EVALUATION OF NATURAL LANGUAGE INTERFACES TO DATA BASE SYSTEMS 
Bozena Henisz Thompson 
California Institute of Technology 
INTEODUCT~ON 
Is  eva luat ion ,  l i ke  beauty,  in  the eye of the beholder? 
The answer i s  fa r  from simple because i t  depends on who 
i s  cons idered to be the proper beho lder .  Eva luacors  may 
range from casua l  users  to soc ie ty  as a whole,  w i th  sys -  
tem builders, sophisticated users, linguists, grant pro- 
viders, system buyers ,  and o thers  in  between. The 
members of th l s  panel  are system bu i lders  and l ingu is ts  
- -  or ra ther  the t~ao fused in to  one - -  but ,  I be l ieve ,  
in teres ted  in  a l l  or almost a l l  ac tua l  or potent ia l  
bodies  of eva luators .  One of our co l leagues  expressed a
force fu l  op in ion  wh i le  being a member of a s imi la r  panel  
a t  las t  year ' s  ACL conference:  "Those of us on th i s  
panel  and other  researchers  in  the f ie ld  s imply don ' t  
have the r ight  to determine whether a system i s  p ract i -  
ca l .  Only the users  of such a system can make Chat 
determinat ion .  Only a user  can dec ide whether the hi. 
\ [natura l  language\]  capab i l i ty  const i tu tes  su f f i c ient  
added va lue  to be deemed pract i ca l  Only a user  can 
dec ide i f  the sys tem's  f requency of inappropr ia te  
response i s  su f f i c ient ly  low to be deemed pract i ca l .  
Only a user  can decide whether the overa l l  NL in terac -  
t ion ,  taken in to to ,  o f fe rs  enough benef i t s  over a l te r -  
nat ive  formal in teract ions  to be deemed pract i ca l "  I l l .  
I t  i s  hard for  me co d i sagree ,  s ince  I argued as fo rce -  
fu l l y  on the bas i s  of my study of users* eva luat ion  of 
machine t rans la t ion  \[2\] - -  a study which was prompted by 
the eva luat ions  of the qua l i ty  of machine t rans la t ion  as 
viewed by l ingu is ts  and users ,  ranging from 35Z accept -  
ab le  for  the former to 90Z for the la t te r .  Whet the 
study a l so  showed was chat the pract i ca l i ty  of the out -  
put could indeed only be judged by the users ,  s ince  even 
incomplete and s ty l i s t i ca l l y  very ine legant  t rans la t ions  
were found qu i te  use fu l  in p ract i ce  because they,  on the 
one hand, prov ided,  however c rude ly ,  the in format ion  
sought by the users ,  and, on the other  hand, the users  
themselves brought knowledge chat made the texts  fa r  
more unders tandab le  and use fu l  then might appear co a 
nonspec ia l i s t  l i ngu is t .  But th i s  endorsement on mY per t  
of the user a~ the u l t imate  judge in  eva luat ions  does 
not prec lude my fu l l y  subscr ib ing  co Norm Sondheimer's  
\[3\] in t roductory  co~ents  co th i s  panel  s ta t ing  that  to 
"make progress  as a f ie ld ,  we need to be ab le  Co eva lu -  
a te . "  We are now less  l i ke ly  co confuse the i ssue  of the 
eva luat ion  by people l i ke  ourse lves  and the judgment of 
the users ,  less  l i ke ly  to be surpr i sed  at  the d i sc repan-  
c ies ,  and less likely to be surprised at the users" 
acceptance of the limitations of our NL interfaces. 
Also, we are far more aware of the fact chac evaluations 
of '~orth" or "quality" have Co be conducted in the con- 
texts  of the ac tua l ,  perce ived needs. Zn extens ive  s tu -  
d ies  on eva luat ion  of innovat ions ,  Moste l le r  \ [4 \ ] ,  the 
recent ly  re t i red  pres ident  of AAAS, found that  "success-  
fu l  innovators  bet ter  understand user  needs; \[and\] pay 
more a t tent ion  to market ing . . . .  " The same source,  
however, leads me co the notor ious  d i f f i cu l t ies  of 
eva luat ion  g iven the v ide  range of evaluaCors and the i r  
purposes.  We are a l l  undoubtedly convinced of the va lue 
of NLI for  the soc ie ty  as a whole, but the eva luat ion  of 
exper iments wi th these in ter faces  i s  another  mat ter .  
Mosce l ler  was faced wi th  soc ia l ,  soc iomed ica l ,  and medi-  
ca l  f i e lds .  Let me recount some of the s tud ies  he and 
h is  team made for  reasons  which w i l l  soon become obv i -  
ous.  His teem scored a g iven program on a sca le  from 
plus ~wo Co minus ~wo with zero meaning there was essen- 
tially uo ga in .  Accord ing ly ,  a study of de l inquent  
girls that identified th ~- buc failed to prevent them 
from del inquency rece ived  a zero.  L ikewise,  a zero was 
assigned Co a probation experiment for conviction 
for public drunkenness in which three methods were 
used: (I) no treatment, (2) an alcoholic clinic, and 
(3) A lcoho l i cs  Anonymous. Since the "no t reatment"  
group performed somewhat bet ter ,  shor t - te rm re fer ra l s  
were cons idered  of no va lue .  A minus one was g iven to a 
study whose resu l t s  were oppos i te  co those hoped fo r :  a 
major insurance cOmpany increased  outpat ient  benef i t s  in  
the hope of decreas ing  hosp i ta l  cos ts ,  but the outpa-  
t ient  g roup 's  hosp i ta l  s tays  inc reased .  F ina l ly ,  a dou- 
b le  p lus  was swarded to an exper iment  invo lv ing  the Salk 
vacc ine ,  which was, p red ic tab ly ,  very success fu l .  Now 
th i s  k ind of eva luat ion  may be jus t i f i ed  when the needs 
of the soc ie ty  are at  s take .  I have gone in to  these 
deta i l s ,  however, for  the purpose of express ing  the 
op in ion ,  in  which I know I 'm not a lone,  that  ne la t ive  
resu l t s  are as important  as pos i t i ve  ones, that  eva lua -  
t ion  in  our case i s  almost equ iva lent  to the amount of 
in fo rmat ion  obta ined in an exper iment .  An exper iment 
whose resu l t s  would be to ta l l y  p red ic tab le  would be 
almost use less ,  but one w i th  resu l t s  d i f fe rent  frOm 
those hoped for  might be embarrass ing but very va luab le .  
Another c~ent  prompted by those eva luat ions  i s  chat 
the application of any rigid, fine scale is totally 
inappropriate in the case of NLI evaluations. 
NLI EVALUATIONS 
A. METHODOLOGY AND SOME RESULTS 
I t  had been w ide ly  taken for  granted some time ago Chat 
l~LI i s  as good as i s  i t s  g r -~- r ,  and a grammar i s  as 
good as i t  i s  ex tens ive .  The spec i f i c  needs of users ,  
the requ i rements  of spec ia l  tasks  and the l i ke  cook a 
back seat .  The nature  of ht--an d i scourse  was yet  to be 
exp lored .  Happi ly ,  we have been in  a d i f fe rent  s i tua -  
t ion  for some time. When the REL \[5, 5, 7\] system was 
getting into ? reasonably sturdy shape with respect to 
speed and buss,  I s ta r ted  p lanning exper iments  to tes t  
i t .  There yes important  l i te ra ture  about d i scourse ,  
espec ia l l y  in  soc io logy ,  such as the work of Scheg lo f f .  
I t  was thus c lear  that  success fu l  NLI exper iments  had Co 
be based on knowledge of h i ,  an d i scourse .  St was a l so  
c lear  chat that  was the way Co make the in ter face  more 
natura l .  This ass~pt ion  has a l ready  been f ru i t fu l :  
the NL in ter face  in POL \ [9 \ ] ,  a successor  Co REL, has 
a l ready  been extens ive ly  improved as a resu l t  of the 
EEL-re lated exper iments .  
Experiments were made in th ree  modes: in  add i t ion  to 
face - to - face  and human-to-co~puter ,  cera ina l -co - te rmina l  
communication was examined, s ince  at  p resent  chat i s  the 
only pract i ca l  mode of access ing  the computer. Through 
ear ly  1980, Over 80 sub jec ts ,  80,000 words, and over 50 
hours were analyzed in g reat  deta i l .  In the fa l l  of 
1980, another  13 sub jec ts  were tes ted  in the computa- 
t iona l  mode only ,  adding approx imate ly  20 hours.  From 
the s tar t ,  the exper iments  were encouraging,  a l though 
l im i ted  to ~wo modes: F-F and T-T. In teract ions  not 
only showed a great  dea l  of s t ruc ture  but extens ive  
s imi la r i t ies  in  both modes, the most important  being the 
constancy of the nt=aber of words in  sentences (about 
70Z); the length  of sentences  (about 7 words) ;  the 
ex is tence  of f ragments (70Z of messages in  F-F and 50Z 
in T-T containing them); and phatics (10Z of total for 
F-F and 5Z for T-T). Thus similarities between the 
=odes were a candidate for consideration in experiments 
in the computational mode, the T-T mode being seemingly 
quite far removed from natural F-F. The sentence having 
historically been the unit of analysis (and since phat- 
i t s  were considered of lesser Lmportance from the compu- 
tational v i~ ,  although of great interest in general), 
m 7 at tent ion  turned Co f ragments .  REL al lowed for th ree  
non-sentence type s t ruc tures :  "NP?" ( inc lud ing  number 
parsed in to  NP); "a l l /none  or uomber" answers;  and 
39 
definitions i n t roduc ib le  by the user  which make ic pos- 
s ib le  to include ind iv idua l  knowledge and terminology.  
The ana lys i s  of F-F and T-T protoco ls ,  however, showed 
the ex is tence of other  fragment categor ies ,  f ina l ly  
analyzed ~nco a dozen categor ies  (see \ [8 \ ] ) .  Since they 
const i tu te  a cons iderab le  amount of F-F conversat ions  
and even T-T protoco ls ,  they c lear ly  had co be watched 
for  in computational  exper iments.  
The experiments for  ac tua l ly  observin~ user -sys tem 
in teract ion  were conducted in the w inter  Cem of  1979/80 
and produced 21 protoco ls ,  the ana lys i s  of  which was 
compared with resu l t s  of e ight  F-F and fou~ T-T exper i -  
ments. Another 13 computat ional  experiments done in the 
fall couf imed the results of  the earlier ones. The 
Cask in a l l  three =odes was a rea l  one: loading cargo 
onto a sh ip ,  the data coming from the actua l  envirooment 
of loading U.S. navy ships by a group in San Diego, Cal- 
ifornia. In the F-F and T-T exper iments ,  ~n,~o persons 
were involved -- one given cargo item~ Co be loaded, the 
other infot~nation about decks (details in \[8\]). In the 
computational mode (H-C) the ship data was in ~he com- 
puter and the l i s t  of cargo to be loaded was handed Co 
the subjects, all with Caltech background. Details 
being ava i lab le  elsewhere andspace  l imi ted here,  only 
some major resu l t s  are given here.  Table 1 shows the 
comparison of the three modes. 
TABLE 1 
~-__~ T-__/~ . - c  
Sentence length 6.8 6.I 7.8 
Message length 9.5 10.3 7.0 
Frequent length 2.7 2.8 2.8 
Z words in  sentences 68.8 72.8 89.3  
Z words in fragments 17.2 21.1 10.7 
Toca~ AvR. ~ota~ Avt. ToCa~ Ave, 
Messages 5574 697 310 78 1093 52 
Parsed & nonparsed 1615 77 
Sentences 5302 663 385 77 882 42 
Fragments 3253 402 230 58 211 10 
Phatics (including 
connectors & tags)  48A2 605 148 37 46 2 
Total ~ota\ [  Total  
Words in messages 49800 3285 8525 
Words in sentences 34266 2393 6880 
Words in  f ra~encs  8584 694 823 
As can be seen, severa l  s ta t i s t i cs  show s ia i la r i t ias :  
sentence length,  message length,  fragment length ,  per -  
centage of words in sentences and f ragments.  The c lose -  
ness of the average of messages in T-T and parsed and 
uonparsed inputs in H--C is striking. 
Table 2 (the meaning of abbreviations is given below the 
cable) deals with fragments. Zt i s  most ly self- 
explanatory, as i s  the absence of dsfiniclons from ?-F 
and T-T (although some abbreviations used there fall in 
this category) and the absence of  some other categor ies  
from T-T and K-C. At lease ~wo comaents, however, are 
necessary .  The surpr i s ing ly  low use of te rse  quest ions  
?n H-C may be accounted for  by the tendency toward a 
formal style in compuCacionnl in teract ion .  The de f in i -  
t ions  used were o f ten  of qu i te  complex character ,  
a l though far  fever  than could be hoped for  due 
apparent ly  to lack of fami l ia r i ty  with th i s  capab i l i ty .  
The complex character  of de f in i t ions  undoubtedly had 
some e f fec t  on the length of sentences in the H-C mode. 
d 
TABLE 2 
F-F T-T H-C 
Tota~ ~l TOCa ~ ; TOCa t 
g 532 ?6.4 10 4.3 
ADD 425 13. I 41 17.8 
CORE 56 1 ? 7 
COMP 95 2.9 2 .9 
SELF I14 3.5 
T~ 571 17.6 67 29.1 
TQ 4li 12.5 31 13.4 
TI 297 9 . 1 48 20 . 9 
FS 413 12.7 23 I0.0 
TEUN 339 I0.4 9 3.9 
DrY 
p 4~2 148 
C 1935 34 
T 31 
91 37 o8 
67 27.8 
, 30 12,4 
53 22.0 
Abbrev iat ions  
E (Echo): An ezacc or par t ia l  repet i t ion  of usua l ly  
the other  speaker ' s  s t r ing .  Often an NP, but i t  
may be an e l l ip t i ca l  s t ruc ture  of var ious  forms. 
ADD (Added ~nformat iou):  An e l l ip t i ca l  s t ruc ture ,  
o f ten  NP, used to c la r i f  7 or complete a prev ious 
ut terance ,  o f ten  ode" s own, e .g . ,  " IC doesn" ~: say 
anything here about weight, or breaking chins, 
down. Except for orushablee.", "It's smaller. 
36"x20"x17"." Spelling out words was Lncluded 
here .  
CORE (Correction): This may be done by either speaker. 
Tf done by the smm speaker i t  i s  re la ted  Co fa l se  
s tar t ,  but semantic cons iderat ions  suggest  a 
cor rect ion ,  e .g . ,  "Those are  30, ,,h, 48 l ength  by 
40 width by 14 he ight . "  
COMP (ComoleCion): Completion of the o ther  speaker ' s  
u t te rance ,  d i s t ingu ished  from in ter rupt ion  by the 
cooperat ive  nature of the u t terance ,  e.g., "As T've 
got a l o t  o f . . .Z 've  toe B: two pages. A: Yeah." 
SZLY.(Ta~kin S co 0uesel f~:  Mut ts r ings ,  even to the 
point  of undec ipherabi l iCy,  noc intended fo r  the 
o ther  person.  
TR (Terse rep ly ) :  An e l l ip t i ca l  rep ly ,  o f ten  NP, 
e.go, "No.", "Probably meters.", "50 and 7.62." 
TQ (Terse OuesCion) : An elliptical quest ion ,  often 
NP, e .g . ,  '~hy?" ,  "How about pyrotechn ics?" ,  '~h ich  
ones?" 
TI (Terse Information): A ra ther  e lus ive  category,  
ne i ther  quest ion ,  rep ly  nor co- -and,  an e l l ip t i ca l  
s tatement but one o f ten  requ i r ing  an act ion .  
F8 (Fa lse  Sta~c):  These are a lso  abandoned ut ter -  
ances,  but i~ed is te ly  fol lowed by usua l ly  syntac -  
t i ca l ly  and semant ica l ly  re la ted  ones,  e .g . ,  "They 
may, they may be identical c lasses . " ,  '~ell, the 
height, the next largest height I've got is 34." 
TRUN (Truncated.): An incomplete utterance, voluntarily 
abandoned. 
DEF (Definition): E.g., '~0efine: ED: each deck of the 
Almeo." 
P (Phatics): The largest subgroup of  fragments whose 
nets is borrowed from Malinoweki ?s tern "phacic 
colmtmion" with which he referred to chose vocal 
ut terances  chat serve to establish soc ia l  relations 
racher than the direct purpose of communication. 
This term has been broadened to inc lude a l l  f rag -  
ments which help keep the channel of communication 
open, such as '~ell", '~aic", and even '~ou Cur- 
kay". Two subcategor ies  of phacics are:  
C (Dialogue Connectors) : Words such as "Then", 
"And", "Because" (at the beginning of a message or 
utterance). 
T (Tan Ouescions) :  E .g . ,  "They're a l l  under 60, 
seen" t they?" 
40 
B. SYST~4 PERFORMANCE, sYNTAX USED, SPECIAL STRATEGIES, 
AND ERROR ANALYSIS 
System performance can obv ious ly  be eva luated  in a 
number of ways, but w i thout  good response t ime meaning- 
fu l  exper iments are imposs ib le .  When much data i s  
invo lved in p rocess ing  a delay of a few minutes can 
probably be to le ra ted ,  but the vas t  ma jor i ty  of requests  
should be responded to w i th in  seconds.  The la t te r  was 
the case in my exper iments .  Fa i r ly  complex messages of 
about 12 words were responded to in  about l0 seconds.  
The system clearly has to be reasonably free of bugs -- 
in my case, 12 bugs were hit in the total of 1615 parsed 
and nonparsed messages.  The adequate extent  of natura l  
language syntax i s  imposs ib le  to determine.  Table 3 
shows the syntax used by my sub jec ts .  
sentences ;  or poss ib ly  jus t  "baby talk" due to the 
suspicion of the computer's limitations. 
An interesting fact to note is that similar results with 
respect  to syntax were obta ined  in the exper~nents w i th  
USL, the "sister system" of REL developed by IBM Heidel- 
berg \[10\] -- with German used as gLl in two studies of 
high school students: predominance of wh-questions (317 
in total of 451); not many relative clauses (66); com- 
mands (35); conjunctions (26); quantifiers (15); defini- 
tions (ii); comparisons (2); yes/no questions (i). 
An evaluation which would not include an analysis of 
unparsed input would at best be of limited value. It 
was shown in Table i that i093 out of 1515 or about ~o 
th i rds  were parsed in my exper iments .  
TABLE 3 
SENTENCE TYPES 
Tot~l 
882 
651 
Al l  sentences 
Simple sentences ,  e .g . ,  "L i s t  the decks 
of the Alamo." 73.8 
Sentences with pronouns, e .g . ,  '~/hat is 
its length?", "what is in its pyro- 
technic looker?" 30 3.A 
Sentences with quantifier(s), e.g., 
"List the class of each cargo." 71 8.0 
Sentences with conjunctions, e.g. "What 
is the maxim,-- stow height and bale 
cube of the pyrotechnic locker of the 
AL?" 88 I0.0 
Sentences with quantifier and conjunc- 
tion(s), e.g., "List hatch width and 
hatch length of each deck of the Alamo." 13 2.6 
Sentences w i th  re la t ive  c lause ,  e .g . ,  
"List the ships that have water." 6 .7 
Sentences with relative clause (or 
related construction) and cemparator, 
e.g., "List the ships with a beam less 
than lO00." 6 .7 
Sentences with quantifier and relative 
clause, e.g., "List height of each 
content whose class is class IV." 2 .23 
Sentences with quantifier, conjunction 
and relative clause, e.g., "List length, 
width and height of each content whose 
class is a--nunicion." 2 .23 
Sentences with quantifiers and comparator, 
e .g . ,  '~Iow many sh ips  have a beam greater  
than 10007'* 3 .34 
Wh-questions 75 .0  
Yes/no quest ions  1.0 
Con=sands 19.0 
Statements (data  add i t ion)  5.0 
Consider ing the wide range of R k'r- syntax \ [7\] ,  the pau- 
c i ty  of complex sentences i s  surpr i s ing .  The use of 
de f in i t ions  which o f ten  invo lved  complex const ruct ions  
( re la t ive  c lauses ,  con junct ions ,  even quant i f ie rs )  had a 
de f in i te  in f luence .  So d id ,  undoubtedly,  the task  
s i tuat ion  causing opt imizat ion  of work methods. The 
in f luence  of the spec i f i c  nature  of the task  would 
requ i re  add i t iona l  s tud ies ,  but the spec ia l  dev ice pro-  
v ided by the system (a load ing prompt sequence - -  which 
was not analyzed)  was employed by every sub jec t .  Dew- 
i ces  such as these obv ious ly  are a great  a id  in  accom- 
p l i sh in  8 tasks .  They should be tes ted  extens ive ly  to 
determine how they can augment the uatura lness  of NLIs. 
Other reasons for  the re la t ive ly  s imple syntax used were 
spec ia l  strategies: paraphrasing into s impler  syntax 
even though a sentence d id not parse for o ther  reasons ;  
"SUCCesS strategy" resulting in repetitious simple 
TABLE 4 
Total % 
Vocabulary 161 36.1 
Punctuation 72 16.1 
Syntax 62 13.9 
Spelling 61 13.6 
Transmission 32 7.2 
Definition format 30 6.7 
Lack of response 16 3.6 
Bus 12 2.7 
Table 4 s t~_er i zes  the categor ies  of e r ro rs .  The 
predominance of vocabulary  i s  not surpr i s ing ,  but re la -  
t i ve ly  few syntact i c  e r ro rs  are .  In par t  th i s  may be 
due to the method of scor ing  in which er rors  were 
counted only once, so i f  a sentence conta ined an unknown 
vocabu lary  i tem (e .g .  "On what decks of the Alamo 
cargo be s tored?" )  but would have fa i led  on syatact i c  
grounds as we l l ,  i t  would fa l l  in  the vocabu lary  
category .  A comparison can be made here wi th  Damerau's 
study I l l \ ]  of the use of the ll~A system by the c i ty  
p lann in  S department in  White P la ins ,  a t  leas t  w i th  
regard  to the to ta l  of quer ies  to those completed: 788 
to 513. So, aga in ,  roughly t~ao th i rds  were parsed.  In 
o ther  categor ies  "pars in  S fa i lu re"  i s  147, " lookup 
failures" 119, "nothing in data base" 61, "program 
error" 39, but this only points to the general difficul- 
ties of comparisons of system performance. 
SOME CONCLUSIONS 
Norm Sondheimer suggested some questions we might try to 
answer. What has been learned about user needs? What 
most important linguistic phenomena to allOW for? What 
other kinds of interactions? Error analysis points in 
the obvious directions of user needs, and so do the 
types of sentences employed. While it is justified to 
quit the search for an almost perfect grnmm,r, it would 
be a mistake to constrain it to the constructions used. 
Improved naturalness can be achieved with diagnostics, 
definitions, and devices geared to specific tasks such 
as special prompting sequences. Some tasks clearly 
require math in the NLI. How good are systems? An 
ob jec t ive  measurement i s  probably imposs ib le ,  but the 
percentage of requests  processed might g ive  some idea .  
In the case of a task  s i tuat ion  such as loading cargo 
i tems,  the percentage of task  complet ion may s igna l  both 
system performance and user satisfaction. System 
response times are a very important measure. The ques- 
tionnaire method can and has been used (in the case of 
MT and USL), but as yet there is too little experience 
to measure user satisfaction. Users seem very good at 
adapting to systems. They paraphrase, use success stra- 
tegy, simplify syntax, use special devices -- what they 
really do is maximize their performance with respect Co 
a given task. 
41 
What have we learned about running evaluations7 I t  is 
important Co know what to look for, therefore the need 
for good knowledge of human to hmnan discourse. Good 
system response times are a sine qua non. Controlled 
experiments have the advantage of being rep l i cab le ,  a 
c ruc ia l  fac tor  in a r r iv ing  ac eva luat ion  c r i te r ia .  
Determining user b ias and experience nay be important ,  
but even more so ?s user  t ra in ing .  Contro l led exper i -  
ments can show what methods are ~ost  e f fec t ive  (e .g .  a 
manual or study of proCocols~). Study of user commence 
- -  phacic mater ia l  - -  g ives some measure of user  
(d i s )sat i s fac t ion  ( I  have seen '"/ou l ie , "  buc I have yeC 
to see "Good boy, youZ"). C lear ly ,  the best  ind icat ion  
of user sa t i s fac t ion  is  whether he or she uses the sys -  
tem again.  Extensive IonS-term s tud ies  are needed for  
that .  
What should the fu ture  look l ike? Task or iented  s i tua -  
t ions  seem to be a promising envirooment for  ~LZ. The 
standards of NL systems performance w i l l  be set  by the 
users .  Future eva luat ions?  As Antoine de Sainc-Zxup&r7 
wrote,  "As for  the Future,  your task is  not to fo resee ,  
but to enable i t . "  
REFERENCES 
i .  Har r i s ,  Larry E. "Prospects  of P ract i ca l  Natural  
Language Systems."  Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
Meetin~ of  the Assoc ia t ion  fo r  Computationa~ 
Linguistics, June 1980, p. 129. 
Z. .  Henisz-DosterC, B.; Macdonald, R. E.; and Zarech- 
rusk, M. Machine Translation. The Hague: Mouton, 
1979. 
3. Sondheimer, N. K. "Evaluation of Natural Language 
I n ter faces  to Data Base Systems."  Proceedings o( 
the 19th Annual Meecin~ of the Assoc ia t ion  for  Com- 
putat iona l  L ingu is t i cs ,  June 1981. 
4. Moste l le r ,  F. "~nnovation and Eva luat ion . "  Science 
(February 27, 1981):881-886. 
5. Thompson, F. B. and Thompson, Boaena H. "?tactical 
Natural Language Processing: The EEL System as 
Prototype." In Advances in Computers, ed. M. Rubi- 
noff  and M. C. Yovi ts .  Yol. 13. New York: 
Academic Press ,  1975. 
6. Thompson, BozenaH. and Thompson, F. B. "Rapidly 
Extendable Natural Language." Proceedings of the 
1978 Nationa~ Conference of the ACM, pp. 173-182. 
7. Thompson, Bozena H. REL English for the User. 
Pasadena: California Institute of Technology, 1978. 
8. Thompson, Bozena H. "Linguistic Analysis of 
Natural Language Co--,unication rich Computers." 
COLING 80: Proceedings of the gCh Internationa~ 
Conference on Computariona~ Linguistics, Tokyo, 
October 1980, pp. 190-201. 
9. Thompson, Bozeua H. and Thompson, F .B .  "Shifting 
to a Higher Gear in a Hatura l  Language System." 
Proceedinzs of the Nat~ona~ Computer Conference, 
May 1981. 
10. Lehmann, Hubert; OCt, Nikolaue; Zoeppri~z, Mag- 
dalene.  '~ser  Experiments with Natura l  Language 
for DaCe Base Access." COLING 78: ProceedinRs of 
ch~ 7oh International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. Bergen, August 1978. 
Ii. Oamtrau, Fred J .  The Transformational ~uestion 
Answ~rin~ ~T~A~ System: Operational Statistics - 
1978. EC 7739. Yorktown Heights: IBM T. J. Watson 
research Center, June 1979. 
42 
