SOME COMPUTATIONAL ASPECTS OF SITUATION S~21ANTICS 
Jon Barwise 
Philosophy Department 
Stanford Unlverslty~ Stanford, California 
Departments of Mathematics and Computer Science 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
Can a realist model theory  of natural language be 
computationally plausible? Or, to  put  i t  another way, 
is the view of linguistic meaning as a relation between 
expressions of a natural language and things (objects, 
properties, etc.) in the world, as opposed to a 
re la t ion  between express ions  and procedures  in  the  head.  
consistent with a computational approach  to  
understanding natural language? The model theorist must 
either claim that the answer is yes, or be willing to  
admit that humans transcend the computatlonally feasible 
in their use of language? 
Until recently the only model theory of natural language 
that was at all well developed was Montague Grammar. 
Unfortunately, it was based on the primitive notion of 
"possible world" and so was not a realist theory, unless 
you are prepared to  grant that  all possible worlds are 
real. Montague Grammar is also computatlonally 
intractable, for reasons to be discussed below. 
J ohn  Per ry  and I have  deve loped a somewhat d i f fe rent  
approach  to  the  model  theory  o f  natura l  language,  a 
theor~ we call "Situation Semantics". Since one of my 
own motivations in the early days of this project was to 
use the insights of generalized racurslon theory to find 
a eomputatlonally plausible alternative to Montague 
Grammar, it seems fitting to give a progress report 
here .  
I. MODEL-THEORETIC SEMANTICS "VERSUS" 
PROCEDURAL SEMANTICS 
First, however, l can't resist putting my two cents 
worth into this continuing discussion. Procedural 
semantics starts from the observation that there is 
something computational about our understanding of 
natural language. This is obviously correct. Where 
some go astray, though, is in trying to identify the 
meaning of an expression with some sort of program run 
in the head. But programs are the sorts of things to 
HAVE meanings, not to BE meanings. A meaningful program 
sets up some sort of relationship between things - 
perhaps a function from numbers to numbers, perhaps 
something much more sophisticated. But i t  is that 
relation which is its meaning, not some other program.  
The situation is analogous in the case of natural 
language. It is the relationships between things in the 
world that  a language allows us to  express that  make a 
language meaningful. I t  is these relationships that  are 
identified with the meanings of the expressions in model 
theory. The meaningful expressions are procedures that 
define these relations that are their meanings? At 
least this is the view that Perry and I take in 
situation semantics. 
With its emphasis on situations and events, situation 
semantics shares some perspectives with  work in 
artificial intelligence on representing knowledge and 
action (e.g., McCarthy and Hayes, 1969), but it differs 
i n  some cruc ia l  respects .  I t  i s  a mathemat ica l  theory  
o f  l ingu is t i c  mean ing ,  one  that  rep laces  the  v iew o f  the  
connect ion  between language and the  wor ld  a t  the  hear t  
o f  Tarsk i - s ty le  model  theory  w i th  one much more l i ke  
that  found in  J . L .  A -s t ln ' s  "T ruth" .  For  another ,  i t  
takes  ser ious ly  the  syntact i c  s t ructures  of  natura l  
language,  d i rec t ly  in terpret ing  them wi thout  assuming  an  
in termediary  leve l  of  " log ica l  fo rm" .  
2. A COMPUTATION OBSTRUCTION AT THE CORE OF 
~IRST-ORDER LOGIC 
The standard model-theory for first-order logic, and 
with it the der ivat ive  model-theory of indices 
( "poss ib le  wor lds" )  used  in  Montague GrA~r  i s  based  on 
F rege 'a  suppos i t ion  that  the  re ference  of  a sentence  
cou ld  on ly  be taken  as  a t ru th  va lue ;  that  a l l  e l se  
spec i f i c  to  the  sentence  i s  los t  a t  the  leve l  of  
re ference .  As Quine has  seen  most  c lear ly ,  the  
resu l t ing  v iew o f  semant ics  i s  one where  to  speak  o f  a 
par t  of  the  wor ld ,  as  in  (1 ) .  i s  to  speak  o f  the  whole  
world and of all th ings  in the world. 
(I) The dog with the red collar 
belongs to my son. 
There is a philosophical position that  grows out of this 
view of logic, but it is not a practlc~l one for those 
who would implement the resulting model-theory as a 
theory of natural language. Any treatment of (I) that 
involves a universal quantification over all objects in 
the domain of discourse is doom"d by facts of ordinary 
discourse, e.g., the fact that I can make a statement 
llke (I) in a situation to describe another situation 
without making any statement at all about other dogs 
that come up later in a conversation, let alne about 
the dogs of Tibet. 
Logicians have been all too ready to dismiss such 
philosophical scruples as irrelevant to our task-- 
especially shortsighted since the same problem is well 
known to have been an obstacle in developing recurslon 
theory ,  both  ord inary  recur  s ion  theory  and the  
genera l i za t ions  to  o ther  domains  l i ke  the  funct ions  o f  
f in i te  type .  
We fo rget  that  on ly  in  1938, severa l  years  a f te r  h i s  
in i t ia l  work  in  recurs lon  theory ,  d id  K /eene in t roduce  
the  c lass  o f  PARTIAL recurs lve  funct ions  in  o rder  to 
prove  the  famous Zecurs lon  Theorem. We tend to  over look  
the  s ign i f i cance  of  th i s  move, f rom to ta l  to  par t ia l  
funct ions ,  unt i l  i t s  impor tance  i s  b rought  in to  focus  in  
o ther  contexts .  Th is  i s  Jus t  what  happened when K leene  
deve loped h is  recurs lon  theory  fo r  funct ions  o f  f in i te  
type .  H is  in i t ia l  fo rmulat ion  res t r i c ted  a t tent ion  to  
to ta l  funct lons ,  to ta l  funct ions  o f  to ta l  funct lons ,  
e tc .  Two very  impor tant  pr inc ip les  fail in the 
resulting theory - the Substitution Theorem and the 
First Recurslon Theorem. 
This theory has been raworked by Platek (1963), 
Moschovakls (1975), and by Kleene (1978, 1980) using 
109 
partial functions, partial functions of partial 
functions, etc., as the  objects over which computations 
take place, imposing (in one way or another) the 
following constraint on all objects F of the theory: 
Persistence of Computations: If s 
is a partial function and F(s) is 
def ined  then  F(s') m F(s )  fo r  every  
extension s" of a. 
In other words, it should not be possible to invalidate 
s computation that F(s) - a by simply adding further 
information to s. To put it yet  another way, 
computations involving partial functions s should only 
be ab le  to use positive information about s, not 
information of the form that s is undefined at this or 
that argument. To put it yet another way, F should be 
continuous in the topology of partial information. 
Computatlonally, we are always dealing with partial 
information and must insure persistence (continuity) of 
computations from it. But thls is just what blocks a 
straightforward implementation of the standard model- 
theory--the whollstic view of the world which it is 
committed to ,  based on Frege's initial supposition. 
When one shifts from flrst-order model-theory to the 
index or "possible world" se~antics used in ~ionta~e's 
semantics for natural language, the whollstlc view must 
be carried to  heroic lengths. For index semantics must 
embrace (as David Lewis does) the claim that talk about 
a particular actual situation talks indirectly not Just 
about everything which actually exists, but about all 
possible objects and all possible worlds. And It is 
just thls point that raises serious difficulties for 
Joyce Friedman and her co-workers in their attempt to 
implement ~iontague Grammar in a working system (Friedman 
and Warren ,  1978) .  
The problem is that  the  bas ic  formalization of possible 
world semantics is incompatible wlth the limitations 
imposed on us by partial information. Let me illustrate 
the problem thec arises in a very  simple instance. In 
possible world semantics, the meaning of a word llke 
"talk' is a total function from the set I of ALL 
poss ib le  wor lds  to  the  set  o f  ALL TOTAL funct ions  f rom 
the  set  A of ALL possible individuals to the  t ru th  
values 0, i. The intuition is that b talks in 'world" i 
if 
meaning('talk')(1)(d) - i. 
It is built into the  formalism that each world contains 
TOTAL information about the extensions of all words and 
expressions of the language. The meaning of an adverb 
llke "rapidly" is a total function from such functions 
(from I into Fun(A,2)) to other such functions. Simple 
arithmetic shows that even if there are only I0 
individuals and 5 possible worlds, there are 
(iexpSO)exp(iexpSO) such functions and the specification 
of even one is completely out of the question. 
The same sorts of problems come up when one wants Co 
study the actual model-theory that goes wlth MontaEue 
Semantics, as in Gallin's book. When one specifies the 
notion of a Henkln model of intenslonal logic,  i t  must  
be done in a totally "impredlcatlve" way, since what 
const i tu tes  an  ob jec t  a t  any  one  type  depends  on  what  
the  ob jec ts  a re  o f  o ther  types .  
For  some t ime I toyed  w i th  the  idea  of  g iv ing  a 
semant ics  fo r  Hontasue 's  log ic  v ia  par t ia l  funct ions  but  
a t tempts  conv inced  me that  the  bas ic  in tu i t ion  beh ind  
possible wor lds  is really inconsistent wlth the  
constraints placed on us by partial information. At the 
same tlme work on the semantics of  perception statements 
led me away from possible worlds, while reinforcing my 
conviction that it was crucial to represent partial 
information about the world around us, information 
present in the perception of the scenes before us and of 
the situations in which we find ourselves all the time. 
3. ACTUAL sITUATIONS AND SITUATION-TYPES 
The world we perceive a-~ talk about  consists not just 
of  ob jec ts ,  nor  even of  jus t  ob jec ts ,  p roper t ies  and 
re la t ions ,  hut  of  ob jec ts  hav ing  proper t ies  and s tand ing  
in  var ious  re la t ions  to  one another ;  that  i s ,  we 
perceive and talk about various types of situations from 
the  perspect ive  of other  situations. 
In situation semantics the meanlng of a sentence is a 
relation between various types of situations, types of 
discourse situations on the one har~ and types of 
"sub ject  matter" sltuatio~s on the  other. We represent 
various types of situations abstractly as PARTIAL 
functions from relations and objects to 0 and I. For 
example ,  the  type  
s (be long ,  Jack ie ,  Jonny)  = 1 
s (dog ,  Jack ie )  " l 
s(smart, J ack le )  = 0 
represents a number of true facts about my son, Jonny, 
and his dog. (It is important to realize that s is 
taken to be a function from objects, properties and 
relations to 0,I, not from words to 0,Io) 
A typ ica l  s l tuat lon - - type  represent ing  a d i scourse  
situation might be given by 
d(speak, Bill) = I 
d(father, Bill, Alfred) - i 
d(dog,  Jackle) " I 
representing the type of discourse situation where Bill, 
the  fa ther  of  A l f red ,  i s  speak ing  and where  there  i s  a 
s ing le  dog ,  Jack ie ,  p resent .  The mean ing  of  
(2) The dog belongs to my son 
is a relation (or ,-tlti-valued function) R between 
various types  of discourse situations a~d other types  of 
situations. Appl ied to  the d above R will have various 
values R(d) including s" given below, but not including 
the  s f rom above:  
s ' (be long ,  Jack ie ,  A l f red)  m 1 
s'(tall, Al f red)  = i .  
Thus if Bill were to use  this sentence in a situation of 
type d, and if s, not s', represents the t rue  state of 
affairs, then what Bill said would be false. Lf s" 
represents the true state of  affairs, then what he said 
would  be t rue .  
Expressions of a language heve a fixed llngulstlc 
meanlng, Indepe-~enC of the discourse situation. The 
same sentence (2) can be used in different types of 
discourse situations to express different propositions. 
Thus, we can treat the  linguistic meaning of an 
expression as a function from discourse si~uatlon types 
to  other  complexes  o f  ob jec ts  a -a  proper t ies .  
Application of thlS function to a partioular discourse 
situation type we call the interpretation of the 
expression. In particular, the interpretation of a 
sentence llke (2) in a discourse s i tuat ion  type  llke d 
iS a set of various situation types, including s* shove, 
but not including s. This set of types is called the 
propos i t ion  expressed  by (2 ) .  
Various syntactic categories of  natural language will 
have var ious  sor ts  of i n terpretat ions .  Verb phrases ,  
e .g . ,  wi l l  be i n terpreted  by re la t ions  between ob jects  
and  s i tuat ion  types .  Def in i te  descr ip t ions  will he 
i n terpreted  as  funct ions  f rom s i tuat ion  types  to 
i nd iv idua ls .  The d i f fe rence  between re ferent ia l  and  
a t t r ibut ive  uses  o f  de f in i te  descr ip t ions  w i l l  
cor respond to  d i f fe rent  ways o f  us ing  such  a funct ion ,  
evaluation at s particular accessible s i tuat ion ,  or to 
constrain other  types within i t s  domain. 
i i0 
4. A FRAGMENT OF ENGLISH INVOLVING DEFINITE AND 
INDEFINITE DESCRIPTIONS 
At my talk I will illustrate the ideas discussed above 
by presenting a grammar and formal semantics for a 
fragment of English that embodies definite an d 
indefinite descriptions, restrictive and nonrestrictive 
relative clauses, and indexlcals llke "I", "you", "this" 
and "that". The aim is to have a semantic account that 
does not go through any sort of flrst-order "logical 
form", but operates off of the syntactic rules of 
English. The fragment incorporates both referential and 
attributive uses of descriptions. 
The basic idea is that descriptions are interpreted as 
functions from situation types to individuals, 
restrictive relative clauses are i n te rpreted  as 
functions from situation types to sub-types, and the 
interpretation of the whole is to be the composition of 
the functions i n te rpret ing  the parts. Thus, the 
interpretations of "the", "dog", and "that talks" are 
given by the following three functions, respectively: 
f (X )  = the unique element of X if there 
is one, 
- undef ined,  o therw ise .  
g(s )  - the set  of a such that  s (dos ,  a ) - I  
h(s )  - the " res t r i c t ion '  of s to the set  of 
a such that  s ( ta lk ,a ) - l .  
The in terpreta t ion  of " the dog that  ta lks"  i s  Jus t  the 
composi t ion of these three funct ions .  
From a log ica l  po int  of view, th i s  i s  qu i te  in teres t ing .  
In f i r s t -o rder  log ic ,  the meaning of "the dog that  
ta lks '  has to be bu i l t  up from the meanings of ' the '  and 
'dog that  ta lks ' ,  not from the meanings of "the dog* and 
'that talks'. However, in situation semantics, since 
composition of functions i s  associative, we can combine 
the meanings of these expressions either way: f.(g.h) - 
(f.g).h. Thus, our semantic analysis is compatible with 
both of the syntactic structures argued for in the 
linguistic literature, the Det-Nom analysis and the NP-R 
analysis. One point that comes up in Situation 
Semantics that might interest people st this meeting Is 
the reinterpretaclon of composltlonality that it forces 
on one, more of a top-down than a bottom-up 
composltionallty. This makes it much more 
computatlonally tractible, since it allows us to work 
with much smaller amount of information. Unfortunately, 
a full discussion of this point is beyond the scope of 
such a small paper. 
Another important point not discussed is the constraint 
placed by the requirement of persistence discussed in 
section 2. I t  forces us to introduce space-time 
locations for the analysis of attrlbutive uses of 
definlte descriptions, locations that are also needed 
for the semantics of tense, aspect and noun phrases like 
"every man', "neither dog', and the Ilk,. 
5. CONCLUSION 
The main point of this paper has been to alert the 
readers  to a perspect ive  in  the model theory of natura l  
language which they might well find interesting and 
useful. Indeed, they may well find that it is one that 
they have in many ways adopted already for other 
reasons .  
REFERENCES 
I .  J .L .  Aust in ,  "Truth",  Ph i losoph ica l  Papers ,  Oxford, 
1961, 117-134. 
2. J. Barvise, "Scenes and other s i tuat ions" ,  J.  o f  
Phi losophy,  to appear,  1981. 
3. J .  Barwise end J .  Perry ,  "Semantic innocence and 
uncoap rom/s t~,  s i tuat ions" ,  Midwest Studies in  
Philosophy V~I, to appear 1981. 
4. J .  Barvise and J .  Per ry ,  S i tuat ion  Se.~,ntics: A 
Mathematical  Theory o f  L in6u is t i c  Meaning, book in  
p reparat ion .  
5. J .  Friedman and V.S. Warren, "A pars ln8 ,us,hod for  
Hontague Grammars," IAnsulstlcs and Phi losophy,  
2 (1978), 347-372. 
6. S.C. Kleene, "Recurs lve  funct iona ls  and quant l f le rs  
of f in i te  type revisited I " ,  Genera l i zed  gecurs lon  
Theory 1__I, North Holland, 1978, 185-222; and par t  
I I  in  The Kleene S~nposium, North Holland, 1980, 1- 
31. 
7. J .  McCarthy, "Programs with common sense" .  Semantic 
Inforwa. t lon  P rocess ing ,  (Minsky, ed . ) ,  M. I .T . ,  
1968, 403-418. 
8. R. Moo,ague, "Universal Grammar", Theorla, 36 
(1970), 373-398. 
9. Y.N. Moschovakls, "On the basic notions in the 
theory of induction", Logic, Foundations of 
Methe,aatice and Co~utab l l i t~"  Theory, (Butts  and 
Hint ikka,  ed),  Reid, l ,  1976, 207-236. 
I0. J .  Perry ,  "Percept ion ,  ac t ion  and the s t ruc ture  of 
be l lev lng" ,  to  appear .  
I I .  R. P la tek ,  "Foundations of Recursloo Theory", Ph.D. 
Thes is ,  Stanford Un ivers i ty ,  1963. 
111 

