Corepresentational Grammar and Parsing English Comparatives 
Karen P#an 
University of )linnesota 
SEC. 1 INTRODUCTION SEC. 3 COREPRESENTATIONAL GRAMMAR (CORG) 
Marcus \[3\] notes that the syntax of English comparative 
constructions is highly complex, and claims that both 
syntactic end semantic information must be available for 
them to be parsed. This paper argues that comparatives 
can be structurally analyzed on the basis of syntactic 
information alone via a str ict ly  surface-based grammar. 
Such a grammar is given in Ryan \[5\], based on the co- 
representational model of Kac I l l .  While the grammar 
does not define a parsing algorithm per se, i t  nonethe- 
less expresses regularities of surface organization and 
its relationship to semantic interpretation that an ade- 
quate parser would be expected to incorporate. This 
paper wil l  discuss four problem areas in the description 
of comparatives and wil l  outline the sections of the 
grammar of \[5\] that apply to them. 
The central problem in parsing comparatives involves 
identifying the arguments of comparative predicates, and 
the relations borne by these arguments to such predi- 
cates. A corepresentational grammar is expl ic it ly de- 
signed to assign predicate-argument s ructure to sen- 
tences on the basis of their surface syntactic organi- 
zation. 
SEC. 2 COMPARATIVE PREDICATES 
An in i t ia l  assumption underlying the proposed analysis 
of, comparatives is that the comparative lements such as 
~r~'  faster, more spacious, are syntactically akin to 
i ca t -~,  and thus that the principles applying to 
predicate-argument s ructure extend to them. Each com- 
parative element wil l  accordingly have arguments (Subject 
and Object) assigned to i t ,  and comparative predications 
wil l  also be analyzed as being in relations of subordin- 
ation or superordination with other predications in the 
sentences in which they appear. For example, in ( l)  
below, the comparative predicate richer wil l  have both a 
simple NP Subject and a simple NP~t :  
(1) John knows doctors richer than Tom 
SUBJ ~" OBJ 
The referent of OBJ(richer), i.e. Tom, is to be inter- 
preted as the standar--d-o-~-compariso-n-against which the 
referen~ of doctors is Judged. The entire predication 
forms a term ~ i o n  ( 'T')  acting as OBJ(kn~ow), so 
that the whole relational analysis is as shown In (2). 
(2) John knows doctors richer than Tom 
I T suBJ T 0~J Pr/richer(T} 
su~J 0~J 
Because Pr/richer is included in an argument of another 
predicate ( ~  the former is in a relation subordinate 
to the latter. 
This analysis assumes three types of comparative predi- 
cates: adverbial, adjectival, and quantifier. I l lustra- 
tions are given below: 
(3) Alice builds planes faster than robots f ly them 
(4) John met people ta l ler  than Bob 
(5) Alice drank more beer than Helen 
The adverbial predicates are subcategorized as taking 
predicational arguments in both relations, and only such 
arguments; the other types can take nonpredicational 
arguments, though in some cases their Objects may be 
predicational. 
The grammar i tse l f  consists of two sets of principles. 
The f i r s t  set consists of general constraints on sentence 
structure and applies as well to non-comparative con- 
structions. These principles are discussed in detail in 
\ [ l \ ]  and \[2\] and wil l  be presented here without jus t i f i -  
cation. In addition there are a number of principles 
applying only to comparative constructions but non ad 
hoc in the sense that each can be applied toward the so- 
lution of a number of distinct problems of analysis. 
These principles are as follows: 
(6) Law of Correspondence Every NP or term in a 
sentence must be assigned a relational role. I l l  
(7) L~wof Uniqueness No two elements in a sentence 
may bear the same relation to a sinnle predicate 
unless they are coordinate or coreferential. I l l  
(8) Object Rule (OR) I f  P is an active transitive 
predicate~ OBJ(P) must be identified in such a 
way as to guarantee that as many segments thereof 
as possible occur to the right of P. I l l  
(g) ?~ulti-Predicate Constraint Every predicate in a 
sentence which contains more than one predicate 
must be in an ordination relation with some other 
predicate in that sentence.\[4\] 
(lO) Term Identification Principles 
a. Any predication with the internal structure 
OBJ-SUB-PREO may be analyzed as T. Any UP is 
a T. Any T satisfying either of these conditions 
is a SIMPLE TE~I. 
b. Any predication consisting solely of a compara- 
tive predicate with simple ~!P's as arguments is 
a T; such expressions wil l  be called SIMPLE 
CO?IPARATIVE TE~.IS. All others wil l  be COtlPLEX 
COMPARATIVE TE~IS. 
c. Any predication whose Subject occurs to the 
right of than, and whose predicate either 
occurs tot--E~-e left  of than or occurs as SUBJ(do) 
where do i tse l f  occursto the right of than, is 
a T; s~h expressions wil l  be called PRE-'DTCATE- 
CONTAIN~IG TERMS or PCT's. 
( l l )  Comparative Object Rule The object of a comparative 
predicate is any term or predication satisfying the 
subcategorization of the predicate and which in- 
cludes some element occurin 0 immediately to the 
right of than. 
(12) Comparative-e-~ubject Rule The Subject of a compara- 
tive predicate must occur to the left  of than. 
(13) Comparative Object Restriction The Object--o-? a 
nonadverbial comparative predicate must be a simple 
term unless the tiP occuring immediately to the 
right of than is SUBJ of a PCT; in that case, the 
OBJ of the non-adverbial comparative predicate must 
be a PC-term. 
These principles do not define a parsing algorithm per 
se;  rather, they express certain surface true restric- 
tions which taken together and in concert with the gen- 
eral principles from Kac Zl \] and \[2 \], define exactly 
the set of predicate argument structures assignable to 
a comparative construction. Since no particular analyt- 
ic procedure is associated with CORG, the assignment of 
particular analyses may be thought of either as a com- 
parison of complete potential relational analyses with 
the principles, whereby all potential analyses of the 
string not consistent with the grammar are discarded, or 
as a process of sequential assignments of partial analy- 
ses where each step is checked against the principles. 
The sequential method of analysis wil l  be used here to 
present the operation of these principles; however, i t  
is not a necessary adjunct to the grammar. 
13 
SEC. 4.0 STRUCTURE TYPES AND DESCRIPTIVE PROBLEMS 
There are three types of comparative predicates, already 
noted in section 2: adjectival, quantifier and adverbial. 
The differing subcategorization of these predicates does 
affect the possible analyses for a given sentence. Sev- 
eral other factors which influence the interpretation of 
the sentence are the position of the comparative predi- 
cate in the sentence, the degree of ellipsis in the 
than-phrase, and the subcategorization of surrounding 
p-~-~dicates. The effect of the type of predicate and the 
effect of the position of the predicate (in particular 
relative to than) will be considered separately in the 
following sect~o---"-ns. The effects of the degree of 
ellipsis in the ~than phrase and the subcategorization of
surrounding predlcates will be considered together in 
section 4.3. It should be kept in mind however that all 
of these variables may act together in any combination 
to affect the type and number of interpretations a given 
sentence may have. 
SEC. 4.I SUBCATEGORI~.ATION AND PREDICATE TYPES 
The. effects of the type of comparative predicate on the 
interpretation can be noted in (3) and (4). The adverb- 
ial predicate faster in (3) takes predicational arguments 
only (ignoring f-T6"r"now the problem of lexical ambiguity) 
while the adjectival predicate taller takes non-predica- 
tional (.gP or Term) arguments. 
To see how these differences interact with the possible 
analyses which may be assigned, consider a complete 
analysis of (4). This analysis may begin with any ele- 
ment in the sentence. In most cases the assignment of 
the object of the comparative predicate, as the first 
step, will result in a more direct path to a complete 
analysis. Assume then, that Bob has been analyzed as 
O~(taller). This assignment-~atisfies the Comparative 
ObjecT~-uTe and is also consistent with the OR. 
(14) John met people taller than Bob. 
T 
Since neither met nor tal ler is a reflexive predicate, 
the Law of Unique'--'ness guarantees that Bob cannot be 
analyzed as OBJ (P), where P is any pr~-'Tcate (other 
than taller) as long as i t  is analyzed as OBJ(taller). 
Slnce t-TEe'F'~ are two non-reflexive predicates in this 
sentence (taller and m e_~.t), there are four remaininq re- 
lational ass-~g~ents whlch must be made before the analy- 
sis is complete. These are SUBJ(me_~.t), OBJ(met), SUBJ 
(taller) and some ordination relatlon betwee--n-the pred- 
icates met and taller. 
John or Either ~ people may be analyzed as SUBJ(taller) at 
this point since both satisfy the Comparative ~-~t  
Rule by occuring to the left of than. I f  John were 
assigned the relation SUBJ(taller-)--The analysis would 
violate some principles. A~for  purposes of demon- 
stration, that John=SUBJ(taller). The relational analy- 
sis at this point would th--en be: 
(15) John met people taller than Bob 
SRBJ T o~J 
The remaining relational assignments would be OBJ(met), 
SUBJ(met) and some ordination relation for the two pred- 
i ca te~ The next apparently logical step would be to 
analyze people as O~j(me_~t). However, this will violate 
the OR, since i t  is possible to include mere than just 
the ;(P people as part of the OBJ(met). The OR requires 
that as many segments as possible-Eccuring to the rioht 
of a predicate be included in OBJ(P). The way to satis- 
fy this condition would be to analyze ~ as part of 
PR/taller. Then the OR would be satisfied by the maxi- 
mum number of elements (consistent with the grammar) 
which occur to the right of met. The only possible re- 
lation that people could bear to taller would be SUBJ 
(taller) s in~occurs  to the l ~  than (see Com- 
parative Subject Rule). I f  i t  is analyzed as SUBJ(tal- ? 
ler), then John can no longer be analyzed as SUBJ(talL 
ler). These steps would wive the following partial rela- 
tional representation: 
(16) John met people taller than Bob 
T SUBJ ~ OBJ 
PR/taller(T) 
OBj 
At this point in the analysis, the only relation which 
needs to be assigned st i l l  is SUBJ(met). The assignment 
of this relation to John is the only possible choice 
which violates no principle of the grammar and this as- 
signment would give a complete analysis. 
The analysis of (3) procedes along somewhat different 
lines due to the subcategorization of the adverbial 
comparative predicate faster, which requires predica- 
tional arguments. Thean~sis can begin as before by 
attempting to assign arguments to the comparative predi- 
cate faster. However, the f irst NP after than cannot be 
assigned to faster as OBJ since i t  is not a predicational 
arnument. The subcategorization of faster requires com- 
plete predications to be available b~arguments for 
i t  may be identified. Thus consider the other predi- 
cates, build and fly. Both are transitive predicates 
taking on--~simple HP's as arguments. The ~IP them must 
be analyzed as OBJ(fly) because of the OR. Th~mpar- 
ative OBJ Rule and ~ OR together will require robots 
to be analyzed as part of the PR/fly. Since robots 
occurs immediately to the right of than, i t  mus-Et-6"~in- 
cluded as part of the OBJ(faster) by--~Te Comparative OBJ 
Rule. The OR requires the"O-~J-~f any predicate to in- 
clude as many elements to the right of that predicate as 
possible. Therefore, i f  possible, fly and them must 
also be included as elements of OBJ~-?aster).----~ince 
faster is an adverbial predicate, itwl-'~TTT-allow a com- 
pe-l-eEe-predication (in fact requires) to be its object. 
Thus, all three of these aspects of the grammar work to- 
gether to force the string robots..fly..them to be anal- 
yzed as a predication PR/fly as shown below, with PR/fly 
analyzed as OBJ(faster)(as allowed by the Comparative 
OBJ Rule). 
(17) Alice builds planes faster than robots fly them 
T SUBJ OBj I "  
PR/flv OBJ 
At this point the arguments of build still need to be 
assigned and build and faster must be assigned some or- 
dination re la~ S ln~ter  requires a complete 
predication for its sub jec~ predication build must 
be built first. If any rip's other than A l i ceTp lanes  
are used as arguments for builds, the anay--T'~s cou~ 
be completed. For example~obots  were analyzed as 
OBJ(bullds) (as well as SUBJ(fly-\]~-T, then either Alice or 
SlCOUld be analyzed as SUBJ(builds) completing 
d. 
(18) Alice builds planes faster than rgbo~s fly them 
SU~J I" "F OBa S~BJq" ~Bj 
PR/build PR/fly OBj 
PR/build could then be analyzed as SUBJ(faster) and all 
the necessary relations between arguments and predicates, 
and between predicates themselves(i.e, ordination rela- 
tions) would be assigned. However, the analysis would be 
ill-formed since one element, in this case lap_~, would 
be left unanalyzed in violation of the Law o? ~orrespon- 
dence. The only way this situation can be avoided, while 
at the same time not violating the OR or the Comparative 
Object Rule as discussed above for the OBJ(faster), would 
be to use only Alice and planes as arguments for builds. 
The OR would requlr~ that~.~ be analyzed as OB~  
(builds) leaving Alice to be analyzed as SUBJ(builds). 
This resulting pred--dT~'ation Pr/builds can then be anal- 
yzed as SUBJ(faster) completing the analysis with all 
rules in the grammar satisfied. 
(Ig) Alice bu~ds planes faster than robots f ly them 
SU~V T OBj ~ SHR,/ "r' onj 
PR/builds SUBJ I P~/fIY OBJ 
14 
The most obvious differences between the analyses of (3) 
and (4) is in the types of arguments which the compara- 
tive predicates take and the ordination relations be- 
tween the predicates and the order in which the differ- 
ent predications were "built up". For (3), the argu- 
ments for the non-comparative predicates must be assigned 
f i rst ,  before the arguments for the comparative predi- 
cate. This is required by the subcategorization of the 
adverbial predicate, which takes predicational arguments 
only. In this sentence, the non-comparative predicates 
are analyzed as subordinate to the comparative predicate. 
This too is a conseqence of the subcategorization of 
faster. For (4), the most efficient procedure for 
as--~ing relations (i.e. the one requiring the least 
backtracking) requires the arguments of the comparative 
predicate tal ler to be assigned f irst.  In addition 
since the~egor i za t ion  of this predicate allows 
only for non-predicational arguments, the comparative 
predicate is analyzed as subordinate to the non-compar- 
ative predicate in the sentence. Thus the type of com- 
parative predicate and its subcategorization affects the 
type of analysis provided by the grammar, and also the 
"optimal" order of relational assignments, when proce- 
dural aspects of the analysis are considered. 
SEC. 4.2 POSITION OF THE COMPARATIVE PREDICATE 
There are two aspects to the problem of the position of 
the comparative predicate: one involves the position of 
the SUBJ(COMP P) relative to than; the other involves 
the position of the entire comparative predication rela- 
tive to any other predicate in the string. 
SEC. 4.2.1 COORDI~IATE AND NON-COORDINATE ADVERBIAL 
COMPARATIVE CONSTRUCTIONS 
In some cases, the arguments of comparative predicates 
may be coordinate. This will always be the case for 
adverbial comparative predicates for which there is some 
ellipsis in the string as in 
(20) John builds planes faster than robots 
Here robots can be considered to be coordinate with 
either E - '~es  or John, that is i t  can be interpreted as 
either t--h-e~-O'BJ(b~s) or as the OBd(builds). In non- 
adverbial comparative constructions, i t  will not always 
be the case that a single riP after than will be inter- 
preted as coordinate with some nother-"r-~TP. Consider the 
differences in possible interpretations between (4) and 
(21) 
(21) John met tal ler people than Bob 
(4) John met people tal ler than Bob 
For (4), there is only one possible interpretation, while 
there are two possible interpretations for (21). That is, 
in (21) Bob may simply be interpreted as OBJ(taller) 
correspond--dTng to the meaning of the sentence 
(22) John met people who are tal ler than Bob 
However, (21) has another interpretation in which Bob is 
interpreted as SUBJ(met). This case corresponds t~he 
interpretation of (23). 
(23) John met tal ler people than Bob did 
For this second interpretation, there are two subjects 
for me.__tt, i .e. ,  John and Bob. This means that John and 
Bob must be forma---aITy def~d as coordinate arguments. 
l~-~'s formal definition is necessary since the Law of 
Uniqueness tates that no two NP's may bear the same 
relation to a predicate (i.e. both be SUBJ(P i )  unless 
they are coordinate or coreferentia1. Such a definition 
for rlP's such as John and Bob in (23) is not unreason- 
able since they bo--Eh--meet ~ basic requirements for 
coordinate elements. They are both interpretable as 
bearing the same relation to some Predicate Pi. 
The Comparative Object Restriction and a definition of 
coordinate comparative lements are required to precise- 
ly define the conditions under which two elements may be 
construed as coordinate in a comparative construction. 
The essence of the Coordinate Comparative Definition 
(not included here due to space considerations) is that 
any two elements may be coordinated by than i f  no 
non-adverbial comparative predicate occurs immediately 
to the left of than. The ultimate consequence of this 
condition is that only one interpretation is a11owed for 
constructions like (4) and this interpretation does not 
include any arguments coordinated by than. This means 
that in (4) for example there is no possl-'--%le analysis in 
which Bob can be SUBJ(met). 
In the coordinate interpretation of (22), ( i .e. ,  where 
John is coordinate with Bob) the final analysis of the 
s-ErTng will include the ~r6Tlowing predicational struc- 
ture: 
(24) John ~t  tal ler pe?pleOBJ thans~ 
Pr/met(PCT) 
It  is this term, then, which is assigned to the relation 
OBJ(taller), ~ being SUBJ(taller) (note that people 
plays two distlnct roles in this sentence). 
(25) John met tal ler peopl~ than Bqb 
"I ~ ~ OBQ SOBJ 
? F" " Pr/met(PCT) 
L SUBJ OBJ 
This particular assignment (of pr/met as OBJ(taller~ is 
allowed by the Comparative Object Restriction. That is, 
tal ler, being non-adverbial comparative predicate, is 
~bcategor i zed  for predicational arguments. But in 
(25) OBJ(taller) contains a predicate as one of its 
arguments. 
This particular predicational structure is defined as a 
Predicate Containing Term or PCT by the Term Definition~ 
The Comparative Object Restriction has the effect of al- 
lowing the OBJ(CO~P P) to be a PCT. Since the particular 
substring of (22), met..people..Bob need not be analyzed 
as a PCT, an altern~ive analysis for (22) is also pos- 
sible. The alternative analysis would be like that for 
(4), where only Beb=SUBJ(taller). That is, the Compar- 
ative Object Restriction does not necessarily require an 
analysis for (22) like (25); i t  merely allows i t  i f  cer- 
tai:n conditions set out in the Term Definition are met. 
The Comparative Object Restriction is quite important, 
then, in distinguishing the possible analysis for non- 
adverbial comparative constructions. It is equally Im- 
p lant  in obtaining the correct analysis for the sen- 
tence types to be discussed in the next section. 
SEC. 4.2.2 SUBJECT COMPARATIVES 
The position of the entire comparative predication, rela- 
tive to other predicates in the string is also quite im- 
portant in determining the possible types of analysis. 
Sentence (25) exhibits a subject comparative where the 
comparative predication occurs to the left  of another 
predicate. I t  is useful to compare this sentence with 
the object comparative in (22) repeated here. 
(26) Taller people than Bob met John 
(22) John n~t tal ler people than Bob 
As has already been discussed in 4.2.1, (22) has two pos- 
sible interpretations. Sentence (26), however, has only 
one possible interpretation. Therefore there should be 
only one possible analysis. The analysis which needs to 
be avoided is 
(27) Taller people thans~ ~ m~ John T o~J I pr/m@t 
SUBJ OBJ 
This case must be disallowed while at the same time al- 
lowing the structure in (24) to be analyzed as OBJ(tal- 
ler). The Comparative Object Rule and the Term 
15 
Definitions work together to achieve this. The structure 
Pr/met shown in (28) does not meet the requirements set 
out for a PC-Term and the subcategorization of taller 
(i.e. non-predicational arguments only) wil l  not allow 
Pr/met to be analyzed as an argument of taller unless i t  
is analyzable as a PC-Term. Thus, the subcategorization 
of taller and the Comparative Object Restriction wil l  
both prevent he assignment of Pr/met as OBJ(taller)in 
(27). Since an analysis which includes (27) is not pos- 
sible, the only way the analysis can procede is as fol- 
lows. The Comparative Subject Rule wil l  require 
people=SUBJ(taller) since i t  is the only tip to the left 
of than. Since Bob is the element occuring immediately 
to t-'h-e-right o f~n,  it is the only ~IP which can be 
analyzed as objec-'t--~f taller. The resulting predication 
Pr/taller is defined as a term by (IOb). 
(28) Taller peqple than B b met John ? s..J 
Pr/taller(T) 
The MP John must be analyzed as OBJ(met) to satisfy the 
OR, leav-~Pr/taller to be analyzed as SUBJ(met). This 
will also satisfy the )lultiPredicate Constraint since 
taller and met will be in some ordlnatlon relation as a 
res-'~. 
(2g) TalerLprxtaler(T)su)dpeqple~uB,\] than ~jB b m i t  JofnOBd 
Pr/met 
No other analysis is possible since no non-comparative 
predicate occurs to the left of than (which would allow 
for possible coordinate interpretatl----~ons). 
SEC. 4.2.3 COMCLUSIONS 
The important points in this section are that for Sub- 
ject Comparatives such as (26), only one interpretation 
is possible, while for Object Comparatives such as {21), 
two interpretations are possible. Position of the com- 
parative predication relative to the rest of the string 
is thus an important factor in determining the number of 
possible interpretations. Position of individual NP's 
relative to than is also an important factor in deter- 
mining the number of possible interpretations a sentence 
may have; Sentences like (4),where no tIP occurs between 
than and the comparative predicate, have only one inter- 
pretation, ~lhile sentences like (ZIP, where an PIP does 
occur in the position, have two possible interpretations. 
The Comparative Object Restriction and the Term Defini- 
tions figure crucially in all these cases in the deter- 
mination of the correct number and type of possible 
analyses. 
SEC. 4.3 DEGREE OF ELLIPSIS AND SUBCATEGORIZATION O.~F 
SURROUtlDIr~G PREDICATES 
The degree of ellipsis following than in comparative 
structures is quite important in ~rmin ing  the number 
of possible interpretations a structure may have. For 
example, in the f i rst  sentence of each pair below, where 
only a single predicate occurs before than, more than 
one interpretation is possible per str -~,  while in the 
second sentence in each pair, where an PIP followed by 
some predicate occurs, only one interpretation is 
possible. 
(30) Alice builds planes faster than robots 
(31) Alice builds planes faster than robots do 
(32) John knows richer doctors than Alice 
(33) John knows richer doctors than Alice does 
The actual analysis of these sentences wil l  not be 
presented here. Such sentences are discussed in detail 
in Ryan \[5\]. 
SEC. 4.3.1 DEGREE OF ELLIPSIS AND SUBCATEGORIZATION OF 
SURRDUMDING PREDICATES. 
The problem of degree of ell ipsis interacts crucially 
with another factor, the subcateqorization of surround- 
ing predicates, in a very interesting way. Consider , 
the following sets of sentences. 
(34) John knows more doctors than lawyers debate 
(35) John knows more doctors than lawyer s debate 
psychiatrists 
(36) John knows more doctors than lawyersrun 
(37) John knows more doctors than lawyers spoke to 
(38) John hired more doctors than lawyers debate 
(39) *John hired more doctorsthan lawyers debate 
psychiatrists 
(40) *John hired more doctors than lawyers run 
(41) John hired more doctors than lawyers spoke to 
(42) John thinks more doctors than lawyers debate 
(43) John thinks more doctors than lawyers debate 
psychiatrists 
(44) John thinks more doctors than lawyers run 
(45) *John thinks more doctors than lawyers spoke to 
These sentences contain different combinations of com- 
parative predicates with either transitive or intrans- 
itive verbs following them and preceding verbs which 
take: either complement or NP objects (34~-(37); NP 
objects only (38-41); and complement objects only (42- 
45). The type and number of interpretations depends on 
the subcategorlzation of these verbs and the verbs fol- 
lowing the comparative predicate. The flrst sentence in 
each group contains a transitive verb, debate, with no 
overt object. The second sentence in eac~group contains 
debate with an overt object. This results in (39) in an 
ungrammatical sentence, as compared with (38), and in 
(35) in a sentence with only one possible interpretat ion 
as compared with (34), which has two possible interpre- 
tations. The third sentence in each group contains an 
int rans i t ive  verb, run. This also results in an ungram- 
matical sentence for--T40) in the second group and in a 
sentence with only one interpretat ion,  (36) in the f i r s t  
group. The last sentence in each group contains another 
t rans i t ive verb, spoke to, without an overt object. The 
difference between th is~erb  and debate is that debate 
is a so-called 'object deletable've-~'eF~-while spo\]E~"~o- 
is not. Mote that in (45) this results in an ungra~at- 
lcal  sentence (compare to 42) while in (37) the sentence 
is grammatical. However, in (37) the structure of the 
phrase more doctors than lawyers d i f fers  from i ts  struc- 
ture in (35) and (36), in which more doctors than 
~e tS the subject of the third verb. That is not in (37), where only la~ers  is the subject of 
the third verb. It can be seen from this that the sub- 
categorization of the preceding the following predicates 
Is very Inq~ortant to the structure of the comparative 
predication. In addltlo~as the first two sentences 
in each group show, the degree of ellipsis also affects 
the structure. 
In all cases, the structure of the phrase more doctors 
than lawyers shifts in structure. The most important 
aspect of this data is the type of arguments which the 
comparative predicates must take. In these particular 
cases i t  is a change in the object of the comparative 
predicate which corresponds to a sh i f t  in the structure 
of the sentence. This is accounted for most d i rect ly  by 
the rules in (lOp, ( l l )  and (13). 
For example, in (36) the OBJ(more) is lawyers and the 
co~q}lete predication Pr/more ~he S u r f  run. 
This partial analysis i s~wn in (46). 
(46) John knows more doqtors than lawxers r4n 
suBJ o~j T Pr/more(T) SUBJ 
16 
i 
In (38), the object of more is the sequence doctors.. 
lawyers..debate, a term according to (lOa). 
shown in the partial analysis in (47). 
(47) John hired more doctprs than lawyers debate 
T )OBJ SUBJ I" | Pr/debate(T) SqBJ ~qj 
Sentence (36) could not be analyzed as in (47) because 
run, the third verb in (36), is intransitive while 
de-e~ate, the third verb in (38), is transitive. Thus run 
cannot be included in any structure satisfying the Te~ 
Identification Principles (lO), while debate can be so 
analyze@. This means that run cannot be T~cluded as part 
of the OBJ(more). This is ~ranteed by the Comparative 
Object Restrlct-'---ion (13). 
Both of the analyses shown in (46) and (47) are possible 
for sentence (34) since knows may take predicational 
objects (in this case, more doctors than lawyers run) or 
i t  may take nonpredicatlonal objects such as the Complex 
comparative term in (47). 
Sentences (39) and (40) do not have possible analyses 
since hired cannot take predicational objects (such as 
that sho--o-wn-in (46)), and the presence of either an 
intransitive verb (run) or a transitive verb with an 
overt object (debate'-psychiatrists) after the compara- 
tive predicate, forces such a structure because of rules 
(lO) and (13). Sentence (41) would have a structure 
similar to (47). 
Sentences (42) - (44) v~uld all have structures similar 
to the partial analysis in (46). This is forced by the 
subcategorization of thinks, which takes only predica- 
tional objects. There--iT-no possible analysis for (45) 
since the subcateqorization of s o_~to ,  unlike debate, 
requires the presence of an overt object. But i a?-a-n-- 
object is assigned to spoke to, the result wil l  u l t i -  
mately be a structure Ti-Ee'-tlTat shown in (47). But the 
structure shown in (47) is a term and therefore nonpred- 
icational. This means i t  could not be analyzed as 
OBJ(thinks), while requires a predicational (complement) 
structure. 
Finally, i t  is precisely because a sentence with sooke 
to as the third verb must have a structure like (~TF-- 
TT.e. nonpredicational) that sentence (41) has a possible 
analysis in contrast to (45). That is, the structure of 
the string more doctors than lawyers spoke to in (49) 
has a nonpredicational (comparative term) structure. 
Since i t  is a term and not a predication, any verb tak- 
ing i t  as an argument must be subcategorized for nonpred- 
icational arguments. Think in (45) takes only predica- 
tional arguments in the---~ect relation, while hired in 
(41) takes only nonpredicational arguments in th-'-e-~'6ject 
relation. Thus, only the sentence with hired may take 
the comparative term as an argument. But sooke to does 
not allow the string more doctors than lawyers to simply 
be analyzed as its sub-ject, since no possible object 
would then be available for spoke to, However, i f  the 
string more doctors than lawyers is--not analyzed as 
SUBJ(spoke to), i t  wil l  not be possible to analyze the 
string as a predication Pr/spoke to, thus blocking the 
analysis of the string as OBJ(think). 
SEC. 4.3.2 CONCLUSION 
The degree of el l ipsis and the subcategorization of the 
surrounding predicates interact to affect the possible 
number and type of interpretations for each of the sen- 
tences in this section. That interaction can be most 
clearly seen in a comparison of (34) and (35) and (36). 
The verb know is subcategorized for either predicational 
or nonpred-i-E~tional arguments. This allows the string 
more doctors than lawyers debate to have two possible 
structures corresponding to the structures shown in (46) 
and (47). The.structure in (46) is a predicational 
structure while the structure in (47) is a nonpredica- 
tional structure. The subcategorization of knows allows 
either of those as possible interpretations of the OBJ 
(knows). Verbs subcategorized for only one type of ar- 
gument, say predicational, wil l  allow only one of those 
possible structures of more doctors than lawyers .debate, 
in this case the predica'tional one shown in (46), to be 
analyzed as the object of that verb. This is one way in 
which the subcategorization of surrounding predicates 
affects the type and number of possible interpretations 
a sentence may have. 
The effect of the subcategorization of the following 
predicate parallels the effect of no el l ipsis after than. 
Thus sentences (36) and (36) each have only one possib--bT~ 
interpretation and the relation of the string more doc- 
tors than lawyers is the same in each case; that is, i t  
is the same as the predicational structure shown in (46), 
being the subject of the following predicate. Thus, the 
presence of an intransitive verb or the presence of a 
transitive verb plus an overt object to its right as in 
(35) and (36) forces a predicational structure of the 
type shown in (46). Since knows takes predicational 
objects, these sentences are s t i l l  grammatical. I f  
hired is substituted for knows . as in (39) and (40), the 
sentences are no longer grammatical, since the subcate- 
gorization of hired does not allow predication argument~ 
The last type of effect of the predicate following than 
is in some cases to force a nonpredicational structure 
like that shown in (47). The verb s~oke to is not an 
object deletable verb, while the verb debate does allow 
unspecified objects. For this reason ,~erb  sooke to 
cannot be part of a structure like that shown in-~6),  .... 
since i t  would require the object of spoke to to be 
analyzed as "unspecified". Thus, the presence of a verb 
like spoke to after than forces the nonpredicational 
structure o?-the type--s-hown in (47), since in this struc- 
ture the object of ~ to would be overt. Since the 
presence of spoke to force's a nonpredicational structure 
for the string more--doctors than lawyers spoke to, i t  
can only occur as part of an object of a verb which al- 
lows nonpredicational objects, like know or hired. 
It  follows from this that i f  the string more doctors 
than lawyers spoke to occured after a verb which took 
predicationa'l arguments only, such as thinks, the result 
would be an ungrammatical sentence. This is in fact the 
case, as can be seen from sentence (45). 
SEC. 5 CONCLUSIONS 
The rules presented here provide an axiom system which 
allows only one possible analysis for each interpreta- 
tion of a sentence, and no possible analysis for sen- 
tences which are ungrammatical. The rules specifically 
proposed for comparatives have been shown to apply to a 
wide variety of construction types; for example, the 
Comparative Object Restriction and the Term Definitions 
figure crucially in the analysis of sentences in all the 
subsections of section 4. In addition, these rules are 
based on observations about characteristics of the sen- 
tences which are either directly observable in the 
string (e.g. left  to right relative order) or which are 
a necessary ~art of any grammatical description (e.g. 
subclassification and subcategorization of verbs). Such 
a grammar can provide useful and accessible information 
for the problem of parsing as well as grammatical 
description. 
17 
REFERENCES 
I. Kac, Michael (1978) Corepr~sentation of Grammatical 
Structure. Hpls: Uni~rsity of Hlnnesota Press. 
2. , (1980) "Corep~sentatlonal Grammar". 
In Syntax & Semantics 13, E. A. Moravcsik & 
J. R. Wirth (eds.). Academic Press. 
3. Marcus, Mitchell (1980) A Theory of Syntactic 
Recognitio~ for Natural Languaqe. Cambridge, MA: 
~T Press. 
4. Rtndflesch, Tom (1978) "The General Structure of 
Hulti-Predlcatlonal Sentences in Engllsh" in 
Mlnnesota Papers 5, G. A. Sanders and )l. 8. Kac, 
eds. 
5. Ryan, Karen L. (1981) A Surface Based.Analysis 
of En91tsh Comparative Constructions. H.A. 
Thesis, University of Minnesota. 
18 
