PLANNING NATURAL LANGUAGE 
REFERRING EXPRESSIONS 
Douglas E. Appelt 
SRI International 
Menlo Park, California 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes how a language-planning system 
can produce natural-language r ferring expressions that 
satisfy multiple goals. It describes a formal representation 
for reasoning about several agents' mutual knowledge us- 
ing possible-worlds semantics and the general organization 
of a system that uses the formalism to reason about plans 
combining physical and linguistic actions at different levels 
of abstraction. It discusses the planning of concept ac- 
tivation actions that are realized by definite referring ex- 
pressions in the planned utterances, and shows how it is 
possible to integrate physical actions for communicating 
intentions with linguistic actions, resulting in plans that 
include pointing as one of the communicative actions avail- 
able to the speaker. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
One of the mo~t important constituent processes of 
natural-language neration is the production of referring 
expressions, which occur in almost every utterance. Refer- 
ring expressions often carry the burden of informing the 
hearer of propositions as well as referring to objects. There- 
fore, many phenomena that are observed in dialogues can- 
e t .?_w~eet . . / -  J " -? '~ " " '  " -~  
Figure 1 
Satisfying Multiple Goals with a Referring Expression 
The author gratefully acknowledges the support for this research 
provided in part by the Office of Naval Research under contract 
N0014-80-C-0296 and in part by the National Science Foundation 
under grant MCS-8115105. 
not be explained by the simple view that referring expres- 
sions are descriptions of the intended referent sufficient o 
distinguish the referent from other objects in the domain 
or in focus. 
Consider the situation (depicted in Figure 1) in which 
two agents, an apprentice and an expert, are cooperating 
on a common task, such as disassembling an air compres- 
sor. Several tools are lying on the workbench, and al- 
though the apprentice knows that the objects are there, 
he may not necessarily know where they are. The expert 
might say: 
Use the wheelpuller to remove the flywheel. (1) 
while pointing at the wheelpuller. The apprentice may 
think to himself at this point, "Ah, ha, so that's a wheel- 
puller," and then proceed to remove the flywheel. 
What the expert is accomplishing through the utterance 
of (1) by using the noun phrase "the wheelpuller" cannot 
be fully explained by treating definite referring expressions 
simply as descriptions that are uniquely true of some ob- 
ject, even taking focusing \[71\[11\] into account. The expert 
uses "the wheelpuller" to refer to an object that in fact 
uniquely fits the description predicated of it, so this simple 
analysis is incapable of accounting for the effects the expert 
intends his utterance to have. 
If one takes the knowledge and intentions of the speaker 
and hearer into account, a more accurate account of the 
speaker's use of the referring expression can be developed. 
The apprentice does not know what the object is that 
fits the description "the wheelpuller". The expert knows 
that the apprentice doesn't know this, and performs the 
pointing action to guarantee that his intentions will be 
recognized correctly. 
The apprentice must recognize what the expert is try- 
ing to communicate by pointing - -  he must realize that 
pointing is not just a random gesture, but is intended by 
the speaker to be recognized as a communicative act by 
the hearer in much the same way as his utterances are 
recognized as communicative acts. Furthermore, the ap- 
prentice must recognize how the pointing act is cw:,'elated 
with the utterance the expert is producing. Although there 
is no sped~: deictic reference in the expert's utterance, it
is clear that he does not mean the flywheel, since we will 
assume that the apprentice can determine that the object 
108 
he is pointing to is a tool. The apprentice realizes that 
the object the expert is pointing to is the intended referent 
of "the wheelpuUer," but in the process, he also acquires 
the information that the expert believes the object he is 
pointing to is a wheelpuller, and that the exPert has also 
informed him of that fact. 
A language-planning system called KAMP (for Know- 
ledge And Modalities Planner} has been developed that 
can plan utterances similar to example {1) above, coor- 
dinate the linguistic actions with physical actions, and 
know that the utterance it plans will have the intended 
multiple effects on the hearer. KAMP builds on Cohen and 
Perrault's idea of planning speech acts \[4\], but extends the 
planning activity down to the level of constructing sur- 
face English sentences. A detailed description of the en- 
tire KAMP system can be found in \[2\]. The system has 
been implemented and tested on examples in a cooperat ive 
equipment assembly domain, such as the  one in example 
{1). This paper develops and extends ome of the ideas of 
an early prototype system described in \[1\]. 
The reference problems that KAMP addresses are a sub- 
set of a more general problem, which, following Cohen \[5\] 
will be called 'identification.' Whenever a speaker makes 
a definite reference, he intends the hearer to identify some 
object in the world as the referent. Identifying a refer- 
en~ requires that the agent perform some cognitive ac- 
tivity, such as the simple case of matching the description 
with what he knows, or in some cases plan to perform 
perceptual actions that lead to the identification. KAMP 
simplifies the problem by not considering perceptual ac- 
tions, and assumes that there is some 'perceptual field' 
common to the participants in a dialogue, and that the 
objects that lie within that field are mutually known to 
the participants, along with the observable properties and 
relations that hold among them. 
For example, the speaker and hearer in (1) are assumed 
to mutually know the size, shape and location of all objects 
on the workbench. The agents may not know unobservable 
properties of the objects, such as the fact that a particular 
tool is a wheelpuller. Similarly, the participants are as- 
sumed to be mutually aware of physical actions that take 
place within their perceptual field, without explicitly per- 
forming any perceptual ctions. When the expert points at 
the wheelpuller, the apprentice is simply assumed to know 
that he is doing it. 
H. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION 
KAMP uses an intensional logic to describe facts about 
the world, including the knowledge of agents. The possible- 
worlds semantics of this intensional logic is axiomatized in
first-order logic as described by Moore \[8\]. The axiomatiza- 
tion enables KAMP to reason about how the knowledge of 
both the speaker and the hearer changes as they perform 
actions. 
* What it means to identify an object is somewhat problematical. 
KAMP assumes that identification means that the referring descrip- 
tion conjoined with focusing knowledge picks out the same individual 
in all possible worlds consistent with what the agent knows. 
Moore's central idea is to axiomatize operators uch as 
Know as relations between possible worlds. For example, 
if Wo denotes the real world, then Know(John, P) means 
P is true in every possible world that is consistent with 
what John knows. This is stated formally in the axiom 
schema: 
Vwl T(w,, Know(A,  P ) )  
Vw2 K(A, w,, w2) D T(w2,P). (1) 
The predicate T(w,P) means that P is true in possible 
world w. The predicate K(A,w,,w2) means that w2 is 
consistent with what A knows in w,. 
Actions are described by treating possible worlds as 
state variables, and axiomatizing actions as relations be- 
tween possible worlds. Thus, R(E, wl, w2) means that 
world w2 is the result of event E happening in world w2. 
It is important that a language planning system reason 
about mutual knowledge while planning referring expres- 
sions \[31151. Failure to consider the mutual knowledge of 
the speaker and hearer can lead to the failure of the refer- 
ence. K.AMP uses an axiomatization of mutual knowledge 
in terms of relations on possible worlds. An agent's know- 
ledge is described as everything that is true in all pos- 
sible worlds compatible with his knowledge. The mutual 
knowledge of two agents A and B is everything that is 
true in the union of the possible worlds compatible with 
A's knowledge and B's knowledge.* To state this fact for- 
mally, an individual called the kernel of A and B is defined 
such that the set of possible worlds compatible with the 
kernel's knowledge is the set of all worlds compatible with 
either A's knowledge or B's knowledge. This leads to the 
following definition of mutual knowledge: 
Vw, T(wl, Mutua l lyKnow(A,  B, P)) 
Vw2 K(Kernel(A, B), U\]l, I/)2) D r(w2, P). (2) 
In (2), T(w, P) means that the object language proposition 
P is true in possible world w, and K(a, w,, w~) is a predi- 
cate that describes the relation between possible worlds 
that means that w2 is a possible alternative to w, accord- 
ing to a's knowledge. The second axiom needed is: 
Vz, w,, w2 K(z, w,, w2) D VyK(Kernel(z, y), wl, w~) (3) 
Axiom (3) states that the possible worlds consistent with 
any agent's knowledge is a subset of the possible worlds 
consistent with the kernel of that agent and any other 
agent. 
HI. THE KAMP PLANNING SYSTEM 
KAMP is a multiple-agent planning system designed 
around a NOAH-like hierarchical planner \[10\]. KAMP uses 
two descriptions of each action available to the planning 
agent: a complete axiomatization of the action using the 
possible-worlds approach outlined above, and an action 
* Notice that the "intersection" of the propositions believed by two 
agents is represented by the union of possible worlds compatible with 
their knowledge. 
109 
summary consisting of a simplified escription of the action 
that serves as a heuristic to aid in proposing plans that are 
likely to succeed. KAMP forms a plan using the simplified 
action summaries first, and then verifies the plan using the 
full axiomatization. Since the possible-worlds axioms lend 
themselves more efficiently to proving a plan correct han 
in generating a plan in the first place, such an approach 
results in a system that is considerably more efficient han 
one relying on the possible-worlds axioms alone. 
Because action summaries represent actions in a sim- 
plified form, the planner can ignore details of the effects 
of communicative acts to produce a plan that is likely to 
work in most circumstances. For example, if a simplified 
description of the effects of informing states that the hearer 
knows the proposition, then the planner can reason that a 
plan to achieve the goal of the hearer knowing P is likely to 
include the action of informing him that P is true. In the 
relatively unlikely event hat this description is inadequate, 
this fact will be detected uring the verification phase 
where the more complete description is invoked. 
The flow of control during KAMP's heuristic plan-gen- 
eration phase is similar to that of NOAH's. If a goal needs 
to be satisfied, KAMP searches for actions that can achieve 
the goal and inserts them into the plan, along with the 
preconditions, which become new goals to be satisfied. 
When the entire plan has been expanded to one level of 
abstraction, then if there is a lower level, all high-level 
actions that have low-level expansions are expanded. 
Between each stage of expansion, critics are invoked 
that examine the plan for global interactions between ac- 
tions, and make changes in the structure of the plan to 
avoid the bad effects of the interactions and take advantage 
of the beneficial ones. Critics play an important role in the 
planning of referring expressions, and their functions are 
described more fully in Section IV. 
I IIIocuUonary Acts \[ 
Ilequ~Nalnql 
I Surface Speech Acts I 
Cammm~ Oe~lam 
Judi 
! ??.o.?, I _ __  _ 
1 , Utterance Acts I 
Figure 2 
A Hierarchy of Actions Related to Lanb~uage 
KAMP's hierarchy of linguistic actions is illustrated in 
Figure 2. The hierarchy consists of illocntionary acts, sur- 
face speech-acts, concept-activation actions, and utterance 
acts? Illocutionary acts are speech acts such as inform- 
ing and requesting, which are planned at the highest level 
without regard for any specific linguistic realization. The 
next level consists of surface speech-acts, which are abstrac- 
tions of the actions of uttering particular sentences with 
particular syntactic structures. At this level the planner 
starts making commitments o particular choices in syn- 
tactic structure, and linguistic knowledge nters the plan- 
ning process. One surface speech-act can realize one or 
more illocutionary acts. The next level consists of concept- 
activation actions, which entail the planning of descrip- 
tions that are mutually believed by the speaker and hearer 
to refer to objects in the world. This is the level of abstrac- 
tion at which noun phrases for definite reference are plan- 
ned. Finally, at the lowest level of abstraction are ut- 
terance acts, consisting of the utterance of specific words. 
IV. PLANNING CONCEPT-ACT IVAT ION 
ACT IONS 
Concept-activation actions describe referring at a high 
enough level of abstraction so that they are not constrained 
to have purely linguistic realizations. When a concept- 
activation action is expanded to a lower level of abstrac- 
tion, it can result in the planning of a noun phrase within 
the surface speech-act of which the concept activation is a 
part, and physical actions uch as pointing that also com- 
municate the speaker's intention to refer. 
KAMP can plan referential definite noun phrases that 
realize concept-activation actions. (The planning of at- 
tributive and indefinite referring expressions has not yet 
been addressed.) KAMP recognizes the need to plan a 
concept activation when it is expanding a surface speech- 
act. The surface speech-act is planned with a particular 
proposition that the hearer has to come to believe the 
speaker wants him to know or want. It is necessary to 
include whatever information the hearer needs to recog- 
nize what the proposition is, and this leads to the neces- 
sity of referring to the particular objects mentioned in the 
proposition. The planner often reasons that some objects 
do not need to be referred to at all. For example, in re- 
questing a hearer to remove the pump from the platform 
in an air-compressor assembly task, if the hearer knows 
that the pump is attached to the platform and nothing 
else, it is not necessary to mention the platform, since it 
is sufficient o say "Remove the pump," for the hearer to 
recognize the following propomtlon: 
Want(S, Do(H, Remove(pumpl, latforml))). 
The planning of a concept-activation action is similar 
to the planning of an illocutionary act in that the speaker 
is trying to get the hearer to recognize his intention to 
perform the act. This means that all that is necessary 
from a high-level planning point of view is that the speaker 
perform some action that signals to the hearer that the 
* For a description of KAMP's  formalization of wanting, see Appelt, 
12\]? 
ii0 
speaker wants to refer to the object. This is often done by 
incorporating a mutually believed description of the ob- 
ject into the utterance, but there is no requirement that 
the means by which the speaker communicates this inten- 
tion be linguistic. For example, the speaker could point 
at an object (almost always a communicative act), or per- 
haps throw it at the hearer (not so clearly communicative 
but definitely attention-getting. The hearer has to reason 
whether there are any communicative intentions behind 
the act.) 
Since concept-activation actions are planned during the 
expansion of surface speech-acts, the actions that realize 
them must somehow become part of the utterance being 
planned. Therefore, all concept-activation actions are ex- 
panded with two components: an intention-communication 
component and a surface-linguistic component. The inten- 
tion-communication component is an abstraction of the 
speaker's plan to communicate his intention to refer, and 
may be realized by a plan that includes physical and lin- 
guistic actions. The surface-linguistic component consists 
of the realization (in some linguistic expression) of the 
intention-communication component as part of the surface 
speech.act being planned, which means that the realization 
must be grammatically consistent with the sentence. 
The following two axiom schemata describe concept 
activation in KAMP's possible worlds representation: 
Vwl, w2 R(Do(A, Cact(B, C)), w,, w2) D 
T(w,, Want(A, Active(A, B, C))) A 
T{w2, Active(A, B, C)) 
(4) 
Vw,, w2 R(Do(A, Cact(B, C)), Wl, w2) D 
Vw3 K(Kernel(A, B), w2, wa) D 
3w4 R(Do(A, Cact(B, C)), w4, ws) A (5) 
K(Kernel(A, B), w,, w4) 
Axiom schema (4) says that when an agent A performs a
concept activation for an agent B, he must first want the 
object C to be active, and as a result of performing it, C 
becomes active with respect o A and B; Axiom schema 
(5) says that after agent A performs the action, the two 
agents A and B mutually know that the action has been 
performed. 
The consequence for the planner of axiomatizing con- 
cept activation as in (4) and (5) is that the problem of ac- 
tivating a concept now becomes one of getting the hearer 
to know that the speaker wants a particular concept o 
be active. This is the role of the intention-communication 
component in the expansion of the concept activation. 
KAMP knows about two types of actions that produce 
knowledge about what concepts a speaker wants to be ac- 
tive. One is an action called describe, which is ultimately 
expanded into a linguistic description corresponding to the 
concept he speaker intends to activate, and the other is 
called point, which is a generalized pointing action. The 
point action is assumed to directly communicate he inten- 
tion to activate aconcept, thereby avoiding the problem of 
observing a gesture and deciding whether it is a pointing, 
or an attempt o scratch an itch. 
The following schema defines the describe action: 
VWlW2 R(Do(A, Describe(B, P}), w,, w2) D 
3. A (vy D'(y) 3 ? = y)) - (6) 
T(wl, Want(A, Active(A, B, z))) 
Axiom (6) says that the precondition for an agent to per- 
form an action of describing using a particular description 
P is that the speaker wants an objee~ to be active if and 
only if it uniquely fits the description predicated of it. In 
(6), the symbol P denotes a description consisting of object 
language predicates that can be applied to the object being 
described. It could be defined as 
P ~- Xx.(D,(z) A.. .  A D.(x)) 
where the Di(z) are the individual descriptors that com- 
prise the description. The symbol D* denotes a similar ex- 
pression, which includes all the descriptors of P conjoined 
with a set of predicates that describe the focus of thedis- 
course. An axiom similar to (5) is also needed to assert 
that the speaker and hearer will mutually know, after the 
action is performed, that it has taken place. Therefore, if
the speaker and hearer mutually know of an object that 
satisfies P in focus, then they mutually know that the 
speaker wants it to be active. 
The pointing action is much simpler because it does not 
require either the speaker or the hearer to know anything 
at all about the object. 
Vwl, w2 R(Do(A, Point(B,X)), w,, w~) D 
T(w,, Want(A, Active(A, B, X))). (7) 
According to the above axiom, if an agent points at an 
object, that implies that he wants the object to be active. 
As usual, an axiom similar to (5) is required to assert hat 
the agents mutually know the action has been performed. 
Axioms (4) and (5) work together with (6) and (7) 
to produce the desired effects. When a speaker utters a 
description, or points, he communicates his intention to 
refer. When he performs the concept-activation action 
by incorporating the surface-linguistic component of his 
action into a surface speech-act, his intentions are carried 
out. Because the equivalence of axiom (6) can be used 
in both directions, if the speaker wants an object to be 
active, then one can reason that he knows the description 
predicated of it is true. 
A major problem facing the planner is deciding when 
the necessary conditions obtain to be able to take ad- 
vantage of the interactions between (6) and (7). Since this 
task involves examining several actions in the plan, it is 
performed by a critic called the action-subsumption critic. 
This critic notices when the speaker is informing the hearer 
* A complete discussion of focusing in KAMP is beyond the scope of 
this paper. KAMP uses an axiomatization of Sidner's focusing rules 
Ill\]to keep track of focus shifts. 
Iii 
of a predication that could be included in the description 
associated with a concept activation. When such an in- 
teraction is noticed, the critic proposes a modification to 
the plan. If the surface-linguistic component does not in- 
sist that the modification is impossible given the grammar, 
then the action subsumption is carried out. 
In example (1), for instance, the expert has a high-level 
plan that includes the performance of two illocutionary 
acts: requesting that the apprentice remove the pump us- 
ing a particular tool (call it tool1), and informing the ap- 
prentice that tool1 is a wheelpuller. The action subsump- 
tion critic notices that in the request the expert is referring 
to tool1 and also wants to inform the hearer of a property 
of tool1. Therefore, it proposes combining the property of 
being a wheelpuller into the description used for referring 
to tool1 while making the request. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper has described a formalism for describing the 
action of referring in a manner that is useful for a genera- 
tion system based on planning, like KAMP. The central 
idea is to divide referring into two tasks: an intention- 
communication task and a surface-linguistic ask. By so 
doing, it is possible to axiomatize different actions that 
communicate a speaker's intention to refer. Thus, the 
planner is able to produce plans that produce natural- 
language referring expressions, but take the larger context 
of the speaker's nonlinguistic actions into account as well. 
KAMP currently plans only simple definite reference. 
One promising extension of this approach for future re- 
search is to extend the active predicate to apply to inten- 
sional concepts in addition to the extensional ones now 
required for definite reference. We hope this will allow for 
the planning of attributive and indefinite reference as well. 
KAMP currently does not plan quantified noun phrases, 
nor can it refer generically, nor can it refer to collections 
of entities. Much basic research needs to be done to ex- 
tend KAMP to handle these other cases, but we hope that 
the formalism outlined here will provide a good base from 
which to investigate these extensions. 
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author is grateful to Barbara Grosz, Bob Moore 
and Nils Nilsson for comments on earlier drafts of this 
paper. 
VII. REFERENCES 
\[3\] 
\[4\] 
\[51 
\[6\] 
\[7\] 
\[8\] 
I9\] 
\[10\] 
\[11\] 
Clark, Herbert, and C. Marshall, Definite Reference 
and Mutual Knowledge, in Joshi et. al. (eds.), Ele- 
ments of Discourse Understanding, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 1981. 
Cohen, Philip and C. R. Perrault, Elements of a Plan- 
Based Theory of Speech Acts, Cognitive Science, vol. 
3, pp. 177-212, 1979. 
Cohen, Philip, and H. Levesque, Speech Acts and 
the Recognition of Shared Plans,, Proceedings of the 
Canadian Society for Computational Studies in Intel- 
ligence, 1980. 
Cohen, Philip, The Need for Referent Identification 
as a Planned Action, Proceedings of IJCAI-7, 1981. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Focusing and Description in Nat- 
ural Language Dialogs, in Joshi et al (eds.), Elements 
of Discourse Understanding: Proceedings of a 
Workshop on Computational Aspects of Lin- 
guistic Structure and Discourse Setting, Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1980. 
Moore, Robert C., Reasoning about Knowledge and 
Action, SRI International Technical Note No. 191, 
1980. 
Olson, D., From Utterance to Text: The Bias of Lan- 
guage in Speech and Writing, Harvard Educational 
Review, Vol, 47, No. 3, August, 1077. 
Sacerdoti, Earl, A Structure for Plans and Be- 
havior, Elsevier North-Holland, Inc., Amsterdam, 
1977. 
Sidner, Candacl L., Toward a Computational Theory 
of Definite Anaphora Comprehension i  English, MIT 
Technical Report AI-TR-537, 1979. 
I1\] 
I2\] 
Appelt, Douglas E., Problem Solving Applied to Lan- 
guage Generation, Proceedings of the 18th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, 1980. 
Appelt, Douglas E., Planning Natural Language Utter- 
ances To Satisfy Multiple Goals, SRI International 
Technical Note No. 259, 1982. 
112 
