OUR DOUBLE ANNIVERSARY 
Victor H. Yngve 
University of Chicago 
Chlcngo, 1111nols 60637 USA 
ABSTRACT 
In June of 1952, ten years before the founding 
of the Association, the first meeting ever held on 
computational l inguistics took place. This meet- 
ing, the succeeding ten years, and the first year 
of  the  Assoc ia t ion  are  d i scussed .  Some thoughts  
a re  o f fe red  as to  what  the  fu ture  may br ing .  
I THE EARLY YEARS 
When the  suggest ion  came f rom Don Walker  to  
ce lebrate  our  twent ie th  ann iversary  by a pane l  
discussion I responded with enthusiasm at the op- 
portunlty for us all to reminisce. Much has hap- 
pened i n  those  twenty  years  to  look  back  on,  and 
there  have  been many changes :  Not many here  w i l l  
remember  that  found ing  meet ing .  As our  thoughts  go 
back to the beginnings it must also be with a note 
of sadness, for some of our most illustrious early 
members can no longer be counted among the living. 
Not many of you will remember either that our 
meeting here today marks another anniversary of 
signal importance for this Association. Thirty 
years ago the first organized conference ever to be 
held in the field of computational linguistics took 
place. The coincidence of the dates is remarkable. 
This conference is on June 16-18, 1982, that one 
was on June 17-20, 1952, overlapping two of our 
three dates. That meeting was the M.I.T. Confer- 
ence on Mechanical Translation. It was an inter- 
national meeting organized by ?. Bar-Hillsl and 
held at the M.I.L faculty club. If our association 
was born twenty years ago, this was the moment of 
its conception, exactly thirty years ago. I will 
try to recall that meeting for you, as best I can, 
for I propose that we celebrate that anniversary as 
well. 
For  that  very  f i r s t  meet ing  Bar -H i l le l  had 
brought  together  e ighteen  in teres ted  peop le  f rom 
both  coasts  and f rom En~In~d.  The f i r s t  sess ion  
was an evening session open to the public. It 
consisted of five short semi-popular talks. The 
real business of the meeting took place the next 
three days in closed sessions in a pleasant room 
overlooking the Charles River. We sat around a 
kind of rectangular round-table, listened to fif- 
teen prepared papers or presentations, and discus- 
sed them wi th  a no -ho lds -bar red  g ive -and- take  cata -  
lyzed  by the  in tense ,  open,  and cand id ly  outspoken 
persona l i ty  o f  Bar -H i l le l .  He was the  on ly  person  
I ever  knew who cou ld  a rgue  w i th  you ,  shout ing  
exc i ted ly  a t  the  top  o f  h i s  lungs  unt i l  your  back  
was literally against the wall, and always with 
that angelic smile on his face and you couldn't 
help llklng him through it all. The stenotype 
transcript of the dlsousslon at that first meetlng 
makes interesting reading even today. The partici- 
pants grappled in a preliminary but often insight- 
ful way with diff icult issues many of which are 
still with u~ 
As for the papers at the conference, three 
were given by Erwin Relfler of the Far Eastern and 
Russian Institute, the University of Washington; 
two by Victor Oswald of the Department of Germanic 
Languages, UCLA; two by Willlam Bull of the Depart- 
ment of Spanish, UCLA; one each by Stuart Dodd of 
the University of Washington, William Locke of the 
Department of Modern Languages, M.I.T., James Perry 
of the Center for International Studies, M.I.T., 
Harry Huskey of the National Bureau of Standards 
computer lab at UCLA, and Jay Forrester of the 
Digital Computer Laboratory, M.I.T. Two were by 
Bar-Hillel hlmself, from M.I?T.; and one was by A. 
D? Booth of the Electronic Computer Section, Birk- 
beck  co l lege ,  London.  Most  o f  the  substant ia l  
papers  were la ter  rev ised  fo r  pub l i ca t ion  as some 
o f  the  four teen  ar t i c les  in  the  vo lume Mach ine  
~ o f L a n ~ u ~ e s  ed i ted  by Locke and Booth ,  
or  in  the  pages o f  the  Journa l  Mechan ica l  T rans la -  
t ion ,  which was started in March of 195~. Two 
reports of the conference were subsequently pub- 
lished in the Journal, one by Erwln Relfler and one 
by Craig Reynolds, J~  of IBM. 
The ten years between the first conference and 
the founding of the Association were marked by many 
newsworthy events and considerable technical prog- 
ress. A number  o f  ind iv idua ls  and groups  entered  
the  f ie ld ,  both  here  and abroad ,  and an adequate  
leve l  o f  suppor t  mater ia l i zed ,  most ly  from govern-  
ment  agenc ies .  Th is  impor tant  cont r ibut ion  to  
progress  in  our  f ie ld  shou ld  be a mat ter  o f  p r ide  
to  the  agenc ies  invo lved .  I t  was an essent ia l  
ingred ient  in  the  mix  o f  e f fo r ts  that  have  put  us  
where  we are  today .  P rogress  in  that  f i r s t  ten  
years  can  be es t imated  by cons ider ing  that  up to  
the  t ime o f  the  found ing  o f  the  Assoc ia t ion  the  
journal ~ ~ p u b l l s h e d  52 arti- 
cles, 187 abstracts of the llterature, and ran to 
532 pages. 
92 
To rev iew a l l  o f  that  research  adequate ly  
wou ld  be a la rge  task ,  and one that  I w i l l  not  
under take  here .  But  I shou ld  l i ke  to  say  that  i t  
includes a number of  cases where computer tech- 
niques have played an essential role in linguistic 
research. Just one example is the work on the 
depth hypothesis during the summer of 1959, which 
owes everything to  the heuristic advantages of  
computer model ing  in linguistics. Those linguists 
who still scorn or ignore computational linguistics 
shou ld  cons ider  care fu l ly  those  many examples  o f  
the efflcaoy of  computer methods in their dlsoi- 
pllne. 
II FOUNDING THE SOCIETY 
Toward the  end of  those  ten  years  the  need fo r  
a pro fess iona l  soc ie ty  became c lear .  We d id  keep  
in touch byphone and letter, and ad hoc committees 
had been formed fo r  var ious  purposes .  But most  of  
a l l  we needed a fo rmal  o rgan izat ion  to  br ing  a 
degree  o f  o rder  in to  the  process  o f  p lann ing  meet -  
ings .  We cou ld  make p lans  through our  in fo rmal  
contacts ,  but  there  was a lways  the  prob lem that  new 
groups  or  ex is t ing  organ izat ions  wou ld  go ahead 
w i th  p lans  o f  the i r  own fo r  meet ings  too  soon  
before  or  a f te r  our  own. There were a l so  requests  
f rom sponsor ing  agenc ies  fo r  sympos ia  rev iewing  
progress  and encourag ing  cooperat ion  between the  
growing  number of  federa l ly  suppor ted  pro jec ts .  We 
wanted regu lar  meet ings  but  we res i s ted  the  idea  o f  
hav ing  too  many. 
As an example of the situation we faced, I 
received a let ter  early in 1959 from the Associa- 
tion for Computing Machinery, who were planning a 
National Conference to be held at M.I.~ September 
1-3 ,  1959.  They asked  me i f  I thought  that  peop le  
connected with mechanical translation would llke to 
have a session at the meeting or meet concurrently. 
I said I didn't know, but agreed to write to some 
people in the field about it. I did write, offer- 
ing to set up a session or a separate meeting if 
others wanted me to do it, but expressing the 
thought that there were very few of us doing re- 
search in the field and that there now were a 
number of organizations that would llke to include 
mechanical translation papers in their programs to 
build interest and attendance. It was a hot topic 
at the time. 
We did not take up the ACM in their kind 
offer. Had we done so, we might today be a Special 
Interest Group of the AC~l, and that would have 
hindered our close ties to linguistics. 
In any event, the people at UCLA organized a 
National Symposium on Machine Translation, which 
took place on February 2-5, 1960, Just five months 
after the date of the ACM meeting, and five months 
after that, on July 18-22, 1950, a meeting of 
federally sponsored machine translation workers, 
organized by Harry Josselson and supported by NSF 
and ONR was held at the Princeton Inn, Princeton, 
New Jersey. The next year, on April q-7, 1961, a 
similar conference was held st Georgetown Univer- 
sity, and Just five months after that, on September 
5-8, 1961, the National Physical Laboratory in 
Teddlngton, England hosted an International Confer- 
ence on Machine Translation of Languages and ?p- 
plied Language Analysis. SomethlnE clearly had to 
be done .  So the  s tage  had been set ,  and n ine  
months later, on June 13, 1962, at another confer- 
ence organized by the irrepressible Harry Josselson 
at the Princeton Inn, we finally founded a profes- 
sional society: The Association for Machine Trans- 
lation and Computational Linguistics, renamed six 
years later the Association for Computational Lin- 
gulstlca. 
I have not been able to locate a llst of our 
charter members. I am sure one exists. The offi- 
cers for the first year were Victor H. Yngve, 
President; David G. Hays, Vice-Presldent; and Harry 
H. Josselson, Secretary-Treasurer. Mrs. Ida Rhodes, 
Paul Garvln, and Wlnfred P. Lehmann were members of 
the  Execut ive  Counc i l .  R ichard  See ,  Anthony  G. 
Oettinger, and Sydney M. Lamb were members of the 
NominatlngCommlttee. Our announced purpose was to 
encourage high professional standards by aponsoring 
meet ings ,  pub l i ca t ion ,  and o ther  exchange of  ln /o r -  
mat ion .  I t  was  to  prov ide  a means  o f  do ing  to -  
gether  what  ind iv idua ls  cannot  do a lone .  
Many of us had hoped for a truly international 
association. We felt this would be particularly 
appropriate for an organization involved in trying 
to improve the means for international communica- 
tion through mechanical translation. But the cost 
of travel, travel restrictions from some countries, 
and various other practical problems stood in the 
way. We became an in ternat iona l  but  p redominant ly  
Amer ican assoc ia t ion .  We dec ided  from the beg in -  
n ing  to  meet  in  a l te rnate  years  in  con junct ion  w i th  
a major computer conference and a major linguistics 
conference, 
My year of tenure as President was uneventful, 
or so it seemS. It is difficult to extract one 
year of memories twenty years ago. I do remember a 
trip to Denver to see about arrangements for our 
first annual meetlng at the Denver Hilton, to take 
place August 25 and 26, 1963, the two days immedi- 
ately preceding the ACM National Conference. The 
local arrangements people for that meeting were 
most helpful. The program was put together by 
Harry Josselson. There were thirty-four papers 
covering a wide variety of topics including syntac- 
tic analysis, semantics, particulars of languages, 
theoretical linguistics, research procedures, and 
research techniques. Abstracts for the thirty four 
papers were published i n ~ ~ ,  
Yol. 7, No. 2, and a group photograph of some of 
the delegates attending appeared in Vol. 8, No. I. 
Look ing  a t  th i s  photograph and those  taken  at- 
earlier conferences and published in earlier issues 
invokes considerable nostalgia for those days. 
III THE FUTURE 
I do remember my presidential address, for it 
stressed some matters that I thought were particu- 
95 
l a r ly  impor tant  fo r  the fu ture .  These thoughts  
were a l so  embodied in  a longer  paper  read to  the  
American Ph i losoph ica l  Soc iety  three months la ter ,  
in  November 1963, and pub l i shed  the  next  year  by 
that  o rgan izat ion .  I should  l i ke  to  quote  a few 
sentences for  they are par t i cu la r ly  appropr iate  a t  
th i s  point:  
? A new f ie ld  o f  research  has grown up which 
revo lves  about languages, computers, and symbolic 
processes. This sometimes is called computational 
llnguistlcs, mechanical linguistics, information 
process ing ,  symbol man ipu la t ion ,  and so on. None 
of the names are really adequate. The implications 
Of this research for the future are far-reachlng. 
Imagine what it would mean if we bad computer 
programs that could actually understand English. 
Besides the obvious practical implications, the 
implications for our understanding of language are 
most exciting. This research promises to give us 
new insights into the way in which languages convey 
information, the way in which people understand 
English, the nature of thought processes, the na- 
ture of  our theor ies ,  ideas ,  and pre jud ices ,  and 
eventua l ly  a deeper  unders tand ing  o f  ourse lves .  
Perhaps one of the last frontiers of man~s under- 
standing of his environment is his understandlr~of 
man and his mental processes. 
"This new f ie ld  touches, with var ious  degrees 
of  over lap and in teract ion ,  the a lready we l l -es tab-  
l i shed  d iverse  f ie lds  of  l i ngu is t i cs ,  psychology, 
logic, philosophy, information theory, circuit 
theory, and computer design. The interaction with 
l inguistics has already produced several small 
revolutions in methodology, point of view, insight 
into language, and standards of rigor and exact- 
ness. It appears that before we are done, linguis- 
tics will be completely revolutionized." 
This  quotat ion  i s  par t i cu la r ly  apt  because I
s t i l l  be l ieve  that  before we are done l ingu is t i cs  
w i l l  be complete ly  revo lu t ion ized .  Let me explain.  
First, the difficulties in mechanlzlng translation 
had already at that early date called attention to 
fundamental inadequacies in linguistic theory, 
traditional or transformational, it makes no dif- 
ference. Second, the depth  hypothes is  and the 
problems raised in trying to square it with current 
linguistic theory threw further doubt on the scien- 
tific integrity of linguistics. And third, the 
depth hypothes is  also provided an important  c lue as 
to how the Inadequacies in linguistic theory might 
eventually be overcome. I have spent the last two 
decades or so fol lowing this lead and trying to 
find a more satisfactory foundation for l inguis- 
tics. The following is a brief progress report to 
the parent  body, as i t  were.  A recent  wr i t ten  
repor t  may be found in  the  J a n u a ~ S e r i e s  
Major volume 97, ed i ted by F lo r ian  Coulmas. 
Modern scientific linguistics, since its be- 
Elnnlng a century and a half ago, has been charac- 
terized by three  cent ra l  goa ls  (1) that  i t  s tudy  
language, (2) that it be scientific, and (3) that 
it seek explanations in terms of people. It turns 
out that these goals are contradictory and mutually 
incompatible, and this is the underlying reason for 
the most serious Inadequacies in linguistic theor~ 
Linguistics, and that includes computational 
linguistics, is faced with two mutually exclusive 
alternatives. We can either accept the first goal 
and study language by the methods of grammar, or we 
can accept the second and third goals and seek 
explanations of communicative phenomena in terms of 
people by the methods ofsclence. 
We cannot continue with business a usual and 
try to have it both ways. Basically this is be- 
cause science studies real objects given in advance 
whereas grammar studies objects that are only 
created by a point of vlew, as Saussure realized. 
Their study rests on a special assumption that 
places grammar outside of science. To try to have 
it both ways also leads to the fallacies of the 
psychologlcal and social reality of grammar. 
The full implications of this fork in the road 
that linguistics faces is Just now sinking in. 
Only the second alternative is viable, science 
rather than grammar. This means we will have to 
give up the two thousand year grammatical tradition 
at the core of linguistic thought and reconstruct 
the discipline on well-known scientific principles 
instead. This will open up vast opportunities for 
research to uncover that essential and unique part 
of human nature, how people communicate. We may 
then finally be able to do all those things we have 
been trying so hard to do. 
In  th i s  necesaary  reconst ruc t ion  I fo resee  
that computat ional  l i ngu is t i cs  i s  dest ined to play 
an essent ia l  ro le .  
94 
