TRANSFORMING ENGLISH INTERFACES TO OTHER NATURAL LANGUAGES: 
AN EXPERIMENT WITH PORTUGUESE 
GABRIEL PEREIRA LOPES (1) 
Departamento de Matem~tica 
? Instituto Superior de Agronomia 
Tapada da Ajuda - 1399 Lisboa Codex, Portugal 
ABSTRACT 
Nowadays i t  is common the construction of 
English understanding systems (interfaces) that soo- 
ner or later one has to re-use, adapting and conve~ 
ting them to other natural languages. This is not an 
easy task and in many cases the arisen problems are 
quite complex. In this paper an experiment hat was 
accomplished for Portuguese language is reported 
and some conclusions are expl ic itely stated. A know 
ledge information processing system, known as SSIPA, 
with natural language comprehension capabilities 
that interacts with users in Portuguese through a 
Portuguese interface, LUSO, was bui l t .  Logic was u- 
sed as a mental aid and as a practical tool. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The CHAT-80 program for English (Warren & 
Pereira, 1981; Pereira, 1983) was transformed and a 
dapted to Portuguese. Logic Programming as a mental 
aid, and Prolog (Coelho, 1983; Clocksin & Melish , 
1981) and Extraposition Grammars (Pereira, 1983) as 
practical tools, were adopted to implement a natu- 
ral language interface for Portuguese. The interfa- 
ce here reported, called LUSO, was then coupled to 
a knowledge base for geography, an extension of the 
CHAT-80 knowledge base. In an ulter ior  experiment ,
LUSO dictionary was augmented with new vocabulary 
and LUSO was coupled to other modules that conside- 
rably augmented the expertise capabilities of SSIPA 
(Sistema Simulador de um Interlocutor Portugu~s Au- 
tom~tico (2)). 
SSIPA is a complex knowledge information processing 
system with natural language comprehension and syn- 
thesis capabilitites that interacts with users in 
Portuguese due to the l inguist ic knowledge that is 
logically organized and codified in the above men- 
tioned SSIPA's interface ca\]led LUSO.After the f i r s t  
step of its development, SSIPA was able to answer 
(1) Present Adress: Centro de Inform~tica, Laborat5 
rio Nacional de Engenharia Civ i l ,  lOl, Av. do Bra= 
s i l ,  1799 Lisboa Codex, Portugal 
(2) Simulating System of a Portuguese Automatic In- 
terlocutor. 
questions about geography and could agree or disa- 
gree with the opinions stated by the users about 
i ts geographical knowledge. After the second step 
of its development SSIPA became more powerful and 
intel l igent because i t  could also perform actions 
that tradit ional ly were attributes of computer mo- 
nitors (Lopes & Viccari, 1984).As a matter of fact, 
SSIPA can create and delete f i les ,  f i l l  them, 
change their names, l i s t  and change their, contents; 
SSIPA receives, keeps and send messaqes 
answers questions not only about geography but 
also about the knowledge SSIPA represents; i t  a - 
grees or disagrees with the opinions stated byusers 
about the Knowledg~ context behind dialogues, 
reacts when users try to cheat i t  but, as a rule, 
SSIPA behaves as a helpful, deligent and cooperat~ 
ve interlocutor wi l l ing to serve human users, chan 
ging from one to another topic of conversation and 
developing intel l igent c lar i f icat ion dialogues (Lo 
pes, 1984). All these features require a very power 
ful Portuguese language interface whosemain moron~ 
-syntact ic  features are pointed out in this pa- 
per. 
2. FORMALIZATION OF NATURAL 
LANGUAGE CONSTRUCTS 
Natural language are complex structured 
systems d i f f i cu l t  to formalize. Formalization can 
be understood as a step by step construction of a 
theory to achieve , as an ultimate goal, an axioma 
t ic  definit ion of natural language constructs. I f  
this descriptive theory can also function as the 
l inguist ic  structured knowledge necessary to simu- 
late a human native using his mother language then, 
the formalization effort has acquired and gained a 
new insight. While representing a natural language 
system, i t  may represent a native competence about 
his mother language and, simultaneously, i t  mayper 
form the role of a native using that competence. 
This dual unity, incorporatingadescription f l in  
guistic knowledge and incorporating the same l in  - 
guistic knowledge ready to be active, is central to 
this work.This unification in the same unit of two 
apparently conflicting and contraditory aspects of 
natural languages is possible due to the usage of 
logic as a mental and a practical tool. SSIPA enca 
psulates both views of natural language. 
Practice demonstrates that, for the cons 
truction of complex models i t  is better to begin 
with simple model versions to represent the system 
one intends to simulate. This practical conclusion 
8 
seems reasonable because knowledge about a system 
and about its representation keeps on augmenting as 
far as, to achieve the validation of the simula - 
ting model, empirical investigation progresses(Klir, 
1975). However one must be aware that while Know - 
ledge about a real system keeps on growing so do 
the complexitythat one can unwill ingly introduce in 
to the model. Having all this in mind, i f  we want 
to formalize l inguist ic knowledge about natural fan 
guage we must be prepared to use powerful formal- 
languages prone to description of complex systems 
and able to be used as programming languages. Here 
i t  is subsumed that computers are tools adapted to 
deal with complexity, augmenting considerably hu- 
man capabilities to handle highly complex represen 
tational systems. 
3. LUSO 
LUSO input subsystem is a device that 
transforms a sequence of words morfologically, syn 
tactical ly and semantically significant into a Lo- 
gical Form. A Logical Form is here understood as a 
sequence of predicates, envelopes for knowledge 
transportation from users to SSIPA central proces- 
sing unit (the EVENT DRIVER) and from this unit to 
users. These predicates generalize and augment he 
potencialities of Pereira's equivalent predicates, 
(Pereira, 1983). They can also be compared with the 
lexical functions of Bresnam (Ig81). However we 
don't use case classification. In Portuguese, pre- 
positions associated to noun semanticfeatures eem 
to be enough to identify and differentiate mea- 
nings of verbal, noun, adjectival and even prepos~ 
tional form functions (Lopes, 1984). 
LUSO is a natural language interface that 
concentrates l inguist ic expert knowledge about Pot 
tuguese language. 
LUSO input subsystem works sequentially. 
In a f i r s t  step i t  performs the syntactical analy- 
sis of an input Portuguese sequence of words. De- 
pending on the task LUSO has been commited to per- 
form, a lexical ly f i l l ed  syntagmatic marker or a 
fai lure is the result of LUSO eagerness to prove 
the above mentioned input sequence of words as a 
syntactically correct yes-no question, wh-question, 
imperative or declarative sentence, or as a syntac 
t ica l ly  correct noun phrase or prepositional phra Z 
se. When a lexical ly f i l l ed  syntagmatic marker is 
obtained, i t  is translated to a logical form. Fi- 
nally this form is planned and simplified accor - 
ding to the methodology described by Pereira (1983) 
and Warren (1981). 
The design of LUSO input subsystem re - 
flects the following hypothesis: 
? morphological analysis of Portuguese 
constructs is syntactically driven; 
? l inguist ic semantic analysis of Portu- 
guese constructs is lexical ly (functio 
nally) driven (in a quasi-bresnamian, 
sense (Bresnam, 1981; Pereira, 1983;Lo 
pes, 1984)); 
? cognitive semantic analysis of Portu - 
guese constructs depends on syntacti - 
cal and l inguist ic  semantic analysis 
previously achieved for Portuguese cons 
tructs. 
This suggests SSIPA as a formal system 
that already theorizes some aspects of Portuguese 
language while LUSO specificates the form of for- 
mal functions whose cognitive content and formal ap 
titude for transforming system state are defined at 
the semantic level of the formal system. 
To complete the formal role wewanted SS ! 
PA to play, LUSO output subsystem synthesizes Por- 
tuguese noun phrases, prepositional phrases or se D 
tences whenever i t  receives correspondent requests 
to output such constructs. To achieve that goal LU 
SO transforms any previously lexical ly f i l l ed  syn- 
tagmatic marker into a sequence of Portuguesewords 
in its f inal forms, ready to be sent to a user. 
4. MORPHO-SYNTACTICAL ANALYSIS AND SYNTHE - 
SIS OF PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE CONSTRUCTS 
The morpho-syntactical analysis of Portu 
guese language constructs is application indepen - 
dent and is based on the various concepts develo- 
ped by Chomsky and followers in the framework of 
the Extended Standard Theory of Generative Grammar 
(Chomsky, 1980, 1981a, 1981b; Rouveret, 1983 and 
many others)? As i t  was already mentioned in this 
paper, one of the crucial hypothesis behind LUSO's 
design reflects the idea that morphological analy- 
sis of Portuguese constructs is syntactically dri- 
ven. This means that when the syntactical parseris 
waiting for a specific grammatical category, i t  ta 
kes the next word to be analysed from the input se 
quence of words and searches the dictionary for that 
category, trying to find the input word. I f  the i 
put word does not match any dictionary entry for 
that particular category, all possible input word 
endings, one after another, starting from the lon- 
gest towards ths shortest, are matched against the 
ending entries for that category unti l  a success - 
ful match wi l l  occur. I f  such a match does not suc 
ceed, this means that the input word does not be- 
long to the foreseen grammatical category. As a co) 
sequence, a fai lure occurs and the Prolog mecha - 
nism for backtracking is automatically activated. 
When one of the input word possible endings mat - 
ches an ending entry for the syntactically predic- 
ted category, a basic form for the input word is 
coined. The newly coined basic form for that in - 
put word is then checked against the subdictionary 
entries for the foreseen grammatical category.A pr~ 
cess of successes and/or failures proceeds. A syn- 
tagmatic marker for each input Portuguese construct 
is f i l l ed  with word basic forms and correspon - 
dingsyntactic features information (person, gender 
and number for noun phrases; tense, mode, aspect , 
voice and negation for verbs; etc.). The basic form 
fora-verb is its in f in i t i ve  form; for a nouhisits 
singular form; for a pronoun, art icle or adjective 
is its singular masculine form. 
The morphological synthesis of Portugue- 
se constructs is syntactically driven. This means 
that, departing from a syntagmatic marker lexical- 
lp f i l led  with basic forms of Portuguese words, u- 
sing the syntactic features that are expl ic i te l ly  
considered into that marker, LUSO output subsystem 
coines the corresponding sequence of Portuguese 
words in its final output form ready to be sent to 
the user with whom the system is interacting. For 
this purpose most of the rules that were designed 
to consult LUSO's dictionary were reordered. Depa~ 
ting from basic forms of words, their final forms 
are obtained by a process nearly inverse of the 
process used for input. 
Extraposition grammars, the formalism d e 
veloped by Pereira (1983), were used to implement 
the analyser and the synthesizer for Portuguese.It 
is worth tel l ing that this formalism proved to be 
quite adequate for the description of move-alpha ru 
le (Chomsky, IgBlb) in complex syntactical environ 
ments such as those that frequently occur in Portu 
guese. As a matter of fact phrase constituents or- 
der in Portuguese sentences is quite free. LUSO ta 
kes into account the same type of problems handled 
by CHAT-80 program. Additionally, i t  analysis syn- 
tactical structures involving prepositional phra - 
ses and verb headed sentences where there is reor- 
dering of noun phrase constituents inside those se~ 
tences due to the heading process. Problems rela- 
ted to common ouns followed by the proper nouns 
they refer, in the context where they appear,is a ! 
so handled. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
I t  is wiser to concentrate efforts to o 0 
tain more and more powerful morpho-syntactic anal~ 
sets, l inguistic semantic analysers and cognitive, 
semantic interpreters for the natural language we 
are working in. Constructing replicants of applica 
tion directed interfaces starting from scratch is 
unproductive. Constructing more and more powerful 
interfaces, as the number of applications natural- 
ly grows, the natural language analyser, planned to 
be application independent, is always under impro- 
vement because i t  is always incorporating more and 
more linguistic knowledge. At the same time one is 
freed from consideration of morphological and syn- 
tactic basic problems and so one can shift  his at- 
tention to more subtle problems related to tense , 
modality and others and one can concentrate his 
mind to the way how concepts related to words are 
defined. As a consequence, the implementing task 
can be organized by areas of specialization. 
When one has to construct an interface 
for a specific language i t  is reasonable to look 
for interfaces implemented for other languages wh e 
re the faced syntactical and morphological prob - 
lems have a similar degree of complexity. Having 
this in mind, Portuguese language seriously compe- 
tes with English because i t  rises quite important 
syntactic, semantic and pragmatic problems similar 
to problems risen by lat in,  slavonic and germanic 
languages. 
6. AKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Helder Coelho for 
his insightful comments and suggestions throughout 
this research and the writing of this paper. 
7 REFERENCES 
BRESNAM, J., "The passive in lexical theory", Occa 
sional Paper 7, The Center for Cognitive Science 
MIT, 1981. 
CHOMSKY, N., 'bn binding", Linguistic Inquiry,vol. 
I I ,  n9 l ,  1-46, 1980. 
CHOMSKY, N., "Lectures on government and binding", 
Foris Publications, Dordrecht, Holland, I981a. 
CHOMSKY, N., "On the representation of form and 
function", The Linguistic Review, vol. l ,  n9 l ,  
30-40, 1981a. 
COELHO, H., "The art of knowledge ngineering with 
Prolog", INFOLOG PROJ, Faculdade de Ci~ncias, U- 
nivers~dade Cl~ssica de Lisboa, 1983. 
KLIR, G., "On the representationof act ivity arrays~ 
Int. J. General Systems, 2, 149-168, 1975 
LOPES, G., "Implementing dialogues in a knowledge 
information system", paper submited to Interna - 
tional Workshop on Natural Language Understan 
ding and Logic Programming, Rennes, France, 1984. 
LOPES, G. and VICCARI, R., "An intell igent monitor 
interacting in Portuguese language", short paper 
accepted for ECAI-84, Pisa. 
PEREIRA, F., "Logic for natural language analysis~ 
Technical Note 275, SRI International, 1983. 
ROUVERET, A., unpublished lectures lectured in Lis 
bon, 1983. 
WARREN, D., "Efficient processing of interactive r e 
lational data base queries expressed in logic" , 
Dept. of Ar t i f i c ia l  Intelligence, Univ. of Edin- 
burgh, 1981. 
WARREN, D. and PEREIRA, F., "An eff icient easil ly 
adaptable system for interpreting natural langua 
ge queries", DAI research paper nQ 155, Univ. of 
Edinburgh, 1981. 
10 
