AUTOMATIC  CONSTRUCTION OF D ISCOURSE REPRESENTATION STRUCTURES 
Franz Guenthner  
Universit~it T i ib ingen 
Wilhelmstr. 50 
D-7400 Tdb ingen,  FRG 
Hubert Lehmann 
IBM Deutschland GmbH 
Heidelberg Scientific Center 
Tiergartenstr. 15 
D-6900 Heidelberg, FRG 
Abstract 
Kamp's Discourse Representation Theory is a major 
breakthrough regarding the systematic translation 
of natural language discourse into logical form. We 
have therefore chosen to marry the User Specialty 
Languages System, which was originally designed as 
a natural language frontend to a relational database 
system, with this new theory. In the paper we try 
to show taking - for the sake of simplicity - Kemp's 
fragment of English how this is achieved. The re- 
search reported is going on in the context of the 
pro ject  Linguistics and Logic Based Legal Expert 
System under taken  joint ly by the IBM He ide lberg  
Scient i f ic  Center  and the Universit~it T i ib ingen.  
1 Introduction 
In th is  paper  we are concerned  with the systemat ic  
t rans la t ion  of natura l  language d iscourse  into Dis- 
course  Representat ion  S t ructures  as they  are de-  
f ined in D iscourse  Representat ion  Theory  (DRT) 
f i r s t  formulated by Kamp (1981). Th is  theory  re -  
p resents  a major b reakthrough in that  it sys temat -  
ically accounts  for the context  dependent  
in terpreta t ion  of sentences ,  in par t i cu la r  with re -  
gard  to anaphor ic  re lat ions .  
From a syntactic point of view, however, Kamp 
chose a very restricted fragment of Engl ish. It is 
our goal, therefore, to extend the syntactic cover- 
age for DRT by linking it to the grammars described 
for the User Specialty Languages (USL) system 
(Lehmann (1978), Ott and Zoeppritz (1979), Leh- 
mann (1980), Sopefia (1982), Zoeppritz (1984)) 
which are comprehensive enough to deal with realis- 
tic discourses. Our  main tasks are then to describe 
the syntactic framework chosen 
Discourse Representation Structures (DRSs) 
the translation from parse trees to DRSs  
The translation from parse trees to DRSs  will, as we 
shall see, not proceed directly but rather via Inter- 
mediate Structures. which were already used in the 
USL  system. Clearly, it is not possible here to de- 
scribe the complete process in full detail. We will 
hence limit ourselves here to a presentation Kamp's 
fragment of English in our framework. 
The work repor ted  here  forms par t  of the deve l -  
opment of a Natura l  Language Ana lyzer  that  will 
t rans la te  natura l  language d iscourse  into DRSs and 
that  is evo lv ing  out of the USL system.  We in tend  
to use this Natura l  Language Ana lyzer  as a par t  of a 
legal exper t  sys tem the const ruct ion  of which is the 
object ive of a joint pro ject  of the Un ivers i ty  of 
T i ib ingen and the IBM He ide lberg  Scient i f ic  Center .  
2 SyntaJc 
2.1 Syntactic framework and parsing process 
The parser  used  in the Natura l  Language Ana lyzer  
was  or ig inal ly  descr ibed  by Kay (1967) and subse-  
quent ly  implemented in the REL sys tem (Thompson 
et .  al. (1969)).  The Natural  Language Ana lyzer  
uses  a modif ied vers ion  of th is  parser  which is due 
to Ber t rand  &al (1976, IBM (1981)).  
Each grammar rule contains the name of an inteP- 
pretation routine, and hence each node in the parse 
tree for a given sentence also contains the name of 
such a routine. The  semantic executer invokes the 
interpretation routines in the order in which they 
appear in the parse tree, starting at the root of the 
tree. 
2.2 Syntactic coverage 
The  syntactic coverage of the Natural Language An-  
alyzer presently includes 
Nouns 
Verbs 
Adjectives and adjectival phrases: gradation, 
modification by modal adverbial, modification by 
ordinal number  
- Units of measure 
- Noun phrases: definiteness, quantification, in- 
terrogative pronouns, personal pronouns, pos- 
sessive pronouns, relative pronouns 
- Verb complements: subjects and nominative com- 
plements, direct objects, indirect objects, prepo- 
sitional objects 
- Noun complements: relative clauses, participial 
attribute phrases, genitive attributes, apposi- 
tions, prepositional attributes 
- Complements of noun and verb: negation, loca- 
tive adverbials, temporal adverbials 
- Coordination for nouns, noun phrases, 
adjectives, verb complexes and sentences 
- Comparative constructions 
- Subordinate clauses: conditionals 
- Sentences : declarative sentences, questions, 
commands 
398  
2.3 Syntax  ru les to cover the Kamp fragment 
In this section we give the categories and rules used 
to process the Kamp fragment. The syntax rules 
given below are somewhat simplified with regard to 
the full grammars used in the Natural Language Ana- 
lyzer, but they have been formulated in the same 
spirit. For a detailed account of the German syntax 
see Zoeppritz (1984), for the Spanish grammar see 
Sopefia (1982). 
Syntactic categories 
We need the following categories : <NAME>, 
<NOMEN>,  <QU>, <NP> (features: REL, PRO, NOM,  
ACC) ,  <VERB> (features: TYP=NI,  TYP=NA) ,  
<SENT>, <SC> (feature: REL). 
Vocabulary 
The vocabulary items we have taken from Ramp 
(1981). 
<NAME> : Pedro, Chiquita, John, Mary, 
Bill, ... 
<NOMEN:?NOM,?ACC> : farmer, donkey, widow, 
man, woman, ... 
<VERB:TYP=NI> : thrives, ... 
<VERB:TYP=NA> : owns, beats, loves, admires, 
courts, likes, feeds .... 
<QU> : a, an, every 
<NP:+PRO,+NOM> : he, she, it 
<NP:?PRO,+ACC> : him, her, it 
<NP: ?REL ,?NOM> : who, which, that 
<NP:?REL ,+ACC> : whom, which, that 
2.3 . I  Syntax  ru les 
To he lp  readab i l i ty ,  the  spec i f i ca t ion  of in te rpreta -  
t ion rout ines  has  been  taken  out  of the  left  hand  
s ide of the  syntax  ru les  and  has  been  p laced in the  
succeed ing  l ine.  The  numbers  appear ing  as parame-  
te rs  to in terpreta t ion  rout ines  re fe r  to the  pos i t ion  
of the  categor ies  on the r ight  hand  s ide of the  
ru les .  As can be seen ,  in terpreta t ion  rout ines  can 
be nested  where  appropr ia te .  The  operat ion  of the  
in terpreta t ion  rout ines  is exp la ined  below. 
1. <NP> <- <NAME> 
PRNAME ( 1 ) 
2. <NP> <- <QU> <NOMEN> 
NPQUAN(1 ,2)  
3. <NOMEN> <- <NOMEN> <SC:*REL> 
RELCL(1,2) 
4. <SC:?REL> <- <NP:?REL> <VERB:TYP=NI> 
NOM(VERB ( I ) ,  i) 
5. <SC: ?REL> <- <NP: *REL, ?NOM> 
<VERB : TYP=NA> 
<NP: - REL> 
NOM (ACC (VERB (2), 3), I) 
6. <SC: ?REL> <- <NP: *REL, ?ACC> 
<VERB:  TYP=NA> 
<NP: -REL> 
ACC (NOM(VERB (2) ,  1),  3) 
7. <SC> <- <NP> <VERB:TYP=NI> 
NOM(VERB (2) ,  1) 
8. <SC> <- <NP: ?NOM> <VERB:TYP=NA> <NP> 
NOM (ACC (VERB (2), 1), 3) 
9. <SENT> <- <SC> 
STMT(1)  
10? <SENT> <- if <SC> then  <SC> 
STMT (COND (1 ,2 ) )  
3 Intermediate S t ructures  
I n te rmed ia te  S t ruc tures  are used  to fac i l i tate  the  
t rans la t ion  f rom parse  t rees  to the  semant ic  repre -  
sentat ion  language.  They  are  t rees  conta in ing  all 
the  in format ion  necessary  to generate  adequate  ex -  
p ress ions  in the  semant ic  representat ion  language 
for  the  sentences  they  represent .  
3.1 The def init ion of Intermediate S t ructures  
The  bas ic  not ions  used  in In termed ia te  S t ruc tures  
are  RELATION and  ARGUMENT. In o rder  to come to 
adequate  mean ing  representat ions  it has  also to be 
d i s t ingu ished  whether  RELATIONs s tand  for  verbs  
or nomina ls ,  there fore  the not ions  VERBSTR and  
NOMSTR have  been  in t roduced  in add i t ion .  In case  
of coord inate  s t ruc tures  a branch ing  is needed for  
the  ARGUMENTs.  It is p rov ided  by  COORD. In-  
format ion  not  needed to t reat  the  Kamp f ragment  is 
left  out  here  to s impl i fy  the  presentat ion .  
3.1.1 Relation nodes and Argument  nodes  
Nodes  of type  Relat ion conta in  the re la t ion  name and 
po in ters  to f i r s t  and  last  ARGUMENT. 
Nodes  of type  Argument  conta in  the  fo l lowing in for -  
mat ion:  type ,  s tandard  role name,  po in ters  to the  
node represent ing  the contents  of the  a rgument ,  
and  to the  prev ious  and  next  ARGUMENTs.  
3.1 .2  Verb nodes  
Verb  nodes  cons is t  of a VERBSTR with a po in ter  to 
a RELATION.  That  is verb  nodes  are  Relat ion 
nodes  where  the re lat ion cor responds  to a verb .  
Verb  nodes  (VERBSTR)  conta in  a po in ter  to the  RE- 
LATION represented  by  the  verb ?  They  can be 
ARGUMENTs,  e .g . ,  when they  represent  a re la t ive  
c lause  (which  modi f ies  a noun ,  i .e .  is a t tached  to a 
RELATION in a nominal  node) .  
3.1 .3  Nominal nodes  
Nominal nodes  are  Argument  nodes  where  the  AR-  
GUMENT conta ins  a nominal  e lement ,  i . e .  a noun ,  an  
ad jec t ive ,  or  a noun  phrase .  They  conta in  the  fol-  
lowing in format ion  in NOMSTR: type  on noun,  a 
po in ter  to contents  of NOMSTR, congruence  in forma-  
t ion (number  and  gender ) ,  quant i f ie r ,  a po in ter  to 
re fe rent  of demonst ra t ive  or re la t ive  pronoun.  
3.1 .4  Formation ru les  for In termediate  ?:truetures 
1. An In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  represent ing  a sen-  
tence  is cal led a sentent ia l  In te rmed ia te  St ruct ,~re  
(S IS ) .  
Any  we l l - fo rmed In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  represent -  
ing  a sentence  has  a verb  node as i ts  root .  
399 
2. An  In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  w i th  an  Argument  
node  as  root  is ca l led  an  Argument  In termed ia te  
S t ruc ture  (A IS ) .  
An  In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  represent ing  a nomina l  is  
an  A IS .  
3. I f  s is  a SIS and  a is  an  A IS ,  then  s '  is a 
we l l - fo rmed S IS ,  if s '  is const ruc ted  f rom s and  a by  
a t tach ing  a as  las t  e lement  to the  l i s t  of  ARGUMENTs  
of  the  RELAT ION in the  root  of  s and  de f in ing  the  
ro le  name of the  ARGUMENT fo rming  the  root  of  a .  
4. I f  n and  m are  A IS ,  then  n '  is a we l l - fo rmed A IS ,  
if the  root  node  of  n conta ins  a RELAT ION and  m is 
a t tached  to i t s  l i s t  of  ARGUMENTs  and  a ro le  name 
is de f ined  fo r  the  ARGUMENT fo rming  the  root  of  m. 
5. I f  s is a SIS and  a is an  Argument  node ,  then  a '  
is an  A IS ,  if s is a t tached  to a and  the  argument  
type  is  se t  to VERBSTR.  
6. I f  a and  b a re  A IS  and  e is an  Argument  node  of  
type  COORD,  then  c'  is an  AIS if the  contents  of  a 
is a t tached  as  le f t  par t  of  COORD,  the  contents  of  b 
is a t tached  as  r ight  par t  of  COORD,  and  the  con-  
junct ion  operator  is  de f ined .  
3.2  The  const ruct ion  of In termed ia te  S t ructures  
from parse  t rees  
To cover  the  Ramp f ragment  the  fo l low ing  in terpre -  
ta t ion  rout ines  a re  needed:  
PRNAME and NOMEN wh ich  map s t r ings  of  charac -  
te rs  to e lements  of  A IS ;  
NPDEF, NPINDEF and blPQUAN which  map pa i rs  
cons i s t ing  of  s t r ings  of  characters  and  e lements  of  
AIS to e lements  of  A IS ;  
VERB which  maps  s t r ings  of  characters  to e lements  
of SIS ; 
NOM and ACC which  operate  accord ing  to In termed i -  
a te  S t ruc ture  fo rmat ion  ru le  3; 
RELCL which  app l ies  In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  fo rma-  
t ion  ru le  5 and  then  4; 
COND which  combines  a pa i r  of  e lements  of  SIS by  
app ly ing  In termed ia te  S t ruc ture  fo rmat ion  ru le  5 and  
then  ru le  3; 
STMT which  maps  e lements  of  SIS to DRSs .  
These  rout ines  a re  app l ied  as  ind icated  in the  
parse  t ree  and  g ive  the  des i red  In termed ia te  S t ruc -  
tu re  as  a resu l t .  
4 D iscourse  Representat ion  S t ructures  
In  th i s  sec t ion  we g ive  a br ie f  descr ip t ion  of  Kamp's  
D iscourse  Representat ion  Theory  (DRT) .  For  a 
more  deta i led  d i scuss ion  of  th i s  theory  and  i t s  gen-  
e ra l  rami f i ca t ions  fo r  natura l  l anguage  process ing ,  
c f .  the  papers  by  Kamp (1981) and  Guenthner  
(1984a,  1984b) .  
According to DRT, each natural anguage sen- 
tence (or discourse) is associated with a so-called 
Discourse Representation Structure (DRS) on the 
basis of a set of DRS forrnatior ules. These rules 
are sensitive to both the syntactic structure of the 
sentences in question as well as to the DRS context 
in which in the sentence occurs. 
4.1 Definition of Discourse Representation Struc- 
tures 
A DRS K fo r  a d i scourse  has  the  genera l  fo rm K = 
<U, Con> where  U is  a se t  of  "d i scourse  re fe rents"  
fo r  K and  Con  a se t  of  "cond i t ions"  on  these  ind i -  
v idua ls .  Cond i t ions  can  be  e i ther  atomic or  
complex. An atomic condition has the form 
P(tl,...,tn) or tl=c, where  ti is a discourse refer- 
ent, c a proper name and P an n-place predicate. 
Of  the  complex  cond i t ions  we wil l  on ly  ment ion  
" imp l i ca t iona l "  cond i t ions ,  wr i t ten  as  K1 IMP K2,  
where  K1 and  K2 are  a lso  DRSs .  With a d i scourse  D 
is thus  assoc ia ted  a D iscourse  Representat ion  S t ruc -  
tu re  wh ich  represents  D in  a quant i f ie r - f ree  
"c lausa l "  fo rm,  and  wh ich  captures  the  propos i t iona l  
impor t  of  the  d i scourse .  
Among other things, DRT has important conse- 
quences for the treatment of anaphora which are due 
to the condition that only those discourse referents 
are admissible for a p ronoun that are accessible from 
the DRS in which the pronoun occurs (A precise de- 
finition of accessibility is given in Ramp (1981)). 
D i scourse  Representat ion  S t ruc tures  have  been  
imp lemented  by  means  of  the  th ree  re la t ions  AS-  
SERT ION,  ACCESS IBLE ,  and  DR shown in the  ap-  
pend ix .  These  three  re la t ions  a re  wr i t ten  out  to the  
re la t iona l  database  sys tem (Ast rahan  &al (1976) )  a f -  
te r  the  cur rent  text  has  been  processed .  
4.2 From Intermediate Structures to DRSs  
The  Intermediate Structures are processed starting 
at the top. The  transformation of all the items in 
the Intermediate Structure are relatively straight- 
forward, except for the proper semantic represen- 
tation of pronouns. According to the spirit of DRT,  
pronouns are assigned discourse referents accessi- 
ble from the DRS in which the pronoun occurs. In 
the example given in the appendix, as we  can see 
from the ACCESS IBLE  table there are only two dis- 
course referents available, namely ul and u2. 
Given the morphological information about these in- 
dividuals the pronoun "it" can only be assigned the 
discourse referent u2 and this is as it should be. 
For further problems arising in anaphora resolution 
in general cf. Kamp (1981) and Guenthner  and Leh- 
mann (1983). 
5 Remarks  on work  in p rogress  
We are  a t  p resent  engaged in extend ing  the  above  
const ruc t ion  a lgor i thm to a much w ider  var ie ty  of  
l i ngu is t i c  s t ruc tures ,  in par t i cu la r  to the  ent i re  
f ragment  of  Eng l i sh  covered  by  the  USL  grammar .  
Bes ides  incorporat ing  qu i te  a few more  aspects  of  
d i scourse  s t ruc ture  (p resuppos i t ion ,  ambigu i t i ty ,  
cohes ion)  we are  par t i cu la r ly  in teres ted  in  fo rmula t -  
ing  a deduct ive  account  fo r  the  re t r ieva l  of  
in fo rmat ion  f rom DRSs .  Th is  account  wil l  ma in ly  
cons is t  in  combin ing  techn iques  f rom the  theory  of  
re la t iona l  database  query  as  wel l  as  f rom present  
techn iques  in  theorem prov ing .  
400  
In our opinion Ramp's theory of Discourse Repre- 
sentation Structures is at the moment the most prom- 
ising vehicle for an adequate and efficient 
implementation of a natural language processing sys- 
tem. It incorporates an extremely versatile dis- 
course-oriented representation language and it 
allows the precise specification of a number  of up to 
now intractable discourse phenomena. 
References 
Astrahan, M. M., M. W. Blasgen, D. D. 
Chamberlin, K. P. Eswaran, J. N. Gray, P. P. 
Griffiths, W. F. King, R. A. Lorie, P. R. McJones, 
J. W. Mehl, G. R. Putzolu, I. L. Traiger, B. W. 
Wade, V. Watson (1976): "System R: Relational Ap- 
proach to Database  Management" ,  ACM Transactions 
on Database Systems, vol.  1, no. 2, June  1976, p. 
97. 
Bertrand, O., J. J. Daudenarde, D. Starynkevich, 
A. Stenbock-Fermor (1976) : "User Application 
Generator", Proceedings of the IBM Technical Con- 
ference on Relational Data Base Systems, Bar i ,  
I ta ly ,  p. 83. 
Guenthner ,  F. (1984a) "D iscourse  Representat ion  
Theory  and  Databases" ,  fo r thcoming .  
Guenthner, F. (1984b) "Representing Discourse Re- 
presentation Theory in PROLOG" ,  forthcoming. 
Guenthner ,  F . ,  H. Lehmann (1983) "Rules  for  P ron-  
ominalization", Proc. 1st Conference and Inaugural 
Meeting of the European Chapter of the ACL, Pisa, 
1983. 
II3M (1981) : User Language Generator: Program 
Description~Operation Manual, SBI0-7352,  IBM 
Prance, Paris. 
Ramp, H. (1981) "A Theory  of T ruth  and  Semant ic  
Representat ion" ,  in Groenend i jk ,  J .  et  al.  Formal 
Methods in the Study of Language. Amsterdam.  
Lehmann,  H. (1978): " In terpretat ion  of Natura l  
Language in an  In format ion  System" ,  IBM J.  Res. 
Develop. vol.  22, p. 533. 
Lehmann, H. (1980): "A System for Answering 
Questions in German", paper presented at the 6th 
International Symposium of the ALLC,  Cambridge, 
England. 
Ott, N. and M. Zoeppritz (1979): "USL-  an Exper- 
imental Information System based on Natural Lan- 
guage", in L. Bolc (ed): Natural Language Based 
Computer Systems, Hanser, Munich. 
de Sopefia Pastor ,  L. (1982): "Grammar  of Span ish  
for  User  Spec ia l ty  Languages" ,  TR 82.05.004, IBM 
Heidelberg Scientific Cente ~. 
Zoeppr i t z ,  M. (1984): Syntax for  German in the 
User Specialty Languages System, Niemeyer ,  
T f ib ingen.  
Appendix: E~mmple 
SENT 
i 
SC 
I 
4- - - - - -  . . . . .  ~ . . . . . . . . .  - . . . . . . . . .  + . . . .  -4 -  
I 
NP 
i + . . . . .  + 
I 
NOHEN 
I + . . . . . .  + 
I 
QU NOHEN VERB NP 
I I I I 
every farmer donkey beats  i t  
SC 
I 
+.. .+ .... + 
I I \[ 
I i xP 
\[ I \[ 
I I + ...... + 
I I I i 
NP VERB QD NOHEN 
I I I i 
who owns a 
Parse  tree 
R: BEAT 
A(NOH): R: FARHER (EVERY) 
A(NOH): R: OWN 
A(NOM): RELPRO 
A(ACC): R: DONKEY (A) 
A(ACC): PERSPR0 
In termed ia te  S t ructure  
ASSERTION tab le  
I i 
\]DRS#1 ASSERTION 
1 FARHER(ul) 
1 OWN(ul,u2) 
1 DONKEY(u2) 
2 BEAT(ul ,u2) 
DR re la t ion  
iDRiVRS iCongriS i'evel 
i I I 
l u l l  1 he  \ ]1  1 
lu21 1 i t  11 2 
I I I 
I I I 
I I I 
ACCESSIBLE re la t ion  
\[upper DRS lower DRS 
I 
I 1 2 
i 
401 
