A GENERAL COMPUTATIONAL MODEL FOR WORD-FORM RECOGNITION AND PRODUCTION 
Kimmo Koskenniemi 
Department of General Linguistics 
Univeristy of Helsinki 
Hall ituskatu 11-13, Helsinki 10, Finland 
ABSTRACT 
A language independent  mode l  for 
recogni t ion and product ion  of word forms 
is presented. This " two- leve l  model" is 
based on a new way of descr ib ing  morpho-  
logical alternations. All rules describing 
the morphophonological variations are par- 
al lel  and re lat ive ly  independent  of each 
other. Individual rules are implemented as 
f inite state automata,  as in an ear l ier  
model  due to Mar t in  Kay and Ron Kaplan. 
The two-level model has been implemented 
as an operat iona l  computer  p rograms in 
several  places. A number  of operat iona l  
two-level descriptions have been written 
or are in progress  (Finnish, Engl ish, 
Japanese, Rumanian,  French, Swedish,  Old 
Church Slavonic,  Greek, Lappish, Arabic, 
Icelandic). The model is bidirectional and 
it is capable of both analyz ing and syn- 
thesizing word-forms. 
I. Generative phonology 
The formalism of generative phonology 
has been wide ly  used since its introduc-  
tion in the 1960's. The morpho logy  of any 
language may be described with the formal- 
ism by const ruct ing  a set of rewr i t ing  
rules. The rules start from an underlying 
lexical  representat ion,  and t rans form it 
step by step until the surface representa- 
tion is reached. 
The generative formalism is unidirec- 
t ional and it has proven to be computa-  
t ional ly  di f f icult ,  and therefore it has 
found little use in practical morphologi- 
cal programs. 
2. The model of Kay and Kaplan 
Martin Kay and Ron Kaplan from Xerox 
PARC not iced that each of the generat ive  
rewr i t ing  rules can be represented by a 
f inite state automaton  (or transducer) 
(Kay 1982). Such an automaton  would com- 
pare two successive levels of the genera- 
tive f ramework:  the level immediate ly  
The work descr ibed in this paper is a part 
of the project 593 sponsored by the Acade- 
my of Finland. 
before app l i ca t ion  of the rule, and the 
level after app l i ca t ion  of the rule. The 
whole morphological grammar would then be 
a cascade of such levels and automata: 
lexical 
representation IFSA II 
t 
after ist rule 
t after 2nd rule ! 
t after (n-1)st 
rule 
surface 
representation 
A cascade of automata  is not opera-  
t ional  as such, but Kay and Kaplan noted 
that the automata  could be merged into a 
single, larger automaton  by using the 
techniques of automata  theory. The large 
automaton would be functionally identical 
to the cascade, a l though single rules 
could no more be identified within it. The 
merged automaton would be both operation- 
al, e f f i c ient  and bid i rect ional .  Given a 
lexical  representat ion,  it would produce 
the surface form, and, vice versa, given a 
surface form it would guide lexical search 
and locate the appropriate endings in the 
lexicon. 
In p r inc ip le ,  the approach  seems 
ideal. But there is one vital problem: the 
size of the merged automaton. Descriptions 
of languages with complex morphology, such 
as Finnish, seem to result  in very large 
merged automata.  A l though there are no 
conc lus ive  numer ica l  es t imates  yet, it 
seems probable  that the size may grow 
prohibitively large. 
3. The two-level approach 
My approach is computationally close 
to that of Kay and Kaplan, but it is based 
on a d i f ferent  morpho log ica l  theory. In- 
178 
stead of abstract phonology, I fo l low the 
l ines of concrete  or natura l  morpho logy  
(e.g. Linell, Jackendoff,  Zager, Dressler, 
Wurzel ) .  Us ing  this  a l te rnat ive  or ienta -  
t ion I a r r ive  at a theory,  where  there is 
no need for merging the automata in order 
to reach an operat ional  system. 
The two- level  model  rejects abstract 
lex ica l  representat ions ,  i.e. there need 
not a lways  be a s ing le  invar iant  under -  
lying representation. Some variat ions are 
cons idered  supp le t ion - l i ke  and are not 
described with rules. The role of rules is 
res t r i c ted  to one-segment  var ia t ions ,  
wh ich  are fa i r ly  natural .  A l te rnat ions  
wh ich  a f fec t  more  than one segment ,  or 
where  the a l te rnat ing  segments  are unre-  
lated, are considered supplet ion- l ike and 
handled by the lexicon system. 
4. Two- level  rules 
There are only two representat ions in 
the two- level  model: the lexical represen- 
tation and the surface representation. No 
intermediate stages "exist", even in prin- 
ciple. To demonst ra te  this, we take an 
example from Finnish morphology. The noun 
lasi  'glass' represents the product ive and 
most  common type of nouns  end ing  in i. The 
lex ica l  representat ion  of the par t i t i ve  
plural form consists of the stem lasi, the 
plural  morpheme I, and the part i t ive end- 
ing A. In the two- level  f ramework  we write 
the lex ica l  representat ion  las i IA  above 
the surface form laseja: 
Lexical  
representation: 1 a s i I A 
Surface 
representation: 1 a s e j a 
This conf igurat ion exhibits three morpho- 
phonological  variations: 
a) S tem f ina l  i is rea l i zed  as e in 
front of typical plural  forms, i.e. when I 
fo l lows  on the lex ica l  level ,  schemat i -  
cally: ~I (1) 
b) The p lura l  I i tse l f  is rea l i zed  as j 
if it occurs  between vowels  on the sur-  
face, schematical ly:  
, (2) 
V V 
c) The part i t ive ending, l ike other end- 
ings, agrees with the stem with respect to 
vowe l  harmony.  An arch iphoneme A is used 
instead of two dist inct part i t ive endings. 
It is rea l i zed  as ~ or a accord ing  to the 
harmonic value of the stem, schematical ly:  
back-V . . .~~a (3) 
The task of the two- leve l  ru les  is to 
specify how lexical and surface represen- 
tations may correspond to each other. For 
each lex ica l  segment  one must  de f ine  the 
various possible surface realizations. The 
rule component  should state the necessary 
and suff ic ient condit ions for each alter- 
native. A rule fo rmal i sm has been designed 
for expressing such statements. 
A typical two- level  rule states that 
a lex ica l  segment  may be rea l i zed  in a 
cer ta in  way if and on ly  i f  a context  con-  
d i t ion  is met. The a l te rnat ion  (i) in the 
above example  can be expressed  as the 
fo l lowing two- level  rule: 
i <=> ___  I ( i ' )  
e = 
Th is  rule s ta tes  that  a lex ica l  i may  be 
rea l i zed  as an e on ly  i f  it is fo l lowed by 
a p lu ra l  I, and if we have a lex ica l  i in 
such an env i ronment ,  it must  be rea l i zed  
as e (and as noth ing  else). Both  s tate -  
ments are needed: the former to exlude i-e 
correspondences occur r ing  e l sewhere ,  and 
the la t ter  to prevent  the de fau l t  i - i  
correspondence in this context. 
Ru le  (i') re fe r red  to a lex ica l  seg- 
ment  I, and it d id  not mat ter  what  was  the 
sur face  character  cor respond ing  to it 
(thus the pair  I-=). The fo l low ing  rule 
governs the real izat ion of I: 
<?> v - - -  v 
This rule requires that the plural  I must 
be between vowels on the surface. Because 
certain stem final vowels are real ized as 
zero in f ront  of p lu ra l  I, the generat ive  
phono logy  orders  the rule for p lu ra l  I to 
be applied after the rules for stem final 
vowels .  In the two- leve l  f ramework  there 
is no such order ing.  The ru les  on ly  s tate  
a static correspondence relation, and they 
are nondirect ional  and parallel. 
5. Rules as automata 
In the fo l low ing  we const ruct  an 
automaton  wh ich  per fo rms the check ing  
needed for the i-e a l te rnat ion  d i scussed  
above. Ins tead  of s ing le  characters ,  the 
automaton  accepts  character  pairs.  Th is  
automaton  (and the automata  for o ther  
rules) must accept the fo l lowing sequence 
of pairs: 
i-I, a-a, s-s, i-e, I-j, A-a 
The task of the ru le-automaton is to 
permi t  the pair  i -e if and on ly  if the 
plural I follows. The fo l lowing automaton 
with three states (I, 2, 3) per forms this: 
179 
(i") 
State  1 is the in i t ia l  state of the autom-  
aton. If the automaton  rece ives  pa i rs  
without lexical i it wil l  remain in state 
1 (the symbo l  =-= denotes  "any  o ther  
pair"). Rece iv ing  a pair  i -e causes  a 
t rans i t ion  to state 3. S ta tes  1 and 2 are 
final states (denoted by double circles), 
i.e. if the automaton is in one of them at 
the end of the input, the automaton  ac- 
cepts  the input. S tate  3 is, however ,  a 
nonf ina l  state, and the automaton  shou ld  
leave it before  the input ends (or e lse  
the input  is re jected).  If the next  char -  
acter  pair  has p lu ra l  I as its lex ica l  
character  (which is denoted  bY I-=), the 
automaton  re turns  to s tate  1. Any other  
pair  w i l l  cause the input  to be re jec ted  
because there is no appropriate transit ion 
arc. Th is  part  of the automaton  accom-  
p l i shes  the "only if" part  of the cor re -  
spondence: the pair i-e is a l lowed only if 
it is fol lowed by the plural I. 
The state 2 is needed for the "if" 
part. If a lexical i is fo l lowed by plural 
I, we must  have the cor respondence  i-e. 
Thus, if we encounter a correspondence of 
lexical i other than i-e (i-=) it must not 
be fol lowed by the plural I. Anything else 
(=-=) w i l l  re turn  the automaton  to state 
i. 
Each rule of a two- level  descr ipt ion 
model corresponds to a finite state autom- 
aton as in the model of Kay and Kaplan. In 
the two- leve l  mode l  the ru les or the au- 
tomata  operate ,  however ,  in para l le l  in- 
stead of being cascaded: 
Lexical  
~ .  ~ r e p r e s e n t a t i o n . .  
- Surface 
representat ion 
The rule-automata compare the two repre- 
sentat ions ,  and a conf igurat ion  must  be 
accepted  by each of them in order  to be 
valid. 
The two- level  model  (and the program) 
operates  in both d i rec t ions :  the same 
descr ip t ion  is u t i l i zed  as such for pro-  
duc ing  sur face  word- fo rms f rom lex ica l  
representations, and for analyzing surface 
forms. 
As it stands now, two- level  programs 
read the ru les as tabu lar  automata ,  e.g. 
the automaton (i") is coded as: 
"i - e in front of plural I" 3 4 
i i I = 
= e = = 
i: 2 3 1 1 
2: 2 3 0 1 
3. 0 0 1 0 
Th is  ent ry  fo rmat  is, in fact, more  prac -  
tical than the state transit ion diagrams. 
The tabu lar  representat ion  remains  more  
readable even when there are half a dozen 
s ta tes  or more. It has a lso  proven  to be 
quite feasible even for those who are lin- 
guists rather than computer  professionals. 
A l though it is feas ib le  to wr i te  
morpho log ica l  descr ip t ions  d i rec t ly  as 
automata, this is far from ideal. The two- 
level rule formal i sm is a much more read- 
able way of document ing two- level  descrip- 
tions, even if hand compi led automata are 
used in the actual implementat ion.  A com- 
piler which would accept rules d irect ly  in 
some two- level  rule formal ism would be of 
great value. The compi ler  could automat i -  
ca l ly  t rans form the ru les  into f in i te  
state automata ,  and thus fac i l i ta te  the 
c reat ion  of new descr ip t ions  and fur ther  
development  of exist ing ones. 
5. Two- leve l  lex icon  system 
S ing le  two- leve l  ru les are at least  
as powerfu l  as single rules of generat ive 
phonology. The two- level  rule component  as 
a who le  (at least  in p ract i ca l  descr ip -  
tions) appears  to be less power fu l ,  be- 
cause of the lack of extr ins ic  rule order- 
ing. 
Var iat ions affect ing longer sequences 
of phonemes, or where the relat ion between 
the alternat ives is phonologica l ly  other- 
w ise  nonnatura l ,  are descr ibed  by g iv ing  
dist inct lexical representations. General -  
izations are not lost since insofar as the 
var ia t ion  per ta ins  to many lexemes ,  the 
a l te rnat ives  are g iven  as a min i lex icon  
referred to by all entr ies possessing the 
same alternation. 
The al ternat ion in words of the fol- 
lowing types are descr ibed using the mini-  
lexicon method: 
hevonen - hevosen 'horse' 
vapaus - vapautena 
- vapauksia 'freedom' 
The lex ica l  ent r ies  of such words  g ives  
on ly  the nonvary ing  part  of the s tem and 
re fers  to a common a l te rnat ion  pat tern  
nen/S or s-t-ks/S: 
hevo nen/S "Horse S"; 
vapau s-t-ks/S "Freedom S"; 
The mini lex icons for the al ternat ion pat- 
180 
terns list the alternative lexical repre- 
sentat ions  and assoc iate  them with the 
appropriate sets of endings: 
LEXICON nen/S 
LEXICON s-t-ks/S 
nen S 0 "" ; 
sE S123 " " 
s $0 "" ; 
TE S13 ""; 
ksE $2 "" 
6. Current status 
The two-level program has been imple- 
mented f irst in PASCAL language and is 
running at least on the Burroughs  B7800, 
DEC-20, and large IBM systems. The program 
is ful ly operat iona l  and reasonably  fast 
(about 0.05 CPU seconds per word a l though 
hardly any effort  has been spent to opt i -  
mize the execut ion speed). It could be 
used run on 128 kB mic ro -computeres  as 
well. Lauri Karttunen and his students at 
the Un ivers i ty  of Texas have imp lemented  
the model  in INTERLISP (Karttunen 1983, 
Gajek & al. 1983, Khan & al. 1983). The 
execut ion speed of their vers ion is com- 
parable to that of the PASCAL version. The 
two-level model has also been rewritten in 
Zeta l isp  (Ken Church at Bell) and in NIL 
(Hank Bromley in Helsinki and Ume~). 
The model has been tested by writing 
a comprehens ive  descr ip t ion  of F inn ish 
morpho logy  cover ing all types of nomina l  
and verbal inflection including compound- 
ing (Koskenniemi, 1983a,b). Karttunen and 
his students have made two-level descrip- 
t ions of Japanese,  Rumanian,  Engl ish  and 
French (see art ic les  in TLF 22). At the 
University of Helsinki, two comprehensive 
descr ip t ions  have been completed:  one of 
Swed ish  by Oll i  B l~berg (1984) and one of 
Old Church S lavon ic  by Jouko L indstedt  
(forthcoming). Further work is in progress 
in Hels ink i  for making descr ip t ions  for 
Arab ic  (Jaakko H~meen-Ant t i la )  and for 
Modern Greek (Martti Nyman). The system is 
also used the Un ivers i ty  of Oulu, where a 
descr ip t ion  for Lapp ish  is in progress  
(Pekka Sammal laht i ) ,  in Uppsala,  where a 
more comprehensive French description is 
in progress (Anette Ostling), and in Goth- 
enburg. 
The two-level model could be part of 
any natural  language process ing  system. 
Especially the ability both to analyze and 
to generate  is useful. Sys tems deal ing 
w i th  many  languages ,  such  as mach ine  
t rans lat ion  systems, could benef i t  f rom 
the un i form language- independent  formal- 
ism. The accuracy of information retrieval 
systems can be enhanced by using the two- 
level model for discarding hits which are 
not true inf lected forms of the search 
key. The a lgor i thm could be also used for 
detecting spelling errors. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
My s incere thanks are due to my in- 
structor, professor Fred Karlsson, and to 
Martin Kay, Ron Kaplan and Lauri Karttunen 
for fruitful ideas and for acquainting me 
with their research. 
REFERENCES 
Alam, Y., 1983. A Two-Leve l  Morpho log ica l  
Analysis of Japanese. In TLF 22. 
Bl~berg, O., 1984. Svensk b~jn ingsmor fo -  
logi:  en t i l l~mpning  av tv~n iv~-  
modellen. Unpublished seminar paper. 
Depar tment  of Genera l  L ingu is t ics ,  
University of Helsinki. 
Gajek, O., H. Beck, D. Elder, and G. Whit -  
remote, 1983. KIMMO: LISP Implementa- 
tion. In TLF 22. 
Karlsson, F. & Koskenn iemi ,  K., forth-  
coming. A process model of morphology 
and lexicon. Folia Linguistica. 
Karttunen,  L., 1983. KIMMO: A Genera l  
Morphological Processor. In TLF 22. 
Karttunen,  L. & Root, R. & Uszkorei t ,  H., 
1981. TEXFIN: Morphological analysis 
of F inn ish  by computer.  A paper read 
at 71st Meet ing  of the SASS, Albu-  
querque, New Mexico. 
Karttunen, L. & Wi t tenburg ,  K., 1983. A 
Two-Level Morpho log ica l  Descr ip t ion  
of English. In TLF 22. 
Kay, M., 1982. When meta - ru les  are not 
meta-ru les.  In Sparck - Jones  & Wi lks  
(eds.) Automat ic  natura l  l anguage 
processing. University of Essex, Cog- 
nitive Studies Centre. (CSM-10.) 
Khan, R., 1983. A Two-Leve l  Morpho log ica l  
Analysis of Rumanian. In TLF 22. 
Khan, R. & Liu, J. & Ito, T. & Shuldberg,  
K., 1983. K IMMO User's Manual.  In TLF 
22. 
Koskenn iemi ,  K., 1983a. Two- leve l  Mode l  
for Morphological Analysis. Proceed- 
ings of IJCAI-83, pp. 683-685. 
---, 1983b. Two-level Morphology: A Gen- 
eral  Computat iona l  Mode l  for Word-  
Form Recognition and Production. Uni- 
versity of Helsinki, Dept. of General 
Linguistics, Publications, No. ii. 
L indstedt ,  J., for thcoming.  A two- leve l  
descr ip t ion  of Old Church S lavon ic  
morphology. Scando-Slavica. 
Lun, S., 1983. A Two-Leve l  Ana lys i s  of 
French. In TLF 22. 
TLF: Texas L ingu is t i c  Forum. Depar tment  
of Linguistics, University of Texas, 
Austin, TX 78712. 
181 
