AMBIGUITY RESOLUTION IN THE HUMAN SYNTACTIC PARSER: AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
Howard S. Kurtzman 
Department of Psychology 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
(This paper presents in summary form some major 
points of Chapter 3 of Kurtzman, 1984.) 
Models of the human syntactic parsing mecha- 
nism can be classified according to the ways in 
which they operate upon ambiguous input. Each mode 
of operation carries particular requirements con- 
cerning such basic computational characteristics of 
the parser as its storage capacities and the sched- 
uling of its processes, and so specifying which 
mode is actually embodied in human parsing is a 
useful approach to determining the functional orga- 
nization of the human parser. In Section l ,  a pre- 
liminary taxonomy of parsing models is presented, 
based upon a consideration of modes of handling 
ambiguities; and then, in Section 2, psycholinguis- 
t ic evidence is presented which indicates what 
type of model best describes the human parser. 
I. Parsing Models 
Parsing models can be in i t ia l l y  classified ac- 
cording to two basic binary features. One feature 
is. whether the model immediately analyzes an ambi- 
guity, i .e . ,  determines structure for the ambiguous 
portion of the string as soon as that portion be- 
gins, or delays the analysis, i .e . ,  determines 
structure only after further material of the string 
is received. The other feature is whether the model 
constructs just a single analysis of the ambiguity 
at one time, or instead constructs multiple anal- 
yses in ~ .  The following account develops 
and compITcates this in i t ia l  classification scheme. 
Not every type of model described here has actually 
been proposed in the l iterature. The purpose here 
is to outline the space of possibil it ies so that a 
freer exploration and clearer evaluation of types 
can be made. 
An Immediate Single Analysis (ISA) model is 
characterized by two properties: (1) An ambiguity 
is resolved as soon as i t  arises, i .e . ,  on its 
f i r s t  word (or morpheme); (2) the analysis that 
serves as the resolution of the ambiguity is adopted 
without consideration of any of the other possible 
analyses. Typically, such models lack the capabili- 
ty to store input material in a form which is not 
completely analyzed. Pure top-down, depth-first 
models such as classical ATN's (Woods, 1970) are 
examples of ISA models. 
For certain sentences, Frazier & Fodor's (1978) 
Sausage Machine also behaves like an ISA model. In 
explaining their Local Association principle, they 
claim that in the f i r s t  stage of parsing, structure 
can be bui l t  for only a small number of words at a 
time. As a result, in a sentence like "Rose read 
the note, the memo and the letter to Mary," the PP 
"to Mary" is immediately attached into a complex NP 
with "the letter" without any consideration of the 
other possible attachment directly into the VP, the 
head of which ("read") is many words back. 
A Dela_eZay_ed_Single ~ (DSA) model is also 
characterized by two propertles: (1) When an ambi- 
guity is reached, no analysis is attempted until a 
certain amount of further input is received; and (2) 
when an anlysis is attempted, then the analysis that 
serves as the resolution of the ambiguity is adopted 
without consideration of any other possible analyses 
( i f  any others are s t i l l  possible--i.e., i f  the 
string is s t i l l  ambiguous). A bottom-up parser is 
an example of a DSA model. Another example is Marcus's 
(1980) Parsifal. These models must have some sort of 
storage buffer for holding unanalyzed material. 
I t  is possible for Single Analysis models to 
combine Immediate and Delayed determination of 
structure. Ford, Bresnan, & Kaplan's (1982) version 
of a GSP does so in a limited way. Their Final Ar- 
guments principle permits a delay in the determina- 
tion of the attachment of particular constituents 
into the overall structure of the sentence that has 
been determined at certain points. (The GSP's Chart 
is what stores the unattached constituents.) However, 
i t  must be noted that during the period in which 
that determination is delayed, other attachment pos- 
s ib i l i t i es  of the constituent into higher-level 
structures (which are themselves not yet attached 
into the overall sentence structure) are considered. 
Therefore, i t  is not the case in their model that 
there is a true delay in attempting any analysis. 
The fundamentally Immediate nature of the GSP re- 
quires that some attachment possibil ity always be 
tested immedi-ai-e-ly. 
More authentic combinations of D- and ISA could 
be constructed by modifying bottom-up parsers or 
Parsifal, which are both inherently Delaying, so 
that under certain conditions auxil iary procedures 
are called which implement Immediate Analysis. 
(There is, though, no real motivation at present for 
such modifications.) I t  can be noted that while 
bottom-up mechanisms are logically capable of only 
Delayed Analysis, top-down mechanisms are capable of 
either Immediate or Delayed Analysis. 
Another type of model uti l izes Delayed Parallel 
Analysis (DPA). In this type, paralle-T-a-6aTysls--\]-s--6-f~ 
an ambiguity is commenced only after some delay 
481 
beyond the beginning of the ambiguous portion of 
the string. Such a model requires a buffer to hold 
input material during the delay before i t  is anal- 
yzed. Also, any model that allows parallelism re- 
quires that the parser's representational/storage 
medium be capable of supporting and distinguishing 
between multiple analyses of the same input mater- 
ia l ,  and that the parser contain procedures that 
eventually oversee a decision of which analysis is 
to be adopted as resolution of the ambiguity. An 
example of a DPA parser would be a generally 
bottom-up arser which was adjusted so that at cer- 
tain points, perhaps at the ends of sentences or 
clauses, more than one analysis could be con- 
structed. Another example would be a (serious) 
modification of Parsifal such that when the pattern 
of more than one production rule is matched, all  of 
those rules could be activated. 
There are actually two sorts of parallelism. 
One can be called momentary parallelism, in which a 
choice is made among the possible analyses according 
to some decision procedure immediately--before the 
next word is received. The other sort can be called 
strong parallelism, in which the possible analyses 
can stay active and be expanded as new input is 
received. I f  further input is inconsistent with any 
of the analyses, then that analysis is dropped. 
There might also be a limitation on how long paral- 
lel analyses can be held, with some decision pro- 
cedure choosing from the remaining possibil it ies 
once the limiting point is reached. ( I t  would seem 
that some limitation would be required in order to 
account for garden-pathing.) 
In addition, in strong parallelism although 
multiple analyses are all  available, they might 
s t i l l  be ranked in a preference order. 
A further type of model is characterized by 
Immediate Parallel Analysis (IPA), in which al l  of 
the possib~ analyses of an ambiguity are bui lt  
as soon as the ambiguous portion of the string 
begins. Frazier & Fodor's (1978) parser is par- 
t ia l l y  describable as an IPA model with momentary 
parallelism. In explaining their Minimal Attachment 
principle, they propose that an attempt is made to 
build in parallel al l  the possible available struc- 
tures, on the f i rs t  word of an ambiguity. The par- 
t icular structure that contains the fewest con- 
necting nodes is the one that is then right away 
adopted. 
Fodor, Bever, & Garrett (1974) proposed an IPA 
with strong parallelism. As soon as an ambiguity 
arises, the possible analyses are determined in 
parallel and can stay active until a clause boun- 
dary is reached, at which point a decision among 
them must be made. 
There is another design characteristic that a 
parser might have which has not been considered so 
far. Instead of the parser, after making a single 
or parallel analysis of an ambiguity, maintaining 
the analysis/es as further input is received, one 
can imagine i t  just dropping whatever analysis i t  
had determined. This can be called abandonment. 
Then analysis would be resumed at some later point, 
determined by some scheduling principles. Perhaps 
the most natural form of a parser which uti l izes 
abandonment would be an IPA model. The construction 
of more than one analysis for an ambiguity would 
trigger the parser to throw out the analyses and 
wait until a later point to attempt analysis anew. 
Thus, the parser is not forced to make an early de- 
cision which might turn out to be incorrect, as in 
momentary parallelism, nor is i t  forced to carry 
the load of multiple analyses, as in strong paral- 
lelism. At an implementation level, this abandonment 
might be realizedas mutual inhibition by the seve- 
ral analyses. 
Abandonment is also possible in an ISA model. 
Take, for instance, a generally bottom-up model in 
which constituents can be held free, not yet a t -  
tached into the overall sentence structure. A con- 
straint could be plced on such a model which for- 
bade such free constituents, forcing the analyses 
of the constituents to be abandoned i f  they cannot 
immediately be f i t  into the overall sentence struc- 
ture. (Such a constraint might be implemented as a 
l imit  on storage space for free constituents.) 
Then, at some later point, a new analysis of the 
constituents and their attachments would be made. 
Abandonment is also possible, though less in- 
tu i t ively satisfying, in delayed models. In these 
models, there would be a delay in beginning analy- 
sis, and then another delay as a result of abandon- 
ment. 
When analysis is begun again following aban- 
donment, i t  can proceed according to any of the 
above models, though of course some would seem to 
be more natural than others. 
2. Experiment 
Previous psycholinguistic experiments have 
often used quite indirect methods for tapping 
parsing processes (e.g., Frazier & Rayner's (1982) 
measurements of eye-movements during reading and 
Chodorow's (1979) measurements of subjects' recall 
of time-compressed speech) and have yielded con- 
f l ict ing results. The present investigation set out 
to gather data concerning the determinants and 
scheduling of ambiguity resolution, through use of 
an on-line task that provides readily interpretable 
results. 
Subjects sat in front of a CRT screen and on 
each tr ia l  were presented with a series of words 
comprising a sentence, one word at a time, each 
word in the center of the screen. Each word re- 
mained on the screen for 240 msec and was followed 
by a 60 msec blank screen. Presentation of the 
words stopped at some point, either within or at 
the end of the sentence, and a beep was heard. The 
subjects' task was to respond, by pressing one of 
two response keys, whether or not the sentence had 
been completely grammatical up to that point. 
For experimental items, presentation always 
stopped before the end of  the sentence, and the 
sentence was always grammatical. These experimen- 
tal sentences contained ambiguities which were 
shown to be correctly resolved in only one way 
by the last word that was presented. There were 
482 
two versions of each experimental item, which di f -  
ferred only in the last presented word. And these 
last words of the versions resolved the ambiguity in 
different ways. An example is shown in (1) (along 
with possible completions of the sentences in paren- 
theses). 
(1) The intel l igent scientist examined with a 
magnifier \[a\] our (leaves.) 
\[b\] was (crazy.) 
Any individual subject was presented with only one 
version of an item. I f  subjects had chosen a par- 
t icular resolution for the ambiguity before the last 
word was presented, i t  was expected that they would 
make more errors and/or show longer correct response 
times (RTs) for the version which did not match the 
resolution that they had chosen than for the version 
which did match. (Experimental items were embedded 
among a large number of f i l l e r  items whose presenta- 
tion stopped at a wide variety of points. Many of 
these f i l l e rs  also contained ungrammaticalities, of 
various sorts and in various locations in the sen- 
tence.) 
A wide variety of ambiguities were tested, in- 
cluding those investigated in previous studies. Only 
a few highlights of the results are presented here, 
in order simply to i l lustrate the major findings. 
For items like (Ib), subjects made a large num- 
ber of errors--about 75%. This indicates that they 
were garden-pathed--just as in one's experience in 
normal reading of such sentences. By contrast, for 
items like (la), very few errors were made. Further, 
the RTs for the correct responses to (la) were sig- 
nif icantly lower than those to (Ib). For (la), RTs 
feIY in the 450-650 msec range, while for (Ib) the 
RTs were lO0 to 400 msec higher. Evidently, subjects 
had resolved the ambiguity in (1) before receiving 
the last word, and they chose the resolution f i t t ing  
(la), in which "examined" is a main-clause past- 
tense verb, rather than the resolution f i t t ing  (Ib), 
in which i t  is a past participle of a reduced rela- 
tive clause. 
However, quite different results were obtained 
for items like (2), which differs from (1) only by 
the replacement of "scientist" by "alien". 
(2) The intel l igent alien examined with a 
magnifier \[a\] our (leaves.) 
\[b\] was (crazy.) 
There was no difference between (2a) and (2b) in 
either error rate or RT--both measures fe l l  into the 
same low range as those for (la). That is, subjects 
were not garden-pathed on either sentence. They kept 
open both possibil it ies for analysis throughout 
presentation of the sentence. 
Several conclusions can be drawn from comparing 
results of items like (1) and those like (2). First, 
i t  i s  possible to delay the resolution of an analy- 
sis. Two classes of parsing models can thus be ruled 
out as descriptions of the overall operations of the 
human system: ISA and IPA-with-momentary-parallelism. 
Second, the duration of this delay is variable, and 
therefore any model in which the point of resolution 
for a particular syntactic structure is invariant 
is ruled out. Marcus's Parsifal is an example of 
such a disconfirmed model. By the way, this does not 
mean that there must alw__~be some delay in resolu- 
tion. In fact, for items like (1) i t  does appear 
the resolution is made immediately upon reception 
of "examined". This is indicated by subjects' per- 
formance for (3) and (4) matching their performance 
for (1) and (2), respectively. 
(3) The intel l igent scientist examined 
\[a\] our (leaves.) 
\[b\] was (crazy.) 
(4) The intel l igent alien examined 
\[a\] our (leaves.) 
\[b\] was (crazy.) 
I t  seems then that the delay can vary from zero to 
evidently a quite substantial number of words (or 
constituents). 
Third, the duration of the delay is apparently 
due to conceptual, or real-world knowledge, factors. 
With regard to (1) and (2), one component of our 
real-world knowledge is that scientists are l ikely 
to examine something with a magnifier but unlikely 
to be examined, but for aliens the likelihoods of 
examining and being examined with a magnifier are 
more alike. Thus, i t  seems that the point at which 
a resolution is made is the point at which one of 
the possible meanings of the sentence can be con- 
f idently judged to be the more plausible one. So, 
parsing decisions would be under significant inf lu-  
ence of coneptual mechanisms. This f i t s  with work 
in Kurtzman (1984; Chapter 2), in which a substan- 
t ia l  amount of evidence is offered for the strong 
claim that parsing strategies in the form of prefe- 
rences for particular structures (e.g., Frazier & 
Fodor, 1978; Ford et a l . ,  1982; Crain & Steedman, 
in press) do not exist. I t  is argued rather that 
al l  cases of preference for one resolution of an 
ambiguity over another can be accounted for by a 
model in which conceptual mechanisms judge which 
possible resolution of the ambiguity results in the 
sentence expressing a meaning which better satis- 
fies expectations for particular conceptual infor ~ 
mation or for general plausibi l i ty.  Such a model 
requires that parallel analyses be presented to the 
conceptual mechanisms o that i t  may be judged 
which analysis better meets the expectations. 
Therefore, an acceptable parsing model must have 
some parallel analysis at the time a resolution is 
made (which is consistent with some previous psycho- 
l inguist ic  evidence: Lackner & Garrett, 1973). This 
requirement of parallelism then leaves us with the 
following models as candidates for describing the 
human parser: DPA with either kind of parallelism, 
IPA-with-strong-parallelism, or Abandonment-with- 
parallel-reanalysis. (Abandonment might work in (2) 
by abandoning analysis upon the attempt at analysis 
of "examined" and then commencing re-analysis either 
(a) at a point determined by some internal schedule, 
or (b) upon a signal from conceptual mechanisms 
that the conceptual content of the syntactically 
unanalyzed words was great enough to support a con- 
fident resolution decision.) 
In contrast to the other remaining models, 
483 
IPA-with-strong-parallelism posits that input mate- 
rial is at all times analyzed. A look at results 
for other stimuli suggests that this might be the 
case. In a task similar to the present one, Crain 
& Steedman (in press) have shown that for items 
such as (5), comprised of more than one sentence, 
the f i r s t  sentences (5a or 5b) can bias the per- 
ceiver towards one or the other resolution in the 
last sentence (5c or 5d), which contains an ambig- 
uous "that"-clause (complement vs. relative). 
(5a) RELATIVE-BIASING CONTEXT 
A psychologist was counseling two married 
couples. One of the couples was fighting with 
him but the other one was nice to him. 
(5b) COMPLEMENT-BIASING CONTEXT 
A psychologist was counseling a married couple. 
One member of the pair was fighting with him 
but the other one was nice to him. 
(5c) RELATIVE SENTENCE 
The psychologist old the wife that he was 
having trouble with to leave her husband. 
(5d) COMPLEMENT SENTENCE 
The psychologist old the wife that he was 
having trouble with her husband. 
So, for example, (5c) preceded by (Sa) is processed 
smoothly, while (5c) preceded by (Sb) results in 
garden-pathing at the point of disambiguation (the 
word "to"). In the present experiment, sentences 
in which the "that"-clause was disambiguated immedi- 
ately following the beginning of the clause (5e 
or 5f) were presented following the contexts of (5a) 
or (5b). 
(Se) RELATIVE SENTENCE 
The psychologist old the wife that 
was (yelling to shut up.) 
(Sf) COMPLEMENT SENTENCE 
The psychologist old the wife that 
to (yell was not constructive..) 
It  turned out that context had no effect on perfor- 
mance for this type of item. Rather, subjects per- 
formed somewhat more poorly when the "that"-clause 
was disambiguated as a relative (5e), showing about 
20% errors and sometimes elevated RTs, as compared 
with the complement disambiguation in (5f), which 
showed low RTs and practically no errors. The effect 
did not differ in strength between the two contexts. 
These results along with those of Crain & Steedman 
show that in i t ia l l y  the complement resolution is 
preferred but that later this preference can be 
overturned in favor of the relative resolution i f  
that is what best f i t s  the context. Now, there is 
no reason to believe that subjects are actually 
garden-pathed when they end up adopting the relative 
resolution. Note that there is no conscious experi- 
ence of garden-pathing, and that the error and RT 
effects here are much weaker than for classical 
garden-pathing items like (1). I t  seems more l ikely 
that both possible analyses of "that" have been 
determined but that one--as a complementizer--has 
been in i t ia l l y  ranked higher and so is in i t ia l l y  
more accessible. In this speeded task, i t  would be 
expected that the less accessible relative pronoun 
analysis of "that" would sometimes be missed--resul- 
ting in incorrect responses for (5e)--or take longer 
to achieve. Now, i f  "that" had simply not been ana- 
lyzed at all by the time of the presentation of the 
last word, as in a DPA or Abandonment model, there 
would be l i t t le  reason to expect that one analysis 
of i t  should cause more errors than the other. 
So, we may tentatively conclude that IPA-with- 
strong-parallelism describes the human parser's 
operations for at least certain types of structures. 
Similar results with other sorts of structures are 
consistent with this claim. This does not rule out 
the possibi l i ty, however, that the human parser is 
a hybrid, ut i l i z ing delay or abandonment in some 
other circumstances. 
Why is the complementizer analysis immediately 
preferred for "that"? In these items all of the 
main verbs of the ambiguous entences had meanings 
which involved some notion of communication of a 
message from one party to another (e.g., "told", 
"taught", "reminded"). In Kurtzman (1984) i t  is 
argued that such verbs generate strong expectations 
for conceptual information about the nature of the 
message that is communicated. The complement reso- 
lution of the "that"-clause permits the clause to 
directly express this expected information, and so 
i t  would be preferred over the relative resolution, 
which generally would not result in expression of 
the information. I t  is also possible that such a 
conceptually-based preference gets encoded as a 
higher ranking for the verbs' particular lexical 
representations which subcategorize for the com- 
plement (cf. Ford et a l . ,  1982). 
REFERENCES 
Chodorow, M.S. Time-compressed speech and the study 
of lexical and syntactic processing. In W.E. 
Cooper & E.C.T. Walker (Eds.), Sentence proces- 
sing. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, l~  
Crain, S. & Steedman, M. On not being led up the 
garden path: The use of context by the psycho- 
logical parser. In D. Dowty, L. Kartunnen, & A. 
Zwicky (Eds.), Natural language processing. NY: 
Cambridge Univers1~ress,  in press. 
Fodor, J.A., Bever, T.G., & Garrett, M.F. The psy- 
chology o__f_flanguage. NY: McGraw-Hill, 1974. 
Ford, M., Bresnan, J., & Kaplan, R.M. A competence- 
based theory of syntactic closure. In J. Bresnan 
(Ed.), The mental representation of grammatical 
relation-s~. ~dge,  MA: MIT Pre~, 1982. 
Frazier, L. & Fodor, J.D. The sausage machine: A 
new two-stage parsing model. Cognition, 1978, 6, 
291-325. 
Frazier, L. & Rayner, K. Making and correcting er- 
rors during sentence comprehension: Eye movements 
in the analysis of structurally ambiguous en- 
tences. Cognitive Psychology, 1982, 14, 178-210. 
484 
Kurtzman, H.S. Studies in syntactic ambiguity reso- 
lution. Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, 1984. (Available 
from author in autumn, 1984, at School of Social 
Sciences, Univ. of Cal i fornia, I rvine, CA 92664.) 
Lackner, J.R. & Garrett, M.F. Resolving ambiguity: 
Effects of biasing context in the unattended ear. 
Cognition, 1973, I ,  359-372. 
Marcus, M. A theory o_f_f syntactic recognition for 
natural language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1980. 
Woods, W.A. Transition network grammars for natu- 
ral language analysis. Communications of ACM, 
1970, 13, 591-602. 
485 
