ON PARSING PREFERENCES 
Lenhart K. Schubert 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Alberta, Edmonton 
Abstract. It is argued that syntactic preference 
pr inciples such as Right Associat ion and Minimal 
Attachment are unsat isfactory as usually 
formulated. Among the di f f icult ies are: (I) 
dependence on i l l -specif ied or implausible 
pr inciples of parser operation; (2) dependence on 
quest ionable assumptions about syntax; (3) lack Of 
provision, even in principle, for integrat ion with 
semantic and pragmatic  preference principles; and 
(4) apparent counterexamples,  even when discounting 
(I)-(3). A possible approach to a solution is 
sketched. 
I. Some preference pr inciples 
The fol lowing are some standard kinds of 
sentences i l lustrat ing the role of syntactic 
preferences. 
(I) John bought the book which I had selected for 
Mary 
(2) John promised to visit frequently 
(3) The girl in the chair with the spindly legs 
looks bored 
(4) John carr ied the grocer ies for Mary 
(5) She wanted the dress on that rack 
(6) The horse raced past the Darn fell 
(7) The boy got fat melted 
(I) (3) i l lustrate Right Associat ion of PP's 
and adverbs, i.e., the preferred associat ion of 
these modif iers with the r ightmost verb (phrase) or 
noun (phrase) they can modify (Kimball 1973). Some 
variants of Right Associat ion (also character ized 
as Late Closure or Low Attachment) which have Dean 
proposed are Final  Arguments (Ford et al 1982) and 
Shift ing Preference (Shieber 1983); the former is 
roughly Late Closure restr icted to the last 
obl igatory const i tuent and any fol lowing optional 
const i tuents of verb phrases, whi le the latter is 
Late Closure with in the context of an LR(1) shift- 
reduce parser. 
Regarding (4), it would seem that according to 
Right Associat ion the PP for Mar~ should be 
preferred as postmodif ier  of grocer ies rather than 
carried; yet the opposite is the case. Frazier & 
Fodor's (1979) explanat ion is based on the assumed 
phrase structure rules VP -> V NP PP, and NP -> 
NP PP: attachment of the PP into the VP minimizes 
the resultant number of nodes. This pr inc ip le of 
Minimal Attachment is assumed to take precedence 
over Right Association. Ford et al's (1982) variant 
is Invoked Attachment, and Shieber's (1983) variant 
is Maximal Reduction; roughly speaking, the former 
amounts to early closure of no___nn-final constituents,  
whi le the latter chooses the longest reduction 
among those possible reductions whose init ial 
constituent is "strongest" (e.g., reducing V NP PP 
to VP is preferred to reducing NP PP to PP). 
In (5), Minimal Attachment would predict 
associat ion of the PP on that rack with wanted, 
while the actual  preference is for associat ion with 
dress. Both Ford et al and Shieber account for 
this fact by appeal to lexical preferences: for 
Ford et al, the strongest form of want takes an NP 
complement only, so that Final Arguments prevails; 
for Shieber, the NP the dress is stronger than 
wanted, v iewed as a V requir ing NP and PP 
complements, so that the shorter reduction 
prevails. 
sentence (6) leads most people "down the garden 
path", a fac t  explainable in terms of Minimal 
Attachment or its variants. The explanat ion also 
works for (7) (in the case  of Ford et al with 
appeal to the addit ional  pr inc ip le that re-analysis 
of complete phrases requir ing re-categor izat ion of 
lexical const i tuents is not possible). Purportedly, 
this is an advantage over Marcus' (1980) parsing 
model, whose three-phrase buffer should al low 
trouble-free pars ing of (7). 
2. Problems with the preference pr inciples 
2.1 Dependence on i l l -speci f ied or implausible 
pr inciples of parser operation. 
Frazier & Fodor's (1979) model does not 
completely speci fy what structures are built as 
each new word is accommodated. Consequent ly  it is 
hard to tel l  exact ly what the effects Of their 
preference pr inc ip les are. 
Shieber 's  (1983) shi f t -reduce parser is wel l -  
defined. However, it postu lates complete phrases 
only, whereas human parsing appears to involve 
integration of completely analyzed phrases into 
larger, incomplete phrases. Consider for example 
the fol lowing sentence Deginnings: 
(8) So I says to the ... 
(9) The man reconci led hersel f  to the ... 
(10) The news announced on the ... 
(11) The reporter  announced on the ... 
(12) John beat a rather hasty and undigni f ied ... 
People presented with complete, spoken sentences 
beginning like (8) and (9) are able to signal 
detect ion of the errors about two or three 
syl lables after their occurrence. Thus agreement 
247 
features appear to propagate upward from incomplete 
constituents.  (10) and (11) suggest that even 
semantic features (logical translat ions?) are 
propagated before phrase completion. The 
"premature" recognit ion of the id iom in (12) 
provides further evidence for early integrat ion of 
part ial  structures. 
These considerat ions appear to favour a "full- 
paths" parser which integrates each successive word 
(in possibly more ways than one) into a 
comprehensive parse tree (with overlaid 
alternatives) spanning all of the text processed. 
Ford et al. 's (1982) parser does develop 
complete top-down paths, but the nodes on these 
paths dominate no text. Nodes postulated bottom-up 
extend only one level above complete nodes. 
2.2 Dependence on quest ionable assumptions 
ab____out syntax 
The successful  predict ion of observed 
preferences in (4) depended on an assumpt ion that 
PP postmodi f iers  are added to carr ied via the rule 
VP -> V NP PP and to grocer ies via the rule NP -> 
NP PP. However, these rules fail to do justice to 
certain systematic s imi lar i t ies between verb 
phrases and noun phrases, evident in such pairs as 
(13) John loudly quarreled with Mary in the 
kitchen 
(14) John's loud quarrel  with Mary in the kitchen 
When the analyses are al igned by postu lat ing two 
levels of postmodi f icat ion for both verbs and 
nouns, the accounts of many examples that 
supposedly involve Minimal Attachment (or Maximal 
Reduction) are spoiled. These include (4) as well  
as standard examples involving non-preferred 
relat ive clauses, such as 
(15) John told the gir l  that he loved the story 
(16) Is the block sitt ing in the box? 
2.3 Lack of provis ion for integrat ion with 
semant ic /pragmatic  preference pr inc ip les 
Right Associat ion and Minimal Attachment (and 
their variants) are typical ly presented as 
pr inciples which prescr ibe part icu lar  parser 
choices. As such, they are simply wrong, since the 
choices often do not coincide with human choices 
for text which is semantical ly or pragmat ica l ly  
biased. 
For example, there are conceivable contexts in 
which the PP in (4) associates with the verb, or in 
which (7) is trouble-free. (For the latter, imagine 
a story in which a young worker in a shortening 
factory toi ls long hours melt ing down hog fat in 
c lar i fy ing vats.) Indeed, even isolated sentences 
demonstrate the effect of semantics: 
(~7) John met the gir l  that he married at a dance 
(\]8) John saw the bird with t~e yel low wings 
(!9) She wanted the gun on her night table 
(20) This lens gets l ight focused 
These sentences should be contrasted with (I), (4), 
(5). and (7) respectively. 
Whi le the reversal  of choices Dy semantic and 
pragmatic  factors is regularly acknowledged, these 
factors are rarely assigned any expl ic i t  role in 
the theory; (however, see Crain & Steedman 1981). 
Two views that seem to under l ie  some discuss ions of 
this issue are (a) that syntactic preferences are 
"defaults" that come into effect only in the 
absence Of semant ic /pragmatic  preferences;  or (b) 
that a l ternat ives are tr ied in order of syntact ic  
preference, with semantic tests serving to reject 
incoherent combinations. Evidence against both 
posi t ions is found in sentences in which syntact ic 
preferences prevai l  over much more coherent 
alternat ives:  
(21) Mary saw the man who had l ived with her 
whi le on materni ty  leave. 
(22) John met the tall, slim, auburn-ha i red gir l  
from Montreal  that he marr ied at a dance 
(23) John was named after  his twin sister 
What we apparent ly need is not hard and fast 
decis ion rules, but some way of trading off 
syntact ic and non-syntact ic  preferences of var ious 
strengths against each other. 
2.4 Apparent counterexamples.  
There appear to be st ra ight forward 
counterexamples to the syntact ic  preference 
pr incip les which have been proposed, even if we 
discount evidence for integrat ion of incomplete 
structures, accept the syntact ic assumpt ions made, 
and restr ict  ourselves to cases where none of the 
a l ternat ives show any semantic anomaly. 
The fol lowing are apparent counterexamples to 
Right Associat ion (and Shi f t ing Preference. etc.): 
(24) John stopped speaking f requent ly  
(25) John discussed the girl  that he met with his 
mother 
(26) John was a larmed by the d isappearance of the 
administrator  from head off ice 
(27) The deranged inventor announced that he had 
perfected his design of a cl ip car shoe 
(shoe car clip, cl ip shoe car, shoe cl ip 
car, etc.) 
(28) Lee and Kim or Sandy departed 
(29) a. John removed all of the fat and some of 
the bones from the roast 
b. John removed all of the fat and sinewy 
pieces of meat 
The point Of (24)-(26) should De clear. (27) and 
(28) show the lack of r ight-associat ive tendencies 
in compound nouns and coordinated phrases. (29a) 
i l lustrates the non-occurrence of a garden path 
predicted by Right Associat ion (at least Dy 
Shieber 's  version); note the possible ad ject iva l  
reading of fat and ..., as i l lustrated in (29b). 
The fol lowing are apparent counterexamples  to 
Minimal  Attachment (or Maximal Reduction):  
(30) John abandoned the attempt to please Mary 
(31) Kim overheard John and Mary's quarre l  with 
Sue 
(32) John carr ied the umDre!la, the t rans ister  
radio, the bundle of old magazines, and the 
grocer ies for Mary 
(33) The boy got fat spattered on his arm 
Whi le the account of (30) and (31) can be 
rescued by d ist inguish ing subcategor ized and non- 
subcategor ized noun postmodif iers,  such a move 
would lead to the fai lures a lready ment ioned in 
section 2.2. Ford et al (1982) would have no 
248 
trouble with (30) or (31), but they, too, pay a 
price: they would erroneously predict associat ion 
of the PP with the object NP in 
(34) Sue had d i f f icu l t ies  with the teachers 
(35) Sue wanted the dress for Mary 
(36) Sue returned the dress for Mary 
(32) is the sort of example which motivated 
Frazier & Fodor's (1979) Local Attachment 
principle, but their parsing model remains too 
sketchy for the impl icat ions of the pr inciple to be 
clear. Concerning (33), a small -scale experiment 
indicates that this is not a garden path. This 
result appears to inval idate the accounts of (7) 
based on irreversible closure at fat. Moreover, the 
di f ference between (7) and (33) cannot De explained 
in terms of one-word lookahead, since a further 
experiment has indicated that 
(37) The boy got fat spattered. 
is quite as di f f icult  to understand as (7). 
3. Towards an account of preference trade-offs 
My main object ive has been to point out 
def ic iencies in current theories of parsing 
preferences, and hence to spur their revision. \] 
conclude with my own rather speculative proposals, 
which represent work in progress. 
In summary, the proposed model involves (I) a 
ful l -paths parser that schedules tree pruning 
decis ions so as to l imit the number of ambiguous 
const i tuents to three; and (2) a system of 
numerical  "potentials" as a way of implementing 
preference trade-offs. These potent ials  (or "levels 
of activation") are assigned to nodes as a funct ion 
of their syntact ic /semant ic /pragmat ic  structure, 
and the preferred structures are those which lead 
to a global ly high potential. The total potent ia l  
of a node consists of (a) a negative rule 
potential~ (b) a posit ive semantic potential ,  (c) 
posit ive expectat ion potent ia ls  contr ibuted by al l  
daughters fol lowing the head (where these decay 
with distance from the head lexeme), and (d) 
transmitted potent ia ls  passed on from the daughters 
to the mother. 
I have already argued for a ful l -paths approach 
in which not only complete phrases but also all 
incomplete phrases are fully integrated into 
(overlaid) parse trees dominat ing all of the text 
seen so far. Thus features and partial  logical 
translat ions can be propagated and checked for 
consistency as early as possible, and a l ternat ives 
chosen or d iscarded on the basis of all of the 
avai lable information. 
The rule potent ia l  is a negative increment 
contr ibuted by a phrase structure rule to any node 
which instant iates that rule. Rule potent ials  lead 
to a minimal-attachment tendency: they " inhibit" 
the use of rules, so that a parse tree using few 
rules wi l l  general ly  De preferred to one using 
many. Lexical  preferences can be captured by making 
the rule potent ia l  more negative for the more 
unusual rules (e.g., for N --> fat, and for 
V -~ time). 
Each "expected" daughter of a node which fol lows 
the node's head lexeme contr ibqtes a non-negat ive 
expectat ion potent ia l  to the total potent ia l  of the 
node. The expectat ion potent ia l  contr ibuted by a 
daughter is maximal if the daughter  immediately 
fol lows the mother's head lexeme, and decreases as 
the distance (in words) of the daughter from the 
head lexeme increases. The decay of expectat ion 
potent ials  with distance evident ly results in a 
r ight-associat ive tendency. The maximal expectat ion 
potent ials  of the daughters of a node are fixed 
parameters of the rule instant iated by the node. 
They can be thought Of as encoding the "aff inity" 
of the head daughter for the remaining 
constituents, with "strongly expected" const i tuents 
having relat ively large expectat ion potentials.  For 
example, I would assume that verbs have a general ly 
stronger af f in i ty for (certain kinds Of) PP 
adjuncts than do nouns. This assumption can explain 
PP-associat ion with the verb in examples like (4), 
even if the rules governing verb and noun 
postmodif icat ion are taken to be structural ly 
analogous. S imi lar ly  the scheme al lows for 
counterexamples to Right Associat ion l ike (24), 
where the af f in i ty of the first verb (stop) for the 
frequency adverbial  may be assumed to De 
suff ic ient ly great compared to that of the second 
(speak) to overpower a weak r ight-associat lve 
effect result ing from the decay of expectat ion 
potent ials  with distance. 
I suggest that the effect Of semantics and 
pragmatics can in pr inciple be captured through a 
semantic potential  contr ibuted to each node 
potential  by semant ic /pragmatic  process ing of the 
node. The semantic potent ia l  of a terminal node 
(i.e., a lexical node with a part icular  choice of 
word sense for the word it dominates) is high to 
the extent that the associated word sense refers to 
a famil iar  (highly consol idated) and contextual ly  
sal ient concept (entity, predicate, or function). 
For example, a noun node dominat ing star, with a 
translat ion express ing the astronomical  sense Of 
the word, presumably has a higher semantic 
potent ia l  than a similar node for the show-bus~ness 
sense Of the word, when an astronomical  context 
(but no show-business context) has been 
establ ished; and vice versa. Possibly a spreading 
act ivat ion mechanism could account for the context-  
dependent part  of the semantic potential  (of., 
Qui l l ian 1968, Col l ins & Loftus 1975, Charniak 
1983). 
The semantic  potent ia l  of a nonterminal  node is 
high to the extent that its logical t ranslat ion 
(obtained by suitably combining the logical 
t ranslat ions of the daughters) is easi ly  
t ransformed and elaborated into a descr ipt ion of a 
fami l iar  and contextual ly  relevant kind of object 
or situation. (My assumpt ion is that an unambiguous 
meaning representat ion of a phrase is computed on 
the basis of its init ial  logical form by context-  
dependent pragmat ic  processes; see Schubert & 
Pel let ier  1982.) For example, the sentences Time 
flies, The years pass swiftly, The minutes creep 
by, etc., are instances of the famil iar  pattern of 
predicat ion 
<predicate of locomotion> (<time term>), 
and as such are easi ly t ransformable into certain 
commonplace (and unambiguous) assert ions about 
one's personal  sense of progress ion through time. 
Thus they are l ikely to be assigned high semantic 
249 
potentials, and so wi l l  not easi ly admit any 
alternat ive analysis. S imi lar ly  the phrases met 
\[someone\] at a dance (versus married \[someone\] at a 
dance) in sentence (17), and bird with the yel low 
wings (versus saw \[something\] with the yel low wings 
) in (18) are easi ly interpreted as descr ipt ions of 
famil iar kinds of objects and situations, and as 
such contr ibute semantic potent ials  that help to 
edge Out competing analyses. 
Crain & Steedman's (1981) very interest ing 
suggestion that readings with few new 
presupposit ions are preferred has a possible place 
in the proposed scheme: the mapping from logical 
form to unambiguous meaning representat ion may 
often be relat ively simple when few presupposit ions 
need to De added to the context. However, their  
more general  p lausib i l i ty  pr inciple appears to fail 
for examples like (21)-(23). 
Note that the above pattern of temporal  
predicat ion may well  be considered to violate a 
selectional restrict ion, in that predicates of 
locomotion cannot l i teral ly  apply to times. Thus 
the nodes with the highest semantic potent ia l  are 
not necessar i ly  those conforming most fully with 
selectional restrictions. This leads to some 
departures from Wilks' theory of semantic 
preferences (e.g., 1976), a l though I suppose that 
normally the most easi ly interpretable nodes, and 
hence those with the highest semantic potential ,  
are indeed the ones that conform with select ional  
restrict ions. 
The di f ference between such pairs of sentences 
as (17) and (22) can now be explained in terms of 
semantic/syntact ic  potential  trade-offs. In both 
sentences the semantic potential  of the reading 
which associates the PP with the first verb is 
relat ively high. However, only in (17) is the PP 
close enough to the first verb for this effect to 
overpower the r ight-associat ive tendency inherent 
in the decay of expectat ion potentials. 
The f inal contr ibut ion to the potential  of a 
node is the transmitted potential, i.e., the sum of 
potentials of the daughters. Thus the total 
potential  at a node ref lects the 
syntact ic /semant ic /pragmatic  propert ies of the 
entire tree it dominates. 
A crucial  quest ion that remains concerns the 
scheduling Of decis ions to discard global ly weak 
hypotheses. Examples like (33) have convinced me 
that Marcus (1980) was essential ly correct in 
posit ing a three-phrase limit on successive 
ambiguous constituents. (In the context of a full- 
paths parser, ambiguous constituents can be def ined 
in terms of "upward or-forks" in phrase structure 
trees.) Thus I propose to discard the global ly 
weakest a l ternat ive at the latest when it is not 
possible to proceed rightward without creating a 
fourth ambiguous constituent. Very weak 
alternatives (relative to the others) may be 
discarded earlier, and this assumption can account 
for early d isambiguat ion in cases like (10) and 
(11). 
Although these proposals are not fully worked 
out (especially with regard to the def init ion of 
semantic potential) ,  prel iminary invest igat ion 
suggests that they can do justice to examples l ike 
(I)-(37). Schubert & Pel let ier  1982 br ief ly 
descr ibed a ful l -paths parser which chains upward 
from the current word to current "expectat ions" by 
" left-corner stack-ups" Of rules. However, this 
parser searched alternat ives by backtracking only 
and did not handle gaps or coordination. A new 
version designed to handle most aspects of 
General ized Phrase Structure Grammar (see Gazdar et 
al., to appear) is currently being implemented. 
Acknowledgements 
I thank my unpaid informants who pat ient ly  
answered strange quest ions about strange sentences. 
I have also benef i ted from discuss ions with members 
Of the Logical  Grammar Study Group at the 
University of Alberta, especial ly Matthew Dryer, 
who suggested some relevant references. The 
research was supported by the Natural  Sciences and 
Engineer ing Research Counci l  of Canada under 
Operat ing Grant A8818. 
References 
Charniak, E. (1983). Passing markers: a theory of 
contextual  inf luence in language comprehension. 
Cognit ive Science 7, pp. 171-190. 
Coll ins, A. M. & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading 
act ivat ion theory of semantic processing. 
Psychological  Review 82, pp. 407-428. 
Crain, S. & Steedman, M. (1981). The use of context 
by the Psychological  Parser. Paper presented at 
the Symposium on Model l ing Human Parsing 
Strategies, Center for Cognit ive Science, Univ. 
of Texas, Austin. 
Ford, M., Bresnan, J. & Kaplan, R. (1981). A 
competence-based theory of syntact ic closure. In 
Sresnan, J. (ed.), The Mental Representat ion of 
Grammatical  Relat ions MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Frazier, L. & Fodor, J. (1979). The Sausage 
Machine: a new two-stage parsing model. 
Cognit ion 6, pp. 191-325. 
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G. K. & Sag, I. A. 
(to appear). General ized Phrase Structure 
Grammar: A Study in Engl ish Syntax. 
Kimball, J. (1973). Seven pr inciples of surface 
structure parsing in natural language. Cognit ion 
2, pp. 15-47. 
Marcus, M. (1980). A Theory of Syntact ic  
Recognit ion for Natural Language, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Quil l ian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory. In Minsky, 
M. (ed.), Semantic Information Processing, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 227-270. 
Schubert, L .K .  & Pelletier, F. J. (1982). From 
English to logic: context- free computat ion of 
'conventional' logical translations. Am. J. of 
Computat ional  Linguist ics 8, pp. 26-44. 
Shieber, S. M. (1983). Sentence disambiguat ion by a 
shift -reduce parsing technique. Proc. Sth Int. 
Conf. on Art i f ic ial  Intel l igence, Aug. 8-12, 
Karlsruhe, W. Germany, pp. 699-703. Also in 
Proc. of the 21st Ann. Meet. of the Assoc. for 
Computat ional  Linguistics, June 15-17, MIT, 
Cambridge, MA., pp. 113-118. 
Wilks, Y. (1976). Parsing Engl ish II. In Charniak, 
E. & Wilks, Y. (eds.), Computat ional  Semantics,  
North-Hol land, Amsterdam, pp. 155-184. 
250 
