APPLICATIONS OF A LEXICOGRAPHICAL DATA BASE FOR GERMAN 
Wolfgang Teubert 
Institut f~r deutsche Sprache 
Fr iedr ich-Kar l -Str .  12 
6800 Mannheim i, West Germany 
ABSTRACT 
The Institut fHr deutsche Sprache 
recently has begun sett ing up a 
LExicographica l  DAta Base for German 
(LEDA). This data base is designed to 
improve ef f ic iency in the col lection, 
analysis, order ing and descr ipt ion of 
language mater ia l  by faci l i tat ing access 
to textual samples within corpora and to 
word art ic les,  within machine readable 
dict ionar ies and by provid ing a frame to 
store results of lexicographical  research 
for further processing. LEDA thus consists 
of the three components Tezt Bank, 
Diationary Bank and ResuZt Bank and 
serves as a tool to suppport monol ingual  
German dict ionary projects at the 
Institute and elsewhere. 
I INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 
Since the foundation of the Institut 
fHr deutsche Sprache in 1964, its research 
has been based on empir ical  findings; 
samples of language produced in spoken or 
wr i t ten from were the main basis. To 
handle ef f ic ient ly  large quant i t ies of 
texts to be researched it was necessary to 
use a computer, to assemble machine 
readable corpora and to develop programs 
for corpus analysis. An outl ine of the 
computat ional  act iv i t ies of the Institute 
is given in LDV-Info (1981 ff); the basic 
corpora are descr ibed in Teubert (1982). 
The present main frame computer, which was 
instal led in January 1983, is a Siemens 
7.536 with a core storage of 2 megabytes, 
a number of tape and disc decks and at the 
moment 15 visual display units for 
interact ive use. 
Whereas in former years most jobs 
were carr ied out in batch, the terminals 
now make it possible for the l inguist to 
work interact ively with the computer. It 
was therefore a logical step to devise 
Lexicographical  Data Base for German 
(LEDA) as a tool for the compi lat ion of 
new dict ionaries. The ideology of 
interact ive use demands a di f ferent 
concept of programming where the 
lexicographer himself can choose from the 
menu of alternat ives of fered by the system 
and fix his own search parameters.  Work on 
the Lex icographica l  Data Base was begun in 
1981; a f irst vers ion incorporat ing all 
three components is p lanned to be. ready 
for use in 1986. 
What is the goal of LEDA? In any 
lex icographica l  project, once the concept 
for the new dict ionary has been 
establ ished, there are three major tasks 
where the computer can be employed: 
(i) For each lemma, textual samples 
have to be determined in the corpus which 
is the l inguist ic  base of the dict ionary. 
The text corpus and the programs to be 
appl ied to it wil l  form one component of 
LEDA, namely the Text Bank. 
(ii) For each lemma, the lexico- 
grapher wil l  want to compare corpus 
samples with the respect ive word art ic les 
of exist ing relevant dict ionaries.  For 
easy access, these dict ionar ies should be 
t ransformed into a machine readable corpus 
of integrated word articles. Word corpus 
and the perta in ing retr ieval  programs wil l  
form the second component, i.e. the 
Dict ionary Bank. 
(iii) Once the formal structure of 
the word art ic les in the new dict ionary 
has been establ ished, descr ipt ion of the 
lemmata within to the framework of this 
structure can be begun. A data base system 
will  provide this frame so that homogenous 
and interre lated descr ipt ions can be 
carr ied out by each member of the 
dict ionary team at all stages of the 
compi lat ion.  This component of LEDA we 
call the Result  Bank. 
II TEXT BANK 
Each dict ionary project  should make 
use of a text corpus assembled to the 
specif ic requirements of the part icu lar  
lex icographical  goal. As sel f -evident as 
this c la im seems to be, it is nonetheless 
true for most German monol ingual  
d ict ionar ies on the market that they have 
been compi led without any corpus; this is 
apparent ly  even the case for the new six 
volume BROCKHAUS-WAHRIG,  as has been 
pointed out by Wiegand/Kucera  (1981 and 
1982). For a general  d ict ionary of 
34 
contemporary German containing about 
200 000 lemmata, the Homburger Thesen 
(1978) asked for a corpus of not less than 
50 mi l l ion words (tokens). 
To be used in the text bank, corpora 
will have to conform to the special 
codi f icat ion or pre-edit ing requirements 
demanded by the interactive query system. 
At present, a number of machine readable 
corpora in unif ied codif icat ion are 
available at the Institute, including the 
Mannheim corpora of contemporary written 
language, the Freiburg corpus of spoken 
language and the East/West German 
newspaper corpus, total l ing altogether 
about 7 mil l ion running words of text. 
Further corpora habe been taken over from 
other research institutions, publ ishing 
houses and other sources. These texts had 
been coded in all k inds  of different 
conventions, and programs had to (and 
still have to) be develQped to transform 
them according to the Mannheim coding 
rules. Other texts to be included in the 
corpus of the text bank will be recorded 
by OCR, via terminal or by use of an 
optical scanner, if they are not avai lable 
on machine readable data carriers. By the 
end of 1985 texts of a total length of 20 
mil l ion words will be available from which 
any dict ionary project can make its own 
selection. 
A special query system cal led REFER 
has been developed and is still being 
improved. For a detai led descript ion of 
it, see Br~ckner (1982) and (1984). The 
purpose of this system is to ensure quick 
access to the data of the text bank, thus 
enabl ing the lexicographer to use the 
corpus interact ively via the terminal. 
Unlike other query programs, REFER does 
not search a word form (or a combinant ion 
of graphemes) in the corpus itself, but in 
registers containing all the word forms. 
One register is arranged in the usual 
alphabetical  way, the other is organized 
in reverse or a tergo to al low a search 
for suffixes or the terminal elements of 
compounds. All word forms in the registers 
are connected with the references to their 
actual occurrence in the corpus, which are 
then looked up directly. With REFER, it 
normally takes no more than three to five 
seconds for the search procedure to be 
completed, and all occurrences of the word 
form within an arbitrar i ly chosen context 
can be viewed on the screen. Response 
behaviour does not depend on the size of 
the text bank. 
In addition, REFER 
fol lowing options: 
features the 
- The lexicographer can search for a word 
form, for word forms beginning or ending 
with a specif ied string of graphemes or 
for word forms containing a speci f ied 
string of graphemes at any place. 
- The lexicographer can search for any 
combinat ion of word forms and/or 
graphemic  strings to occur within a 
single sentence of the corpus. 
- REFER is connected with a morphological  
generator supplying all inf lected forms 
for the basic form, e.g. the inf init ive 
(cf. fahren (inf.) --- fahre, f~hrst, 
fahrt, f-~rt, fuhr, fuhren, fuhrst, 
f~hre, f ~ ,  f -~st ,  9efahren).-?--~s 
will make it much easler for the 
lexicographer to state his query. 
- For all word forms, REFER will provide 
information on the relat ive and absolute 
frequency and the distr ibut ion over the 
texts of the corpus. 
- The lexicographer hat a choice of 
options for the output. He can view the 
search item in the context of a full 
sentence, in the context of any number 
of sentences or in the form of a 
KWIC-Index, both on the screen and in 
print. 
- For each search procedure, the l inguist 
can define his own subcorpus from the 
complete corpus. 
- Lemmatized registers are in preparation. 
They will be produced automatical ly 
using a complete dict ionary of word 
forms with their morphological  
descriptions. These lemmatized registers 
not only reduce the search time, but 
also give the accurate frequency of a 
lemma, not just a word form, in the 
corpus. 
- Register of word classes and 
morphological  descr ipt ions (e.g. l ist ing 
references of all past part ic iples) will 
be produced automatical ly  by invert ing 
the lemmatized registers. Thus the 
l inguist can search for relevant 
grammatical  constructions, like all verb 
complexes in the passive voice. 
- Another feature will permit searching 
for an element at a predetermined 
sentence position, l ike all f inite verbs 
as the first words of a sentence or all 
nouns preceded by two adjectives. 
Thus the text bank is a tool for the 
lexicographer to gain information of the 
fol lowing kind: 
- Which word forms of a lemma are found in 
the corpus? Are there spel l ing or 
inf lect ional  var iat ions? 
- In which meanings and syntactical  
construct ions is the lemma employed? 
- What col locat ions are there? What 
compounds is the lemma part of? 
- Is there evidence for idiomatic and 
phraseological  usuage? 
- What is the relat ive and absolute 
frequency of the lemma? Is there a 
character ist ic  d istr ibut ion over 
dif ferent text types? 
- Which samples can best be used to 
demonstrate the meanings of the lemma? 
35 
Prel iminary versions of the text bank 
are in use since 1982. Not only 
lexicographers but also grammarians employ 
this interact ive system to gain the 
textual samples they need. A steadi ly 
growing number of service demands both 
from members of the Institute and from 
l inguists at other inst i tut ions are being 
ful f i l led by the text bank. 
I I I  D ICT IONARY BANK 
If access to the textual samples of a 
corpus is an indisputable prerequis i te  for 
successful  d ict ionary compilat ion, 
consultat ion of other relevant 
dict ionar ies can faci l i tate the drawing up 
of lexical entries. It is v i r tual ly  
impossible to assemble a corpus so 
extensive and encompassing that it wil l  
suff ice to describe the whole vocabulary 
of a language, even within the l imits of 
the part icular  concept ion of any 
dict ionary (unless it were a pure corpus 
dict ionary).  A d ict ionary of contemporary 
language should not let down its user if 
he is reading a text written in the early 
19th century though it wil l  contain words 
and meanings of words not found in a 
corpus of post World War II texts. This 
holds even more for languages for special 
purposes; they cannot be descr ibed without 
recurrence to technical  dict ionaries, 
col lect ions of terminology and thesauri, 
because the more or less standardized 
meanings cannot be retr ieved from their 
occurrences in texts. 
According to Nagao et al (1982), 
"dict ionaries themselves are rich sources, 
as l inguist ic corpora. When dict ionary 
data is stored in a data base system, the 
data can be examined by making cross 
references of various viewpoints.  This 
leads to new discoveries of l inguist ic 
facts which are almost impossible to 
achieve in the convent ional  pr inted 
versions" A dict ionary bank wil l  
therefore form one of the components of 
the Lexicographical  Data Base. 
Since 1979 a team at the Bonn 
Institut fur Kommunikat ionsforschung und 
Phonetik is compi l ing a 'cumulative word 
data base for German', using ii exist ing 
machine readable dict ionar ies of var ious 
kinds, including dict ionar ies assembled 
for Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence projects, 
machine translat ion systems and, for 
copyright reasons, only two generals 
purpose dict ionaries. Programs have been 
developed to make up for the di f ferences 
in the descr ipt ion of lemmata and to 
permit automatic cumulation. For further 
information regarding this project, see 
Hess/Brustkern/Lenders (1983) and 
Brustkern/Schulze (1983, 1983a). The 
cumulat ive word data base, which is due to 
be completed in 1984, wil l  then be 
implemented in Mannheim and form the core 
of the dict ionary bank of LEDA. 
In its final version, the dict ionary 
bank wil l  provide a ful ly integrated 
cumulat ion of the source dict ionaries, 
down to the level of lexical entries, 
including statement of word class and 
morphosyntact ica l  information. A complete 
integrat ion within the microstructure of 
the lexical entry, however, seems neither 
possib le nor even desirable. Automatic  
uni f icat ion cannot be achieved on the 
level of semantic and pragmatic  
descript ion. Here, the source for each 
informat ion item has to be retr ievable to 
assist the lex icographer  in the evulation. 
The dict ionary bank wil l  be a 
valuable tool not only for the 
lex icographer but also for the grammarian. 
Retr ieval  programs wil l  make it possible 
to come up with a l ist ing of all verbs 
with a dative and accusat ive complement, 
or of all nouns belonging to a part icu lar  
inf lect ional  class. Since the construct ion 
of the dict ionary bank and the result bank 
wil l  be related to each other, every time 
a new dict ionary has been compi led in the 
result  bank, it can be copied into the 
dict ionary bank, making it a growing 
source of lexical knowledge. The 
dict ionary bank can then be used as a 
master d ict ionary as def ined by Wolfart  
(1979), from which der ived pr inted 
versions for d i f ferent purposes can be 
produced. 
IV RESULT  BANK 
Whereas text bank and dict ionary bank 
supply the lex icographer with l inguist ic  
information, the result  bank wil l  be empty 
at the beginning of a project; it consists 
of a set of forms which are the frames for 
the word articles. Into these forms the 
lexicographer enters the (often 
prel iminary) results of his work, which 
wil l  be altered, amended or shortened and 
interre lated with other word art ic les 
(e.g. via synonymy or antonymy) in the 
course of compilat ion; he copies into 
those forms relevant textual samples from 
the text bank and useful  informat ion units 
from the d ict ionary bank. 
Access via terminal is not only 
possible to any file represent ing a word 
article but also to any record 
represent ing a category of expl icat ion. 
The result bank, which can be constructed 
within the framework of any standard data 
base management system, thus permits 
consul tat ion and comparison on any level 
of lexical descript ion. Descr ipt ive 
uni formity in the morphosyntact ica l  
categories seems easy enough. But as has 
been shown in a number of studies, e.g. by 
Mugdan (1984), most exist ing d ict ionar ies 
36 
abound in discrepancies and inaccuracies 
which easi ly can be avoided by 
cross-checking within the result bank. 
More diff icult  is homogeneity in the 
semantic descript ion of the vocabulary, 
representing a partly hierarchical,  ~art ly 
associative net of conceptual relations. 
The words used in semantic expl icat ions 
must be used only in the same sense or 
senses in which they are defined under 
their respective heard words. These tasks 
can be carried out easier within a data 
base system. Furthermore, the result bank 
will support col lecting and comparing the 
related elements of groups such us: 
- all verbs with the same sentence 
patterns 
- all adjectives used predicat ively only 
- all nouns denoting tools 
- all words rated as obsolete 
- the vocabulary of automobile 
engineering. 
Files will differ from word class to 
word class, as part ic les or adverbs cannot 
be describend within the same cluster of 
categories as nouns or verbs. Similari ly, 
macrostructure and microstructure will not 
be the same for any two dictionaries. 
Still Categories should be defined in such 
a way that the final version of the 
dict ionary can be copied into the 
dict ionary bank without addit ional manual 
work. 
After the dict ionary has been 
compiled, it can be used as copy, using 
standard editing programs to produce the 
pr inted version directly from the result 
bank. At that level, strict formatting is 
no longer necessary and should be 
abandoned, whereever possible, in favour 
to economy of space. 
Work on the result bank will begin in 
autumn 1984. The pilot version of it will 
be applied to the current main dict ionary 
project of the Institute, i. e. the 
"Manual of Hard Words", which at present 
is still in its planning stage. Even in 
its initial version, however, LEDA will be 
accessible and applicable for other 
lexicographical  projects as well. 
REFERENCES 
Tobias Br~ckner. Programm Dokumentat ion 
Refer Version i. LDV-Info 2. 
Informationsschri f t  der Arbeitsstel le 
L inguist ische Datenverarbeitung. 
Mannheim: Institut fur deutsche 
Sprache, 1982, pp. 1-26. 
Tobias Br~ckner. Der interaktive Zu@riff 
auf die Textdatei der Lexikographischen 
Datenbank (LEDA) Sprache und 
Datenverarbeitung 1-2/1982, 1984, pp. 
28-33. 
Jan Brustkern/Wolfgang Schulze. Towards a 
Cumulated Word Data Base for the German 
Language. IKP-Arbeitsbberichte Abtei-  
lung LDV. Bonn: Institut fur Kommuni- 
kat ionsforschung und Phonetik der 
Universit~t Bonn, 1983, pp. 1-9. 
Jan Brustkern/Wolfgang Schulze. The Struc- 
ture of the Word Data Base for the 
German Language. IKP-Arbeitsber ichte 
Abtei lung LDV, Nr. i. Bonn: Institut 
fur Kommunikat ions f or schung und Pho- 
netik der Universit~t Bonn, 1983, pp 
1-9. 
Klaus HeB/Jan Brustkern/Winfr ied Lenders. 
Maschinenlesbare deutsche W~rterb0cher.  
Dokumentation, Vergleich, Integration. 
T~bingen, 1983. 
LDV-Info. Informationsschr i f t  der Arbeits-  
stelle L inguist ische Datenverarbeitung, 
Mannheim : Institut fur deutsche 
Sprache, 1981 ff. 
Joachim Mugdan. Grammatik im W~rterbuch : 
wortbi ldung. Germanist ische Linguist ik 
1-3/83, 1984, pp. 237-309. 
M. Nagao, J. Tsujii, Y. Ueda, M. Takiyama. 
An Attempt to Computer ize Dict ionary 
Data Bases. J. Gotschalckx, L. Rol l ing 
(eds.). Lexicography in the Electronic 
Age. Amsterdam, 1982, pp. 51-73. 
Wolfgang Teubert Corpus and Lexicography. 
Proceedings of the Second Scientif ic 
Meeting "Computer Processing of 
L inguist ic Data". Bled, Yugoslavia, 
1982, pp. 275-301. 
Herbert Ernst Wiegand / Antonin Kucera. 
Brockhaus-Wahrig.  Deutsches W6rterbuch 
auf dem Pr~fstand der prakt ischen 
Lexikologie. I. Teil: I. Band (A-BT) ; 
2. Band (BU-FZ). Kopenhagener Beitr~ge 
zur Germanist ischen Linguistik, 18, 
1981, pp.. 94-217. 
Herbert Ernst Wiegand / Antonin Kucerao 
Brockhaus-Wahri@. Deutsches W~rterbuch 
auf dem Pr~fstand der prakt ischen Lexi- 
kologie. II. Teil: i. Band (A-BT); 2. 
Band (BU-FZ); 3. Band (G-JZ). 
Germanist ische L inguist ik 3-6/80, 1982, 
pp. 285-373. 
H. C. Wolfart. Divers i f ied Access in Lexi- 
cography. R.R.K.Hartmann (edo). 
Dict ionaries and Their Users. Papers 
from the 1978 B.A.A.L. Seminar on 
Lexicography. (=Exeter Linguist ic 
Studies, Vol.4). Exeter, 1979, pp. 
143-153. 
37 
