CONTROL STRUCTURES AND THEORIES OF INTERACTION 
IN SPEECII UNDEP~.WI'ANDING SYSTEMS 
E.J. Briscoe and B.K. Boguraev 
University of Cambridge, Computer  Laboratory 
Corn Exchange Street,  Cambridge CB2 3QG, England 
ABSTRACT 
lr: this paper, we approach the problem of organisat ion 
and control  ip. automat ic  speech unders tand ing  sys tems 
firaT.ly, by present in~ a theory  of the non-ser ia l  
in teract ions  "~eces';ary between two processors  in the 
system; namely, the morphosyntaet i c  and the prosodic, 
and secondly, by showing how, when general ised,  this 
theory  allows one to specify a highly eff ic ient 
a rch i tec ture  for a speech unders tand ing  sys tem with a 
simple control  s t ruc ture  and genuinely independent  
components .  The theory of non-ser ia l  in teract ions  we 
present  predicts  that  speech is temporal ly organised in 
a very specif ic way; that  is, tee sys tem would not 
funct ion effectively if the tempora l  d istr ibut ion of 
var ious types of in format ion in speech were dif ferent.  
The arch i tec ture  we propose is developed from a s tudy 
of the task of speech, unde:s tand ing  and, fu r thermore ,  is
specific to this task. Consequent ly,  the paper  a rgues  
that  general  problem solving methods  are unnecessary  
for speech unders tand ing .  
! INTRODUCTION 
\]t is general ly accepted that  (he control  s t ruc tures  of 
speech unders tand ing  sys tems (SUSs) must  allow for 
non-ser ia l  in teract ions  between di f ferent knowledge 
sources  or components  within the system. By r, on- 
serial  in te rac t ion  (NS1) we refer to communicat ion  
which extends  beyond the normal,  serial, flow of 
in format ion entai led by the tasks  under taken  by each 
component .  For example, the output  of the word 
recognit ion sys tem will provide the input  to 
morphosyntact i c  analysis,  a lmost  by definition; 
however, the operat ion of the morpho.~yntaetic 
ana iyser  .,~hould be const ra ined  on some occas ions by 
prosodic  cues: say, that  he:" is accented  and followed 
by a "pause".  whil,':'.t dog is not, in 
(1) Max gave her  dog b4-';cuits. 
Similarly, the output  of the morphosyntact i c  ana lyser  
will provide the input to scrnantie analysis,  but on 
occasion, the operat ion of the rnorphosyntacLic 
ana lyser  will be more eff ic ient if it has  access  to 
in format ion about  the discourse:  say, that  the horse 
has no unique re ferent  ip, 
(2) "/he horse raced  past  the barn  fe l l ,  
because this informat ion will faci l i tate the reduced 
relative in terpretat ion  (see Crain & Steedman,  in 
press).  Thus, NSIs will be required between 
components  which occur  both before and after  the 
morphosyntact ie  ana lyser  in the serial chain of 
p rocessors  which const i tu te  the complete SUS. 
NSls can be captured  in a str ict ly  serial, 
h ierarch ica l  model, in which the flow of informat ion is 
always "upwards",  by comput ing every possibil ity 
compat ib le with the input at each level of processing.  
However, this will involve much unnecessary 
computat ion  within each separate  component  which 
could be avoided by uti l ising in format ion already 
ten,:;orally available in the signal or context  of 
u t te rance ,  \]::ut net  part  of the input to that  level. An 
a l ternat ive a rch i tec ture  is the heterarch ica l  system; 
this avoids such  ineff iciency, in principle, by allowing 
each component, to communicate  with all o ther  
components  in the system.  However, control l ing the 
flow of in format ion and specifying the in ter faces  
between components  in such  sys tems has  proved very  
diff icult (Rcddy & Erman,  1975). The most  
soph is t icated SUS arch i tec ture  to date is the 
b lackboard model (Erman at a!., 1980). The model 
provides a means  for common representat ion  and a 
global database  for communicat ion  between 
components  and allows control  of the sys tem to be 
eentra l ised and relatively independent  of individual 
components .  The four essent ia l  e lements  of the model 
b lackboard entr ies,  knowledge sources, the 
blackboard and an intel l igent control  mechan ism -
in teract  t.o emulate  a problem solving style that  is 
charactemst icat ly  incrementa l  and opportunist ic .  NSIs 
arc thus  allowed to occur,  in principle, when they will 
be of g reates t  value for prevent ing unnecessary  
computat ion .  
What  is striking about these system architectures 
is that they place no limlts on the kinds of interaction 
which occur between component.% that is. none of 
them are based on any theory  of what kind of 
in teract ions  and eomrnunicat ion will be needed in a 
SUS. The des igners  of tile Hearsay- l l  sys tem were 
exphcit  about  this, arguing that. what was requi red 
was an arch i tec ture  capable of suppor t ing  ally form of 
interact ion,  but which was still relatively eff ic ient 
(Erman & Lesser, 1975:484). 
259 
qhcrc  appear  to bc al least two prob lems with such an 
approach  Fir.~tly. the des igner  of an mdivMua\] 
con'.pe~lent must  stdl take ml.o account  whmh other  
components  hould be act ivated by its outputs ,  as well 
as who prey,des ~ts inputs,  precmcly because  no 
prmc~plcs of in teract ion  are provided by the model. This 
entai ls,  even within the loosely s t ruc tured  aggregat ion  
h ie rarchy  of the b lackboard,  some commttment  to 
deci'.;ions about  in ter -component  traff ic in in fo rmat ion  - 
rat ional  answers  to these dec ismns  cannot  be provided 
wi thout  a theory  of mteractmn between individual 
components  in a SUS. 
Secondly. aconsiderable amount of effort has gone 
into specifying lobal scheduling heuristics for 
maintaining an agenda of knowledge sourcc activation 
records m blackboard system~, and this has sometimes 
led to treating the control problem as a distinct issue 
independent of the don-~ain under consideration, 
localismg it on a scparatc, schcdu\]ing, blackboard 
(I\]alzcr, Errnan and London, t980; Haycs-Roth,  1983a). 
Once again, this is because  the b lackboard  f ramework,  
as iL is defined, provides no inherent  const ra in ts  on 
mtcract ions  ( | tayes-Hoth,  1983b). While this means  that  
the model is powerful  enough to repl icate cont ro l  
s t ra teg ies  used in qual i tat ively different. AI sys tems,  as 
well as generat ise  to prob lem-so lwng in mult iple domains  
(}laycs-I,:oth, 1983a), the b lackboard  method of cont ro l  
still fails to provide a complete  answer  to the schedul ing 
problem. It is in tended predommantty  for solving 
prob lems whose so lut ien  depends  on heur i s t i cs  which 
must  cope with large vo lumes of nmsy data. 
In the context  of a b lackboard-based  SUS, where 
the assumptmn that  the fo rmat ion  of the "cor rect "  
in terpretat ion  of an input  signal will, mevitably,  be 
accompan ied  hy the generatmn of many compet ing  
(part ia l )  mterprc ta tmns  is Impiicit m the redundancy  
encoded in the individual knowledge sources ,  the only 
real and pract ica l  answer  to the contro l  p rob lem 
remains  the deve lopment  of global s t ra teg ies  to keep 
unnecessary  computatmn within pract ica l  limits. These 
s t ra tcgms are developed by tun ing the sys tem on the 
basis  of per fo rmance  cr i tema: this tuareg appears  to 
hmlt  in teract ions  to just. those  opt imal cases which are 
likely to yield success fu l  analyses,  tlowever, msofar  as 
the fmal sys tem might claim to embody a theory  about  
~hicil int,-,ractions are useful,  this will never  be 
represented  in an explicit fo rm in the loosely s t ruc tured  
syzt.cm components ,  but  only implimtly in the the run-  
t ime behav iour  of the whole system: and there fore  is 
unlikely to be rceow.'rable (see the ana logous  cr i t ic ism in 
\]Iayes-l~.oth, 1983a:55). 
I INTERACTIVE DETERMINISM: 
A THEORY OF NON-SERIAL INTERACTION 
In this section, we concentrate on the study of NSI 
between morphosyntactm and prosodic  in fo rmat ion  in 
specch, largely f rom the perspective of 
morphosyntact i c  analysis.  This in teract ion  occurs 
between two of the bet ter  unders tood  components  of a 
SUS and there fore  seems an appropr ia te  s tar t ing  point  
for the deve lopment  of a theory  of NSIs. 
Lea (1950) a rgues  that  prosod ic  in fo rmat ion  will 
be of use for morphosyntaet ic  process ing .  This 
dmcuss ion  is bascd on the observat ion  (see Cooper  & 
Pacc ia-Cooper ,  1980; Cooper  & Sorenson ,  1981), that  
there  is a s t rong  cor re la t ion  between some syntact i c  
boundar ies  and prosod ic  ef fects  such as lengthening,  
s tep  up in fundamenta l  f requency,  changes  of 
ampl i tude and, somet imes ,  pausing.  However, many of 
these  ef fects  are  probab ly  i r re levant  to 
morphosyntact i c  analysis,  being, for example,  side 
ef fects  of product ion ,  such  as planning,  hes i tat ion,  
a f te r thorghts ,  false s tar ts ,  and so forth.  If p rosody is 
to be uti l ised effectively to faci l i tate morphosyntact i c  
analysis,  then  we rcqmre  a theory  eapab!c  of 
indicat ing when an ambiguous  prosodic  cue such  as 
lengthen ing  is a consequence  of syntact i c  env i ronment  
and, there fore ,  re levant  to morphosyntact ie  analysis.  
None of tea 's  p roposa ls  make this d ist inct ion.  
In o rder  to develop such  a theory,  we requ i re  a 
prec ise account  of morphosyntact ie  analysm embedded 
in a model of a SUS which specif ies the nature  of the 
NSIs available to the morphosyntaet ie  ana lyser  
Conmdcr a s imple modu lar  a rch i tec ture  of a SUS m 
which most  in fo rmatmn flows upwards  through each 
lcvel of process ing,  as in the serial,  h ie rarch ica l  
mode l  This in format ion  is passed  wi thout  delay, so 
any operat ion  per fo rmed by a processor  will be passed  
up to its successor  m the cham of p rocessors  
immediate ly  (see Fig. l). 
Fur thermore ,  we const ra in  the model as follows: 
at least  f rom the point of word recogni t ion  upwards ,  
only one in terpretat ion  is computed  at each level. 
That is, word recogni t ion  re turns  a ser ies  of unique,  
cor rec t  words, then morphosyntact i c  analys is  provides 
the unique,  correct grammat ica l  descr ip t ion  of these 
words, and so forth.  In o rder  to implement  such  a 
const ra in t  on the processmg,  the model includes, in 
addit ion to the pr imary  flow of in format ion,  secondary  
channe ls  of commumcat ion  which provide for the NSIs 
( represented  by stogie a r rows  tn the diagram).  These 
interact ive  channe ls  are bidirect ional ,  allowing one 
component  to request  cer ta in  highly res t r tc ted  kinds 
of in format ion  f rom another  component  and, in 
principle, can connect  any pair  of p rocessors  in a 
SUS 
260 
DISCOURSE\[ <-~ 
\[ SEMANTICS I 
O" 
PARSE '~---J 
4> 
WORDS 
'~1 PROSODY I 
Fig. 1 
imag ine  a morphosyntact ie  ana lyser  which bu i lds  
a un ique  s t ruc ture  w i thout  backt rack ing  and  employs  
no, or  very  l itt le, l ook -ahead Such a parser  will face a 
ehmce point ,  i r reso lvab le  morphcsyntaet i ca l l y ,  a lmost  
every  t ime it encounters  a s t ruc tura l  ambigu i ty ,  
whether  local or g loba l  Fur ther ,  suppose  that  th i s  
parser  seeks  to apply some genera l  s t ra teg ies  to 
reso lve  such  cho ices ,  that  is, to se lec t  a par t i cu la r  
g rammat ica l  in te rpreta t ion  when faced  with ambigu i ty .  
If such  a parser  m to be able to operate  
dcterrn in ls t ica l ly ,  and  stil l  re turn  the  cor rec t  ana lys i s  
w i thout  e r re r ,  m cases  when a genera l  s t ra tegy  would 
yield the  wrong ana lys i s ,  then  it will requ i re  
in teract ive  channe ls  for t ransmi t t ing  a s ignal  capab le  
of b lock ing the  app l i ca t ion  of the  s t ra tegy  and  forc ing  
the  cor rec t  ana lys is .  These  are  the  secondary  
channe ls  of communicat ion  pos i ted  in the  model  of the  
SUS above.  
A theory  of NSls shou ld  spec i fy  when,  in te rms  
of the  operat ion  of any  indiv idual  p rocessor ,  
in te rac t ion  will be necessary ;  in te rac t ive  channe ls  for  
th i s  parser  must  be capab le  of prov id ing th is  
in fo rmat ion  at  the  onset  of any  given 
morphosyntaet i c  ambigu i ty ,  which is def ined as the  
po int  at  which the  parser  will have  to apply  its 
reso lu t ion  s t ra tegy .  In o rder  to make  the  concept  of 
onset  of ambigu i ty  p rec i se  a model  of the  
This d iagram is not  in tended to be complete  and  is 
only inc luded  to i l l us t ra te  the  two d i f fe rent  types  
of communicat ion  proposed  in th i s  paper .  
morphosyntactic component  of a SUS was designed 
and  imp lemented .  This  ana lyser  (hencefor th  the  
LEXieal-CATegorial  parser  - because  it employs  an  
Extended Categor ia l  Grammar  (eg. Ades & Steedman,  
1982) represent ing  morphosyntact i c  in fo rmat ion  as an  
extens ion  of the  lex icon)  makes  spec i f ic  p red ic t ions  
about  the  tempora l  avai labi l i ty  of non-morphosyntact ie  
in fo rmat ion  c ruc ia l  to  the  theory  of NSls p resented  
here .  LEXICAT's s t ra tegy  for  reso lu t ion  of ambigu i t ies  
is approx imate ly  a combinat ion  of late c losure  
(Fraz ier ,  1979) and  r ight  assoc ia t ion  (Kimball ,  1973). 
LEXICAT is a spec ies  of sh i f t - reduce  parser  which 
ernp~oys the  same s tack  for  the  s to rage  and  ana lys i s  
of input  and inspects  the  top three  cel ls of the  s tack  
be fore  each  pars ing  operat ion .  Reduct ion ,  however ,  
never  invo lves more  than  two ee'.ls, so the  top cell of 
the  s tack  ac ts  as  a very  res t r i c ted  one word look- 
ahead  buf fer .  In genera l ,  LEXICAT reduces  the  i tems in 
cel ls  two and  three  prov ided  thai. reduct ion  between 
cel ls  one and  two is not  g rammat ica l l y  possib le*.  
;Yhen LEXICAT encounters  ambigu i ty ,  in the  
major i ty  of s i tuat ions  th is  sur faces  as a cho ice  
between sh i f t ing  and  reduc ing .  When a sh i f t - reduce  
ehmce ar i ses  between e i ther  cel ls  one and two or two 
and  three ,  reduct ion  will be preferred by  defau l t ;  
a l though,  of course ,  a se t  of in te rac t ive  requests  will 
be generated  at  the  po in t  when thin cho ice  ar ises ,  and  
these  may prov ide in fo rmat ion  which b locks  the  
pre fer red  s t ra tegy .  The approx imate  e f fec t  of the  
pre ference  for  reduct ion  is that  incoming  mater ia l  is 
a t tached  to the  const i tuent  cur rent ly  under  ana lys i s  
which is " lowest"  in the  phrase  s t ruc ture  t ree.  LEXICAT 
is mrni lar  to recent  p roposa ls  by Church  (1980), 
i : 'ercira (in p ress )  and  Sh ieber  (1983), in that  it 
employs  genera l  s t ra teg ies ,  s ta ted  in te rms  of the  
parser ' s  bas ic  operat ions ,  in o rder  to parse  
determin is l iea l l y  with an ambiguous  grammar .  
A theory  of NSls shou ld  also spec i fy  how 
in teract ion  occurs .  When LEXICAT recogn iscs  a cho ice  
point ,  it makes  a request  for  non-morphosyntact i c  
in fo rmat ion  re levant  to th i s  th race  on all of the  
in teract ive  channe ls  to wh ich  it is connected ;  if any  of 
these  channe ls  re turns  a pos i t ive  response ,  the  
de fau l t  in te rpreta t ion  is over r idden .  The parser  is 
there fore  agnost i c  concern ing  which channe l  might  
prov ide the  re levant  in fo rmat ion ;  for example ,  
ana lys ing  
(3) ha fore the King rides h~:s horse 
it's :tsually groomed. 
The onset  of th is  rnorphosyntact i c  ambigu i ty  a r i ses  
when the horse has  bcen  ana lysed  as a noun  phrase .  
LEXICAT must  dec ide  at  th i s  po in t  whether  Tides is to 
be t reated  as t rans i t i ve  or  in t rans i t i ve :  the  t rans i t i ve  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
This is not  complete ly  accurate ;  see  
1984:Ch3 fer  a full descr ip t ion  of LEXICAT. 
E~riszoe 
261 
reading Is p re fer red  given the rcsnluLion strategy 
outlin(,.d above. "(herefore, an interact ive request will 
be generated  reque:~tin~ in format ion concern ing  the 
rcP:tmnship between these two constituents.  A simple 
yes /no  rcsponse  is all that  m needed along this 
interact ive channei :  "yes" to prevent  appl;.cation of the 
s t rategy,  "no" if the processor  concerned f inds 
noth ing re levant  to the decision. In re lat ion to this 
example,  cons ider  the channel  to the prosodic  
ana lyser  which mon i to rs  for prosodic  "breaks"  (def ined 
in terms or vowel lengthening,  change of fundamenta l  
f requency  and so forth):  whcn the request  is rcecivcd 
the prosodic analyscr returns a positive response if 
such a break is prcscnt in the appropriate part of the 
speech signal. In (3) none of these cues is likely to 
occur since t.hc rclcvant boundary is syntactically 
wcak (see Cooper & Paecm-Coopcr, 1980), so the 
interactive request wil l  not rcsu!t in a positive 
response, the default resolution strategy will apply 
and his horse will bc intcrprctcd as direct object of 
r ides. In 
(4) \[Tefore the h~ng rides his horse 
is usua l ly  groomed, 
cn the e ther  hand, an interact ive request  will be 
generated  at the same point, but  the interact ive  
channe l  between the prosodic  and morphosyntact i c  
components  is likely to produce  a posit ive response  
s ince the boundary  between rides end his horse is 
synLactical ly sLrongcr.  Thus, a l tachment  will be 
blocked, closing the subord inate  clause, and thereby  
forcing the cor rect  in terpretat ion .  
NSI , then,  is res t r i c ted  to a set. of yes /no  
responses  over the interact ive channe ls  at the 
explicit. :'equcst of the processor connected to those 
channels ,  where a posit ive response  on one interact ive  
channe l  suff ices to overr ide th:~ unmarked  choice 
which would be made in the absence  of such a signal. 
This highly res t r i c ted  form of interact ion is :;ufficient 
to guarantee  that  I,EXICAT will p roouce  the cor rect  
analys is  even in cases  of severe mutt iplc ambiguity;  
for example,  ,Jnalymng the noun compound in 
(b)lioron epoxy rocket motor  chambers,  
( f rom Mareu:~, \[980:253), th(:rc are four teen  + licit 
morph:~syntactm in terpretat ions ,  assuming  s tandard  
gramrnat.ical ana lyses  (eg. Sell{irk, t983). However, if 
this example were spoken and we assume that  it would 
have the prosodic  s t ruc ture  pred icted by Cooper & 
Pace ia -Cooper 's  (1980) a lgor i thm for deriving prosody  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Possibly Lhese responses  hon!d be represented as 
conf idence rat ings  ra ther  Lhan a d iscrete  choice. 
In this case levels of cer ta in ty  concern ing  the 
prcscnce /absencc  of re levant  events  cculd be 
rvpre~i 'ntcd,  l lowcver, for tim rest  of ~.his paper  we 
assume binary channe ls  wi!! suffice. 
+ Cor respond ing  to the Catalan numbers ;  see Martin 
eL al. (198l).  
f rom syntact ic  s t ruc ture ,  LEXICAT could produce  the 
correct analyms without error, just through 
interaction with the prosodic analyser. As each noun 
enters the ar,alyser, reduction will be blocked by the 
general strategy but, because LEXICAT will reeognise 
the ex is tence of ambLguity, an interact ive  request  will 
be generated  before each shift.  The prosod ic  b reak  
channe l  will then prevent  reduct ion  a f ter  epoxy and 
a f ter  ~otor ,  forc ing the cor rect  analys is  ((boron 
epoxy) ((rocket motor)  chambers)),  as opposed  to the 
defaul t  r ight -branch ing  structure. 
Thus, NSI between the morphosyntaetie and 
prosod ic  components  can be captured  by a bistable,  
b id i rect ional  link capable  of t ransmi t t ing  a request  
and signal ing a b inary  reponse,  e i ther  blocking or 
allowing the appl icat ion of the re levant  s t ra tegy  
according to the presence or absence of a prosodic 
break. Given the simplicity of this interaction, the 
prosodic analyser requires no more information from 
Lhe parser  than  that  a decis ion is requested  
concern ing  a par t i cu la r  boundary .  Nor need the 
prosodic  ana lyser  decide, pr ior  to an in teract ive  
request  on this channel ,  whether  a par t i cu la r  
occur rence  of, say lengthening,  is signall ing the 
presence  of a prosodic  break,  ra ther  than  for ins tance  
s t ress ,  s ince the request  itself will help resolve the 
in terpretat ion  of the cue. Moreover, we have a s imple 
genera l i sat ion  about  when inLeractive requests  will be 
made s ince Lhis account  of NSIs pred ic ts  that  prosod ic  
in fe rmatmn will only be re levant  to morphosyntaet ic  
analys is  at the onset  of a morphosyntact i c  ambiguity.  
If we assume (boldly) that  this account  of NSI 
bcLween the morphosyntaet ie  and prosodic  ana lysers  
will genera l i sc  to a complete  model of SUS, then  such  
a model rnakcs a set  of pred ic t ions  concern ing  the 
tempora l  availabil ity of in teracQvc in fo rmat ion  in the 
speech  signal and representaQon of the context  of 
u t te rance .  In effect, it c laims that  the SUS 
arch i tec ture  simply presupposes  that  language is 
o rgan iscd  Jil the appropr ia te  fashion s ince the model 
will not. funct ion if it is not. We call this strong 
predict ion about the temporal  organisat ion of the 
speech signal the Interactive Determin ism (ID) 
Hypothes ,s  s ince it is essenQal ly  an extens ion  of 
Marcus'  (1980) Determin ism Hypothesis .  
II TESTING 
THE INTERACTIVE DETERMINISM HYPOTttESIS 
The ID hypothes is  pred ic ts  th,~t speech  and the 
represcntat ion  of context  is organiscd in such  a way 
that. in format ion  will be available, when needed, vza 
NSI Lo resolve a choice in any individual component  at 
the point  when that  choice ar ises.  Thus m the case of 
prosodic  in teract ion  with morphosyntaet ie  analys is  the 
theory  pred ic ts  that  a prosodic  b reak  should  be 
present  in speech  at  the onset  of a morphosyntaet ie  
262 
ambigu i ty  which requ i res  a non-defau l t  in te rpreta t ion  
and wh ich  is  not  reso lved  by o ther  non-  
morphosyntactic i n fo rmat ion .  This  aspect  of the  ID 
hypothes is  has  been  tes ted  and  cor roborated  by Paul  
Warren (1983; in prep;  a lso see Br iscoe,  1984:Ch4), 
who has  under taken  a ser ies  of speech  product ion  
exper iments  in which (typical ly)  ten  sub jec ts  read  
a loud a l ist  of sentences .  This  l ist conta ins  se ts  of 
pa i r s  of local ly ambiguous  sentences ,  and  some fi l ler 
sentences  so that  the  purpose  of the  exper iment  is 
not  apparent  to the  sub jec ts .  Their  p roduct ions  a rc  
ana lysed  acoust i ca l l y  and  the  resu l t s  of th i s  ana lys i s  
a rc  then  checked  s tat i s t i ca l ly .  The techn ique  g ives a 
good ind icat io~ of whether  the  cues  assoc ia ted  with a 
prosod ic  b reak  are  present  at the  appropr ia te  po in ts  
in the  speech  s ignal ,  and  the i r  cons , , s tency  across  
d i f fe rent  speakers .  
Return ing  to examples  (3) and  (4) above,  we 
noted  that  a p rosod ic  b reak  would be requ i red  in (4), 
but  not  (3), to p revent  a t tachment  of r ides  and  hzs 
horse.  Warren found  exact ly  th i s  pat te rn  of resu l t s ;  
the  durat ion  of r ides  (and s imi la r  i tems in th is  
pos i t ion)  is an  average  51% longer  in (4) and  the  fall 
in fundamenta l  f requency  is a lmost  twice as great  with 
a cor respond ing  s tep  up to horse,  as  compared  to a 
smooth  dec l inat ion  across  th is  boundary  in (3). 
Similar ly,  ana lys ing  
(6) 7he company  awarded  the cont rac t  
\ [ to /was \ ]  the h ighest  bidcler. 
I,E),qCAT pre fers  a t tachment  of The company  to 
awarded ,  t reat ing  awarded  as the  main  verb.  In the  
case  where  awarded  must  be t reated  as the  beg inn ing  
cf a reduced  re lat ive,  Warren  found  that  the  durat ion  
of the  f inal sy l lable of company  is lengthened and  that  
the  same pat tern  of fall and  s tep  up in fundamenta l  
f requency  occurs .  Perhaps  the  mo'~t in teres t ing  cases  
a re  ambiguous  const i tuent  questmns ;  Church  
(19g0,117) a rgued  that  it is p robab ly  imposs ib le  to 
parse  these  dctermin is t iea l l y  by employ ing  look -ahead:  
"The real ly  hard  prob lem with wh-movement  is 
f ind ing the  "gap" where  the  wh-e lement  
or ig inated.  This is not  par t i cu la r ly  d i f f icu l t  for  
a non-determin is t i c  competence  theory ,  but  it 
is (probably)  imposs ib le  for  a determin is t i c  
p rocess ing  model . "  
LEXICAT pred ic ts  that  in a sentence  such  as 
(7) ~Vho d id you  want  to g ive the presents  to 5~.e? 
the  potent ia l  po int  of a t tachment  of Who as d i rec t  
ob ject  of want  will bc ignored by de fau l t  in p re ference  
for  the  immedia te  a t tachment  of to give.  Thus  there  is 
a p red ic t ion  that  the  sentence ,  when spoken ,  shou ld  
conta in  a p rosod ic  b reak  at  th i s  point.  Warren has  
found  some ev idence  for th i s  pred ic t ion ,  i.e. want  is 
lengthened as compared  to examples  where  th is  is not  
the  cor rec t  po int  of a t tachment  of the  prcposed  
phrase, such as 
(8) Who did you  want  t.~ g ive  the presents to? 
but  the  prosod ic  cues ,  a l though cons is tent ,  a re  
comparat ive ly  weak, and  it is not  c lear  that  l i s teners  
a re  ut i l i s ing them in the  manner  pred ic ted  by the  
theory  (see Br iscoe,  1984:Ch4).  
A d i f fe rent  k ind of suppor t  is p rov ided  by 
sentences such as 
(9) Before the I~ng r ides  a servant  
g rooms his horse.  
which exh ib i t  the  same local ambigu i ty  as  (3) and  (,t) 
but  where  the  semant ic  in terpreta t ion  of the  noun  
phrase  makes  the d i rect  ob ject  read ing  implaus ib le ,  in 
th i s  case  it is l ikely that  an  in teract ive  channe l  
between the  semant ic  and  morphosyntact l c  ana lysers  
would block the  incor rec t  in terpreta t ion .  So there  is a 
p red ic t ion  that  the  funct iona l  load on prosod ic  
in fo rmat ion  will decrease  and,  there fore ,  that  the  
prosod ic  cues  to the  break  may be less  marked .  This  
p red ic t ion  was aga in  cor roborated  by Warren who 
found  that  the  prosod ic  b reak  in examples  such  as (9) 
was s ign i f i cant ly  less  rnarked acoust i ca l l y  than  for 
c~arnp lcs  such  as (4)*. In genera l  then ,  these  
exper imenta l  resu l t s  suppor t  the  ID hypothes is .  
Ill CONTROl, STRUCI'URE AND ORGANISATION 
In a SU~J based  on the  ID model ,  the  main  flow of 
in fo rmat ion  will be def ined by the  tasks  of each  
component ,  and  the i r  med ium of communicat ion ,  will 
be a natura l  consequence  of these  tasks ;  as  for  the  
ser ia l ,  h ie rarch ica l  model .  However,  in the  ID model ,  
un l ike  the  h ie rarch ica l  model ,  there  a rc  less  
overheads  because  unnecessary  computat ion  at  any  
icv(.l of p rocess ing  will be e l im inated  by the  NSIs 
between components .  These  in teract ions  will, of 
course ,  requ i re  a la rge number  of in te rac t ive  
channe ls ;  but  these  do not imply a common 
representat ion  language because the  in fo rmat ion  
which passes  a long them is representat ion - independent  
and  res t r i c ted  to a min imal  request  and  a b inary  
response .  Each  channe l  in the  full SUS will be 
ded icated  to a speci f ic  in te rac t ion  between 
components ;  so the  morphosyntact ie  component  will 
requ i re  a p rosod ic  b reak  channe l  and  a un ique  
re ferent  channe l  (see example  (1)), and  so for th .  
Thus ,  a complete  model  of SUS will imp lement  a theory  
of the  types  of NSI requ i red  between all components .  
Finally, the  ID model  will no t  requ i re  that  any  
ind iv idual  p rocessor  has  knowledge  of the  nature  of 
the  operat ions  of another  p rocessor ;  that  is, the  
Note that this result is inexplicable for theories 
which attempt to derlve the prosodlc structure of a 
sentence directly f rom its syntactic structure; see 
Cooper  3: Paccia-Cooper (\].980:181f). 
263 
morphosyr:tacLic ana lyser  need riot know what is being 
eoiT~puted at the other  end of the prosodic  break  
channel ,  or how; nor  riced the p:'osodic ana lyser  know 
why it is eomput in~ the presence  or absence  of a 
prosodic  break. Rather, the knowledge that this 
infor'ma~lon is potent ia l ly  impor tant  is expressed  by 
the ex istence of this par t i cu la r  inLeract ive channel.  
The cont ro l  s t ruc ture  of this model is 
s t ra ight fo rward ;  a f te r  each separate  operat ion  of each 
indiv idual  c~mponent  the resu l ts  of this operat ion  will 
be passed to the next  component  in the ser ial  chain 
ol processors.  An in teract ive  request  ~'ill be made by 
an}, component  only when faced with an indetermin ism 
i r reso lvab le  in "erms of the input  avai lable to it. No 
fu r ther  scheduhng or  eent.ral ised cont ro l  of process ing 
will be reqmred.  Fur thermore ,  a l though each indiv idual  
eomK.enent determines  when .N3Is will occur,  because 
of the res t r i c ted  nature  of this in teract ion  each 
component  can sti l l  be developed as a complete ly  
independent  knowledge source. 
The determin is t i c  nature  of the individual 
component~ of this SUS e l iminates the need for any 
glob,d hcurm! ies  to be brought  into the analys is  o\[ the 
speech  signal. Thus we have di--pensed neat ly with the 
requ i rement  for an over -powerfu l  and over -genera l  
problem-solv ing f ramework,  such as the b lackboard,  
and replacr:d it with a theory  specif ic to the domain 
under  conmdera l ion;  namely, language. The theory  of 
X~q}s of fers  a uat is faetory  specif ic method for speech  
undci.-:tallding which allowrr the separate  specia l ist  
c,~mpor;ent procedures  of a SUS to be 
"a!For i thmet ized'"  and compiled. As Erman et al 
(1980::L16) suggest: "In such a ease t i le f lex ib i l i ty  of a 
system l ike Hcarsay- l l  may no longer  be needed".  
"fhe res t r i c t ions  on the nature  and d i rect ional i ty  
of NSI ehanne is  in a SUE:, and the s i tuat ions  in which 
they \[iced to be act ivated,  a;Iowt; a modu lar  sys tem 
who'.~e contro l  s t ruc ture  is not inuch more  complex 
than  th:.~t of the h ierarch ica l  mode}, and yet, via the 
net.work of interact ive channels ,  achieves the 
eff iciency sought  5y the heterarch iea l  and b lackboard  
models, wi thout  the concomi tant  p rcb lems of common 
knowledge representat ions  and complex 
eom!Tmni~zations protoco ls  between separate  knowledge 
sources .  Thus, the ID mode! d i spenses  with the 
overhe. id costs  of data -d i rec ted  act ivat ion of 
'.mowledge sources  and the need for oppor tun is t i c  
schedul ing or a complex focus -o f -cont ro l  mechan ism.  
IV CONCLUSION 
In this paper  we have proposed  a very idealised model 
of a SUS with a s imple o rgan isat ion  and cont ro l  
s t ruc ture ,  Clearly, the ID model assumes  a greater  
level of unders tand ing  of many aspects  of speech  
process ing  than  is cur rent .  For example,  we have 
assurncd that  the word recogni t ion  component  is 
capable  of re turn ing  a ser ies  of unique,  cor rec t  lexical 
items; even with interaction of the kind envisaged, it 
is doubt fu l  that  our  cur rent  unders tand ing  of 
acoust i c -phcnet ic  analys is  is good enough for it to be 
poss ib le to build such  a component  now. Neverthe less ,  
t i . .  exper imenta l  work repor ted  by Marslcn-Wilson & 
Tyler (1980) and Cole & Jakimik (1980), for example,  
suggests  that  l i s teners  are  capable  of access ing  a 
un ique Icxical i tem on the basis  of the acoust i c  s ignal 
and interact ive  fcedback f rom the developing analys is  
of the u t terance  and its context  (of ten before the 
acoust i c  signal is complete) .  More ser iously,  f rom the 
perspective of interactive determinism, little has been 
said about the many other interactive channels which 
will be required for speech understanding and, in 
part icu lar ,  whether ,  these  channe ls  can be as 
res t r i c ted  a.~: the prosod ic  break  channel .  For example,  
cons ider  the channe l  which will be requ i red  to capture  
the in teract ion  in example  (9); this will need to be 
sensiLive to someth ing  like semant ic  "anomaly" .  
tIowever, ?.emantic anomaly  is an inherent ly  vague 
concept ,  part icu lar ly  by compar i son  with that  of a 
prosodic  break.  Similarly, as we noted above, the 
morphosyntact i c  ana lyser  will requ i re  an in teract ive  
channe l  to the d i scourse  ana lyser  which ind ieates  
whether  a noun phrase  followed by a potent ia l  relat ive 
clause, such  as ta r  horse  in (3), has  a un ique 
re ferent .  However. s ince this ehanne l  would only seem 
to be re levant  to ambigui t ies  involving relat ive c lauses,  
it appears  to east  doubt  on the claim that  interaet ive  
requests  are  generated  automat ica l ly  on every channe l  
each t ime any type of ambigui ty  is encountered .  This, 
in turn,  suggests  that  the contro l  s t ruc ture  proposed  
in the last sect ion is oversimpli f ied. 
Nevertheless ,  by s tudy ing these tasks  in te rms of 
far more re, ; tr ictcd and potentially more  
eomputat iona l ly  eff ic ient models, we are more  likely to 
uncover  res t r i c t ions  on language which, once 
discovered,  will take us a s tep  c loser  to t rac tab le  
so lut ions  to the task of speech  unders tand ing .  Thus, 
the work repor ted  here suggests  that  language is 
organ ised in such  a manner  that  morphosyntact i c  
analys is  can proceed detcrmin is t ica l ly  on the basis  of 
a very res t r i c ted  pars ing algor i thm, because  non-  
s t ruc tura l  in format ion  necessary  to resolve 
ambigui t ies  will be available in the speech  signal (or 
representat ion  of the context  of u t te rance)  at  the  
po int  when the  choice ar i ses  dur ing  mcrphosyntaet ic  
analysis.  
Tile account  of morphosyntact ie  analys is  that  
thls constraint allows is more elegant, parsimonious 
264 
and empirical ly adequate  than  employing look-ahead 
(Marcus, 1980). Firstly, an account  based on look- 
ahead is forced to claim that  local and global 
ambiguit ies are resolved by di f ferent mechan isms 
(since the latter ,  by definit ion, cannot  be resolved by 
the use of morphosyntaet ic  informat ion fu r ther  
downst ream in the signal), whilst the ID model 
requires only one mechanism. Secondly, res t r i c ted  
look-ahead fails to delimit accurate ly  the class of so- 
called garden path sentences  (Milne, 1982; Briscoe, 
1983), whilst the ID account  correct ly  predicts  the i r  
" interact ive"  nature  (Briscoe, 1982, 1984; Crain & 
Steedman, in press). Thirdly, look-ahead involves 
delaying decisions, a s t rategy which is made 
implausible, at least in the context  of speech 
understanding,  by the body of exper imenta l  resu l ts  
summar ised by Tyler (1981), which suggest that  
morphosynta: ' : t ie analysis is extremely rapid. 
The generat isat ion of these resu l ts  to a complete 
model of SUS represents  commitment  o a research  
programme which sets as its goal the discovery of 
const.raints on language which allow the assoc iated 
process ing tasks to bc implemented in an eff icient and 
t ractab le  manner  What is advocated here, therefore,  
is the development of a computat iona l  theory  of 
iangoage processing derived through the study of 
language from the perspect ive of these process ing 
tasks, much in the ~ame way in whmh Marr (1982) 
developed his comput.ational theory of vision. 
Acknowledgements: We would like to thank  David 
Carter, Jane Robinson, Karen Sparck Jones and John 
Tait for the i r  helpful comments.  Mistakes remain our  
own. 
V REFERENCES 
Ades,A. and Steedman,M.(1982) 'On the Order of 
Words', Linguistics and Philosophy, col.5, 320-363 
Balzer,R., Erman,L., London,P. and Williams,C.(1980) 
'HEARSAY-Ill: A Domain- Independent  Framework for 
Expert  Systems',  Proceedings of the AAAI(1), 
SLanford, CA, pp. 108-110 
Briscoe,E.(1982) 'Garden Path  Sentences  or Garden 
Path  Utterances? ' ,  Cambridge Papers in Phonetics 
and Experimental Lingui.~tics, vol.\], 1-9 
Briscoc,E.(1983) 'Determinism and its implementat ion  
m Parsifal '  in Sparck Jones,K and Wilks,Y.(eds.), 
Automatic Natural Language Parsing, Ellis 
Horwood, Chichester,  pp.61-68 
Briscoe,E.(1984) Towards an Understanding of Spoken 
Sentence Comprehension: The Interactive 
Determinism H~jpothesis, Doctoral Thesis, 
Cambridge University 
Church,K(1980)  On Memory Limitations in Natural 
Language Processing, MIT/LCS/TR-245 
Cole,R and Jakimek,J .(1980) 'A Model of Speech 
Percept ion '  in Cole,R.(eds ), Perception and 
Production of Fluent Speech, Lawrence Erlbaum, 
New Jersey 
Cooper,W. and Paccia-Cooper, J .  (1980) 3yntax and 
Speech, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass 
Cooper,W. and Sorenson, J . (1981) Pundamental 
Prequency in Sentence Production, Spr inger  
Verlag, New York 
Crain,S. and Steedman,M.( In press) 'On Not Being Led 
Up the Garden Path: the Use of Context by the 
Psychologmal Parser '  in Dowty,D., Kar t tuncn ,L  
and Zwicky,A.(eds.), Natural Language Processing, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Erman,L ,  Hayes-Roth,F., Lesser,V. and Rcddy,R.(1980) 
'The t learsay-I I  Speech Understanding System: 
Integrat ing Knowledge to Resolve Uncerta inty ' ,  
Computing Surveys, col. 12, 213-253 
Erman,L. and Lesser,V.(1975) 'A Multi-Level 
Organisat ion for Problem Solving Using Many, 
Diverse, Cooperat ing Sources of Knowledge', 
Proceedings of the 4th IJCAI, Tbilisi, Georgia, 
pp.d83-490 
Fra:'ier,L. (1979) On Comprehending Sentences: 
Syntactic Parsing 52rategies, IULC, Bloomington, 
Indiana 
}Iayes-Roth,B.(1983a) A Blackboard Model of Control, 
Report No.HPP-83-38, Depar tment  of Computer  
Science, Stanford University 
l layes-Roth,B.(1983b) 7he Blackboard Architecture: A 
General Framework for Problem Solving?, Report 
No HPP-83-30, Department. of Computer  Science, 
Stanford  University 
Kimbatl,J.(1973) 'Seven Pr inciples of Surface St ructure  
Pars ing in Natural  Language',  Cognition, col.2, 15- 
47 
I,ea,W.(1980) 'Prosodic Aids to Speech Recognit ion' in 
W. l,ea(cds. ), Trends in Speech Recognition, 
Prent ice  Hall, New Jersey, pp 166-205 
Marcus,M.(1980) A Theory of S)jntactie Recognition for 
Natural I~nguage, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Marr,D.(1982) V/sion, W.H.Freeman and Co., San 
Francisco 
Marslcn-Wdson,W. and Tyler,L.(1980) 'The Temporal 
S t ructure  of Spoken \]_,anguagc Understanding:  the 
Percept ion of Sentences  and Words in Sentences ' ,  
Cbgnition, col 8, 1-74 
Martin,W., Church,K. and Patil ,R.(1982) Preliminary 
Analysis of a I3readth-F~rst Parsing Algorithm: 
Theoretical and Experimental Results, 
MIT / I,CS/TR- 261 
Milne,R.(1982) 'Predict ing Garden Path  Sentences ' ,  
Cognitive Science, col.6, 349-373 
Percira,F.( \ ]n press)  'A New Character i zat ion  of 
A t tachment  Pre ferences '  in Dowty,D., Karttunen,L.  
and Zwicky,A.(eds.), Natural I~nguage Processing, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
Selkwk,E.(1983) The Syntaz of Words, MIT Press, 
Cambridge Mass. 
Shieber,S (1983) 'Sentence  Disambiguation by a Shift- 
265 
t,~ccltJ(',~ Par~irL.q Technique' ,  I~'oceedings of th.e 
21.st A~.n.~zctl ,,~4eeti.ng of AC\[,. C~rnbridgc, Mass, 
pp 1 13-ilFJ 
t,~eddy,JL and Erman,\[ ,(197,5) 'Tutor ia l  on System 
Organlsatlon for Speech Understanding' in 
R!{eddy(eds), Speech \[?ecogr~tior~" Invited Papers 
of th.e ll';J'."," .b~.qrrtpos'i.um. Academic Pre~s, New 
York, pp.,IbT- ,179 
'ryler,L.(1981) ',~er~ai and Interact lye-Parallel Theories 
of Sentence Proces~;ing', 7~eorelLcat \[,ir~g~zistics, 
vot.\[L 29-65 
War'ren,P.(19l\]3) 'Temporal and Non-Ternporal Cues to 
Sent.encc Structure' .  6"ctmbmdge Papers irL 
Phonetics ~nd I;zperimenta.l l,?r~guist?cs, vot.H 
Warren,P.(|n prep) lhzrational i;~ctors in 5~geech 
~5'ocessinE, Doctoral Thesis, Cambridge University 
266 
