DICTIONARIES OF THE HIND 
George A. Miller 
Department of Psychology 
Princeton University 
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA 
ABSTRACT 
How lexical information should be 
formulated, and how it is organized in 
computer memory for rapid retrieval, are 
central questions for computational 
linguists who want to create systems for 
language understanding. How lexical 
knowledge is acquired, and how it is 
organized in human memory for rapid 
retrieval during language use, are also 
central questions for cognitive psycholo- 
gists. Some examples of psycholinguistic 
research on the lexical component of 
language are reviewed with special atten- 
tion to their implications for the compu- 
tational problem. 
INTRODUCTION 
I would like to describe some recent 
psychological research on the nature and 
organization of lexical knowledge, yet to 
introduce it that way, as research on the 
nature and organization of lexical 
knowledge, usually leaves the impression 
that it is abstract and not very 
practical. But that impression is pre- 
cisely wrong; the work is very practical 
and not at all abstract. So I shall take 
a different tack. 
Computer scientists -- those in ar- 
tificial intelligence especlally -- some- 
times introduce their work by emphasizing 
its potential contribution to an under- 
standing of the human mind. I propose to 
adopt that strategy in reverse: to intro- 
duce work in psychology by emphasizing 
Its potential contribution to the devel- 
opment of information processing and 
communication systems. We may both be 
wrong, of course, but at least this 
strategy indicates a spirit of coopera- 
tion. 
Let me sketch a general picture of 
the future. You may not share my expec- 
tations, but once you see where I think 
events are leading, you will understand 
why I believe that research on the nature 
and organization of lezical knowledge is 
worth doing. You may disagree, but at  
least you will understand. 
Some Technological Assumptions 
I assume that computers are going to 
be directly linked by communication net- 
works. Even now, in local area networks, 
a workstation can access information on 
any disk connected anywhere in the net. 
Soon such networks will not be locally 
restricted. The model that is emerging 
is of a very large computer whose parts 
are geographically distributed; large 
corporations, government agencies, uni- 
versity consortia, groups of scientists, 
and others who can afford it will be 
working together in shared information 
environments. For example, someday the 
Association foe Computational Linguistics 
will maintain and update an exhaustive 
knowledge base immediately accessible to 
all computational linguists. 
Our present conception of computers 
as distinct objects will not fade away -- 
the local workstation seems destined to 
grow smaller and more powerful every year 
-- but developments in networking will 
allow users to think of their own work- 
stations not merely as computers, but as 
windows into a vast information space 
that they can use however they desire. 
Most of the parts needed for such a 
system already exist, and fiber optic 
technology will soon transmit broadband 
signals over long distances at affordable 
costs. Putting the parts together into 
large, non-local networks is no trivial 
task, but it will happen. 
Computer scientists probably have 
their own versions of this story, but no 
special expertise is required to see that 
rapid progress lies ahead. Moreover, 
this development will have implications 
for cognitive psychology. However the 
technological implementation works out, 
at least one aspect raises questions of 
considerable psychological interest: in 
particular, how will people use it? What 
kind of man-machine interface will there 
be? 
305 
What might lie "beyond the key- 
board," as one futurist has put it (Bolt, 
1984), has been a subject for much crea- 
tive speculation, since the possibilities 
are numerous and diverse. Although no 
single interface will be optimal for 
every use, many users will surely want to 
interact with the system in something 
reasonably close to a natural language. 
Indeed, if the development of information 
networks is to be financed by those who 
use them, the interface will have to be 
as natural as possible -- which means 
that natural language processing will be 
a part of the interface. 
Natural  Language Interfaces 
Natural language interfaces to large 
knowledge bases are going to become gen- 
erally available. The only question is 
when. How long will it take? Systems 
already exist that converse and answer 
questions on restricted topics. How much 
remains to be done? 
Before these systems will be gener- 
ally useful, three difficult requirements 
will have to be met. An interface must: 
(1) have access to a large, general-pur- 
pose knowledge base; (2) be able to deal 
with an enormous vocabulary~ (3) be able 
to reason in ways that human users find 
familiar. Other features would be highly 
desirable (e.g., automatic speech recog- 
nition, digital processing of images, 
spatially distributed displays of infor- 
mation), but the three listed above seem 
critical. 
Requirement (I) will be met by the 
creation of the network. How a user's 
special interests will shape the organ- 
ization of his knowledge base and his 
locally resident programs poses fascin- 
ating problems, but I do not understand 
them well enough to comment. I simply 
assume that eventually every user can 
have at his disposal, either locally or 
remotely, whatever data bases and expert 
systems he desires. 
Requirement (3), the ability to draw 
inferences as people do, is probably the 
most difficult. It is not likely to be 
"solved" by any single insight, but a 
robust system for revising belief struc- 
tures will be an essential component of 
any satisfactory interface. I believe 
that psychologists and other cognitive 
scientists have much to contribute to the 
solution of this problem, but the most 
promising work to date has been done by 
computer scientists. Since I have little 
to say about the problem other than how 
difficult it is, I will turn instead to 
requirement (2), which seems more trac- 
table. 
THE VOCABULARY PROBLEM 
Giving a system a large vocabulary 
poses no difficulty in principle. And 
everyone who has tried to develop systems 
to process natural language recognizes 
the importance of a large vocabulary. 
Thus, the vocabulary problem looks like a 
good place to start. The dimensions of 
the problem are larger than might be 
expected, however, so there has been some 
disagreement about the best strategy. 
If, in addition to understanding a 
user's queries, the system is expected to 
understand all the words in the vast 
knowledge base to which it will have 
access, then it should probably have on 
the order of 250,000 lexical entries: at 
1,000 bytes/entry (a modest estimate), 
that is 250 megabytes. Since standard 
dictionaries do not contain many of the 
words that are printed in newspapers 
(Walker & Amsler, 1984), another 250,000 
megabytes would probably be required for 
proper nouns. Since I am imagining the 
future, however, I will assume that such 
large memories will be available inex- 
pensively at every user's workstation. 
It is not memory size per se that poses 
the problem. 
The problem is how to get al that 
information into a computer. Even if you 
knew how the information should be repre- 
sented, a good lexical entry would take a 
long time to write. Writing 250,000 of 
them is a daunting task. 
No doubt there are many exciting 
projects that I don't happen to know 
about, but on the basis of my perusal of 
the easily accessible literature there 
seem to he two approaches to the vocabu- 
lary problem. One uses a machine-read- 
able version of some traditional diction- 
ary and tries to adapt it to the needs of 
a language processing system. Call this 
the "book" approach. The other writes 
iexical entries for some fragment of the 
English lexicon, hut formulates those en- 
tries in a notation that is convenient 
for computational manipulation. Call 
this the "demo" approach. 
The book approach has the advantage 
of including a large number of words, but 
the information with each word is diffi- 
cult to use. The demo approach has the 
advantage that the information about each 
word is easy to use, but there are usual- 
ly not many words. The real problem, 
therefore, is how to combine these two 
approaches: how to attain the coverage of 
a traditional dictionary in a computa- 
tionally convenient form. 
306 
Q 
The Book Approach 
If you adopt the book approach, what 
you want to do is translate traditional 
dict ionary entries into a notation that 
makes evident to the machine the morpho- 
logical, syntactic, semantic, and prag- 
matic properties that are needed in order 
to construct interpretations for senten- 
ces. Since there are many entries to be 
translated, the natural solution is to 
write a program that will do it automa-  
tically. But that is not an easy task. 
One reason the translations are dif- 
ficult is that synonyms are hard to find 
in a conventional dictionary. Alpha- 
betical ordering is the only way that a 
lexicographer who works by hand can keep 
track of his data, but an alphabetical 
order puts together words with similar 
spell ings and scatters haphazardly words 
with similar meanings. Consequently, 
similar senses of different words may be 
written very differently; they may be 
written at different times and even by 
different people. (For example, compare 
the entries for the modal verbs 'can,' 
'must,' and 'will' in the Oxford English 
Dictionary.) Only a very smart program 
could appreciate which definit ions should 
be paraphrases of one another. 
Another reason that the translations 
are diff icult is that lexicographers are 
fond of polysemy. It is a mark of care- 
ful scholarship that all the senses of a 
word should be distinguished; the more 
careful the scholarship, the greater the 
number of distinctions. 
When dictionary entries are taken 
l iterally the results for sentence inter- 
pretation are ridiculous. Consider an 
example. Suppose the language processor 
is asked to provide an interpretation for 
some simple sentence, say: 
"The boy loves his mother." 
And imagine it has available the text of 
Merriam-Webster's Ninth New Col leo ia te  
D ~ .  Ignoring sub-senses: 
"the" has 4 senses, 
"boy" has 3, 
"love" has 9 as a noun and 4 as a 
verb, 
"his" has  2 entries, and 
"mother" has 4 as a noun, 3 as an ad- 
jective, 2 as a verb. 
Such numbers invite calculation. If we 
assume the system has a parser able to do 
no more than recognize that "love" is a 
verb and "mother" is a noun, then, on the 
basis of the literal information in this 
dictionary, there are 4x3x4x2x4 - 384 
candidate interpretations. This calcula- 
tion assumes minimal parsing and maximal 
reliance on the dictionary. Of course, 
no self-respecting parser would tolerate 
so many parallel interpretations of a 
sentence, but the i l l us t ra t ion  gives a 
feeling for how much work a good parser 
does. A-d all of it is done in order to 
"disambiguate" a sentence that nobody who 
knows English would consider to be the 
least ambiguous. 
: Synonymy and polysemy pose serious 
problems, even before we raise the ques- 
tion of how to translate conventional 
definit ions into computational ly useful 
notations. Any system will have to cope  
with synonymy and polysemy, of course, 
but the book approach to the vocabulary 
problem seems to raise them in acute 
forms, while providing little of the in- 
formation required to resolve them. With 
sufficient patience this approach will 
surely lead to a satisfactory solution, 
but no one should think it wil l be easy. 
The Vocabulary Matrix 
As presented so far, synonymy and 
polysemy appear to be two distinct prob- 
lems. From another point of view, they 
are merely two different ways of looking 
at the same problem. 
In essence, a conventional dict ion- 
ary is simply a mapping of senses onto 
words, and a mapping can be conveniently 
represented as a matrix: call it a vocab- 
ulary matrix. Imagine a huge matrix with 
all the words in a language across the 
top of the matrix, and all the different 
senses that those words can express down 
the the side. If a particular sense can 
be expressed by a word, then the cell in 
that row and column contains an entry; 
otherwise it contains nothing. The entry 
itself can provide syntactic information, 
or examples of usage, or even a picture 
-- whatever the lexicographer deems im-  
portant enough to include. Table 1 shows 
a fragment of a vocabulary matrix. 
Table i. Fragment of a Vocabulary Matrix 
Columns represent modal verbs; rows 
represent modal senses; 'E' in a cell 
means the word in that column can express 
the sense in that row. 
WORDS 
SENSES can may _ m u ~ ~ _ M i l  1 
be able to E . . . 
be permitted to E E . . . 
be possible E E . . 
be obliged to . . E . 
certain to be . . E 
be necessary . . E 
expected  to be  . . E E 
307 
Several comments should be made about the 
vocabulary matrix. 
First, it should be apparent that 
any conventional dictionary can be repre- 
sented as a vocabulary matrix: simply add 
a column to the matrix for every word, 
and add a row to the matrix for every 
sense of every word that is given in the 
printed dictionary. (A lexical matrix 
can be viewed as an impractical w~y of 
printing a dictionary on a single, very 
large sheet of paper.) 
Second, entering such a matrix con- 
sists of searching down some column or 
across some row. So a vocabulary matrix 
can be entered either with a word or with 
a sense. Thus, one difference between 
conventional dicticnaries, which can be 
entered only with a word, and the dic- 
tionary in out mind, which can be entered 
with either words or senses, disappears 
when dictionaries are represented in this 
more abstract form. 
Third, if you enter the matrix with 
a sense and search along a row, you find 
all the words that express that sense. 
When different words express the same 
sense, we say they are g~iQ~ym~USo On 
the other hand, if you enter the matrix 
with a word and look down that column, 
you find all the different senses that 
that word can express. When one word can 
express two or more senses, we say that 
it is ambiguous, or ~ixsemglL~. Thus, 
the two great complications of lexical 
knowledge, synonymy and polysemy, are 
seen as complementary aspects of a single 
abstract structure= 
Finally, since the vocabulary matrix 
serves only to represent the mapping 
between the two domains, it is free to 
expand as new words, or new senses for 
familiar words, are added. Of course, 
the number of columns is relatively fixed 
by the size of the vocabulary, so the 
major degrees of freedom are in deciding 
what the senses are and how to represent 
them. 
The Demo Approach 
When the question is raised of what 
a computationally useful lexical entry 
should look like, it is time to shift 
from the book approach to the demo ap- 
proach, where serious attempts have been 
made to establish a conceptual notation 
in which semantic interpretations can be 
expressed for computational use. 
By "the demo approach" I mean the 
strategy of building a system to process 
language that is confined to some well 
defined content area. Since language 
processing is a large and difficult 
enterprise, it is sensible to begin by 
trying out one's ideas in a small way to 
see whether they work. If the ideas 
don't work in a limited domain, they 
certainly won't work in the unlimited 
domain of general discourse. The result 
of this approach has been a series of 
progressively more ambitious demonstra- 
tion programs. 
Among those who take this approach, 
two extremes can be distinguished. On 
the one hand are those who feel that 
syntactic analysis is essential and 
should be carried, if not to completion, 
then as far as possible before resorting 
to semantic information. On the other 
hand are those who prefer semantics-based 
processing and consider syntactic cri- 
teria only when they get in trouble. 
The difference is largely one of 
emphasis, since neither extreme seems 
willing to rely totally on one or the 
other kind of information, and most 
workers would probably locate themselves 
somewhere in the middle. Since I am 
concerned here with the lexical aspects 
of language comprehension, however, I 
shall look primarily at semantics-based 
processing. 
Vocabulary Size 
Most of these demos have small vo- 
cabularies. It is surprising how much 
you can do with 1,500 well chosen words; 
a demo with more than 5,000 words would 
be evidence of manic energy on the part 
of its creator. A few thousand lexical 
entries have been all that was required 
in order to test the ideas that the de- 
signer was interested in. 
The problem, of course, is that 
writing dictionary definitions is hard 
work, and writing them in LISP doesn't 
make it any easier. If you are satisfied 
with definitions that take five lines of 
code, then, obviously, you can build a 
much larger dictionary than if you try to 
cram into an entry all the different 
senses that are found in conventional 
dictionaries. But even with short 
definitions, a great many have to be 
written. 
If you want the language processor 
to have as large a vocabulary as the 
average user, you will have to give it at 
least i00,000 words. One way to get  a 
feeling for how many words that is is to 
translate it into a rate of acquisition. 
Several years ago I looked at Mildred 
Templin's (1953) data that way. Templin 
measured the vocabulary size of children 
of average intelligence at 6, 7, and 8 
years of age. In two years they acquired 
28,300 - 13,000 = 15,300 words, which 
308 
averages out to about 21 words per day 
(Miller, 1977). 
Most people, when they hear that 
result, confess that they had no idea 
that children are learning new words at 
such a rapid rate. But the arithmetic 
holds just as well for computers as for 
children. If you want the language pro- 
cessor to have a vocabulary of 100,000 
words, and if you are willing to spend 
ten years putting definitions into it, 
then you will have to put in more than 27 
new definitions every day. 
How far from this goal are today's 
demos? The answer should be simple, but 
it's not. It is hard to tell exactly how 
many words these systems can handle. 
Definitions are usually written in terms 
of a relatively small set of semantic 
primitives, and the inheritance of 
properties is assumed wherever possible. 
The goal, of course, is to create an 
unambiguous semantic representation that 
can be used as input to an inferencing 
system, so the form of these representa- 
tions is much more important than their 
variety, at least in the initial experi- 
ments. In the hands of a clever program- 
mer, a few hundred semantic primitives 
can really do an enormous amount of work. 
Although it is often assumed that 
the fewer semantic primitives a system 
requires, the better it is, in fact there 
seems to be little advantage to keeping 
the number small. When the number of 
primitives is small, definitions become 
long permutations of that small number of 
different atoms (Miller, 1978). When the 
set of primitives gets too small, defini- 
tions become like machine code: the com- 
puter loves them, but people find them 
hard to read or write. 
C~In lng  Book and Demo 
How large a set of semantic primi- 
tives do we need? It is claimed that 
Basic English can express any idea with 
only 850 words, but that really cuts the 
vocabulary to the bone. The 
Dictionary of Contemporary Enalish~ which 
is very popular with people learning 
English as a second language, uses a 
constrained vocabulary of about 2,000 
words (plus some specialized terms) to 
write its definitions. 
Using the L ~  as a guide, Richard 
Cullingford and I tried to estimate how 
much effort would be involved in creat- 
ing a computationally useful lexicon. 
Our initial thought was to write LISP 
programs for 2,000 basic terms, then use 
Cullingford's language processor 
(Cullingford, 1985) to translate all of 
the definitions into LISP. We quickly 
realized, however, that the 2,000 words 
are polysemous; different senses are used 
in different definitions. As a rough 
estimate, we thought 12,000 basic 
concepts might suffice. 
An examination of the ~ defi- 
nitions also indicated that a great deal 
of information might have to be added to 
the translated definitions. Many of the 
simpler conceptual dependencies (informa- 
tion required for disambiguation, as well 
as for drawing inferences; Schank, 1975) 
have to be included in the definitions. 
Each translated definition would have to 
be checked to see that all sense 
relations, predicate-argument structures, 
and selectional restrictions were 
explicit and correct, and a wide variety 
of pragmatic facts (e.g., that "anyhow" 
in initial position signals a change of 
topic) would probably have to be added. 
We have not undertaken this task. 
Not only would writing 12,000 defini- 
tions (and checking out and supple- 
menting 50,000 more) require a major 
commitment of time and energy, but we do 
not have Longman's permission to use 
their dictionary this way. I report it, 
not as a project currently under way, but 
simply as one way to think about the 
magnitude of the vocabulary problem. 
So the situation is roughly this: In 
order to have natural language interfaces 
to the marvellous information sources 
that will soon be available, one thing we 
must do is beef up the vocabularies that 
natural language processors can handle. 
That will not be an easy thing to 
accomplish. Although there is no 
principled reason why natural language 
processors should not have vocabularies 
large enough to deal with a any domain of 
topics, we are presently far from having 
such vocabularies on llne. 
THE SEARCH PROBLEM 
As we look ahead to having large 
vocabularies, we must begin to think more 
carefully about the search problem. 
In general, the larger a data base 
is, the longer it takes to locate some- 
thing in it. How a large vocabulary can 
be organized in human memory to permit 
retrieval of word meanings at conversa- 
tional rates is a fascinating question, 
especially since retrieval from the 
subjective lexicon does not seem to get 
slower as a person's vocabulary gets 
larger. The technical issues involved in 
achieving such performance with silicon 
309 
memories raise questions I understand 
only well enough to recognize that there 
are many possibilities and no easy an- 
swers. Instead of speculating about the 
computer, therefore, I will take a moment 
to marvel at how well people manage their 
large vocabularies. 
In the past fifteen years or so a 
number of cognitive psychologists have 
been sufficiently impressed by people's 
lexical skills to design experiments that 
they hoped would reveal how people do it. 
This is not the time to review all that 
research (see Simpson, 1984), but some of 
the questions that have been raised merit 
attention. 
Psychologists have considered two 
kinds of theories of lexical access, 
known as search theories and threshold 
theories. 
Search theories assume that a pas- 
sive trace is stored in the mental lexi- 
con and that lexical access consists of 
matching the stimulus to its memory rep- 
resentation. Preliminary analysis of the 
stimulus is said to generate a set of 
candidates, which is searched serially 
until a match is found. 
Threshold theories claim that each 
sense of every word ks an independent 
detector waiting for its features to 
occur. When the feature count for any 
sense gets above some threshold, that 
sense becomes conscious. 
Both kinds of theories can account 
for most of the experimental data, but 
not all of it -- which is unfortunate, 
since a clear decision in favor of one or 
the other might help to resolve the ques- 
tion of whether lexical access involves a 
serial processor with search and retrie- 
val, or a parallel processor with simple 
activation. Since the brain apparently 
uses slow and noisy components, something 
searching in parallel seems plausible, 
but such devices are not yet well under- 
s tood .  
Accesslnq Ambiquous Words 
Some of the most interesting psycho- 
logical research on lexical access con- 
cerns how people get at the meanings of 
polysemous words. These studies exploit 
a phenomenon called priming: when a word 
in a given lexical domain occurs, other 
words in that domain become more acces- 
sible. 
For example, a person is asked to 
say, as quickly as possible, whether a 
sequence of letters spells an English 
word. If the word DOCTOR has just been 
presented, then NURSE will be recognized 
more rapidly than if the preceding word 
had been unrelated~ like BUTTER (Meyer & 
Schvaneveldt, 1971; Becket, 1980). The 
recognition of DOCTOR is said to prime 
the recognition of NURSE. 
This lexlcal decision task can be 
used to study polysemy if the priming 
word is ambiguous, and if it ks followed 
by probe words appropriate to its dif- 
ferent senses. 
For example, the ambiguous prime 
PALM might be followed on some occasions 
by BAND and on other occasions by TREE. 
The question ks whether all senses of a 
polysemous word are activated simultan- 
eously, or whether context can facili- 
tate one meaning and inhibit all others. 
Three explanations of the results of 
these experiments are presently in compe- 
tition. 
Context dependent access--Only the 
sense that is appropriate to the context 
is retrieved or activated. 
Ordered access--Search starts with 
the most frequent sense and continues 
serially until a sense ks found that sat-  
isfies the context. 
Exhaustive access--Everything is 
activated in parallel at the same time, 
then context selects the most appropriate 
sense. 
At present, exhaustive access seems 
to be the favorite. According to that 
theory, disambiguation is a post-access 
process; the access process itself ks a 
cognitive "module," automatic and insul- 
ated from contextual influence. My own 
suspicion is that none of these theories 
is exactly right, and that Simpson (1984) 
is probably closer to the truth when he 
suggests that multiple meanings are ac- 
cessed, but that dominant meanings appear 
first and subordinate meanings come in 
more slowly and then disappear. 
Psychological research on lexical 
access is continuing; the complete story 
is not yet ready to be told. One aspect 
of the work is so obvious, however, that 
its importance tends to be overlooked. 
Semantic Fields 
The priming phenomenon presupposes 
an organization of lexical knowledge into 
patterns of conceptually related words, 
patterns that some linguists have called 
semantic fields. Apparently a semantic 
field can fluctuate in accessibility as a 
whole. 
310 
I have generally taken the existence 
of semantic fields as evidence in favor 
of theories of semantic decomposition 
(Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976). The idea 
is that all the words in a semantic fleld 
share some primitive semantic concept, 
and it is the activation or suppression 
of that shared concept that affects the 
accessibillty of the words sharing it. 
I will illustrate the problem by de- 
Scribing some research we have been doing 
on vocabulary growth in school children. 
The results indicate that we need better 
ways to teach new words~ with that need 
in mind I will return to the question of 
what we can reasonably expect from natu- 
ral language interfaces. 
Nominal semantic fields are fre- 
quently organized hierarchically and so 
are relatively simple to appreciate. 
Verbal semantic fields, however, tend to 
be more complex. For example, all the 
motion verbs -- "move," "come," "go," 
"bring," "rise," "fall," "walk," "run," 
=turn," and so on -- share a semantic 
primitive that might be glossed as 
"change location as a function of time." 
In a similar manner, verbs of possession 
-- "possess," "have," "own," "borrow," 
"buy," "sell," "find," and so on -- share 
a semantic primitive that has to do with 
Eights of ownership. 
Not all semantic primes nucleate 
semanti? fields, however. There is a 
causative primitive that differentiates 
"rise" and "raise," "fall" and "fell," 
"die" and "kill," and so on, yet the 
causative verbs "raise," "fell," "kill" 
do not form a causative semantic field. 
Johnson-Laird and I distinguished two 
classes of semantic primitives: those 
(like motion) around which a semantic 
field can form, and those (like causa- 
tion) used to differentiate concepts 
within a given field. 
Although the nature of semantic 
primitives is a matter of considerable 
interest to anyone who proposes a sem- 
antic notation for writing the defini- 
tions that a language processing system 
will use, they have received relatively 
little attention from psychologists. 
Experimental psychologlsts have a strong 
tendency to concentrate on questions of 
function and process at the expense of 
questions of content. Perhaps their 
attempts to understand the processes of 
disambiguation will stimulate greater 
interest in these structural questions. 
THE PROBLEM OF CONTEXT 
The reason that lexical polysemy 
causes so little actual ambiguity is 
that, in actual use, context provides 
information that can be used to select 
the intended sense. Although contextual 
disambiguation is simple enough when 
people do it, it is not easy for a compu- 
ter to do, even when the text is seman- 
tically well-formed. With semantically 
ill-formed input the problem is much 
worse. 
Chi ld ren 's  Use o f  D ic t ionar ies  
We have been looking at what happens 
when teachers send children to the dic- 
tionary to "look up a word and write a 
sentence using it." The results can be 
amusing: for example, Deese (1967) has 
reported on a 7th-grade teacher who told 
her class to look up "chaste" and use it 
in a sentence. Their sentences included: 
"The milk was chaste," "The plates were 
still chaste after much use," and "The 
amoeba is a chaste animal." 
In order to understand what they 
were doing, you have to see the diction- 
ary entry for "chaste': 
CHASTE: i. innocent of unlawful sexual 
intercourse. 2. celibate. 3. pure in 
thought and act, modest. 4. severely 
simple in design or execution, austere. 
As Deese noted, each of the children's 
sentences is compatible with information 
provided by the dictionary that they had 
been told to consult. 
You might think that Deese's obser- 
vation was merely an amusing reflection 
of some quirk in the dictionary entry foe 
"chaste," but that assumption would be 
quite wrong. Patti Gildea and I (Miller 
& Gildea, 1985) have confirmed Deese's 
observation many times over. We asked 
5th and 6th grade children to look words 
up and to write sentences using them. As 
of this writing, our i0- and 11-year old 
friends have written a few thousand sen- 
tences for us, and we are still collect- 
ingthem. 
Our goal is to discover which kinds 
of mistakes are most frequent. In order 
to do this, we evaluate each sentence as 
we enter it into a data management system 
and, if something is wrong, we describe 
the mistake. By collecting our descrip- 
tions, we have made a first, tentative 
classification. 
This project is still going on, so I 
can give only a preliminary report based 
on about 20% of our data. So far we have 
analyzed 457 sentences incorporating 22 
target words: 12 are relatively common 
words that most of the children knew, and 
i0 are relatively rare words with which 
they were unfamiliar. The common words 
311 
were selected from the core vocabulary of 
words introduced by authors of 4th-grade 
basal readers; the rare words were selec- 
ted from those introduced in 12th-grade 
readers (Taylor, Frackenpohl, & White, 
1979). It is convenient to refer to them 
as the 4th-grade words and the 12th-grade 
words, respectively. 
Errors were relatively frequent. Of 
the sentences classified so far, only 21% 
of those using 4th-grade words were suf- 
ficiently odd or unacceptable to indicate 
that the author did not have a good grasp 
on the meaning and use of the word, but 
63t of the sentences using 12th-grade 
words were judged to be odd= Thus, the 
majority of the errors occurred with the 
12th-grade words. 
Table 2 shows our current classifi- 
cation. Note that the categories are not 
mutually exclusive: some ingenious young- 
sters are able to make two oz even three 
mistakes in a single sentence. 
Table 2 
Classification of Sentences  
TYPe of. Sentence 4th-arade 12th~azade 
No mistake 197(249) 76(208) 
Selectional error i0 58 
Wrong part of speech 4 41 
Wrong preposition 4 24 
Inappropriate topic 0 24 
Used rhyming word 0 14 
Inappropriate object 5 9 
Wrong entry 4 9 
Word not used 9 1 
Object missing 5 3 
Two senses confounded 4 3 
No response 0 4 
Not a word ? 3 
Unacceptable idiom 3 0 
Sentence not complete 3 0 
Most of the descriptive phrases in Table 
2 should be self-explanatory, but some 
examples may help. Skip the selectional 
errors; I shall say more about them in a 
moment.  
Cons ider "Wrong part of speech": 
a student wrote "my hobby is 1 istening 
to Ouran Duran records, I have obtained 
an ACCRUE for it', thus using a verb as a 
noun. As an example of "Wrong prepo- 
sition," consider the student who wrote: 
aBe very METICULOUS on your work." An 
example of "Inappropriate topic" is: "The 
train was TRANSITORY." An example of 
"Inappropriate ob ject"  is: " I  was METIC- 
ULOUS about falling off the cliff." Ex- 
amples of "Used rhyming word" are =Did it 
ever ACCRUE to you that Maria T. always 
marks with a special pencil on my face?', 
"Did you evict that old TENET?", and "The 
man had a knee REPARATION o" 
Other categories were even less fre- 
quent, so return now to the most common 
type of mistake, the one labelled "Selec- 
tional error=" 
Vlolatlons of Seleetlonal Preferences 
The sentences that Deese reported 
illustrate selectional errors. Further 
examples can be taken from our data= "We 
had a branch ACCRUE on our plant," "1 
bought a battery that was TRANSITORY," 
"The rocket REPUDIATE off into the sky," 
"John is always so TENET to me=" 
It is unfair to call these sentences 
"errors" and to laugh at the children's 
mistakes= The students were doing their 
best to use the dictionary. If there was 
any mistake, it was made by adults who 
misunderstood the nature of the task that 
they had assigned. 
Take the "accrue" sentence, for ex- 
ample= The definition that the students 
saw was: 
ACCRUE= come as a growth or result= "In- 
terest will accrue to you every year 
from money left in a savings bank. 
Ability to think will accrue to you 
from good habits of study." 
We assume that the student read this def- 
inition looking for something she under- 
stood and found "come as a growth." She 
composed a sentence around this phrase: 
"We had a branch COME AS A GROWTH on our 
plant', then substituted "accrue" for it. 
This strategy seems to account for 
the other examples. A familiar word is 
found in the definition, a sentence is 
composed around it, then the unfamiliar 
word is substituted for the familiar 
word. Some further evidence supports the 
claim that something like this strategy 
is being used. One intriguing clue is 
that sometimes the final substitution is 
not made= the written sentence contains 
the word selected from the definition but 
not the word that it defined. And, since 
substitution is not a simple mental oper- 
ation for children, sometimes the selec- 
ted word or phrase from the definition is 
actually written in the margin of the 
paper, alongside the requested sentence. 
These are called selectional errors 
because they violate selectional pref- 
erences. For example, the girl who dis- 
covered that "stimulate" means "stir up" 
and so wrote, "Mrs. Jones stimulated the 
cake," violated the selectional prefer- 
ence that =stimulate" should take an ani- 
mate ob ject .  
312 
One reason these errors are so fre- 
quent is that dict ionaries do not pro- 
vide much information about selectional 
preferences. We think we know how to 
remedy that deficiency, but that is not 
what I want to discuss here. For the 
moment it suffices if you recognize that 
we have a plentiful supply ~f  sentences 
containing violations of selectional 
preferences, and that the sentences are 
of some educational significance. 
Intelligent Tutoring? 
Now let me pose the following ques- 
tion. Could we use these sentences as a 
"bug catalog" in an intell igent tutoring 
system? 
At the moment, intell igent tutoring 
systems (Sleeman & Brown, 1982) use many 
menus to obtain the student's answers to 
questions, and some people feel that this 
is actually an advantage. But I suspect 
that if we had a good language interface, 
one that understood natural language re- 
sponses, it would soon replace the menus. 
In any case, imagine an intell igent 
tutoring system that can handle natural 
language input. Imagine that the tutor 
asked children to write sentences con- 
taining words that they had just seen 
defined, recognized when a selectional 
er ror  had occurred, then undertook to ex- 
plain the mistake. 
What would the intell igent tutor 
have to know in order to detect and cor- 
rect a selectional error? Otherwise 
said, what more would it have to know 
than any language comprehender has to 
know? 
The question is not rhetorical~ I 
ask it because I would really like to 
know the answer. In my view, it poses 
something of a dilemma. The problem, as 
Yorick Wilks (1978) has pointed out, is 
that any simple rules of co-occurrence 
that we are likely to propose will, in 
real discourse, be violated as often as 
they are observed. (Not only do people 
often say one thing and mean another, but 
the prevalence of figurative and idioma- 
tic language is consistently underesti- 
mated by theorists.) If we give the 
intell igent tutor strict rules in order 
to detect selectional errors like "Our 
car depletes gasoline," will it not also 
treat "Our car drinks gasoline" as an 
error? On the other hand, if the tutor 
accepted the latter, would it not also 
accept the former? 
An even simpler dilemma, one often 
noted, is that a system that blocks such 
phrases as "colorless green ideas" will 
also block such sentences as "There are 
no colorless green ideas." If our tutor 
teaches chi ldren to avoid "stimulate the 
cake," wil l  it also teach them to avoid 
=you can't st imulate a cake'? 
When subtle semantic dist inct ions 
are at issue, it is customary to remark 
that a satisfactory language understand- 
ing system will have to know a great deal 
more that the l inguistic values of words. 
It wil l  have to know a great deal about 
the world, and about things that people 
presuppose without reflection. Such 
remarks are probably true, but they offer 
l itt le guidance in getting the job done. 
Since I have no better answer, I 
wil l  simply agree that the lexical infor- 
mation available to any satisfactory lan- 
guage understanding system will have to 
be closely coordinated with the system's 
general information about the world. To 
pursue that idea would, of course, go 
beyond the lexical l imits I have imposed 
here, but it does suggest that we will 
have to write our dict ionary not once, 
but many times -- until we get it right. 
So, while there is no principled 
obstacle to having large vocabularies in 
our natural language interfaces, there 
are still many problems to be solved. 
There is work here for everyone -- lin- 
guists, philosophers, and psychologists, 
as well as computer scientists -- and it 
is not abstract or impractical work. The 
answers we provide will shape important 
aspects of the information systems of the 
future. 
References 
Amsler, R. A. (1984) Machine-readable 
dictionaries. Annual  Review Qf 
Information Science and TeGhnolouv, 
19, 161-209. 
Becket, C. A. (1980) Semantic context 
effects in visual word recognition: An 
analysis of semantic strategies. 
Memory  & Cooni~ion, 8, 493-512. 
Bol t ,  R.A. (1984) The Human Interface: 
Where People and Computers meet. 
Belmont, Ca\]if.: Lifetime Learning. 
Cullingford, R. E. (1985) Natural Lan- 
guage Processing: A Knowledge Engine- 
ering Approach. (Manuscript). 
Deese, J. 
meaning. 
641-651. 
(1967) Meaning and change of 
American Psvcholooist, 22, 
313 
Meyer, D. E., & Schvaneveldt, R. W. 
(1971) Faciliation in recognizing 
pairs of words: Evidence of a depen- 
dence between retrieval operations. 
Journal ofLExDerimental_Psvcholoav, 
90, 227-234. 
Miller, G. A. (1977) 
ADDrentices? Children and Lanauaue. 
New York: Seabury Press. 
Miller, G. A. (1978) Semantic relations 
among words. In M. Halle, J. Bresnan, 
& G. A. Miller (eds.), L i ~  
Theor~ and Psvcholoaical RealitY? 
C~mhridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Miller, G. A . ,  & G i ldea ,  P. M. (1985) 
How to misread a dictionary. AILA 
Bulletin (in press). 
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. 
(1976) Lanuuaue and Perception. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 
Procter, P. (ed.) (1978) Z d ~  
tionarv of Contemporary Enulish. 
Harlow, Essex: Longman. 
chank, R. C. (1975) 
marion Processing. 
North-Holland. 
Conceotual Infor- 
Amsterdam: 
Simpson, G. B. (1984) Lexical ambiguity 
and its role in models of word recog- 
nition? Psvcholoaical Bulletin, 96, 
316-340. 
Sleeman, D.,  & Brown,  J.  S. (eds . )  
(1982) Intelliaent Tutorina Systems. 
New York: Academic Press. 
Taylor, S. E., Frackenpohl, H., & White, 
C. E. (1979) A revised core vocab- 
ulary. In EDL Core Vocabularies in 
~Eadinu. Mathematics. Science. and 
? " . New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Templin, M. C. (1957) Certain Lanuuaae 
Skills in Children= Their DeveloomenE 
and Interrelationships. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 
Walker, D. E., & Amsler, R. A. (1984) 
The use of machine ~eadable diction- 
aries in subianguage analysis. In R. 
I. Kittredge (ed.), Workshop on Sub~ 
lanuuage Analv~iSo (Available from 
the authors at Bell Communications Re- 
search, 435 South Street, 
Mocristown, NJ 07960.) 
Wilks, Y. A. (1978) Making preferences 
more active. Artif icial Intslliaence, 
11, 197-223. 
314 
