REPAIRING REFERENCE IDENTIFICATION FAILURES 
BY RELAXATION 
Bradley A. Goodman 
BBN Laboratories 
I0 Moulton Street 
Cambridge. Mass. 02238 
ABSTRACT 
The goal of thls work is the enrichment of 
human-mach lne  mteractIons in a natural language 
envlronment. 1 We want to provide a f ramework less 
restrictive than earlier ones by allowing a speaker 
leeway tn forming an utterance about a task and in 
determining the conversational vehicle to deliver it, A 
speaker and listener cannot be assured to have the 
same beliefs, contexts, backgrounds or goals at each 
point in a conversation. As a result, dlfflcultles and 
mistakes arise when a listener interprets a speakers  
utterance. These mistakes can lead to various kinds of 
mlsunderstandlngs between speaker and hstener. 
including reference failures or failure to understand 
the speaker's mtentlon. We cal l  these 
mtsunderstandlngs mlscommunmat lon  Such m~stakes 
constitute a klnd of "ill-formed" input that can slow 
down end possibly break down communication. Our goal 
~s to recognize and Isolate such mlscommunlcattons and 
circumvent them. Thls paper will hlghhght a particular 
class of mlscommunlcat lon - reference problems - by 
descr lbmg a case study, includlng techniques for 
avoldlng failures of reference 
I Introduction 
Cohen, Perrault and Allen showed in thelr paper 
"Beyond Question Answering" \[8~ that ",.. users of 
cluestlon-answerzng systems expect them to do more 
than just answer isolated questions - -  they expect 
systems to engage tn conversation. In doing ~o, the 
system ts expected to allow users to be less than 
meticulously hteral ~n conveying their zntentlons, and tt 
is expected to make hnguxstlc and pragmatic use of the 
previous discourse." Following in thelr footsteps, we 
want to build robust natural language processing 
systems that can detect and recover from 
mlsc~mmunlcatton. The development of such systems 
requires s study on how people communicate and how 
they recover from problems In communication. This 
paper summarizes the results of a dissertation \[13\] 
that tnvestlgates the kinds of mlscommunlcat lon that 
occur in human communicat ion with a special emphasis 
on reference prooiems, i.e.. problems a listener has 
determining whom or what a speaker ts talking about. 
We have written computer  programs and algorithms that 
demonstrate h~w one could handle such problems m 
IThis reseorcn was suDDorted in port by the Oefenee 
Advonce4 Reseorch Pro~ect Aqency under ?ontr=ct  Neee14--77-- 
C-~378.  
the context of a natural language understand2ng 
system. The study of mzscommunlcat lon is a necessary 
task w l thm such a context since any computer  capable 
of communlcat~ng with humans  tn natural language must 
be tolerant of the tmprecIse, lll-devlsed or complex 
utterances that people often use. 
Our current research \[25, 26\] views most 
dialogues as being cooperatlve and goal directed, l,e.. a 
speaker and hstener work  together to achieve a 
common goal. The interpretation of an utterance 
involves Identifying the underlying plan or goal that 
the utterance reflects \[5. I, 23\]. Thls plan, however, is 
rarely, d ever, obvious at the surface sentence level. 
A central issue In the interpretation of utterances ts 
the transformation of sequences of imprecise, zll- 
devised or complex utterances into well-speclhed plans 
that might be carried out by dialogue participants. 
Within thls context, mlscommunlcat lon can occur. 
We ere particularly concerned with cases of 
mxscommunlcat lon from the heater's viewpoint, such as 
when the hearer is mattentlve to. confused about, or 
misled about the zntentlons of the speaker. In 
ordinary exchanges speakers usually make assumptions 
regarding what thelr listeners know about a topic of 
discussion. They w111 leave out details thought to be 
superfluous \[2. 19\]. Since the speaker really does not 
know exactly what  a listener knows about a topic, tt ts 
easy to make statements that can be misinterpreted or 
not understood by the listener because not enough 
details were presented. One principal source of trouble 
Is the description constructed by the speaker to refer 
to an actual object in the world. The descmptlon can 
be tmpreclse, confused, ambiguous or over!v speclflc. It 
might be interpreted under  the wrong context. This 
leads to dlfflculty for the hstener when figuring out 
what oblect ~s being described, that Is. ref.erence 
identification errors. Such descriptions are "all- 
formed" input, the blame for ill-formedness may lie 
partly with the speaker and partly with the listener 
The speaker may have been sloppy or not taken the 
hearer into consideration, the listener may be either 
remiss or unwilling to admit he can't understand the 
speaker and to ask the speaker for clarification, or 
may slmply feel that he has understood when he zn fact 
has not. 
Thls work ts part of an on-going effort  to 
develop a reference Identlfzcatmn and plan recognition 
mechan ism that can exhibit more "human-hke  ' 
tolerance of such utterances. Our goal zs to build a 
more robust system that can handle errorful 
utterances, and ~hat can be incorporated in exlstlng 
systems. As a start, we have concentrated on 
re fe rence  tdentlflcatzon. In conversation people use 
imperfect descriptions to communicate  about objects; 
sometimes their partners succeed zn understanding and 
occasionally they fail. Any computer  hoping to play the 
part of a listener must be capable of taking what the 
204 
speaker says and either deleting, adapting or clarifying 
it. We are developing a theory of the use of 
extensional descrlptlons that will help exp lam how 
people successfully use such imperfect descriptions. 
We call thls the theory of reference mlscommunlcat ion 
Section 2 of this paper highlights some aspects of 
normal communicat ion and then provides a general 
discussion on the types of miscommunlcat lon that occur 
In conversation, concentrating primarily on reference 
problems and motivating many of them with Illustrative 
protocols. Section 3 presents possible ways around 
some of the problems of miscommunxcation in reference. 
Motivated there is a partial Implementation of a 
reference mechanism that attempts to overcome many 
reference problems. 
We are following the task -omented  paradigm of 
Grosz  \ [14 \ ]  s ince  i t  Is easy  to  s tudy  ( through 
v ideotapes) .  It p laces  the  wor ld  In f ront  of you  (a 
pr imar i ly  extens iona l  wor ld ) ,  and  It l imi ts  the  
d l scuss lon  wh l le  s t i l l  p rov id ing  a r l ch  env i ronment  fo r  
complex  descr ip t ions .  The task  chosen  as  the  ta rget  
fo r  the  sys tem Is the  assembly  of a toy  water  pump.  
The water  pump Is reasonab ly  complex ,  conta in ing  four  
subassembl ies  that  a re  bu i l t  f rom p las t i c  tubes ,  
nozz les ,  va lves ,  p lungers ,  and  caps  that  can  be sc rewed 
or  pushed together .  A la rge  corpus  of d ia logues  
concern ing  th l s  task  was  co l lec ted  by  Cohen (see  
\[7. 8. 9\]) .  These  d ia logues  conta ined  ins t ruct ions  f rom 
an  "exper t "  to  an  "apprent ice"  that  exp la in  the  
assembly of the toy water pump, Both participants 
were  work ing  to ach ieve  a common goa l  - the  
success fu l  assembly  of the  pump Thls  domain  Is r l ch  
m perceptua l  in fo rmat ion ,  a l low ing  fo r  complex  
descr ip t ions  of e lements  in it. The data  prov ide  
examples of imprecision, confusion, and ambiguity as 
we!l as attempts to correct these prob lems 
The following exchange exemplifies one such 
situation. Here A Is instructing J to assemble part of 
the  water  pump. Refer  to F igure  l (a )  fo r  a p ic ture  of 
the  pump.  A and  J a re  communicat ing  verba l ly  but  
ne i ther  can  see  the  o ther .  (The bracketed  text  In the  
excerpt  te l l s  what  was  actua l ly  occur r ing  whi le  each  
ut terance  was  spoken. )  Not lce  the  complex i ty  of the  
speaker ' s  descr ip t ions  and  the  resu l tant  p rocess ing  
requ i red  by the  l i s tener ,  Thls  d ia logue  i l lus t ra tes  when 
l i s teners  repa i r  the  speakers  descr ip t ion  in o rder  to  
f lnd  a re ferent ,  when they  repa i r  the i r  mzt la l  re ference  
choice once  they  are  g iven  more  in format ion ,  and  when 
they  fal l  t ~. choose  a proper  re ferent  In Linp 7, A 
:\[,=scribes the two holes on the BAjEVALVE as "the httle 
ho ie"  J must  repa i r  the  descr lp t lon ,  reahzmg that A 
doesnt  rea l ly  mean "one  ho le  but  is re fer r ing  to t,~e 
' two '  ho les .  J apparent ly  does  th i s  s ince  he doesnt  
compla in  about  as  descr ip t ion  and  cor rect ly  a t taches  
the BASEVALVE to the TUBEBASE F igure  l ib )  shows 
the conf igurat ion  of the pump af ter  the TUBEBASE is 
a t tached to the  MAINTUBE "n Lme I0, \[n Lme 13. J 
in terprets  "a  red  p las t i c  p iece"  to re fer  to  the  .VOZZLE 
When A adds  the  re la t ive  c lause  " that  has  four  g i=mos 
on it." J is forced to drop the NOZZLE as the referent 
and to se{ect the SLLDEV~LVE In Lmes  i7 and 18, A'S 
description "the other - - the  open part of the maln 
tube. the lower valve" is ambiguous, and J selects the 
wrong s l te ,  namely  the  TUBEBAEE, in which  to inser t  
the SLIDEVALVE. Since the SL/DEVALVE flts, J doesn't 
detect  any  trouble. L~nes 20 and 21 keep I f rom 
th ink ing  that  someth ing  is wrong because  the  par t  f i ts  
loose ly ,  In L~nes 27 and 28, J i nd icates  that  A dld not  
glve him enough znformat lon  to perform the requested 
act ion .  In Lme 30. J fu r ther  compounds  the  er ror  in 
Line 18 by putting the  SPOUT on the  TUBEBASE. 
Excerpt  1 (Te lephone)  
A. I. Now there 's  a b lue  cap  
\[J grabs  the  TUBEBASE\]  
2. that  has  two l i t t le  teeth  s t i ck ing  
3. out  of  the  bot tom of it. 
J: 4. Yeah.  
A. 5. Okay On that take the 
6. brlght shocking pink piece of plastic 
\[J takes BASEVALVE\]  
7. and stick the little hole over the 
teeth .  
\[J s ta r ts  to i ns ta l l  the  BASEVALVE. backs  off, looks  
at it again and then  goes  ahead and 
insta l l s  it\] 
J. 8 Okay  
A: 9 Now screw that  b lue  cap  onto  
I0. the  bot tom of the  maln  tube .  
\[J screws TUBEBASE onto MAINTUBE\]  
J. 11. Okay  
A. 12 Now. there 's  a - -  
13. a red  p las t i c  p iece  
\[J starts for NOZZLE\] 
14 that  has  four  g i zmos  on  It. 
\[J switches to SLIDEVALVE\] 
J. 15  Yes. 
A 16 Okay Put the ungtzmoed end In the 
uh 
17 the o ther - - the  open 
18 par t  of the  maln  tube ,  the  lower  
va lve  
\[3 puts  SLIDEVALVE in to  ho le  in  TUBEBASE, but  A 
meant OUTLET2 of MAINTUBE\] 
I 19 All r ight  
A 20 !t ;ust hts loosely It .doesnt 
'~I have to f'.t right. Okay. then take 
.~2 the clear plastic elbow \]omt 
\[J takes SPOUT\] 
J 23 All r ight  
A $4 And put tt over the bottom opening, 
too. 
\[J trees installing SPOUT on TI/BEBASE\] 
l -~ Okay  
a. 28. Okay  Now. take  the- -  
27 Which end  am I supposed to put  It 
over') 
28 Do you know ? 
A. -:'9 Put the - -put  the - - the  big end- -  
30 the blg end over it. 
\[J pushes big end of SPOUT on TUBEBASE. twlstlng 
zt to force it on\] 
205 
NO:zZe 
Figure I: 
I,~.d) 
I' 
(a) (b) 
The Toy Water Pump 
C 
2 Miscommunication 
People must and do manage to resolve lots of 
(potentaal) mascommumcataon In everyday conversataon. 
Much of it as resolved subconscaously wlth the 
hstener unaware that anything is wrong, Other 
mlscommumcat lon  is resolved wath the listener actively 
deleting or replacang mformataon m the speakers  
utterance until It flts the current context. Sometimes 
thls resolutlon Is postponed until the questlonable part 
of the utterance is actually needed. Shl l .  when all 
these fail. the hstener can ask the speaker to clarlfy 
what was said. 2 
There are many aspects of an utterance that the 
hstener can become confused about and that can lead 
to mascommunacatton. The hstener can become 
confused about what the speaker intends for the 
referents, the actaons, and the goals described by the 
utterance, Confuslons often appear to result from 
confhct between the current state of the conversation. 
the overall goal of the speaker, or the manner  In which 
the speaker presented the anformatlon. However, when 
the hstener steps back and is able to discover what 
k~nd of confuslon ~s occurring, then the confusion can 
qulte possibly be resolved. 
2.1 Causes of mlscommunicat ion 
Thls sectaon attempts to motlvate a paradlgm for 
the kinds of conversation that we studled and traes to 
point out places m the paradlgm that leave room for 
mlscommumcat lon.  
~'.1.1 Ef fec ts  of the  s t ruc ture  of task -or iented  
dia logues 
Task-or iented conversatlons have a speclfic goal 
to be achleved: the performance of a task (e.g.. \[14\]). 
The partlclpants in the dlalogue can have the same 
skill level and they can slmply work  together to 
accomplish the task; or one of them, the expert, could 
know more and could direct the other, the apprentlce. 
to perform the task. We have concentrated prlmarlly 
on the latter case - due to the protocols that we 
examlned - but many of our observations can be 
generahzed to the former case, too. We will refer to 
thls as the apprent lce-expert  domaln. 
The v lewpomts  of the expert and apprentlce differ 
greatly In apprent lce-expert  exchanges. The expert, 
having an understandlng of the functlonahty of the 
elements in the task. has more of a feel for how the 
elements work  together, how they go together, and how 
the indlvldual elements can be used. The apprentlce 
normally has no such knowledge and must base hls 
declslons on perceptual features such as shape \[15\]. 
The structure of the task affects the structure of 
the dlalogue \[14}. partlcularly through the center of 
attentlon of the expert and apprentlce. Thls is the 
phenomenon called focus \[14. 20. 24\]. whlch, in task- 
orlented dlalogues Is a very real and operational thlng 
(e.g., focus is used In resolving anaphorac references). 
Shafts ~n focus correspond dlrectly to the task, ats 
subtasks, the oblects an a task and the subpleces of 
each object Focus and focus shifts are governed by 
many rules \[14. :~0, 24\] Confusaon may result when 
expected shafts do not take place. For example. If the 
expert changes focus to an object but never discusses 
Its subpaeces ~such as an obvaous attachment surface) 
or never bothers to talk about the object reasonably 
soon after its antroductlon (Le., between the tame of ~ts 
mtroduct lon and its use. without digressing in a well- 
structured way In between (see \[20\])), then the 
apprentlce may become confused, leavang hlm r~pe for 
mlscommunlcatlon. The reverse anfluence between focus 
and oblects can lead to trouble, too. A shzft In focus 
by the expert that does not have a manHestat lon In 
the apprentlce's world wall also perplex the apprent ice 
Focus also influences how descr:ptlons are 
formed \[15, 2\]. The level of detail requlred in a 
description depends directly on the elements currently 
highlighted by the focus If the oblect to be descrabed 
Is samflar to other element~ m focus, the expert must 
be more speclhc m the formulation of the descraptlon 
or may conslder shlftmg focus away from the posslbly 
ambiguous objects to one where the amblgulty wont  
occur. 
2.2 Consequences  of miscommunicat lon 
In thls section we will make It clear that people 
do m:scommunlcate and yet they often manage to flx 
thlngs. We will look at speclfic forms of 
mlscommunlcat lon and descrlbe ways to detect them. 
We will hzghhght relatlonsh;ps between different 
mlscommunzcat;on problems but won't necessarzly 
demonstrate ways to resolve each of them. 
2An analysis of c la r i f i ca t ion  suodialogues can be found 
;n \[17).  
206 
2.2.1 Ins tances  of mtscommun/cat ion  
There are  many ways hearers  can  get  confused  
dur ing  a conversat ion .  F igure  2 out l ines  some of them 
that  were der ived  from ana lyz ing  the  water  pump 
protoco ls .  This sec t ion  def ines  and i l l us t ra tes  many of 
them through numerous  excerpts .  Each excerpt  is 
marked  in parentheses  to show what  moda l i ty  of 
communicat ion  was used  (see \[9\] for a descr ip t ion  
about  the  co l lec t ion  of these  excerpts ) .  Each 
bracketed  por t ion  of the  excerpt  exp la ins  what  was 
occur r ing  at  that  po in t  in the  d ia logue.  The confus ions  
themse lves ,  coup led  with the  descr ip t ion  at  the  end of 
th i s  sec t ion  on how to recogn ize  when one of them is 
occur r ing ,  p rov ides  mot ivat ion  for the  use of the  
a lgor i thm out l ined  in Sect ion  3 as a means  for  
repa i r ing  communicat ion  prob lems.  We will on ly  d i scuss  
re ferent  confus ion  tn th i s  paper .  The o ther  forms of 
confus ion  - Action. Goal, and Cogmt ive  Load - are  
descr ibed  in \[11. 13\]. Another  categor i za t ion  of 
confusmns  that  lead to conversat ion  fa i lu re  can  be 
found in \[22\]. 
? F igure  2: A taxonomy of confusmns  
Referent  ~onfus lon occurs  when the l i s tener  is 
unab le  to correct ly  determine  what the  speaker  is 
re fe r r ing  to with a par t i cu la r  descr lp tmn.  \[t occurs  
when the descr ip t ions  In the  u t te rance  are  ambiguous  
or imprec ise ,  when there  IS confus ion  between the 
speaker  and l i s tener  about  what  the current  focus or 
context  Is, or when the  descr ip t ions  in the  u t te rance  
are  e i ther  incor rec t  or incompat ib le  with the  cur rent  
or g lobal  context .  
E r roneous  Spec i f i c i ty  
Ambiguous (and. thus,  imprec ise)  descnptxons  can 
cause  confus ion about  the  re ferent .  Excerpt  2 below 
i l lus t ra tes  a case  where  the  speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  is 
underspecxf led  - it does not  prov ide  enough dated  to 
prune  the set  of poss ib le  re fe rents  down to one. 
Excerpt  2 (Pace- to -Face)  
S 1. And now take  the l i t t le  red 
3. peg, 
\[P takes  PLUG\] 
3. Yes, 
4. and p lace  it xn the  hole at  the  
5. g reen  end. 
\[P s ta r ts  to put  PLUG into  OUTLETR of MAINTUBE\] 
6. no 
7. the - - in  the  green  th ing  
\[P puts  PLUG into  green  par t  of PLUNGER\] 
P: 8. Okay. 
In Line 4 and  5, S descr ibes  the  locat ion  to p lace  a peg 
in to  a ho le  by g iv ing spat ia l  in fo rmat ion .  S ince the  
locat ion  is g iven re la t ive  to another  locat ion  by "in the  
hole  at  the  green  end", i t  de f ines  a reg ion  where  the  
peg might  go ins tead  of a spec i f i c  locat ion .  In th is  
par t i cu la r  case,  there  a re  th ree  poss ib le  ho les  to 
choose  from that  a re  near  the  green  end. The l i s tener  
chooses  one - the  wrong one - and  inser ts  the  peg 
into  it. Because  th i s  d ia logue  took p lace  face to face, 
S is ab le  to cor rec t  the  ambigu i ty  in Lines 6 and  7. 
A speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  can  be imprec ise  in 
severa l  poss ib le  ways. (1) It may conta in  features  that  
do not  read i ly  app ly  in the  domain.  In f ine  3, Excerpt  
3, the  feature  " funny"  has  no re levance  to the  l i s tener .  
It is not  unt i l  A p rov ides  a fu l le r  descr ip t ion  in Lines 5 
to 8 that  E is ab le  to se lec t  the  proper  p iece.  (2) It 
may use a vague  head  noun coup led  with few or no 
feature  va lues  (and context  a lone does  not  necessar i l y  
suf f ice  to d i s t ingu ish  the  object) .  In Excerpt  4, Line 9, 
"a t tachment"  is vague  because  al l  ob jec ts  in the  
domain  are  a t tachab le  par ts .  The exper t ' s  use  of 
"a t tachment"  was most l i ke ly  to s igna l  the  ac t ion  the  
apprent ice  can  expect  to take  next .  The use of the  
feature  va lue  "clear'* p rov ides  l i t t le  benef i t  e i ther  
because  three  c lear ,  unused  par ts  ex is t .  The s ize 
descr ip tor  " l i t t le "  p runes  th i s  set  of poss ib le  re fe rents  
down to two contenders .  (3) Enough feature  va lues  a re  
prov ided  but  at  leas t  one va lue  is too vague  lead ing  to 
t roub le .  In Excerpt  5, Line 3, the  use of the  a t t r ibute  
va lue  " rounded"  to descr ibe  the  shape  does not  
su f f i c ient ly  reduce  the set  of four poss ib le  re fe rents  
( though,  in th i s  par t i cu la r  ins tance ,  A cor rec t ly  
ident i f ies  it) because  the  term is app l i cab le  to 
numerous  par ts  In the  dommn. A more prec i se  shape  
descr ip tor  such  as "be l l - shaped"  or "cy l indr i ca l "  would 
have  been  more benef i c ia l  to the  l i s tener ,  
Excerpt  3 (Te lephone)  
E: I. All r ight .  
2. Now. 
3. There's another  funny l i t t le  
4. red  th ing,  a 
\[A is confused ,  examines  both  NOZZLE 
SX.,mr-VALVE \] 
5. l i t t le  teeny  red th ing that ' s  
6. some- -shou ld  be somewhere  on 
7. the  desk,  that  has  um- - there 's  
8. l ike teeth  on one end. 
\[E takes  SLIDEVALVE\] 
and 
A: 9. Okay. 
E: 10. I t 's  a funny- loo - -ho l low,  
11. hol low pro jec t ion  on one end 
12. and then  teeth  on the other .  
Excerpt  4 (Teletype)  
A: I. take  the  red th ing with the  
2. p rongs  on it  
3. and fit i t  onto the  o ther  hole  
4. of the  cy l inder  
5. so that  the  prongs  are  
6. s t i ck ing  out  
2O7 
R: 7. ok 
A: 8. now take the c lear  l ittle 
9. a t tachment  
10. and put  on the hole where you 
11. jus t  put  the red cap on 
12. make sure  it po ints  
13. upward 
R: 14. ok  
F, xeerpt  5 (Teletype) 
S; I. Ok, 
2. put  the  red nozzle on the out let  
3. of the rounded c lear  chamber  
4. ok? 
A: 5. got it. 
Improper  Focus 
Focus confus ion  can occur  when the speaker  sets  
up one focus and then proceeds  with another  one 
without  lett ing the l i s tener  know of the switch (i.e., a 
focus shift  occurs  without  any indicat ion).  An opposi te  
phenomenon can also happen - the l i s tener  may feel 
that  a focus shift  has  taken place when the speaker  
actual ly never  in tended one. These real ly are very 
similar - one Is viewed more s t rong ly  from the 
perspect ive  of the speaker  and the o ther  from the 
l istener.  
Excerpt  6 below lUust ra tes  an mstance  of the 
f i rst  type of focus confus ion.  In the excerpt ,  the 
speaker  (S) shi f ts  focus without noti fying the l is tener  
(P) of the switch. As the excerpt  begins,  P ,s holding 
the TUBEBASE. S prov ides in Lines 1 to 16 
mst ructzons  for P to a t tach  the CAP and the SPOUT to 
out lets  OUTLETI and OUTLET2, respect ively,  on the 
MAINTUSE. Upon P's success fu l  complet ion of these 
a t tachments .  S switches focus m Lines 17 to 20 to the 
TUSESASE assembly and requests  P to screw tt on to 
the bottom of the M,e/NTUSE. White P completes the 
task. S real izes she left out  a step in the assembly - 
the p lacement of the SLIDEVALVE into OUTLET2 of the 
M,eJNTUSE before the SPOUT ts placed over the same 
outlet. S a t tempts  to cor rect  her  mistake by 
request ing  P to remove "the pies "~ piece in ~nes  22 
and 23. Since S never  indicated a shift  in focus from 
the TUSESASE back to the IPOUT, P mterprets  "the 
pies" to refer  to the TUSESASE. 
Excerpt  6 (Face- to -Face)  
S 1. And place 
2. the blue cap that ' s  left 
\[P takes CAP\] 
3. on the side holes that  are 
3The whole ward here is "p leet i c . "  People in general 
tend to be good ot proceedinq before heorin 9 the whole 
utteronce or even the whole word. 
4. on the cyl inder,  
\[P lays down TUBEBASE\] 
5. the side hole that  is fa r thest  
6. from the green  end. 
\[P puts  CAP on OUTLET! of MAINTUBE\] 
P: 7. Okay. 
S; 8. And take the nozz le - look ing  
9. piece, 
\[P g rabs  NOZZLE\] 
10. no 
11. I mean the c lear  p last ic  one, 
\[P takes  SPOUT\] 
12. and place it on the o ther  hole 
\[P ident i f ies O ~  of MA1NTUBE\] 
13. that ' s  left, 
14. so that  nozzle po ints  away 
15. from the 
\[P insta l ls  SPOUT on OUTLET2 of MAINTUBE\] 
16. r ight. 
P: 17. Okay. 
S: 18. Now 
19. take the 
20. cap base thing 
\[P takes  TUBEBASE\] 
21. and screw it onto the bottom, 
\[P sorewsTUBEBASE on)L~3NTUBE\] 
22, ooops, 
\[S real izes she has  fo rgot ten  to have P put  
SLIDL~ALVE into OUTLET2 of MAINTUBE\] 
23. un -undo  the pies 
\[P s ta r ts  to take  TUBEBASE off MAINTUBE\] 
24. no 
25. the c lear p last ic  thing that  I 
26. told you to put  on 
\[P removes SPOUT\] 
27. sorry. 
28. And place the l ittle red thing 
\[P takes  $LID~ALVZ\] 
29. tn there  f irst,  
\[P mser ts  SLXD~ALVZ into OUTLET~ of M\[AINT~E\] 
30. it f its loosely in there.  
Excerpt  7 below demonst ra tes  the la t ter  type of 
focus confuszon that  occurs  when the speaker  (S) sets  
up one focus - the M,4\]NTUBE, which is the cor rect  
focus In this case - but  then proceeds  in such a 
manner  that  the l i s tener  (J) th inks  a focus shift to 
another  piece, the TUBESASE, has occur red .  Thus, 
Line 15 re fers  to " the lower side hole in the 
M,41NTUBE" for S and " the hole in the TUBEBASE" for 
J. J has  no way of real iz ing that  he has  focused 
incor rect ly  un less  the  descr ip t ion  as he in terprets  it 
doesn ' t  have a real world cor re la te  (here  something 
does sat isfy the descr ipt ion  so J doesn ' t  sense  any 
problem) or  if, la ter  in the  exchange,  a conf l ict  ar i ses  
2O8 
due to the mistake (e.g,, a requested  act ion can not  be 
performed).  In Line 31, J inser ts  a piece into the 
wrong hole because  of the misunders tand ing  in Line 15. 
Line 31 h ints  that  J may have become susp ic ious  that  
an ambiguity existed but  s ince the task  was 
successfu l ly  completed (i.e., the red piece fit into the 
hole in the base),  and s ince S did not  provide any 
clar i f icat ion, he assumed he was cor rect .  
hcerpt  7 (Telephone) 
S: 1. Um now. 
2. Now we're gett ing a l ittle 
3. more difficult. 
J: 4. ( laughs) 
S: 5. Pick out  the large air  tube 
\ [ l  picks up SAND\ ]  
6. that  has the p lunger  in it. 
\[J puts  down STAND. takes  PLUNGER/MAINTUB~. 
assembly\]  
J: 7. Okay. 
S: 8. And set it on ~ts base, 
\[J puts  down idAINTUBE, s tand ing vert ical ly,  on the 
TABLE\] 
9. which is blue now, 
10. rzght? 
\[J has  shi f ted focus to the TUBEBASE\] 
J: 11. Yeah. 
$, 12. Base is blue. 
13. Okay. 
14. Now 
15. You've got a bottom hole still 
16. to be filled, 
17. cor rec t?  
J: 18. Yeah. 
\[J answers  this with MAINTUBE stil l s i t t in t  on the 
TABLE; he shows no indicat ion of what 
hole he th inks  i8 meant  - the one on 
the MAINTUBE. OUTLET2, or  the one in 
the TUBEBASE\] 
\[J 
S. 
picks 
19. Okay. 
20. You have one red piece 
21. remamm8? 
up ldA/NTUBE assembly and looks at 
TUBEBASE, ro ta t ine  the MAINTUBE so 
that  TUBP-BASE is po inted up, and 
sees the hole in i t ;  he then  looks at 
the SLIDEVALVE\] 
J: 22. Yeah. 
3. 23. Okay. 
24. Take that  red piece. 
\[j takes  SIJDEVALVE\] 
25. It 's got four l ittle feet on 
26. it? 
J: 27. Yeah. 
S; 28. And put  the small end into 
29. that  hole on the air tube- -  
30. on the big tube.  
\[J 
J; 31. On the very  bot tom? 
s tar ts  to put  it into the bottom hole of 
TUBEBASE - though he ind icates  he is 
unsure  of himself\]  
S: 32. On the bot tom,  
33. Yes. 
Misfocus can also occur  when the speaker  
inadver tent ly  lefts to d is t ingu ish  the proper  focus 
because  he did not  not ice a poss ib le ambiguity; or 
when, th rough no fault  of the speaker ,  the l i s tener  jus t  
fails to recognize a switch in focus indicated by the 
speaker .  ~xcerpt  7 above is an example of the f i rst  
type because  S failed to not ice that  an amblguzty 
existed since he never  explicit ly b rought  the TUBEBASE 
e i ther  into or  out  of focus. He just  assumed that  J 
had the same perspect ive  as hzm - a perspect ive  in 
which uo ambiguity occur red .  
Wrong Context 
Context differs from focus. The context  of a 
por t ion  of a conversat ion  is concerned  with the po:nt 
of the d iscuss ion in that  f ragment and with the set of 
objects  re levant  to that  d iscussion,  though not 
a t tended to current ly .  Focus per ta ins  to the elements 
which are cur rent ly  being at tended to in the context.  
For example, two people can share  the same context  
but  have di f ferent focus ass ignments  wt~hm it - we're 
both talking about  the water  pump but you ' re  
descr ib ing the MA/NTUB? and I'm descr lbmg the 
AIRCH,4MB?,q. Alternatively, we could JUst be uslng 
di f ferent contexts  - I th ink you' re  talking about taking 
the pump apar t  but  you ' re  talking about  replh^lng the 
pump with new par ts  - m both cases we m~v be 
shar ing  the same focus - the pump - but our  conte~,s  
are total ly off from one another .  ~ The kinds of 
misunders tand ings  that  can occur  because of context  
problems are similar to those for focus problems: (1) 
the speaker  might set  up or be xn one context  for a 
d iscuss ion and then proceed in another  one without 
effectively lett ing the l i s tener  know of the change, (2) 
the l i s tener  may feel a change in context  has taken 
place when in fact the speaker  never  Intended one, or 
(:3) the Listener fails to recognize an indicated context  
switch by the speaker .  Context affects re ference 
because  it helps define the set of available oblects that  
are possible contenders  for the re ferent  of the 
speaker ' s  descr ipt ions.  If the contexts  of the speaker  
and l is tener  differ, then m|sre ference  might result .  
Bad AnaloEy 
An analogy (see \[I0\] for ? discusslon on 
analogies) is a useful  way to help descr lbe an object by 
attempt lng to be more prec ise  by using shared  past  
expemence and knowledge - espec:al ly shape and 
funct ional  reformation. If that  past  experxence or 
knowledge doesn' t  conta in  the reformation the speaker  
assumes it does or isn ' t  there,  then trouble occurs.  
Thus. one more way re ferent  confus ion can occur  Is by 
descr ib ing an oh}act using ? poor  analogy. An analogy 
used to descr ibe an object might not be spec:fic 
4Groez \[14, lS\] would dem~ril~ th is  as o d i f ference in 
"task DIane J ~ i le  Rai?ltlNnt \[2e, 21\] m~uld say that the 
"c0mlmmjcativa gCNlie" dJffare?l. 
2O9 
enough - confus ing  the l i s tener  because  severa l  p ieces  
might  conform to the  ana logy  or, tn fact ,  none  at  al l  
appear  to f i t  because  d i scover ing  a mapp ing  between 
the  ana logous  ob ject  and  some p iece  in the  
env i ronment  Is too di f f icul t .  In Excerpt  8, J at  f i r s t  
has  t roub le  cor rec t ly  sa t i s fy ing  A's funct iona l  ana logy  
"s topper"  in " the  bag b lue  s topper" ,  but  f ina l ly  se lec ts  
what  he cons iders  to be the  c loses t  match  to 
"s topper" .  
Excerpt  8 (Te lephone)  
A: I. Okay. Now. 
2. take the big blue 
3. stopper that's laying around 
\[J g rabs  ~diCI4AMBER\] 
4. .. and take the black 
5, r ing--  
J: 6. The big b lue  s topper?  
\[J is confused  and  t r ies  to communicate  i t  to  A; he 
is ho ld ing  the  AIRCHAMBER here \ ]  
A. 7 Yeah. 
8. the blg blue s topper  
9. and the b lack  r ing  
\[J d rops  AIRCHAMBER and  takes  the  O-RING and  
the  TUBEBASE\] 
In o ther  cases  tt might be too spec i f i c  - 
con fus ing  the l i s tener  because  none of the  ava i lab le  
re ferents  appear  to fit it. In Line 8 of Excerpt  6, 
"nozz le - look ing"  forms a poor  shape  ana logy  because  
the ob ject  being re fer red  to ac tua l ly  Is an e lbow-  
shaped spout .  The "nozz le - look lng"  par t  of the  
descr ip t ion  conv inced  the l i s tener  that  what  he was 
look ing for was someth ing  spec i f i c  l ike a nozz le  (which 
xs a small  spout) .  Somet imes,  when an ob lec t  xs a c lear  
representat ive  of a spec i f ied  ana logy  c lass ,  the 
apprent2ce  may become confused ,  wonder ing  why the 
exper t  bothered  to form an ana logy  mstead  of jus t  
d i rec t ly  descr ib ing  the  ob ject  as a member of the  c lass.  
Hence, tt would not  be surpr i s ing  d the  apprent ice  
tgnoreu  the best  representatnve  of the c lass  for some 
less  obv ious exemplar .  Thus, for example,  It ts bet ter  to 
say "nozz le"  ins tead  of "nozz le - look ing . "  In Excerpt  9, 
the  descr ip t ion  "h ippopotamus  face shape"  (a shape  
analogy) tn Lines 2 and 3, and "champagne top" (a 
shape  ana logy)  in Line 9. e re  too spec lhc  and the 
hs tener  ts unab le  to eas i ly  f ind someth ing  c lose  enough 
to match e i ther  of them. He can ' t  d i scover  a mapping 
between the ob lect  in the  ana logy  and one in the  rea l  
world. 
Excerpt  9 (Audiotape)  
M; I. take  the  br ight  p lnk f lat  
2. p iece  of h ippopotamus  face 
3. shape  p iece of p las t i c  
4. and you not i ce  that  the  two 
5. ho les  on xt 
\[M is t r~tng to re fer  to BASEVALVE\] 
6. match 
7. a long with the  two 
8. peg ho les  on the  
9. champagne top sor t  of 
10. look ing bot tom that  had  
I I .  th reads  on It 
\[M is t ry in  E to re fer  to TUBEBASE\] 
Descr ip t ion  incompat ib i l i ty  
Incompat ib le  descr ip t ions  can  lead  to confus ion  
also. A descr ip t ion  is incompat ib le  when (1) one or 
more of the  spec i f ied  cond i t ions ,  i.e., the  feature  
va lues ,  do not  sa t i s fy  any of the  p ieces ;  (2) when one 
or  more spec i f ied  const ra in ts  do not  ho ld  (e.g.. say ing  
" the  loose one" when all  ob jec ts  a re  t ight ly  a t tached) .  
or  (3) if no one ob ject  sa t i s f ies  al_~l of the  features  
spec i f ied  in the  descr ip t ion .  In Lines 7 and 8 of 
Excerpt  9 above,  M's use  of " the  two peg ho les"  leads  
to  bewi lderment  for  the  l i s tener  because  the  descr ibed  
ob ject  has  no ho les  in it. M actua l ly  meant  "two pegs".  
2.2.2 Detect ing  miscommunicat lon  
Par t  of our  research  has  been  to examine  how a 
l i s tener  d i scovers  the  need  for a repa i r  of an 
u t te rance  or a descr ip t ion  dur ing  communicat ion .  The 
incompat ib i l i ty  of a re fe rent  or ac t ion  is one s igna l  of 
poss ib le  t roub le .  The appearance  of an obstac le  that  
b locks  one from ach iev ing  a goal  is another  ind icat ion  
of a problem. 
Incompat ib i l l ty  
Two k inds  of incompat~btl t ty,  ac t ion  or re fe rent .  
appear  In the  taxonomy of confus ions .  The s t rongest  
h int  that  there  is a re fe rence  prob lem occurs  when the 
l i s tener  f inds no rea l  world ob ject  to cor respond to the  
speaker ' s  descr ip t ion .  This can occur  when (1) one or 
more of the  spec i f ied  feature  va lues  xn the  descr ip t ion  
are  not  sa t i s f ied  by any of the  p ieces  (e .g .  say ing  " the 
orange  cap" when none of the  ob jec ts  a re  orange~. {2) 
when one or more spec i f ied  const ra in ts  do not hold 
(e.g., say ing  " the  red plug that  f i ts  loose ly"  when all 
the red p lugs  a t tach  t ight ly) ,  or (3) If no one ob ject  
sa t i s f ies  al l  of the  features  spec i f ied  m the descr ip t ion  
(I.e., ther 'e - ts ,  for each  feature ,  an ob ject  that  exh ib i t s  
the  spec i f ied  feature  value,  but  no one ob ject  exh ib i t s  
all  of the  va lues) .  An ac t ion  prob lem xs l ike ly  ~f I l) the  
l i s tener  cannot  per form the  ac t ion  spec i f ied  by the  
speaker  because  of some obstac le ;  (2) the  hs tener  
per fo rms the ac t ion  but  does  not  a r r lve  at  i ts  in tended 
ef fect  (I.e., a spec i f ied  or  de fau l t  const ramt  l sn t  
sat is f ied) ;  or (3) the  cur rent  ac t ion  a f fec ts  a p rev ious  
ac t ion  tn an adverse  way, yet  the  speaker  has  g iven no 
s ign of any impor tance  to th is  s ide -e f fec t .  
Goal obs tac le  
A goal  obs tac le  occurs  when a goal  (or subgoa\[ )  
one is t ry ing  to ach ieve  ts b locked  This b lockage  can 
resu l t  m confus ion  for the  hs tener  because  he did not  
expect  the  speaker  to give him tasks  that  could not be 
ach ieved.  Often. though,  it po in ts  out  for the  hs tener  
that  some mlscommunicat ion  (such  as mls re ference)  has  
occur red .  
Goal redundancy  
Goal redundancy  occurs  when the  requested  goal  
(or subgoa l )  is a l ready  sat is f ied .  In some sense ,  xt xs a 
spec ia l  k lnd  of goal  obs tac le  where  the  goal  to be 
ful f i l led is b locked  because  it is a l ready  sat i s f ied .  It is 
a s imple goal  obs tac le  because  nothmg has  to be done 
to get  a round it. However, it can  lead  to confus ion  on 
210 
the  par t  of l i s teners  because  they  may suspect  they  
misunders tood  what  the  speaker  has  requested  s ince  
they  wou ldn ' t  expect  a reasonab le  speaker  Lo request  
the  per fo rmance  of an  a l ready  completed  ac t ion .  It 
p rov ides  a h in t  that  miscommumcat ion  has  occur red .  
3 Repa i r ing  Reference  Fa i lu res  
3. I I n t roduct ion  
The previous section dlustrated how task- 
oriented natural language mteractlons in the real 
world can induce contextually poor utterances. Given 
all the possibilities for confusion, when confusions do 
occur, they must be resolved If the task is to be 
per fo rmed.  Th is  sect ion  exp lores  the  prob lem of f i x ing  
re ference  fa i lu res .  
Re ference  Ident i f i ca t ion  is a search  process  where  
a l i s tener  looks  for  someth ing  in the  wor ld  that  
satisfies a speaker's uttered description. A 
computatlonal scheme for performing reference has 
evolved from work  by other artificial intelligence 
researchers (e.g., see \[14\]). That tradltlonal approach 
succeeds if a referent ~s found, or falls d no referent 
ts found {see Figure 3(a)). However, a reference 
identlficatlon component  must be more versatile than 
those constructed m the traditional manner. The 
excerpts provided m the prevlous section show that 
the  t rad i t iona l  approach  is wrong  because  people's rea l  
behavlor zs much more elaborate. In particular. 
hsteners often find the correct referent even when the 
speaker's descrlpt)on does not describe any object In 
the world. For example, a speaker could descrlbe a 
blue block as the "turquoise block." Most listeners 
would go ahead and assume that the blue block was the 
one the speaker meant. 
A key feature to reference identlficatlon is 
"negotlatlon." Negotlatlon in reference ldentlhcatlon 
comes in two forms. First. It can occur between the 
listener and the speaker. The listener can step back, 
expand greatly on the speaker's descrlptlon of a 
plausible referent, and ask for conhrmat lon that he 
has indeed found the correct referent. For example, a 
hstener could mltlate negotiation wlth 'Tin confused. 
Are you talking about the thlng that is klnd of flared 
at the top? Couple inches long. It's kind of blue." 
Second. negotiation can be wlth oneself. Thls type of 
negotiation, called self-negotlatlon. Ls the one that we 
are most concerned wlth in thls research. The listener 
conslders aspects of the speaker's descrzptlon, the 
context of the commumcat lon ,  and the listener's own 
abdltles. He then apphes that dehberatlon to determine 
whether one referent candldate :s better than another 
or. if no candidate Is found, what are the most likely 
places for error or confuslon. Such negotlatlon can 
result in the listener testing whether or not a 
partlcular referent works. For example, linguistic 
descrlptlons can influence a listener's perception of 
the world. The listener must ask himself whether he 
can percelve one of the oblects in the world the way 
the speaker described it. in some cases, the listener's 
perceptlon may overrule the descrlptlon because the 
listener can't percelve ~t the way the speaker 
described it. 
To repa i r  the  t rad i t iona l  approach  we have  
developed an a lgor i thm that  captures  for  cer ta in  cases  
the  l i s tener ' s  abd i ty  to negot ia te  w i th  h imse l f  for  a 
re fe rent  It can  look  for  a re fe rent  and .  If It doesn ' t  
f ind  one,  i t  can  t ry  to f ind  poss ib le  re fe rent  cand idates  
that  might  work ,  and  then  loosen  the  speaker ' s  
descr ip t ion  us ing  knowledge  about  the  speaker ,  the  
conversat ion ,  and  the  l i s tener  h imse l f .  Thus.  the  
re ference  process  becomes  mul t i - s tep  and  resumable  
This  computat iona l  model ,  wh ich  I ca l l  "FWIM" for  "F ind 
What  I Mean" ,  is  more  fa i th fu l  to  the  data  than  the  
t rad i t iona l  mode l  ( see  F igure  3(b)).  
Current  I_ ~ RefePence ~u....= 
Component 
~mi~=t 
Current  
Reference -~ ~,,=?..= 
Component 
~ ~J~milure 
Re laxat ion  1 
Component T?.-,,- u 
(a) Traditional (b) FWIM 
F igure  3: Approaches to reference \ ]dentd lcat lon  
One means  of mak ing  sense  of an  approx lmate  
descr ip t ion  is to de le te  or  rep lace  por t lons  of it that  
don ' t  match  ob jec ts  In the  heater ' s  wor ld .  \[n our  
p rogram we are  us lng  " re laxat ion"  techn iques  to 
capture  th i s  behav ior .  Our re fe rence  ident lhcat lon  
modu le  t reats  descr ip t ions  as approx imate  It re laxes  
a descr ip t ion  in o rder  to f ind  a re ferent  when the  
h tera l  content  of the  descr ip t ion  fa l l s  to p rov ide  the  
needed In fo rmat ion .  Re laxat ion .  however ,  is not  
per fo rmed b l ind ly  on the  descr ip t ion  We t ry  to model  
a person 's  behav ior  by  drawlng  on sources  of 
knowledge  used  by  peop le .  We have  deve loped  a 
computat iona l  model  that  can  re lax  aspects  of a 
descr lp t lon  us ing  many of these  sources  of knowledge .  
Re laxat ion  then  becomes  a form of commumcat lon  
repa i r  \[4\] that  hearers  can  use.  
3.2 The re laxat ion  component  
When a descr ip t ion  fa i l s  to denote  a re ferent  In 
the  rea l  wor ld  proper ly ,  It Is poss ib le  to repa i r  tt by a 
re laxat lon  process  that  ignores  or  mod i f ies  par ts  of the  
descr lp t lon .  S ince  a descr ip t ion  can  spec l fy  many  
features  of an  ob jec t ,  the  order  In wh ich  par ts  of It 
a re  re laxed  Is c ruc ia l  (i.e.. re lax ing  Ln d i f fe rent  o rders  
cou ld  y ie ld  matches  to d i f fe rent  ob jec ts )  There  are  
severa l  k inds  of re laxat ion  poss ib le  One can  ignore  a 
const i tuent ,  rep lace  It w i th  someth ing  c lose ,  rep lace  it 
w i th  a re la ted  va lue ,  or  change focus  (i.e.. cons ider  a 
d i f fe rent  g roup  of ob jec ts . ) .  Th is  sec t ion  descr lbes  the  
overa l l  re laxat lon  component  that  d raws  on knowledge  
sources  about  descr ip t ions  and  the  rea l  wor ld  as i t  
t r ies  to re lax  an  er ror fu l  descr ip t ion  to one  for  wh ich  
a re ferent  can  be sdent l f ied .  
3.2.1 F ind  a re ferent  us ing  a re ference  mechamsm 
Ident i fy ing  the  re ferent  of a descr ip t ion  requ i res  
f ind ing  an  e lement  in the  wor ld  that  cor responds  to the  
speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  (where  every  feature  spec i f ied  in 
the  descr ip t ion  is p resent  In the  e lement  in the  wor ld  
but  not  necessar i l y  v i ce  versa) .  The in i t ia l  task  of our  
re fe rence  mechan ism Is to determine  whether  or not a 
search  of the  ( taxonomic )  knowledge base  that  we use 
to model the  world Is necessary .  For example,  the  
re ference  component  shou ld  not  bother  search ing  - 
un less  spec i f i ca l ly  requested  to do so - for a re fe rent  
for indef in i te  noun phrases  (which usua l ly  descr ibe  new 
or  hypothet i ca l  ob jec ts )  or ext remely  vague 
descr ip t ions  (which do not  c lear ly  descr ibe  an ob lect  
because  they are  composed of imprec ise  feature  
values). A number  of aspects of discourse pragmattcs 
can be used in that determination (eg., the use of a 
delctlc In a definite noun  phrase, such as "thls X" or 
"the last X", hints that the object was either mentioned 
prev ious ly  or that  it p robab ly  was evoked by some 
prev ious  re ference ,  and  that  it is searchab le )  but  we 
will not  examine them here .  
The knowledge base contains linguistic 
descriptions and a descrlptton of the listener's vlsual 
scene itself. In our Implementation and algorithms, we 
assume It is represented In KL -One \[3\], a system for 
describing taxonomic knowledge. KL -One is composed 
of CONCEPTs, ROLEs on concepts, end links between 
them. A CONCEPT Is like a set. representing those 
elements described by it. A SUPERC link ( '==>") is 
used between concepts to show set Inclusion. For 
example, consider Figure 3. The SuperC from Concept B 
to Concept A is like stating BCA for two sets A and 
B An INDIVIDUAL CONCEPT ts used to guarantee that the 
subset speclhed by a concept Is un ique  The \[ndlvldual 
Concept D shown m the figure Is dehned to be a 
unique member  of the subset specified by Concept 
C ROLEs on concepts are like normal attributes and 
slot hllers m other  knowledge representation 
languages. They define a functlonal relatlonshlp 
between the concept and other concepts  
Concept 
C Individual 
Concept 
Figure 4: A KL -One Taxonomy 
Assuming that  a search  of the  knowledge base Is 
cons idered  necessary ,  then  a re ference  search  
mechanism ts revoked.  The search  mechanism uses  the  
KL-One C lass ther  \[16\] to search  the knowledge base 
taxonomy.  Thls search  Is const ra ined  by a focus 
mechan lsm based on the one deve loped  by Grosz \[14\]. 
The Classaf ler 's  purpose  Is to d i scover  all approprmte  
~ubsumpt lon  re la t ionsh ips  between a newly formed 
descr lp t ton  and all  o ther  descriptions In a gwen 
taxonomy.  With respect to reference, th is  means that 
all possible (descriptions of) referents of the 
descrlptlon will be subsumed by tt after It has been 
classLhed rote the knowledge base taxonomy. If more 
than one candidate referent Is below (when a 
descrlptlon A Is subsumed by B. we say A ts "below" B) 
the classified description, then, unless a quantifier in 
the description specified more than one element, the 
speaker's description is ambiguous. If exactly one 
descr~ptlon Is below it, then the intended referent is 
assumed to have been  found. Final ly,  if no re ferent  is 
found below the  c lass i f ied  descrxpt ion ,  the  re laxat ion  
component  is invoked.  We will on ly  cons ider  the  last  
case  in the  res t  of the  paper .  
3.2.2 Col lect  votes  fo r  o r  aga ins t  re lax ing  the  
descr ip t ion  
It is necessary  to determine  whether  or  not the 
lack  of a re fe rent  for  a descr ip t ion  has  to do with the 
descr ip t ion  i t se l f  (i.e.. re fe rence  fa i lu re)  or outs ide  
fo rces  that  a re  caus ing  re ference  confus ion .  For 
example,  the  prob lem may be with the  flow of the  
conversat ion  and the  speaker ' s  and hs teners  
perspect ives  on it; i t  may be due to mcor rect  
a t tachment  of a modif ier;  i t  may be due to the  ac t ion  
requested ;  and  so on. P ragmat ic  ru les  are  Invoked to 
dec ide  whether  or not  the  descrxpt lon  shou ld  be 
re laxed .  These ru les  will not  be d i scussed  here  so we 
will assume that  the  problem l ies in the  speakers  
descr ip t ion .  
3.2.3 Per form the  re laxat ion  of the  descr ip t ion  
If re laxat ion  Is demanded,  then  the system must 
(1) f ind potent ia l  re fe rent  cand idates ,  (2l determine  
which features  in the  speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  to re lax  
and in what  order ,  and use those  ordered  features  to 
o rder  the potent ia l  cand idates  with respect  to the 
pre fer red  order ing  of features ,  and (3~ determine  the 
proper  re laxat ion  techn iques  to use and app ly  them to 
the  descr ip t ion .  
F ind potent ia l  re fe rent  cand idates  
Before re laxat ion  can take  p lace,  potent ia l  
cand idates  for re fe rents  (which denote  e lements  in the 
l i s tener ' s  v i sua l  scene) must f i rs t  be found These 
cand idates  a re  d i scovered  by per fo rming  a "walk" tn 
the  knowledge base  taxonomy in the genera l  v l c lmty  of 
the  speakers  c lass i f ied  descr ip t ion .  A KL-One par t ia l  
marcher  is used  to determme how c lose the candidate 
descr ip t ions  found dur ing  the  walk a re  to the speakers  
descr ip t ion ,  The par t ia l  metcher  generates  a numer ica l  
score  to represent  how well the descr lp t lons  match 
(a f ter  f i rs t  generat ing  scores  at the  feature  level to 
help determme how the features  a re  to be a l igned end 
how well they  match).  This score  is based  on 
in fo rmat ion  about  KL-One and does not  take  mto 
account  any in fo rmat ion  about  the  task  domain.  The 
order ing  of features  and cand idates  for re laxat ion  
descr ibed  below takes  Into account  the  task  domain. 
The set  of bes t  descr ip t ions  re turned  by the  marcher  
(as determined  by some cutof f  score)  a re  se lec ted  as 
re ferent  cand idates .  
Order the  features  and cand idates  for  re laxat ion  
At th is  peat  the  re ference  system inspects  the 
speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  and the cand idates ,  dec ides  wtltch 
features  to re lax  and in what order .  5 and generates  a 
master  o rder ing  of features  for re laxat ion .  Once the 
feature  o rder  Is c reated ,  the  re ference  system uses 
50f course, om=a one ~r t i cu la r  candidate is selected. 
then deciding which features to relax is re la t ive ly  t r (v ia l  
- one simply c(mporee feature by feature between the 
candidate descr ipt ion (the target)  and the speaker's 
descr ipt ion ( the ~t tern)  and notes any discrepancies. 
212 
that  o rder ing  to determine  the order  in which to t ry  
relaxing the candidates. 
We draw pr;martly on sources of linguistic 
knowledge, pragmatic knowledge, discourse knowledge, 
domam knowledge, perceptual knowledge, hierarchical 
knowledge, and trial and error knowledge durmg this 
repair process. A detailed treatment of all of them can 
be found In \[12, 27, 13\]. These knowledge sources are 
consulted to determine the feature ordering for 
relaxation. We represent information from each 
knowledge source as a set of relaxation rules. These 
rules are written in a PROLOG-I ike language. Figure 5 
illustrates one such  linguistic knowledge relaxation 
rule. This rule is motivated by the observation in the 
excerpts that speakers typ~cally add more important 
informatlon at the end of a descrlpt~on (where they are 
separated from the ma~n part of the descrlpt~on and 
thus provided more emphasis). Since the syntactic 
constituents often at the end are relatlve clauses or 
predicate complements, we created this more specdic 
relaxatlon rule. However. a more general and more 
applicable rule is that information presented at the 
end of a descrlptlon is usually more promment .  
Re lox  the  features  in  the  speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  in  the  
order :  od jec t ives ,  then  I : repoe i t iono!  phroeee ,  ond  
f ino l ly  re lc t ive  ? louses  ond  pred icc te  complements .  
E.g. .  
Rel ox-Feot ure-Be f o re(v  1 .v2) 
<- ObjectOeecr(d) ,  
Feat ureOeec r i p tor (v !  ) ,  
FectureOescr iptor(v2), 
FecturelnOeecr i pt ion(v f  .d) .  
Feat urel  nOesc r i pt i on(v2 .d ) .  
5"quo I (syntoc t i c - f  orm(v t .d) ,  "ADJ").  
;'quo I (synt a?t i c - f  orm(v2.d) ,  "REL-CLS") 
Figure 5: A sample relaxation rule 
Each knowledge source produces ~ts own partial 
o rdermg of features. The partial o rdermgs are then 
zntegrated to form a d~rected graph. For example. 
perceptual knowledge may say to relax color However. 
~f the color value was asserted ~n a relative clause. 
linguistic knowledge would rank color lower. ~.e.. 
p lacmg ~t later ~n the list of things to relax. 
Smce different knowledge sources generally have 
di f ferent  par t ia l  o rder lngs  of features ,  these  
d i f fe rences  can lead to a conf l ic t  over which features  
to relax.  It Is the job of the  best  cand idate  a lgor i thm 
to resolve the d~sagreements among knowledge sources. 
It's goal ts to order the referent candidates, Ci, so 
that relaxation ~s attempted on the best candzdates 
first Those candidates are the ones that conform best 
to a proposed feature ordering. To start, the algorithm 
exammes pairs of candidates and the feature order~ngs 
from each knowledge source. For each candidate C i. 
the algorithm scores the effect of relaxlng the 
speaker's orlglnal descrlpt~on to C i. using the feature 
ordering from one knowledge source. The score 
reflects the goal of mln~mlz:ng the number  of features 
relaxed whale try3ng to relax the features that are 
"earhest" sn the feature ordermg. It repeats ~ts 
scoring of C i for each knowledge source, and sums up 
its scores to form Ci's total score. The Ci's are then 
ordered by that score. 
Figure 6 provides a graphic description of th~s 
process. A set of objects ~n the real world are 
selected by the partial marcher as potent~a| candidates 
for the re ferent .  These cand idates  a re  shown across  
the top of the f igure. The l ines  on the  r ight  s ide of 
each box correspond to the set of features that 
describe that object. The speaker's descrlpt~on ts 
represented in the center of the figure. The set of 
spec i f ied  features  and the i r  ass igned  feature  va lue 
(e.g., the  pa i r  Co lo r -Maroon)  a re  also shown there .  A 
set  of par t ia l  o rder ings  a re  generated  that  suggest  
which features  in the  speaker ' s  descr ip t ion  shou ld  be 
re laxed  f i r s t  - one order ing  for each  knowledge source  
(shown as "l~nguist~c," "Perceptual." and "H~erarchlcaI" 
in the figure). These are put together to form a 
directed graph that represents the possible, reasonable 
ways to relax the features specified tn the speakers  
description. Finally. the referent candidates are 
reordered using the information expressed ~n the 
speaker's description and in the directed graph of 
features .  
OQ/ecrl 
? *a pm-c~a l  FI -~ ?o1?*- f~ t l  oe fz P~ 
? - )  N|eeet.?tnlceJ f3 - )  F~I : I~  f2 F3 fZ oe f~ oe F,* 
F4 - )  Size f3 fa 
f4 
5 
O~Nct4d Ct~ of/~rtu.s I~  ,*~,~r~;~ 
Figure 8: Reordering referent candldates 
Once a set of ordered, potential candldates are 
selected, the relaxation mechanlsm begms step 3 of 
relaxatlon; it trles to find proper relaxation methods to 
relax the features that have lust been ordered ~success 
tn flndlng such methods "justifies" relaxing the 
descrlptlon). It stops at the first candidate which zs 
reasonable. 
Determine which re laxat ion  methods  to app ly  
Relaxation can take place wlth many aspects of a 
speaker's descrlptlon: wlth complex relatlons specified 
In the descrlptlon, wlth indlvldual features of a 
referent specified by the descrlptlon, and with the 
focus of attention in the real world where one attempts 
to find a match. Complex relatlons speclfted in a 
speaker's descrlptlon include spatlal relations (e.g.. 
"the outlet near  the top of the tube">, comparatives 
(e.g. "the larger tube") and superlatlves (e.g., "the 
longest tube"). These can be relaxed. The slmpler 
features of an object (such as slze or color) that are 
speclfied in the speaker's descrlptton are also open to 
relaxation. 
Often the objects in focus In the real world 
implicitly cause other objects to be In focus \[14, 2{\]\]. 
The subparts of an object ~n focus, for example, are 
reasonab le  cand idates  for the  re ferent  of a fazhng 
descr ip t ion  and shou ld  be checked .  At o ther  t imes, the  
speaker  might a t t r ibute  features  of a subpar t  of an 
213 
object to the whole object (e.g., describing a plunger 
that Is composed of a red handle, a metal rod, a blue 
cap, and a green cup as "the green plunger"). In 
these cases, the relaxation mechan ism utilizes the 
part-whole relation in object descriptions to suggest a 
way  to relax the speaker's description. 
Relaxation of a description has a few global 
strategies that can be followed for each part of the 
description: (I) drop the errorful feature value from 
the description altogether, (2) weaken or tighten the 
feature value but keep its new value close to the 
specified one, or (S) try some other feature value. 
These  s t ra teg ies  a re  rea l i zed  through a set  of 
p rocedures  (o r  reLa=, , t ion  methods)  that  a re  organ ized  
hierarchically. Each procedure is an expert at relaxing 
its particular type of feature. For example, a 
Generat e-  Similar- Feature-Values procedure is 
composed of procedures llke Generate-S imi lar -Shape-  
Values, Generate-Simi lar-Color-Values and Generate-  
Similar-Size-Values. Each of those procedures are 
specialists that attempt to first relax the feature value 
to one "near" the current one (e.g., one would prefer 
to first relax the color "red" to "pink" before relaxing 
it to "blue") and then. d that fails, to try relaxing it 
to any of the other possible values. If those fail. the 
feature would simply be ignored. 
3.3 An example  on  hand l ing  a mis re ference  
This section describes how a referent 
identification system can handle a mlsreference using 
the scheme outlined in the previous section. For the 
purposes of thls example, assume that the water pump 
objects currently in focus include the CAP. the 
MAINTUBE. the AIRCHAMBER and the STAND (see Figure 
l{a) for a picture of these parts) Assume also that 
the speaker tries to describe two of the objects. 
". two devices that are clear piastlc One of them has 
two openings on the outside with threads on the end, 
and its about five inches long. The other one tsa  
rounded piece with a turquoise base on it. Both are 
tubular. The rounded piece fits loosely over...". The 
reference system can find a unique referent for the 
first obJect but not for the second. The relaxation 
algorithm will be shown below to reduce the set of 
referent candidates for the second description down to 
two. It. then. requires the system/listener to try out 
those candidates to determine if one. or both, fits 
loosely. The protocols exhibit a similar result when the 
listener uses "fits loosely" to get the correct referent 
(eg.. Excerpt 6 exemplifies where the "fit" can confirm 
that  the  proper  re ferent  was  found) .  
Figure 7 provides a simplified and hnearlzed vlew 
of the actual KL -One representatlon of the  speaker's 
descriptions after they have been parsed and 
semantically interpreted. A representation of each of 
the water pump objects that are currently under 
consideration is presented in Figure 8 Each provides a 
physical description of the object - in terms of its 
dimensions, the basic 3 -D  shapes composing it, and its 
physical features - and a basic functional description 
of the obJect. The first entry in each representation 
tn Figure 8 {that entry is shown in uppercase) defines 
the basic kind of entity being described {e.g.. "TUBE" 
means that the object being described is some kind of 
tube)  The words  in mixed  case  re fer  to  the  names  of 
features  and  the  words  in  uppercase  re fer  to  poss ib le  
f i l l e rs  of those  features  f rom th ings  in the  water  pump 
wor ld .  The  "Subpar t "  feature  prov ides  a p lace  fo r  an  
embedded descr ip t ion  of  an  ob jec t  that  is  a subpar t  of 
a parent  ob jec t .  Such  subpar ts  can  be  re fer red  to  on  
the i r  own or  as  par t  of  the  parent  ob jec t .  The 
"Or ientat ion"  feature ,  used  in  the  representat ions  in 
F igure  8. p rov ides  a ro ta t ion  and  t rans la t ion  of the  
ob jec t  f rom some s tandard  or ientat ion  to  the  ob lec ts  
current orientation in 3 -D  space. The standard 
orientation provides a way  to define relative positions 
such as "top," "bottom," or "slde." 
Dlaer l :  
I DCVIC~ IT rensperency  C~ARI  
*Composition PL.ASTIC) 
iSuSpert I (~PL~Ni l I i  
ISUDpiTI 10111) )  
ISu l le i r t  {T~ADS I l i i - Po l i t l on  \ [NDI t )  
ID lm4,n i lon l  I~n l th  S .O I I  
i lA i lo l i?i l -~h l l l  T$111 J l i l l l  
( F IT - INTO IOuter  (D \ [V IC /  (T r lnsperencv  C'~TARI 
;Compos , t  ,on  PLASTIC) 
Shape R~O ) 
( A i l@lo|  I ? l i  -.~hllpe 'r~.~ljt~R ) 
(Subp i r l  ~SA. ~? q( 'o lo r  T'~T~QtrOl.~T);Ib) 
? Inner  ) 
i r , tCond| t~on LOOSEI ) 
F igure  7: The  speaker ' s  descr ip t ions  
The  f i r s t  s tep  in  the  re ference  process  ts the  
actua l  search  fo r  a re ferent  in the  knowiedge base  
The  re ference  ident i f i ca t ion  process  is i nc rementa l  in 
nature ,  l .e, ,  the  l i s tener  c~n beg in  the  search  process  
be fore  he  hears  the  complete  descr ip t ion  Th is  was  
observed  throughout  the  v ideotape  excerpts  and  the  
a lgor i thm presented  here  is ac tua l ly  des lgned to  be 
incrementa l .  The  KL -One C lass i f ie r  compares  the  
features spec i f ied  in the speaker ' s  descr ip t ions  (Descr l  
and  the" "Outer"  feature  of Descr2  in F igure  T) w i th  the  
features  spec lhed  fo r  each  e lement  in the  EL -One 
taxonomy that  cor responds  to  one  of the  cur rent  
ob jec ts  of i n teres t  in  the  rea l  wor ld .  Not ice  that  some 
features  are  d i rec t ly  comparab le .  For  example ,  the  
"Transparency"  feature of Descr l  and  the 
"Transparency"  feature  of MAINTUBE are  both  equa l  to 
"CLEAR." Other  features  requ i re  fu r ther  process ing  
before  they  can  be  compared .  The  OPENING va lue  of 
"Subpar t "  in Deecr l  is thought  of p r imar i ly  as  a 2 -D  
c ross -sect lon  (such  as  a "ho le" ) .  wh i le  two CYLINDER 
subpar ts  of MA/NTUBE are  v iewed as  13-D)  cy l inders  
that  have  the  "Funct ion"  of  be ing  out le ts ,  i .e. ,  OUTLET-  
ATTACHMENT-POINTS. To compare  OPENING and 
CYLINDER, the  in ference  must  be  made that  both  th ings  
can  descr ibe  the  same th ing  (s imi la r  in fe rences  are  
deve loped in (18 \ ] ) .  One way  th i s  in fe rence  can  occur  
ts by  recurs lve ly  examin ing  the  subpar ts  of MA/NTUBE 
wlth  the  par t ia l  matcher  unt i l  the  cy l inders  a re  
examined at  the  2 -D  leve l .  At that  leve l ,  an  end  of the  
cy l inder  wil l  be  de f ined  as  an  OPENING With that  
examinat ion ,  the  MAINTUBE can  be  seen  as  descr ibed  
by  Deeer  I. 
Descr2  presents  d i f fe rent  prob lems.  Descr2  re fers  
to  an  ob Ject  that  is supposed to  have  a subpar t  that  is 
TURQUOISE. The  C lass i f ie r  determines  that  Descr2  cou ld  
not  descr ibe  e i ther  the  CAP or  3TAND because  both  are  
BLUE. It a l so  cou ld  not  descr ibe  the  MAINTUBE 6 or  .aIR 
CHAMBER s ince  each  has  subpar ts  that  a re  e i ther  
VIOLET or  BLUE. The  C lass i f ie r  p laces  Descr2  as  best  it 
can  in the  taxonomy,  showing  no  connect ions  between 
6Sin?e Deacr~ re fers  to ~AJNTUSE. MAINTUBE could be 
dropped as ? potent ia l  re fe rent  cand idate  fo r  Descr2.  We 
w i l l .  hommver, leave i t  ae a potent ia l  cand idate  to make 
th i s  eso~le more coelples. 
214 
(C~mpol, t ion  PI,~I~T IC I 
C&P ( T ronzp i ren??  ~l i~?.~ ) 
I~* in l ion l  i l , , l l l l l t l  .~ l  ID i l l#r  .S i t  
i ( l l te~i i t~on l lo te l~o~l  iO.O 0 .0  tO.O~ i 
I l l i n i l i t~on ~(l*O 0 ,0  O .O l i ) l  
I TU~ 
ilA I I~ 
ors*or  v lo l rT*  
{C==pOI I t l~  PLA~'r|C) 
(Transparency CI.\[ASl 
(Ot l l l l~ l lO~l  I~tn l th  4 . |~1)  
(SuPport ICYLIND~R IO: l l~nSlOnS #Len l t~ .~51 (O i l  d I t r ie r  I .{ZS) )  
tOr lent@t lO8 *Rot i l l o8  10.0 0 .0  0 .0)1  
L lS  iT rens l l t ton  *0 .0  0 .0  3 .?5) i )  
(F~n?t lon  OL~IrT-aTTAC)~NT-~OINT)I} 
(Subpert ICYLINO?R IO l lmns loss  I Len | th  3 .~ l  ~Olsmeter I .O I )  
T~&e~o~ (Orsent l t lon  /Rotat ion IO*O 0.0  o .o l i  
(T rsns le t~o~ (0 .0  0 .0  .25 i l l ) )  
($ubssrt (CYLINO~S (O l l~ l l~ l  I~@nlth  .~S i  IO l~ l~ter  1*12S i )  
(Or ientat ion  IRot l t |on  (O.O O.O O*Ol l  
~ff@l14~ I T r l f l l l i i l o ,  IO.O 0.00*O)) i  
(FUnct IOB '~AJDE~-A~'ACHId~NT-POINT)))  
(Subpirt (CY~IN~I\[R (O l=~l lO~l  ( \ [ .en l t f l  .3751 {Ol l lL l~ter .5 ) )  
(Or lent l t :on  *Rotat ion  (O.O O.O 90o0}) 
Ot~lle#~ (T r@ns ie t lon  (O.O ,~ 3 .00) ) )  
(F~tnct lon O~'T~T-AlrTAC~4~,NT-POINY})i 
(Subpsrt (CYLiNOER (O l lMn l lOn l  i~en l th  ,375)  IO l l l /wter  *S) )  
(Or ientat ion  IRots t=on (O.O O.O 90.O))  
~At l le l2  IT rsn l io t lon  (O.O ,S .82~))  
{ runct lo~ OIJ~frT*ATTACiSlS~NT-POINTI))i 
~IR 
CH~R 
(C~lTA I l l t l l  (D imens ,on |  ?t.I\[~GTH 2 .75) )  
(Ccm@o=ttion PLASTICI 
(SuPport  t H~.MISPH~ *Co lor  VIOt.I~?) 
(T ransparency  CLI~XRI 
C~4ml~@f lO l l l l~f l l lO f l l  IO l lme ler  l .O l l  
To s (O@leht l? lon  ISo la t ion  ?0.0 0 .00 .O l )  
I~r in l i i t l o~ 10.0 0 .0  2 .~ l l ) ) )  
(Subpirt (CY~INOER lCo lor  VIOLET} 
(Trlnsperenov CLEAR! 
Chamoe~ (D~menl lons  ?Len&th 1.01 (O~wter  2 .25}1 
Bo@y (Or ientat ion  (Sot~t lO~ iO.O 0 .0  0 .01)  
(~r ln l iOt lOn  I0 .0  0 .0  .375)* ) ) )  
(Sub~ert {C3"LINOER (Co lor  SLU~i 
(Trlnspereney OPaQUe) 
(O l lens lon l  (Lcn l th  .3Y51 (nt~ds~ler 1 .25( )  
tOr len? l l l o ,  (Rotat ion  IO*O O.O 0 .0 ) )  
Chcm~eP (T rans la t ion  (O*O 0,0 0.0) ) )  
Bore=s= ( runct*an  CAP OUTLET-A~&CHM~J~-~)(NTI 
{~Dp~rt  ;CYLINDER 4Color  8t.UE) 
IO l~n l lOn l  i Lensth -*3TS)  
(Or lentat loa  
{Rogation (O*O O.O 0.0)) 
(T rans la t ion  ~O.O o,0 0 .0 ) ) )  
(F~tc t lon  
OU'rtrT.al"~'~C)Od~lT-I=~lNT))))) 
{Sub,art ?CY~{h'O/R (Co lor  VIOLET) 
(Teon l~ loen?~ CLE,/I~I 
C~a~oft  (D imens ions  (Len?(h  .51 lO lmaet~r  .37~l l  
Ot l~\[r f  (Or ientat ion  (Rot i t *on  ,0 .0  0 .0  ~0.0) )  
(Terns ( i L ion  ( .625 .825 .625})) 
(~ct lon  OUTL~T-~TTAC;~q~NT-P~)INT)lt) 
:T~\ [  ,D,mens,ons ?LenCtn 2 .7~) (  
4Compos,tton PLASTIC) 
(5uupsrt 1CYLINDER fCo lor  BLUE1 
{Trsn|parehcy CLEARt 
r0p (D*mens;ons ?LenGth 2 .25)  40j~dlte(er .3TS l )  
(o r tenta? ion  tRoL i t *oh  ?0.0 0 .0  0 .0 ) )  
~TA;ND (T ren l tscson  (.$ O,0 .375})~ 
(Funct ,on  (X~L?T-&TTAC~.NT-POINT I ) )  
t lub=*r t  ;C~*LINO?R ?CoIor BLUI~) 
(T r lnspereneF  CL?AR) 
8@s@ I~ l~ef l s lon l  I~.~rneth .3~5) (Ollulet@@ l .  OI) 
IOe lcntet?of l  iRotml lon  {0 .0  0 .0  0 .0 ) )  
~Teens i i l i o f l  fO*O 0 .0  0 .0 ) ) )  
I F~not .on  OUTLLT-*rI"AC)O4E~T-POINTt))I 
Figure 8: The objects in focus 
it and any of the objects currently in focus. At this 
point,  a probable  misre ference is noted. The re ference 
mechan ism now t r ies  to f ind potent ia l  re ferent  
candidates, using the taxonomy exploration routine 
described in Section 3.2.3. by examining the elements 
closest to Descr2 In the taxonomy and using the partial 
matcher to score how close each element is to Descr2. 7 
The matcher determines MA/NTUBE. STAND, and AIR 
7The par t ia l  mctcher  scores  are  numer ica l  scores  computed 
f rom 0 set  of  ro le  scores  that  ind icate  how we l l  each 
feature  of the two descr ip t ions  match  Thosa feature  
scores  are  represented  OS a sca le :  H IGH\ [ST  |+| ,  {> <( ,  
{-( .  {?l,  {-( COWEST. 
CHAMBER as reasonable candidates 
compar ing their features to Descr2 .  
Scor ing  Descr2  to MAINTUBE. 
by a l ign ing  and 
o a TUBE is a kind of DEVICE: (>) 
o the Transparency of each is CLEAR; (-'{ 
o the Composltlon of each Is pLASTIC. (~-) 
o a TUBE Implies Analoglcal-Shape TUBULAR.  
which implies Shape CYLINDRICAL, which ~s a 
k ind  of Shape ROUND: (>) 
o the recurslve partlal matching of subparts: A 
BASE Is viewed as a kind of BOTTOM. 
Therefore, BASE In Descr2 could match to the 
subpart In MA/NTUBE that has a Translation 
of  (0 .0  0 ,0  0 .0 )  - I .e. ,  Threads of MAINTUBE. 
However, they mismatch since color 
TURQUOISE  In Descr ~- differs from color VIOLET 
of MAINTUBE. ( - )  
Scor ing  Descr2  to STAND: 
o a TUBE Is a k ind of DEVICE, (>)  
o the  Transparency  of each  is CLEAR. ( - ,  
o the Composltlon of each is PLASTIC. (-) 
o a TUBE *mphes Analoglcal-Shape TUBULAR. 
whlch imphes Shape CYLINDRICAL. which Ls a 
kind of Shape ROUND; (>) 
o the recurswe partial matching of zubparts. 
BASE in Descr2 could match to the subpart (n 
STAND that has a Translation of 10.0 00  0.0) 
- I .e..  Base  of STAND.  However.  they 
mismatch since color  TURQUOISE m Descr2 
di f fers from color BLUE of STAND ( - )  
Scoring Descr2  to AIR CHAMBER: 
o a CONTAINER Is  a k ind  of  DEVICE. (>)  
o the  Transparency  of Descr2 .  CLEAR. matches  
the  Transparency  of ChamberTop. 
ChamberOutlet and ChamberBody of AIR 
CHAMBER but mismatches the Transparency 
of ChamberBottom of AIR CHAMBER. 
There fore .  the  par t ia l  match  is uncer ta in .  (?) 
o the  Compos l t lon  of each  is PLASTIC, (+)  
o the  subpar ts  of AIR CHAMBER have Shape 
HEMISPHERICAL and CYLINDRICAL wh ich  are  
each  a k lnd  of Shape ROUND: {>) 
o the recurstve partial matching of subparts. 
BASE m Desor2 could match to the subpart in 
AIR CHAMBER that has a translation of (0.0 
0.0 0 .0 )  - i .e., ChamberBot tom o( .4IR 
CHAMBER.  However. they mismatch since 
color  TURQUOISE m Deacr2 di f fers from color 
BLUE of AIR  CHAMBER {- )  
The above analysls using the partial matcher 
provldes no clear winner smce the differences are so 
close causing the scores generated for the candldates 
to be almost exactly the same (i.e.. the only difference 
was In the score for Transparency). All candidates. 
hence, will be retained for now. 
215 
At this point, the knowledge sources and their 
associated rules that were ment loned earlier apply. 
These rules attempt to order the feature values m the 
speaker's description for relaxation. First. we'll order 
the features m DescrZ using lingulstlc knowledge. 
Linguistic analysls of Deser2, "... are clear plastlc ... a 
rounded pace  wlth a turquoise base ... Both are 
tubular ... fits loosely over .... " tells us that the 
features were specified using the following modifiers. 
o Adlect~ve: (Shape ROUND)  
o Prepositional Phrase: (Subpart (BASE (Color 
TURQUOISE))) 
o Predicate Complement: (Transparency CLEAR), 
IComposltion PLASTIC), (Analoglcal-Shape 
TUBULAR), (Fit LOOSE) 
Observations from the protocols (as described by the 
ru les  deve loped  In \[13\]) has  shown that  people  tend  to 
re lax  f i rs t  features  spec i f ied  as ad lec t lves ,  then  as 
prepos l t lona l  phrases  and f ina l ly  as re la t ive  c lauses  or 
p red icate  complements .  Thls suggests  re laxat ion  of 
Descr2  in the  order :  
\ ]Shape} < |Co lo r .Subpor t |  
< |T ronsporency .COmpOSi  t ;on .Ana log ica l -ShaDe ,F; t | 
The set of features on the left side of a "<" symbol is 
relaxed before the set on the rlght side The order 
that the features inside the braces. " )~",  are relaxed 
is left unspecified {i.e., any order of relaxation Is 
alrlght) Perceptual Information about the domain also 
provldes suggestlons. Whenever  a feature has feature 
values that are close, then one should be prepared to 
relax any of them to any of the others (we call thls 
the "clustered feature value rule") \[n thls example. 
smce the colors are all very close - BLUE. TURQUOISE, 
and VIOLET - then Color may be a reasonable thing to 
relax. Hxerarchlcal Information about how closely 
related one feature value Is to another can also be 
used to determine what to relax. The Shape values are 
a good example. A CYLINDRICAL shape Is also a CONICAL 
shape, which Is also a 3 -D  ROUND shape. Hence. It Is 
very reasonable to match ROUNDED to CYLINDRICAL. All 
of these suggestions can be put together to form the 
order: 
~Sho~e.Co~or| < ~Su~l)art~ 
< |Trangpore f l cy  ,Compos i t i on.  
Ana|  og i ca I --Shope. F i I: | .  
The re ferent  cand ldates  MAINTUBE. STAND, and 
.41R CHAMBER can be examined  and poss ib ly  o rdered  for 
relaxation using the above feature ordering For this 
example, the relaxation of Descr2 to any of the 
candidates requires relaxing their SHAPE and COLOR 
features. Since they each require re iaxmg the same 
features, the candidates can not be ordered w, th 
respect to each other (i.e., none of the possible feature 
orders is better for relaxing the candidates). Hence. 
no one candidate stands out as the most likely 
referent. 
While no orderlng of the candidates was posslble. 
the order generated to relax the features In the 
speaker's description can be used to guide the 
relaxation, of each candldate. The relaxation methods 
mentioned at the end of the last section come Into use 
here.  Generate -S imdar -Shape-Va lues  can determine  
that  HEMISPHERICAL and CYLINDRICAL shapes  of the AIR 
CHAMBER are close to the 3D-ROUND shape.. This holds 
equa l ly  t rue  for the cyhndr lca l  shapes  of the  
MAINTUBE and the  STAND. Generate -S imi la r -Co lo r -  
Values next  t rms  re lax ing  the Color TURQUOISE. It 
determmes the  colors BLUE and GREEN as the best 
alternates. Here only two clear winners exist - the 
AIR CHAMBER and the STAND - while the MAINTUBE is 
dropped as a candidate smce it Is reasonable to relax 
TURQUOISE  to BLUE or to GREEN but not to VIOLET 
Subpart, Transparency, Analoglcal- Shape, and  
Composition provide no further help {though. the fact 
that the AIR CHAMBER has both CLEAR and OPAQUE 
subparts mght  put it slightly lower than the ST,hVD 
whose subparts are all CLEAR. Thls difference. 
however, is not slgndicant.). Thls leaves trial and  
error attempts to try to complete the FIT action. The 
one (if any) that fits - and fits loosely - Is selected 
as the referent. The protocols showed that people 
often do just that - reducing their set of choices down 
as best they can and then taking each of the remalnmg 
chmces  and trying out the requested action on them 
4 Conc lus ion  
Our goal m thls work Is to budd robust natural 
language understanding systems, a l lowmg them to 
detect and avold mlscommunlcatlon. The goal is not to 
make a perfect listener but a more tolerant one that 
could avold many mistakes, though still wrong on 
occasion. In Section 2, we mtroduced a taxonomy of 
mlscommunlcat lon problems that occur tn expert - 
apprentice dialogues. We showed that reference 
mistakes are one kind of obstacle to robust 
communication. To tackle reference problems, we 
descrlbed how to extend the succeed/fad paradigm 
followed by previous natural language researchers  
We represented real world objects hlerarchlcallv 
in a knowledge base using a representation language, 
KL-One.  that follows in the tradition of semantlc 
networks and frames. In such a representatlon 
framework, the reference identification task looks for a 
re fe rent  by compar ing  the representat ion  of the 
speakers  Input to elements in the knowledge base by 
using a matching procedure. Failure to find a referent 
in previous reference identlhcatlon systems resulted In 
the unsuccessful termination of the reference task We 
claim that people behave better than this and exphcltly 
illustrated such cases in an expert-apprentlce domain 
about toy water pumps. 
We deve loped  a theory  of re laxat ion  for 
recovering from reference failures that provides a 
much better model for human performance. When 
people are asked to identify objects, they go about it 
m a certain way. flnd candidates, adjust as necessary, 
re-try, and, if necessary, glve up and ask for help. We 
claim that relaxation is an Integral part of this process 
and that the particular parameters of relaxation differ 
from task to task and person to person. Our work 
models the relaxation process and provldes a 
computatlonal model for experimenting w~th the 
different parameters. The theory incorporates the 
same language and physical knowledge that people use 
m performing reference identification to guide the 
relaxation process. Thls knowledge Is represented as a 
set of rules and as data m a hierarchical knowledge 
base. Ru le-based relaxation provided a methodical way  
to use knowledge about language and the world to find 
a referent. The hlererchxcal representation made It 
posslble to tackle issues of Impreclslon and over-  
specification In a speakers  description. It allows one 
to check the position of a description in the hierarchy 
and to use that position to fudge Imprecision and 
over -spec l f i ca t ion  and to suggest  poss ib le  repa i rs  to 
the  descr ip t lon .  
216 
Interest ingly.  one would expect  that  "c losest"  
match would suff ice to solve the problem of f inding a 
referent .  We showed, however,  that  it doesn ' t  usual ly  
provide you with the cor rect  re ferent .  Closest match 
isn't  suff ic ient because  there  are many features  
assoc iated wlth an object and, thus.  determimng whlch 
of those features  to keep and which to drop Is a 
difficult problem due to the combinatorlcs and the 
effects of context. The relaxation method described 
circumvents the problem by using the knowledge that 
people have about language and the physical  world to 
prune  down the search  space. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I want to thank especially Candy Sidner for her 
inslghtful comments  and suggestions during the course 
of thls work. I'd also like to acknowledge the helpful 
comments  of George Hadden, Diane L~tman, Marc Vilam, 
Dave Waltz, Bonme Webber and Bill Woods on this paper. 
Many thanks also to Phil Cohen, Scott Fertig and Kathy 
Starr for providing me wlth thelr water pump dmlogues 
and for their invaluable observations on them. 
REFERENCES 
\ [ I \ ]  Allen. James F. A Plan-Based Approach to Speech 
Act Recognztion. Ph.D. Th.. University of Toronto. 1979. 
\[2\] Appelt, Douglas E. Planning AIat~Tal Language 
Utterances to Satisf!/ Multiple Goals. Ph.D Th., 
Stanford Unlverslty, 1981. 
\[3\] Brachman, Ronald J. A 3tr~ctura l  Parad igm /or  
Representing Knowledge. Ph.D. Th., Harvard Umverslty,  
1977 Also, Technlcal Report No. 3605. Bolt Beranek 
and Newman Inc. 
\[4\] Brown, John Seely and Kurt VanLehn. "Repair 
Theory A Generat ive Theory of Bugs m Procedura l  
Sk111s." Cognitive Science ~, 4 (1980), 379-426 
\[5\] Cohen. Philip R On Kno~vlng What to Sa?l. 
Planning Speech Acts. Ph.D. Th., University of Toronto, 
1978. 
\[8\] Cohen. P.. C Perrau l t  and J. Allen. Beyond 
Question Answering. In KnowLedge Representat ion and 
Natural Language Processing. W. Lehnart  and M. Ringle, 
Ed..Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1981. 
\[7\] Cohen. Phlhp R. The need for Referent 
Identlficatlon as a Planned Actlon. Proceedings of 
IJCAI-81. Vancouver. B.C., Canada, August. 1981, pp. 
31-35. 
\[8\] Cohen, Phlhp R, Scott Fertlg and Kathy Start. 
Dependencies of Discourse Structure on the Modahty of 
Communlcatlon. Telephone vs. Teletype. Proceedings of 
ACL, Toronto. Ont., Canada, June, 1982, pp. 28-35. 
\[9\] Cohen, Philip R. "The Pragmatlcs of Referring and 
the Modahty of Communlcatlon." Computational 
Linguistics 10, 2 (Apr i l - June 1984). 97-146.  
\[10\] Gentner. Dedre. The Structure of Analogical 
Models In Science. Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.. July, 
1980. 
\[11\] Goodman. Bradley A. Mlscommunlcatlon an Task- 
Oriented Dialogues. KRNL Group Working Paper, Bolt 
BeraneK and Newman Inc., April 1982. 
\[12\] Goodman, Bradley A. Repairing Miscommunlcatlon: 
Relaxation m Reference. Proceedings of AAAI-83. 
Washlngton. b.C.. August, 1983, pp. 134--138. 
\[13\] Goodman, Bradley A. Communication and 
Miscomccr,~n~cation. Ph.D. Th., Univers i ty of Illinols. 
Urbane,  1984. 
\[14\] Gross,  Barbara  J. The Representat ion and Use of 
Focus in Dialogue Under'standing. Ph.D. Th., Univers i ty 
of Californla, Berkeley. 1977. Also, Technical Note 151. 
Stanford  Research  Inst l tute.  
\[15\] Gross.  Barbara  J. Focusing and descr ip t ions  in 
natural language dialogues. In Elements of Discourse 
Understanding, Joshi. Webber and Sags, Ed.,Cambrldge 
University Press, 1981, pp. 84-ID5. 
\[16\] Lipkis, Thomas. A \](L-ONE Classifier. Proceedings 
of the 1981 KL -One Workshop, June, 1982, pp. 128-145. 
Report No. 4842, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. Also 
Consul Note # 5, USC/Information Sciences Institute. 
October 1981. 
\[17\] L4tman, Diane J. and James F. Allen. A Plan 
Recogmtion Model for Clarlfication Subdialogues. 
Proceedings of Coling84, Stanford Umverslty, Stanford, 
CA., July, 1984, pp. 302-311. 
\[18\] Mark. William. Realization. Proceedings of the 
1981 \](L-One Workshop, June, 1982, pp. 78-89. Report 
No. 4842, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. 
\[19\] McKeown, \](athleen R. Recurslon In Text and Its 
Use in Language Generation. Proceedings of AAAI-83. 
Washington, D.C., August, 1983. pp. 270-273. 
\[20\] Relchman, Rachel. "Conversational Coherency." 
Cognitive Science 2. 4 (1978). 283-327. 
\[21\] Relchman. Rachel. Plain Speaking: A Theory and 
Grammar of 3pontaneo~s Discourse. Ph.D Th.. Harvard 
Umverslty, 1981. Also, Technical Report No. 4861, Bolt 
Beranek and Newman Inc. 
\[22\] Ringle. Martin and Bertram Bruce. Conversation 
Failure. In Knowledge Representation and Hatlzral 
Language Processing, W. Lehnart and M. RIngle. 
Ed.,Lawrence Erlbaum Assocmtes, 1981. 
\[:~3\] Sidner. C L.. and Israel, D.J. Recogmzmg 
antended meamng and speaker's plans. Proceedings of 
the Internatlone, l Joint Conference In Artlfictal 
Intelhgence. The International Joint Conferences on 
Artlficai Intelligence. Vancouver. B.C. August. 1981, pp. 
203-208. 
\[24\] Sldner, Candace Lee. To,yards cz Computational 
Theory of Definite AnaphoTa Comprehension i English 
Discourse. Ph.D. Th., Massachusetts Instltute of 
Technology, 1979. Also, Report No. TR-537, MIT AI Lab 
\[25\] Sidner, C. L.. M. Bates, R. J. Bobrow, 
R. J. Brachman, P. R. Cohen, D. J. Israel, J. Schmolze. 
B. L. Webber, W. A. Woods. Research an Knowledge 
Representatlon for Natural Language Understanding 
Report No. 4785, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc.. 
November, 1981. 
\[26\] Sidner, C. L.. Bates, M.. Bobrow. R.. Goodman,  B.. 
Haas, A.. Ingrla, R.. Israel, D.. McAllester. D.. Moser, M.. 
Schmolze, J.. Vilem, M. Research an Knowledge 
Representation for Natural Language Understanding - 
Annual Report. I September 1982 - 31 August 1983. 
Technical Report 5421. BBN Laboratories. Cambradge. 
MA, 1983. 
\[27\] Sidner. C., Goodman. B.. Haas, A.. Moser. M.. 
Stallard, D.. Vilem, M. Research m Knowledge 
Representation for Natural Language Understanding - 
Annual Report, I September 1983 - 31 August 1984. 
Technical Report 5894. BBN Laboratorles Inc., 
Cambrldge, MA, 1984. 
\[28\] Webber, Bonnle Lynn. A Forma~ App~'oach to  
/~.scourse Anapho1"a. Ph.D. Th., Harvard University. 
1978. Also, Techmcal  Report  No. 3761. Bolt Beranek 
and Newman Inc. 
217 
