Some Pragmatic Issues in the Planning of Definite and Indefinite 
Noun Phrases 
Doug las  E.  Appe l t  
Ar t i f i c ia l  In te l l igence  Center ,  SR I  In ternat iona l  
and  
Center  for  the  S tudy  o f  Language and  In format ion  
Stanford  Un ivers i ty  
1 In t roduct ion  
In this paper we examine the pragmatic knowledge an 
utterance-planning system must have in order to produce 
certain kinds of definite and indefinite noun phrases. An 
utterance.planning system, like other planning systems, 
plans actions to satisfy an agent's goals, but allows some 
of the actions to consist of the utterance of sentences. This 
approach to language generation emphasizes the view of 
language as action, and hence assigns a critical role to prag- 
matics. 
The noun phrases under consideration i this paper are 
those that presuppose the existence of an individual that 
could be described by the description D. In other words, 
when a speaker uses a noun phrase with description P, it 
makes sense to ask the question "Which x is P? ~ This cri- 
terion includes more than strictly referential uses of noun 
phrases, because it is not necessary for the speaker or hearer 
to k'now what individual is described by D - -  it is merely 
necessary that the existence of such an individual is pre- 
supposed. Consider the attributive description in sentence 
(l}: 
The runner who wins tomorrow's race will qualify 
(I) for the semifinals. 
The description "runner who wins tomorrow's race" cannot 
be referential, because, under ordinary circumstances, the 
speaker could not possibly know who it is that wouid fit the 
description. Nevertheless, it is still reasonable to ask which 
runner will win tomorrow's race, because the description is 
objectively true of some individual. 
This qualification excludes noun phrases whose referents 
are bound within the scope of a universal quantifier, such 
as "the woman ..." in 
(2) Every man wants to meet the woman of his dreams. 
For a similar reason, indefinites within the scope of a sen- 
tential negation axe excluded because they introduce an 
existential quantifier, which, under the scope of negation, 
is really a universal quantifier. Therefore, "a screwdriver" 
in 
(3) John does not have a screwdriver. 
is excluded because, under most circumstances of its use, 
there is no screwdriver that the description in sentence (3) 
denotes. Predicate nnminal~ are excluded, as in the sen- 
tence 
(4) John wants to be a doctor. 
because one would not ask the question "Which doctor does 
John want to be?* 
The choice of this particular class of noun phrases is mo- 
tivated by considerations relevant to planning. When a 
speaker communicates with a hearer, he often intends the 
hearer to hold some attitudes toward individuals in the do- 
main. This is particularly true in task-oriented ialogues 
where the hearer may have to locate and manipulate things 
in his environment. 
The theory of utterance planning assumed for the pur- 
pose of this analysis is the one embodied in KAMP lAp- 
pelt, 1985). Individuals are represented by terms in an 
intensional logic of knowledp~e and acti,m. A metalanguage 
is used to axiomatize the relationship that holds between 
the terms and the individuals they denote. The terms can 
consist of predicates combined with an iota operator, as in 
Lz D(z), where 
D{z) = D,(z)  A . . .A  D.(.c). 
The predicates O~ are called descriptor.9, and their conjunc- 
tion. D, is called a description. Because most noun phrases 
employ terms that are constructed from ;x description, often 
the words "term" and "description ~ aro ,,sed interchange- 
ably. 
The propositional content ~,f the spe;~ker'~ ltterance is
represented by a sentence in the intensi~,nal \[ogm involving 
the terms discussed above. Uttering a sentence ntails per- 
forming a number of actions, called concept activation ac- 
tions, which result in the terms constituting the proposition 
receiving a special status called "active. " The proposition 
198 
that the speaker intends to convey is a predication involv- 
ing the active terms. Referring is a particular type of con- 
cept activation action with relatively strict conditions on 
what must be mutually believed by the speaker and hearer 
for the action to succeed. Searle {1969) presents an anal- 
ysis of referring as a speech act and dismisses many uses 
of noun phrases as nonreferring. Such nonreferring noun 
phrases occur very frequently, and the considerations that 
underly their planning share much in common with those 
that underly actual referring. Therefore, the concept acti- 
vation action provides a suitable generalization that allows 
a plan-based treatment of many more  uses of noun phrases. 
2 Research Objectives 
The analysis presented in this paper represents one of the 
first steps toward a plan-based account of definite and in- 
definite noun phrases. Ideally, such an account would (1) 
provide a semantics for noun phrases, (2) define an actions 
like "uttering a definite noun phrase, ~and (3) provide an 
analysis that shows how the speaker's intentions follow di- 
rectly from the semantics of the noun phrase he utters, 
plus conditions on mutual knowledge and general princi- 
ples of rationality. This program is very much in the spirit 
of the analysis of illocutionary acts provided by Cohen and 
Levesque (1980), who demonstrate how illocutionary acts 
can be defined in terms of the kinds of inferences made, 
given a semantic analysis of an utterance, facts about mu- 
tual knowledge, and general principles of rational behavior. 
Cohen ( 1984} provided such an analysis for referring ac- 
tions by postulating a semantics for the definite determiner 
that would give the semantics of a definite noun phrase as 
a request to identify the referent of a description. This 
analysis would be impossible to extend to the more gen- 
eral concept activation actions, because, in some cases, the 
speaker intends that the hearer not identify the denota- 
tion of the description, even when a definite noun phrase is 
used. A complete analysis along these lines that subsumes 
both referring and nonreferring noun phrases has yet to be 
worked out. 
As an intermediate step toward this ultimate goal, we 
shall propose a taxonomy of concept activation actions that 
convey the various intentions a speaker may have with re- 
spect to a hearer and a description. This taxonomy is of 
theoretical interest, because it characterizes differences and 
similarities among uses of noun phrases that current theo- 
ries do not characterize. It is also of practical interest for 
utterance planning, because the set of actions to be pro- 
posed provides a useful level of abstraction for the reason- 
ing processes of an utterance-planning system. For exam- 
ple. certain planning strategies such as action subsumption 
{Appelt. 1985} axe applicable only to certain kinds of con- 
cept activation actions and not to others. Therefore, even if 
the complete plan-based analysis of noun ph~ is worked 
out, the taxonomy of actions presented here will still be of 
practical importance. 
Until an analysis like Cohen and Levesque's is worked 
out, the concept activation actions here will be treated like 
illocutionary acts in a speech-act theory. When a hearer 
understands an utterance, he reasons about whether it con- 
stitutes an assertion, a request, a warning, etc. Therefore, 
understanding one of the definite or indefinite noun phrases 
under consideration i this paper is assumed to entail recog- 
nition of what concept activation action the speaker intends 
to perform. 
3 Summary of Actions Underlying 
Noun Phrases 
There are many distinctions that one could draw between 
noun phrases, only some of which are relevant o planning. 
For example, one could distinguish noun phrases that refer 
to amorphous ubstances from those that refer to discrete 
entities. Such a distinction may have some valid motiva- 
tion, but it is not necessarily so from the standpoint of 
planning. It would be well motivated only if there were 
a clear difference in the preconditions and effects of the 
concept activation actions-underlying mass terms, or in the 
strategy for the selection of descriptors. This does not seem 
to be the case for mass versus discrete ntities. 
However, there are two criteria that clearly affect the rel- 
evant preconditions, intended effects, and planning strate- 
gies of concept activation actions: {l) whether the speaker 
intends that the hearer identify the denotation of the de- 
scription, and {2) how much mutual knowledge the speaker 
and hearer share about the description's denotation. The 
first criterion is what {roughly} distinguishes referring noun 
phrases from nonreferring noun phrases. The necessity, of 
the hearer performing the identification constrains the de- 
scription to be one that facilitates the hearer's formulation 
of a plan to do so. 
The second criterion is the knowledge that is shared 
by the speaker and the hearer at the time of the utter- 
ance. Planning strategies are influenced by whether or not  
the speaker and hearer mutually believe appropriate facts 
about the intended referent. In particular, if the speaker 
and hearer share enough knowledge about the descriptions 
denotation and the contextual situation, it may be possible 
for the hearer to recognize the speakers intenrt,~as using 
only a subset of the descriptors in the n~mn phrase's de- 
scription. In such a situation, the speaker an augment 
the description with additional descriptors for tile purpose 
of informing the hearer that they are true ,ff the denota- 
tion of the other part of the description. Such a ~trate~' is
called action anbaurnption, {Appeit, i985). The action sub- 
sumption strategy cannot be used with concept activation 
actions that are not based on shared knowledge. 
Since there are two dimensions relevant to ,:haracteriz- 
ing concept activation actions, it is possible to define four 
199 
I de~t  * r , ca t  *an  
In tent*on  
NS! 
Tyuw o i  r nov  ohrD l~ ? i 
? e fgc~t*a | ,  g t t r  ,bog ,  vq .  
de l lm*te  mtd  *ndef i~| ta .  
P IM* I *S  s i r  i l es$~ * 
UNC. I  d~.cr ,o l *e*  ~*  
? deer ,  ' *?o?**~ a lan  
~bsu~t  e **  *ntemt  **ns  
reCOSn*Sed ** lv  e#te~ 
no  ~h~ret l  ,dm~t~f~?~t*e*  i s  caN| I t *  
Tvae  e f  .e~ ~hrwses  T~ e f  noun DhrsSe~ 
R i f~mt* l | .  ~w~l~i r tn t te .  f l t t r tb~t tve ,  de f*~l t t  ~ 
? ndef tn~ to .  
p |m~t  ,~1 s t r  e | l~ J~t  P |m,~J  s t~et4~J~ e 
|a fe? lmt*ve  ~r~Gt  lea  ~f f  ~?tm~t  d~rscr * Og * 
NSNI 5NI 
s| 
fvae  or  noun O~r~e~ 
hr .=At ,e l ,  d*? ,~, tu  
,nc iud ,*~ dGaenst re t*ves .  
P I~n *n*J s t rmteSY*  
? f f , c ie~t  ,dent , rv ,ng  dncr l : s*~ 
~bsweot ,  **  bess*  h ie  
~ e d  
Figure I: Four Types of Concept Activation Actions 
actions, as illustrated in Figure 1. These actions are SI 
(shared concept activation with identification intention), 
NSI (nonshared concept activation with identification in- 
tention), SNI (shared concept activation with no identifi- 
cation intention), and NSNI (nonshared concept activation 
with no identification intention.) Each action has distinct 
preconditions, effects, and an assocated planning strategy. 
4 Mutua l  Knowledge  and 
Ident i f icat ion 
The two most important considerations in planning con- 
cept activation actions axe (1) whether or not the speaker 
intends the hearer to identify the referent of the description 
and (2} what knowledge about the description's possible de* 
notations the speaker and hearer share. 
What it means for an agent to "identify ~ the referent of 
a description is a topic of considerable conplexity. Seaxle 
(1969) sta~es that "So identification ... rests squarely on 
the speaker's ability to supply an expression ... which is 
satisfied uniquely by the object to which he intends to re- 
fer." What  counts as an identifying description depends on 
the purpose for which the agent is identifying the descrip- 
tion:s denotation. For example, the description that one 
must know to carry out a plan requiring the identification 
of ~John's residence" may be quite different depending on 
whether one is going to visit him, or mail him a letter. If I 
want to speak to a guest at a Halloween party, I need only 
a description capable of distinguishing him from the other 
guests at the party, not to know who it really is wearing 
the disguise. 
Identification of the denotation of a term D is therefore 
defined as finding another term /P (called a prima facie 
(PF) identifiable term) that has the same denotation as/~ 
according to the bearer's knowledge, but that meets certain 
syntactic criteria for being the "right kind" of term. It is 
stipulated that any two distinct PF  identifiable terms must 
denote different individuals in the same situation. The sim- 
plest criterion for PF  identifiability that meets this require- 
ment is that the term be a 81andsrd name. Because each 
standard name denotes the same individual in any context, 
knowing that a particular standard name is equivalent to 
a term implies that the agent knows the denotation of the 
term. Furthermore, any two distinct standard names de- 
note different individuals. 
The standard name approach was taken by the KAMP 
system. The standard name assumption has two difficul- 
ties. First, it is extremely implausible to believe that an 
agent has a unique name for anything that can be referred 
to. Also, knowing a standard name implies having made 
an absolute identification. Therefore, to refer to a guest at 
a costume party, it is a consequence of successful identifi- 
cation that the speaker and the hearer mutually know the 
identity of the person in the disguise, which is obviously 
too strong a condition for successful reference. Developing 
adequate criteria for PF  identifiable terms is an important 
research problem; however, none of the points in this paper 
depend on what the criteria for PF  identifiability are. 
The importance of mutual belief to the successful use of 
referring expressions was demonstrated by Clark and Mar- 
shall (1981). It was shown by a series of rather complex 
examples that, if one did not observe an infinite number 
of preconditions of the form "A believes that B believes 
that A believes that B believes ... description P applies 
to R," then it is impossible to guarantee that description 
D can be used to refer felicitously to R, because it would 
always be possible to construct some set of circumstances 
in which the hearer would believe the speaker intended to 
refer to something else. Perrau\[t and Cohen (1981) show 
that a s}ightly weaker condition is adequate: the mutual 
belief preconditions have to hold in all but a finite number 
of cases. Nadathur and Josh| (1983) adopt a s(rat%oS" that 
amounts to assuming that if D is believed to apply to R. 
then it is also mutually believed to apply to R unless there 
is reason to believe that it is not. 
The case for some form of mutual belief ~ a prerequisite 
to a successful referring action is strong; however, spoakers 
oRen use noun phrases that should be analyzed .~s r,~fcren- 
tial in which it is clear from the context hat. n(~l ~ml.v i~ the 
description ot mutually believed tc~ h~d,l ~)f 'he }nt,m,led 
referent, but the speaker knows this is the ,':me ~vhcn he 
plans the utterance. For example, consider a situation in 
which the speaker is giving instructions to the hearer and 
says 
(5) Turn left at the third block past the ~toplight. 
This utterance might be reasonable ven if the hearer had 
never been to the intersection in question and the speaker 
and hearer have no mutual belief at the time of the utter- 
ance about the location to which the speaker intends to 
200 
refer. The hearer knows that the speaker can formulate a 
plan at the time of the utterance that will guarantee that 
he will have identified the referent of the description at the 
time that it is needed. 
This observation is one motivation for the distinction 
dra~n along the horizontal axis of Figure 1. There are 
really' two kinds of definite referring actions: one is that in 
which the precondition is mutual knowledge of a descrip- 
tion. and the other in which there is mutual knowledge of 
a plan incorporating the description to acquire additional 
knowledge. 
5 Definitions of Concept 
Activation Actions 
This section discusses each of the four major types of con- 
,-ept activation actions outlined in Section 3. The defi- 
nitions of the actions are not stated rigorously, but are 
intended to give the reader an intuitive understanding of
their preconditions and effects, and how they differ from 
each other. 
5.1 Shared Concept Activation with 
Identif ication Intent ion (SI) 
These actions are the only type of concept activation ac- 
ti,ms that were considered in the earlier KAMP research. 
SI actions are used most frequently in referring to past 
events and objects that are not perceptually accessible to 
the hearer. In such situations, the hearer can perform few, 
if any. actions to acquire more knowledge that would enable 
? him to identify' the referent of a description whose referent 
wa~ not already mutually known at the time of the utter- 
am'l,. 
SI Act ion:  The speaker S performs action SI with hearer 
H and term D 
Precond i t ions :  There is some term D' which is PF identi- 
fiable; S and H mutually believe that Denotation(D} =
Denotation(O'). 
Effect: H knows that S intends that the term D' be active, 
The preconditions of this action depend strictly on the 
mutual belief of the speaker and the hearer at the time of 
the utterance. The noun phrase in a sentence such aa 
(6) Use the same wrench you used to unfasten the pump. 
must arise from this type of action in normal situations of 
its use. because the description, based on a past event, does 
not facilitate any kind of plan for acquiring more informa- 
tion. 
When planning an utterance, the speaker knows the PF  
identifiable term, and his problem is to get the hearer to 
recognize the same term. Consistency with the Gricean 
maxim of quantity requires that the planned description be 
as simple or efficient as possible. There are several ways 
to measure the complexity of a description, including the 
number of descriptors involved and the ease with which 
these descriptors can be incorporated into the utterance. 
When planning an SI action, the planner's most important 
task is reasoning about the efficiency of the description. 
Concept activation actions that involve shared belief 
about the denotation of the description at the time of the 
utterance have the property that they are candidates for 
action subsumption. Because the information required to 
perform the identification can be communicated through a 
subset of the descriptors in the noun phra.se, or extralin- 
guistically through pointing actions or strong contextual 
cues, and because the precondition 
Denotation(D) = Denotation(D') 
is known to hold, the speaker can use the additional de- 
scriptors to inform the hearer that the dos,'riptors are true 
of the intended referent. 
5.2 Nonshared Concept Activation with 
Identi f icat ion Intent ion (NSI) 
This action is what a speaker does when he wants to refer to 
an object that is not known to the hearer, or for which the 
speaker and hearer do not mutually believe enough proper- 
ties at the time of the utterance so that identification can 
take place based on mutual knowledge. 
NS I  Act ion:  The speaker S performs acti,,n NSI with 
hearer H and term P. 
P recond i t ions :  S and H mutually believe that there is 
some plan P such that, if H executes P. then in the re- 
sulting state, there exists a \['F identifiable term P' such 
that H knows that Denotation(Pl = Dem;tation(DI), 
and 5" intends that H execute P. 
Eff~:ts: H knows that S intends that /) be active. 
The NSl action is used in situations in which ,'he speaker 
and hearer do not mutually know the denotation of the de- 
scription, yet. to realize the perlocutionary eff,.,:ts of the 
utterance, the hearer must be able to identify tile speaker'~ 
intended referent. This lack of mutual knowledge may oc- 
cur if the speaker can identify the referent from the de- 
scription, but the hearer cannot, as is most likely the case 
in example (5). Also, as is the case in example (7), the 
speaker may not be able to identify the referent, but nev- 
ertheless knows of a plan the hearer can execute that will 
lead to. the identification of the referent at the appropriate 
time. 
(7) Get me the largest tomato from the garden. 
201 
The speaker of sentence (7) is uttering an attributive de- 
scription, because he is probably not referring to a partic- 
ular tomato, but to whatever tomato fits his description. 
However, it is conceivable that he had a particular tomato 
in mind, and chose that description because he believed it 
would lead to the best plan for the hearer to identify it, 
and would, in that case, be referential. One can see from 
this example that the referential-attributive distinction is 
orthogonal to the distinctions motivated by utterance plan- 
ning, In both referential and attributive cases, the speaker 
knows that the right conditions on mutual knowledge are 
not satisfied for an SI action, and plans a description that 
he knows the hearer can use successfully. It does not mat- 
ter to the planner whether the description is referential or 
attributive - -  the same reasoning takes place in both cases 
with the same results. 
The NSI action depends on the hearer's ability to find the 
plan P. Therefore, the speaker must plan to furnish infor- 
mation as part of P that will make it as easy as possible for 
the hearer to formulate his plan. If the hearer has enough 
infomation to formulate P, then P is a useful description. 
It is possible for a speaker to formulate a description that, 
although it denotes the individual the speaker has in mind, 
is not useful because there is no plan the hearer can formu- 
late to take advantage of the description. An example of 
such a nonuseful description would be if S and H are riding 
a bus, H asks at what stop he should get off, to which S 
replies tone stop before I do /  The description "one stop 
before \[ do, ~ while being true of a unique location, is not 
a useful description, assuming that the hearer has recourse 
only to observing the speaker's actions. 
The reader may wonder if an SI action can be regarded as 
a degenerate case of the NSI action. In the case of the NSI 
action, the speaker and hearer mutually know of a plan that 
will result in identification of the intended referent, and in 
the case of the S\[ action, the plan is simply to do nothing, 
because the referent of the term is already mutually known. 
This is not the case, because the precondition of the SI 
action is that the speaker and hearer mutually believe both 
the description in the noun phrase and the PF identifiable 
description. In the case of the NSI action, the speaker and 
he=rer mutually believe that executing plan P will result 
in the hearer acquiring the required information, but, since 
only the hearer is actually executing the plan, the speaker 
and hearer may never meet the mutual belief condition of 
the SI action. Therefore it is possible to have an NSI action 
with a null plan, which is not equivalent o an SI action 
with the same description. For example, suppose a speaker 
wants a son to deliver an envelope to his father, and makes 
the request 
(8) Give this to your father. 
a~though the speaker does not know who the son's father 
is. In sentence (8) the speaker is using the description at- 
tributively because he has no particular individual in mind, 
just whoever fits the description. Furthermore, the speaker 
assumes that the son is capable of identifying his own fa- 
ther on the basis of knowledge he already has; therefore the 
plan for the hearer to identify the description is to do noth- 
ing. This is different from the SI action, in which there is 
some individual who is mutually believed to be the hearer's 
father. 
5.3 Shared Concept Activation with No 
Identif ication Intent ion (SNI) 
When a speaker performs an SNI action, he provides a de- 
scription, but he does not intend that the hearer try to 
identify its denotation. Therefore, the SNI action is not a 
referring action, because identification is an essential part 
of referring. The SNI action is used when a speaker has a 
belief involving some individual for whom he has a descrip- 
tion, but not a PF identifiable description, and intends that 
the hearer hold the same belief. 
SNI Act ion:  The speaker S performs action SNI with 
hearer H and term P. 
Precondi t ions:  S and H mutually believe that there ex- 
ists an individual R such that Denotation(P) = R. 
Effecti:  H knows that S intends that D be active. 
The primary effect of the SNI action is the same as the 
NSI action: it activates the term corresponding to the de- 
scription P. However, because the preconditions are dif- 
ferent, no intention to identify the description is communi- 
cated, ~md the ultimate effect of the action on the hearer's 
beliefs and intentions is therefore quite different. This type 
of action underlies the use of an attributive description 
when no identification is intended. This type of action has 
been discussed in the literature (Donellan, 1966: Kripke, 
1977) with the situation of two people discovering Smith's 
badly mutilated body, and one saying "The man who mur- 
dered Smith is insane." In this situation, the speaker is 
informing the hearer of something about the referent of the 
description ~man who murdered Smith." but does not know 
who this individual is, nor does he intend that the hearer 
identify him. However, there are conditions on the mutual 
belief of the speaker and hearer for the utterance to make 
sense. The speaker mad hearer must mutually beiieve that 
the dead man is Smith, that he was in fact murdered, and 
that it was a man who killed him. 
5.4 Nonshared Concept Activation with 
No Identif ication Intention (NSNI). 
N$NI  Act ion:  The speaker S performs action NSNI with 
hearer H and term D. 
Precondit ions:  No mutual belief preconditions. 
202 
Effects: H knows that S intends that the term D be active. 
Unlike the SNI action, the NSNI action does not require 
that the speaker and hearer share any knowledge about the 
denotation of the description prior to the utterance. This 
action is used by a speaker to introduce a new individual to 
the discourse, without intending that the hearer associate 
that individual with any that he already knows about. For 
example, a speaker says, =I met an old friend from high 
school yesterday." The speaker does not assume that the 
hearer shares any knowledge of his old high school friends, 
nor does he intend the hearer to identify the person he is 
talking about. The most important consideration for the 
planner in this case is to include enough information in the 
description D to serve the speaker's purpose in the rest of 
tile discmtrse. 
NSNl actions are most frequently realized by referential 
indefinite noun phrases (Fodor and Sag, 1982}. Such a noun 
phrase is indefinite, but it is clear from the context that 
there is some particular individual that is denoted by the 
description. 
6 Summary 
This paper has examined a class of actions called concept 
activation actions, in which a speaker communicates the in- 
tent that the hearer ecognize a particular description. The 
performance of one of these actions consists of uttering a 
noun phrase, either in isolation, or as part of a sentence. 
Therefore, the noun phrases resulting from the performance 
of a concept activation action are, in some sense, referen- 
tial. even though neither the speaker nor the hearer may 
kn,,w the noun phrase's denotation, either at the i'ime of 
the utterance or subsequently. 
While the four actions discussed in this paper account 
for a vor.v important class of noun phrzses, the class by 
n~, means exhausts all possibilities, and further rf'search 
is needed to understand the pragmatic nnsi~lerations rel- 
want r,~ other noun phrases. Some other noun-phrase x- 
amples of were discussed earlier, including quantiticational 
noun phrases and predicate nominals. Generics, and bare 
plurals will require additional analysis. There is also an ex- 
tremely =mportant class of concept activation actions that 
ha~ qol been discussed here, namely coreferrin9 actions, 
whi,'h ,'n~ail the activation of terms that. have already been 
irlt r,~du,'od to the discourse. 
This analysis of the actions underlying the production 
of noun phrases is of particular importance to utterance 
planning. Planning requires a characterization f actions 
that describes what their effects are, when they are appli- 
cable, and what strategies are available for their expansion. 
"\['he four actions described in this paper fill an important 
gap that has been left open in previous utterance-planning 
research. 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported, in part, by the National Sci- 
ence Foundation under grant DCR-8407238 and was made 
possible, in part, by a gift from the System Development 
Foundation to SRI International as part of a coordinated 
research program with the Center for the Study of Lan- 
guage and Informatiou at Stanford University. The author 
is grateful to Barbara Grosz and Ray Perrault for comments 
on earlier drafts of this paper. 
References  
Appelt, D. E., Planning English Sentences, Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press. Cambridge, UK (1985). 
Clark. H. and C. Marshall, "Definite Reference and Mutual 
Knowledge," in Joshi, Sag, and Webber (eds.} Element.~ 
of Discourse Understandin 9, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK (1981) pp. IO-63. 
Cohen, P. R., and C. R. Perrault, "Elements of a Plan 
Based Theory of Speech Acts," Cognitive Science 3 (1979) 
pp. 177-212. 
Cohen, P. R., "Referring ,an Requesting, ~ Proceedinqs of the 
Tenth International Conference on Computational Linguis- 
tics (1984) pp. 307--221. 
Cohen, P. R. and II. Levesque, "Speech Acts and the Recog- 
nition of Shared Plans," Proceedings of the Third Biennial 
Conference, Canadian Society for Computational Studies 
of Intelligence (1980). 
Cohen. P.R., "Pragmatics. Speaker-Reference, and the 
Modality of C.rmmmnication," Computational Linguistics 
10 (198-1) pp. 97- 1.16. 
Donetlan. K., "Reference and Definite Descriptions." Philo- 
sophical Review, 75 (19G6) pp. 281-3f}.1. 
l:.dor, .l. anti I. Sag, ":Referential and O uantificatioual \[n- 
definites." Linguistics and Philosophy 5 (1982) pp. 3.-3-1- 
398. 
Kripke, S., =Speaker Reference and Semantic Reference." 
in French, Uehling, and Wettstein tods.) (',)~temporary 
Perspectives in the Philosophy , f  Lan~j,age. I.'ni:'ersity ,~f 
Minnesota Press..Minneap~,lis. MS. (1977} pp 6-27. 
Nadathur. G. an,l A..l~shi. "'Mutual 13,qi,,f~ in (',,nvema- 
rional Systems: Tlmir Rob- in Referring E::pre~i,m~." Pra- 
ceedin,js ,ff the Eighth International .l,znt (',~n.&rcnce on 
Artificial \[ntelliyence. {198,q1 pp. 603-605. 
Perrault, C.R., and P.R. Cohen, "It's for Your Own Good: 
A Note on Inaccurate Reference." in .lo~hi. Sag. and Web- 
ber (eds.) Element.~ of Di.~rour.~e \['nderstar, din 9. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge. I.; K t 1981 !. 
Searle. J.R., Speech Acts. Cambridge l.'niversiLv Press. 
Cambridge, UK (1969). 
203 
