THE USE OF SYNTACTIC CLUES IN DISCOURSE PROCESSING 
Nan Decker 
1834 Chase Avenue 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45223, USA 
ABSTRACT 
The des i rab i l i ty  of  a syntact i c  pars ing  com- 
ponent in  natura l  language unders tand ing  sys tems 
has been the sub jec t  of  debate  fo r  the past  severa l  
years .  Th is  paper  descr ibes  an approach  to  auto -  
mar ie  text  p rocess ing  which i s  ent i re ly  based 
on syntact i c  form. A program i s  descr ibed  which 
processes  one genre  of d i scourse ,  that  of  news-  
paper  repor ts .  The program creates  summaries of  
repor ts  by re ly ing  on an expanded concept  of  text  
g round ing :  cer ta in  syntact i c  s t ruc tures  and tense /  
aspect  oa i rs  ind icate  the most impor tant  events  
in  a news s tory .  Suppor t ive ,  background mater ia l  
i s  a l so  h igh ly  coded syntact i ca l ly .  Cer ta in  types  
of  in fo rmat ion  are rout ine ly  expressed  wi th  
d i s t inc t  syntact i c  fo rms.  Where more than one 
ep isode  occurs  in a s ing le  repor t ,  a change of 
ep isode  w i l l  a l so  be marked syntact i ca l ly  in a 
re l iab le  way. 
INTRODUCTION 
The ro le  that  syntact i c  s t ruc ture  shou ld  play  
in natura l  language process ing  has been a mat ter  
of debate  in computat iona l  l ingu is t i cs .  While 
some researchers  eschew syntact i c  p rocess ing  as 
g iv ing  a poor re turn  on the heavy investment  of  a 
parser  (Schank and R iesbeck ,  1981) ,  o thers  make 
syntact i c  representat ions  the bas is  from which 
fu r ther  work i s  done (Sager ,  1981; Hi rschman and 
Sager, 1982). Current syntax-based processors 
tend to work only within a narrow semantic domain, 
s ince  they rely heav i ly  on word co -occur rence  
pat terns  which hold on ly  w i th in  texts  from a par t?  
i cu la r  sublangua&e.  Knowledge-based processors ,  
on the o ther  hand,  can operate  on a less  res t r i c ted  
semant ic  f ie ld ,  but  on ly  i f  su f f i c ient  knowledge in 
the form of  sc r ip ts ,  f rames ,  and so fo r th ,  i s  bu i l t  
in to  the program. 
This paper describes a syntactic approach to 
natural language processing which is not bound to 
a narrow semantic field, and which requires little 
or no world knowledge. This approach has been 
demonstrated in a computer program called DUMP 
(~iscourse Understanding model \[rogram), which 
relies solely on syntactic structure to create 
summaries of one particular genre of discourse-- 
that of newspaper repor ts - -and  to l abe l  the kinds 
of information given in them (Decker, 1985). The 
process for creating these summaries differs sub- 
stantially from the word-llst and statistical 
methods used by other automatic abstractor programs 
(Borko and Beru ie r ,  1975).  The DUMP program 
there fore  depends on a pred ic tab le  d i scourse  
genre  or  s ty le ,  ra ther  than a pred ic tab le  sub lang-  
uage lex icon  or  body of wor ld knowledge.  
DUMP was deve loped from a corpus of over 5800 
words represent ing  twenty - three  news repor ts  from 
three  da i ly  newspapers :  the  New York T imes,  the 
Boston Globe,  and the Prov idence  Journa l /Even in~ 
Bulletin. With one exception, each s tory  appeared 
in the upper right-hand column of the front page. 
The stories in the corpus were chosen randomly and 
the only criterion for rejection was too large a 
percentage of quoted material. Only the first two 
hundred words or so of each story were included in 
the corpus in order to allow a greater samplin~ 
of reports. The discourse principles at work are 
fairly represented in an excerpt o ~ this length. 
The input to the DUMP program consists of a 
llst of hand-~6rsed sentences making up each story. 
Ideaily,.these parse trees should be the output of 
a parsing program. ~n fact, about one-third of 
the sentences were passed through the RUS parser 
(Woods, 1973). RUS experienced difficulty with 
some of these sentences for a number of reasons: 
the parser was operating without a semantic compon- 
ent ,  and arcs from nodes were ordered with the 
expectation of feedback from semantics; RUS lacked 
some rules for structures which appear with regul- 
arlt 7 in the news; It attempted to give all the 
parses of a sentence, where DUMP only required one, 
and that not necessarily the correct or complete 
one (about which more later); and DUMP's rules 
call for certain syntactic labels which are not 
ordinarily assigned by parsing programs (negative 
and adversative clauses, for example). However, 
it should be stressed that none of these difficul- 
ties represents parsing problems of theoretical 
import. All could he resolved by extensions to 
existing components of the ATN and its dictionary. 
THE DISCOURSE STRUCTURE OF NEWS REPORTS 
The syntactic rules used by DUMP work because 
of the predictable, almost formu\[aic discourse 
structure of hard news reports~. Two journalistic 
devices above all else characterize hard news: 
the inverted pyramid, and the block paragraph 
(Green, 1979). The inverted pyramid refers to the 
convention of relating the most important facts of 
* Features ,  spor ts  repor ts ,  and so fo r th  have the i r  
own discourse structure. 
315 
a news s tory  in  the  f i r s t  paragraph ,  fo l lowed by 
less important information g iven  in descend ing  
order (or, it may be argued, random order) of im- 
portance. Thus, the news differs markedly from 
canonical story form in which material is given in 
chronological order. The block paragraph, the 
second device, is one which stands independent of 
paragraphs adjacent to it. This unit contains no 
Logica l  connect ives  (however,  in add i t ion ,  ~ore -  
over)  which l ink  i t  to p reced ing  or fo l low ing  
paragraphs .  The avo idance  of such connect ives  
a l lows the newspaper ed i to r  to qu ick ly  de le te  
paragraphs  from a s to ry  in  the  morning ed i t ion  
to f i t  in to  the  even ing  ed i t ion  w i thout  rewr i t ing .  
The b lock paragraph  i s  shor t :  over  s ix ty  percent  
of the paragraphs in the corpus are only one sent- 
ence long; about one-half have two sentences, and 
less than one percent have three sentences. The 
effect is that most sentences of the  report are 
presented at the same level of importance: there 
is no orthographic unit larger than the sentence 
which reliably indicates that a group of sentences 
is related topically or episodically. In place of 
the normal paragraph, we shall see, is a highly 
reliable level of syntactic coding which links 
sentences  in to  episodes. 
At a lower level of organization than the in- 
verted pyramid and block paragraph are the two 
discourse units which DUMP relies on: the episode, 
and within the episode, the information field as 
found in the detached clause. 
News repor ts  may conta in  more than one ep isode .  
A new ep isode  beg ins  when the set  of characters  
and/or  se t t ing  ( tempora l  or geograph ica l )  changes .  
The detached clause is def ined  Intonatlonally: 
it is bounded by pauses, has falling intonation 
at the end, or is preceded by a clause with fall- 
ing intonation (Thompson, 1983). This clause is 
almost always set off in text with commas. So, 
for example, the following sentence from the 
ninth story in the corpus ("Ararat Forces Lose 
Key Position," Boston Globe, November 7, 1983) 
consists of four detached clauses, or information 
fields: 
(9:3)~ Arafat's soldiers, who resisted the 
assault, fell back sir miles to Beddawi, 
the remaining PiO stronghold in the area, 
and Nahr el Bared is now surrounded by Syrian 
soldiers .... 
The information fields here are: a nonrestric- 
tive relative clause ("who resisted the assault"), 
an appositive ("the remaining PLO stronghold in 
the area"), and two main clauses ("Arafat's 
soldiers fell back..." and "Nahr el Bared is now 
surrounded..."). 
There are a small number of syntactic forms 
which reliably indicate the beginning of new 
episodes. Likewise, there is a strong correlation 
* The first number indicates the story in the 
corpus, the second the number of the sentence 
within that story. 
between the category of information the Journalist 
conveys in each detached clause and the syntactic 
structures used for its expression. For example, 
the nonrestrictive relative clause in 9:3 expresses 
background events, the appositive expresses  an 
identif ication of place, and the two main clauses 
express a main event and a current state, respect- 
ively. The next two sections will Look at the 
syntactic correlates of the information field and 
the  ep isode  boundary in  detail. 
Syntactic Correlates of the Information Field 
The syntact i c  ru les  used by DUMP re f lec t  
g round ing  pr inc ip les  found un iversa l ly  in  d i s -  
course  (Gr imes,  1975).  Cer ta in  asser t iona l  s t ruc -  
tu res  in  text deliver foreground information, which 
tells the events of the narrative and moves the 
story forward. These events comprise a summary of 
the story. Less assertional structures are used to 
express background, supportive information which 
fleshes out the skeleton provided in the foreground 
but does not move the action forward. There is a 
strong correlation between the syntactic form and 
information type of this supportive material which 
allows DUMP to subcategorize it into the following 
classes: past  events and processes Leading up to 
the most recent development in the story; plans for 
the future; current state of the world; informa- 
tion of secondary impor tance ;  identifications; 
import of the story; effects of actions; comments 
made by participants in the story; and collateral 
(things which did not happen). 
This division of material into foreground vs. 
background gives text its texture. A narrative 
in which everything is presented at the same level 
of prominence tends to be monotonous. One of the 
chief means of distinguishing foreground from 
background is tense and aspect, which has been 
called a sort of flow-of-control mechanism, allow- 
in K the reader to pick out the most important parts 
of a discourse (Hopper, 1979). Sentences with 
simple past verbs in the active voice are the 
chief conveyors of foreground material in news. 
This fact recalls the broader concept of transi- 
tivit 7 put forth by Hopper and Thompson (1980), 
whereby certain properties of the verb and its 
arguments transfer the action from agent to patient 
more effectively than others. Foregrounded clauses 
have high transitivity, backgrounded clauses low 
transitivity. 
High transitivity verbs are kinetic, relic, 
punctual, volitional, affirmative, and realis. 
Kinetic verbs allow easy transfer of action from 
subject to object. Throw is therefore kinetic, 
while the copular to be is not. Telic verbs are 
those which express an action with a natural end- 
poin=. The verb make ia "John is making a chair" 
is relic, while the verb sin 5 in "John is singing" 
is not .  Telic and atelic verbs can be ~istin- 
guisned by their entailments: if John is interrup- 
ted while making a chair, it is not true thac he 
has made a chair, but if he is interrupted while 
singing, it is still true that he has sung (Comrie, 
1976). Punctual verbs (sneeze, kick) refer to 
actions with no obvious internal structure. 
Study and carr~ are examples of non-punctual verbs. 
316 
Vo l i t iona l  verbs  ("T wrote  h i s  name") have greater  
t rans i t i v i ty  than  non-vo l i t iona l  verbs  ("~ fo rgot  
h i s  name") (Hopper  and Thompson, 1980, p. 252).  
Affirmation distinguishes collateral information 
from all other types. And finally, the realis 
mode d is t ingu ishes  events  which have ex is ted  from 
those  which on ly  might  have or  would have .  Main 
event  c lauses  there fore  never  conta in  moda ls .  The 
d i f fe rent ia l  behav ior  o f  verbs  from these  semant ic  
c lasses  has been descr ibed  by a number of  taxon-  
omers (Comrie,  1976; Moure la tos ,  1981; Ota,  1963; 
Vend ler ,  1967).  
Arguments high in transitivity are those which 
are  strong agents ,  totally affected and h igh ly  
ind iv iduated .  S t rong  agents  a re  human ra ther  than 
non-human: "George startled me" has more transi- 
tivit 7 than "The picture startled me" (Hopper and 
Thompson, 1980, p.252). Objects which are wholly 
af fec ted  lend greater  t rans i t i v i ty  than those  which 
are  on ly  par t ia l l y  a f fec ted  ( " I  drank the mi lk"  
vs .  " I  drank some mi lk" ) .  L ikewise ,  more h igh ly  
ind iv iduated  o - -~e~def ined  as proper ,  human or 
an imate ,  concrete ,  s ingu lar ,  count  and def in i te ,  
add more t rans i t iv i ty  than less  ind iv iduated  ones .  
These t rans i t iv i ty  parameters  assume a good 
dea l  of semant ic  knowledge about  verbs  and the i r  
a rguments .  In  fac t ,  the a f f i rmat ive  and rea l i s  
features  are  the on ly  ones re f lec ted  Ln DUMP's 
ru les .  But in another  respect ,  Hopper and Thomp- 
son 's  not ion  of t rans i t i v i ty  must be extended.  An  
examinat ion  of  tense  and aspect  a lone  i s  not  
su f f i c ient  to d i s t ingu ish  fo reground from back-  
ground in the DUMP corpus .  The type of  c lause  In 
which the verb  appears  i s  a l so  c ruc ia l .  So, fo r  
example,  the s imple  past  may be used to convey both  
fo reground and background mater ia l ,  depend ing on 
the type of c lause  in which i t  occurs :  in main 
c lauses ,  i t  w i l l  a lways convey the most recent  
events  in a s to ry ,  wh i le  in re la t ive  c lauses ,  i t  
w i l l  a lways convey past  events .  The f i r s t  two 
sentences  of s to ry  6 ( "S tone  Meets w i th  Sa lvador  
Rebel  Of f i c ia l , "  Boston GLobe, August 1, 1983) 
i l l us t ra te  the d i s t inc t  uses  of  the two c lause  
types .  
(6:i) After weeks of maneuvering and frus- 
tration, presidential envoy Richard B. Stone 
met face-to-face yesterday for the first time 
with a key Leader of the  Salvadoran guerril la 
movement. 
Here, the simple past is used in a main clause to 
foreground information. 
(6:Z) "The ice has been broken," proclaimed 
President BeLisario Betancur of  Co lombia,  
who eng ineered  the meeting. 
The simple past engineered in a relative clause 
indicates background material. 
The information-bearing capacities of these 
two clause types, when they occur with the simple, 
active past, are in complementary distribution in 
newswriting. The main clause is more assertionaL 
than the relative clause; it is used to give 
information which the writer assumes the reader is 
seeing for the  first time. The relative clause, 
on the other hand, is more presuppositionaL. The 
writer uses it to  convey o ld  information which is 
of Lesser importance or which the reader may 
already have knowledge of. 
Sentences 6:i and 6:Z il lustrate the way in 
which syntactic forms provide information which 
might otherwise need to be culled from world know- 
Ledge. We know that the planning of a meeting pre- 
cedes its occur rence ,  but  no such knowledge is 
necessary  here ,  s ince  the  past  verb  form in a re l -  
a t ive  c lause  s igna ls  an event  which occur red  be fore  
the  main event .  
The so-called "hot news" present perfect i- a 
main clause ("The president has resigned") signals 
a main event if it occurs in the first sentence of 
a story. Its appearance further down or in a nou- 
main clause signals information about past events 
or states. Two sentences from story 16 ("Peron- 
ists Suffer Stunning Defeat in Argentine Vote," 
New York Times, November I, 1983) illustrate this. 
(16 :1)  The Leader o f  a midd le -c lass  par ty  
has swept to victory in  Argentina's presi- 
dential elections .... 
(16:4) The e~?~on,  called by the ruling 
military, was a stunning defeat for the 
Perou is ts ,  who have dominated Argent ina 's  
political Life since their party was founded 
in 1945 by Juan Domin~o Peron. 
I n  16:1,  the present  per fec t  has swept i s  used 
in  the hot  news sense.  In  16:4 ,  the present  per -  
fec t  have dominated Ls used in a re la t ive  c lause  
w i th  an adverb ia l  phrase  ( "s ince  the i r  par ty  was 
founded in 1945. . . " )  to descr ibe  a s ta te  that  has 
ex is ted  fo r  decades .  Note a l so  that  the verb 
dominate  i s  a te l i c  and non-punctua l ,  and there fore  
Low in transitivity. However, knowledge of the 
verb's semantic class is not necessary to identify 
the relative clause as supportive. The mere fact 
that the verb is in a relative clause or the fact 
that  the present  per fec t  appears af ter  the f i r s t  
sentence  suffices. 
Syntactic clues may be used to avoid the need 
for time programs which determine the relative 
timing of events by interpreting adverbials. The 
following main clauses use the present perfect, but 
since they are non-initial, the states and events 
referred to in them must have occurred before the 
main event in the story ("O'Neill Now Calls Gren- 
ada Invasion 'Justified' Action," New York Times, 
November 9, 1983). 
(19 :5)  Pressures  to pass a s t r i c t  60-day 
Legal  l im i t  \ [ to  the s tay  o f  U.S. t roops  in  
Grenada\]  have eased in  the past  week. 
(19 :6)  Both houses have passed such measures,  
but  the Senate vers ion  has been bot t led  up 
because i t  was a t tached to a debt -ce i l ing  b i l l .  
(i~:7) Other versions of the 60-day War Powers 
Resolution have been introduced but not acted 
upon. 
The appearance  of  the present  per fec t  th i s  fa r  
317 
i n to  the s tory  means that  the t ime phrase  in  the  
past  week does not  have to be in terpreted  by a t ime 
program.  
L ikewise ,  the use of  the  pass ive  s imple  past  in 
a main c lause  ind icates  that  the  event  i s  suppor t ive  
material: main events, it turns out, are never 
expressed with passive voice in the corpus. In 
story 14 ("U.S. Says Moscow Threatens to Quit 
Talks on Missiles," New York Times, October 12, 
1983) ,  there  i s  no need to in terpret  the adver -  
b ia l  in  1980 and in 1979 w i th  a t ime program,  
un less  re la t ive  order ing  of  background events  is 
des i red .  The mere presence  of  the pass ive  marks 
these  events  as occur r ing  be fore  the  t ime of  
the main events in the story. 
(14 :8)  Ta lks  on a comprehens ive  tes t  ban of 
nuc lear  dev ices  were suspended in Geneva 
in  1980, and the Geneva negot ia t ions  were 
suspended in  1979. 
Main events  then are  expressed  in  main c lauses  
w i th  s imple  past  verbs .  Events  and s ta tes  which 
ex is ted  be fore  these  main events  are  expressed  
w i th  a greater  var ie ty  of  syntact i c  fo rms,  from 
main c lauses ,  to re la t ive  and subord inate  c lauses ,  
down to noun phrases (which are not analyzed by 
DUMP). Nominalizations are perhaps the most fre- 
quent conveyors of background information In the 
news. The nominalization rule transforms a sent- 
ence into a noun phrase which can then be inserted 
into another sentence. St is a highly presupposi- 
t iona i  s t ruc ture ,  s ince  the sub jec t  and ob jec t  
of  the or ig ina l  verb  are  o f ten  de le ted  dur ing  the 
t rans format ion  and the  reader  must then supp ly  
these  arguments  from wor ld knowledge.  An ~xampie 
from the second s tory  in the corpus  ( "Lebanon 
Needs Israeli Troops ,  Shu l tz  To ld , "  Boston Globe,  
March 14, 1983) shows the heavy use of nominaii- 
zations to create a very long prepositions\[ phrase 
which contains not a single verb: 
(Z:2)  In the f i r s t  h igh -Leve l  contacts  
between the two governments  ince  the s tar t  
ear ly  this year  of OS- Is rae i i - Lebanese  
ne~ot ia t ions  on the  w i thdrawa l  of I s rae l ' s  
forces from Lebanon, .... 
We wi l l  see o ther  uses  of nomina l i za t lon  to express  
o ther  in fo rmat ion  categor ies  and to re fer  to 
episodes with a single word. 
The following incomplete llst gives a cursory 
look at the strong correlation between the remain- 
ing information categories in news reports and the 
syntactic forms used to express them. Most of the 
examples are from story 6, about envoy Stone's 
meeting with a Salvadoran guerril la Leader, and 
story 16, about the defeat of the Peronists in 
Argentina's elections. The next two categories, 
Current States and Plans, also locate events or 
states in time, and therefore must occur in finite 
clauses. - 
Current States: This category describes the 
scale of the world at the time the report is 
written. Current states are expressed with simple 
present  or p resent  progress ive  verbs  used in main 
c lauses  and in  subord inate  and re la t ive  c lauses .  
(6:10)  Stone has repeated ly  sought  to meet 
w i th  po l i t i ca l  Leaders  of  the  Sa lvadoran  
le f t ,  a l l  of  whom l ive  in ex i le ,  . . . .  
(16=11) The country Mr. Alfonsin is due 
to govern is racked by a deep economic crisis. 
Plans: These may be expressed with appropr ia te  
modals (will, ~ ,  would) in the same struc- 
tures used fo r  Current States. 
(6 :10)  His miss ion  i s  to encourage  par t i c ipa -  
t ion  by the  left in  Sa lvadoran  e lec t ions ,  
which w i l l  p robab ly  be he ld  in  March 198~. 
(16:10)  M i l i ta ry  o f f i c ia l s  sa id  the ru l ing  
junta  would cons ider  i t  in a meet ing  Tuesday.  
Cer ta in  verbs  which express  present  planning 
(come , go , leave ,  s ta r t )  can be used to ind icate  
future time with the present  tense: "Fiscal year 
1983, which begins Oct. 1 .... ". 
It seems to be a discourse principle of Jour- 
nalese that while non-main events may be "promo- 
ted" to expression by the most assertive clause 
type, they may also be expressed with less asser- 
tional forms: subordinate and relative clauses, 
nominailzations, etc. The converm, however, is 
not true. Main events may never by "demoted" to 
expression by any other than the most assertive 
form. 
The remaining information types do not Locate 
actions in time, and therefore are free to appear 
in constructions without finite verbs. 
Import: This category is occasionally 
expressed with equative sentences of the form: 
NP V-be NP. The subject and predicate NPs tend 
to be nominaLizations, with the former referring 
to the main episode. 
(16:4) The election...was a stunning defeat 
for the Peronists .... 
E lect ion  re fers  to the main event  in t roduced in 
16 : i .  16:4 te l l s  why that  event  i s  newswor thy .  
Nonrest r i c t ive  PPs w i th  nomina l i za t ions  as 
heads  may a l so  express  Impor t :  
(4 :1)  The. . .Budget  Committee, in  a major 
blow to Pres ident  Ronald Reagan, voted 
yesterday to hold the real growth in defense 
spending to 5 percent next year .... ("Senate 
Panel Trims Reagan Arms Budget," Boston GLobe, 
April 8, 1983) 
Identifications: With only one exception, all 
identifications in the corpus are made with pre- 
nominal modifiers ("Prime Minister Smith") or 
with appositives, which may be embedded recur- 
s iveLy :  
(6 :3)  . . .S tone . . . ta lked  w i th  Ruben Zamora, 
the No. 2 Leader of the Revo lu t ionary  Demo- 
318 
crat i c  F ront ,  the :po l i t i caL  arm of the f i ve  
Marx is t - led  guer r i l l a  bands f ight ing  gov-  
ernment fo rces  here .  
E f fec ts :  Detached par t i c ip ia l  phrases  are used 
to tell the effects of the actions described in 
main c lauses .  
(16:1) The leader of a middle-class party 
has swept to victory in Argentina's presi- 
dential elections, handin~ the union-based 
Peronists their first election defeat ~n 
near ly  four  decades .  
Comments: Comments are s imply  quotat ions  from 
people invo lved in an event .  While in o ther  nar ra -  
t i ves ,  d ia logue  i s  o f ten  the ch ie f  means of te l l -  
ing a s to ry  and moving the ac t ion  forward,  th i s  i s  
not  the  case  in  newswr i t ing .  Mere, quotes  from 
par t i c ipants  add f lavor  and g ive  supp lementary  
information, but they are never the so le  veh ic le  
for informing readers of an event. This is a 
lucky fact, sSnce the syntactic forms used in 
quoted speech are usually much less constrained 
than those in non-quoted portions. 
(16:5) "We are entering a new stage," the 
56-year old Mr. Alfonsin, whose politics 
are Left  of center, said in a television 
i n te rv iew ear ly  today.  
Collateral: News reports tell what did not 
happen in a story, what events and processes 
never were, with surprising frequency. This 
information category is expressed by negations of 
c lauses ,  including negat ive  ex is tent ia l s ,  neg- 
ative subord inate  c lauses ,  and var ious  negat ive  
prefixes and prenominal modifiers. 
(6:7) Salvadoran officials had no immediate 
comment on what they heard from Stone .... 
(6 :9)  Stone had been unable  to a r range  a 
meet ing with the Sa lvadoran  rebe l  leaders . . .  
earlier this month. 
If it were the case that the correspondence 
between a syntactic form and the information types 
it expresses was one-to-many, this relation would 
not be of much help in automatic processing. In 
fact, the correspondence is closer to one-to-one, 
so that, for example, equatives only express im- 
port and not identifications, as would be natural 
in conversational English ("Smith is mayor of the 
city"). 
DUMP was success fu l  in creating good summaries 
and labeling the information types for all but two 
of the twenty-three stories in the corpus. These 
two exceptions were highly eventful, chronological 
accounts and DUMP had difficulty distinguishing 
minor events from major ones. in addition, after 
the completion of the program, it performed well 
with a final story not from the corpus. 
Syntact i c  Cor re la tes  of Episode Boundar ies  
About one-thlrd of the stories in the DUMP 
corpus consist of more than one episode. Story 17, 
given here with its DUMP-derived analysis of infor- 
mation, contains three minor episodes in addition 
to the major one introduced in the first sentence 
of the report. The discussion below of syntactic 
forms used to indicate episode boundar ies  will 
call upon this story for examples. 
Story 17 
The New York Times, November 4, 1983 
"Senate Approves Secret U.S. Action 
Against Managua" 
By Martin Tolchin 
Special to  the New York Times 
Washington, Nov. 3 - i. The Senate today 
approved by voice vote continued aid for covert 
operations In Nicaragua. Z. The approval was 
made contingent upon notif ication to the intelli- 
gence committee of the goals and risks of specific 
cover t  p ro jec ts .  
3. The act ion  would prov ide  on ly  $19 mi l l i on  
of the $50 mill ion that the Administration sought 
for covert operations in Central America, mostly 
in Nicaragua. 4. Those funds are expected to run 
out in less than six months, when the Central 
Intelligence Agency would have to give an account 
of its activities as it sought the rest of the 
funds. 
5. The vote followed an hourLong debate that 
focused on covert United States activity in Nicar- 
agua, which was banned in a Mouse-passed bill. 
6. The Mouse bill would provide $50 mill ion in open 
assistance to any friendly Central American govern- 
ment. 7. Mouse and Senate conferees will now seek 
to resolve differences in the two measures, and 
the Nicaraguan dispute is expected to be a stumb- 
ling block in the negotiations. 
Judge Orders Investigation 
8. In San Francisco, a Federal district judge 
ordered Attorney General Will iam French Smith to 
conduct a preliminary investigation of charges that 
President Reagan and other Government officials 
v io la ted  the Neutrality Act by supporting the 
activities of paramilitary groups seeking to over- 
throw the Nicaraguan government. 9. The ruling 
came in a lawsuit filed by Representative Ronaid 
V. DeLLums, Democrat of California \[Page A9\]. 
I0. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New 
York Democrat who is vice chairman of the Intell- 
igence Committee, told the Senate that the Admin- 
istration had modified its covert policy Last 
summer, and was not supporting the insurgents 
seeking to overthrow the Sandinista government .  
Summary of Main Events: The Senate today approved 
by voice vote continued aid for covert operations 
in Nicaragua. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan 
told the Senate that the Administration had 
? Dump does not analyze either subtitles, which n~t 
all newspapers use, or titles. 
319 
modi f ied  i t s  cover t  po l i cy  las t  summer and was 
not  suppor t ing  the  bnsurgents  seek ing  to over throw 
the Sandinlsta government. 
Past  Events :  . . .wh ich  \ [cover t  US ac t iv i ty  in  
N icaragua\ ]  was banned in  a House-passed  b i l l .  
Cur rent  S ta te :  Those  funds  are  expected  to run  out  
in  less  than  s ix  months .  
. . . the  Nicaragua d ispute  is expected  to be 
a stumbling block in the negotiations. 
P lans :  Sentence  3.  
. . .when \ [ in  Less  than  s ix  months \ ]  the  Cent ra l  
In te lL igence  Agency would have  to g ive  an account -  
ing  o f  i t s  ac t iv i t ies  as I t  sought  the  res t  o f  
the  funds .  
Sentence  6. 
House and Senate  conferees  w i l l  now seek  to  
reso lve  d i f fe rences  in  the  two measures .  
Secondar ) , : *  The approva l  was made cont ingent  upon 
not i f i ca t ion  to  the  in te l l igence  commit tee  o f  the  
goa ls  and r i sks  o f  spec i f i c  cover t  p ro jec ts .  
Ident i f i ca t ions :  . . .Moyn ihan ,  the  New York Democrat  
who i s  v i ce  cha i rman o f  the  In te l l igence  Commit tee .  
The remain ing  uncategor i zed  sentences  a re  
ep isode  markers  and w i l l  be d i scussed  be low.  
* * * * * 
As noted  ear l ie r ,  o r thograph ic  paragraphs  are  
not  used  in  newswr i t tng  to ind icate  ep isode  
boundar ies .  In  the i r  p lace  are  a smal l  number  o f  
const ruc t ions  wh ich  regu lar ly  in t roduce  new 
ep isodes ,  re la t ing  them tempora l ly  to  p rev ious  
ep isodes .  These  s t ruc tures  inc lude  the  doub le  
conta iner  sentence ,  the  sentence  in t roduced  w i th  
a won- res t r i c t ive  locat ion  PP, the  L inkS ,  and the  
detached  t ime adverb ia l  w i th  a nominaL iza t iou  in  
i t .  
The f i r s t  four  sentences  o f  s~ovy 17 concern  
the  m=%n ep isode .  A new, minor  ep isode  i s  in t ro -  
duced by the  doub le  conta iner  in  sentence  5. Th is  
k ind  o f  s t ruc ture  has  a verb  f rom the  smal l  c lass  
(e .g .  p recede ,  fo l low,  resu l t  in )  wh ich  may take  
a nomina l i za t ion  in  both  sub jec t  and ob jec t  pos i -  
t i on .  The sub jec t  re fe rs  to  an o ld  ep isode  and the  
ob jec t  to  a new one .  
(17 :5 )  The vote  fo l lowed an hour long  debate  
that  focused  on cover t  Un i ted  S ta tes  
ac t iv i ty  in  N icaragua  . . . .  
The sub jec t  vote  re fe rs  back to  the  s to ry ' s  
main  event ,  the  Senate  vote  in  the  f i r s t  sentence .  
The ob jec t ,  or  new ep isode ,  i s  the  nomina l i za t ton  
debate .  The ob jec t  a l so  te l l s  o f  another  ep isode  
concern ing  passage  of  a House b i l l .  Th i s  b i l l  
ep i sode  i s  deve loped  in  17:6  and 17 :7 .  
The second minor  ep isode  i s  in t roduced  w i th  a 
* Th is  ca tegory  i s  not  a very  re l iab le  one .  I t  
inc ludes  c lauses  w i th  pass ives  and copu las .  
s imp le  detached  PP o f  locat ion  in  17 :8 .  Th is  
s t ruc ture  i s  used  to sh i f t  the  set t ing  f rom the  
date l ine  locat ion  to  a new p lace .  In  th i s  case ,  
the  ac t ion  moves f rom Wash ington  to  San F ranc isco :  
(17 :8 )  In  San F ranc isco ,  a Federa l  d i s t r i c t  
Judge  ordered  At to rney  Genera l  Wi l l i am French  
Smi th  to  conduct  a p re l im inary  invest igat ion  
o f  charges  that  P res ident  Reagan and o ther  
Government  o f f i c ia l s  v io la ted  the  Neut ra l i ty  
Act  . . . .  
Th i s  ep isode  i s  not  deve loped  any fu r ther  in  
th i s  repor t ,  but  i s  in te r rupted  in  the  next  sent -  
euce ,  a L inkS ,  by the  th i rd  minor  ep isode .  The 
Links Is of the form: 
The nomina l i zed  sub jec t  re fe rs  back  to  a p rev ious  
ep isode  and the  ob jec t  o f  came re fers  to a new 
ep isode .  The con junct  o r  ~r - -~os i t ion  shows the  new 
ep isode 's  tempora l  re la t ion  to  the  o ld .  
(17 :9 )  The ru l ing  came in  a lawsu i t  f i l ed  
by Representat ive  Rona ld  V. De i lums,  Democrat  
o f  Ca l i fo rn ia .  \ [Page AP. I 
The lawsu i t  ep isode  i s  deve loped  e l sewhere  in  
the  paper .  The page re ference  c loses  th i s  
ep isode ,  and there fore ,  s ince  17:10 conta ins  no 
re fe rence  to a new p lace  or  t ime,  and has  a s imp le  
past  main  verb  (~oLd) ,  i t  must  by de fau l t  be par t  
o f  the  o r ig ina l ,  ma in  ep isode .  Th is  dec is ion  i s  
suppor ted  by the  e leventh  sentence  in  the  s to ry  
(not included in the corpus): 
Af ter  th i s  po l i cy  change ,  Mr. Moyn ihan sa id ,  
the  commit tee  approved  add i t iona l  funds .  
There  i s  no example  o f  the  f ina l  ep isode  
marker  in  s to ry  17- - the  sentence  in t roduced  by a 
detached  t ime adverb ia l  w i th  a nomina l i za t ion  in  a 
time phrase ("Two hours before the vote"; "During 
the Pope's visit")? The nomlnalization refers to 
a previous episode and the main sentence to which 
the  whole  adverb ia l  phrase  i s  a t tached  in t roduces  
the  new ep isode .  S tory  10 ( "F rench  Je ts  KetaL ia te ,  
H i t  Sh i i te  Pos i t ions , "  Boston  GLobe, November 18,  
L983) begins vith French planes bombing Iranian- 
backed militia in Lebanon. A related episode 
starts in sentence 5: 
(10:5) Six hours after the French air attacks, 
gunmen f i red  rocket -propeL led  grenades  and 
automat ic  weapons a t  a F rench  peacekeep in~ post  
in  the  Sh i i te  Moslem ne ighborhood  o f  Khand ik  
Ghamik in West Beirut. 
Each ep isode  in  a repor t  has  the  potent ia l  to  
conta in  i t s  own main  events ,  background events ,  
p lans ,  cur rent  s ta tes ,  ident i f i ca t ions ,  and so 
forth. An extension of DUMP's labeling ability 
would be the creation of a discourse tree for each 
news report, with a root node dominating episode 
nodes, which in turn dominate relevant information 
categor ies .  
320 
THE DUMP PROGRAM 
DUMP works very  s imply .  I t  takes  as input  
parsed  sentences  of  a s to ry  and searches  through 
them for  the k inds  of  syntact i c  labe ls  descr ibed  
above (dec la ra t ive  sentence ,  detached PP, e tc . ) .  
These labe ls  in t roduce  in fo rmat ion  f ie lds ,  each of  
which is stored on a stack. A set of rules is 
then  app l ied  to  each ent ry  on the  s tack ,  and 
ass ignment  of  each ent ry  made Co one of  the  
information categories on the basis of the struc- 
tural label and optional tense/aspect marker. 
DUMP does not  need a fu l l  parse  of  a sentence  
to assign syntactic structures to a partlcular 
information category. For example, it does not 
need to know anything about the attachment of 
clause-lnternal PPs, a difficult problem for 
parsing programs. Furthermore, newswriting (with 
the  except ion  of quoted  por t ions ,  which DUMP does 
not  need parsed)  does not  re f lec t  the use  of  a 
fu l l  grammar of  Eng l i sh .  The corpus  conta ins  no 
quest ion  forms and a number of  the "s ty l i s t i c "  
transformations (pseudo-cleft, coplcaLizatlon 
are examples) do not appear. The question of 
whether some kind of "fuzzy" parser with a limited 
number of  ru les  could  prov ide  adequate  output  fo r  
DUMP is  one ~or fu r ther  research .  
On the o ther  hand,  whatever  parser  i s  used to 
prepare  input  fo r  DUMP wi l l  need cer ta in  labe ls  
not  o rd inar i~y  found in  parse  t rees :  sentences  are  
not  usually d is t ingu ished  as equat ive  or  doub le  
conta iner  in type .  Fur thermore ,  DUMP requ i res  
some non-s tandard  features  on words .  For example,  
we have seen in  a number of  ins tances  how cruc ia l  
i t  i s  to mark nouns as nomina l i za t ions .  
RELATION TO OTHER WORK 
The DUMP program embodies pr inc ip les  use fu l  
both  to the process ing  of  sub languages  and to AI 
research. In the former case, these principles 
allow preliminary automatic processing of texts 
within the same genre, regardless of the breadth 
of the semantic field. As noted earlier, current 
work with subLanguages relies on word co-occur- 
rence c lasses  which resu l t  from the i r  very  
const ra ined  sub jec t  mat ter .  Newswr i t ing  covers  a 
wide range of  top ics  and there fore  word co -occur -  
rence  classes are not an efficient method of 
automat ic  p rocess ing .  However, these  repor ts  do 
show pred ic tab le  const ra in ts  in  the use of  syn-  
tac t i c  constructions to express particular kinds 
of information and it is this regularity that DUMP 
depends upon. 
In  the case  of AI research ,  DUMP can serve  as 
a suppor t  program to knowledge-based  processors .  
The FRUMP program (DeJong,  L979), fo r  example,  
creates summaries from sketchy scripts by looking 
fo r  key requests ,  or  main events ,  in the text .  
So, the sc r ip t  fo r  an ear thquake  s tory  might  
conta in  key requests  fo r  in fo rmat ion  about  the 
quake 's  rating on the R ichter  Sca le ,  the  amount 
of  p roper ty  damage I t  d id ,  where the ep icenter  
was located ,  and how far  shock waves were fe l t .  
FRUMP would then  look to  the  newspaper  text  fo r  
ev idence  of  each of  the  key requests  in  the sc r ip t .  
The scripts are written by the programmer, based 
on his or her assumption of the most important 
information likely to be found in  all stories 
about a particular topic. DUMP is feted from 
reliance on such scripts because of the fact that 
the news reporter, however unconsciously, encodes 
key requests syntactically. DUMP can locate these 
key requests easily and also signal the beginning 
of new elpsodes, thus facilitating one of the tasks 
which FRUMP finds most difflcu~t--thafi of script 
selection. (Imaglne the confusion that could 
result in scot 7 17 when the Congressional script 
is interrupted in the eighth sentence by an 
episode requiring a judicial script.) Once all 
of the detached clauses and episodes in a report 
have been correctly ~abeLled by DUMP, a knowledge- 
based processor could then go about building 
conceptua l  representat ions  fo r  each un i t .  
I t  i s  expected  that  DUMP's approach  cou ld  be 
extended to o ther  genres  of  wr i t ing ,  s ince  most 
texts  ach ieve  texture  by d i s t ingu ish ing  fo reground 
from background.  However, texts  vary  in the pro -  
por t ion  of  fo regrounded to backgrounded mater ia l  
and in their pref~ence for certain forms to convey 
grounding. The literary style of a discourse will 
therefore influence the design of automatic text 
processing programs. The style of news reports is 
re la t ive ly  subord inated ,  non- redundant ,  and pred i -  
catlonaiiy dense. The sentences in the DUMP corpus 
average 2.88 predications per sentence, as compared 
to a high of 2.78 in the informative sections of 
the Brown corpus and 2.6A across all genres 
(Francis and Kucera, 1982). The term predication 
refers co both the flniCe and non-flnlCe types, and 
therefore the 2.88 figure indicates that the news 
corpus is characterized by a great deal of embedd- 
ing of both types: finite clauses (relative clause~ 
adverbial clauses), and well as non-finites (infin- 
itive complements, reduced relatives, participials). 
I t  can be hypothes ized  that  a h igh ly  pred icated  
wr i t ing  s ty le  such as Journa lese  w i l l  show greater  
var ie ty  in  i t s  syntact i c  s t ruc tures  than  a s ty le  
w i th  few pred icat ions  per  sentence .  Th is  syntact i c  
diversity will reflect a text with less fore- 
grounded mater ia l - - in  shor t ,  a text  w i th  greater  
texture .  A fu r ther  hypothes is  i s  that  in a pred i -  
ra t iona l ly  dense s ty le  there  w i l l  be a s t ronger  
cor re la t ion  between syntact i c  forms and the par -  
t i tu la r  In fo rmat ion  types  expressed  by these  fo rms.  
I t  seems l i ke ly  that  a genre  which uses  few pred-  
i ca t ions  per  sentence  would cons is t  ch ie f l  7 of main 
c lauses  used as the workhorse  to express  a l l  k inds  
of  in fo rmat ion :  background,  main events ,  p lans ,  
impor t ,  and so fo r th .  Some of  these  in fo rmat ion  
categor ies  w i l l  be d i s t ingu ishab le  by verb  tense ,  
aspect ,  mood and vo ice ,  as in  the news. But o thers  
w i l l  have to re ly  on wor ld  knowledge fo r  categor i -  
za t ion .  As an example,  cons ider  a rev ised  vers ion  
of  the  open ing  of  s to ry  6, rewr i t ten  so that  em- 
bedded c lauses  in the or ig ina l  a re  expressed  as 
main c~auses: 
Richard  B. Stone met face -co - face  today w i th  
a key leader  of  the Sa lvadoran  guer r i l l a  
movement. He spent  severa l  f rus t ra t ing  weeks 
321 
maneuvering the meet ing.  
"The Ice has been broken,"  proc la imed 
Pres ident  Be l i sar io  BeCancur of Colombia. 
He engineered the meet ing.  
Knowledge about the way p lans are made would be 
needed to d i s t ingu ish  foreground from background in 
these  sentences .  
One fu r ther  metr i c  can be hypothes ized  for 
determin ing  d i scourse  genres  su i tab le  for syntact i c  
ana lys i s .  In syntact i c  theory  there  is  a we l l -  
known cor re la t ion  between the f lex ib i l i ty  of word 
order  in a language and i t s  use of morphosyu- 
tactic Inflections. Languages llke English which 
have Lost most of their inflectional markers rely 
on rigid word order to establish syntactic 
relations. On the other hand, highly inflected 
~anguages llke Latin can afford greater flexibility 
in  word order  s ince  in f lec t ions  on the ends of 
words ind icate  the i r  funct ion  in the sentence .  
An analogy might be drawn in which syntactic 
structures correspond to morphosyntactic \[nflec- 
Lions and in fo rmat ion  order  in d i scourse  cor res -  
ponds to word order .  The d i scourse  s t ruc ture  of 
news repor ts  v io la tes  canon ica l  s to ry  form. The 
wr i te r  does not s ta r t  at the beg inn ing  and re la te  
events  through to the end. The potent ia l  confus ion  
in t roduced by th i s  unpred ic tab i l i ty  i s  compounded 
by the dens i ty  of new in fo rmat ion  in news repor ts .  
Perhaps the great  regu lar i ty  in the use of d i s t inc t  
syntact i c  forms to express  the types of in fo rmat ion  
conveyed in the news serves to compensate for the 
flexibility ~n discourse structure. It is as 
though the s t rong  cor re la t ion  between syntact i c  
form and tnforma~ion type f rees  the reader  to 
process  the large amount of new in fo rmat ion  being 
de l ivered .  Jus t  as in f lec t iona l  endings al low the 
L i s tener  to ass ign  words to the i r  funct iona l  s lo ts  
regard less  of the order  in which they appear ,  so 
the syntact i c  cor re la tes  to in fo rmat ion  types al low 
the news reader  to qu ick ly  ass ign  phrases  the i r  
funct ion  in the d i scourse .  S tor ies  which adhere 
to a s tandard  s tory  grammar do not need such 
syncactlc regularity, since the position of the 
material in the text indicates its function. 
The extens ion  of a program Like DUMP to o ther  
d i scourse  genres would requ i re ,  f i r s t ,  the 
ident i f i ca t ion  of the in fo rmat ion  categor ies  
expressed  by the kind of text .  Cookbooks, fo r  
example, convey ins t ruc t ions  and descr ip t ions ,  not 
main events ,  e f fec ts  and ident i f i ca t ions .  
Secondly ,  cor re la t ions  between syntact i c  form and 
in fo rmat ion  type and the syntact i c  means for  
~nd icat ing  ep isode boundar ies  must be determined.  
The degree of cor re la t ion  between syntact i c  form 
and ?nformation type in non-news genres  is  a 
mat ter  for  fu r ther  invest igat ion .  
ACKNONLEDGMENTS 
This research  was car r ied  ouC under grant  
G008101781 from the U.S. Department of Educat ion,  
Program for  the Hearing Impaired. 
REFERENCES 
Borko, Harold and Bern ie r ,  Char les .  1975. 
Abst rac t in~ Concepts and Methods. New York: 
Academic Press.  
Comrie, Bernard.  1976. Aspect .  Cambridge: 
Cambridge Un ivers i ty  P ress .  
Decker, Nan. 1985. Syntact i c  c lues  to 
d i scourse  s t ruc ture :  A case  from journa l i sm.  
Ph.D. d i sser ta t ion ,  Brown Un ivers i ty .  
DeJong, Gera ld .  1979. Skimming s tor ies  
in  rea l  t ime: An exper iment  in in tegrated  
unders tand ing .  Research Report  #158, Depart -  
ment of Computer Sc ience ,  Yale Un ivers i ty .  
F ranc is ,  W. Nelson and Kucera, Henry. 1982. 
Frequency Ana lys is  of Eng l i sh  Usage. Boston; 
Houghton-Mi f f l in  Company. 
Green, Georgia.  1979. Organ izat ion ,  goa ls  and 
comprehens ib i l i ty  in nar ra t ives :  newswr i t ing ,  a 
case study. Technical Report #132. The Center for 
the Study of Reading, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. 
Grimes, Joseph. 1975. The Thread of Dlscourse. 
Janua Linguarum, Series Minor, no. 207. The 
Hague: Mouton. 
Hirschman, Lynette and Sager, Naomi. 1982. 
Automatic information formatting of a medical 
subtanguage.  In R. K i t t redge  and J. Lehrberger  
(Eds . ) ,  SubLan~ua~e: S tud ies  in Language ~n 
Rest r i c ted  Semantic Domains. New York: Walter 
de Gruyter .  
Hopper, Paul. 1979. Aspect and foregrounding 
in discourse. In T. Glvon (Ed.), Syntax and 
and Semantics, rot. 12. New York: Academic Press. 
and Thompson, Sandra. 1980. 
Transitivity in grammar and discourse. Language 56: 
251-299. 
Mourelatos ,  A lexander .  1981. Events ,  processes 
and states. In P. Tedesch? and A. Zaenen (Eds.), 
Syntax and Semantics, vol. Z4. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Ota, Akira. 1963. Tense and Aspect of Present- 
Day American English. Tokyo: Kenkyusha. 
Sager,  Naomi. 1981. Natura l  Language In fo r -  
mation Process ing :  A Computer Grammar of Eng l i sh  
and i t s  Applications. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Schank, Richard and R lesbeck,  Chr i s topher .  1981. 
Ins ide  Computer Unders tand ing .  H i l l sda le ,  NJ: 
Lawrence ErLOaum Assoc ia tes .  
Thompson, Sandra. 1983. Grammar and d iscourse :  
The Engl i sh  detached par t i c ip ia l  phrase .  In 
F. K le in-Andreu (Ed . ) ,  D iscourse Perspect ives  on 
Syntax.  New York: Academic P ress .  
322 
Vendler, Zeno. 1967. L inguis t ics  in Philosophy. 
~thaca, N?: Coruell  Univers i ty  Press. 
Woods, W~lliam. 1973. An experimental parsing 
system for t rans i t ion  network grammars. In 
R. Rustin (Ed.),  Natural Language Processing. 
Englewood C l i f f s ,  NJ: P rent ice-Ha l l .  
323 
