SEMANTICALLY S IGNIF ICANT PATTERNS IN D ICT IONARY DEF IN IT IONS * 
Jud i th  Markowitz  
Computer  Science Department  
De Paul University,  Chicago, IL 60604 
Thomas Ahlswede 
Mar th~ Evens 
Computer  Science Department  
I l l inois  Inst i tute of Technology,  Chicago, Ii 60616 
ABSTRACT 
Natural  language process ing systems 
need large lexicons conta in ing expl ic i t  
in format ion about lex ica l -semant lc  
re lat ionships,  se lect ion  restr ict ions,  
and verb categories.  Because the labor 
involved in const ruct ing  such lexicons by 
hand is overwhelming,  we have been try ing 
to construct  lexical  entr ies 
automat ica l ly  from informat ion ava i lab le  
in the mach ine- readab le  vers ion of 
Webst@r 's  ~@ve~h Co l !eg late  Dict ionary.  
This work  is r ich in impl ic i t  
information; the prob lem is to make it 
expl icit .  This paper descr ibes  methods 
for f inding taxonomy and set -membersh ip  
re lat ionships,  recogniz ing nouns that 
ord inar i ly  represent  human beings, and 
ident i fy ing act ive and stat ive verbs and 
adject ives.  
INTRODUCTION 
Large natural  language process ing 
systems need lexicons much larger than 
those avai lab le  today with expl ic i t  
in format ion about lex lca l -semant ic  
re%ationships,  about usage, about forms, 
about morphology,  about case frames and 
se lect ion  rest r ic t ions  and other kinds of 
co l locat ional  information.  Apresyan, 
Mel 'cuk, and Zho lkovsky studied the kind 
of expl ic i t  lexical  in format ion needed by 
non-nat ive  speakers of a language. Their  
Exp lanatory -Combinatory  D ic t ionary  (1970) 
expla ins  how each word is used and how it 
combines wi th  others in phrases and 
sentences.  Their  dream has now been 
rea l ized in a fu l l -sca le  d ic t ionary  of 
Russ ian (Mel 'cuk and Zholkovsky,  1985) 
and in example entr ies for French 
(Mel 'cuk et al, 1984). Computer  
programs need sti l l  more expl ic i t  and 
deta i led information. We have d iscussed 
e lsewhere the kind of lexical in format ion 
needed in a quest ion  answer ing  system 
(Evens and Smith, 1978) and by a system 
to generate medical  case reports (Li et 
al., 1985). 
This research was supported by the 
Nat ional  Sc ience Foundat ion  under IST-85- 
10069. 
A number of exper iments  have shown 
that re lat ional  thesauri  can 
s ign i f i cant ly  improve the e f fect iveness  
of an in format ion retr ieval  system (Fox, 
1980; Evens et al, 1985; Wang et al, 
1985). A re lat ional  thesaurus is used to 
add further terms to the lquery, terms 
that are re lated to the ~r ig lnal  by 
lexlcal  re lat ions l ike synonymy, 
taxonomy, set -membership,  or the part- 
whole relat ion, among others. The 
add i t ion  of these re lated terms enables 
the system to ident i fy  more re levant  
documents.  The deve lopment  of such 
re lat ional  thesauri  would be 
comparat ive ly  s imple  if we had a large 
lex icon conta in ing relational 
information.  (A comparat ive  study of 
lexical  re lat ions can be found in Evens 
et al, 1980). 
The work involved in deve lop ing  a 
lexicon for a large subset  of Engl ish  is 
so overwhelming,  that it seems 
appropr ia te  to try to bui ld  a lex icon 
automat ica l ly  by ana lyz ing  in format ion  in 
a mach ine- readab le  dict ionary.  A 
co l leg iate  level d ic t ionary  contains an 
enormous amount of in format ion about 
thousands of words in the natura l  
language it descr ibes.  This in format ion 
is presented in a form intended to be 
eas i ly  understood and used by a human 
being wi th  at least some command of the 
language. Unfortunate ly ,  even when the 
d ic t ionary  has been t ranscr ibed into 
mach ine- readab le  form, the knowledge 
which a human user can acqui re  from the 
d ic t ionary  is not readi ly  ava i lab le  to 
the computer.  
There have been a number of ef forts  to 
extract  in format ion from machine-  
readable dict ionar ies.  Amsler  (1980, 
1981, 1982) and Amsler  and John White  
(1979) mapped out the taxonomic 
h ierarch ies  of nouns and verbs in the 
Merr iam-Webster  Pocket Dict ionary.  
Mich ie ls  (1981, 1983) ana lyzed the 
Longman Dic t ionary  of C0ntemporary  
Engl is  h (LDOCE), taking advantage of the 
fact that that d ic t ionary  was des igned to 
some extent to fac i l i tate computer  
manipulat ion.  Smith (1981) studied the 
112 
"def in ing formulae" - s ign i f i cant  
recurr ing  phrases - in a se lect ion  of 
ad ject ive  def in i t ions  from We bster \ [s  
Caro lyn White (1983) has deve loped a 
program to create entr ies for Sager 's  
L inguist ic  Str ing Parser  (1981) from WY. 
Chodorow and Byrd (1985) have ext racted 
taxonomic hierarchies, assoc iated wl th  
feature information,  from LDOCE and W7. 
We have parsed W7 ad ject ive  
def in i t ions  (Ahlswede, 1985b) us ing 
Sager 's  L inguist ic  Str ing Parser  (Sager, 
1981) in order to automat ica l ly  ident i fy  
lex ica l -semant ic  re lat ions assoc ia ted  
wi th  def in ing  formulae. We have also 
(Ahlswede and Evens, 1983) ident i f ied  
def in ing  formulae in noun, verb and 
adverb def in i t ions  from W7. At present  
we are work ing  on three inter re lated 
projects:  ident i f i ca t ion  and analys is  of 
lex ica l -semant ic  -elations in or out of 
WY; generat ion  of computed def in i t ions  
for words which are used or re ferred to 
but not def ined in WY; and pars ing of the 
ent i re d ic t ionary  (or as much of it as 
possible) to generate  from it a large 
general  lexical  knowledge base. 
This paper represents  a cont inuat ion  
of our work on def in ing formulae in 
d ic t ionary  def in i t ions,  in par t icu lar  
def in i t ions  from W7. The patterns  we 
deal wi th  are l imited to recurr ing  
phrases, such as '"any of a" or "a qua l i ty  
or state of" (common in noun def in i t ions)  
and "of or re lat ing to" (common in 
ad ject ive  def in i t ions) .  From such 
phrases, we gain in format ion  not only 
about the words being def ined but also 
about the words used in the def in i t ions  
and other words in the lexicon. 
Speci f ica l ly ,  we can extract  se lect iona l  
information,  co -occur rence  relat ions,  and 
lex ica l - semant ic  relat ions.  These 
methods of ext ract ing  in format ion from W7 
were des igned for use in the lex icon 
bui lder  descr ibed ear l ier  by Ah lswede 
(1985a). 
The computat iona l  steps involved in 
this study were re la t ive ly  simple. First 
W7 def in i t ions  were d iv ided by part of 
speech into separate f i les for nouns, 
verbs, adject ives,  and others. Then a 
separate  Keyword In Context  (KWIC) Index 
was made for each part of speech. 
Hypotheses were tr ied out in i t ia l ly  on a 
subset of the d ic t ionary  conta in ing  only 
those words which appeared  eight or more 
t imes in the Kucera and Franc is  corpus 
(1968) of a mi l l ion  words of running 
Engl i sh  text. Those that proved val id  
for this subset were then tested on the 
full d ict ionary.  This work would have 
been imposs ib le  wi thout  the kind 
permiss ion  of the G. & C. Merr iam 
Company to use the mach ine- readab le  
vers ion of W7 (Olney et al 1967). 
NOUN TAXONOMY 
Noun def in i t ions  wh ich  begin wi th  
"Any" s ignal  a taxonomic re la t ionsh ip  
between the noun being def ined and a 
taxonomic superord inate  which fol lows the 
word "Any." One subset of the formulae 
beg inn ing wi th  "Any" has the form: "Any"- 
NP, where the NP can be a noun, noun 
phrase, or a co -ord inated  noun or 
ad ject ive  structure.  
la. a lkyl  any un iva lent  a l iphat ic ,  
aromat ic -a l iphat ic ,  or 
a l i cyc l i c  hydrocarbon radical. 
b. ammuni t ion  any mater ia l  used in 
at tack  or defense. 
c. s t reptococcus  any coccus in chains 
d. nectar  any de l ic ious  dr ink 
e. d iscord  any harsh or unp leasant  
sound 
f. mi lkwort  any herb of a genus 
(Pol_ygala) of the fami ly 
Polygalaceae,  the mi lkwort  
fami ly 
In these def in i t ions  the taxonomic 
superord inate  of the noun being def ined 
is the head noun of the NP immediate ly  
fo l lowing "Any". The superord inate  of 
"alkyl" is "radical ,"  wh ich  is the head 
of the co -ord inated  s t ructure  fo l lowing 
"Any" whereas  the superord inate  of 
"ammunit ion" is the unmodi f ied  noun 
"mater ia l ."  Of the 97 examples  of "Any"- 
NP only two fai led to conta in  an overt 
taxonomic  superord inate  fo l lowing "Any." 
2a. week any seven consecut ive  days 
b. couple any two persons pa i red 
together  
In each of these cases there is an 
impl ic i t  taxonomic superord inate  "set." 
The second f requent ly  occurr ing  subset  
of noun def in i t ions  conta in ing  "Any" 
begins with the fo l lowing pattern: "Any 
of"-NP. This pattern has two pr inc ipa l  
rea l i zat ions  depend ing  upon what 
immediate ly  fo l lows "Any of." In one 
sub-pat tern  a quant i f ier ,  numer ic  
expression,  or "the" fo l lows the init ial  
"Any of" and begins an NP which conta ins 
the superord inate  of the noun being 
defined. This pattern is s imi lar  to that 
descr ibed above for the "Any"-NP formula. 
113 
3a. doctor  any of several  br ight ly  
co lored ar t i f i c ia l  f l ies 
b. a l lomorph any of two or more d is t inct  
c rysta l l ine  forms of the same 
substance.  
c. e lder  any of var ious  church 
of f icers  
The other sub-pat tern  expresses  a 
b io log ica l  taxonomic  re la t ionsh ip  and has 
the fo l lowing de f in i t ion  structure:  
"Any of a/an" 
<opt ional> modi f ie r  
taxonomic  level 
" ( "sc ient i f i c  name")" 
"of" taxonomic  superord inate  
e i ther  a t t r ibutes  or taxonomic  
subord inate  
The modi f ie r  is opt ional  and modi f ies  
the taxonomic level of the noun being 
defined; the cap i ta l i zed  sc ient i f i c  name 
of the level fo l lows in parenthes is ;  the 
taxonomic  superord inate  can be a noun or 
a complex  NP and is the object  of the 
second "of" in the formula; and the 
in format ion  fo l lowing the superord inate  
is genera l ly  a co -ord inated  structure,  
f requent ly  co -ord inated  NPs. Of the 901 
instances of the de f in i t ion - in i t ia l  "Any 
of a/an" sequence 853, or 95 per cent, 
were b io log ica l  def in i t ions.  
4a. ant any of a fami ly (Formicidae) 
of co lonia l  hymenopterous  
insects w i th  complex socia l  
o rgan izat ion  and var ious  
castes per fo rming  specia l  
duties. 
b. grass any of a large fami ly 
(Gramineae) of 
monocoty ledonous  most ly  
herbaceous  p lants  w i th  jo inted 
stems, s lender  sheath ing  
leaves, and f lowers borne in 
sp ike lets  of bracts.  
c. acar ld  any of an order (Acarina) of 
a rachn ids  inc lud ing mites and 
ticks. 
d. cerc is  any of a small  genus (Cerci s) 
of leguminous shrubs or low 
trees. 
e. nematode any of a class or phy lum 
(Nematoda) of e longated 
cy l indr ica l  worms paras i t i c  in 
an imals  or p lants  or 
f ree- l iv ing  in soi l  or water.  
f. a rchaeorn is  any of a genus 
(Archaeornis)  of upper  
Jurass ic  toothed birds. 
The only sequences  wh ich  break from 
the pat tern  descr ibed  above are non- 
b io log ica l  def in i t ions ,  wh ich  do not have 
parenthet ica l  in format ion  fo l lowing the 
head noun of the NP fo l lowing "Any of 
a/an" and b io log ica l  de f in i t ions  where  
that head noun is "breed." 
5a. g lobu l in  any of a c lass of s imple  
prote ins  (as myosin) inso lub le  
in pure water  but so lub le  in 
d i lute  salt  so lut ions  that 
occur w ide ly  in p lant  and 
animal  t issues. 
b. ro t twe i le r  any of a breed of tall 
v igorous  b lack  shor t -ha i red  
catt le  dogs. 
c. po land  china any of an Amer ican  
breed of large wh i te -marked  
b lack  swine of the lard type. 
The de f in i t ion  for "g lobul in"  
i l lus t rates  that even when a non- 
b io log ica l  de f in i t ion  has a parenthes is ,  
that parenthet i ca l  in fo rmat ion  does not 
immediate ly  fo l low the NP fo l lowing "Any 
of a/an." The other de f in i t ions  in (5) 
are instances of "breed" fo l lowing "Any 
of a/an."  In general ,  when a de f in i t ion  
begins  w i th  "Any of a/an" it is a lmost  
cer ta in ly  a b io log ica l  de f in i t ion  and 
that cer ta in ty  is increased if the "Any 
of a /an  noun" is immediate ly  fo l lowed by 
parenthes is  un less  the noun of the 
pat tern  is "breed." 
THE MEMBER-SET  RELAT ION 
Another  de f in ing  formula w i th  an 
in teres t ing  resemblance  to taxonomy also 
occurs  in noun def in i t ions .  The pat tern  
"A member  of" -NP is s imi lar  to the basic  
o rgan izat ion  of the "Any" de f in i t ions  in 
that the immediate  superord inate  of the 
noun being de f ined  is the object  of the 
prepos i t ion  "of" except in this pat tern  
the re la t ionsh ip  is, of course, member-  
set. 
6a. hand a member  of a sh ip 's  crew. 
b. ear l  a member  of the th ird grade 
of the Br i t i sh  peerage rank ing  
be low a marquess  and above a 
v iscount .  
c. F rank  a member  of a West Germanic  
people  enter ing  the Roman 
prov inces  in A.D. 253, 
occupy ing  the Nether lands  and 
most of Gaul, and es tab l i sh ing  
themselves  a long the Rhine. 
d. repub l i can  a member  of a po l i t i ca l  
114 
party  advocat ing  repub l i can ism 
e. Fox a member  of an Indian people 
former ly  l iv ing in Wisconsin.  
f. Ep iscopa l ian  a member  of an episcopal  
church (as the Protestant  
Episcopal  Church). 
g. fr iar a member  of a mendicant  order 
What we have here is a gener ic  term 
for any member  of the spec i \ [ led  set. It 
Is perhaps best thought of as s imi lar  to 
the part -whole  re lat ion -- a hand is part 
of a crew, a Frank is part of a tribe, an 
earl is (somewhat inelegantly)  part of a 
peerage. 
In our data the nouns being def ined 
wi th  this formula are invar iab ly  human. 
Of the 581 def in i t ions  wh ich  begin wi th  
"A member of" only nine def ine non-human 
nouns and two of those are 
anthropomorphic .  
7a. Jo tunn a member of a race of g iants 
in Norse mytho logy  
b. Houyhnhnm a member of a race of 
horses endowed with  reason in 
Swif t 's  qu~l i~!~ ~ Y ~ .  
Why is it important  to mark nouns in a 
lex icon as exp l ic i t ly  human? Many verbs 
can take only human subjects  or objects.  
Also, the choice between the re lat ive 
pronouns Vb9 and which depends on whether  
the referent  is human or not. 
The member-set  re lat ion needs to be 
d is t ingu ished from another  re lat ion that 
c lass i f ies  a spec i f ic  indiv idual  as in 
8a. Circe sorceress  who changed 
Odysseus' men into swine. 
GENERIC AGENTS 
Gener ic  agents are the typical  f i l lers 
of the agent argument  sot for a g iven 
verb. They are par t i cu la r ly  va luable  in 
unders tand ing  intersentent ia l  references 
or generat ing  them. One very surpr is ing 
source of def in i t ions  for human nouns is 
the formula "One that." Of the 1419 
examples of this pattern 694, or 49 per 
cent were ver i f iab ly  human. That is, it 
was poss ib le  to determine from the 
def in i t ion  itself or from assoc iated 
def in i t ions,  such as a re lated verb, that 
the noun being def ined was +human. This 
est imate is, therefore, conservat ive.  It 
was also determined that a large port ion  
of these def in i t ions  (30 per cent) were 
of occupations. 
9a. go ldbeater  one that beats gold into 
gold leaf 
b. po l l s ter  one that conducts  a poll  or 
compi les  data obta ined by a 
poll. 
c. schoo lmaster  one that d isc ip l ines  
or directs.  
d. hat ter  one that makes, sells, or 
c leans and repairs  hats. 
e. assass in  one that murders  e i ther  
for hire or for fanat ical  
motives.  
f. taxpayer  one that pays or is 
l iable to pay a tax 
g. te letyp ls t  one that operates a 
teletypewriter. 
WHAT THE PARENTHESES TELL US 
The formula "one (..)" of fers  very 
d i f ferent  information.  (This formula 
typ ica l ly  occurs somewhere in the midd le  
of a def in i t ion,  not at the beginning.)  
If the f irst word of the parenthet ica l  
in format ion is not "as", a de f in i t ion  
which begins wi th  this pat tern  is a 
b io logica l  def in i t ion.  The parenthet ica l  
mater ia l  is the sc ient i f i c  name of the 
noun being def ined. These def in i t ions  
are sub-def in i t ions  and almost  invar iab ly  
fo l low "esp: ". 
lOa. p impernel  any of a genus (Anagall is) 
of herbs of the pr imrose 
family; e~P: one (A. aryensis)  
whose scarlet,  white, or 
purp l i sh  f lowers c lose at the 
approach of ra iny or c loudy 
weather.  
b. whe lk  any of numerous large mar ine 
snai ls  (as of the genus 
Buccinum);  esp: one 
(B~ undatum) much used as 
food in Europe. 
c. tu rn ip  either  of two b iennia l  herbs 
of the mustard  fami ly  wi th  
thick roots eaten as a 
vegetab le  or fed to stock, one 
(Brassic@ rapa) wi th  hai ry  
leaves and usu. f lat tened 
roots. 
d. capuch in  any of a genus (~ebus) 
of So. Amer ican  monkeys; 
esp one (C. capuc!nas) 
wi th  the hair  on its crown 
resembl ing a monk's  cowl. 
e. c roton any of a genus (Crot0n) of 
115 
herbs and shrubs of the spurge 
famil, one (C. @lute~ia) of 
the Bahamas y ie ld ing  
cascar i l la  bark. 
f. bu l ly  tree any of several  tropical  
Amer ican  trees of the 
Sapodi l lo  family; es~ one 
(Mani lkara bid entata) that 
y ie lds ba lata  gum and heavy 
red timber. 
SUFFIX DEF IN IT IONS 
The def in ing  pat tern  "One.. . ( . . .  
spec i f ic  /such. . . )"  is an interest ing 
sequence wh ich  is only used to def ine 
suff ixes.  The words "specif ic"  and 
"such" s ignal  this whi le  at the same time 
ind icat ing what  semant ic  in format ion  
should  be taken from the stem to wh ich  
the suf f ix  is aff ixed. 
11a.  -e r  one that is a su i tab le  object  
of (a spec i f ied  act ion).  
b. -ate one acted upon (in a spec i f ied  
way). 
c. -morph one hav ing (such) a form. 
d. -path one suf fer ing  from (such) an 
ai lment.  
e. -ant one that per forms (a spec i f ied  
act ion).  
f. -grapher  one that wr i tes  about 
(specif ied) mater ia l  or in a 
(specif ied) way. 
Examples  assoc ia ted  wi th  some of the 
de f in i t ions  in (10) are " isomorph,"  
"psychopath,"  and "v io l in ist ."  We are in 
the  process  of ana lyz ing  all instances of 
parenthet ica l  "speci f ied" and "such" to 
determine whether  the def in ing  formula 
exempl i f ied  by (10) is a general  approach 
to the de f in i t ion  of aff ixes.  Clearly,  
the use of parentheses  is very 
s igni f icant ,  s igna l l ing  an important  
semant ic  d is t inct ion.  
WHAT NOUN DEF IN IT IONS TELL US ABOUT VERBS 
Noun def in ing  patterns  can prov ide 
important  in format ion  about spec i f ic  
verbs. Not surpr is ingly ,  one of these is 
the pat tern  "Act of Ving" wh ich  is an 
ind icator  of act ion  verbs. 
Act ion  verbs d i f fer  from stat lve verbs 
in a number of important  ways. Act ion  
verbs l lke b i te and Re rsuade can appear  
in imperat ive sentences,  whi le  s tat lve 
verbs l ike own and resemble  cannot: 
Bite that man! 
Persuade him to go! 
*Own the house! 
*Resemble your father! 
Ac t ion  verbs take the progress ive  aspect; 
s tat ive verbs do not: 
She is b i t ing  the man. 
She is persuad ing  him to go. 
*She is owning the house. 
*She is resembl ing  your father. 
Act ion  verbs can appear in a number of 
embedded sentences  where stat ives cannot 
be used. 
I told her to bite the man. 
*I told her to own the house. 
In de f in i t ions  the act ion  verb  appears  
as the gerund ive  object  of the 
prepos i t ion  "of" or as the present - tense  
verb of the subord inate  clause. 
12a. p lumbing  the act of us ing a plumb. 
b. forg iveness  the act of forgiving.  
c. so l i l oquy  the act of ta lk ing to 
oneself .  
d. p ro jec t ion  the act of throwing or 
shoot ing forward. 
e. re fund the act of re fund ing  
f. p ro t rus ion  the act of protruding.  
g. invest i ture  the act of ra t i fy ing  
or es tab l i sh ing  in off ice. 
The examples  in (11) indicate that the 
re lated verb is not a lways 
morpho log ica l ly  related. This pat tern  
could, therefore,  be used as a means of 
access ing  semant ica l ly  re lated verbs and 
nouns or as a tool for the const ruct ion  
of a semant ic  network.  
"The act of Ving" de f in i t ions  have a 
subpat tern  wh ich  cons is ts  of "The act of 
V ing or the state of be ing <adj>." There 
are not many examples  of this subpattern,  
but in all but one instance the noun 
being def ined, the verb and the ad ject ive  
are morpho log ica l ly  related. 
13a. adornment  the act of adorn ing  or the 
state of be ing adorned. 
b. popu lar i za t ion  the act of 
popu lar i z ing  or the state of 
be ing popu lar i zed  
c. nour i shment  the act of nour i sh ing  or 
the state of being nour ished.  
116 
d. in t rus ion  the act of int rud ing or the 
state of being intruded. 
e. embodiment  the act of embody ing  or 
the state of be ing embodied. 
In contrast,  our data do not support  
the use of the cor respond ing  formula "The 
state of be ing" -past  part. for 
ident i fy ing  stat ive verbs, Many 
instances of this pat tern  appear  to be 
pass ives  or s tat ive use of normal ly  non- 
s tat ive verbs. This pos i t ion  is 
supported by the presence of a fair 
number of def in i t ions  which con jo in  the 
two formulae. 
14a. d i sp lacement  the act or process  
of d isp lac ing:  the state of 
being displaced.  
b. examinat ion  the act or process of 
examining:  the state of be ing 
examined. 
c. expans ion  the act or process  of 
expanding.  The qua l i ty  or 
state of being expanded. 
It is l ike ly that the formula "The 
qua l i ty  or state of be ing" -past  part. is 
a s tat ive verb ind icator  when it does not 
co-occur  wi th  "Act of" def in i t ions .  
Support  comes from the f requency wi th  
which that pat tern  a l ternates  adject ives,  
wh ich  are normal ly  stat ive, w i th  the past 
part ic ip le.  
SELECT IONAL INFORMATION 
FOR VERB DEF IN IT IONS 
A l though the s t ructure  of verb 
def in i t ions  is much more l imited than 
that of noun def in i t ions,  e lements  of 
verb def in i t ions  do prov ide in terest ing  
ins ights into co l locat lona l  informat ion.  
One s t r ik ing  example of this is the use 
of parenthet ica l  in fo rmat ion  wh ich  f lags 
typical  ins tant ia t ions  of case arguments  
for the verb being def ined. The most 
cons is tent  of these patterns is "To"-V- 
(<"as">NP) where the NP is the typical  
object  of the verb being defined. 
15a. mount  to put or have (as art i l lery)  
in posit ion.  
b. lay to br ing forth and depos i t  (an 
egg) .  
c. deve lop  to subject  (exposed 
phetograph ic  mater ia l )  to a 
usu. chemical  t reatment. . .  
We are in the process  of determin ing  
how cons is tent  the parenthet i ca l  "as" is 
in s igna l l ing  typical  case relat ions.  
SELECTIONAL INFORMATION FOR ADJECT IVES 
Ad ject ive  def in i t ions  d i f fer  from 
those of nouns and verbs in that whi le  
nouns are v i r tua l ly  a lways def ined in 
terms of other nouns and verbs in terms 
of other verbs, only about 10 percent  of 
ad ject ives  are def ined in terms of other 
ad ject ives  -- the rest are re lated to 
nouns or somet imes to verbs. 
Furthermore,  the semant ic  in format ion  in 
an ad ject ive  de f in i t ion  refers more to 
the noun (or type of noun) modi f ied  by 
the ad ject ive  than it does to the 
ad ject ive  itself. This is because an 
adject ive,  together wi th  the noun it 
modif ies,  def ines a taxonomic 
re la t ionsh ip  -- or, to put it another  
way, denotes  a feature of the thing 
def ined in the ad jec t ive+noun phrase. 
For instance, we can say e i ther  that the 
phrase "big dog" denotes  a par t icu lar  
k ind of (the more general  term) "dog"; or 
that it denotes  a dog wi th  the addi t iona l  
feature of "bigness". 
A useful  piece of in format ion  we would  
l ike to get from ad ject ive  def in i t ions  is 
se lect iona l  in format ion  -- what sort of 
noun the ad ject ive  can mean ingfu l ly  
modify. Se lect iona l  res t r i c t ions  are 
harder  to f ind and are large ly  negat ive  - 
- for instance, the formula "contain ing" 
def ines  ad ject ives  that do not (in the 
sense so defined) mod i fy  an imate nouns. 
10a. bas ic  conta in ing  re la t ive ly  l i t t le 
si l ica. 
b. normal  conta in ing  ne i ther  basic 
hydroxyl  nor ac id hydrogen. 
The same is true of some other 
moderate ly  common formulae, such as 
"cons ist ing of", "extending" and 
"causing". We hope that further ana lys is  
wi l l  a l low us to f ind more ind icat ions of 
se lect iona l  character i s t i cs  of 
adject ives.  
RECOGNIZ ING ACT ION VS. STATIVE ADJECT IVES 
One proper ty  be long ing  more to 
ad ject ives  themselves  than to their  
assoc ia ted  nouns is an act ive -s ta t ive  
d is t inc t ion  s imi lar  to that found in 
verbs. The test for an "active" 
ad ject ive  is that one may use it in a 
s tatement  of the form "they are being --- 
-" or in the command "be .. . .  \]" e.g. "be 
aggress ive!"  or "be good!",  but not *"be 
tal l!" or *"be ba l l i s t ic !"  As these 
examples  indicate, most  ad ject ives  that 
can be used act ive ly  can also be used 
117 
stat ive ly  -- aggress iveness  or goodness 
may be thought of as a state rather than 
as an act ion -- but not the other way 
around. 
Contrary  to our expectat ions,  the 
act ive -s tat ive  parameter  of ad ject ives  is 
much easier  to ident i fy  in def in i t ions  
than is se lect lona l  information.  Some of 
the def in ing formulae d iscussed in Smith 
(1981) and Ahlswede (1985b) seem to be 
l imited to stat lve adject ives.  "Of or 
re lat ing to", one of the most common, is 
one of these: 
fla. ba l l i s t i c  of or re lat ing to 
ba l l i s t i cs  or to a body in 
mot ion accord ing to the laws 
of bal l ist ics.  
b. l i terary  of or re lat ing to books. 
A l though many ad ject ives  def ined wi th  
"of or re lat ing to" can be used act ive ly  
in other senses, they are s t r i c t ly  
stat ive in the senses where this formula 
is used: 
12a. civi l  of or re lat ing to c i t izens 
<~ l ibert ies>. 
b. peacefu l  of or re lat ing to a state 
or t ime of peace. 
The common formula "being ...", on the 
other hand, def ines  ad ject ives  wh ich  at 
least lean toward the act ion end of the 
spectrum: 
13a. natura l  being in accordance wi th  
or determined by nature. 
b. cursed being under or deserv ing  a 
curse. 
Even such a normal ly  stat ive ad ject ive  as 
" l iquid" is re lat ive ly  act ive in one of 
its senses: 
14a. l iquid being musical  and free of 
harshness  in sound. 
By no means all formulae give 
ind icat ions of the s tat ive -act ive  
qua l i t ies  of an adject ive.  A large 
family of formulae ("having", 
"character ized by", "marked by", etc.) 
denot ing attr ibut ion,  are complete ly  
neutral  wi th  respect to this parameter.  
SUMMARY 
W7 contains a wea l th  of impl ic it  
information.  We have presented methods 
for making some of this in format ion 
expl ic i t  by focuss ing on spec i f ic  
formulae found in noun, verb, and 
ad ject ive  def in i t ions.  Most of these 
formulae appear at the start  of 
def in i t ions,  but we have also 
demonst rated  that important in format ion 
can be extracted from syntact ic  and 
graphemic  elements,  such as 
parenthet ica ls .  The in format ion  we have 
ext racted involves lexical  re la t ionsh ips  
such as taxonomy and set membership,  
se lect iona l  restr ict ions,  and specia l  
subcategor ies  of nouns, verbs, and 
adject ives.  This in format ion  is used by 
an automat ic  lex icon bui lder  to create 
lexical  entr ies  automat ica l ly  from W7 
def in i t ions.  
REFERENCES 
Ahiswede, Thomas. 1985a. "A Tool Kit for 
Lex icon Bui ld ing,"  P roceed ings  of the 
23rd Annual  Meet ing  of the ACL, Chicago, 
pp. 268-278. 
Ahlswede, Thomas. 1985b. "A L ingu is t ic  
Str ing Grammar for Ad ject ive  
Def in i t ions ,"  in S. Wi l l iams,  ed., 
Humansand Machines:  The Inter face 
through Language. Ablex, Norwood, NJ, pp. 
101-127. 
Ahlswede,  Thomas and Martha  Evens. 1983. 
"Generat ing a Re lat iona l  Lex icon from a 
Mach ine-Readab le  Dict ionary ."  
Forthcoming.  
Amsler, Robert.  1980. The St ructure  of 
the Merr iam-Webster  Pocket Dict ionary.  
Ph.D. D issertat ion,  Computer  Science, 
Un ivers i ty  of Texas, Austin. 
Amsler, Robert.  1981. "A Taxonomy for 
Engl ish  Nouns and Verbs."  P roceed ings  of 
the 19th Annual  Meet ing  of the ACL, 
Stanford, pp. 133-138. 
Amsler, Robert.  1982. "Computat iona l  
Lexicology:  A Research Program."  
Proceed ings  of the Nat ional  Computer  
Conference,  AFIPS, pp. 657-663. 
Amsler, Robert  and John White, 1979. 
Deve lopment  of a Computat iona l  
Methodo logy  for Der iv ing  Natura l  Language 
Semant ic  St ructures  v ia  Ana lys is  of 
Mach ine-Readab le  Dict ionar ies .  TR MCS77-  
01315, L ingu is t ics  Research Center, 
Un ivers i ty  of Texas. 
Apresyan, Yuri, Igor Mel 'cuk,  and 
A lexander  Zholkovsky.  1970.  "Semant ics  
and Lexicography:  Towards a New Type of 
Uni l ingual  D ict ionary ,"  in F. Kiefer,  
ed., Studies in Syntax and Semantics,  
Reidel,  Dordrecht,  Hol land, pp. 1-33. 
Chodorow, Mart in  and Roy Byrd, 1985.  
"Extract ing Semant ic  H ierarch ies  from a 
118 
Large On-Line Dictionary." Proceedings 
of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, 
pp. 299-304. 
Evens, Martha and Raoul Smith. 1978. "A 
Lexicon for a Computer Question-Answering 
System", American Journal of 
Computational Linguistics, No. 4, pp. 1- 
96. 
Evens, Martha, Bonnie Litowitz, Judith 
Markowitz, Raoul Smith, and Oswald 
Werner. 1980. Lexical-Semantic 
Relations: a Comparative Survey, 
Linguistic Research, Inc., Edmonton, 
Alberta, 1980. 
Evens, Martha, James Vandendorpe, and 
Yih-Chen Wang. 1985. "Lexical-Semantic 
Relations in Information Retrieval", in 
S. Williams, ed., Humans and Machines. 
Ablex, Norwood, New Jersey, pp. 73-100. 
Fox, Edward. 1980. "Lexical Relations: 
Enhancing Effectiveness of Information 
Retrieval Systems," ACM SIGIR Forum, 15, 
3, pp. 5-36. 
Kucera, Henry, and Nelson Francis. 1967. 
Computational Analysis of Present-Day 
American English, Brown University Press, 
Providence, Rhode Island. 
Li, Ping-Yang, Thomas Ahlswede, Carol 
Curt, Martha Evens, and Daniel Hier. 
1985. "A Text Generation Module for a 
Decision Support System for Stroke", 
Proc. 1985 Conference on Intell igent 
Systems and Machines, Rochester, 
Michigan, April. 
Mel'cuk, Igor, and Alexander Zholkovsky. 
1985. Explanatory-Combinatory Dict ionary 
of Russian, Wiener Slawisticher Almanach, 
Vienna. 
Mel'cuk, Igor, Nadia Arbatchewsky- 
Jumarie, Leo Elnitzky, Lidia Iordanskaya, 
and Adele Lessard. 1984. Dict lonnalre 
Expllcatif et Combinatoire du Francais 
Contemporaln, Presses de l"Universite de 
Montreal, Montreal. 
Michiels, A., 1981. Exploit ing a Large 
Dict ionary Data Base. Ph.D. Thesis, 
University of Liege, Belgium. 
Michiels, A., 1983. "Automatic Analysis 
of Texts." Workshop on Machine Readable 
Dictionaries, SRI, Menlo Park, Ca. 
Olney, John, Carter Revard, and Paul 
Zeff. 1967. "Processor for Machine- 
Readable Version of Webster's Seventh at 
System Development Corporation." The 
Finite String, 4.3, pp. 1-2. 
Sager, Naomi. 1981. Natural Language 
Information Processing. Addison-Wesley, 
New York. 
Smith, Raoul. 1981. "On Defining 
Adjectives, Part III." In Dictionaries: 
Journal of the Dict ionary Society of 
North America, no. 3, pp. 28-38. 
Wang, Yih-Chen, James Vandendorpe, and 
Martha Evens. 1985. "Relational Thesauri 
in Information Retrieval", JASIS, Vol. 
36, No. i, pp. 15-27. 
Webster's Seventh New Col legiate 
Dictionary, 1963. G.aC. Merriam Company, 
Springfield, Massachusetts. 
White, Carolyn. 1983. "The Linguistic 
String Project Dict ionary for Automatic 
Text Analysis," Workshop on Machine- 
Readable Dictionaries, SRI, April. 
119 
