Lexica\] Selection in the Process of Language Generation 
3ames  Puste jovsky  
Department of Computer Science 
Brandeis University 
Waltham, MA 02254 
617-736-2709 
j amespQ brandeis.caner -relay 
Serge i  N i renburg  
Computer Science Department 
Carnegie-Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA. 15213 
412-268-3823 
sergeiQcad.cs.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
In this paper we argue that lexical selection plays a more 
important role in the generation process than has com- 
monly been assumed. To stress the importance of lexical- 
semantic input to generation, we explore the distinction 
and treatment of generating open and closed cla~s lexical 
items, and suggest an additional classification of the lat- 
ter into discourse-oriented and proposition-oriented items. 
Finally, we discuss how lexical selection is influenced by 
thematic (\[oc~) information in the input. 
I .  In t roduct ion  
There is a consensus among computational linguists 
that a comprehensive analyzer for natural language must 
have the capability for robust lexical d isambiguat ion,  
i.e., its central task is to select appropriate meanings of 
lexical items in the input and come up with a non contra- 
dictory, unambiguous representation f both the proposi- 
tional and the non-propositional meaning of the input text. 
The task of a natural anguage generator is, in some sense, 
the opposite task of rendering an unambiguous meaning 
in a natural language. The main task here is to to per- 
form principled selection of a) lexical items and b) the 
syntactic structure for input constituents, based on lexical 
semantic, pragmatic and discourse clues available in the 
input. In this paper we will discuss the problem of lexlcal 
selection. 
The problem of selecting lexical items in the pro- 
cess of natural language generation has not received as 
much attention as the problems associated with express- 
ing explicit grammatical knowledge and control. In most 
of the generation systems, lexical selection could not be 
a primary concern due to the overwhelming complexity 
of the generation problem itself. Thus, MUMBLE con- 
centrates on gr:~mmar-intensive control decisions (McDon- 
ald and Pustejovsky, 1985a) and some stylistic considera- 
tions (McDonald and Pustejovsk'y, 1985b); TEXT (McKe- 
own, 1985) stresses the strategical level of control decisions 
about the overall textual shape of the generation output. 
~KAMP (Appelt, 1985) emphasizes the role that dynamic 
planning plays in controlling the process of generation, 
and specifically, of referring expressions; N IGEL  (Mann 
and Matthiessen, 1983) derives its control structures from 
the choice systems of systemic grammar, concentrating on 
grammatical knowledge without fully realizing the 'deli- 
cate' choices between elements of what systemicists call 
leto's (e.g., HaLiiday, 1961). Thus, the survey in Cummlng 
(1986) deals predominantly with the grammatical spects 
of the lexicon. 
We discuss here the problem of lexical selection and 
explore the types of control knowledge that are neces- 
sary for it. In particular, we propose different control 
strategies and epistemological foundations for the selec- 
tion of members of a) open-class and b) closed-class lex- 
ical items. One of the most important aspects of control 
knowledge our generator employs for lexical selection is the 
non-propositional information (including knowledge about 
focus and discourse cohesion markers). Our generation 
system incorporates the discourse and textual knowledge 
provided by TEXT as well as the power of MUMBLE's 
grammatical constraints and adds principled lexical selec- 
tion (based on a large semantic knowledge base) and a 
control structure capitalizing on the inherent flexibility of 
distributed architectures. 2 The specific innovations dis- 
cussed in this paper are: 
I Derr and McKeown, 1984 and McKeown, 1985, however, 
discuss thematic information, i e. focus, as a basis for the selec- 
tion of anaphoric pronouns. This is a fruitful direction, and we 
attempt to extend it for treatment of additional discourse-based 
phenomena. 
2 Rubinoff (1986) is one attempt st integrating the tex- 
tual component ofTEXT with the grammar of MUMBLE. This 
interesting idea leads to a significant improvement in the perfor- 
mance of sentence production. Our approach differs from this 
effort in two important repsects. First, in Rubinoff's ystem the 
output of TEXT serves as the input to MUMBLE, resulting in 
a cascaded process. We propose a distributed control where the 
separate knowledge sources contribute to the control when they 
can, opportunistically. Secondly, we view the generation process 
as the product of many more components han the number pro- 
posed in current generators. For a detailed discussion of these 
see Nirenburg and Pu~tejovslry, in preparation. 
201 
I. We attach importance to the question of what the input 
to a generator should be, both as regards its content and 
its form; thus, we maintain that discourse and pragmatic 
information is absolutely essentiM in order for the genera- 
tor to be able to handle a large class of lexicM phenomena; 
we distinguish two sources of knowledge for lexicM selec- 
tion, one discourse and pragznatics-based, the other lexicM 
semantic. 
2. We argue that lexicM selection k not just a side ei~ect of 
grammatical decisions but rather ~ts to flexibly constrain 
concurrent and later generation decisions of either lexicM 
or ~at icM type. 
For comparison, MUMBLE lexical selections are per- 
formed after some grammatical constraints have been used 
to determine the surface syntactic structure; this type of 
control of the generation process does not seem optimal 
or su~icient for all generation tasks, although it may be 
appropriate for on-line generation models; ; we argue that 
the decision process is greatly enhanced by making lexicM 
choices early on in the process. Note that the above does 
not presuppose that the control structure for generation ls 
to be like cascaded transducers; in fact, the actual system 
that we are building based on these principles, features a 
distributed architecture that supports non-rigid decision 
making (it follows that the lexical and grammatical deci- 
sions are not explicitly ordered with respect to each other). 
This architecture is discussed in detail in Nirenburg ~nd 
Pustejovsky, in preparation. 
3. We introduce an important distinction between open- 
class and closed-class lexical items in the way they are rep- 
resented as well as the way they are processed by our gen- 
erator; our computational, processing-oriented paradigm 
has led us to develop a finer classification of the closed- 
class items than that tr~litionMly acknowledged in the 
psycholinguistic literature; thus, we distinguish between 
discourse oriented closed-class (DOCC) items and propo- 
sition oriented ones (POCC); 
4. We upgrade the importance of knowledge about focus 
in the sentence to be generated so that it becomes one of 
the prime heuristics for controlling the entire generation 
process, including both lexical selection and grammatical 
phrasing. 
5. We suggest a comprehensive design for the concept lex- 
icon component used by the generator, which is perceived 
as a combination of a gener'M-purpose semantic knowl- 
edge base describing a subject domain (a subworld) and 
a generation-specific lexicon (indexed by concepts in this 
knowledge base) that consists of a large set of discrimi- 
nation nets with semantic and pragmatic tests on their 
nodes. 
These discrimination nets are distinct from the choo- 
sers in NIGEL's choice systems, where grammatical knowl- 
edge is not systematically separated from the lexical se- 
mantic knowledge (for a discussion of problems inherent 
in this approach see McDonald, Vaughau and Pustejovsky, 
1986); the pragmatic nature of some of the tests, as well 
ms the fine level of detail of knowledge representation is 
what distinguishes our approach from previous conceptual 
generators, notably PHRED (Jscobs, 1985)). 
2. Input  to  Generat ion  
As in McKeown (1985,1986) the input to the pro- 
cess of generation i cludes information about the discourse 
within which the proposition is to be generated. In our sys- 
tem the following static knowledge sources constitute the 
input to generation: 
1. A representation f the meaning of the text to be gener- 
ated, chunked into proposition-size modules, each of which 
carries its own set of contextual values; (cf. TRANSLA- 
TOR, Nirenburg et al, 1986, 1987); 
2. the semantic knowledge base (concept lexicon) that 
contains information about the types of concepts (objects 
(mental, physical and perceptuM) and processes (states 
and actions)) in the subject domain, represented with the 
help of the description module (DRL) of the TRANSLA- 
TOR knowledge representation language. The organiza- 
tiona~ basis for the semantic knowledge base is an empir- 
ically derived set of inheritance networks (isa, m~ie-of, 
belongs-to, has-as-part, etc.). 
3. The specific lexicon for generation, which takes the form 
of a set of discrimination ets, whose leaves are marked 
with lex/cal units or lexicM gaps and whose non-leaf nodes 
contain discrimination criteria that for open-class items are 
derived from selectional restrictions, in the sense of Katz 
and Fodor (1963) or Chomsk'y (1965), as modified by the 
ideas of preference semantics (Wilks, 1975, 1978). Note 
that most closed.class items have a special status in this 
generation lexicon: the discrimination ets for them axe 
indexed not by concepts in the concept lexicon, but rather 
by the types of values in certain (mostly, nonpropc~itional) 
slots in input frames; 
4. The history of processing, structured Mong the lines of 
the episodic memory oWaa~zat~on suggested by Kolodner 
(1984) and including the feedback of the results of actual 
lexic~l choices during the generation of previous sentences 
in a text. 
202 
3. Lex ica l  C lasses  
The distinction between the open- and closed-class 
lexical unite has proved an important one in psychology 
and psycholinguistics. The manner in which retrieval of el- 
ements from these two classes operates is taken as evidence 
for a particular mental lexicon structure. A recent pro- 
posal (Morrow, 1986) goes even further to explain some of 
our discourse processing capabilities in term~ of the prop- 
erties of some closed-da~ lexicM items. It is interesting 
that for this end Morrow assumes, quite uncritically, the 
standard division between closed- and open-cla~ lexical 
categories: 'Open-class categories include content words, 
such as nouns, verbs and adjectives... Closed-class cate- 
gories include function words, such as articles and prepo- 
sitions...' (op. cir., p. 423). We do not elaborate on the 
definition of the open-class lexical items. We have, how- 
ever, found it useful to actually define a particular subset 
of dosed-class items as being discourse-oriented, distinct 
from those closed-class items whose processing does not 
depend on discourse knowledge. 
A more complete list of closed-class lexical items 
will include the following: 
? determiners and demonstratives (a, the, thiJ, tl~t); 
? quantifiers (most, e~ery, each, all o/); 
? pronouns (he, her, its); 
? deictic terms and indexicats (here, now, I, there); 
? prepositions (on, during, against); 
. paxentheticals and attitudinal~ (az a matter off act, 
o~ the contrary); 
? conjunctions, including discontinuous ones (and, be. 
r .~e,  neither...nor); 
primary verbs (do, have, be); 
? modal verbs (shall, might, aurar to); 
? wh-words (toho, why, how); 
? expletives (no, yes, maybe). 
We have concluded that the above is not a homoge- 
neous list; its members can be characterized on the basis of 
what knowledge sources axe used to evaluate them in the 
generation process. We have established two such distinct 
knowledge sources: purely propositional information and 
contextual and discourse knowledge. Those closed-class 
items that are assigned a denotation only in the context 
of an utterance will be termed discourse-oriented closed 
class (DOCC) items; this includes determiners, pronouns, 
indexicals, and temporal prepositions. Those contributing 
to the propositional content of the utterance will be called 
proposition-oriented closed-class (POCC) items. These in- 
clude modals, locative and function prepositions, and pri- 
mary verbs. 
According to this classification, the ~definitenees 
effect" (that is, whether a definite or an intefinite noun 
phrase is selected for generation) is distinct from general 
quantification, which appears to be decided on the basis 
of propositional factors. Note that prepositions no longer 
form a natural class of simple closed-class items. For ex- 
ample, in (I) the preposition before unites two entities con- 
nected through a discourse marker. In (2) the choice of the 
preposition on is determined by information contained in 
the propositional content of the sentence. 
(I) John ate breakfast bet'ore leaving for work. 
(2) John sat on the bed. 
We will now suggest a set of processing heuristics for 
the lexical selection of a member from each lexical class. 
This classification entails that the lexicon for generation 
will contain only open-cla~ lexical items, because the rest 
of the lexical items do not have an independent epistemo- 
logical status, outside the context of an utterance. The 
selection of closed-class items, therefore, comes as a result 
of the use of the various control heuristics that guide the 
process of generation. In other words, they axe incorpo- 
rated in the procedural knowledge rather than the static 
knowledge. 
4.0  Lex ica l  Se lec t ion  
4.1 Selection of Open-Class Items 
A significant problem in lexical selection of open- 
class items is how well the concept to be generated matches 
the desired lexical output. In other words, the input to 
generate in English the concept 'son's wife's mother' will 
find no single lexical item covering the entire expression. In 
Russian, however, this meaning is covered by a single word 
'swatja.' This illustrates the general problem of lexlcal 
gaps and bears on the question of how strongly the con- 
ceptual representation is influenced by the native tongue of 
the knowledge-engineer. The representation must be com- 
prehensive yet flexible enough to accommodate this kind 
of problem. The processor, on the other hand, must be 
constructed so that it can accommodate lexical gaps by 
being able to build the most appropriate phrase to insert 
in the slot for which no single lexical unit can be selected 
(perhaps, along the lines of McDonald and Pustejovsky, 
1985a). 
To illustrate the knowledge that bears upon the 
choice of an open-class lexicM item, let us trace the process 
of lexicai selection of one of the words from the list: desk, 
table, dining table, coffee table, utility table. Suppose, dur- 
ing a run of our generator we have already generated the 
following p~.-tial sentence: 
(3) John bought a ...... 
and the pending input is as partially shown in Figures 1-3. 
Figure I contains the instance of a concept to be generated. 
203 
(stol$4 
(instance-of 8tel) 
(coXor black) 
(size 8m~l) 
(height average) 
(:as. auerafe) 
(a,~e-of ateel) 
(location-of #~t)) 
F|~Lre I 
(stol 
( i . ,  furniture) 
(color black brown yellow white) 
(size amaJl average) 
(height lOW averGgs high) 
(was. les~-than-avsmqe averaqe) 
(aade-of t~ood plastic steel) 
(Iocatlon-of e~t write sew work) 
(has-as-pert ( leg leg leg (leg) top) 
(topolol7 O| (top loS))) 
Figure 2 
Figure 2 contains the representation of the corresponding 
type in the semantic knowledge base. Figure 3 contains an 
excerpt from the English generation lexicon, which is the 
discrimination et for the concept in Figure 2. 
cuo location-of of 
eat: cuo height of 
low: co~ree table 
avnrqe  : dining table 
~.te :  demk 
sev: sewing table 
saw: workbench 
otherwise: table 
Figure 3 
In order to select the appropriate l xicalization the 
generator has to traverse the discrimination et, having 
first found the answers to tests on its nodes in the repre- 
sentation of the concept oken (in Figure 1). In addition, 
the latter representation is compared with the represen- 
tation of the concept type and if non-default values are 
found in some slots, then the result of the generation will 
be a noun phrase with the above noun as its he~l and a 
number of ~ljectival modifiers. Thus, in our example, the 
generator will produce 'bla~.k steel dining table'. 
4.2 Selection of  POCC I tems 
Now let us discuss the process of generating a propo- 
sition oriented lexical item. The example we will use here 
is that of the function preposition to. The observ'4tion 
here is that if to is a POCC item, the information required 
for generating it should be contained within the proposi- 
tional content of the input representation; o contextual 
information should be necessary for the lexical decision. 
A~ume that we wish to generate sentence (1) where we 
axe focussing on the selection of to. 
(1) John walked to the store. 
If the input to the gener~tor is
(walk 
(Actor John) 
(Location "hers')  
(Source U) 
(Goal stars23) 
(TL~o past2) 
( in tent ion  U) 
(Direction otare~3) ) 
then the only information ecessary to generate the prepo- 
sition is the case role for the goal, 8tore. Notice that a 
change in the lexicalization of this attribute would only 
arise with a different input to the generator. Thus, if the 
goal were unspecified, we might generate (2) instead of (1); 
but here the propositional content is different. 
(2) John walked towards the store. 
In the complete paper we will discuss the generation of two 
other DOCC items; namely, quantifiers and primary verbs, 
such as do and have. 
4.2 Selection of  DOCC I tems:  
? Generat ing  a discourse anaphor  
Suppose we wish to generate an anaphoric pronoun 
for an NP in a discourse where its antecedent was men- 
tioned in a previous entence. We illustrate this in Figure 
2. Unlike open-cl~s items, pronominals axe not going to 
be directly a~ociated with concepts in the semantic kn- 
woledge b~se. Rather, they are generated as a result of 
decisions involving contextual knowledge, the beliefs of the 
speaker and hearer, and previous utterances. Suppose, we 
have alre~ly generated (4) and the next sentence to be 
generated a.l~o refers to the same individual and informs 
us that John was at his father's for two days. 
(1) John, visited his father. 
(2) He~ stayed for two days. 
Immediate/ocuz information, in the sense of Grosz (1979) 
interacts with a history of the previous sentence struc- 
tures to determine a strategy for selecting the appropriate 
anaphor. Thus, selecting the appropriate pronoun is an 
attached procedure. The heuristic for discourse-directed 
pronomin~ization is as follows: 
204 
IF: (I) the input for the generation of a sentence 
includes an instance of an object present in a recent 
input; and 
(2) the the previous instance of this object (the po- 
tential antecedent} is in the topic position; and 
(3) there are few intervening potential antecedents; 
and 
(4} there is no focus shift in the space between the 
occurrence of the antecedent and the current object 
instance 
THEN: realize the current instance of that object as a pro- 
noun; consult the grammatical knowledge source for 
the proper gender, number and case form of the pro- 
noun. 
In McDonald and Pustejovsky (1985b) a heursitic 
was given for deciding when to generate a full NP  and 
when a pronoun. This decision was fully integrated into 
the grammatical decisions made by MUMBLE in terms of 
realization-classes, and was no different from the decision 
to make a sentence active or passive. Here, we are separat. 
ing discourse information from linguistic knowledge. Our 
system is closer to McKeown's (1985, 1986) TEXT system, 
where discourse information acts to constrain the control 
regimen for Linguistic generation. We extend McKeown's 
idea, however, in that we view the process of lexical selec- 
tion as a constraining factor i~ geruera/. In the complete 
paper, we illustrate how this works with other discourse 
oriented dosed-class items. 
5. The  Ro le  o f  Focus  in  Lex ica l  Se lec t ion  
As witnessed in the previous section, focus is an im- 
portant factor in the generation of discourse anaphors. In 
this section we demonstrate that focus plays an important 
role in selecting non-discourse items as well. Suppose your 
generator has to describe a financial transaction as a result 
of which 
(I) Bill is the owner of a car that previously belonged 
to John, and 
(2) John is richer by $2,000. 
Assuming your generator is capable of representing the 
~at ica l  structure of the resulting-English sentence, 
it still faces an important decision of how to express lexi- 
cally the actual transaction relation. Its choice is to either 
use buy or 8ell as the main predicate, leading to either (I) 
or (2), or to use a non-perspective phrasing where neither 
verb is used. 
(1) Bill bought a car from John for $2,000. 
(2) John sold a car to Bill for $2,000. 
We distinguish the following major contributing factors for 
selecting one verb over the other;, (I) the intended perspec- 
tive of the situation, (2) the emphasis of one activity rather 
than another, (3) the focus being on a particular individ- 
ual, and (4) previous lexicalizations of the concept. 
These observations are captured by allowing/ocu8 
to operate over several expression including event-types 
such as tra~/sr. Thus, the variables at pIw for focus in- 
dude: 
? end-of-transfer, 
? beginning-of-transfer, 
? activity-of- transfer, 
? goal-of-object, 
? source-of-object, 
? goal-of-money, 
? source-of-money. 
That is, lexical/zation depends on which expressions are in 
focus. For example, if John is the immediate focus (as in 
McKeown (1985)) and beginning-of-transfer is the current- 
focus, the generator will lexicalize from the perspective of 
the sell/ng, namely (2). Given a different focus configura- 
tion in the input to the generator, the selection would be 
different and another verb would be generated. 
6. Conc lus ion  
In this paper we have argued that lexJcal selection 
is an important contributing factor to the process of gen- 
eration, and not just a side effect of grammatical deci- 
s/ons. Furthermore, we claim that open-class items are 
not only conceptually different from closed-class items, but 
are processed ifferently as well. Closed class items have 
no epistemological status other than procedural attach- 
ments to conceptual and discourse information. Related to 
this, we discovered an interesting distinction between two 
types of closed-class items, distinguished by the knowledge 
sources necessary to generate them; discourse oriented and 
proposition-oriented. Finally, we extend the importance of 
focus information for directing the generation process. 
205 
References 
\[1\] Appelt, Dougla~ Planning Enqlish Sentences, Cam. 
bridge U. Press. 
\[2\] Chomsky, Noam A~pec~ on tM. Theo~ o! $ynt~ 
MIT Press. 
\[3\] Cumming, Susanna, "A Guide to Lexical Acquisi- 
tion in the JANUS System" ISI Research Report 
ISI/RR-85-162, Information Sciences Institute, Ma- 
rina del Rey, California~ 1986a. 
\[4\] Cvmming, Stumana, "The Distribution of I.,exic.M 
Information i Text Generation', presented for Work- 
shop on Automating the Lexicon, Pisa~ 1986b. 
\[5\] Den', K. and K. McKeown "Focus in Generation, 
COLING 1984 
\[6\] Dowty, David R., Word Meaning and Montague 
Grammar, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, Holland, 1979. 
\[7\] Hall/day, M.A.K. ~Options and functions in the En- 
gl~h clause m. Brno Studies in Enfli~h 8, 82-88. 
\[8\] Jacobs, Paul S., "PHRED: A Generator for Nat- 
ural Language Interface', Computational Linguis- 
tics, Volume 11, Number 4, 1085. 
\[9\] Katz, Jerrold and Jerry A. Fodor, "The Structure of 
a Semantic Theory', Language Vol 39, pp.170-210, 
1963. 
\[10\] Mann, William and Matthiessen, "NIGEL: a Sys- 
temic Grammar for Text Generation', in Freddle 
(ed.), Systemic Perspectives on Discoerae, Ablex. 
\[11\] McDonald, David and James Pustejovsky, "Descrip- 
tion directed Natural Language Generation" Pro- 
ceedings of IJCAI-85. Kaufmann. 
\[12\] McDonald, David and James Pustejovsky, "A Com- 
putational Theory of Prose Style for Natural Lan- 
guage Generation, Proceedings ofthe European ACL, 
University of Geneva, 1985. 
\[13\] McKeown, Kathy Tez~ Generatio,~ Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press. 
\[14\] McKeown, Kathy, "Stratagies and Constraints for 
Generating Natural Language Text ~, in Bolc and 
McDonald, 1087. 
\[151 Morrow "The Processing of Closed Class Lexical 
Items', in Cognitive Science 10.4, 1986. 
\[161 Nirenburg, Sergei, Victor Raskin, and Allen Tucker, 
"The Structure of Interlingua in TRANSLATOR", 
in Nirenburg (ed.) Machine Translation: Theoret- 
ical ~nd Afeth~dolofical ls~ttes, Cambridge Univer- 
sity Pres~. 1987. 
\[17\] Wilks, Yorick "Preference Semantics, ~ Artificial In- 
telligence, 1975. 
206 
