Expressing Concern 
Computer Science Division 
University of California t Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA 94720 
U.S.A. 
Abstract 
A consultant system's main task is to provided helpful advice 
to the user. Consultant systems hould not only find solutions 
to user problems, but should also inform the user of potential 
problems with these solutions. Expressing such potential 
caveats is a difficult process due to the many potential plan 
failures for each particular plan in a particular planning situa- 
tion. A commonsense planner, called KIP, Knowledge Inten- 
sive Planner, is described. KIP is the planner for the UNIX 
Consultant system. KIP detect potential plan failures using a 
new knowledge structure termed a concern. Concerns allow 
KIP to detects plan failures due to unsatisfied conditions or 
goal conflict. KIP's concern algorithm also is able to provide 
information to the expression mechanism regarding potential 
plan failures. Concern information ispassed to the expression 
mechanism when KIP's selected plan might not work. In this 
case, KIP passes information regarding both the suggested 
plan and the potential caveats in that plan to the expression 
mechanism. This is an efficient approach since KIP must 
make such decisions in the context of its planning process. A 
concern's declarative structure makes it easier to express than 
procedural descriptions of plan failures used by earlier sys- 
tems. 
Marc Luria 
Computer Science Department 
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology 
Halfa 
Israel 
(a2) Let me know if the door is locked. 
(a3) Be careful walking down the stairs. 
(a4) Make sure to turn off the basement light. 
In (al), the mother has provided the child with information 
about the location of his shoe. The mother has also implied 
the use of a plan: Walk down to the basement and get your 
shoes. However, there are a number of problems inherent in 
this plan. The mother might also inform her child of these 
problems. The first problem, (a2), is that one of the condi- 
tions necessary to execute the plan might be unsatisfied. The 
door to the basement might be locked. If it is locked addition- 
al steps in the plan will be necessary. The second problem, 
(a3), is that executing the walk-down-the-stairs plan might 
result in a fall. The mother knows that this outcome is likely, 
due to her experience of the child's previous attempts at the 
walk-down-the-stairs plan. The mother wishes to prevent the 
child from falling, since this is a potentially dangerous and 
frightening experience for the child. The third problem, (a4), 
is that the child might forget to turn off the light in the base- 
ment. This would threaten the mothers's goal of preventing 
the basement light from burning out. 
However, the same parent might not add: 
I. Introduction 
The most important task of a consultant is to provide 
advice to a user. Human consultants are asked to provide 
answers to user queries in domains within which they have 
more expertise than the user. In some cases, the answers pro- 
vided to the user are basic information about a particular 
domain. However, in many cases, the task of the consultant is 
provide answers to user problems. Furthermore, they are not 
only asked to find solutions, they are also asked to use their 
expertise to anticipate potential problems with these solutions. 
Let us consider a very simple example of a consultant rela- 
tionship. For example, suppose a child asks the following 
question: 
(a) Where is my shoe? 
His mother might respond: 
(al) It's in the basement. 
However, his mother might also add: 
(a5) Let me know if the door needs to be oiled 
(a6) Be careful walking in the basement 
(a7) Make sure to close the basement door 
This second set of responses also provide advice that reflects 
problems due to unsatisfied conditions of the plan or potential 
goal conflicts. However, the mother might not decide to ex- 
press these statements to the child since they are either unlike- 
ly or unimportant causes of potential plan failure. 
Therefore, the mother has made three decisions. First, 
she has decided which plan to suggest o the child based on 
his world knowledge. Secondly, she has decided which parts 
of that plan should be expressed to the child. Thirdly, she has 
decided which potential caveats in that plan should be ex- 
pressed to the child based on her experience. 
Previous research in intelligent user interfaces (Allen84, 
Appelt85, McDonald84) has focused on the second decision. 
Systems attempt not to violate Grice's second Maxim of 
Quantity: Make your contribution as informative as is re- 
quired (Grice 1975). These systems formulated a response 
221 
that would provide information or a plan to the user. Allen 
sought o discover obstacles in the user's plan. He tried to 
help the user's plan by providing the user with the information 
he needed to execute that plan. However, he did not provide a 
mechanism for expressing plan failures. In this paper, we 
focus on the problem of making decisions regarding those po- 
tential problems which should be expressed to the user. How- 
ever, rather than using a separate mechanism for this purpose, 
we propose that this decision be made using information pro- 
vided by the problem solving component of the system, the 
planner. 
We describe a commonsense planner called KIP, 
Knowledge Intensive Planner. KIP is being developed for 
UC, the UNIX Consultant system (Luria85, Wilensky 84a, 
86). UC provides solutions to user problems in the UNIX 
operating system domain. KIP provides the information 
necessary in order to make decisions regarding which poten- 
tial plan failures should be expressed to the user. KIP must 
make decisions regarding potential plan failures in order to 
devise a good plan for the user. Rather than use a separate 
process to make decisions about those potential plan failures 
which should be expressed to the user, KIP provides this in- 
formation to the expression mechanism directly. In the next 
section, we give some examples of KIP's interaction with ex- 
pression mechanism. KIP provides information about poten- 
tial plan failures which will be expressed to the user. We also 
describe KIP's role in the UNIX Consultant system. In the 
following section, we describe a declarative representation 
that allows KIP to detect and provide expression i formation 
about potential plan failures. 
2. KIP Examples 
(b) User: 
UC: 
How do I pr int J im's file on 
the l inepr inter?  
Print J im's fi le foo by 
typing ipr foo. This plan 
wil l  not work if you don't  have 
read permiss ion  on J im's file 
or if the pr inter  is out of 
paper. 
(c) User: 
UC: 
How do I move a file named 
paul to the file named mary? 
To move the file paul to the 
file named mary, type mv paul 
mary. However, if the file 
mary exists, it wil l  be 
deleted. 
(d) User: 
UC: 
How do I change my password? 
To change your passwd use the 
passwd command. However, 
remember that if you change 
your password on one machine, 
it wil l  not be changed on 
other machines.  
In each of these examples, KIP has selected a known 
plan for accomplishing the goals of the user. However, in 
each of these examples, KIP determines that the plan could 
fail and therefore has decided to express this potential failure 
to the user. 
KIP has a large knowledge-base of information about 
the UNIX operating system. Decisions regarding UC's own 
actions are made by UCEgo. The parser and goal analyzer 
(Mayfield 86) of UC pass KIP a set of goals, and KIP wies to 
find appropriate plans for those goals. KIP determines a plan 
for the problem, and notes which potential plan failures hould 
be expressed to the user. KIP passes this decision-making in-
formation to the UCExpression mechanism(Chin86, Wilen- 
sky86). The expression mechanism decides how to express 
the plan to the user, given a model of the user's knowledge 
about UNIX. The plan is then passed to the natural language 
generator, which generates a natural language response to the 
user. UC is a conversational system, and if necessary KIP can 
query the user for more information. Nevertheless, KIP tries 
to provide the best plan it can with the information provided 
by user. 
3. Concerns 
In the previous ections, we have described the impor- 
tance of informing the user about potential problems with a 
plan. In this section, we describe a new concept which we 
have introduced, termed a concern. A concern allows KIP to 
predict potential plan failures and provide knowledge to ex- 
press potential plan failures to the user. 
A concern refers to those aspects of a plan which should 
be considered because they are possible sources of plan 
failure. A concern describes which aspects of a plan are likely 
to cause failure. 
There are two major types of concerns, condition con- 
cerns, and goal conflict concerns. These two types reflect he 
two major types of plan failure. Condition concerns refer to 
those aspects of a plan that are likely to cause plan failure due 
to a condition of the plan that is needed for successful execu- 
tion. The conditions about which KIP is concerned are always 
conditions of a particular plan. (These are fully described in 
Luria86, 87a). 
Goal conflict concerns refer to those aspects of a plan 
which are likely to cause plan failure due to a potential goal 
conflict between an effect of a plan and a goal of the user. 
Goal conflict concerns relate plans to user goals and to other 
pieces of knowledge that are not part of the plan. Examples of 
this knowledge include background goals which may be 
threatened by the plan. Since these background goals are not 
usually inferred until such a threat is perceived, goal conflict 
concerns often refer to conflicts between a potential plan and a 
long-term interest of the user. Interests are general states that 
KIP assumes are important to the user. An interest differs 
from a goal in that one can have interests about general states 
of the world, while goals refer to a concrete state of the world. 
For example, preserving the contents of one's files is an in- 
terest, while preserving the contents of the file named filel is a 
222 
goal. KIP's knowledge-base includes many interests that KIP 
assumes on the part of the user. Goals are generated only 
when expressed by the user, or by KIP itself during the plan- 
ning process. 
Stored goal conflict concerns refer to concerns about 
conflicts of interest. These are concerns about the selected 
plan conflicting with an interest of the user. If KIP detects a 
conflict-of-interest concern, then KIP must determine if it 
should infer an individual goal on the part of the user that 
reflects this interest. If KIP decides to infer this individual 
goal, then a dynamic concern between the selected plan and 
the individual goal is also instantiated. (Goal conflict are 
described more fully in Luria87b.) 
Some plan failures are more likely to occur than others, 
and some plan failures are more important than others if they 
do occur. The representation f concerns reflects this differ- 
ence by assigning a varying degree of concern to the stored 
concerns in the knowledge base. The degree of a condition 
concern reflects both the likelihood that the condition will fail, 
and the importance of satisfying the condition for the success- 
ful execution of the plan. There are many factors that deter- 
mine the degree of concern about a confiict-of-interes~. The 
planning knowledge base designer needs to determine how 
likely a conflicting effect is to occur, how likely it is that the 
user holds the threatened goal, and how important this goal is 
to the user. 
In the present implementation f KIP, information re- 
garding concerns of potential plans is supplied by a human ex- 
pert with a great deal of UNIX experience. Stored concerns 
are therefore, a way for the planner database designer to ex- 
press his personal experience regarding those aspects of a 
stored plan that are most likely to fail. In principle, however, 
the information might be supplied by an analysis of data of ac- 
tual UNIX interactions. 
4. Concerns and Expression 
In this section, we describe the problems that concerns 
were initially meant o address in plan failure detection. We 
also describe how this same process has been used to express 
potential plan failures to the user. 
KIP is a a commonsense planner ONilensky83) - a 
planner which is able to effectively use a large body of 
knowledge about a knowledge-rich domain. Such knowledge 
includes a general understanding of planning strategy, detailed 
descriptions of plans, the conditions necessary for these plans 
to execute successfully, and descriptions of those potential 
goal conflicts that the plans might cause. Due to the detailed 
nature of this knowledge, it is difficult to detect potential plan 
failures. Condition failures are hard to detect since there are 
many conditions for any particular plan. Goal conflict failures 
are difficult to detect since any of the many effects could 
conflict with any of the many goals of the user. Furthermore, 
many of the user goals are not inferred until a threat o user in- 
terest is perceived. Previous planning programs (Fikes71, 
Newel172, Sacerdoti74) searched exhaustively among every 
condition and every potential goal conflict for potential plan 
failure. This is a very inefficient process. On the other hand, 
human consultants generally consider only a few potential 
plan failures while assessing a particular plan. 
Additionally, KIP may not be aware of the values of 
many of the conditions of a particular plan. Most previous 
planning research assumed that the values for all the condi- 
tions is known. However, in UC, when a user describes a 
planning problem which is then passed to KIP, the values for 
many conditions are usually left out. All users would believe 
that normal conditions, like the machine being up, would be 
assumed by the consultant. A naive user might not be aware 
of the value of many conditions that require a more sophisti- 
cated knowledge of UNIX. An expert user would believe that 
the consultant would make certain assumptions requiring this 
more sophisticated knowledge of UNIX. It would be undesir- 
able to prompt the user for this information, particularly for 
those values which axe not important for the specific plonning 
situation. 
Therefore, concerns were introduced in order to detect 
plan failures. Concerns allow KIP to use information about 
the likelihood and importance of potential plan failures. They 
allow the planning database designer to store knowledge re- 
garding which conditions are most likely to be unsatisfied, and 
which goal conflicts are most likely to occur as a result of the 
execution of a particular plan. 
Furthermore, the same concern information can be used 
in order to determine which potential plan failures should be 
expressed to the user. When, KIP selects a potential plan, the 
concerns of that particular plan are evaluated in the particular 
planning situation. Once the concerns of a plan are evaluated 
there are three possible scenarios. In the first case, none of the 
concerns are important in the particular planning situation. 
The plan is generated to the user without any concern infor- 
mation. In the second case, there is a moderate degree of con- 
cern regarding the plan. In this case, the plan is generated 
along with the concern information. In cases where there is a 
high degree of concern, the plan is modified or a new plan is 
selected. These scenarios will be fully explained in the fol- 
lowing section. Before describing KIP's algorithm regarding 
decisions about concerns, we first describe a simple example 
of the use of concerns. For the purposes of this example, we 
consider only condition concerns. 
5. An Example of the Use of Concerns 
The simplest use of concerns addresses the problem of 
specifying which conditions of a particular plan are important 
enough invoke the planner's concern. For example, suppose 
the user asks the following question: 
(e) How do I pr int  out the fi le named 
george on the laser pr inter?  
KIP is passed the goal of printing the file named george 
on the laser printer. In this case, KIP's knowledge-base con- 
223 
rains a stored plan for the goal of printing a file, namely, the 
USE-LSPR-COI~gclAND plan. KIP creates an instance of this 
plan, which it calls USE-LSPR-COMMANDI. KIP must then 
evaluate the USE-LSPR-COMMAND1 plan in order to determine 
if the plan is appropriate for this particular planning situation. 
This process entails the examination of those conditions likely 
to cause failure of this plan. 
In order to examine these conditions, KIP looks at the 
stored concerns of the stored plan, USE-LSPR-COMMAND. For 
each of the stored concerns of the stored plan, it creates a 
dynamic concern in this individual plan, USE-LSPR- 
COMMANDI. KIP examines the USE-LSPR-COM~'IAND plan, 
and finds that two of its many conditions are cause for con- 
cern: 
(i) the pr inter  has paper 
(2) the pr inter  is onl ine 
The most likely cause of plan failure involves (1), since the 
paper runs out quite often. Therefore, (1) has a moderate de- 
gree of concern, and (2) has a low degree of concern. KIP 
considers the most likely concerns first. These concerns are 
called stored condition concerns, because the failure of these 
conditions" often causes the failure of USE-LSPR-COMMAND. 
KIP therefore creates dynamic concerns regarding the paper in 
the printer, and the printer being online. 
KIP then must evaluate ach of these dynamic concerns. 
In this particular example, there is no explicit information 
about the paper in the printer or the printer being online. 
Therefore, KIP uses the default values for the concerns them- 
selves. KIP's concern about paper in the printer is high 
enough to warrant further consideration. Therefore, this con- 
tern is temporarily overlooked. However, the concern about 
the printer being online is disregarded. Its degree of concern 
is low. It is not a very likely source of plan failure. Since 
there are no other dynamic concerns for this particular plan, 
KIP looks back at its overlooked concern. Since this is the 
only concern, and the degree of concern is moderate, KIP de- 
cides that this concern should not be elevated to a source of 
plan failure. Rather, KIP decides to express this concern to 
the user. KIP assumes that, except for this concern, the plan 
will execute successfully. The plan is then suggested to the 
user: 
(E) UC: To print the file george on the 
laser printer, type lpr -Plp 
george. This plan will not work 
if the pr inter  is out of paper. 
There are many other conditions of the USE-LSPR- 
COMMAND plan that KIP might have considered. For exam- 
ple, the condition that the file exists is an important condition 
for the lpr command. However, KIP need not be concerned 
about this condition in most planning situations, since it is un- 
likely that this condition will cause plan failure. Hence such 
conditions are not stored in the long term memory of KIP as 
stored concerns. 
6. KIP 's  Concern Treatment Algorithm 
In the following section, we describe the part of KIP's 
algorithm that decides what to do with concerns once they 
have been evaluated. KIP's entire algorithm for determining 
the concerns of a particular plan is fully described in 
(Luria86) and CLuria87ab). 
Once KIP has evaluated a particular dynamic concern of 
a particular plan, it can proceed in one of three ways, depend- 
ing on the degree of that particular concern. If the degree of 
concern is low, KIP can choose to disregard the concern. 
Disregard means that the concern is no longer considered at 
all. KIP can u'y to modify other parts of the plan, and suggest 
the plan to the user with no reference to this particular con- 
tern. 
If the degree of concern is high, KIP can choose to 
elevate the concern to a source of plan failure. In this case, 
KIP determines that it is very likely that the plan will fail. 
KIP tries to fix this plan in order to change the value of this 
condition, or tries to find another plan. 
The most complex case is when the degree of concern is 
moderate. In this case, KIP can choose to disregard the con- 
cern, or elevate it to a source of plan failure. KIP can also 
choose to overlook the concern. 
KIP then evaluates each of the concerns of a particular 
plan. It addresses all of the concerns which have been elevat- 
ed to a a source of plan failure. KIP thus develops a complete 
plan for the problem by satisfying conditions about which it 
was concerned, and resolving goal conflicts about which it 
was concerned. Once KIP has developed a complete plan, it is 
once again faced with the need to deal with the overlooked 
concerns. If the plan will work, except for the overlooked 
concerns, KIP can again choose to disregard the concern. If 
there are a number of overlooked concerns KIP may choose to 
elevate one or more of these overlooked concerns to a source 
of plan failure. The plan is then modified accordingly, or a 
new plan is selected. 
At this point, KIP can also choose to suggest an answer 
to the user. Any, overlooked concerns are then expressed to 
the user in the answer. 
Furthermore, if the concern has been elevated to a 
source of plan failure, and no other acceptable plan has been 
found, KIP can choose to suggest he faulty plan to the user, 
along with the potential caveats. The concern information is 
based on default knowledge that assumed by KIP. Therefore, 
the plans may work if these defaults are not correct even if 
there are concerns in the particular planning situation. Also, 
the user may decide that he is not concerned about particular 
plan failure. For example, KIP may have mid the user about a 
potential deleterious side effect. The user may decide that this 
side effect is not that important if it occurs. This corresponds 
to a human consultant, who, when faced with a problem he 
cannot solve, gives the user a potentially faulty plan with the 
explanation of the potential caveats. This is more informative 
' 224  
for the user than just saying that he doesn't know. 
7. Advantages of Concerns 
Thus, concerns are used by KIP to decide how the plan- 
ning process hould proceed and how to decide which answer 
is expressed. In this section, we describe a few more exam- 
pies of KIP's behavior In these examples, we also refer to a 
new type of concern called a violated default concern. These 
concerns are accessed by KIP whenever it realizes that a de- 
fault has been violated. In this way, KIP can use knowledge 
from default concerns when there is no knowledge that de- 
faults have been violated. However, when planning in novel 
situations, general violated default concerns are accessed. 
Consider the following examples: 
(f) How do I edit the file anyfi le? 
(g) How do I edit J im's file j imfi le? 
(h) How do I edit the file groupf i le  
which is shared by my group? 
One of KIP's main concerns in any of the possible edit- 
ing plans is the write permission of the file. If the user tries to 
edit a file on which he does not have write permission, the 
plan will fall. In (f), this concern is inherited from the edit 
plan with a relatively low degree of concern. According to the 
default case, the file belongs to the user and he has write per- 
mission on the file. Since there is no infortnation about the 
write permission of the file, the default must be assumed and 
this concern is disregarded. KIP would therefore return a plan 
of 
(F) To edit the file named anyfile, use 
vi anyfi le. 
In (g) ,  KIP realizes that the default of the file belong- 
ing to the user is violated. Due to this default violation, a 
violated default concern of having write permission on the file 
is created. This concern of write permission is therefore 
evaluated by the default mechanism. Since there is a very 
good chance that the plan will not work, this concern about 
write permission of the file is elevated to a cause of plan 
failure. Once a condition is a cause of plan failure, KIP must 
deal with the plan failure. KIP c/n suggest a plan for chang- 
ing the condition or try some new plan. In this case, since 
there is no way to change the write permission of J im's file, 
another plan is chosen. 
(G) In order to edit J im's file, copy the 
file to your d i rectory and then use vi 
f i lename to edit the file. 
In (h) ,  KIP also realizes that the default of the file be- 
longing to the user has been violated. However, the default 
value for write permission of this file is different because the 
file belongs to the user's group. There is a good chance that 
the user does have write permission on the file. However, 
since there still is some chance that he does not have group 
write permission, there is still some concern about the condi- 
tion. In this case, since the degree of concern is moderate, 
KIP can choose to overlook the concern, and suggest he plan 
to the user. However, the concern is sdli high enough that the 
answer expression mechanism (Luria 82ab), might choose to 
express the concern to the user. The answer to (h) would 
therefore be: 
(H) To edit the file groupfi le,  use vi 
groupf i le.  However, it might not work, 
if you don't have write permiss ion on 
this par t i cu la r  group file. 
KIP can therefore use concerns to select a potential plan 
which has a moderate likelihood of success. KIP can express 
the plan and its reservations regarding the plan to the user. By 
temporarily overlooking a concern, KIP may search for other 
plan failures of a particular plan or other potential plans. KIP 
can accomplish this without completely disregarding a con- 
cern or elevating the concern to a source of certain plan 
failure. 
8. Implementation and Representation 
KIP is implemented in Zetalisp on a Symbolics 3670. 
Concepts are represented in the KODIAK knowledge represen- 
tation language (Wilensky84b). In particular, knowledge 
about UNIX commands has been organized in complex hierar- 
chies using multiple inheritance. Therefore, when searching 
for stored default concerns of a particular plan that uses a par- 
ticular UNIX command, KIP must search through a hierarchy 
of these commands. This is also true when looking for default 
violations. KIP searches up the hierarchy, and retrieves the 
stored concerns or default violations in this hierarchy. 
Stored condition concerns are presently implemented by 
creating a different CONCERN concept for each concern. Also, 
a HAS-CONCER~ relation is added between each concern and 
those conditions which are cause for concern. Degrees of con- 
cern are implemented by creating a HAS-CONCERN-LEVEL re- 
lation between the particular concern and the degree of con- 
cern. Degrees of concerns are presently implemented as 
numbers from one to ten. Dynamic condition concerns are 
implemented as instances of these stored concerns. 
Stored goal conflict concerns are presendy implemented 
by creating a different CONCERN concept for each concern. 
Also, a 3-way HAS-CONCERN relation is created between each 
concern, the conflicting effect and the threatened interest or 
goal which are cause for concern. 
Defaults are implemented in the current version of KIP 
by attaching default values of conditions to the plans them- 
selves. Context-dependent defaults are implemented by ex- 
ploiting the concretion mechanism of UC, which tries to find 
the most specific concept in the hierarchy. Therefore, since 
KIP retrieves the most specific plan in the knowledge-base, it 
automatically retrieves the most specific defaults. 
Violated default concerns are implemented by creating 
a different VIOLATED-DEFAULT-CONCERN concept for each 
violated default concern. A HAS-VIOLATED-DEFAULT- 
225 
CONCERN relation is added between the concern and the 
stored default which is violated. Therefore, when KIP has 
found the default hat has been violated, it looks for the violat- 
ed default concerns that are referenced by this default. 
Particular concerns have been entered into the database 
of UNIX plans through a KODIAK knowledge representation 
acquisition language called DEFABS. These concerns are all 
based on my experience using UNIX and on discussions I 
have had with other UNIX users in our research group. We 
are currently investigating a way to enter this concern infor- 
mation, using the UCTeacher program (Martin, 1985) a natur- 
al language knowledge acquisition system. Eventually, KIP 
may incorporate a learning component that would allow KIP 
to detect he frequency of certain plan failures and to store 
these as concerns. 
9. Previous Research 
9.1. Planning 
Early planners uch as STRIPS (Fikes71) did not address 
Goal Conflict Detection as a separate problem. Conflicts were 
detected by the resolution theorem prover, The theorem 
prover compares a small set of add or delete formulas, and a 
small set of formulas that described the present state and the 
desired state of the world. If an action deleted the precondi- 
tion of another action in the plan sequence, backtracking al- 
lowed the planner to determine another ordering of the plan 
steps. ABSTRIPS (Sacerdod74), modified STRIPS to avoid these 
interacting subgoal problems by solving goals in a hierarchical 
fashion. Conflicts in ABSTRIPS were also noticed by the 
theorem prover. However, since the most important parts of 
the plan were solved first, they occurred less often and fewer 
paths were explored. Thus, both these programs identified a
plan failure as a failed path in the search tree. Therefore, no 
information about he nature of a failed path could easily be 
extracted and expressed toa user of the planning system. 
Sacerdoti's NOAH (Sacerdoti77) program separated the 
detection of conflicts from the rest of the planning process us- 
ing his Resolve-Conflicts critic. This critic detects one partic- 
ular kind of conflict, in which one action deletes the precondi- 
tion of another action. We refer to this type of conflict as a 
deleted precondition plan conflict. The critic resolves the 
conflict by committing to an ordering of steps in which the ac- 
tion which requires the precondition is executed first. The 
ordering of steps is usually possible since NOAH uses a least 
commitment strategy for plan step ordering. By separating the 
detection of goal conflicts from the rest of the planning pro- 
cess, NOAH needs to search fewer plan paths than earlier 
planners. 
In order to detect conflicts NOAH computes a TOME, a 
table of multiple effects, each time a new action is added to 
the plan. This table includes all preconditions which are as- 
serted or denied by more than one step in the current plan. 
Conflicts are recognized when a precondition for one step is 
denied in another step. In order to construct this table, NOAH 
must enter all the effects and preconditions for each of the 
steps in the plan every time a new step is added to the plan. 
NOAH'S separation of the Goal Conflict Detection Phase 
from the rest of the planning process was an important addi- 
tion to planning research. However, NOAH'S approach is 
problematic in a number of ways. First, it only detects 
conflicts that occur as a result of deleted preconditions. Other 
conflicts, such as conflicts between effects of a plan and other 
planner goals, cannot be detected using this method. Most of 
the examples in this paper are part of this category of conflict. 
If many planner goals were included in a TOME, as would be 
necessary in real world planning situations, this method would 
be computationally inefficient, Therefore, the same problems 
that were discussed earlier in regard to exhaustive search also 
apply to this method. A TOME is (1) computationally 
inefficient, (2) not cognitively valid, (3) unable to deal with 
default knowledge, and (4) assumes that all user goals are 
known, i.e. would have to evaluate very planner interest in a 
particular planning situation. 
Furthermore, information from a critic which is derived 
from a TOME is very difficult to express. The only thing that 
NOAH knows regarding a potential plan failure is that one 
step in a plan will delete the precondition of another step in 
the plan. A concern, on the other hand is very easy express to 
the user. Concerns connect the various objects that are effect- 
ed by a plan failure. In addition, as in any part of the KO- 
DIAK knowledge base, additional expression i formation can 
be attached to the concern itself. This difference between a
concern and a TOME is another example of the advantage of 
knowledge-rich declarative representations over procedural 
representation f knowledge. 
9.2. Expression 
As discussed earlier, work in intelligent user 
interfaces(Allen84, Appelt85, McDonald84) has primarily 
focused on decisions regarding what aspects of a plan should 
be expressed to the user. Expressing concerns about potential 
plan failures is a natural extension to these other user inter- 
faces. 
The texture of this work is very similar to work done 
earlier by the author. In earlier work on question answering in 
a text understanding system (Luria82ab), question-answering 
was divided into two separate processes. According to earlier 
work one question-answering process determined what was 
contained in the answer and how that information was ex- 
pressed to the user. The first of our two processes determined 
which part of a causal chain was relevant for a particular 
answer. The second process determined which part of that 
causal chain should be generated into a natural anguage 
response for the user. This resulted in one relatively simple 
process that found that correct response, and another more 
general expression process termed answer expression. 
In the present work, the process of expressing potential 
caveats in a plan was not divided into two new processes, In- 
stead, this process is divided into the preexisting planning 
component, and a more general expression mechanism. In so 
doing, we have improved the ability of the planning com- 
ponent to deal with potential plan failures. 
226 
10. References 
Allen, J. 1984. Recognizing Intentions From Natural 
Language Utterances. In Michael Brady (ed.) Computa- 
tional Models of Discourse Cambridge, Mass; MIT 
Press. 
Appelt, D. 1982. Planning Natural Utterances to Satisfy Mul- 
tiple Goals. SRI International AI Center Technical Note 
259. 
Chin, D. N. 1987. "KNOME: Modeling What the User Knows 
in UC" to appear in User Modelling in Dialog Systems, 
Springer-Verlag series on Symbolic Computation. 
Ernst, G. and Newell, A. 1969. GPS: A Case Study in Gen- 
erality and Problem Solving. New York: Academic 
Press. 
Fikes, R. E., and Nilsson, N. J. STRIPS: A new approach to 
the application of theorem proving to problem solving. 
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 2, No. 3-4, pp. 189-208. 
1971. 
Grice, H. P. Logic and Conversation. In P. Cole (ed.) Syntax 
and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts, New York: Academ- 
ic Press, pp. 41-58. 
Luria, M. "Question Answering: Two Separate Processes" 
Proceedings of the 4th National Conference of the Cog- 
nitive Science Society, Ann Arbor, MI August, 1982. 
Luria, M. "Dividing up the Question Answering Process" 
Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial In- 
telligence, Pittsburgh, PA. August, 1982. 
Luria, M. "Commonsense Planning in a Consultant System" 
Proceedings of 9th Conference of the IEEE on Systems, 
Man, and Cybernetics, Tuscon, AZ. November, 1985. 
Luria, M. "Concerns: How to Detect Plan Failures." Proceed- 
ings of the Third Annual Conference on Theoretical ls- 
sues in Conceptual Information Processing. Philadel- 
phia, PA. August, 1986. 
Luria, M. "Concerns: A Means of Identifying Potential Plan 
Failures." Proceedings of the Third IEEE Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence Applications. Orlando, Florida. 
February, 1987. 
Luria, M. "Goal Conflict Concerns" Proceedings of the Tenth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Inteligence. 
Milan, Italy. August, 1987. 
McDonald, D. 1984. Natural Language Generation as a com- 
putational problem. In Michael Brady (ed.) Computa- 
tional Models of Discourse Cambridge, Mass; MIT 
Press. 
Martin, J., 1985. Knowledge Acquisition Through Natural 
Language Dialogue, Proceedings of the 2nd Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence Applications, Miami, Florida, 
1985. 
Mayfield, J., 1986. When to Keep Thinking, Proceedings of 
the Third Annual Conference on Theoretical Issues in 
Conceptual Information Processing. Philadelphia, PA. 
1986. 
Newell, A., and Simon, H. A. Human Problem Solving. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N. J. 1972. 
Sacerdoti, E., Planning in a Hierarchy of Abstraction Spaces, 
Artificial lnteUigence Vol. 5, pp. 115-135, 1974. 
Sacerdoti E. A Structure for Plans and Behavior Elsevier 
North-Holland, New York, N.Y. 1977. 
Wilensky, R. Planning and Understanding: A Computational 
Approach to Human Reasoning. Addison-Wesley, Read- 
ing, Mass., 1983. 
Wilensky, R., "KODIAK: A Knowledge Representation 
Language". Proceedings of the 6th National Conference 
of the Cognitive Science Society, Boulder, CO, June 
1984. 
Wilensky, R., Arens, Y., and Chin, D. Talking to Unix in En- 
glish: An Overview of UC. Communications of the As- 
sociation for Computing Machinery, June, 1984. 
Wilensky, R., et. al., UC - A Progress Report. University of 
California, Berkeley, Electronic Research Laboratory 
Memorandum No. UCB/CSD 87/303. 1986. 
Sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DoD), Arpa Order No. 4871, monitored by Space 
and Naval Warfare Systems Command under Contract 
N00039-84-C-0089. 
227 
