Cues and control in Expert-Client Dialogues 
Steve Whittaker & Phil Stenton 
Hewlett-Packard Laboratories 
Filton Road, Bristol BS I2  6QZ,  UK .  
email: sjw~hplb.csnet 
April 18, 1988 
Abst rac t  
We conducted an empirical analysis into the 
relation between control and discourse struc- 
ture. We applied control criteria to four di- 
alognes and identified 3 levels of discourse 
structure. We investigated the mechanism for 
changing control between these structures and 
found that utterance type and not cue words 
predicted shifts of control. Participants used 
certain types of signals when discourse goals 
were proceeding successfully but resorted to 
interruptions when they were not. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A number of researchers have shown that there 
is organisation i  discourse above the level of 
the individual utterance (5, 8, 9, 10), The cur- 
rent exploratory study uses control as a pa- 
rameter for identifying these higher level struc- 
tures. We then go on to address how conversa- 
tional participants co-ordinate moves between 
these higher level units, in particular looking 
at the ways they use to signal the beginning 
and end of such high level units. 
Previous research as identified three means 
by which speakers ignal information about 
discourse structure to listeners: Cue words 
and phrases (5, 10); Intonation (7); Pronomi- 
nalisation (6, 2). In the cue words approach, 
Reichman'(10) has claimed that phrases like 
"because", "so", and "but" offer explicit in- 
formation to listeners about how the speaker's 
current contribution to the discourse relates 
to what has gone previously. For example a 
speaker might use the expression "so" to signal 
that s/he is about to conclude what s/he has 
just said. Grosz and Sidner (5) relate the use 
of such phrases to changes in attentional state. 
An example would be that "and" or "but" sig- 
nal to the listener that a new topic and set 
of referents i being introduced whereas "any- 
way" and "in any case" indicate a return to a 
previous topic and referent set. A second in- 
direct way of signalling discourse structure is 
intonation. Hirschberg and Pierrehumbert (7) 
showed that intonational contour is closely re- 
lated to discourse segmentation with new top- 
ics being signalled by changes in intonational 
contour. A final more indirect cue to discourse 
structure isthe speaker's choice of referring ex- 
pressions and grammatical structure. A num- 
ber of researchers (4, 2, 6, 10) have given ac- 
counts of how these relate to the continuing, 
retaining or shifting of focus. 
The above approaches have concentrated on
particular surface linguistic phenomena and 
then investigated what a putative cue serves to 
signal in a number of dialogues. The problem 
123 
with this approach is that the cue may only be 
an infrequent indicator of a particular type of 
shift. If we want to construct a general theory 
of discourse than we want to know about the 
whole range of cues serving this function. This 
study therefore takes a different approach. We 
begin by identifying all shifts of control in the 
dialogue and then look at how each shift was 
signalled by the speakers. A second problem 
with previous research is that the criteria for 
identifying discourse structure are not always 
made explicit. In this study explicit criteria 
are given: we then go on to analyse the rela- 
tion between cues and this structure. 
2 The  data  
The data were recordings of telephone conver- 
sations between clients and an expert concern- 
ing problems with software. The tape record- 
ings from four dialogues were then transcribed 
and the analysis conducted on the typewrit- 
ten transcripts rather than the raw recordings. 
There was a total of 450 turns in the dialogues. 
2.1 Cr i ter ia  for classifying u t terance  
types.  Each utterance in the dialogue was 
classified into one of four categories: (a) As- 
sert ions - declarative utterances which were 
used to state facts. Yes or no answers to ques- 
tions were also classified as assertions on the 
grounds that they were supplying the listener 
with factual information; (b) Commands  - 
utterances which were intended to instigate 
action in their audience. These included vari- 
ous utterances which did not have imperative 
form, (e.g. "What I would do if I were you 
is to relink X ' )  but were intended to induce 
some action; (c) Quest ions - utterances which 
were intended to elicit information from the 
audience. These included utterances which 
did not have interrogative form. e.g. "So 
my question is...." They also included para- 
phrases, in which the speaker eformulated or 
repeated part or all of what had just been said. 
Paraphrases were classified as questions on the 
grounds that the effect was to induce the lis- 
tener to confirm or deny what had just been 
stated; (d) P rompts  - These were utterances 
which did not express propositional content. 
Examples of prompts were things like "Yes" 
and ~Uhu ~. 
2.2 A l locat ion of  contro l  in the dia- 
logues. We devised several rules to determine 
the location of control in the dialogues. Each 
of these rules related control to utterance type: 
(a) For questions, the speaker was defined as 
being in control unless the question directly 
followed a question or command by the other 
conversant. The reason for this is that ~ ques- 
tions uttered following questions or commands 
are normally attempts to clarify the preceding 
utterance and as such are elicited by the previ- 
ous speaker's utterance rather than directing 
the conversation i  their own right. (b) For 
assertions, the speaker was defined as being in 
control unless the assertion was made in re- 
sponse to a question, for the same reasons as 
those given for questions; an assertion which 
is a response to a question could not be said 
to be controlling the discourse; (c) For com- 
mands, the speaker was defined as controlling 
the conversation. Indirect commands (i.e. ut- 
terances which did not have imperative form 
but served to elicit some actions) were also 
classified in this way; (d) For prompts, the 
listener was defined as controlling the conver- 
sation, as the speaker was clearly abdicating 
his/her turn. In cases where a turn consisted 
of several utterances, the control rules were 
only applied to the final utterance. 
We applied the control rules and found 
that control did not alternate from speaker to 
speaker on a turn by turn basis, but that there 
were long sequences of turns in which con- 
trol remained with one speaker. This seemed 
to suggest hat the dialogues were organised 
above the level of individual turns into phases 
124 
where control was located with one speaker. 
The mean number of turns in each phase was 
6.63. 
3 Mechanisms for switch- 
ing control 
We then went on to analyse how control was 
exchanged between participants at the bound- 
aries of these phases. We first examined the 
last utterance of each phase on the grounds 
that one mechanism for indicating the end of 
a phase would be for the speaker controlling 
the phase to give some cue that he (both par- 
ticipants in the dialogues were always male) no 
longer wished to control the discourse. There 
was a total of 56 shiRs of control over the 4 
dialogues and we identified 3 main classes of 
cues used to signal control shifts These were 
prompts, repetitions and summaries. We also 
looked at when no signal was given (interrup- 
tions). 
3.1 P rompts .  On 21 of the 56 shifts (38%), 
the utterance immediately prior to the con- 
trol shift was a prompt. We might therefore 
explain these shifts as resulting from the per- 
son in control explicitly indicating that he had 
nothing more to say. 
(In the following examples a line indicates a
control shift) 
Example 1 - Prompt Dialogue C - 
1. E: "And they are, in your gen 
you'll find that they've relocated into 
the labelled common area" (E con- 
trol) 
2. C: "That's right." (E control) 
3. E: "Yeah" (E abdicates control 
with prompt) 
4. C: "I've got two in there. There 
are two of them." (C control) 
5. E: "Right" (C control) 
6. C: "And there's another one which 
is % RESA" (C control) 
7. E: "OK urn" (C control) 
8. C: "VS" (C control) 
9. E: "Right" (C control) 
10. C: "Mm" (C abdicates control 
with prompt) 
11. E: "Right and you haven't got 
- I assume you haven't got local la- 
belled common with those labels" (E 
control) 
3.2 Repet i t ions  and  summar ies  On a 
further 15 occasions (27%), we found that the 
person in control of the dialogue signalled that 
they had no new information to offer. They 
did this either by repeating what had just been 
said (6 occasions), or by giving a summary of 
what they had said in the preceding utterances 
of the phase (9 occasions). We defined a rep- 
etition as an assertion which expresses part or 
all of the propositional content of a previous 
assertion but which contains no new informa- 
tion. A summary consisted of concise reference 
to the entire set of information given about the 
client's problem or the solution plan. 
Example 2 - Repetition. Dialogue C - 
I. Client: "These routines are filed 
as DS" (C control) 
125 
2. Expert: "That's right, yes" (C 
control) 
3. C: "DS" (C abdicates control with 
repetition) 
4. E: "And they are, in your gen 
you'll find they've relocated 
into your local common area." (E 
control) 
Half the repetitious were accompanied by 
cue words. These were "and", "well" and "so", 
which prefixed the assertion. 
Example 3 - Summary Dialogue B - 
1. E. "OK. Initialise the disc retain- 
ing spares" (E control) 
2. C: "Right" (E control) 
3. E: "Uh and then TF  it back" (E 
control) 
4. C: "Right" (E control) 
5. E: "Did you do the TF with ver- 
ify. ~ (E control) 
6. C: "Er yes I did" (E control) 
7. E: "OK. That would be my recom- 
mendation and that will ensure that 
you get er a logically integral set of 
files" (E abdicates control with sum- 
mary) 
8. C: "Right. You think that initial- 
ising it using this um EXER facility." 
(C control) 
What are the linguistic characteristics of
summaries? Reichman (10) suggests that "so" 
might be a summary cue on the part of the 
speaker but we found only one example of this, 
although there were 3 instances of "and", one 
"now" one "but" and one "so". In our di- 
alogues the summaries eemed to be charac- 
terised by the concise reference to objects or 
entities which had earlier been described in de- 
tail, e.g. (a) "Now, I'm wondering how the two 
are related" in which "the two" refers to the 
two error messages which it had taken several 
utterances to describe previously. The other 
characteristic of summaries is that they con- 
trast strongly with the extremely concrete de- 
scriptions elsewhere in the dialogues, e.g. "err 
the system program standard call file doesn't 
complete this means that the file does not have 
a tail record" followed by "And I've no clue at 
all how to get out of the situation". Exam- 
ple 3 also illustrates this change from specific 
(1, 3, 5) to general (7). How then do rep- 
etitious and summaries operate as cues? In 
summarising, the speaker is indicating a nat- 
ural breakpoint in the dialogue and they also 
indicate that they have nothing more to add 
at that stage. Repetitions eem to work in a 
similar way: the fact that a speaker eiterates 
indicates that he has nothing more to say on 
a topic. 
3.3 Interrupt ions .  In the previous cases, 
the person controlling the dialogue gave a sig- 
nal that control might be exchanged. There 
were 20 further occasions (36% of shifts) on 
which no such indication is given. We there- 
fore went on to analyse the conditions in which 
such interruptions occurred. These seem to 
fall into 3 categories: (a) vital facts; (b) re- 
spouses to vital facts; (c) clarifications. 
3.3.1 Vital  facts. On a total of 6 occasions 
(11% of shifts) the client interrupted to con- 
tradict the speaker or to supply what seemed 
to be relevant information that he believed the 
expert did not know. 
126 
Example 4 Dialogue C - 
1. E: ".... and it generates this warn- 
ing, which is now at 4.0 to warn you 
about the situation" (E control) 
2. C: "It is something new though 
urn" (C assumes control by interrup- 
tion) 
3. E: "Well" (C control) 
4. C: "The programs that I've run 
before obviously LINK A's got some 
new features in it which er..." (C con- 
trol) 
5. E: "That's right, it's a new warn- 
ing at 4.0" (E assumes control by in- 
terruption) 
Two of these 6 interjections were to supply ex- 
tra information and one was marked with the 
cue "as well". The other four were to con- 
tradict what had just been said and two had 
explicit markers "though" and "well actually": 
the remaining two being direct denials. 
3.3.2 Revers ions of  contro l  fol lowing 
vi ta l  facts. The next class of interruptions 
occur after the client has made some interjec- 
tion to supply a missing fact or when the client 
has blocked a plan or rejected an explanation 
that the expert has produced. There were 8 
such occasions (14% of shifts). 
The interruption in the previous example il- 
lustrates the reversion of control to the expert 
after the client has suIiplied information which 
he (the client) believes to be highly relevant 
to the expert. In the following example, the 
client is already in control. 
Example 5 Dialogue B - 
1. "I'11 take a backup first as you say" 
(C control) 
2. E: "OK" (C control) 
3. C: "The trouble is that it takes a 
long time doing all this" (C control) 
4. E: "Yeah, yeah but er this kind 
of thing there's no point taking any 
short cuts or you could end up with 
no system at all." (E assumes control 
by interruption) 
On five occasions the expert explic- 
itly signified his acceptance or re- 
jection of what the client had said, 
e.g."Ah","Right", "indeed" , "that's 
r ight' ,"No',"Yeah but". On three 
occasions there were no markers. 
3.3.3 Clar i f icat ions.  Participants can also 
interrupt to clarify what has just been said. 
This happened on 6 occasions (11%) of shifts. 
Example 6 Dialogue C - 
1. C: "If  I put an SE in and then do 
an EN it comes up" (C control) 
2. E: "So if you put in a ...?" ( E 
control) 
3. C: "SE" (E control) 
On two occasions clarifications were prefixed 
by "now" and twice by "so". On the final two 
occasions there was no such marker, and a di- 
rect question was used. 
3.3.4 An  exp lanat ion  of  in terrupt ions .  
We have just described the circumstances in
which interruptions occur, but can we now ex- 
plain why they occur? We suggest he follow- 
ing two principles might account for interrup- 
127 
tions: these principles concern: (a) the infor- 
mation upon which the participants are basing 
their plans, and (b) the plans themselves. 
(A). In format ion  qual ity: Both expert 
and client must believe that the informa- 
tion that the expert has about the prob- 
lem is true and that this information is 
sufficient o solve the problem. This can 
be expressed by the following two rules 
which concern the truth of the informa- 
tion and the ambiguity of the information: 
(A1) if the speaker believes a fact P and 
believes that fact to be relevant and either 
believes that the speaker believes not P or 
that the speaker does not know P then in- 
terrupt; (A2) If the listener believes that 
the speaker's assertion is relevant but am- 
biguous then interrupt. 
(B). P lan  qual ity: Both expert and client 
must believe that the plan that the ex- 
pert has generated is adequate to solve 
the problem and it must be comprehensi- 
ble to the client. The two rules which ex- 
press this principle concern the effective- 
heSS of the plan and the ambiguity of the 
plan: (B1) If the listener believes P and 
either believes that P presents an obstacle 
to the proposed plan or believes that part 
of the proposed plan has already been sat- 
isfied, then interrupt; (B2) If the listener 
believes that an assertion about the pro- 
posed plan is ambiguous, then interrupt. 
In this framework, interruptions can be seen 
as strategies produced by either conversational 
participant when they perceive that a either 
principle is not being adhered to. 
3.4 Cue reliability. We also investigated 
whether there were occasions when prompts, 
repetitions and summaries failed to elicit the 
control shifts we predicted. We considered two 
possible types of failure: either the speaker 
could give a cue and continue or the speaker 
could give a cue and the listener fall to re- 
spond. We found no instances of the first 
case; although speakers did produce phrases 
like "OK" and then continue, the "OK" was 
always part of the same intonational contour 
as that further information and there was no 
break between the two, suggesting the phrase 
was a prefix and not a cue. We did, how- 
ever, find instances of the second case: twice 
following prompts and once following a sum- 
mary, there was a long pause, indicating that 
the speaker was not ready to respond. We 
conducted a similar analysis for those cue 
words that have been identified in the liter- 
ature. Only 21 of the 35 repetitions, sum- 
maries and interruptions had cue words asso- 
ciated with them and there were also 19 in- 
stances of the cue words "now", "and", "so", 
"but" and "well" occurring without a control 
shift. 
4 Contro l  cues and global 
control  
The analysis so far has been concerned with 
control shifts where shifts were identified from 
a series of rules which related utterance type 
and control. Examination of the dialogues 
indicated that there seemed to be different 
types of control shifts: after some shifts there 
seemed to be a change of topic, whereas for 
others the topic remained the same. We next 
went on to examine the relationship between 
topic shift and the different ypes of cues and 
interruptions described earlier. To do this it 
was necessary first to classify control shifts ac- 
cording to whether they resulted in shifts of 
topic. 
4.1 Ident i fy ing topic shifts. We iden- 
tified topic shifts in the following way: Five 
judges were presented with the four dialogues 
and in each of the dialogues we had marked 
where control shifts occurred. The judges were 
128 
asked to state for each control shift whether 
it was accompanied by a topic shift. All five 
judges agreed on 24 of the 56 shifts, and 4 
agreed for another 22 of the shifts. Where 
there was disagreement, the majority judg- 
ment was taken. 
4.2 Topic shift and type  of  control  
shift. Analysing each type of control shift, 
it is clear that there are differences" between 
the cues used for the topic shift and the 
no shift cases. For interruptions, 90% oc- 
cur within topic, i.e. they do not result in 
topic shifts. The pattern is not as obvious for 
prompts and repetitions/summaries, with 57% 
of prompts occurring within topic and 67% of 
repetitions/summaries occurring within topic. 
This suggests that change of topic is a care- 
fully negotiated process. The controlling par- 
ticipant signals that he is ready to close the 
topic by producing either a prompt or a rel>- 
etition/summary and this may or may not be 
accepted by the other participant. What is 
apparent is that it is highly unusual for a 
participant o seize control and change topic 
by interruption. It seems that on the ma- 
jority of occasions (63%) participants walt for 
the strongest possible cue (the prompt) before 
changing topic. 
4.3 Other  re lat ions between topic  and 
control.  We also looked at more general 
aspects of control within and between top- 
ics. We investigated the number of utterances 
for which each participant was in control and 
found that there seemed to be organisation 
in the dialogues above the level of topic. We 
found that each dialogue could be divided into 
two parts separated by a topic shift which we 
labelled the central shift. The two parts of 
the dialogue were very different in terms of 
who controlled and initiated each topic. Be- 
fore the central shift, the client had control 
for more turns per topic and after it, the ex- 
pert had control for more turns per topic. 
The respective numbers of turns client and ex- 
pert are in control before and after the central 
shift are :Before 11-7,22-8,12-6,21-6; After 12- 
33,16-23,2-11,0-5 for the four dialogues. With 
the exception of the first topic in Dialogues 1 
and 4, the client has control of more turns in 
every topic before the central shift, whereas af- 
ter it, the expert has control for more turns in 
every topic. In addition we looked at who ini- 
tiated each topic, i.e. who produced the first 
utterance of each topic. We found that in each 
dialogue, the client initiates all the topics be- 
fore the central shift, whereas the expert initi- 
ates the later ones. We also discovered a close 
relationship between topic initiation and topic 
dominance. In 19 of the 21 topics, the per- 
son who initiated the topic also had Control of 
more turns. As we might expect, the point at 
which the expert begins to have control over 
more turns per topic is also the point at which 
the expert begins to initiate new topics. 
5 Conclusions 
The main result of this exploratory study is 
the finding that control is a useful parameter 
for identifying discourse structure. Using this 
parameter we identified three levels of struc- 
ture in the dialogues: (a) control phases; (b) 
topic; and (c) global organisation. For the con- 
trol phases, we found that three types of utter- 
maces (prompts, repetitions and summaries) 
were consistently used to signal control shifts. 
For the low level structures we identified, (i.e. 
control phases), cue words and phrases were 
not as reliable in predicting shifts. This re- 
sult challenges the claims of recent discourse 
theories (5, 10) which argue for a the close re- 
lation between cue words and discourse struc- 
ture. We also examined how utterance type 
related to topic shift and found that few inter- 
ruptions introduced a new topic. Finally there 
was evidence for high level structures in these 
dialogues as evidenced by topic initiation and 
129 
control, with early topics being initiated and 
dominated by the client and the opposite be- 
ing true for the later parts. 
Another focus of current research as been \[3\] 
the modelling of speaker and listener goals (1, 
3) but there has been little research on real 
dialogues investigating how goals are commu- 
nicated and inferred. This study identifies 
surface linguistic phenomena which reflect he \[4\] 
fact that participants are continuously moni- 
toring their goals. When plans are perceived 
as succeeding, participants use explicit cues 
such as prompts, repetitions and summaries \[5\] 
to signal their readiness to move to the next 
stage of the plan. In other cases, where partic- 
ipants perceive obstacles to their goals being 
achieved, they resort to interruptions and we 
have tried to make explicit the rules by which \[6\] 
they do this. 
In addition our methodology is different 
from other studies because we have attempted 
to provide an explanation for whole dialogues 
rather than fragments of dialogues, and used 
explicit criteria in a bottom-up manner to \[7\] 
identify discourse structures. The number of 
dialogues was small and taken from a single 
problem domain. It seems likely therefore that 
some of our findings (e.g the central shift) will 
be specific to the diagnostic dialogues we stud- 
ied. Further esearch applying the same tech- \[8\] 
niques to a broader set of data should establish 
the generality of the control rules suggested 
here. 
References 
\[1\] Allen, J.F. and Perrault, C.R. (1980). 
Analyzing intentions in utterances. Ar- 
tificial Intelligence, 15, 143-178. 
\[2\] Brennan, S. E., Friedman, M. W., and 
Pollard, C. (1987) A centering approach 
to pronouns. In Proceedings of the 25th 
\[lO\] 
Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Cohen, P. R. and Levesque, H. J. (1985) 
Speech acts and rationality. In Proceed- 
ings of the ~3th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguis- 
tics. 
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K., Weinstein, S. 
(1986) Towards a computational theory 
of discourse interpretation. Draft. 
Grosz, B. J., and Sidner, C. L. (1986) At- 
tentions, intentions and the structure of 
discourse. Computational Linguistics, 12, 
175 - 204. 
Guindon, R., Sladky, P., Brunner, H., 
and Conner, J. (1986). The structure of 
user-adviser dialogues: Is there method 
in their madness? In Proceedings of the 
24th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
Hirschberg, J. and Pierrehumhert, J. B. 
(1986) The intonational structuring of 
discourse. In Proceedings of the ~4th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics. 
Levin, J. A. and Moore, J. A. (1977) Dia- 
logue games: metacommunication struc- 
tures for natural language interaction. 
Cognitive Science, 4, 395 - 421. 
Polanyi, L. and Scha, R. (1983). Con- 
nectedness in Sentence, Discourse and 
Te~t. Tilburg University, Tilburg, 141- 
178. 
Reichman, R. (1985) Getting computers 
to ta& like you and me. Cambridge, M.A.: 
MIT Press. 
130 
