A General Computational Treatment Of The 
Comparative 
Caro l  F r iedman"  
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
New York University 
715 Broadway, Room 709 
New York, NY  10005 
Abstract 
We present a general treatment of the com- 
parative that is based on more basic linguistic 
elements o that the underlying system can 
be effectively utilized: in the syntactic analy- 
sis phase, the comparative is treated the same 
as similar structures; in the syntactic regular- 
ization phase, the comparative is transformed 
into a standard form so that subsequent pro- 
ceasing is basically unaffected by it. The scope 
of quantifiers under the comparative is also in- 
tegrated into the system in a general way. 
1 Introduct ion 
Recently there has been interest in the devel- 
opment of a general computational treatment 
of the comparative. Last year at the Annual 
ACL Meeting, two papers were presented on 
the comparative by Ballard \[1\] and Rayner 
and Banks \[14\]. Previous to that a compre- 
hensive treatment of the comparative was in- 
corporated into the syntactic analyzer of the 
Linguistic String Project \[15\]; in addition the 
DIALOGIC grammar utilized by TEAM \[9\] 
also contains ome coverage of the compara- 
tive. 
An interest in the comparative is not sur- 
prising because it occurs regularly in lan- 
*This work was supported by the Defense Ad- 
vanced Re .arch  Projects Agency under Contract 
N00014-8.5-K-0163 from the Office of Naval Research. 
The author's current addr?~ is: Center for Medical 
Infornmti~, Columhia~Pre~byterian Medical Center, 
Columbia University, 161 Fort Waahington Avenue, 
Room 1310, New York NY 10032. 
guage, and yet is a very difficult structure to 
process by computer. Because it can occur in 
a variety of forms pervasively throughout the 
grammar, its incorporation i to a NL system 
is a major undertaking which can easily ren- 
der the system unwieldy. We will describe an 
approach to the computational treatment of 
the comparative, which provides more general 
coverage of the comparative than that of other 
NLP Systems while not obscuring the underly- 
ing system. This is accomplished by associat- 
ing the comparative with simpler, more basic 
linguistic entities o that it could be processed 
by the system with only minor modifications. 
The implementation f the comparative de- 
scribed in this paper was done for the Pro- 
re,8 Question Answering System \[8\] 1 (referred 
to hereafter as Proteus QAS), and should be 
adaptable for other systems which have sim- 
ilar modules. A more detailed discussion of 
this work is given in \[7\]. 
1.1 The  Prob lem 
The comparative is a difficult structure to pro- 
cess for both syntactic and semantic reasons. 
Syntactically the comparative is extraordinar- 
ily diverse. The following sentences illustrate 
a range of different types of comparative struc- 
tures, some of which resemble other English 
structures, as noted by Sager \[15\]. In the ex- 
amples below, sentences with the comparative 
that resemble other forms are followed by a 
1 The treatment of the comp~'ative in the syntac- 
tic analysis component was adapted from a previous 
implementation done by this 8uthor for the Linguistic 
String Project \[15\]. 
161 
sentence illustrating the similar form: 
con junct ion- l ike  : 
la.Men eat more apples than oranges. 
lb.Men eat apples and oranges. 
2a.More men buy than write books. 
2b.Men buy and write books. 
3a. We are more for than against he plan. 
3b. We are for or against the plan. 
4a.He read more than 8 books. 
4b.He read ~ or 3 books. 
wh-relat ive-c lanse- l ike : 
5a.More guests than we invited visited us. 
5b.Guests that we invited visited as. 
subord inate  and adverb ia l  :
6a.More visitors came than was ezpected. 
6b. Visitors came, which was ezpected. 
7a.More visitors came than usual. 
7b.Many t~sitors came as usual. 
Special  Comparat ive  Const ruct ions  : 
8.A taller man than John visited us. 
9. John is taller than 6 ft. 
10. A man taller than John visited us. 
11.He ran faster than ever. 
The problems in covering the syntax of the 
comparative are therefore at least as complex 
as the problems encountered for general coor- 
dinate conjunctions, relative clauses, and cer- 
tain subordinate and adverbial clauses. Incor- 
porating conjunction-like comparatives into a 
grammar is particularly difficult because that 
structure can occur almost anywhere in the 
grammar. Wh-relative-clause-like compara- 
tives are complicated because they contain 
an omitted noun where the omission can oc- 
cur arbitrarily deep within the comparative 
clause. 
The comparative is difficult to process for 
semantic reasons also because the comparative 
marker can occur on different linguistic cate- 
gories. Adjectives, quantifiers, and adverbs 
can all take the comparative form, as in: he is 
tal ler  than John, he took more  courses than 
John, and he ran faster  than John. There- 
fore the semantics of the comparative has to 
be consistent with the semantics of different 
linguistic categories while retaining its own 
unique characteristics. 
2 The Underlying System 
Proteus QAS answers natural language 
queries relevant to a domain of student 
records. It is highly modular and contains 
fairly standard components which perform: 
1. A syntactic analysis of the sentence us- 
ing an augmented context-free grammar 
consisting of a context-free component 
which defines the grammatical structures, 
a restriction component which contains 
welbformedness constraints between con- 
stituents, and a lexicon which classifies 
words according to syntactic and seman- 
tic categories. 
2. A syntactic regularization of the anal- 
ysis using Montague-style compositional 
translation rules to obtain a uniform 
operator-operand structure. 
3. A domain analysis of the regularized 
structure to obtain an interpretation i
the domain. 
4. An analysis of the scope of the quanti- 
tiers. 
5. A translation to logical form. 
6. Retrieval and answer generation. 
The syntactic analyzer also covers general 
coordinate conjunction by containing a con- 
junction metarule mechanism which automat- 
ically adds a production containing conjunc- 
tion to certain context-free definitions. 
3 The Syntactic Analysis 
of the Comparative 
In Section 1.1 it was shown that the com- 
parative resembles other complex syntactic 
structures. This observation suggests that 
the comparative could be treated as general 
coordinate conjunctions, wh-relative clauses, 
and certain subordinate and adverbial clauses 
162 
by the syntactic analysis component of the 
system. If the system can already handle 
these structures, the extension for the compar- 
ative is straightforward. This approach has 
the advantage of utilizing the system's exist- 
ing machinery to process comparative struc- 
tures which are very complex and diverse; 
in this way a minimal amount of effort re- 
sults in extensive coverage. For example, to 
cover conjunction-like comparative structures, 
the production containing possible conjunc- 
tions was modified to include than; to include 
relative-clause-like comparatives, the produc- 
tion containing words which can head rela- 
tive clauses was also modified to include than. 
Analogous minor grammar changes were made 
for the other types of similar structures shown 
above. Using this approach, a comprehen- 
sive comparative xtension was obtained by 
a trivial modification of only a small number 
of grammar productions. 
Thus, a conjunction-like comparative struc- 
ture such as Sentence la. in Section 1.1 would 
be analyzed as consisting of an object which 
contains a conjoined noun phrase more apples 
CONJ 0 oranges where the value of CONJ 
is than, and where a quantifier phrase similar 
to more has been omitted which occurs with 
oranges. A relative-clause type of compara- 
tive structure such as Sentence 5a. would be 
analyzed as a relative clause than we invited 
0 adjoined to more guests. Those construc- 
tions that are unique to the comparative, as 
shown in Sehtences 8 through 11, have to be 
uniquely defined. For example, the compara- 
tive clause in Sentence 8 is defined as a clause 
where the predicate is omitted, whereas the 
comparative clause in Sentence 9 is defined as 
a measure phrase. 
Although the comparative syntactically re- 
sembles other structures, this type of similar- 
ity does not carry over to the underlying struc- 
ture or to the semantics of the comparative, 
as will be discussed shortly. 
There are also some syntactic differences be- 
tween the comparative and the structures it 
resembles. For example, the comparative has 
zeroing patterns that are somewhat different 
from those associated with conjunctions: 
+ John slept more than Mary \[slept\]. 
- John slept and Mary \[slept\]. 
The comparative constructions also have 
scope marker constraints that are not appli- 
cable to non-comparative structures. These 
differences are handled by special add-on con- 
straints that specifically deal with the com- 
parative, and do not interfere with the other 
restrictions. 
The treatment of the comparative marker 
is complicated because it can occur in a large 
number of different locations in the head 
clause 2, as illustrated by a few examples be- 
low: 
He wanted to travel to more  coun- 
tries than he was able to. 
He is ta l ler  than Mary. 
He ate 3 more  apples than Mary did. 
He ate more  in the fall than in the 
winter. 
Because the comparative marker can occur in 
such a variety of locations and also be deeply 
embedded in the head clause, it cannot be con- 
veniently handled in the BNF  component of 
the grammar. Instead, the constraint com- 
ponent deals with this problem by means of 
special constraints that assign and pass up 
the comparativ e marker; other constraints test 
that the comparative clause is in the scope of 
the marker. 
4 Underlying Structure 
Basically, linguists such as Chomsky \[3,4\], 
Bresnan \[2\], Harris \[10\], and Pinkham \[13\] 
agree on fundamental aspects concerning 
the underlying structure of the comparative. 
They regard its underlying structure as con- 
sisting of two complete clauses where informa- 
tion in the comparative clause which is iden- 
tical to information in the head clause is re- 
quired to be zeroed. 
Harris' work is particularly suitable for 
computational purposes because he claims 
that one underlying structure is the source of 
2This phrase was used by Bresnan \[2\] to refer to 
the clause of the comparative that contains the com- 
parative marker. 
163 
all comparative forms. We modified his in- 
terpretation somewhat to obtain a more con- 
venient form for computation. In our ver- 
sion, the underlying structure contains a main 
clause where the comparison is the primary 
relation; each quantity in the relation con- 
tains an embedded clause specifying the quan- 
tity being compared. An example of this 
form is shown below for the sentence John 
ate more apples than Mary, which resembles a 
conjunction-like comparative structure where 
the verb phrase has been omitted: 
Nx \[John ate Nx apples\] > 
N2 \[Mary ate N2 apples\] 
This form is also appropriate for all the 
different comparative forms shown in Sec- 
tion 1.1. For example, the underlying form 
for a relative-clause-like comparative, such as 
Sentence 5a. is: 
N1 \[Nx guests visited us\] > 
N2 \[we invited N2 guests\] 
The underlying form for a sentence such as a 
man taller than John visited us is slightly dif- 
ferent because the comparative structure it- 
self is embedded in a noun phrase. The main 
clause is a man visited us, and the compar- 
ative structure is a clause adjoining a man, 
whose underlying structure is: 
NI \[the man is N1 tall\] > 
N2 \[John is N2 tall\] 
The notion that there is one underlying 
form for all comparatives has important im- 
plications for a computational treatment: 
? Regularization procedures can be written 
to transform all comparative structures 
into one standard form consisting of a 
comparative operator and two complete 
clauses which specify the quantities be- 
ing compared. 
? In the standard form, each clause of the 
comparative operator is a simpler struc- 
ture which can be processed using basi- 
cally the usual procedures of the system. 
This means that further processing does 
not have to be modified for the compara- 
tive. 
This process can be illustrated by a simple ex- 
ample. When the sentence more guests than 
we invited visited us is regularized, a structure 
consisting of an operator connecting two com- 
plete clauses is obtained: 
(> (visited (er guests) (us)) 
(invited (we) ( than guests))) 
The symbols er and than,  shown above, 
roughly correspond to quantities being com- 
pared, and in subsequent processing they are 
each interpreted as denoting a certain type 
of quantity. Notice that each clause of the 
comparative is also in operator-operand form 
where generally the verb of a sentence is con- 
sidered the operator and the subject and ob- 
ject (and sometimes sentence adjunct phrases) 
are considered the operands z. Each of the two 
clauses can be processed in the usual manner 
provided that er and than  are treated appro- 
priately. This will be described further in Sec- 
tion 5 which contains a discussion of semantics 
and the comparative. 
The regularization process was modified to 
be a two phase process. The first phase uses 
ordinary compositional translation rules to 
perform the standard regularization so that 
the surface analysis is transformed into a uni- 
form operator-operand form. The composi- 
tional regularization procedure is effective for 
fairly basic sentence structures but not for 
complex ones such as the comparative. The 
compositional rules associated with compara- 
tive structures only include labels categoriz- 
ing the type of comparative structure. The 
second phase, written specifically for the com- 
parative, completes the regularization process 
by filling in the missing elements, permuting 
the structures to obtain the correct operator- 
operand form, and supplying the appropriate 
quantifiers er and than  to the items being 
comparativized. An example of this process 
is shown for the relative-clause type of com- 
parative in more guests than we invited visited 
as, where the comparative clause than we in- 
vited is analyzed syntactically as being a right 
adjunct modifier of guests. 
3However, if the predicate is an ad~ectlvsl phrase, 
the adjective isconsidered the operator and the verb 
be the tense c~-rier. Thus, ignoring tense information, 
the regularized form of John is t611 is: (tall (John)). 
164 
Phase I: (visited (more guests 
(reln-than 
(invited (we) 0))) 
(us)) 
Phase 2: (> (visited (er guests) (us)) 
(invited (we) (than guests))) 
Another example is shown below for a 
conjunction-like comparative, such as John 
ate more apples than oranges: 
Phase 1: (ate (John) 
(conj-than (more oranges) 
(0 oranges))) 
Phase 2: (> (ate (John) (er apples) 
? (ate (John) (than oranges))) 
There are a few key points that should 
be made concerning the regularization proce- 
dures. The Montague-style translation rules 
could not readily be used to regularize the 
comparative constructions as they were de- 
fined in the context-free component. To use 
the rules, the grammar would have to be mod- 
ified substantially because the translation of 
the comparative is different and more com- 
plex than that of the structures it resembles. 
In particular, it would then not be possible 
to use the general conjunction mechanism to 
obtain coverage of that type of comparative 
structure. In the case of the usual relative 
clause, the regularized form is also substan- 
tially different from the regularized form of 
the relative-clause type of comparative shown 
above. For a typical relative clause, such as 
that we invited 0 in g.ests that we invited vis- 
ited us, the regularized form occurs as a clause 
embedded in the main clause as follows: 
(visited (guests (invited (we) 0)) 
(us)) 
The second important point is that be- 
cause of regularization further processing of 
sentences containing a comparative is signifi- 
cantly simplified and only minor changes are 
required specifically for the comparative. In 
Prote,s QAS, as well as other NLP  Sys- 
tems, several other processing components are 
needed after syntactic regularization until the 
final result is obtained. Therefore a signifi- 
cant result of our approach is that subsequent 
components do not have to be modified for the 
comparative. As long as the underlying sys- 
tem can handle adjectives, degree xpressions, 
quantifiers, and adverbs, the remainder of the 
processing of sentences with the comparative 
is basically no different than the processing of 
ordinary sentences because at that point the 
comparative is represented asbeing composed 
of fundamental linguistic entities. 
5 Semantics of the Com- 
parative 
Semantically the comparative denotes the 
comparison of two quantities relative to a cer- 
tain scale. This interpretation is consistent 
with work in formal semantics ( \[12,11\], \[6,5\]), 
although our formalism is not the same. 
Since the comparative marker can occur 
with adjectives, quantifiers, and adverbs, we 
would like to integrate its semantic treat- 
ment with the semantics of those fundamen- 
tal linguistic categories and also remain true 
to the semantics and syntax of the compara- 
tive. This can be done by noting that once 
the comparative is regularized, the compara- 
tive marker becomes a higher order operator 
connecting two clauses and what remains of 
the marker within each clause functions as a 
quantitative phrase. For example, the regu- 
larized form for/s John taller than Mary is: 
(> (tall (DEG er) (John)) 
(tall (DEG than) (Mary)).) 
In this form er and than are each interpreted 
as a type of degree phrase that occurs with 
adjectives. In a question answering applica- 
tion such as that of Proteus QAS, each clause 
of the above form is equivalent to the regu- 
larized form of how tall is John, where how is 
also interpreted as a degree phrase modifying 
tall: 
(tall (DEG how) (John)) 
The interpretation of a sentence containing 
the comparative is therefore reduced to the 
interpretation of two similar simpler clauses, 
each containing an adjective operator and an 
165 
operand which is a degree phrase. Issues con- 
cerning the correct scale and criteria of com- 
parison for adjectives are non-trivial, but are 
generally not different from those issues con- 
cerning adjectives not being comparativized. 
For example, determining the scale and crite- 
ria that should be used to interpret is John 
more refiable than Jim raises similar issues to 
those for ho~a reliable is Jim. 
The semantic treatment of adverbs gener- 
ally parallels that of adjectives; the interpre- 
tation of quantifiers in the comparative form 
is also equivalent to the interpretation of cer- 
tain interrogatives. For example, the regular- 
ized form of did John take more courses than 
Mary consists roughly of the two clauses John 
took er courses and Mary took than  courses, 
which is treated analogously to how many in 
how many courses did John take. 
6 Quantifier Analysis 
An interesting problem involving the compar- 
ative concerns the scope of quantifiers when 
there is a higher order sentential operator such 
as the comparative. The problem is not dis- 
cussed much in the literature, but was dis- 
cussed by Rayner and Banks \[14\] when they 
described their treatment ofquantifiers for ev- 
eryone spent more money in London than in 
New York. The basic issue is whether the 
quantifier every in everyone should be given 
wider scope than the comparative itself, in 
which case it is applicable to both clauses of 
the comparative. Our approach addresses this 
problem in a general way by adding a prelimi- 
nary phase to the standard quantifier analysis. 
Our approach as several key features: 
? The replication of a quantified noun 
phrase does not lead to impossible scop- 
ing combinations, as frequently happens 
when these phrases are replicated for the 
purpose of obtaining a complete clause. 
? Our approach is applicable to all gen- 
eral higher order operators connecting 
two clauses. 
? The scope of quantifiers is determined in 
a late stage of processing so that corn- 
mittment is not done prematurely. 
? A procedure using pragmatics and do- 
main knowledge can easily be incorpo- 
rated into the system as a separate com- 
ponent o aid in scope determination. 
In Proteus QAS, the scope of quantifiers is 
determined subsequent to the regularization 
and domain analysis components in a manner 
similar to other NLP Systems, as described by 
Woods \[16\]. The basic quantifer analysis pro- 
cedure initially handled simple clauses, and 
therefore had to be modified to accommodate 
scope determination when a sentence contains 
a higher order operator such as a compara- 
tive or a coordinate conjunction. A prelim- 
inary quantifier analysis phase was added to 
find and label quantifiers which have a wider 
scope than the comparative. In addition, mi- 
nor modifications were made to the compo- 
nent which translates the regularized form to 
logical form, in order to handle the translation 
of wider scope quantifiers. 
Generally, in the case of the comparative, 
the criteria used for determining whether or 
not a quantifier should have a wider scope in- 
volves the location of the quantifier relative to 
the comparative marker in the surface form. 
Usually, a preference is given to the wider 
scope interpretation if the quantifier precedes 
the marker. Using this approach, the sen- 
tence everyone spent more money in London 
than in New York is first interpreted syntac- 
tically as consisting of two complete clauses, 
which are roughly everyone spent er money 
in London and everyone spent han money in 
New York. The semantics of each clause is 
interpreted the same as that of a simpler sen- 
tence how much money did everyone spend in 
London. The preliminary quantifier analysis 
phase prefers the reading where the scope of 
everyone is wider than the comparative opera- 
tor because veryone precedes more. The sen- 
tence is translated to logical form so that the 
quantified expression YX : person(X) occurs 
outside the comparative operator, and there- 
fore has scope over both c|auses of the com- 
parative. The interpretation is roughly: 
166 
VX:person(X)(>(spent (X) (er money) 
(in London)) 
(spent (X) (than money) 
(in New York))) 
A different scope interpretation is obtained for 
more students read than wrote a book, where 
the two clauses are er students read a book 
and than  students wrote a book. The nar- 
row scope interpretation of a in a book is ob- 
tained because a follows more. In this case, 
the quantified expressions for each clause of 
the comparative are completely independent 
of the other. 
7 Concluding Remarks 
We have presented a method for incorporat- 
ing general comparatives into a system with- 
out unduly complicating the system. This is 
done in the syntactic analysis component by 
treating the comparatives the same as simi- 
lar structures o that features of the syntac- 
tic analyzer that already exist may be uti- 
lized. The various comparative structures are 
then regularized so that they are in a stan- 
dard form consisting of a comparative opera- 
tor and two complete clauses that contain a 
quantity er or than  which is interpreted by 
the semantic omponent as a quantity such 
as how, how many,  or how much,  as ap- 
propriate. A preliminary quantifier analysis 
component was added to determine whether 
a sentence containing a higher order operator 
has any quantifiers which have a wider scope 
than the operator, and to label those that do. 
The remainder of the processing is done as 
usual except for minor modifications. 
The treatment of the comparative that we 
have presented is more extensive and general 
than that of other NLP Systems to date, and 
also is simple to implement. Only a small 
number of productions of the BNF component 
were changed to cover the comparative struc- 
tures described in this paper. In addition, 
three restrictions were modified for the com- 
parative, and a set of separate add-on restric- 
tious were included to handle comparative 
zeroing patterns and scope marker require- 
ments. Special regularization procedures were 
written to regularize the different compara- 
tive forms so that the standard Montague- 
style compositional translation rules could be 
used prior to the comparative regularization 
phase. 
Although we can process many forms of the 
comparative, there is still substantial work 
that remains which involves comparative sen- 
tences where the comparative clause itself has 
been omitted, as in New York banks are start- 
ing to offer higher interest rates. In some 
cases the comparison is between two different 
time periods; in other cases the comparison 
involves different types of like objects, such 
as the interest rates of New York banks com- 
pared to the interest rates of Florida banks. 
The context can often be an aid in helping to 
recover the missing information, but the re- 
covery problem is still quite a challenge. Sen- 
tences with this type of anaphora re very in- 
teresting because they occur surprisingly reg- 
ularly in language, and yet the recovery possi- 
bilities are more limited and more controlled 
than those occurring in discourse in general. 
Possibly these type of sentences can provide us 
with clues as to what elements are significant 
for the recovery of the missing information. 
Acknowledgements  
I would like to thank Ralph Grishman, Naomi 
Sager, and Tomek Strzalkowski for their help 
and comments. 
References 
\[1\] B. BaUard. A general computational 
treatment of comparatives for natural 
language question answering. In Proc. 
of the ~6th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 
pages 41-48, 1988. 
\[21 Joan W. Bresnan. Syntax of the com- 
parative clause construction in English. 
Linguistic Inquiry, IV(3):275-343, 1973. 
\[3\] Noam Chomsky. Aspects of the Theory of 
Syntaz. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass., 
1965. 
167 
\[4\] Noam Chomsky. On wh-movement. In 
P. Culicover, T. Wasow, and A. Akma- 
jian, editors, Formal Syntaz, pages 71- 
132, Academic Press, .New York, 1977. 
\[5\] M.J. Cresswell. Logics and Language. 
Methuen, London, 1973. 
\[6\] M.J. Cresswell. The semantics of degree. 
In B.H.Partee, editor, Montague Gram- 
mar, pages 261-292, Academic Press, 
New York, 1975. 
\[7\] C. Friedman. A Computational Treat- 
ment of the Comparative. PhD thesis, 
New York University, 1989. Reprinted 
as PROTEUS Project Memorandum 21, 
New York University, Courant Insti- 
tute of Mathematical Science, Proteus 
Project, New York, 1989. 
\[8\] R. Grishman. PROTEUS Parser Refer- 
ence Manual. PROTEUS Project Memo- 
randum 4, New York University, Courant 
Institute of Mathematical Science, Pro- 
teus Project, New York, July 1986. 
\[9\] B. Grosz, D. Appelt, P. Martin, and F. 
Pereira. Team: an experiment in the de- 
sign of transportable natural-language in- 
terfaces. Artilical Intelligence, 32(2): 173- 
243, 1987. 
\[10\] Zellig Harris. A Grammar of English 
On Mathematical Principles. John Wi- 
ley and Sons, New York, N.Y., 1982. 
\[11\] Ewan Klein. The interpretation of adjec- 
tival comparatives. Journal of Linguis- 
tics, (18):113-136, 1982. 
\[12\] Ewan Klein. A semantics for positive and 
comparative adjectives. Linguistics and 
Philosophy, (4):1-45, 1980. 
\[13\] J. Pinkham. The Formation of Compara- 
tive Clauses in French and English. Gar- 
land Publishing, New York, 1985. 
\[14\] M. Rayner and A. Banks. Parsing and in- 
terpreting comparatives. In Proc. of the 
26th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pages 49- 
60, 1988. 
\[15\] Naomi Sager. Natural Language Infor- 
mation Processing: A Computer Gram- 
mar of English and Its Applications. 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1981. 
\[16\] W.A. Woods. Semantics and quantifi- 
cation in natural language question an- 
swering systems. Advances in Comput- 
ers, 17:1-87, 1978. 
168 
