REFERENCE TO LOCATIONS 
Lewis  G. Creary ,  J. Mark  Gawron ,  and  John  Nerbonne 
Hewlet t -Packaxd Laborator ies ,  3U 
1501 Page  Mil l  Road  
Pa lo  A l to ,  CA  94304-1126 
Abstract I.I Sketch  of  P roposa l  
We propose a semantics for locative expressions 
such as near Jones or west of Denver, an impor- 
tant subsystem for NLP applications. Locative ex- 
pressions denote regions of space, and serve as argu- 
ments to predicates, locating objects and events pa- 
tially. Since simple locatives occupy argument posi- 
tions, they do NOT participate in scope ambiguities m 
pace one common view, which sees locatives as logical 
operators. Our proposal justifies common representa- 
tional practice in computational linguistics, account- 
ing for how locative expressions function anaphori- 
tally, and explaining a wide range of inference in- 
volving locatives. We further demonstrate how the 
argument analysis may accommodate multiple loca- 
tive arguments in a single predicate. The analysis is 
implemented for use in a database query application. 
1 Introduction 
Locative expressions take diverse forms: in New 
York, here, there, nowhere, and on a boat he has 
in Ohio. They combine with common nouns (city 
on the Rhine), or with verbs or verb-phrases (work 
in Boston), always locating objects and situations in 
space. Some temporal expressions are similar, but we 
focus here on spatial locatives. 
The analysis was developed for use in an NLP sys- 
tem producing database queries; it is fully imple- 
mented and has been in frequent (developmental) use 
for 18 months. It is important o provide facilities 
for reasoning about location in database query ap- 
plications because users typically do not query loca- 
tive information in the exact form it appears in the 
database. A database may e.g. contain the infor- 
mation that a painting is in the Guggenheim Mu- 
seum, perhaps even that it's in the Guggenheim in 
New York, and yet be helpless when queried whether 
that same painting is in the US. In our implementa- 
tion information about location is represented using 
the logical analysis provided here. I 
i of course, the in?ormation that New York is in the US must 
be provided by a compatible geographical knowledge base. 
The provides general service: first, in collecting the 
data relevant to a semantic analysis of locatives; sec- 
ond, in presenting the proposal in a fashion which ap- 
plies to other natural languages and other logical rep- 
resentations; and third, in noting the consequences 
of our proposal for the organization of NLP  systems, 
specifically the cooperation of syntax and semantics. 
The behavior of locatives in inference and anaphora 
reflects their semantics. This behavior justifies the 
hypothesis that (unquantified) locatives refer to re- 
gions, while related sequences of locatives refer to 
the intersection of the regions associated with their 
components. E.g. the phrase (sequence) in Canada 
on the Atlantic Coast refers to the (maximal) region 
which is both in Canada and on the Atlantic Coast. 
Locative adverbials within a verb phrase will then 
be seen to contribute to a location argument in pred- 
icates which identifies an area within which the pred- 
icate is asserted to hold. The view that locatives 
occupy an ARGUMENT position within a predication 
is contrasted with the view that they are EXTER- 
NAL OPERATORS (cf. Cresswell \[7\]), or MODIFIERS on 
predications (cf. Davidson \[8\] or Sondheimer \[18\]). 
In fact, however, the analysis of locative phrases as 
arguments jibes well with the practice of most com- 
putational linguists; cf. Allen \[1\], pp.198-207 and the 
references there, \[1\], p.218. The present effort con- 
tributes to the justification and explication of this 
practice. 
Our approach is closest to Jackendoff \[12\]. We 
follow Jackendoff first, in suggesting that locative 
phrases are referential in the same way that noun 
phrases (NPs) are; and second, in taking locative ad- 
verbials to function as arguments. But there is a sig- 
nificant foundational problem implicit in the hypoth- 
esis that locatives are arguments: locatives, unlike 
standard arguments in the predicate calculus, appear 
optionally and multiply. Predicate logic does not ac- 
commodate the occurrence of multiple arguments in 
a single argument position. We solve this techni- 
cal problem by allowing that multiple locatives CON- 
42 
STRAIN a single argument within a predication. This 
effectively challenges a standard assumption about 
the syntax-semantics nterface, viz. how syntactic el- 
ements map into arguments, but leads to an elegant 
semantics. 
In addition to the adverbial use of locatives, we 
recognize a predicative use illustrated by (1). We 
return to these in Section 6 below. 
(I) Tom is in Canada on the Atlantic Coast. 
2 The  Logic of Locatives 
In this section we collect valid and invalid argument- 
patterns involving adverbial locatives. A semantics of 
locatives should explain the entailments we catalog 
here. We restrict our attention initially to locative 
phrases in which locations are specified with respect 
to logical individuals (denoted by proper names, e.g. 
'Boston', 'Jones', or 'Mass Ave') because we assume 
that their analysis is relatively uncontroversial. 2 We 
begin by noting that any number of locatives may 
adjoin to almost any verb (phrase); 
(2) Tom works on Mass Ave. in Boston near MIT. 
A natural question to ask, then, concerns the logical 
relation between complex clauses like (2) and simpler 
clauses eliminating one or more of its locatives. To 
begin, the SIMPLIFYING INFERENCE in (3) is valid: 
(3) AI works in Boston. .'. AI works. 
Using multiple adjuncts doesn't disturb this pattern 
of inference, as (4) and (5) illustrate: 
AI works on Mass Ave. in Boston. 
(4) ".'. 'AI works in Boston. 
(5) Al works on Mass Ave. in Boston. .'. Al works on Mass Ave. 
PERMUTING locative adjuncts has no effect on 
truth conditions. Thus the sentences in (6) are truth- 
conditionally equivalent. Some are less felicitous than 
others, and they may manipulate discourse context 
differently, but they all describe the same facts: 
2We don't think it matters whether the proper names are 
taken to be indlvidtud constants, as they normally are, or 
whether they are analyzed as restricted parameters, as situ- 
ation semantics (\[3\],pp.165-68) has suggested. 
(6) 
AI works on Mass Ave in Boston near M IT  
AI works near M IT  on Mass Ave in Boston 
Al works near M IT  in Boston on Mass Ave 
Al works in Boston near M IT  on Mass Ave 
AI works in Boston on Mass Ave near M IT  
Al works on Mass Ave near M IT  in Boston 
Even though the simplifying inference in (3) is 
valid, we must take care, since the complementary 
(accumulative) inference (7) is INVALID (but cf. the 
valid (8)): 
AI works in NY. 
(7) AI works in Boston. 
./. AI works in NY in Boston. 
AI works in NY. 
(8) AI works in Boston. 
.'. Al works in NY and in Boston. 
Finally, there is what we call the UPWARD MONO- 
TONICITY of locatives. If a sentence locating some- 
thing at a region R is true, and if R is contained in 
the region R ~, then a sentence locating that thing at 
R ~ is true: 
(9) 
A1 works in New York. 
New York is in the US. 
.'. AI works in the US. 
(10) 
The dog sleeps under the table. 
Under the table is in the house (region 
"under the table" is contained in 
region "in the house.") 
.'. The dog sleeps in the house. 
Notice in (10) that the locative phrases are specified 
with respect not to locations, but to other logical 
individuals. This is accomplished by the semantics 
of the prepositions under and in; our proposal will 
require that locative PHRASES refer to regions, but 
not that their subcomponents must. 
3 Other  Semant ic  Ev idence  
3.1  Scope  
Locatives by themselves do NOT induce scope am- 
biguity with respect o negation, thus the semantic 
nonambiguity of (11); compare that with (12). 
(11) Tina didn't work in New York. 
(12) Tina didn't drink because of her husband. 
43 
The causal adjunct becanse of DOES induce a scope 
ambiguity with respect o negation. That is why (12) 
has two readings, one (narrow scope negation) on 
which Tina's not drinking is in some way due to her 
husband, another (wide-scope negation) which denies 
that Tina's drinking is because of her husband. (11) 
shows no analogous scope ambiguity. Thus, locatives 
appear to behave differently from at least some other 
adjuncts in that they no show no scope variation with 
respect o negation. 
The simplest explanation of this failure to induce 
scope ambiguity is to deny that simple locatives have 
scope, i.e. to deny that they are logical operators or 
external modifiers. We propose xactly this when we 
postulate that they are arguments rather than op- 
erators. We grant that locatives in sentence-initial 
position DO display properties which suggest scope, 
but this needn't vitiate the argument analysis,  
Note that the "commutativity of locatives" shown 
in (6) is another indication of failure to scope: loca- 
tives fall to scope with respect o each other. 
3.1.1 Scope versus Focus 
In evaluating the claim that no SCOPE AMBIGUITY is 
possible in (11), it is important not to be confused by 
the possibility of interpreting the FOCUS of negation 
in various ways. The association of negation with 
a focused element is a well-discussed, if not not a 
well-understood, phenomenon i the literature (see 
Jackendoff (\[11\], pp.229-78), Chomsky (\[4\], pp.199- 
208), and Rooth \[17\] for discussions of focus). The 
crucial point about focus is that it affects arguments 
and adjuncts alike, and that ambiguities involving the 
association of negation with focus affect both. For 
example, 
(13) Elizabeth Browning didn't adore Robert. 
The focus can be either on adore or on Robert, giving 
different presuppositions, 4 even though the proper 
name Robert is never analyzed as scope-inducing. 
3.2 Preposed Locatives 
PaEPOSED locatives do show properties that resemble 
scope. Cf. Thomason and Stalnaker (\[21\], p.205): 
nit is worth emphasizing that we are nanking a semantic 
point boa-e--there may be a syntactic (attachment) ambiguity 
in (11), but it's not one that has any semantic significance. 
t Relevant here is Horn's \[10\] notion of metallnguistic nega- 
tion, which accounts for purely contrastive or contradicting 
negation. The issues Horn discusses are also orthogonal to 
the ambiguity in (12), since the ambiguity persists outside of 
contrastive contexts. 
In that restaurant, if John is asked to wear a 
(14) tie, he wears a tie. 
Here the preposed locative does not belong exclu- 
sively to either the antecedent or the consequent of 
the conditional; rather, the sentence says: if John 
is asked to wear a tie in that restaurant, he wears 
a tie in that restaurant. Thomason and Stalnaker 
argue hence that the locative must be treated seman- 
tically as a sentence operator. Cf. Cresswell (\[7\], 
p.217) points out another example where the result 
of preposing a locative is not a simple paraphrase of 
its "source": 
(15) At our house, everyone is eating. 
Everyone is eating at our house. 
Here there is a reading of the first which can 
be paraphrased Everyone at our house is eating, 
where the quantifier is restricted to people at our 
house. The most important point to make here 
is that "preposing" generates new readings, read- 
ings unavailable for unpreposed adverbial ocatives. 
So if these examples are evidence for a sentence- 
operator semantics for locatives, then it's a seman- 
tics limited to locatives found in this position. The 
"wide-scope" readings occur only for locatives in this 
"topic" (sentence-initial) position, s It would be se- 
mantically implausible to regard the preposed adver- 
bials here as mere stylistic variants of nonpreposed 
elements,  
? But we note further that locations can be restricted 
by discourse context alone: 
(16) Joan lived in LA. She often went swimming. 
We naturally interpret Joan as swimming in LA; and 
such effects can extend indefinitely through discourse. 
We propose to analyze both Thomason and Stal- 
naker's example and Cresswell's example as R.E- 
STRICTINO TOPIC locatives that restrict some loca- 
tion roles in the sentence to follow. In the case of 
(14), the restriction applies to the locations of both 
the antecedent and consequent clauses of the condi- 
tional sentence; in the case of (15), the restriction 
5Note that this is not normally the case for sentence- 
operator adverbials; The number of the planeta is necessarily 
nine is semantically ambiguous between a wide- and narrow- 
scope reading of neeessarlb. 
eIt is syntactically implausible as well to regard restrict- 
ing topic elements as stylistic variants of unpreposed lements, 
since some preposed ements can only occur preposed: 
Of the dogs at the show, only Schnauzers were affected. 
44 
applies to the quantifier Everyone, limiting its do- 
main to those individuals at "our house. "7 This has 
the consequence that there is a class of restrictive 
topic-position modifiers that cannot be analyzed as 
preposed adverbials. 
3 .3  Ana logy  w i th  NPs  
Jackendoff (\[12\], Chap.3) is partially devoted to ar- 
ticulating the strong semantic analogy between loca- 
tive phrases and noun phrases. The analogy includes 
quantification, a distinction between definite and in- 
definite reference, deictic reference, and anaphora. 
Jackendoff's programmatic point is that the seman- 
tic status of locatives is therefore the same as that of 
NPs: they both refer and both function as arguments. 
It is noteworthy that locatives have explicitly quan- 
tificational forms, as in: 
(17) Bill sang everywhere Mary sang. 
This suggests that quantified locatives have the same 
relationship to simple locatives as general NPs (such 
as erery small country) have to singular NPs (such as 
the smallest country, a small country, and Honduras). 
Though SIMPLE locatives show no scope variation 
with respect to other scope operators, quantified loca- 
tives (such as everywhere and nowhere) clearly do. 
But this scope is due to the quantification, ot to the 
locative function. Since locatives occupy argument 
positions in predications, quantified locatives are sim- 
ply quantifications over those predications, exactly 
analogous to nonlocative quantifications. 
Second, we find similarly noteworthy the indefi- 
nitely referring locative somewhere. We note that its 
particular reference (like that of someone) is available 
for subsequent anaphoric use. That is, (18) may be 
understood to claim that Ed works where AI works, s
(18) AI lives somewhere on the Ohio, 
and Ed works there. 
Third, we note that deictic locative reference is 
possible (using here or there), just as deictic non- 
locative reference is (using pronouns or demonstra- 
tives). We address the fourth and final reminder of 
the analogy between NP and locative reference, loca- 
tive anaphora, in Section 3.4, immediately below. 
~'We don't claim to offer a complete analysis of these topic- 
locatives (nothing we have said makes it clear how these re- 
strictions are enforced, or what the constraints on them are); 
but we offer a plausibility argument that these ewe cases of a 
somewhat different color. 
SThis contrasts with examples of locative anaphors with 
shnple locative antecedents, examined below in Section 3.4. 
cf. (19). 
3 .4  Anaphora  
Viewing simple locatives as analogous to singular 
NPs, we obtain a simple account of the anaphoric po- 
tential of locatives by taking them to denote spatial 
regions. The functioning of locatives as antecedents 
for the locative pro-form there then provides addi- 
tional evidence that simple locatives are in a class 
with singular NPs. Consider: 
(19) A1 lives on the Ohio, and Ed works there. 
(19) makes the claim, not that AI lives in the same 
place Ed works, but that he lives on the same river 
that AI works on. Thus the reference of both on the 
Ohio and there appears to be the entire spatial re- 
gion which is ON the Ohio (as opposed to any partic- 
ular subregion of it). This region is uniquely (though 
vaguely) determined in a given context by the name 
of the river and the particular preposition on. We 
are, in effect, claiming that the PP on the Ohio acts 
as a sort of definite description of a particular spatial 
region. Anaphoric reference back to it is reference 
back to that same region. 
A further note is worthwhile here. If the locative 
phrase on the Ohio in (19) refers to the entire region 
which may be so described (as we've just argued), 
then the LOCATION role of the predicates LIVE and 
WORK must be construed as specifying a region 'within 
which' a relation is somewhere instantiated. Indeed, 
we postulate this as a general property of location 
roles within all predicates. 
3 .5  Reg iona l  In tersect ion  
Next consider a more complicated version of (19): 
(20) AI lives on the Ohio in Kentucky, 
and Ed works there. 
In (20) one may understand there as referring to the 
intersection of the regions 'on the Ohio,' and 'in Ken- 
tucky' (and again, NOT to the particular subpart of 
that intersection where AI lives). In fact, this reading 
is preferred. (There may also be understood to refer 
to one of the component superregious, and our anal- 
ysis is fully compatible with this possibility.) Let's 
consider how best to supply the intersective r ference 
for the pronoun there. 
In (20) the two locative expressions in the first 
clause simultaneously constrain the same location 
role. In general, each successive locative in a clause 
further narrows the region filling the location role: 
(WORK agent : Ed  
(21) loc : ( n~reg:  {0N(Ohio), IN(Kentucky) })) 
45 
'n~' is the intersection operation over regions. Cf. 
Section 5.2 for formal discussion. 
Now, since the filler of a Location role is always 
a single region, the anaphoric potential illustrated in 
(20) Ls explained. It would remain unexplained if each 
locative introduced a distinct predication. 
4 Syntax /Semant ics  Mapp ing  
We employ a syntax/semantics nterface that's inno- 
vative in two respects: first, we allow that adjuncts 
(locatives) be interpreted as arguments, rather than 
operators. Cf. McConnell-Ginet (\[14\],p.167ff) for 
a similar proposal about manner adverbs. Second, 
we allow that multiple locatives (in the same verb 
phrase) jointly determine a single location argument 
via the intersection of regions. Thus we allow sev- 
eral syntactic dependents corresponding to a single 
semantic argument. This challenges a standard work- 
ing assumption about the syntax-semantics mapping 
made in a number of f rameworks ,  9 but it leads to 
a neuter semantic account: by allowing several loca- 
tive specifiers to constrain a single role, we account 
more easily for the permutability of locatives, and we 
provide the right range of anaphoric antecedents. 
5 Formal  Aspects  
Here we describe the logical expressions into which 
locatives (and sentences containing them) are trans- 
lated, and the semantic interpretations of the logical 
expressions. 
5.1 Overv iew o f  NFLT  
Our logical formalism is called NFLT. t? It is a modifi- 
cation and augmentation fstandard predicate calcu- 
lus, with two modifications relevant here: predicates 
and functors of variable arity, and a semantic inter- 
pretation in terms of situation-types. 
5.1.1 P red icate  and Funct ion  Express ions 
Predications and functional terms in NFLT have an 
explicit rolemark for each argument; in this respect 
NFLT resembles emantic network formalisms and 
differs from standard predicate calculus, where the 
9This doesn't contradict Montague's semantic theoriea, but 
it abandons the favored "functional pplication n mode of inter- 
pretation. Cf. Montague \[15\], p.202. Neither verb (phrase) nor 
locative is interpreted as a function applying to the argument 
supplied by the other. 
l?Cf. Creary and Pollard \[6\] for conceptual background, 
literature references, and more complete presentation f NFLT. 
roles are order-coded. For example, atomic formulas 
in NFLT are constructed of a base-predicate and a 
set of rolemark-argument pairs, as in the following 
translation of Tom works in Boston: 
(22) (WORK agent:TOM 
location:(IN theme:BOSTON)) 
The explicit representation of roles permits each 
predicate- and function-symbol in NFLT to take a 
variable number of arguments, so that different oc- 
currences of a verb are represented with the same 
predicate-symbol, despite differences in valence (i.e. 
number and identity of attached complements and 
adjuncts). 11 
5.2 Functional Location Terms 
Functional location terms are functional terms denot- 
ing regions. These are of two general sorts, simple 
and intersective. The simple ones consist of a prepo- 
sitional functor applied to an appropriate argument, 
while the intersective ones consist of a regional in- 
tersection functor applied to a set of regions. As an 
example, consider the following location term, which 
might serve as the translation (in a given context) of 
the iterated locatives on the Ohio in Kentucky near 
Illinois: 
(23) 
(N=reg:{ON3(OHIO), 
IN(KENTUCKY), 
NEAEI(ILLINOIS)}) 
This is a complex location term whose components 
are simple functional location terms. NE.L~I should 
denote (e.g.) a function that maps Illinois onto a 
region beginning at its borders and extending out a 
short distance. 
The functor of an intersective location term de- 
notes the regional intersection function, which maps 
RI, R~, . . . ,  Rn onto their intersection R. More for- 
mally, we postulate that spatial regions, partially or- 
dered by the subregion relation (written __.~), form a 
LATTICr.. The intersection of regions is then their 
lattice-theoretic MEET (written 17~), the greatest 
lower bound with respect o C,~. 
The eommutativity and associativity of n~ jus- 
tify specifying its arguments via sets. The order- 
indifference of set specification accounts for the per- 
mutability of locatives illustrated in (6). 
We will also make use of the following familiar lat- 
tice theorem: 
l l In order to save space, we shall write I I(Boston) for ( I I  
the~ : BOSTON), however. 
46 
(Ex sub:(rlxreg:{R1,R2,..., P~}) 
(24) eup: ( l ' l=reg:{R1,R2, . . . ,  P~})  ) ,  
where l~m~. .  
According to (24), an intersective location term T al- 
ways denotes a subregion of the region denoted by the 
result of deleting some (but not all) of the argument- 
terms of T. 
5.3 Located Predicat ions 
This is a fact about situations being located in space: 
if an event or state occurs or obtains within a region 
R, then it occurs or obtains within any region R' 
containing R: 
(25) 
( ( (~  eub:R eup:R') 
A (PRED ... loc:R)) 
(PRED ... loc:R')) 
This is simply a statement of upward monotonicity 
for the location arguments of relations. The schemata 
(24) and (25) together justify the inference schema 
(26) 
(g0RK agt;:TOM 
loc : (nxreg :{R l , . . . , \ ]~}) )  
. ' .  (WORK agt:TOM 
lo? : (nxreg :{R l , . . . ,~}) ) ,  
where l~m~n.  
This accounts for the correctness of the locative- 
simplifying inferences in (4) and (5). 
The other sort of simplifying inference given in Sec- 
tion 2 was that exemplified in (3), the inference from 
Tom's working in Boston to Tom's working. In NFLT 
this inference is formulated thus: 
(NORK ag't:TOM loc:IN(BOSTON)) 
(27) .-. (woRK ag~:T0X) 
Both the premise and the conclusion of (27) are in- 
terpreted as denoting situation-types; each is true if 
there exists a situation of the type it denotes. Since 
every situation of the type denoted by the premise 
is necessarily also of the type denoted by the con- 
clusion, the truth of the premise necessarily entails 
the truth of the conclusion. This accounts for the 
validity of (3) in the situation-theoretic framework of 
NFLT. In a fixed-arity framework, one would repre- 
sent the conclusion as existentially quantifying over a 
location argument-position; the inference would then 
be existential generalization. 
We recall that (7), repeated here for convenience, 
is invalid, while the similar (8) (right) is valid: 
Tom works in NY. 
Tom works in Boston. 
.~. Tom works in NY  in Boston. 
Tom works in NY. 
Tom works in Boston. 
.'. Tom works in NY  and in Boston. 
The reason is that the premises of the former may 
locate two different 'working' events while its conclu- 
sion refers to one. The conclusion of the latter, on the 
other hand, may refer to distinct 'working' events. Its 
translation into NFLT is: 
((WORK agt:TOM loc:IN(~P\[)) A 
(28) (W0RK ag~:TOM loc:IN(BOSTON)) ) 
This conclusion is nothing more than the conjunction 
of the premises. 
6 Adnomina l  Locat ives  
We propose above that the ability to induce scope 
effects is a litmus test for distinguishing arguments 
and operators. This test, together with anaphoric 
evidence, suggests a heterodox treatment of adnomi- 
nal locatives. In a nutshell, these locatives might be 
arguments as well. 
(29) Few cars in Ohio rust. 
(30) (FEg x (CAR inszance:x loc:IN(0HI0)) 
(RUST thm:x)) 
There is a reasonable competing (predicative) analy- 
sis of the use of adnominal locatives, however. 
(31) 
(FEW x ((CAR instance:x) A 
(LOCATED thm:x loc:IN(0HI0))) 
(RUST ~ha:x)) 
Note that in both formulations there is reference to 
a region, and that the locative cannot participate in 
scope ambiguities. 12
12We leave as an exercise for the reader to show that the 
well known (semantically significant) attachment ambiguity 
between adverbial and adnominal loactives may be represented 
h~re: 
Tom evaluated a car in Ohio. 
47 
7 Other Proposals 
7.1 External Operator Analysis 
Cresswell (\[7\], p.13) poses the problem of analysis for 
adverbial modification thus: 
There are two basic approaches to the 
analysis of adverbial constructions \[...\] One 
is to follow Richard Montague and treat 
them as sentential operators of the same 
syntactical category as not. The other is to 
follow Donald Davidson and represent them 
in the predicate calculus with the aid of an 
extra argument place in the verb to be mod- 
ified \[...\] 
We suspect that Cresswell would classify the tack 
taken toward locative adverbials in this paper as an 
"extra argument" analysis, but we shall note be- 
low some important differences between our approach 
and Davidson's. 
We find fault with the operator analysis of locative 
adverbials since it inherently attributes a scope to 
locatives which, as Section 3.1 shows, isn't reflected 
in natural language semantics. It is also clear that 
the simplifying and commutative inferences for loca- 
tives noted in Section 2 are not predicted by the ex- 
ternal operator analysis. Locatives wouldn't neces- 
sarily have these properties any more than negation 
or the modal adverbs. Finally, we note as problem- 
atic the comportment of the operator analysis with 
the anaphoric evidence, particularly where multiple 
locatives are concerned. 
7.2 Davidsonian Analyses 
Davidson \[8\], and, following him, Bartsch \[2\] and 
Sondheimer \[18\] have proposed that adverbial modifi- 
cation is best represented using an unexpected argu- 
ment place within a predicate. Bartsch (\[2\], pp.122- 
39) and Sondheimer \[18\] focus on locative construc- 
tions, so we concentrate on those works here. Sond- 
heimer (\[18\], pp.237-39) provides the following anal- 
ysis: 
(32) 
John stumbled in the park under a tree. 
3e(Stmbl(J,e) A In(e,p) A Under(e,t)) 
The standard logic textbook representation of an in- 
transitive verb such as stumble uses a ONE-PLACE 
predicate, where Sondheimer, following Davidson, 
uses the TWO-PLACE predicate signifying a relation 
between an individual and an event. This is the "ex- 
tra argument place" that distinguishes Davidsonian 
treatments. It is worth noting that this approach ac- 
counts for the logical properties of locatives that we 
noted in Section (2) above. The simplification and 
commutativity of locatives follow from the proposi- 
tional logic of conjunction. 
The most important differences between Davidso- 
nian analyses and our own are the ability to account 
for locative anaphors, and the treatment of scope. 
As presented in Section 3.4 above, our treatment 
provides correct regional antecedents for the loca- 
tive anaphor there. On the other hand, Davidsonian 
treatments make no explicit reference to regions at all 
(to which anaphors might refer), and further provide 
no mechanism for referring to the intersective regions 
that were seen to be required in the analysis of (20). 
Our analysis places simple locatives within the 
scope of all sentence operators. The Davidsonian 
analysis creates multiple propositions, and scope- 
inducing elements such as negation can then be ana- 
lyzed as including some, but not all of these proposi- 
tions within their scope. For this reason, Davidsonian 
treatments are much less specific in their predictions 
vis-a-vis scope (than the one proposed here). Bartsch 
(\[2\], p.133) indicates e.g. that she would allow sen- 
tential negation to have scope over some of the con- 
juncts in logical forms such as (32), but not others; 
and Sondheirner (\[18\], p.250) seems to have a similar 
move in mind in his discussion of almost as in I al- 
most locked him in the closet. As indicated in Section 
3.2 above, we regard such renderings as confusions of 
scope and focus. 
7.3 Other  Works  
Jackendoff (\[12\], Chap.3,9) argues that reference to 
places be recognized in semantic theory, thus allow- 
ing that locative phrases refer in the same way that 
NPs do, and that they function as arguments. But 
Jackendoff never examined inferences involving loca- 
tives, nor did he attempt o deal with the prima fa- 
cie difficulties of the argument analysis--the fact that 
locatives occur optionally and multiply. It is the lat- 
ter facts which make the argument analysis techni- 
cally difficult. Finally, where we have been precise 
about the semantics of the location role, emphasizing 
that it specifies a region WITHIN WHICH a relation 
must hold, Jackendoff was less exact. On the other 
hand, Jackendoff's analysis of PATH EXPRESSIONS is 
intriguingly analogous to that of locatives, and offers 
opportunity for extension of the work here. 
Colban (\[5\]) analyzes locatives in situation seman- 
tics, and would like to have the operator/argument 
48 
issue both ways: he allows that locatives might be 
external modifiers or arguments. But he offers no ev- 
idence to support this postulate of ambiguity. Ter 
Meulen (\[20\], also working within situation seman- 
tics, provides a means of referring to the location of 
complex events, such as the event of two detectives (33) 
solving a crime. She crucially requires a reference for 
locative xpressions, and her proposals eem compat- 
ible with ours. 
Talmy \[19\], Herskovits \[9\], and Kautz \[13\] theorize 
about the INTERPRETATION of locative expressions, 
and especially how this is affected by the sorts of ob- 
jects referred to in locative expressions. Much of this 
latter work may be regarded as complementary to our 
own, since we have not attempted to characterize in
any detail the manner in which context affects the (34) 
choice of functional denotation for particular locative 
prepositions. 
8 Conclusions 
8.1 Claims 
1. 
. 
. 
4 .  
Locative expressions (e.g. north of Boston near 
Harry) denote regions of space. The denotations 
may be referred to anaphorically. 
Locative expressions are used adverbially to con- 
strain a location argument in a relation defined 
by a verb. Thus simple locatives fail to show 
scope (like proper names). 
Relations are upwardly monotonic at location ar- 
guments: if a relation holds at R, then it holds 
at every containing R I. 
When multiple locatives are used, the intersec- 
tion of their denoted regions plays 8 location 
role. This describes the truth conditions and 
anaphoric potential of such uses, and predicts 
correctly the permutability and omissibility of 
locatives. 
8.2 Qualifications 
We don't claim that all reference to regions is through 
upwardly monotonic location arguments. On the 
contrary, regions can stand in relations in a variety 
of other ways. To take an obvious case, the sub- 
region relation is upwardly monotonic (transitive), 
but only in one (superregion) argument--it's not up- 
wardly monotonic in the first (subregion) argument. 
Here are two more fairly transparent examples of ref- 
erence to locations that don't involve the location at- 
guments of predicates, and therefore aren't upwardly 
monotonic: 
Tom likes it in Mendocino. 
./. Tom likes it in California. 
George VI ruled in England. 
./. George VI ruled in Europe. 
We claim that the regions referred to in (33) aren't 
location arguments, but rather theme (or patient) ar- 
guments. There are other examples of monotonicity 
failing that are less easily dismissed, however: 
It is the tallest in Palo Alto 
./. It is the tallest in California. 
He is alone in the dining room. 
.f. He is alone in the house. 
The apparent location argument of these relations 
(and of all superlatives) is especially interesting be- 
cause it not only fails to be upwardly monotonic, it 
even turns out to be downwardly monotonic. We wish 
to deny that these phrases denote regions which play 
location roles--more specifically, we allow that the 
phrases denote regions, but we distinguish the seman- 
tic role that the regions play. In the case of LOCATION 
arguments, the intended semantics requires that the 
relation hold somewhere within the region denoted. 
In the case of (34), however, the relation can only 
hold be said to hold if it holds fhrougho,t the region 
denoted. It is this implicit (universal) quantification 
that explains the failure of upward monotonicity, of 
course. We symbolize this sort of role as "throughout, 
and represent the downwardly monotonic (34) in the 
following way: 
(TALLEST tim: ? 
(35) throughout  : In (Pa.Zo-Alt o) ) 
(We emphasize that this is intended to illustrate 
the distinction between the various semantic roles 
that locations play--it is not proferred as a serious 
analysis of the superlative.) 
8.3 Future Directions 
We'd like to improve this account in several ways: 
first, we'd like to understand the interface between 
the syntax and semantics more rigorously. Section 4 
explains what is unusual about our views here, but 
the model of syntax/semantics cooperation it sug- 
gests is something we'd like to explore. Second, we 
need an account of preposed locatives, as Section 3.2 
49 
admits. Third, we'd like to describe the relationship 
between predicates relating objects and regions on 
the one hand with regions occupied by the objects, as 
Section 6 shows. Fourth, we'd be interested in explor- 
ing the relation between our work on the semantics 
of locatives with work on the contextually dependent 
interpretation of locatives, such as the work by Her- 
skovits \[9\] and Retz-Schmidt \[16\]. 
9 Acknowledgements  
We're indebted to Carl Pollard for the suggestion to 
use the algebraic operator 'N~ We'd like to thank 
him, Barbara Partee, David Dowry, and our col- 
leagues in the Natural Language Project at Hewlett- 
Packard Laboratories, especially Bill Ladusaw, for 
discussion and criticism of the ideas presented here. 
References 
\[1\] James Allen. Natural Language Understanding. 
Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, 1987. 
\[2\] l~nate Bartsch. Adverbialsemantik. Athenaum, 
Frankfurt, 1972. 
\[3\] Jon Barwise and John Perry. Situations and At- 
titudes. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1983. 
\[41 Noam A. Chomsky. Deep structure, surface 
structure, and semantic interpretation. In 
Danny D. Steinberg and Leon A. Jacobovits, ed- 
itors, Semantics: An Interdiscipinary Reader in 
Philosophy, Linguistics, and Psychology, pages 
183-216. Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge, 1970. 
\[5\] Erik Colban. Prepositional phrases in situation 
schemata. In Jens Erik Fenstad, Per-Kristian 
Halvorsen, Tore Langholm, and Johan van Ben- 
them, editors, Situations, Language, and Logic, 
pages 133-156. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1987. 
\[6\] Lewis G. Creary and Carl J. Pollard. A compu- 
tational semantics for natural language. In Pro- 
ceedings of the ~Sth Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 
172-179, 1985. 
IT\] M. J. CressweU. Adverbial Modification: Interval 
Semantics and its Rivals. D.Reidel, Dordrecht, 
1985. 
\[8\] Donald Davidson. The logical form of action sen- 
tences. In Nicholas Rescher, editor, The Logic of 
Decision and Action, pages 81-95. University of 
Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, 1967. 
\[9\] Annette Herskovits. Space and Prepositions 
in English: Regularities and Irregularities in a 
Complez Domain. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England, 1985. 
\[10\] Laurence R. Horn. Metafinguistic negation and 
pragmatic ambiguity. Language, 61(1):121-174, 
1985. 
\[11\] Ray Jackendoff. Semantics Interpretation in 
Generative Grammar. MIT Press, Cambridge, 
1972. 
\[12\] Ray Jackendoff. Semantics and Cognition. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1983. 
\[13\] Henry A. Kautz. Formalizing spatial concepts 
and spatial concepts. In Hobbs et at., editor, 
Commonsense Summer: Final Report, pages 
2.1-2.45. CSLI, 1985. 
\[14\] Sally McConnell-Ginet. Adverbs and logical 
form. Language, 58(1):144-184, 1982. 
\[15\] Richard Montague. English as a formal lan- 
guage. In Bruno Visentini, editor, Lingnaggi 
neUa societa e nella tecnica. Edizioni di Comu- 
nita, Milan, 1970. 
\[16\] Gudula Retz-Schmidt. Various views on spatial 
prepositions. AI Magazine, 9(2):95-105, 1988. 
\[17\] Mats Rooth. Association and Focus. PhD thesis, 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst, 1986. 
\[18\] Norman K. Sondheimer. Reference to spatial 
properties. Linguistics and Philosophy, 2(2), 
1978. 
\[19\] Leonard Talmy. How language structures space. 
In Herbert Pick and Linda Acredolo, editors, 
Spatial Orientation: Theory, Research, and Ap- 
plication. Plenum Press, 1983. 
\[20\] Alice ter Meulen. Locating events. In 
Jeroen Groenendijk, Dick de Jongh, and Mar- 
tin Stokhof, editors, Foundations of Pragmatics 
and Lezical Semantics, pages 27-40. Forts, Dor- 
drecht, 1986. 
\[21\] Richmond Thomason and Robert Stalnaker. A 
semantic theory of adverbs. Linguistic Inquiry, 
4(2), 1973. 
5O 
