ACQUIRING DISAMBIGUATION RULES FROM TEXT 
Donald Hindle 
AT~T Bell Laboratories 
600 Mountain Avenue 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974-2070 
Abstract 
An effective procedure for automatically acquiring 
a new set of disambiguation rules for an existing 
deterministic parser on the basis of tagged text is 
presented. Performance of the automatically ac- 
quired rules is much better than the existing hand- 
written disambiguation rules. The success of the 
acquired rules depends on using the linguistic in- 
formation encoded in the parser; enhancements to 
various components of the parser improves the ac- 
quired rule set. This work suggests a path toward 
more robust and comprehensive syntactic analyz- 
ers. 
1 Introduction 
One of the most serious obstacles to developing 
parsers to effectively analyze unrestricted English 
is the difficulty of creating sufllciently comprehen- 
sive grammars. While it is possible to develop 
toy grammars for particular theoretically interest- 
ing problems, the sheer variety of forms in En- 
glish together with the complexity of interaction 
that arises in a typical syntactic analyzer makes 
each enhancement of parser coverage increasingly 
difficult. There is no question that we are still 
quite far f~om syntactic analyzers that even begin 
to adequately model the grammatical variety of 
English. To go beyond the current generation of 
hand built grAmrnars for syntactic analysis it will 
be necessary to develop means of acquiring some 
of the needed grammatical information from the 
regularities that appear in large corpora of natu- 
rally occurring text. 
This paper describes an implemented training 
procedure for automatically acquiring symbolic 
rules for a deterministic parser on the basis of un- 
restricted textual input. In particular, I describe 
experiments in automatically acquiring a set of 
rules for disambiguation f lexical category (part 
of speech). Performance of the acquired rule set 
is much better than the set of rules for lexical dis- 
ambiguation written for the parser by hand over 
a period of several rules; the error rate is approx- 
imately half that of the hand written rules. Fur- 
thermore, the error rate is comparable to recent 
probabilistic approaches such as Church (1987) 
and Garside, Leech and Sampson (1987). The 
current approach has the added advantage that, 
since the rules acquired depend on the parser's 
grammar in general, independent improvements in 
other modules of the parser can lead to improve- 
ment in the performance of the disambiguation 
component. 
2 Categorial Ambiguity 
Ambiguity of part of speech is a pervasive char- 
acteristic of English; more than a third of the 
word tokens in the million-word "Brown Corpus" 
of written English (Francis and Kucera 1982) are 
cate$orially ambiguous. It is possible to construct 
sentences in which every word is ambiguous, uch 
as the following, 
(1) Her hand had come to rest on that very book. 
But even without such contrived exaggeration, 
ambiguity of lsxical category is not a trivial prob- 
lem. Nor can part of speech ambiguity be ig- 
nored in constructing models of natural anguage 
processing, since syntactic analysis (as well as 
higher levels of analysis) depends on correctly dis- 
ambiguating the lexical category of both content 
words and function words like to and that. 
It may seem that disambiguating lexical cate- 
gory should depend on complex reasoning about 
a variety of factors known to influence ambiguity 
in general, including semantic and pragmatic fac- 
tors. No doubt some aspects of disambiguating 
lexical category can be expressed in terms of such 
higher level decisions. But if disambiguation in 
fact depends on such higher level reasoning, there 
is little hope of succeeding in disambiguation 
unrestricted text. 
118 
Fortunately, there is reason to believe that lex- 
ical disambiguation can proceed on more limited 
syntactic patterns. Indeed, recent increased inter- 
est in the problem of disambiguating lexical cat- 
egory in English has led to significant progress in 
developing effective programs for assigning lexi- 
cal category in unrestricted text. The most suc- 
cessful and comprehensive of these are based on 
probabilistic modeling of category sequence and 
word category (Church 1987; Garside, Leech and 
Sampson 1987; DeRose 1988). These stochastic 
methods show impressive performance: Church re- 
ports a success rate of 95 to 99%, and shows a 
sample text with an error rate of less than one 
percent. What  may seem particularly surprising 
is that these methods succeed essentially with- 
out reference to syntactic structure; purely sur- 
face lexical patterns are involved. In contrast 
to these recent stochastic methods, earlier meth- 
ods based on categorical rules for surface patterns 
achieved only moderate success. Thus for exam- 
ple, Klein and Simmons (1963) and Greene and 
Rubin (1971) report success rates considerably be- 
low recent stochastic approaches. 
It is tempting to conclude from this contrast 
that robust handling of unrestricted text de- 
mands general probabilistic methods in preference 
to deeper linguistic knowledge. The Lancaster 
(UCREL)  group explicitly takes this position, sug- 
gesting: "... if we analyse quantitatively a suffi- 
ciently large amount of language data, we will be 
able to compensate for the computer's lack of so- 
phisticated knowledge and powers of inference, at 
least to a considerable extent." (Garside, Leech 
and Sampson 1987:3). 
In this paper, I want to emphasize a somewhat 
different view of the role of large text corpora in 
building robust models of natural language. In 
particular, I will show that that large corpora of 
naturally occurring text can be used together with 
the rule-based syntactic analyzers we have today 
- to build more effective linguistic analyzers. As the 
information derived from text is incorporated into 
our models, it will help increase the sophistication 
of our linguistic models. I suggest that in order to 
move from our current impoverished natural lan- 
guage processing systems to more comprehensive 
and robust linguistic models we must ask Can we 
acquire the linguistic information needed on the 
basis of tezt? If we can answer this question 
aff~matively - and this paper presents evidence 
that we can - then there is hope that we can make 
some progress in constructing more adequate nat- 
ural language processing systems. 
It is important to emphasize that the ques- 
tion whether we can acquire linguistic informa- 
tion from text is independent of whether the model 
is probabilistic, categorical, or some combination 
of the two. The issue is not, I believe, symbolic 
versus probabilistic rules, but rather whether we 
can acquire the necessary linguistic information in- 
stead of building systems completely by hand. No 
algorithm~ symbolic or otherwise, will succeed in 
large scale processing of natural text unless it can 
acquire some of the needed knowledge from sam- 
pies of naturally occurring text. 
3 Lexical D isambiguat ion in 
a Determinist ic  Parser 
The focus of this paper is the problem of disam- 
biguating lexical category (part of speech) within 
a deterministic parser of the sort originated by 
Marcus (1980). Fidditch is one such deterministic 
parser, designed to provide a syntactic analysis of 
text as a tool for locating examples of various lin- 
guisticaUy interesting structures (Hindle 1983). It 
has gradually been modified over the past several 
years to improve its ability to handle unrestricted 
text. 
Fidditch is designed to provide an annotated 
surface structure. It aims to build phrase structure 
trees, recovering complement relations and gapped 
elements. It has 
? a lexicon of about 100,000 words listing all 
possible parts of speech for each word, along 
with root forms for inflected words. 
? a morphological analyzer to assign part of 
speech and root form for words not in the 
lexicon 
? a complementation lexicon for about 4000 
words 
? a list of about 300 compound words, such as 
of cotJrse 
? a set of about 350 regular grammar rules to 
build phrase structure 
? a set of about 350 rules to disambiguate lexi- 
cal category 
Being a deterministic parser, Fidditch pursues a 
single path in analyzing a sentence and provides a 
single analysis. Of course, the parser is necessarily 
far from complete; neither its grammar rules nor 
its lexicon incorporate all the information needed 
119  
to adequately describe English. Therefore, it is to 
be expected that the parser will encounter struc- 
tures that it does not recognize and will make er- 
rors of analysis. When it is unable to provide a 
complete analysis of text, it is designed to return 
a partial description and proceed. Even with the 
inevitable rrors, it has proven useful for analyz- 
ing text. (The parser has been used to analyze 
tens of millions of words of written text as well 
as transcripts of speech in order to, for example, 
search for subject-verb-object triples.) 
Rules for the parser are essentially pattern- 
action rules which match a single incomplete node 
(from a stack) and a buffer of up to three com- 
pleted constituents. The patterns of parser rules 
can refer only to limited aspects of the current 
parser state. Rules can mention the grammatical 
category of the constituents in the buffer and the 
current incomplete node. Rules can also refer to 
a limited set (about 200) of specific words that 
are grammatically distinguished (e.g. be, of, as). 
Complementation rules of course refer to a larger 
set of specific lexical items. 
The model of the parser is that it recognizes 
grammatical patterns; whenever it sees a pattern 
of its rule base, it builds the associated structure; 
if it doesn't see a pattern, it does nothing. At ev- 
ery step in the parse, the most specific pattern is 
selected..The more linguistic information in the 
parser, the better able it will be to recognize and 
describe patterns. But when it does not recognize 
some construction, it simply uses a more general 
pattern to parse it. This feature (i.e., matching the 
most specific pattern available, but always having 
default analyses as more general patterns) is nec- 
essary both for analyzing unrestricted text and for 
training on the basis of unrestricted text. 
D isambiguat ion  ru les  
One of the possible rule actions of the parser is to 
select a lexical category for an ambiguous word. 
In Fidditch about half of the 700 pattern-action 
rules are disambiguation rules. 
A simple disambiguation rule, both existing in 
the hand-written disambiguation rules and ac- 
quired by the training algorithm, looks like this: 
(9.) \[PREP-{-TNS\] " -TNS \[N'ILV\] 
Rule (2) says that a word that can be a preposi- 
tion or a tense marker (i.e. the word to) followed 
by a word which can be a noun or a verb is a 
tense marker followed by a verb. This rule is obvi- 
ously not always correct; there are two ways that 
120 
it can be overridden. For rule (2), a previous rule 
may have already disambiguated the PREP-t-TNS, 
for example by recognizing the phrase close to. Al- 
ternatively, a more specific urrent rule may apply, 
for example recognizing the specific noun date in 
to date. In general, the parser provides a window 
of attention that moves through a sentence from 
the beginning to the end. A rule that, considered 
in isolation, would match some sequence of words 
in a sentence, may not in fact apply, either be- 
cause a more specific rule matches, or because a 
different rule applied earlier. 
These disambiguation rules are obviously closely 
related to the bigrams and trigrams of stochastic 
disambiguation methods. The rules differ in that 
1) they can refer to the 200 specified lexical items, 
and 9.) they can refer to the current incomplete 
node. 
Disambiguation of lexical category must occur 
before the regular grammar ules can run; regu- 
lar grammar rules only match nodes whose lexical 
category is disambiguated. 1 
The  grammat ica l  ca tegor ies  
Fidditch has 46 lexical categories (incltlding 8 
punctuations), mostly encoding rather standard 
parts of speech, with inflections folded into the 
category set. This is many fewer than the 87 sim- 
ple word tags of the Brown Corpus or of related 
tagging systems (see Garside, Leech and Samp- 
son 1987:165-183). Most of the proliferation of 
tags in such systems is the result of encoding in- 
formation that is either lexically predictable or 
structurally predictable. For example, the Brown 
tagset provides distinct ags for subjective and ob- 
jective uses of pronouns. For I and me this dis- 
tinction is predictable both from the lexical items 
themselves and from the structure in which they 
occur. In Fidditch, both subjective and objective 
pronouns are tagged simply as PRo. 
One of the motivations of the larger tagsets is 
to facilitate searching the corpus: using only the 
elaborated tags, it is possible to recover some lex- 
ical and structural distinctions. When Fidditch 
is used to search for constructions, the syntactic 
structure and lexical identity of items is available 
and thus there is no need to encode it in the tagset. 
To use the tagged Brown Corpus for training and 
IMore recent approaches todeter~i-i~tic parsing may 
allow categorial disamhiguation to occur ~fler some of the 
syntactic properties ofphrases are noted (Marcus, Hindle, 
and Fleck 1983). But in structure-b,,Hdln~ determlniRtlc 
parsers such ss Fidditch, lexical category must be disam- 
biguAted be/ore any ~m~r~ can he built. 
evaluating disambiguation rules, the Brown cate- 
gories were mapped onto the 46 lexical categories 
native to Fidditch. 
E r ro rs  in  the  hand-wr i t ten  d i sam-  
b iguat ion  ru les  
Using the tagged Brown Corpus, we can ask how 
well the disambiguation rules of Fidditch perform 
in terms of the tagged Brown Corpus. Compar- 
ing the part of speech assigned by Fidditch to the 
(transformed) Brown part of speech, we find about 
6.5% are assigned an incorrect category. Approxi- 
mately 30% of the word tokens in the Brown Cor- 
pus are categorially ambiguous in the Fidditch lex- 
icon; it is this 30% that we are concerned with in 
acquiring disambignation rules. For these ambigu- 
ons words, the error rate for the hand constructed 
disambignation rules is about 19%. That is, about 
1 out of 5 of the ambiguous word tokens are in- 
correctly disambiguated. This means that there is 
a good chance that any given sentence wilt have 
an error in part of speech. Obviously, there is 
considerable motivation for improving the lexical 
disambiguation. I deed, errors in lexical category 
disambignation are the biggest source of error for 
the parser. 
It has been my experience that the disambigna- 
tion rule set is particularly difficult to improve by 
hand. The disambiguation rules make less syn- 
tactic sense than the regular grammar ules, and 
therefore the effect of adding or deleting a rule 
on the parser performance is hard to predict. In 
the long run it is likely that these disambignation 
rules should be done away with, substituting dis- 
ambiguation by side effect as proposed by Milne 
(1986). But in the meantime, we are faced with 
the need to improve this model of lexical disana- 
bignation for a determinhtic parser. 
4 The  Tra in ing  Procedure  
The model of deterministic parsing proposed by 
Marcus (1980) has several properties that aid in 
acquisition of symbolic rules for syntactic analy- 
sis, and provide a natural way to resolve the twin 
problems of discovering a) when it is necessary to 
acquire a new rule, and b) what new rule to ac- 
quire (see the discussion in Berwick 1985). The 
key features of this niodel of parsing relevant o 
acquisition are: 
? because the parser is deterministic and has 
a limited window of attention, failure (and 
therefore the need for a new rule) can be lo- 
calized. 
? because the rules of the parser correspond 
closely to the instantaneous description of the 
state of the parser, it is easy to determine the 
form of the new rule. 
? because there is a natural ordering of the rules 
acquired, there is never any ambiguity about 
which rule to apply. The ordering of new 
rules is fixed because more specific rules al- 
ways have precedence. 
These characteristics of the deterministic parser 
provide a way to acquire a new set of lexical disam- 
biguation rules. The idea is as follows. Beginning 
with a small set of disambiguation rules, proceed 
to parse the tagged Brown Corpus. Check each 
d~ambiguation action against the tags to see if 
the correct choice was made. If an incorrect choice 
was made, use the current state of the parser'to- 
gether with the current set of disambiguation rules 
to create a new disambiguation rule to make the 
correct choice. 
Once a rule has been acquired in this manner, 
it may turn out that it is not a correct rule. Al- 
though it worked for the triggering case, it may fail 
on other cases. If the rate of failure is sufficiently ~
high, it is deactivated. 
An additional phase of acquisition would be to 
generalize the rules to reduce the number of rules 
and widen their applicability. In the experiments 
reported here, no genera~.ation has been done. 
This makes the rule set more redundant and less 
compact han necessary. However, the simplicity 
of the rule patterns of this expanded rule set al 
low a compact encoding and an ei~cient pattern 
matching. 
The initial state for the training has the com- 
plete parser grammar - all the rules for building 
structures - but only a minimal set of context in- 
dependent default disambiguation rules. Specifi- 
cally, training begins with a set of rules which se- 
lect a default category for ambiguous words words 
ignoring all context. For example, the rule (3) says 
that a word that can be an adjective or a noun or 
a verb (appearing in the first buffer position) is a 
noun, no matter what the second and third buffer 
positions show and no matter what the current 
incomplete node is. 
(3) A default  d lsambiguat ion rule 
= N \[*\] \[*\] 
In the absence of any other disambiguation rules 
(i.e. before any training), this rule would declare 
121 
fleet, which according to Fidditch's lexicon is an 
XVJ-I-Nq-V, to be a noun. There are 136 such de- 
fault disambiguation rules, one for each lexically 
possible combination of lexical categories. 
Acquisition of the disambiguation rules pro- 
ceeds in the course of parsing sentences. In this 
way, the current state of the parser - the sentence 
as analyzed thus far - is available as a pattern for 
the training. At each step in parsing, before apply- 
ing any parser ule, the program checks whether a
new disambiguation rule may be acquired. If nei- 
ther the first nor the second buffer position con- 
tains an ambiguous word, no disambiguation can 
occur, and no acquisition will occur. When an am- 
biguous word is encountered in the first or second 
buffer position, the current set of disambiguation 
rules may change. 
New rule acquisition 
The training algorithm has two basic components. 
The first component - new rule acquis i t ion - 
first checks whether the currently selected dis- 
ambiguation rule correctly disambiguates the 
biguous items in the buffer. If the wrong choice 
is made, then a new, more specific rule may be 
added to the rule set to make the correct disam- 
biguation choice. (Since the new rule is more spe- 
cific than the currently selected rule, it will have 
precedence over the older rule, and thus will make 
the correct disambiguation for the current case, 
overriding any previous disamhiguation choice). 
The  pat tern  for the new rule is determined 
by the current parse state together with the cur- 
rent set of disambiguation rules. The new rule pat- 
tern must match the current state and also must 
be be more specific than any currently matching 
disambiguation rule. (If an existing rule matches 
the current state, it must be doing the wrong dis- 
ambiguation, otherwise we would not be trying to 
acquire a new rule). If there is no available more 
specific pattern, no acquisition is possible, and the 
current rule set reiD~ins. 
Although the patterns for rules are quite re- 
stricted, referring only to the data structures of 
the parser with a restricted set of categories, there 
are nevertheless on the order of 109 possible dis- 
ambiguation rules. 
The  act ion for  the new rule is simply to 
choose the correct part of speech. 
Rule deactivation 
The second component of the rule acquisition - 
ru le  deact ivat ion  - comes into play when the 
current disambiguation rule set makes the wrong 
disambiguation and yet no new rule can be ac- 
quired (because there is no available more specific 
rule). The incorrect rule may in this case be per- 
manently deactivated. This deactivation occurs 
only when the proportion of incorrect applications 
reaches a given threshold (10 or 20% incorrect rule 
applications). 
Ideally we might expect hat each disambigua- 
tion rule would be completely correct; an incorrect 
application would count as evidence that the rule 
is wrong. However, this is an inappropriate ide- 
AliT.ation, for several reasons. Most crucially, the 
gr~,m~atical coverage as well as the range of lin- 
guistic processes modeled in Fidditch, are limited. 
(Note that this is a property of any current or 
foreseeable syntactic analyzer.) Since the gram- 
mar itself is not complete, the parser will have 
misanalyzed some constructions, leading to incor- 
rect pattern matching. Moreover, some linguistic 
patterns that determine disambiguation (such as 
for example, the influence of parallelism) cannot 
be incorporated into the current rules at all, lead- 
ing to occasional failure. As the overall syntactic 
model is improved, such cases will become less and 
less f~equent, but they will never disappear alto- 
gether. Finally, there are of course errors in the 
tagged input. Thus, we can't demand perfection 
of the trained rules; rather, we require that rules 
reach a certain level of success. For rules that 
disambiguate he first element (except he default 
disambiguation rules), we require 80% success; for 
the other rules, 90% success. These cutoff fig- 
ures were imposed arbitrarily; other values may 
be more appropriate. 
An example of a rule that is acquired and then 
deactivated is the following. 
(4) \[ADJ+N+V\] = ADJ \[*l 
This rule correctly disambiguates some cases like 
sound health and light barbell but fails on a suffi- 
cient proportion (such cases as sound energy and 
light intens/ty) that it is permanently deactivated. 
Interleaving of grammar and disam- 
biguation 
One of the advantages of embedding the training 
of disambiguation rules in a general parser is that 
independent parser actions can make the disam- 
biguation more effective. For example, adverbs 
122 
often occur in an auxiliary phrase, as in the phrase 
has immediately left The parser effectively ignores 
the adverb immediately so that from its point of 
view, has and left are contiguous. This in turn 
allows the disambignation rules to see that has is 
the leR context for left and to categorize left as 
a past participle (rather than a past tense or an 
adjective or a noun). 
5 The Training 
The training text was 450 of the 500 samples that 
make up the Brown Corpus, tagged with part of 
speech transformed into the 46 grammatical cate- 
gories native to Fidditch. Ten percent of the cor- 
pus, selected from a variety of genres, was held 
back for testing the acquired set of disambigua- 
tion rules. 
The tr~inlng set (consisting of about a million 
words) was parsed, beginning with the default 
rule set and acquiring disambiguation rules as de- 
scribed above. After parsing the training set once, 
a certain set of disambignation rules had been ac- 
quired. Then it was parsed over again, a total of 
five times. Each time, the rule set is further re- 
fined. It is effective to reparse the same corpus be- 
cause the acquisition depends both on the sentence 
parsed and on the current set of rules. Therefore, 
the same sentence can induce different changes in 
the rule set depending on the current state of the 
rule set. 
After the five iterations, 35000 rules have been 
acquired. For the training set, overall error rate 
is less than 2% and error rate for the ambiguous 
words is less than 5%. Clearly, the acquired rules 
effectively model the training set. Because the rule 
patterns are simple, they can be efficiently indexed 
and applied. 
For the one tenth of the corpus held back (the 
test set), the performance of the trained set of 
rules is encouraging. Overall, the error rate for the 
test set is about 3%. For the ambiguous words the 
error rate is 10%. Compared to the performance of
the existing hand-written rules, this shows almost 
a 50% reduction in the error rate. Additionally 
of course, there is a great saving in development 
time; to cut the error rate of the original hand- 
written rules in half by further hand effort would 
require an enormous amount of work. In contrast, 
this training algorithm is automatic (though it de- 
pends of course on the hand-written parser and 
set of grammar ules, and on the significant effort 
in tagging the Brown Corpus, which was used for 
123 
training). 
It is harder to compare performance directly to 
other reported disambiguation procedures, since 
the part of speech categories used are different. 
The 10% error rate on ambiguous words is the 
same as that reported by Garside, Leech and 
Sampson (1987:55). The program developed by 
Church (1987), which makes ystematic use of rel- 
ative tag probabilities, has, I believe, a somewhat 
smaller overall error rate. 
Add ing  lex ica l  re la t ionsh ips  
The current parser models complementation rela- 
tions only partially and it has no model at all of 
what word can modify what word (except at the 
level of lexical category). Clearly, a more com- 
prehensive system would reflect the fact, for ex- 
ample, that public apathy is known to be a noun- 
noun compound, though the word public might be 
a noun or an adjective. One piece of evidence of 
the importance of such relationships i  the fact 
that more than one fourth of the errors are confu- 
sions of adjective use with noun use as premodifier 
in a noun phrase. The current parser has no access 
to the kinds of information relevant to such modifi- 
cation and compound relationships, and thus does 
not do well on this distinction. 
The claim of this paper is that the linguistic 
information embodied in the parser is useful to 
disambiguation, and that enhancing the linguis- 
tic information will result in improving the disam- 
bignation. Adding that information about lexical 
relations to the parser, and making it available to 
the disambignation procedure, should improve the 
accuracy of the disambiguation rules. In the long 
run the parser should incorporate general mod- 
els of modification. However, we can crudely add 
some of this information to the disambiguation 
procedure, and take advantage of complementa- 
tion information. 
For each word in the training set, all word pairs 
including that word that might be lexically condi- 
tioned modification or complementation relation- 
ships are recorded. Any pair that occurs more 
than once and always has the same lexical cate- 
gory is taken to be a lexically significant colloca- 
tion - either a complementation r a modification 
relationship. For example, for the word study the 
following lexical pairs are identified in the training 
set. 
bD \] \[NOUN\] 
\[NI \[NI 
\[VPPRT\] IN\] 
\[PP-ZPI\[N\] 
\[vl\[M 
\[vl\[Pp.zP\] 
\[NI\[Pm~P\] 
recent study, present study, 
psychological study, graduate study, 
own study, such study, 
theoretical study 
use study, place-name study, 
growth study, time-&-motion study, 
birefringence study 
prolonged study, detailed study 
under study 
study dance 
study at 
study of, study on, 
study by 
Obviously, only a small subset of the modifica- 
tion and complementation relations of English are 
included in this set. But m\[qsing pairs cause no 
trouble, since more general disambiguation rules 
will apply. This is an instance of the general strat- 
egy of the parser to use specific information when 
it is available and to fall back on more general 
(and less accurate) information i case no specific 
pattern matches, permitting an incremental im- 
provement of the parser. The set of lexical pairs 
does include many high frequency collocations in- 
volving potentially ambiguous words, such as close 
tO (ADJ PREP) and long time (ADJ N). 
The test set was reparsed using this lexical infor- 
mation. The error rate for dis~mhiguation using 
to these lexically related word pairs is quite small 
(3.5% of the ambiguous words), much better than 
the error rate of the disambiguation rules in gen- 
eral, resulting in an improved overall performance 
in disambiguation. Although this is only a crude 
model of complementation and modification rela- 
tionships, it suggests how improvements in other 
modules of the parser will result in improvements 
in the disamhiguation. 
Us ing  grammat ica l  dependency  
A second source of failure of the acquired isam- 
biguation rules is that the acquisition algorithm 
is not paying enough attention to the information 
the parser provides. 
The large difference in accuracy between the 
training set and the test set suggests that the ac- 
quired set of disambiguation rules are matching 
idiosyncratic properties of the training set rather 
than general extensible properties; the rules are 
too powerful. It seems that the rules that refer to 
all three items in the buffer are the culprit. For 
example, the acquired rule 
124 
(5) \[M\[P P+TNS\] = 'rNs \[ +vl = v 
applies to such cases as 
(6) Shall we flip a coin to see which of us goes 
first? -~ 
In effect, this rule duplicates the action of another 
rule 
(7) \[PREP'~t'TNS\] ----" TNS \[N'~V\] "--V 
In short, the rule set does not have appropriate 
shift invariance. 
The problem with disamhiguation rule (5) is 
that it refers to three items that are not in fact 
syntactically related: in sentence (6), there is no 
structural relation between the noun coin and the 
infinitive phrase to see. It would be appropriate to 
only acquire rules that refer to constituents that 
occur in construction with each other, since the 
predictability of part of speech from local context 
arises because of stract,ral relations among words; 
there should be no predictabifity across words that 
ate not structurally related. 
We should therefore be able to improve the set 
of disamhiguation rules by restricting new rules to 
only those involving elements hat are in the same 
structure. We use the grammar as implemented in 
the parser to decide what elements are related and 
thus to restrict he set of rules acquired. Specif- 
ically, the following restriction on the acquisition 
of new rules is proposed. 
All the buffer elements referred to by 
a disambiguation rule must appear to- 
gether in some other single rule. 
This rules out examples like rule (5) because no 
single parser grammar rule ever refers to the noun, 
the to and the following verb at the same time. 
However, a rule llke (7) is accepted because the 
parser grammar rule for infinitives does refer to to 
and the following verb st the same time. 
For training, an additional escape for rules was 
added: if the first element of the buffer is ambigu- 
ous s rule may use the second element to disam- 
biguate it whether or not there is any parser ule 
that refers to the two together. In these cases, if no 
new rule were added, the default disamhiguation 
rules, which are notably ineffective, would match. 
(The default rules have a success rate of only 55% 
compared to over 94% for the disambiguation rules 
that depend on context.) Since the parser is not 
sufficiently complete to recognize all cases where 
words are related, this escape admits some local 
context even in the absence of parser internal rea- 
sons to do so. 
The training procedure was applied with this 
new constraint on rules, parsing the training set 
five times to acquire a new rule set. Restricting 
the rules to related elements had three notable f- 
fects. First, the number of disambiguation rules 
acquired was cut to nearly one third the number 
for the unrestricted rule set (about 12000 rules). 
Second, the difference between the tr~inlng set 
and the test set is reduced; the error rate differs 
by only one percent. Finally, the performance of 
the restricted rule set is if anything slightly better 
than the unrestricted set (3427 errors for the re- 
stricted rules versus 3492 errors for the larger rule 
set). These results show the power of using the 
grammatical information encoded in the parser to 
direct the attention of the disambiguation rules. 
6 Conclusion 
I have described a training algorithm that uses 
an existing deterministic parser together with a 
corpus of tagged text to acquiring rules for dis- 
ambiguating lexical category. Performance of the 
trained set of rules is much better than the pre- 
vious hand-written rule set (error rate reduced by 
half). The success of the disambiguation proce- 
dure depends on the linguistic knowledge mbod- 
ied in the parser in a number of ways. 
It uses the data structures and linguistic cat- 
egories of the parser, focusing the rule acqui- 
sition mechanism on relevant elements. 
It is embedded in the parsing process so 
that parser actions can set things up for 
acquisition (for example, adverbs axe in ef- 
fect removed within elements of the auxil- 
iary, restoring the contiguity of auxiliary ele- 
ments). 
It uses the grammar rules to identify words 
that are grammatically related, and are there- 
fore relevant to disambiguation. 
It can use rough models of complementation 
and modification to help identify words that 
are related. 
Finally, the parser always provides a default 
action. This permits the incremental im- 
provement of the parser, since it can take ad- 
vantage of more specific information when it 
is available, but it will always disambiguate 
somehow, no matter whether it has acquired 
the appropriate rules or not. 
This work demonstrates the feasibility of acquiring 
the linguistic information needed to analyze unre- 
stricted text from text itself. Further improve- 
ments in syntactic analyzers will depend on such 
automatic acquisition of grammatical and lexical 
facts. 
References 
Berwick, Robert C. 1985. The Acquisition of Syn- 
tactic Knowledge. M IT  Press. 
Church, Kenneth. 1987. A stochastic parts pro- 
gram and noun phrase parser for unrestricted 
text. Proceedings Second A CL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing. 
DeRose, Stephen J. 1988. Grammatical category 
disambiguation by statistical optimization. 
Computational Linguistics 14.1.31-39. 
Francis, W. Nelson and Henry Kucera. 1982. Fre- 
fuency Analysis of English Usage. Houghton 
Mifflin Co. 
Garside, Roger, Geoffrey Leech, and  Geoffrey 
Sampson. 1987. The Computational Analysis 
of English. Longman. 
Greene, Barbara B. and Gerald M. Rubin. 1971. 
Automated grammatical tagging of English. 
Department of Linguistics, Brown University. 
Donald Hindle. 1983. Deterministic parsing of syn- 
tactic non-fluencies. Proceedings of the 21st 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics. 
Klein, S. and R.F. Simmons. 1963. A computa- 
tional approach to grammatical coding of En- 
glish words. JACM 10:334-47. 
Marcus, Mitchell P. 1980. A Theory of Syntactic 
Recognition for Natural Language. MIT Press. 
Marcus, Mitchell P., Donald Hindle and Margaret 
Fleck. 1983. D-theory: talking about talking 
about trees. Proceedings of the ~lst Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
Milne, Robert. 1986. Resolving Lexical Ambigu- 
ity in a Deterministic Parser. Computational 
Linguistics 12.1, 1-12. 
125 
