Mixed Initiative in Dialogue: An Investigation into Discourse 
Segmentation 
Marilyn Walker 
University of Pennsylvania* 
Computer Science Dept. 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
lyn@linc.cis.upenn.edu 
Steve Whittaker 
Hewlett Packard Laboratories 
Bristol, England BS12 6QZ 
HP Stanford Science Center 
sjw@hplb.hpl.hp.com 
Abstract  
Conversation between two people is usually of 
MIXED-INITIATIVE, with CONTROL over the con- 
versation being transferred from one person to an- 
other. We apply a set of rules for the transfer of 
control to 4 sets of dialogues consisting of a total of 
1862 turns. The application of the control rules lets 
us derive domain-independent discourse structures. 
The derived structures indicate that initiative plays 
a role in the structuring of discourse. In order to 
explore the relationship of control and initiative to 
discourse processes like centering, we analyze the 
distribution of four different classes of anaphora for 
two data sets. This distribution i dicates that some 
control segments are hierarchically related to oth- 
ers. The analysis uggests that discourse partic- 
ipants often mutually agree to a change of topic. 
We also compared initiative in Task Oriented and 
Advice Giving dialogues and found that both allo- 
cation of control and the manner in which control 
is transferred is radically different for the two dia- 
logue types. These differences can be explained in 
terms of collaborative planning principles. 
1 Introduct ion 
Conversation between two people has a number of 
characteristics that have yet to be modeled ade- 
quately in human-computer dialogue. Conversa- 
tion is BIDIRECTIONAL; there is a two way flow 
of information between participants. Information 
*This research was partially funded by ARO grants 
DAAG29-84-K-0061 and DAAL03-89-C0031PRI, DARPA 
grant N00014-85-K0018, and NSF grant MCS-82-19196 at 
the University of Pennsylvania, and by Hewlett Packard, 
U.K. 
is exchanged by MIXED-INITIATIVE. Each partici- 
pant will, on occasion, take the conversational lead. 
Conversational partners not only respond to what 
others say, but feel free to volunteer information 
that is not requested and sometimes ask questions 
of their own\[Nic76\]. As INITIATIVE passes back and 
forth between the discourse participants, we say 
that CONTROL over the conversation gets trans- 
ferred from one discourse participant to another. 
Why should we, as computational linguists, be 
interested in factors that contribute to the interac- 
tivity of a discourse? There are both theoretical 
and practical motivations. First, we wish to ex- 
tend formal accounts of single utterances produced 
by single speakers to explain multi-participant, 
multi-utterance discourses\[Po186, CP86\]. Previ- 
ous studies of the discourse structure of multi- 
participant dialogues have often factored out the 
role of MIXED-INITIATIVE, by allocating control to 
one participant\[Gro77, Coh84\], or by assuming a
passive listener\[McK85, Coh87\]. Since conversation 
is a collaborative process\[CWG86, SSJ74\], models 
of conversation can provide the basis for extending 
planning theories\[GS90, CLNO90\]. When the sit- 
uation requires the negotiation of a collaborative 
plan, these theories must account for the interact- 
ing beliefs and intentions of multiple participants. 
~,From apractical perspective, there is ample evi- 
dence that limited mixed-initiative has contributed 
to lack of system usability. Many researchers 
have noted that the absence of mixed-initiative 
gives rise to two problems with expert systems: 
They don't allow users to participate in the rea- 
soning process, or to ask the questions they want 
answered\[PHW82, Kid85, FL89\]. In addition, ques- 
tion answering systems often fail to take account 
of the system's role as a conversational partner. 
70 
For example, fragmentary utterances may be inter- 
preted with respect o the previous user input, but 
what users say is often in reaction to the system's 
previous response\[CP82, Sid83\]. 
In this paper we focus on interactive discourse. 
We model mixed-initiative using an utterance type 
classification and a set of rules for transfer of control 
between discourse participants that were proposed 
by Whittaker and Stenton\[WS88\]. We evaluate the 
generality of this analysis by applying the control 
rules to 4 sets of dialogues, including both advi- 
sory dialogues (ADs) and task-oriented ialogues 
(TODs). We analysed both financial and support 
ADs. The financial ADs are from the radio talk 
show "Harry Gross: Speaking of Your Money "1 
The support ADs resulted from a client phoning 
an expert o help them diagnose and repair various 
software faults ~. The TODs are about the construc- 
tion of a plastic water pump in both telephone and 
keyboard modality S. 
The application of the control rules to these dia- 
logues lets us derive domain-independent discourse 
segments with each segment being controlled by one 
or other discourse participant. We propose that 
control segments correspond to different subgoals 
in the evolving discourse plan. In addition, we ar- 
gue that various linguistic devices are necessary for 
conversational participants to coordinate their con- 
tributions to the dialogue and agree on their mu- 
tual beliefs with respect o a evolving plan, for ex- 
ample, to agree that a particular subgoal has been 
achieved. A final phenomenon concerns hifts of 
control and the devices used to achieve this. Con- 
trol shifts occur because it is unusual for a single 
participant o be responsible for coordinating the 
achievement of the whole discourse plan. When a 
different participant assumes control of a discourse 
subgoal then a control shift occurs and the par- 
ticipants must have mechanisms for achieving this. 
The control framework distinguishes instances in 
which a control shift is negotiated by the partic- 
ipants and instances where one participant seizes 
control. 
This paper has two objectives: 
110 randomly selected ialogues (474 turns) from a corpus 
that was collected and transcribed by Martha Pollack and 
Julia Hirschberg\[HL87, PHW82\]. 
24 dialogues (450 turns) from tapes made at one of 
Hewlett-Packard's customer response centers. See \[WS88\]. 
35 keyboard (224 turns) and 5 telephone dialogues (714 
turns), which were collected in an experiment by Phil Cohen 
to explore the relationship between modality, interactivity 
and use of referring expressions\[Coh84\]. 
To explore the phenomenon of control in rela- 
tion to ATTENTIONAL STATE \[GS86, GJW86, 
Sid79\] 4. We predict shifts of attentional state 
when shifts in control are negotiated and 
agreed by all participants, but not when con- 
trol is seized by one participant without the 
acceptance of the others. This should be re- 
flected in different distribution of anaphora in 
the two cases. 
To test predictions about the distribution of 
control in different types of dialogues. Be- 
cause the TOD's embody the master-slave 
assumption\[GSg0\], and control is allocated to 
the expert, our expectation is that control 
should be located exclusively with one partici- 
pant in the TODs in contrast with the ADs. 
2 Rules  for the A l locat ion 
and Transfer of Control  
We use the framework for the allocation and trans- 
fer of control of Whittaker and Stenton\[WS88\]. The 
analysis is based on a classification of utterances 
into 4 types 5. These are: 
? UTTERANCE TYPES 
-- ASSERTIONS: Declarative utterances used 
to state facts. Yes and No in response to 
a question were classified as assertions on 
the basis that they are supplying informa- 
tion. 
-- COMMANDS: Utterances intended to in- 
stigate action. Generally imperative 
form, but could be indirect such as My 
suggestion would be that you do ..... 
-QUESTIONS: Utterances which are in- 
tended to elicit information, including in- 
direct forms such as I was wondering 
whether I should .... 
-- PROMPTS: Utterances which did not ex- 
press propositional content, such as Yeah, 
Okay, Uh-huh .... 
4The theory of centering, which is part of attentional 
state, depends on discourse participants' recognizing the be- 
ginning and end of a discourse segment\[BFP87, Wal89\]. 
5The relationship between utterance l vel meaning and 
discourse intentions rests on a theory of joint commitment 
or shared plans\[GSg0, CLNO90, LCN90\] 
71 
Note that prompts are in direct contrast o the 
other options that a participant has available at 
any point in the discourse. By indicating that the 
speaker does not want the floor, prompts function 
on a number of levels, including the expression of 
understanding or agreement\[Sch82\]. 
The rules for the allocation of control are based 
on the utterance type classification and allow a di- 
alogue to be divided into segments that correspond 
to which speaker is the controller of the segment. 
? CONTROL RULES 
UTTERANCE 
ASSERT ION 
COMMAND 
QUEST ION 
PROMPT 
CONTROLLER (ICP) 
SPEAKER, unless response 
to a Question 
SPEAKER 
SPEAKER, unless response 
to Question or Command 
HEARER 
The definition of controller can be seen to cor- 
respond to the intuitions behind the term INITI- 
ATING CONVERSATIONAL PARTICIPANT (ICP), who 
is defined as the initiator of a given discourse 
segment\[GS86\]. The OTHER CONVERSATIONAL 
PARTICIPANT(S), OCP, may speak some utterances 
in a segment, but the DISCOURSE SEGMENT PUR- 
POSE, must be the purpose of the ICP. The control 
rules place a segment boundary whenever the roles 
of the participants (ICP or OCP) change. For ex- 
ample: 
Abdication Example 
E: "And they are, in your gen youql find that they've relo- 
Cated into the labelled common area" 
(ASSERT - E control) 
C: "That's right." (PROMPT - E control) 
E: "Yeah" (PROMPT - E abdicates control) 
CONTROL SHIFT TO C - -  
C: "I've got two in there. There are two of them." (ASSERT 
- C control) 
E: "Right" (PROMPT - C control) 
C: "And there's another one which is % RESA" 
(ASSERT - C control) 
E: "OK urn" (PROMPT - C control) 
C: "VS" (ASSERT- C control) 
E: "Right" (PROMPT - C control) 
C: "Mm" (PROMPT - C abdicates control) 
CONTROL SHIFT TO E - - - -  
E: "Right and you haven't got - I assume you haven't got 
local labelled common with those labels" 
(QUESTION - E control) 
Whittaker and Stenton also performed a post-hoe 
analysis of the segment boundaries that are defined 
by the control rules. The boundaries fell into one 
of three types: 
? CONTROL SHIFT  TYPES 
- ABDICATION: Okay, go on. 
- REPETITION/SUMMARY: That would be 
my recommendation a d that will ensure 
that you get a logically integral set of files. 
- I N T E R R U P T I O N :  It is something new 
though urn. 
ABDICATIONS 6 correspond to those cases where 
the controller produces a prompt as the last 
utterance of the segment. The class REPETI- 
TION/SUMMARY corresponds to the controller pro- 
ducing a redundant  utterance. The utterance is 
either an exact repetition of previous propositional 
content, or a summary that realizes a proposition, 
P, which could have been inferred from what came 
before. Thus orderly control shifts occur when 
the controller explicitly indicates that s/he wishes 
to relinquish control. What unifies ABDICATIONS 
and REPETITION/SUMMARIES is that the controller 
supplies no new propositional content. The re- 
maining class, INTERRUPTIONS, characterize shifts 
occurring when the noncontroller displays initia- 
tive by seizing control. This class is more general 
than other definitions of Interruptions. It prop- 
erly contains cross-speaker interruptions that in- 
volve topic shift, similar to the true-interruptions 
of Grosz and Sidner\[GS86\], as well as clarification 
subdialogues\[Sid83, LA90\]. 
This classification suggests that the transfer of 
control is often a collaborative phenomenon. Since 
a noncontroller(OCP), has the option of seizing con- 
trol at any juncture in discourse, it would seem 
that controllers(ICPs), are in control because the 
noncontroller allows it. These observations address 
problems raised by Grosz and Sidner, namely how 
ICPs signal and OCPs recognize segment bound- 
aries. The claim is that shifts of control often do 
not occur until the controller indicates the end of 
a discourse segment by abdicating or producing a 
repetition/summary. 
3 Control Segmentation and 
Anaphora 
To determine the relationship between the de- 
rived control segments and ATTENTIONAL STATE we 
6Our abdication category was called prompt by \[WS88\]. 
72 
looked at the distribution of anaphora with respect 
to the control segments in the ADs. All data were 
analysed statistically by X 2 and all differences cited 
are significant at the 0.05 level. We looked at all 
anaphors (excluding first and second person), and 
grouped them into 4 classes. 
? C lasses  o f  Anaphors  
- 3RD PERSON: it, they, them, their, she, 
he, her, him, his 
- -  ONE/SOME, one of them, one of those, a 
new one, that one, the other one, some 
- DEICTIC: Noun phrases, e.g. this, that, 
this NP, that NP, those NP, these NP 
- EVENT: Verb Phrases, Sentences, Seg- 
ments, e.g. this, that, it 
The class DEICTIC refers to deictic references to 
material introduced by noun phrases, whereas the 
class EVENT refers to material introduced clausally. 
3.1 Hierarchical Relationships 
The first phenomenon we noted was that the 
anaphora distribution indicated that some seg- 
ments are hierarchically related to others 7. This 
was especially apparent in cases where one dis- 
course participant interrupted briefly, then imme- 
diately passed control back to the other. 
Interrupt/Abdicate 1 
A: ... the only way I could do that was to take a to take a 
one third down and to take back a mortgage (ASSERTION) 
-INTERRUPT SHIFT TO B- - -  
2. B: When you talk about one third put a number on it 
(QUESTION) 
3. A: uh 15 thou (ASSERTION, but response) 
4. B: go ahead (PROMPT) 
- - - -ABDICATE SHIFT BACK TO .4.- 
5. A: and then I'm a mortgage baz.k for 36 
The following example illustrates the same point. 
Interrupt/Abdicate 2 
1. A: The maximum amount ... will be $400 on THEIR 
tax return. (ASSERTION) 
INTERRUPT SHIFT TO B 
7Similar phenomena h s been noted by many researchers 
in discourse including\[Gro77, Hob79, Sid79, PHg0\]. 
2. B: 400 for the whole year? (QUESTION) 
3. A: yeah it'll be 20% (ASSERTION, but response) 
4. B: um hm (PROMPT) 
- - - - -ABDICATE SHIFT BACK TO A- 
5. A: now if indeed THEY pay the $2000 to your wife .... 
The control segments as defined would treat both 
of these cases as composed of 3 different segments. 
But this ignores the fact that utterances (1) and 
(5) have closely related propositional content in the 
first example, and that the plural pronoun straddles 
the central subsegment with the same referents be- 
ing picked out by they and their in the second ex- 
ample. Thus we allowed for hierarchical segments 
by treating the interruptions of 2-4 as subsegments, 
and utterances 1 and 5 as related parts of the parent 
segments. All interruptions were treated as embed- 
dings in this way. However the relationship of the 
segment after the interruption to the segment be- 
fore must be determined on independent grounds 
such as topic or intentional structure. 
3.2 Distr ibution 
Once we extended the control framework to allow 
for the embedding of interrupts, we coded every 
anaphor with respect o whether its antecedent lay 
outside or within the current segment. These are la- 
belled X (cross segment boundary antecedent) NX 
(no cross segment boundary), in Figure 1. In addi- 
tion we break these down as to which type of control 
shift occurred at the previous egment boundary. 
3rd Pets One Deictic Event 
x  xlxk xlxi x x I 
Abdication 1 105 0 10 27 7 18 
3  ll01 4 l i31  5 li 5 i 
Inter pt 7 :7 il 0 I 0 il 8 I 9 i l2  1, I 
TOTAL 11 165 el 0 I 14 ii 24 I 41 el '1 34 i 
Figure 1: Distribution of Anaphora in Finance ADs 
We also looked at the distribution of anaphora in 
the Support ADs and found similar results. 
For both dialogues, the distribution of anaphors 
varies according to which type of control shift oc- 
curred at the previous segment boundary. When 
we look at the different ypes of anaphora, we find 
that third person and one anaphors cross bound- 
73 
Abdication 
Summary 
Interrupt 
TOTAL  
3rd Pets One Deictic Event x ixtvlixl xllx v 
4 46 0 4 12 4 
4 =6 i l l  4 II 10 16  II 9 =4 
6 40 II 0 4 115 I 5 II 5 10 
16 11211 1 11 11191 23 Il ls 42 I 
Figure 2: Distribution of Anaphora in Support ADs 
aries extremely rarely, but the event anaphors and 
the deictic pronouns demonstrate a different pat- 
tern. What does this mean? 
The fact that anaphora is more likely to cross 
segment boundaries following interruptions than for 
summaries or abdications i consistent with the con- 
trol principles. With both summaries and abdica- 
tions the speaker gives an explicit signal that s/he 
wishes to relinquish control. In contrast, interrup- 
tions are the unprompted attempts of the listener 
to seize control, often having to do with some 'prob- 
lem' with the controller's utterance. Therefore, in- 
terruptions are much more likely to be within topic. 
But why should deixis and event anaphors be- 
have differently from the other anaphors? Deixis 
serves to pick out objects that cannot be selected 
by the use of standard anaphora, i.e. we should 
expect he referents for deixis to be outside imme- 
diate focus and hence more likely to be outside the 
current segment\[Web86\]. The picture is more com- 
plex for event anaphora, which seems to serve a 
number of different functions in the dialogue. It is 
used to talk about the past events that lead up to 
the current situation, I did THAT in order to move 
the place. It is also used to refer to sets of propo- 
sitions of the preceding discourse, Now THAT'S  a 
little background (cf \[Web88\]). The most prevalent 
usei however, was to refer to future events or ac- 
tions, THAT would be the move that I would make 
- but you have to do IT  the same day. 
SUMMARY EXAMPLE 
A: As far as you are concerned THAT could cost you more 
.... what's your tax bracket? (QUESTION) 
B: Well I'm on pension Harry and my wife hasn't worked at 
all and ..(ASSERT/RESP) 
A: No reason at all why you can't do THAT. (ASSERTION) 
- - -SUMMARY 3HIFT to B .... 
13: See my comment was if we should throw even the $2000 
into an IRA or something for her. (ASSERTION) 
--REPETITION SHIFT to A. 
A: You could do THAT too. (ASSERTION) 
Since the task in the ADs is to develop a plan, 
speakers use event anaphora s concise references to 
the plans they have just negotiated and to discuss 
the status and quality of plans that have been sug- 
gested. Thus the frequent cross-speaker references 
to future events and actions correspond to phases of 
plan negotiation\[PHW82\]. More importantly these 
references are closely related to the control struc- 
ture. The example above illustrates the clustering 
of event anaphora t segment boundaries. One dis- 
course participant uses an anaphor to summarize a 
plan, but when the other participant evaluates this 
plan there may be a control shift and any reference 
to the plan will necessarily cross a control boundary. 
The distribution of event anaphora bears this out, 
since 23/25 references to future actions are within 
2 utterances of a segment boundary (See the ex- 
ample above). More significantly every instance of 
event anaphora crossing a segment boundary occurs 
when the speaker is talking about future events or 
actions. 
We also looked at the TODs for instances of 
anaphora being used to describe a future act in 
the way that we observed in the ADs. However, 
over the 938 turns in the TODs, there were only 18 
instances of event anaphora, because in the main 
there were few occasions when it was necessary to 
talk about the plan. The financial ADs had 45 event 
anaphors in 474 utterances. 
4 Cont ro l  and  Co l laborat ive  
P lans  
To explore the relationship of control to planning, 
we compare the TODs with both types of ADs 
(financial and support). We would expect these 
dialogues to differ in terms of initiative. In the 
ADs, the objective is to develop a collaborative plan 
through a series of conversational exchanges. Both 
discourse participants believe that the expert has 
knowledge about the domain, but only has partial 
information about the situation. They also believe 
that the advisee must contribute both the prob- 
lem description and also constraints as to how the 
problem can be solved. This information must be 
exchanged, so that the mutual beliefs necessary to 
develop the collaborative plan are established in 
the conversation\[Jos82\]. The situation is different 
74 
in the TODs. Both participants here believe at 
the outset that the expert has sufficient informa- 
tion about the situation and complete and correct 
knowledge about how to execute the Task. Since 
the apprentice has no need to assert information 
to change the expert's beliefs or to ask questions 
to verify the expert's beliefs or to issue commands, 
we should not expect the apprentice to have con- 
trol. S/he is merely present o execute the actions 
indicated by the knowledgeable participant. 
The differences in the beliefs and knowledge 
states of the participants can be interpreted in the 
terms of the collaborative planning principles of 
Whittaker and Stenton\[WS88\]. We generalize the 
principles of INFORMATION QUALITY and PLAN 
QUALITY, which predict when an interrupt should 
occur .  
? INFORMATION QUALITY: The listener must be- 
lieve that the information that the speaker has 
provided is true, unambiguous and relevant o 
the mutual goal. This corresponds to the two 
rules: (A1) TRUTH: If the listener believes a 
fact P and believes that fact to be relevant and 
either believes that the speaker believes not P 
or that the speaker does not know P then inter- 
rupt; (A2)AMBIGUITY: If the listener believes 
that the speaker's assertion is relevant but am- 
biguous then interrupt. 
? PLAN QUALITY: The listener must believe that 
the action proposed by the speaker is a part of 
an adequate plan to achieve the mutual goal 
and the action must also be comprehensible to 
the listener. The two rules to express this are: 
(B1)EFFECTIVENESS: If the listener believes 
P and either believes that P presents an ob- 
stacle to the proposed plan or believes that P 
? is part of the proposed plan that has already 
been satisfied, then interrupt; (B2) AMBIGU- 
ITY: If  the listener believes that an assertion 
about the proposed plan is ambiguous, then 
interrupt. 
These principles indirectly proyide a means to 
ensure mutual belief. Since a participant must in- 
terrupt if any condition for an interrupt holds, then 
lack of interruption signals that there is no discrep- 
ancy in mutual beliefs. If there is such a discrep- 
ancy, the interruption is a necessary contribution 
to a collaborative plan, not a distraction from the 
joint activity. 
We compare ADs to TODs with respect o how 
Turns/Seg 
Exp-Contr 
Abdication 
Summary 
Interrupt 
Finance Support Task-Phone Task-Key 
7.49 8.03 15.68 11.27 
60?~ 51~ 91% 91% 
38~ 38~0 45~ 28% 
23?~ 27~ 7~ 6~ 
38~ 36?~ 48~ 67% 
Turns/Seg: Average number of turns between control shifts 
Exp-Contr: % total turns controlled by expert 
Abdication: ~ control shifts that are Abdications 
Summaries: % control shifts that are Reps/Summaries 
Interrupt: ~ control shifts that are Interrupts 
Figure 3: Differences in Control for Dialogue Types 
often control is exchanged by calculating the aver- 
age number of turns between control shifts . We 
also investigate whether control is shared equally 
between participants and what percentage of con- 
trol shifts are represented by abdications, inter- 
rupts, and summaries for each dialogue type. See 
Figure 3. 
Three things are striking about this data. As we 
predicted, the distribution of control between ex- 
pert and client is completely different in the ADs 
and the TODs. The expert has control for around 
90% of utterances in the TODs whereas control is 
shared almost equally in the ADs. Secondly, con- 
trary to our expectations, we did find some in- 
stances of shifts in the TODs. Thirdly, the distri- 
bution of interruptions and summaries differs across 
dialogue types. How can the collaborative planning 
principles highlight the differences we observe? 
There seem to be two reasons why shifts occur in 
the TODs. First, many interruptions in the TODs 
result from the apprentice seizing control just to 
indicate that there is a temporary problem and that 
plan execution should be delayed. 
TASK INTERRUPT 1, A is the Instructor 
A: It's hard to get on (ASSERTION) 
- - - - - INTERRUPT SHIFT TO B 
B: Not there yet - ouch yep it's there. (ASSERTION) 
A: Okay (PROMPT) 
B: Yeah (PROMPT) 
-ABDICATE SHIFT TO A- -  
A: All right. Now there's a little blue cap .. 
Second, control was exchanged when the execu- 
tion of the task started to go awry. 
8 We excluded turns  in dialogue openings and closings. 
75 
TASK INTERRUPT 2, A is the Instructor 
A: And  then the elbow goes over that ... the big end of the 
elbow. (COMMAND) 
- - - INTERRUPT SHIFT TO B ~  
B: You said that it d idn't  fit tight, but  it doesn't  fit t ight at 
all, okay ... (ASSERTION) 
A: Okay (PROMPT)  
B: Let me try THIS - oo1~ - again(ASSERTION) 
The problem with the physical situation indicates 
to the apprentice that the relevant beliefs are no 
longer shared. The Instructor is not in possession 
of critical information such as the current state of 
the apprentice's pump. This necessitates an infor- 
mation exchange to resynchronize mutual beliefs, 
so that the rest of the plan "~ ~,v be successfully ex- 
ecuted. However, since control is explicitly allo- 
cated to the  instructor in TODs, there is no reason 
for that participant o believe that the other has 
any contribution to make. Thus there are fewer 
attempts by the instructor to coordinate activity, 
such as by using summaries to synchronize mutual 
beliefs. Therefore, if the apprentice needs to make 
a contribution, s/he must do so via interruption, 
explaining why there are many more interruptions 
in these dialogues. 9 In addition, the majority of 
Interruptions (73%) are initiated by apprentices, in
contrast to the ADs in which only 29% are produced 
by the Clients. 
Summaries are more frequent in ADs. In the ADs 
both participants believe that a plan cannot be con- 
structed without contributions from both of them. 
Abdications and summaries are devices which al- 
low these contributions to be coordinated and par- 
ticipants use these devices to explicitly set up op- 
portunities for one another to make a contribution, 
and to ensure mutual bellefs The increased fre- 
quency of summaries in the ADs may result from 
the fact that the participants start with discrepant 
mutual beliefs about the situation and that estab- 
lishing and maintaining mutual beliefs is a key part 
of the ADs. 
5 D iscuss ion  
It has Often been stated that discourse is an inher- 
ently collaborative process and that this is man- 
ifested in certain phenomena, e.g. the use of 
9The higher, percentage of Interruptions in the keyboard 
TODs in comparison with the t ~1 ~ ./.hone TODs parallels Ovi- 
att and Cohen's analysis, showing that participants exploit 
the Wider bandwidth of the iptoractive spoken channel to 
break tasks down into subtaskstCoh84 , OC89\]. 
anaphora nd cue words \[GS86, HL87, Coh87\] by 
which the speaker makes aspects of the discourse 
structure xplicit. We found shifts of attentional 
state when shifts in control are negotiated and 
agreed by all participants, but not when control 
is seized by one participant without the acceptance 
of the others. This was reflected in different distri- 
bution of anaphora in the two cases. Furthermore 
we found that not all types of anaphora behaved 
in the same way. Event anaphora clustered at seg- 
ment boundaries when it was used to refer to pre- 
ceding segments and was more likely to cross seg- 
ment boundaries because of its function in talking 
about the proposed plan. We also found that con- 
trol was distributed and exchanged ifferently in 
the ADs and TODs. These results provide support 
for the control rules. 
In our analysis we argued for hierarchical orga- 
nization of the control segments on the basis of 
specific examples of interruptions. We also be- 
lieve that there are other levels of structure in dis- 
course that are not captured by the control rules, 
e.g. control shifts do not always correspond with 
task boundaries. There can be topic shifts with- 
out change of initiation, change of control without 
a topic shift\[WS88\]. The relationship of cue words, 
intonational contour\[PH90\] and the use of modal 
subordination\[Rob86\] to the segments derived from 
the control rules is a topic for future research. 
A more controversial question concerns rhetori- 
cal relations and the extent to which these are de- 
tected and used by listeners\[GS86\]. Hobbs has ap- 
plied COHERENCE RELATIONS to face-to-face con- 
versation in which mixed-initiative is displayed by 
participants\[HA85, Hob79\]. One category of rhetor- 
ical relation he describes is that of ELABORATION, 
in which a speaker epeats the propositional con- 
tent of a previous utterance. Hobbs has some diffi- 
culties determining the function of this repetition, 
but we maintain that the function follows from the 
more general principles of the control rules: speak- 
ers signal that they wish to shift control by sup- 
plying no new propositional content. Abdications, 
repetitions and summaries all add no new informa- 
tion and function to signal to the listener that the 
speaker has nothing further to say right now. The 
listener certainly must recognize this fact. 
Summaries appear to have an additional function 
of synchronization, by allowing both participants to 
agree on what propositions are mutually believed 
at that point in the discussion. Thus this work 
highlights aspects of collaboration i discourse, but 
76 
should be formally integrated with research on 
collaborative planning\[GS90, LCN90\], particularly 
with respect o the relation between control shifts 
and the coordination of  plans. 
6 Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank Aravind Joshi for his sup- 
port, comments and criticisms. Discussions of joint 
action with Phil Cohen and the members of CSLI's 
DIA working group have influenced the first au- 
thor. We are also indebted to Susan Brennan, Herb 
Clark, Julia Hirschberg, Jerry Hobbs, Libby Levi- 
son, Kathy McKeown, Ellen Prince, Penni Sibun, 
Candy Sidner, Martha Pollack, Phil Stenton, and 
Bonnie Webber for their insightful comments and 
criticisms on drafts of this paper. 
References 
\[BFP87\] Susan E. Brennan, Marilyn Walker 
Friedman, and Carl J. Pollard. A cen- 
tering approach to pronouns. In Proc. 
25th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 
155-162, 1987. 
\[CLNO90\] Phillip R. Cohen, Hector J. Levesque, 
Jose H. T. Nunes, and Sharon L. Ovi- 
att. Task oriented dialogue as a conse- 
quence of joint activity, 1990. Unpub- 
lished Manuscript. 
\[Coh84\] Phi\]lip R. Cohen. The pragmatics of re- 
ferring and the modality of communica- 
tion. ComputationalLinguistics, 10:97- 
146, 1984. 
\[Coh87\] Robin Cohen. Analyzing the structure 
of argumentative discourse. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 13:11-24, 1987. 
\[CP82\] Phillip R. Cohen, C. Raymond Per- 
rault, and James F. Allen 1982. Beyond 
question answering. In Wendy Lehnert 
and Martin Ringle, editors, Strategies 
for Natural Language Processing, pages 
245-274. Lawrence Erlbaum Ass. Inc, 
Hillsdale, N.J., 1982. 
\[CP86\] Philip R. Cohen and C. Raymond 
Perrault. Elements of a plan-based 
theory of speech acts. In Bonnie 
\[CWG86\] 
\[FL89\] 
\[GJW86\] 
\[Gro77\] 
\[GS86\] 
\[GS90\] 
\[HA85\] 
\[HL87\] 
\[Hob79\] 
\[Jos82\] 
Lynn Webber Barbara J. Grosz, Karen 
Sparck Jones, editor, Readings in Nat- 
ural Language Processing, pages 423- 
440. Morgan Kauffman, Los Altos, Ca., 
1986. 
Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes- 
Gibbs. Referring as a collaborative pro- 
cess. Cognition, 22:1-39, 1986. 
David M. Frohlich and Paul Luff. Con- 
versational resources for situated action. 
In Proc. Annual Meeting of the Com- 
puter Human Interaction of the ACM, 
1989. 
Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and 
Scott Weinstein. Towards a computa- 
tional theory of discourse interpretation. 
Unpublished Manuscript, 1986. 
Barbara J. Grosz. The representation 
and use of focus in dialogue understand- 
ing. Technical Report 151, SRI Inter- 
national, 333 Ravenswood Ave, Menlo 
Park, Ca. 94025, 1977. 
Barbara J. Grosz and Candace L. Sid- 
net. Attentions, intentions and the 
structure of discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 12:pp. 175-204, 1986. 
Barbara J. Grosz and Candace L. Sid- 
her. Plans for discourse. In Cohen, 
Morgan and Pollack, eds. Intentions 
in Communication, MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA., 1990. 
Jerry R. Hobbs and Michael H. Agar. 
The coherence of incoherent discourse. 
Technical Report CSLI-85-38, Center 
for the Study of Language and Informa- 
tion, Ventura Hall, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA 94305, 1985. 
Julia Hirschberg and Diane Litman. 
Now lets talk about now: Identifying 
cue phrases intonationally. In Proc. 25th 
Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 163- 
171, Stanford University, Stanford, Ca., 
1987. 
Jerry R. Hobbs. Coherence and corefer- 
ence. Cognitive Science, 3:67-90, 1979. 
Aravind K. Joshi. Mutual beliefs in 
question-answer systems. In Neil V. 
77 
\[Kid85\] 
\[LA90\] 
\[LCN90\] 
\[McK85\] 
\[Nic76\] 
\[oc89\] 
\[PH90\] 
\[PHW82\] 
\[Po186\] 
Smith eds. Mutual Knowledge, Aca- 
demic Press, New York, New York, 
pages 181-199, 1982. 
Alison Kidd. The consultative role 
of an expert system. In P. Johnson 
and S. Cook, editors, People and Com- 
puters: Designing the Interface. Cam- 
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 
U.K., 1985. 
Diane Litman and James Allen. Rec- 
ognizing and relating discourse inten- 
tions and task-oriented plans. In Co- 
hen, Morgan and Pollack, eds. Inten- 
tions in Communication, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA., 1990. 
Hector J. Levesque, Phillip R. Cohen, 
and Jose H. T. Nunes. On acting to- 
gether. In AAAIgO, 1990. 
Kathleen R. McKeown. Discourse 
strategies for generating natural lan- 
guage text. Artificial Intelligence, 
27(1):1-42, September 1985. 
R.S. Nickerson. On converational in- 
teraction with computers. In SiegFried 
Treu, editor, User-Oriented Design of 
Interactive Graphics Systems, pages 
101-65. Elsevier Science, 1976. 
Sharon L. Oviatt and Philip R. Cohen. 
The effects of interaction on spoken dis- 
course. In Proc. 27th Annual Meeting of 
the ACL, pages 126-134, 1989. 
Janet Pierrehum- 
bert and Julia Hirschberg. The meaning 
of intonational contours in the interpre- 
tation of discourse. In Cohen, Morgan 
and Pollack, eds. Intentions in Commu- 
nication, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA., 
1990. 
Martha Pollack, Julia Hirschberg, and 
Bonnie Webber. User participation in 
the reasoning process of expert systems. 
In Proc. National Conference on Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, 1982. 
Martha Pollack. Inferring domain plans 
in question answering. Technical Report 
403, SRI International - Artificial Intel- 
ligence Center, 1986. 
\[Rob86\] 
\[Sch82\] 
\[Sid79\] 
\[Sid83\] 
\[SSJ74\] 
\[Wa189\] 
\[Web86\] 
\[Web88\] 
\[ws88\] 
Craige Roberts. Modal Subordination 
and Anaphora. PhD thesis, Linguis- 
tics Dept, University of Massachusetts, 
Amherst, 1986. 
Emanuel A. Sehegloff. Discourse as an 
interactional chievement: Some uses of 
'uh huh' and other things that come 
between sentences. In D. Tannen, ed- 
itor, Analyzing Discourse: Text and 
Talk, pages 71-93. Georgetown Univer- 
sity Press, 1982. 
Candace L. Sidner. Toward a computa- 
tional theory of definite anaphora com- 
prehension i english. Technical Report 
AI-TR-537, MIT, 1979. 
Candace Sidner. What the speaker 
means: the recognition of speakers plans 
in discourse. International Journal of 
Computers and Mathematics, 9:71-82, 
1983. 
Harvey Sacks, Emmanuel Schegloff, and 
Gail Jefferson. A simplest systematics 
for the organization of turn-taking in 
conversation. Language, 50:pp. 325-345, 
1974. 
Marilyn A. Walker. Evaluating dis- 
course processing algorithms. In Proc. 
27th Annual Meeting of the A CL, pages 
251-261, 1989. 
Bonnie Lynn Webber. Two steps closer 
to event reference. Technical Report 
MS-CIS-86-74, Line Lab 42, Depart- 
ment of Computer and Information Sci- 
ence, University of Pennsylvania, 1986. 
Bonnie Lynn Webber. Discourse deixis: 
Reference to discourse segments. In 
Proc. 26th Annual Meeting of the ACL, 
Association of Computational Linguis- 
tics, pages 113-123, 1988. 
Steve Whittaker and Phil Stenton. Cues 
and control in expert client dialogues. In 
Proc. 26th Annual Meeting of the ACL, 
Association of Computational Linguis- 
tics, pages 123-130, 1988. 
78 
