TRANSFORMING SYNTACTIC  GRAPHS INTO 
SEMANTIC  GRAPHS*  
Hae-Chang R im 
Jungyun Seo 
Rober t  F. S immons  
Depar tment  of Computer  Sc iences 
and  
Art i f ic ia l  In te l l igence Laboratory  
Tay lor  Hal l  2.124, Un ivers i ty  of Texas  at  Aust in ,  
Aust in ,  Texas  78712 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, we present a computational 
method for transforming a syntact i c  graph,  
which represents all syntactic interpretations of a 
sentence, into a semant ic  g raph  which filters out 
certain interpretations, but also incorporates any 
remaining ambiguities. We argue that the result- 
ing ambiguous graph, supported by an exclusion 
matrix, is a useful data structure for question an- 
swering and other semantic processing. Our re- 
search is based on the principle that ambiguity is 
an inherent aspect of natural anguage communi- 
cation. 
INTRODUCTION 
In computing meaning representations from 
natural language, ambiguities arise at each level. 
Some word sense ambiguities are resolved by syn- 
tax while others depend on the context of dis- 
course. Sometimes, syntactic ambiguities are re- 
solved during semantic processing, but often re- 
main even through coherence analysis at the dis- 
course level. Finally, after syntactic, semantic, 
and discourse processing, the resulting meaning 
structure may still have multiple interpretations. 
For example, a news item from Associated Press, 
November 22, 1989, quoted a rescued hostage, 
"The foreigners were taken to the Estado 
Mayor, army headquarters. I left that 
hotel about quarter to one, and by the 
*This work is sponsored by the Army Research Office 
under contract DAAG29-84-K-0060. 
47 
time I got here in my room at quarter to 
4 and turned on CNN, I saw myself on 
TV getting into the little tank," Blood 
said. 
The article was datelined, Albuquerque N.M. A 
first reading suggested that Mr. Blood had been 
flown to Albuquerque, but further thought sug- 
gested that "here in my room" probably referred 
to some sleeping section in the army headquarters. 
But despite the guess, ambiguity remains. 
In a previous paper \[Seo and Simmons 1989\] we 
argued that a syntactic graph - -  the union of all 
parse trees - -  was a superior representation for 
further semantic processing. It is a concise list of 
syntactically labeled triples, supported by an ex- 
clusion matrix to show what pairs of triples are 
incompatible. It is an easily accessible represen- 
tation that provides ucceeding semantic and dis- 
course processes with complete information from 
the syntactic analysis. Here, we present methods 
for transforming the syntactic graph to a func- 
tional graph (one using syntactic functions, SUB- 
JECT, OBJECT, IOBJECT etc.) and for trans- 
forming the functional graph to a semantic graph 
of case relations. 
BACKGROUND 
Most existing semantic processors for natural 
language systems (NLS) have depended on a strat- 
egy of selecting a single parse tree from a syntac- 
tic analysis component (actual or imagined). If 
semantic testing failed on that parse, the system 
would sel~,ct another - -  backing up if using a top- 
down parser, or selecting another interpretation 
vpp(8) 
ppn 
0 
1 (SNP saw John) 1 
2 (VNP saw man) 2 
3 (DET man a) 3 
4 (NPP man on) 4 
5 (VPP saw on) 5 
6 (DET hill the) 6 
, 7 (PPN on hill) 7 
S (VPP saw with) S 
9 (NPP man with) 9 
,(11) 10 (NPP hill with) 10 
11 (PPN with telescope) 11 
12 (DET telescope a) 12 
0 1 ~13 4 51617 
1 
1 
S 9 10 11 12 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
Figure 1: Syntactic Graph and Exclusion Matrix for "John saw a man on the hill with a telescope." 
from an all-paths chart. Awareness has grown in 
recent years that this strategy is not the best. At- 
tempts by Marcus \[1980\] to use a deterministic 
(look-ahead) tactic to ensure a single parse with- 
out back-up, fail to account for common, garden- 
path sentences. In general, top-down parsers with 
backup have unpleasant implications for complex- 
ity, while efficient all-paths parsers limited to com- 
plexity O(N 3) \[Aho and Ullman 1972, Early 1970, 
Tomita 1985\] can find all parse trees in little more 
time than a single one. If we adopt the economical 
parsing strategy of obtaining an all-paths parse, 
the question remains, how best to use the parsing 
information for subsequent processing. 
Approaches by Barton and Berwick \[1985\] and 
Rich et  al. \[1987\] among others have suggested 
what Rich has called ambigu i ty  procras t ina -  
t ion  in which a system provides multiple potential 
syntactic interpretations and postpones a choice 
until a higher level process provides sufficient in- 
formation to make a decision. Syntactic repre- 
sentations in these systems are incomplete and 
may not always represent possible parses. Tomita 
\[1985\] suggested using a shared-packed-forest a  an 
economical method to represent all and only the 
parses resulting from an all-paths analysis. Unfor- 
tunately, the resulting tree is difficult for a person 
to read, and must be accessed by complex pro- 
grams. It was in this context that we \[Seo and 
Simmons 1989\] decided that a graph composed of 
the union of parse trees from an all-paths parser 
would form a superior representation for subse- 
quent semantic processing. 
48 
SYNTACTIC  GRAPHS 
In the previous paper we argued that the syntac- 
tic graph supported by an exclusion matrix would 
provide all and "only" the information given by a 
parse forest. 1 Let us first review an example of a 
syntactic graph for the following sentence: 
Exl)  John saw a man on the hill with a tele- 
scope. 
There are at least five syntactic interpreta- 
tions for Exl  from a phrase structure grammar. 
The syntactic graph is represented as a set of 
dominator-modifier triples 2 as shown in the mid- 
dle of Figure 1 for Exl. Each triple consists of a 
label, a head-word, and a modifier-word. 
Each triple represents an arc in a syntactic 
graph in the left of Figure 1. An arc is drawn 
from the head-word to the modifier-word. The 
label of each triple, SNP, VNP, etc. is uniquely 
determined according to the grammar ule used 
to generate the triple. For example, a triple with 
the label SNP is generated by the grammar ule, 
SNT --+ NP  + VP ,  VPP is from the rule VP --+ 
VP  ? PP ,  and PPN from PP  ---+ Prep? NP,  etc. 
We can notice that the ambiguities in the graph 
are signalled by identical third terms (i.e., the 
same modifier-words with the same sentence posi- 
tion) in triples because a word cannot modify two 
different words in one syntactic interpretation. In 
1 We proved the "all" but  have discovered that in certain 
cases to be shown later, the transformation to a semantic 
graph may result in arcs that do not occur in any complete 
analysis. 
2Actually each word in the triples also includes notation 
for position, and syntactic lass and features of the word. 
Figure 2: Syntactic Graph and Exclusion Matrix for "The monkey lives in tropical jungles near rivers and 
streams." 
a graph, each node with multiple in-arcs shows an 
ambiguous point. There is a special arc, called 
the root  are, which points to the head word of 
the sentence. The arc (0) of the syntactic graph in 
Figure 1 represents a root arc. A root arc contains 
information (not shown) about the modalities of 
the sentence such as voice: passive, active, mood: 
declarative or wh-question, etc. Notice that a sen- 
tence may have multiple root arcs because of syn- 
tactic ambiguities involving the head verb. 
One interpretation can be obtained from a syn- 
tactic graph by picking up a set of triples with no 
repeated third terms. In this example, since there 
are two identical occurrences of on and three of 
with, there are 2 .3  = 6 possible sentence interpre- 
tations in the graph represented above. However, 
there must be only five interpretations for Exl. 
The reason that we have more interpretations i  
that there are triples, called exc lus ive tr ip les,  
which cannot co-occur in any syntactic interpre- 
tation. In this example, the triple (vpp  saw on) 
and (npp  man wi th)  cannot co-occur since there 
is no such interpretation i this sentence. 3 That 's  
why a syntactic graph must maintain an exelu- 
s lon matr ix .  
An exclusion matrix, (Ematr ix) ,  is an N ? N 
matrix where N is the number of triples. If 
Ematr ix ( i , j )  = 1 then the i-th and j-th triple 
3Once the phrase "on the hill" is attached to saw, "with 
a telescope" must be attached to either hill or saw, not 
m0~n.  
cannot co-occur in any reading. The exclusion ma- 
trix for Exl  is shown in the right of Figure 1. In 
Exl, the 'triples 5 and 9 cannot co-occur in any 
interpretation according to the matrix. Trivially 
exclusive triples which share the same third term 
are also marked in the matrix. It is very impor- 
tant to maintain the Ematr ix  because otherwise 
a syntactic graph generates more interpretations 
than actually result from the parsing grammar. 
Syntactic graphs and the exclusion matrix are 
computed from the chart (or forest) formed by 
an all-paths chart parser. Grammar ules for the 
parse are in augmented phrase structure form, but 
are written to minimize their deviation from a 
pure context-free form, and thus, limit both the 
conceptual and computational complexity of the 
analysis system. Details of the graph form, the 
grammar, and the parser are given in (Seo and 
Simmons 1989). 
COMPUTING SEMANTIC  
GRAPHS FROM SYNTACTIC  
GRAPHS 
49 
An important test of the utility of syntactic 
graphs is to demonstrate that they can be used di- 
rectly to compute corresponding semantic graphs 
that represent the union of acceptable case analy- 
ses. Nothing would be gained, however, if we had 
to extract one reading at a time from the syntactic 
graph, transform it, and so accumulate the union 
of case analyses. But if we can apply a set of rules 
,ubj(~s) 
s~S" ~~p(lO) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
9 
t01 
112 
14 
15 
16 
17 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 55 
0 1 2 3 9 1012141516175051\]525354:55 
1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 i 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 
1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 11  1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 i 1 1 .1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
i1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 i 1 1 I 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
!1 1 1 1 
Figure 3: Funct ional  Graph and Exclusion Matr ix  for "The monkey  lives in tropical jungles near rivers and 
streams."  
direct ly to the syntact ic graph, mapping it into the 
semantic graph, then using the graph can result in 
a signif icant economy of computat ion.  
We compute a semantic graph in a two-step pro- 
cess. F irst ,  we transform the labeled dependency 
tr iples result ing from the parse into funct ional  no- 
tat ion,  using labels such as subject, object, etc. 
and transforming to the canonical  active voice. 
This results in a funct iona l  g raph  as shown in 
F igure 3. Second, the funct ional  graph is trans-  
formed into the semantic  graph of F igure 5. Dur-  
ing the second t ransformat ion,  f i ltering rules are 
appl ied to reduce the possible syntact ic interpre- 
tat ions to those that  are semant ical ly  plausible. 
COMPUTING FUNCTIONAL GRAPHS 
To determine SUB, OBJ  and IOBJ  correctly, 
the process checks the types of verbs in a sentence 
and its voice, active or passive. In this process, 
a syntact ic tr ip le is t ransformed into a functional 
triple: for example,  ( snp  X Y)  is t ransformed 
into ( sub j  X Y)  in an active sentence. 
However, some t ransformat ion rules map several 
syntact ic tr iples into one functional triple. For 
example, in a passive sentence, if three triples, 
(vo ice  X pass ive) ,  (vpp  X by) ,  and (ppn  by  
Y) ,  are in a syntact ic graph and they are not ex- 
clusive with each other, the process produces one 
funct ional  tr iple ( sub j  X Y) .  Since preposit ions 
are used as funct ional  relat ion names, two syn- 
tact ic tr iples for a preposi t ional  phrase are also 
reduced into one funct ional  triple. For example, 50 
(vpp  l ives  in)  and (ppn  in  jung les )  are trans- 
formed into ( in  l ives  jung les ) .  These transfor- 
mat ions are represented in Prolog rules based on 
general inference forms such as the following: 
( s type  X dec larat ive)  & (voice X passive)  & 
(vpp  X by)  & (ppn  by  Y) => (sub jec t  X Y) 
(vpp  X P)  ~ (ppn  P Y) &: not (vo lce  X pas-  
sive) => (P X Y). 
When the left side of a rule is satisfied by a set 
of tr iples from the graph, the exclusion matr ix  is 
consulted to ensure that  those tr iples can all  co- 
occur with each other. 
This step of t ransformat ion is fair ly straight-  
toward and does not resolve any syntact ic ambigu-  
ities. Therefore, the process must  careful ly trans- 
form the exclusion matr ix  of the syntact ic graph 
into the exclusion matr ix  of the funct ional  graph 
so that  the transformed funct ional  graph has the 
same interpretat ions as the syntact ic  graph has 4. 
Intuit ively, if a funct ional  tr iple, say F ,  is pro- 
duced from a syntact ic triple, say T, then F 
must be exclusive with any funct ional  tr iples pro- 
duced from the syntact ic tr iples which are exclu- 
sive with T. When more than one syntact ic triple, 
say T\[s are involved in producing one funct ional  
triple, say F1, the process marks the exclusion 
4At a late stage in our research we noticed that we could 
have written our grammar to result directly in syntactic- 
functional notation; but one consequence would be increas- 
ing the complexity of our grammar rules, requiring frequent 
tests and transformations, thus increasing conceptual nd 
computational complexities. 
N : the implausible triple which will be removed. 
The process starts by calling remove-al l -Dependent-arcs(\[N\]) .  
remove-al l-dependent-arcs(Arcs-to-be-removed) 
for all Arc in Arcs-to-be-removed do
begin 
i\] Arc is not removed yet 
then 
find all arcs pointing to the same node as Arc: call them Alt-arcs 
find arcs which are exclusive with every arc in Alt-arcs, call them Dependent-arcs 
remove Arc 
remove entry of Arc from the exclusion matrix 
remove-al l -Dependent-arcs(Dependent-arcs) 
end 
Figure 4: Algorithm for Finding Dependent Relations 
matr ix so that F1 can be exclusive with all func- 
tional triples which are produced from the syntac- 
tic triples which are exclusive with any of T/~s. 
The syntactic graph in Figure 2 has five possible 
syntactic interpretations and all and only the five 
syntactic-functional interpretations must be con- 
tained in the transformed functional graph with 
the new exclusion matr ix in Figure 3. Notice that, 
in the functional graph, there is no single, func- 
tional triple corresponding to the syntactic triples, 
(~)-(8), (11) and (13). Those syntactic triples are 
not used in one-to-one transformation of syntac- 
tic triples, but are involved in many-to-one trans- 
formations to produce the new functional triples, 
(50)-(55), in the functional graph. 
COMPUTING SEMANTIC  GRAPHS 
Once a functional graph is produced, it is trans- 
formed into a semantic graph. This transforma- 
tion consists of the following two subtasks: given 
a functional triple (i.e., an are in Figure 3), the 
process must be able to (1) check if there is a se- 
mantical ly meaningful relation for the triple (i.e., 
co-occurrence constraints test), (2) if the triple is 
semantically implausible, find and remove all func- 
tional triples which are dependent on that triple. 
The co-occurrence constraints test is a matter 
of deciding whether a given functional triple is se- 
mantically plausible or not. 5 The process uses a 
type hierarchy for real world concepts and rules 
that state possible relations among them. These 
relations are in a case notation such as agt  for 
agent, ae for affected-entity, etc. For example, the 
5 Eventually we will incorporate more sophisticated tests 
as suggested by Hirst(1987) and others, but our current 
emphasis i on the procedures for transforming graphs. 
51 
subject(I) arc between lives and monkey numbered 
(1) in Figure 3 is semantically plausible since an-  
ima l  can be an agent of l ive if the an ima l  is a 
subj of the live. However, the subject arc between 
and and monkey numbered (15) in Figure 3 is se- 
mantically implausible, because the relation con- 
jvp connects and and streams, and monkey can not 
be a subject of the verb streams. In our knowledge 
base, the legitimate agent of the verb streams is a 
f low- th ing  such as a river. 
When a given arc is determined to be seman- 
tically plausible, a proper case relation name is 
assigned to make an arc in the semantic graph. 
For example, a case relation agt is found in our 
knowledge base between monkey and lives under 
the constraint subject. 
If  a triple is determined to be semantically im- 
plausible, then the process removes the triple. 
Let us explain the following definition before dis- 
cussing an interesting consequence. 
Def in i t ion  1 A triple, say T1, is dependent  
on  another triple, say T2, if every interpretation 
which uses 7"1 always uses T2. 
Then, when a triple is removed, if there are any 
triples which are dependent on the removed triple, 
those triples must also be removed. Notice that 
the dependent  on  relation between triples is 
transitive. 
Before presenting the algorithm to find depen- 
dent triples of a triple, we need to discuss the fol- 
lowing property of a functional graph. 
P roper ty  1 Each semantic interpretation de- 
rived from a functional graph must contain every 
node in each position once and only once. 
(2 
attr(S) ~rles 
near(51) 
0 
1 
2 
3 
9 
10 
12 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 
1 11  I1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 
i 1 
1\ ]1  1 1 1 
1 !1 1 1 
Figure 5: Semantic Graph and Exclusion Matrix for "The monkey lives in tropical jungles near rivers and 
streams." 
Here the position means the position of a word 
in a sentence. This property ensures that all words 
in a sentence must be used in a semantic interpre- 
tation once and only once. 
The next property follows from Property 1. 
P roper ty  2 Ira triple is determined to be seman- 
tically implausible, there must be at least one triple 
which shares the same modifier-word. Otherwise, 
the sentence is syntactically or semantically ill- 
formed. 
Lemma 1 Assume that there are n triples, say 
7"1 . . . .  , Tn, sharing a node, say N, as a modifier- 
word (i.e. third term) in a functional graph. I f  
there is a triple, say T, which is exclusive with 
T1, . . . ,  T/-1, Ti+ l . . . . .  Tn and is not exclusive with 
T~, T is dependent on Ti. 
This lemma is true because T cannot co-occur 
with any other triples which have the node N as a 
modifier-word except T / in  any interpretation. By 
Property 1, any interpretation which uses T must 
use one triple which has N as a modifier-word. 
Since there is only one triple, 7~ that can co-occur 
with T, any interpretations which use T use T/.\[3 
Using the above lemma, we can find triples 
which are dependent on a semantically implausible 
triple directly from the functional graph and the 
corresponding exclusion matrix. An algorithm for 
finding a set of dependent relations is presented in 
Figure 4. 
For example, in the functional graph in Fig- 
ure 3, since monkey cannot be an agt  of streams, 
the triple (15.) is determined to be semantically 
52 
implausible. Since there is only one triple, (1), 
which shares the same modifier-word, monkey, the 
process finds triples which are exclusive with (1). 
Those are triples numbered (14), (15), (16), and 
(17). Since these triples are dependent on (16), 
these triples must also be removed when (16) is re- 
moved. Similarly, when the process removes (14), 
it must find and remove all dependent riples of 
(14). In this way, the process cascades the remove 
operation by recursively determining the depen- 
dent triples of an implausible triple. 
Notice that when one triple is removed, it 
removes possibly multiple ambiguous syntactic 
interpretations--two interpretations are removed 
by removing the triple (16) in this example, but 
for the sentence, It is transmitted by eating shell- 
fish such as oysters living in infected waters, or 
by drinking infected water, or by dirt from soiled 
fingers, 189 out of 378 ambiguous yntactic inter- 
pretations are removed when the semantic relation 
( rood water  d r ink ing)  is rejected, e This saves 
many operations which must be done in other ap- 
proaches which check syntactic trees one by one to 
make a semantic structure. The resulting seman- 
tic graph and its exclusion matrix derived from 
the functional graph in Figure 3 have three seman- 
tic interpretations and are illustrated in Figure 5. 
This is a reduction from five syntactic interpre- 
tations as a result of filtering out the possibility, 
(agt  s t reams monkey) .  
There is one arc in Figure 5, labeled near(51), 
that proved to be of considerable interest to us. 
6In "infec'~ed r ink ing  water" ,  ( rood  water  d r ink ing)  
is p laus ib le  but  not  in  "dr ink ing  in fec ted  water" .  
If we attempt o generate a complete sentence us- 
ing that arc, we discover that we can only pro- 
duce, "The monkey lives in tropical jungles near 
rivers." There is no way that that a generation 
with that arc can include "and streams" and no 
sentence with "and streams" can use that arc. 
The arc, near(51), shows a failure in our ability 
to rewrite the exclusion matrix correctly when we 
removed the interpretation "the monkey lives ... 
and streams." There was a possibility of the sen- 
tence, "the monkey lives in jungles, (lives) near 
rivers, and (he) streams." The redundant arc was 
not dependent on subj(16) (in Figure 3) and thus 
remains in the semantic graph. The immediate 
consequence is simply a redundant arc that will 
not do harm; the implication is that the exclusion 
matrix cannot filter certain arcs that are indirectly 
dependent on certain forbidden interpretations. 
D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The utility of the resultant semantic graph can 
be appreciated by close study of Figure 5. The 
graph directly answers the following questions, 
(assuming they have been parsed into case nota- 
tion): 
? Where does the monkey live? 
1. in tropical jungles near rivers and 
streams, 
2. near rivers and streams, 
3. in tropical jungles near rivers, 
4. in tropical jungles. 
? Does the monkey live in jungles? Yes, by 
agt(1) and in(53) which are not exclusive with 
each other. 
? Does the monkey live in rivers? No, because 
in(52) is exclusive with conj(lO), and in(SS) 
is pointing to jungles not rivers. 
? Does the monkey live near jungles? No, be- 
cause near(50) and conj(12) are exclusive, so 
no path from live through near(50) can go 
through eonj(12) to reach jungle, and the 
other path from live through near(51) goes 
to rivers which has no exiting path to jungle. 
Thus, by matching paths from the question 
through the graph, and ensuring that no arc in 
the answering path is forbidden to co-occur with 
any other, questions can be answered irectly from 
the graph. 
In conclusion, we have presented a computa- 
tional method for directly computing semantic 
graphs from syntactic graphs. The most crucial 
and economical aspect of the computation is the 
53 
capability of applying tests and transformations 
directly to the graph rather than applying the 
rules to one interpretation, then another, and an- 
other, etc. When a semantic filtering rule rejects 
one implausible relation, then pruning all depen- 
dent relations of that relation directly from the 
syntactic graph has the effect of excluding sub- 
stantially many syntactic interpretations from fur- 
ther consideration. An algorithm for finding such 
dependent relations is presented. 
In thispaper,  we did not consider the multi- 
ple word senses which may cause more seman- 
tic ambiguities than we have illustrated. Incor- 
porating and minimizing word sense ambiguities 
is part of our continuing research. We are also 
currently investigating how to integrate semantic 
graphs of previous entences with the current one, 
to maintain a continuous context whose ambigu- 
ity is successively reduced by additional incoming 
sentences. 
References 
\[1\] Alfred V. Aho, and Jeffrey D. Ullman, The 
Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compil- 
ing, Vol. 1, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1972. 
\[2\] G. Edward Barton and Robert C. Berwick, 
"Parsing with Assertion Sets and Informa- 
tion Monotonicity," Proceedings of IJCAI-85: 
769-771, 1985. 
\[3\] Jay Early, "An Efficient Context-free Pars- 
ing algorithm," Communications ofthe A CM, 
Vol. 13, No. 2: 94-102, 1970. 
\[4\] Graeme Hirst, Semantic Interpretation and 
the Resolution of Ambiguity, Cambridge Uni- 
versity Press, Cambridge, 1987. 
\[5\] Mitchell P. Marcus, A Theory of Syntac- 
tic Recognition for Natural Language, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, 1980. 
\[6\] Elain Rich, J im Barnett, Kent Wittenburg 
and David Wroblewski, "Ambiguity Procras- 
tination," Proceedings of AAAL87: 571-576, 
1987. 
\[7\] Jungyun Seo and Robert F. Simmons, "Syn- 
tactic Graphs: A Representation for the 
Union of All Ambiguous Parse Trees," Com- 
putational Linguistics, Vol. 15, No. 1: 19-32, 
1989. 
\[8\] Masaru Tomita, Efficient Parsing for Natu- 
ral Language, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Boston, 1985. 
