A S IMPL IF IED THEORY OF TENSE REPRESENTAT IONS 
AND CONSTRAINTS ON THEIR  COMPOSIT ION 
Michae l  R .  Brent  
MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab 
545 Technology Square 
Cambridge, MA 02139 
michael@ai.mit.edu 
ABSTRACT 
This paper proposes a set of representations for 
tenses and a set of constraints on how they can be com- 
bined in adjunct clauses. The semantics we propose ex- 
plains the possible meanings of tenses in a variety of sen- 
tential contexts. It also supports an elegant constraint 
on tense combination i  adjunct clauses. These semantic 
representations provide insights into the interpretations 
of tenses, and the constraints provide a source of syntac- 
tic disambiguation that has not previously been demon- 
strated. We demonstrate an implemented disambiguator 
for a certain class of three-clause sentences based on our 
theory. 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper proposes a set of representations for tenses 
and a set of constraints on how they can be combined. 
These representations provide insights into the interpre- 
tation of tenses, and the constraints provide a source of 
syntactic disambiguation that has not previously been 
demonstrated. 
The sentences investigated in this paper contain 
multiple clauses connected by tempora l /causa l  con- 
nect ives,  words like once, by the time, when, and be- 
fore. (1) shows that the tenses of multi-clause sentences 
affect their acceptability. This raises several important 
*when } 
(1) a. * Rachel won the game *once Jon 
*before 
arrives 
here answer these questions. Specifically, they provide 
explanations in terms of the meanings of the tenses. We 
propose an explanatory theory and demonstrate an im- 
plementation which successfully disambiguates a class of 
three-clause sentences. 
The issues raised by (1) are significant for compu- 
tational inguistics on several accounts. First, an under- 
standing of the constraints on tense combinations can be 
used to support syntactic disambiguation. For example, 
consider the alternative parses shown textually in (2) 
and graphically in Figure -1. The first parse in both 
(2) a. oK 
b. * 
\[s Jon will learn \[s that he won s/ when 
Rachel arrivess\] 
Read as: When Rachel arrives, Jon will 
learn that he won 
Jon will learn \[s that he won when Rachel 
arrives s/ 
Read as: Jon will learn that, when 
Rachel arrives, he won 
(2) and Figure -1, where the adjunct clause starting with 
when is attached high, is fine; the second, where it is at- 
tached low, is unacceptable. Figure -1 demonstrates our 
parser discriminating between the acceptable and unac- 
ceptable parses of (2). The details of the representation 
cannot be understood until later, but it can be seen that 
different compositions of the tenses in the two parses 
result in marking the top node of the second parse as 
bad. The contrast between example (2) and example (3) 
shows that whether the preferred attachment depends on 
the tenses of the clauses. Examples (2) and (3) show 
b. OK Rachel will win the game 
Jon arrives 
when } 
once 
before 
questions. Which tense combinations are acceptable and 
which are not? Why do they have the status they do? 
How can observations like (1) be used to leverage prob- 
lems like syntactic disambiguation and knowledge repre- 
sentation? The representations and constraints proposed 
(3) a. * 
b. OK 
that there are 
\[s Jon will learn \[s that he had won s/by 
the time Rachel arrived s/ 
Read as: By the time Rachel arrived, 
Jon will learn that he had won 
Jon will learn \[s that he had won by the 
time Rachel arrived s/ 
Read as: Jon will learn that by lhe lime 
Rachel arrived he had won 
interesting interactions among tenses, and 
119 
(print-trees 
(porse-ond-ceeput e-tense-structures 
'(Jon ull l  learn that he ted ale uhen Rachel *s arrive))) 
I~S: E.R R_S POST 
, I S_R I. E FUT 
I I I E (e ) fE (e )  
S, R R, E PRES 
\[T v FUT TEUPORRL-CONN P~ uP: S_R U,E T.: \[ . . . . .  " f f i '= l l= ' :  u., , . ,  ,,E,I 
' 
E. l l S PUUTJ 
?ou,.ER-.. I s .  "STI I::: ,.R ,.E ''ESI ITS: S R R,E FUT TS: E,R l_S JTZRE:-FUTURE 
~ERF: - 
ITZflEZTURE, ~ '~ '="  ~ iSS: - -T'  'U'LEU-VERll I E.R R_S ITS: $,R R.E PRES 
SP . '~E.R  R ITZHE: ,RESENT ~ERF: - 
? J TE I fSE-U~ P _S POST lk'\] i '~ iTTnE: PUESENTi ~ 
~o.,~ER-~, I 
T I Ts: E.u R S PnUTI 
I ITXUE: ,OUT - I ? r - i~  I --g 
?.R R_S POST i 
J IO  I 
s violates: UCTR \] R.E OuR PRES~ 
S_R R.~ FUT 
E.R I S POST 
I I - I  s vlelotes: UCTR 
R.E S.R PRE: 
U_I R.E FU1 i: FUTURE 
FUIURE 
I T8= E.R R S POUT J 
I I I ' I  I I $ violates= OCTR I 
t O,E S,n ,REU~ 
~ S s  E.l l U PUST 
I I I I '1  I I I " violates: SCIR I 
I i u .  1 S.R,R,~ 
~ I::: E.u i.s 'R-I i~;'~-':::~:* o, ,  I"" u., u.E ,RESI 
I.o..~Eu-uE'.. , W~ ----------'~ 
,.u= ..u R U ..T, I*% PUEUl | ITEnE: PUUT - I $,l R.E 
_L ~ERF:- I 
T E N S E - U ~  
I ~rT' 
D~,r~mic Lisp Listener I . I  
Figure -1: The output of our parser on the sentence in (2). The restrictions on tense combination disambiguate his sentence, 
shown by the asterisk with which our program marks the second parse as unacceptable. Note that the restrictions on the 
complement clauses are different from those on a~ijunct clauses. The former are not discussed in this paper, but see Hornstein 
(1990). 
120 
that a good theory of these interactions would be use- 
ful for syntactic disambiguation. Such a theory, and an 
implementation of a disambiguator based on it, are the 
subjects of this paper. 
In addition to its potential for syntactic disam- 
biguation, a theory of these temporal adjunction phe- 
nomena is may guide the construction of model-theoretic 
interpretations of the temporal and causal relations 
among events. Finally, people clearly have a lot of knowl- 
edge about the interaction among tenses. By making this 
knowledge xplicit, we are likely to open new, unfore- 
seen avenues to improving the performance of natural 
language processing devices. 
1.1 Context  
The subjects of tense and temporal representation 
have generated a great deal of interest in artificial intel- 
ligence, computational linguistics, linguistics, and phi- 
losophy. Work in these areas addresses a variety of in- 
teresting questions which can be broadly divided into 
two types: questions about representing the temporal 
knowledge conveyed by natural anguage, and questions 
about representing role of tense in sentential grammar. 
The former questions have often been addressed by at- 
tempting to construct amodel-theoretic semantics of cer- 
tain temporally significant linguistic constructions. Im- 
portant work in this area includes Dowty (1979), Allen 
(1984), Dowty (1986), Hinrichs (1986), Moens (1987), 
and Hinrichs (1988). Much of the recent work in this 
area has used some version of Reichenbach's (1947) rep- 
resentation of tenses as a starting point)  The questions 
about the role of tense in sentential grammar, and in 
particular about its effect on the acceptability of various 
sentence types, has been addressed by a different set of 
researchers. This work, which also uses Reichenbach as 
a starting point, is well represented by Hornstein (1990) 
and Comrie (1985), and the works cited therein. In this 
paper, we focus on how tenses affect the acceptability of 
sentences, but we attempt o explain their effect in terms 
of their interpretations. While we explain certain obser- 
vations about the acceptability of sentences in terms of 
interpretations, we do not attempt o develop a theory 
of the temporal interpretation of natural anguage. 2 
Earlier attempts to explain the phenomena under 
study here include Hornstein (1977), Hornstein (1981), 
Yip (1986), and Hornstein (1990). In the current pa- 
per, we attempt o remove some semantic underdeter- 
mination and some theoretical redundancy that we have 
1Hinrichs, 1986; Harper and Gharniak, 1987; Hinrichs, 
1988; Moens and Steedman, 1988; Nakhimovsky, 1988; Pas- 
soneau, 1988; and Webber, 1988 
2In particular, the important issue of tense as discourse 
anaphor is not addressed. (See Hinrichs, 1986; Moens, 1987; 
Hinrichs, 1988; Nakhimovsky, 1988; and Webber, 1988.) Fur- 
ther, we do not have a theory of the interaction of temporal 
interpretation with aspect. (See Dowty, 1979; Dowty, 1986; 
Moens, 1987; Moens and Steedman, 1988; Nakhimovsky, 
1988; and Passoneau, 1988.) 
found in these works. Section 5 provides a more de- 
tailed comparison with Yip (1986) and Hornstein (1990). 
Along with Hornstein and Yip, Harper and Charniak 
(1987) also propose a set of rules to account for the ac- 
ceptability of tense combinations in adjunct construc- 
tions. However, their primary interest is in representing 
the temporal knowledge that can be conveyed by natu- 
ral language. As a result, they explicitly choose not to 
use their semantic system to construct an explanation 
for their adjunction rules; rather they propose their ad- 
junction rules as syntactic descriptions. By contrast, the 
current paper focuses primarily on developing a semantic 
explanation of tense compatibility. 
Although we do not offer specific variations on the 
model-theoretic approach, we hope that our work will 
further it indirectly. At a minimum, since many model 
theoretic approaches use Reichenbach's (1947) tense rep- 
resentations, our insights into those representations may 
be significant. Further, we hope that our constrained 
rules for composing those individual tense structures will 
provide a richer set of representations on which model 
theoretic approaches can be built. 
1.2 P rev iew 
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. 
Section 2 introduces the representations for individual 
tenses. Section 3 presents the method of composing 
tenses from different clauses, and a general constraints 
that applies to such composition. 3 Section 4 demon- 
strates the computer program implementing this theory. 
Section 5 steps back from the technical details to assess 
the contributions of this paper and compare it to closely 
related works. Finally, Section 6 sums up the conclusions 
drawn throughout the paper. 4
2 The  Representat ion  o f  Ind iv idua l  
Tenses  
In order to construct a theory explaining which 
tenses can be combined we need a representation f the 
tenses. The representation used here is variant of that 
used by Hornstein (1990), who bases it on Comrie (1985). 
It is a Neo-Reichenbachian representation (Reichenbach, 
1966) in that its s imple tense s t ructures  (STSs) re- 
late the following three entities: the time of the event 
named by the verb, denoted by "E", the time of speech, 
denoted by "S", and a reference time, denoted by "R". 
The reference time R is used to locate an event with re- 
spect to another event in sentences like (lb) above. (A 
mechanism for connecting tenses via the 1% point will be 
3Brent (1989) presents two additional constraints on tense 
composition. 
4While English alone has been studied in detail, prelimi- 
nary investigation supports the expectation that the theory 
will extend to Romance and Germanic languages. One of 
the most obvious difference between Romance and Germanic 
languages i addressed in Brent (1989). 
121 
X_Y Y_X X,Y Y,X 
Table 1: Notat ion  for  poss ib le  re lat ions  between 
t ime po ints  X and  Y 
Tense Name Simple Tense Example  VP  
St ructure  
past 
present 
future 
past perfect 
present perfect 
future perfect 
E,R R_S 
S,R R,E 
S-R R,E 
E_R R-S 
E_R S,R 
E_R S_R 
Jon  WOn 
Jon wins, 
is winning 
Jon will win 
Jon had won 
Jon has won 
Jon will have won 
Table 2: The  six STSs express ib le  in Engl ish ver-  
bal morpho logy  
detailed in Section 3.) Each STS consists of a relation 
between S mad R and one between R and E; S and E are 
not directly related. For any directly related time points 
X and Y, at most one of four possible relations holds be- 
tween them. These are written as in Table 1. Although 
we use the same notation as Hornstein (1990), we view it 
as merely notation for fundamentally semantic relations, 
whereas he appears to view the syntax as primary. 
For the purposes of constraining tense combination 
there appear to be six basic tenses 5 (Table 2). We assign 
STS representations to tenses as shown in Table 2. One 
of the main contributions of this paper over previous 
attempts will be its ability to completely determine the 
assignments of Table 2 in terms of the semantics of the 
representations and the meanings of actual tenses. 
The assignment of STSs to tenses hown in Table 2 
can be derived from the possible interpretations of vari- 
ous tenses. Before arguing that Table 2 can be derived, 
we note that it is at least consistent with the interpre- 
tations of the tenses. Suppose that underscore is inter- 
preted as temporal precedence and comma as simultane- 
ity (As in Hornstein, 1990. Under this interpretation the 
various tense structures correspond to the evident mean- 
ings of the tenses. For example, the STS of the past tense 
is "E,R R.S." That is, the event referred to by the clause 
is simultaneous'with some reference point R, which pre- 
cedes the time of speech (E  = R < S). It follows that 
the event precedes the time of speech, which corresponds 
to the evident meaning of the past tense. On the other 
hand, the proposed semantics for comma and underscore 
cannot completely determine the assignments shown in 
Table 2, because Table 2 distinguishes X,Y and Y,X, 
5The constraints on tense combination appear to be en- 
tirely independent of whether or not the tensed verb bears 
progressive morphology. 
but the semantics does not assign them distinct mean- 
ings. That situation is remedied by introducing a new 
and slightly more complex interpretation for comma, as 
described in (4). 
(4) In terpretat ion  of  "X ,Y ' :  
a. Y does not precede X. 
b. X is simultaneous with Y, in the absence of 
evidence that X precedes Y. (Such evidence 
can come from other tenses, adverbs, or con- 
nectives, as described below.) 
c. X precedes Y, in the presence of supporting 
evidence from other tenses, adverbs, or con- 
nectives. 
The reinterpretation f comma as precedence due to the 
presence of an adverb is illustrated in (5). Although 
(5) i{  leave } { OK tomorrow } 
am leaving for LA * yesterday 
leave is in the present ense, it is interpreted as a future 
because of the adverb tomorrow. The fact that adjec- 
tives can cause the present ense to be reinterpreted as
a future but not as a past indicates that its STS must 
be S,R R,E, not any of the permutations like S,R E,R. 
If the present had S,R E,R as its STS then E,R could 
be reinterpreted such that E < R = S, a past. Similar 
arguments can be made for the other STSs in Table 2. 
Further, evidence that both tenses from other clauses 
and temporal/causal connectives can cause comma to 
be reinterpreted as precedence will be presented below. 
Note that (4) does not mean that "X,Y" is inter- 
preted as "X is prior to or simultaneous with Y". Rather, 
a particular occurrence of "X,Y" Mways has exactly one 
of the following two interpretations: 1) X is simultane- 
ous with Y; 2) X is prior to Y. "X,Y" is never ambiguous 
between the two. 6 
3 Causa l /Tempora l  Ad junct  C lauses  
In this section we introduce a composition opera- 
tion on STSs, and a major constraint on composition. 
It is important o keep in mind that we are discussing 
only causal/temporal djunct clauses. In particular, we 
are not  considering complement clauses, as in "Rachel 
knows that  Jon played the fool yesterday." 
3.1 Tense Compos i t ion  and  Semant ic  
Cons is tency  
When one clause is adjoined to another by a tem- 
poral/causal connective like once, by the lime, when, or 
before the acceptability of the resulting sentence depends 
in part on the tenses of the two clauses. This is demon- 
strated by (1). In fact, of the 36 possible ordered pairs 
~This is different from Yip (1986), where comma is cru- 
cially interpreted as ambiguous between the two readings. 
122 
of tenses only nine are acceptable when put in adjunct 
constructions like (1). (The nine acceptable tense pairs 
are listed in Table 3.) 20 of the 27 unacceptable ones, 
but none of the nine acceptable ones, have the following 
character: their adjunct-clause SR relation is inconsis- 
tent with their matrix-clause SR relation, and cannot 
be reinterpreted according to (4) in a way that makes it 
consistent. This can be understood in terms of the merg- 
ing of the adjunct Sit relation with that of the matrix, 
yielding a combined tense  s t ruc ture  (CTS) that has 
only the matrix SR relation. Besides explaining the ac- 
ceptability status of many CTSs, the idea of merging the 
adjunct SR relation into that of the matrix makes sense 
in terms of the representational schema. In particular, 
the idea that the adjunct's R point should be identi f ied 
with that of the matrix through causal/temporal adjunc- 
tion is consistent with the representational schema which 
uses R as a reference point for relating one event to an- 
other. Furthermore, since "S" is a deictic point repre- 
senting the time of speech (more accurately, the time 
of proposition), and since both clauses represent propo- 
sitions made in the same context, it makes sense that 
they should have the same S point. Once the S and R 
points of the adjunct clause have been identified with 
that of the matrix clause, it makes sense that sentences 
where the matrix asserts one order for the shared S and 
R points while the adjunct asserts another order would 
be irregular. 
Before attempting to formalize these intuitively ap- 
pealing ideas, let us consider an example. The notation 
for CTSs is as follows: the STS of the matrix clause is 
written above that of the adjunct clause and, if possible, 
the identified S and R points are aligned and connected 
by vertical bars, as shown in (6). 7 
(6) S_R R,E FVrURE (WIN) 
i f l 
S,R R,E PRESENT (ARRIVE) 
(6) is the CTS  for sentence (lb). Although the SR re- 
lation for the present tense adjunct is not identical to 
that of the future tense matrix clause, the adjunct can 
be reconciled with that of the matrix clause if the S,R is 
interpreted as precedence, S < R. Notice that sentence 
(lb) is, in fact, interpreted such that the arriving oc- 
curs in the future, even though the verb is in the present 
tense. Because of the two possible interpretations of the 
comma relation proposed in (4), a single representation 
accounts for the possibility of interpreting the present as 
a future. Further, by making the (still informal) restric- 
tion on tense composition a semantic one, we use the 
same mechanism to account for tense compatibility. 
Now consider an unacceptable example. (la) has 
7all tense structures shown in typewriter face are actual 
output from our program. When they are reported as the 
tense structure for a particular sentence, then the program 
generated them in response to that sentence. For more on 
the implementation, see Section 4. 
the CTS shown in (7). Note how the matrix clause as- 
(7) E,R R_S PAST (WIN) 
\[ it 
* violates: ACIR 
R,E S,R PRESENT (ARRIVE) 
serts that the (shared) R point precedes the (shared) S 
point, while the adjunct clause asserts that the R point 
is simultaneous with the S point. The adjunct clause 
could be reinterpreted according to (4) such that the R 
point follows the S point, but this would not help - -  the 
assertions on the two levels would still be inconsistent. 
In general, if the SR relation on the matrix and adjunct 
tiers of the CTS do not have the same left-to-right order 
then their meanings cannot be reconciled, s 
We have proposed that the adjunct SR relation 
must be consistent with the matrix SR relation, argued 
that this constraint is intuitively appealing and conso- 
nant with the representational system as a whole, and 
shown an example. Despite the intuitive appeal, there 
are two hypotheses here that should be made explicit: 
first, that the SR relation of the adjunct clause is merged 
with that of the matrix when temporal/causal adjuncts 
are interpreted; and second, that CTSs containing con- 
tradictory assertions as a result of that merger are ex- 
perienced as unacceptable, not merely implausible. We 
codify those two hypotheses as follows: 
Ad junct  Clause In fo rmat ion  Restr ic t ion  (ACIR) :  
"Adjunct clauses that introduce new SR information i to 
the CTS are unacceptable." 
3.2 In terpretat ion  o f  CTSs  
The interpretation of comma offered in (4), in combi- 
nation with the ACIR, explained the incompatibility of 
20 tense combinations in causal/temporal djunct con- 
structions. Thus the new interpretation has important 
consequences for the SR portion of the CTS, the por- 
tion referred to by the ACIR. We now explore its conse- 
quences for the RE portion of the CTS. 
According to the ACIR a CTS contains only a sin- 
gle SR relation, that provided by the matrix clause. 
Since both the matrix event (E, nat) and the adjunct 
event (Ea4i) bear temporal relations to their shared R 
point, it follows that they may be comparable. For 
example, the structure shown in (8b) is interpreted as 
Emat < R = Earl1, by default. (Our program prints 
out the default Emat - Eadj comparison for valid CTSs, 
but they have been suppressed up to now. In addition, 
Table 3 lists all tense combinations that yield acceptable 
CTSs according to the Emat - Earl1 ordering of their 
SThis is shown in greater detail in Brent (1989). Also, note 
that Hornstein (1990) takes this condition on the form of the 
CTSs as primary instead of reducing it to their meanings. 
For discussion of the differences, ee Section 5. 
123 
(8) a. 
b. 
Jon had won the game when Rachel arrived 
( 
E_R R_S PAST-PERFECT 
\[ \[ J E(m)<E(a) 
E,R R_S PAST) 
inatrix 
adjunct 
matrix 
adjunct 
matrix 
adjunct 
E,~,~ < Ea@ 
past perf. 
past 
present perf. 
present 
future perf. 
present 
Ead i < Emat 
past 
past perf. 
present 
present perf. 
future 
present perf. 
Ea~j = E ,~ 
past 
past 
present 
present 
future 
present 
Table 3: Legal  tense  combinat ions ,  a r ranged by  
apparent  E~dj - Emat deduct ion  
default interpretation.) Sentence (8a) does indeed im- 
ply that the matrix event (Jon's winning) occurred be- 
fore the adjunct event (Rachel's arriving). If the comma 
in "E,~,t,R" could be reinterpreted as temporal prece- 
dence then, instead of Emat < R = Eadj, we would have 
Emat < R and E~dj < R; Era,, and E~dj would be in- 
comparable. Brent (1989) proposed a constraint ruling 
out CTSs that do not yield an Em,t  - Eadj comparison. 
The reason for that proposal was the unacceptability 9 of 
sentences like (9). Now consider the following reformu- 
(9) a. 
b. 
$on had won the game when Rachel had ar- 
rived 
( 
E_R R_S PAST-PERFECT 
I I I 
* violates: interpretation 
E_R R_S PAST-PERFECT) 
lation of that constraint: 
In terpretat ion  Const ra in t :  "An acceptable interpre- 
tation of a CTS must yield an E,,a, - Eadj comparison." 
This reformulation allows the same constraint both to 
narrow the possible interpretations of constructions like 
(8) and to explain the problematic status of construc- 
tions like (9). Reexamining (8), Ea~, R cannot be rein- 
terpreted because to do so would violate the Interpreta- 
tion Constraint; Emat-R cannot be reinterpreted because 
underscore has only the precedence interpretation. Thus 
(8) has only a single interpretation. 
Now consider CTSs with E,~a,, R and E~dj, R, and 
in (10c). Their default interpretation will be E, nat= 
R = Eaaj. But by picking appropriate temporal/causal 
9For present purposes it does not matter whether sen- 
tences like (9) are regarded as strictly ungrammatical or
merely reliably infelicitous. 
connectives or pragmatic contexts we can force either 
comma to be reinterpreted, yielding Eadj < R = E,,~, as 
in (10a), E ,~t  < R = Eadj as in (10b)) ? Of course, the 
(10) a.  OK Jon quit his job after Rachel left him 
b. OK Rachel left Jon before he quit his job 
c. ( 
E, R R_S PAST 
\[ \[ \[ E(m)=E(a) 
E,R R_S PAST) 
Interpretation Constraint prevents both commas from 
being simultaneously reinterpreted. 
We have shown that the interpretation of comma 
offered in (4) provides a flexibility in the interpretation 
of CTSs that is required data such as (10). Further, 
it restricts the interpretation of constructions like (8), 
where one of the clauses is in a perfect ense. Although 
we cannot fully explore the interpretive range of such 
perfect constructions here, the restriction on them has 
intuitive appeal. 
4 The  Computer  Mode l  
This section describes our implementation f the theory 
described above. The implementation serves two pur- 
poses. First, we use it as a tool to verify the behavior 
of the theory and explore the effects of variations in it. 
Second, the implementation demonstrates the use of our 
tense theory in syntactic disambiguation. 
Our program operates on parse trees, building com- 
plex tense structures out of simple ones and determining 
whether or not those CTSs are acceptable, according to 
the constraints on tense combination. This program was 
linked to a simple feature-grammar parser, allowing it 
to take sentences as input, n In addition to building 
the CTS for a sentence, the program lists the apparent 
Emat - Ea4/ relation for the CTSs it accepts, and the 
constraints violated by the CTSs it rejects. Its behav- 
ior on several of the examples from Section 1 is shown 
below. 
Examples (la) and (lb) show the effects of the Ad- 
junct Clause Information Restriction on the acceptabil- 
ity of sentences. 
;;; (la) * Rachel won the game when Jon arrives 
(compute-tense-structures 
(parse 
'(Rachel +ed win the game when Jon +s arrive))) 
1?See also Moens and Stccdman, 1988 regarding when 
clauses. 
11 Because morphology is quite distant from our interest in 
tense, the parser has no morphological component. Instead, 
input sentences have their tense morphemes, uch as +ed, 
separated and preposed. A morphological parser could easily 
return the components in this order. -t-ed represents he past- 
tense morpheme, +s the present-tense morpheme, and 4-en 
the past participle morpheme. 
124 
( 
E,R R_S PAST (WIN) 
I 11 
* violates: ACIR 
R,E S,R PRESENT (ARRIVE)) 
;;;  (lb) ok Rachel s i l l  s in  the game ehen Jon arr ives 
(compute-tense-structures 
(parse 
'(Rachel sill win the game shen Jon +s arrive))) 
( 
S_R R,E FUTURE (WIN) 
J I I E(m)-E(a) 
S,R R,E PRESENT (ARRIVE)) 
Examples (2) and (3) show how a sentence with two 
possible adjunction sites for the adjunct clause can pro- 
duce two CTSs. The unacceptability of the CTSs re- 
sulting from one of the adjunction sites disambiguates 
the sentences. In sentence (2) it is high attachment, o 
the matrix clause, that is acceptable; in sentence (3), 
low attachment to the complement clause. Figure -1, 
page 2, shows the two possible parses of (2) output by 
our program. One of them is automatically abeled un- 
grammatical with an asterisk on its CTS. Note that the 
composition of tenses from subcategorized complement 
clauses, as opposed to adjunct clauses are not investi- 
gated here, but rather adopted from Hornstein (1990). 
5 D iscuss ion  
In this section we compare the preceding solutions to the 
temporal/causal djunction problem with those offered 
in Yip (1986) and Hornstein (1990). 
5.1 Semant ics  of  S imple Tense  St ructures  
Two other works, Yip (1986) and Hornstein (1990), 
have developed theories of the effect of tense on the 
acceptability of temporal/causal djunct constructions. 
Both of these are at least partially rooted in the mean- 
ings of the tenses, and both use representations for sim- 
ple tense structures that are similar to the ones used 
here. However, they both have difficulty in justifying 
the assignment of STSs to tenses. 
Yip assumes that comma is ambiguous between < 
and =. Notice that this is different from the default 
interpretation suggested here, whereby a given comma 
in a given tense structure has exactly one interpreta- 
tion at any one time. Yip's assumptions are critical for 
the explanatory power of his argument, which won't go 
through using a default interpretation. According to 
Yip's interpretation, "Jon is running" and "Jon runs" 
ought to be ambiguous between the present and the fu- 
ture, but they clearly are not. Both describe vents or 
sets of events that necessarily must include the time of 
speech. This problem is exacerbated by Yip's proposal 
that the present ense be assigned two STSs, one equiva- 
lent to "S,R R,E", the one used here, and the other "E,R 
R,S". This proposal, along with the ambiguous interpre- 
tation of comma, would predict that the present ense 
could be interpreted as meaning the same thing as nearly 
any other tense. For example, the present could be inter- 
preted as equivalent to the past perfect, if both commas 
in its "E,R R,S" STS received the reading E < R < S. 
Hornstein (1990) uses the simultaneity interpreta- 
tion of comma exclusively in assigning STSs to tenses. 
Thus there is no semantic reason, in Hornstein's model, 
why the present tense should have "S,R R,E" rather than 
"S,R E,R". Furthermore, reinterpretation f comma is 
not invoked to explain the fact that the present ense 
is reinterpreted as referring to the future when it is ad- 
joined to a future clause or modified by a future adverb. 
Instead, a syntactic rewrite rule that changes X,Y to 
X_Y under these conditions is used. However, in the 
absence of semantic onstraint, it is not clear why that 
rule is better than one that switches order too, rewrit- 
ing Y,X to X.Y. This alternative rewrite rule would be 
consistent with the observations if every X,Y in every 
STS were switched to Y,X. Since X,Y and Y,X are in- 
terpreted in the same way in Hornstein's theory, there 
is no reason not to make these two changes. That is to 
say, Hornstein's theory does not explain why the STSs 
and the rewrite rule are the way they are, rather than 
some other way. 
Yip could not correctly derive his STS/tense map- 
ping from the meanings of the tenses because he allowed 
each STS to have too many different meanings in the 
simple, unmodified situations. Even so, these meanings 
were too narrow for his constraint on adjunction, so he 
was forced to propose that the present has two STSs. 
This only made the underdetermination f the mean- 
ings of simple sentences worse. Hornstein, on the other 
hand, did not allow enough variation in the meanings 
of the simple tense structures. As a result, many of his 
possible STSs had equivalent meanings, and there was 
no way to prefer one over the other. This was exacer- 
bated by the fact that he used non-semantic constraints 
on adjunction, reducing the amount of constraint hat 
the acceptability data on adjunctions could provide for 
the assignment of STSs to tenses. This paper takes an 
intermediate position. Comma is interpreted as simul- 
taneity in the unmodified case, but can be interpreted as 
precedence in appropriate nvironments. Since the con- 
straints on adjunction are semantically based, the inter- 
pretations of adjunct constructions provide evidence for 
the assignments of STSs to tenses that we use. 
5.2 Semant ics  of  Combined  Tense St ructures  
In addition to allowing semantics to uniquely de- 
termine the assignment of STSs to tenses, our default- 
based interpretation of comma explains a problem ac- 
knowledged in Hornstein (1990). If comma is inter- 
preted as strict simultaneity, as Hornstein initially pro- 
poses, then the structure in (10c) must be interpreted 
as Emat = R = Eadj.  However, as noted above, neither 
sentence (10a) nor sentence (lOb) has this interpretation. 
Hornstein alludes to a different form of reinterpretation 
125 
of ER to account for examples like (10). However, his 
mechanism for the interpretation of Ernat - Eadj order- 
ing in CTSs is unrelated to his semantics for STSs or his 
constraints on their combination. Our explanation, by 
contrast, uses the same mechanism, the default-based se- 
mantics of comma, in every portion of the theory. Rein- 
terpretation ofcomma in the SR relation accounts for the 
compatibility of the present ense with future adverbs 
and future matrix clauses. Reinterpretation of comma 
in ER relations accounts for the flexible interpretation 
of sentences like those in (10). 
6 Conclusions 
This paper describes two contributions to the the- 
ory of temporal/causal djunction beyond those of Yip 
(1986), Brent (1989), and Hornstein (1990). First, we 
propose the asymmetric, default-based interpretation of
comma described in (4). This leads to a uniform, seman- 
tically based theory explaining the assignments of STSs 
to tenses hown in Table 2, the incompatibility of many 
tense pairs in causal/temporal djunction, and the in- 
terpretations of combined tense structures in a variety 
of situations. In particular, the default based interpre- 
tation of comma has benefits both in the interpretation 
of SR relations (adverbs and clausal adjuncts) and ER 
relations (event order in CTSs). Few of the theoretical 
observations or hypotheses presented in this paper con- 
stitute radical departures from previous assaults on the 
same problem. Rather, this paper has worked out incon- 
sistencies and redundancies in earlier attempts. Besides 
theoretical work, we presented a computer implementa- 
tion and showed that it can be used to do structural 
disambiguation f a certain class of sentences. Although 
our contribution to syntactic disambiguation ly solves 
a small part of that huge problem, we expect that a 
series of constrained syntactic/semantic heories of the 
kind proposed hear will yield significant progress. 
Finally, the adjustments we have suggested to the 
interpretation of comma in both simple tense structures 
and combined tense structures hould contribute to the 
work of the many researchers using Reichenbachian rep- 
resentations. In particular, constrained combination of 
tense structures ought to provide a richer set of represen- 
tations on which to expand model-theoretic approaches 
to interpretation. 
Acknowledgments 
Thanks to Bob Berwick and Norbert Hornstein for their 
detailed readings and invaluable comments on many ver- 
sions of this work. 
References 
\[Allen, 1984\] J. Allen. Towards a General Theory of Ac- 
tion and Time. AI Journal, 23(2), 1984. 
\[Brent, 1989\] M. Brent. Temporal/Causal Connectives: 
Syntax and Lexicon. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual 
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive 
Science Society, 1989. 
\[Comrie, 1985\] B. Comrie. Tense. Cambridge Textbooks 
in Linguistics. Cambridge U. Press, New York, NY, 
1985. 
\[Dowty, 1979\] D. Dowty. Word Meaning and Montague 
Grammar. Synthese Language Library. D. Reidel, 
Boston, 1979. 
\[Dowty, 1986\] D. Dowty. The effects of aspectual class 
on the temporal structure of discourse: Semantics or 
pragmatics? Linguistics and Philosophy, 9:37-61, 
1986. 
\[Harper and Charniak, 1987\] M. Harper and E. Char- 
niak. Time and tense in english. In ??th Annual 
Proceedings of the Association for Comp. Ling., pages 
3-9. Association for Comp. Ling., 1987. 
\[tIinrichs, 1986\] E. Hinrichs. Temporal anaphora in dis- 
courses of english. Linguistics and Philosophy, 9:63- 
82, 1986. 
\[Hinrichs, 1988\] E. Hinrichs. Tense, quantifiers, and con- 
text. Comp. Ling., 9(2), 1988. 
\[Hornstein, 1977\] N. Hornstein. Towards a theory of 
tense. Linguistic Inquiry, 8:521-557, 1977. 
\[Hornstein, 1981\] N. Hornstein. The Study of Meanin 9 
in Natural Language. Longman, New York, 1981. 
\[I-Iornstein, 1990\] N. Hornstein. As Time Goes By: 
Tense and Universal Grammar. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA, 1990. 
\[Moens and Steedman, 1988\] M. Moens and M. Steed- 
man. Temporal Ontology and Temporal Reference. 
Comp. Ling., 14(2), 1988. 
\[Moens, 1987\] M. Moens. Tense, Aspect, and Tempo- 
ral Reference. PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh, 
Centre for Cognitive Science, 1987. 
\[Nakhimovsky, 1988\] A. Nakhimovsky. Aspect, aspec- 
tual class, and the temporal structure of narrative. 
Comp. Ling., 14(2), 1988. 
\[Passoneau, 1988\] R. Passoneau. A computational 
model of the semantics of tense and aspect. Comp. 
Ling., 14(2), 1988. 
\[Reichenbach, 1966\] H. Reichenbach. The Elements of 
Symbolic Logic. The Free Press, New York, 1966. 
\[Webber, 1988\] B. Webber. Tense as a discourse 
anaphor. Comp. Ling., 14(2), 1988. 
\[Yip, 1986\] K. Yip. Tense, aspect, and the cognitive rep- 
resentation of time. In Proceedings of the A CL. Asso- 
ciation for Comp. Ling., 1986. 
126 
