SUBJECT-DEPENDENT CO-OCCURRENCE AND WORD SENSE 
D ISAMBIGUATION 
Joe A. Guthrie,* Louise Guthrie, Yorick Wilks, and Homa Aidinejad 
Computing Research LabomtoD, 
Box 30001 
New Mexico State University 
Las Cruces, NM 88003-0001 
ABSTRACT 
We describe a method for obtaining 
subject-dependent word sets relative to some 
(subjecO domain. Using the subject 
classifications given in the machine-readable ver- 
sion of Longman's Dictionary of Contemporary 
English, we established subject-dependent co- 
occurrence links between words of the defining 
vocabulary to construct these "neighborhoods". 
Here, we describe the application of these neigh- 
borhoods to information retrieval, and present a
method of word sense disambiguation based on 
these co-occurrences, an extension of previous 
work. 
INTRODUCTION 
Word associations have been studied 
for some time in the fields of psycholinguis- 
tics (by testing human subjects on words), 
linguistics (where meaning is often based on 
how words co-occur with each other), and 
more recently, by researchers in natural 
language processing (Church and Hanks, 
1990; Hindle and Rooth, 1990; Dagan, 
1990; McDonald et al, 1990; Wilks et al, 
1990) using statistical measures to identify 
sets of associated words for use in various 
natural language processing tasks. 
One of the tasks where the statistical 
data on associated words has been used with 
some success is lexical disambiguation. 
However, associated word sets gathered 
* Present address: Mathematics Department, University 
of Texas at k-:l Paso, El Paso, Tx 79968 
from a general corpus may contain words 
that are associated with many different 
senses. For example, vocabulary associated 
with the word "bank" includes "money", 
"rob", "river" and "sand". In this paper, we 
describe a method for obtaining subject- 
dependent associated word sets, or "neigh- 
borhoods" of a given word, relative to a par- 
ticular (subject) domain. Using the subject 
classifications of Longman's Dictionary of 
Contemporary English (LDOCE), we have 
established subject-dependent co-occurrence 
finks between words of the defining vocabu- 
lary to construct hese neighborhoods. We 
will describe the application of these neigh- 
borhoods to information reuieval, and 
present a method of word sense disambigua- 
tion based on these co-occurrences, an 
extension of previous work. 
CO-OCCURRENCE NEIGHBORHOODS 
Words which occur frequently with a 
given word may be thought of as forming a 
"neighborhood" of that word. If we can 
determine which words (i.e. spelling forms) 
co-occur frequently with each word sense, 
we can use these neighborhoods to disambi- 
guate the word in a given text. 
Assume that we know of only two of 
the classic senses of the word bank: 
1) A repository for money, and 
2) A pile of earth on the edge of a river. 
We can expect the "money" sense of 
bank to co-occur frequently with such words 
146 
as "money", "loan", and "robber", while the 
"fiver" sense would be more frequently asso- 
ciated with "river", "bridge", and "earth". In 
order to disambiguate "bank" in a text, we 
would produce neighborhoods for each 
sense, and intersect hem with the text, our 
assumption being that the neighborhood 
which shared more words with the text 
would determine the correct sense. Varia- 
tions of this idea appear in (l.,esk, 1986; 
McDonald, et al, 1990; Wilks, 1987; 1990; 
Veronis and Ide, 1990). 
Previously, McDonald and Plate 
(McDonald et al, 1990; Schvaneveldt, 1990) 
used the LDOCE definitions as their text, in 
order to generate co-occurrence data for the 
2,187 words in the LDOCE control 
(defining) vocabulary. They used various 
methods to apply this data to the problem of 
disambiguating control vocabulary words as 
they appear in the LDOCE example sen- 
tences. In every case however, the neighbor- 
hood of a given word was a co-occurrence 
neighborhood for its spelling form over all 
the definitions in the dictionary. Distinct 
neighborhoods corresponding to distinct 
senses had to be obtained by using the 
words in the sense definition as a core for 
the neighborhood, and expanding it by com- 
bining it with additional words from the co- 
occurrence neighborhoods of the core words. 
SUBJECT-DEPENDENT NEIGHBORHOODS 
The study of word co-occurrence in a 
text is based on the cliche that "one (a word) 
is known by the company one keeps". We 
hold that it also makes a difference where  
that company is kept: since a word may 
occur with different sets of words in dif- 
ferent contexts, we construct word neighbor- 
hoods which depend on the subject of the 
text in question. We call these, naturally 
enough, "subject-dependent neighborhoods". 
A unique feature of the electronic ver- 
sion of LDOCE is that many of the word 
sense definitions are marked with a subject 
field code which tells us which subject area 
the sense pertains to. For example, the 
"money"-related senses of bank  are marked 
EC (Economics), and for each such main 
subject heading, we consider the subset of 
LDOCE definitions that consists of those 
sense definitions which sham that subject 
code. These definitions are then collected 
into one file, and co-occurrence data for their 
defining vocabulary is generated. Word x is 
said to co-occur with word y if x and y 
appear in the same sense definition; the total 
number of times they co-occur is denoted as 
We then construct a 2,187 x 2,187 
matrix in which each row and column 
corresponds to one word of the defining 
vocabulary, and the entry in the xth row and 
yth column represents the number of times 
the xth word co-occurred with the yth word. 
(This is a symmetric matrix, and therefore it 
is only necessary to maintain half of it.) We 
denote by f ,  the total number of times word 
x appeared. While many statistics may be 
used to measure the relatedness of words x 
and y, we used the function 
r (x,y ) = f x~ . 
in this study. We choose a co-occurrence 
neighborhood of a word x from a set of 
closely related words. We may choose the 
ten words with the highest relatedness tatis- 
tic, for instance. 
Neighborhoods of the word "metal" in 
the category "Economics" and "Business" 
are presented below: 
Table 1. Economics neighborhood f metal 
Subject Code EC ffi Economics 
metal idea coin them silver 
w, al should pocket gold 
well him 
Table 2. Business neighborhood of recta/ 
Subject Code BU = Business 
metal bear apparatus mouth 
spring entrance plate 
tight sheet 
inside 
brags 
147 
In this example, the ~ghborhoods 
reflect a fundamental difference between the 
two subject areas. Economics is a more 
theoretical subject, and therefore its neigh- 
borhood contains words like "idea", "gold", 
"silver", and "real", while in the more practi- 
cal domain of Business, we find the words 
"brass", "apparatus", spring", and "plate". 
We can expect the contrast between 
subject neighborhoods to be especially great 
for words with senses that fall into different 
subject areas. Consider the actual neighbor- 
hoods of our original example, bank. 
Table 3. Economics neighborhood fbank 
bank 
Subject Code EC = Economies 
account cheque money by 
into have keep order 
out pay at put 
from draw an busy 
more supply it safe 
Table 4. Engineering neighborhood of bank 
bank 
Subject Code EG = Engineering 
river wall flood thick 
earth prevent opposite chair 
hurry paste spread overflow 
walk help we throw 
clay then wide level 
Notice that even though we included 
the twenty most closely related words in 
each neighborhood, they are still unrelated 
or disjoint, although many of the words 
which appear in the lists are indeed sugges- 
tive of the sense or senses which fall under 
that subject category. In LDOCE, three of 
the eleven senses of bank are marked with 
the code EC for Economics, and these 
represent the "money" senses of the word. It 
is a quirk of the classification in LDOCE 
that the "river" senses of bank are not 
marked with a subject code. 
This lack of a subject code for a word 
sense in LDOCE is not uncommon, how- 
ever, and as was the case with bank, some 
word senses may have subject codes, while 
others do not. We label this lack of a sub- 
ject code the "null code", and form a neigh- 
borhood of this type of sense by using all 
sense definitions without code as text. This 
"null code neighborhood" can reveal the 
common, or "generic" sense of the word. 
The twenty most frequently occurring 
words with bank in definitions with the null 
subject code form the following neighbor- 
hood: 
Table 5. Null Code neighborhood fbank 
Subject Code NULL = no code assigned 
bank rob river account lend 
overflow flood money criminal 
lake flow snow cliff 
police shore heap thief 
borrow along steep earth 
It is obvious that approximately half of 
these words are associated with our two 
main senses of bank-but a new element has 
crept in: the appearance of four out of eight 
words which refer to the money sense ("rob", 
"criminal", "police", and "thief") reveal a 
sense of bank which did not appear in the 
EC neighborhood. In the null code 
definitions, there are quite a few references 
to the potential for a bank to be robbed. 
Finally, for comparison, consider a 
neighborhood for bank which uses all the 
LDOCE definitions (see McDonald et al, 
1990; Schvaneveldt, 1990; Wilks et al, 
1990): 
Table 6. Unrestricted neighborhood of bank 
Subject Code All 
bank account bank busy cheque 
criminal earn flood flow 
interest lake lend money 
overflow pay river rob 
safes and thief wall 
Only four of these words ("bank", 
"cam", "sand", and "thief") are not found in 
148 
the other three neighborhoods, and the 
number of words in the intersection of this 
neighborhood with the Economics, 
Engineering, and Null neighborhoods are: 
six, four, and eleven, respectively. Recalling 
that the Economics and Engineering neigh- 
borhoods are disjoint, this data supports our 
hypothesis that the subject-dependent neigh- 
borhoods help us to distinguish senses more 
easily than neighborhoods which are 
extracted from the whole dictionary. 
There are over a hundred main subject 
field codes in LDOCE, and over three- 
hundred sub-divisions within these. For 
example, "medicine-and-biology" is a main 
subject field (coded "MD"), and has twenty- 
two sub-divisions uch as "anatomy" and 
"biochemistry". These main codes and their 
sub-divisions constitute the only two levels 
in the LDOCE subject code hierarchy, and 
main codes such as "golf' and "sports" are 
not related to each other. Cknrently, we use 
only the main codes when we are construct- 
ing a subject-dependent neighborhood. But 
even this division of the definition text is 
fine enough so that, given a word and a sub- 
ject code, the word may not appear in the 
definitions which have that subject code at 
all. 
To overcome this problem, we have 
adopted a restructured hierarchy of the sub- 
ject codes, as developed b~y Slator (1988). 
This tree structure has a node at the top, 
representing all the definitions. At the next 
level are six fundamental categories such as 
"science" and "transportation", as well as the 
null code. These clusters are further sub- 
divided so that some main codes become 
sub-divisions of others ("golf' becomes a 
sub-division of "sports", etc.). The max- 
imum depth of this tree is five levels. 
If the word for which we want to pro- 
duce a neighborhood appears too infre- 
quently in definitions with a given code, we 
travel up the hierarchy and expand the text 
under consideration until we have reached a
point where the word appears frequently 
enough to allow the neighborhood to be con- 
structed. The worst case scenario would be 
one in which we had traveled all the way to 
the top of the hierarchy and used all the 
definitions as the text, only to wind up with 
the same co-occurrence neighborhoods as 
did McDonald and Plate (Schvaneveldt, 
1990; Wilks et al, 1990)! 
There are certain drawbacks in using 
LDOCE to construct he subject-dependent 
neighborhoods, however, the amount of text 
in LDOCE about any one subject area is 
rather limited, is comprised of a control 
vocabulary for dictionary definitions only, 
and uses sample sentences which were con- 
cocted with non-native English speakers in 
mind. 
In the next phase of our research, large 
corpora consisting of actual documents from 
a given subject area will be used, in order to 
obtain neighborhoods which more accurately 
reflect he sorts of texts which will be used 
in applications. In the future, these neigh- 
borhoods may replace those constructed 
from LDOCE, while leaving the subject 
code hierarchy and various applications 
intact. 
WORD SENSE DISAMBIGUATION 
In this section, we describe an applica- 
tion of subject-dependent co-occurrence 
neighborhoods to the problem of word sense 
disambiguation. The subject-dependent co-
occurrence neighborhoods are used as build- 
ing blocks for the neighborhoods used in 
disambiguation. For each of the subject 
codes (including the null code) which appear 
with a word sense to be disambiguated, we 
intersect the corresponding subject- 
dependent co-occurrence n ighborhood with 
the text being considered (the size of text 
can vary from a sentence to a paragraph). 
The intersection must contain a pre-selected 
minimum number of words to be considered. 
But if none of the neighborhoods intersect at 
greater than this threshold level, we replace 
the neighborhood N by the neighborhood 
N(1), which consists of N together with the 
first word from each neighborhood of words 
in N, using the same subject code. If neces- 
sary, we add the second most strongly asso- 
ciated word for each of the words in the ori- 
ginal neighborhood N, forming the neighbor- 
149 
hood N(2). We continue this process until a 
subject-dependent co-occurrence neighbor- 
hood has intersection above the threshold 
level. Then, the sense or senses with this 
subject code is selected. If more than one 
sense has the selected code, we use their 
definitions as cores to build distinguishing 
neighborhoods for them. These are again 
intersected with the text to determine the 
correct sense. 
The following two examples illustrate 
this method. Note that some of the neigh- 
borhoods differ from those given earlier 
since the text used to construct these neigh- 
borhoods includes any example sentences 
which may occur in the sense definitions. 
Those neighborhoods presented earlier 
ignored the example sentences. In each 
example, we attempt to disambiguate the 
word "bank" in a sentence which appears as 
an example sentence in the Collins 
COBUILD English Language Dictionary. 
The disambiguation consists of choosing the 
correct sense of "bank" from among the thir- 
teen senses given in LDOCE. These senses 
are summarized below. 
bank(l) : \[ \] : land along the side of a fiver, 
lake, etc. 
bank(2) : \[ \] : earth which is heaped up in a 
field or garden. 
bank(3) : \[ \] : a mass of snow, clouds, mud, etc. 
bank(4) : \[AU\] : a slope made at bends in a road 
or race-track. 
bank(5) : \[ \] : a sandbank in a river, etc. 
bank(6) : \[ALl\] : to move a ear or aircraft with 
one side higher than the other. 
bank('/) : \[ \] : a row, especially of oars in an 
ancient boat or keys on a typewriter. 
bank(8) : \[EC\] : a place in which money is kept 
and paid out on demand. 
bank(9) : \[MD\] : a place where something is 
held ready for use, such as blood. 
bank(10) : \[GB\] : (a person who keeps) a supply 
of money or pieces for payment in a gam- 
bling game. 
bank(ll) : \[ \] : break the bank is to win all the 
money in bank(10). 
bank(12) : \[EC\] : to put or keep (money) in a 
bank. 
bank(13) : \[EC\] : to keep ones money in a bank. 
Example 1. The sentence is 'Whe air- 
craft turned, banking slightly." 
The neighborhoods of "bank" for the five 
relevant subject codes are given below. 
Table 7. Automotive neighborhood fbank 
Subject Code ALl = Automotive 
bank make go up move 
so they high also 
round car side turn 
road aircraft slope bend 
safe 
Table 8. Economics neighborhood f bank 
bank 
Subject Code EC = Economics 
have it person out 
into take money put 
write keep pay order 
another paper draw supply 
account safe sum cheque 
Table 9. Gambling neighborhood f bank 
bank 
Subject Code GB = Gambling 
person use money piece 
play keep pay game 
various supply chance 
Table 10. Medical neighborhood f bank 
Subject Code MD - Medicine and Biology 
bank something use place hold 
medicine ready blood human 
origin organ store hospital 
tream~ent product comb 
150 
Table 11. Null Code neighborhood of bank 
bank 
Subject Code NULL = No code assigned 
game earth stone boat 
fiver bar snow lake 
sand shore mud framework 
flood cliff heap harbor 
ocean parallel overflow clerk 
The AU neighborhood contains two 
words, "aircraft" and "turn", which also 
appear in the sentence. Note that we con- 
sider all forms of tum (tumed, tuming, etc.) 
to match "turn". Since none of the other 
neighborhoods have any words in common 
with the sentence, and since our threshold 
value for this short sentence is 2, AU is 
selected as the subject code. We must now 
decide between the two senses which have 
this code. 
At this point we remove the function 
words from the sense definitions and replace 
each remaining word by its root form. We 
obtain the following neighborhoods. 
Table 12. Words in sense 4 of bank 
Definition bank(4) 
slope make bend road so 
they safe car go round 
Table 13. Words in sense 6 of bank 
Definition bank(6) 
car aircraft move side 
high make turn 
Since bank(4) has no words in com- 
mon with the sentence, and bank(6) has two 
Ctum" and "aircraft"), bank(6) is selected. 
This is indeed the sense of "bank" used in 
the sentence. 
Example 2. The sentence is "We got 
a bank loan to buy a car." The original 
neighborhoods of "bank" are, of course, the 
same as in Example 1. The threshold is 
again 2. None of the neighborhoods has 
more than one word in common with the 
sentence, so the iterative process of enlarg- 
ing the neighborhoods is used. The AU 
neighborhood is expanded to include 
"engine" since it is the first word in the AU 
neighborhood of "make". The first word in 
the AU neighborhood of "up" is "increase", 
so "increase" is added to the neighborhood. 
If the word to be added already appears in 
the neighborhood of "bank", no word is 
added. 
On the fifteenth iteration, the EC 
neighborhood contains "get" and "buy". 
None of the other neighborhoods have more 
than one word in common with the sentence, 
so EC is selected as the subject code. 
Definitions 8, 12, and 13 of bank all have 
the EC subject code, so their definitions are 
used as cores to build neighborhoods to 
allow us to choose one of them. After 
twenty-three iterations, bank(8) is selected. 
Experiments are underway to test this 
method and variations of it on large numbers 
of sentences so that its effectiveness may be 
compared with other disambiguation tech- 
niques. Results of these experiments will be 
reported elsewhere. 
FURTHER APPUCATIONS 
Several applications of subject- 
dependent neighborhoods in addition to 
word-sense disambiguation are being pur- 
sued, as well. For information retrieval, pre- 
viously constructed neighborhoods relevant 
to the subject area can be used to expand a 
query and the target (titles, key words, etc.) 
to include more words in the intersection, 
and improve both recall and precision. 
Another application is the determination of 
the subject area of a text. Since the effec- 
tiveness of searching for key words to deter- 
mine the topic of a text is limited by the 
choice of the particular list of key words, 
and the fact that the text may use synonyms 
or refer to the concept the key word 
represents without using it (for example by 
using a pronoun in its place), we could look 
for word associations (thereby involving 
more words in the process and making it 
less vulnerable to the above problems), 
151 
rather than simply searching for key words 
indicative of a topic. Neighborhoods of 
words in the text could be constructed for 
each of the six fundamental categories, and 
intersected with the surrounding words in 
the text. After choosing the category with 
the greatest intersection, we would then 
traverse the subject code tree downward to 
arrive at a more specific code, stopping at 
any point where there is not enough data to 
allow us to choose one code over the others 
at that level. Once a subject code is selected 
for a text, it could be used as a context for 
word-sense disambiguation. 
CONCLUSION 
Although the words in the LDOCE 
definitions constitute a small text (almost 
one million words, compared with the 
mega-texts used in other co-occurrence stu- 
dies), the unique feature of subject codes 
which can be used to distinguish many 
definitions, and LDOCE's small control 
vocabulary (2,187 words) make it a useful 
corpus for obtaining co-occurrence data. 
The development of techniques for informa- 
tion retrieval and word-sense disambiguation 
based on these subject-dependent co- 
occurrence neighborhoods is very promising 
indeed. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by the 
New Mexico State University Computing 
Research Laboratory through NSF Grant No. 
IRI-8811108. Grateful acknowledgement is 
accorded to all the members of the CRL 
Natural Language Group for their comments 
and suggestions. 
REFERENCES 
Church, Kenneth W., and Patrick Hanks 
(1990). Word Association Norms, Mutual Infor- 
mation, and Lexicography. Computational 
Linguistics, 16, 1, pp.22-29. 
Dagan, Ido, and Alon Itai (1990). Process- 
ing Large Corpora for Reference Resolution. 
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING-90), 
Helsinki, Finland, 3, pp.330-332. 
Hindle, Donald, and Mats Rooth (1990). 
Structural Ambiguity and Lexical Relations. 
Proceedings of the DARPA Speech and Natural 
Language Workshop. 
Lesk, Michael E. (1986). Automatic Sense 
Disambiguation Using Machine Readable Dic- 
tionaries: How to Tell a Pine Cone from an Ice 
Cream Cone. Proceedings of the ACM SIGDOC 
Conference, Toronto, Ontario. 
McDonald, James E., Tony Plate, and 
Roger W. Schvaneveldt (1990). Using 
Pathfinder to extract semantic information from 
text. In R. W. Schvaneveldt (ed.), Pathfinder 
Associative Networks: Studies in Knowledge 
Organization. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Schvaneveldt, Roger W. (1990). Path- 
finder Associative Networks: Studies in 
Knowledge Organization. New Jersey: Ablex. 
Slator, Brian M. 0988). Constructing 
Contextually Organized Lexical Semantic 
Knowledge-bases. Proceedings of the Third 
Annual Rocky Mountain Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (RMCAI-88), Denver, CO, pp.142- 
148. 
Veronis, Jean., Nancy Ide (1990). Very 
Large Neural Networks for Word-sense Disambi- 
guation. COLING '90, 389-394. 
Wilks, Yorick A., Dan C. Fass, Cheng- 
ming Guo, James E. McDonald, Tony Plate, and 
Brian M. Slator (1987). A Tractable Machine 
Dictionary as a Resource for Computational 
Semantics. Memorandum in Computer and Cog- 
nitive Science, MCCS-87-105, Computing 
Research Laboratory, New Mexico State Univer- 
sity. In Branimir Boguraev and Ted Briscoe 
(eds.), Computational IJ.xicography for Natural 
Language Processing. Harlow, Essex, England: 
Longman Group Limited. 
Wilk.% Ymick A., Dan C. Fass, Cheng- 
ming Guo, James E. McDonald, Tony Plate, and 
Brian M. Slator (1990). Prodding Machine 
Tractable Dictionary Tools. Journal of Machine 
Translation, 2. Also to appear in Theoretical and 
Computational Issues in Lexical Semantics , J. 
Pnstejovsky (~!.) 
152 
