Collaborating on Referring Expressions 
Peter  A .  Heeman 
Depar tment  of  Computer  Sc ience 
Un ivers i ty  of  Toronto  
Toronto ,  Canada,  M5S 1A4 
heeman@ai . to ronto .edu  
Abst ract  
This paper presents a computational model of how 
conversational participants collaborate in making re- 
ferring expressions. The model is based on the plan- 
ning paradigm. It employs plans for constructing and 
recognizing referring expressions and meta-plans for 
constructing and recognizing clarifications. This al- 
lows the model to account for the generation and un- 
derstanding both of referring expressions and of their 
clarifications in a uniform framework using a single 
knowledge base. 
I, Introduction 
In the dialogue below 1, person A wants to refer to some 
object and have person B identify it. Person A does this 
by uttering a referring expression; however, A's expression 
fails to allow B to uniquely identify the object. Person B 
then tries to clarify A's referring expression by expanding 
it. A rejects B's clarification and replaces it, which al- 
lows B to identify the referent of the refashioned referring 
expression. 
A: 1 See the weird creature 
B: 2 In the corner? 
A: 3 No, on the television 
B: 4 Okay. 
This paper presents a computation model of Clark 
and Wilkes-Gibbs's work on how conversational partici- 
pants collaborate in forming referring expressions \[2\]. Our 
model takes the role of one of the participants, either the 
participant who initiates the referring expression, the ini- 
tiator, or the one who is trying to identify the referent, the 
responder. It accounts for how the initiator constructs the 
initial referring expressions and how she and the responder 
then collaborate in clarifying the referring expression until 
it is acceptable. Each step of the collaboration consists of 
a clarification of the referring expression and a subsequent 
understanding of the clarification. 
This work is based on the planning paradigm. The 
knowledge that is needed to choose the content of a refer- 
ring expression is encoded in plans. This allows an agent 
to use the same knowledge base for both constructing and 
recognizing initial referring expressions. Furthermore, the 
I This example is a simplified version of \[6\] S.2.4a (1-8). 
knowledge needed to clarify a referring expression is en- 
coded as plans. These are meta-plans that take an instan- 
tiated plan corresponding to a referring expression as a 
parameter. The meta-plans reason about the failed con- 
straints or effects of the instantiated plan in order to clarify 
it. These repairs can subsequently be understood by per- 
forming plan recognition. This approach allows the entire 
collaborative process to be expressed in a uniform frame- 
work with a single knowledge base. 
II. Referring as Action 
Plans encode a relationship between goals and the prim- 
itive actions that will accomplish these goals. Hence, a 
set of primitive actions is needed that is relevant in the 
domain of referring expressions \[1\]. We use the primitive 
actions - re fer  and s -a t t r .  S - re fer  is performed by the 
initiator to signal to the responder that she is referring to 
an object, and that she intends him to identify the object. 
S -a t t r  ascribes ome attribute to an object, for instance 
its category, color, or shape. 
III. Initial Referring Expression 
Constructing: When an initiator wants to refer to an 
object, she can do so by constructing a re fer  plan. This 
plan consists of two steps, the action s - re fer ,  mentioned 
above, and the subplan descr ibe .  Descr ibe,  through its 
subplans headnoun and modi f ie rs ,  constructs a descrip- 
tion of the object that is intended to allow the responder to 
identify the object. Headnoun decomposes into an s -a t t r  
action that ascribes to the object the head noun chosen by 
the constraints of the plan. The mod i f ie rs  plan is more 
complicated. Through its constraints, it ensures that the 
referring expression is believed to allow the responder to 
uniquely identify the object. The mod i f ie rs  plan achieves 
this by decomposing into the mod i f ie r  plan a variable 
number of times (through recursion). Each instance of the 
mod i f ie r  plan constructs an individual component of the 
description, such as the object's color, shape, or location 
(through an s -a t t r  action). 
Recogn iz ing :  The responder, after hearing the initial 
referring expression, tries to recognize the intention behind 
the initiator's utterance. Starting with the set of primi- 
tive actions that he observed, the responder employs plan 
345 
recognition to determine a plan that accounts for them. 
This process will lead him to ascribe the re fer  plan to the 
initiator, including the intention for the responder to iden- 
tify the referent of the description. Plan recognition, by 
analyzing the constraints and effects of the inferred plan, 
lets the responder attempt o identify the referent of the 
description. 
There are two reasons why the responder might be 
unable to identify the referent. Either the responder is 
unable to find any objects that satisfy the referring ex- 
pression or he is able to find more than one that satisfies 
it. This situation might arise if the initiator and respon- 
der have different states of knowledge or belief about the 
world. For instance, in the dialogue above the responder 
might think that several objects are "weird". The con- 
straint or effect that was violated in the inferred plan is 
noted by the plan recognizer, and this knowledge is used 
to repair the plan. This approach ismotivated by Pollack's 
treatment of ill-formed omain plans \[5\]. 
IV.  Clari f ications 
Constructing: If the responder was unsuccessful atin- 
ferring the referent of the referring expression, he will plan 
to inform the initiator that her referring expression was 
not successful. As Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs \[2\] point out, 
the responder will try to refashion the referring expression 
in order to minimize the collaborative effort, and hence he 
will prefer to replace or expand the referring expression 
rather than just rejecting it or postponing the decision. 
The responder has several different clarification plans 
\[4\] at his disposal and they take as a parameter the inferred 
plan corresponding to the referring expression. These 
plans correspond to Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs's analysis of 
the repair process. One of these plans is rej  ect-replace. 
This plan rejects the step of the inferred referring expres- 
sion plan that has a constraint violation and replaces it 
by a similar step but with the violated constraint relaxed 
(relaxing a description is due to \[3\]). A second plan is 
postpone-expemd, which is used to further qualify a refer- 
ring expression that a participant found to match several 
objects. This plan is used by the responder in (2) in the 
dialogue above. 
Recognizing: If the responder clarifies the referring 
expression, the initiator will have to infer that the respon- 
der is unable to identify the referent of the expression. 
Furthermore, the initiator must determine how the clarifi- 
cation will affect he underlying referring expression. The 
responder might have rejected or postponed his decision, 
as well as proposed a correction to the underlying refer- 
ring expression by replacing or expanding it. Following 
Litman's work on understanding clarification subdialogues 
\[4\], this process is achieved through plan recognition. 
Continuing On: Clarification subdialogues might ex- 
tend beyond the responder's clarification of the initial re- 
ferring expression. For instance, in the above dialogue, af- 
ter the initiator inferred the responder's clarification, she 
found the resulting referring expression plan ill-formed. 
Hence, she constructed a subsequent clarification--"No, n 
the television". Then, the responder had to infer this clar- 
ification. In general, this process will continue until both 
participants accept he referring expression. The analysis 
involved with these subsequent turns of the dialogue issim- 
ilar to the analysis given in the preceding two subsections. 
There may be differences between how the initiator and 
responder clarify a referring expression, since the initia- 
tor knows the identity of the referent. Also, there may be 
differences between a clarification following the initial re- 
ferring expression and one following another clarification, 
since, in the latter case, the referring expression may have 
already been partially accepted. 
V. Be l ie f  Rev is ion  
As was mentioned earlier, the initiator and responder 
might have different states of knowledge or belief about 
the world, and these differences will be a cause of clarifica- 
tion subdialogues. In the process of collaborating tomake 
referring expressions, these differences inbelief will arise in 
the replacements and expansions that the two participants 
propose. Hence, they will need a way of resolving their 
differences in beliefs about the world if they are to both 
accept he referring expression. Hence the model proposed 
in this paper will need to incorporate belief revision. 
VI.  Conc lus ion 
This paper has presented a computational model of how 
conversational participants collaborate in making referring 
expressions. However, it is hoped that the ideas presented 
in this paper are of relevance to a much larger range of 
collaborative processes. 
The work outlined in this paper is in progress. At 
present, a computer system has been implemented in Pro- 
log that can construct and recognize initial referring ex- 
pressions, and that can construct clarifications. In terms 
of the dialogue above, the system can model both the ini- 
tiator and responder for the first line and can model the 
responder for the second. 
References  
\[1\] D. E. Appelt. Planning English referring expressions. Ar~ificlal 
Intelligence, 26(1):1-33, April 1985. 
\[2\] H. H. Clark and D. Wilkes-Gibbs. Referring as a collaborative 
process. Cognition, 22:1-39, 1986. 
\[3\] B. A. Goodman. Repvh'ing reference identification failures by 
relaxation. In Proceedings o\] the ~3 rd Annual Meeting o\] the 
Association \]or Computational Linguistics, pages 204-217, 1985. 
\[4\] D. J. Litman and J. F. Allen. A plan recognition model for 
subdlalogues in conversations. Cognitive Science, 11(2):16,3-200, 
April- June 1987. 
\[5\] M. E. Pollack. Inferring domain plans in question-answerlng. 
Technical Note 403, SRI Interx~tional, 1986. 
\[{3\] J. Svartvik and R. Quirk. A Corpus o\] English Conversation. 
Ltmd Studies in English. 56. C.W.K. Gleerup, Lund, 1980. 
346 
