Current Research in the Development of a Spoken Language 
Understanding System using PARSEC* 
Carla B. Zoltowski 
School of Electrical Engineering 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN 47907 
February 28, 1991 
1 Introduct ion 
We are developing a spoken language system 
which would more effectively merge natural an- 
guage and speech recognition technology by us- 
ing a more flexible parsing strategy and utiliz- 
ing prosody, the suprasegmental information in 
speech such as stress, rhythm, and intonation. 
There is a considerable amount of evidence which 
indicates that prosodic information impacts hu- 
man speech perception at many different levels 
\[5\]. Therefore, it is generally agreed that spoken 
language systems would benefit from its addi- 
tion to the traditional knowledge sources such 
as acoustic-phonetic, syntactic, and semantic in- 
formation. A recent and novel approach to incor- 
porating prosodic information, specifically the 
relative duration of phonetic segments, was de- 
veloped by Patti Price and John Bear \[1, 4\]. 
They have developed an algorithm for computing 
break indices using a hidden Markov model, and 
have modified the context-free grammar rules to 
incorporate links between non-terminals which 
corresponded to the break indices. Although in- 
corporation of this information reduced the num- 
ber of possible parses, the processing time in- 
creased because of the addition of the link nodes 
in the grammar. 
2 Constraint 
Grammar 
Dependency  
Instead of using context-free grammars, we are 
using a natural language framework based on the 
*Parallel Architecture Sentence ConstraJner 
Constraint Dependency Grammar  (CDG)  for- 
realism developed by Maruyama \[3\]. This frame- 
work allows us to handle prosodic information 
quite easily, Rather than coordinating lexical, 
syntactic, semantic, and contextual modules to 
develop the meaning of a sentence, we apply 
sets of lexical, syntactic, prosodic, semantic, and 
pragmatic rules to a packed structure containing 
a developing picture of the structure and mean- 
ing of a sentence. The CDG grammar has a weak 
generative capacity which is strictly greater than 
that of context-free grammars and has the added 
advantage of benefiting significantly from a par- 
allel architecture \[2\]. PARSEC is our system 
based on the CDG formalism. 
To develop a syntactic and semantic analysis 
using this framework, a network of the words for 
a given sentence is constructed. Each word is 
given some number indicating its position rela- 
tive to the other words in the sentence. Once 
a word is entered in the network, the system 
assigns all of the possible roles the words can 
have by applying the lexical constraints (which 
specify legal word categories) and allowing the 
word to modify all the remaining words in the 
sentence or no words at all. Each of the arcs 
in the network has associated with it a matrix 
whose row and column indices are the roles that 
the words can play in the sentence. Initially, all 
entries in the matrices are set to one, indicat- 
ing that there is nothing about one word's func- 
tion which prohibits another word's right to fill 
a certain role in the sentence. Once the net- 
work is constructed, additional constraints are 
introduced to limit the role of each word in the 
sentence to a single function. In a spoken lan- 
guage system which may contain several possible 
candidates for each word, constraints would also 
353 
provide feedback about impossible word candi- 
dates. 
? We have been able to incorporate the dura- 
tional information from Bear and Price quite 
easily into our framework. An advantage of 
our approach is that the prosodic information 
is added as constraints instead of incorporat- 
ing it into a parsing grammar. Because CDG 
is more expressive than context-free grammars, 
we can produce prosodic rules that are more ex- 
pressive than Bear and Price are able to pro- 
vide by augmenting context-free grammars, Also 
by formulating prosodic rules as constraints, we 
avoid the need to clutter our rules with nonter- 
minals required by context-free grammars when 
they are augmented to handle prosody. Assum- 
ing O(n4/log(n)) processors, the cost of apply- 
ing each constraint is O(log (n))\[2\]. Whenever 
we apply a constraint to the network, our pro- 
cessing time is incremented by this amount. In 
contrast, Bear and Price, by doubling the size of 
the grammar are multiplying the processing time 
by a factor of 8 when no prosodic information is
available (assuming (2n) 3 = 8n 3 time). 
3 Current Research 
Our current research effort consists of the devel- 
opment of algorithms for extracting the prosodic 
information from the speech signal and incor- 
poration of this information into the PARSEC 
framework. In addition, we will be working to 
interface PARSEC with the speech recognition 
system being developed at Purdue by Mitchell 
and Jamieson. 
We have selected a corpus of 14 syntactically 
ambiguous entences for our initial experimen- 
tation. We have predicted what prosodic fea- 
tures humans use to disambiguate he sentences 
and are attempting to develop algorithms to ex- 
tract those features from the speech. We are 
hoping to build upon those algorithms presented 
in \[1, 4, 5\]. Initially we are using a professional 
speaker trained in prosodics in our experiments, 
but eventually we will test our results with an 
untrained speaker. 
Although our current system allows multiple 
word candidates, it assumes that each of the pos- 
sible words begin and end at the same time. It 
currently does not allow for non-aligned word 
boundaries. In addition, the output of the speech 
recognition system which we will be utilizing will 
consist of the most likely sequence of phonemes 
for a given utterance, so additional work will be 
required to extract he most likely word candi- 
dates for use in our system. 
4 Conclus ion 
The CDG formalism provides a very promis- 
ing framework for our spoken language system. 
We believe its flexibility will allow it to over- 
come many of the limitations imposed by natural 
language systems developed primarily for text- 
based applications, uch as repeated words and 
false starts of phrases. In addition, we believe 
that prosody will help to resolve the ambigu- 
ity introduced by the speech recognition system 
which is not present in text-based systems. 
5 Acknowledgement  
This research was supported in part by NSF IRI- 
9011179 under the guidance of Profs. Mary P. 
Harper and Leah H. Jamieson. 
References 
\[1\] J. Bear and P. Price. Prosody, syntax, and parsing. 
In Proceedings of the ~8th annual A CL, 1990. 
\[2\] R. Helzerman and M.P. Harper. Parsec: An archi- 
tecture for parallel parsing of constraint dependency 
grammars. In Submitted to The Proceedings o/the 
~9th Annual Meeting o.f ACL, June 1991. 
\[3\] H. Maruyama. Constraint dependency grammar. 
Technical Report #RT0044, IBM, Tokyo, Japan, 
1990. 
\[4\] P. Price, C. Wightman, M. Ostendorf, and J. Bear. 
The use of relative duration in syntactic disambigua- 
tion. In Proceedings o\] 1CSLP, 1990. 
\[5\] A. Waibel. Prosody and Speech Recognition. Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Los Altos, CA, 1988. 
354 
