Modifying Beliefs in a Plan-Based Dialogue Model 
Lynn Lambert 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Delaware 
Newark, Delaware 197161 
1 Introduction 
Previous models of discourse have inadequately 
accounted for how beliefs change during a conversation. 
This paper outlines a model of dialogue which main- 
tains and updates a user's multi-level belief model as 
the discourse proceeds. This belief model is used in a 
plan-recognition framework to identify communicative 
goals such as expressing surprise. 
2 Plans, Beliefs, and Processing 
My plan-based model of dialogue incrementally 
builds a structure of the discourse (a Dialogue Model, 
or DM) using a multi-level belief model updated after 
each utterance. The belief model contains the beliefs as- 
cribed to the user during the course of the conversation 
and how strongly each belief is held. 
Researchers \[1, 3, 5\] have noted that discourse 
understanding can be enhanced by recognizing a user's 
goals, and that this recognition process requires reason- 
ing about the agent's beliefs \[7\]. For example, in order 
to recognize from utterance IS2 in the following dia- 
logue that the speaker has the communicative goal of 
expressing surprise at the proposition that Dr. Smith 
is teaching CIS360 and not just asking if Dr. Smith is 
teaching CIS420, it is necessary for the system to be 
able to plausibly ascribe to IS the beliefs that 1) Dr. 
Smith is teaching CIS420; 2) that this somehow implies 
that Dr. Smith is not teaching CIS360; and 3) that IP 
believes that Dr. Smith is teaching CIS360. 
ISI: Who is teaching CIS 360? 
IPl: Dr. Smith. 
IS2: Dr. Smith is teaching CIS 420, isn't she? 
IP2: Yes, she is. Dr. Smith is teaching two courses. 
IS3: What time is CIS 360? 
My model ascribes these beliefs to IS as the discourse 
proceeds, anti uses the ascribed beliefs for recognizing 
utterances that involve negotiation dialogues. Without 
the ability to modify a belief model as a dialogue pro- 
gresses, it would not be possible to plausibly ascribe 
1) or 3), so it is unclear how recognizing expressions 
of surprise would be accomplished in systems uch as 
Litman's \[5\] that recognize discourse goals but do not 
maintain belief models. IS2 also exemplifies how people 
may have levels of belief and indicate those levels in the 
This  mater ia l  is based upon  work supported by the National 
Science Foundat ion under  Grant  No. IRI-8909332. The Govern- 
ment  has certain r ights in this material .  
surface form of utterances. Here, IS uses a tag question 
to indicate that he thinks that Dr. Smith is teaching 
CIS420, but is not certain of it. My belief model main- 
tains three levels of belief, three levels of disbelief, and 
one level indicating no belief about a proposition. 
My process model begins with the semantic rep- 
resentation of an utterance. The effects of the surface 
speech act, such as a tag question, are used to suggest 
augmentations to the belief model. Plan inference rules 
are used to infer actions that might motivate the utter- 
ance; the belief ascription process during constraint sat- 
isfaction determines whether it is reasonable to ascribe 
the requisite beliefs to the agent of the action and, if 
not, the inference is rejected. Focusing heuristics allow 
expectations derived from the existing dialogue context 
to guide the recognition process by preferring those in- 
ferences that lead to the most coherent expansions of 
the existing dialogue model. 
The resultant DM contains astructure of the dia- 
logue at every point in the discourse, including three dif- 
ferent kinds of goals, each modeled on a separate level: 
the domain level models domain goals such as travel- 
ing by train; the problem-solving level, plan-construction 
goals such as instantiating a variable in a plan; and the 
discourse level, communicative goals such as express. 
ing surprise. Within each of these levels, actions may 
contribute to other actions on the same level; for exam- 
ple, on the discourse level, providing background ata, 
asking a question, and answering a question all can be 
part of obtaining information. 2 So, actions at each level 
form a tree structure in which each node represents an 
action that a participant is performing and the chil- 
dren of a node represent actions pursued in order to 
perform the parent action. This tree structure allows 
my model to capture the relationship among several ut- 
terances that are all part of the same higher-level dis- 
course plan, which is not possible in Litman's model 
\[5\]. In addition, an action on one level may contribute 
to, or link to, an action on an immediately higher level. 
For example, discourse actions may be executed to at- 
tain the knowledge needed for problem-solving actions 
at the middle level. 
This tripartite, plan-based model of discourse fa- 
2The DM is really a menta l  model  of intent ions \[7\] which im- 
plicitly captures a number  of intent ions that  are at t r ibuted  to the 
part ic ipants,  such as the intent ion that  the part ic ipants follow 
through with the subact ions that  are part  of p lans for act ions in 
the DM. 
349 
cilitates recognition of changing beliefs as the dialogue 
progresses. Allen's representation f an Inform speech 
act \[1\] assumed that a listener adopted the communi- 
cated proposition. Clearly, listeners do not adopt every- 
thing they are told (e.g., IS2 indicates that IS does not 
immediately accept hat Dr. Smith is teaching CIS360). 
Perrault \[6\] assumed that a listener adopted the com- 
municated proposition unless the listener had conflict- 
ing beliefs, as in IS2. Unfortunately, Perrault assumes 
that people's beliefs persist so it would not be possible 
for Perranlt to model IS adopting IP's explanation in 
IP2. I am assuming that the participants are involved 
in a cooperative dialogue, so try to square away their 
beliefs \[4\]. Thus, after every Inform action, a speaker 
expects the listener either to accept any claims that the 
speaker made or to initiate a negotiation dialogue. 3 Ac- 
ceptance can be communicated in two ways. Either the 
listener can explicitly indicate acceptance ( .g., "oh, al- 
right"), or the listener can implicitly convey acceptance 
\[2\] by making an utterance which cannot be interpreted 
as initiating a negotiation dialogue. Since both parties 
are engaged in a cooperative dialogue in which beliefs 
are squared away, this failure to initiate a negotiation di- 
alogue by default indicates (implicit) acceptance of any 
claims not disputed. This corresponds with a restricted 
form of Perrault's default reasoning about the effects of 
Inform acts \[6\]. An example of implicit acceptance is
considered in the next section. 
3 Example  
Consider the dialogue model given in Section 2. 
The process model infers from the first utterance that IS 
is executing a high level discourse action of Obtain.Info- 
Ref to determine who is teaching CIS360 and problem- 
solving actions of Insfanfiate- Var and Build-Plan in or- 
der to build a plan to take CIS360 so that IS may even- 
tually execute a domain action, Take-Course, to take 
CIS360. IS2 is recognized as an expression of surprise 
at IP's answer since acceptance or negotiation of the 
answer is expected and since the following beliefs can 
be ascribed to IS: 1) as a default rule, that teachers 
generally teach only one course; 2) that Dr. Smith is 
already teaching CIS420 (from the tag question form); 
and 3) that the combination of 1) and 2) implies that 
Dr. Smith is not teaching CIS360. IP responds by try- 
ing to make her answer believable and to resolve the 
conflict. This is done by informing IS that his belief 
about Dr. Smith teaching CIS420 is correct, but that 
Dr. Smith is an exception to the default rule. 
Focusing heuristics uggest explicit acceptance of
or objection to IP~ as ways to continue the current dis- 
course plan. However utterance IS3, instead, pursues a 
3A third possibility exists: that the participants agree to dis- 
agree about a particular point, and continue the dialogue. My 
model  will handle this also, but it is not preferred, and for space 
reasons will not  be considered further here. 
completely new discourse action, Obtain-Info-Ref, un- 
related to the original Obtain-Info-Ref, though still re- 
lated to the problem-solving action of Instantiate-Var 
in order to build a plan to take CIS360. Since a new 
discourse plan is being pursued, the process model in- 
fers by default hat IP2 has been accepted because oth- 
erwise IS would have initiated a negotiation dialogue. 
Since the inform action is accepted (implicitly), this ac- 
tion, and the higher level actions that it contributes to, 
are considered to be successfully completed, so the goals 
and effects of these plans are considered to hold. Some 
of the goals of these plans are that 1) IS believes that 
Dr. Smith teaches both CIS360 and CIS420, and thus is 
an exception to the default rule that teachers only teach 
one course and 2) IS knows that Dr. Smith is the faculty 
member that teaches CIS360, the answer to the original 
question that IS asked. Once the process model recog- 
nizes IS3 as pursuing this new Obtain-Info-Ref action, 
the belief model is updated accordingly. 
4 Conc lus ion  
Previous models of dialogue have inadequately 
accounted for changing beliefs of the participants. This 
paper has outlined a plan-based model of dialogue that 
makes use of beliefs currently ascribed to the user, ex- 
pectations derived from the focus of attention in the di- 
alogue, and implicit or explicit cues from the user both 
to identify communicative goals and to recognize altered 
user beliefs. 
Re ferences  
\[1\] James F. Allen. A Plan-Based Approach to Speech Act 
Recognition. PhD thesis, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, 1979. 
\[2\] S. Carberry. A pragmatics-based approach to ellipsis res- 
olution. Computational Linguistics, 15(2):75-96, 1989. 
\[3\] B. Grosz and C. Sidner. Attention, intention, and 
the structure of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
12(3):175-204, 1986. 
\[4\] Aravind K. Joshi. Mutual beliefs in question-answer sys- 
tems. In N. Smith, editor, Mutual Beliefs, pages 181- 
197, New York, 1982. Academic Press. 
\[5\] D. Litman and J. Allen. A plan recognition model for 
subdialogues in conversation. Cognitive Science, 11:163- 
200, 1987. 
\[6\] R. Perrault. An application of default logic to speech 
act theory. In P. Cohen, J. Morgan, and M. Pollack, 
editors, Intentions in Communication, pages 161-185. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1990. 
\[7\] Martha Pollack. A model of plan inference that distin- 
guishes between the beliefs of actors and observers. In 
Proceedings of the ~th Annual Meeting o;f the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 207-214, New 
York, New York, 1986. 
350 
