STRUCTURAL AMBIGUITY  AND LEX ICAL  RELAT IONS 
Donald Hindle and Mats Rooth 
AT&T Bell Laboratories 
600 Mountain Avenue 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974 
Abstract  
We propose that ambiguous prepositional phrase 
attachment can be resolved on the basis of the 
relative strength of association of the preposition 
with noun and verb, estimated on the basis of word 
distribution in a large corpus. This work suggests 
that a distributional approach can be effective in 
resolving parsing problems that apparently call for 
complex reasoning. 
In t roduct ion 
Prepositional phrase attachment is the canonical 
case of structural ambiguity, as in the time worn 
example, 
(1) I saw the man with the telescope 
The existence of such ambiguity raises problems 
for understanding and for language models. It 
looks like it might require xtremely complex com- 
putation to determine what attaches to what. In- 
deed, one recent proposal suggests that resolving 
attachment ambiguity requires the construction of 
a discourse model in which the entities referred to 
in a text must be reasoned about (Altmann and 
Steedman 1988). Of course, if attachment am- 
biguity demands reference to semantics and dis- 
course models, there is little hope in the near term 
of building computational models for unrestricted 
text to resolve the ambiguity. 
Structure based ambiguity resolution 
There have been several structure-based proposals 
about ambiguity resolution in the literature; they 
are particularly attractive because they are simple 
and don't demand calculations in the semantic or 
discourse domains. The two main ones are: 
? Right Association - a constituent tends to at- 
tach to another constituent immediately to its 
right (Kimball 1973). 
? Minimal Attachment - a constituent tends to 
attach so as to involve the fewest additional 
syntactic nodes (Frazier 1978). 
For the particular case we are concerned with, 
attachment of a prepositional phrase in a verb + 
object context as in sentence (1), these two princi- 
ples - at least in the version of syntax that Frazier 
assumes - make opposite predictions: Right Asso- 
ciation predicts noun attachment, while Minimal 
Attachment predicts verb attachment. 
Psycholinguistic work on structure-based strate- 
gies is primarily concerned with modeling the time 
course of parsing and disambiguation, and propo- 
nents of this approach explicitly acknowledge that 
other information enters into determining a final 
parse. Still, one can ask what information is rel- 
evant to determining a final parse, and it seems 
that in this domain structure-based disambigua- 
tion is not a very good predictor. A recent study 
of attachment of prepositional phrases in a sam- 
ple of written responses to a "Wizard of Oz" travel 
information experiment shows that neither Right 
Association or Minimal Attachment account for 
more than 55% of the cases (Whittemore t al. 
1990). And experiments by Taraban and McClel- 
land (1988) show that the structural models are 
not in fact good predictors of people's behavior in 
resolving ambiguity. 
Resolving ambiguity through lexical 
associations 
Whittemore t al. (1990) found lexical preferences 
to be the key to resolving attachment ambiguity. 
Similarly, Taraban and McClelland found lexical 
content was key in explaining people's behavior. 
Various previous proposals for guiding attachment 
disambiguation by the lexical content of specific 
229 
words have appeared (e.g. Ford, Bresnan, and Ka- 
plan 1982; Marcus 1980). Unfortunately, it is not 
clear where the necessary information about lexi- 
cal preferences i  to be found. In the Whittemore 
et al study, the judgement of attachment pref- 
erences had to be made by hand for exactly the 
cases that their study covered; no precompiled list 
of lexical preferences was available. Thus, we are 
posed with the problem: how can we get a good 
list of lexical preferences. 
Our proposal is to use cooccurrence of with 
prepositions in text as an indicator of lexical pref- 
erence. Thus, for example, the preposition to oc- 
curs frequently in the context send NP --, i.e., 
after the object of the verb send, and this is evi- 
dence of a lexical association of the verb send with 
to. Similarly, from occurs frequently in the context 
withdrawal --, and this is evidence of a lexical as- 
sociation of the noun withdrawal with the prepo- 
sition from. Of course, this kind of association 
is, unlike lexical selection, a symmetric notion. 
Cooccurrence provides no indication of whether 
the verb is selecting the preposition or vice versa. 
We will treat the association as a property of the 
pair of words. It is a separate matter, which we 
unfortunately cannot pursue here, to assign the 
association to a particular linguistic licensing re- 
lation. The suggestion which we want to explore 
is that the association revealed by textual distri- 
bution - whether its source is a complementation 
relation, a modification relation, or something else 
- gives us information eeded to resolve the prepo- 
sitional attachment. 
Discovering Lexical Associa- 
tion in Text 
A 13 million word sample of Associated Press new 
stories from 1989 were automatically parsed by 
the Fidditch parser (Hindle 1983), using Church's 
part of speech analyzer as a preprocessor (Church 
1988). From the syntactic analysis provided by 
the parser for each sentence, we extracted a table 
containing all the heads of all noun phrases. For 
each noun phrase head, we recorded the follow- 
ing preposition if any occurred (ignoring whether 
or  not the parser attached the preposition to the 
noun phrase), and the preceding verb if the noun 
phrase was the object of that verb. Thus, we gen- 
erated a table with entries including those shown 
in Table 1. 
In Table 1, example (a) represents a passivized 
instance of the verb blame followed by the prepo- 
VERB 
blame 
control 
enrage 
spare 
grant 
determine 
HEAD NOUN 
PASSIVE 
money 
development 
government 
military 
accord 
radical 
WHPRO 
it 
concession 
flaw 
Table h A sample of the Verb-Noun-Preposition 
table. 
sition for. Example (b) is an instance of a noun 
phrase whose head is money; this noun phrase 
is not an object of any verb, but is followed by 
the preposition for. Example (c) represents an in- 
stance of a noun phrase with head noun develop- 
ment which neither has a following preposition or 
is the object of a verb. Example (d) is an instance 
of a noun phrase with head government, which is 
the object of the verb control but is followed by no 
preposition. Example (j) represents an instance of 
the ambiguity we are concerned with resolving: a 
noun phrase (head is concession), which is the ob- 
ject of a verb (grant), followed by a preposition 
(to). 
From the 13 million word sample, 2,661,872 
noun phrases were identified. Of these, 467,920 
were recognized as the object of a verb, and 
753,843 were followed by a preposition. Of the 
noun phrase objects identified, 223,666 were am- 
biguous verb-noun-preposition triples. 
Estimating attachment prefer- 
ences 
Of course, the table of verbs, nouns and preposi- 
tions does not directly tell us what the strength 
lexical associations are. There are three potential 
sources of noise in the model. First, the parser in 
some cases gives us false analyses. Second, when 
a preposition follows a noun phrase (or verb), it 
may or may not be structurally related to that 
noun phrase (or verb). (In our terms, it may at- 
tach to that noun phrase or it may attach some- 
where else). And finally, even if we get accu- 
rate attachment information, it may be that fre- 
230 
quency of cooccurrence is not a good indication of 
strength of attachment. We will proceed to build 
the model of lexical association strength, aware of 
these sources of noise. 
We want to use the verb-noun-preposition table 
to derive a table of bigrams, where the first term is 
a noun or verb, and the second term is an associ- 
ated preposition (or no preposition). To do this we 
need to try to assign each preposition that occurs 
either to the noun or to the verb that it occurs 
with. In some cases it is fairly certain that the 
preposition attaches to the noun or the verb; in 
other cases, it is far less certain. Our approach is 
to assign the clear cases first, then to use these to 
decide the unclear cases that can be decided, and 
finally to arbitrarily assign the remaining cases. 
The procedure for assigning prepositions in our 
sample to noun or verb is as follows: 
1. No Preposition - if there is no preposition, the 
noun or verb is simply counted with the null 
preposition. (cases (c-h) in Table 1). 
2. Sure Verb Attach 1 - preposition is attached 
to the verb if the noun phrase head is a pro- 
noun. (i in Table 1) 
3. Sure Verb Attach 2 - preposition is attached 
to the verb if the verb is passivized (unless 
the preposition is by. The instances of by fol- 
lowing a passive verb were left unassigned.) 
(a in Table 1) 
4. Sure Noun Attach - preposition is attached to 
the noun, if the noun phrase occurs in a con- 
text where no verb could license the preposi- 
tional phrase (i.e., the noun phrase is in sub- 
ject or pre-verbal position.) (b, if pre-verbal) 
5. Ambiguous Attach 1 - Using the table of at- 
tachment so far, if a t-score for the ambiguity 
(see below) is greater than 2.1 or less than 
-2.1, then assign the preposition according to 
the t-score. Iterate through the ambiguous 
triples until all such attachments are done. (j 
and k may be assigned) 
6. Ambiguous Attach 2 - for the remaining am- 
biguous triples, split the attachment between 
the noun and the verb, assigning .5 to the 
noun and .5 to the verb. (j and k may be 
assigned) 
7. Unsure Attach - for the remaining pairs (all 
of which are either attached to the preceding 
noun or to some unknown element), assign 
them to the noun. (b, if following a verb) 
This procedure gives us a table of bigrams rep- 
resenting our guess about what prepositions asso- 
ciate with what nouns or verbs, made on the basis 
of the distribution of verbs nouns and prepositions 
in our corpus. 
The procedure  fo r  guess ing  a t tach-  
ment  
Given the table of bigrams, derived as described 
above, we can define a simple procedure for de- 
termining the attachment for an instance of verb- 
noun-preposition ambiguity. Consider the exam- 
ple of sentence (2), where we have to choose the 
attachment given verb send, noun soldier, and 
preposition into. 
(2) Moscow sent more than 100,000 sol- 
diers into Afganistan . . .  
The idea is to contrast the probability with 
which into occurs with the noun soldier (P(into 
\[ soldier)) with the probability with which into 
occurs with the verb send (P(into \[ send)). A t- 
score is an appropriate way to make this contrast 
(see Church et al to appear). In general, we want 
to calculate the contrast between the conditional 
probability of seeing a particular preposition given 
a noun with the conditional probability of seeing 
that preposition given a verb. 
P(prep \[ noun) - P(prep \[ verb) 
t=  
~/a2(P(prep I noun)) + ~2(e(prep I verb)) 
We use the "Expected Likelihood Estimate" 
(Church et al, to appear) to estimate the prob- 
abilities, in order to adjust for small frequencies; 
that is, given a noun and verb, we simply add 1/2 
to all bigram frequency counts involving a prepo- 
sition that occurs with either the noun or the verb, 
and then recompute the unigram frequencies. This 
method leaves the order of t-scores nearly intact, 
though their magnitude is inflated by about 30%. 
To compensate for this, the 1.65 threshold for sig- 
nificance at the 95% level should be adjusted up 
to about 2.15. 
Consider how we determine attachment for sen- 
tence (2). We use a t-score derived from the ad- 
justed frequencies in our corpus to decide whether 
the prepositional phrase into Afganistan is at- 
tached to the verb (root) send/V or to the noun 
(root) soldier/N. In our corpus, soldier/N has an 
adjusted frequency of 1488.5, and send/V has an 
adjusted frequency of 1706.5; soldier/N occurred 
in 32 distinct preposition contexts, and send/Via 
231 
60 distinct preposition contexts; f(send/V into) = 
84, f(soidier/N into) = 1.5. 
From this we calculate the t-score as follows: 1 
t -  
P(wlsoldier/ N ) - P(wlsend/ V) 
~/a2(P(wlsoidier/N)) + c~2(P(wlsend/ V)) 
l(soldier/N into)+ll2 .f(send/V into)+l/2 
f(soidierlN)+V/2 - -  /(send/V)+V/2 
\ / / ( ,o ld ie r /N  into)+l/2 /(send/V into)+l\[2 (f(soldierlN)+V/2)2 + (/(send/V)+V/2)~ 
1.s+1/2 84+1/2 
-.. 1488.5+70/2 -  1706.5-t-70/2 ~, - -8 .81  
1.5+i/2 84+i/2 
1488.5+70/2p -I- 1706.s+70/2)2 
This figure of-8.81 represents a significant asso- 
ciation of the preposition into with the verb send, 
and on this basis, the procedure would (correctly) 
decide that into should attach to send rather than 
to soldier. Of the 84 send/V into bigrams, 10 were 
assigned by steps 2 and 3 ('sure attachements'). 
Test ing At tachment  Prefer- 
ence 
To evaluate the performance of this procedure, 
first the two authors graded a set of verb-noun- 
preposition triples as follows. From the AP new 
stories, we randomly selected 1000 test sentences 
in which the parser identified an ambiguous verb- 
noun-preposition triple. (These sentences were se- 
lected from stories included in the 13 million word 
sample, but the particular sentences were excluded 
from the calculation of lexical associations.) For 
every such tr iple,  each author made a judgement 
of the correct attachment on the basis of the three 
words alone (forced choice - preposition attaches 
to noun or verb). This task is in essence the one 
that we will give the computer - i.e., to judge the 
attachment without any more information than 
the preposition and the head of the two possible 
attachment sites, the noun and the verb. This 
gave us two sets of judgements to compare the al- 
gorithm's performance to. 
a V is the number of distinct preposition contexts for 
either soldier/N or send/V; in this c~se V = 70. Since 
70 bigram frequencies f(soldier/N p) are incremented by 
1/2, the unigram frequency for soldier/N is incremented 
by 70/2. 
J udg ing  cor rect  a t tachment  
We also wanted a standard of correctness for these 
test sentences. To derive this standard, we to- 
gether judged the attachment for the 1000 triples 
a second time, this time using the full sentence 
context. 
It turned out to be a surprisingly difficult task 
to assign attachment preferences for the test sam- 
ple. Of course, many decisions were straightfor- 
ward; sometimes it is clear that a prepositional 
phrase is and argument of a noun or verb. But 
more than 10% of the sentences seemed problem- 
atic to at least one author. There are several kinds 
of constructions where the attachment decision is 
not clear theoretically. These include idioms (3-4), 
light verb constructions (5), small clauses (6). 
(3) But over t ime, misery has given way 
to mending. 
(4) The meeting will take place in Quan- 
rico 
(5) Bush has said he would not make cuts 
in Social Security 
(6) Sides said Francke kept a .38-caliber 
revolver in his car 's  glove compartment 
We chose always to assign light verb construc- 
tions to noun attachment and small clauses to verb 
attachment. 
Another source of difficulty arose from cases 
where there seemed to be a systematic ambiguity 
in attachment. 
(7) . . .known to frequent he same bars 
in one neighborhood. 
(8) Inaugural officials reportedly were 
trying to arrange a reunion for Bush and 
his old submarine buddies . . .  
(9) We have not signed a settlement 
agreement with them 
Sentence (7) shows a systematic locative am- 
biguity: if you frequent a bar and the bar is in 
a place, the frequenting event is arguably in the 
same place. Sentence (8) shows a systematic bene- 
factive ambiguity: if you arrange something for 
someone, then the thing arranged is also for them. 
The ambiguity in (9) arises from the fact that if 
someone is one of the joint agents in the signing of 
an agreement, hat person is likely to be a party 
to the agreement. In general, we call an attach- 
ment systematically ambiguous when, given our 
understanding of the semantics, situations which 
232 
make the interpretation ofone of the attachments 
true always (or at least usually) also validate the 
interpretation of the other attachment. 
It seems to us that this difficulty in assigning 
attachment decisions is an important fact that de- 
serves further exploration. If it is difficult to de- 
cide what licenses a prepositional phrase a signif- 
icant proportion of the time, then we need to de- 
velop language models that appropriately capture 
this vagueness. For our present purpose, we de- 
cided to force an attachment choice in all cases, in 
some cases making the choice on the bases of an 
unanalyzed intuition. 
In addition to the problematic ases, a sig- 
nificant number (120) of the 1000 triples identi- 
fied automatically as instances of the verb-object- 
preposition configuration turned out in fact to 
be other constructions. These misidentifications 
were mostly due to parsing errors, and in part 
due to our underspecifying for the parser exactly 
what configuration to identify. Examples of these 
misidentifications include: identifying the subject 
of the complement clause of say as its object, 
as in (10), which was identified as (say minis- 
ters from); misparsing two constituents as a single 
object noun phrase, as in (11), which was identi- 
fied as (make subject o); and counting non-object 
noun phrases as the object as in (12), identified as 
(get hell out_oJ). 
(10) Ortega also said deputy foreign min- 
isters from the five governments would 
meet Tuesday in Managua . . . .  
(11) Congress made a deliberate choice 
to make this commission subject to the 
open meeting requirements . . .  
(12) Student Union, get the hell out of 
China! 
Of course these errors are folded into the calcu- 
lation of associations. No doubt our bigram model 
would be better if we could eliminate these items, 
but many of them represent parsing errors that 
cannot readily be identified by the parser, so we 
proceed with these errors included in the bigrams. 
After agreeing on the 'correct' attachment for 
the sample of 1000 triples, we are left with 880 
verb-noun-preposition triples (having discarded 
the 120 parsing errors). Of these, 586 are noun 
attachments and 294 verb attachments. 
Evaluating performance 
First, consider how the simple structural attach- 
ment preference schemas perform at predicting the 
Judge 1 
I i i i i  4.9 i
LA 557 323 85.4 65.9 78.3 
Table 2: Performance on the test sentences for 2 
human judges and the lexical association proce- 
dure (LA). 
outcome in our test set. Right Association, which 
predicts noun attachment, does better, since in 
our sample there are more noun attachments, but 
it still has an error rate of 33%. Minimal Attach. 
meat, interpreted to mean verb attachment, has 
the complementary error rate of 67%. Obviously, 
neither of these procedures i particularly impres- 
sive. 
Now consider the performance of our attach- 
ment procedure for the 880 standard test sen- 
tences. Table 2 shows the performance for the 
two human judges and for the lexical association 
attachment procedure. 
First, we note that the task of judging attach- 
ment on the basis of verb, noun and preposition 
alone is not easy. The human judges had overall 
error rates of 10-15%. (Of course this is consid- 
erably better than always choosing noun attach- 
ment.) The lexical association procedure based 
on t-scores is somewhat worse than the human 
judges, with an error rate of 22%, but this also 
is an improvement over simply choosing the near- 
est attachment site. 
If we restrict the lexical association procedure 
to choose attachment only in cases where its con- 
fidence is greater than about 95% (i.e., where t is 
greater than 2.1), we get attachment judgements 
on 607 of the 880 test sentences, with an overall 
error rate of 15% (Table 3). On these same sen- 
tences, the human judges also showed slight im- 
provement. 
Underlying Relations 
Our model takes frequency of cooccurrence as ev- 
idence of an underlying relationship, but makes 
no attempt o determine what sort of relationship 
is involved. It is interesting to see what kinds 
of relationships the model is identifying. To in- 
vestigate this we categorized the 880 triples ac- 
233 
\[ choice I % correct \] 
N V N V total 
Judge 1 ~ 
Judge 2 
LA 
Table 3: Performance on the test sentences for 2 
human judges and the lexical association proce- 
dure (LA) for test triples where t > 2.1 
cording to the nature of the relationship underly- 
ing the attachment. In many cases, the decision 
was difficult. Even the argument/adjunct distinc- 
tion showed many gray cases between clear partici- 
pants in an action (arguments) and clear temporal 
modifiers (adjuncts). We made rough best guesses 
to partition the cases into the following categories: 
argument, adjunct, idiom, small clause, locative 
ambiguity, systematic ambiguity, light verb. With 
this set of categories, 84 of the 880 cases remained 
so problematic that we assigned them to category 
other. 
Table 4 shows the performance ofthe lexical at- 
tachment procedure for these classes of relations. 
Even granting the roughness of the categorization, 
some clear patterns emerge. Our approach isquite 
successful at attaching arguments correctly; this 
represents some confirmation that the associations 
derived from the AP sample are indeed the kind 
of associations previous research as suggested are 
relevant o determining attachment. The proce- 
dure does better on arguments han on adjuncts, 
and in fact performs rather poorly on adjuncts of 
verbs (chiefly time and manner phrases). The re- 
maining cases are all hard in some way, and the 
performance t nds to be worse on these cases, 
showing clearly for a more elaborated model. 
Sense Conflations 
The initial steps of our procedure constructed a 
table of frequencies with entries f(z,p), where z is 
a noun or verb root string, and p is a preposition 
string. These primitives might be too coarse, in 
that they do not distinguish different senses of a 
preposition, noun, or verb. For instance, the tem- 
porM use of in in the phrase in December is identi- 
fied with a locative use in Teheran. As a result, the 
procedure LA necessarily makes the same attach- 
relation }count \] %correct 
argument noun 375 88.5 
argument verb 103 86.4 
adjunct noun 91 72.5 
adjunct verb 101 61.3 
light verb 19 63.1 
small clause 13 84.6 
idiom 20 65.0 
locative ambiguity 37 75.7 
systematic ambiguity 37 64.8 
other 84 61.9 
Table 4: Performance of the Lexical attachment 
procedure by underlying relationship 
ment prediction for in December and in Teheran 
occurring in the same context. For instance, LA 
identifies the tuple reopen embassy in as an NP at- 
tachment ( -score 5.02). This is certainly incorrect 
for (13), though not for (14). 2 
(13) Britain reopened the embassy in De- 
cember 
(14) Britain reopened its embassy in 
Teheran 
Similarly, the scalar sense of drop exemplified in 
(15) sponsors a preposition to, while the sense rep- 
resented in drop the idea does not. Identifying the 
two senses may be the reason that LA makes no 
attachment choice for drop resistance to (derived 
from (16)), where the score is -0.18. 
(15) exports are expected to drop a fur- 
ther 1.5 percent o 810,000 
(16) persuade Israeli leaders to drop their 
resistance to talks with the PLO 
We experimented with the first problem by sub- 
stituting an abstract preposition in ,MONTH for 
all occurrences of in with a month name as an ob- 
ject. While the tuple reopen embassy in~oMONTH 
was correctly pushed in the direction of a verb at- 
tachment (-1.34), in other cases errors were intro- 
duced, and there was no compelling eneral im- 
provement in performance. In tuples of the form 
drop/grow/increase p rcent inJ~MONTH , derived 
from examples uch as (16), the preposition was 
incorrectly attached to the noun percent. 
2(13) is a phrase from our corpus, while (14) is a con- 
structed example. 
234 
(16) Output at mines and oil wells 
dropped 1.8 percent in February 
(17) ,1.8 percent was dropped by output 
at mines and oil wells 
We suspect hat this reveals a problem with our 
estimation procedure, not for instance a paucity 
of data. Part of the problem may be the fact that 
adverbial noun phrase headed by percent in (16) 
does not passivize or pronominalize, so that there 
are no sure verb attachment cases directly corre- 
sponding to these uses of scalar motion verbs. 
Comparison with a Dictionary 
The idea that lexical preference is a key factor 
in resolving structural ambiguity leads us natu- 
rally to ask whether existing dictionaries can pro- 
vide useful information for disambiguation. There 
are reasons to anticipate difficulties in this re- 
gard. Typically, dictionaries have concentrated 
on the 'interesting' phenomena ofEnglish, tending 
to ignore mundane lexical associations. However, 
the Collins Cobuild English Language Dictionary 
(Sinclair et al 1987) seems particularly appro- 
priate for comparing with the AP sample for sev- 
eral reasons: it was compiled on the basis of a 
large text corpus, and thus may be less subject 
to idiosyncrasy than more arbitrarily constructed 
works; and it provides, in a separate field, a di- 
rect indication of prepositions typically associated 
with many nouns and verbs. Nevertheless, even 
for Cobuild, we expect o find more concentration 
on, for example, idioms and closely bound argu- 
ments, and less attention to the adjunct relations 
which play a significant role in determining attach- 
ment preferences. 
From a machine-readable version of the dictio- 
nary, we extracted a list of 1535 nouns associated 
with a particular preposition, and of 1193 verbs 
associated with a particular preposition after an 
object noun phrase. These 2728 associations are 
many fewer than the number of associations found 
in the AP sample. (see Table 5.) 
Of course, most of the preposition association 
pairs from the AP sample end up being non- 
significant; of the 88,860 pairs, fewer than half 
(40,869) occur with a frequency greater than 1, 
and only 8337 have a t-score greater than 1.65. So 
our sample gives about three times as many sig- 
nificant preposition associations as the COBUILD 
dictionary. Note however, as Table 5 shows, the 
overlap is remarkably good, considering the large 
space of possible bigrams. (In our bigram table 
Source \[ 
COBUILD 
AP sample 
AP sample ( f  > 1) 
AP sample 
(t > 1.65) 
Total I NOUN I VERB 
2728 
88,860 
40,869 
8,337 
COBUILD n AP 1,931 
COBUILD N AP 1,040 
(t > 1.65) 
1535 1193 
64,629 24,231 
31,241 9,628 
6,307 2,030 
1,147 784 
656 384 
Table 5: Count of noun and verb associations for 
COBUILD and the AP sample 
there are over 20,000 nouns, over 5000 verbs, and 
over 90 prepositions.) On the other hand, the 
lack of overlap for so many cases - assuming that 
the dictionary and the significant bigrams actually 
record important preposition associations - indi- 
cates that 1) our sample is too small, and 2) the 
dictionary coverage is widely scattered. 
First, we note that the dictionary chooses at- 
tachments in 182 cases of the 880 test sentences. 
Seven of these are cases where the dictionary finds 
an association between the preposition and both 
the noun and the verb. In these cases, of course, 
the dictionary provides no information to help in 
choosing the correct attachment. 
Looking at the 175 cases where the dictionary 
finds one and only one association for the preposi- 
tion, we can ask how well it does in predicting the 
correct attachment. Here the results are no better 
than our human judges or than our bigram proce- 
dure. Of the 175 cases, in 25 cases the dictionary 
finds a verb association when the correct associa- 
tion is with the noun. In 3 cases, the dictionary 
finds a noun association when the correct associa- 
tion is with the verb. Thus, overall, the dictionary 
is 86% correct. 
It is somewhat unfair to use a dictionary as a 
source of disambiguation i formation; there is no 
reason to expect that a dictionary to provide in- 
formation on all significant associations; it may 
record only associations that are interesting for 
some reason (perhaps because they are semanti- 
cally unpredictable.) Table 6 shows a small sample 
of verb-preposition associations from the AP sam- 
235 
AP sample COBUILD 
approach 
appropriate 
approve 
approximate 
arbitrate 
argue 
arm 
arraign 
arrange 
array 
arrest 
arrogate 
ascribe 
ask 
assassinate 
assemble 
assert 
assign 
assist 
associate 
about (4.1) 
with (2.4) 
for (2.5) 
with (2.5) 
as(3.2) 
in (2.4) 
on (4.1) 
through (5.9) 
after (3.4) 
along_with (6.1) 
during (3.1) 
on (2.8) 
while (3.9) 
about (4.3) 
in (2.4) 
at (3.8) 
over (5.8) 
to (5.1) 
in (2.4) 
with (6.4) 
for 
to 
between 
with 
with 
on 
for 
in 
for 
to 
to 
about 
to 
in 
with 
with 
Table 6: Verb-(NP)-Preposition associations in 
AP sample and COBUILD. 
pie and from Cobuild. The overlap is considerable, 
but each source of information provides intuitively 
important associations that are missing from the 
other. 
Conclusion 
Our attempt to use lexical associations derived 
from distribution of lexical items in text shows 
promising results. Despite the errors in parsing 
introduced by automatically analyzing text, we 
are able to extract a good list of associations with 
prepositions, overlapping significantly with an ex- 
isting dictionary. This information could easily be 
incorporated into an automatic parser, and addi- 
tional sorts of lexical associations could similarly 
be derived from text. The particular approach to 
deciding attachment by t-score gives results nearly 
as good as human judges given the same infor- 
mation. Thus, we conclude that it may not be 
necessary to resort to a complete semantics or to 
discourse models to resolve many pernicious cases 
of attachment ambiguity. 
It is clear however, that the simple model of at- 
tachment preference that we have proposed, based 
only on the verb, noun and preposition, is too 
weak to make correct attachments in many cases. 
We need to explore ways to enter more complex 
calculations into the procedure. 
References 
Altmman, Gerry, and Mark Steedman. 1988. Interac- 
tion with context during human sentence process- 
ing. Cognition, 30, 191-238. 
Church, Kenneth W. 1988. A stochastic parts program 
and noun phrase parser for unrestricted text, 
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied 
Natural Language Processing, Austin, Texas. 
Church, Kenneth W., William A. Gale, Patrick Hanks, 
and Donald Hindle. (to appear). Using statistics 
in lexical analysis, in Zernik (ed.) Lexical acqui- 
sition: using on-line resources to build a lexicon. 
Ford, Marilyn, Joan Bresnan and Ronald M. Kaplan. 
1982. A competence based theory of syntactic lo- 
sure, in Bresnan, J. (ed.) The Mental Represen. 
tation o.f Grammatical Relations. MIT Press. 
Frazier, L. 1978. On comprehending sentences: Syn- 
tactic parsing strategies. PhD. dissertation, Uni- 
versity of Connecticut. 
Hindle, Donald. 1983. User manual for fidditch, a 
deterministic parser. Naval Research Laboratory 
Technical Memorandum 7590-142. 
Kimball, J. 1973. Seven principles of surface structure 
parsing in natural anguage, Cognition, 2, 15-47. 
Marcus, Mitchell P. 1980. A theory of syntactic recog- 
nition for natural anguage. MIT Press. 
Sinclair, J., P. Hanks, G. Fox, R. Moon, P. Stock, et 
al. 1987. Collins Cobuild English Language Dic- 
tionary. Collins, London and Glasgow. 
Taraban, Roman and James L. McClelland. 1988. 
Constituent attachment and thematic role as- 
signment in sentence processing: influences of 
content-based xpectations, Journal of Memory 
and Language, 27, 597-632. 
Whittemore, Greg, Kathleen Ferrara and Hans Brun- 
net. 1990. Empirical study of predictive powers 
of simple attachment schemes for post-modifier 
prepositional phrases. Proceedings of the ~8th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 23-30. 
236 
