Two Languages Are More Informative Than One * 
Ido Dagan 
Computer Science Department 
Technion, Haifa, Israel 
and 
IBM Scientific Center 
Haifa, Israel 
dagan@cs.technion.ac.il 
Alon Itai 
Computer Science Department 
Technion, Haifa, Israel 
itai~cs.technion.ac.il 
Ulrike Schwall 
IBM Scientific Center 
Inst i tute for Knowledge 
Based Systems 
Heidelberg, Germany 
schwall@dhdibml 
Abst rac t  
This paper presents a new approach for resolving lex- 
ical ambiguities inone language using statistical data 
on lexical relations in another language. This ap- 
proach exploits the differences between mappings of 
words to senses in different languages. We concen- 
trate on the problem of target word selection in ma- 
chine translation, for which the approach is directly 
applicable, and employ astatistical model for the se- 
lection mechanism. The model was evaluated using 
two sets of Hebrew and German examples and was 
found to be very useful for disambiguation. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The resolution of hxical ambiguities innon-restricted 
text is one of the most difficult asks of natural lan- 
guage processing. A related task in machine trans- 
lation is target word selection - the task of deciding 
which target language word is the most appropriate 
equivalent of a source language word in context. In 
addition to the alternatives introduced from the dif- 
ferent word senses of the source language word, the 
target language may specify additional alternatives 
that differ mainly in their usages. 
Traditionally various linguistic levels were used 
to deal with this problem: syntactic, semantic and 
pragmatic. Computationally the syntactic methods 
are the easiest, but are of no avail in the frequent 
situation when the different senses of the word show 
*This research was partially supported by grant number 
120-741 of the Iarael Council for Research and Development 
the same syntactic behavior, having the same part of 
speech and even the same subcategorization frame. 
Substantial application of semantic or pragmatic 
knowledge about he word and its context for broad 
domains requires compiling huge amounts of knowl- 
edge, whose usefulness for practical applications has 
not yet been proven (Lenat et al, 1990; Nirenburg et 
al., 1988; Chodorow et al, 1985). Moreover, such 
methods fail to reflect word usages. 
It is known for many years that the use of a word in 
the language provides information about its meaning 
(Wittgenstein, 1953). Also, statistical approaches 
which were popular few decades ago have recently 
reawakened and were found useful for computational 
linguistics. Consequently, a possible (though partial) 
alternative tousing manually constructed knowledge 
can be found in the use of statistical data on the oc- 
currence of lexical relations in large corpora. The 
use of such relations (mainly relations between verbs 
or nouns and their arguments and modifiers) for var- 
ious purposes has received growing attention in re- 
cent research (Church and Hanks, 1990; Zernik and 
Jacobs, 1990; Hindle, 1990). More specifically, two 
recent works have suggested to use statistical data 
on lexical relations for resolving ambiguity cases of 
PP-attachment (Hindle and Rooth, 1990) and pro- 
noun references (Dagan and Itai, 1990a; Dagan and 
Itai, 1990b). 
Clearly, statistical methods can be useful also for 
target word selection. Consider, for example, the 
Hebrew sentence xtracted from the foreign news 
section of the daily Haaretz, September 1990 (tran- 
scripted to Latin letters). 
130 
(1) Nose ze maria' mi-shtei ha-mdinot mi-lahtom 'al 
hoze shalom. 
This sentence would translate into English as: 
(2) That issue prevented the two countries from 
signing a peace treaty. 
The verb 'lab_tom' has four word senses: 'sign', 
'seal', 'finish' and 'close'. Whereas the noun 'hose' 
means both 'contract' and 'treaty'. Here the differ- 
ence is not in the meaning, but in usage. 
One possible solution is to consult a Hebrew corpus 
tagged with word senses, from which we would prob- 
ably learn that the sense 'sign' of 'lahtom' appears 
more frequently with 'hoze' as its object than all the 
other senses. Thus we should prefer that sense. How- 
ever, the size of corpora required to identify lexical 
relations in a broad domain is huge (tens of millions 
of words) and therefore it is usually not feasible to 
have such corpora manually tagged with word senses. 
The problem of choosing between 'treaty' and 'con- 
tract' cannot be solved using only information on He- 
brew, because Hebrew does not distinguish between 
them. 
The solution suggested in this paper is to iden- 
tify the lexical relationships in corpora of the target 
language, instead of the source language. Consult- 
ing English corpora of 150 million words, yields the 
following statistics on single word frequencies: 'sign' 
appeared 28674 times, 'seal' 2771 times, 'finish' ap- 
peared 15595 times, 'close' 38291 times, 'treaty' 7331 
times and 'contract' 30757 times. Using a naive ap- 
proach of choosing the most frequent word yields 
(3) *That issue prevented the two countries from 
closing a peace contract. 
This may be improved upon if we use lexical rela- 
tions. We consider word combinations and count how 
often they appeared in the same syntactic relation 
as in the ambiguous sentence. For the above exam- 
ple, among the successfully parsed sentences of the 
corpus, the noun compound 'peace treaty' appeared 
49 times, whereas the compound 'peace contract' did 
not appear at all; 'to sign a treaty' appeared 79 times 
while none of the other three alternatives appeared 
more than twice. Thus we first prefer 'treaty' to 'con- 
tract' because of the noun compound 'peace treaty' 
and then proceed to prefer 'sign' since it appears 
most frequently having the object 'treaty' (the or- 
der of selection is explained in section 3). Thus in 
this case our method yielded the correct translation. 
Using this method, we take the point of view that 
some ambiguity problems are easier to solve at the 
level of the target language instead of the source 
language. The source language sentences are con- 
sidered as a noisy source for target language sen- 
tences, and our task is to devise a target language 
model that prefers the most reasonable translation. 
Machine translation (MT) is thus viewed in part 
as a recognition problem, and the statistical model 
we use specifically for target word selection may be 
compared with other language models in recognition 
tasks (e.g. Katz (1985) for speech recognition). 
In contrast o this view, previous approaches in MT 
typically resolved examples like (1) by stating various 
constraints in terms of the source language (Niren- 
burg, 1987). As explained before, such constraints 
cannot be acquired automatically and therefore are 
usually limited in their coverage. 
The experiment conducted to test the statistical 
model clearly shows that the statistics on lexical re- 
lations are very useful for disambiguation. Most no- 
table is the result for the set of examples for Hebrew 
to English translation, which was picked randomly 
from foreign news sections in Israeli press. For this 
set, the statistical model was applicable for 70% of 
the ambiguous words, and its selection was then cor- 
rect for 92% of the cases. 
These results for target word selection in machine 
translation suggest o use a similar mechanism even 
if we are interested only in word sense disambigua- 
tion within a single language! In order to select he 
right sense of a word, in a broad coverage applica- 
tion, it is useful to identify lexical relations between 
word senses. However, within corpora of a single lan- 
guage it is possible to identify automatically only re- 
lations at the word level, which are of course not use- 
ful for selecting word senses in that language. This 
is where other languages can supply the solution, ex- 
ploiting the fact that the mapping between words 
and word senses varies significantly among different 
languages. For instance, the English words 'sign' and 
'seal' correspond to a very large extent o two distinct 
senses of the Hebrew word 'lab_tom' (from example 
(1)). These senses hould be distinguished by most 
applications of Hebrew understanding programs. To 
make this distinction, it is possible to do the same 
process that is performed for target word selection, 
by producing all the English alternatives for the lex- 
ical relations involving 'lahtom'. Then the Hebrew 
sense which corresponds to the most plausible En- 
glish lexical relations is preferred. This process re- 
quires a bilingual lexicon which maps each Hebrew 
sense separately into its possible translations, imilar 
131 
to a Hebrew-Hebrew-English lexicon (like the Oxford 
English-English-Hebrew dictionary (Hornby et al, 
1980)). 
In some cases, different senses of a Hebrew word 
map to the same word also in English. In these cases, 
the lexical relations of each sense cannot be identi- 
fied in an English corpus, and a third language is 
required to distinguish among these senses. As a 
long term vision, one can imagine a multilingual cor- 
pora based system, which exploits the differences be- 
tween languages to automatically acquire knowledge 
about word senses. As explained above, this knowl- 
edge would be crucial for lexical disambiguation, and 
will also help to refine other types of knowledge ac- 
quired from large corpora 1 .
2 The Linguistic Model 
The ambiguity of a word is determined by the num- 
ber of distinct, non-equivalent representations into 
which the word can be mapped (Van Eynde et al, 
1982). In the case of machine translation the ambi- 
guity of a source word is thus given by the number 
of target representations for that word in the bilin- 
gual lexicon of the translation system. Given a spe- 
cific syntactic ontext he ambiguity can be reduced 
to the number of alternatives which may appear in 
that context. For instance, if a certain translation 
of a verb corresponds to an intransitive occurrence 
of that verb, then this possibility is eliminated when 
the verb occurs with a direct object. In this work 
we are interested only in those ambiguities that are 
left after applying all the deterministic syntactic on- 
straints. 
For example, consider the following Hebrew sen- 
tence, taken from the daily Haaretz, September 1990: 
(4) Diplomatim svurim ki hitztarrfuto shell Hon 
Sun magdila et ha.sikkuyim l-hassagat hitqad- 
dmut ba-sihot. 
Here, the ambiguous words in translation to En- 
glish are 'magdila', hitqaddmut' and 'sih_ot'. To fa- 
cilitate the reading, we give the translation of the 
sentence to English, and in each case of an ambiguous 
selection all the alternatives are listed within curly 
brackets, the first alternative being the correct one. 
1For inatanoe, Hindie (1990) indicates the need to dis- 
tlnguhsh among aeaases of polysemic words for his statistical 
c\]~Hic~tlon method. 
132 
(5) Diplomats believe that the joining of Hon 
Sun { increases I enlarges I magnifies } the 
chances for achieving { progress \[ advance I
advancement } in the { talks I conversations I 
calls }. 
We use the term a lezical relation to denote the 
cooccurrence r lation of two (or possibly more) spe- 
cific words in a sentence, having a certain syntac- 
tic relationship between them. Typical relations are 
between verbs and their subjects, objects, comple- 
ments, adverbs and modifying prepositional phrases. 
Similarly, nouns are related also with their objects, 
with their modifying nouns in compounds and with 
their modifying adjectives and prepositional phrases. 
The relational representation f a sentence is sim- 
ply the list of all lexical relations that occur in the 
sentence. For our purpose, the relational represen- 
tation contains only those relations that involve at 
least one ambiguous word. The relational represen- 
tation for example (4) is given in (6) (for readability 
we represent the Hebrew word by its English equiv- 
alent, prefixed by 'H' to denote the fact that it is a 
Hebrew word): 
(6) a. (subj-verb: H-joining H-increase) 
b. (verb-obj: H-increase H-chance) 
c. (verb-obj: H-achieve H-progress) 
d. (noun-pp: H-progress H-in H-talks) 
The relational representation f a source sentence 
is reflected also in its translation to a target sen- 
tence. In some cases the relational representation f 
the target sentence is completely equivalent to that 
of the source sentence, and can be achieved just by 
substituting the source words with target words. In 
other cases, the mapping between source and target 
relations is more complicated, as is the case for the 
following German example: 
(7) Der Tisch gefaellt mir. - -  I like the table. 
Here, the original subject of the source sentence 
becomes the object in the target sentence. This kind 
of mapping usually influences the translation process 
and is therefore ncoded in components of the trans- 
lation program, either explicitly or implicitly, espe- 
cially in transfer based systems. Our model assumes 
that such a mapping of source language relations to 
target language relations is possible, an assumption 
that is valid for many practical cases. 
When applying the mapping of relations on one 
lexicai relation of the source sentence we get several 
alternatives for a target relation. For instance, ap- 
plying the mapping to example (6-c) we get three 
alternatives for the relation in the target sentence: 
(8) (verb-obj: achieve progress) 
(verb-obj: achieve advance) 
(verb-obj: achieve advancement) 
For example (6-d) we get 9 alternatives, since 
both 'H-progress' and 'H-talks' have three alterna- 
tive translations. 
In order to decide which alternative is the most 
probable, we count the frequencies of all the alter- 
native target relations in very large corpora. For ex- 
ample (8) we got the counts 20, 5 and 1 respectively. 
Similarly, the target relation 'to increase chance' was 
counted 20 times, while the other alternatives were 
not observed at all. These counts are given as input 
to the statistical model described in the next section, 
which performs the actual target word selection. 
3 The Statist ical  Model  
Our selection algorithm is based on the following sta- 
tistical model. Consider first a single relation. The 
linguistic model provides us with several alternatives 
as in example (8). We assume that each alternative 
has a theoretical probability Pi to be appropriate for 
this case. We wish to select he alternative for which 
Pi is maximal, provided that it is significantly larger 
than the others. 
We have decided to measure this significance by 
the odds ratio of the two most probable alternatives 
P = Pl/P2. However, we do not know the theoretical 
probabilities, therefore we get a bound for p using 
the frequencies of the alternatives in the corpus. 
Let/3 i be the probabilities as observed in the cor- 
pus (101 = ni/n, where ni is the number of times that 
alternative i appeared in the corpus and n is the to- 
tal number of times that all the alternatives for the 
relation appeared in the corpus). 
For mathematical convenience we bound In p in- 
stead of p. Assuming that samples of the alternative 
relations are distributed normally, we get the follow- 
ing bound with confidence 1- a: 
where Z is the eonfidenee coefficient. We approxi- 
mate the variance by the delta method (e.g. John- 
son and Wichern (1982)): 
= ,n 
_ 1 p~(1 - p~) -) 1 p~(1 - p~) + 2 P*P~ 
p~ n p~ n npxI~ 
1 1 1 1 1 1 = + ~, + =~+~.  
npa nI~ n~x n~ nl n2 
Therefore we get that with probability at least 
1--or, 
In _> In - Z l -a  + 
We denote the right hand side (the bound) by 
B~,(nl, n2). 
In sentences with several relations, we consider the 
best two alternatives for each relation, and take the 
relation for which B,, is largest. If this Ba is less than 
a specified threshold then we do not choose between 
the alternatives. Otherwise, we choose the most fre- 
quent alternative to this relation and select the tar- 
get words appearing in this alternative. We then 
eliminate all the other alternative translations for the 
selected words, and accordingly eliminate all the al- 
ternatives for the remaining relations which involve 
these translations. In addition we update the ob- 
served probabilities for the remaining relations, and 
consequently the remaining Ba's. This procedure is
repeated until all target words have been determined 
or the maximal Ba is below the threshold. 
The actual parameters we have used so far were 
c~ = 0.05 and the bound for Bawas -0.5. 
To illustrate the selection algorithm, we give the 
details for example (6). The highest bound for the 
odds ratio (Ba = 1.36) was received for the relation 
'increase-chance', thus selecting the translation 'in- 
crease' for 'H-increase'. The second was Ba = 0.96, 
133 
for 'achieve-progress'. This selected the transla- 
tions 'achieve' and 'progress', while eliminating the 
other senses of 'H-progress' in the remaining rela- 
tions. Then, for the relation 'progress-in-talks' we 
got Ba = 0.3, thus selecting the appropriate transla- 
tion for 'H-talks'. 
4 The Exper iment  
An experiment was conducted to test the perfor- 
mance of the statistical model in translation from 
Hebrew and German to English. Two sets of para- 
graphs were extracted randomly from current He- 
brew and German press. The Hebrew set con- 
tained 10 paragraphs taken from foreign news sec- 
tions, while the German set contained 12 paragraphs 
of text not restricted to a specific topic. 
Within these paragraphs we have (manually) iden- 
tified the target word selection ambiguities, using a 
bilingual dictionary. Some of the alternative transla- 
tions in the dictionary were omitted if it was judged 
that they will not be considered by an actual compo- 
nent of a machine translation program. These cases 
included very rare or archaic translations (that would 
not be contained in an MT lexicon) and alternatives 
that could be eliminated using syntactic knowledge 
(as explained in section 2) 2 . For each of the remain- 
ing alternatives, it was judged if it can serve as an 
acceptable translation in the given context. This a 
priori judgment was used later to decide whether the 
selection of the automatic procedure is correct. As a 
result of this process, the Hebrew set contained 105 
ambiguous words (which had at least one unaccept- 
able translation) and the German set 54 ambiguous 
words. 
Now it was necessary to identify the lexical rela- 
tions within each of the sentences. As explained be- 
fore, this should be done using a source language 
parser, and then mapping the source relations to 
the target relations. At this stage of the research, 
we still do not have the necessary resources to per- 
form the entire process automatically s, therefore we 
have approximated it by translating the sentences 
into English and extracting the lexical relations us- 
ing the English Slot Grammar (ESG) parser (mc- 
2Due to some technicalities, we have also restricted the 
experiment to cases in which all the relevant ranslations of 
a word consists exactly one English word, which is the most  
frequent situaticm. 
awe are currently integrating this process within GSG 
(German Slot Gr~nmm') and LMT-GE (the Germs~a toEn- 
glish MT prototype). 
Cord, 1989) 4. Using this parser we have classified 
the lexical relations to rather general classes of syn- 
tactic relations, based on the slot structure of ESG. 
The important syntactic relations used were between 
a verb and its arguments and modifiers (counting as 
one class all objects, indirect objects, complements 
and nouns in modifying prepositional phrases) and 
between a noun and its arguments and modifiers 
(counting as one class all noun objects, modifying 
nouns in compounds and nouns in modifying prepo- 
sitional phrases). The success of using this general 
level of syntactic relations indicates that even a rough 
mapping of source to target language relations would 
be useful for the statistical model. 
The statistics for the alternative English relations 
in each sentence were extracted from three cor- 
pora: The Washington Post articles (about 40 mil- 
lion words), Associated Press news wire (24 million) 
and the Hansard corpus of the proceedings of the 
Canadian Parliament (85 million words). The statis- 
tics were extracted only from sentences of up to 25 
words (to facilitate parsing) which contained alto- 
gether about 55 million words. The lexical relations 
in the corpora were extracted by ESG, in the same 
way they were extracted for the English version of the 
example sentences ( ee Dagan and Itai (1990a) for a 
discussion on using an automatic parser for extract- 
ing lexical relations from a corpus, and for the tech- 
nique of acquiring the statistics). The parser failed 
to produce any parse for about 35% of the sentences, 
which further reduced the actual size of the corpora 
which was used. 
5 Evaluation 
Two measurements, applicability and precision, are 
used to evaluate the performance of the statistical 
model. The applicability denotes the proportion of 
cases for which the model performed a selection, i.e. 
those cases for which the bound Bapassed the thresh- 
old. The precision denotes the proportion of cases for 
which the model performed a correct selection out of 
all the applicable cases. 
We compare the precision of the model to that 
of the "word frequencies" procedure, which always 
selects the most frequent arget word. This naive 
"straw-man" is less sophisticated than other meth- 
ods suggested in the literature but it is useful as a 
common benchmark (e.g. Sadler (1989)) since it can 
4The parsing process was controlled manually to make sure 
that we do not get wrong relational representation f the exo 
amp\]es due to parsing errors. 
134 
be easily implemented. The success rate of the "word 
frequencies" procedure can serve as a measure for the 
degree of lexical ambiguity in a given set of examples, 
and thus different methods can be partly compared 
by their degree of success relative to this procedure. 
Out of the 105 ambiguous Hebrew words, for 32 
the bound Badid not pass the threshold (applicabil- 
ity of 70%). The remaining 73 examples were dis- 
tributed according to the following table: 
\[ Hebrew-Engiish \]\] Word Frequencies 
correct I incorrect I 
Relations Statistics \[ correct 
Thus the precision of the statistical model was 92% 
(67/73) 5while relying just on word frequencies yields 
64% (47/73). 
Out of the 54 ambiguous German words, for 22 the 
bound Badid not pass the threshold (applicability of 
59%). The remaining 32 examples were distributed 
according to the following table: 
Oerm  English II Word  equeoci  I
,, correct \] incorrect 
Relations Statistics \[ correct 8 in??rre ' \[\[ I 0 I 
Thus the precision of the statistical model was 75% 
(24/32), while relying just on word frequencies yields 
53% (18/32). We attribute the lower success rate for 
the German examples to the fact that they were not 
restricted to topics that are well represented in the 
corpus. 
Statistical nalysis for the larger set of Hebrew ex- 
amples hows that with 95% confidence our method 
succeeds in at least 86% of the applicable xamples 
(using the parameters of the distribution of propor- 
tions). With the same confidence, our method im- 
proves the word frequency method by at least 18% 
(using confidence interval for the difference of pro- 
portions in multinomial distribution, where the four 
cells of the multinomial correspond to the four entries 
in the result table). 
In the examples that were treated correctly by our 
5An a posteriorl observation showed that in three of the 
six errors the selection of the model was actually acceptable, 
and the a priori judgment of the hnman translator was too se- 
vere. For example, in one of these cases the statistics elected 
the expression 'to begin talks' while the human translator re- 
garded this expression as incorrect and selected 'to start talks'. 
If we consider these cases as correct then there are only three 
selection errors, getting a 96% precision. 
method, such as the examples in the previous ec- 
tions, the statistics ucceeded to capture two major 
types of disambiguating data. In preferring 'sign- 
treaty' upon 'seal-treaty', the statistics reflect the 
relevant semantic onstraint. In preferring 'peace- 
treaty' upon 'peace-contract', the statistics reflect 
the hxical usage of 'treaty' in English which differs 
from the usage of 'h_oze' in Hebrew. 
6 Failures and Possible Im- 
provements 
A detailed analysis of the failures of the method is 
most important, as it both suggests possible improve- 
ments for the model and indicates its limitations. 
As described above, these failures include either the 
cases for which the method was not applicable (no 
selection) or the cases in which it made an incorrect 
selection. The following paragraphs list the various 
reasons for both types. 
6.1 Inapplicability 
Insufficient data. This was the reason for nearly 
all the cases of inapplicability. For instance, none of 
the alternative relations 'an investigator f corrup- 
tion' (the correct one) or 'researcher of corruption' 
(the incorrect one) was observed in the parsed cor- 
pus. In this case it is possible to perform the correct 
selection if we used only statistics about the cooc- 
currences of 'corruption' with either 'investigator' r 
'researcher', without looking for any syntactic rela- 
tion (as in Church and Hanks (1990)). The use of 
this statistic is a subject for further esearch, but our 
initial data suggests hat it can substantially increase 
the applicability of the statistical method with just 
a little decrease in its precision. 
Another way to deal with the lack of statistical 
data for the specific words in question is to use 
statistics about similar words. This is the basis for 
Sadler's Analogical Semantics (1989) which has not 
yet proved effective. His results may be improved if
more sophisticated techniques and larger corpora re 
used to establish similarity between words (such as 
in (Hindle, 1990)). 
Conflicting data. In very few cases two alterna- 
tives were supported equally by the statistical data, 
thus preventing a selection. In such cases, both alter- 
natives are valid at the independent level of the lexi- 
cal relation, but may be inappropriate for the specific 
context. For instance, the two alternatives of'to take 
135 
a job' or 'to take a position' appeared in one of the 
examples, but since the general context concerned 
with the position of a prime minister only the latter 
was appropriate. In order to resolve such examples 
it may be useful to consider also cooccurrences of
the ambiguous word with other words in the broader 
context. For instance, the word 'minister' seems to 
cooccur in the same context more frequently with 
'position' than with 'job'. 
In another example both alternatives were appro- 
priate also for the specific context. This happened 
with the German verb 'werfen', which may be trans- 
lated (among other options) as 'throw', 'cast' or 
'score'. In our example 'werfen' appeared in the con- 
text of 'to throw/cast light' and these two correct al- 
ternatives had equal frequencies in the corpus ('score' 
was successfully eliminated). In such situations any 
selection between the alternatives will be appropriate 
and therefore any algorithm that handles conflicting 
data will work properly. 
6.2 Incorrect Select ion 
Using the  inappropr ia te  re lat ion.  One of the ex- 
amples contained the Hebrew word 'matzav', which 
two of its possible translations are 'state' and 'po- 
sition'. The phrase which contained this word was: 
'to put an end to the {state I position} of war . . .  '. 
The ambiguous word is involved in two syntactic rela- 
tions, being a complement of 'put' and also modified 
by 'war'. The corresponding frequencies were: 
(9) verb-comp: put-position 320 
verb-comp: put-state 18 
noun-nob j: state-war 13 
noun-nob j: position-war 2 
The bound of the odds ration (Ba) for the first re- 
lation was higher than for the second, and therefore 
this relation determined the translation as 'position'. 
However, the correct ranslation should be 'state', as 
determined by the second relation. 
This example suggests that while ordering the in- 
volved relations (or using any other weighting mech- 
anism) it may be necessary to give different weights 
to the different ypes of syntactic relations. For in- 
stance, it seems reasonable that the object of a noun 
should receive greater weight in selecting the noun's 
sense than the verb for which this noun serves as a 
complement. 
Confus ing senses. In another example, the 
Hebrew word 'qatann', which two of its meanings 
are 'small' and 'young', modified the word 'sikkuy', 
which means 'prospect' or 'chance'. In this context, 
the correct sense is necessarily 'small'. However, the 
relation that was observed in the corpus was 'young 
prospect', relating to the human sense of 'prospect' 
which appeared in sport articles (a promising young 
person). This borrowed sense of 'prospect' is nec- 
essarily inappropriate, since in Hebrew it is repre- 
sented by the equivalent of 'hope' ('tiqva'), and not 
by 'sikkuy'. 
The reason for this problem is that after producing 
the possible target alernatives, our model ignores 
the source language input as it uses only a mono- 
lingual target corpus. This can be solved if we use 
an aligned bilingual corpus, as suggested by Sadler 
(1989) and Brown et al (1990). In such a cor- 
pus the occurrences of the relation 'young prospect' 
will be aligned to the corresponding occurrences of 
the Hebrew word 'tiqva', and will not be used when 
the Hebrew word 'sikkuy' is involved. Yet, it should 
be brought in mind that an aligned corpus is the re- 
sult of manual translation, which can be viewed as 
a manual tagging of the words with their equivalent 
senses in the other language. This resource is much 
more expensive and less available than the untagged 
monolingual corpus, while it seems to be necessary 
only for relatively rare situations. 
Lack o f  deep unders tand ing .  By their nature, 
statistical methods rely on large quantities of shallow 
information. Thus, they are doomed to fail when dis- 
ambiguation can rely only on deep understanding of
the text and no other surface cues are available. This 
happened in one of the Hebrew examples, where the 
two alternatives were either 'emigration law' or 'im- 
migration law' (the Hebrew word 'hagira' is used for 
both subsenses). While the context indicated that 
the first alternative is correct, the statistics preferred 
the second alternative. It seems that such cases are 
quiet rare, but only further evaluation will show the 
extent o which deep understanding is really needed. 
7 Conclus ions 
The method presented takes advantage of two lin- 
guistic phenomena: the different usage of words and 
word senses among different languages and the im- 
portance of lexical cooccurrences within syntactic re- 
lations. The experiment shows that these phenom- 
ena are indeed useful for practical disambiguation. 
We suggest hat the high precision received in the 
experiment relies on two characteristics of the am- 
136 
biguity phenomena, namely the sparseness and re- 
dundancy of the disambiguating data. By sparseness 
we mean that within the large space of alternative 
interpretations produced by ambiguous utterances, 
only a small portion is commonly used. Therefore 
the chance of an inappropriate interpretation to be 
observed in the corpus (in other contexts) is low. 
Redundancy relates to the fact that different infor- 
mants (such as different lexical relations or deep un- 
derstanding) tend to support rather than contradict 
one another, and therefore the chance of picking a 
"wrong" informant is low. 
The examination of the failures suggests that fu- 
ture research may improve both the applicability and 
precision of the model. Our next goal is to handle in- 
applicable cases by using cooccurrence data regard- 
less of syntactic relations and similarities between 
words. We expect hat increasing the applicability 
will lead to some decrease inprecision, similar to the 
tradeoff between recall and precision in information 
retrieval. Pursuing this tradeoff will improve the per- 
formance of the method and reveal its limitations. 
8 Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Mori Rimon, Peter Brown, 
Ayala Cohen, Ulrike Rackow, Herb Leass and Hans 
Karlgren for their help and comments. 
References 
\[1\] Brown, P., Cocks, J., Della Pietra, S., Della 
Pietra, V., Jelinek, F., Mercer, R.L. and Rossin 
P.S., A statistical approach to language transla- 
tion, Computational Linguistics, vol. 16(2), 79- 
85 (1990). 
\[2\] Chodorow, M. S., R. J. Byrd and G. E. Heidron, 
Extracting Semantic Hierarchies from a Large 
On-Line Dictionary. Proc. of the 23rd Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, 299-304 (1985). 
\[3\] Church, K. W., and Hanks, P., Word associa- 
tion norms, mutual information, and Lexicogra- 
phy, Computational Linguistics, vol. 16(1), 22- 
29 (1990). 
\[4\] Dagan, I. and A. Itai, Automatic Acquisition 
of Constraints for the Resolution of Anaphora 
References and Syntactic Ambiguities, COLING 
1990, Helsinki, Finland. 
\[5\] Dagan, I. and A. Itai, A Statistical Filter for 
Resolving Pronoun References, Proc. of the 7th 
Israeli Sym. on Artificial Intelligence and Com- 
puter Vision, 1990. 
\[6\] Hindle, D. Noun Classification from Predicate- 
Argument Structures, Proc. of the 28rd Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, (1990). 
\[7\] Hindle D. and M. Rooth, Structural Ambiguity 
and Lexical Relations, Proc. of the Speech and 
Natural Language Workshop, (DARPA), June 
1990. 
\[8\] Hornby, A. S., C. Ruse, J. A. Reif and Y. 
Levy, Ozford Student's Dictionanary for He- 
brew Speakers, Kernerman Publishing Ltd, Lon- 
nie Kahn & Co. Ltd. (1986). 
\[9\] Johnson, R. A. and D. W. Wichern, Multivariate 
Statistical Analysis, Prentice-Hall, 1982. 
\[10\] Katz, S., Recursive m-gram language model via 
a smoothing of Turing's formula, IBM Tech. Dis- 
closure Bull., 1985. 
\[11\] Lenat, D. B., R. V. Guha, K. Pittman, D. Pratt 
and M. Shepherd, Cyc: toward programs with 
common sense, Comm. ACM, vol. 33(8), 1990. 
\[12\] McCord, M. C., A new version of slot grammar, 
Research Report RC 1~506, IBM Research Di- 
vision, Yorktown Heights, NY, 1989. 
\[13\] Sirenburg, S., (ed.), Machine Translation, Cam- 
bridge University Press (1987). 
\[14\] Nirenburg, S., I. Monarch, T. Kaufmann, I. 
Nirenburg and J. Carbonell. Acquisition of 
Very Large Knowledge Bases: Methodology, 
Tools and Applications, Center for Machine 
Translation, Carnegie-Mellon, CMU-CMT-88- 
108, (1988). 
\[15\] Sadler, V., Working with analogical semantics: 
disambiguation techniques in DLT, Foris Publi- 
cations, 1989. 
\[16\] Van Eynde, F. et al: The Task of Transfer vis-a- 
vis Analysis and Generation. Eurotra Final Re- 
port ET-10-B/NL, (1982). 
\[17\] Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical Investigations, 
Oxford (1953). 
\[18\] Zernik U., and P. Jacobs, Tagging for Learn- 
ing: Collecting Thematic Relations from Cor- 
pus. Proc. COLING 1990. 
137 
