Discovering the Lexical Features of a Language 
Eric Brill * 
Department of Computer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
emaih brill@unagi.cis.upenn.edu 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper examines the possibility of automatically 
discovering the lexieal features of a language. There 
is strong evidence that the set of possible lexical fea- 
tures which can be used in a language is unbounded, 
and thus not innate. Lakoff \[Lakoff 87\] describes 
a language in which the feature -I-woman-or-fire-or- 
dangerons-thing exists. This feature is based upon 
ancient folklore of the society in which it is used. If 
the set of possible lexieal features is indeed unbounded, 
then it cannot be part of the innate Universal Gram- 
mar and must be learned. Even if the set is not un- 
bounded, the child is still left with the challenging task 
of determining which features are used in her language. 
If a child does not know a priori what lexical fea- 
tures are used in her language, there are two sources 
for acquiring this information: semantic and syntactic 
cues. A learner using semantic cues could recognize 
that words often refer to objects, actions, and proper- 
ties, and from this deduce the lexical features: noun, 
verb and adjective. Pinker \[Pinker 89\] proposes that 
a combination of semantic ues and innate semantic 
primitives could account for the acquisition of verb fea- 
tures. He believes that the child can discover semantic 
properties of a verb by noticing the types of actions 
typically taking place when the verb is uttered. Once 
these properties are known, says Pinker, they can be 
used to reliably predict the distributional behavior of 
the verb. However, Gleitman \[Gleitman 90\] presents 
evidence that semantic cues axe not sufficient for a 
child to acquire verb features and believes that the 
use of this semantic information in conjunction with 
information about the subcategorization properties of 
the verb may be sufficient for learning verb features. 
This paper takes Gleitman's uggestion to the ex- 
treme, in hope of determining whether syntactic ues 
may not just aid in feature discovery, but may be all 
that is necessary. We present evidence for the suffi- 
ciency of a strictly syntax-based model for discovering 
*The author would like to thank Mitch Marcus for valuable 
help. This work was supported by AFOSR jointly under grant 
No. AFOSR-90-0066, and by ARO grant No. DAAL 03-89- 
C0031 PRI. 
the lexical features of a language. The work is based 
upon the hypothesis that whenever two words are se- 
mantically dissimilar, this difference will manifest it- 
self in the syntax via 
playing out the notion 
51\]). Most, if not all, 
For instance, there is 
lexical distribution (in a sense, 
of distributional analysis \[Harris 
features have a semantic basis. 
a clear semantic difference be- 
tween most count and mass nouns. But while meaning 
specifies the core of a word class, it does not specify 
precisely what can and cannot be a member of a class. 
For instance, furniture is a mass noun in English, but 
is a count noun in French. While the meaning of fur- 
niture cannot be sufficient for determining whether it 
is a count or mass noun, the distribution of the word 
Call. 
Described below is a fully implemented program 
which takes a corpus of text as input and outputs a 
fairly accurate word class list for the language in ques- 
tion. Each word class corresponds to a lexical feature. 
The program runs in O(n 3) time and O(n 2) space, 
where n is the number of words in the lexicon. 
2 D iscover ing  Lex ica l  Features  
The program is based upon a Markov model. A 
Markov model is defined as: 
1. A set of states 
2. Initial state probabilities init(x) 
--3. Transition probabilities trans(x,~) 
An important property of Markov models is that they 
have no memory other than that stored in the current 
state. In other words, where X(t) is the value given by 
the model at time t, 
P , (X( t )  = ~, I x ( t  - 1) = ~,_ ,  . . .  x (o )  = ~o) = 
Pr(X(t )  = ~tt \[ X ( t  -- 1) = at- l )  
In the model we use, there is a unique state for each 
word in the lexicon. We are not concerned with initial 
state probabilities. Transition probabilities represent 
the probability that word b will follow a and are esti- 
mated by examining a large corpus of text. To estimate 
the transition probability from state a to state b: 
339  
1. Count the number of times b follows a in the corpus. 
2. Divide this value by the number of times a occurs in 
the corpus. 
Such a model is clearly insufficient for expressing 
the grammar of a natural language. However, there 
is a great deal of information encoded in such a model 
about the distributional behavior of words with respect 
to a very local context, namely the context of imme- 
diately adjacent words. For a particular word, this 
information is captured in the set of transitions and 
transition probabilities going into and out of the state 
representing the word in the Markov model. 
Once the transition probabilities of the model have 
been estimated, it is possible to discover word classes. 
If  two states are sufficiently similar with respect o the 
transitions into and out of them, then it is assumed 
that the states are equivalent. The set of all suffi- 
ciently similar states forms a word class. By varying 
the level considered to be sufficiently similar, different 
levels of word classes can be discovered. For instance, 
when only highly similar states are considered equiva- 
lent, one might expect animate nouns to form a class. 
When the similarity requirement is relaxed, this class 
may expand into the class of all nouns. Once word 
classes are found, lexical features can be extracted by 
assuming that there is a feature of the language which 
accounts for each word class. Below is an example ac- 
tually generated by the program: 
With very strict state similarity requirements, HE and 
SHE form a class. As the similarity requirement is re- 
laxed, the class grows to include I, forming the class 
of singular nominative pronouns. Upon further relax- 
ation, THEY and WE form a class. Next, (HE, SHE, 
I) and (THEY, WE) collapse into a single class, the 
class of nominative pronouns. YOU and IT collapse 
into the class of pronouns which are both nominative 
and accusative. Note that next, YOU and IT merge 
with the class of nominative pronouns. This is because 
the program currently deals with bimodals by eventu- 
ally assigning them to the class whose characteristics 
they exhibit most strongly. For another example of 
this, see HER below. 
3 Resu l ts  and Future Direc- 
t ions 
This algorithm was run on a Markov model trained 
on the Brown Corpus, a corpus of approximately one 
million words \[Francis 82\]. The results, although pre- 
liminary, are very encouraging. These are a few of the 
word classes found by the program: 
? CAME WENT 
? THEM ME HIM US 
? HER HIS 
? FOR ON BY IN WITH FROM AT 
? THEIR MY OUR YOUR ITS 
? ANY MANY EACH SOME 
? MAY WILL COULD MIGHT WOULD CAN 
SHOULD MUST 
? FIRST LAST 
? LITTLE MUCH 
? MEN PEOPLE MAN 
This work is still in progress, and a number of dif- 
ferent directions are being pursued. We are currently 
attempting to automatically acquire the suffixes of a 
language, and then trying to class words based upon 
how they distribute with respect o suffixes. 
One problem with this work is that it is difficult to 
judge results. One can eye the results and see that 
the lexical features found seem to be correct, but how 
can we judge that the features are indeed the correct 
ones? How can one set of hypothesized features mean- 
ingfully be compared to another set? We are currently 
working on an information-theoretic metric, similar to 
that proposed by Jelinek \[Jelinek 90\] for scoring prob- 
abilistic context-free grammars, to score the quality of 
hypothesized lexical feature sets. 
References  
\[Francis 82\] Francis, W. and H. Kucera. (1982) Frequency Anal- 
ysis o.f English Usage: Le~c.icon and Grammar. 
Houghton Mifflin Co. 
\[G|eitman 90\] G|eitman, Lila. (1990) "The Structural Sources 
of Verb Meanings." Language Acquisition, Voltmae 
1, pp. 3-55. 
\[Harris 51\] Harris, Zeli 8. 
(1951) Structural Lingulstics. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
\[Jelinek 90\] Jellnek, F., J.D. Lafferty & R.L. Mercer. (1990) 
"Basic Methods of Probahilistic Context Free 
Grvannmrs." I.B.M. Technical Report, RC 16374. 
\[Lakoff87\] Lakoff, G. (1987) Women, Fire and Dangerous 
Things: What Categories Reveal About the Mind. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
\[Pinker 89\] Pinker, S. Learnability and Cognition. Cambridge: 
MIT Press. 
340 
