AN ALGORITHM FOR VP ELLIPSIS 
Daniel Hardt 
Department of Computer and Information Science 
University of Pennsylvania 
Philadelphia, PA 19104 
Internet: hardt @linc.cis.upenn.edu 
ABSTRACT 
An algorithm is proposed to determine an- 
tecedents for VP ellipsis. The algorithm elim- 
inates impossible antecedents, and then im- 
poses a preference ordering on possible an- 
tecedents. The algorithm performs with 94% 
accuracy on a set of 304 examples of VP el- 
lipsis collected from the Brown Corpus. The 
problem of determining antecedents for VP el- 
lipsis has received little attention in the litera- 
ture, and it is shown that the current proposal 
is a significant improvement over alternative 
approaches. 
INTRODUCTION 
To understand an elliptical expression it is nec- 
essary to recover the missing material from sur- 
rounding context. This can be divided into two 
subproblems: first, it is necessary to determine the 
antecedent expression. Second, a method of recon- 
structing the antecedent expression at the ellipsis 
site is required. Most of the literature on ellipsis 
has concerned itself with the second problem. In 
this paper, I propose a solution for the first prob- 
lem, that of determining the antecedent. I focus 
on the case of VP ellipsis. 
VP ellipsis is defined by the presence of an 
auxiliary verb, but no VP, as in the following 
example 1:
(1) a. It might have rained, any time; 
b. only - it did not. 
To interpret he elliptical VP "did not", the 
antecedent must be determined: in this case, 
"rained" is the only possibility. 
The input to the algorithm is an elliptical VP 
and a list of VP's occurring in proximity to the el- 
liptical VP. The algorithm eliminates certain VP's 
IAll examples are taken from the Brown Corpus 
unless otherwise noted. 
9 
that are impossible antecedents. Then it assigns 
preference l vels to the remaining VP's, based on 
syntactic onfigurations as well as other factors. 
Any VP's with the same preference level are or- 
dered in terms of proximity to the elliptical VP. 
The antecedent is the VP with the highest prefer- 
ence level. 
In what follows, I begin with the overall struc- 
ture of the algorithm. Next the subparts of the 
algorithm are described, consisting of the elimina- 
tion of impossible antecedents, and the determina- 
tion of a preference ordering based on clausal rela- 
tionships and subject coreference. I then present 
the results of testing the algorithm on 304 exam- 
ples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown Cor- 
pus. Finally, I examine other approaches to this 
problem in the literature. 
THE ALGORITHM 
The input to the algorithm is an elliptical 
VP(VPE), and VPlist, a list of VP's occurring in 
the current sentence, and those occurring in the 
two immediately preceding sentences. In addition, 
it is assumed that the parse trees of these sentences 
are available as global variables, and that NP's in 
these parse trees have been assigned indices to in- 
dicate coreference and quantifier binding. 
The antecedent selection function is: 
A-Select(VPlist,VPE) 
VPlist := remove-impossible(VPl ist,VPE) 
VPlist := assign-levels(VPlist,VPE) 
antecedent. := select-highest(VPlist,VPE) 
First, impossible antecedents are removed 
from the VPlist. Then, the remaining items in 
VPlist are assigned preference l vels, and the item 
with the highest preference l vel is selected as the 
antecedent. If there is more than one item with 
the same preference level, the item closest to the 
VPE, scanning left from the VPE, is selected. 
The definition of the function remove-  
imposs ib le  is as follows: 
remove-impossible(VPlist,VPE) 
For all v in VPlist 
if ACD(v,VPE) or 
BE-DO-conflict(v,VPE) 
then remove(v, VPlist) 
There are two types of impossible antecedents: 
the first involves certain antecedent-containment 
structures, and the second involves cases in which 
the antecedent contains a BE-form and the target 
contains a DO-form. These are described in detail 
below. 
Next, preference l vels are assigned to remain- 
ing items in VPlist by the assign- levels  function. 
(All items on VPlist are initialized with a level of 
0.) 
assign-levels (VPlist, VPE) 
For all v in VPlist 
if related-clause(v,VPE) then 
v.level := v.level + 1 
if coref-subj (v,VPE) then 
v.level := v.level + i 
An antecedent is preferred if there is a clausal 
relationship between its clause and the VPE 
clause, or if the antecedent and the VPE have 
coreferential subjects. The determination of these 
preferences i  described in detail below. 
Finally, the se lec t -h ighest  function merely 
selects the item on VPlist with the highest prefer- 
ence level. If there is more than one item with the 
highest preference level, the item nearest o the 
VPE (scanning left) is selected. 
IMPOSSIBLE  ANTECEDENTS 
This section concerns the removal of impossible 
antecedents from VPlist. There are two cases in 
which a given VP is not a possible antecedent. 
The first deals with antecedent-containment, the 
second, with conflicts between BE-forms and DO- 
forms. 
ANTECEDENT CONTAINMENT 
There are cases of VP ellipsis in which the VPE is 
contained within the antecedent VP: 
IV \[... VPE ...\]\]vP 
Such cases are tradition- 
ally termed antecedent-contained d letion (ACD). 
They are highly constrained, although the proper 
10 
formulation of the relevant constraint remains con- 
troversial. It was claimed by May (1985) and oth- 
ers that ACD is only possible if a quantifier is 
present. May argues that this explains the fol- 
lowing contrast: 
(2) a. Dulles suspected everyone who Angelton 
did. 
b. * Dulles suspected Philby, who Angelton 
did. 
However, it has been subsequently noted (cf. 
Fiengo and May 1991) that such structures do not 
require the presence of a quantifier, as shown by 
the following examples: 
(3) a. Dulles suspected Philby, who Angelton 
did too. 
b. Dulles suspected Philby, who Angelton 
didn't. 
Thus the algorithm will allow cases of ACD in 
which the target is dominated by an NP which is 
an argument of the antecedent verb. It will not 
allow cases in which the target is dominated by 
a sentential complement of the antecedent verb, 
such as the following: 
(4) That still leaves you a lot of latitude. And 
I suppose it did. 
Here, "suppose" is not a possible antecedent 
for the elliptical VP. In general, configurations of 
the following form are ruled out: 
IV \[... VPE .--\]s-..\]vP 
BE/DO CONFL ICTS 
The auxiliary verb contributes various teatures to 
the complete verb phrase, including tense, aspect, 
and polarity. There is no requirement that these 
features match in antecedent and elliptical VP. 
However, certain conflicts do not appear to be pos- 
sible. In general, it is not possible to have a DO- 
form as the elliptical VP, with an overt BE-form in 
the antecedent. Consider the following example: 
(5) Nor can anyone be certain that Prokofief 
would have done better, or even as well, 
under different circumstances. His fellow- 
countryman, Igor Stravinsky, certainly 
did not. 
In this example, there are two elements on the 
VP list: "be certain...", and "do better". The tar- 
get "did not" rules out "be certain" as a possible 
antecedent, allowing only the reading "Stravinsky 
did not do better". If the elliptical VP is changed 
from "did not" to "was not", the situation is re- 
versed; the only possible reading is then "Stravin- 
sky was not certain that Prokofief would have done 
better...". 
A related conflict to be ruled out is that of ac- 
tive/passive conflicts. A passive antecedent is not 
possible if the VPE is a DO-form. For example: 
(6) Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappear- 
ance when it was announced, and, when 
he did, while he had a fleeting suspicion, 
he dismissed it; 
In this example, "was announced" is not a 
possible antecedent for the VPE "did". 
One possible exception to this rule involves 
progressive antecedents, which, although they con- 
tain a BE-form, may be consistent with a DO- 
form target. The following (constructed) example 
seems marginally acceptable: 
(7) Tom was cleaning his room today. Harry 
did yesterday. 
Thus a BE-form together with a progressive 
does not conflict with a DO-form. 
PREFERENCE LEVELS 
If there are several possible antecedents for a given 
VPE, preferences among those antecedents are de- 
termined by looking for other relations between 
the VPE clause and the clauses containing the pos- 
sible antecedents. 
CLAUSAL RELAT IONSHIPS  
An antecedent for a given VPE is preferred if there 
is a configurational relationship between the an- 
tecedent clause and the VPE clause. These include 
comparative structures and adverbial clauses. 
Elliptical VP's (VPE) in comparative con- 
structions are of the form 
\[VP Comparative \[NP VPE\]\] 
where Comparatives are expressions uch as "as 
well as", "better than", etc. In constructions of 
this form there is a strong preference that VP  is 
the antecedent for VPE .  For example: 
(8) Now, if Morton's newest product, a corn 
chip known as Chip-o's, turns out to sell 
as well as its stock did... 
Here, the antecedent of the VPE "did" is the 
VP "sell". 
The next configuration i volves VPE's within 
adverbial clauses. For example, 
(9) But if you keep a calendar of events, as we 
do, you noticed a conflict. 
Here the antecedent for the VPE "do" is "keep 
a calendar of events". In general, in configurations 
of the form: 
11 
\[VP ADV \[NP VPE\]\] 
VP is preferred over other possible an- 
tecedents. 
It is important to note that this is a preference 
rule, rather than an obligatory constraint. Al- 
though no examples of this kind were found in the 
Brown Corpus, violations of this constraint may 
well be possible. For example: 
(10) John can walk faster than Harry can run. 
Bill can walk faster than Barry can. 
If a reading is possible in which the VPE is 
"Barry can run", this violates the clausal relation- 
ship preference rule. 
SUBJECT COREFERENCE 
Another way in which two clauses are related is 
subject coreference. An antecedent is preferred if 
its subject corefers with that of the elliptical VP. 
An example: 
(11) He wondered if the audience would let him 
finish. They did. 
The preferred reading has "they" coreferential 
with "the audience" and the antecedent for "did" 
the VP "let him finish". 
Subject "coreference" is determined manually, 
and it is meant to reflect quantifier binding as 
well as ordinary coreference - that is, standard 
instances involving coindexing of NP's. 
Again, it must be emphasized that the subject 
coreference rule is a preference rule rather than an 
obligatory constraint. While no violations were 
found in the Brown corpus, it is possible to con- 
struct such examples. 
INTERACTION OF  PREFERENCE 
RULES 
There are cases where more than one preference 
rule applies. The antecedent selected is the item 
with the highest preference level. If more than 
one item has the same preference level, the item 
nearest o the VPE is selected, where nearness is 
determined by number of words encountered scan- 
ning left from the VPE. 
In the following example, two preference rules 
apply: 
(12) usually, this is most exasperating to men, 
who expect every woman to verify their 
preconceived notions concerning her sex, 
and when she does not, immediately con- 
demn her as eccentric and unwomanly. 
The VPE clause is an adverbial clause modi- 
fying the following clause. Thus the VP "condemn 
her as eccentric and unwomanly" receives a pref- 
erence level of 1. The subject "she" of the VPE is 
coindexed with "every woman". This causes the 
VP "verify their preconceived notions concerning 
her sex" to also receive a preference level of 1. 
Since both of these elements have the same pref- 
erence level, proximity is determined by scanning 
left from the VPE. This selects "verify their pre- 
conceived notions concerning her sex" as the an- 
tecedent. 
TEST ING THE ALGORITHM 
The algorithm has been tested on a set of 304 ex- 
amples of VP ellipsis collected from the Brown 
Corpus. These examples were collected using the 
UNIX grep pattern-matching utility. The version 
of the Brown Corpus used has each word tagged by 
part of speech. I defined search patterns for aux- 
iliary verbs that did not have verbs nearby. These 
patterns did not succeed in locating all the in- 
stances of VP ellipsis in the Brown Corpus. How- 
ever, the 304 examples do cover the full range of 
types of material in the Brown Corpus, includ- 
ing both "Informative" (e.g., journalistic, scien- 
tific, and government texts) and "Imaginative" 
(e.g., novels, short stories, and humor). I have di- 
vided these examples into three categories, based 
on whether the antecedent is in the same sentence 
as the VPE, the adjacent (preceding) sentence, or 
earlier ("Long-Distance"). The definition of sen- 
tence is taken from the sentence divisions present 
in the Brown Corpus. 
RESULTS 
The algorithm selected the correct antecedent in
285, or 94% of the cases. For comparison pur- 
poses, I present results of an alternative strategy; 
namely, a simple linear scan of preceding text. In 
this strategy, the first verb that is encountered is 
taken to be the head of the antecedent VP. 
The results of the algorithm and the "Linear 
Scan" approach are displayed in the following ta- 
ble. 
Category 
Same-sent 
Adj-sent 
Long-Dist 
Total 
196 
93 
15 
304 
A lgor i thm 
No. Correct 
193(96%) 
85(92%) 
7(47%) 
285(94%) 
Linear Scan 
No. Correct 
172(88%) 
72(77%) 
2(13%) 
247(81%) 
The algorithm performs considerably better 
than Linear Scan. Much of the improvement is due 
to "impossible antecedents" which are selected by 
the Linear Scan approach because they are closest 
to the VPE. A frequent case of this is contain- 
ing antecedents hat are ruled out by the algo- 
rithm. Another case distinguishing the algorithm 
from Linear Scan involves coreferential subjects. 
There were several cases in which the coreferen- 
tial subject preference rule caused an antecedent 
to be selected that was not the nearest to the VPE. 
One example is: 
(13) a. But, darn it all, why should we help a cou- 
ple of spoiled snobs who had looked down 
their noses at us? 
b. But, in the end, we did. 
Here, the correct antecedent is the more dis- 
tant "help a couple of...", rather than "looked 
down their noses...". There were no cases in which 
Linear Scan succeeded where the algorithm failed. 
(14) a. 
SOURCES OF  ERROR 
I will now look at sources of errors for the algo- 
rithm. The performance was worst in the Long 
Distance category, in which at least one sentence 
intervenes between antecedent and VPE.  In sev- 
eral problem cases in the Long Distance category, 
it appears that intervening text contains some 
mechanism that causes the antecedent to remain 
salient. For example: 
"...in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a 
chance to act. I could show what I can 
do"  . 
b. As far as I was concerned, she had already 
and had dandily shown what she could do. 
In this case, the elliptical VP "had already" 
means "had already had a chance to act". The 
algorithm incorrectly selects "show what I can 
do" as the antecedent. The intervening sentence 
causes the previous antecedent to remain salient, 
since it is understood as "(If I had a chance to 
act then) I could show what I can do." Further- 
more, the choice made by the algorithm ight per- 
haps be eliminated on pragmatic grounds, given 
the oddness of "she had already shown what she 
could do and had dandily shown what she could 
do ." 
Another way in which the algorithm could be 
generalized is illustrated by the follow example: 
(15) a. "I didn't ask you to fight for the ball club", 
Phil said slowly. 
b. "Nobody else did, either". 
Here the algorithm incorrectly selects '~fight 
for the ball club" as the antecedent, instead of "ask 
you to fight for the ball club". The subject coref- 
erence rule does not apply, since "Nobody else" 
12 
is not coreferential with the subject of any of the 
possible antecedents. However, its interpretation 
is dependent on the subject 'T' of "ask you to fight 
for the ball club". Thus, if one generalized the 
subject coreference rule to include such forms of 
dependence, the algorithm would succeed on such 
examples. 
Many of the remaining errors involve an an- 
tecedent that takes a VP or S as complement, of- 
ten leading to subtle ambiguities. One example of 
this is the following: 
(16) a. Usually she marked the few who did thank 
you, you didn't get that kind much in a 
place like this: and she played a little 
game with herself, seeing how downright 
rude she could act to the others, before 
they'd take offense, threaten to call the 
manager. 
b. Funny how seldom they did: used to it, 
probably. 
Here the algorithm selects "call the manager" 
as antecedent, instead of "threaten to call the 
manager", which I determined to be the correct 
antecedent. It may be that many of these cases 
involve a genuine ambiguity. 
OTHER APPROACHES 
The problem addressed here, of determining the 
antecedent for an elliptical VP, has received little 
attention in the literature. Most treatments of 
VP ellipsis (cf. Sag 1976, Williams 1977, Webber 
1978, Fiengo and May 1990, Dalrymple, Shieber 
and Pereira 1991) have focused on the question 
of determining what readings are possible, given 
an elliptical VP and a particular antecedent. For 
a computational system, a method is required to 
determine the antecedent, after which the possible 
readings can be determined. 
Lappin and McCord (1990) present an al- 
gorithm for VP ellipsis which contains a partial 
treatment of this problem. However, while they 
define three possible ellipsis-antecedent configura- 
tions, they have nothing to say about selecting 
among alternatives, if there is more than one VP 
in an allowed configuration. The three configu- 
rations given by Lappin and McCord for a VPE- 
antecedent pair < V,A> are: 
1. V is contained in the clausal complement of 
a subordinate conjunction SC, where the SC- 
phrase is either (i) an adjunct of A, or (ii) an 
adjunct of a noun N and N heads an NP argu- 
ment of A, or N heads the NP argument of an 
adjunct of A. 
2. V is contained in a relative clause that modifies 
a head noun N, with N contained in A, and, if 
13 
a verb A t is contained in A and N is contained 
in A t, then A p is an infinitival complement of A 
or a verb contained in A. 
3. V is contained in the right conjunct of a senten- 
tial conjunction S, and A is contained in the left 
conjunct of S. 
An examination of the Brown Corpus exam- 
ples reveals that these configurations are incom- 
plete in important ways. First, there is no con- 
figuration that allows a sentence intervening be- 
tween antecedent and VPE. Thus, none of the 
Long-Distance xamples (about 5% of the sam- 
ple) would be covered. Configuration (3) deals 
with antecedent-VPE pairs in adjacent S's. There 
are many such cases in which there is no sentential 
conjunction. For example: 
(17) a. All the generals who held important com- 
mands in World War 2, did not write 
books. 
b. It only seems as if they did. 
Perhaps configuration (3) could be interpreted 
as covering any adjacent S's, whether or not an 
explicit conjunction is present. 9. 
Furthermore, there are cases in which the ad- 
jacent categories are something other than S; in 
the following two examples, the antecedent and 
VPE are in adjacent VP's. 
(18) 
(19) 
The experts are thus forced to hypothe- 
size sequences of events that have never 
occurred, probably never will - but possi- 
bly might. 
The innocent malfeasant, filled with that 
supreme sense of honor found in bars, in- 
sisted upon replacing the destroyed mona- 
cle - and did, over the protests of the for- 
mer owner - with a square monacle. 
In the following example, the adjacent cate- 
gory is S'. 
(20) I remember him pointing out of the win- 
dow and saying that he wished he could 
live to see another spring but that he 
wouldn't. 
Configurations (1) and (2) deal with 
antecedent-VPE pairs within the same sentence. 
In Configuration (1), the VPE is in a subordinate 
clause, and In (2), the VPE is in a relative clause. 
In each case, the VPE is c-commanded by the 
antecedent A. While the configurations cover two 
2However, a distinction must be maintained be- 
tween VPE and related phenomena such as gapping 
and "pseudo-gapping", in which an explicit conjunc- 
tion is required. 
quite common cases, there are other same-sentence 
configurations in which the antecedent does not c- 
command the VPE. 
(21) 
(22) 
In the first place, a good many writers who 
are said to use folklore, do not, unless one 
counts an occasional superstition or tale. 
In reply to a question of whether they now 
tax boats, airplanes and other movable 
property excluding automobiles, nineteen 
said that they did and twenty that they 
did not. 
In sum, the configurations defined by Lappin 
and McCord would miss a significant number of 
cases in the Brown Corpus, and, even where they 
do apply, there is no method for deciding among 
alternative possibilities. 3 
CONCLUSIONS 
To interpret an elliptical expression it is neces- 
sary to determine the antecedent expression, after 
which a method of reconstructing the antecedent 
expression at the ellipsis site is required. While 
the literature on VP ellipsis contains a vast ar- 
ray of proposals concerning the proper method of 
reconstructing a given antecedent for an elliptical 
VP, there has been little attention to the question 
of determining the antecedent. 
In this paper, I have proposed a solution to 
this problem; I have described an algorithm that 
determines the antecedent for elliptical VP's. It 
was shown that the algorithm achieves 94% ac- 
curacy on 304 examples of VP ellipsis collected 
from the Brown Corpus. Many of the failure cases 
appear to be due to the interaction of VPE with 
other anaphoric phenomena, nd others may be 
cases of genuine ambiguity. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Aravind Joshi and Bonnie Webber. 
This work was supported by the following grants: 
ARO DAAL 03-89-C-0031, DARPA N00014-90- 
J-1863, NSF IRI 90-16592, and Ben Franklin 
91S.3078C-1. 
REFERENCES 
Susan E. Brennan, Marilyn Walker Friedman, and 
Carl J. Pollard. A Centering Approach to Pro- 
3While the problem of antecedent determination 
for VP ellipsis has been largely neglected, the anal- 
ogous problem for pronoun resolution has been ad- 
dressed (cf. Hobbs 1978, Grosz, Joshi, and Weinstein 
1983 and 1986, and Brennan, Friedman and Pollard 
1987), and two leading proposals have been subjected 
to empirical testing (Walker 1989). 
\ ]4 
nouns, Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of 
the ACL, 1987. 
Mary Dalrymple, Stuart Shieber and Fer- 
nando Pereira. Ellipsis and Higher-Order Unifi- 
cation. Linguistics and Philosophy. Vol. 14, no. 
4, August 1991. 
Robert Fiengo and Robert May. Ellipsis and 
Anaphora. Paper presented at GLOW 1990, Cam- 
bridge University, Cambridge, England. 
Robert Fiengo and Robert May. ndices and 
Identity. ms. 1991. 
Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott We- 
instein. Providing a Unified Account of Definite 
Noun Phrases in Discourse. In Proceedings, 2Ist 
Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 44-50, Cam- 
bridge, MA, 1983. 
Barbara Grosz, Aravind Joshi, and Scott We- 
instein. Towards a Computational Theory of Dis- 
course Interpretation. ms. 1986. 
Isabelle Haik. Bound VP's That Need To Be. 
Linguistics and Philosophy 11: 503-530. 1987. 
Jerry Hobbs. Resolving Pronoun References, 
Lingua 44, pp. 311-338. 1978. 
Shalom Lappin and Michael McCord. 
Anaphora Resolution in Slot Grammar, in Com- 
putational Linguistics, vol 16, no 4. 1990. 
Robert May. Logical Form: Its Structure and 
Derivation, MIT Press, Cambridge Mass. 1985. 
Ivan A. Sag. Deletion and Logical Form. 
Ph.D. thesis, MIT. 1976. 
Marilyn Walker. Evaluating discourse pro- 
cessing algorithms. In Proceedings, 27th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL, Vancouver, Canada. 1989. 
Bonnie Lynn Webber. A Formal Approach to 
Discourse Anaphora. Ph.D. thesis, Harvard Uni- 
versity. 1978. 
Edwin Williams. Discourse and Logical Form. 
Linguistic Inquiry, 8(1):101-139. 1977. 
