CORRECTING ILLEGAL NP  OMISS IONS US ING LOCAL FOCUS 
Linda Z. Suri 1 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences 
University of Delaware 
Newark DE 19716 
Internet: suri@udel.edu 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The work described here is in the context of de- 
veloping a system that will correct he written En- 
liSh of native users of American Sign Language 
SL) who are learning English as a second lan- 
guage. In this paper we focus on one error class 
that we have found to be particularly prevalent: 
the illegal omission of NP's. 
Our previous analysis of the written English of 
ASL natives has led us to conclude that language 
transfer (LT) can explain many errors, and should 
thus be taken advantage of by an instructional sys- 
tem (Suri, 1991; Suri and McCoy, 1991). We be- 
lieve that many of the omission errors we have 
found are among the errors explainable by LT. 
Lillo-Martin (1991) investigates null argument 
structures in ASL. She identifies two classes of ASL 
verbs that allow different types of null argument 
structures. Plain verbs do not carry morphological 
markings for subject or object agreement and yet 
allow null argument structures in some contexts. 
These structures, she claims, are analogous to the 
null argument structures found in languages (like 
Chinese) that allow a null argument if the argument 
co-specifies the topic of a previous entence (ttuang, 
1984). Such languages are said to be discourse- 
oriented languages. 
As it turns out, our writing samples collected 
from deaf writers contain many instances of omit- 
ted NP's where those NP's are the topic of a pre- 
vious sentence and where the verb involved would 
be a plain verb in ASL. We believe these errors can 
be explained as a result of the ASL native carry- 
ing over conventions of (discourse-oriented) ASL to 
(sentence-oriented) English. 
If this is the case, then these omissions can be 
corrected if we track the topic, or, in computa- 
tional linguistics terms, the local focus, and the 
actor focus. 2 We propose to do this by develop- 
ing a modified version of Sidner's focus tracking 
algorithm (1979, 1983) that includes mechanisms 
for handling complex sentence types and illegally 
omitted NP's. 
1Thls research was supported in part  by NSF Grant 
~IRI-9010112. Support  was also provided by the Nemours 
Fotuldation. We thank Gallaudet U~fiversity, the National 
Technical Inst itute for the Deaf, the Pennsylvalfia School for 
the Deaf, the Margaret S. Sterck School, and the Bicultural 
Center for providing us with writing samples. 
2 Grosz, Joshi had Weinstein (1983) use the notion of cen- 
tering to track something similar to local focus and argue 
against he use of a separate actor focus. However, we think 
that the example they use does not argue against a separate 
actor focus, but il lustrates the need for extensions to Sial- 
her's algorithm to specify how complex sentences should be 
processed. 
273 
2 FOCUS TRACKING 
Our focusing algorithm is based on Sidner's fo- 
cusing algorithm for tracking local and actor foci 
(Sidner 1979; Sidner 1983). 3 In each sentence, the 
actor focus (AF) is identified with the (thematic) 
agent of the sentence. The Potential Actor Focus 
List (PAFL) contains all NP's that specify an ani- 
mate element of the database but are not the agent 
of the sentence. 
Tracking local focus is more complex. The first 
sentence in a text can be said to be about some- 
thing. That something is called the current focus 
(.CF) of the sentence and can generally be identified 
via syntactic means, taking into consideration the 
thematic roles of the elements in the sentence. In 
addition to the CF, an initial sentence introduces 
a number of other items (any of which can become 
the focus of the next sentence). Thus, these items 
are recorded in a potential focus list (PFL). 
At any given point in a well-formed text, after 
the first sentence, the writer has a number of op- 
tions: 
? Continue talking about the same thing; in this 
case, the CF doesn't change. 
? Talk about something just introduced; in this 
case, the CF is selected from the previous en- 
tence's PFL. 
? Return to a topic of previous discussion; in 
this case, that topic must have been the CF of 
a previous entence. 
? Discuss an item previously introduced, but 
which was not the topic of previous discussion; 
in this case, that item must have been on the 
PFL of a previous entence. 
The decision (by the reader/hearer/algorithm) as 
to which of these alternatives was chosen by the 
speaker is based on the thematic roles (with par- 
ticular attention to the agent role) held by the 
anaphora of the current sentence, and whether 
their co-specification is the CF, a previous CF, or 
a member of the current PFL or a previous PFL. 
Confirmation of co-specifications requires inferenc- 
ing based on general knowledge and semantics. 
At each sentence in the discourse, the CF and 
PFL of the previous sentence are stacked for the 
possibility of subsequent return. 4 When one of 
these items is returned to, the stacked CF's and 
PFL's above it are popped, and are thus no longer 
available for return. 
3 Carter.(1987) extended Sichler s work to haaldle in- 
trasententlal naphora,  but  for space reasons we do not dis- 
cuss these extensions. 
4Sidner did not stack PFL's.  Our reasons for stacking 
PFL's  are discussed in section 4. 
2.1 F ILL ING IN A MISS ING NP 
We propose extending this algorithm to iden- 
tify an illegally omitted NP. To do this, we treat 
the omitted NP as an anaphor which, like Sidner's 
treatment of full definite NP's and personal pro- 
nouns, co-specifies an element recorded by the fo- 
cusing algorithm. This approach is based on the 
belief that an omitted NP is likely to be the topic of 
a previous entence. We define preferences among 
the focus data structures which are similar to Sid- 
ner's preferences. 
More specifically, when we encounter an omit- 
ted NP that is not the agent, we first try to fill 
the deleted NP with the CF of the immediately 
preceding sentence. If syntax, semantics or infer- 
encing based on general knowledge cause this co- 
specification to be rejected, we then consider mem- 
bers of the PFL of the previous sentence as fillers 
for the deleted NP. If these too are rejected, we con- 
sider stacked CF's and elements of stacked PFL's, 
taking into account preferences (yet to be deter- 
mined) among these elements. 
When we encounter an omitted agent NP, in a 
simple sentence or a sentence-initial clause, we first 
test the AF of the previous entence as co-specifier, 
then members of the PAFL, the previous CF, and 
finally stacked AF's, CF's and PAFL's. To iden- 
tify a missing agent NP in a non-sentence-initial 
clause, our algorithm will first test the AF of the 
previous clause, and then follow the same prefer- 
ences just given. Further preferences are yet to be 
determined, including those between the stacked 
AF, stacked PAFL, and stacked CF. 
2.2 COMPUTING THE CF 
To compute the CF of a sentence without any 
illegally omitted NP's, we prefer the CF of the last 
sentence over members of the PFL, and PFL mem- 
bers over members of the focus stacks. Exceptions 
to these preferences involve picking a non-agent 
anaphor co-specifying a PFL member over an agent 
co-specifying the CF, and preferring a PFL member 
co-specified by a pronoun to the CF co-specified by 
a full definite description. 
To compute the CF of a sentence with an illegally 
omitted NP, our algorithm treats illegally omitted 
NP's as anaphora since they (implicitly) co-specify 
something in the preceding discourse. However, it 
is important o remember that discourse-oriented 
languages allow deletions of NP's that are the topic 
of the discourse. Thus, we prefer a deleted non- 
agent as the focus, as long as it closely ties to 
the previous entence. Therefore, we prefer the co- 
specifier of the omitted non-agent NP as the (new) 
CF if it co-specifies either the last CF or a member 
of the last PFL. If the omitted NP is the thematic 
agent, we prefer for the new CF to be a pronomi- 
nal (or, as a second choice, full definite description) 
non-agent anaphor co-specifying either the last CF 
or a member of the last PFL (allowing the deleted 
agent NP to be the AF and keeping the AF and CF 
different). 5 If no anaphor meets these criteria, then 
5As future work, we will explore how to resolve more 
than one non-agent anaphor  in a sentence co-specifying PFL 
elements. 
274 
the members of the CF and PFL focus stacks will 
be considered, testing a co-specifier of the omitted 
NP before co-specifiers of pronouns and definite de- 
scriptions at each stack level. 
3 EXAMPLE 
Below, we describe the behavior of the extended 
algorithm on an example from our collected texts 
containing both a deleted non-agent and agent. 
Example :  "($1) First, in summer I live at home 
with my parenls. ($2) I can budget money easily. 
($3) I did not spend lot of money at home because 
al home we have lot of good foods, I ate lot of foods. 
(S4) While living at college I spend lot of money 
because_ go out to eat almost everyday. ($5) At 
home, sometimes my parents gave me some money 
right away when I need_. " 
After S1, the AF is I, the CF is I, and the PFL 
contains SUMMER, HOME, and the LIVE VP. For $2, 
I is the only anaphor, so it becomes the CF, the 
PFL contains HONEY and the BUDGET VP, and the 
focus stack contains I and the previous PFL. 
$3 is a complex sentence using the conjunction 
"because." Such sentences are not explicitly han- 
dled by Sidner's algorithm. Our analysis so far 
suggests that we should not split this sentence into 
two 6, and should prefer elements of the main clause 
as focus candidates. Thus, we take the CF from 
the first clause, and rank other elements in that 
clause before elements in the second clause on the 
PFL. 7 In this case, we have several anaphora: I, 
money, at home .... The AF remains I. The CF be- 
comes MONEY since it co-specifies a member of the 
PFL and since the co-specifier of the last CF is the 
agent. Ordering the elements of the first clause be- 
fore the elements in the second results in the PFL 
containing HOME, the NOT SPEND VP, GOOD FOOD, 
and the HAVE VP. We stack the CF and the PFL of 
$2. 
Note that $4 has a missing agent in the sec- 
ond clause. To identify the missing agent in a 
non-sentence-initiM clause, our algorithm will first 
test the AF of the preceding clause for possible co- 
specification. Because this co-specification would 
cause no contradiction, the omitted NP is filled 
with 'T', which is eventually taken as the AF of 
$4. The CF is computed by first considering the 
first clause of $4, since the X clause is the pre- 
ferred clause of an X BECAUSE Y construct. Since 
"money" co-specifies the CF of $3, and nothing else 
in the preferred clause co-specifies a member of the 
PFL, MONEY remains the CF. The PFL contains 
COLLEGE, the SPEND VP, EVER.Y DAY, the TO EAT 
VP, and the GO OUT TO EAT VP. We stack the CF 
and PFL of $3. 
$5 contains a subordinate clause with a miss- 
ing non-agent. Our algorithm first considers the 
6If we were to split the sentence up, then tile focus would 
shift away from MONEY when we process the second clause 
(which contradicts our intuit ion of what the focus is in this 
paragraph) .  
7The appropriateness of placing elements from both 
clauses in one PFL and ranking them according to clause 
menlbership will be further investigated. This construct ("X 
BECAUSE Y") is further discussed in section 4. 
CF, MONEY, as the co-specifier of the omitted NP; 
syntax, semantics and general knowledge inferenc- 
ing do not prevent this co-specification, so it is 
adopted. MONEY is also chosen as the CF since it 
is the co-specifier of the omitted NP occurring in 
the verb complement clause which is the preferred 
clause in this type of construct. 
4 D ISCUSSION OF  EXTENSIONS 
One of the major extensions needed in Sidner's 
algorithm is a mechanism for handling complex sen- 
tences. Based on a limited analysis of sample texts, 
we propose computing the CF and PFL of a com- 
plex sentence based on a classification of sentence 
types. For instance, for a sentence of the form "X 
BECAUSE Y" or "BECAUSE Y, X", we prefer the 
expected focus of the effect clause as CF, and or- 
der elements of the X clause on the PFL before el- 
ements of the Y clause. Analogous PFL orderings 
apply to other sentence types described here. For a 
sentence of the form "X CONJ Y", where X and Y 
are sentences, and CONJ is "and", "or", or "but", 
we prefer the expected focus of the Y clause. For a 
sentence of the form "IF X (THEN) Y", we prefer 
the expected focus of the THEN clause, while for 
"X, IF Y", we prefer the expected focus of the X 
clause. Further study is needed to determine other 
preferences and actions (including how to further 
order elements on the PFL) for these and other 
sentence types. These preferences will likely de- 
pend on thematic roles and syntactic riteria (e.g., 
whether an element occurs in the clause containing 
the expected CF). 
The decisions about how these and other exten- 
sions should proceed have been or will be based on 
analysis of both standard written English and the 
written English of deaf students. The algorithm 
will be developed to match the intuitions of native 
English speakers as to how focus shifts. 
A second difference between our algorithm and 
Sidner's is that we stack the PFL's as well as the 
CF's. We think that stacking the PFL's may be 
needed for processing standard English (and not 
just for our purposes) since focus sometimes re- 
volves around the theme of one of the clauses of 
a complex sentence, and later returns to revolve 
around items of another clause. Further investiga- 
tion may indicate that we need to add new data 
structures or enhance xisting ones to handle focus 
shifts related to these and other complex discourse 
patterns. 
We should note that while we prefer the CF as 
the co-specifier of an omitted NP, Sidner's recency 
rule suggests that perhaps we should prefer a mem- 
ber of the PFL if it is the last constituent of the 
previous entence (since a null argument seems im- 
ilar to pronominal reference). However, our studies 
show that a rule analogous to the recency rule does 
not seem to be needed for resolving the co-specifier 
of an omitted NP. In addition, Carter (1987) feels 
the recency rule leads to unreliable predictions for 
co-specifiers of pronouns. Thus, we do not expect 
to change our algorithm to reflect the recency rule. 
(We also believe we will abandon the recency rule 
for resolving pronouns.) 
275 
Another task is to specify focus preferences 
among stacked PFL's and stacked CF's, perhaps 
using thematic and syntactic information. 
An important question raised by our analy- 
sis is how to handle a paragraph-initial, but not 
discourse-initial, sentence. Do we want to treat it 
as discourse-initial, or as any other non-discourse- 
initial sentence? We suggest (based on analysis of 
samples) that we should treat the sentence as any 
non-discourse-initial sentence, unless its sentence 
type matches one of a set of sentence types (which 
often mark focus movement from one element o a 
new one). In this latter case, we will treat the sen- 
tence as discourse-initial by calculating the CF and 
PFL in the same manner as a discourse-initial sen- 
tence, but we will retain the focus stacks. We have 
identified a number of sentence types that should 
be included in the set of types which trigger the 
latter treatment; we will explore whether other sen- 
tence types should be included in this set. 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
We have discussed proposed extensions to Sid- 
ner's algorithm to track local focus in the pres- 
ence of illegally omitted NP's, and to use the ex- 
tended focusing algorithm to identify the intended 
co-specifiers of omitted NP's. This strategy is rea- 
sonable since LT may lead a native signer of ASL 
to use discourse-oriented strategies that allow the 
omission of an NP that is the topic of a preceding 
sentence when writing English. 
REFERENCES 
David Carter (1987). Interpreting Anaphors in 
Natural Language Texts. John Wiley and Sons, 
New York. 
Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi and Scott We- 
instein (1983). Providing a unified account of 
definite noun phrases in discourse. In Proceed- 
ings of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, 44-50. 
C.-T. James Huang (1984). On the distribution 
and reference of empty pronouns. Linguistic In- 
quiry, 15(4):531-574. 
Diane C. Lillo-Martin (1991). Universal Grammar 
and American Sign Language. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston. 
Candace L. Sidner (1979). Towards a Computa- 
tional Theory of Definite Anaphora Comprehen- 
sion in English Discourse. Ph.D. thesis, M.I.T., 
Cambridge, MA. 
Candace L. Sidner (1983). Focusing in the com- 
prehension of definite anaphora. In Robert C. 
Berwick and Michael Brady, eds., Computational 
Models of Discourse, chapter 5,267-330. M.I.T. 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Linda Z. Sur i  and Kathleen F. McCoy (1991). 
Language transfer in deaf writing: A correction 
methodology for an instructional system. TR- 
91-20, Dept. of CIS, University of Delaware. 
Linda Z. Suri (1991). Language transfer: A foun- 
dation for correcting the written English of ASL 
signers. TR-91-19, Dept. of CIS, University of 
Delaware. 
