ON THE INTONATION OF MONO- AND DI-SYLLABIC WORDS WITHIN THE 
DISCOURSE FRAMEWORK OF CONVERSATIONAL GAMES 
Jacqueline C. Kowtko* 
Human Communication Research Centre 
University of Edinburgh 
2 Buccleuch Place 
Edinburgh EH8 9LW SCOTLAND 
Internet: J.Kowtko@edinburgh.ac.uk 
Abst rac t  
Recent studies on the analysis of intonational func- 
tion examine a ran~ of materials from cue phrases 
in monologue (Litman and Hirschberg, 1990) and 
dialogue (Hirschberg and Litman, 1987; Hockey, 
1991) to longer utterances in both monologue and 
dialogue (McLemore, 1991). Results match spe- 
cific intonational tunes to certain discourse func- 
tions which are more or less well defined. Al- 
though these results make a convincing case that 
intonation does signal a change in discourse struc- 
ture, the specification of discourse function re- 
mains vague. A suitable taxonomy is needed to 
fine-tune the relationship between intonation and 
discourse function. A recent analysis of dialogue 
(Kowtko et al, 1991) provides a framework of con- 
versational games which allows more fine-grained 
examination ofprosodic function. The current pa- 
per introduces an intonational nalysis of mono- 
and di-syllabic words based upon such a frame- 
work and compares results in progress with previ- 
ous work on intonation. 
In t roduct ion  
Recent approaches to the analysis of intonational 
function within dialogue include an examination f
the tunes carried by single-word cue phrases (e.g. 
now (Hirschberg and Litman, 1987), okay (Hockey, 
1991), and others (Litman and Hirschberg, 1990)) 
across different discourse situations. The litera- 
ture also includes a more sweeping approach to- 
ward classifying phrase-final tunes which presents 
broadly generalized discourse functions for each of 
three types of intonational tune: phrase-final r/se, 
level, and fall (McLemore, 1991). Since there is 
currently no workable grammar of discourse, these 
studies devise their own relevant discourse cate- 
gories. Hockey (1991, p. 1) reflects upon the prob- 
lem, with reference to cue phrases. She states that 
*AUK Overseas Research Student Award provides 
partial support. Thanks to my advisors Stephen Isaxd 
and D. Robert Ladd for comments on drafts. 
cue phrases 
...convey information about the structure of 
a discourse rather than contributing to the 
semantic ontent of a sentence . . . .  Context 
and prosody are major factors contributing 
to differences in interpretation among various 
instances of a cue phrase. In order to investi- 
gate the connection between prosodic features 
and uses of a cue phrase, uses must be iden- 
tified. 
The above is partly a response to Himchberg 
and Litman (1987; Litman and Hirschberg, 
1990) who limit their description to a binary 
discourse/sentential distinction. Litman and 
Hirschberg (1990) leave the analysis of cue phrase 
function to the interpretation of various specific 
discourse approaches and instead focus on validat- 
ing their (1987) prosodic model of cue phrase use 
with additional data from monologue. The model 
specifies that a cue phrase in discourse use will oc- 
cur either alone in a phrase (with unspecified tune) 
or initially in a larger phrase (deaccented or with 
a low tone). Thus, Litman and Hirschberg leave 
open the question of how their prosodic model 
could further specify discourse function. 
McLemore (1991) approaches discourse as 
structured by topics and interruptions. Her data 
includes announcements given at Texas sorority 
meetings and conversation between members. She 
finds that phrase-final tunes indicate certain gen- 
eral functions: rising tune connects, level tune con- 
tinues, and falling tune segments. The specifics 
about how each of these tunes operates depends 
upon the context. For instance, phrase-final rise 
which indicates non-finality or connection mani- 
fests itself as turn-holding in one context, phrase 
subordination i another, and intersentential co- 
hesion in yet another context. Likewise, the other 
tunes perform slight variations on the function of 
continue and segment according to context, which 
is left up to the reader to determine. 
Hockey (1991) admits to settling upon an ar- 
bitrary discourse classification and letting her data 
282 
speak for itself, after attempting to adopt a sys- 
tem of analysis based upon a somewhat similar set 
of speech data 1. She focuses on task oriented i- 
alogue and attempts to specify discourse function 
of the cue phrase okay. She presents her results 
in terms of intonational contours and their cor- 
responding discourse categories, finding that they 
correlate with McLemore's (1991) results: 89% of 
rising contour occurs where the speaker was pass- 
ing up a turn and letting the other person con- 
tinue; 86% of level contour serves to continue an 
instruction; 88% of falling contour marks the end 
of a subtask. But her categorization f discourse 
is still weak. 
Admittedly, there are a limited number of in- 
tonational tunes (low rise, high rise, level, fall, 
etc.). But limitation in intonational tune should 
not force a limitation in discourse category. De- 
tailed understanding of intonational function is 
necessarily linked to a more robust view of dis- 
course structure. These previous tudies provide 
good intonational analysis but within weak dis- 
course structures. 
Conversat iona l  Games  in D ia logue  
The analysis offered by Kowtko, Isard, and Do- 
herty (1991) provides an independently defined 
taxonomy of discourse structure which allows 
a closer examination of how intonation signals 
speaker intention within task oriented ialogue. In 
the analysis, linguistic exchanges termed conver -  
sa t iona l  games (from a tradition of literature orig- 
inating in Power (1974)) embody the initiation- 
response-feedback patterns which relate to under- 
lying non-linguistic goals. It is through the frame- 
work of games and their components, conversa- 
tional moves, that the intonation of mono- and 
di-syllabic words can be compared with their dis- 
course function, as intended by the speaker. 
A conversational game is defined as consist- 
ing of the turns necessary to accomplish a con- 
versational goal or sub-goal. The initiating utter- 
ance determines which game is being played and is 
similar to the core speech act in Traum and Allen 
(1991). The ensuing response and feedback moves 
function as presentation and acceptance phases, in 
the terms of Clark and Schaefer (1987). Implicit, 
mutually agreed rules dictate the shape of a game 
and what constitutes an acceptable move within a 
game. These rules embody procedural, as opposed 
to declarative, knowledge which speakers employ 
in everyday conversation. 
~Hockey had hoped to map discourse categories of 
okay based upon data collected from conversation at
a library reference desk to that arising from a task in 
which one person described a design for another person 
to make out of paper clips. 
283 
The repertoire of games and moves in Kowtko, 
Isard and Doherty (1991) is based upon a map 
task (see Anderson et al, 1991, for a detailed e- 
scription): One person is given a map with a path 
marked on it and has to tell another person how 
to draw the path onto a similar map. Neither par- 
ticipant can see the other's map. 
The nature of the map task is such that 
from the conversations the speaker's intentions 
remain fairly obvious. Kowtko, Isard, and Do- 
herty (1991) report that one expert and three 
naive judges agree on an average of 83% of the 
moves classified in two map task dialogues. Six 
games appear in the dialogues: Instruction, Con- 
firmation, Question-YN, Question-W, Explana- 
tion, and Alignment. They are initiated by 
the following moves: INSTRUCT (Provides in- 
struction), CHECK (Elicits confirmation of known 
information), QUERY-YN (Asks yes-no question 
for unknown information), QUERY-W (Asks con- 
tent, wh-, question for unknown information), EX- 
PLAIN (Gives unelicited escription), and ALIGN 
(Checks alignment of position in task). 
Six other moves provide response and addi- 
tional feedback: CLARIFY (Clarifies or rephrases 
given information), REPLY-Y (Responds affirma- 
tively), REPLY-N (Responds negatively), REPLY- 
W (Responds with requested information), AC- 
KNOWLEDGE (Acknowledges and requests con- 
tinuation), and READY (Indicates intention to be- 
gin a new game). 
Since the map task involves instructing one 
player on how to draw a path, the conversation 
naturally consists of many Instruction games. The 
structure of games allows for nesting of games and 
looping of response and feedback moves within 
games ~ 
The prototypical game consists of two or three 
moves: Initiation, Response, and optionally Feed- 
back. The large majority of games (84% from a 
sample of 3 dialogues, n = 65) match the simple 
prototype. Games that do not match the proto- 
type are still well-formed, having extra response- 
feedback loops, nested games, or extra moves. 
Very few games (less than 2%) break down as a 
result of a misunderstanding or other problem. 
Here is an example of a prototypical Instruc- 
tion game. The vertical bar indicates the bound- 
ary of a move: 
A: Right,\[\[ just draw round it. 
READY I\[ INSTRUCT 
B: Okay. 
ACKNOWLEDGE 
2As a comparison with Clark and Schaefer (1987) 
embedded games often coincide with instances of em- 
bedded contributions in the acceptance phase. 
Conversational game structure, offers a taxon- 
omy which specifies both the function and context 
of an utterance, as move z within game y. This 
facilitates the study of the function of intonational 
tune, since the tune reflects an utterance's conver- 
sational role. 
In tonat ion  in Games  
Using data from map task dialogues (Anderson et 
at., 1091), I have been analyzing mono- and di- 
syllabic words which compose single moves within 
themselves: right, okay, yes, no, mmhmm, and nh- 
huh. In addition, I am categorizing the cases where 
these words form part of a move. They typically 
surface as 5 of the 12 moves in the games anal- 
ysis (Kowtko et at., 1991): READY, ACKNOWL- 
EDGE, ALIGN, REPLY-Y, and REPLY-N. The cur- 
rent data set consists of 68 utterances spoken by 
3 of the 4 conversants in 2 dialogues. 
In order to compare my results with those 
of McLemore (1991) and Hockey (1991), I have 
tried to collapse moves and their contexts into the 
three general categories: ACKNOWLEDGE move 
following INSTRUCT serves to connect; READY, 
ACKNOWLEDGE (and other) moves which inter- 
rupt an INSTRUCT (i.e. precede a continued 
INSTRUCT move) continue; REPLY-Y, REPLY- 
N, ACKNOWLEDGE after EXPLAIN, and AC- 
KNOWLEDGE after a response move (specifically 
elicited moves) segment. 
The data yield the following results s: 42% 
of rises (5 of 11) appear as connecting moves, 
30% of levels (13 of 44) as continuing moves, 
and 69% of falls (9 of 13) as segmenting moves. 
Only one category approaches a match to other 
published results. It is possible that my de- 
cisions of which moves collapse together would 
not be corroborated and cause some of the dis- 
agreement. It is also possible that dialectal vari- 
ation would account for some of the difference 
(The map task contains Scottish as opposed to 
American English), but it would be folly to wave 
such a hand of dismissal. These results reflect 
an intonation-based approach. Information may 
be lost in the process of collapsing various dis- 
course contexts into three intonational categories 
(McLemore, 1991) and then limiting discourse cat- 
egories to match those three existing intonational 
categories (Hockey, 1991). Separate discourse cat- 
egories, in a discourse-based approach, should fa- 
cilitate clearer esults. 
When categorized according to move and dis- 
course context, the data begins to speak on its 
3p > .20 for each result, according to the 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov One-sample Test, indicates ta- 
tistical non-significance. 
284 
own. Granted, the numbers for each category are 
currently small and not statistically reliable, but 
some trends are striking and suggest hat more 
data will prove to yield interesting results. For ex- 
ample, of 15 REPLY-Y/N moves, 12, or 80%, are 
levels, the 3 others being falls in a single category, 
REPLY-Y after QUERY-YN. All 4 cases of REPLY- 
Y after ALIGN are high levels, while REPLY-Y/N 
after QUERY-YN are mostly low levels (6 of 8). 
Work is progressing on other dialogues, amass- 
ing enough pitch trace data to allow clear patterns 
to emerge for each type of move in each game con- 
text. The goal is, given a discourse context, to be 
able to predict an utterance's function or move, 
given the intonation, and, conversely, predict in- 
tonational tune, given the type of move. 
Re ferences  
Anderson, Anne H., Miles Bader, Ellen G. Bard, 
Elizabeth Boyle, Gwyneth Doherty, Simon Car- 
rod, Stephen Isard, JacqueUne Kowtko, Jan 
MeAllister, Jim Miller, Catherine Sotillo, Henry 
Thompson, and Regina Weinert (1991). The 
HCRC Map Task Corpus. Language and Speech, 
34(4):351-366. 
Clark, Herbert H. and Edward F. Schaefer (1987). 
Collaborating on contributions to conversations. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 2(1):19-41. 
Hirsehberg, Julia and Diane Litman (1987). Now 
let's talk about no~ Identifying cue phrases into- 
nationally. Proceedings of the ~5th annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Stanford, 163-171. 
Hockey, Beth Ann (1991). Prosody and the inter- 
pretation of "okay". Presented at the AAAI Fall 
Symposium, Monterey, CA, November. 
Kowtko, Jacqueline, Stephen Isard and Gwyneth 
Doherty (1991). Conversational games within di- 
alogue. Proceedings of the ESPRIT Workshop on 
Discourse Coherence, Edinburgh, April. To ap- 
pear as an HCRC Research Report, Human Com- 
munication Research Centre, Edinburgh, 1992. 
Litman, Diane and Julia Hirschberg (1990). Dis- 
ambiguating cue phrases in text and speech. 
COLING-90 Proceedings, Helsinki, 251-256. 
McLemore, Cynthia A (1991). The Pragmatic 
Interpretation of English Intonation: Sorority 
Speech. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas 
at Austin. 
Power, Richard (1974). A Computer Model of 
Conversation. Ph.D. dissertation, University of 
Edinburgh. 
Traum, David R. and James F. Allen (1991). Con- 
versation Actions. Proceedings of the AAA1 Fall 
Symposium, Monterey, CA, November, 114-119. 
