Spatial Lexical ization in the Translation of Preposit ional 
Phrases 
Arturo  Tru j i l lo*  
Computer  Laboratory  
University of Cambr idge 
Cambr idge CB2 3QG, England 
iat@cl.cam.ac.uk 
Abst rac t  
A pattern in the translation of locative prepositional 
phrases between English and Spanish is presented. A
way of exploiting this pattern is proposed in the con- 
text of a multilingual machine translation system under 
development. 
In t roduct ion  
Two of the main problems in machine translation (MT) 
are ambiguity and lexical gaps. Ambiguity occurs when 
a word in the source language (SL) has more that one 
translation i to the target language (TL). Lexical gaps 
occur when a word in one language can not be trans- 
lated directly into another language. This latter prob- 
lem is viewed by some as the key translation problem, 
(Kameyama et al, 1991). 
A case in point is the translation of prepositional 
phrases (PP). The following entry for the translations 
into Spanish of the preposition along demonstrates this 
(entry taken from (Garcia-Pelayo, 1988)). 
along: pot (by), a lo largo de (to the length of), 
segfin (according to) 
Both problems occur here: there are three different 
translations for the same English preposition, and the 
second of these is a phrase used to describe a sense of 
along which is not encoded as one word in Spanish. 
Lex ica l i za t ion  Pat terns  
It is argued in (Talmy, 1985) that languages differ in 
the type of information they systematically encode in 
lexical units. That is, languages exhibit distinct lexical- 
ization patterns. For instance, in a sentence where both 
the direction and manner of motion are expressed, En- 
glish will encode motion and manner in the same verb, 
whereas in Spanish a distinct lexicalization ofthese two 
meaning components will be favoured (Ibid. p. 69): 
Spa. E1 globo subi6 pot la chimenea flotando 
Lit. the balloon moved-up through the chimney 
floating 
Eng. The balloon floated up the chimney 
*This work was funded by the UK Science and Engineer- 
ing Research Council 
Here Spanish subi6 encodes 'move + up' whereas En- 
glish floated encodes 'move ? floating'. 
Capturing lexicalization patterns of this sort can help 
us make certain generalizations about lexical gaps and 
ambiguities in MT. In the rest of this paper two lex- 
icalization patterns for English locative prepositional 
phrases (PP) will be presented. It will be shown how 
they allow us to simplify the bilingual lexicon of a trans- 
fer based, multi-lingual MT system under development. 
Ev idence  
The two lexicalization patterns under analysis can be 
illustrated using the following three sentences (loc = 
location, dest = destination): 
Eng. She ran underloc the bridge (in circles) 
Spa. Corri5 debajo del puente (en circulos) 
Lit. Ran-she under of-the bridge 
Eng. She ran underpa, h+zoc the bridge (to the other 
side) 
Spa. Corri6 por debajo del puente (hasta el otro 
lado) 
Lit. Ran-she along under of-the bridge 
Eng. She ran underde,t+aoc the bridge (and stopped 
there) 
Spa. Corri6 hasta debajo del puente (y alll se de- 
tuvo) 
Lit. Ran-she to under of-the bridge 
In the first sentence there is a direct translation of the 
English sentence. In this case the features encoded by 
the English and Spanish PP's are the same. In the sec- 
ond sentence the English preposition encodes the path 
followed by the runner and the location of this path 
with respect o the bridge; in Spanish such a combina- 
tion needs to be expressed by the two prepositions pot 
and debajo de. In the third example the English prepo- 
sition expresses the destination of the running and the 
location of that destination with respect o the bridge; 
this has to be expressed by the two Spanish prepositions 
basra and debajo de. 
306 
Other English prepositions which allow either two or 
three of these readings in locative xpressions are shown 
in the table below. 
P location path 'along P' destination 'to P' 
behind detr~s de pot detrLs de hasta detr?s de 
below debajo de pot debajo de hasta debajo de 
inside dentro de pot dentro de hasta dentro de 
outside fuera de pot fuera de hasta fuera de 
under debajo de pot debajo de hasta debajo de 
between entre por entre - 
near cerca de hasta cerca de 
From the table the following generalization can be 
made: whatever the translation P of the locative sense 
of an English preposition is, its path incorporating sense 
is translated as pot P and its destination incorporating 
sense is translated as hasta P. 
In short, certain English prepositions are ambiguous 
between encoding location, path + location or destina- 
tion + location. This is not the case in Spanish. When 
translating from English such ambiguities can not be 
preserved very naturally. In particular, whenever it is 
necessary to preserve them (e.g. for legal documents), 
a disjunction of each individual sense must be used in 
the TL sentence. 
In certain cases, however, it may be the case that 
only one of these readings is allowed. 
Disambiguation 
As far as the selection of the appropriate target lan- 
guage (TL) preposition is concerned the constituent 
which the PP modifies plays a major role in determining 
which readings of a preposition sense are allowed. 
Deciding whether the preposition is used in a spatial 
sense, as opposed to a temporal or causative sense, is 
determined by the semantics of the noun phrase (NP) 
within it, e.g. under the table, under the regime, under 
three minutes, under pressure, under development, un- 
der the bridge; that is, a place denoting NP gives rise 
to a spatial PP. 
There are two cases to consider in disambiguating 
spatial senses. In the case of the PP attaching to a 
noun, the sense selected will be the location one. For 
example 
Eng. The park outs ide  the city 
Spa. E1 parque fuera  de la ciudad 
The second case is when the PP modifies a verb. For 
this case it is necessary to consider the semantics of 
the verb in question. Verbs of motion such as walk, 
crawl, run, swim, row, gallop, march, fly, drive, jump 
and climb allow location, path and destination readings. 
For instance: 
Eng. The diver swam below the boat 
Spa. E1 buceador had6 deba jo  de /por  deba jo  
de /hasta  deba jo  de/1 bote 
Verbs which do not express motion such as stand, sit, 
rest, sleep, live and study usually require the location 
sense of the preposition: 
Eng. The diver rested be low the boat 
Spa. El buceador descans6 deba jo  del bote 
This second analysis is oversimplistic since some 
readings depend on other semantic features of the verb, 
preposition and complement NP involved. However, 
these can be incorporated into the strategy explained 
below. 
One last point to note is that not all the prepositions 
presented allow all three readings. This will be taken 
into consideration when making the generalizations in 
the encoding of the above observation. 
Encoding 
Representat ion  fo r  P repos i t ions  
As exemplified above, the translation of a preposition 
depends on three sources of information: 1) the word 
modified by the PP determines whether the sense of 
the preposition may include a path or a destination 
component, 2) the preposition itself determines how 
many spatial senses it allows, 3) the NP complement 
of the preposition determines whether it is being used 
spatially, temporally, causatively, etc. To encode these 
three sources, prepositions will be represented as three 
place relations. The pattern for a prepositional entry is 
shown in 1); a possible entry for below is shown in 2). 
1) P\[modified, preposition, complement\] 
2) below\[motion-verb, \[path,dest\],place\] 
The notation here is an informal representation f the 
typed feature structures described in (Briscoe et al, 
1992) and (Copestake, 1992). The argument types in 1) 
can be explained as follows. 'Modified' is a type which 
subsumes 'events' (denoted by verbs) and 'objects' (de- 
noted by nouns); the type 'event' is further subdivided 
into 'motion-verb' and 'non-motion-verb'. 'Preposition' 
is a type which subsumes properties which depend on 
the preposition itself; for the examples presented this 
type will encode whether the preposition can express a 
path or a destination (the extra square brackets indi- 
cate a complex type). Finally, 'complement' subsumes 
a number of types corresponding to the semantic field 
of the complement NP; these include 'spatial' with sub- 
type 'place'; 'temporal', and 'causative'. 
The instantiated entry in 2) corresponds to the use 
of below in the diver swam below the boat. Such in- 
stantiations would be made by the grammar by struc- 
ture sharing of the semantic features from the modified 
constituent and from the complement NP. In this way 
the three translations of below would only be produced 
when the semantic features of the modified constituent 
and complement NP unify with the first and third ar- 
guments respectively. 
307 
Bi l ingua l  Lex ica l  Rules 
To encode the regularity of the translations presented, 
bilingual lexical rules will be introduced. These rules 
take as input a bilingual exical entry and give as out- 
put a bilingual exical entry. An oversimplified rule to 
generate the 'path' sense for a preposition that allows 
such a reading is given below (P  = variable ranging 
over prepositions, e = the empty type, lugar = place, 
camino = path). 
Rule: 
PE.g \[motion-verb, \[path,-\],place\] 
P sp~ \[verbo-movimiento,e,lugax\] de 
Pz,g \[motion-verb, \[path,-\] place\] 
P OR\[verbo-movimiento,camino,lugar\] 
P ap~ \[verbo-movimiento,e,lugar\] de 
A similar rule would encode the 'destination' sense gen- 
eralization. 
The bilingual lexical rules work by extending the 
bilingual lexicon automatically before any translation 
takes place; this gives rise to a static transfer compo- 
nent with faster performance but more memory con- 
sumption. Only those entries which unify with the in- 
put part of a rule actually produce a new bilingual en- 
try. 
An example of the 'path' rule being applied is shown 
below. 
Input: 
below\[motion-verb,\[path,dest\],place\] ~-* 
debaj o\[verbo-movimiento,e,lugar\] de 
Output:  
below \[motion-verb,\[path,dest\],place\] *-* 
P OR.\[verbo-movimiento,camino,lugar\] debajo\[verbo- 
movimiento,e,lugar\] de 
Note that not all prepositions in the table above al- 
low all three readings; for this the allowed readings are 
stated in the second argument of the preposition. 
Related Research 
In (Copestake ~ al., 1992) the notion of a llink is intro- 
duced. These are typed feature structures which encode 
generalizations about the type of transfer elations that 
occur in the bilingual lexicon. That is, each bilingual 
entry corresponds to one ffink. Because ffmks are rep- 
resented as a hierarchy of types, the amount of data 
stored in the bilingual lexicon is minimal. The bilin- 
gual lexical rules presented here will further refine the 
idea of a tlink by minimizing the number of bilingual 
lexical entries that have to be coded manually, since 
the bilingual exical rules can be seen as operating over 
ffinks (and hence bilingual exical entries) to give new 
tlinks. 
The grammatical formalism used broadly resembles 
earlier versions of HPSG. The idea of bilingual exical 
rules is partly inspired by the lexical rules introduced 
within this framework in (Pollard & Sag, 1992). 
Conc lus ion  
We have argued that ambiguities and lexical mis- 
matches found in English-Spanish translation of PP's 
can be dealt with using ideas from cross-linguistic stud- 
ies of lexicalization patterns, and suggested a use of the 
relevant linguistic insights for MT applications. 
This consisted of encoding prepositions as three place 
relations, and of having bilingual exical rules which op- 
erate over the bilingual lexicon to expand it. By for- 
mulating regularities in this way consistency and com- 
pactness in the bilingual exicon, and therefore in the 
transfer module, are achieved. 
The next steps will include the implementation of
the mechanism to drive the bilingual exical rules, the 
refining and testing of the semantic lassification, the 
isolation of further egularities and the investigation of
other types of PP's. 
Acknowledgements 
Many thanks to Ted Briscoe, Antonio Sanfilippo, Ann 
Copestake and two anonymous reviewers. Thanks also 
to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, for a travel grant. All re- 
maining errors are mine. 
References 
Briscoe, T.; Copestake, A., and de Paiva, V., editors. 1992 
(forthcoming). Default Inheritance in Unification Based 
Approaches to the Lexicon. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England. 
Copestake, A.; Jones, B.; Sanfilippo, A.; Rodriguez, H.; 
Vossen, P.; Montemagni, S., and Marinal, E. 1992. Multilin- 
gual lexical representations. Technical Report 043, ESPRIT 
BRA-3030 AQUILEX Working Paper, Commission of the 
European Communities, Brussels. 
Copestake, A. 1992. The AQUILEX LKB: Representa- 
tion issues in semi-automatic axluisition of large lexicons. 
In Proceedings 3rd Con\]erence on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, Trento, Italy. 
Garcia-Pelayo, R. 1988. Larousse Gran Diccionario 
Espaaol-Inglgs English-Spanish. Larousse, Mexico DF, Mex- 
ico. 
Kameyama, M.; Ochitani, R., and Peters, S. 1991. Re- 
solving translation mismatches with information flow. In 
Proceedings A CL-91, Berkeley, CA. 
Pollard, C., and Sag, I. 1992 forthcoming. Agreement, 
Binding and Control: Information Based Syntax and Se- 
mantics Vol. II. Lecture Notes. CSLI, Stanford, CA, USA. 
Talmy, L. 1985. Lexicalization patterns: semantic struc- 
ture in lexical forms. In Shopen, T., editor, Language Typol- 
ogy and Syntactic Description Vol. 111: Grammatical Cate- 
gories and the Lexicon. Cambridge University Press, Cam- 
bridge, England. 
308 
