RIGHT ASSOCIAT ION REVIS ITED * 
Michael  Niv 
Department  of  Computer  and Informat ion Science 
Univers i ty o f  Pennsy lvania  
Phi ladelphia, PA, USA 
niv@linc, cis.upenn.edu 
Abstract 
Consideration of when Right Association works and 
when it fails lead to a restatement of this parsing prin- 
ciple in terms of the notion of heaviness. A computa- 
tional investigation of a syntactically annotated corpus 
provides evidence for this proposal and suggest circum- 
stances when RA is likely to make correct attachment 
predictions. 
1 Introduction 
Kimball (1973) proposes the parsing strategy of Right 
Association (RA). RA resolves modifiers attachment am- 
biguities by attaching at the lowest syntactically per- 
missible position along the right frontier. Many au- 
thors (among them Wilks 1985, Schubert 1986, Whit- 
temore et al 1990, and Weischedel et al 1991) in- 
corporate RA into their parsing systems, yet none rely 
on it solely, integrating it instead with disambiguation 
preferences derived from word/constituent/concept o- 
occurrence based. On its own, RA performs rather well, 
given its simplicity, but it is far from adequate: Whitte- 
more et al evaluate RA's performance on PP attachment 
using a corpus derived from computer-mediated dialog. 
They find that RA makes correct predictions 55% of the 
time. Weischedel et al, using a corpus of news sto- 
ries, report a 75% success rate on the general case of 
attachment using a strategy Closest Attachment which 
is essentially RA. In the work cited above, RA plays a 
relatively minor role, as compared with co-occurrence 
based preferences. 
The status of RA is very puzzling, consider:. 
(1) a. John said that Bill left yesterday. 
b. John said that Bill will leave yesterday. 
"I wish to thank Bob Frank, Beth Ann Hockey, Yonng-Snk Lee, 
Mitch Marcus, Ellen Prince, Phil Resnik, Robert Rubinoff, Mark 
Steedman, and the anonymous referees for their helpful suggestions. 
This research as been supported by the following grants: DARPA 
N00014-90-J-1863, ARt  DAAL03-89-C-0031, NSF IRI 90-16592, 
Ben Franklin 91S.30"/8C-1. 
285 
(2) In China, however, there isn't likely to be any 
silver lining because the economy remains guided 
primarily by the state. 
(from the Penn Treebank corpus of Wall Street 
Journal articles) 
On the one hand, many naive informants do not see the 
ambiguity of la and are often confused by the putatively 
semantically unambiguous lb - a strong RA effect. On 
the other hand (2) violates RA with impunity. What is 
it that makes RA operate so strongly in 1 but disappear 
in 2? In this paper I argue that it is an aspect of the 
declarative linguistic ompetence that is operating here, 
not a principle of parsing. 
2 Heaviness 
Quirk et al (1985) define end weight as the ten- 
dency to place material with more information content 
after material with less information content. This notion 
is closely related with end focus which is stated in terms 
of importance of the contribution of the constituent, (not 
merely the quantity of lexical material.) These two prin- 
ciples operate in an additive fashion. Quirk et al use 
heaviness to account for a variety of phenomena, mong 
them: 
? genitive NPs: the shock of his resignation, 
* his resignation's shock. 
? it-extraposition: It bothered me that she left 
quickly. ? That she left quickly bothered me. 
Heaviness clearly plays a role in modifier attach- 
ment, as shown in table 1. My claim is that what is 
wrong with sentences such as (1) is the violation, in the 
high attachment, of the principle of end weight. While 
violations of the principle of end weight in unambigu- 
ous sentences (e.g. those in table 1) cause little grief, 
as they are easily accommodated by the hearer, the on- 
line decision process of disambiguationjcould well be 
much more sensitive to small differences in the degree 
of violation. In particular, it would seem that in (1)b, 
John sold it today. 
John sold the newspapers today. 
John sold his rusty socket-wrench set today. 
John sold his collection of 45RPM Elvis 
records today. 
John sold his collection of old newspapers from 
before the Civil War today. 
John sold today it. 
John sold today the newspapers. 
John sold today his rusty socket-wrench set. 
John sold today his collection of 45RPM Elvis 
records. 
John sold today his collection of old newspapers 
from before the Civil War. 
Table I: Illustration of heaviness and word order 
the heaviness-based preference for low attachment has a 
chance to influence the parser before the inference-based 
preference for high attachment. 
Theprecise definition of heaviness i an open prob- 
lem. It is not clear whether end weight and end focus ad- 
equately capture all of its subtlety. For the present study 
I approximate heaviness by easily computable means, 
namely the presence of a clause within a given con- 
stituent. 
3 A study 
The consequence of my claim is that light adverbials 
cannot be placed after heavy VP arguments, while heavy 
adverbials are not subject o such a constraint. When the 
speaker wishes to convey the information in (1)a, there 
are other word-orders available, namely, 
(3) a. Yesterday John said that Bill left. 
b. John said yesterday that Bill left. 
If the claim is correct hen when a short adverbial modi- 
fies a VP which contains aheavy argument, he adverbial 
will appear either before the VP or between the verb and 
the argument. Heavy adverbials hould be immune from 
this constraint. 
To verify this prediction, I conducted an investi- 
gation of the Penn Treebank corpus of about 1 mil- 
lion words syntactically annotated text from the Wall 
Street Journal. Unfortunately, the corpus does not dis- 
tinguish between arguments and adjuncts - they're both 
annotated as daughters of VP. Since at this time, I do 
not have a dictionary-based method for distinguishing 
(VP asked (S when...)) from (VP left (S when...)), my 
search cannot include all adverbials, only those which 
could never (or rarely) serve as arguments. I therefore 
restricted my search to subgroups of the adverbials. 
1. Ss whose complementizers participate overwhelm- 
ingly in adjuncts: after although as because be- 
fore besides but by despite ven lest meanwhile once 
provided should since so though unless until upon 
whereas while. 
2. single word adverbials: now however then already 
here too recently instead often later once yet previ- 
ously especially again earlier soon ever jirst indeed 
sharply largely usually together quickly closely di- 
rectly alone sometimes yesterday 
The particular words were chosen solely on the basis 
of frequency in the corpus, without 'peeking' at their 
word-order behavior 1.
For arguments, I only considered NPs and Ss with 
complementizer that, and the zero complementizer. 
The results of this investigation appear the following 
\[able: 
adverbial: 
arg type 
light 
heavy 
total 
single word 
pre-arg posbarg 
760 399 
267 5 
1027 404 
clausal 
pre-arg post-arg 
13 597 
7 45 
20 642 
Of 1431 occurrences of single word adverbials, 404 
(28.2%) appear after the argument. If we consider only 
cases where the verb takes a heavy argument (defined as 
one which contains an S), of the 273 occurrences, only 
5 (1.8%) appear after the argument. This interaction 
with heaviness of the argument is statistically significant 
(X 2 = 115.5,p < .001). 
Clausal adverbials tend to be placed after the verbal 
argument: only 20 out of the 662 occurrences of clausal 
adverbials appear at a position before the argument of 
the verb. Even when the argument is heavy, clausal 
adverbials appear on the right: 45 out of a total of 52 
clausal adverbials (86.5%). 
(2) and (4) are two examples of RA-violating sen- 
tences which I have found. 
(4) Bankruptcy specialists ay Mr. Kravis set a 
precedent for putting new money in sour LBOs 
recently when KKR restructured foundering Sea- 
man Furniture, doubling KKR's equity slake. 
To summarize: light adverbials tend to appear be- 
fore a heavy argument and heavy adverbials tend to ap- 
pear after it. The prediction is thus confirmed. 
1 Each adverbial can appear in at least one position before the argu- 
ment to the verb (sentence initial, preverb, between verb and argument) 
and at least one post-verbal-argument position (end of VP, end of S). 
286 
RA is at a loss to explain this sensitivity to heavi- 
ness. But even a revision of RA, such as the one pro- 
posectby Schubert (1986) which is sensitive to the size 
of the modifier and of the modified constituent, would 
still require additional stipulation to explain the apparent 
conspiracy between a parsing strategy and tendencies 
in generator to produce sentences with the word-order 
properties observed above. 
4 Parsing 
How can we exploit he findings above in our design of 
practical parsers? Clearly RA seems to work extremely 
well for single word adverbials, but how about clausal 
adverbials? To investigate this, I conducted another 
search of the corpus, this time considering only ambigu- 
ous attachment sites. I found all structures matching the 
following two low-attached schemata 2 
low VP attached: \[vp ... \[s * \[vp * adv *\] * \] ...\] 
low S attached: \[vp ... \[s * adv *\] ...\] 
and the following two high-attached schemata 
high VP attached: \[vp v * \[... \[s \]\] adv *\] 
high S attached: Is * \[... \[vp ... \[s \]\]\] adv * \] 
The results are summarized in the following table: 
adverb-type low-attached high-att. % high. 
single word 1116 10 0.8% 
clausal 817 194 19,2% 
As expected, with single-word adverbials, RA is al- 
most always right, failing only 0.8% of the time. How- 
ever, with clausal adverbials, RA is incorrect almost one 
out of five times. 
5 Toward a Meaning-based ac- 
count of Heaviness 
At the end of section 3 I stated that a declarative ac- 
count of the ill-formedness of a heavy argument fol- 
lowed by a light modifier is more parsimonious than 
separate accounts for parsing preferences and generation 
preferences. I would like to suggest that it is possible to 
formalize the intuition of 'heaviness' in terms of an as- 
pect of the meaning of the constituents involved, namely 
their givenness in the discourse. 
Given entities tend to require short expressions (typ- 
ically pronouns) for reactivation, whereas new entities 
tend to be introduced with more elaborated expressions. 
2By * I mean match 0 or more daughters. By Ix ... \[y \]\] I
mean constituent x contains constituent y as a rightmost descendant. 
By \[x ... \[y \] ... \] I mean constituent x contains constituent y as a 
descendant. 
287 
In fact, it is possible to manipulate heaviness by chang- 
ing the context. For example, (1)b is natural in the 
following dialog z (when appropriately intoned) 
A: John said that Bill will leave next week, and that 
Mary will go on sabbatical in September. 
B: Oh really? When announce all this? 
A: He said that Bill will leave yesterday, and he told 
us about Mary's sabbatical this morning. 
6 Conclusion 
I have argued that the apparent variability in the applica- 
bility of Right Association can be explained if we con- 
sider the heaviness of the constituents involved. I have 
demonstrated that in at least one written genre, light 
adverbials are rarely produced after heavy arguments - 
precisely the configuration which causes the strongest 
RA-type effects. This demarcates a subset of attach- 
ment ambiguities where it is quite profitable to use RA 
as an approximation of the human sentence processor. 
The work reported here considers only a subset of 
the attachment data in the corpus. The corpus itself rep- 
resents avery narrow genre of written discourse. For the 
central claim to be valid, the findings must be replicated 
on a corpus of naturally occurring spontaneous speech. 
A rigorous account of heaviness i also required. These 
await further esearch. 
References 
\[1\] Kimball, John. Seven Principles of Surface Structure 
Parsing. Cognition 2(1). 1973. 
\[2\] Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey 
Leech and Jan Svartvik. A Comprehensive Grammar of 
the English Language. Longman. London. 1985. 
\[3\] Schubert, Lenhart. Are there Preference Trade-offs 
in Attachment Decisions? AAAI-86. 
\[4\] Wilks Yorick. Right Attachment and Preference Se- 
mantics. ACL-85 
\[5\] Weischedel, Ralph, Damaris Ayuso, R. Bobrow, 
Sean Boisen, Robert Ingria, and Jeff Palmucci. Partial 
Parsing: A Report on Work in Progress. Proceedings of 
the DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop. 
1991. 
\[6\] Whittemore, Greg, Kathleen Ferrara, and Hans 
Brunner. Empirical study of predictive powers of sim- 
ple attachment schemes for post-modifier prepositional 
phrases. ACL-90. 
sI am grateful to EUen Prince for a discussion ofthis issue. 
