A BASIS FOR A FORMALIZATION OF LINGUISTIC STYLE 
Stephen J. Green 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Waterloo 
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 3G1 
INTRODUCTION 
Style in language is more than just surface ap- 
peaxance, on the contrary, it is an essential part 
of the meaning conveyed by the writer. A com- 
putational theory of style could be of great use 
in many computational linguistics applications. A
system that is 'stylistically aware' could analyze the 
writer's stylistic intent and understand the com- 
plex interaction of choices that produce a certain 
effect. In applications such as machine translation, 
a computational theory of stylistics would allow 
the preservation or modification of stylistic effects 
across languages. The theory would also be use- 
ful in computer-aided language instruction where, 
along with vocabulary and grammar, the individ- 
ual writing style of the student could be analysed 
and amended. The work described in this paper 
will be incorporated into into the Nigel grammar 
of the Penman system to provide a fine degree of 
stylistic ontrol in language generation. 
Drawing on both classical and contemporary 
rhetorical theory, we view style as goal directed: 
that is, texts axe written for a purpose and this 
purpose dictates the stylistic choices that must be 
made. We find a computational counterpart tothis 
view in the work of Hovy (1988), who used style as 
one of the pragmatic factors controlling eneration 
in his PAULINE system. More recently, DiMaxco 
(1990), the basis for this research, attempted to 
codify many of the elements of style that had pre- 
viously been defined only descriptively and infor- 
mally. 
DiMaxco presented a vocabulary of stylistic 
terms that was used to construct a syntactic stylis- 
tic grammar at three levels: primitive elements, ab- 
stract elements, and stylistic goals. At the base 
level of the grammar, the primitive elements de- 
scribe the stylistic effects of individual sentence 
components. These primitive elements axe then 
combined at a level of more abstract descriptions. 
These abstract elements comprise a stylistic 'met- 
alanguage' that allows each element o be used 
to characterize a gIoup of stylistically similar sen- 
tences. At the top level are the stylistic goals, such 
as clarity or concreteness, that are realized by pat- 
terns of the abstract elements. 
312 
The primitive-element level of DiMaxco's 
stylistic grammar isdivided into two views, connec- 
tire and hierarchic. Here I will focus on the connec- 
tive view, for which the stylistic effect of a sentence 
component is determined by considering its degree 
of cohesiveness within the sentence. The degrees of 
cohesiveness, or connectivity, vary on a scale from 
conjunct ? (neither connective nor disconnective) 
through conjunct 4 (excessively connective). 1 
In more recent work, DiMaxco and Hirst (1992) 
have provided a more formal basis for their the- 
ory of linguistic style, a basis that has its roots 
in the established linguistic theory of Halliday and 
Hasan (1976) and Halliday (1985). I am extend- 
ing and refining their preliminary classifications of
the primitive elements to provide a sounder basis 
for the entire computational theory of style. I will 
show how the connective primitive elements can 
be firmly tied to linguistic theory and how their 
properties are transmitted through the levels of the 
stylistic grammar. 
A BASIS FOR LINGUISTIC STYLE 
Drawing on the work of Halliday and Hasan (1976), 
a seminal work in textual cohesion, I will show how 
intrasentence ohesion, and its related stylistic ef- 
fects, can be derived from the textual cohesive rela- 
tions that Halliday and Hasan describe. Although 
there are undoubtedly significant stylistic effects at 
the text level, I feel that the codification of style at 
the sentence l vel has not yet been fully explored. 
For the most part, these cohesive relations func- 
tion as well at the sentence l vel as they do at the 
text level. This is illustrated in Quirk et al (1985), 
where all of the relations that Halliday and Hasan 
describe for texts are also demonstrated within sin- 
gle sentences. 
Halliday and Hasan enumerate four major 
types of cohesive relations for English: ellipsis, sub- 
stitution, reference, and conjunction. They classify 
IThere is also a scale of disconnectivity, or 'anti- 
junctness', but I will not be using it in this discussion. 
these relations in terms of their cohesive strengths 
relative to one another: ellipsis and substitution axe 
the most cohesive relations, followed by reference, 
with conjunction being the least cohesive. One of 
the main objectives of my research is determining 
how all of these cohesive relations can be incorpo- 
rated into the scale of 'conjunctness' described ear- 
lier. In this paper, I will deal only with ellipsis. 2
Halliday and Hasan consider substitution to be 
equally as cohesive as ellipsis. I argue that el- 
lipsis is more cohesive, after Quirk etal .  (1985, 
p. 859) who state that for substitution and ellip- 
sis "there are generally strong preferences for the 
most economical variant, viz the one which exhibits 
the greatest degree of reduction." Thus, the ellip- 
tical relations are more cohesive, due to the fact 
that they are generally more reduced. In DiMaxco 
and Hirst, all forms of eRipsis are given a classifica- 
tion of conjunct s (strongly connective), but here I 
will look at the three types of ellipsis separately, as- 
signing each its own degree of cohesiveness,  This 
assignment is made using by considering the most 
reducing relations to be the most cohesive, in the 
spirit of the above quote from Quirk et al Since 
Halliday and Hasan provide a ranking for the four 
types of cohesive relation, and since ellipsis is con- 
sidered to be the most cohesive relation, all of the 
degrees assigned for the different ypes of ellipsis 
will be ranked in the top half of the scale of cohe- 
siveness. 
The first type of ellipsis which Halliday and 
Hasan deal with is nominal ellipsis. This occurs 
most often when a common noun is elided from 
a nominal group and some other element of the 
nominal group takes the place of this elided noun. 
An example of this occurs in (1), where the noun 
ezpedition is elided, and the numerative t~0o takes 
its place. 
(1) The first expedition was quickly followed by 
another two Q.4 
This is the least concise form of ellipsis, since only 
a single noun is elided. As such, it is given the 
lowest classification in this category: conjunct s
(moderately-strong connective). 
Next, we have verbal ellipsis. In instances of 
verbal ellipsis, any of the operators in the verbal 
group may be elided, as opposed to nominal ellipsis 
aWhen identifying the kinds of ellipsis, I use the 
texans defined by Halliday and Hasan and Quirk etal. 
All examples are taken from the appropriate sections 
of these references. 
sI will be using a wider scale of cohesiveness than 
the one used by DLMarco and Hirst. Here conjunc~ e,
rather than conjunct*, becomes the classification for 
the excessively connective. This change is made to al- 
low for the description of more-subtle stylistic effects 
than is currently possible. 
4Adapted from Quirk etal. example 12.54, p. 900. 
where only the noun is elided. As Halliday and 
Hasan point out, many forms of verbal ellipsis are 
very diiticnlt o detect, due to the complexity of the 
English verbal group. Because of this, I will deal 
only with two simple cases of verbal ellipsis: those 
in which the verbal group is removed entirely, as in 
(2), and those in which the verbal group consists 
of only modal operators, as in (3). 
(2) You will speak to whoever I tell you to Q.5 
(3) It may come or it may not ?.e 
Both of these sentences axe quite concise, as all, 
or nearly all, of the verbal group is elided. Verbal 
ellipsis is generally more concise than nominal el- 
lipsis, and thus it has a higher level of cohesiveness: 
conjunct 4. 
Finally, we look at clausal ellipsis, in which an 
entire clause is elided from a sentence. We see an 
example of this in (4). 
(4) You can borrow my pen if you want Q.7 
Since this form is more concise than either of the 
previous two verbal forms, we accord it a still 
higher level of cohesiveness: conjunct s. This clas- 
sification gives clausal ellipsis a degree of cohesive- 
ness verging on the extreme. The excessive amount 
of missing information tends to become conspicu- 
ous by its absence. Here we axe beginning to devi- 
ate from what would be considered normal usage, 
creating an effect that DiMaxco (1990) would call 
st~/listic discord. 
I will now present a short example to demon- 
strate how the effects of a foundation based on 
functional theory axe built up through the three 
levels of the stylistic grammar. 
313 
A SIMPLE EXAMPLE 
I will use the functional basis of style described 
above to illustrate how small variations in sen- 
tence structure can lead to larger variations in the 
stylistic goals of a sentence. This will be demon- 
strated by tracing the analysis of an example sen- 
tence through the levels of description of the stylis- 
tic grammar. 
The first step in the analysis determines which 
connective primitive elements axe present in the 
sentence and where they occur in our scale of co- 
hesiveness. Next, the primitive elements axe used 
to determine which abstract elements axe present. 
Finally the abstract elements axe examined to de- 
termine the stylistic goals of the sentence. 
We start with sentence (4) as above. This 
sentence contains several connective primitive d- 
ements, the most prominent being the conjunct s
SQuirk et al example 12.64, p. 908. 
eAdapted from Halliday and Hasan example 4:57, 
p. 170. 
~Quisk etal. example 12.65, p. 909. 
clausal ellipsis noted eaxlier, as well as instances of 
a conjunct a personal reference (you), a conjunct 2
deictic (my), and a conjunct 1 adversative (if you 
want). (Although I have completed the analysis for 
the other cohesive relations, here I am using the 
preliminary classifications given by DiMaxco and 
Hirst (1992) for the other connective lements.) 
Apart from the terminal ellipsis, all of these 
connective lements are concordant, that is, they 
represent constructions that conform to normal us- 
age. The terminal ellipsis, due to its excessively 
high level of cohesiveness, i  weakly discordant, a
slight deviation from normal usage. Thus, this sen- 
tence contains initial and medial concords, followed 
by a terminal discord. In the terms of the stylis- 
tic grammar, this shift from concord to discord is 
formalized in the abstract element of dissolution. 
The presence of dissolution characterizes the stylis- 
tic goal of concreteness, which is associated with 
sentences that suggest an effect of specificity by an 
emphasis on certain components of a sentence. In 
this sentence, the emphasis is created by the ter- 
minal discord. The clausal ellipsis requires that a 
great deal of information be recovered by the reader 
and because of this it leaves her feeling that the 
sentence is unfinished. 
The next example, sentence (5), is a modifica- 
tion of (4) and is an example of verbal ellipsis, as 
in (2). 
(5) You can borrow my pen if you want to Q. 
In this sentence, all of the previous connective l- 
ements remain except for the terminal clausal el- 
lipsis. This ellipsis has been replaced by a ver- 
bal ellipsis that is conjunct 4, strongly but not ex- 
cessively cohesive. This replacement consequently 
eliminates the terminal discord present in the pre- 
vious sentence, changing it to a strong concord. 
Thus, (5) has initial, medial, and terminal con- 
cords, making it a fully concordant sentence. At 
the level of abstract elements, such a sentence is 
said to be centroschematic, that is, a sentence with 
a central, dominant clause with optional depen- 
dent clauses and complex subordination. Cen- 
troschematic sentences characterize the stylistic 
goal of clarity, which is associated with sentences 
that suggest plainness, preciseness, and predictabil- 
ity. In this sentence, the effect of predictability is
created by removing the terminal discord, thus re- 
solving the unfulfilled expectations of (4). 
Thus, using the cohesive relations of Halliday 
and Hasan, it is possible, as I have shown, to pro- 
vide a formal basis for the connective primitive el- 
ements of the syntactic stylistic grammar. These 
primitive elements can now be used as the compo- 
nents of more-precise abstract elements, with sub- 
tle variations in the primitive elements allowing 
more-expressive ariations in the abstract elements 
314 
that constitute a sentence. These variations at the 
abstract-element level of the grammar axe mirrored 
at the level of stylistic goals by large variations in 
the overall goals attributed to a sentence. 
CONCLUSION 
The research presented above is a part of a larger 
group project on the theory and applications of 
computational stylistics. I have completed the in- 
tegration of all the connective primitive elements 
with Halliday and Hasan's theory of cohesion. My 
next step is to perform the same kind of analysis 
for the hierarchic primitive elements, giving them a 
solid basis in functional theory. In addition, I have 
completed refinements to the abstract elements, 
making them more expressive, and I will be able 
to formulate their definitions in terms of the new 
primitive elements. 
The full theory of style will be implemented in
a functionally-based stylistic analyzer by Pat Hoyt. 
This control of stylistic analysis combined with my 
work on the Penman generation system will allow 
us to begin exploring the myriad of applications 
that require an understanding of the subtle but sig- 
nificant nuances of language. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the University of 
Waterloo and the Information Technology Re- 
seaxch Centres. My thanks to Chyrsanne DiMaxco, 
Gracme Hirst, and Cameron Shelley for their com- 
ments on an earlier version of this paper, and to the 
Anonymous Referees for their helpful criticisms. 
REFERENCES 
DiMaxco, Chrysanne (1990). Computational stylis- 
tics for natural language translation. PhD the- 
sis, University of Toronto. 
DiMaxco, Chrysanne and Hirst, Graeme (1992). 
"A computational approach to style in lan- 
guage." Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Halliday, Michael (1985). An introduction to func- 
tional grammar. Edward Arnold. 
Halliday, Michael and Hasan, Ruqaiya (1976) Co- 
hesion in English. Longman. 
Hovy, Eduaxd H. (1988). Generating natural lan- 
guage under pragmatic constraints. Lawrence 
Edbaum Associates. 
Quirk, Randolph, Greenbaum, Sidney, Leech, Ge- 
offrey, and Svartvik, Jan (1985). A comprehen- 
sive grammar of the English language. Long- 
man.  
