A LOGICAL  SEMANTICS  
FOR NONMONOTONIC  SORTS 
Abst ract  
Suppose we have a feature system, and we wish 
to add default values in a well-defined way. We 
might start with Kasper-Rounds logic, and use 
Reiter's example to form it into a default logic. 
Giving a node a default value would be equiv- 
alent to saying "if it is consistent for this node 
to have that value, then it does." Then we 
could use default theories to describe feature 
structures. The particular feature structure 
described would be the structure that supports 
the extension of the default theory. This is, in 
effect, what the theory of nonmonotonic sorts 
gives you. This paper describes how that the- 
ory derives from what is described above. 
Mark  A .  Young &~ B i l l  Rounds  
Art i f ic ia l  In te l l igence  Laboratory  
The  Un ivers i ty  of  M ich igan  
1101 Bea l  Ave.  
Ann  Arbor ,  M I  48109 
marky, rounds?engin, umich, edu 
The original presentation of nonmonotonic sorts 
provided only a description of their operation and 
an informal description of their meaning. In this 
paper, we present a logical basis for NSs and non- 
monotonically sorted feature structures (NSFSs). 
NSFSs are shown to be equivalent to default theo- 
ries of default logic (Reiter 1980). In particular, we 
show how nonmonotonic sort unification is equiv- 
alent to finding the smallest default theory that 
describes both NSFSs; and also how taking a solu- 
tion for a NSFS is the same as finding an extension 
for that theory. 
INTRODUCTION 
There have been many suggestions for incorporat- 
ing defaults into unification-based grammar for- 
malisms (Bouma 1990; Bouma 1992; Carpenter 
1991; Kaplan 1987; Russell et al 1992; Shieber 
1986; Shieber 1987). Each of these proposes a 
non-commutative, non-associative default unifica- 
tion operation that combines one structure repre- 
senting strict information with another epresent- 
ing default information. When presented with a 
set of structures, the result depends on the order in 
which the structures are combined. This runs very 
much against he unification tradition, in which any 
set has a unique most general satisfier (if a satisfier 
exists at all). 
A method that is free of these ordering effects 
was presented in (Young 1992). The method of 
nonmonotonic sorts (NSs) allows default labels to 
be assigned at any time, and used only in the ab- 
sence of conflicting information. NSs replace the 
more traditional labels on feature structures to give 
nonmonotonically sorted feature structures (NS- 
FSs). These structures can be combined by an asso- 
ciative and commutative unification operation. FSs 
are rederived from NSFSs by taking a solution--an 
operation defined in terms of information present 
in the NSFS. 
FEATURE SYSTEMS 
Unification-based grammar formalisms use formal 
objects called feature structures to encode linguis- 
tic information. We use a variant of the standard 
definition. Each structure has a sort (drawn from 
a finite set 8), and a (possibly empty) set of at- 
tributes (drawn from a finite set ~).  
Def in i t ion1  A feature structure is a tuple 
(Q, r, 6, O) where 
? Q is a finite set of nodes, 
? r E Q is the root node, 
? 6 : QxY  r ---+ Q is a partial feature value function 
that gives the edges and their labels, and 
? (9 : Q ~ S is a sorting function that gives the 
labels of the nodes. 
This structure must be connected. 
It is not unusual to require that these structures 
also be acyclic. For some systems O is defined only 
for sink nodes (PATR-II, for example). Fig. 1 shows 
a standard textual representation for a FS. 
We sometimes want to refer to substructures of a 
FS. If .A is a feature structure as described above, 
we write .A / f  for the feature structure rooted at 
6(q, f) .  This feature structure is defined by Q~ c_ Q, 
the set of nodes that can be reached from 6(r, f) .  
We will use the letter p (possibly subscripted) to 
represent paths (that is, finite sequences from .T'*). 
We will also extend ~ to have paths in its second 
209 
<subj agr person> isa 3rd 
<subj agr number> isa singular 
<subj agr> = <pred agr> 
<pred actor> = <subj> 
<pred rep> isa sleep 
<pred tense> isa present 
Figure 1: Textual Feature Structure: "Uther 
sleeps." 
TRUE 
FALSE 
a where a E S 
pl -" P2 where each Pi E J~* 
f : ? where f E ~- and ? E FML 
?^? 
?v?  
Figure 2: SFML: the domain of sorted logical for- 
mulas. 
1. A 
2. A 
3 . .4  
4 . ,4  
5. A 
6. A 
7 . .4  
position, with the notion of iterated application of 
5. 
We will assume that there is a partial order, -~, 
defined on S. This ordering is such that the great- 
est lower bound of any two sorts is unique, if it 
exists. In other words, (S U {_1_}, -q) is a meet- 
semilattice (where _l_ represents inconsistency or 
failure). This allows us to define the most general 
unifier of two sorts as their greatest lower bound, 
which write as aAsb. We also assume that there is 
a most general sort, T, called top. The structure 
(S, -g) is called the sort hierarchy. 
KASPER-ROUNDS LOGIC  
(Kasper 1988) provides a logic for describing fea- 
ture structures. Fig. 2 shows the domain of these 
logical formulas. We use the standard notion of 
satisfaction. Let A = (Q, r, 5, O). 
= TRUE always; 
- FALSE never; 
=a~O(r )__ .a ;  
=pl  --'p~ -:-, > 5(r, pl) = 5(r,p~); 
= f : ? ?=~ A/ f  is defined and A/ f  ~ ?; 
= ?A? ?===~ A ~ ? and .A ~ ?; 
= ? V?  ?---~ A ~?orA~? 
Note that item 3 is different han Kasper's original 
formulation. Kasper was working with a flat sort 
hierarchy and a version of FSs that allowed sorts 
only on sink nodes. The revised version allows for 
order-sorted hierarchies and internal sorted nodes. 
NONMONOTONIC  SORTS 
Figure 3 shows a lexical inheritance hierarchy for 
a subset of German verbs. The hierarchy specifies 
VERB template 
<past tense suffix> default +te 
<past participle prefix> isa ge+ 
<past participle suffix> default +t 
spiel lex VERB 
MIDDLE-VERB template VERB 
<past participle suffix> isa +en 
mahl lex MIDDLE-VERB 
STRONG-VERB template MIDDLE-VERB 
<past ense suffix> isa 0 
zwing lex STRONG-VERB 
<past tense stem> isa zwang 
<past participle stem> isa zwung 
Figure 3: Example Lexicon with Defaults 
strict (isa) and default (default) values for various 
suffixes. If we ignore the difference between strict 
and default values, we find that the information 
specified for the past participle of mahl is inconsis- 
tent. The MIDDLE-VERB template gives +en as 
the suffix, while VERB gives +t. The declaration 
of the latter as a default tells the system that it 
should be dropped in favour of the former. The 
method of nonmonotonic sorts formalizes this no- 
tion of separating strict from default information. 
Def in i t ion  2 A nonmonotonic sort is a pair (s, A / 
where s E S, and A C S such that for each d E A,  
d-4 s. 
The first element, s, represents the strict informa- 
tion. The default sorts are gathered together in A. 
We write Af for the set of nonmonotonic sorts. 
Given a pair of nonmonotonic sorts, we can unify 
them to get a third NS that represents their com- 
bined information. 
Def in i t ion  3 The nonmonotonic sort unifier of 
nonmonotonic sorts (s l ,Az)  and (s2,As) is the 
nonmonotonic sort (s, A) where 
? S ~ 81Ass2 ,  and 
? A = {dAss I d E Az U A2 A (dAss) -~ s}. 
The nonmonotonic sort unifier is undefined if 
saAss2 is undefined. We write nzA~n2 for the NS 
unifier of nl and n2. 
The method strengthens consistent defaults while 
eliminating redundant and inconsistent ones. It 
should be clear from this definition that NS unifica- 
tion is both commutative and associative. Thus we 
may speak of the NS unifier of a set of NSs, with- 
out regard to the order those NSs appear. Looking 
back to our German verbs example, the past par- 
ticiple suffix in VERB is (T, {+t}), while that of 
MIDDLE-VERB is (+en, {}). The lexical entry for 
mahl gets their nonmonotonic sort unifier, which is 
(+en, {}). If +tAs+en had been defined, and equal 
210 
to, say, +ten, then the NS unifier of (T, {+t}) and 
(+en, {}) would have been (+an, {+ten}}. 
Once we have nonmonotonic sorts, we can create 
nonmonotonically sorted feature structures (NS- 
FSs) by replacing the function 0 : Q ~ S by a 
function ~ : Q ~ Af. The nodes of the graph 
are thus labeled by NSs instead of the usual sorts. 
NSFSs may be unified by the same procedures as 
before, only replacing sort unification at the nodes 
with nonmonotonic sort unification. NSFS unifi- 
cation, written with the symbol rlN, is associative 
and commutative. 
NSFSs allow us to carry around default sorts, but 
has so far given us no way to apply them. When 
we are done collecting information, we will want 
to return to the original system of FSs, using all 
and only the applicable defaults. To do that, we 
introduce the notions of explanation and solution. 
Def in i t ion  4 A sort t is said to be explained by a 
nonmonotonic sort (s,A} if there is a D C A such 
that t = S^s(AsD) .  I f  t is a maximally specific 
explained sort, lhen ~ is called a solution of n. 
The solutions for {+en, {)) and {T, {+t}) are +en 
and +t respectively. The latter NS also explains T. 
Note that, while D is maximal, it's not necessar- 
ily the case that D = A. If we have mutually incon- 
sistent defaults in A, then we will have more than 
one maximal consistent set of defaults, and thus 
more than one solution. On the other hand, strict 
information can eliminate defaults during unifica- 
tion. That  means that a particular template can 
inherit conflicting defaults and still have a unique 
solution--provided that enough strict information 
is given to disambiguate. 
NSFS solutions are defined in much the same way 
as NS solutions. 
Def in i t ion 5 A FS (Q,r,~,O) is said to be ex- 
plained by a NSFS (Q,r, 8, Q) if for each node 
q E Q we have ~2(q) explains O(q). If.A is a max- 
imally specific explained FS, then A is called a so- 
lution. 
If  we look again at our German verbs example, we 
can see that the solution we get for mahl is the FS 
that we want. The inconsistent default suffix +t 
has been eliminated by the strict +en, and the sole 
remaining default must be applied. 
For the generic way we have defined feature 
structures, a NSFS solution can be obtained sim- 
ply by taking NS solutions at each node. More 
restricted versions of FSs may require more care. 
For instance, if sorts are not allowed on internal 
nodes, then defining an attribute for a node will 
eliminate any default sorts assigned to that node. 
Another example where care must be taken is with 
typed feature structures (Carpenter 1992). Here 
the application of a default at one node can add 
strict information at another (possibly making a 
default at the other node inconsistent). The defini- 
tion of NSFS solution handles both of these cases 
(and others) by requiring that the solution be a 
FS as the original system defines them. In both 
of these cases, however, the work can be (at least 
partially) delegated to the unification routine (in 
the former by Mlowing labels with only defaults 
to be removed when attributes are defined, and in 
the latter by propagating type restrictions on strict 
sorts). 
What is done in other systems in one step has 
been here broken into two steps--gathering infor- 
mation and taking a solution. It is important hat 
the second step be carried out appropriately, since 
it re-introduces the nonmonotonicity that we've 
taken out of the first step. For a lexicon, templates 
exist in order to organize information about words. 
Thus it is appropriate to take the solution of a lex- 
ical entry (which corresponds to a word) but not of 
a higher template (which does not). If the lexicon 
were queried for the lexical entry for mahl, then, it 
would collect the information from all appropriate 
templates using NSFS unification, and return the 
solution of that NSFS as the result. 
DEFAULT LOGIC  
The semantics for nonmonotonic sorts is motivated 
by default logic (Reiter 1980). What  we want a 
default sort to mean is: "if it is consistent for this 
node to have that sort, then it does." But where 
Reiter based his DL on a first order language, we 
want to base ours on Kasper-P~ounds logic. This 
will require some minor alterations to lZeiter's for- 
malism. 
A default theory is a pair (D, W) where D is a 
set of default inferences and W is a set of sentences 
from the underlying logic. The default inferences 
are triples, written in the form 
~:Mp 
Each of the greek letters here represents a wff from 
the logic. The meaning of the default inference is 
that if ~ is believed and it is consistent o assume 
t5, then 7 can be believed. 
Given a default theory (D, W), we are interested 
in knowing what can we believe. Such a set of be- 
liefs, cMled an extension, is a closure of W under 
the usual rules of inference combined with the de- 
fault rules of inference given in D. An extension 
E is a minimal closed set containing W and such 
that if c~ :M f l /7 is a default, and if ~ E E and 
consistent with E then 7 E E (that is, if we believe 
~x and fl is consistent with what we believe, then 
we also believe 7). 
l~eiter can test a formula for consistency by test- 
ing for the absence of its negation. Since Kasper- 
Rounds logic does not have negation, we will not be 
able to do that. Fortunately, we have do have our 
211 
own natural notion of consistency--a set of formu- 
las is consistent if it is satisfiable. Testing a set of 
Kasper-Rounds formulas for consistency thus sim- 
ply reduces to finding a satisfier for that set. 
Formally, we encode our logic as an information 
system (Scott 1982). An information system (IS) 
is a triple (A, C, b) where A is a countable set of 
"atoms," Cis a class of finite subsets of A, and t- is 
a binary relation between subsets of A and elements 
of A. A set X is said to be consistent if every finite 
subset of X is an element of C. A set G is closed if 
for every X _C G such that X l- a, we have a E G. 
Following thesty le  used for information systems, 
we will write G for the closure of G. 
In our case, A is the wffs of SFML (except 
FALSE),  and C is the class of satisfiable sets. The 
entailment relation encodes the semantics of the 
particular unification system we are using. That  
is, we have 
F I - I~ if VF.F~AF~F~fl. 
For instance, 
P l  ":- P2, P2 - -  P3 I- P l  - -  P3 
represents the transitivity of path equations. 
DEFAULT KASPER-ROUNDS 
LOGIC  
In the previous section we described the generic 
form of default logic. We will not need the full 
generality to describe default sorts. We will re- 
strict our attention to closed precondition-free nor- 
mal defaults. That  is, all of our defaults will be of 
the form: 
:M~ 
We will write D E as an abbreviation for this default 
inference. Here fl stands for a generic wff from the 
base language. Even this is more general than we 
truly need, since we are really only interested in 
default sorts. Nevertheless, we will prove things in 
the more general form. 
Note that our default inferences are closed and 
normal. This means that we will always have an 
extension and that the extension(s) will be consis- 
tent if and only if W is consistent. These follow 
from our equivalents of Reiter's theorem 3.1 and 
corollaries 2.2 and 2.3. 
Let's consider now how we would represent he 
information in Fig. 3 in terms of Kasper-Rounds 
default logic. The strict statements become normal 
KR formulas in W. For instance, the information 
for MIDDLE-VERBs (not counting the inheritance 
information) is represented as follows: 
({}, {past : participle: suff ix: +en) )  
The information for VERB will clearly involve 
some defaults. In particular, we have two paths 
leading to default sorts. We interpret hese state- 
ments as saying that the path exists, and that it has 
the value indicated by default. Thus we represent 
the VERB template as: 
D = {Dpast : tenae:suyf ix :+te ,  
Dpast:part ieiple:su \] \] ix : + t ) ,  
W = {past : tense : suffix : T ,  
past : participle : suffix : -I-, 
past : participle : prefix : ge+ } 
Inheritance is done simply by pair-wise set union of 
ancestors in the hierarchy. Since the entry for mahl 
contains no local information, the full description 
for it is simply the union of the two sets above. 
D = {Dpast:tense:suy$i~::+te, 
Opast:part ie iple: ,u Lf ix :  +t }, 
W = {past : tense : suffix :-l-, 
past : participle : suffix : T,  
past : participle : prefix : ge+, 
past : participle : suffix : +en} 
We can then find an extension for that default the- 
ory and take the most general satisfier for that for- 
mula. It is easy to see that the only extension for 
raahl is the closure of: 
past : tense : suffix : +te, 
past : participle : suffix : +en, 
past : participle : prefix : ge+ 
The default suffix +t  is not applicable for the past 
participle due to the presence of +en. The suffix 
+re is applicable and so appears in the extension. 
DKRL  AND NONMONOTONIC  
SORTS 
In the previous section we defined how to get the 
right answers from a system using default sorts. In 
this section we will show that the method of non- 
monotonic sorts gives us the same answers. First 
we formalize the relation between NSFSs and de- 
fault logic. 
Def in i t ion  6 Let 79 = (Q, r, 5, ~) be a nonmono- 
tonically sorted feature structure. The default the- 
ory of D is 
DT(79) = ({Dp:t I ~2(5(r,p)) = (s, A)  A t  6 A},  
{{Pl,P2} I 5(r, PQ ---- 5(r, p2)} 
u{p:s  I ~(5(r,p)) = (s, A))) 
The default part of DT(79) encodes the default 
sorts, while the strict part encodes the path equa- 
tions and strict sorts. 
Theorem 1 The FS .4 is a solution for the NSFS 
7) if  and only if {?1.4~?} is an extension of 
DT(79). 
212 
Because we are dealing with closed normal default 
theories, we can form extensions imply by taking 
maximal consistent sets of defaults. This, of course, 
is also how we form solutions, so the the solution 
of a NSFS is an extension of its default theory. 
We now need to show that NSFS unification be- 
haves properly. That  is, we must show that non- 
monotonic sort unification doesn't create or destroy 
extensions. We will write (D1, W1)=zx(D2, I4/2) to 
indicate that (O1, W1) and (D2, W2) have the same 
set of extensions. We will do this by combining a
number of intermediate r sults. 
Theorem 2 Let (D, W) be a closed normal default 
theory. 
1. /fc~ A/3 ?* 7, 
then (D, W to {4 ^ /3})=a(D, W to {7})- 
2. / f  W U {/3} is inconsistent, 
then (D t^ {DE} , W)=A(D,  W). 
3. I fW ~-/3, then (D U {DE} , W)=A(D,  W). 
4. I fW~-~ anda^/3?:~7,  
then (D tO {DE} , W)=A(D tO {D.y}, W). 
The formulas ~ and /3 represent he (path pre- 
fixed) sorts to be unified, and 7 their (path pre- 
fixed) greatest lower bound. The first part deals 
with strict sort unification, and is a simple conse- 
quence of the fact that (D, W) has the same exten- 
sions as (D, W). The next two deal with inconsis- 
tent and redundant default sorts. They are simi- 
lar to theorems proved in (Delgrande and Jackson 
1991): inconsistent defaults are never applicable; 
while necessary ones are always applicable. The 
last part allows for strengthening of default sorts. 
It follows from the previous three. Together they 
show that nonmonotonic unification preserves the 
information present in the NSFSs being unified. 
Theorem 3 Let 791 and 792 be NSFSs. Then 
DT(79Z RN792)=zx DT(791) to DT(792) (using pair- 
wise set union). 
DISCUSSION 
Most treatments of default unification to date have 
been presented very informally. (Bouma 1992) 
and (Russell et al 1992), however, provide very 
thorough treatments of their respective methods. 
Bouma's is more traditional in that it relies on 
"subtracting" inconsistent information from the de- 
fault side of the unification. The method given in 
th ispaper  is similar to Russell's method in that 
it relies on consistency to decide whether default 
information should be added. 
Briefly, Bouma defines a default unification op- 
eration AU!B = (A - B) II B, where A - B is de- 
rived from A by eliminating any path that either 
gets a label or shares a value in B. In the lexi- 
con, each template has both "strict" and "default" 
information. The default information is combined 
A template 
<f> isa a 
<g> default b 
B template 
<f> default c 
<g> isa d 
C lex A B 
Figure 4: Multiple Default Inheritance 
with the inherited information by the usual unifica- 
tion. This information is then combined (using El!) 
with the strict information to derive the FS associ- 
ated with the template. This FS is then inherited 
by any children of the template. 
Note that the division into "strict" and "default" 
for Bouma is only local to the template. At the 
next level in the hierarchy, what was strict becomes 
default. Thus "defaultness" is not a property of the 
information itself, as it is with NSs, but rather a 
relation one piece of information has to another. 
The method described in (Russell et al 1992) 
also divides templates into strict and default 
parts 1. Here, though, the definitions of strict and 
default are closer to our own. Each lexical entry 
inherits from a list of templates, which are scanned 
in order. Starting from the lexical entry, at each 
template the strict information is added, and then 
all consistent defaults are applied. 
The list of templates that the lexical entry in- 
herits from is generated by a topological sort of the 
inheritance hierarchy. Thus the same set may give 
two different results based on two different order- 
ings. This approach to multiple inheritance allows 
for conflicts between defaults to be resolved. Note, 
however, that if template A gets scanned before 
template B, then A must not contain any defaults 
that conflict with the strict information in template 
B. Otherwise we will get a unification failure, as 
the default in A will already have been applied 
when we reach B. With NSs, the strict informa- 
tion will always override the default, regardless of 
the order information is received. 
The treatment of default information with NSs 
allows strict and default information to be inherited 
from multiple parents. Consider Fig. 4. Assuming 
that the sorts do not combine at all, the resulting 
FS for lexical entry C should be 
\[,a\] 
g d 
The two methods mentioned above would fail to get 
any answer for 6': one default or the other would 
l'I'here may actually be multiple strict parts, which 
are treated as disjuncts, but that is not pertinent to the 
comparison. 
213 
be applied before the other template was even con- 
sidered. In order to handle this example correctly, 
they would have to state C's properties directly. 
One advantage of both Bouma and Russell is 
that exceptions to exceptions are allowed. With 
nonmonotonic sorts as we have presented them 
here, we would get conflicting defaults and thus 
multiple answers. However, it is straight-forward 
to add priorities to defaults. Each solution has a 
unique set of defaults it uses, and so we can com- 
pare the priorities of various olutions to choose the 
most preferred one. The priority scheme can be any 
partial order, though one that mirrored the lexical 
inheritance hierarchy would be most natural. 
Another advantage that both might claim is that 
they deal with more than just default sorts. How- 
ever, the theorems we proved above were proved 
for generic wits of Kasper-Rounds logic. Thus any 
formula could be used as a default, and the only 
question is how best to represent the information. 
Nonmonotonic sorts are a concise and correct im- 
plementation of the kind of default inheritance we 
have defined here. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has shown how the method ofnonmono- 
tonic sorts is grounded in the well-established the- 
ories of Kasper-Rounds logic and Reiter's default 
logic. This is, to our knowledge, the first attempt 
to combine Reiter's theory with feature systems. 
Most previous attempts to fuse defaults with fea- 
ture structures have relied on procedural code--  
a state of affairs that is highly inconsistent with 
the declarative nature of feature systems. Meth- 
ods that do not rely on procedures still suffer from 
the necessity to specify what order information is 
received in. 
It seems to us that the major problem that has 
plagued attempts to add defaults to feature systems 
is the failure to recognize the difference in kind be- 
tween strict and default information. The state- 
ment that the present participle suffix for English 
is '+ing' is a very different sort of statement than 
that the past participle suffix is '+ed'  by default. 
The former is unassailable information. The latter 
merely describes a convention--that you should use 
'+ed' unless you're told otherwise. The method of 
nonmonotonic sorts makes this important distinc- 
tion between strict and default information. The 
price of this method is in the need to find solu- 
tions to NSFSs. But much of the cost of finding 
solutions is dissipated through the unification pro- 
cess (through the elimination of inconsistent and 
redundant defaults). In a properly designed lexi- 
con there will be only one solution, and that can 
be found simply by unifying all the defaults present 
(getting a unification failure here means that there 
is more than one solution--a situation that should 
indicates an error). 
The semantics given for NSs can be extended in 
a number of ways. In particular, it suggests a se- 
mantics for one kind of default unification. It is 
possible to say that two values are by default equal 
by giving the formula Dp -p2. This would be useful 
in our German verbs example to specify that the 
past tense root is by default equal to the present 
tense root. This would fill in roots for spiel and 
mahl without confounding zwing. Another exten- 
sion is to use a prioritized efault logic to allow for 
resolution of conflicts between defaults. The nat- 
ural prioritization would be parallel to the lexicon 
structure, but others could be imposed if they made 
more sense in the context. 
Re ferences  
Bouma, Gosse 1990. Defaults in unification gram- 
mar. In Proceedings of the 1990 Conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 165- 
172. 
Bouma, Gosse 1992. Feature structures and 
nonmonotonicity. Computational Linguistics 
18(2):183-203. 
Carpenter, Bob 1991. Skeptical and credulous de- 
fault unification with applications to templates 
and inheritance. In Default Inheritance Within 
Unification-Based Approaches to the Lexicon. 
Carpenter, Bob 1992. The Logic of Typed Feature 
Structures. Cambridge University Press. 
Delgrande, James P and Jackson, W Ken 1991. 
Default logic revisited. In Proceedings of the Sec- 
ond International Conference on the Principles of 
Knowledge Representation and Reasoning. 118- 
127. 
Kaplan, Ronald 1987. Three seductions of com- 
putational linguistics. In Linguistic Theory and 
Computer Applications. Academic Press, London. 
149-188. 
Kasper, Bob 1988. Feature Structures: A Logical 
Theory with Applications to Language Analysis. 
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor. 
Reiter, Ray 1980. A logic for default reasoning. 
Artificial Intelligence 13:81-132. 
Russell, Graham; Ballim, Afzal; Carroll, John; 
and Warwick-Armstrong, Susan 1992. A practi- 
cal approach to multiple default inheritance for 
unification-based lexicons. Computational Lin- 
guistics 18(3):311-337. 
Scott, Dana 1982. Domains for Denotational Se- 
mantics, volume 140 of Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science. 
Shieber, Stuart 1986. An Introduction to 
Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar, vol- 
ume 4 of CSLI Lecture Notes. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago. 
214 
Shieber, Stuart 1987. Separating linguistic anal- 
yses from linguistic theories. In Linguistic The- 
ory and Computer Applications. Academic Press, 
London. 1-36. 
Young, Mark 1992. Nonmonotonic sorts for fea- 
ture structures. In National Conference on Arti- 
ficial Intelligence, San Jose, California. 596-601. 
215 
