PLANNING MULT IMODAL D ISCOURSE 
Wolfgang Wahls ter  
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 
Stuh lsatzenhausweg 3 
D-6600 Saarbr/ icken 11, Germany 
Internet :  wahlster@dfk i .un i -sb .de 
Abst rac t  
In this talk, we will, show how techniques for plan- 
ning text and discourse can be generalized to plan 
the structure and content of multimodal communi- 
cations, that integrate natural anguage, pointing, 
graphics, and animations. The central claim of 
this talk is that the generation of multimodal dis- 
course can be considered as an incremental plan- 
ning process that aims to achieve a given commu- 
nicative goal. 
One of the surprises from our research is that 
it is actually possible to extend and adapt many 
of the fundamental concepts developed to date 
in computatational linguistics in such a way that 
they become useful for multimodal discourse as 
well. This means that an interesting methodologi- 
cal transfer from the area of natural anguage pro- 
cessing to a much broader computational model of 
multimodal communication is possible. In partic- 
ular, semantic and pragmatic oncepts like speech 
acts, coherence, focus, communicative act, dis- 
course model, reference, implicature, anaphora, 
rhetorical relations and scope ambiguity take an 
extended meaning in the context of multimodal 
discourse. 
It is an important goal of this research not 
simply to merge the verbalization and visualiza- 
tion results of mode-specific generators, but to 
carefully coordinate them in such a way that they 
generate a multiplieative improvement in commu- 
nication capabilities. Allowing all of the modali- 
ties to refer to and depend upon each other is a 
key to the richness of multimodal communication. 
A basic principle underlying our model is that 
the various constituents of a multimodal commu- 
nication should be generated from a common rep- 
resentation of what is to be conveyed. This raises 
the question of how to decompose a given com- 
municative goal into subgoals to be realized by 
the mode-specific generators, so that they com- 
plement each other. To address this problem, we 
explore computational models of the cognitive de- 
eision process, coping with questions uch as what 
should go into text, what should go into graphics, 
and which kinds of links between the verbal and 
non-verbal fragments are necessary. In addition, 
we deal with layout as a rhetorical force, influ- 
encing the intentional and attentional state of the 
discourse participants. 
We have been engaged in work in the area of 
multimodal communication for several years now, 
starting with the HAM-ANS (Wahlster et al 1983) 
and VITRA systems (Wahlster 1989), which auto- 
matically create natural language descriptions of 
pictures and image sequences shown on the screen. 
These projects resulted in a better understanding 
of how perception interacts with language produc- 
tion. Since then, we have been investigating ways 
of integrating tactile pointing and graphics with 
natural language understanding and generation 
in the XTRA (Wahlster 1991) and WIP projects 
(Wahlster et al 1991). 
The task of the knowledge-based presentation 
system WIP is the context-sensitive g neration of 
a variety of multimodal communications from an 
input including a presentation goal (Wahlster et 
al. 1993a). The presentation goal is a formal repre- 
sentation of the communicative intent specified by 
a back-end application system. WIP is currently 
able to generate simple multimodal explanations 
in German and English on using an espresso ma- 
chine, assembling a lawn-mower, or installing a 
modem, demonstrating our claim of language and 
application independence. WIP is a highly adap- 
tive multimodal presentation system, since all of 
its output is generated on the fly and customized 
for the intended iscourse situation. The quest for 
adaptation is based on the fact that it is impos- 
sible to anticipate the needs and requirements of
each potential dialog partner in an infinite number 
of discourse situations. Thus all presentation deci- 
sions are postponed until runtime. In contrast o 
hypermedia-based approaches, WIP does not use 
any preplanned texts or graphics. That is, each 
presentation is designed from scratch by reasoning 
95 
from first principles using commonsense presenta- 
tion knowledge. 
We approximate the fact that multimodal 
communication is always situated by introducing 
seven discourse parameters in our model. The cur- 
rent system includes a choice between user stereo- 
types (e.g. novice, expert), target languages (Ger- 
man vs. English), layout formats (e.g. paper hard- 
copy, slide, screen display), output modes (incre- 
mental output vs. complete output only), pre- 
ferred mode (e.g. text, graphics, or no prefer- 
ence), and binary switches for space restrictions 
and speech output. This set of parameters i  used 
to specify design constraints that must be satisfied 
by the final presentation. The combinatorics of 
WIP's contextual parameters can generate 576 al- 
ternate multimodal presentations of the same con- 
tent. 
At the heart of the multimodal presentation 
system WIP is a parallel top-down planner (Andr6 
and Rist 1993) and a constraint-based layout man- 
ager. While the root of the hierarchical plan struc- 
ture for a particular multimodal communication 
corresponds to a complex communicative act such 
as describing a process, the leaves are elementary 
acts that verbalize and visualize information spec- 
ified in the input from the back-end application 
system. 
In multimodal generation systems, three dif- 
ferent processes are distinguished: a content plan- 
ning process, a mode selection process and a con- 
tent realization process. A sequential architec- 
ture in which data only flow from the "what to 
present" to the "how to present" part has proven 
inappropriate because the components responsible 
for selecting the contents would have to anticipate 
all decisions of the realization components. This 
problem is compounded if content realization is 
done by separate components (e.g. for language, 
pointing, graphics and animations) of which the 
content planner has only limited knowledge. 
It seems even inappropriate to sequentialize 
content planning and mode selection. Selecting a 
mode of presentation depends to a large extent on 
the nature of the information to be conveyed. 
On the other hand, content planning is 
strongly influenced by previously selected mode 
combinations. E.g., to graphically refer to a phys- 
ical object (Rist and Andr6 1992), we need visual 
information that may be irrelevant o textual ref- 
erences. In the WIP system, we interleave content 
and mode selection. In contrast o this, presen- 
tation planning and content realization are per- 
formed by separate components o enable parallel 
processing (Wahlster et al 1993b). 
In a follow-up project to WIP called PPP 
(Personalized Plan-Based Presenter), we are cur- 
rently addressing the additional problem of plan- 
ning presentation acts such as pointing and coor- 
dinated speech output during the display of the 
multimodal material synthesized by WIP. 
The insights and experience we gained from 
the design and implementation f the multimodal 
systems IIAM-ANS, VITRA, XTRA and WIP 
provide a good starting point for a deeper un- 
derstanding of the interdependencies of language, 
graphics, pointing, and animations in coordinated 
multimodal discourse. 
REFERENCES 
Andre, Elisabeth; and Rist, Thomas. 1993. The 
Design of Illustrated Documents as a Planning 
Task. Maybury, Mark (ed.). Intelligent Multime- 
dia Interfaces, AAAI Press (to appear). 
Rist, Thomas; and Andr6, Elisabeth. 1992. 
From Presentation Tasks to Pictures: Towards an 
Approach to Automatic Graphics Design. Pro- 
ceedings European Conference on AI (ECAI-92), 
Vienna, Austria (1992) 764-768. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang. 1989. One Word Says 
more than a Thousand Pictures. On the Auto- 
matic Verbalization of the Results of Image Se- 
quence Analysis Systems. Computers and Artifi- 
cial Intelligence, 8, 5:479-492 
Wahlster, Wolfgang. 1991. User and Dis- 
course Models for Multimodal Communication. 
in: Sullivan, J.W.; and Tyler, S.W.(eds.). Intel- 
ligent User Interfaces, Reading: Addison-Wesley 
(1991): 45-67. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang; Marburger, Heinz; Jame- 
son, Anthony; Busemann, Stephan. 1983. Over- 
answering Yes-No Questions: Extended Responses 
in a NL Interface to a Vision System. Proceedings 
of IJCAI-83, Karlsruhe: 643-646. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang; Andr6, Elisabeth; Graf, 
Winfried; and Rist, Thomas. 1991. Designing I1- 
lustrated Texts: How Language Production is In- 
fluenced by Graphics Generation. Proceedings Eu- 
ropean ACL Conference, Berlin, Germany: 8-14. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang; Andr6, Elisabeth; Ban- 
dyopadhyay, Som; Graf, Winfried; and Rist, 
Thomas. 1993a. WIP: The Coordinated Gener- 
ation of Multimodal Presentations from a Com- 
mon Representation, i : Ortony, A.; Slack, J.; and 
Stock, O.(eds.). Communication from an Artifi- 
cial Intelligence Perspective: Theoretical and Ap- 
plied Issues, Springer: Heidelberg: 121-144. 
Wahlster, Wolfgang; Andr6, Elisabeth; Fin- 
kler, Wolfgang; Profitlich, Hans-Jiirgen; and Rist, 
Thomas. 1993b. Plan-Based Integration of Natu- 
ral Language and Graphics Generation. Artificial 
Intelligence Journal 26(3), (to appear). 
96 
