THE EFFECT OF ESTABL ISHING COHERENCE IN 
ELLIPSIS AND ANAPHORA RESOLUTION 
Andrew Keh ler  
Harvard  Un ivers i ty  
A iken Computat ion  Laboratory  
33 Oxford  S t reet  
Cambr idge ,  MA 02138 
keh ler@das .harvard .edu  
Abst ract  
This paper presents a new model of anaphoric pro- 
cessing that utilizes the establishment of coherence 
relations between clauses in a discourse. We sur- 
vey data that comprises a currently stalemated ar- 
gument over whether VP-ellipsis is an inherently 
syntactic or inherently semantic phenomenon, and 
show that the data can be handled within a uni- 
form discourse processing architecture. This archi- 
tecture, which revises the dichotomy between ellip- 
sis vs. Model Interpretive Anaphora given by Sag 
and Hankamer (1984), is also able to accommodate 
divergent heories and data for pronominal refer- 
ence resolution. The resulting architecture serves 
as a baseline system for modeling the role of cohe- 
sive devices in natural anguage. 
1 In t roduct ion  
There has been much debate concerning the ap- 
propriate level of language processing at which to 
treat VP-ellipsis resolution. Syntactic accounts 
(Fiengo and May, 1990; Hgik, 1987; Hellan, 1988; 
Hestvik, 1993; Lappin, 1993; Lappin and McCord, 
1990) claim that syntactic material is copied from 
the antecedent clause and reconstructed in the 
elided clause, whereas emantic accounts (Dalrym- 
ple, 1991; Dalrymple et al, 1991; Gawron and Pe- 
ters, 1990; Hardt, 1992; Kehler, 1993; Klein, 1987) 
claim this material is retrieved from semantic rep- 
resentations. This debate is currently deadlocked; 
indeed a survey of the data seems to indicate that 
ellipsis must be both a syntactic and semantic phe- 
nomenon.  In Section 2, we examine five types of 
ellipsis contexts, and show a pattern that has gone 
unnoticed in the literature. In Section 3 we break 
the deadlock by presenting a discourse processing 
architecture from which the correct predictions nat- 
urally result. We present further evidence for this 
architecture from pronominal NP reference resolu- 
tion data in Section 4, and conclude in Section 5. 
2 VP Ellipsis Data 
A simple example of verb phrase (VP) ellipsis is 
given in sentence (1): 
(1) Ross likes his mother, and Bill does too. 
The stranded auxiliary in the second clause (the 
target clause) indicates the deletion of a verb phrase, 
a representation for which is to be located from an- 
other clause (the source clause), in this case, the 
first clause. Sentence (1) displays a strict/sloppy 
ambiguity: Bill may like Ross's mother (the strict 
reading) or his own mother (the sloppy reading). 
In this section we examine five types of elliptical 
contexts, and show the following heretofore unno- 
ticed pattern. 1 When the relationship between the 
source clause A and the target clause B is what we 
term parallel (as exemplified by the sentential struc- 
ture "A and B too", as in sentence (1)), the data 
indicates that a syntactic representation is recon- 
structed at the target site. That is, a syntactically- 
parallel source VP must be available, and recon- 
struction of this VP in the target clause is subject o 
syntactic onstraints. However, in non-parallel con- 
structions (for example, contrastive conjunctions 
("A but B"), subordinates ("A because B'), and 
domparatives ("A better than B")) neither a syn- 
tactic source VP nor compliance with syntactic on- 
straints is necessary, instead only a suitable seman- 
tic source representation is required. These data 
strongly suggest a discourse processing architecture 
that is sensitive to the establishment of coherence 
relations between clauses, which is described in Sec- 
tion 3. 
2.1 Pass ive /Act ive  A l te rnat ion  
Active elided target VPs can receive interpretations 
from passive source VPs: 
(2) In March, four fireworks manufacturers asked 
that the decision be reversed, and on Monday 
the ICC did. \[ reverse the decision \] 
(from text of Rosenthal (1988), cited in Dal- 
rymple (1991)) 2
1Although space precludes us from discussing past 
work in detail, no approach known to us addresses 
(let alne accounts for) all of the phenomena discussed 
herein. 
2This use of and in this example does not signify a 
parallel relationship between thc source and target, as 
62  
(3) This problem was to have been looked into, but 
obviously nobody did. \[ look into the problem \] 
(Vincent Della Pietra, in conversation) 
Less frequent, but still extant, are cases of passive 
targets with active sources: 
(4) In addition to inducing lethality during the 
first instar, it 3 retards embryonic development, 
but not to the extent that the growth cones 
were. \[ retarded \] 
(from text of (Jarecki, 1992)) 
(5) Actually I have implemented it 4 with a man- 
ager, but it doesn't have to be. \[ implemented 
with a manager \]
(Steven Ketchpel, in conversation) 
These examples are problematic for syntactic anal- 
yses of ellipsis, because the source clause is not a 
surface VP constituent. In contrast, semantic anal- 
yses cannot account for the unacceptability of sim- 
ilar examples with parallel constructions: 
(6) * This problem was looked into by John, and 
Bob did too. 
(7) * This agent retards embryonic development, 
and the growth cones were too. 
Syntactic parallelism is apparently required in the 
parallel construction, but not in the non-parallel 
ones. 
2.2 Cond i t ion  C V io lat ions  
Fiengo and May (1990) and Lappin (1993) note the 
unacceptability of examples uch as (8) and (9): 
(8) * I hit Billi, and then hei did too. 
(9) * Mary introduced Johnj to everyone, and hej 
did too. 
Under a syntactic reconstruction analysis, this is 
predicted by a Condition C violation within Binding 
Theory (Chomsky, 1981): 
(10) * I hit Bill/, and then he/hit  Bill/too. 
(11) * Mary introduced Johnj to everyone, and hej 
introduced Johnj to everyone too. 
Because syntactic onstraints do not apply at the 
semantic level, semantic accounts predict these 
cases to be acceptable. However, Dalrymple (1991) 
gives examples where Condition C should apply but 
apparently does not: 5 
the use of too would be inappropriate under the desired 
reading. We might term this relationship to be result. 
3Here, it refers to a previously mentioned chemical 
agent. 
4Here, it refers to a previously mentioned computer 
system. 
5These particular cases also violate the Vehicle 
Change proposal of Fiengo and May (1990), which ade- 
quately handles other acceptable cases that violate Con- 
dition C. 
(12) I expected Billi to win even when he/ didn't. 
(13) The lawyer defended Billj against he accusa- 
tions better than hej could have. 
As these examples are non-parallel constructions, 
again it appears that syntactic onstraints apply in 
parallel constructions but not in non-parallel ones. 
2.3 Cond i t ion  A V io lat ions  
As predicted by Condition A of Binding Theory, it 
is generally difficult to obtain a strict reading when 
the source clause contains a reflexive pronoun: 
(14) ?? Johni defended himselfi, and Bobj did too. 
\[ defended John/\]  
(15) ?? Fredi voted for himself/, and Garyj did too. 
\[ voted for Fredi \] 
Given appropriate semantic context, judgements 
improve but still remain somewhat stilted: 6
(16) ? The alleged murderer/ defended himself/, 
and his lawyerj did too. \[ defended the alleged 
murdereri \] 
(17) ? Bill Clinton/ voted for himself/, and his 
campaign managerj did too. \[ voted for Bill 
Clinton/\] 
The stiltedness of reflexives under a strict reading 
disappears, however, in non-parallel constructions 
(from Dalrymple (1991)): 
(18) Billi defended himself/against the accusations 
better than his lawyerj did. \[ defended Billi \] 
(19) John/ voted for himself/ even though no one 
elsej did. \[ voted for Johni \] 
In these cases, the strict reading is readily available 
and perhaps preferred. Again, there appears to be 
a syntactic dependency in the parallel cases that is 
absent from the non-parallel ones. 
2.4 Non-VP  Antecedents  
In the following examples, the source representa- 
tion is not a syntactic VP but instead comes from 
a nominalization: 7 
(20) This letter deserves a response, but before you 
do, .... \[ respond \] 
(Gregory Ward, p.c.) 
(21) Meanwhile, they sense a drop in visitors to the 
city. Those who do, they say, are not taking 
cabs. \[ visit the city \] 
(Chicago Tribune, courtesy Gregory Ward) 
SThere appears to be a dialect that readily allows 
strict readings with reflexives. However, even for those 
speakers, the non-parallel constructions given below are 
more acceptable under the strict interpretation than the 
parallel cases. 
~Some speakers find these cases slightly awkward or 
stilted. Again, however, most find these better than the 
parallel construction cases given below. 
63 
Semantic analyses can account for these cases if 
nominalizations are assumed to evoke event repre- 
sentations into the discourse model. However, in 
parallel constructions, discourse-model events from 
nominalizations are apparently not available: 
(22) * ,This letter provoked a response from Bush, 
and Clinton did too. \[ responded \]
(23) * There is a rise in American visitors to the 
city, and Canadians do too. \[ visit the city \] 
A similar pattern is seen in cases where the an- 
tecedent of the ellipsis is evoked by an adjectival 
phrase: 
(24) First person pronouns aren't very shiftable, al- 
though the plural ones can be. \[ shifted \] 
(Barbara Partee, in conversation) 
The acceptability of example (24) is to be compared 
with the relative unacceptability of an otherwise 
similar parallel construction case: 
(25) * First person pronouns aren't very shiftable, 
and the plural ones also don't. \[ shift \] 
Again, non-syntactic source representations appear 
to only be available in the non-parallel construction 
cases. 
2.5 Sub jacency  V io la t ions  
Ha'ik (1987) gives examples of apparent subjacency 
violations in antecedent contained eletion (ACD): 
(26) John read everything which Bill believes he 
did. 
(27) * John read everything which Bill believes the 
claim that he did. 
(28) * John read everything which Bill wonders 
why he did. 
This data is problematic for a purely semantic the- 
ory of ellipsis, as there should be no syntactic de- 
pendency at the ellipsis site. However, sentence 
(29), which has a subordinate conjunction, does 
not display the expected subjacency violation (from 
Rooth (1981)): s 
(29) Which problem did you think John would 
solve because of the fact that Susan did? 
Without ellipsis, the gap remains and a subjacency 
violation results: 
(30) * Which problem did you think John would 
solve because of the fact that Susan solved? 
In our account, the relative pronoun which does not 
specify an interclausal coherence link, and therefore 
sentences (26-28) are parallel constructions. Conse- 
quently, again the source representation for the par- 
allel construction is apparently syntactic, whereas 
that for the non-parallel construction (e.g., example 
(29)) is semantic. 
8I thank Stuart Shieber for bringing this example to 
my attention. 
3 An  Arch i tec ture  that  Exp lo i t s  
Coherence  
The data given in Section 2 suggests that VP- 
ellipsis resolution copies a syntactic representation 
in parallel constructions and a semantic represen- 
tation in non-parallel ones. In this section, we 
present a discourse processing architecture from 
which these predictions naturally result. We first 
describe Sag and Hankamer's (1984) (henceforth 
S&H) earlier work, the representations from which 
our analysis will utilize. 
3.1 Sag and Hankamer~s Architecture 
S&H give a performance-based view of anaphoric 
processing that utilizes two forms of representa- 
tion, a propositional representation and a discourse 
model. Propositional representations, which they 
conjecture are held by short-term registers in mem- 
ory (henceforth propositional registers), maintain 
the surface syntactic constituent structure of an 
utterance as well as binding relations; however, 
discourse anaphors are resolved. 9 These repre- 
sentations are built in tandem with a discourse 
model. S&H claim that the ellipsis resolution pro- 
cess obtains referents from propositional represen- 
tations, whereas what they term Model Interpre- 
tive Anaphora (MIA) (e.g., 'do it' anaphora) ob- 
tains referents from the discourse model. They give 
the following example to illustrate (judgements are 
theirs): 
(31) The children asked to be squirted with the 
hose, so 
a. they were. \[ ellipsis \] 
b. * we did. \[ ellipsis \] 
c. we did it. \[ MIA \] 
In their theory, example (31a) is acceptable because 
the source representation is a surface VP and there- 
fore is retrievable from its propositional representa- 
t ion.  Example (31b) is unacceptable because the 
source squirt the children with the hose is not a sur- 
face VP in the propositional representation3 ? Sen- 
tence (31c) is acceptable because 'do it' anaphora 
is an MIA process, and therefore obtains referents 
from the discourse model, in which a representation 
for squirt the children with the hose is assumed to 
exist. One problem with this account is that it does 
not explain the dichotomy of judgements for the 
data given in Section 2. For each of these phenom- 
ena, the S~zH approach predicts that all cases are 
9In fact, they suggest hat propositional represen- 
tations (as opposed to classical surface structures) are 
what the parser constructs, a view consistent with our 
account. 
1?Ellipsis, in their formulation, is subject to an 
identity-o\]-logical-\]orm constraint on propositional rep- 
resentations. See Dalrymple et al (1991) and Hardt 
(1992) for arguments that this condition is flawed. 
64  
either acceptable or unacceptable without regard 
to the type of construction. The data instead sug- 
gests that VP-ellipsis within the parallel construc- 
tion behaves like S&H's definition of ellipsis, and 
in non-parallel constructions it behaves like their 
MIA. We believe that their dichotomy of phenom- 
ena is somewhat illusory, and a more compelling 
and elegant treatment is possible by appealing to 
discourse structure and coherence. 
3.2 A Rev ised  Arch i tec ture  
We follow S&H and earlier arguments by Johnson- 
Laird (1983) in specifying a discourse processing 
architecture that includes both propositional rep- 
resentations and a discourse model. We propose 
that a main function of the propositional repre- 
sentations is to serve as a "bridge" in establishing 
clause-to-clause coherence. That  is, as clauses are 
parsed, propositional representations are generated 
and held in the short-term registers. When it is 
established that a non-parallel coherence relation- 
ship is present between a clause (or set of clauses) 
and a subsequent clause, the propositional repre- 
sentation(s) for the first is integrated into the dis- 
course model so that coherence can be computed, 
thereby freeing the short-term propositional reg- 
ister for subsequent representations. Non-parallel 
constructions specify a non-parallel coherence rela- 
tionship overtly (e.g., 'contrast' (because), 'compar- 
ison' (better than), 'result' (the use of and in exam- 
ple 2)) 11, thereby identifying the first clause as a 
unit for coherence stablishment and invoking inte- 
gration of its propositional representation i to the 
discourse model. 
Parallel constructions, on the other hand, do not 
invoke this integration. Hobbs (1979), in discussing 
the parallel coherence relation he defines, suggests 
one basis for this distinction: 
One frequent function of the Parallel re- 
lation is to suggest or support the gener- 
alization which the two segments are spe- 
cific instances of. The relation often links 
segments which together function as an 
Exemplification or Elaboration of a more 
general statement. 
In our terms, clauses conjoined by a parallel relation 
will form a group and cohere as a unit with prior 
and subsequent statements. Therefore, this rela- 
tion in itself does not cause the representation for 
the first clause to be integrated into the discourse 
model. Instead, the integration of both representa- 
tions into the discourse model as a unit is invoked 
by subsequent coherence stablishment. 
11This use of and raises the question of how the lis- 
tener knows which meaning of and is present during 
processing. We assume that the listener can consider 
multiple possibilities in parallel, although it may also be 
that in these cases the interclausal relationship has been 
established by the time the ellipsi~ site is processed. 
The preceding analysis makes the predictions 
necessary to account for the ellipsis data given in 
Section 2. Under our account, the representation of
an utterance either exists in a propositional regis- 
ter or in the discourse model; these are not cre- 
ated in tandem as S&H suggest. An elided VP 
then receives an interpretation from whichever ep- 
resentation is available. The parallel construction 
cases in Section 2 are unacceptable because the 
source clause has not been integrated into the dis- 
course model when the ellipsis site is processed. 
The source must therefore be retrieved from the 
propositional representation, where surface syntac- 
tic structure and binding relations are maintained. 
Reconstructing this representation requires syntac- 
tic parallelism (ruling out passive/active and nomi- 
nalization cases) and can result in violation of syn- 
tactic constraints (such as Condition C violations, 
Condition A violations, or subjacency violations). 
The non-parallel construction cases in Section 2 are 
acceptable because the antecedent for the ellipsis 
has been integrated into the discourse model when 
the ellipsis site is processed. Because the vestiges 
of syntactic information are no longer present in 
the representation, syntactic constraint violations 
do not occur; furthermore source representations 
from nominalizations and clauses of differing voice 
now exist in the discourse model, x2 
3.3 Examples 
In this section, we work through two examples to 
illustrate the proposals that have been made thus 
far. For resolution at the syntactic level, we as- 
sume an S&H-like propositional representation and 
a straightforward mechanism whereby a VP repre- 
sentation is copied from the source clause represen- 
tat.ion into the target clause representation. For res- 
olution in the discourse model, we will use the event 
representation and resolution algorithm defined in 
(Kehler, 1993). The focus of this section, however, 
is to offer a general illustration of the architecture 
rather than to make specific claims concerning the 
12Differences remain between the distribution of 
S&tt's ellipsis and MIA phenomena that need to be 
accounted for in a comprehensive treatment of event 
anaphora, as examples (31a-c) show (although judge- 
ments as to the unacceptability of sentence (31b) vary). 
Interestingly, contra S&H, MIA phenomena also appear 
to be sensitive to syntactic onstraints in certain con- 
texts, as the following example from Dalrymple (1991) 
shows: 
* I hit Suei, and then she1 did it. 
One hypothesis is that VP-ellipsis is actually event 
anaphora with an empty pronoun; it may then be that 
distributional differences between "do ?", "do it ' ,  and 
"do that" are due only to the anaphoric properties of the 
event pronoun involved, and not due to a fundamental 
difference between ellipsis and MIA phenomena. This 
hypothesis i the subject of ongoing work. 
65  
nature of the representations involved. 
Examples (32) and (33) exhibit the contrast be- 
tween parallel and non-parallel constructions with 
active target clauses that have passive source 
clauses, as discussed in Section 2.1: 
(32) * John was shot by Bob, and Bill did too. 
(33) John was shot by Bob because Bill wouldn't. 
The propositional representation for the source 
clause in these sentences is shown in representation 
(34), where P denotes the passive voice: 
(34) \[ P \[ was.shot'(by(Bob')) \] (John') \] 
Because the two clauses in sentence (32) stand in a 
parallel relationship, the source representation has 
not been integrated into the discourse model at the 
time the ellipsis site is processed; therefore the el- 
lipsis is resolved at the propositional level of repre- 
sentation. A representation is constructed with the 
information present in the target clause: 
(35) \[ A \[... \] (Bill') \] 
Here A denotes the active voice, a feature which 
is indicated in the target clause through the use of 
did. When the elided VP is retrieved, a mismatch 
occurs: the passive VP cannot be brought into a 
representation marked as having active voice. The 
copying can therefore not be completed, resulting 
in the unacceptability of the sentence. 
Sentence (33) also has representation (34) for its 
source clause. However, because the two clauses 
stand in a non-parallel relationship, representation 
(34) has already been integrated into the discourse 
model when the ellipsis site is processed, and thus 
resolution occurs in the discourse model. The rep- 
resentation for the source clause is: 
(36) el: \[predicate: shot 
time: past 
polarity: positive 
modality: necessity 
agent: Bob 
theme: John \] 
Because this representation is based upon thematic 
(and not syntactic) roles, the representations for ac- 
tive and passive forms of a sentence are identical. 
For the target clause, a parallel event representa- 
tion is created with empty roles, and the role fillers 
present in the target clause are filled in: 
(37) e~: \[ predicate: 
time: past 
polarity: negative 
modality: volitional_possibility 
agent: Bill 
theme:\]  
Representations for the the remaining role fillers are 
retrieved from the source clause representation: 
(38) e2: \[predicate: shot 
time: past 
polarity: negative 
modality: volitional_possibility 
agent: Bill 
theme: John \] 
This resolution successfully ields the correct rep- 
resentation for the target clause in sentence (33). 
Examples (39) and (40) illustrate the contrast be- 
tween parallel and non-parallel constructions with 
respect to potential Condition C violations, as de- 
scribed in Section 2.2: 
(39) * The lawyer defended Bil4 and hei did too. 
(40) The lawyer defended Bill/ better than hei 
could have. 
In each sentence, the propositional representation 
for the source clause takes the form given in (41): 
(41) \[\[ defend'(nill') \] (lawyerl') \] 
Because the two clauses in sentence (39) stand in a 
parallel relationship, the source representation has 
not been integrated into the discourse model at the 
time the ellipsis site is processed. The ellipsis is 
then resolved at the propositional level of represen- 
tation. After filling in the information present in 
the target clause and copying the representation of 
the source VP, representation (42) results: 13 
(42) \[\[ defend'(Bill/) \] (he/') \] 
A manifestation of Condition C applying at this 
level rules out this representation asill-formed, be- 
cause the pronoun he c-commands the coreferential 
NP form Bill. 
Sentence (40) also has representation (41) for 
its source clause. Because the two clauses stand 
in a non-parallel relation, representation (41) has 
already been integrated into the discourse model 
when the ellipsis site is processed. Resolution then 
occurs in the discourse model. The representation 
for the source clause is: 
(43) e3: \[predicate: defend 
time: past 
modality: necessity 
agent: lawyer 1 
theme: Bill \] . 
After creating a parallel event representation, fill- 
ing in role fillers present in the target clause, and 
retrieving remaining role fillers from the source rep- 
resentation, representation (44) results: 
(44) e4: \[predicate: defend 
time: past 
modality: possibility 
agent: Bill 
theme: Bill \] 
13Recall that pronouns have been resolved at this 
level of representation; we indicate this by coindexing. 
66  
Because no syntactic onstraints apply at this level 
of representation, representation (44) is well-formed 
and yields the correct interpretation for the target 
clause. 
In summary, our architecture accounts for data 
supporting both the syntactic and semantic ac- 
counts of ellipsis resolution in an elegant and in- 
tuitive way. Section 4 examines pronominal NP 
resolution in this model. 
4 Pronoun Reso lu t ion  
There are also dichotomous views in the literature 
concerning the process by which pronoun resolu- 
tion is performed. Theories incorporating a notion 
of local focus generally utilize syntactic information 
in their specifications. For example, the Centering 
framework of Grosz et al (1986) utilizes grammat- 
ical role information in specifying the accessibility 
of potential referents on an ordered forward-looking 
center list. Kameyama's work (Kameyama, 1988) 
contains rules for property sharing utilizing gram- 
matical roles. Passonneau (1991), in looking at the 
distribution of 'it' and 'that' for NP reference in 
naturally-occurring texts, concludes that both syn- 
tactic form of the antecedent and its grammatical 
role are needed to adequately account for the data. 
Furthermore, she suggests that the function of the 
propositional register discussed by S&H is appro- 
priate for accommodating her rules. 
Alternatively, some researchers (Hobbs, 1979; 
Wilensky, 1978) have suggested that coreference is
determined as a by-product of coherence determi- 
nation between sentences. In Hobbs' account, for 
example, pronouns are modeled as free variables 
and are assigned to objects during the process of 
establishing coherence relations. 
However, Hobbs himself acknowledges the power 
of grammatical role-based heuristics, 14 noting that 
upon hearing example (45), 
(45) John can open Bill's safe. He ... 
one is likely to assume that John is the referent of 
He. The existence of a garden-path effect in ex- 
ample (46), where He refers to Bill instead of John, 
suggests that pronominal reference resolution is not 
guided by coherence considerations alone: 
(46) John can open Bill's safe. He's going to have 
to get the combination changed soon. 
As focus-based theories would predict, the reader 
assigns John as the referent of He, and double- 
takes when semantic information later suggests 
otherwise. 15 Our architecture provides an expla- 
nation for this phenomenon. Since a coherence 
14Hobbs (1976) found that a heuristic favoring sub- 
jects over objects was 90% accurate for written texts. 
15This effect causes Hobbs to admit that "this 
strongly suggests that some psychological reality un- 
derlies the heuristic \[ favoring subjects over objects \]." 
relation has not been established at the time the 
pronoun is processed, the propositional representa- 
tion for the first clause (which preserves information 
that focus-based theories utilize, such as surface- 
string ordering and depth-of-embedding of poten- 
tial referents) is the representation available to the 
reference resolution algorithm. 16 However, when a 
non-parallel coherence link is overt, our architecture 
would predict that a semantically-based resolution 
process would be used because the propositional 
representation containing potential referents has al- 
ready been integrated into the discourse model at 
the time the pronoun is processed. This predic- 
tion is borne-out empirically; consider the follow- 
ing two sentence prefixes (complete sentences taken 
from (Ehrlich, 1980)): 
(47) Steve blamed Frank and he ... \[ spilt the cof- 
fee \]. 
(48) Steve blamed Frank because he ... \[ spilt the 
coffee \]. 
Focus-based theories predict the strong bias toward 
the referent of he in example (47) being the subject 
(i.e., Steve), even though he is consistent with both 
potential referents. Because this sentence is a par- 
allel construction (i.e., the meaning of "and" is not 
result), our architecture also makes this prediction 
in accordance with those theories. The heuristic 
preferring subjects does not apply in example (48), 
where Frank is perhaps the preferred referent of he, 
seemingly as a result of reasoning using semantic 
features of the verb blame. Our architecture cor- 
rectly predicts that the pronoun in sentence (48) 
does not cause processing problems while the one 
in example (46) does, because only in sentence (48) 
has the clause containing the referent of he been in- 
tegrated into the discourse model at the time the 
pronoun is processed. 
Ehrlich (1980) gives experimental evidence sup- 
porting this view. Ehrlich's goal was to test the bi- 
asing effect of the so-called "implicit causality" fea- 
ture (Garvey and Caramazza, 1974) of verbs such 
as blame in pronoun reference assignment in two- 
clause sentences with conjunctions other than be- 
cause (which was the only conjunction used in pre- 
vious work (Garvey el al., 1976)). In her experi- 
ments, subjects were tested for their ability to iden- 
tify correct referents of pronouns in three versions 
of six two-clause sentences (such as those in sen- 
tences (47) and (48)), where each of the sentences 
contained one of the conjunctions and, but, and be- 
cause. It was found that subjects were significantly 
more accurate in determining correct referents of 
aSAfter garden-pathing, "off-line" reasoning appar- 
ently allows the reader of example (46) to identify the 
correct referent of the pronoun. This reasoning may al- 
low propositional representations to be integrated into 
the discourse model so that Hobbs-like coherence deter- 
mination can be performed. 
67  
pronouns when the conjunction used was because or 
but, and therefore that the effect of implicit causal- 
ity was not constant with respect o the conjunction 
used. While a detailed analysis of her work is be- 
yond the scope of this paper, two generalizations 
that she draws as a result of her experiments are: 
(1) that subjects were more able to utilize 'gen- 
eral knowledge' in determining the referent when 
the conjunction used was because or but than when 
it was and; and (2) that hearers analyze language 
a clause at a time. The first of these results sup- 
ports our view that semantic information required 
for reasoning is primarily available in the discourse 
model (since the representation for the first clause is 
integrated into the discourse model when the con- 
junction used is but or because); the second point 
supports our claim that the propositional registers 
hold clause-level representations. 17 
In summary, our architecture also accommo- 
dates evidence supporting competing theories of 
how pronominal NP resolution is performed. 
5 Conc lus ions  
This paper presents a model for anaphoric process- 
ing that incorporates the role of establishing coher- 
ence relationships between clauses in a discourse. 
By postulating the existence of propositional rep- 
resentations in addition to a discourse model, we 
account for ellipsis data that has gridlocked work 
on the topic. Furthermore, arguments for dichoto- 
mous approaches to pronoun resolution are resolv- 
able within this framework. 
It should be noted that coherence stablishment 
is not likely to be the only discourse factor involved 
in integrating propositional representations into the 
discourse model. Therefore, the analysis described 
herein only indicates tendencies, as opposed to pre- 
dicting cut-and-dry judgements on the basis of type 
of construction alone. For instance, example (49) 
has been judged by some speakers to be acceptable 
under a strict reading: is 
(49) I voted for myself, and I hope you did too! 
Our account predicts that this case would be at 
least somewhat stilted due to a Condition A viola- 
tion. One factor distinguishing this example from 
17 Ehrhch's results with the conjunction and are mixed 
with respect o our theory, as in some cases her partic- 
ipants preferred a non-subject position referent over a 
subject position one. In particular, she notes that this 
happens when the main verb of the second clause is 
the stative verb be, as in Sue criticized Penny and she 
was gloomy. These sentences contain the resultmeaning 
of and as opposed to the parallel one. Unfortunately, 
Ehrlich's original data was not available at the time of 
this writing so an analysis distinguishing between uses 
of and could not be performed. 
lsI thank an anonymous reviewer for this example. 
others we have discussed is the use of first and sec- 
ond person pronouns, and a second is the fact that 
the pronominal referent necessary to yield the strict 
reading is also present in the target clause. Future 
work is needed to further analyze the effects of these 
differences. 
The theory presented here evokes many other 
questions for future study. One such question is 
how the postulated representations should be fur- 
ther formalized, and how reasoning with these for- 
malizations is to be performed. A second question 
is how this conception of discourse processing may 
be integrated with theories of discourse structure 
(Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Scha and Polanyi, 1988; 
Webber, 1991). While we have looked primarily 
at two-clause structures, the ramifications that the 
claims have on multi-clause discourse structure re- 
quire further investigation. Such studies will form 
the basis for further characterization f the role of 
coherence stablishment in anaphoric processing. 
Acknowledgments  
This work was supported in part by National Sci- 
ence Foundation Grant IRI-9009018, National Sci- 
ence Foundation Grant IRI-9157996, and a match- 
ing grant for the latter from the Xerox Corporation. 
I would like to thank Mary Dalrymple, Barbara 
Grosz, Shalom Lappin, Karen Lochbaum, Christine 
Nakatani, Stuart Shieber, and two anonymous re- 
viewers for valuable discussions and comments on 
earlier drafts. 
References 
(Chomsky, 1981) Noam Chomsky. Lectures in Gov- 
ernment and Binding. Foris, Dordrecht, 1981. 
(Dalrymple et al, 1991) Mary Dalrymple, Stuart 
M. Shieber, and Fernando Pereira. Ellipsis and 
higher-order unification. Linguistics and Philo- 
sophy, 14:399-452, 1991. 
(Dalrymple, 1991) Mary Dalrymp!e. Against re- 
construction in ellipsis. Technical Report SSL- 
91-114, Xerox, 1991. 
(Ehrlich, 1980) Kate Ehrlich. Comprehension of 
pronouns. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology," 32:247-255, 1980. 
(Fiengo and May, 1990) Robert Fiengo and Robert 
May. Anaphora and ellipsis, ms., City Univer- 
sity of New York and University of California at 
Irvine, 1990. 
(Garvey and Caramazza, 1974) C. Garvey and 
A. Caramazza. Implicit causality in verbs. Lin- 
guistic Inquiry, 5:549-564, 1974. 
(Garvey et al, 1976) C. Garvey, A. Caramazza, 
and J. Yates. Factors underlying assignment 
of pronoun antecedents. Cognition, 3:227-243, 
1976. 
68 
(Gawron and Peters, 1990) Mark Gawron and 
Stanley Peters. Anaphora and Quantification in 
Situation Semantics. CSLI/University of Chicago 
Press, Stanford University, 1990. CSLI Lecture 
Notes, Number 19. 
(Grosz and Sidner, 1986) Barbara Grosz and Can- 
dace Sidner. Attention, intentions, and the strc- 
ture of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
12(3):175-204, 1986. 
(Grosz et al, 1986) Barbara J. Grosz, Aravind K. 
Joshi, and Scott Weinstein. Towards a computa- 
tional theory of discourse interpretation. Unpub- 
lished manuscript, 1986. 
(Ha'/k, 1987) Isabelle Ha'ik. Bound variables that 
need to be. Linguistics and Philosophy, 11:503- 
530, 1987. 
(Hardt, 1992) Daniel Hardt. VP ellipsis and con- 
textual interpretation. In Proceedings of the In- 
ternational Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics (COLING-92), Nantes, July 1992. 
(Hellan, 1988) Lars Hellan. Anaphora in Norwe- 
gian and the Theory of Grammar. Studies in 
Generative Grammar 32. Forts, Dordrecht, 1988. 
(Hestvik, 1993) Arild Hestvik. Strict reflexives and 
the subordination effect. In S. Berman and 
A. Hestvik, editors, Proceedings of the Stuttgart 
Workshop on Ellipsis: Arbeitspapiere des Son- 
derforschungsbereich 340, Berichl Nr. 29-1992, 
SFB 340. University of Stuttgart, University of 
Tuebingen, and IBM Germany, 1993. 
(Hobbs, 1976) Jerry Hobbs. Pronoun resolution. 
Technical Report 76-1, Department ofComputer 
Science, City University of New York, 1976. 
(Hobbs, 1979) Jerry Hobbs. Coherence and coref- 
erence. Cognitive Science, 3:67-90, 1979. 
(Johnson-Laird, 1983) P. N. Johnson-Laird. Men- 
tal Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of Lan- 
guage, Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge 
University Press, 1983. 
(Kameyama, 1988) Megumi Kameyama. Japanese 
zero pronominal binding: Where syntax and dis- 
course meet. In William J. Poser, editor, Pa- 
pers from the Second International Workshop on 
Japanese Syntax, pages 47-74. CLSI, 1988. 
(Kehler, 1993) Andrew Kehler. A discourse copy- 
ing algorithm for ellipsis and anaphora resolu- 
tion. In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics (EACL-93), Utrecht, the 
Netherlands, April 1993. 
(Klein, 1987) Ewan Klein. VP-Ellipsis in DR the- 
ory. In Groenindijk and Stokhof, editors, Studies 
in Discourse Representation Theory and the The- 
ory of Generalized Quantifiers. Forts, 1987. 
(Lappin and McCord, 1990) Shalom Lappin and 
Michael McCord. Anaphora resolution in slot 
grammar. Computational Linguistics, 16:197- 
212, 1990. 
(Lappin, 1993) Shalom Lappin. The syntactic ba- 
sis of ellipsis resolution. In S. Berman and 
A. Hestvik, editors, Proceedings of the Stuttgart 
Workshop on Ellipsis: Arbeitspapiere des Son- 
derforschungsbereich 340, Bericht Nr. 29-i992, 
SFB 340. University of Stuttgart, University of 
Tuebingen, and IBM Germany, 1993. 
(Passonneau, 1991) Rebecca Passonneau. Persis- 
tence of linguistic form in discourse processing. 
In Proceedings of the Fall Symposium on Dis- 
course Structure in Natural Language Under- 
standing and Generation, Monterey, CA, Novem- 
ber 1991. 
(Rooth, 1981) Mats Rooth. A comparison of three 
theories of verb phrase llipsis. University of Mas- 
sachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics, Vol- 
ume 7, 1981. 
(Sag and Hankamer, 1984)Ivan Sag and Jorge 
Hankamer. Toward a theory of anaphoric pro- 
cessing. Linguistics and Philosophy, 7:325-345, 
1984. 
(Scha and Polanyi, 1988) Remko Scha and Livia 
Polanyi. An augmented context free grammar 
for discourse. In Proceedings of the Interna- 
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-88), pages 573-577, Budapest, August 
1988. 
(Webber, 1991)Bonnie Lynn Webber. Struc- 
ture and ostension in the interpretation of dis- 
course deixis. Language and Cognitive Processes, 
6(2):107-135, 1991. 
(Wilensky, 1978) Robert Wilensky. Understanding 
Goal-Based Stories. PhD thesis, Yale, 1978. Re- 
search Report #140. 
Sources of Examples 
(Jarecki, 1992) Jill Jarecki. The role ofsynaptic ac- 
tivity during embryonic neuromuscular junction 
development in drosophila melangestr. Unpub- 
lished Yale University Prospectus, August 1992. 
(Rosenthal, 1988) Harry F. Rosenthal. Agency or- 
ders UPS to resume fireworks deliveries-after 
July 4th. Associated Press Newswire, June 1988. 
69 
