COMPACT REPRESENTATIONS BY  F IN ITE-STATE 
TRANSDUCERS 
Mehryar Mohri 
Institut Gaspard Monge-LADL 
Universit6 Marne-la-Vall6e 
2, rue de la But te  verte  
93160 Noisy- le -Grand,  FRANCE 
Internet:  mohr i@univ -mlv . f r  
Abst rac t  
Finite-state transducers give efficient represen- 
tations of many Natural Language phenomena. 
They allow to account for complex lexicon restric- 
tions encountered, without involving the use of a 
large set of complex rules difficult to analyze. We 
here show that these representations can be made 
very compact, indicate how to perform the corre- 
sponding minimization, and point out interesting 
linguistic side-effects of this operation. 
1. MOTIVAT ION 
Finite-state transducers constitute appropriate 
representations of Natural Language phenomena. 
Indeed, they have been shown to be sufficient tools 
to describe morphological nd phonetic forms of a 
language (Kaxttunen et al, 1992; Kay and Ka- 
plan, 1994). Transducers can then be viewed as 
functions which map lexical representations to the 
surface forms, or inflected forms to their phonetic 
pronunciations, and vice versa. They allow to 
avoid the use of a great set of complex rules of. 
ten difficult to check, handle, or even understand. 
Finite-state automata nd transducers can 
also be used to represent the syntactic onstraints 
of languages uch as English or French (Kosken- 
niemi, 1990; Mohri, 1993; Pereira, 1991; Roche, 
1993). The syntactic analysis can then be reduced 
to performing the intersection of two automata, 
or to the application of a transducer to an au- 
tomaton. However, whereas first results how that 
the size of the syntactic transducer xceeds several 
hundreds of thousands of states, no upper bound 
has been proposed for it, as the representation f 
all syntactic entries has not been done yet. Thus, 
one may ask whether such representations could 
succeed on a large scale. 
It is therefore crucial to control or to limit 
the size of these transducers in order to avoid a 
blow up. Classic minimization algorithms permit 
to reduce to the minimal the size of a determinis- 
tic automaton recognizing a given language (Aho 
et al, 1974). No similar algorithm has been pro- 
posed in the case of sequential transducers, namely 
transducers whose associated input automata re 
deterministic. 
We here briefly describe an algorithm which 
allows to compute a minimal transducer, namely 
one with the least number of states, from a given 
subsequential transducer. In addition to the de- 
sired property of minimization, the transducer ob- 
tained in such a way has interesting linguistic 
properties that we shall indicate. We have fully 
implemented and experimented this algorithm in 
the case of large scale dictionaries. In the last 
section, we shall describe xperiments and corre- 
sponding results. They show this algorithm to be 
very efficient. 
2. ALGORITHM 
Our algorithm can be applied to any sequential 
transducer T = (V, i, F, A, B, 6, ~) where: V is the 
set of the states of T, i its initial state, F the set 
of its final states, A and B respectively the input 
and output alphabet of the transducer, ~ the state 
transition function which maps V x A to V, and 
the output function which maps V x A to B*. 
With this definition, input labels are elements of 
the alphabet, whereas output labels can be words. 
Figure 1 gives an example of a sequential trans- 
ducer. 
Transducers can be considered as automata 
over the alphabet A x B*. Thus, considered as 
such they can be submitted to the minimization 
in the sense of automata. Notice however that 
the application of the minimization algorithm for 
automata does not permit to reduce the number 
of states of the transducer T. We shall describe in 
the following how the algorithm we propose allows 
to reduce the number of states of this transducer. 
This algorithm works in two stages. The first 
one modifies only the output automaton associ- 
ated with the given sequential transducer T. Thus, 
we can denote by (V,i,F,A,B,~,~2) the trans- 
204 
~b:b  ~,1 b:c 
> c :c  
:k J- c-d 
f be Q 
Figure 1. Transducer T. 
ducer T2 obtained after this first stage. Let P be 
the function which maps V to B* which associates 
with each state q of T the greatest common prefix 
of all the words which can be read on the output 
labels of T from q to a final state. The value of 
P(5) is for instance db since this is the greatest 
common prefix of the labels of all output paths 
leaving 3. In particular, if q is a final state then P(q) is the empty word e. In order to simplify this 
presentation, we shall assume in the following that P(i) = e. The output function ~2 of T2 is defined 
by: 
Vq~V, ra tA ,  ~2(q, a)= (P(q))-l~r(q, a)P(6(q, a)). 
Namely, the output labels of T are modified in 
such a way that they include every letter which 
would necessarily be read later on the following 
transitions. Figure 2 illustrates these modifica- 
tions. 
T if beginning with the transition (0, 1). The out- 
put label of the following transition of T2 is now 
empty. Indeed, anything which could be read from 
the transition (1, 2) on the output labels has now 
been included in the previous transition (0,1). 
It is easy to show that the transducer T2 ob- 
tained after the first stage is equivalent o T. 
Namely, these two transducers correspond to the 
same function mapping A* to B*. One may no- 
tice, however, that unlike T this transducer can be 
minimized in the sense of automata nd that this 
leads to a transducer with only six states. Figure 
3 indicates the transducer T3 obtained in such a 
way. 
The second stage of our algorithm precisely 
consists of the application of the minimization i  
the sense of automata, that is, of merging equiv- 
alent states of the transducer. It can be showed 
that the application of the two presented stages to 
~b:bcddb 
b:l~ :- c :E  
. e "e  
b:e b:db 
Figure 2. Transducer T2. 
It shows the transducer T2 obtained from T by 
performing the operations described above. Notice 
that only the output labels of T have" been mod- 
ified. The output label a corresponding to the 
transition linking states 0 and 1 of the transducer 
has now become abcdb as this is the longest word 
which is necessarily read from the initial state 0 of 
a sequential transducer T systematically leads to 
an equivalent sequential transducer with the min- 
imal number of states (Mohri, 1994). Indeed, the 
states of this minimal transducer can be charac- 
terized by the following equivalence r lation: two 
states of a sequential transducer axe equivalent if
and only if one can read the same words from 
205 
a: abcdb d: cdb 
Q 
b : l~ddb ~ b:db 
Figure 3. Transducer Ta. 
these states using the left automaton associated 
with this transducer (equivalence in the sense of 
automata) and if the corresponding outputs from 
these states differ by the same prefix for any word 
leading to a final state. Thus, the described algo- 
rithm can be considered as optimal. 
Notice that we here only considered sequen- 
tial transducers, but not all transducers epresent- 
ing sequential functions are sequential. However, 
transducers which are not sequential though repre- 
senting a sequential function can be determinized 
using a procedure close to the one used for the de- 
terminization of automata. The algorithm above 
can then be applied to such determinized trans- 
ducers. 
The complexity of the application of a non 
sequential transducer to a string is not linear. 
This is not the case even for non-deterministic 
automata. Indeed, recognizing a word w with 
a non-deterministic automaton of IV\[ states each 
containing at most e leaving transitions requires 
O(e\[Vl\[w D (see Aho et al, 1974). The application 
of a non-sequential transducer is even more time 
consuming, so the determinization of transducers 
clearly improves their application. We have con- 
sidered above sequential transducers, but trans- 
ducers can be used in two ways. These transduc- 
ers, although they allow linear time application 
on left, are generally not sequential considered as 
right input transducers. However, the first stage 
of the presented algorithm constitutes a pseudo- 
determinization of right input transducers. In- 
deed, as right labels (outputs) are brought closer 
to the initial state as much as possible, irrelevant 
paths are sooner rejected. 
Consider for example the string x = abcdbcdbe 
and compare the application of transducers T and 
Tz to this sequence on right input. Using the 
transducer T, the first three letters of this se- 
quence lead to the single state 5, but then reading 
db leads to a set of states {1,5,6}. Thus, in or- 
der to proceed with the recognition, one needs to 
store this set and consider all possible transitions 
or paths from its states. Using the transducer T2 
and reading abcdb give the single state 1. Hence, 
although the right input transducer is not sequen- 
tial, it still permits to reduce the number of paths 
and states to visit. This can be considered as an- 
other advantage of the method proposed for the 
minimization of sequential transducers: not only 
the transducer is sequential and minimal on one 
side, but it is also pseudo-sequential on the other 
side. 
The representation of language often reveals 
ambiguities. The sequential transducers we have 
just described o not allow them. However, real 
ambiguities encountered in Natural Language Pro- 
cessing can be assumed to be finite and bounded 
by an integer p. The use of the algorithm above 
can be easily extended to the case of subsequential 
transducers and even to a larger category of trans- 
ducers which can represent ambiguities and which 
we shall call p-subsequential r rgsducers. These 
transducers are provided with p final functions ~i, 
(i E \[1,p\]) mapping F, the set of final states, to 
B*. Figure 4 gives an example of a 2-subsequentiai 
transducer. 
d dd 
Figure 4. 2-subsequential transducer T4. 
The application of these transducers to a 
string z is similar to the one generally used for 
sequential ones. It outputs a string correspond- 
ing to the concatenation f consecutive labels en- 
coutered. However, the output string obtained 
once reaching state q must here be completed by 
the ~i(q) without reading any additional input let- 
ter. The application of the transducer T4 to the 
word abc for instance provides the two outputs 
abca and abcb. 
The extension of the use of the algorithm 
above is easy. Indeed, in all cases p-subsequential 
206 
transducers can be transformed into sequential 
transducers by adding p new letters to the alpha- 
bet A, and by replacing the p final functions by 
transitions labeled with these new letters on in- 
put and the corresponding values of the functions 
on output. These transitions would leave the final 
states and reach a newly created state which would 
become the single final state of the transducer. 
The minimal transducer associated with the 2- 
subsequential transducer T4 is shown on figure 5. 
It results from T4 by merging the states 2 and 4 
after the first stage of pseudo-determinization. 
b.~ 
ca 
c.~ 
d b 
occupying about 1,1 Mb. Also, as the transducer 
is sequential, it allows faster ecognition times. 
In addition to the above results, the trans- 
ducer obtained by this algorithm has interesting 
properties. Indeed, when applied to an input word 
w which may not be a French word this transducer 
outputs the longest common prefix of the phonetic 
transcriptions of all words beginning with w. The 
input w -" opio for instance, though it does not 
constitute a French word, yields opjoman. Also, 
w - opht gives oftalm. This property of mini- 
real transducers a defined above could be used in 
applications such as OCR or spellchecking, in or- 
der to restore the correct form of a word from its 
beginning, or from the beginning of its pronunci- 
ation. 
Table 1. Results of minimization experiments 
Figure 5. Minimal 2-subsequential transducer Ts. 
In the following section, we shall describe 
some of the experiments we carried out and the 
corresponding results. These experiments u e the 
notion of p-subsequential transducers just devel- 
opped as they all deal with cases where ambigui- 
ties appear. 
3. EXPERIMENTS,  RESULTS,  
AND PROPERT IES  
We have experimented the algorithm described 
above by applying it to several large scale dictio- 
naries. We have applied it to the transducer which 
associates with each French word the set of its pho- 
netic pronunciations. This transducer can be built 
from a dictionary (DELAPF) of inflected forms of 
French, each followed by its pronunciations (La- 
porte, 1988). It can be easily transformed into 
a sequential or p-subsequential transducer, where 
p, the maximum number of ambiguities for this 
transducer, is about four (about 30 words admit 
4 different pronunciations). This requires that the 
transducer be kept deterministic while new asso- 
ciations are added to it. 
The dictionary contains about 480.000 entries 
of words and phonetic pronunciations and its size 
is about 10 Mb. The whole minimization algo- 
rithm, including building the transducer f om the 
dictionary and the compression of the final trans- 
ducer, was quite fast: it took about 9 minutes 
using a HP 9000/755 with 128 Mb of RAM. The 
resulting transducer contains about 47.000 states 
and 130.000 transitions. Since it is sequential, it
can be better compressed as one only needs to 
store the set of its transitions. The minimal trans- 
ducer obtained has been put in a compact form 
Initial size 
DELAPF FDELAF EDELAF 
Final size 
States 
Transitions 
1,1 Mb 
47.000 
130.000 
13.500 
, 
Alphabet 
1,6 Mb 
66.000 
195.000 
20.000 
20' Time spent 
1 Mb 
47.000 
115.000 
\[IEVE 
, 
We have also performed the same experi- 
ment using 2 other large dictionaries: French 
(FDELAF) (Courtois, 1989) and English (EDF_,- 
LAF) (Klarsfeld, 1991) dictionaries of inflected 
forms. These dictionaries are made of associ- 
ations of inflected forms and their correspond- 
ing canonical representations. It took about 20 
minutes constructing the 15-subsequential trans- 
ducer associated with the French dictionary of 
about 22 Mb. Here again, properties of the ob- 
tained transducers seem interesting for various ap- 
plications. Given the input w=transducte for in- 
stance the transducer provides the output trans- 
ducteur.Nl:m. Thus, although w is not a cor- 
rect French word, it provides two additional let- 
ters completing this word, and indicates that it is 
a masculine noun. Notice that no information is
given about the number of this noun as it can be 
completed by an ending s or not. Analogous re- 
sults were obtained using the English dictionary. 
A part of them is illustrated by the table above. 
It allows to compare the initial size of the file 
representing these dictionaries and the size of the 
equivalent transducers in memory (final size). The 
third line of the table gives the maximum num- 
ber of lexical ambiguities encountered in each dic- 
tionary. The following lines indicate the number 
207 
of states and transitions of the transducers and 
also the size of the alphabet needed to represent 
the output labels. These experiments show that 
this size remains small compared to the number 
of transitions. Hence, the use of an additional al- 
phabet does not increase noticeably the size of the 
transducer. Also notice that the time indicated 
corresponds to the entire process of transforma- 
tion of the file dictionaries into tranducers. This 
includes of course the time spent for I/O's. We 
have not tried to optimize these results. Several 
available methods hould help both to reduce the 
size of the obtained transducers and the time spent 
for the algorithm. 
4. CONCLUSION 
We have informally described an algorithm which 
allows to compact sequential transducers used in 
the description of language. Experiments on large 
scale dictionaries have proved this algorithm to be 
efficient. In addition to its use in several applica- 
tions, it could help to limit the growth of the size 
of the representations of syntactic onstraints. 
REFERENCES 
Aho, Alfred, John Hopcroft, Jeffery Ullman. 1974. 
The design and analysis o,f computer algorithms. 
Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley. 
Courtois, Blandine. 1989. DELAS: Diction- 
naire Electronique du LADL pour les roots simples 
du franais Technical Report, LADL, Paris, France. 
Karttunen, Laura, Ronald M. Kaplan, and 
Annie Zaenen. 1992. Two-level Morphology with 
Composition. Proceedings o.f the fifteenth Inter- 
national Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'92}, Nantes, France, August. 
Kay, Martin, and Ronald M. Kaplan. 1994. 
Regular Models of Phonological Rule Systems. To 
appear in Computational Linguistics. 
Klarsfeld, Gaby. 
phologique de l'anglais. 
Paris, France. 
1991. Dictionnaire mot- 
Technical Report, LADL, 
Koskenniemi Kimmo. 1990. Finite-state 
Parsing and Disambiguation. Proceedings of the 
thirteenth International Conference on Computa- 
tional Linguistics (COLING'90), Helsinki, Fin- 
land. 
Laporte, Eric. 1988. MJthodes algorithmiques 
et lezicales de phon~tisation de teztes. Ph.D the- 
sis, Universit4 Paris 7, Paris, France. 
Mohri, Mehryar. 1993. Analyse et 
representation par automates de structures syntaz- 
iques eompos~es. Ph.D thesis, Universit4 Paris 7, 
Paris, France. 
Mohri, Mehryar. 1994. Minimization of Se- 
quential Transducers. Proceedings of Combinato- 
rial Pattern Matchnig (CPM'9~), Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin Heidelberg New York. Also Submitted to 
Theoretical Computer Science. 
Pereira, Fernando C. N. 1991. Finite- 
State Approximation of Phrase Structure Gram- 
mars. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 
(A CL '91), Berkeley, California. 
Roche Emmanuel. 1993. Analyse syntaz- 
ique translormationnelle dufranfais par transduc- 
teur et lezique-grammaire. Ph.D thesis, Universitd 
Paris 7, Paris, France. 
208 
Mehryar MOHRI 
Institut Gaspard Monge 
Universit4 Marne-la-Val l4e 
2, Rue de la Butte Verte 
93166 NOISY-LE-GRAND CEDEX 
FRANCE 
Ph: 33 (I) 49 32 60 54 
Fax: 33 (I) 43 04 16 05 
209 
