A COMPUTATIONAL V IEW OF THE COGNIT IVE  
SEMANTICS  OF SPAT IAL  PREPOSIT IONS*  
Pat r i ck  Ol iv ie r  
Centre for Intelligent Systems 
University of Wales 
Aberystwyth  
Dyfed, SY23 3DB, UK 
Internet:  p lo~aber .ac .uk 
Abst rac t  
This paper outlines the linguistic semantic om- 
mitments underlying an application which au- 
tomatically constructs depictions of verbal spa- 
tial descriptions. Our approach draws on the 
ideational view of linguistic semantics developed 
by Ronald Langacker in his theory of Cognitive 
Grammar, and the conceptual representation f 
physical objects from the two-level semantics of 
Bierwisch and Lang. In particular the dimensions 
of the process of conventwnal imagery are used 
as a metric for the design of our own conceptual 
representation. 
INTRODUCTION 
An increased interest in ttle semantics of 
spatial language has accompanied the recent 
rise in popularity of cognitive linguistics (see 
\[Rudzka-Ostyn1988\]), yet computational ap- 
proaches are thin on the ground. This can in 
part be accounted for by the rather descriptive 
and unformalized nature of the theories devel- 
oped, but is more likely due to the adoption of 
an ideational view of linguistic meaning which, 
it seems, is an anathema to computational lin- 
guists. In this paper we take a serious, if infor- 
mal, look at Ronald Langacker's theory of Cogni- 
tive Grammar \[Langacker1987\], \[Langacker1988a\], 
\[Langacker1988b\], more specifically its commit- 
ment to conceptualization a d the use of conven- 
tional imagery. 
The first section of this paper introduces the 
semantics of projective prepositions (eg. "in front 
of", "behind", "left of", "right of"), illustrating 
that these seemingly simple predicates are supris- 
ingly complex and ambiguous. In the light of 
this discovery the following sections consider Lan- 
gacker's view of linguistic meaning, and the design 
of a conceptual representation for spatial preposi- 
tions motivated by the consideration f the various 
*Thi~ research wa~ kindly funded by the Mat- 
sushita Electric Industrial Company Limited. 
Jun-ichi Tsujii 
Centre for Computational Linguistics 
University of ~anchester 
Institute of Science and Technology , 
Manchester, M60 1QD, UK 
Internet: tsujii~ccl.umist.ac.uk 
dimensions of conventional imagery. The repre- 
sentation has been implemented for English spa- 
tial descriptions and after demonstrating its utility 
for the automatic depiction of verbal descriptions, 
we finally contrast our approach against previous 
at tenapts. 
THE SEMANTICS OF 
PROJECTIVE PREPOSITIONS 
In this section we characterize the components of
the spatial meaning of projective prepositions that 
have motivated our interest in cognitive linguis- 
tic approaches. Throughout, the decoding prob- 
lem, that is, generating adequate meanings for a 
locative xpression i  a particular situation, is our 
benchmark for representational adequacy. 
The spatial meaning Of a projective preposi- 
tional predication (eg. "the chair is in front of the 
desk") can include: a constraint on the proximity 
of the located (LO) (eg. "the chair") and refer- 
ence objects (RO) (eg. "the desk"); a directional 
constraint on the LO relative to the RO; and a 
relative orientation between the speaker, LO and 
RO. Constraints are of an intrinsically fuzzy na- 
ture such that different relative positions and ori- 
entations of the speaker, RO and LO satisfy the 
predication to different degrees, and combinations 
of constraints on the RO and LO originating from 
different predications must be readily accommo- 
dated. 
PROXIMITY  CONSTRAINTS 
Projective prepositions necessarily place a con- 
straint on the proximity of the located object 
and the reference object. Predications uch as 
"the chair is in front of the desk" constrain the 
"desk" and "chair", to some degree, to be prox- 
imal to each other. Conversely projective prepo- 
sitions such as "away from" predicate a distal re- 
lationship between the located and reference ob- 
ject. The degree of the proximity expressed in any 
projective prepositional predication varies accord- 
303 
2 
INTRINS IC  In the intrinsic case the reference 
frame is centered at the R0  and adopts the intrin- 
sic orientations of the RO. Thus a LO is deemed 
to be "in front of" the RO under.an intrinsic read- 
ing if it is located in the direction defined by the 
vector that is the half-plane of the front of the R0. 
In figure 1 stool number I is intrinsically "in front 
of the desk". 
DEICT IC  The reference frame for a deictic in- 
terpretation is centered at the speaker and adopts 
the speaker's orientation; deictic readings can 
be invoked explicitly with qualifications such as 
"from where we are standing"; when the RO has 
no intrinsic or extrinsic sideness relating to the 
preposition used; or when intrinsic or extrinsic in- 
terpretations are ruled out on other grounds (eg. 
the impossibility of spatially arranging the objects 
as required by the interpretation). In figure 1 stool 
number 2 is deictically "in front of the desk". 
Figure 1: Intrinsic, deictic and extrinsic uses of 
"in front off' 
ing to a number of considerations including: the 
spatial context (the spatial extent and content of 
the scene described); and the absolute and relative 
sizes of the LO and RO (eg. a car that is "left of" 
a lorry is typically less proximal than an apple and 
orange similarly described). 
D IRECT IONAL CONSTRAINTS 
In addition to the constraint on the proximity of 
the LO and RO, projective prepositions place a 
constraint on the position of the LO relative to 
a particular side of the RO. In the case of the 
intrinsic interpretation (see section ) of a predi- 
cation such as "the stool is in front of the desk", 
the "stool" is located in some region of the space 
defined by the half-plane that is the intrinsic front 
of the "desk". Intuitively, the closer the "stool" is 
to the region of space defined by the projection of 
the desk's dimensions into this space, the more the 
spatial arrangement conforms to the prototypical 
interpretation of the predication. 
REFERENCE FRAMES 
Intrinsic, deictic and extrinsic interpretations of
projective prepositions differ according to the ref- 
erence frame with respect o which the directional 
constraint is characterized \[Retz-Schmidt1988\]. 
Figure 1 is an example of a scene that might give 
rise to predications which invoke each of these ref- 
erence frames. 
EXTRINS IC  Extrinsic readings can occur 
when the RO has no intrinsic sides relating to the 
locative preposition (eg. for objects such as trees) 
but is in close proximity to another object that is 
strongly sided (eg. such as a house); in which case 
the reference frame capturing the intrinsic orienta- 
tions of the stronger sided object can be adopted 
by the RO. Referring to figure 1 the chair is ex- 
trinsically "in front of stool number 3"; here the 
stool has inherited an extrinsic front from the right 
wall. 
INTERACTING CONSTRAINTS 
Typically an object is located with respect o more 
than one RO by the means of multiple spatial 
predications. This places a requirement of on 
the meaning representation f spatial predications 
that they must capable of being easily combined, 
to give rise to a cumulative meaning. 
COGNIT IVE  GRAMMAR AND 
L INGUIST IC  MEANING 
Cognitive granlmar is comprised of five basic 
claims as to the composition of linguistic mean- 
ing, following \[Langacker1988b\] these are: 
1. Meaning reduces to conceptualization. 
2. Polysemy is the norm and can be adequately 
accommodated by representing the meaning a 
lexical item as a network of senses related by 
categorizing relationships of schematicity or ex- 
tension. 
3. Semantic structures are characterized relative to 
cognitive domains. Domains are hierarchically 
304 
organized in terms of conceptual complexity, 
where the characterization f a concept at one 
level can draw on lower level concepts. While 
there need not necessarily be any conceptual 
primitives, the lowest level domains are termed 
basic domains and include our experience of 
time, space, color etc. 
4. A semantic structure derives its value through 
the imposition of a "profile" upon a "base". 
5. Semantic structures incorporate conventional 
"imagery", our ability to construe the same in- 
formational content in different ways. 
That meaning reduces to conceptualization 
(thesis 1), is characterized relative to cognitive 
domains (thesis 3), and incorporates conventional 
imagery (thesis 5) runs in stark contrast o the 
heavy emphasis placed on truth conditions and 
formalization by current computational linguistic 
approaches. We have attempted to tackle the in- 
formality of this ideational view of meaning, by 
addressing one particular basic cognitive domain, 
that of oriented three-dimensional space, and im- 
plement a restricted version of Langacker's process 
of conceptualization by means of conventional im- 
agery. To verify the utility of the resulting concep- 
tualization, we use the interpretations of spatial 
expressions so generated (the resulting images), to 
automatically construct a depictions of the scene. 
Theses 2, that prototypes should replace tra- 
ditional objective categories, lies at the very heart 
of cognitive semantics \[Taylor1989\], and though it 
is widely accepted as true for semantic and most 
other linguistic ategories, prototype theory is not 
conducive to rigorous formalization and has con- 
sequently been ignored by mainstream computa- 
tional linguistics. Likewise our concern is with 
meaning variations that originate from different 
construals of the same information in the process 
of conventional imagery (thesis 5). 
IMAGERY AND ITS  
IMPLEMENTATION 
This special technical use of imagery (not to be 
confused with the psychological term meaning the 
formation and manipulation mental images) refers 
to "our amazing mental ability to "structure" or 
"construe"' a conceived situation in many alter- 
nate ways" \[Langacker1988b\], as opposed to tradi- 
tional semantic approaches whose concern is with 
informational content alone. Thus "every concep- 
tion reflects some particular construal of its con- 
tent". Langacker identifies ix important dimen- 
sions of imagery; in our semantic analysis of spa- 
tial expressions we are interested in just three of 
these: 
1. level of specificity 
2. scale and scope of predication 
3. perspective 
The remainder of this section is a characteri- 
zation of each of these dimensions and the conse- 
quences that their consideration has with respect 
to the design of a conceptual representation for 
spatial expressions. 
REPRESENTING 3-D SPACE 
The basic cognitive domain relative to which the 
spatial meaning of projective prepositions is char- 
acterized, is structured three-dimensional space. 
In our system space is represented using an orthog- 
onal axis system we refer to as the DCS (Domain 
Coordinate System). In the process of image con- 
struction conceptual objects will be constrained 
to locations described relative to the DCS. The 
DCS mirrors the speaker's perceptual assignment 
of axes to a scene, the x-axis extends from deictic 
left to deictic right, the y-axis from deictic front 
to deictic back, and the z-axis extends vertically. 
LEVEL  OF  SPECIF IC ITY  
The level of specificity of conventional imagery ad- 
dresses the issue of the degree of detail with which 
an entity is characterized. Specificity has already 
been mentioned in connection with the construc- 
tion of the network of polysemous senses of a lex- 
ical item; on the other hand, concerning different 
lexical items, we can readily identify different spa- 
tial predications that are schematic with respect 
to each other. Consider the sentences below. 
(a) The chair is near the desk. 
(b) The chair is in front of the desk. 
(c) The chair is facing the desk. 
Sentence (a) simply predicates proximity; (b) 
predicates both proximity and a positioning of the 
LO relative to a particular side of the RO I ; lastly 
(c) predicates proximity and a relative positioning 
of the LO with respect to the RO, with the addi- 
tional anti-alignment of the fronl face normals of 
the two objects. 
Schematic contrast dictates the min imum de- 
gree of detail we must maintain in our com- 
putational representation of the conceptual ref- 
erence and located objects. In sentences (a) 
the objects can be thought of as structureless 
points; in (b) the representation of the RO 
must incorporate the notion of sideness; and in 
(c) both the RO and LO are sided. We bor- 
row Lang's conceptual representation of objects 
ZThe issue of which side of the reference object 
the located object is positioned with respect to is ad- 
dressed as a consequence of the perspective dimension 
of conventional imagery 
305 
termed object schemata \[Lang1993\], constructed 
within Bierwisch's and Lang's the two-level se- 
mantics \[Bierwisch and Lang1989\]. The object 
schema for a desk is: 
a max b vert c across 
al i-left bl i-bottom el i-front 
a2 i-right b2 i-top c2 i-back 
In this first schema a, b and ? label three or- 
thogonal axes centered at the object, each of which 
can be instantiated by one or more dimensional as- 
signment parameters (DAPs)2; a l -a2,  bl-b2 and 
c1-?2 are corresponding half-axes. Each half axis 
is labelled either n i l  or with an intrinsic side 
(eg. i - fronl;) .  This representation is augmented 
with both a three-dimensional Cartesian coordi- 
nate which when assigned locates the conceptual 
schema relative to the DCS; and the values of the 
default extents for the object type along the axes 
a, b and ?. 
Imagery implies an imager, that is, the im- 
age exists in and with respect cognitive world of 
the speaker (by default) and this necessarily has 
important consequences. With respect to spatial 
language, issues pertaining to perspective, that is 
taking account of the imager, include the speaker's 
vantage point and orientation. 
ORIENTAT ION 
The interpretation of some spatial expressions i
dependent on assumptions as to the speaker's 
orientation with respect to the objects in the 
scene (eg. whether A is "to the left of" B in 
a scene, is dependent on the orientation of the 
speaker/viewer); other expressions are orientation 
independent such as "above" and "below" which 
implicitly refer to the downward pull of gravity (al- 
though in space verticality is speaker dependent). 
When an object schemata is characterized rel- 
ative to the DCS it is both assigned a Cartesian 
position (as we show later), and its half-axes are 
assigned deictic sides according to their relative 
orientation with the observer. For example if a 
desk is positioned "against he left wall" as in fig- 
ure 1 this would result an instantiated conceptual 
schema for the "desk" of: 
a max b vert c across 
al i-left bl i-bottom cl i-front 
d-front d-bottom d-right 
a2 i-right b2 i-top c2 i-back 
d-back d-t op d-lef t 
2DAPs are not of direct interest here although they 
are fundamental tothe process of dimensional designa- 
tion and and important where dimensional ~signment 
might result in a reorientation ofthe conceptual object 
(eg. "the pole is high"). 
Here al is the intrinsic left side but the deictic 
front of the desk. 
VANTAGE POINT 
The speaker's vantage point is another factor that 
determines the interpretation of spatial expres- 
sions in a scene. The notions of deictic and in- 
trinsic interpretations of projective prepositions 
can be accounted for purely by recognizing that in 
each the speaker adopts a different vantage point. 
For deictic interpretations the vantage point is the 
speaker's actual position. The vantage point for 
intrinsic interpretations i  the functionally rele- 
vant position with respect o a reference object, 
for example, "left of the desk" under the intrinsic 
interpretation uses a vantage point that is directly 
in front of the desk (the typical configuration when 
a human uses a desk). 
The meaning of a projective preposition is 
conceptually represented as a spatial constraint on 
the conceptual schema of the located object which 
extends out from a particular side of a reference 
object, the precise nature of which we describe in 
the next subsection. In our system the lexicalized 
constraint is of the form of a two place predicate: 
< zoneprox  X:s ids  Y > 
Where X is the reference object and Y the lo- 
cated object. The parameter s ide depends on the 
preposition. Thus the schematicity we observed in 
section is explicitly represented: 
(a) V is near X. 
< zonsprox  X Y > 
Proximity constraint between X and Y. 
(b) Y is in front of X. 
< zoneprox  X: f ront  Y > 
Proximity and alignment of Y with front of X 
(c) Y is facing X. 
< zoneprox  X: f ron~ Y :back  > 
Proximity, alignment and specific "facing" oriem 
SCOPE OF  PREDICAT ION 
Scope refers to exactly how much of a cognitive 
domain is included in the characterization. Mini- 
mally, the scope of an image for "next to" must en- 
compass at least the reference and subject objects 
and some region of space separating them. We im- 
plement he spirit of this concept by realising the 
lexicalized constraint for a projective preposition 
as a potential field fixed at the reference object's 
position in the DCS 3, The proximity and direc- 
tional nature of the constraint < zoneprox . .  > is 
captured using a potential field P~, where: 
d,  = (x - x0) (1) 
3This technique is borrowed from robot manipula- 
tor path-planning \[Khatib1986\] 
306 
d~ = (y - y0) (2) 
P~ = Pp .... ? + ed,.,~ (3) 
P"?~,~= 2 ~ p.ox,~) (4) 
Kay., ~ d~ (5) Pdir,~ : 2 
Here the x-axis points direction of the half- 
axis of the particular side of the reference axis in 
the DCS; and in the case of "in front of" y is the 
perpendicular direction in the horizontal plane; 
(x0,y0) is the Cartesian coordinate of the refer- 
ence object in the DCS, and lower the value of 
Pt~ for a location (x, y) for the located object the 
better the spatial constraint is satisfied. The min- 
imum for the field can be quickly computed using 
gradual approximation \[3ramada et al1988\]. The 
values of Kproz ~. Lproz ' ~r ' and Kdir,.~. are depen- 
dent on the located and reference objects and are 
set on the basis of scale considerations ( ee). Mul- 
tiple spatial predications over an object is simply 
accommodated within the potential field model by 
linear addition of component fields. 
SCALE OF PREDICAT ION 
The concept of the scale relates to the object de- 
pendency of the degree of proximity and direc- 
tional constraint afforded by a preosition: where 
"X is left of Y", and X and Y are houses, then the 
meaning of this predication would contrast with its 
meaning if X and Y were pieces of fruit. The con- 
cept of proximity and directional constraint pred- 
icated by "left of" is apparent in both cases, what 
differs is the scale relative to which it is character- 
ized. 
Scale effects are realised in the mechanism by 
which the constants of the potential field are set. 
For the potential field P~, the effect of the con- 
stants on the nature of the constraint are: 
:. K..o.,,~ 
Proportional to range of the possible separa- 
tions of X and Y that would still satisfy the 
predication. 
2. Lpro~,~ , 
The default separation of X and Y. 
Proportional to the range of directions that 
would still satisfy the predication. 
Thus for a reference object that is a house 
Kp,.o~:,~, Lp,.o~,~, Kai, .~ r must all be consider- 
ably greater than for a piece of fruit. The precise 
values can only reasonably set as a result of some 
experimental investigation, currently Kp~o~, t~' and 
Lpro~ ,~ are linearly dependent on the sum of the 
extents of the reference and subject objects in the 
direction of spatial alignment; and Kdi~,~. on the 
perpendicular extent of the reference object in the 
plane of the constraint. 
GENERATING DEPICTIONS 
After using gradual approximation to find the po- 
sition of the minimum in the potential fields rep- 
resenting the spatial predications over a particular 
object, this point can be regarded as a probable 
interpretation. By tying each conceptual object 
to a graphical model, and interpreting the DCS 
as the viewer's perceptual axis system, concep- 
tual interpretations can be rendered as scene de- 
pictions. Figure 2 illustrates one depiction of the 
cumulative interpretation of the following verbal 
description, in which all projective prepositions 
are viewed intrinsically 4.
"I am in a room. Against the left wall is a 
long desk. Against the back wall is a short desk. 
In front of the long desk is a chair. Another chair 
is to the left of the long desk. The chair in front 
of the desk is near the short desk." 
OTHER APPROACHES AND 
CLOSING REMARKS 
Nearly all the work in recent years on computing 
the meanings of spatial prepositions stem from the 
prototype 
semantics of either Herskovits \[Herskovits1985\], 
\[Herskovits1986\] or Talmy \[Talmy1983\]. Schirra 
\[Schirra nd Stopp1993\] adopts Herskovits' notion 
of a core meaning, and implements this as a typ- 
icality field. The ability to sum fields of different 
predications satisfies the compositionality require- 
ment. Yet representational poverty exists with re- 
spect to the spatial and perceptual characteristics 
of the objects, as while directionality and prox- 
imity constraints are adequately captured for the 
intrinsic reference frame and set of objects, varia- 
tion in the degree of constraint (for example, de- 
pending on the size of the reference object) and 
the potential for ambiguity arising from interpre- 
tations with respect o different reference frames 
are not accounted for. 
Underlying Kalita's 
work \[Kalita nd Badler1991\] is a conceptualiza- 
tion of the space around a reference object as six 
4Natural anguage sentences are parsed to three 
branch quantifiers using a prolog DCG grammar, the 
logical predicates are the input to the cognitive seman- 
tic processor, the resulting conceptual representations 
are converted to depictions in by the depiction module 
. The cognitive semantic processor and the depiction 
module are implemented in Smalltalk/Objectworks 
307 
Gn~/aa Dmo 
InDut \[ 
Figure 2: Computer generated depiction'of a ver- 
bal description 
orthogonal rectangula~ projected regions (based 
upon an enclosing cuboid idealization of the ob- 
ject) due to Douglas \[Douglas and Novick1987\]. 
Using this model and following Talmy's work, the  
semantics ofprojective prepositions are lexicalized 
as geometric-relation schemas. Reference frame 
anabiguity is not addressed; directionality is too 
tightly restricted to one of the six rectangular re- 
gions, and proximity constraint is left to the "un- 
derlying constraint satisfaction techniques and the 
use of a weight slot in the template for constraint 
representation". 
Within the framework of the LILOG project 
\[Maienborn1991\] Ewald Lang implemented the 
two-level approach to the semantics of di- 
mensional adjectives in which the percep- 
tual and dimensional properties of objects are 
conceptually represented as object schemata 
\[Bierwisch and Lang1989\]. Further developed 
for projective spatial predications, Lang's object 
schemata are capable of distinguishing deictic and 
intrinsic readings, though without explicit refer- 
ence to a quantitative space (ie. actual scenes and 
observers) as in the case of Schirra and Kalita. 
Our system represents ~ first attempt, and 
very highly specialized implementation, f the con- 
ventional imagery process that is a component of 
the cognitive grammarian's view of linguistic se- 
mantics. Its performance, in terms of generating 
all possible interpretations, and the quality of the 
interpretations constitutes a significant advance 
on previous approaches. 
References ' 
\[Bierwisch and Lang1989\] 
M Bierwisch and E Lang. 1989. Dimensional 
Adjectives: Grammatical Structure and Concep- 
tual Interpretation. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Hei- 
delberg New York. 
\[Douglas and Novick1987\] 
S Douglas and D Novick. 1987. Consistency 
and variance in spatial reference. In Proceedings 
of the Ninth Annual Cognitive Science Society 
Meeting, pages 417-426. 
\[Herskovits1985\] A Herskovits. 1985. Semantics 
and pragmatics of locative xpressions. Cogni- 
tive Science, 9:341-378. 
\[Herskovits1986\] A Herskovits. 1986. Language 
and spatial cognition -- an interdisciplinary 
study of the prepositions in English. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (UK). 
\[Kalita nd Badler1991\] J Kalita and B Badler. 
1991. Interpreting prepositions physically. In 
Proceedings AAAI-91, pages 105-110. 
\[Khatib1986\] O Khatib. 1986. Real-time obstacle 
avoidance for manipulators and modile robots. 
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 
5(1):90-98. 
\[Lang1993\] E Lang. 1993. A two-level approach to 
projective prepositions. In C Zelinsky-Wibbelt, 
editor, The semantics of prepositions: from 
mental processing to Natural Language process- 
ing. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin. 
\[Langacker1987\] R W Langacker. 1987. Founda- 
tions of Cognitive Grammar, Volume I, Theo- 
retical Prerequisites. Stanford University Press, 
Stanford. 
\[Langacker1988a\] R W Langacker. 1988a. An 
overview of cognitive grammar. In B Rudzka- 
Ostyn, editor, Topics in Cognitive Linguis- 
tics, pages 3-48. Benjamins, Amsterdam- 
Philadelphia. 
\[Langacker1988b\] R W Langacker. 1988b. A view 
of linguistic semantics. In B Rudzkw-Ostyn, ed- 
itor, Topics in Cognitive Linguistics, pages 49- 
90. Benjamins, Amsterdam-Philadelphia. 
\[Maienborn1991\] J R Maienborn. 1991. Process- 
ing spatial knowledge in lilog. IWBS Report 
157, IBM Germany. 
\[Retz-Schmidt1988\] G Retz-Schmidt. 1988. Vari- 
ous views on spatial prepositions. AI Magazine, 
9(2):95-105. 
\[Rudzka-Ostyn1988\] B Rudzka-Ostyn, 
editor. 1988. Topics in Cognitive Linguistics. 
Benjamins, Amsterdam-Philadelphia. 
308 
\[Schirra and Stopp1993\] ,\] R 3 Schirra and 
E Stopp. 1993. Antlima -- a listener model 
with mental images. In Proceedings of IJCAI, 
pages 175-180. 
\[TaJmy1983\] L Talmy. 1983. How language struc- 
tures space. In H Pick and L Acredolo, editors, 
Spatial Orientation: Theory, Research, and Ap- 
plication, pages 225-282. Plenum Press, New 
York. 
\[Taylor1989\] J R Taylor. 1989. Linguistic catego- 
rization: prototypes in linguistic theory. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 
\[Yamadaet a1.1988\] A Yamada, T Nishida, and 
S Doshita. 1988. Figuring out most plausible 
interpretation from spatial descriptions. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 1Pth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, pages 764-769. 
309 
