A Quant i tat ive Evaluat ion of Linguist ic Tests for 
the Automat ic  Predict ion of Semant ic  Markedness 
Vas i le ios  Hatz ivass i log lou  and  Kath leen  McKeown 
Depar tment  of Computer  Sc ience 
450 Computer  Sc ience Bu i ld ing  
Co lumbia  Un ivers i ty  
New York ,  N.Y .  10027 
{vh, kathy}~cs, columbia, edu 
Abst ract  
We present a corpus-based study of methods 
that have been proposed in the linguistics liter- 
ature for selecting the semantically unmarked 
term out of a pair of antonymous adjectives. 
Solutions to this problem are applicable to the 
more general task of selecting the positive term 
from the pair. Using automatically collected 
data, the accuracy and applicability of each 
method is quantified, and a statistical analysis 
of the significance of the results is performed. 
We show that some simple methods are indeed 
good indicators for the answer to the problem 
while other proposed methods fail to perform 
better than would be attributable to chance. 
In addition, one of the simplest methods, text 
frequency, dominates all others. We also ap- 
ply two generic statistical learning methods 
for combining the indications of the individual 
methods, and compare their performance to 
the simple methods. The most sophisticated 
complex learning method offers a small, but 
statistically significant, improvement over the 
original tests. 
1 In t roduct ion  
The concept of markedness originated in the work 
of Prague School linguists (Jakobson, 1984a) and 
refers to relationships between two complementary 
or antonymous terms which can be distinguished by 
the presence or absence of a feature (+A versus --A). 
Such an opposition can occur at various linguistic 
levels. For example, a markedness contrast can arise 
at the morphology level, when one of the two words 
is derived from the other and therefore contains an 
explicit formal marker such as a prefix; e.g., prof- 
itable-unprofitable. Markedness contrasts also ap- 
pear at the semantic level in many pairs of grad- 
able antonymous adjectives, especially scalar ones 
(Levinson, 1983), such as tall-short. The marked 
and unmarked elements of such pairs function in dif- 
ferent ways. The unmarked adjective (e.g., tall) can 
be used in how-questions to refer to the property de- 
scribed by both adjectives in the pair (e.g., height), 
but without any implication about the modified item 
relative to the norm for the property. For exam- 
ple, the question How tall is Jack? can be answered 
equally well by four or seven feet. In contrast, the 
marked element of the opposition cannot be used 
generically; when used in a how-question, it implies 
a presupposition of the speaker egarding the rela- 
tive position of the modified item on the adjectival 
scale. Thus, the corresponding question using the 
marked term of the opposition (How short is Jack?) 
conveys an implication on the part of the speaker 
that Jack is indeed short; the distinguishing feature 
A expresses this presupposition. 
While markedness has been described in terms of 
a distinguishing feature A, its definition does not 
specify the type of this feature. Consequently, sev- 
eral different ypes of features have been employed, 
which has led into some confusion about the meaning 
of the term markedness. Following Lyons (1977), we 
distinguish between formal markedness where the 
opposition occurs at the morphology level (i.e., one 
of the two terms is derived from the other through 
inflection or affixation) and semantic markedness 
where the opposition occurs at the semantic level 
as in the example above. When two antonymous 
terms are also morphologically related, the formally 
unmarked term is usually also the semantically un- 
marked one (for example, clear-unclear). However, 
this correlation is not universal; consider the exam- 
ples unbiased-biased and independent-dependent. 
In any case, semantic markedness i the more in- 
teresting of the two and the harder to determine, 
both for humans and computers. 
Various tests for determining markedness in gen- 
eral have been proposed by linguists (see Section 3). 
However, although potentially automatic versions of 
some of these have been successfully applied to the 
problem at the phonology level (Trubetzkoy, 1939; 
Greenberg, 1966), little work has been done on the 
empirical validation or the automatic application of 
those tests at higher levels (but see (Ku~era, 1982) 
for an empirical analysis of a proposed markedness 
test at the syntactic level; some more narrowly fo- 
cused empirical work has also been done on marked- 
ness in second language acquisition). In this paper 
197 
we analyze the performance ofseveral linguistic tests 
for the selection of the semantically unmarked term 
out of a pair of gradable antonymous adjectives. 
We describe a system that automatically extracts 
the relevant data for these tests from text corpora 
and corpora-based databases, and use this system 
to measure the applicability and accuracy of each 
method. We apply statistical tests to determine the 
significance of the results, and then discuss the per- 
formance of complex predictors that combine the an- 
swers of the linguistic tests according to two general 
statistical learning methods, decision trees and log- 
linear regression models. 
2 Mot ivat ion  
The goal of our work is twofold: First, we are inter- 
ested in providing hard, quantitative evidence on the 
performance of markedness tests already proposed 
in the linguistics literature. Such tests are based 
on intuitive observations and/or particular theories 
of semantics, but their accuracy has not been mea- 
sured on actual data. The results of our analysis 
can be used to substantiate heories which are com- 
patible with the empirical evidence, and thus offer 
insight into the complex linguistic phenomenon of
antonymy. 
The second purpose of our work is practical appli- 
cations. The semantically unmarked term is almost 
always the positive term of the opposition (Boucher 
and Osgood, 1969); e.g., high is positive, while low is 
negative. Therefore, an automatic method for deter- 
mining markedness values can also be used to deter- 
mine the polarity of antonyms. The work reported 
in this paper helps clarify which types of data and 
tests are useful for such a method and which are not. 
The need for an automatic orpus-based method 
for the identification of markedness becomes appar- 
ent when we consider the high number of adjectives 
in unrestricted text and the domain-dependence of 
markedness values. In the MRC Psycholinguis- 
tic Database (Coltheart, 1981), a large machine- 
readable annotated word list, 25,547 of the 150,837 
entries (16.94%) are classified as adjectives, not in- 
cluding past participles; ifwe only consider regularly 
used grammatical categories for each word, the per- 
centage of adjectives rises to 22.97%. For compar- 
ison, nouns (the largest class) account for 51.28% 
and 57.47% of the words under the two criteria. 
In addition, while adjectives tend to have prevalent 
markedness and polarity values in the language at 
large, frequently these values are negated in spe- 
cific domains or contexts. For example, healthy is in 
most contexts the unmarked member of the opposi- 
tion healthy:sick; but in a hospital setting, sickness 
rather than health is expected, so sick becomes the 
unmarked term. The methods we describe are based 
on the form of the words and their overall statistical 
properties, and thus cannot predict specific occur- 
fences of markedness reversals. But they can predict 
the prevalent markedness value for each adjective in 
a given domain, something which is impractical to 
do by hand separately for each domain. 
We have built a large system for the automatic, 
domain-dependent classification of adjectives ac- 
cording to semantic riteria. The first phase of our 
system (Hatzivassiloglou and McKeown, 1993) sep- 
arates adjectives into groups of semantically related 
ones. We extract markedness values according to 
the methods described in this paper and use them in 
subsequent phases of the system that further analyze 
these groups and determine their scalar structure. 
An automatic method for extracting polarity in- 
formation would also be useful for the augmenta- 
tion of lexico-semantic databases such as WordNet 
(Miller et al, 1990), particularly when the method 
accounts for the specificities of the domain sublan- 
guage; an increasing number of NLP systems rely 
on such databases (e.g., (Resnik, 1993; Knight and 
Luk, 1994)). Finally, knowledge of polarity can be 
combined with corpus-based collocation extraction 
methods (Smadja, 1993) to automatically produce 
entries for the lexical functions used in Meaning- 
Text Theory (Mel'~uk and Pertsov, 1987) for text 
generation. For example, knowing that hearty is 
a positive term enables the assignment of the col- 
location hearty eater to the lexical function entry 
MAGS( eater)=-hearty. 1 
3 Tests  fo r  Semant ic  Markedness  
Markedness in general and semantic markedness in
particular have received considerable attention in 
the linguistics literature. Consequently, several tests 
for determining markedness have been proposed by 
linguists. Most of these tests involve human judg- 
ments (Greenberg, 1966; Lyons, 1977; Waugh, 1982; 
Lehrer, 1985; Ross, 1987; Lakoff, 1987) and are not 
suitable for computer implementation. However, 
some proposed tests refer to comparisons between 
measurable properties of the words in question and 
are amenable to full automation. These tests are: 
1. Text frequency. Since the unmarked term can 
appear in more contexts than the marked one, 
and it has both general and specific senses, it 
should appear more frequently in text than the 
marked term (Greenberg, 1966). 
2. Formal markedness. A formal markedness re- 
lationship (i.e., a morphology relationship be- 
tween the two words), whenever it exists, should 
be an excellent predictor for semantic marked- 
ness (Greenberg, 1966; Zwicky, 1978). 
3. Formal complexity. Since the unmarked word is 
the more general one, it should also be morpho- 
logically the simpler (Jakobson, 1962; Battis- 
tella, 1990). The "economy of language" prin- 
1MAGN stands for magnify. 
198 
ciple (Zipf, 1949) supports this claim. Note that 
this test subsumes test (2). 
4. Morphological produclivity. Unmarked words, 
being more general and frequently used to de- 
scribe the whole scale, should be freer to com- 
bine with other linguistic elements (Winters, 
1990; Battistella, 1990). 
5. Differentialion. Unmarked terms should ex- 
hibit higher differentiation with more subdis- 
tinetions (Jakobson, 1984b) (e.g., the present 
tense (unmarked) appears in a greater variety 
of forms than the past), or, equivalently, the 
marked term should lack some subcategories 
(Greenberg, 1966). 
The first of the above tests compares the text fre- 
quencies of the two words, which are clearly mea- 
surable and easily retrievable from a corpus. We 
use the one-million word Brown corpus of written 
American English (Ku~era and Francis, 1967) for 
this purpose. The mapping of the remaining tests to 
quantifiable variables is not as immediate. We use 
the length of a word in characters, which is a rea- 
sonable indirect index of morphological complexity, 
for tests (2) and (3). This indicator is exact for the 
case of test (2), since the formally marked word is 
derived from the unmarked one through the addition 
of an affix (which for adjectives is always a prefix). 
The number of syllables in a word is another ea- 
sonable indicator of morphological complexity that 
we consider, although it is much harder to compute 
automatically than word length. 
For morphological productivity (test (4)), we mea- 
sure several variables related to the freedom of the 
word to receive affixes and to participate in com- 
pounds. Several distinctions exist for the definition 
of a variable that measures the number of words 
that are morphologically derived from a given word. 
These distinctions involve: 
Q Whether to consider the number of distinct 
words in this category (types) or the total fre- 
quency of these words (tokens). 
? Whether to separate words derived through 
affixation from compounds or combine these 
types of morphological relationships. 
? If word types (rather than word frequencies) are 
measured, we can select to count homographs 
(words identical in form but with different parts 
of speech, e.g., light as an adjective and light as 
a verb) as distinct ypes or map all homographs 
of the same word form to the same word type. 
Finally, the differentiation test (5) is the one gen- 
eral markedness test that cannot be easily mapped 
into observable properties of adjectives. Somewhat 
arbitrarily, we mapped this test to the number of 
grammatical categories (parts of speech) that each 
word can appear under, postulating that the un- 
marked term should have a higher such number. 
The various ways of measuring the quantities com- 
pared by the tests discussed above lead to the consid- 
eration of 32 variables. Since some of these variables 
are closely related and their number is so high that 
it impedes the task of modeling semantic marked- 
ness in terms of them, we combined several of them, 
keeping 14 variables for the statistical analysis. 
4 Data  Co l lec t ion  
In order to measure the performance of the marked- 
ness tests discussed in the previous section, we 
collected a fairly large sample of pairs of antony- 
mous gradable adjectives that can appear in how- 
questions. The Deese antonyms (Deese, 1964) is the 
prototypical collection of pairs of antonymous adjec- 
tives that have been used for similar analyses in the 
past (Deese, 1964; Justeson and Katz, 1991; Grefen- 
stette, 1992). However, this collection contains only 
75 adjectives in 40 pairs, some of which cannot be 
used in our study either because they are primar- 
ily adverbials (e.g., inside-outside) or not gradable 
(e.g., alive-dead). Unlike previous studies, the na- 
ture of the statistical analysis reported in this paper 
requires a higher number of pairs. 
Consequently, we augmented the Deese set with 
the set of pairs used in the largest manual previ- 
ous study of markedness in adjective pairs (Lehrer, 
1985). In addition, we included all gradable adjec- 
tives which appear 50 times or more in the Brown 
corpus and have at least one gradable antonym; 
the antonyms were not restricted to belong to this 
set of frequent adjectives. For each adjective col- 
lected according to this last criterion, we included all 
the antonyms (frequent or not) that were explicitly 
listed in the Collins COBUILD dictionary (Sinclair, 
1987) for each of its senses. This process gave us a 
sample of 449 adjectives (both frequent and infre- 
quent ones) in 344 pairs. 2 
We separated the pairs on the basis of the how-test 
into those that contain one semantically unmarked 
and one marked term and those that contain two 
marked terms (e.g., fat-lhin), removing the latter. 
For the remaining pairs, we identified the unmarked 
member, using existing designations (Lehrer, 1985) 
whenever that was possible; when in doubt, the pair 
was dropped from further consideration. We also 
separated the pairs into two groups according to 
whether the two adjectives in each pair were mor- 
phologically related or not. This allowed us to study 
the different behavior of the tests for the two groups 
separately. Table 1 shows the results of this cross- 
classification of the adjective pairs. 
Our next step was to measure the variables de- 
scribed in Section 3 which are used in the various 
2The collection method is similar to Deese's: He also 
started from frequent adjectives but used human sub- 
jects to elicit antonyms instead of a dictionary. 
199 
One Both 
unmarked marked 
Morphologically 211 54 
unrelated 
Morphologically 68 3 
related 
Total 279 57 
Total 
265 
71 
\[\[ 336 
Table 1: Cross-classification of adjective pairs ac- 
cording to morphological relationship and marked- 
ness status. 
tests for semantic markedness. For these measure- 
ments, we used the MRC Psycholinguistic Database 
(Coltheart, 1981) which contains a variety of mea- 
sures for 150,837 entries counting different parts of 
speech or inflected forms as different words (115,331 
distinct words). We implemented an extractor pro- 
gram to collect the relevant measurements for the 
adjectives in our sample, namely text frequency, 
number of syllables, word length, and number of 
parts of speech. All this information except the 
number of syllables can also be automatically ex- 
tracted from the corpus. The extractor program also 
computes information that is not directly stored in 
the MRC database. Affixation rules from (Quirk et 
al., 1985) are recursively employed to check whether 
each word in the database can be derived from each 
adjective, and counts and frequencies of such de- 
rived words and compounds are collected. Overall, 
32 measurements are computed for each adjective, 
and are subsequently combined into the 14 variables 
used in our study. 
Finally, the variables for the pairs are computed 
as the differences between the corresponding vari- 
ables for the adjectives in each pair. The output of 
this stage is a table, with two strata corresponding 
to the two groups, and containing measurements on
14 variables for the 279 pairs with a semantically 
unmarked member. 
5 Eva luat ion  o f  L ingu is t i c  Tests  
For each of the variables, we measured how many 
pairs in each group it classified correctly. A positive 
(negative) value indicates that the first (second) ad- 
jective is the unmarked one, except for two variables 
(word length and number of syllables) where the op- 
posite is true. When the difference is zero, the vari- 
able selects neither the first or second adjective as 
unmarked. The percentage of nonzero differences, 
which correspond to cases where the test actually 
suggests a choice, is reported as the applicability of 
the variable. For the purpose of evaluating the accu- 
racy of the variable, we assign such cases randomly 
to one of the two possible outcomes in accordance 
with common practice in classification (Duda and 
Hart, 1973). 
For each variable and each of the two groups, we 
also performed a statistical test of the null hypoth- 
esis that its true accuracy is 50%, i.e., equal to the 
expected accuracy of a random binary classifier. Un- 
der the null hypothesis, the number of correct re- 
sponses follows a binomial distribution with param- 
eter p = 0.5. Since all obtained measurements of
accuracy were higher than 50%, any rejection of the 
null hypothesis implies that the corresponding test 
is significantly better than chance. 
Table 2 summarizes the values obtained for some 
of the 14 variables in our data and reveals some 
surprising facts about their performance. The fre- 
quency of the adjectives i the best predictor in both 
groups, achieving an overall accuracy of 80.64% with 
high applicability (98.5-99%). This is all the more 
remarkable in the case of the morphologically related 
adjectives, where frequency outperforms length of 
the words; recall that the latter directly encodes the 
formal markedness relationship, so frequency is able 
to correctly classify some of the cases where formal 
and semantic markedness values disagree. On the 
other hand, tests based on the "economy of lan- 
guage" principle, such as word length and number 
of syllables, perform badly when formal markedness 
relationships do not exist, with lower applicability 
and very low accuracy scores. The same can be said 
about the test based on the differentiation properties 
of the words (number of different parts of speech). In 
fact, for these three variables, the hypothesis of ran- 
dom performance cannot be rejected even at the 5% 
level. Tests based on the productivity of the words, 
as measured through affixation and compounding, 
tend to fall in-between: their accuracy is generally 
significant, but their applicability is sometimes low, 
particularly for compounds. 
6 P red ic t ions  Based  on  More  than  
One Test  
While the frequency of the adjectives is the best 
single predictor, we would expect to gain accuracy 
by combining the answers of several simple tests. 
We consider the problem of determining semantic 
markedness as a classification problem with two pos- 
sible outcomes ("the first adjective is unmarked" 
and "the second adjective is unmarked"). To de- 
sign an appropriate classifier, we employed two gen- 
eral statistical supervised learning methods, which 
we briefly describe in this section. 
Dec is ion  t rees  (Quinlan, 1986) is the first statis- 
tical supervised learning paradigm that we explored. 
A popular method for the automatic onstruction 
of such trees is binary recursive partitioning, which 
constructs a binary tree in a top-down fashion. 
Starting from the root, the variable X which better 
discriminates among the possible outcomes is se- 
lected and a test of the form X < consiant is as- 
200 
Test Morphologically Unrelated 
P-Value 
Frequency 
Applicability 
99.05% 
Accuracy 
75.36% 8.4 .10  -14 
Number of syllables 58.29% 55.92% 0.098 
Word length 83.41% 52.13% 0.582 
Number of 71.09% 56.87% 0.054 homographs 
Total number of 64.45% 61.14% 0.0015 compounds 
Unique words derived 95.26% 66.35% 2.3.10 -6 
by affixation 
Total frequency of 82.46% 66.35% 2.3 ? 10 -6 
derived words 
II Morphologically Related 
Applicability Accuracy P-Value 
98.53% 
95.59% 
100.00% 
97.06% 
92.65% 
95.59% 
< 10 -16 
7 .7 .10  -14 
4.4.10 -16 
66.18% 
14.71% 
98.53% 
83.82% 
79.41% 
60.29% 
94.12% 
91.18% 
i . I  ? i 0  - s  
0.114 
5.8.10 -15 
8.2.10 -13 
Table 2: Evaluation of simple markedness tests. The probability of obtaining by chance performance equal 
to or better than the observed one is listed in the P- Value column for each test. 
sociated with the root node of the tree. All train- 
ing cases for which this test succeeds (fails) belong 
to the left (right) subtree of the decision tree. The 
method proceeds recursively, by selecting a new vari- 
able (possibly the same as in the parent node) and 
a new cutting point for each subtree, until all the 
cases in one subtree belong to the same category or 
the data becomes too sparse. When a node can- 
not be split further, it is labeled with the locally 
most probable category. During prediction, a path 
is traced from the root of the tree to a leaf, and the 
category of the leaf is the category reported. 
If the tree is left to grow uncontrolled, it will ex- 
actly represent the training set (including its pecu- 
liarities and random variations), and will not be very 
useful for prediction on new cases. Consequently, 
the growing phase is terminated before the training 
samples assigned to the leaf nodes are entirely ho- 
mogeneous. A technique that improves the quality 
of the induced tree is to grow a larger than optimal 
tree and then shrink it by pruning subtrees (Breiman 
et al, 1984). In order to select the nodes to shrink, 
we normally need to use new data that has not been 
used for the construction of the original tree. 
In our classifier, we employ a maximum likeli- 
hood estimator based on the binomial distribution 
to select the optimal split at each node. During the 
shrinking phase, we optimally regress the probabili- 
ties of children nodes to their parent according to a 
shrinking parameter ~ (Hastie and Pregibon, 1990), 
instead of pruning entire subtrees. To select the op- 
timal value for (~, we initially held out a part of the 
training data. In a later version of the classifier, 
we employed cross-validation, separating our train- 
ing data in 10 equally sized subsets and repeatedly 
training on 9 of them and validating on the other. 
Log- l inear  regress ion  (Santner and Duffy, 
1989) is the second general supervised learning 
method that we explored. In classical inear model- 
ing, the response variable y is modeled as y -- bTx+e 
where b is a vector of weights, x is the vector of the 
values of the predictor variables and e is an error 
term which is assumed to be normally distributed 
with zero mean and constant variance, independent 
of the mean of y. The log-linear egression model 
generalizes this setting to binomial sampling where 
the response variable follows a Bernoulli distribution 
(corresponding to a two-category outcome); note 
that the variance of the error term is not indepen- 
dent of the mean of y any more. The resulting gen- 
eralized linear model (McCullagh and Nelder, 1989) 
employs a linear predictor y = bTx + e as before, 
but the response variable y is non-linearly related to 
through the inverse logit function, 
eY y - __  
1A-e" 
Note that y E (0, 1); each of the two ends of that 
interval is associated with one of the possible choices. 
We employ the iterative reweighted least squares 
algorithm (Baker and Nelder, 1989) to approximate 
the maximum likelihood cstimate of the vector b, 
but first we explicitly drop the constant erm (in- 
tercept) and most of the variables. The intercept 
is dropped because the prior probabilities of the 
two outcomes are known to be equal. 3 Several of 
the variables are dropped to avoid overfitting (Duda 
and Hart, 1973); otherwise the regression model will 
use all available variables, unless some of them are 
linearly dependent. To identify which variables we 
should keep in the model, we use the analysis of de- 
viance method with iterative stepwise refinement of 
the model by iteratively adding or dropping one term 
if the reduction (increase) in the deviance compares 
3The order of the adjectives in the pairs is randomized 
before training the model, to ensure that both outcomes 
are equiprobable. 
201 
12" 
10 
i 
? 
?3 
40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 
Accuracy 
Figure 1: Probability densities for the accuracy 
of the frequency method (dotted line) and the 
smoothed log-linear model (solid line) on the mor- 
phologically unrelated adjectives. 
favorably with the resulting loss (gain) in residual 
degrees of freedom. Using a fixed training set, six 
of the fourteen variables were selected for modeling 
the morphologically unrelated adjectives. Frequency 
was selected as the only component of the model for 
the morphologically related ones. 
We also examined the possibility of replacing some 
variables in these models by smoothing cubic B- 
splines (Wahba, 1990). The analysis of deviance for 
this model indicated that for the morphologically 
unrelated adjectives, one of the six selected variables 
should be removed altogether and another should be 
replaced by a smoothing spline. 
7 Eva luat ion  o f  the  Complex  
Pred ic tors  
For both decision trees and log-linear egression, we 
repeatedly partitioned the data in each of the two 
groups into equally sized training and testing sets, 
constructed the predictors using the training sets, 
and evaluated them on the testing sets. This pro- 
cess was repeated 200 times, giving vectors of esti- 
mates for the performance of the various methods. 
The simple frequency test was also evaluated in each 
testing set for comparison purposes. From these vec- 
tors, we estimate the density of the distribution of 
the scores for each method; Figure 1 gives these den- 
sities for the frequency test and the log-linear model 
with smoothing splines on the most difficult case, 
the morphologically unrelated adjectives. 
Table 3 summarizes the performance of the meth- 
ods on the two groups of adjective pairs. 4 In order 
to assess the significance of the differences between 
4The applicability of all complex methods was 100% 
in both groups. 
the scores, we performed a nonparametric sign test 
(Gibbons and Chakraborti, 1992) for each complex 
predictor against he simple frequency variable. The 
test statistic is the number of runs where the score 
of one predictor is higher than the other's; as is com- 
mon in statistical practice, ties are broken by assign- 
ing half of them to each category. Under the null 
hypothesis of equal performance of the two methods 
that are contrasted, this test statistic follows the bi- 
nomial distribution with p = 0.5. Table 3 includes 
the exact probabilities for obtaining the observed (or 
more extreme) values of the test statistic. 
From the table, we observe that the tree-based 
methods perform considerably worse than frequency 
(significant at any conceivable level), even when 
cross-validation is employed. Both the standard 
and smoothed log-linear models outperform the fre- 
quency test on the morphologically unrelated adjec- 
tives (significant at the 5% and 0.1% levels respec- 
tively), while the log-linear model's performance is
comparable to the frequency test's on the morpho- 
logically related adjectives. The best predictor over- 
all is the smoothed log-linear model. 5
The above results indicate that the frequency test 
essentially contains almost all the information that 
can be extracted collectively from all linguistic tests. 
Consequently, even very sophisticated methods for 
combining the tests can offer only small improve- 
ment. Furthermore, the prominence of one variable 
can easily lead to overfitting the training data in the 
remaining variables. This causes the decision tree 
models to perform badly. 
8 Conc lus ions  and  Future  Work  
We have presented a quantitative analysis of the per- 
formance of measurable linguistic tests for the selec- 
tion of the semantically unmarked term out of a pair 
of antonymous adjectives. The analysis hows that a 
simple test, word frequency, outperforms more com- 
plicated tests, and also dominates them in terms of 
information content. Some of the tests that have 
been proposed in the linguistics literature, notably 
tests that are based on the formal complexity and 
differentiation properties of the words; fail to give 
any useful information at all, at least with the ap- 
proximations we used for them (Section 3). On the 
other hand, tests based on morphological productiv- 
ity are valid, although not as accurate as frequency. 
Naturally, the validity of our results depends on 
the quality of our measurements. While for most of 
the variables our measurements are necessarily ap- 
sit should be noted here that the independence as- 
sumption of the sign test is mildly violated in these re- 
peated runs, since the scores depend on collections of in- 
dependent samples from a finite population. This mild 
dependence will increase somewhat the probabilities un- 
der the true null distribution, but we can be confident 
that probabilities such as 0.08% will remain significant. 
202 
Morphologically Morphologically Overall 
Predictor tested unrelated related 
Accuracy P-Value Accuracy P-Value Accuracy P-Value 
Frequency 75.87% - 97.15% - 81.07% - 
Decision tree (no cross-validation) 64.99% 8.2.10 -53 94.40% 1.5.10 - l? 72.05% 1.7- 10 TM 
Decision tree 10-40 75.19% 7.2.10 -47 (cross validated) 69.13% 94.40% 1.5- 10 - l? 
Log-linear model 
(no smoothing) 76.52% 0 .0281 97.17% 1.00 81.55% 0.0228 
Log-linear model 
(with smoothing) 76.82% 0.0008 97.17% 1.00 81.77% 0.0008 
Table 3: Evaluation of the complex predictors. The probability of obtaining by chance a difference in 
performance r lative to the simple frequency test equal to or larger than the observed one is listed in the 
P- Value column for each complex predictor. 
proximate, we believe that they are nevertheless of
acceptable accuracy since (1) we used a representa- 
tive corpus; (2) we selected both a large sample of 
adjective pairs and a large number of frequent ad- 
jectives to avoid sparse data problems; (3) the pro- 
cedure of identifying secondary words for indirect 
measurements based on morphological productivity 
operates with high recall and precision; and (4) the 
mapping of the linguistic tests to comparisons of 
quantitative variables was in most cases straightfor- 
ward, and always at least plausible. 
The analysis of the linguistic tests and their com- 
binations has also led to a computational method 
for the determination f semantic markedness. The 
method is completely automatic and produces ac- 
curate results at 82% of the cases. We consider 
this performance r asonably good, especially since 
no previous automatic method for the task has been 
proposed. While we used a fixed set of 449 adjec- 
tives for our analysis, the number of adjectives in 
unrestricted text is much higher, as we noted in Sec- 
tion 2. This multitude of adjectives, combined with 
the dependence of semantic markedness on the do- 
main, makes the manual identification ofmarkedness 
values impractical. 
In the future, we plan to expand our analy- 
sis to other classes of antonymous words, particu- 
larly verbs which are notoriously difficult to ana- 
lyze semantically (Levin, 1993). A similar method- 
ology can be applied to identify unmarked (posi- 
tive) versus marked (negative) terms in pairs such 
as agree: dissent. 
Acknowledgements  
This work was supported jointly by the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency and the Office of Naval 
Research under contract N00014-89-J-1782, and by 
the National Science Foundation under contract 
GER-90-24069. It was conducted under the auspices 
of the Columbia University CAT in High Perfor- 
mance Computing and Communications in Health- 
care, a New York State Center for Advanced Tech- 
nology supported by the New York State Science and 
Technology Foundation. We wish to thank Judith 
Klavans, Rebecca Passonneau, and the anonymous 
reviewers for providing us with useful comments on 
earlier versions of the paper. 
Re ferences  
R. J. Baker and J. A. Nelder. 1989. The GLIM 
System, Release 3: Generalized Linear Interactive 
Modeling. Numerical Algorithms Group, Oxford. 
Edwin L. Battistella. 1990. Markedness: The Eval- 
uative Superstructure of Language. State Univer- 
sity of New York Press, Albany, NY. 
T. Boucher and C. E. Osgood. 1969. The Polyanna 
hypothesis. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 
Behavior, 8:1-8. 
Leo Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. J. 
Stone. 1984. Classification and Regression Trees. 
Wadsworth International Group, Belmont, CA. 
M. Coltheart. 1981. The MRC Psycholinguis- 
tic Database. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 33A:497-505. 
James Deese. 1964. The associative structure of 
some common English adjectives. Journal of Ver- 
bal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 3(5):347-357. 
Richard O. Duda and Peter E. Hart. 1973. Pattern 
Classification and Scene Analysis. Wiley, New 
York. 
Jean Dickinson Gibbons and Subhabrata Chak- 
raborti. 1992. Nonparametric Statistical Infer- 
ence. Marcel Dekker, New York, 3rd edition. 
203 
Joseph H. Greenberg. 1966. Language Universals. 
Mouton, The Hague. 
Gregory Grefenstette. 1992. Finding semantic simi- 
larity in raw text: The Deese antonyms. In Prob- 
abilistic Approaches to Natural Language: Papers 
from the 1992 Fall Symposium. AAAI. 
T. Hastie and D. Pregibon. 1990. Shrinking trees. 
Technical report, AT&T Bell Laboratories. 
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou and Kathleen McKeown. 
1993. Towards the automatic identification of ad- 
jectival scales: Clustering adjectives according to 
meaning. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meet- 
ing of the ACL, pages 172-182, Columbus, Ohio. 
Roman Jakobson. 1962. Phonological Studies, vol- 
ume 1 of Selected Writings. Mouton, The Hague. 
Roman Jakobson. 1984a. The structure of the Rus- 
sian verb (1932). In Russian and Slavic Grammar 
Studies 1931-1981, pages 1-14. Mouton, Berlin. 
Roman Jakobson. 1984b. Zero sign (1939). In 
Russian and Slavic Grammar Studies 1931-1981, 
pages 151-160. Mouton, Berlin. 
John S. Justeson and Slava M. Katz. 1991. Co- 
occurrences of antonymous adjectives and their 
contexts. Computational Linguistics, 17(1):1-19. 
Kevin Knight and Steve K. Luk. 1994. Building 
a large-scale knowledge base for machine transla- 
tion. In Proceedings of the 12th National Confer- 
ence on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-94). AAAI. 
Henry KuSera and Winthrop N. Francis. 1967. 
Computational Analysis of Present-Day American 
English. Brown University Press, Providence, RI. 
Henry Ku6era. 1982. Markedness and frequency: 
A computational nalysis. In Jan Horecky, edi- 
tor, Proceedings of the Ninth International Con- 
ference on Computational Linguistics (COLING- 
82), pages 167-173, Prague. North-Holland. 
George Lakoff. 1987. Women, Fire, and Dangerous 
Things. University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Adrienne Lehrer. 1985. Markedness and antonymy. 
Journal of Linguistics, 31(3):397-429, September. 
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter- 
nations: A Preliminary Investigation. University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Stephen C. Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 
John Lyons. 1977. Semantics, volume 1. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, England. 
Peter McCullagh and John A. Nelder. 1989. Gen- 
eralized Linear Models. Chapman and Hall, Lon- 
don, 2nd edition. 
Igor A. Mel'~uk and Nikolaj V. Pertsov. 1987. Sur- 
face Syntax of English: a Formal Model within 
the Meaning-Text Framework. Benjamins, Ams- 
terdam and Philadelphia. 
George A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, 
D. Gross, and K. J. Miller. 1990. WordNet: An 
on-line lexical database. International Journal of 
Lexicography (special issue), 3(4):235-312. 
John R. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees. 
Machine Learning, 1(1):81-106. 
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey 
Leech, and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive 
Grammar of the English Language. Longman, 
London and New York. 
Philip Resnik. 1993. Semantic lasses and syntactic 
ambiguity. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop 
on Human Language Technology. ARPA Informa- 
tion Science and Technology Office. 
John R. Ross. 1987. Islands and syntactic pro- 
totypes. In B. Need et ah, editors, Papers 
from the 23rd Annual Regional Meeting of the 
Chicago Linguistic Society (Part I: The General 
Session), pages 309-320. Chicago Linguistic Soci- 
ety, Chicago. 
Thomas J. Santner and Diane E. Duffy. 1989. The 
Statistical Analysis of Discrete Data. Springer- 
Verlag, New York. 
John Sinclair (editor in chief). 1987.  Collins 
COBUILD English Language Dictionary. Collins, 
London. 
Frank Smadja. 1993.  Retrieving collocations 
from text: XTRACT. Computational Linguistics, 
19(1):143-177, March. 
Nikolai S. Trubetzkoy. 1939.  Grundzuger der 
Phonologic. Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de 
Prague 7, Prague. English translation i  (Trubet- 
zkoy, 1969). 
Nikolai S. Trubetzkoy. 1969. Principles of Phonol- 
ogy. University of California Press, Berkeley and 
Los Angeles, California. Translated into English 
from (Trubetzkoy, 1939). 
Grace Wahba. 1990. Spline Models for Observa- 
tional Data. CBMS-NSF Regional Conference se- 
ries in Applied Mathematics. Society for Indus- 
trial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadel- 
phia, PA. 
Linda R. Waugh. 1982. Marked and unmarked: A
choice between unequals. Semiotica, 38:299-318. 
Margaret Winters. 1990. Toward a theory of syn- 
tactic prototypes. In Savas L. Tsohatzidis, editor, 
Meanings and Prototypes: Studies in Linguistic 
Categorization, pages 285-307. Routledge, Lon- 
don. 
George K. Zipf. 1949. Human Behavior and the 
Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Hu- 
man Ecology. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. 
A. Zwicky. 1978. On markedness in morphology. 
Die Spra'che, 24:129-142. 
204 
