Corpus Statistics Meet the Noun Compound:  
Some Empirical Results 
Mark  Lauer  
Microsoft Inst i tute  
65 Epping Road, 
North Ryde NSW 2113 
Austra l ia  
t -mark l?microso f t ,  com 
Abst rac t  
A variety of statistical methods for noun 
compound anMysis are implemented and 
compared. The results support wo main 
conclusions. First, the use of conceptual 
association ot only enables a broad cove- 
rage, but also improves the accuracy. Se- 
cond, an analysis model based on depen- 
dency grammar issubstantially more accu- 
rate than one based on deepest constitu- 
ents, even though the latter is more preva- 
lent in the literature. 
1 Background 
1.1 Compound Nouns 
If parsing is taken to be the first step in taming the 
natural language understanding task, then broad co- 
verage NLP remains a jungle inhabited by wild be- 
asts. For instance, parsing noun compounds appears 
to require detailed world knowledge that is unavaila- 
ble outside a limited domain (Sparek Jones, 1983). 
Yet, far from being an obscure, endangered species, 
the noun compound is flourishing in modern lan- 
guage. It has already made five appearances in this 
paragraph and at least one diachronic study shows 
a veritable population explosion (Leonard, 1984). 
While substantial work on noun compounds exists in 
both linguistics (e.g. Levi, 1978; Ryder, 1994) and 
computational linguistics (Finin, 1980; McDonald, 
1982; Isabelle, 1984), techniques suitable for broad 
coverage parsing remain unavailable. This paper ex- 
plores the application of corpus tatistics (Charniak, 
1993) to noun compound parsing (other computa- 
tional problems are addressed in Arens el al, 1987; 
Vanderwende, 1993 and Sproat, 1994). 
The task is illustrated in example 1: 
Example 1 
(a) \[womanN \[aidN workerN\]\] 
(b) \[\[hydrogenN ionN\] exchangeN\] 
The parses assigned to these two compounds dif- 
fer, even though the sequence of parts of speech are 
identical. The problem is analogous to the prepo- 
sitional phrase attachment task explored in Hindle 
and Rooth (1993). The approach they propose in- 
volves computing lexical associations from a corpus 
and using these to select he correct parse. A similar 
architecture may be applied to noun compounds. 
In the experiments below the accuracy of such a 
system is measured. Comparisons are made across 
five dimensions: 
? Each of two analysis models are applied: adja- 
cency and dependency. 
? Each of a range of training schemes are em- 
ployed. 
? Results are computed with and without uning 
factors uggested in the literature. 
? Each of two parameterisations areused: asso- 
ciations between words and associations bet- 
ween concepts. 
? Results are collected with and without machine 
tagging of the corpus. 
1.2 Training Schemes 
While Hindle and Rooth (1993) use a partial par- 
ser to acquire training data, such machinery appears 
unnecessary for noun compounds. Brent (1993) has 
proposed the use of simple word patterns for the ac- 
quisition of verb subcategorisation nformation. An 
analogous approach to compounds i used in Lauer 
(1994) and constitutes one scheme valuated below. 
While such patterns produce false training examp- 
les, the resulting noise often only introduces minor 
distortions. 
A more liberal alternative is the use of a co- 
occurrence window. Yarowsky (1992) uses a fixed 
100 word window to collect information used for 
sense disambiguation. Similarly, Smadja (1993) uses 
a six content word window to extract significant col- 
locations. A range of windowed training schemes are 
employed below. Importantly, the use of a window 
provides a natural means of trading off the amount 
of data against its quality. When data sparseness un- 
dermines the system accuracy, a wider window may 
47 
admit a sufficient volume of extra accurate data to 
outweigh the additional noise. 
1.3 Noun Compound Analys is  
There are at least four existing corpus-based al- 
gorithms proposed for syntactically analysing noun 
compounds. Only two of these have been subjected 
to evaluation, and in each case, no comparison to 
any of the other three was performed. In fact all au- 
thors appear unaware of the other three proposals. 
I will therefore briefly describe these algorithms. 
Three of the algorithms use what I will call the 
ADJACENCY MODEL, an analysis procedure that goes 
back to Marcus (1980, p253). Therein, the proce- 
dure is stated in terms of calls to an oracle which 
can determine if a noun compound is acceptable. It
is reproduced here for reference: 
Given three nouns nl, n2 and nz: 
? If either \[nl n2\] or In2 n~\] is not semantically 
acceptable then build the alternative structure; 
? otherwise, if \[n2 n3\] is semantically preferable 
to \[nl n2\] then build In2 nz\]; 
? otherwise, build \[nl n2\]. 
Only more recently has it been suggested that cor- 
pus statistics might provide the oracle, and this idea 
is the basis of the three algorithms which use the 
adjacency model. The simplest of these is repor- 
ted in Pustejovsky et al(1993). Given a three word 
compound, a search is conducted elsewhere in the 
corpus for each of the two possible subcomponents. 
Whichever is found is then chosen as the more closely 
bracketed pair. For example, when backup compiler 
disk is encountered, the analysis will be: 
Example  2 
(a) \[backupN \[compilerN diskN\]\] 
when compiler disk appears elsewhere 
(b) \[\[backupN compilerN\] diskN\] 
when backup compiler appears elsewhere 
Since this is proposed merely as a rough heuristic, 
it is not stated what the outcome is to be if neither 
or both subcomponents appear. Nor is there any 
evaluation of the algorithm. 
The proposal of Liberman and Sproat (1992) is 
more sophisticated and allows for the frequency of 
the words in the compound. Their proposal invol- 
ves comparing the mutual information between the 
two pairs of adjacent words and bracketing together 
whichever pair exhibits the highest. Again, there is 
no evaluation of the method other than a demon- 
stration that four examples work correctly. 
The third proposal based on the adjacency model 
appears in Resnik (1993) and is rather more complex 
again. The SELECTIONAL ASSOCIATION between a 
predicate and a word is defined based on the con- 
tribution of the word to the conditional entropy of 
the predicate. The association between each pair 
of words in the compound is then computed by ta- 
king the maximum selectional association from all 
possible ways of regarding the pair as predicate and 
argument. Whilst this association metric is compli- 
cated, the decision procedure still follows the out- 
line devised by Marcus (1980) above. Resnik (1993) 
used unambiguous noun compounds from the parsed 
Wall Stree~ Journal (WSJ) corpus to estimate the 
association ~alues and analysed a test set of around 
160 compounds. After some tuning, the accuracy 
was about 73%, as compared with a baseline of 64% 
achieved by always bracketing the first two nouns 
together. 
The fourth algorithm, first described in Lauer 
(1994), differs in one striking manner from the other 
three. It uses what I will call the DEPENDENCY MO- 
DEL. This model utilises the following procedure 
when given three nouns at, n2 and n3: 
? Determine how acceptable the structures \[nl n2\] 
and \[nl n3\] are; 
? if the latter is more acceptable, build \[n2 nz\] 
first; 
? otherwise, build In1 rig.\] first. 
Figure 1 shows a graphical comparison of the two 
analysis models. 
In Lauer (1994), the degree of acceptability is 
again provided by statistical measures over a cor- 
pus. The metric used is a mutual information-like 
measure based on probabilities of modification rela- 
tionships. This is derived from the idea that parse 
trees capture the structure of semantic relationships 
within a noun compound. 1 
The dependency model attempts to choose a parse 
which makes the resulting relationships as accepta- 
ble as possible. For example, when backup compiler 
disk is encountered, the analysis will be: 
Example  3 
(a) \[backupN \[compilerN diskN\]\] 
when backup disk is more acceptable 
(b) \[\[backupN compilerN\] diskN\] 
when backup compiler is more acceptable 
I claim that the dependency model makes more 
intuitive sense for the following reason. Consider 
the compound calcium ion exchange, which is typi- 
cally left-branching (that is, the first two words are 
bracketed together). There does not seem to be any 
reason why calcium ion should be any more frequent 
than ion exchange. Both are plausible compounds 
and regardless of the bracketing, ions are the object 
of an exchange. Instead, the correct parse depends 
on whether calcium characterises the ions or media- 
tes the exchange. 
Another significant difference between the models 
is the predictions they make about the proportion 
1Lauer and Dras (1994) give a formal construction 
motivating the algorithm given in Lauer (1994). 
48 
L 
N2 
t 
R 
Adjacency 
N3 
t 
Prefer 
left-branching 
ig 
L is more 
acceptable 
than R 
L 
N1 N2 N3 
t t 
R 
Dependency 
Figure 1: Two analysis models and the associations they compare 
of left and right-branching compounds. Lauer and 
Dras (1994) show that under a dependency mo- 
del, left-branching compounds hould occur twice 
as often as right-branching compounds (that is two- 
thirds of the time). In the test set used here and 
in that of Resnik (1993), the proportion of left- 
branching compounds is 67% and 64% respectively. 
In contrast, the adjacency model appears to predict 
a proportion of 50%. 
The dependency model has also been proposed by 
Kobayasi et al(1994) for analysing Japanese noun 
compounds, apparently independently. Using a cor- 
pus to acquire associations, they bracket sequences 
of Kanji with lengths four to six (roughly equiva- 
lent to two or three words). A simple calculation 
shows that using their own preprocessing hueristics 
to guess a bracketing provides a higher accuracy on 
their test set than their statistical model does. This 
renders their experiment inconclusive. 
2 Method 
2.1 Ext ract ing  a Test  Set 
A test set of syntactically ambiguous noun com- 
pounds was extracted from our 8 million word Gro- 
lier's encyclopedia corpus in the following way. 2 Be- 
cause the corpus is not tagged or parsed, a some- 
what conservative strategy of looking for unambi- 
guous sequences of nouns was used. To distinguish 
nouns from other words, the University of Penn- 
sylvania morphological nalyser (described in Karp 
et al 1992) was used to generate the set of words 
that can only be used as nouns (I shall henceforth 
call this set AZ). All consecutive sequences of these 
words were extracted, and the three word sequences 
used to form the test set. For reasons made clear 
below, only sequences consisting entirely of words 
from Roget's thesaurus were retained, giving a total 
of 308 test triples. 3
These triples were manually analysed using as 
context he entire article in which they appeared. In 
2We would like to thank Grolier's for permission to 
use this material for research purposes. 
3The 1911 version of Roget's used is available on-line 
and is in the public domain. 
some cases, the sequence was not a noun compound 
(nouns can appear adjacent o one another across 
various constituent boundaries) and was marked as 
an error. Other compounds exhibited what Hin- 
die and Rooth (1993) have termed SEMANTIC INDE- 
TERMINACY where the two possible bracketings can- 
not be distinguished in the context. The remaining 
compounds were assigned either a left-branching or 
right-branching analysis. Table 1 shows the number 
of each kind and an example of each. 
Accuracy figures in all the results reported be- 
low were computed using only those 244 compounds 
which received a parse. 
2.2 Conceptua l  Assoc ia t ion  
One problem with applying lexical association to 
noun compounds is the enormous number of para- 
meters required, one for every possible pair of nouns. 
Not only does this require a vast amount of memory 
space, it creates a severe data sparseness problem 
since we require at least some data about each pa- 
rameter. Resnik and Hearst (1993) coined the term 
CONCEPTUAL ASSOCIATION to refer to association 
values computed between groups of words. By assu- 
ming that all words within a group behave similarly, 
the parameter space can be built in terms of the 
groups rather than in terms of the words. 
In this study, conceptual association is used with 
groups consisting of all categories from the 1911 ver- 
sion of Roget's thesaurus. 4 Given two thesaurus ca- 
tegories tl and t~, there is a parameter which re- 
presents the degree of acceptability of the structure 
\[nine\] where nl is a noun appearing in tl and n2 
appears in t2. By the assumption that words within 
a group behave similarly, this is constant given the 
two categories. Following Lauer and Dras (1994) we 
can formally write this parameter as Pr(t l  ~ t2) 
where the event tl ~ t2 denotes the modification of 
a noun in t2 by a noun in tl. 
2.3 T ra in ing  
To ensure that the test set is disjoint from the trai- 
ning data, all occurrences of the test noun com- 
pounds have been removed from the training corpus. 
4It contains 1043 categories. 
49  
Type 
Error 
Indeterminate 
Left-branching 
Right-branching 
Number 
29 
35 
163 
81 
Proportion 
9% 
11% 
53% 
26% 
Example 
In monsoon regions rainfall does not . . .  
Most advanced aircraft have precision navigation systems. 
. . .escaped punishment by the Allied war crimes tribunals. 
Ronald Reagan, who won two landslide election victories, . . .  
Table 1: Test set distribution 
Two types of training scheme are explored in this 
study, both unsupervised. The first employs a pat- 
tern that follows Pustejovsky (1993) in counting the 
occurrences of subcomponents. A training instance 
is any sequence of four words WlW2W3W 4 where 
wl, w4 ~ .h/and w2, w3 E A/'. Let county(n1, n2) be 
the number of times a sequence wln ln2w4 occurs in 
the training corpus with wl, w4 ~ At'. 
The second type uses a window to collect training 
instances by observing how often a pair of nouns co- 
occur within some fixed number of words. In this 
study, a variety of window sizes are used. For n > 2, 
let countn(nl, n2) be the number of times a sequence 
n lw l . . .w ins  occurs in the training corpus where 
i < n - 2. Note that windowed counts are asym- 
metric. In the case of a window two words wide, 
this yields the mutual information metric proposed 
by Liberman and Sproat (1992). 
Using each of these different raining schemes to 
arrive at appropriate counts it is then possible to 
estimate the parameters. Since these are expressed 
in terms of categories rather than words, it is ne- 
cessary to combine the counts of words to arrive at 
estimates. In all cases the estimates used are: 
1 count(wl, w2) Vr(tl --, t2) = ~ 
ambig(wl) ambig(w2) 
wl f i t l  
w2qt2 
count(wl, w2) 
where ~ =  ~,~j? ambig(wl)ambig(w~) 
w2Et2 
Here ambig(w) is the number of categories in 
which w appears. It has the effect of dividing the 
evidence from a training instance across all possi- 
ble categories for the words. The normaliser ensures 
that all parameters for a head noun sum to unity. 
2.4 Ana lys ing  the  Test  Set 
Given the high level descriptions in section 1.3 it 
remains only to formalise the decision process used 
to analyse a noun compound. Each test compound 
presents a set of possible analyses and the goal is to 
choose which analysis is most likely. For three word 
compounds it suffices to compute the ratio of two 
probabilities, that of a left-branching analysis and 
that of a right-branching one. If this ratio is greater 
than unity, then the left-branching analysis is cho- 
sen. When it is less than unity, a right-branching 
analysis is chosen. ~ If the ratio is exactly unity, the 
analyser guesses left-branching, although this is fai- 
rly rare for conceptual association as shown by the 
experimental results below. 
For the adjacency model, when the given com- 
pound is WlW2W3, we can estimate this ratio as: 
Ra4i : ~-~t,~cats(..~ Pr(t l  ---* t2) (1) 
~-'~t,ecats(-b Pr(t2 ---* t3) 
For the dependency model, the ratio is: 
Rdep = ~-~,,ec~ts(~,) Pr(Q ---* t~) Pr(t~ ---* ta) (2) 
)-~t,ec~ts(~) Pr(~l ---* t3) Pr(t2 ~ ta) 
In both cases, we sum over all possible categories 
for the words in the compound. Because the de- 
pendency model equations have two factors, they 
are affected more severely by data sparseness. If 
the probability estimate for Pr(t2 ~ t3) is zero for 
all possible categories t2 and t3 then both the nu- 
merator and the denominator will be zero. This 
will conceal any preference given by the parame- 
ters involving Q. In such cases, we observe that the 
test instance itself provides the information that the 
event t2 --~ t3 can occur and we recalculate the ra- 
tio using Pr(t2 ---* t3) = k for all possible categories 
t2,t a where k is any non-zero constant. However, no 
correction is made to the probability estimates for 
Pr(t l  --~ t2) and Pr(Q --* t3) for unseen cases, thus 
putting the dependency model on an equal footing 
with the adjacency model above. 
The equations presented above for the dependency 
model differ from those developed in Lauer and Dras 
(1994) in one way. There, an additional weighting 
factor (of 2.0) is used to favour a left-branching ana- 
lysis. This arises because their construction is ba- 
sed on the dependency model which predicts that 
left-branching analyses hould occur twice as often. 
Also, the work reported in Lauer and Dras (1994) 
uses simplistic estimates of the probability of a word 
given its thesaurus category. The equations above 
assume these probabilities are uniformly constant. 
Section 3.2 below shows the result of making these 
two additions to the method. 
sit either probability estimate is zero, the other ana- 
lysis is chosen. If both are zero the analysis is made as 
if the ratio were exactly unity. 
50  
Accuracy 
(%) 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
50 
I I I I I I I I 
Dependency Model 
Adjacency Model o 
Guess Left . . . .  
Pattern 2 3 4 5 10 50 100 
Training scheme (integers denote window widths) 
Figure 2: Accuracy of dependency and adjacency model for various training schemes 
3 Resu l ts  
3.1 Dependency  meets  Adjacency 
Eight different raining schemes have been used to 
estimate the parameters and each set of estimates 
used to analyse the test set under both the adjacency 
and the dependency model. The schemes used are: 
? the pattern given in section 2.3; and 
? windowed training schemes with window widths 
of 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 50 and 100 words. 
The accuracy on the test set for all these expe- 
riments is shown in figure 2. As can be seen, the 
dependency model is more accurate than the adja- 
cency model. This is true across the whole spec- 
trum of training schemes. The proportion of cases 
in which the procedure was forced to guess, either 
because no data supported either analysis or because 
both were equally supported, is quite low. For the 
pattern and two-word window training schemes, the 
guess rate is less than 4% for both models. In the 
three-word window training scheme, the guess rates 
are less than 1%. For all larger windows, neither 
model is ever forced to guess. 
In the case of the pattern training scheme, the 
difference between 68.9% for adjacency and 77.5% 
for dependency is statistically significant at the 5% 
level (p = 0.0316), demonstrating the superiority of 
the dependency model, at least for the compounds 
within Grolier's encyclopedia. 
In no case do any of the windowed training sche- 
mes outperform the pattern scheme. It seems that 
additional instances admitted by the windowed sche- 
mes are too noisy to make an improvement. 
Initial results from applying these methods to the 
EMA corpus have been obtained by Wilco ter Stal 
(1995), and support he conclusion that the depen- 
dency model is superior to the adjacency model. 
3.2 Tuning 
Lauer and Dras (1994) suggest two improvements to 
the method used above. These are: 
? a factor favouring left-branching which arises 
from the formal dependency construction; and 
? factors allowing for naive estimates of the varia- 
tion in the probability of categories. 
While these changes are motivated by the depen- 
dency model, I have also applied them to the adja- 
cency model for comparison. To implement them, 
equations 1 and 2 must be modified to incorporate 
1 in each term of the sum and the a factor of 
entire ratio must be multiplied by two. Five trai- 
ning schemes have been applied with these extensi- 
ons. The accuracy results are shown in figure 3. For 
comparison, the untuned accuracy figures are shown 
with dotted lines. A marked improvement is obser- 
ved for the adjacency model, while the dependency 
model is only slightly improved. 
3.3 Lexical Associat ion 
To determine the difference made by conceptual s- 
sociation, the pattern training scheme has been re- 
trained using lexical counts for both the dependency 
and adjacency model, but only for the words in 
the test set. If the same system were to be app- 
lied across all of Af (a total of 90,000 nouns), then 
around 8.1 billion parameters would be required. 
Left-branching is favoured by a factor of two as de- 
scribed in the previous ection, but no estimates for 
the category probabilities are used (these being mea- 
ningless for the lexical association method). 
Accuracy and guess rates are shown in figure 4. 
Conceptual association outperforms lexical associa- 
tion, presumably because of its ability to generalise. 
3.4 Using a Tagger 
One problem with the training methods given in sec- 
tion 2.3 is the restriction of training data to nouns 
in .Af. Many nouns, especially common ones, have 
verbal or adiectival usages that preclude them from 
being in .Af. Yet when they occur as nouns, they 
still provide useful training information that the cur- 
rent system ignores. To test whether using tagged 
51 
Accuracy 
(%) 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
50 
I I l I 
Tuned Dependency 
- 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  Tuned Adjacency o 
? . . . . . . . . 
I I I 
Pattern 2 3 5 10 
Training scheme (integers denote window widths) 
Figure 3: Accuracy of tuned dependency and adjacency model for various training schemes 
A c c u r a c y  
(%) 
85 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
50 
I ! 
Conceptual ? 
Lexical O _ 
Dependency Adjacency 
30 
25 
2O 
Guess Rate (%) 15 
10 
I I 
Conceptual ? 
Lexical \[\] 
I I 
Dependency Adjacency 
Figure 4: Accuracy and Guess Rates of Lexical and Conceptual Association 
52 
85 i l 
Accuracy  
(%) 
80 
75 
70 
65 
60 
55 
50 
Tagged Dependency 
Tagged Adjacency o 
I I 
Pattern 3 
Training scheme (integers denote window widths) 
Figure 5: Accuracy using a tagged corpus for various training schemes 
data would make a difference, the freely available 
Brill tagger (Brill, 1993) was applied to the corpus. 
Since no manually tagged training data is available 
for our corpus, the tagger's default rules were used 
(these rules were produced by Brill by training on 
the Brown corpus). This results in rather poor tag- 
ging accuracy, so it is quite possible that a manually 
tagged corpus would produce better esults. 
Three training schemes have been used and the 
tuned analysis procedures applied to the test set. 
Figure 5 shows the resulting accuracy, with accuracy 
values from figure 3 displayed with dotted lines. If 
anything, admitting additional training data based 
on the tagger introduces more noise, reducing the 
accuracy. However, for the pattern training scheme 
an improvement was made to the dependency model, 
producing the highest overall accuracy of 81%. 
4 Conc lus ion  
The experiments above demonstrate a number of im- 
portant points. The most general of these is that 
even quite crude corpus statistics can provide infor- 
mation about he syntax of compound nouns. At the 
very least, this information can be applied in broad 
coverage parsing to assist in the control of search. I
have also shown that with a corpus of moderate size 
it is possible to get reasonable r sults without using 
a tagger or parser by employing a customised trai- 
ning pattern. While using windowed co-occurrence 
did not help here, it is possible that under more data 
sparse conditions better performance ould be achie- 
ved by this method. 
The significance of the use of conceptual associa- 
tion deserves ome mention. I have argued that wit- 
hout it a broad coverage system would be impossible. 
This is in contrast o previous work on conceptual 
association where it resulted in little improvement 
on a task which could already be performed. In this 
study, not only has the technique proved its worth 
by supporting enerality, but through generalisation 
of training information it outperforms the equivalent 
lexical association approach given the same informa- 
tion. 
Amongst all the comparisons performed in these 
experiments one stands out as exhibiting the grea- 
test contrast. In all experiments he dependency 
model provides a substantial dvantage over the ad- 
jacency model, even though the latter is more pre- 
valent in proposals within the literature. This re- 
sult is in accordance with the informal reasoning i- 
ven in section 1.3. The model also has the further 
commendation that it predicts correctly the obser- 
ved proportion of left-branching compounds found 
in two independently extracted test sets. 
In all, the most accurate technique achieved an ac- 
curacy of 81% as compared to the 67% achieved by 
guessing left-branching. Given the high frequency of 
occurrence of noun compounds in many texts, this 
suggests tha; the use of these techniques in proba- 
bilistic parsers will result in higher performance in
broad coverage natural anguage processing. 
5 Acknowledgements  
This work has received valuable input from people 
too numerous to mention. The most significant con- 
tributions have been made by Richard Buckland, 
Robert Dale and Mark Dras. I am also indebted 
to Vance Gledhill, Mike Johnson, Philip Resnik, Ri- 
chard Sproat, Wilco ter Stal, Lucy Vanderwende and 
Wayne Wobcke. Financial support is gratefully ack- 
53 
nowledged from the Microsoft Institute and the Au- 
stralian Government. 
Re ferences  
Arens, Y., Granacki, J. and Parker, A. 1987. Phra- 
sal Analysis of Long Noun Sequences. In Procee- 
dings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics, Stanford, CA. 
pp59-64. 
Brent, Michael. 1993. From Grammar to Lexi- 
con: Unsupervised Learning of Lexical Syntax. In 
Computational Linguistics, Vol 19(2), Special Is- 
sue on Using Large Corpora II, pp243-62. 
Brill, Eric. 1993. A Corpus-based Approach to Lan- 
guage Learning. PhD Thesis, University of Penn- 
sylvania, Philadelphia, PA.. 
Charniak, Eugene. 1993. Statistical Language Lear- 
ning. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Finin, Tim. 1980. The Semantic Interpretation of 
Compound Nominals. PhD Thesis, Co-ordinated 
Science Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL. 
Hindle, D. and Rooth, M. 1993. Structural Am- 
biguity and Lexical Relations. In Computational 
Linguistics Vol. 19(1), Special Issue on Using 
Large Corpora I, ppl03-20. 
Isabelle, Pierre. 1984. Another Look At Nominal 
Compounds. In Proceedings of COLING-84, Stan- 
ford, CA. pp509-16. 
Karp, D., Schabes, Y., Zaidel, M. and Egedi, D. 
1992. A Freely Available Wide Coverage Mor- 
phological Analyzer for English. In Proceedings of 
COLING-92, Nantes, France, pp950-4. 
Kobayasi, Y., Tokunaga, T. and Tanaka, H. 1994. 
Analysis of Japanese Compound Nouns using 
Collocational Information. In Proceedings of 
COLING-94, Kyoto, Japan, pp865-9. 
Lauer, Mark. 1994. Conceptual Association for 
Compound Noun Analysis. In Proceedings of the 
32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, Student Session, Las Cru- 
ces, NM. pp337-9. 
Lauer, M. and Dras, M. 1994. A Probabilistic Mo- 
del of Compound Nouns. In Proceedings of the 7th 
Australian Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli- 
gence, Armidale, NSW, Australia. World Scienti- 
fic Press, pp474-81. 
Leonard, Rosemary. 1984. The Interpretation of 
English Noun Sequences on the Computer. North- 
Holland, Amsterdam. 
Levi, Judith. 1978. The Syntax and Semantics of 
Complex Nominals. Academic Press, New York. 
Liberman, M. and Sproat, R. 1992. The Stress and 
Structure of Modified Noun Phrases in English. 
In Sag, I. and Szabolcsi, A., editors, Lexical Mat- 
ters CSLI Lecture Notes No. 24. University of 
Chicago Press, ppl31-81. 
Marcus, Mit~.hell. 1980. A Theory of Syntactic Re- 
cognition for Natural Language. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 
McDonald, David B. 1982. Understanding Noun 
Compounds. PhD Thesis, Carnegie-Mellon Uni- 
versity, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Pustejovsky, J., Bergler, S. and Anick, P. 1993. Le- 
xical Semantic Techniques for Corpus Analysis. In 
Computational Linguistics Vol 19(2), Special Is- 
sue on Using Large Corpora II, pp331-58. 
Resnik, Philip. 1993. Selection and Informa- 
tion: A Class.Based Approach to Lexical Relati- 
onships. PhD dissertation, University of Pennsyl- 
vania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Resnik, P. and Hearst, M. 1993. Structural Ambi- 
guity and Conceptual Relations. In Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Very Large Corpora: Academic 
and Industrial Perspectives, June 22, Ohio State 
University, pp58-64. 
Ryder, Mary Ellen. 1994. Ordered Chaos: The In- 
terpretation of English Noun-Noun Compounds. 
University of California Press Publications in Lin- 
guistics, Vol 123. 
Smadja, Frank. 1993. Retrieving Collocations from 
Text: Xtract. In Computational Linguistics, Vol 
19(1), Special Issue on Using Large Corpora I, 
pp143-177. 
Sparck Jones, Karen. 1983. Compound Noun 
Interpretation Problems. In Fallside, F. and 
Woods, W.A., editors, Computer Speech Proces- 
sing. Prentice-Hall, NJ. pp363-81. 
Sproat, Richard. 1994. English noun-phrase accent 
prediction for text-to-speech. In Computer Speech 
and Language, Vol 8, pp79-94. 
Vanderwende, Lucy. 1993. SENS: The System for 
Evaluating Noun Sequences. In Jensen, K., Hei- 
dorn, G. and Richardson, S., editors, Natural Lan- 
guage Processing: The PLNLP Approach. Kluwer 
Academic, pp161-73. 
ter Stal, Wilco. 1995. Syntactic Disambiguation f 
Nominal Compounds Using Lexical and Concep- 
tual Association. Memorandum UT-KBS-95-002, 
University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands. 
Yarowsky, David. 1992. Word-Sense Disambigua- 
tion Using Statistical Models of Roget's Catego- 
ries Trained on Large Corpora. In Proceedings of 
COLING-92, Nantes, France, pp454-60. 
54 
