Identi fying Word Translations in Non-Paral lel  Texts 
Reinhard Rapp 
ISSCO, Universit6 de Gen~ve 
54 route des Acacias 
Gen~ve, Switzerland 
rapp@divsun.unige.ch 
Abst ract  
Common algorithms for sentence and 
word-alignment allow the automatic iden- 
tification of word translations from paxalhl 
texts. This study suggests that the identi- 
fication of word translations should also be 
possible with non-paxMlel and even unre- 
lated texts. The method proposed is based 
on the assumption that there is a corre- 
lation between the patterns of word co- 
occurrences in texts of different languages. 
1 In t roduct ion  
In a number of recent studies it has been shown that 
word translations can be automatically derived from 
the statistical distribution of words in bilingual pax- 
allel texts (e. g. Catizone, Russell & Warwick, 1989; 
Brown et al, 1990; Dagan, Church & Gale, 1993; 
Kay & Rbscheisen, 1993). Most of the proposed 
algorithms first conduct an alignment of sentences, 
i. e. those palxs of sentences axe located that are 
translations of each other. In a second step a word 
alignment is performed by analyzing the correspon- 
dences of words in each pair of sentences. 
The results achieved with these algorithms have 
been found useful for the compilation of dictionaries, 
for checking the consistency of terminological usage 
in translations, and for assisting the terminological 
work of translators and interpreters. 
However, despite serious efforts in the compilation 
of corpora (Church & Mercer, 1993; Armstrong & 
Thompson, 1995) the availability of a large enough 
paxallel corpus in a specific field and for a given pair 
of languages will always be the exception, not the 
rule. Since the acquisition of non-paxallel texts is 
usually much easier, it would be desirable to have 
a program that can determine the translations of 
words from comparable or even unrelated texts. 
2 Approach  
It is assumed that there is a correlation between 
the co-occurrences of words which are translations 
of each other. If - for example - in a text of one 
language two words A and B co-occur more often 
than expected from chance, then in a text of an- 
other language those words which axe translations of 
A and B should also co-occur more frequently than 
expected. This assumption is reasonable for parallel 
texts. However, in this paper it is further assumed 
that the co-occurrence patterns in original texts axe 
not fundamentally different from those in translated 
texts. 
Starting from an English vocabulary of six words 
and the corresponding German translations, table la  
and b show an English and a German co-occurrence 
mat~x. In these matrices the entries belonging to 
those pairs of words that in texts co-occur more fre- 
quently than expected have been marked with a dot. 
In general, word order in the lines and columns of a 
co-occurrence matrix is independent of each other, 
but for the purpose of this paper can always be as- 
sumed to be equal without loss of generality. 
If now the word order of the English matrix is per- 
muted until the resulting pattern of dots is most sim- 
ilar to that of the German matrix (see table lc), then 
this increases the likelihood that the English and 
German words axe in corresponding order. Word n 
in the English matrix is then the translation of word 
n in the German matrix. 
3 S imulat ion  
A simulation experiment was conducted in order to 
see whether the above assumptions concerning the 
similarity of co-occurrence patterns actually hold. 
In this experiment, for an equivalent English and 
German vocabulary two co-occurrence matrices were 
computed and then compared. As the English vo- 
cabulary a list of 100 words was used, which h~l 
been suggested by Kent & Rosanoff (1910) for asso- 
ciation experiments. The German vocabulary con- 
sisted of one by one translations of these words as 
chosen by Russell (1970). 
The word co-occurrences were computed on the 
basis of an English corpus of 33 and a German corpus 
of 46 million words. The English corpus consists of 
320 
Table 1: When the word orders of the English and 
the German matrix correspond, the dot patterns of 
the two matrices are identical. 
(a) 
II1 n213141s161 
blue 1 ? ? 
green 2 ? ? 
plant 3 ? 
school 4 ? 
sky 5 ? 
teacher 6 ? 
(b) 
(c) 
11112131415181 
blau 1 ? ? 
grfin 2 ? ? 
Himmel 3 ? 
Lehrer 4 ? 
Pflanze 5 ? 
Schule 6 s 
1 2 5 6 3 4 
blue 1 * ? 
green 2 ? ? 
5 ? 
6 ? 
3 ? 
4 ? 
sky 
teacher 
plant 
school 
the Brown Corpus, texts from the Wall Street Your- 
hal, Grolier's Electronic Encyclopedia nd scientific 
abstracts from different fields. The German cor- 
pus is a compilation of mainly newspaper texts from 
Frankfurter Rundschau, Die Zei~ and Mannl~eimer 
Morgen. To the knowledge of the author, the English 
and German corpora contain no parallel passages. 
For each pair of words in the English vocabulary 
its frequency of common occurrence in the English 
corpus was counted. The common occurrence of two 
words was defined as both words being separated 
by at most 11 other words. The co-occurrence fre- 
quencies obtained in this way were used to build 
up the English matrix. Equivalently, the German 
co-occurrence matrix was created by counting the 
co-occurrences of German word pairs in the German 
corpus. As a starting point, word order in the two 
matrices was chosen such that word n in the German 
matrix was the translation of word n in the English 
matrix. 
Co-occurrence studies like that conducted by 
Wettler & Rapp (1993) have shown that for many 
purposes it is desirable to reduce the influence of 
word frequency on the co-occurrence counts. For 
the prediction of word associations they achieved 
best results when modifying each entry in the co- 
occurrence matrix using the following formula: 
( ' f ( i~J)) '  (1) 
A, j  -- f ( i ) .  f( j)  
Hereby f(i&j) is the frequency of common occur- 
rence of the two words i and j, and f(i) is the corpus 
frequency of word i. However, for comparison, the 
simulations described below were also conducted us- 
ing the original co-occurrence matrices (formula 2) 
and a measure similar to mutual information (for- 
mula 3). 1 
A,,j = f(i&j) (2) 
f(i&j) (3) 
ai,i - -  f ( i ) .  f( j)  
Regardless of the formula applied, the English and 
the German matrix where both normalized. 2 Start- 
ing from the normalized English and German matri- 
ces, the aim was to determine how far the similarity 
of the two matrices depends on the correspondence 
of word order. As a measure for matrix similarity 
the sum of the absolute differences of the values at 
corresponding matrix positions was used. 
N N 
s = ~ ~ \[E, a - G,,jl (4) 
i=1 ./=1 
This similarity measure leads to a value of zero for 
identical matrices, and to a value of 20 000 in the 
case that a non-zero entry in one of the 100 * 100 
matrices always corresponds to a zero-value in the 
other. 
4 Results  
The simulation was conducted by randomly permut- 
ing the word order of the German matrix and then 
computing the similarity s to the English matrix. 
For each permutation it was determined how many 
words c had been shifted to positions different from 
those in the original German matrix. The simulation 
was continued until for each value of c a set of 1000 
similarity values was available. 8 Figure 1 shows for 
the three formulas how the average similarity J be- 
tween the English and the German matrix depends 
on the number of non-corresponding word positions 
c. Each of the curves increases monotonically, with 
formula 1 having the steepest, i. e. best discriminat- 
ing characteristic. The dotted curves in figure 1 are 
the minimum and maximum values in each set of 
1000 similarity values for formula 1. 
X The logarithm has been removed from the mutual 
information measure since it is not defined for zero co- 
occurrences. 
=Normalization was conducted in such a way that the 
suxn of all matrix entries adds up to the number of fields 
in the matrix. 
Sc ---- 1 is not possible and was not taken into account. 
321 
mooo 
20 ..................................................... -,  O)  
18 " :"--': <.. . .  
16 j .. 
14 ' 
? -,~ 
12 E "~/ ..... 
10 
- I  C '0 10 2"0 3"0 40 5"0 6"0 7"0 8"0 90 100 
Figure 1: Dependency between the mean similarity i 
of the English and the German matrix and the num- 
ber of non-corresponding word positions c for 3 for- 
mulas. The dotted lines are the minimum and max- 
imum values of each sample of 1000 for formula 1. 
5 Discussion and prospects 
It could be shown that even for unrelated Eng- 
lish and German texts the patterns of word co- 
occurrences strongly correlate. The monotonically 
increasing chaxacter of the curves in figure 1 indi- 
cates that in principle it should be possible to find 
word correspondences in two matrices of ditferent 
languages by randomly permuting one of the ma- 
trices until the similarity function s reaches a mini- 
mum and thus indicates maximum similarity. How- 
ever, the minimum-curve in figure 1 suggests that 
there are some deep minima of the similarity func- 
tion even in cases when many word correspondences 
axe incorrect. An algorithm currently under con- 
sttuction therefore searches for many local minima, 
and tries to find out what word correspondences axe 
the most reliable ones. In order to limit the seaxch 
space, translations that axe known beforehand can 
be used as anchor points. 
Future work will deal with the following as yet 
unresolved problems: 
? Computational limitations require the vocabu- 
laxies to be limited to subsets of all word types 
in large corpora. With criteria like the corpus 
frequency of a word, its specificity for a given 
domain, and the salience of its co-occurrence 
patterns, it should be possible to make a selec- 
tion of corresponding vocabularies in the two 
languages. If morphological tools and disv~m- 
biguators axe available, preliminaxy lemmatiz~ 
tion of the corpora would be desirable. 
? Ambiguities in word translations can be taken 
into account by working with continuous prob- 
abilities to judge whether a word translation 
is correct instead of making a binary decision. 
Thereby, different sizes of the two matrices 
could be allowed for. 
It can be expected that with such a method the qual- 
ity of the results depends on the thematic ompara- 
bility of the corpora, but not on their degree of paz- 
allelism. As a further step, even with non parallel 
corpora it should be possible to locate comparable 
passages of text. 
Acknowledgements 
I thank Susan Armstrong and Manfred Wettler for 
their support of this project. Thanks also to Graham 
Russell and three anonymous reviewers for valuable 
comments on the manuscript. 
References 
Armstrong, Susan; Thompson, Henry (1995). A 
presentation of MLCC: Multilingual Corpora 
for Cooperation. Linguistic Database Workshop, 
Groningen. 
Brown, Peter; Cocke, John; Della Pietra, Stephen 
A.; Della Pietra, Vincent J.; Jelinek, Fredrick; 
Lstferty, John D.; Mercer, Robert L.; Rossin, Paul 
S. (1990). A statistical pproach to machine trans- 
lation. Computational Linguistics, 16(2), 79-85. 
Catizone, Roberta; Russell, Graham; Waxwick, Su- 
san (1989). Deriving translation data from bilin- 
gual texts. In: U. Zernik (ed.): Proceedings of the 
First International Lezical Acquisition Workshop, 
Detroit. 
Church, Kenneth W.; Mercer, Robert L. (1993). 
Introduction to the special issue on Computa- 
tional Linguistics using large corpora. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 19(1), 1-24. 
Dagan, Ido; Church, Kenneth W.; Gale, William A. 
(1993). Robust bilingual word alignment for ms- 
chine aided translation. Proceedings of the Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora: Academic and In- 
dustrial Perspectives. Columbus, Ohio, 1-8. 
Kay, Maxtin; l~Sscheisen, Maxtin (1993). Text- 
Translation Alignment. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 19(1), 121-142. 
Kent, G.H.; R~sanoff, A.J. (1910). A study of asso- 
ciation in insanity. American Journal of Insanity, 
67, 37-96, 317-390. 
Russell, Wallace A. (1970). The complete German 
language norms for responses to 100 words from 
the Kent-Rosanoff word association test. In: L. 
Postman, G. Keppel (eds.): Norms of Word As- 
sociation. New York: Academic Press, 53-94. 
Wettler, Manfred; Rapp, Reinhaxd (1993). Com- 
putation of word associations based on the co- 
occurrences of words in large corpora. In: Pro- 
ceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora: 
Academic and Industrial Perspectives, Columbus, 
Ohio, 84-93. 
322 
