A Prosodic Analysis of Discourse Segments in 
Direction- Giving Monologues 
Julia Hirschberg 
AT&T Laboratories, 2C-409 
600 Mountain Avenue 
Murray Hill, NJ 07974 
Christine H. Nakatani* 
Harvard University 
33 Oxford Street 
Cambridge, MA 02138 
Abst rac t  
This paper reports on corpus-based research 
into the relationship between intonational vari- 
ation and discourse structure. We examine the 
effects of speaking style (read versus ponta- 
neous) and of discourse segmentation method 
(text-alone versus text-and-speech) on the na- 
ture of this relationship. We also compare 
the acoustic-prosodic features of initial, me- 
dial, and final utterances in a discourse seg- 
ment. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
This paper presents empirical support for the as- 
sumption long held by computational linguists, that 
intonation can provide valuable cues for discourse 
processing. The relationship between intonational 
variation and discourse structure has been explored 
in a new corpus of direction-giving monologues. We 
examine the effects of speaking style (read versus 
spontaneous) and of discourse segmentation method 
(text-alone versus text-and-speech) on the nature of 
this relationship. We also compare the acoustic- 
prosodic features of initial, medial, and final utter- 
ances in a discourse segment. A better understand- 
ing of the role of intonation in conveying discourse 
structure will enable improvements in the natural- 
ness of intonational variation in text-to-speech sys- 
tems as well as in algorithms for recognizing dis- 
course structure in speech-understanding systems. 
2 Theoret i ca l  and  Empi r i ca l  
Foundat ions  
It has long been assumed in computational lin- 
guistics that discourse structure plays an impor- 
tant role in Natural Language Understanding tasks 
such as identifying speaker intentions and resolving 
anaphoric reference. Previous research has found 
*The second author was partially supported by NSF 
Grants No. IRI-90-09018, No. IRI-93-08173, and No. 
CDA-94-01024 at Harvard University and by AT&T Bell 
Laboratories. 
that discourse structural information can be inferred 
from orthographic cues in text, such as paragraph- 
ing and punctuation; from linguistic cues in text 
or speech, such as cue PHI~.ASES 1 (Cohen, 1984; 
Reichman, 1985; Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Passon- 
neau and Litman, 1993; Passonneau and Litman, 
to appear) and other lexical cues (Hinkelman and 
Allen, 1989); from variation in referring expres- 
sions (Linde, 1979; Levy, 1984; Grosz and Sidner, 
1986; Webber, 1988; Song and Cohen, 1991; Passon- 
neau and Litman, 1993), tense, and aspect (Schu- 
bert and Hwang, 1990; Song and Cohen, 1991); 
from knowledge of the domain, especially for task- 
oriented iscourses (Grosz, 1978); and from speaker 
intentions (Carberry, 1990; Litman and Hirschberg, 
1990; Lochbaum, 1994). Recent methods for auto- 
matic recognition of discourse structure from text 
have incorporated thesaurus-based and other in- 
formation retrieval techniques to identify changes 
in topic (Morris and Hirst, 1991; Yarowsky, 1991; 
Iwafiska et al, 1991; Hearst, 1994; Reynar, 1994). 
Parallel investigations on prosodic/acoustic cues 
to discourse structure have investigated the contri- 
butions of features uch as pitch range, pausal du- 
ration, amplitude, speaking rate, and intonational 
contour to signaling topic change. Variation in pitch 
range has often been seen as conveying 'topic struc- 
ture' in discourse. Brown et al (1980) found that 
subjects typically started new topics relatively high 
in their pitch range and finished topics by com- 
pressing their range. Silverman (1987) found that 
manipulation of pitch range alone, or in conjunc- 
tion with pausal duration between utterances, facil- 
itated the disambiguation f ambiguous topic struc- 
tures. Avesani and Vayra (1988) also found variation 
in pitch range in professional recordings which ap- 
peared to correlate with topic structure, and Ayers 
(1992) found that pitch range correlates with hierar- 
chical topic structure more closely in read than spon- 
taneous conversational speech. Duration of pause 
between utterances or phrases has also been identi- 
1 Also called DISCOURSE MARKERS or DISCOURSE PAR- 
TICLES, these are items uch as now, first, and by the way, 
which explicitly mark discourse structure. 
286 
fled as an indicator of topic structure, with longer 
pauses marking major topic shifts (Lehiste, 1979; 
Brown, Currie, and Kenworthy, 1980; Avesani and 
Vayra, 1988; Passonneau and Litman, 1993); Wood- 
bury (1987), however, found no such correlation in 
his data. Amplitude was also found to increase at 
the start of a new topic and decrease at the end 
(Brown, Currie, and Kenworthy, 1980). Swerts and 
colleagues (1992) found that melody and duration 
can pre-signal the end of a discourse unit, in ad- 
dition to marking the discourse-unit-final utterance 
itself. And speaking rate has been found to cor- 
relate with structural variation; in several studies 
(Lehiste, 1980; Brubaker, 1972; Butterworth, 1975) 
segment-initial utterances exhibited slower rates, 
and segment-final, faster rates. Swerts and Osten- 
dorf (1995), however, report negative rate results. 
In general, these studies have lacked an 
independently-motivated notion of discourse struc- 
ture. With few exceptions, they rely on intuitive 
analyses of topic structure; operational definitions 
of discourse-level properties (e.g., interpreting para- 
graph breaks as discourse segment boundaries); or 
'theory-neutral' discourse segmentations, where sub- 
jects are given instructions to simply mark changes 
in topic. Recent studies have focused on the ques- 
tion of whether discourse structure itself can be em- 
pirically determined in a reliable manner, a pre- 
requisite to investigating linguistic ues to its exis- 
tence. An intention-based theory of discourse was 
used in (Hirschberg and Grosz, 1992; Grosz and 
Hirschberg, 1992) to identify intonational correlates 
of discourse structure in news stories read by a 
professional speaker. Discourse structural elements 
were determined by experts in the Grosz and Sidner 
(1986) theory of discourse structure, based on either 
text alone or text and speech. This study revealed 
strong correlations of aspects of pitch range, ampli- 
tude, and timing with features of global and local 
structure for both segmentation methods. Passon- 
neau and Litman (to appear) analyzed correlations 
of pause, as well as cue phrases and referential re- 
lations, with discourse structure; their segmenters 
were asked to identify speakers' communicative "ac- 
tions". The present study addresses i sues of speak- 
ing style and segmentation method while exploring 
in more detail than previous tudies the prosodic pa- 
rameters that characterize initial, medial, and final 
utterances in a discourse segment. 
3 Methods  
3.1 The Boston Directions Corpus 
The current investigation f discourse and intonation 
is based on analysis of a corpus of spontaneous and 
read speech, the Boston Directions Corpus. 2 This 
2The Boston Directions Corpus was designed and col- 
lected in collaboration with Barbara Grosz. 
corpus comprises elicited monologues produced by 
multiple non-professional speakers, who were given 
written instructions to perform a series of nine in- 
creasingly complex direction-giving tasks. Speakers 
first explained simple routes uch as getting from one 
station to another on the subway, and progressed 
gradually to the most complex task of planning a 
round-trip journey from Harvard Square to several 
Boston tourist sights. Thus, the tasks were de- 
signed to require increasing levels of planning com- 
plexity. The speakers were provided with various 
maps, and could write notes to themselves a  well as 
trace routes on the maps. For the duration of the 
experiment, he speakers were in face-to-face con- 
tact with a silent partner (a confederate) who traced 
on her map the routes described by the speakers. 
The speech was subsequently orthographically tran- 
scribed, with false starts and other speech errors re- 
paired or omitted; subjects returned several weeks 
after their first recording to read aloud from tran- 
scriptions of their own directions. 
3.2 Acoustic-Prosodic Analysis 
For this paper, the spontaneous and read recordings 
for one male speaker were acoustically analyzed; fun- 
damental frequency and energy were calculated us- 
ing Entropic speech analysis oftware. The prosodic 
transcription, a more abstract representation f the 
intonational prominences, phrasing, and melodic 
contours, was obtained by hand-labeling. We em- 
ployed the ToBI standard for prosodic transcription 
(Pitrelli, Beckman, and Hirschberg, 1994), which 
is based upon Pierrehumbert's theory of Ameri- 
can English intonation (Pierrehumbert, 1980). The 
ToBI transcription provided us with a breakdown 
of the speech sample into minor or INTERMEDIATE 
PHRASES (Pierrehumbert, 1980; Beckman and Pier- 
rehumbert, 1986). This level of prosodic phrase 
served as our primary unit of analysis for measur- 
ing both speech and discourse properties. The por- 
tion of the corpus we report on consists of 494 and 
552 intermediate phrases for read and spontaneous 
speech, respectively. 
3.3 Discourse Segmentat ion 
In our research, the Grosz and Sidner (1986) the- 
ory of discourse structure, hereafter G&S, provides 
a foundation for segmenting discourses into con- 
stituent parts. According to this model, at least 
three components ofdiscourse structure must be dis- 
tinguished. The utterances composing the discourse 
divide into segments that may be embedded rela- 
tive to one another. These segments and the em- 
bedding relationships between them form the LIN- 
GUISTIC STRUCTURE. The embedding relationships 
reflect changes in the ATTENTIONAL STATE, the dy- 
namic record of the entities and attributes that are 
salient during a particular part of the discourse. 
Changes in linguistic structure, and hence atten- 
287 
tional state, depend on the discourse's INTENTIONAL 
STRUCTURE; this structure comprises the intentions 
or DISCOURSE SEGMENT PURPOSES (DSPs) under- 
lying the discourse and relations between DSPs. 
Two methods of discourse segmentation were em- 
ployed by subjects who had expertise in the G~:S 
theory. Following Hirschberg and Grosz (1992), 
three subjects labeled from text alone (group T) and 
three labeled from text and speech (group S). Other 
than this difference in input modality, all subjects 
received identical written instructions. The text for 
each task was presented with line breaks correspond- 
ing to intermediate phrase boundaries (i.e., ToBI 
BREAK INDICES of level 3 or higher (Pitrelli, Beck- 
man, and Hirschberg, 1994)). In the instructions, 
subjects were essentially asked to analyze the lin- 
guistic and intentional structures by segmenting the 
discourse, identifying the DSPs, and specifying the 
hierarchical relationships among segments. 
4 Resul ts  
4.1 Discourse Segmentat ion 
4.1.1 Raw Agreement 
Labels on which all labelers in the group agreed 
are termed the CONSENSUS LABELS. 3 The consen- 
sus labels for segment-initial (SBEG), segment-final 
(SF), and segment-medial (SCONT, defined as nei- 
ther SBEG nor SF) phrase labels are given in Ta- 
ble 1. 4 
Table h Percentage of Consensus Labels by 
Segment Boundary Type 
SBEG SF SCONT Total 
READ (N=494) 
Text alone (T) 14% 11% 32% 57% 
Text & Speech (S) 18% 14% 49% 80% 
SPON (N=552) 
Text alone (T) 13% 10% 40% 61% 
Text & Speech (S) 15% 13% 54% 81% 
Note that group T and group S segmentations 
differ significantly, in contrast o earlier findings of 
ttirschberg and Grosz (1992) on a corpus of read- 
aloud news stories and in support of informal find- 
ings of Swerts (1995). Table 1 shows that group 
S produced significantly more consensus boundaries 
for both read (p<.001, X=58.8, df=l) and spon- 
taneous (p<.001, X=55.4, df=l) speech than did 
3Use of consensus labels is a conservative measure of 
labeler agreement. Results in (Passonneau and Litman, 
1993) and (Swerts, 1995) show that with a larger num- 
ber of labelers, notions of BOUNDARY STRENGTH can be 
employed. 
4Consensus percentages for the three types in Table 1 
do not necessarily sum to the total consensus agreement 
percentage, since a phrase is both segment-initial nd 
segment-final when it makes up a segment by itself. 
group T. When the read and spontaneous data 
are pooled, group S agreed upon significantly more 
SBEG boundaries (p<.05, X=4.7, df=l) as well as 
SF boundaries (p<.05, X=4.4, df=l) than did group 
T. Further, it is not the case that text-alone seg- 
menters imply chose to place fewer boundaries in 
the discourse; if this were so, then we would expect 
a high percentage ofSCONT consensus labels where 
no SBEGs or SFs were identified. Instead, we find 
that the number of consensus SCONTs was signifi- 
cantly higher for text-and-speech labelings than for 
text-alone (p<.001, X=49.1, df=l). It appears that 
the speech signal can help disambiguate among al- 
ternate segmentations of the same text. Finally, the 
data in Table 1 show that spontaneous speech can be 
segmented as reliably as its read counterpart, con- 
trary to Ayer's results (1992). 
4.1.2 Inter- labeler Reliabi l ity 
Comparisons of inter-labeler reliability, that is, 
the reproducibility ofa coding scheme given multiple 
labelers, provide another perspective on the segmen- 
tation data. How best to measure inter-labeler re- 
liability for discourse segmentation tasks, especially 
for hierarchical segmentation, is an open research 
question (Passonneau and Litman, to appear; Car- 
letta, 1995; Flammia nd Zue, 1995; Rotondo, 1984; 
Swerts, 1995). For comparative purposes, we ex- 
plored several measures proposed in the literature, 
namely, COCHRAN'S Q and the KAPPA (~) COEF- 
FICIENT (Siegel and Castellan, 1988). Cochran's Q, 
originally proposed in (Hirschberg and Grosz, 1992) 
to measure the likelihood that similarity among la- 
belings was due to chance, was not useful in the cur- 
rent study; all tests of similarity using this metric 
(pairwise, or comparing all labelers) gave probabil- 
ity near zero. We concluded that this statistic did 
not serve, for example, to capture the differences 
observed between labelings from text alone versus 
labelings from text and speech. 
Recent discourse annotation studies (Isard and 
Carletta, 1995; Flammia and Zue, 1995) have mea- 
sured reliability using the g coefficient, which factors 
out chance agreement taking the expected istribu- 
tion of categories into account. This coefficient is 
defined as 
Po-  P~ 
1-Ps  
where Po represents the observed agreement and 
PE represents the expected agreement. Typically, 
values of .7 or higher for this measure provide ev- 
idence of good reliability, while values of .8 or 
greater indicate high reliability. Isard and Car- 
letta (1995) report pairwise a scores ranging from 
.43 to .68 in a study of naive and expert classifi- 
cations of types of 'moves' in the Map Task dia- 
logues. For theory-neutral discourse segmentations 
of information-seeking dialogues, Flammia (Flam- 
mia and Zue, 1995) reports an average pairwise 
288 
of .45 for five labelers and of .68 for the three most 
similar labelers. 
An important issue in applying the t~ coefficient 
is how one calculates the expected agreement us- 
ing prior distributions of categories. We first calcu- 
lated the prior probabilities for our data based sim- 
ply on the distribution of SBEG versus non-SBEG 
labels for all labelers on one of the nine direction- 
giving tasks in this study, with separate calculations 
for the read and spontaneous versions. This task, 
which represented about 8% of the data for both 
speaking styles, was chosen because it was midway 
in planning complexity and in length among all the 
tasks. Using these distributions, we calculated x co- 
efficients for each pair of labelers in each condition 
for the remaining eight tasks in our corpus. The 
observed percentage of SBEG labels, prior distribu- 
tion for SBEG, average of the pairwise ~ scores, and 
standard eviations for those scores are presented in 
Table 2. 
Table 3: Comparison of Weighted Average 
Coefficients and Extra for Each Condition 
Using Flammia's Metric 
READ 
Text alone 
Text & Speech 
SPON 
Text alone 
Text & Speech 
% Weighted 
Average Low High 
0.51 .22 .67 
0.70 .48 .87 
0.53 .19 .60 
0.74 .63 1.00 
Once again, averaged scores of .7 or better for 
text-and-speech labelings, for both speaking styles, 
indicate markedly higher inter-labeler reliability 
than do scores for text-alone labelings, which av- 
eraged .51 and .53. 
Table 2: Comparison of Average 
t? Coefficients for SBEGs 
% Avg. 
SBEG P~ a s.d. 
-READ 
Text alone .38 .53 .56 .08 
Text & Speech .35 .55 .81 .01 
SPON 
Text alone .39 .52 .63 .04 
Text & Speech .35 .55 .80 .03 
The average g scores for group T segmenters indi- 
cate weak inter-labeler reliability. In contrast, aver- 
age t~ scores for group S are .8 or better, indicating 
a high degree of inter-labeler reliability. Thus, ap- 
plication of this somewhat stricter reliability metric 
confirms that the availability of speech critically in- 
fluences how listeners perceive discourse structure. 
The calculation of reliability for SBEG versus non- 
SBEG labeling in effect tests the similarity of lin- 
earized segmentations and does not speak to the is- 
sue of how similar the labelings are in terms of hier- 
archical structure. F lammia has proposed a method 
for generalizing the use of the g coefficient for hi- 
erarchical segmentation that gives an upper-bound 
estimate on inter-labeler agreement. 5 We applied 
this metric to our segmentation data, calculating 
weighted averages for pairwise ~ scores averaged for 
each task. Results for each condition, together with 
the lowest and highest average ~ scores over the 
tasks, are presented in Table 3. 
5Flammia uses a flexible definition of segment match 
to calculate pairwise observed agreement: roughly, a seg- 
ment in one segmentation is matched if both its SBEG 
and SF correspond to segment boundary locations in the 
other segmentation. 
4.2 Intonat ional  Features of  Segments 
4.2.1 Phrase Classes and Features 
For purposes of intonational analysis, we take 
advantage of the high degree of agreement among 
our discourse labelers and include in each seg- 
ment boundary class (SBEG, SF, and SCONT) only 
the phrases whose classification all subjects agreed 
upon. We term these the CONSENSUS-LABELED 
PHRASES, and compare their features to those of all 
phrases not in the relevant class (i.e., non-consensus- 
labeled phrases and consensus-labeled phrases of the 
other types). Note that there were one-third fewer 
consensus-labeled phrases for text-alone labelings 
than for text-and-speech (see Table 1). We exam- 
ined the following acoustic and prosodic features of 
SBEG, SCONT, and SF consensus-labeled phrases: 
f0 maximum and f0 average; 6 rms (energy) max- 
imum and rms average; speaking rate (measured 
in syllables per second); and duration of preced- 
ing and subsequent silent pauses. As for the seg- 
mentation analyses, we compared intonational cor- 
relates of segment boundary types not only for group 
S versus group T, but also for spontaneous versus 
read speech. While correlates have been identified 
in read speech, they have been observed in sponta- 
neous speech only rarely and descriptively. 
6We calculated f0 maximum in two ways: as simple f0 
peak within the intermediate phrase and also as f0 max- 
imum measured at the rms maximum of the sonorant 
portion of the nuclear-accented syllable in the interme- 
diate phrase (HIGH F0 in the ToBI framework (Pitrelli, 
Beckman, and Hirschberg, 1994)). The latter measure 
proved more robust, so we report results based on this 
metric. The same applies to measurement of rms maxi- 
mum. Average f0 and rms were calculated over the entire 
intermediate phrase. 
289 
Table 4: Acoustic-Prosodic Correlates of Consensus Labelings from Text Alone 
SBEG 
Read 
Spon 
SCONT 
Read 
Spon 
Max F0 
(at HighF0) 
Avg FO 
(phrasal) 
Max RMS 
(at HighF0) 
Avg RMS 
(phrasal) 
Rate 
~wer 
lower 
SF 
Read lower lower lower lower 
Spon lower ~wer lower lower 
Preceding 
Pause 
Subsequent 
Pause 
higher higher higher higher longer shorter 
higher higher higher higher longer shorter 
lower** lower** lower shorter ? shorter ? 
slower* shorter* shorter ? 
faster *? shorter longer 
faster ? shorter longer 
Table 5: Acoustic-Prosodic Correlates of Consensus Labelings from Text and Speech 
SBEG 
Read 
Spon 
SCONT 
Read 
Spon 
SF 
Read 
Spon 
Max F0 
(at HighF0) 
higher 
higher 
lower 
lower 
lower 
lower 
Avg F0 
(phrasal) 
higher 
higher 
lower ?
lower 
lower 
Max RMS 
(at HighFO) 
higher 
higher 
lower 
lower 
Avg RMS \] 
(phrasal) 
higher 
higher 
lower 
Rate 
slower ?
lower faster* 
lower faster 
Preceding Subsequent 
Pause Pause 
longer shorter 
longer shorter 
shorter t shorter t 
shorter ? shorter ? 
shorter longer 
shorter longer 
4.2.2 G loba l  In tonat iona l  Cor re la tes  
We found strong correlations for consensus SBEG, 
SCONT, and SF phrases for all conditions. Results 
for group T are given in Table 4, and for group S, in 
Table 5. ~ 
Consensus SBEG phrases in all conditions pos- 
sess significantly higher maximum and average f0, 
higher maximum and average rms, shorter subse- 
quent pause, and longer preceding pause. For con- 
sensus SCONT phrases, we found some differences 
between read and spontaneous speech for both la- 
beling methods. Features for group T included sig- 
nificantly lower f0 maximum and average and lower 
rms maximum and average for read speech, but only 
lower f0 maximum for the spontaneous condition. 
Group S features for SCONT were identical to group 
T except for the absence of a correlation for maxi- 
mum rms. While SCONT phrases for both speak- 
ing styles exhibited significantly shorter preceding 
and subsequent pauses than other phrases, only the 
spontaneous condition showed a significantly slower 
rate. For consensus SF phrases, we again found simi- 
lar patterns for both speaking styles and both label- 
7T-tests were used to test for statistical significance of 
difference in the means of two classes of phrases. Results 
reported are significant at the .005 level or better, except 
where '*' indicates ignificance at the .03 level or better. 
Results were calculated using one-tailed t-tests, except 
where't' indicates a two-tailed test. 
ing methods, namely lower f0 maximum and aver- 
age, lower rms maximum and average, faster speak- 
ing rate, shorter preceding pauses, and longer sub- 
sequent pauses. 
While it may appear somewhat surprising that 
results for both labeling methods match so closely, 
in fact, correlations for text-and-speech labels pre- 
sented in Table 5 were almost invariably statistically 
stronger than those for text-alone labels presented 
in Table 4. These more robust results for text-and- 
speech labelings occur even though the data set of 
consensus labels is considerably arger than the data 
set of consensus text-alone labelings. 
4.2.3 Local Intonational Correlates 
With a view toward automatically segmenting a 
spoken discourse, we would like to directly clas- 
sify phrases of all three discourse categories. But 
SCONT and SF phrases exhibit similar prominence 
features and appear distinct from each other only 
in terms of timing differences. A second issue is 
whether such classification can be done 'on-line.' 
To address both of these issues, we made pairwise 
comparisons of consensus-labeled phrase groups us- 
ing measures of relative change in acoustic-prosodic 
parameters over a local window of two consecutive 
phrases. Table 6 presents ignificant findings on rel- 
ative changes in f0, loudness (measured in decibels), 
and speaking rate, from prior to current intermedi- 
290 
Table 6: Acoustic-Prosodic Change from Preceding Phrase for Consensus Labelings from Text and Speech 
SBEG versus SCONT 
Read 
Sport 
SCONT versus SF 
Read 
Spon 
SBEG versus SF 
Read 
Spon 
II Max F0 Change 
(at HighF0s) 
Max DB Change 
(at HighF0s) 
Rate Change 
increase increase 
increase increase 
increase* increase* 
increase 
increase increase 
increase increase decrease* t 
ate phrase, s 
First, note that SBEG is distinguished from both 
SCONT and SF in terms of f0 change and db change 
from prior phrase; that is, while SBEG phrases are 
distinguished on a variety of measures from all other 
phrases (including non-consensus-labeled phrases) in 
Table 5, this table shows that SBEGs are also distin- 
guishable directly from each of the other consensus- 
labeled categories. Second, while SCONT and SF 
appear to share prominence features in Table 5, Ta- 
ble 6 reveals differences between SCONT and SF in 
amount of f0 and db change. Thus, in addition to 
lending themselves to on-line processing, local mea- 
sures may also capture valuable prominence cues to 
distinguish between segment-medial nd segment- 
final phrases. 
5 Conc lus ion  
Although this paper reports results from only a sin- 
gle speaker, the findings are promising. We have 
demonstrated that a theory-based method for dis- 
course analysis can provide reliable segmentations of 
spontaneous a  well as read speech. In addition, the 
availability of speech in the text-and-speech labeling 
method led to significantly higher reliability scores. 
The stronger correlations found for intonational fea- 
tures of the text-and-speech labelings suggest not 
only that discourse labelers make use of prosody in 
their analyses, but also that obtaining such data can 
lead to more robust modeling of the relationship be- 
tween intonation and discourse structure. 
The following preliminary results can be con- 
sidered for incorporation in such a model. First, 
segment-initial utterances differ from medial and fi- 
8We present results only for text-and-speech label- 
ings; results for text-alone were quite similar. Note that 
'increase' means that there is a significantly greater in- 
crease in f0, rms, or rate from prior to current phrase for 
category 1 than for category 2 of the comparison, and 
'decrease' means that there is a significantly greater de- 
crease. T-tests again were one-tailed unless marked by 
t, and significance l vels were .002 or better except hose 
marked by *, which were at .01 or better. 
nal utterances in both prominence and rhythmic 
properties. Segment-medial nd segment-final ut- 
terances are distinguished more clearly by rhythmic 
features, primarily pause. Finally, all correlations 
found for global parameters can also be computed 
based on relative change in acoustic-prosodic param- 
eters in a window of two phrases. 
Ongoing research is addressing the development 
of automatic lassification algorithms for discourse 
boundary type; the role of prosody in conveying hier- 
archical relationships among discourse segments; in- 
dividual speaker differences; and discourse segmen- 
tation methods that can be used by naive subjects. 
Re ferences  
Avesani, Cinzia and Mario Vayra. 1988. Dis- 
corso, segmenti di discorso e un' ipotesi sull' in- 
tonazione. In Corso eli stampa negli Atti del Con- 
vegno Inlernazionale "Sull'Interpunzione', Val- 
leechi, Firenze, Maggio, pages 8-53. 
Ayers, Gayle M. 1992. Discourse functions of pitch 
range in spontaneous and read speech. Paper pre- 
sented at the Linguistic Society of America An- 
nual Meeting. 
Beckman, Mary and Janet Pierrehumbert. 1986. 
Intonational structure in Japanese and English. 
Phonology Yearbook, 3:15-70. 
Brown, G., K. Currie, and J. Kenworthy. 1980. 
Questions of Intonation. University Park Press, 
Baltimore. 
Brubaker, R. S. 1972. Rate and pause character- 
istics of oral reading. Journal of Psycholinguistic 
Research, 1(2):141-147. 
Butterworth, B. 1975. Hesitation and semantic 
planning in speech. Journal of Psycholinguistic 
Research, 4:75-87. 
Carberry, Sandra. 1990. Plan Recognition in Nat- 
ural Language Dialogue. MIT Press, Cambridge 
MA. 
291 
Carletta, Jean C. 1996. Assessing agreement on 
classification tasks: the kappa statistic. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 22(2), To appear. 
Cohen, Robin. 1984. A computational theory of the 
function of clue words in argument understand- 
ing. In Proceedings of the lOth International Con- 
ference on Computational Linguistics, pages 251- 
255, Stanford. 
Flammia, Giovanni and Victor Zue. 1995. Empir- 
ical evaluation of human performance and agree- 
ment in parsing discourse constituents in spoken 
dialogue. In Proceedings of EUROSPEECH-95, 
Volume 3, pages 1965-1968. Madrid. 
Grosz, B. and J. Hirschberg. 1992. Some intona- 
tional characteristics of discourse structure. In 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference 
on Spoken Language Processing, pages 429-432, 
Banff, October. 
Grosz, Barbara. 1978. Discourse analysis. In 
D. Walker, editor, Understanding Spoken Lan- 
guage. Elsevier, pages 235-268. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 1986. At- 
tention, intentions, and the structure of discourse. 
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
Hearst, Marti A. 1994. Context and Structure in 
Automated Full-Text Information Access. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of California at Berkeley. Avail- 
able as Report No. UCB/CSD-94/836. 
Hinkelman, E. and J. Allen. 1989. Two constraints 
on speech act ambiguity. In Proceedings of the 
27th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com- 
putational Linguistics, pages 212-219, Vancouver. 
Hirschberg, J. and B. Grosz. 1992. Intonational 
features of local and global discourse structure. 
In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Lan- 
guage Workshop, pages 441-446, Harriman NY, 
DARPA, Morgan Kaufmann, February. 
Isard, Amy and Jean Carletta. 1995. Transaction 
and action coding in the map task corpus. Re- 
search paper HCRC/RP-65, March, Human Com- 
munication Research Centre, University of Edin- 
burgh, Edinburgh. 
Iwafiska, Lucia, Douglas Appelt, Damaris Ayuso, 
Kathy Dahlgren, Bonnie Glover Stalls, Ralph Gr- 
ishman, George Krupka, Christine Montgomery, 
and Ellen Riloff. 1991. Computational spects of 
discourse in the context of Muc-3. In Proceedings 
of the Third Message Understanding Conference 
(Mac-3), pages 256-282, San Mateo, CA, Morgan 
Kaufmann, May. 
Lehiste, I. 1979. Perception of sentence and 
paragraph boundaries. In B. Lindblom and 
S. Oehman, editors, Frontiers of Speech Research. 
Academic Press, London, pages 191-201. 
Lehiste, I. 1980. Phonetic characteristics of dis- 
course. Paper presented at the Meeting of the 
Committee on Speech Research, Acoustical Soci- 
ety of Japan. 
Levy, Elena. 1984. Communicating Thematic Struc- 
ture in Narrative Discourse: The Use of Referring 
Terms and Gestures. Ph.D. thesis, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, June. 
Linde, C. 1979. Focus of attention and the choice of 
pronouns in discourse. In T. Givon, editor, Syntax 
and Semantics, Vol. 12: Discourse and Syntax. 
The Academic Press, New York, pages 337-354. 
Litman, Diane and Julia Hirschberg. 1990. Dis- 
ambiguating cue phrases in text and speech. 
In Proceedings of the 13th International Confer- 
ence on Computational Linguistics, pages 251- 
256, Helsinki, August. 
Lochbaum, Karen. 1994. Using Collaborative Plans 
to Model the Intentional Structure of Discourse. 
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University. Available as 
Tech Report TR-25-94. 
Morris, J. and G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion 
computed by thesaural relations as an indicator 
of the structure of text. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 17:21-48. 
Passonneau, R. and D. Litman. 1993. Feasibility of 
automated iscourse segmentation. In Proceed- 
ings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Associ- 
ation for Computational Linguistics, pages 148- 
155, Columbus. 
Passonneau, Rebecca J. and Diane J. Litman. To 
Appear. Empirical analysis of three dimensions 
of spoken discourse: Segmentation, coherence and 
linguistic devices. In E. Hovy and D. Scott, ed- 
itors, Burning Issues in Discourse. Springer Vet- 
lag. 
Pierrehumbert, Janet B. 1980. The Phonology and 
Phonetics of English Intonation. Ph.D. thesis, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Septem- 
ber. Distributed by the Indiana University Lin- 
guistics Club. 
Pitrelli, John, Mary Beckman, and Julia Hirschberg. 
1994. Evaluation of prosodic transcription label- 
ing reliability in the ToBI framework. In Proceed- 
ings of the 3rd International Conference on Spo- 
ken Language Processing, volume 2, pages 123- 
126, Yokohama. 
Reichman, R. 1985. Getting Computers to Talk Like 
You and Me: Discourse Context, Focus, and Se- 
mantics. Bradford. The Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge. 
Reynar, Jeffrey C. 1994. An automatic method of 
finding topic boundaries. In Proceedings of the 
Student Session of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 
331-333. Las Cruces, NM. 
292 
Rotondo, John A. 1984. Clustering analysis of sub- 
jective partitions of text. Discourse Processes, 
7:69-88. 
Schubert, L. K. and C. H. Hwang. 1990. Picking ref- 
erence events from tense trees. In Proceedings of 
the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 
34-41, Hidden Valley PA. DARPA. 
Siegel, S. and Jr. Castellan, N. John. 1988. Non- 
parametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, second edition. 
Silverman, K. 1987. The Structure and Processing 
of Fundamental Frequency Contours. Ph.D. the- 
sis, Cambridge University, Cambridge UK. 
Song, F. and R. Cohen. 1991. Tense interpretation 
in the context of narrative. In Proceedings of the 
9th National Conference of the American Associ- 
ation for Artificial Intelligence, pages 131-136. 
Swerts, M., R. Gelyukens, and J. Terken. 1992. 
Prosodic correlates of discourse units in sponta- 
neous speech. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Spoken Language Processing, pages 
421-428, Banff, Canada, October. 
Swerts, Marc. 1995. Combining statistical and pho- 
netic analyses of spontaneous discourse segmen- 
tation. In Proceedings of the XIIth International 
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, volume 4, pages 
208-211, Stockholm, August. 
Swerts, Marc and Mari Ostendorf. 1995. Dis- 
course prosody in human-machine interactions. In 
Proceedings ESCA Workshop on Spoken Dialogue 
Systems: Theories and Applications, pages 205- 
208, Visgo, Denmark, May/June. 
Webber, B. 1988. Discourse deixis: Reference to 
discourse segments. In Proceedings of the 26th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics, pages 113-122, Buffalo. 
Woodbury, Anthony C. 1987. Rhetorical struc- 
ture in a central Alaskan Yupik Eskimo tradi- 
tional narrative. In J. Sherzer and A. Woodbury, 
editors, Native American Discourse: Poetics and 
Rhetoric, pages 176-239, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge UK. 
Yarowsky, David. 1991. Personal communication, 
December. 
293 
