Transitivity and Foregrounding in News Articles: exper iments 
in information retrieval and automatic summaris ing 
Roder ick  Kay  and  Ruth  Ay le t t  
In fo rmat ion  Techno logy  Ins t i tu te  
Un ivers i ty  of  Sa l ford 
Manchester  M5 4WT 
Un i ted  K ingdom 
{rnk ,R .Ay le t t}@i t i . sa l fo rd .ac .uk  
Abst rac t  
This paper describes an on-going study 
which applies the concept of transitivity 
to news discourse for text processing tasks. 
The complex notion of transitivity is de- 
fined and the relationship between transi- 
tivity and information foregrounding is ex- 
plained. A sample corpus of news articles 
has been coded for transitivity. The corpus 
is being used in two text processing exper- 
iments. 
1 I n t roduct ion  
2 Definition of Transitivity 
Transitivity is usually considered to be a property of 
an entire clause (Hopper and Thompson, 1980). It 
is, broadly, the notion that an activity is transferred 
from an agent to a patient. It is therefore inherently 
linked with a clause containing two participants in 
which an action is highly effective. 
The concept of transitivity has been defined in 
terms of the following parameters: 
A. Participants h 
1 
B. Kinesis h 
1 
C. Aspect h 
1 
D. Punctuality h 
1 
E. Volitionality h 
1 
F. Affirmation h 
1 
G. Mode h 
1 
H. Agency h 
1 
I. Affectedness of O h 
1 
J. Individuation of O h 
1 
h=high, l=low 
Each component of transitivity contributes to the 
overall effectiveness or 'intensity' with which an ac- 
tion is transferred from one participant o another. 
A. There must be at least two participants for an 
action to be transferred. 
B. Transferable actions can be contrasted with non- 
transferable states, e.g. he pushed her; he thought 
about her. 
C. An action is either wholly or partially completed 
according to whether it is telic or atelic, e.g. I played 
the piano; I am playing the piano. 
D. Punctual actions have no transitional phase be- 
tween start and end point, having a greater effect 
The basic hypothesis of this study is that the degree 
of transitivity associated with a clause indicates the 
level of importance of a clause in a narrative text. 
For this assumption to form the basis of a practical 
implementation, transitivity must be objectively de- 
fined and the definition must be able to be processed 
automatically. 
The notion of transitivity clearly has many impli- 
cations for text processing, in particular information 
retrieval and automatic summarising, because it can 
be used to grade information in a document accord- 
ing to importance. In an information retrieval con- 
text, it means that a transitivity index could influ- 
ence a decision about the relevance of a document to 
a query. In automatic summarising, it means that 
less important information could be sieved accord- 
ing to transitivity, leaving only the most important 
information to form the basis of a summary. 
News discourse was chosen because it is narra- 
tive based and therefore broadly applicable to the 
notion of transitivity. There has also been exten- 
sive research in the structural characteristics of this 
text type (Duszak, 1995) (Kay and Aylett, 1994) 
(Bell, 1991). However, the study poses a challenge 
in the sense that the notion of transitivity has pre- 
viously been exemplified with relatively simple sen- 
tences presenting action sequences. A central ques- 
tion is how well the concept can be transferred to 
a domain which, although narrative based, diverges 
into commentary and analysis. 
2 or more participants 
1 participant 
action 
non-action 
telic 
atelic 
punctual 
non-punctual 
volitional 
non-volitional 
affirmative 
negative 
realis 
irrealis 
A high in potency 
A low in potency 
0 totally affected 
0 not affected 
0 highly individuated 
0 non-individuated 
369 
on their patients, e.g. he kicked the door; he opened 
the door. 
E. An action is more effective if it is volitional, e.g. 
he bought the present; he forgot the present. 
F. An affirmative action has greater transitivity than 
a negative action, e.g. he called the boy; he didn't 
call the boy. 
G. An action which is realis (occurring in the real 
world) is more effective than an action which is ir- 
realis (occurring in a non-real contingency world), 
e.g. they attacked the enemy; they might attack the 
enemy. 
H. Participants high in agency transfer an action 
more effectively than participants low in agency, e.g. 
he shocked me; the price shocked me. 
I. A patient is wholly or partially affected, e.g. I 
washed the dishes; I washed some of the dishes. 
J. Individuation refers to the distinctiveness of the 
object from the agent and of the object from its own 
background. The following properties contribute to 
the individuation of an object. 
INDIVIDUATED NON-INDIVIDUATED 
proper common 
human, animate inanimate 
concrete abstract 
singular plural 
count mass 
referential, definite non-referential 
Based on these components, clauses can be clas- 
sified as more or less transitive. In English, as a 
whole, transitivity is indicated by a cluster of fea- 
tures associated with a clause. 
The concept of foreground and background infor- 
mation is based on the idea that in narrative dis- 
course some parts are more essential than others. 
Certain sections of a narrative are crucially linked 
with the temporal sequence of events which form 
the backbone of a text. This material is normally 
foregrounded. In contrast, the contextual informa- 
tion relating to characters and environment is back- 
grounded. 
3 T rans i t i v i ty  and  Text  Process ing  
The relationship between transitivity and fore- 
grounding has potential for text processing, in par- 
ticular, information retrieval and automatic sum- 
marising. If it is possible to identify which clauses 
are central to a text, the information can be used to 
contribute to a relevance assessment or as the basis 
for a derived summary. 
3.1 Information Retrieval 
The standard model of text retrieval is based on the 
identification of matching query/document terms 
which are weighted according to their distribution 
throughout a text database. This model has also 
been enhanced by a number of linguistic techniques: 
expansion of query/document terms according to 
thesaurus relations, synonyms, etc. 
The proposal for this study is to code matching 
query/document terms for the transitivity value of 
the clause in which they occur, as a starting point 
for producing comparative term weights based on 
linguistic features. Terms which are less central to 
a discourse will, on this basis, be given lower scores 
because they occur in low transitivity clauses. The 
net result will be to produce a document ranking 
order which more closely represents the importance 
of the documents to a user. There is also potential 
for producing a transitivity index for an entire doc- 
ument as well as for individual clauses so that this 
measure could also feature in a relevance assessment. 
3.2 Automatic  Summarising 
The fundamental task in automatic summarising is
to identify the most important sections of a text so 
that these can be extracted and possibly modified to 
provide a summary. The notion of transitivity pro- 
vides a measure against which clauses can be scored. 
The highest scoring clauses, either above a threshold 
value or on a comparative basis, can then be iden- 
tified as the basic clauses of a summary. These can 
either be extracted raw or in context with pronom- 
inal references resolved and any logical antecedents 
included. A previous study in this area (Decker, 
1985) extracted clauses and sentences on the basis 
of syntactic patterns which broadly correlate with 
certain features of transitivity. The present study fo- 
cuses on the semantic features of transitivity rather 
than associated syntax. 
4 Exper imenta l  P rocedure  
The feasibility of using transitivity as a tool in text 
processing will be assessed by two experiments us- 
ing the same corpus. Clauses in the corpus must 
be hand-coded for transitivity. The difficulties en- 
countered in this process will determine the basis 
for future automation. For the information retrieval 
task, only the clauses containing query/document 
matching terms will be coded for transitivity. For 
the automatic summarising experiment all sentences 
within a text will be coded. 
For the information retrieval experiment, ten 
queries are put to a newspaper database: a demon- 
stration system running on WAIS (Wide Area Infor- 
mation Server), carrying two weeks of articles from 
the Times newspaper from 1993 and 1994. The re- 
sults of the queries are downloaded in their initial 
ranked order (ranked by a host ranking algorithm) 
and re-ranked by a serial batch processor written in 
C+-t-. The processor identifies the transitivity fea- 
tures associated with each matching clause and pro- 
duces a ranked output of documents based on the 
weights assigned to each clause in which the search 
terms occur. The weights assigned to each clause are 
370 
numerically equivalent to the number of transitivity 
features associated with each clause. The total tran- 
sitivity weight for an entire document is the sum of 
clause weights normalised by document length. 
The output dataset consists of a total of 185 news 
articles, an average of 18.5 per batch. Each set of 
articles is ranked by volunteers. The articles are 
ranked for their degree of relevance to a query in two 
ways: on a scale of one to ten; and comparatively, by 
the degree of relevance of an article against all other 
articles. All terms are treated as equal so that dis- 
crimination between documents is based purely on 
accumulative transitivity scores. The performance 
of the ranking technique is evaluated according to 
two precision measures: the Spearman rank corre- 
lation coefficient (rho) and the CRE (Coefficient of 
Ranking Effectiveness) (Noreault et al , 1977). 
For the automatic summarising experiment, ten 
articles are taken from the corpus at random. Sum- 
maries are produced by extracting clauses according 
to transitivity scores. In the initial implementation, 
transitivity scores will be equal to the number of 
transitivity features associated with the main clause 
of each sentence. The selection of sentences for a 
summary will be based, initially, on comparative 
transitivity scores and a reduction factor which will 
determine the number of sentences selected based on 
the length of a document. 
Summaries will be analysed and assessed by vol- 
unteers for coverage, in terms of the original text, 
and comprehensibility as a separate text. The sum- 
maries will be compared against summaries of the 
same texts compiled by the syntactic technique men- 
tioned previously and also against summaries con- 
sisting of the first paragraph of each news article. 
The study is currently at the end of the coding 
stage for the information retrieval experiment. 
guistics, No 2, European Studies Research Insti- 
tute, University of Salford. 
P. Hopper, S. Thompson. 1980. Transitivity in 
grammar in discourse. Language, 56: 251-299. 
T. Noreault, M. Koll, M. McGill. 1977. Automatic 
ranked output from Boolean searches in SIRE. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 27(6): 333-339. 
References 
A. Bell. 1991. The language of news media. Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford 
N. Decker. 1985. The use of syntactic clues in dis- 
course processing. Proceedings of the 23rd meeting 
of the ACL, pages 315-323. 
A. Duszak. 1995. On variation in news-text pro- 
totypes: some evidence from English, Polish, and 
German. Discourse Processes, 19: 465-483. 
G. Green. 1979. Organization, goals and com- 
prehensibility in narratives: news writing, a case 
study. Technical Report 132, The Centre for the 
study of Reading, University of Illinois at Urbana- 
Champaign. 
R. Kay, R. Aylett. 1994. A text grammar for news 
reports. Working papers in Language and Lin- 
371 
