Retrieving Collocations 
by Co-occurrences and Word Order Constraints 
Sayor i  Sh imohata ,  Tosh iyuk i  Sug io  and  Jun j i  Nagata  
Kansa i  Laboratory ,  Research  &: Deve lopment  Group 
Oki  E lectr ic  Indust ry  Co.,  Ltd.  
Crys ta l  Tower  1-2-27, Sh i romi ,  
Chuo-ku ,  Osaka ,  540, Japan  
{ sayori, sugio, nagat a} ?kansai. oki. co. j p 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, we describe a method for 
automatically retrieving collocations from 
large text corpora. This method retrieve 
collocations in the following stages: 1) ex- 
tracting strings of characters as units of 
collocations 2) extracting recurrent combi- 
nations of strings in accordance with their 
word order in a corpus as collocations. 
Through the method, various range of col- 
locations, especially domain specific collo- 
cations, are retrieved. The method is prac- 
tical because it uses plain texts without any 
information dependent on a language such 
as lexical knowledge and parts of speech. 
1 Introduction 
A collocation is a recurrent combination of words, 
ranging from word level to sentence level. In this pa- 
per, we classify collocations into two types according 
to their structures. One is an uninterrupted colloca- 
tion which consists of a sequence of words, the other 
is an interrupted collocation which consists of words 
containing one or several gaps filled in by substi- 
tutable words or phrases which belong to the same 
category. 
The features of collocations are defined as follows: 
? collocations are recurrent 
? collocations consist of one or several lexical 
units 
? order of units are rigid in a collocation. 
For language processing such as machine trans- 
lation, a knowledge of domain specific collocations 
is indispensable because what collocations mean are 
different from their literal meaning and the usage 
and meaning of a collocation is totally dependent 
on each domain. In addition, new collocations are 
produced one after another and most of them are 
technical jargons. 
There has been a growing interest in corpus-based 
approaches which retrieve collocations from large 
corpora (Nagao and Mori, 1994), (Ikehara et al, 
1996) (Kupiec, 1993), (Fung, 1995), (Kitamura and 
Matsumoto, 1996), (Smadja, 1993), (Smadja et al, 
1996), (Haruno et al, 1996). Although these ap- 
proaches achieved good results for the task consid- 
ered, most of them aim to extract fixed collocations, 
mainly noun phrases, and require the information 
which is dependent on each language such as dictio- 
naries and parts of speech. From a practical point of 
view, however, a more robust and flexible approach 
is desirable. 
We propose a method to retrieve interrupted 
and uninterrupted collocations by the frequencies 
of co-occurrences and word order constraints from 
a monolingual corpus. The method comprises two 
stages: the first stage extracts sequences of words 
(or characters) t from a corpus as units of colloca- 
tions and the second stage extracts recurrent com- 
binations of units and constructs collocations by ar- 
ranging them in accordance with word order in the 
corpus. 
2 Algorithm 
2.1 Ext rac t ing  units of collocation 
(Nagao and Mori, 1994) developed a method to 
calculate the frequencies of strings composed of n 
characters(a grams). Since this method generates 
all n-character strings appeared in a text, the output 
contains a lot of fragments and useless expressions. 
For example, even if "local", "area", and "network" 
always appear as the substrings of '% local area net- 
work" in a corpus, this method generates redundant 
strings such as "a local", "a local area" and "area 
network". 
To filter out the fragments, we measure the dis- 
tribution of adjacent words preceding and following 
1A word is recognized as a minimum unit in such a 
language as English where writespace is used to delimit 
words, while a character is recognized as that in such 
languages as Japanese and Chinese which have no word 
delimiters. Although the method escribed in this paper 
is applicable to either kinds of languages, we have taken 
English as an example. 
476 
the strings using entropy threshold. This is based 
on the idea that adjacent words will be widely dis- 
tributed if the string is meaningful, and they will 
be localized if the string is a substring of a mean- 
ingful string. Taking the example mentioned above, 
the words which follow % local area" are practi- 
cally identified as "network" because % local area" 
is a substring of % local area network" in the cor- 
pus. On the contrary, the words which follow % 
local area network" are hardly identified because "a 
local area network" is a unit of expression and innu- 
merable words are possible to follow the string. It 
means that the distribution of adjacent words is ef- 
fective to judge whether the string is an appropriate 
unit or not. 
We introduce ntropy value, which is a measure of 
disorder. Let the string be str, the adjacent words 
wl...wn, and the frequency of str freq(str). The 
probability of each possible adjacent word p(wi) is 
then: 
y~eq(wi) 
p(wi)-  freq(str) (1) 
At that time, the entropy of str H(str) is defined 
as: 
7 l  
H(str) = ~ -p(wi)logp(wi) (2) 
i=1 
H(str) takes the highest value if n = freq(str) and 
1 for all and it takes the lowest value 0 p(wi )  = -~ wi,  
if n = 1 and p(wi) = 1. Calculating the entropy of 
both sides of the string, we adopt the lower one as 
the entropy of the string. Str is accepted only if the 
following inequation is satisfied: 
H(str) > Tentropu (3) 
Fragmental strings such as "a local" and "area 
network" are filtered out with these procedures be- 
cause their entropy values are expected to be small. 
Most of the strings extracted in this stage are mean- 
ingful units such as compound words, prepositional 
phrases, and idiomatic expressions. These strings 
are uninterrupted collocations of themselves while 
they are used in the next stage to construct colloca- 
tions. This method is useful for the languages with- 
out word delimiters, and for the other languages as 
well. 
2.2 Extracting col locations 
By the use of each string derived in the previous 
stage, this stage extracts strings which frequently 
co-occur with the string and constructs them as a 
collocation. It is based on the idea that there is a 
string which is used to induce a collocation. We call 
this string % key string", hereafter. The followings 
are the procedures to retrieve a collocation: 
1. Take a key string strk from the strings stri(i = 
1...n), and retrieve sentences containing strk 
from the corpus. 
2. Examine how often each possible combinations 
of str~ and stri co-occurs, and extract stri if 
the frequency exceeds a given threshold Tire q. 
3. Examine every two strings stri and strj and 
refine them by the following steps alternately: 
? Combine stri and strj when they overlap 
or adjoin each other and the following in- 
equation is satisfied: 
freq(stri, strj ) 
freq(stri) > Tratio (4) 
? Filter out stri if strj subsumes tri and the 
following inequation is satisfied: 
freq(strj) 
freq(srti) >Tratio (5) 
4. Construct a collocation by arranging the strings 
stri in accordance with the word order in the 
corpus. 
The second step and the third step narrow down 
the strings to the units of collocation. Through these 
steps, only the strings which significantly co-occur 
with the key string strk are extracted. 
The second step eliminates the strings that are not 
frequent enough. Consider the example of Figure 1. 
This is a list of sentences containing the key string 
"Refer to" retrieved and each underlined string cor- 
responds to a string stri. Assuming the frequency 
threshold Tlr~q as 2, the strings which co-occur with 
str~ more than twice are extracted in the second 
step. Table 1 shows the result of this step. Al- 
though it is very simple technique, almost all the 
useless trings are excluded through this step. 
stri f req( strk , stri ) 
the 4 
manual 4 
for specific instructions 3 
on 2 
Table 1: Result of the second step 
The third step reorganizes the strings to be opti- 
mum units in the specific context. This is based on 
the idea that a longer string is more significant as a 
unit of collocations if it is frequent enough. Assum- 
ing that the threshold Tra~io is 0.75, first, a string 
"manual for specific instructions" is produced as the 
inequation (4) is satisfied. Next, "manual" and "for 
specific instructions" are deleted as the inequation 
(5) is satisfied. This process is repeated until no 
string satisfies the inequations. Table 2 shows a re- 
sult of this step. 
The fourth step constructs a collocation by ar- 
ranging the strings in accordance with the word or- 
der in the sentences retrieved in the first step. Tak- 
ing stri in order of frequency, this step determines 
477 
Refer to the appropriate manual for instructions o_nn... 
Refer t.o. the manual for specific instructions. 
Refer to the installation manual for specific instructions fo__?r ... 
Refer to the manual for specific in '~~-~f fn  ~ 
Figure 1: Sentences containing "Refer to" 
l s t r i  f req( strk , stri ) 
the 4 
manual for specific instructions 3 
on 2 
Table 2: Result of the third step 
where stri is placed in a collocation. In this example, 
the position of "the" is examined first. According 
to the sentences shown in Figure 1, "the" is always 
placed next to "Refer to". Then its position is de- 
termined to follow "Refer to". Next, the position of 
"manual for specific instructions" is examined and it 
is determined to follow a gap placed after "Refer to 
the". Finally, the following collocation is produced: 
"Refer  to the ... manua l  
for specific instruct ions on ..." 
The broken lines in the collocation indicates the gaps 
where any substitutable words or phrases can be 
filled in. In the example, "appropriate" or "installa- 
tion" is filled in the first gap. 
Thus, we retrieve an arbitrary length of inter- 
rupted or uninterrupted collocation induced by the 
key string. This procedure is performed for each 
string obtained in the previous tage. By changing 
the threshold, various levels of collocations are re- 
trieved. 
3 Eva luat ion  
We performed an experiment for evaluating the al- 
gorithm. The corpus used in the experiment is 
a computer manual written in English comprising 
1,311,522 words (in 120,240 sentences). 
In the first stage of this method, 167,387 strings 
are produced. Among them, 650, 1950, 6774 strings 
are extracted over the entropy threshold 2, 1.5, 1 re- 
spectively. For 650 strings whose entropy is greater 
than 2, 162 strings (24.9%) are complete sentences, 
297 strings (45.7%) are regarded as grammatically 
appropriate units, and 114 strings (17.5%) are re- 
garded as meaningful units even though they are not 
grammatical. This told us that the precision of the 
first stage is 88.1%. 
Table 3 shows top 20 strings in order of entropy 
value. They are quite representative of the given do- 
main. Most of them are technical jargons related to 
computers and typical expressions used in manual 
descriptions although they vary in their construc- 
tions. It is interesting to note that the strings which 
do not belong to the grammatical units also take 
high entropy value. Some of them contain punctua- 
tion, and some of them terminate in articles. Punc- 
tuation marks and function words in the strings are 
useful to recognize how the strings are used in a cor- 
pus. 
Table 4 illustrates how the entropy is changed with 
the change of string length. The third column in the 
table shows the kinds of adjacent words which follow 
the strings. The table shows that the ungrammatical 
strings such as "For more information on" and "For 
more information, refer to" act more cohesively than 
the grammatical string "For more information" in 
the corpus. Actually, the former strings are more 
useful to construct collocations in the second stage. 
In the second stage, we extracted collocations 
from 411 key strings retrieved in the first stage (297 
grammatical units and 114 meaningful units). Nec- 
essary thresholds are given by the following set of 
equations: 
r I~q ~ x 0.1 ~- \]req(str~) 
Tratio = 0.8 
As a result, 269 combinations of units are retrieved 
as collocations. Note that collocations are not gen- 
erated from all the key strings because some of them 
are uninterrupted collocations in themselves like No. 
2 in Table 3. Evaluation is done by human check and 
180 collocations are regarded as meaningful. The 
precision is 43.8% when the number of meaning- 
ful collocation is divided by the number of the key 
strings and 66.9% when it is divided by the number 
of the collocations retrieved in the second stage 2. 
Table 5 shows the collocations extracted with the 
underlined key strings. The table indicates that ar- 
bitrary length of collocations, which are frequently 
used in computer manuals, are retrieved through 
the method. As the method focuses on the co- 
occurrence of strings, most of the collocations are 
specific to the given domain. Common collocations 
are tend to be ignored because they are not used re- 
peatedly in a single text. It is not a serious problem, 
2Usually the latter ratio is adopted as precision. 
478 
however, becausecommon collocations are limited 
in number and we can efficiently obtain them from 
dictionaries or by human reflection. 
No. 7 and 8 in Table 5 are the examples of in- 
valid collocations. They contain unnecessary strings 
such as "to a" and ", the" in them. The majority of 
invalid collocations are of this type. One possible so- 
lution is to eliminate unnecessary strings at the sec- 
ond stage. Most of the unnecessary strings consist of 
only punctuation marks and function words. There- 
fore, by filtering out these strings, invalid colloca- 
tions produced by the method should be reduced. 
Figure 2 summarizes the result of the evaluation. 
In the experiment, 573 strings are retrieved as appro- 
priate units of collocations and 180 combinations of 
units are retrieved as appropriate collocations. Pre- 
cision is 88.1% in the first stage, and 66.9% in the 
second stage. 
1st stage 2nd stage 
CS= 162(24.9%) 
GU=297(45.7%) 
MU=114(17.5%) 
F=77(11.9%) 
MC=180(43.8%) 
F=89(21.7%) 
NC= 142(34.5%) 
CS: complete sentences 
GU: grammatical units 
MU: meaningful units 
MC: meaningful collocations 
F: fragments 
NC: not captured 
Figure 2: Summary of evaluation 
Although evaluation of retrieval systems is usu- 
ally performed with precision and recall, we cannot 
examine recall rate in the experiment. It is difficult 
to recognize how many collocations are in a corpus 
because the measure differs largely dependent on the 
domain or the application considered. As an alter- 
native way to evaluate the algorithm, we are plan- 
ning to apply the collocations retrieved to a machine 
translation system and evaluate how they contribute 
to the quality of translation. 
4 Re la ted  work 
Algorithms for retrieving collocations has been de- 
scribed (Smadja, 1993) (Haruno et al, 1996). 
(Smadja, 1993) proposed a method to re- 
trieve collocations by combining bigrams whose co- 
occurrences are greater than a given threshold 3. In 
their approach, the bigrams are valid only when 
there are fewer than five words between them. This 
is based on the assumption that "most of the lexical 
relations involving a word w can be retrieved by ex- 
amining the neighborhood of w wherever it occurs, 
within a span of five (-5 and +5 around w) words." 
While the assumption is reasonable for some lan- 
guages such as English, it cannot be applied to all 
the languages, especially to the languages without 
word delimiters. 
(Haruno et al, 1996) constructed collocations by 
combining a couple of strings 4 of high mutual in- 
formation iteratively. But the mutual information 
is estimated inadequately lower when the cohesive- 
ness between two strings is greatly different. Take 
"in spite (of)", for example. Despite the fact that 
"spite" is frequently used with "in", mutual informa- 
tion between "in" and "spite" is small because "in" 
is used in various ways. Thus, there is the possibility 
that the method misses ignificant collocations even 
though one of the strings have strong cohesiveness. 
In contrast o these methods, our method focuses 
on the distribution of adjacent words (or charac- 
ters) when retrieving units of collocation and the 
co-occurrence frequencies and word order between a
key string and other strings when retrieving colloca- 
tions. Through the method, various kinds of collo- 
cations induced by key strings are retrieved regard- 
less of the number of units or the distance between 
units in a collocation. Another distinction is that 
our method does not require any lexical knowledge 
or language dependent information such as part of 
speech. Owing to this, the method have good appli- 
cability to many languages. 
5 Conclus ion 
In this paper, we described a robust and practi- 
cal method for retrieving collocations by the co- 
occurrence of strings and word order constraints. 
Through the method, various range of collocations 
which are frequently used in a specific domain are 
retrieved automatically. This method is applicable 
to various languages because it uses a plain tex- 
tual corpus and requires only the general informa- 
tion appeared in the corpus. Although the colloca- 
tions retrieved by the method are monolingual and 
they are not available to the machine application for 
the present, the results will be extensible in various 
ways. We plan to compile a knowledge of bilingual 
collocations by incorporating the method with con- 
ventional bilingual approaches. 
3This approach is similar to the process of the string 
refinement described in this paper. 
4They call the strings word chunks. 
479 
No. str H(str) freq(str) 
1 the current functional area 3.8 45 
2 Before you install this device : 3.78 44 
3 This could introduce data corruption . 3.37 29 
4 All rights are reserved . 3.37 29 
5 Note that the 2.93 53 
6 , such as 2.91 87 
7 Information on minor numbers is in 2.45 20 
8 , for example , 2.44 23 
9 The default is 2.44 52 
10 , you can use the 2.26 25 
11 to see if the 2.2 24 
12 stands for 2.15 30 
13 system accounting : 2.14 48 
14 These are 2.12 37 
15 allocation policy 2.1 21 
16 For example , the 2.1 97 
17 For more information on 2.1 96 
18 permission bits 2.07 26 
19 By default ,  the 2.06 32 
20 The syntax for 2.03 57 
Table 3: Top 20 strings extracted at the first stage 
str H(str) n fveq(str) 
For more 0.13 7 200 
For more information 0.33 3 168 
For more information , 0.21 4 46 
For more information , see 1.03 8 25 
For more information , refer to 1.17 6 15 
For more information on 2.1 56 96 
For more information about 1.69 21 35 
Table 4: Strings including "For more" 
No. collocation 
1 For more information on ..., refer to the ... manual. 
2 You can use the ... to help you. 
3 The syntax for .... is : ... 
4 output from the execution of.. .  commands. 
5 ..., use the ... command with the ... option 
6 ... have a special meaning in this manual. 
7 ... to a (such as ..., and ...). 
8 ... if the system ...or a ...for a...,the.. 
Table 5: Examples of collocations extracted at the second stage 
480 
References  
Pascale Fung. 1995. Compiling bilingual exicon en- 
tries from a non-parallel English-Chinese corpus. 
In Proceedings ofthe 3rd Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora, pages 173-183. 
Masahiko Haruno, Satoru Ikehara, and Take- 
fumi Yamazaki. 1996. Learning Bilingual Col- 
locations by Word-Level Sorting. In Proceedings 
o/ the 16th COLING, pages 525-530. 
Satoru Ikehara, Satoshi Shirai, and Hajime Uchino. 
1996. A statistical method for extracting unin- 
terrupted and interrupted collocations from very 
large corpora. In Proceedings of the 16th COL- 
INC. pages 574-579. 
Mihoko Kitamura and Yuji Matsumoto. 1996. Au- 
tomatic extraction of word sequence correspon- 
dences in parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the 
4th Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 79- 
87. 
Julian Kupiec. 1993. An algorithm for finding noun 
phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In 
Proceedings of the 31th Annual Meeting of ACL, 
pages 17-22. 
Makoto Nagao and Shinsuke Mori. 1994. New 
Method of n-gram statistics for large number of n 
and automatic extranetion of words and phrases 
from large text data of Japanese. In Proceedings 
of the 15th COLING, pages 611-615. 
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from 
text: Xtraet. In Computational Linguistics, 
19(1), pages 143-177. 
Frank Smadja, Kathleen MaKe- 
own, and Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou. 1996. Trans- 
lating collocations for bilingual lexicons: A sta- 
tistical approach. In Computational Linguistics, 
22(1), pages 1-38. 
481 
