A Trainable Rule-based Algorithm for Word Segmentation 
Dav id  D .  Pa lmer  
The  MITRE Corporat ion  
202 Bur l ington  Rd. 
Bedford ,  MA 01730, USA 
palmer@mitre, org 
Abst ract  
This paper presents a trainable rule-based 
algorithm for performing word segmen- 
tation. The algorithm provides a sim- 
ple, language-independent alternative to 
large-scale l xicai-based segmenters equir- 
ing large amounts of knowledge ngineer- 
ing. As a stand-alone segmenter, we show 
our algorithm to produce high performance 
Chinese segmentation. In addition, we 
show the transformation-based algorithm 
to be effective in improving the output of 
several existing word segmentation algo- 
rithms in three different languages. 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper presents a trainable rule-based algorithm 
for performing word segmentation. Our algorithm is 
effective both as a high-accuracy stand-alone seg- 
menter and as a postprocessor that improves the 
output of existing word segmentation algorithms. 
In the writing systems of many languages, includ- 
ing Chinese, Japanese, and Thai, words are not de- 
limited by spaces. Determining the word bound- 
aries, thus tokenizing the text, is usually one of the 
first necessary processing steps, making tasks such as 
part-of-speech tagging and parsing possible. A vari- 
ety of methods have recently been developed to per- 
form word segmentation and the results have been 
published widely. 1 
A major difficulty in evaluating segmentation al- 
gorithms is that there are no widely-accepted guide- 
lines as to what constitutes a word, and there is 
therefore no agreement on how to "correctly" seg- 
ment a text in an unsegmented language. It is 
1Most published segmentation work has been done for 
Chinese. For a discussion of recent Chinese segmentation 
work, see Sproat et al (1996). 
frequently mentioned in segmentation papers that 
native speakers of a language do not always agree 
about the "correct" segmentation a d that the same 
text could be segmented into several very different 
(and equally correct) sets of words by different na- 
tive speakers. Sproat et a1.(1996) and Wu and Fung 
(1994) give empirical results howing that an agree- 
ment rate between ative speakers as low as 75% is 
common. Consequently, an algorithm which scores 
extremely well compared to one native segmentation 
may score dismally compared to other, equally "cor- 
rect" segmentations. We will discuss some other is- 
sues in evaluating word segmentation i  Section 3.1. 
One solution to the problem of multiple correct 
segmentations might be to establish specific guide- 
lines for what is and is not a word in unsegmented 
languages. Given these guidelines, all corpora could 
theoretically be uniformly segmented according to 
the same conventions, and we could directly compare 
existing methods on the same corpora. While this 
approach as been successful in driving progress in 
NLP tasks such as part-of-speech tagging and pars- 
ing, there are valid arguments against adopting it 
for word segmentation. For example, since word seg- 
mentation is merely a preprocessing task for a wide 
variety of further tasks such as parsing, information 
extraction, and information retrieval, different seg- 
mentations can be useful or even essential for the 
different asks. In this sense, word segmentation is 
similar to speech recognition, in which a system must 
be robust enough to adapt to and recognize the mul- 
tiple speaker-dependent "correct" pronunciations of
words. In some cases, it may also be necessary to 
allow multiple "correct" segmentations of the same 
text, depending on the requirements of further pro- 
cessing steps. However, many algorithms use exten- 
sive domain-specific word lists and intricate name 
recognition routines as well as hard-coded morpho- 
logical analysis modules to produce a predetermined 
segmentation output. Modifying or retargeting an 
321 
existing segmentation algorithm to produce a differ- 
ent segmentation can be difficult, especially if it is 
not clear what and where the systematic differences 
in segmentation are. 
It is widely reported in word segmentation 
papers, 2 that the greatest barrier to accurate word 
segmentation is in recognizing words that are not in 
the lexicon of the segmenter. Such a problem is de- 
pendent both on the source of the lexicon as well as 
the correspondence (in vocabulary) between the text 
in question and the lexicon. Wu and Fung (1994) 
demonstrate that segmentation accuracy is signifi- 
cantly higher when the lexicon is constructed using 
the same type of corpus as the corpus on which it 
is tested. We argue that rather than attempting to 
construct a single exhaustive l xicon or even a series 
of domain-specific lexica, it is more practical to de- 
velop a robust trainable means of compensating for 
lexicon inadequacies. Furthermore, developing such 
an algorithm will allow us to perform segmentation 
in many different languages without requiring ex- 
tensive morphological resources and domain-specific 
lexica in any single language. 
For these reasons, we address the problem of word 
segmentation from a different direction. We intro- 
duce a rule-based algorithm which can produce an 
accurate segmentation f a text, given a rudimentary 
initial approximation to the segmentation. Recog- 
nizing the utility of multiple correct segmentations of 
the same text, our algorithm also allows the output 
of a wide variety of existing segmentation algorithms 
to be adapted to different segmentation schemes. In 
addition, our rule-based algorithm can also be used 
to supplement the segmentation of an existing al- 
gorithm in order to compensate for an incomplete 
lexicon. Our algorithm is trainable and language in- 
dependent, so it can be used with any unsegmented 
language. 
2 T rans format ion-based  
Segmentat ion  
The key component of our trainable segmenta- 
tion algorithm is Transformation-based Error-driven 
Learning, the corpus-based language processing 
method introduced by Brill (1993a). This technique 
provides a simple algorithm for learning a sequence 
of rules that can be applied to various NLP tasks. 
It differs from other common corpus-based methods 
in several ways. For one, it is weakly statistical, but 
not probabilistic; transformation-based approaches 
conseo,:~,tly require far less training data than most 
o;a~is~ical pproaches. It is rule-based, but relies on 
2See, for example, Sproat et al (1996). 
machine learning to acquire the rules, rather than 
expensive manual knowledge ngineering. The rules 
produced can be inspected, which is useful for gain- 
ing insight into the nature of the rule sequence and 
for manual improvement and debugging of the se- 
quence. The learning algorithm also considers the 
entire training set at all learning steps, rather than 
decreasing the size of the training data as learning 
progresses, such as is the case in decision-tree in- 
duction (Quinlan, 1986). For a thorough discussion 
of transformation-based l arning, see Ramshaw and 
Marcus (1996). 
Brill's work provides a proof of viability of 
transformation-based techniques in the form of 
a number of processors, including a (widely- 
distributed) part-of-speech tagger (Brill, 1994), 
a procedure for prepositional phrase attachment 
(Brill and Resnik, 1994), and a bracketing parser 
(Brill, 1993b). All of these provided performance 
comparable to or better than previous attempts. 
Transformation-based l arning has also been suc- 
cessfully applied to text chunking (Ramshaw 
and Marcus, 1995), morphological disambiguation 
(Oflazer and Tur, 1996), and phrase parsing (Vilain 
and Day, 1996). 
2.1 Tra in ing 
Word segmentation can easily be cast as a 
transformation-based problem, which requires an 
initial model, a goal state into which we wish to 
transform the initial model (the "gold standard"), 
and a series of transformations to effect his improve- 
ment. The transformation-based algorithm involves 
applying and scoring all the possible rules to train- 
ing data and determining which rule improves the 
model the most. This rule is then applied to all ap- 
plicable sentences, and the process is repeated until 
no rule improves the score of the training data. In 
this manner asequence of rules is built for iteratively 
improving the initial model. Evaluation of the rule 
sequence is carried out on a test set of data which is 
independent of the training data. 
If we treat the output of an existing segmentation 
algorithm 3 as the initial state and the desired seg- 
mentation as the goal state, we can perform a series 
of transformations onthe initial state - removing ex- 
traneous boundaries and inserting new boundaries - 
to obtain a more accurate approximation of the goal 
state. We therefore need only define an appropriate 
rule syntax for transforming this initial approxima- 
3The "existing" algorithm does not need to be a large 
or even accurate system; the algorithm can be arbi- 
trarily simple as long as it assigns ome form of initial 
segmentation. 
322 
tion and prepare appropriate training data. 
For our experiments, we obtained corpora which 
had been manually segmented by native or near- 
native speakers of Chinese and Thai. We divided the 
hand-segmented data randomly into training and 
test sets. Roughly 80% of the data was used to 
train the segmentation algorithm, and 20% was used 
as a blind test set to score the rules learned from 
the training data. In addition to Chinese and Thai, 
we also performed segmentation experiments using 
a large corpus of English in which all the spaces had 
been removed from the texts. Most of our English 
experiments were performed using training and test 
sets with roughly the same 80-20 ratio, but in Sec- 
tion 3.4.3 we discuss results of English experiments 
with different amounts of training data. Unfortu- 
nately, we could not repeat these experiments with 
Chinese and Thai due to the small amount of hand- 
segmented ata available. 
2.2 Ru le  syntax  
There are three main types of transformations which 
can act on the current state of an imperfect segmen- 
tation: 
? Insert - place a new boundary between two char- 
acters 
? Delete - remove an existing boundary between 
two characters 
? Slide - move an existing boundary from its cur- 
rent location between two characters to a loca- 
tion 1, 2, or 3 characters to the left or right 4 
In our syntax, Insert and Delete transformations 
can be triggered by any two adjacent characters (a 
bigram) and one character to the left or right of the 
bigram. Slide transformations can be triggered by a 
sequence of one, two, or three characters over which 
the boundary is to be moved. Figure 1 enumerates 
the 22 segmentation transformations we define. 
3 Resu l ts  
With the above algorithm in place, we can use the 
training data to produce a rule sequence to augment 
an initial segmentation approximation i order to 
obtain a better approximation f the desired segmen- 
tation. Furthermore, since all the rules are purely 
character-based, a sequence can be learned for any 
character set and thus any language. We used our 
rule-based algorithm to improve the word segmen- 
tation rate for several segmentation algorithms in 
three languages. 
4Note that a Slide transformation is equivalent to a 
Delete plus an Insert. 
3.1 Eva luat ion  o f  segmentat ion  
Despite the number of papers on the topic, the eval- 
uation and comparison of existing segmentation al- 
gorithms is virtually impossible. In addition to the 
problem of multiple correct segmentations of the 
same texts, the comparison of algorithms is diffi- 
cult because of the lack of a single metric for re- 
porting scores. Two common measures of perfor- 
mance are recall and precision, where recall is de- 
fined as the percent of words in the hand-segmented 
text identified by the segmentation algorithm, and 
precision is defined as the percentage of words re- 
turned by the algorithm that also occurred in the 
hand-segmented text in the same position. The com- 
ponent recall and precision scores are then used to 
calculate an F-measure (Rijsbergen, 1979), where 
F = (1 +/~)PR/ (~P + R). In this paper we will 
report all scores as a balanced F-measure (precision 
and recall weighted equally) with/~ = 1, such that 
F = 2PR/(P + R) 
3.2 Ch inese  
For our Chinese experiments, the training set con- 
sisted of 2000 sentences (60187 words) from a Xin- 
hun news agency corpus; the test set was a separate 
set of 560 sentences (18783 words) from the same 
corpus. 5 We ran four experiments using this corpus, 
with four different algorithms providing the starting 
point for the learning of the segmentation transfor- 
mations. In each case, the rule sequence learned 
from the training set resulted in a significant im- 
provement in the segmentation of the test set. 
3.2.1 Character -as -word  (CAW)  
A very simple initial segmentation for Chinese is 
to consider each character a distinct word. Since 
the average word length is quite short in Chinese, 
with most words containing only 1 or 2 characters, 6 
this character-as-word segmentation correctly iden- 
tified many one-character words and produced an 
initial segmentation score of F=40.3. While this is 
a low segmentation score, this segmentation algo- 
rithm identifies enough words to provide a reason- 
able initial segmentation approximation. In fact, the 
CAW algorithm alone has been shown (Buckley et 
al., 1996; Broglio et al, 1996) to be adequate to be 
used successfully in Chinese information retrieval. 
Our algorithm learned 5903 transformations from 
the 2000 sentence training set. The 5903 transfor- 
mations applied to the test set improved the score 
from F=40.3 to 78.1, a 63.3% reduction in the error 
5The Chinese texts were prepared by Tom Keenan. 
6The average length of a word in our Chinese data 
was 1.60 characters. 
323 
Boundary Triggering 
Action Context Rule 
xABC y ~ x ABCy 
AB ?==~ A B Insert (delete) between A and B any 
xB ?=:?, x B Insert (delete) before any B any 
Ay ~ A y Insert (delete) after any A any 
ABC ~ A B C Insert (delete) between A and B any 
AND Insert (delete) between B and C 
JAB ~ JAB  Insert (delete) between A and B J to left of A 
--JAB ~ -~JA B Insert (delete) between A and B no J to left of A 
ABK ~ A BK Insert (delete) between A and B K to right of B 
AB~K ~ A B-~K Insert (delete) between A and B no K to right of B 
xA y ~ x Ay Move from after A to before A any 
xAB y ~==e, x ABy Move from after bigram AB to before AB any 
Move from after trigram ABC to before ABC any 
Figure 1: Possible transformations. A, B, C, J, and K are specific characters; x and y can be any character. 
~J and ~K can be any character except J and K, respectively. 
rate. This is a very surprising and encouraging re- 
sult, in that, from a very naive initial approximation 
using no lexicon except hat implicit from the train- 
ing data, our rule-based algorithm is able to produce 
a series of transformations with a high segmentation 
accuracy. 
3.2.2 Max imum match ing  (greedy)  
a lgor i thm 
A common approach to word segmentation is to 
use a variation of the maximum atching algorithm, 
frequently referred to as the "greedy algorithm." 
The greedy algorithm starts at the first character 
in a text and, using a word list for the language be- 
ing segmented, attempts to find the longest word in 
the list starting with that character. If a word is 
found, the maximum-matching algorithm marks a 
boundary at the end of the longest word, then be- 
gins the same longest match search starting at the 
character following the match. If no match is found 
in the word list, the greedy algorithm simply skips 
that character and begins the search starting at the 
next character. In this manner, an initial segmen- 
tation can be obtained that is more informed than 
a simple character-as-word approach. We applied 
the maximum matching algorithm to the test set 
using a list of 57472 Chinese words from the NMSU 
CHSEG segmenter (described in the next section). 
This greedy algorithm produced an initial score of 
F=64.4. 
A sequence of 2897 transformations was learned ?
from the training set; applied to the test set, they 
improved the score from F=64.4 to 84.9, a 57.8% 
error reduction. From a simple Chinese word list, 
the rule-based algorithm was thus able to produce a- 
segmentation score comparable to segmentation al- 
gorithms developed with a large amount of domain 
knowledge (as we will see in the next section). 
This score was improved further when combin- 
ing the character-as-word (CAW) and the maximum 
matching algorithms. In the maximum matching al- 
gorithm described above, when a sequence of char- 
acters occurred in the text, and no subset of the 
sequence was present in the word list, the entire 
sequence was treated as a single word. This of- 
ten resulted in words containing 10 or more char- 
acters, which is very unlikely in Chinese. In this 
experiment, when such a sequence of characters was 
encountered, each of the characters was treated as 
a separate word, as in the CAW algorithm above. 
This variation of the greedy algorithm, using the 
same list of 57472 words, produced an initial score 
of F=82.9. A sequence of 2450 transformations was 
learned from the training set; applied to the test 
set, they improved the score from F=82.9 to 87.7, 
a 28.1% error reduction. The score produced using 
this variation of the maximum matching algorithm 
combined with a rule sequence (87.7) is nearly equal 
to the score produced by the NMSU segmenter seg- 
menter (87.9) discussed in the next section. 
3.2 .3  NMSU segmenter  
The previous three experiments showed that our 
rule sequence algorithm can produce excellent seg- 
mentation results given very simple initial segmen- 
tation algorithms. However, assisting in the adapta- 
tion of an existing algorithm to different segmenta- 
tion schemes, as discussed in Section 1, would most 
likely be performed with an already accurate, fully- 
developed algorithm. In this experiment we demon- 
324 
strate that our algorithm can also improve the out- 
put of such a system. 
The Chinese segmenter CHSEG developed at the 
Computing Research Laboratory at New Mexico 
State University is a complete system for high- 
accuracy Chinese segmentation (Jin, 1994). In ad- 
dition to an initial segmentation module that finds 
words in a text based on a list of Chinese words, 
CHSEG additionally contains specific modules for 
recognizing idiomatic expressions, derived words, 
Chinese person names, and foreign proper names. 
The accuracy of CHSEG on an 8.6MB corpus has 
been independently reported as F=84.0 (Ponte and 
Croft, 1996). (For reference, Ponte and Croft re- 
port scores of F=86.1 and 83.6 for their probabilis- 
tic Chinese segmentation algorithms trained on over 
100MB of data.) 
On our test set, CHSEG produced a segmentation 
score of F=87.9. Our rule-based algorithm learned a 
sequence of 1755 transformations from the training 
set; applied to the test set, they improved the score 
from 87.9 to 89.6, a 14.0% reduction in the error rate. 
Our rule-based algorithm is thus able to produce an 
improvement to an existing high-performance sys- 
tem. 
Table 1 shows a summary of the four Chinese ex- 
periments. 
3.3 Tha i  
While Thai is also an unsegmented language, the 
Thai writing system is alphabetic and the average 
word length is greater than Chinese. ~ We would 
therefore xpect that our character-based transfor- 
mations would not work as well with Thai, since a 
context of more than one character is necessary in 
many cases to make many segmentation decisions in 
alphabetic languages. 
The Thai corpus consisted of texts from the Thai 
News Agency via NECTEC in Thailand. For our 
experiment, he training set consisted of 3367 sen- 
tences (40937 words); the test set was a separate 
set of 1245 sentences (13724 words) from the same 
corpus. 
The initial segmentation was performed using the 
maximum matching algorithm, with a lexicon of 
9933 Thai words from the word separation filter 
in ctte~,a Thai language Latex package. This 
greedy algorithm gave an initial segmentation score 
of F=48.2 on the test set. 
7The average length of a word in our Thai data was 
5.01 characters. 
8The Thai texts were manually segmented by 3o 
Tyler. 
Our rule-based algorithm learned a sequence of 
731 transformations which improved the score from 
48.2 to 63.6, a 29.7% error reduction. While the 
alphabetic system is obviously harder to segment, 
we still see a significant reduction in the segmenter 
error rate using the transformation-based algorithm. 
Nevertheless, it is doubtful that a segmentation with 
a score of 63.6 would be useful in too many appli- 
cations, and this result will need to be significantly 
improved. 
3.4 De-segmented  Engl ish 
Although English is not an unsegmented language, 
the writing system is alphabetic like Thai and the 
average word length is similar. 9 Since English lan- 
guage resources (e.g. word lists and morphological 
analyzers) are more readily available, it is instruc- 
tive to experiment with a de-segmented English cor- 
pus, that is, English texts in which the spaces have 
been removed and word boundaries are not explic- 
itly indicated. The following shows an example of 
an English sentence and its de-segmented version: 
About 20,000 years ago the last ice age ended. 
About20,000yearsagothelasticeageended. 
The results of such experiments can help us deter- 
mine which resources need to be compiled in order to 
develop a high-accuracy segmentation algorithm in 
unsegmented alphabetic languages such as Thai. In 
addition, we are also able to provide a more detailed 
error analysis of the English segmentation (since the 
author can read English but not Thai). 
Our English experiments were performed using a 
corpus of texts from the Wall Street Journal (WSJ). 
The training set consisted of 2675 sentences (64632 
words) in which all the spaces had been removed; the 
test set was a separate set of 700 sentences (16318 
words) from the same corpus (also with all spaces 
removed). 
3.4.1 Max imum match ing  exper iment  
For an initial experiment, segmentation was per- 
formed using the maximum matching algorithm, 
with a large lexicon of 34272 English words com- 
piled from the WSJ. l? In contrast o the low initial 
Thai score, the greedy algorithm gave an initial En- 
glish segmentation score of F=73.2. Our rule-based 
algorithm learned a sequence of 800 transformations, 
9The average length of a word in our English data 
was 4.46. characters, compared to 5.01 for Thai and 1.60 
for Chinese. 
1?Note that the portion of the WSJ corpus used to 
compile the word list was independent of both the train- 
ing and test sets used in the segmentation experiments. 
325 
Initial 
algorithm 
Character-as-word 
Maximum matching 
Maximum matching + CAW 
NMSU segmenter 
l Initial I Rules 
score learned 
40.3 5903 
64.4 2897 
82.9 2450 
87.9 1755 
Improved I 
score  
78.1 
84.9 
87.7 
89.6 
Error 
reduction 
63.3% 
57.8% 
28.1% 
14.0% 
Table 1: Chinese results. 
which improved the score from 73.2 to 79.0, a 21.6% 
error reduction. 
The difference in the greedy scores for English and 
Thai demonstrates the dependence on the word list 
in the greedy algorithm. For example, an exper- 
iment in which we randomly removed half of the 
words from the English list reduced the performance 
of the greedy algorithm from 73.2 to 32.3; although 
this reduced English word list was nearly twice the 
size of the Thai word list (17136 vs. 9939), the 
longest match segmentation utilizing the list was 
much lower (32.3 vs. 48.2). Successive xperiments 
in which we removed ifferent random sets of half 
the words from the original list resulted in greedy 
algorithm performance of 39.2, 35.1, and 35.5. Yet, 
despite the disparity in initial segmentation scores, 
the transformation sequences effect a significant er- 
ror reduction in all cases, which indicates that the 
transformation sequences are effectively able to com- 
pensate (to some extent) for weaknesses in the lexi- 
con. Table 2 provides a summary of the results using 
the greedy algorithm for each of the three languages. 
3.4.2 Basic morpholog ica l  segmentat ion  
exper iment  
As mentioned above, lexical resources are more 
readily available for English than for Thai. We 
can use these resources to provide an informed ini- 
tial segmentation approximation separate from the 
greedy algorithm. Using our native knowledge of 
English as well as a short list of common English 
prefixes and suffixes, we developed a simple al- 
gorithm for initial segmentation of English which 
placed boundaries after any of the suffixes and before 
any of the prefixes, as well as segmenting punctua- 
tion characters. In most cases, this simple approach 
was able to locate only one of the two necessary 
boundaries for recognizing full words, and the ini- 
tial score was understandably low, F=29.8. Never- 
theless, even from this flawed initial approximation, 
our rule-based algorithm learned a sequence of 632 
transformations which nearly doubled the word re- 
call, improving the score from 29.8 to 53.3, a 33.5% 
error reduction. 
3.4.3 Amount of training data 
Since we had a large amount of English data, we 
also performed a classic experiment to determine the 
effect the amount of training data had on the abil- 
ity of the rule sequences to improve segmentation. 
We started with a training set only slightly larger 
than the test set, 872 sentences, and repeated the 
maximum matching experiment described in Section 
3.4.1. We then incrementally increased the amount 
of training data and repeated the experiment. The 
results, summarized in Table 3, clearly indicate (not 
surprisingly) that more training sentences produce 
both a longer rule sequence and a larger error re- 
duction in the test data. 
Training 
sentences 
872 
1731 
2675 
3572 
4522 
Rules 
learned 
436 
653 
800 
902 
1015 
Improved Error 
score reduction 
78.2 18.9% 
78.9 21.3% 
79.0 21.6% 
79.4 23.1% 
80.3 26.5% 
Table 3: English training set sizes. Initial score of 
test data (700 sentences) was 73.2. 
3.4.4 Er ror  analysis 
Upon inspection of the English segmentation er- 
rors produced by both the maximum matching algo- 
rithm and the learned transformation sequences, one 
major category of errors became clear. Most appar- 
ent was the fact that the limited context ransforma- 
tions were unable to recover from many errors intro- 
duced by the naive maximum matching algorithm. 
For example, because the greedy algorithm always 
looks for the longest string of characters which can 
be a word, given the character sequence "economicsi- 
tuation", the greedy algorithm first recognized "eco- 
nomics" and several shorter words, segmenting the 
sequence as "economics it u at io n". Since our 
transformations consider only a single character of 
context, the learning algorithm was unable to patch 
the smaller segments back together to produce the 
desired output "economic situation". In some cases, 
326 
Lexicon 
Language size 
Chinese 57472 
Chinese (with CAW) 57472 
Thai 9939 
English 34272 
,oitial I I Imp.oved 11 score learned score 
64.4 2897 84.9 
82.9 2450 87.7 
48.2 731 63.6 
73.2 800 79.0 
Error 
reduction 
57.8% 
28.1% 
29.7% 
21.6% 
Table 2: Summary of maximum matching results. 
the transformations were able to recover some of the 
word, but were rarely able to produce the full desired 
output. For example, in one case the greedy algo- 
rithm segmented "humanactivity" as "humana c ti 
vi ty". The rule sequence was able to transform this 
into "humana ctivity", but was not able to produce 
the desired "human activity". This suggests that 
both the greedy algorithm and the transformation 
learning algorithm need to have a more global word 
model, with the ability to recognize the impact of 
placing a boundary on the longer sequences of char- 
acters surrounding that point. 
4 D iscuss ion  
The results of these experiments demonstrate that 
a transformation-based rule sequence, supplement- 
ing a rudimentary initial approximation, can pro- 
duce accurate segmentation. In addition, they are 
able to improve the performance of a wide range of 
segmentation algorithms, without requiring expen- 
sive knowledge ngineering. Learning the rule se- 
quences can be achieved in a few hours and requires 
no language-specific knowledge. As discussed in Sec- 
tion 1, this simple algorithm could be used to adapt 
the output of an existing segmentation algorithm to 
different segmentation schemes as well as compen- 
sating for incomplete segmenter lexica, without re- 
quiring modifications to segmenters themselves. 
The rule-based algorithm we developed to improve 
word segmentation is very effective for segment- 
ing Chinese; in fact, the rule sequences combined 
with a very simple initial segmentation, such as 
that from a maximum matching algorithm, produce 
performance comparable to manually-developed s g- 
menters. As demonstrated by the experiment with 
the NMSU segmenter, the rule sequence algorithm 
can also be used to improve the output of an already 
highly-accurate segmenter, thus producing one of 
the best segmentation results reported in the litera- 
ture. 
In addition to the excellent overall results in Chi- 
nese segmentation, we also showed the rule sequence 
algorithm to be very effective in improving segmen- 
tation in Thai, an alphabetic language. While the 
scores themselves were not as high as the Chinese 
performance, the error reduction was nevertheless 
very high, which is encouraging considering the sim- 
ple rule syntax used. The current state of our algo- 
rithm, in which only three characters are considered 
at a time, will understandably perform better with 
a language like Chinese than with an alphabetic lan- 
guage like Thai, where average word length is much 
greater. The simple syntax described in Section 2.2 
can, however, be easily extended to consider larger 
contexts to the left and the right of boundaries; this 
extension would necessarily come at a corresponding 
cost in learning speed since the size of the rule space 
searched uring training would grow accordingly. In 
the future, we plan to further investigate the ap- 
plication of our rule-based algorithm to alphabetic 
languages. 
Acknowledgements  This work would not have 
been possible without the assistance and encour- 
agement of all the members of the MITRE Natural 
Language Group. This paper benefited greatly from 
discussions with and comments from Marc Vilain, 
Lynette Hirschman, Sam Bayer, and the anonymous 
reviewers. 
Re ferences  
Eric Brill and Philip Resnik. 1994. A rule-based ap- 
proach to prepositional phrase attachment disam- 
biguation. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Interna- 
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-1994). 
Eric Brill. 1993a. A corpus-based approach to lan- 
guage learning. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania, Department of Computer and In- 
formation Science. 
Eric Brill. 1993b. Transformation-based rror- 
driven parsing. In Proceedings of the Third In- 
ternational Workshop on Parsing Technologies. 
Eric Brill. 1994. Some advances in transformation- 
based part of speech tagging. In Proceedings of 
~he Twelfth National Conference on Artificial In- 
telligence, pages 722-727. 
327 
John Broglio, Jamie Callan, and W. Bruce Croft. 
1996. Technical issues in building an information 
retrieval system for chinese. CIIR Technical Re- 
port IR-86, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. 
Chris Buckley, Amit Singhal, and Mandar Mitra. 
1996. Using query zoning and correlation within 
smart: Trec 5. In Proceedings of the Fifth Text 
Retrieval Conference (TREC-5). 
Wanying Jin. 1994. Chinese segmentation disam- 
biguation. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Interna. 
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-94), Japan. 
Judith L. Klavans and Philip P~snik. 1996. The 
Balancing Act: Combining Symbolic and Statis- 
tical Approaches to Language. MIT Press, Cam- 
bridge, MA. 
Kemal Oflazer and Gokhan Tur. 1996. Combin- 
ing hand-crafted rules and unsupervised learn- 
ing in constraint-based morphological disambigua- 
tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empir- 
ical Methods in Language Processing (EMNLP). 
Jay M. Ponte and W. Bruce Croft. 1996. Useg: 
A retargetable word segmentation procedure for 
information retrieval. In Proceedings of SDAIR96, 
Las Vegas, Nevada. 
J.R. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees. Ma- 
chine Learning, 1(1):81-106. 
Lance Ramshaw and Mitchell Marcus. 1995. Text 
chunking using transformation-based learning. In 
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Very Large 
Corpora (WVLC-3), pages 82-94. 
Lance A. Ramshaw and Mitchell P. Marcus. 1996. 
Exploring the nature of transformation-based 
learning. In Klavans and Resnik (1996). 
C. J. Van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information Retrieval. 
Butterworths, London. 
Giorgio Satta and Eric Brill. 1996. Efficient 
transformation-based parsing. In Proceedings of 
the Thirty-fourth Annual Meeting of the Associa- 
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-96). 
Richard W. Sprout, Chilin Shih, William Gale, and 
Nancy Chang. 1996. A stochastic finite-state 
word-segmentation algorithm for chinese. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 22(3):377-404. 
Marc Vilain and David Day. 1996. Finite-state 
phrase parsing by rule sequences. In Proceed- 
ings of the Sixteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING-96). 
Marc Vilain and David 
Palmer. 1996. Transformation-based bracketing: 
Fast algorithms and experimental results. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Workshop on Robust Parsing, held 
at ESSLLI 1996. 
Dekai Wu and Pascale Fung. 1994. Improving chi- 
nese tokenization with linguistic filters on sta- 
tistical exical acquisition. In Proceedings of the 
Fourth ACL Conference on Applied Natural Lan- 
guage Processing (ANLP94), Stuttgart, Germany. 
Zimin Wu and Gwyneth Tseng. 1993. Chinese text 
segmentation fortext retrieval: Achievements and 
problems. Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 44(9):532-542. 
328 
