Unification-based Multimodal Integration 
Michae l  Johnston ,  Ph i l ip  R .  Cohen,  Dav id  McGee,  
Sharon  L. Ov ia t t ,  James  A .  P i t tman,  I ra  Smi th  
Center  for Human Computer  Communicat ion  
Depar tment  of Computer  Science and Engineer ing 
Oregon Graduate  Inst i tute ,  PO BOX 91000, Por t land,  OR 97291, USA.  
{johnston, pcohen, dmcgee, oviatt, jay, ira}?cse, ogi. edu 
Abst ract  
Recent empirical research as shown con- 
clusive advantages of multimodal interac- 
tion over speech-only interaction for map- 
based tasks. This paper describes a mul- 
timodal language processing architecture 
which supports interfaces allowing simulta- 
neous input from speech and gesture recog- 
nition. Integration of spoken and gestural 
input is driven by unification of typed fea- 
ture structures representing the semantic 
contributions of the different modes. This 
integration method allows the component 
modalities to mutually compensate for each 
others' errors. It is implemented in Quick- 
Set, a multimodal (pen/voice) system that 
enables users to set up and control dis- 
tributed interactive simulations. 
1 In t roduct ion  
By providing a number of channels through which 
information may pass between user and computer, 
multimodal interfaces promise to significantly in- 
crease the bandwidth and fluidity of the interface 
between humans and machines. In this work, we are 
concerned with the addition of multimodal input to 
the interface. In particular, we focus on interfaces 
which support simultaneous input from speech and 
pen, utilizing speech recognition and recognition of 
gestures and drawings made with a pen on a complex 
visual display, such as a map. 
Our focus on multimodal interfaces i motivated, 
in part, by the trend toward portable computing de- 
vices for which complex graphical user interfaces are 
infeasible. For such devices, speech and gesture will 
be the primary means of user input. Recent em- 
pirical results (Oviatt 1996) demonstrate clear task 
performance and user preference advantages for mul- 
timodal interfaces over speech only interfaces, in par- 
ticular for spatial tasks such as those involving maps. 
Specifically, in a within-subject experiment during 
which the same users performed the same tasks in 
various conditions using only speech, only pen, or 
both speech and pen-based input, users' multimodal 
input to maps resulted in 10% faster task comple- 
tion time, 23% fewer words, 35% fewer spoken dis- 
fluencies, and 36% fewer task errors compared to 
unimodal spoken input. Of the user errors, 48% in- 
volved location errors on the map--errors that were 
nearly eliminated by the simple ability to use pen- 
based input. Finally, 100% of users indicated a pref- 
erence for multimodal interaction over speech-only 
interaction with maps. These results indicate that 
for map-based tasks, users would both perform bet- 
ter and be more satisfied when using a multimodal 
interface. As an illustrative example, in the dis- 
tributed simulation application we describe in this 
paper, one user task is to add a "phase line" to a 
map. In the existing unimodal interface for this ap- 
plication (CommandTalk, Moore 1997), this is ac- 
complished with a spoken utterance such as 'CRE- 
ATE A LINE FROM COORDINATES NINE FOUR 
THREE NINE THREE ONE TO NINE EIGHT 
NINE NINE FIVE ZERO AND CALL IT PHASE 
LINE GREEN'. In contrast he same task can be ac- 
complished by saying 'PHASE LINE GREEN' and 
simultaneously drawing the gesture in Figure 1. 
J 
Figure 1: Line gesture 
The multimodal command involves peech recog- 
nition of only a three word phrase, while the equiva- 
lent unimodal speech command involves recognition 
of a complex twenty four word expression. Further- 
more, using unimodal speech to indicate more com- 
281 
plex spatial features uch as routes and areas is prac- 
tically infeasible if accuracy of shape is important. 
Another significant advantage of multimodal over 
unimodal speech is that it allows the user to switch 
modes when environmental noise or security con- 
cerns make speech an unacceptable input medium, 
or for avoiding and repairing recognition errors (Ovi- 
att and Van Gent 1996). Multimodality also offers 
the potential for input modes to mutually compen- 
sate for each others' errors. We will demonstrate 
:~'~.,, in our system, multimodal integration allows 
speech input to compensate for errors in gesture 
recognition and vice versa. 
Systems capable of integration of speech and ges- 
ture have existed since the early 80's. One of the 
first such systems was the "Put-That-There" sys- 
tem (Bolt 1980). However, in the sixteen years since 
then, research on multimodal integration has not 
yielded a reusable scalable architecture for the con-  
struction of multimodal systems that integrate ges- 
ture and voice. There are four major limiting factors 
in previous approaches to multimodal integration: 
(1) The majority of approaches limit the bandwidth 
of the gestural mode to simple deictic pointing 
gestures made with a mouse (Neal and Shapiro 
1991, Cohen 1991, Cohen 1992, Brison and 
Vigouroux (ms.), Wauchope 1994) or with the 
hand (Koons et al19931). 
(ii) Most previous approaches have been primarily 
speech-driven ~ , treating esture as a secondary 
dependent mode (Neal and Shapiro 1991, Co- 
hen 1991, Cohen 1992, Brison and Vigouroux 
(ms.), Koons et al1993, Wauchope 1994). In 
these systems, integration of gesture is triggered 
by the appearance of expressions in the speech 
stream whose reference needs to be resolved, 
such as definite and deictic noun phrases (e.g. 
'this one', 'the red cube'). 
(iii) None of the existing approaches provide a well- 
understood generally applicable common mean- 
ing representation for the different modes, or, 
(iv) A general and formally-welldefined mechanism 
for multimodal integration. 
I Koons et al1993 describe two different systems. The 
first uses input from hand gestures and eye gaze in order 
to aid in determining the reference of noun phrases in the 
speech stream. The second allows users to manipulate 
objects in a blocks world using iconic and pantomimic 
gestures in addition to deictic gestures. 
~More precisely, they are 'verbal anguage'-driven. 
Either spoken or typed linguistic expressions are the 
driving force of interpretation. 
We present an approach to multimodal integra- 
tion which overcomes these limiting factors. A wide 
base of continuous gestural input is supported and 
integration may be driven by either mode. Typed 
feature structures (Carpenter 1992) are used to pro- 
vide a clearly defined and well understood common 
meaning representation for the modes, and multi- 
modal integration is accomplished through unifica- 
tion. 
2 Qu ickset :  A Mu l t imoda l  In ter face  
fo r  D is t r ibuted  In teract ive  
S imulat ion  
The initial application of our multimodal interface 
architecture has been in the development of the 
QuickSet system, an interface for setting up and 
interacting with distributed interactive simulations. 
QuickSet provides a portal into LeatherNet 3, a sim- 
ulation system used for the training of US Marine 
Corps platoon leaders. LeatherNet simulates train- 
ing exercises using the ModSAF simulator (Courte- 
manche and Ceranowicz 1995) and supports 3D vi- 
sualization of the simulated exercises using Com- 
mandVu (Clarkson and Yi 1996). SRI Interna- 
tional's CommandTalk provides a unimodal spoken 
interface to LeatherNet (Moore et al1997). 
QuickSet is a distributed system consisting of a 
collection of agents that communicate through the 
Open Agent Architecture 4 (Cohen et al1994). It 
runs on both desktop and hand-held PCs under Win- 
dows 95, communicating over wired and wireless 
LANs (respectively), or modem links. The wire- 
less hand-held unit is a 3-1b Fujitsu Stylistic 1000 
(Figure 2). We have also developed a Java-based 
QuickSet agent that provides a portal to the simula- 
tion over the World Wide Web. The QuickSet user 
interface displays a map of the terrain on which the 
simulated military exercise is to take place (Figure 
2). The user can gesture and draw directly on the 
map with the pen and simultaneously issue spoken 
commands. Units and objectives can be laid down 
on the map by speaking their name and gesturing 
on the desired location. The map can also be an- 
notated with line features uch as barbed wire and 
fortified lines, and area features uch as minefields 
and landing zones. These are created by drawing the 
appropriate spatial feature on the map and speak- 
3LeatherNet is currently being developed by the 
Naval Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance Cen- 
ter (NCCOSC) Research, Development, Test and Eval- 
uation Division (NRaD) in coordination with a number 
of contractors. 
4Open Agent Architecture is a trademark of SRI 
International. 
282 
Figure 2: The QuickSet user interface 
ing its name. Units, objectives, and lines can also 
be generated using unimodal gestures by drawing 
their map symbols in the desired location. Orders 
can be assigned to units, for example, in Figure 2 
an M1A1 platoon on the bottom left has been as- 
signed a route to follow. This order is created mul- 
timodally by drawing the curved route and saying 
'WHISKEY FOUR SIX FOLLOW THIS ROUTE'. 
As entities are created and assigned orders they are 
displayed on the UI and automatically instantiated 
in a simulation database maintained by the ModSAF 
simulator. 
Speech recognition operates in either a click-to- 
speak mode, in which the microphone is activated 
when the pen is placed on the screen, or open micro- 
phone mode. The speech recognition agent is built 
using a continuous peaker-independent recognizer 
commercially available from IBM. 
When the user draws or gestures on the map, the 
resulting electronic 'ink' is passed to a gesture recog- 
nition agent, which utilizes both a neural network 
and a set of hidden Markov models. The ink is size- 
normalized, centered in a 2D image, and fed into the 
neural network as pixels, as well as being smoothed, 
resampled, converted to deltas, and fed to the HMM 
recognizer. The gesture recognizer currently recog- 
nizes a total of twenty six different gestures, some of 
which are illustrated in Figure 3. They include var- 
ious military map symbols uch as platoon, mortar, 
and fortified line, editing gestures uch as deletion, 
and spatial features uch as routes and areas. 
i - G line 
tank mechanized 
platoon company 
fo~ied  line 
area point 
deletion mortar 
barbed wire 
Figure 3: Example symbols and gestures 
As with all recognition technologies, gesture 
recognition may result in errors. One of the factors 
283 
contributing to this is that routes and areas do not 
have signature shapes that can be used to identify 
them and are frequently confused (Figure 4). 
O g3 
Figure 4: Pen drawings of routes and areas 
Another contributing factor is that users' pen in- 
put is often sloppy (Figure 5) and map symbols can 
be confused among themselves and with route and 
area gestures. 
mortar tank deletion mechanized 
platoon company 
Figure 5: Typical pen input from real users 
Given the potential for error, the gesture recog- 
nizer issues not just a single interpretation, but a 
series of potential interpretations ranked with re- 
spect to probability. The correct interpretation is
frequently determined as a result of multimodal in- 
tegration, as illustrated below 5. 
3 A Un i f i ca t ion -based  Arch i tec ture  
fo r  Mu l t imoda l  In tegrat ion  
One the most significant challenges facing the devel- 
opment of effective multimodal interfaces concerns 
the integration of input from different modes. In- 
put signals from each of the modes can be assigned 
meanings. The problem is to work out how to com- 
bine the meanings contribute d by each of the modes 
in order to determine what the user actually intends 
to communicate. 
To model this integration, we utilize a unification 
operation over typed feature structures (Carpenter 
1990, 1992, Pollard and Sag 1987, Calder 1987, King 
SSee Wahlster 1991 for discussion of the role of dialog 
in resolving ambiguous gestures. 
1989, Moshier 1988). Unification is an operation 
that determines the consistency of two pieces of par- 
tial information, and if they are consistent combines 
them into a single result. As such, it is ideally suited 
to the task at hand, in which we want to determine 
whether a given piece of gestural input is compatible 
with a given piece of spoken input, and if they are 
compatible, to combine the two inputs into a single 
result that can be interpreted by the system. 
The use of feature structures as a semantic rep- 
resentation framework facilitates the specification of 
partial meanings. Spoken or gestural input which 
partially specifies a command can be represented 
as an underspecified feature structure in which cer- 
tain features are not instantiated. The adoption of 
typed feature structures facilitates the statement of 
constraints on integration. For example, if a given 
speech input can be integrated with a line gesture, 
it can be assigned a feature structure with an under- 
specified location feature whose value is required to 
be of type line. 
I 
Art  I 
Figure 6: Multimodal integration architecture 
Figure 6 presents the main agents involved in the 
QuickSet system. Spoken and gestural input orig- 
inates in the user interface client agent and it is 
passed on to the speech recognition and gesture 
recognition agents respectively. The natural lan- 
guage agent uses a parser implemented in Prolog to 
parse strings that originate from the speech recog- 
nition agent and assign typed feature structures to 
284 
them. The potential interpretations of gesture from 
the gesture recognition agent are also represented as 
typed feature structures. The multimodal integra- 
tion agent determines and ranks potential unifica- 
tions of spoken and gestural input and issues com- 
plete commands to the bridge agent. The bridge 
agent accepts commands in the form of typed fea- 
ture structures and translates them into commands 
for whichever applications the system is providing 
an interface to. 
For example, if the user utters 'M1A1 PLA- 
TOON', the name of a particular type of tank pla- 
toon, the natural anguage agent assigns this phrase 
the feature structure in Figure 7. The type of each 
feature structure is indicated in italics at its bottom 
right or left corner. 
object : echelon :platoon 
un i t  
create_unit location : \] point 
Figure 7: Feature structure for 'M1A1 PLATOON' 
Since QuickSet is a task-based system directed to- 
ward setting up a scenario for simulation, this phrase 
is interpreted as a partially specified unit creation 
command. Before it can be executed, it needs a lo- 
cation feature indicating where to create the unit, 
which is provided by the user's gesturing on the 
screen. The user's ink is likely to be assigned a num- 
ber of interpretations, for example, both a point in- 
terpretation and a line interpretation, which the ges- 
ture recognition agent assigns typed feature struc- 
tures (see Figures 8 and 9). Interpretations of ges- 
tures as location features are assigned ageneral com- 
mand type which unifies with all of commands taken 
by the system. 
\[ \[xcoord 9 30 \] \] 
location : xcoord :94365 
command point 
Figure 8: Point interpretation of gesture 
command 
\[ icoor it \] 1 \[(95301, 94360), location : (95305, 94365), 
(95310, 94380)\] ~in? 
Figure 9: Line interpretation of gesture 
The task of the integrator agent is to field incom- 
ing typed feature structures representing interpreta- 
tions of speech and of gesture, identify the best po- 
tential interpretation, multimodal or unimodal, and 
issue a typed feature structure representing the pre- 
ferred interpretation to the bridge agent, which will 
execute the command. This involves parsing of the 
speech and gesture streams in order to determine po- 
tential multimodal integrations. Two factors guide 
this: tagging of speech and gesture as either com- 
plete or partial and examination of time stamps as- 
sociated with speech and gesture. 
Speech or gesture input is marked as complete if it 
provides a full command specification and therefore 
does not need to be integrated with another mode. 
Speech or gesture marked as partial needs to be in- 
tegrated with another mode in order to derive an 
executable command. 
Empirical study of the nature of multimodal inter- 
action has shown that speech typically follows ges- 
ture within a window of a three to four seconds while 
gesture following speech is very uncommon (Oviatt 
et al97). Therefore, in our multimodal architec- 
ture, the integrator temporally licenses integration 
of speech and gesture if their time intervals overlap, 
or if the onset of the speech signal is within a brief 
time window following the end of gesture. Speech 
and gesture are integrated appropriately even if the 
integrator agent receives them in a different order 
from their actual order of occurrence. If speech is 
temporally compatible with gesture, in this respect, 
then the integrator takes the sets of interpretations 
for both speech and gesture, and for each pairing 
in the product set attempts to unify the two fea- 
ture structures. The probability of each multimodal 
interpretation i the resulting set licensed by unifi- 
cation is determined by multiplying the probabilities 
assigned to the speech and gesture interpretations. 
In the example case above, both speech and 
gesture have only partial interpretations, one for 
speech, and two for gesture. Since the speech in- 
terpretation (Figure 7) requires its location feature 
to be of type point, only unification with the point 
interpretation of the gesture will succeed and be 
passed on as a valid multimodal interpretation (Fig- 
ure 10). 
create_unit 
type:mlal  \] 
object : echelon : platoon J =nit 
xcoord : 95305 \] 
location : xcoord :94365 J poi,~t 
Figure 10: Multimodal interpretation 
The ambiguity of interpretation of the gesture was 
resolved by integration with speech which in this 
case required a location feature of type point. If 
the spoken command had instead been 'BARBED 
285 
WIRE' it would have been assigned the feature 
structure in Figure 11. This structure would only 
unify with the line interpretation of gesture result- 
ing in the interpretation i  Figure 12. 
create_line 
\[ style:barbed_wire \] \] 
object : color : red 
location: \[ \]li,~ , . . . .  b.~ 
Figure 11: Feature structure for 'BARBED WIRE' 
create_line 
object: 
location :
\[ :to~le :: b Tbed-wire \] ,,,~_ob ~\[oorot \] 
\[(95301, 9436o), 
(95305, 94365), 
(95310, 94380)\] .,~ 
Figure 12: Multimodal line creation 
Similarly, if the spoken command escribed an 
area, for example an 'ANTI TANK MINEFIELD' , 
it would only unify with an interpretation f gesture 
as an area designation. In each case the unification- 
based integration strategy compensates for errors in 
gesture recognition through type constraints on the 
values of features. 
Gesture also compensates for errors in speech 
recognition. In the open microphone mode, where 
the user does not have to gesture in order to speak, 
spurious peech recognition errors are more common 
than with click-to-speak, but are frequently rejected 
by the system because of the absence of a compatible 
gesture for integration. For example, if the system 
spuriously recognizes 'M1A1 PLATOON', but there 
is no overlapping or immediately preceding esture 
to provide the location, the speech will be ignored. 
The architecture also supports election among n- 
best speech recognition results on the basis of the 
preferred gesture recognition. In the future, n-best 
recognition results will be available from the recog- 
nizer, and we will further examine the potential for 
gesture to help select among speech recognition al- 
ternatives. 
Since speech may follow gesture, and since even si- 
multaneously produced speech and gesture are pro- 
cessed sequentially, the integrator cannot execute 
what appears to be a complete unimodal command 
on receiving it, in case it is immediately followed by 
input from the other mode suggesting a multimodal 
interpretation. If a given speech or gesture input 
has a set of interpretations including both partial 
and complete interpretations, the integrator agent 
waits for an incoming signal from the other mode. If 
no signal is forthcoming from the other mode within 
the time window, or if interpretations from the other 
mode do not integrate with any interpretations in 
the set, then the best of the complete unimodal 
interpretations from the original set is sent to the 
bridge agent. 
For example, the gesture in Figure 13 is used for 
unimodal specification of the location of a fortified 
line. If recognition is successful the gesture agent 
would assign the gesture an interpretation like that 
in Figure 14. 
/kgXdl..O  
Figure 13: Fortified line gesture 
create J ine 
?bject: \[ \ ] .b j  . . . .  
location :
style : fortified._fine 
color : blue 
coordlist :
\[(93000, 94360), 
(93025, 94365), 
Figure 14: Unimodal fortified line feature structure 
However, it might also receive an additional po- 
tential interpretation asa location feature of a more 
general line type (Figure 15). 
location : 
command line 
coordhst: 
\[(93000,94360), 
(93025,94365), 
i 3112, 94362)\] 
Figure 15: Line feature structure 
On receiving this set of interpretations, the in- 
tegrator cannot immediately execute the complete 
interpretation to create a fortified line, even if it is 
assigned the highest probability by the recognizer, 
since speech contradicting this may immediately fol- 
low. For example, if overlapping with or just after 
the gesture, the user said 'BARBED WIRE' then 
the line feature interpretation would be preferred. If 
speech does not follow within the three to four sec- 
ond window, or following speech does not integrate 
with the gesture, then the unimodal interpretation 
286 
is chosen. This approach embodies a preference for 
multimodal interpretations over unimodal ones, mo- 
tivated by the possibility of unintended complete 
unimodal interpretations of gestures. After more 
detailed empirical investigation, this will be refined 
so that the possibility of integration weighs in favor 
of the multimodal interpretation, but it can still be 
beaten by a unimodal gestural interpretation with a 
significantly higher probability. 
4 Conclusion 
We have presented an architecture for multimodal 
interfaces in which integration of speech and ges- 
ture is mediated and constrained by a unification 
operation over typed feature structures. Our ap- 
proach supports a full spectrum of gestural input, 
not just deixis. It also can be driven by either mode 
and enables a wide and flexible range of interactions. 
Complete commands can originate in a single mode 
yielding unimodal spoken and gestural commands, 
or in a combination of modes yielding multimodal 
commands, in which speech and gesture are able to 
contribute ither the predicate or the arguments of 
the command. This architecture allows the modes 
to synergistically mutual compensate for each oth- 
ers' errors. We have informally observed that inte- 
gration with speech does succeed in resolving am- 
biguous gestures. In the majority of cases, gestures 
will have multiple interpretations, but this is rarely 
apparent o the user, because the erroneous inter- 
pretations of gesture are screened out by the unifi- 
cation process. We have also observed that in the 
open microphone mode multimodality allows erro- 
neous speech recognition results to be screened out. 
For the application tasks described here, we have 
observed a reduction in the length and complexity 
of spoken input, compared to the unimodal spoken 
interface to LeatherNet, informally reconfirming the 
empirical results of Oviatt et al1997. For this fam- 
ily of applications at least, it appears to be the case 
that as part of a multimodal architecture, current 
speech recognition technology is sufficiently robust 
to support easy-to-use interfaces. 
Vo and Wood 1996 present an approach to mul- 
timodal integration similar in spirit to that pre- 
sented here in that it accepts a variety of gestures 
and is not solely speech-driven. However, we be- 
lieve that unification of typed feature structures 
provides a more general, formally well-understood, 
and reusable mechanism for multimodal integration 
than the frame merging strategy that they describe. 
Cheyer and Julia (1995) sketch a system based on 
Oviatt's (1996) results but describe neither the in- 
tegration strategy nor multimodal compensation. 
QuickSet has undergone a form of pro-active val- 
uation in that its design is informed by detailed pre- 
dictive modeling of how users interact multimodally 
and it incorporates the results of existing empirical 
studies of multimodal interaction (Oviatt 1996, Ovi- 
att et al1997). It has also undergone participatory 
design and user testing with the US Marine Corps 
at their training base at 29 Palms, California, with 
the US Army at the Royal Dragon exercise at Fort 
Bragg, North Carolina, and as part of the Command 
Center of the Future at NRaD. 
Our initial application of this architecture has 
been to map-based tasks such as distributed simula- 
tion. It supports a fully-implemented usable system 
in which hundreds of different kinds of entities can 
be created and manipulated. We believe that the 
unification-based method described here will read- 
ily scale to larger tasks and is sufficiently general 
to support a wide variety of other application areas, 
including raphically-based information systems and 
editing of textual and graphical content. The archi- 
tecture has already been successfully re-deployed in
the construction of multimodal interface to health 
care information. 
We are actively pursuing incorporation of 
statistically-derived heuristics and a more sophisti- 
cated dialogue model into the integration architec- 
ture. We are also developing a capability for auto- 
matic logging of spoken and gestural input in order 
to collect more fine-grained empirical data on the 
nature of multimodal interaction. 
5 Acknowledgments 
This work is supported in part by the Informa- 
tion Technology and Information Systems offices of 
DARPA under contract number DABT63-95-C-007, 
in part by ONR grant number N00014-95-1-1164, 
and has been done in collaboration with the US 
Navy's NCCOSC RDT&E Division (NRaD), Ascent 
Technologies, Mitre Corp., MRJ Corp., and SRI In- 
ternational. 
Re ferences  
Bolt, R. A., 1980. "Put-That-There" :Voice and ges- 
ture at the graphics interface. Computer Graph- 
ics, 14.3:262-270. 
Brison, E., and N. Vigouroux. (unpublished ms.). 
Multimodal references: A generic fusion pro- 
cess. URIT-URA CNRS. Universit Paul Sabatier, 
Toulouse, France. 
Calder, J. 1987. Typed unification for natural an- 
guage processing. In E. Klein and J. van Benthem, 
287 
editors, Categories, Polymorphisms, and Unifica- 
tion, pages 65-72. Centre for Cognitive Science, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh. 
Carpenter, R. 1990. Typed feature structures: In- 
heritance, (In)equality, and Extensionality. In 
W. Daelemans and G. Gazdar, editors, Proceed- 
ings of the ITK Workshop: Inheritance in Natural 
Language Processing, pages 9-18, Tilburg. Insti- 
tute for Language Technology and Artificial Intel- 
ligence, Tilburg University, Tilburg. 
Carpenter, R. 1992. The logic of typed feature struc- 
tures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
England. 
Cheyer, A., and L. Julia. 1995. Multimodal maps: 
An agent-based approach. In International Con- 
ference on Cooperative Multimodal Communica- 
tion (CMC/95), pages 24-26, May 1995. Eind- 
hoven, The Netherlands. 
Clarkson, J. D., and J. Yi. 1996. LeatherNet: A 
synthetic forces tactical training system for the 
USMC commander. In Proceedings of the Sixth 
Conference on Computer Generated Forces and 
Behavioral Representation, pages 275-281. Insti- 
tute for simulation and training. Technical Report 
IST-TR-96-18. 
Cohen, P. R. 1991. Integrated interfaces for decision 
support with simulation. In B. Nelson, W. D. Kel- 
ton, and G. M. Clark, editors, Proceedings of the 
Winter Simulation Conference, pages 1066-1072. 
ACM, New York. 
Cohen, P. R. 1992. The role of natural language in a 
multimodal interface. In Proceedings of UIST'92, 
pages 143-149. ACM Press, New York. 
Cohen, P. R., A. Cheyer, M. Wang, and S. C. Baeg. 
1994. An open agent architecture. In Working 
Notes of the AAA1 Spring Symposium on Soft- 
ware Agents (March 21-22, Stanford University, 
Stanford, California), pages 1-8. 
Courtemanche, A. J., and A. Ceranowicz. 1995. 
ModSAF development s atus. In Proceedings 
of the Fifth Conference on Computer Generated 
Forces and Behavioral Representation, pages 3-13, 
May 9-11, Orlando, Florida. University of Central 
Florida, Florida. 
King, P. 1989. A logical formalism for head-driven 
phrase structure grammar. Ph.D. Thesis, Univer- 
sity of Manchester, Manchester, England. 
Koons, D. B., C. J. Sparrell, and K. R. Thorisson. 
1993. Integrating simultaneous input from speech, 
gaze, and hand gestures. In M. T. Maybury, edi- 
tor, Intelligent Multimedia Interfaces, pages 257- 
276. AAAI Press/ MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas- 
sachusetts. 
Moore, R. C., J. Dowding, H. Bratt, J. M. Gawron, 
Y. Gorfu, and A. Cheyer 1997. CommandTalk: 
A Spoken-Language Interface for Battlefield Sim- 
ulations. In Proceedings of Fifth Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 1-7, 
Washington, D.C. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Morristown, New Jersey. 
Moshier, D. 1988. Extensions to unification gram- 
mar for the description of programming languages. 
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
Neal, J. G., and S. C. Shapiro. 1991. Intelligent 
multi-media nterface technology. In J. W. Sul- 
livan and S. W. Tyler, editors, Intelligent User 
Interfaces, pages 45-68. ACM Press, Frontier Se- 
ries, Addison Wesley Publishing Co., New York, 
New York. 
Oviatt, S. L. 1996. Multimodal interfaces for dy- 
namic interactive maps. In Proceedings of Con- 
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: 
CHI '96, pages 95-102, Vancouver, Canada. ACM 
Press, New York. 
Oviatt, S. L., A. DeAngeli, and K. Kuhn. 1997. In- 
tegration and synchronization f input modes dur- 
ing multimodal human-computer interaction. In 
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems: CH\[ '97, pages 415-422, 
Atlanta, Georgia. ACM Press, New York. 
Oviatt, S. L., and R. van Gent. 1996. Error resolu- 
tion during multimodal human-computer interac- 
tion. In Proceedings of International Conference 
on Spoken Language Processing, vol 1, pages 204- 
207, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
Pollard, C. J., and I. A. Sag. 1987. Information- 
based syntax and semantics: Volume I, Funda- 
mentals., Volume 13 of CSLI Lecture Notes. Cen- 
ter for the Study of Language and Information, 
Stanford University, Stanford, California. 
Vo, M. T., and C. Wood. 1996. Building an appli- 
cation framework for speech and pen input inte- 
gration in multimodal learning interfaces. In Pro- 
ceedings of International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech, and Signal Processing, Atlanta, GA. 
Wahlster, W. 1991. User and discourse models for 
multimodal communication. I  J. Sullivan and S. 
Tyler, editors, Intelligent User Interfaces, ACM 
Press, Addison Wesley Publishing Co., New York, 
New York. 
Wauchope, K. 1994. Eucalyptus: Integrating 
natural language input with a graphical user 
interface. Naval Research Laboratory, Report 
NRL/FR/5510-94-9711. 
288 
