The Rhetorical Parsing of Natural Language Texts 
Daniel Marcu 
Depar tment  of  Computer  Science 
Univers i ty of  Toronto 
Toronto,  Ontar io 
Canada M5S 3G4 
marcu~cs, toronto, edu 
Abstract 
We derive the rhetorical structures of texts 
by means of two new, surface-form-based 
algorithms: one that identifies discourse 
usages of cue phrases and breaks sen- 
tences into clauses, and one that produces 
valid rhetorical structure trees for unre- 
stricted natural language texts. The algo- 
rithms use information that was derived 
from a corpus analysis of cue phrases. 
1 Introduction 
Researchers of natural language have repeatedly ac- 
knowledged that texts are not just a sequence of words 
nor even a sequence of clauses and sentences. However, 
despite the impressive number of discourse-related theo- 
ries that have been proposed so far, there have emerged 
no algorithms capable of deriving the discourse struc- 
ture of an unrestricted text. On one hand, efforts such 
as those described by Asher (1993), Lascarides, Asher, 
and Oberlander (1992), Kamp and Reyle (1993), Grover 
et al (1994), and Pr0st, Scha, and van den Berg (1994) 
take the position that discourse structures can be built 
only in conjunction with fully specified clause and sen- 
tence structures. And Hobbs's theory (1990) assumes 
that sophisticated knowledge bases and inference mech- 
anisms are needed for determining the relations between 
discourse units. Despite the formal elegance of these 
approaches, they are very domain dependent and, there- 
fore, unable to handle more than a few restricted exam- 
pies. On the other hand, although the theories described 
by Grosz and Sidner (1986), Polanyi (1988), and Mann 
and Thompson (1988) are successfully applied manually, 
they ,are too informal to support an automatic approach 
to discourse analysis. 
In contrast with this previous work, the rhetorical 
parser that we present builds discourse trees for unre- 
stricted texts. We first discuss the key concepts on which 
our approach relies (section 2) and the corpus analysis 
(section 3) that provides the empirical data for our rhetor- 
ical parsing algorithm. We discuss then an algorithm that 
recognizes discourse usages of cue phrases and that de- 
termines clause boundaries within sentences. Lastly, we 
present the rhetorical parser and an example of its opera- 
tion (section 4). 
2 Foundation 
The mathematical foundations of the rhetorical parsing 
algorithm rely on a first-order formalization of valid text 
structures (Marcu, 1997). The assumptions of the for- 
malization are the following. 1. The elementary units 
of complex text structures are non-overlapping spans of 
text. 2. Rhetorical, coherence, and cohesive relations 
hold between textual units of various sizes. 3. Rela- 
tions can be partitioned into two classes: paratactic and 
hypotactic. Paratactic relations are those that hold be- 
tween spans of equal importance. Hypotactic relations 
are those that hold between a span that is essential for the 
writer's purpose, i.e., a nucleus, and a span that increases 
the understanding of the nucleus but is not essential for 
the writer's purpose, i.e., a satellite. 4. The abstract 
structure of most texts is a binary, tree-like structure. 5. 
If a relation holds between two textual spans of the tree 
structure of a text, that relation also holds between the 
most important units of the constituent subspans. The 
most important units of a textual span are determined re- 
cursively: they correspond to the most important units 
of the immediate subspans when the relation that holds 
between these subspans i paratactic, and to the most im- 
portant units of the nucleus subspan when the relation 
that holds between the immediate subspans i hypotactic. 
In our previous work (Marcu, 1996), we presented a 
complete axiomatization of these principles in the con- 
text of Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann and Thomp- 
son, 1988) and we described an algorithm that, starting 
from the set of textual units that make up a text and 
the set of elementary rhetorical relations that hold be- 
tween these units, can derive all the valid discourse trees 
of that text. Consequently, if one is to build discourse 
trees for unrestricted texts, the problems that remain to 
be solved are the automatic determination of the tex- 
tual units and the rhetorical relations that hold between 
them. In this paper, we show how one can find and ex- 
ploit approximate solutions for both of these problems 
by capitalizing on the occurrences ofcertain lexicogram- 
matical constructs. Such constructs can include tense 
96 
and aspect (Moens and Steedman, 1988; Webber, 1988; 
Lascarides and Asher, 1993), certain patterns of pronom- 
inalization and anaphoric usages (Sidner, 1981; Grosz 
and Sidner, 1986; Sumita et al, 1992; Grosz, Joshi, and 
Weinstein, 1995),/t-clefts (Delin and Oberlander, 1992), 
and discourse markers or cue phrases (Ballard, Conrad, 
and Longacre, 1971; Halliday and Hasan, 1976; Van 
Dijk, 1979; Longacre, 1983; Grosz and Sidner, 1986; 
Schiffrin, 1987; Cohen, 1987; Redeker, 1990; Sanders, 
Spooren, and Noordman, 1992; Hirschberg and Litman, 
1993; Knott, 1995; Fraser, 1996; Moser and Moore, 
1997). In the work described here, we investigate how far 
we can get by focusing our attention only on discourse 
markers and lexicogrammatical constructs that can be 
detected by a shallow analysis of natural language texts. 
The intuition behind our choice relies on the following 
facts: 
? Psycholinguistic and other empirical 
research (Kintsch, 1977; Schiffrin, 1987; Segal, 
Duchan, and Scott, 1991; Cahn, 1992; Sanders, 
Spooren, and Noordman, 1992; Hirschberg and 
Litman, 1993; Knott, 1995; Costermans and 
Fayol, 1997) has shown that discourse markers 
are consistently used by human subjects both as 
cohesive ties between adjacent clauses and as 
"macroconnectors" between larger textual units. 
Therefore, we can use them as rhetorical indica- 
tors at any of the following levels: clause, sen- 
tence, paragraph, and text. 
? The number of discourse markers in a typical 
text - -  approximately one marker for every two 
clauses (Redeker, 1990) - -  is sufficiently large to 
enable the derivation of rich rhetorical structures 
for texts. 
? Discourse markers are used in a manner that is 
consistent with the semantics and pragmatics of 
the discourse segments that they relate. In other 
words, we assume that the texts that we pro- 
cess are well-formed from a discourse perspec- 
tive, much as researchers in sentence parsing as- 
sume that they are well-formed from a syntactic 
perspective. As a consequence, we assume that 
one can bootstrap the full syntactic, semantic, and 
pragmatic analysis of the clauses that make up 
a text and still end up with a reliable discourse 
structure for that text. 
Given the above discussion, the immediate objection 
that one can raise is that discourse markers are doubly 
ambiguous: in some cases, their use is only sentential, 
i.e., they make a semantic ontribution to the interpre- 
tation of a clause; and even in the cases where markers 
have a discourse usage, they are ambiguous with respect 
to the rhetorical relations that they mark and the sizes of 
the textual spans that they connect. We address now each 
of these objections in turn. 
Sentential and discourse usages of cue phrases. 
Empirical studies on the disambiguation of cue 
phrases (Hirschberg and Litman, 1993) have shown that 
just by considering the orthographic environment in 
which a discourse marker occurs, one can distinguish 
between sentential nd discourse usages in about 80% of 
cases. We have taken Hirschberg and Litman's research 
one step further and designed a comprehensive corpus 
analysis that enabled us to improve their results and cov- 
erage. The method, procedure, and results of our corpus 
analysis are discussed in section 3. 
Discourse markers are ambiguous with respect o the 
rhetorical relations that they mark and the sizes of the 
units that they connect. When we began this research, 
no empirical data supported the extent o which this am- 
biguity characterizes natural anguage texts. To better 
understand this problem, the corpus analysis described in 
section 3 was designed so as to also provide information 
about he types of rhetorical relations, rhetorical statuses 
(nucleus or satellite), and sizes of textual spans that each 
marker can indicate. We knew from the beginning that it 
would be impossible to predict exactly the types of rela- 
tions and the sizes of the spans that a given cue marks. 
However, given that the structure that we are trying to 
build is highly constrained, such a prediction proved to 
be unnecessary: the overall constraints on the structure of 
discourse that we enumerated in the beginning of this sec- 
tion cancel out most of the configurations of elementary 
constraints hat do not yield correct discourse trees. 
Consider, for example, the following text: 
(1) \[Although discourse markers are ambiguous, l\]
\[one can use them to build discourse trees for 
unrestricted texts: 2\] \[this will lead to many new 
applications in natural language processing)\] 
For the sake of the argument, assume that we are able to 
break text (1) into textual units as labelled above and 
that we are interested now in finding rhetorical rela- 
tions between these units. Assume now that we can 
infer that Although marks a CONCESSIVE relation be- 
tween satellite 1 and nucleus either 2 or 3, and the colon. 
all ELABORATION between satellite 3 and nucleus either 
1 or 2. If we use the convention that hypotactic rela- 
tions are represented asfirst-order predicates having the 
form rhet_rel(NAME, satellite, nucleus) and that paratac- 
tic relations are represented aspredicates having the form 
rhet_rel(NAME, nucleust, nucleus2), a correct representa- 
tion for text (1) is then the set of two disjunctions given 
in (2): 
rhet_rel(CONCESSlON, 1,2) V 
rhet_rel( CONCESSION, 1,3) 
(2) rhet_rel(ELABORATION, 3, 1)V 
rhet_rel(ELABORATION, 3, 2) 
Despite the ambiguity of the relations, the over- 
all rhetorical structure constraints will associate only 
one discourse tree with text (1), namely the tree 
given in figure 1: any discourse tree configura- 
tion that uses relations rhet_rel(CONCESSlON, 1,3) and 
rhet-reI(ELABORATION, 3, 1) will be ruled out. For ex- 
ample, relation rhet_reI(ELABORATION, 3, 1) will be ruled 
97 
LABORATION 
1 2 
Figure 1: The discourse tree of text (1). 
out because unit I is not an important unit for span \[1,2\] 
and, as mentioned at the beginning of this section, a 
rhetorical relation that holds between two spans of a valid 
text structure must also hold between their most impor- 
tant units: the important unit of span \[1,2\] is unit 2, i.e., 
the nucleus of the relation rhet_rel(CONCESSlON, 1,2). 
3 A corpus analysis of discourse markers 
3.1 Materials 
We used previous work on cue phrases (Halliday and 
Hasan, 1976; Grosz and Sidner, 1986; Martin, 1992; 
Hirschberg and Litman, 1993; Knott, 1995; Fraser, 1996) 
to create an initial set of more than 450 potential dis- 
course markers. For each potential discourse marker, we 
then used an automatic procedure that extracted from the 
Brown corpus aset of text fragments. Each text fragment 
contained a "window" of approximately 200 words and 
an emphasized occurrence of a marker. On average, we 
randomly selected approximately 19 text fragments per 
marker, having few texts for the markers that do not occur 
very often in the corpus and up to 60 text fragments for 
markers uch as and, which we considered to be highly 
ambiguous. Overall, we randomly selected more than 
7900 texts. 
All the text fragments associated with a potential cue 
phrase were paired with a set of slots in which an ana- 
lyst described the following. 1. The orthographic en- 
vironment that characterizes the usage of the potential 
discourse marker. This included occurrences of periods, 
commas, colons, semicolons, etc. 2. The type of usage: 
Sentential, Discourse, or Both. 3. The position of the 
marker in the textual unit to which it belonged: Begin- 
ning, Medial, or End. 4. The right boundary of the textual 
unit associated with the marker. 5. The relative position 
of the textual unit that the unit containing the marker was 
connected to: Before or After. 6. The rhetorical relations 
that the cue phrase signaled. 7. The textual types of the 
units connected by the discourse marker: from Clause 
to Multiple_Paragraph. 8 The rhetorical status of each 
textual unit involved in the relation: Nucleus or Satel- 
lite. The algorithms described in this paper ely on the 
results derived from the analysis of 1600 of the 7900 text 
fragments. 
3.2 Procedure 
After the slots for each text fragment were filled, the 
results were automatically exported into a relational 
database. The database was then examined semi- 
automatically with the purpose of deriving procedures 
that a shallow analyzer could use to identify discourse 
usages of cue phrases, break sentences into clauses, and 
hypothesize rhetorical relations between textual units. 
For  each discourse usage of a cue phrase, we derived 
the following: 
? A regular expression that contains an unambigu- 
ous cue phrase instantiation and its orthographic 
environment. A cue phrase is assigned a regu- 
lar expression if, in the corpus, it has a discourse 
usage in most of its occurrences and if a shallow 
analyzer can detect it and the boundaries of the 
textual units that it connects. For example, the 
regular expression "\[,\] although" identifies uch 
a discourse usage. 
? A procedure that can be used by a shallow ana- 
lyzer to determine the boundaries of the textual 
unit to which the cue phrase belongs. For exam- 
ple, the procedure associated with "\[,\] although" 
instructs the analyzer that the textual unit that 
pertains to this cue phrase starts at the marker and 
ends at the end of the sentence or at a position to 
be determined by the procedure associated with 
the subsequent discourse marker that occurs in 
that sentence. 
? A procedure that can be used by a shallow ana- 
lyzer to hypothesize the sizes of the textual units 
that the cue phrase relates and the rhetorical re- 
lations that may hold between these units. For 
example, the procedure associated with "\[,\] al- 
though" will hypothesize that there xists a CON- 
CESSION between the clause to which it belongs 
and the clause(s) that went before in the same 
sentence. For most markers this procedure makes 
disjunctive hypotheses of the kind shown in (2) 
above. 
3.3 Results 
At the time of writing, we have identified 1253 occur- 
rences of cue phrases that exhibit discourse usages and 
associated with each of them procedures that instruct 
a shallow analyzer how the surrounding text should be 
broken into textual units. This information is used by an 
algorithm that concurrently identifies discourse usages of 
cue phrases and determines the clauses that a text is made 
of. The algorithm examines a text sentence by sentence 
and determines a set of potential discourse markers that 
occur in each sentence, It then applies left to fight the 
procedures that are associated with each potential marker. 
These procedures have the following possible ffects: 
? They can cause an immediate breaking of the cur- 
rent sentence into clauses. For example, when 
an "\[,\] although" marker is found, a new clause, 
whose right boundary is just before the occur- 
rence of the marker, is created. The algorithm is 
then recursively applied on the text that is found 
98 
Text 
Text 
. 
2. 
3. 
'Total 
No. of 
sentences 
1. 242 
2. 80 
3. 19 
Total 341 
No. of discourse 
markers identified 
manually 
174 
63 
38 
275 
No. of discourse 
markers identified 
by the algorithm 
169 
55 
24 
248 
No. of discourse Recall Precision 
markers identified 
correctly 
by the algorithm 
150 86.2% 88.8% 
49 77.8% 89.1% 
23 63.2% 95.6% 
222 80.8% 89.5% 
Table 1: Evaluation of the marker identification procedure. 
No. of clause 
boundaries identified 
manually 
o 
428 
151 
61 
640 
No. of clause 
boundaries identified 
by the algorithm 
416 
123 
37 
576 
No. of clause 
boundaries identified 
correctly 
by the algorithm 
371 
113 
36 
520 
Table 2: Evaluation of the clause boundary identification procedure. 
Recall Precision 
86.7% 89.2% 
74.8% 91.8% 
59.0% 97.3% 
81.3% 90.3% 
between the occurrence of"\[,\] although" and the 
end of the sentence. 
? They can cause the setting of a flag. For example, 
when an "Although " marker is found, a flag is 
set to instruct he analyzer to break the current 
sentence at the first occurrence of a comma. 
? They can cause a cue phrase to be identified as 
having a discourse usage. For example, when the 
cue phrase "Although" is identified, it is also as- 
signed adiscourse usage. The decision of whether 
a cue phrase is considered to have a discourse us- 
age is sometimes based on the context in which 
that phrase occurs, i.e., it depends on the occur- 
rence of other cue phrases. For example, an "and" 
will not be assigned adiscourse usage in most of 
the cases; however, when it occurs in conjunction 
with "although", i.e., "and although", it will be 
assigned such a role. 
The most important criterion for using a cue phrase in 
the marker identification procedure is that the cue phrase 
(together with its orthographic neighborhood) is used as 
a discourse marker in at least 90% of the examples that 
were extracted from the corpus. The enforcement of 
this criterion reduces on one hand the recall of the dis- 
course markers that can be detected, but on the other 
hand, increases significantly the precision. We chose this 
deliberately because, during the corpus analysis, we no- 
ticed that most of the markers that connect large textual 
units can be identified by a shallow analyzer. In fact, 
the discourse marker that is responsible for most of our 
algorithm recall failures is and. Since a shallow analyzer 
cannot identify with sufficient precision whether an oc- 
currence of and has a discourse or a sentential usage, most 
of its occurrences are therefore ignored. It is true that, 
in this way, the discourse structures that we build lose 
some potential finer granularity, but fortunately, from a 
rhetorical analysis perspective, the loss has insignificant 
global repercussions: the vast majority of the relations 
that we miss due to recall failures of and are JOINT and 
SEQUENCE relations that hold between adjacent clauses. 
Evaluation. To evaluate our algorithm, we randomly 
selected three texts, each belonging to a different genre: 
1. an expository text of 5036 words from Scientific 
American; 
2. a magazine article of 1588 words from 7~me; 
3. a narration of 583 words from the Brown Corpus. 
Three independent judges, graduate students in computa- 
tional inguistics, broke the texts into clauses. The judges 
were given no instructions about he criteria that they had 
to apply in order to determine the clause boundaries; 
rather, they were supposed to rely on their intuition and 
preferred efinition of clause. The locations in texts that 
were labelled as clause boundaries by at least two of the 
three judges were considered to be "valid clause bound- 
aries". We used the valid clause boundaries assigned by 
judges as indicators of discourse usages of cue phrases 
and we determined manually the cue phrases that sig- 
nalled a discourse relation. For example, if an "and" was 
used in a sentence and if the judges agreed that a clause 
boundary existed just before the "and", we assigned that 
"and" a discourse usage. Otherwise, we assigned it a 
sentential usage. Hence, we manually determined all 
discourse usages of cue phrases and all discourse bound- 
aries between elementary units. 
We then applied our marker and clause identification 
algorithm on the same texts. Our algorithm found 80.8% 
of the discourse markers with a precision of 89.5% (see 
99 
INPUT: a text T. 
1. Determine the set D of all discourse markers and 
the set Ur of elementary textual units in T. 
2. Hypothesize a set of relations R between the 
elements of Ur. 
3. Use a constraint satisfaction procedure to determine 
all the discourse trees of T. 
4. Assign a weight o each of the discourse trees and 
determine the tree(s) with maximal weight. 
Figure 2: Outline of the rhetorical parsing algorithm 
table 1), a result that outperforms Hirschberg and Lit- 
man's (1993). The same algorithm identified correctly 
81.3 % of the clause boundaries, with a precision of 90.3 % 
(see table 2). We are not aware of any surface-form-based 
algorithms that achieve similar esults. 
4 Building up discourse trees 
4.1 The rhetorical parsing algorithm 
The rhetorical parsing algorithm is outlined in figure 2. 
In the first step, the marker and clause identification algo- 
rithm is applied. Once the textual units are determined, 
the rhetorical parser uses the procedures derived from 
the corpus analysis to hypothesize rhetorical relations 
between the textual units. A constraint-satisfaction pro-
cedure similar to that described in(Marcu, 1996) then de- 
termines all the valid discourse trees (see (Marcu, 1997) 
for details). The rhetorical parsing algorithm has been 
fully implemented in C++. 
Discourse is ambiguous the same way sentences are: 
more than one discourse structure isusually produced for 
a text. In our experiments, we noticed, at least for En- 
glish, that he "best" discourse trees are usually those that 
are skewed to the right. We believe that the explanation 
of this observation is that text processing is, essentially, 
a left-to-rightprocess. U ually, people write texts o that 
the most important ideas go first, both at the paragraph 
and at the text level) The more text writers add, the more 
they elaborate on the text that went before: as a conse- 
quence, incremental discourse building consists mostly 
of expansion of the right branches. In order to deal with 
the ambiguity of discourse, the rhetorical parser com- 
putes a weight for each valid discourse tree and retains 
only those that are maximal. The weight function reflects 
how skewed to the right a tree is. 
4.2 The rhetorical parser in operation 
Consider the following text from the November 1996 
issue of Scientific American (3). The words in italics 
denote the discourse markers, the square brackets denote 
l In fact, journalists axe trained to employ this "pyramid" 
approach to writing consciously (Cumming and McKercher, 
1994). 
the boundaries of elementary textual units, and the curly 
brackets denote the boundaries of parenthetical textual 
units that were determined by the rhetorical parser (see 
Marcu (1997) for details); the numbers associated with 
the square brackets are identification labels. 
(3) \[With its distant orbit {-- 50 percent far- 
ther from the sun than Earth --}and slim at- 
mospheric blanket, 1\] \[Mars experiences frigid 
weather conditions. 2\] \[Surface t mperatures typ- 
ically average about -60 degrees Celsius ( -76 
degrees Fahrenheit) at the equator and can dip 
to -123 degrees C near the poles)\] \[Only the 
midday sun at tropical latitudes i  warm enough 
to thaw ice on occasion:\] [but any liquid wa- 
ter formed in this way would evaporate al- 
most instantly 5\] \[because of the low atmospheric 
pressure. 6 \]
\[Although the atmosphere holds a small 
amount of water, and water-ice clouds ometimes 
develop, 7\] \[most Martian weather involves blow- 
ing dust or carbon dioxide)\] [Each winter,for ex- 
ample, a blizzard of frozen carbon dioxide rages 
over one pole, and a few meters of this dry- 
ice snow accumulate as previously frozen carbon 
dioxide vaporates from the opposite polar cap. 9\] 
\[Yet even on the summer pole, { where the sun re- 
mains in the sky all day long,} temperatures never 
warm enough to melt frozen water) ?\] 
Since parenthetical information is related only to the el- 
ementary unit that it belongs to, we do not assign it an 
elementary textual unit status. Such an assignment will 
only create problems at the formal evel as well, because 
then discourse structures can no longer be represented as
binary trees. 
On the basis of the data derived from the corpus ,anal- 
ysis, the algorithm hypothesizes the following set of re- 
lations between the textual units: 
rhet_rel(JUSTIFICATION, 1 2) V 
rhet..rel(CONDITION, 1,2) 
rhet_rel(ELABORATION, 3, \[1,2\]) V 
rhet_reI(ELABORATION, \[3, 6\], \[ 1,2\]) 
rhet_rel(El_ABOgATlON, \[4, 6\], 3) V 
rhet_ret(ELABOr~YlON, \[4  6\], \[1, 3\]) 
rhet_rel(CONTRAST, 4, 5) 
(4) rhet_rel(EVIDENCE, 6, 5) 
rhet_reI(ELABORATION, \[7, 10\], \[1,6\]) 
rhet_rel(CONCESSION, 7, 8) 
rhet_rel(EXAMPLE, 9 \[7, 8\]) V 
rhet_rel(EXAMPLE, \[9, 10\], \[7, 8\]) 
rhet_rel(ANTITHESlS, 9, 10) V 
rhet_rel(ANTITHESlS, \[7,9\], 10) 
The algorithm then determines all the valid discourse 
trees that can be built for elementary units 1 to 10, given 
the constraints in (4). In this case, the algorithm con- 
structs 8 different trees. The trees are ordered according 
to their weights. The "best" tree for text (3) has weight 
3 and is fully represented in figure 3. The PostScript file 
corresponding to figure 3 was automatically generated by 
100 
: Exempl i f icat ion ? 
? (, fo rexample , )  ' 
. . . . . .  I" . . . .  ? 
. . . . . . . .  ! - . . .  
D 
Justificalion.Co~lion , C . . . .  ion \[ " "~n; i t~ is  :
.'(wth) . '~,~,~o,:, ." ~th.g i ~  : (wt) 
/ , - . . . .  %. 
? . ' ?  / ? 
? / " 
Each winter, 
ex~mxple, a bli~atd "N~ 
? - -o -T  of ~ , . .  ~n  \ t .... &oxide rages over 
' \[ Surfaos ? 
I tm~r,u~,s  . . . . . . . .  . . ' . .  \[ typically avenge ...... ; 
\[ about -60 dag l~ :atmo~herehokk~a mostMattian I onepole, andafew Yetevenonthe \[ 
Withil.ldhllant Mm~exl~tien?~l \[ eclairs(-76 " "'  . . . . .  smal l J~ountof ~athetthvolve~ I melelnofthia \ [sumn~rpole-P-teml~raml~n~et \] 
?tbit 'P" and sl~m frigid weather \[ dagr- -  Fahzenheit) "C?nmut " ' 1 - \] I t 
a~osphcafiCblanket, oonthlion3. I'g at tl~ eq . . . . .  d i ! ,but ) :  water-icewal~r' andclouds blowing du~ orcarbon  dioxide. \[ accemnlttedl~'i . . . . . . . . .   fa~n gh to n~ltwat~. 
(I) . (2) l \[ ?an dip to .123 t ~"  ~meti~esdevelop,.  (8) previotLslyfrozen (10) 
. . . . . . . . . . .  \[ aegr~s C n~ tl~ / \ (7) ~ carbon ,~oxi,t-  
poles. ' . . . . . . . . . . .  evaporates from the 
(3) ! op pc,~li t.. polar cap. 
(9) 
' \ 
Only  the midday sun I 
- 50 ~rc~nt at Izopical ___ ~1 
farther from the latitudes b warm \[ Evidence . where the sun r~.~ml in the sky 
SUla I~lm Earth - enough to thaw ice \[ ( becanse ) all day long, 
on ~on.  
............ !.'2 ............. / ""?'. 
but any liquid \[ . . . .  : . . . . . .  
water formed in \[ , because ofthe low 
this way would \[ " atmo~het~c 
evaporate almo~ \[ ? ppe~sure. 
instantly \[ : (6) 
P?__ I " . . . . . . . . . .  
Figure 3: The discourse tree of maximal weight that can be associated with text (3). 
a back-end ,algorithm that uses "dot", a preprocessor for 
drawing directed graphs. The convention that we use is 
that nuclei are surrounded by solid boxes and satellites 
by dotted boxes; the links between a node and the subor- 
dinate nucleus or nuclei are represented by solid arrows, 
and the links between a node and the subordinate satel- 
lites by dotted lines. The occurrences of parenthetical 
information are marked in the text by a -P -  and a unique 
subordinate satellite that contains the parenthetical infor- 
mation. 
4.3  Discussion and evaluation 
We believe that there are two ways to evaluate the cor- 
rectness of the discourse trees that an automatic process 
builds. One way is to compare the automatically derived 
trees with trees that have been built manually. Another 
way is to evaluate the impact hat the discourse trees that 
we derive automatically have on the accuracy of other 
natural anguage processing tasks, such as anaphora res- 
olution, intention recognition, or text summarization. In 
this paper, we describe valuations that follow both these 
avenues. 
Unfortunately, the linguistic community has not yet 
built a corpus of discourse trees against which our rhetor- 
ical parser can be evaluated with the effectiveness that 
traditional parsers are. To circumvent this problem, two 
analysts manually built the discourse trees for five texts 
that ranged from 161 to 725 words. Although there were 
some differences with respect o the names of the rela- 
tions that the analysts used, the agreement with respect to 
the status assigned to various units (nuclei and satellites) 
and the overall shapes of the trees was significant. 
In order to measure this agreement we associated an 
importance score to each textual unit in a tree and com- 
puted the Spearman correlation coefficients between the 
importance scores derived from the discourse trees built 
by each analyst? The Spearman correlation coefficient 
2The Spearman rank correlation coefficient is an alternative 
to the usual correlation coefficient. It is based on the ranks of 
the data, and not on the data itself, and so is resistant to outliers. 
The null hypothesis tested by Spearman is that two variables 
101 
between the ranks assigned for each textual unit on the 
bases of the discourse trees built by the two analysts was 
very high: 0.798, atp < 0.0001 level of significance. The 
differences between the two analysts came mainly from 
their interpretations of two of the texts: the discourse 
trees of one analyst mirrored the paragraph structure of 
the texts, while the discourse trees of the other mirrored 
a logical organization of the text, which that analyst be- 
lieved to be important. 
The Spearman correlation coefficients with respect to 
the importance of textual units between the discourse 
trees built by our program and those built by each analyst 
were 0.480, p < 0.0001 and 0.449, p < 0.0001. These 
lower correlation values were due to the differences in 
the overall shape of the trees and to the fact that the 
granularity of the discourse trees built by the program 
was not as fine as that of the trees built by the analysts. 
Besides directly comparing the trees built by the pro- 
gram with those built by analysts, we also evaluated the 
impact that our trees could have on the task of sum- 
marizing text. A summarization program that uses the 
rhetorical parser described here recalled 66% of the sen- 
tences considered important by 13 judges in the same five 
texts, with a precision of 68%. In contrast, a random pro- 
cedure recalled, on average, only 38.4% of the sentences 
considered important by the judges, with a precision of 
38.4%. And the Microsoft Office 97 summarizer recalled 
41% of the important sentences with a precision of 39%. 
We discuss at length the experiments from which the data 
presented above was derived in (Marcu, 1997). 
The rhetorical parser presented in this paper uses only 
the structural constraints that were enumerated in sec- 
tion 2. Co-relational constraints, focus, theme, anaphoric 
links, and other syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic fac- 
tors do not yet play a role in our system, but we neverthe- 
less expect hem to reduce the number of valid discourse 
trees that can be associated with a text. We also ex- 
pect that other obust methods for determining coherence 
relations between textual units, such as those described 
by Harabagiu and Moldovan (1995), will improve the 
accuracy of the routines that hypothesize the rhetorical 
relations that hold between adjacent units. 
We are not aware of the existence of any other hetor- 
ical parser for English. However, Sumita et ,'d. (1992) 
report on a discourse analyzer for Japanese. Even if one 
ignores some computational "bonuses" that can be eas- 
ily exploited by a Japanese discourse analyzer (such as 
co-reference and topic identification), there are still some 
key differences between Sumita's work and ours. Partic- 
ularly important isthe fact that he theoretical foundations 
of Sumita et al's analyzer do not seem to be able to ac- 
commodate he ambiguity of discourse markers: in their 
axe independent of each other, against the alternative hypothesis 
that he rank of a variable is correlated with the rank of another 
variable. The value of the statistic ranges from -1, indicating 
that high ranks of one variable occur with low ranks of the 
other variable, through 0, indicating no correlation between tile 
variables, to + 1, indicating that high ranks of one variable occur 
with high ranks of the other variable. 
system, discourse markers are considered unambiguous 
with respect to the relations that they signal. In contrast, 
our system uses a mathematical model in which this am- 
biguity is acknowledged and appropriately treated. Also, 
the discourse trees that we build are very constrained 
structures ( ee section 2): as a consequence, we do not 
overgenerate invalid trees as Sumita et al do. Further- 
more, we use only surface-based methods for determin- 
ing the markers and textual units and use clauses as the 
minimal units of the discourse trees. In contrast, Sumita 
et al use deep syntactic and semantic processing tech- 
niques for determining the markers and the textual units 
and use sentences as minimal units in the discourse struc- 
tures that they build. A detailed comparison of our work 
with Sumita et al's and others' work is given in (Marcu, 
1997). 
5 Conclusion 
We introduced the notion of rhetorical parsing, i.e., the 
process through which natural anguage texts are au- 
tomatically mapped into discourse trees. In order to 
make rhetorical parsing work, we improved previous al- 
gorithms for cue phrase disambiguation, and proposed 
new algorithms for determining the elementary textual 
units and for computing the valid discourse trees of a 
text. The solution that we described is both general and 
robust. 
Acknowledgements. This research would have not 
been possible without the help of Graeme Hirst; there 
are no fight words to thank him for it. I am grateful 
to Melanie Baljko, Phil Edmonds, and Steve Green for 
their help with the corpus analysis. This research was 
supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Re- 
search Council of Canada. 
References 
Asher, Nicholas. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in 
Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Ballard, D. Lee, Robert Conrad, and Robert E. Longacre. 
1971. The deep and surface grammar of interclausal 
relations. Foundations of language, 4:70-118. 
Cahn, Janet. 1992. An investigation i to the correlation 
of cue phrases, unfilled pauses and the structuring of 
spoken discourse. In Proceedings of the IRCS Work- 
shop on Prosody in Natural Speech, pages 19-30. 
Cohen, Robin. 1987. Analyzing the structure of argu- 
mentative discourse. Computational Linguistics, 13 (1- 
2): 11-24, January-June. 
Costermans, Jean and Michel Fayol. 1997. Processing 
lnterclausal Relationships. Studies in the Production 
and Comprehension f Text. Lawrence Erlbaum Asso- 
ciates, Publishers. 
Cumming, Carmen and Catherine McKercher. 1994. 
The Canadian Reporter: News writing and reporting. 
Hartcourt Brace. 
102 
Delin, Judy L. and Jon Oberlander. 1992. Aspect- 
switching and subordination: the role of/t-clefts in dis- 
course. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING- 
92), pages 281-287, Nantes, France, August 23-28. 
Fraser, Bruce. 1996. Pragmatic markers. Pragmatics, 
6(2): 167-190. 
Grosz, Barbara J., Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Weinstein. 
1995. Centering: A framework for modeling the local 
coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21 (2):203-226, June. 
Grosz, Barbara J. and Candace L. Sidner. 1986. Atten- 
tion, intentions, and the structure of discourse. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 12(3): 175-204, July-September. 
Grover, Claire, Chris Brew, Suresh Manandhar, and Marc 
Moens. 1994. Priority union and generalization in dis- 
course grammars. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for ComputationalLinguis- 
tics (ACL-94), pages 17-24, Las Cruces, June 27-30. 
HaUiday, Michael A.K. and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Co- 
hesion in English. Longman. 
Harabagiu, Sanda M. and Dan I. Moldovan. 1995. A 
marker-propagation algorithm for text coherence. In 
Working Notes of the Workshop on Parallel Process- 
ing in Artificial Intelligence, pages 76-86, Montreal, 
Canada, August. 
Hirschberg, Julia and Diane Litman. 1993. Empirical 
studies on the disambiguation f cue phrases. Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 19(3):501-530. 
Hobbs, Jerry R. 1990. Literature and Cognition. CSLI 
Lecture Notes Number 21. 
Kamp, Hand and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse 
to Logic: Introduction to ModelTheoretic Semantics 
of Natural Language, Formal Logic and Discourse 
Representation Theory. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
London, Boston, Dordrecht. Studies in Linguistics and 
Philosophy, Volume 42. 
Kintsch, Walter. 1977. On comprehending stories. In 
Marcel Just and Patricia Carpenter, editors, Cognitive 
processes in comprehension. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, New 
Jersey. 
Knott, Alistair. 1995. A Data-Driven Methodology for 
Motivating aSet of Coherence Relations. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Edinburgh. 
Lascarides, Alex and Nicholas Asher. 1993. Temporal 
interpretation, discourse relations, and common sense 
entailment. Linguistics and Philosophy, 16(5):437- 
493. 
Lascarides, Alex, Nicholas Asher, and Jon Oberlander. 
1992. Inferring discourse relations in context. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-92), pages 1-8. 
Longacre, Robert E. 1983. The Grammar of Discourse. 
Plenum Press, New York. 
Mann, William C. and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988. 
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the- 
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243-281. 
Marcu, Daniel. 1996. Building up rhetorical structure 
trees. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Con- 
ference on Artificial intelligence (AAA1-96 ), volume 2, 
pages 1069-1074, Portland, Oregon, August 4-8,. 
Marcu, Daniel. 1997. The rhetorical parsing, sum- 
marization, and generation of natural anguage texts. 
Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Science, Uni- 
versity of Toronto, Forthcoming. 
Martin, James R. 1992. English Text. System and Struc- 
ture. John Benjamin Publishing Company, Philadel- 
phia/Amsterdam. 
Moens, Marc and Mark Steedman. 1988. Temporal on- 
tology and temporal reference. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 14(2): 15-28. 
Moser, Megan and Johanna D. Moore. 1997. On the 
correlation of cues with discourse structure: Results 
from a corpus tudy. Submitted for publication. 
Polanyi, Livia. 1988. A formal model of the structure of 
discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 12:601-638. 
Pr0st, H., R. Scha, and M. van den Berg. 1994. Discourse 
grammar and verb phrase anaphora. Linguistics and 
Philosophy, 17(3):261-327, June. 
Redeker, Gisela 1990. Ideational and pragmatic markers 
of discourse, structure. Journal ofPragmatics, 14:367- 
381. 
Sanders, Ted J.M., Wilbert P.M. Spooren, and Leo G.M. 
Noordman. 1992. Toward a taxonomy of coherence 
relations. Discourse Processes, 15:1-35. 
Schiffrin, Deborah. 1987. Discourse Markers. Cam- 
bridge University Press. 
Segal, Erwin M., Judith F. Duchan, and Paula J. Scott. 
1991. The role of interclausal connectives in narrative 
structuring: Evidence from adults' interpretations of 
simple stories. Discourse Processes, 14:27-54. 
Sidner, Candace L. 1981. Focusing for interpretation f
pronouns. Computational Linguistics, 7(4):217-231, 
October-December. 
Sumita, K., K. Ono, T. Chino, T. Ukita, and S. Amano. 
1992. A discourse structure analyzer for Japanese text. 
In Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Fifth Generation Computer Systems, volume 2, pages 
1133-1140. 
Van Dijk, Teun A. 1979. Pragmatic connectives. Journal 
of Pragmatics, 3:447-456. 
Webber, Bonnie L. 1988. Tense as discourse anaphor. 
Computational Linguistics, 14(2):61-72, June. 
103 
