Aligning Articles in TV Newscasts and Newspapers 
Yasuh iko  Watanabe 
Ryukoku  Un ivers i ty  
Seta ,  Otsu  
Sh iga ,  Japan 
Yosh ih i ro  Okada 
Ryukoku  Un iv .  
Seta ,  Otsu  
Sh iga ,  Japan 
Kengo kane j i  
Ryukoku  Un iv .  
Seta ,  Otsu  
Sh iga ,  Japan 
Makoto Nagao 
Kyoto University 
Yoshida, Sakyo-ku 
Kyoto, Japan 
watanabe@r ins . ryukoku .ac . jp  
Abst rac t  
It is important to use pattern information (e.g. TV 
newscasts) and textual information (e.g. newspa- 
pers) together. For this purpose, we describe a 
method for aligning articles in TV newscasts and 
newspapers. In order to align articles, the align- 
ment system uses words extracted from telops in 
TV newscasts. The recall and the precision of the 
alignment process are 97% and 89%, respectively. 
In addition, using the results of the alignment pro- 
cess, we develop a browsing and retrieval system for 
articles in TV newscasts and newspapers. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Pattern information and natural anguage informa- 
tion used together can complement and reinforce 
each other to enable more effective communication 
than can either medium alone (Feiner 91) (Naka- 
mura 93). One of the good examples is a TV news- 
cast and a newspaper. In a TV newscast, events 
are reported clearly and intuitively with speech and 
image information. On the other hand, in a news- 
paper, the same events are reported by text infor- 
mation more precisely than in the corresponding 
TV newscast. Figure 1 and Figure 2 are examples 
of articles in TV newscasts and newspapers, respec- 
tively, and report the same accident, that is, the air- 
plane crash in which the Commerce Secretary was 
killed. However, it is difficult o use newspapers and 
TV newscasts together without aligning articles in 
the newspapers with those in the TV newscasts. In 
this paper, we propose a method for aligning arti- 
cles in newspapers and TV newscasts. In addition, 
we show a browsing and retrieval system for aligned 
articles in newspapers and TV newscasts. 
2 TV  Newscasts  and  Newspapers  
2.1 TV Newscasts  
In a TV newscast, events are generally reported in 
the following modalities: 
? image information, 
? speech information, and 
? text information (telops). 
In TV newscasts, the image and the speech infor- 
mation are main modalities. However, it is diffi- 
cult to obtain the precise information from these 
kinds of modalities. The text information, on the 
other hand, is a secondary modality in TV news- 
casts, which gives us: 
? explanations of image information, 
? summaries of speech information, and 
? information which is not concerned with the 
reports (e.g. a time signal). 
In these three types of information, the first and 
second ones represent the contents of the reports. 
Moreover, it is not difficult to extract text infor- 
mation from TV newscasts. It is because a lots 
of works has been done on character ecognition 
and layout analysis (Sakai 93) (Mino 96) (Sato 98). 
Consequently, we use this textual information for 
aligning the TV newscasts with the corresponding 
newspaper articles. The method for extracting the 
textual information is discussed in Section 3.1. But, 
we do not treat the method of character recognition 
in detail, because it is beyond the main subject of 
this study. 
2.2 Newspapers  
A text in a newspaper article may be divided into 
four parts: 
? headline, 
? explanation of pictures, 
? first paragraph, and 
? the rest. 
In a text of a newspaper article, several kinds of 
information are generally given in important order. 
In other words, a headline and a first paragraph in 
a newspaper article give us the most important in- 
formation. In contrast o this, the rest in a newspa- 
per article give us the additional information. Con- 
sequently, headlines and first paragraphs contain 
more significant words (keywords) for representing 
the contents of the article than the rest. 
1381 
Telops in these 
top le~: 
top right: 
middle left: 
middle right: 
bottom left: 
TV news images 
All the passengers, including 
Commerce Secy Brown, were 
killed 
crush point, the forth day 
[Croatian Minister of Domes- 
tic Affairs] "All passengers 
were killed" 
[Pentagon] The plane was off 
course. "accident under bad 
weather condition". 
Commerce Secy Brown, Tu- 
zla, the third day 
Figure 1: An example of TV news articles (NHK evening TV newscasts; April, 4, 1996) 
On the other hand, an explanation of a picture in 
an article shows us persons and things in the picture 
that are concerned with the report. For example, in 
Figure 2, texts in bold letters under the picture is 
an explanation of the picture. Consequently, expla- 
nations of pictures contain many keywords as well 
as headlines and first paragraphs. 
In this way, keywords in a newspaper article are 
distributed unevenly. In other words, keywords are 
more frequently in the headline, the explanation of 
the pictures, and the first paragraph. In addition, 
these keywords are shared by the newspaper article 
with TV newscasts. For these reasons, we align 
articles in TV newscasts and newspapers using the 
following clues: 
? location of keywords in each article, 
? frequency of keywords in each article, and 
? length of keywords. 
1382 
' . : L  . .  ) : '  ' ? 
7: . ' -~4~- -  
Summary of this article: On Apt 4, the Croatian Government confirmed that Commerce Secretary 
Ronald H. Brown and 32 other people were all killed in the crash of a US Air Force plane near the 
Dubrovnik airport in the Balkans on Apt 3, 1996. It was raining hard near the airport at that time. 
A Pentagon spokesman said there are no signs of terrorist act in this crash. The passengers included 
members of Brown's staff, private business leaders, and a correspondent for the New York Times. 
President Clinton, speaking at the Commerce Department, praised Brown as 'one of the best advisers 
and ablest people I ever knew.' On account of this accident, Vice Secretary Mary Good was appointed 
to the acting Secretary. In the Balkans, three U.S. officials on a peace mission and two U.S. soldiers 
were killed in Aug 1995 and Jan 1996, respectively. 
(Photo) Commerce Secy Brown got off a military plane Boeing 737 and met soldiers at the Tuzla airport 
in Bosnia. The plane crashed and killed Commerce Secy Brown when it went down to Dubrovnik. 
Figure 2: An example of newspaper articles (Asahi Newspaper; April, 4, 1996) 
3 A l ign ing  Ar t i c les  in  TV  
Newscasts  and  Newspapers  
3.1 Extracting Nouns from Telops 
An article in the TV newscast generally shares many 
words, especially nouns, with the newspaper a ticle 
which reports the same event. Making use of these 
nouns, we align articles in the TV newscast and in 
the newspaper. For this purpose, we extract nouns 
from the telops as follows: 
Step 1 Extract texts from the TV images by hands. 
For example, we extract "Okinawa ken Ohla 
chiff' from the TV image of Figure 3. When 
the text is a title, we describe it. It is not 
difficult to find title texts because they have 
specific expression patterns, for example, an 
underline (Figure 4 and a top left picture in 
Figure 1). In addition, we describe the follow- 
Figure 3: An example of texts in a TV newscast: 
"Okinawa ken OMa chiji (Ohta, Governor of Oki- 
nawa Prefecture)" 
1383 
Figure 4: An example of title texts: "zantei yosanan 
asu shu-in tsuka he (The House of Rep. will pass 
the provisional budget tomorrow)" 
ing kinds of information: 
? size of each character 
? distance between characters 
? position of each telop in a TV image 
Step 2 Divide the texts extracted in Step 1 into 
lines. Then, segment hese lines at the point 
where the size of character or the distance be- 
tween characters changes. For example, the 
text in Figure 3 is divided into "Okinawa ken 
(Okinawa Prefecture)", "Ohta (Ohta)", and 
" chiji (Governor)". 
S tep  3 Segment the texts by the morphological n- 
alyzer JUMAN (Kurohashi 97). 
Step 4 Analyze telops in TV images. Figure 5 
shows several kinds of information which are 
explained by telops in TV Newscasts (Watan- 
abe 96). In (Watanabe 96), a method of se- 
mantic analysis of telops was proposed and the 
correct recognition of the method was 92 %. 
We use this method and obtain the semantic 
interpretation of each telop. 
S tep  5 Extract nouns from the following kinds of 
telops. 
? telops which explain the contents of TV 
images (except "time of photographing" 
and "image data") 
? telops which explain a fact 
It is because these kinds of telops may con- 
tain adequate words for aligning articles. On 
the contrary, we do not extract nouns from 
the other kinds of telops for aligning articles. 
For example, we do not extract nouns from 
telops which are categorized into a quotation 
of a speech in Step 4. It is because a quota- 
tion of a speech is used as the additional infor- 
1. explanation of contents of a TV im- 
age 
(a) explanation of a scene 
(b) explanation of an element 
i. person 
ii. group and organization 
iii. thing 
(c) bibliographic nformation 
i. time of photographing 
ii. place of photographing 
iii. image data 
2. quotation of a speech 
3. explanation of a fact 
(a) titles of TV news 
(b) diagram and table 
(c) other 
4. information which is not concerned 
with a report 
(a) current ime 
(b) broadcasting style 
(c) names of an announcer and re- 
porters 
Figure 5: Information explained by telops in TV 
Newscasts 
Figure 6: An example of a quotation of a speech: 
"kono kuni wo zenshin saseru chansu wo atae te 
hoshii (Give me a chance to develop our country)" 
mation and may contain inadequate words for 
aligning articles. Figure 6 shows an example 
of a quotation of a speech. 
3.2 Ext ract ion  of  Layout  In fo rmat ion  in 
Newspaper  Art ic les  
For aligning with articles in TV newscasts, we use 
newspaper articles which are distributed in the In- 
ternet. The reasons are as follows: 
1384 
Table 1: The weight w(i,j) 
II newspaper \[ 
title I pier' expl" I fir.t p&r. \[ th . . . .  t 
the number of the articles in the TV newscasts 143 
the number of the corresponding article pairs 100 
the  number of the pairs of aligned articles 109 
the  number of the correct pairs of aligned articles 97 
Figure 7: The results of the alignment 
? articles are created in the electronic form, and 
? articles are created by authors using HTML 
which offers embedded codes (tags) to desig- 
nate headlines, paragraph breaks, and so on. 
Taking advantage of the HTML tags, we divide 
newspaper articles into four parts: 
? headline, 
? explanation of pictures, 
? first paragraph, and 
? the rest. 
The procedure for dividing a newspaper article is as 
follows. 
1. Extract a headline using tags for headlines. 
2. Divide an article into the paragraphs using 
tags for paragraph breaks. 
3. Extract paragraphs which start " {T\]:~>> (sha- 
shin, picture)" as the explanation of pictures. 
4. Extract the top paragraph as the first para- 
graph. The others are classified into the rest. 
3.3 P rocedure  for Al igning Art ic les 
Before aligning articles in TV newscasts and news- 
papers, we chose corresponding TV newscasts and 
newspapers. For example, an evening TV newscast 
is aligned with the evening paper of the same day 
and with the morning paper of the next day. We 
aligned articles within these pairs of TV newscasts 
and newspapers. 
The alignment process consists of two steps. First, 
we calculate reliability scores for an article in the 
TV newscasts with each article in the correspond- 
ing newspapers. Then, we select he newspaper ar- 
ticle with the maximum reliability score as the cor- 
responding one. If the maximum score is less than 
the given threshold, the articles are not aligned. 
As mentioned earlier, we calculate the reliability 
scores using these kinds of clue information: 
? location of words in each article, 
? frequency of words in each article, and 
? length of words. 
If we are given a TV news article z and a newspaper 
article y, we obtain the reliability score by using the 
words k(k - 1... N) which are extracted from the 
TV news article z: 
SCORE(z, y) = 
N 4 2 
~ ~ w(i,j), hap,r(i,k), fTv(j,k)" length(k) 
k=l  i=1 j= l  
where w(i, j) is the weight which is given to accord- 
ing to the location of word k in each article. We 
fixed the values of w(i, j) as shown in Table 1. As 
shown in Table 1, we divided a newspaper article 
into four parts: (1) title, (2) explanation of pic- 
tures, (3) first paragraph, and (4) the rest. Also, 
we divided texts in a TV newscasts into two: (1) 
title, and (2) the rest. It is because keywords are 
distributed unevenly in articles of newspapers and 
TV newscasts, haper(i,k) and fTv(j,k) are the 
frequencies of the word k in the location { of the 
newspaper and in the location j of the TV news, 
respectively, length(k) is the length of the word k. 
4 Exper imenta l  Resu l t s  
To evaluate our approach, we aligned articles in 
the following TV newscasts and newspapers: 
? NHK evening TV newscast, and 
? Asahi newspaper (distributed in the Internet). 
We used 143 articles of the evening TV newscasts 
in this experiment. As mentioned previously, arti- 
cles in the evening TV newscasts were aligned with 
articles in the evening paper of the same day and 
in the morning paper of the next day. Figure 7 
shows the results of the alignment. In this exper- 
iment, the threshold was set to 100. We used two 
measures for evaluating the results: recall and pre- 
cision. The recall and the precision are 97% and 
89%, respectively. 
One cause of the failures is abbreviation ofwords. 
For example, "shinyo-kinko (credit association)" is
abbreviated to "shinkin". In our method, these 
words lower the reliability scores. To solve this 
problem, we would like to improve the alignment 
performance by using dynamic programming match- 
ing method for string matching. (Tsunoda 96) has 
reported that the results of the alignment were im- 
proved by using dynamic programming matching 
method. 
In this experiment, we did not align the TV news 
articles of sports, weather, stock prices, and foreign 
1385 
o . 
2 , ; : 
Interface Retrieval Database 
Figure 8: An example of a sports news article: "sen- 
balsu kaimaku (Inter-high school baseball games tart)" 
exchange. It is because the styles of these kinds of 
TV news articles are fixed and quite different from 
those of the others. From this, we concluded that 
we had better align these kinds of TV news articles 
by the different method from ours. As a result of 
this, we omitted TV news articles the title text of 
which had the special underline for these kinds of 
TV news articles. For example, Figure 8 shows a 
special underline for a sports news. 
5 Browsing and Retrieval System 
for Articles in TV Newscasts and 
Newspapers 
The alignment process has a capability for informa- 
tion retrieval, that is, browsing and retrieving arti- 
cles in TV newscasts and newspapers. As a result, 
using the results of the alignment process, we devel- 
oped a browsing and retrieval system for TV news- 
casts and newspapers. Figure 9 shows the overview 
of the system. The important points for this system 
are as follows: 
? ? Newspaper articles and TV news articles are 
cross-referenced. 
? A user can consult articles in TV newscasts 
and newspapers by means of the dates of broad- 
casting or publishing. 
? A user can consult newspaper articles by full 
text retrieval. In the same way, user can con- 
sult TV newscasts which are aligned with re- 
trieved newspaper articles. In other words, 
content based retrieval for TV newscasts is 
available. 
? Newspaper articles are written in ttTML. In 
addition to this, the results of the alignment 
process are embedded in the HTML texts. As 
a result, we can use a WWW browser (e.g. 
! 
browser 
___J 
"IV news 
articles 
GUI ~ r- alignment [ i ~ ~ .... information 
] retrieval I ~ Newspaperartlcles i 
browser" q"-'CGI script ---./  ~TML document J 
Figure 9: System overview 
Netscape, Internet Explorer, etc) for brows- 
ing and retrieving articles in TV newscasts and 
newspapers. 
A user can consult articles in newspapers and TV 
newscasts by full text retrieval in this way: when 
the user gives a query word to the system, the sys- 
tem shows the titles and the dates of the newspaper 
articles which contain the given word. At the same 
time, the system shows the titles of TV news articles 
which are linked to the retrieved newspaper articles. 
For example, a user obtains 13 newspaper articles 
and 4 TV news articles when he gives "saishutsu 
(annual expenditure)" as a query word to the sys- 
tem. One of them, entitled "General annual expen- 
diture dropped for three successive years" (June, 4, 
1997), is shown in Figure 10. The newspaper article 
in Figure 10 has an icon in the above right, looks 
like an opening scene of a TV news article. The 
icons shows this article is linked to the TV news 
article. When the user select this icon, the system 
shows the TV news article "Public work costs were 
a seven percent decrease" (the top left window in 
Figure 10). 
References 
Feiner, McKeown: Automating the Generation of Coor- 
dinated Multimedia Explanations, IEEE Computer, 
Vol.24 No.10, (1991). 
Nakamura, Furukawa, Nagao: Diagram Understanding 
Utilizing Natural Language Text, 2nd International 
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 
(1993). 
Kurohashi, Nagao: 3UMAN Manual version 3.4 (in Japa- 
nese), Nagao Lab., Kyoto University, (1997) *. 
Mino: Intelligent Retrieval for Video Media (in Japanese), 
Journal of Japan Society for Artificial Intelligence 
Vol.ll No.l, (1996). 
1The source file and the explanation (in Japanese) 
of Japanese morphological nalyzer JUMAN can be ob- 
tained using anonymous FTP from 
ffp://pine.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/pub/juman/juman3.4.tar.gz 
1386 
5~.'NE..~ 1997 
~.7:., llgil~iixJf~i-alaJ!.o)~.~lg-i~J(7[ (1)~1~!I-~?2-, m.3!.~7 ' ,~  "TL.,-.*'UI 
? ~. q.Yg.U. ,  ~ . . . .  
Figure 10: An output of the reference system for articles in TV newscast and newspapers: "Public work 
costs were a seven percent decrease" and "General annual expenditure dropped for three successive years" 
Sakai: A History and Evolution of Document Infor- 
mation Processing, 2nd International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, (1993). 
Sato, Hughes, and Kanade: Video OCR for Digital 
News Archive, IEEE International Workshop on Content- 
based Access of Image and Video Databases, (1998). 
Tsunoda, Ooishi, Watanabe, Nagao: Automatic Align- 
ment between TV News and Newspaper Articles by 
Maximum Length String between Captions and Ar- 
ticle Texts (in Japanese), IPSJ-WGNL 96-NL-115, 
(1996). 
Watanabe, Okada, Nagao: Semantic Analysis of Telops 
in TV Newscasts (in Japanese). IPSJ-WGNL 96- 
NL-116, (1996). 
1387 
