Summarization-based Query Expansion in Information Retrieval 
Tomel~ S~rzaIl~owsl~i, J n Wang, and Bowden Wise 
GE Corporate Research and Development 
1 Research Circle 
Niskayuna, NY 12309 
strzalkowski~crd.ge.com 
Abstract  
We discuss a seml-interactive approach to infor- 
mation retrieval which consists of two tasks per- 
formed in a sequence. First, the system assists 
the searcher in building a comprehensive statement 
of information eed, using automatically generated 
topical summaries of sample documents. Second, 
the detailed statement of information eed is auto- 
matically processed by a series of natural anguage 
processing routines in order to derive an optimal 
search query for a statistical information retrieval 
system. In this paper, we investigate he role of au- 
tomated document summarization in building effec- 
tive search statements. We also discuss the results 
of latest evaluation of our system at the annual Text 
Retrieval Conference (TKEC). 
In fo rmat ion  Ret~r ieva l  
Information retrieval (IR) is a task of selecting docu- 
ments from a database in response to a user's query, 
and ranking them according to relevance. This has 
been usually accomplished using statistical methods 
(often coupled with manual encoding) that (a) select 
terms (words, phrases, and other units) from docu- 
ments that are deemed to best represent their con- 
tent, and (b) create an inverted index file (or files) 
that provide an easy access to documents containing 
these terms. A subsequent search process attempts 
to match preprocessed user queries against term- 
based representations of documents in each case de- 
termining a degree of relevance between the two 
which depends upon the number and types of match- 
ing terms. 
A search is successful if it can return as many 
as possible documents which are relevant to the 
query, with as few as possible non-relevant docu- 
ments. In addition, the relevant documents should 
be ranked ahead of non-relevant ones. The quanti- 
tative tex~ representation methods, predominant in
today's leading information retrieval systems 1 limit 
II~epresentations anchored on words, word or char- 
the system's ability to generate a successful search 
because they rely more on the ,form of a query than 
on its content in finding document matches. This 
problem is particularly acute in ad-hoc retrieval situ- 
ations where the user has only a limited knowledge of 
database composition and needs to resort to generic 
or otherwise incomplete search statements. IrI or- 
der to overcome this limitation, marIy IR systems 
allow varying degrees of user interaction that facil- 
itates query optimization and calibration to closer 
match user's information seeking goals. A popular 
technique here is relevance feedback, where the user 
or the system judges the relevance of a sample of re- 
suits returned from an initial search, and the query is 
subsequently rebuilt to reflect his information. Au- 
tomatic relevance feedback techniques can lead to 
a very close mapping of known relevant documents, 
however, they also tend to overflt, which in turn re- 
duces their ability of finding new documents on the 
same subject. Therefore, a serious challenge for in- 
formation retrieval is to devise methods for building 
better queries, or in assisting user to do so. 
Bu i ld ing  e f fec t ive  search  quer ies  
We have been experimenting with manual and auto- 
matic natural language query (or topic, in TREC 
parlance) building techniques. This differs from 
most query modification techniques used in IR in 
that our method is to reformulate the user's state~ 
ment of information eed rather than the search sys- 
tem's internal representation f it, as relevance feed- 
back does. Our goal is to devise a method of full- 
text expansion that would allow for creating exhaus- 
tive search topics such that: (1) the performance 
of any system using the expanded topics would be 
significantly better than when the system is run us- 
ing the original topics, and (2) the method of topic 
acter sequences, or some surrogates of these, along with 
significance weights derived from their distribution i  the 
database. 
1258 
expansion could eventually be automated or semi- 
automated so as to be useful to a non-expert user. 
Note that the first of the above requirements effec- 
tively calls for a free text, unstructured, but highly 
precise and exhaustive description of user's search 
statement. The preliminary results from TI~EC 
evaluations how that such an approach is indeed 
very effective. 
One way to view query expansion is to make the 
user query resemble more closely the documents it is 
expected to retrieve. This may include both content, 
as well as some other aspects uch as composition, 
style, language type, etc. If the query is indeed made 
to resemble a "typical" relevant document, hen sud- 
denly everything about this query becomes a valid 
search criterion: words, collocations, phrases, var- 
ious relationships, etc. Unfortunately, an average 
search query does not look anything like this, most 
of the time. It is more likely to be a statement speci- 
fying the semantic riteria of relevance. This means 
that except for the semantic or conceptual resem- 
blance (which we cannot model very well as yet) 
much of the appearance of the query (which we can 
model reasonably well) may be, and often is, quite 
misleading for search purposes. Where can we get 
the right queries? 
In today's information retrieval, query expansion 
usually is typically limited to adding, deleting or 
re-weighting of terms. For example, content erms 
from documents judged relevant are added to the 
query while weights of all terms are adjusted in or- 
der to reflect he relevance information. Thus, terms 
occurring predominantly in relevant documents will 
have their weights increased, while those occurring 
mostly in non-relevant documents will have their 
weights decreased. This process can be performed 
automatically using a relevance feedback method, 
e.g., (Rocchio 1971), with the relevance informa- 
tion either supplied manually by the user (Har- 
man 1988), or otherwise guessed, e.g. by assum- 
ing top 10 documents relevant, etc. (Buckley, et 
al. 1995). A serious problem with this term-based 
expansion is its limited ability to capture and rep- 
resent many important aspects of what makes some 
documents relevant o the query, including particu- 
lar term co-occurrence patterns, and other hard-to- 
measure text features, such as discourse structure or 
stylistics. Additionally, relevance-feedback expan- 
sion depends on ~he inherently partial relevance in- 
formation, which is normally unavailable, or unre- 
liable. Other types of query expansions, including 
general purpose thesauri or lexical databases (e.g., 
WordneQ have been found generally unsuccessful in
information retrieval, (Voorhees 1994). 
An alternative to term-only expansion is a full- 
text expansion described in (Strzalkowski et al 
1997). In this approach, search topics are expanded 
by pasting in entire sentences, paragraphs, and other 
sequences directly from any text document. To 
make this process efficient, an initial search is per- 
formed with the unexpanded queries and the top 
N (10-30) returned documents are used for query 
expansion. These documents, irrespective of their 
overall relevancy to the search topic, are scanned 
for passages containing concepts referred to in the 
query. The resulting expanded queries undergo fur- 
ther text processing steps, before the search is run 
again. We need to note that the expansion ma- 
terial was found in both relevant and non-relevant 
documents, benefiting the final query all the same. 
In fact, the presence of such text in otherwise non- 
relevant documents underscores the inherent limRa- 
fions of distribution-based term reweighting used in 
relevance feedback. 
In this paper, we describe a method of full-text 
topic expansion where the expansion passages are 
obtained from an automatic text summarizer. A 
preliminary examination of Tt{EC-6 results indicate 
that this mode of expansion is at least as effective 
as the purely manual expansion which requires the 
users to read entire documents to select expansion 
passages. This brings us a step closer to a fully au- 
tomated expansion: the human-decision factor has 
been reduced to an accept/reject decision for ex- 
panding the search query with a summary. 
Summar izat ion -6ased  query  expansion 
We used our automatic text summarizer to de- 
rive query-specific summaries of documents returned 
from the first round of retrieval. The summaries 
were usually 1 or 2 consecutive paragraphs selected 
from the original document text. The initial purpose 
was to show to the user, by the way of a quick-read 
abstract, why a document has been retrieved. If the 
summary appeared relevant and moreover captured 
some important aspect of relevant information, then 
the user had an option to paste it into the query, 
thus increasing the chances of a more successful sub- 
sequent search. Note again that it wasn't important 
if the summarized ocuments were themselves rele- 
vant, although they usually were. 
The query expansion interaction proceeds as fol- 
lows: 
1. The initial natural anguage statement of informa- 
tion need is submitted to SMART-based NLIK re- 
trieval engine via a Query Expansion Tool (QET) 
interface. The statement is converted into an in- 
1259 
ternal search query and run against he TREC 
database. 2 
2. NEIR returns top N (=30) documents from the 
database that match the search query. 
3. The user determines a topic for the summarizer. 
By default, it is the title field of the initial search 
statement (see below). 
4. The summarizer is invoked to automatically sum- 
marize each of the N documents with respect o 
the selected topic. 
5. The user reviews the summaries (spending ap- 
prox. 5-15 seconds per summary) and de-selects 
these that are not relevant o the search state- 
ment. 
6. All remaining summaries are automatically at- 
tached to the search statement. 
7. The expanded search statement is passed through 
a series of natural anguage processing steps and 
then submitted for the final retrieval. 
A partially expanded TREC Topic 304 is shown 
below. The original topic comprises the first four 
fields, with the Expanded field added through the 
query expansion process. The initial query, while 
somewhat lengthy by IR standards (though not by 
TREC standards) is still quite generic in form, that 
is, it supplies few specifics to guide the search. In 
contrast, the Expanded section supplies not only 
many concrete xamples of relevant concepts (here, 
names of endangered mammals) but also the lan- 
guage and the style used by others to describe them. 
< ~op > 
<num > Number: 304 
< f~le  > Endangered Species (Mammals)  
< desc > Description: 
Compile a list of mammals  that  are considered to be endan- 
gered, identify their  hab i tat  and, if possible, specify what 
threatens them. 
<narr  > Narrative: 
Any document identifying a mammal  as endangered is rel- 
evant. Statements  of author i t ies d isput ing the endangered 
status  would also be relevant. A document containing infor- 
mat ion on hab i tat  and populat ions of a mammal  identified 
elsewhere as endangered would also be relevant even if the 
document at hand did not identify the species as endan- 
gered. Generalized statements  about  endangered species 
without reference to specific mammals  would not be rele- 
vant. 
< expd > Expanded:  
~TFtEC-6 database consisted of approx. 2 GBytes of 
documents from Associated Press newswire, Wall Street 
Journal, Financial Times, Federal Keglster, FBIS and 
other sources (Haxman & Voorhees 1998). 
The Service is responsible \[or eight species ot" marine mam- 
mals under the jur isdict ion of the Department  of the Inte- 
rior, as assigned by the Marine Mammal  Protect ion Act of 
1972. These species are polar bear, sea and marine otters, 
walrus, manatees (three species) and dugong. The report 
reviews the Service's marine mammal-re lated act iv i t ies dar- 
ing the report period. 
The U.S. Fish and Wildl i fe Service had classified the pri- 
mate  as a "threatened" species, but officials said that  more 
protect ion was needed in view of recent studies document-  
ing a drast ic decline in the populat ions of wild chimps in 
AFrica. 
The Endangered Species Act was passed in 1973 and has 
been used to provide protect ion to the bald eagle and grizzly 
bear, among other animals. 
Under the law, a designation ot" a threatened species means 
it is l ikely to become ext inct  wi thout  protection, whereas 
ext inct ion is viewed as a certainty for an endangered 
species. 
The  bear on Cal i fornia 's  state flag should remind us oF what  
we have done to some or our species, I t  is a grizzly. And  
it is ext inct  in Cal i fornia and in most other states where it 
once roamed. 
< /~op > 
In the next section we describe the summarization 
process in detail. 
Robust  text  summar izat ion  
Perhaps the most difficult problem in designing an 
automatic text summarization is to define what a 
summary is, and how to tell a summary from a non- 
summary, or a good summary from a bad one. The 
answer depends in part upon who the summary is 
intended for, and in part upon what it is meant o 
achieve, which in large measure precludes any ob- 
jective evaluation. For most of us, a summary is a 
brief synopsis of the content of a larger document, an 
abstract recounting the main points while suppress- 
ing most details. One purpose of having a summary 
is to quickly learn some facts, and decide what you 
want to do with the entire story. Therefore, one im- 
portant evaluation criterion is the tradeoff between 
the degree of compression afforded by the summary, 
which may result in a decreased accuracy of infor- 
mation, and the time required to review that infor- 
mation. This interpretations is particularly useful, 
though it isn't the only one acceptable, in summariz- 
ing news and other report-like documents. It is also 
well suited for evaluating the usefulness of summa- 
rization in context of an information retrieval sys- 
tem, where the user needs to rapidly and efficiently 
review the documents returned from search for an 
indication of relevance and, possibly, to see which 
aspect of relevance is present. 
Our early inspiration, and a benchmark, have 
been the Quick Read Summaries, posted daily off 
the front page of New York Times on-line edition 
(htip://www.nytimes.com). These summaries, pro- 
duced manually by NYT staff, are assembled out of 
1260 
passages, sentences, and sometimes entence frag- 
ments taken from the main article with very few, 
if any, editorial adjustmergs. The effect is a col- 
lection of perfectly coherent idbits of news: the 
who, the what, and when, but perhaps not why. 
This kind of summarization, where appropriate pas- 
sages are extracted from the original text, is very 
efficient, and arguably ei~ective, because it doesn't 
require generation of any new text, and thus low- 
ers the risk of misinterpretation. It is also relatively 
easier to automate, because we only need to iden- 
tify the suitable passages among the other text, a 
task that can be accomplished via shallow NEP and 
statistical techniques. 3 
It has been noted, eg., (Rino & Scott 1994), 
(Weissberg & Buker 1990), that certain types of 
tex~s, such as news articles, technical reports, re- 
search papers, etc., conform to a set of style and or- 
ganization constraints, called the Discourse Macro 
Structure (DMS) which help the author to achieve 
a desired communication effect. News reports, for 
example, tend to be built hierarchically out of com- 
ponents which fall roughly into one of the two cate- 
gories: the what's-the-news category, and the op- 
tional background category. The background, if 
present, supplies the context necessary to under- 
stand the central story, or to make a follow up story 
self-contained. This organization is oiSen reflected 
in the summary, as illustrated in the example below 
from NYT 10/15/97, where the highlighted portion 
provides the background for the main news: 
Spies Just Wouldn't Come In From Cold War, Files Show 
Terry  Squillaco~e was a Pentagon lawyer who haled her 
job. Kur t  Stand was a union leader wi~h an aging beat- 
nik's slouch. J im Clark was a lonely pr ivate investigator. 
\[A 200-page affidavit filed last week by\] the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation says the three were out-oF-work spies \[or 
East Germany. And alter that state withered away, it says, 
they desperately reached out for anyone who might want 
them as secret agents. 
In this example, the two passages are non- 
consecutive paragraphs in the original text; the 
string in the square brackets at the opening of the 
second passage has been omitted in the summary. 
Here the human summarizer's actions appear rela- 
tively straightforward, and it would not be difficult 
to propose an algorithmic method to do the same. 
This may go as follows: 
1. Choose a DMS template for the summary; e.g., 
Background+News. 
3This approach is contrasted wlth a far more difl~- 
cult method of summarizing text "in your own words." 
Computational attempts at such discourse-level and 
knowledge-level summarization i clude (Ono, Sumita & 
Miike 1994), (McKeown & tIadev 1995), (DeJong 1982), 
and (I\]ehnert 1981). 
2. Select appropriate passages from the original text 
and fill the DMS template. 
3. Assemble the summary in the desired order; delete 
extraneous words. 
We have used this method to build our auto- 
mated summarizer. We overcome the shortcom- 
ings of sentence-based summarization by working on 
paragraph level instead. 4 The summarizer has been 
applied to a variety of documents, including Asso- 
ciated Press newswires, articles from the New York 
Times, Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, San 
Jose Mercury, as well as documents from the Federal 
Register, and Congressional Record. The program 
is domain independent, and it can be easily adapted 
to most European languages. It is also very robust: 
we used it to derive summaries of thousands of doc- 
uments returned by an information retrieval system. 
It can work in two modes: generic and topical. In 
the generic mode, it captures the main topic of a 
document; in the topical mode, it takes a user sup- 
plied statement of interest and derives a summary 
related to this topic. The topical summary is usu- 
ally different han the generic summary of ihe same 
document. 
Deriving automatic summaries 
Each component of a summary DMS needs to be in- 
stantiated by one or more passages extracted from 
the original text. Initially, all eligible passages (i.e., 
explicitly delineated paragraphs) within a document 
are potential candidates for the summary. As we 
move through text, paragraphs are scored for their 
summary-worthiness. The final score for each pas- 
sage, normalized for its length, is a weighted sum 
of a number of minor scores, using the following 
formula: 5
1 
score(paragraph) = -\[ ? E w~ ? S~ (1) 
h 
where Sa is a minor score calculated using metric h; 
wh is the weight reflecting how effective this metric 
is in general; l is the length of the segment. 
The following metrics are used to score passages 
considered for the main news section of the summary 
DMS. We list here only the criteria which are the 
4Kefer to (Euhn 1958) (Paice 1990) (l~u, Brandow 
& Mitze 1994) (Kupiec, Pedersen & Chen 1995) for 
sentence-based summarization approaches. 
SThe weights w~ are trainable in a supervised mode, 
given a corpus of texts and their summaries, or in an un- 
supervised mode as described in (Strzalkowski & Wang 
1996). For the purpose of the experiments described 
here, these weights have been set manually. 
1261 
most relevant for generating summaries in contex~ 
of an information retrieval system. 
1. Words and phrases frequergly occurring in a tex~ 
are likely to be indicative of its content, espe- 
cially if such words or phrases do not occur olden 
elsewhere in the database. A weighted frequency 
score, similar to tf~df used in automatic tex~ in- 
dexing is applicable. Here, idf stands for the in- 
verted document frequency of a term. 
2. Title of a tex~ is often strongly related to its con- 
tent. Therefore, words and phrases from the title 
repeated in text are considered as important in- 
dicators of content concentration within a docu- 
men& 
3. Noun phrases occurring in the opening sentences 
of multiple paragraphs tend to be indicative of the 
content. These phrases, along with words from the 
title receive premium scores. 
4. In addition, all significant terms in a passage (i.e., 
other than the common stopwords) are ranked 
by a passage-level inverted frequency distribution, 
e.g., N/pf, where pf is the number of passages 
containing the term and N is the total number of 
passages contained in a document. 
5. For generic-type summaries, in case of score ties 
~he passages closer to the beginning of a text are 
preferred to those located towards the end. 
The process of passage selection as described here 
resembles query-based ocument retrieval. The 
"documents" here are the passages, and the "query" 
is a set of words and phrases found in the document's 
title and in the openings of some paragraphs. Note 
that the summarizer scores both single- and multi- 
paragraph passages, which makes it more indepen- 
dent from any particular physical paragraph struc- 
ture of a document. 
Supp ly ing  the lSacl~ground passage  
The background section supplies information that 
makes the summary self-contained. For example, a
passage selected from a document may have signif- 
icant links, both explicit and implicit, to the sur- 
rounding context, which if severed are likely to ren- 
der the passage uncomprehensible, or even mislead- 
ing. The following passage illustrates the point: 
"Once again this demonstrates the substantial influence 
Iran holds over terrorist kidnapers," Redman said, adding 
that it is not yet clear what prompted Iran to take the ac- 
tion it did. 
Adding a background paragraph makes this a far 
more informative summary: 
Both the French and Iranian governments acknowledged the 
Iranian role in the release ot" the three French hostages, 
Jean-Paul Kauffmann, Marcel Carton and Marcel Fontaine. 
"Once again this demonstrates the substantial influence 
Iran holds over terrorist kidnapers," Redman said, adding 
that it is not yet clear what prompted Iran to take the ac- 
tion it did. 
Below are three main criteria we consider to decide 
if a background passage is required, and if so, how 
to get one. 
1. One indication that a background information 
may be needed is the presence of outgoing refer- 
ences, such as anaphors. If an anaphor is detected 
within the first N (=6) items (words, phrases) of 
the selected passage, the preceding passage is ap- 
pended to the summary. Anaphors and other ref- 
erences are identified by the presence of pronouns, 
definite noun phrases, and quoted expressions. 
. Initially the passages are formed from single physi- 
cal paragraphs, but for some texts the required in- 
formation may be spread over multiple paragraphs 
so that no clear "winner" can be selected. Sub- 
sequently, multi-paragraph passages are scored, 
starting with pairs of adjacent paragraphs. 
. If the selected main summary passage is shorter 
than 15 characters, then the passage following it is 
added to the to the summary. The value of E de- 
pends upon the average length of the documents 
being summarized, and it was set as 100 charac- 
ters for AP newswire articles. This helps avoiding 
choppy summaries from texts with a weak para- 
graph structure. 
Imp lernen~af ion  and  eva luat ion  
The summarizer has been implemented as a demon- 
stration system, primarily for news summarization. 
In general we are quite pleased with the system's 
performance. The summarizer is domain indepen- 
dent, and can effectively process a range of types 
of documents. The summaries are quite informative 
with excellent readability. They are also quite short, 
generally only 5 to 10% of the original text and can 
be read and understood very quickly. 
As discussed before, we have included the sum- 
marizer as a helper application within the user in- 
terface to the natural anguage information retrieval 
system. In this application, the summarizer is used 
to derive query-related summaries of documents re- 
turned from database search. The summarization 
method used here is the same as for generic sum- 
maries described thus far, with the following excep- 
tions: 
1262 
1. The passage-search "query" is derived from the 
user's document search query rather than from 
the document title. 
2. The distance of a passage from the beginning 
of the document is not considered towards its 
summary-worthiness. 
The topical summaries are read by the users to 
quickly decide their relevance to the search topic 
and, if desired, to expand the initial information 
search statement in order to produce a significantly 
more effective query. The following example shows 
a topical (query-guided summary) and compares it 
to the generic summary (we abbreviate SGML for 
brevity). 
INITIAL SEARCH STATEMENT: 
< ~iHe > Evidence of Iranian support for Lebanese hostage 
takers. 
< desc > Document will give data linking Iran to groups 
in Lebanon which seize and hold Western hostages. 
FIRST RETRIEVED DOCUMENT (TITLE): 
Arab Hijackers' Demands Similar To Those of Hostage- 
Takers in Lebanon 
SUMMARIZER TOPIC: 
Evidence of Iranian support For Lebanese hostage takers 
TOPICAL  SUMMARY (used for expansion): 
Mugniyeh, 36, is a key figure in the security apparatus of 
Hezbollah, or Party of God, an Iranian-backed SMite move- 
ment believed to be the umbrella For Factions holding most 
of the 22 foreign hostages in Lebanon. 
GENERIC SUMMARY (for comparison): 
The demand made by hijackers of a Kuwaiti jet is the same 
as that made by Moslems holding Americans hostage in 
Lebanon - freedom \['or 17 pro-lranian extremists jailed in 
Kuwait \['or bombing U.S. and French embassies there in 
1983. 
PARTIALLY EXPANDED SEARCH STATEMENT: 
< ~itle > Evidence of Iranian support for Lebanese hostage 
takers. 
< desc > Document will give data linking Iran to groups 
in Lebanon which seize and hold Western hostages. 
< expd > Mugniyeh, 36, is a key figure in the security 
apparatus of Hezbollah, or Party of God, an Iranian-backed 
Shiite movement believed to be the umbrella For factions 
holding most of the 22 t'oreign hostages in Lebanon. 
Overv iew o f  t~tie NL IR  System 
The Natural I~anguage Information 17Letrieval Sys- 
tem (NISIR) ? as been designed as a series of par- 
allel text processing and indexing "s\[reams '~. Each 
stream constitutes an alternative representation of 
the database obtained using differenl combination 
of natural language processing steps. The purpose 
of NI~ processing is to obtain a more accurate con- 
tent representation than that based on words alone, 
which will in turn lead to improved performance. 
The following term extraction steps correspond to 
some of the streams used in our syslem: 
6For more  details, see (Strzalkowskl 1995), (Strza- 
Ikowski et al 1997) 
1. Elimination of stopwords: Documents are indexed 
using original words minus selected "stopwords" 
that include all closed-class words (determiners, 
prepositions, etc.) 
2. Morphological stemming: Words are normalized 
across morphological variants using a lexicon- 
based stemmer. 
3. Phrase extraction: Shallow text processing tech- 
niques, including part-of-speech tagging, phrase 
boundary detection, and word co-occurrence met- 
rics are used to identify relatively stable groups of 
words, e.g., joint venture. 
4. Phrase normalization: Documents are processed 
with a syntactic parser, and "Head+Modifier" 
pairs are extracted in order to normalize across 
syntactic variants and reduce to a common "con- 
cept", e.g., weapon+proliferate. 
5. Proper name extraction: Names of people, loca- 
lions, organizations, etc. are identified. 
Search queries, after appropriate processing, are 
run against each stream, i.e., a phrase query against 
the phrase stream, a name query against he name 
stream, etc. The results are obtained by merging 
ranked lists of documents obtained from searching 
all streams. This allows for an easy combination 
of alternative retrieval methods, creating a meta- 
search strategy which maximizes the contribution of 
each stream. Different information retrieval systems 
can used as indexing and search engines each stream. 
In the experiments described here we used Cornell's 
SMART (version 11) (Buckley, et al 1995). 
TREC Eva luat l ion  Resu I t l s  
Table 1 lists selected runs performed with the 
NLIR system on TREC-6 database using 50 queries 
(TREC topics) numbered 301 through 350. The 
expanded query runs are contrasted with runs ob- 
tained using TI~EC original topics using NLIt{ as 
well as Cornell's SMART (version 11) which serves 
here as a benchmark. The first two columns are 
automatic runs, which means that there was no hu- 
man intervention i  the process at any time. Since 
query expansion requires human decision on sum- 
mary selection, these runs (columns 3 and 4) are 
classified as "manual", although most of the process 
is automatic. As can be seen, query expansion pro- 
duces an impressive improvement in precision at all 
levels, l~ecall figures are shown at 1000 retrieved 
documents. 
Query expansion appears to produce consistently 
high gains not only for different sets of queries but 
1263 
Table I: Performance improvement for expanded 
queries 
queries: original original expanded expanded 
SYSTEM SMART NLIR SMART NLIR 
PRECISION 
Average 0.1429 0.1837 0.2672 0.2859 
%change +28.5 +87.0 +100.0 
At 10 docs 0.3000 0.3840 0.5060 0.5200 
%change +28.0 +68.6 +73.3 
At 30 docs 0.2387 0.2747 0.3887 0.3940 
%change +15.0 +62.8 +65.0 
At 100 doc 0.1600 0.1736 0.2480 0.2574 
%change +8.5 +55.0 +60.8 
Recall 0.57 0.53 0.61 0.62 
%change -7.0 +7.0 +8.7 
also for different systems: we asked other groups 
participating in TREC to run search using our ex- 
panded queries, and they reported similarly large 
improvements. 
Finally, we may note that NLP-based indexing has 
also a positive ffect on overall performance, but the 
improvements are relatively modest, particularly on 
the expanded queries. A similar effect of reduced ef- 
fectiveness of linguistic indexing has been reported 
also in connection with improved term weighting 
techniques. 
Conc lus ions  
We have developed a method to derive quick-read 
summaries from news-like texts using a number of 
shallow NISP and simple quantitative techniques. 
The summary isassembled out of passages extracted 
from the original text, based on a pre-determined 
DMS template. This approach as produced a very 
e~cient and robust summarizer for news-like tex~s. 
We used the summarizer, via the QET inter- 
face, to build effective search queries for an informa- 
tion retrieval system. This has been demonstrated 
to produce dramatic performance improvements in 
TREC evaluations. We believe that this query ex- 
pansion approach will also prove useful in searching 
very large databases where obtaining a full index 
may be impractical or impossible, and accurate sam- 
pling will become critical. 
Acknowledgements We thank Chris Buckley for 
helping us to understand the inner workings of 
SMART, and also for providing SMART system re- 
sults used here. This paper is based upon work sup- 
ported in part by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency under Tipster Phase-3 Contract 97- 
F157200-000. 
References  
Buckley, Chris, Amit Singhal, Mandar Mitra, Gerard Salton. 
1995. "New Retrieval Approaches Using SMART: TREC 4". 
Proceedings of TREC-4 Cont'erence, NIST Special Publication 
500-236. 
DeJong, G.G., 1992. An overview of the FRUMP system, Lehn- 
err, W.G. and M.H. Ringle (eds), Strategies \]or NLP, Lawrence 
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Harman, Donna. 1988. "Towards interactive query expansion." 
Proceedings of ACM SIGIR-88, pp. 321-331. 
Harman, Donna, and Ellen Voorhees (eds). 1998. The Text Re- 
trieval Conference (TREC-6). NIST Special Publication (to ap- 
pear). 
Kupiec,J., J. Pedersen and F. Chen, 1995. A trainable document 
summarizer, Proceedings of ACM SIGIR-95, pp. 68-73. 
Lehnert, W.O., 1981. Plots Units and Narrative summarization, 
Cognitive Science, 4, pp 293-331. 
Luhn, H.P., 1958. The automatic creation of literature abstracts, 
IBM Journal, Apt, pp. 159-165. 
McKeown, K.R. and D.R. Radev, 1995. Generating Summaries 
of Multiple News Articles, Proceedings of ACM SIGIR-95 
Proceedings of 5th Message Understanding Conference, San 
Francisco, CA:Morgan Kaufman Publishers. 1993. 
OnO, K., K. Sumita and S.Miike, 1994. Abstract Generation 
based on Rhetorical Structure Extraction, COLINGg$, vol 1, 
pp 344-348, Kyoto, Japan. 
Paice, C.D., 1990. Constructing literature abstracts by com- 
puter: techniques and prospects, Information Processing and 
Managemenf, vol 26 (1), pp 171-186. 
Rau, L.F., R. Brandow and K. Mitze, 1994. Domain- 
independent summarization r news, Summarizing text for in- 
~elligen~ communication, page 71-75, Dagstuhl, Gemany. 
RinG, L.H.M. and D. Scott, 1994. Content selection in summary 
generation, Third International Con\]erence on the Cognitive 
Science of NLP, Dublin City University, Ireland. 
Rocchio, J. J. 1971. "Relevance Feedback in Informatio Re- 
trieval." In Salton, G. (Ed.), The SMART Retrieval System, 
pp. 313-323. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, Jin Wang, and Bowden Wise. 1998. "A 
Robust Practical Text Summarization." Proceedings of AAAI 
Spring Symposium on Intelligent Text Summarization (to ap- 
pear). 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, Fang Lin, Jose Perez-Carballo, and Jin 
Wang. 1997. "Natural Language Information Retrieval: TRECo 
6 Report." Proceedings of TREC-6 conference. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek, Louise Guthrie, Jussi Karlgren, Jim Leis- 
tensnider, Fang Lin, Jose Perez-Carballo, Troy Straszheim, Jin 
Wang, and Jon Wilding. 1997. "Natural Language Information 
Retrieval: TREC?5 Report." Proceedings of TREC-5 confer? 
ence.  
Strzalkowski, Tomek. 1995. "Natural Language Information Re- 
trieval" Information Processing and Management, Vol. 31, No. 
3, pp. 397-417. Pergamon/Elsevier. 
Strzalkowski, Tomek. and Jin Wang, 1996. A Serf-Learning Uni- 
versal Concept Spotter, Proceedings of COLING-96, pp. 931- 
936. 
Tipster Tez~ Phase ~: ~ month Conference, Morgan- 
Kaufmann. 1996 
Voorhees, Ellen M. 1994. "Query Expansion Using Lexical- 
Semantic Relations." Proceedings of ACM SIGIR'94, pp. 61-70. 
Wetssberg, R. and S. Buker, 1990. Writing up Research: Ex- 
perimental Research Repor~ Writing \]or Student of English, 
Prentice Hail, Inc. 
1264 
