The Computational Lexical Semantics of Syntagmatic Relations 
Eve lyne  V iegas ,  S tephen Bea le  and  Serge i  N i renburg  
New Mexico State  Univers i ty 
Comput ing  Research Lab, 
Las Cruces, NM 88003, 
USA 
viegas, sb, sergei?crl, nmsu. edu 
Abst ract  
In this paper, we address the issue of syntagmatic 
expressions from a computational lexical semantic 
perspective. From a representational viewpoint, we 
argue for a hybrid approach combining linguistic and 
conceptual paradigms, in order to account for the 
continuum we find in natural languages from free 
combining words to frozen expressions. In particu- 
lar, we focus on the place of lexical and semantic 
restricted co-occurrences. From a processing view- 
point, we show how to generate/analyze syntag- 
matic expressions by using an efficient constraint- 
based processor, well fitted for a knowledge-driven 
approach. 
1 In t roduct ion  
You can take advantage o\] the chambermaid 1 isnot a 
collocation one would like to generate in the context 
of a hotel to mean "use the services of." This is why 
collocations should constitute an important part in 
the design of Machine Translation or Multilingual 
Generation systems. 
In this paper, we address the issue of syntagmatic 
expressions from a computational lexical semantic 
perspective. From a representational viewpoint, we 
argue for a hybrid approach combining linguistic and 
conceptual paradigms, in order to account for the 
continuum we find in natural languages from free 
combining words to frozen expressions (such as in 
idioms kick the (proverbial) bucket). In particular, 
we focus on the representation f restricted seman- 
tic and lexical co-occurrences, such as heavy smoker 
and pro#ssor ... students respectively, that we de- 
fine later. From a processing viewpoint, we show 
how to generate/analyze syntagmatic expressions by 
using an efficient constraint-based processor, well fit- 
ted for a knowledge-driven approach. In the follow- 
ing, we first compare different approaches to collo- 
cations. Second, we present our approach in terms 
of representation a d processing. Finally, we show 
how to facilitate the acquisition of co-occurrences by 
using 1) the formalism of lexical rules (LRs), 2) an 
1Lederer, R. 1990. Anguished English A Laurel Book, Dell 
Publishing. 
inheritance hierarchy of Lexical Semantic Functions 
(LSFs). 
2 Approaches  to  Syntagmat ic  
Re la t ions  
Syntagmatic relations, also known as collocations, 
are used differently by lexicographers, linguists and 
statisticians denoting almost similar but not identi- 
cal classes of expressions. 
The traditional approach to collocations has been 
lexicographic. Here dictionaries provide infor- 
mation about what is unpredictable or idiosyn- 
cratic. Benson (1989) synthesizes Hausmann's stud- 
ies on collocations, calling expressions such as com- 
mit murder, compile a dictionary, inflict a wound, 
etc. "fixed combinations, recurrent combinations" 
or "collocations". In Hausmann's terms (1979) a 
collocation iscomposed of two elements, a base ("Ba- 
sis") and a collocate ("Kollokator"); the base is se- 
mantically autonomous whereas the collocate cannot 
be semantically interpreted in isolation. In other 
words, the set of lexical collocates which can com- 
bine with a given basis is not predictable and there- 
fore collocations must be listed in dictionaries. 
It is hard to say that there has been a real focus 
on collocations from a l inguistic perspective. The 
lexicon has been broadly sacrificed by both English- 
speaking schools and continental European schools. 
The scientific agenda of the former has been largely 
dominated by syntactic issues until recently, whereas 
the latter was more concerned with pragmatic as- 
pects of natural anguages. The focus has been on 
grammatical collocations uch as adapt to, aim at, 
look \]or. Lakoff (1970) distinguishes a class of ex- 
pressions which cannot undergo certain operations, 
such as nominalization, causativization: the problem 
is hard; *the hardness of the problem; *the problem 
hardened. The restriction on the application of cer- 
tain syntactic operations can help define collocations 
such as hard problem, for example. Mel'~uk's treat- 
ment of collocations will be detailed below. 
In recent years, there has been a resurgence of 
statist ical  approaches applied to the study of nat- 
ural languages. Sinclair (1991) states that '% word 
1328 
which occurs in close proximity to a word under in- 
vestigation is called a collocate of it . . . .  Collocation 
is the occurrence of two or more words within a 
short space of each other in a text". The prob- 
lem is that with such a definition of collocations, 
even when improved, z one identifies not only collo- 
cations but free-combining pairs frequently appear- 
ing together such as lawyer-client; doctor-hospital. 
However, nowadays, researchers seem to agree that 
combining statistic with symbolic approaches lead 
to quantifiable improvements (Klavans and Resnik, 
1996). 
The  Mean ing  Text  Theory  Approach  The 
Meaning Text Theory (MTT) is a generator-oriented 
lexical grammatical formalism. Lexical knowledge is 
encoded in an entry of the Explanatory Combina- 
torial Dictionary (ECD), each entry being divided 
into three zones: the semantic zone (a semantic net- 
work representing the meaning of the entry in terms 
of more primitive words), the syntactic zone (the 
grammatical properties of the entry) and the lexi- 
cal combinatorics zone (containing the values of the 
Lexical  Funct ions  (LFs) 3). LFs are central to the 
study of collocations: 
A lexical function F is a correspondence 
which associates a lexical item L, called the 
key word of F, with a set of lexical items 
F(L)-the value of F. (Mel'6uk, 1988) 4
We focus here on syntagmatic LFs describing co- 
occurrence r lations uch as pay attention, legitimate 
complaint; from a distance. 5 
Heylen et al (1993) have worked out some cases 
which help license a starting point for assigning LFs. 
They distinguish four types of syntagmatic LFs: 
? evaluative qualifier 
Magn(bleed) = profusely 
? distributional qualifier 
Mult(sheep) = flock 
? co -occur rence  
Loc-in(distance)= at a distance 
? verbal operator 
Oper l (at tent ion)  = pay 
The MTT approach is very interesting as it pro- 
vides a model of production well suited for genera- 
tion with its different strata and also a lot of lexical- 
semantic information. It seems nevertheless that all 
2Church and Hanks (1989), Smadja (1993) use statistics 
in their algorithms to extract collocations from texts. 
3See (Iordanskaja et al, 1991) and (Ramos et al, 1994) 
for their use of LFs in MTT and NLG respectively. 
4(Held, 1989) contrasts Hausman's base and collate to 
Mel'tuk's keyword and LF values. 
5There are about 60 LFs listed said to be universal; the 
lexicographic approach of Mel'tuk and Zolkovsky has been 
applied among other languages to Russian, French, German 
and English. 
the collocational information is listed in a static way. 
We believe that one of the main drawbacks of the ap- 
proach is the lack of any predictable calculi on the 
possible expressions which can collocate with each 
other semant ica l ly .  
3 The  Computat iona l  Lex ica l  
Semant ic  Approach  
In order to account for the continuum we find in nat- 
ural languages, we argue for a continuum perspec- 
tive, spanning the range from free-combining words 
to idioms, with semantic ollocations and idiosyn- 
crasies in between as defined in (Viegas and Bouil- 
lon, 1994): 
? f ree -combin ing  words (the girl ate candies) 
* semant ic  co l locat ions  (fast car; long book) 6 
? id iosyncras ies  (large coke; green jealousy) 
? id ioms (to kick the (proverbial) bucket) 
Formally, we go from a purely compositional 
approach in "free-combining words" to a non- 
compositional approach in idioms. In between, a 
(semi-)compositional approach is still possible. (Vie- 
gas and Bouillon, 1994) showed that we can reduce 
the set of what are conventionally considered as id- 
iosyncrasies by differentiating "true" idiosyncrasies 
(difficult to derive or calculate) from expressions 
which have well-defined calculi, being compositional 
in nature, and that have been called semantic ollo- 
cations. In this paper, we further distinguish their 
idiosyncrasies into: 
? res t r i c ted  semant ic  co -occur rence ,  where 
the meaning of the co-occurrence is semi- 
compositional between the base and the collo- 
cate (strong coffee, pay attention, heavy smoker, 
...) 
? res t r i c ted  lexical co -occur rence ,  where the 
meaning of the collocate is compositional but 
has a lexical idiosyncratic behavior (lecture ... 
student; rancid butter; sour milk). 
We provide below examples of restricted seman- 
tic co-occurrences in (1), and restricted lexical co- 
occurrences in (2). 
Rest r i c ted  semant ic  co -occur rence  The se- 
mantics of the combination of the entries is semi- 
compositional. In other words, there is an entry in " 
the lexicon for the base, (the semantic ollocate is 
encoded inside the base), whereas we cannot directly 
refer to the sense of the semantic collocate in the 
lexicon, as it is not part of its senses. We assign 
the co-occurrence a new semi-compositional sense, 
6See (Pustejovsky, 1995) for his account of such expres- 
sions using a coercion operator. 
1329 
where the sense of the base is composed with a new 
sense for the collocate. 
(la) #O=\[key: 
rel: 
(lb) #0= \[key: 
rel: 
"smoker", 
\[syntagmatic: LSFIntensity 
\[base: #0, collocate: 
\[key: "heavy", 
gram: \[subCat: Attributive, 
freq: \[value: 8\]\]\]\]\] ...\] 
"attention", 
\[syntagmatic: LSFOper 
\[base: #0, collocate: 
\[key: "pay", 
gram: \[subCat: SupportVerb, 
freq: \[value: 5\]\]\]\]\] ...\] 
In examples (1), the LSFs (LSFIntensity, LS- 
FOper, ...) are equivalent (and some identical) to 
the LFs provided in the ECD. The notion of LSF 
is the same as that of LFs. However, LSFs and 
LFs are different in two ways: i) conceptually, LSFs 
are organized into an inheritance hierarchy; ii) for- 
mally, they are rules, and produce a new entry com- 
posed of two entries, the base with the collocate. 
As such, the new composed entry is ready for pro- 
cessing. These LSFs signal a compositional syntax 
and a semi-compositional semantics. For instance, 
in (la), a heavy smoker is somebody who smokes a 
lot, and not a "fat" person. It has been shown that 
one cannot code in the lexicon all uses of heavy for 
heavy smoker, heavy drinker, .... Therefore, we do 
not have in our lexicon for heavy a sense for "a lot", 
or a sense for "strong" to be composed with wine, 
etc... It is well known that such co-occurrences are 
lexically marked; if we allowed in our lexicons a pro- 
liferation of senses, multiplying ambiguities in anal- 
ysis and choices in generation, then there would be 
no limit to what could be combined and we could 
end up generating *heavy coffee with the sense of 
"strong" for heavy, in our lexicon. 
The left hand-side of the rule LSFIntensity spec- 
ifies an "Intensity-Attribute" applied to an event 
which accepts aspectual features of duration. In 
(la), the event is smoke. The LSFIntensity also 
provides the syntax-semantic interface, allowing for 
an Adj-Noun construction to be either predicative 
(the car is red) or attributive (the red car). We 
need therefore to restrict the co-occurrence to the 
Attributive use only, as the predicative use is not 
allowed: (the smoker is heavy) has a literal meaning 
or figurative, but not collocational. 
In ( lb) again, there is no sense in the dictionary 
for pay which would mean concentrate. The rule LS- 
FOper makes the verb a verbal operator. No further 
restriction is required. 
Rest r i c ted  lexical  co -occur rence  The seman- 
tics of the combination of the entries is composi- 
tional. In other words, there are entries in the lex- 
icon for the base and the collocate, with the same 
senses as in the co-occurrence. Therefore, we can di- 
rectly refer to the senses of the co-occurring words. 
What we are capturing here is a lexical idiosyncrasy 
or in other words, we specify that we should prefer 
this particular combination of words. This is useful 
for analysis, where it can help disambiguate a sense, 
and is most relevant for generation; it can be viewed 
as a preference among the paradigmatic family of 
the co-occurrence. 
(2a) #O=\[key: 
tel: 
"truth", 
\[syntagmatic: LSFSyn 
\[base: #0, collocate: 
\[key: "plain", sense: adj2, 
Ir: \[comp:no, superl:no\]\]\]\] ...\] 
(2b) #0=\[key: 
rel: 
"pupil", 
\[syntagmatic: LSFSyn 
\[base: #0, collocate: 
\[key: "teacher", sense: n2, 
freq: \[value: 5\]\]\]\]...\] 
(2c) #O=\[key: 
tel: 
"conference" , 
\[syntagmatic: LSFSyn 
\[base: #0, collocate: 
\[key: "student", sense: nl, 
freq: \[value: 9\]\]\]\] ...\] 
In examples (2), the LSFSyn produces a new en- 
try composed of two or more entries. As such, the 
new entry is ready for processing. LSFSyn signals 
a compositional syntax and a compositional seman- 
tics, and restricts the use of lexemes to be used in 
the composition. We can directly refer to the sense 
of the collocate, as it is part of the lexicon. 
In (2a) the entry for truth specifies one co- 
occurrence (plain truth), where the sense of plain 
here is adj2 (obvious), and not say adj3 (flat). The 
syntagmatic expression inherits all the zones of the 
entry for "plain", sense adj2, we only code here the 
irregularities. For instance, "plain" can be used 
as "plainer . . . .  plainest" in its "plain" sense in its 
adj2 entry, but not as such within the lexical co- 
occurrence "*plainer truth", "*plainest truth", we 
therefore must block it in the collocate, as expressed 
in (comp: no, superh no). In other words, we will 
not generate "plainer/plainest truth". Examples 
(2b) and (2c) illustrate complex entries as there is 
no direct grammatical dependency between the base 
and the collocate. In (2b) for instance, we prefer 
to associate teacher in the context of a pupil rather 
than any other element belonging to the paradig- 
matic family of teacher such as professor, instructor. 
Formally, there is no difference between the two 
types of co-occurrences. In both cases, we specify 
the base (which is the word described in the en- 
1330 
try itself), the collocate, the frequency of the co- 
occurrence in some corpus, and the LSF which links 
the base with the collocate. Using the formalism 
of typed feature structures, both cases are of type 
Co-occurrence as defined below: 
Co-occurrence = \[base: Entry, 
collocate: Entry, 
freq: Frequency\] ; 
3.1 Processing of Syntagrnatic Relations 
We utilize an efficient constraint-based control mech- 
anism called Hunter-Gatherer (HG)  (Beale, 1997). 
HG allows us to mark certain compositions as be- 
ing dependent on each other and then forget about h + 
them. Thus, once we have two lexicon entries bitter 
that we know go together, HG will ensure that heavy 
they do. HG also gives preference to co-occurring big 
compositions. In analysis, meaning representations 
constructed using co-occurrences are preferred over v + 
those that are not, and, in generation, realizations oppose 
involving co-occurrences are preferred over equally oblige 
correct, but non-cooccurring realizations, r 
The real work in processing is making sure that we 
have the correct two entries to put together. In re- 
striated semantic o-occurrences, the co-occurrence 
does not have the correct sense in the lexicon. For 
example, when the phrase heavy smoker is encoun- 
tered, the lexicon entry for heavy would not contain 
the correct sense. ( la) could be used to create the 
correct entry. In (la), the entry for smoker contains 
the key, or trigger, heavy. This signals the analyzer 
to produce another sense for heavy smoker. This 
sense will contain the same syntactic information 
present in the "old" heavy, except for any modifi- 
cations listed in the "gram" section (see (la)). The 
semantics of the new sense comes directly from the 
LSF. Generation works the same, except the trig- 
ger is different. The input to generation will be a 
SMOKE event along with an Intensity-Attribute. 
(la), which would be used to realize the SMOKE 
event, would trigger LSFIntensify which has the 
Intensity-Attribute in the left hand-side, thus con- 
firming the production of heavy. 
Restricted lexical co-occurrences are easier in the v + N 
sense that the correct entry already exists in the lexi- 
con. The analyzer/generator simply needs to detect 
the co-occurrence and add the constraint hat the N + N 
corresponding senses be used together. In examples 
like (2b), there is no direct grammatical or semantic 
relationship between the words that co-occur. Thus, 
the entire clause, sentence or even text may have to 
be searched for the co-occurrence. In practice, we 
limit such searches to the sentence level. 
7The selection of co-occurrences i  part  of the lexical pro- 
cess, in other words, if there are reasons not to choose a co- 
occurrence because of the presence of modifiers or because 
of styl ist ics reasons, the generator will not generate the co- 
occurrence. 
3.2 Acquisition of Syntagmatic Relations 
The acquisition of syntagmatic relations is knowl- 
edge intensive as it requires human intervention. In 
order to minimize this cost we rely on conceptual 
tools such as lexical rules, on the LSF inheritance 
hierarchy. 
Lexica l  Ru les  in Acquisition The acquisition of 
restricted semantic o-occurrences can be minimized 
by detecting rules between different classes of co- 
occurrences (modulo presence of derived forms in the 
lexicon with same or subsumed semantics). Looking 
at the following example, 
N <=> V + Adv 
resentment resent bitterly 
smoker smoke heavily 
eater eat *bigly 
hdv <=> Adv + Adj-ed 
strongly strongly opposed 
morally morally obliged 
we see that after having acquired with human in- 
tervention co-occurrences belonging to the A + N 
class, we can use lexical rules to derive the V + Adv 
class and also Adv + Adj-ed class. 
Lexical rules are a useful conceptual tool to extend 
a dictionary. (Viegas et al, 1996) used derivational 
lexical rules to extend a Spanish lexicon. We ap- 
ply their approach to the production of restricted 
semantic o-occurrences. Note that eat bigly will be 
produced but then rejected, as the form bigly does 
not exist in a dictionary. The rules overgenerate co- 
occurrences. This is a minor problem for analysis 
than for generation. To use these derived restricted 
co-occurrences in generation, the output of the lexi- 
cal rule processor must be checked. This can be done 
in different ways: dictionary check, corpus check and 
ultimately human check. 
Other classes, such as the ones below can be 
extracted using lexico-statistical tools, such as in 
(Smadja, 1993), and then checked by a human. 
pay attention, meet an obligation, 
commit an offence, ... 
dance marathon, marriage ceremony 
object of derision . . . .  
LSFs  and Inheritance We take advantage of 1) 
the semantics encoded in the lexemes, and 2) an in- 
heritance hierarchy of LSFs. We illustrate briefly 
this notion of LSF inheritance hierarchy. For in- 
stance, the left hand-side of LSFChangeState spec- 
ifies that it applies to foods (solid or liquid) which 
are human processed, and produces the collocates 
rancid, rancio (Spanish). Therefore it could apply 
to milk, butter, or wine. The rule would end up 
1331 
producing rancid milk, rancid butter, or vino rancio 
(rancid wine) which is fine in Spanish. We therefore 
need to further distinguish LSFChangeState into 
LSFChangeStateSolid and LSFChangeStateLiquid. 
This restricts the application of the rule to produce 
rancid butter, by going down the hierarchy. This 
enables us to factor out information common to sev- 
eral entries, and can be applied to both types of 
co-occurrences. We only have to code in the co- 
occurrence information relevant to the combination, 
the rest is inherited from its entry in the dictionary. 
4 Conc lus ion  
In this paper, we built on a continuum perspec- 
tive, knowledge-based, spanning the range from free- 
combining words to  idioms. We further distin- 
guished the notion of idiosyncrasies as defined in 
(Viegas and Bouillon, 1994), into restricted semantic 
co--occurrences and restricted lexical co-occurrences. 
We showed that they were formally equivalent, hus 
facilitating the processing of strictly compositional 
and semi-compositional expressions. Moreover, by 
considering the information in the lexicon as con- 
straints, the linguistic difference between composi- 
tionality and semi-compositionality becomes a vir- 
tual difference for Hunter-Gatherer. We showed 
ways of minimizing the acquisition costs, by 1) using 
lexical rules as a way of expanding co-occurrences, 2) 
taking advantage of the LSF inheritance hierarchy. 
The main advantage ofour approach over the ECD 
approach is to use the semantics coded in the lex- 
emes along with the language independent LSF in- 
heritance hierarchy to propagate r stricted semantic 
co-occurrences. The work presented here is complete 
concerning representational aspects and processing 
aspects (analysis and generation): it has been tested 
on the translations ofon-line unrestricted texts. The 
large-scale acquisition of restricted co-occurrences is 
in progress. 
5 Acknowledgements  
This work has been supported in part by DoD under 
contract number MDA-904-92-C-5189. We would 
like to thank Pierrette Bouillon, L~o Wanner and 
R~mi Zajac for helpful discussions and the anony- 
mous reviewers for their useful comments. 
References  
S. Beale. 1997. HUNTER-GATHERER: Applying 
Constraint Satisfaction, Branch-and-Bound and 
Solution Synthesis to Computational Semantics. 
Ph.D. Diss., Carnegie Mellon University. 
M. Benson. 1989. The Structure of the Colloca- 
tional Dictionary. In International Journal of Lex- 
icography. 
K.W. Church and P. Hanks. 1989. Word Associa- 
tion Norms, Mutual Information and Lexicogra- 
phy. In Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
F.J. Hausmann. 1979. Un dictionnaire des colloca- 
tions est-il possible ? In Travaux de Linguistique 
et de Littdrature XVII, 1. 
U. Heid. 1979. D~crire les collocations : deux ap- 
proches lexicographiques et leur application dans 
un outil informatisd. Internal Report, Stuttgart 
University. 
D. Heylen. 1993. Collocations and the Lexicalisa- 
tion of Semantic Information. In Collocations, TR 
ET-10/75, Taaltechnologie, Utrecht. 
L. Iordanskaja, R. Kittredge and A. Polgu~re. 1991. 
Lexical Selection and Paraphrase in a Meaning- 
text Generation Model. In C. L. Paris, W. 
Swartout and W. Mann (eds), NLG in AI  and 
CL. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
J. Klavans and P. Resnik. 1996. The Balancing Act, 
Combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to 
Language. MIT Press, Cambridge Mass., London 
England. 
G. Lakoff. 1970. Irregularities in Syntax. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. 
I. Mel'~uk. 1988. Paraphrase t lexique dans la 
th~orie Sens-Texte. In Bes & Fuchs (ed) Lexique6. 
S. Nirenburg and I. Nirenburg. 1988. A Framework 
for Lexical Selection in NLG. In Proceedings of 
COLING 88. 
J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. MIT 
Press. 
M. Ramos, A. Tutin and G. Lapalme. 1994. Lexical 
Functions of Explanatory Combinatorial Dictio- 
nary for Lexicalization i Text Generation. In P. 
St-Dizier & E. Viegas (Ed) Computational Lexical 
Semantics: CUP. 
J. Sinclair. 1991. Corpus, Concordance, Colloca- 
tions. Oxford University Press. 
F. Smadja. 1993. Retrieving Collocations from 
Texts: Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1). 
E. Viegas and P. Bouillon. 1994. Semantic Lexi- 
cons: the Cornerstone for Lexical Choice in Nat- 
ural Language Generation. In Proceedings of the 
7th INLG, Kennebunkport. 
E. Viegas, B. Onyshkevych, V. Raskin and S. Niren- 
burg. 1996. From Submit o Submitted via Sub- 
mission: on Lexical Rules in Large-scale Lexi- 
con Acquisition. In Proceedings of the 34th An- 
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguists. 
L. Wanner. 1996. Lexical Functions in Lexicography 
and Natural Language Processing. John Benjamin 
Publishing Company. 
1332 
