Role of Verbs in Document Analysis 
J ud i th  K lavans*  and Min -Yen  Kan**  
Center for Research on Information Access* and Department of Computer Science** 
Columbia University 
New York, NY 10027, USA 
Abst rac t  
We present results of two methods for assessing 
the event profile of news articles as a function 
of verb type. The unique contribution of this 
research is the focus on the role of verbs, rather 
than nouns. Two algorithms are presented and 
evaluated, one of which is shown to accurately 
discriminate documents by type and semantic 
properties, i.e. the event profile. The initial 
method, using WordNet (Miller et al 1990), 
produced multiple cross-classification f arti- 
cles, primarily due to the bushy nature of the 
verb tree coupled with the sense disambiguation 
problem. Our second approach using English 
Verb Classes and Alternations (EVCA) Levin 
(1993) showed that monosemous categorization 
of the frequent verbs in WSJ made it possible to 
usefully discriminate documents. For example, 
our results how that articles in which commu- 
nication verbs predominate nd to be opinion 
pieces, whereas articles with a high percentage 
of agreement verbs tend to be about mergers or 
legal cases. An evaluation is performed on the 
results using Kendall's ~-. We present convinc- 
ing evidence for using verb semantic lasses as 
a discriminant in document classification. 1 
1 Mot ivat ion  
We present techniques tocharacterize document 
type and event by using semantic lassification 
of verbs. The intuition motivating our research 
is illustrated by an examination of the role of 
1The authors acknowledge earlier implementations by 
James Shaw, and very valuable discussion from Vasileios 
Hatzivassiloglou, Kathleen McKeown and Nina Wa- 
cholder. Partial funding for this project was provided 
by NSF award #IRI-9618797 STIMULATE: Generating 
Coherent Summaries of On-Line Documents: Combining 
Statistical and Symbolic Techniques (co-PI's McKeown 
and Klavans), and by the Columbia University Center 
for Research on Information Access. 
680 
nouns and verbs in documents. The listing be- 
low shows the ontological categories which ex- 
press the fundamental conceptual components 
of propositions, using the framework of Jack- 
endoff (1983). Each category permits the for- 
mation of a wh-question, e.g. for \[THING\] "what 
did you buy?" can be answered by the noun 
"a fish". The wh-questions for \[ACTION\] and 
\[EVENT\] can only be answered by verbal con- 
structions, e.g. in the question "what did you 
do?", where the response must be a verb, e.g. 
jog, write, fall, etc. 
\[TH,NG\] \[DmECT,ON\] \[ACTION\] 
\[eLAtE\] \[MANNER\] \[EVENT\] 
\[AMO,NT\] 
The distinction in the ontological categories 
of nouns and verbs is reflected in information ex- 
traction systems. For example, given the noun 
phrases fares and US Air that occur within a 
particular article, the reader will know what the 
story is about, i.e. fares and US Air. However, 
the reader will not know the \[EVENT\], i.e. what 
happened to the fares or to US Air. Did airfare 
prices rise, fall or stabilize? These are the verbs 
most typically applicable to prices, and which 
embody the event. 
1.1 Focus on the Noun 
Many natural anguage analysis ystems focus 
on nouns and noun phrases in order to identify 
information on who, what, and where. For ex- 
ample, in summarization, Barzilay and Elhadad 
(1997) and Lin and Hovy (1997) focus on multi- 
word noun phrases. For information extraction 
tasks, such as the DARPA-sponsored Message 
Understanding Conferences (1992), only a few 
projects use verb phrases (events), e.g. Ap- 
pelt et al (1993), Lin (1993). In contrast, the 
named entity task, which identifies nouns and 
noun phrases, has generated numerous projects 
as evidenced by a host of papers in recent con- 
ferences, (e.g. Wacholder et al 1997, Palmer 
and Day 1997, Neumann et al 1997). Although 
rich information on nominal participants, ac- 
tors, and other entities is provided, the named 
entity task provides no information on what  
happened in the document, i.e. the event  or 
act ion.  Less progress has been made on ways 
to utilize verbal information efficiently. In ear- 
lier systems with stemming, many of the verbal 
and nominal forms were conflated, sometimes 
erroneously. With the development of more so- 
phisticated tools, such as part of speech taggers, 
more accurate verb phrase identification is pos- 
sible. We present in this paper an effective way 
to utilize verbal information for document ype 
discrimination. 
1.2 Focus on the  Verb  
Our initial observations suggested that both oc- 
currence and distribution of verbs in news arti- 
cles provide meaningful insights into both ar- 
ticle type and content. Exploratory analysis 
of parsed Wall Street Journal data 2 suggested 
that articles characterized by movement verbs 
such as drop, plunge, or fall have a different 
event profile from articles with a high percent- 
age of communication verbs, such as report, say, 
comment, or complain. However, without asso- 
ciated nominal arguments, it is impossible to 
know whether the \[THING\] that drops refers to 
airfare prices or projected earnings. 
In this paper, we assume that the set of verbs 
in a document, when considered as a whole, can 
be viewed as part of the conceptual map of the 
events and action in a document, in the same 
way that the set of nouns has been used as a 
concept map for entities. This paper reports on 
two methods using verbs to determine an event 
profile of the document, while also reliably cat- 
egorizing documents by type. Intuitively, the 
event profile refers to the classification of an ar- 
ticle by the kind of event. For example, the 
article could be a discussion event, a reporting 
event, or an argument event. 
To illustrate, consider a sample article from 
WSJ of average length (12 sentences in length) 
with a high percentage of communication verbs. 
The profile of the article shows that there are 
19 verbs: 11 (57%) are communication verbs, 
including add, report, say, and tell. Other 
2Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al 1994) from the Lin- 
guistic Data Consortium. 
681 
verbs include be skeptical, carry, produce, and 
close. Representative nouns include Polaroid 
Corp., Michael Ellmann, Wertheim Schroder 
Co., Prudential-Bache, savings, operating "re- 
sults, gain, revenue, cuts, profit, loss, sales, an- 
alyst, and spokesman. 
In this case, the verbs clearly contribute in- 
formation that this article is a report with 
more opinions than new facts. The prepon- 
derance of communication verbs, coupled with 
proper noun subjects and human nouns (e.g. 
spokesman, analyst) suggest a discussion arti- 
cle. If verbs are ignored, this fact would be 
overlooked. Matches on frequent nouns like gain 
and loss do not discriminate this article from 
one which announces a gain or loss as breaking 
news; indeed, according to our results, a break- 
ing news article would feature a higher percent- 
age of motion verbs rather than verbs of com- 
munication. 
1.3 On Genre  Detect ion  
Verbs are an important factor in providing an 
event profile, which in turn might be used in cat- 
egorizing articles into different genres. Turning 
to the literature in genre classification, Biber 
(1989) outlines five dimensions which can be 
used to characterize genre. Properties for dis- 
tinguishing dimensions include verbal features 
such as tense, agentless passives and infinitives. 
Biber also refers to three verb classes: private, 
public, and suasive verbs. Karlgren and Cut- 
ting (1994) take a computationally tractable set 
of these properties and use them to compute a 
score to recognize text genre using discriminant 
analysis. The only verbal feature used in their 
study is present-tense verb count. As Karlgren 
and Cutting show, their techniques are effective 
in genre categorization, but they do not claim 
to show how genres differ. Kessler et al (1997) 
discuss some of the complexities in automatic 
detection of genre using a set of computation- 
ally efficient cues, such as punctuation, abbrevi- 
ations, or presence of Latinate suffixes. The tax- 
onomy of genres and facets developed in Kessler 
et al is useful for a wide range of types, such 
as found in the Brown corpus. Although some 
of their discriminators could be useful for news 
articles (e.g. presence of second person pronoun 
tends to indicate a letter to the editor), the in- 
dicators do not appear to be directly applicable 
to a finer classification of news articles. 
News articles can be divided into several stan- 
dard categories typically addressed in journal- 
ism textbooks. We base our article category 
ontology, shown in lowercase, on Hill and Breen 
(1977), in uppercase: 
1. FEATURE STORIES  : feature; 
2. INTERPRET IVE  STORIES:  editorial ,  opinion, report; 
3. PROFILES;  
4. PRESS RELEASES:  announcements, mergers, legal cases; 
5. OB ITUARIES;  
6. STAT IST ICAL  INTERPRETAT ION:  posted earnings; 
7. ANECDOTES;  
8. OTHER:  poems. 
The goal of our research is to identify the 
role of verbs, keeping in mind that event profile 
is but one of many factors in determining text 
type. In our study, we explored the contribu- 
tion of verbs as one factor in document type dis- 
crimination; we show how article types can be 
successfully classified within the news domain 
using verb semantic classes. 
2 Initial Observat ions 
We initially considered two specific categories of 
verbs in the corpus: communication verbs and 
support verbs. In the WSJ  corpus, the two most 
common main verbs are say, a communication 
verb, and be, a support verb. In addition to 
say, other high frequency communication verbs 
include report, announce, and state. In journal- 
istic prose, as seen by the statistics in Table 1, 
at least 20% of the sentences contain commu- 
nication verbs such as say and announce; these 
sentences report point of view or indicate an 
attributed comment. In these cases, the subor- 
dinated complement represents the main event, 
e.g. in "Advisors announced that IBM stock 
rose 36 points over a three year period," there 
are two actions: announce and rise. In sen- 
tences with a communication verb as main verb 
we considered both the main and the subor- 
dinate verb; this decision augmented our verb 
count an additional 20% and, even more im- 
portantly, further captured information on the 
actual event in an article, not just the commu- 
nication event. As shown in Table 1, support 
verbs, such as go ("go out of business") or get 
("get alng"), constitute 30%, and other con- 
tent verbs, such as fall, adapt, recognize, or vow, 
make up the remaining 50%. If we exclude all 
support type verbs, 70% of the verbs yield in- 
formation in answering the question "what hap- 
pened?" or "what did X do?" 
3 Event  P ro f i le :  WordNet  and  EVCA 
Since our first intuition of the data suggested 
that articles with a preponderance of verbs of 
682 
Verb Type Sample Verbs % 
communication say, announce .... 20% 
support  have, get, go, ... 30% 
remainder abuse, claim, offer, ... 50% 
Table 1: Approximate Frequency of verbs by 
type from the Wall Street Journal (main and 
selected subordinate verbs, n = 10,295). 
a certain semantic type might reveal aspects of 
document ype, we tested the hypothesis that 
verbs could be used as a predictor in provid- 
ing an event profile. We developed two algo- 
rithms to: (1) explore WordNet (WN-Verber) 
to cluster related verbs and build a set of verb 
chains in a document, much as Morris and Hirst 
(1991) used Roget's Thesaurus or like Hirst and 
St. Onge (1998) used WordNet to build noun 
chains; (2) classify verbs according to a se- 
mantic classification system, in this case, us- 
ing Levin's (1993) English Verb Classes and 
Alternations (EVCA-Yerber) as a basis. For 
source material, we used the manually-parsed 
Linguistic Data Consortium's Wall Street Jour- 
nal (WSJ) corpus from which we extracted main 
and complement of communication verbs to test 
the algorithms on. 
Us ing WordNet .  Our first technique was 
to use WordNet to build links between verbs 
and to provide a semantic profile of the docu- 
ment. WordNet is a general exical resource in 
which words are organized into synonym sets, 
each representing one underlying lexical concept 
(Miller et al 1990). These synonym sets - or 
synsets - are connected by different semantic 
relationships uch as hypernymy (i.e. plunging 
is a way of descending), synonymy, antonymy, 
and others (see Fellbaum 1990). The determina- 
tion of relatedness via taxonomic relations has a 
rich history (see Resnik 1993 for a review). The 
premise is that words with similar meanings will 
be located relatively close to each other in the 
hierarchy. Figure 1 shows the verbs cite and 
post, which are related via a common ancestor 
inform, . . . ,  let know. 
The WN-Verber tool .  We used the hypernym 
relationship in WordNet because of its high cov- 
erage. We counted the number of edges needed 
to find a common ancestor for a pair of verbs. 
Given the hierarchical structure of WordNet, 
the lower the edge count, in principle, the closer 
the verbs are semantically. Because WordNet 
common ancestor 
inform ..... let know 
t e s t i f Y ~ ~ o u ~ c ~  .... 
abduct ..... cite attest . . . .  report post sound 
Figure 1: Taxonomic Relations for cite and post 
in WordNet. 
allows individual words (via synsets) to be the 
descendent of possibly more than one ances- 
tor, two words can often be related by more 
than one common ancestor via different paths, 
possibly with the same relationship (grandpar- 
ent and grandparent, or with different relations 
(grandparent and uncle). 
Resu l ts  f rom WN-Verber. We ran all arti- 
cles longer than 10 sentences in the WSJ cor- 
pus (1236 articles) through WN-Verber. Output 
showed that several verbs - e.g. go, take, and 
say - participate in a very large percentage of 
the high frequency synsets (approximate 30%). 
This is due to the width of the verb forest in 
WordNet (see Fellbaum 1990); top level verb 
synsets tend to have a large number of descen- 
dants which are arranged in fewer generations, 
resulting in a flat and bushy tree structure. For 
example, a top level verb synset, inform, . . . ,  
give information, let know has over 40 children, 
whereas a similar top level noun synset, entity, 
only has 15 children. As a result, using fewer 
than two levels resulted in groupings that were 
too limited to aggregate verbs effectively. Thus, 
for our system, we allowed up to two edges to in- 
tervene between a common ancestor synset and 
each of the verbs' respective synsets, as in Fig- 
ure 2. 
acceptab le ?  \] i ?  unacceptable?  
2 a 2 0 ?2  vl  ? 1 1 
4 ? ? ? 3  v~ v~ ? ? v l  
i v l  v2 ? ? v2 ? v2 ? 
Figure 2: Configurations for relating verbs in 
our system. 
In addition to the problem of the flat na- 
ture of the verb hierarchy, our results from 
WN-Verber are degraded by ambiguity; similar 
effects have been reported for nouns. Verbs with 
differences in high versus low frequency senses 
caused certain verbs to be incorrectly related; 
683 
for example, have and drop are related by the 
synset meaning "to give birth" although this 
sense of drop is rare in WSJ. 
The results of NN-Verber in Table 2 reflect 
the effects of bushiness and ambiguity. The five 
most frequent synsets are given in column 1; col- 
umn 2 shows some typical verbs which partici- 
pate in the clustering; column 3 shows the type 
of article which tends to contain these synsets. 
Most articles (864/1236 = 70%) end up in the 
top five nodes. This illustrates the ineffective- 
ness of these most frequent WordNet synset to 
discriminate between article types. 
Synset Sample Art icle types 
Verbs (listed in order) 
in Synset 
Act  have, relate, announcements, editori- 
(interact, act to- give, tell als, features 
gether, ...) 
Communicate  give, get, in- announcements, editori- 
(communicate, form, tell als, features, poems 
i n tercommunicate ,  
. . .)  
Change have, modify, poems, editorials, an- 
(change) take nouncements, features 
Alter convert, announcements, poems, 
(alter, change) make, get editorials 
I n fo rm inform, ex- announcements, poems, 
(inform, round on, plain, de- features 
...) scribe 
Table 2: Frequent synsets and article types. 
Evaluat ion using Kenda l l ' s  Tau. We 
sought independent confirmation to assess the 
correlation between two variables' rank for 
WN-Verber results. To evaluate the effects of 
one synset's frequency on another, we used 
Kendall's tau (r) rank order statistic (Kendall 
1970). For example, was it the case that verbs 
under the synset act tend not to occur with 
verbs under the synset think? If so, do ar- 
ticles with this property fit a particular pro- 
file? In our results, we have information about 
synset frequency, where each of the 1236 arti- 
cles in the corpus constitutes a sample. Ta- 
ble 3 shows the results of calculating Kendall's 
r with considerations for ranking ties, for all 
(10) = 45 pairing combinations of the top 10 
most frequently occurring synsets. Correlations 
can range from -1 .0  reflecting inverse correla- 
tion, to +1.0 showing direct correlation, i.e. the 
presence of one class increases as the presence 
of the correlated verb class increases. A T value 
of 0 would show that the two variables' values 
are independent of each other. 
Results show a significant positive correlation 
between the synsets. The range of correlation 
is from .850 between the communicat ion  verb 
synset (give, get, inform, ...) and the act verb 
synset (have, relate, give, ...) to .238 between 
the th ink  verb synset (plan, study, give, ...) and 
the change s ta te  verb synset (fall, come, close, 
. . . ) .  
These correlations show that frequent synsets 
do not behave independently of each other and 
thus confirm that the WordNet results are not 
an effective way to achieve document discrim- 
ination. Although the WordNet results were 
not discriminatory, we were still convinced that 
our initial hypothesis on the role of verbs in 
determining event profile was worth pursuing. 
We believe that these results are a by-product 
of lexical ambiguity and of the richness of the 
WordNet hierarchy. We thus decided to pur- 
sue a new approach to test our hypothesis, one 
which turned out to provide us with clearer and 
more robust results. 
act com chng alter infm exps thnk I judg I t rnf  
~tate .407 .296 .672 .461 .286 .269 .238 I .355 .268 
;rnsf .437 .436 .251 .436 .251 .404 .369 .359 
iudge .444 .414 .435 .450 .340 .348 .427 
.~xprs .444 .414 .435 .397 .322 .432 
;hink .444 .414 .435 .397 .398 
~nfrm .614 ,649 .341 .380 
~lter .501 .454 .619 
Table 3: Kendall's T for frequent WordNet 
synsets. 
Ut i l i z ing EVCA.  A different approach to 
test the hypothesis was to use another semantic 
categorization method; we chose the semantic 
classes of Levin's EVCA as a basis for our next 
analysis. 3 Levin's seminal work is based on the 
time-honored observation that verbs which par- 
ticipate in similar syntactic alternations tend to 
share semantic properties. Thus, the behavior 
of a verb with respect o the expression and in- 
terpretation of its arguments can be said to be, 
in large part, determined by its meaning. Levin 
has meticulously set out a list of syntactic tests 
(about 100 in all), which predict membership n
no less than 48 classes, each of which is divided 
into numerous ub-classes. The rigor and thor- 
oughness of Levin's study permitted us to en- 
code our algorithm, EVCA-Verber, on a sub-set 
3Strictly speaking, our classification is based on 
EVCA. Although many of our classes are precisely de- 
fined in terms of EVCA tests, we did impose some x- 
tensions. For example, support verbs are not an EVCA 
category. 
of the EVCA classes, ones which were frequent 
in our corpus. First, we manually categorized 
the 100 most frequent verbs, as well as 50 addi- 
tional verbs, which covers 56% of the verbs by 
token in the corpus. We subjected each verb to 
a set of strict linguistic tests, as shown in Ta- 
ble 4 and verified primary verb usage against 
the corpus. 
Verb  C lass  
(sample verbs) 
Communicat ion  
(add, say, an- 
nounce,  . . .) 
Mot ion  
(rise, fall, decl ine, 
. . .) 
Agreement  
(agree, accept,  con- 
cur, . . .)  
Argument  
(argue, debate,  , 
. . .) 
Causat ive  
(cause) 
Sample  Test  
(1) Does this involve a transfer of ideas?  
(2) X verbed "someth ing . "  
(1) * "X  verbed w i thout  moving" .  
(1) "They  verbed to jo in forces." 
(2) involves more than one part ic ipant .  
(1) "They  verbed (over)  the  issue."  
(2) indicates conf l ict ing views. 
(3) involves more than one part ic ipant .  
(1) X verbed Y ( to  happen/happened) .  
(2) X br ings  about  a change in Y.  
Table 4: EVCA verb class test 
Resu l ts  f rom EVCA-Verber. In order to be 
able to compare article types and emphasize 
their differences, we selected articles that had 
the highest percentage of a particular verb class 
from each of the ten verb classes; we chose five 
articles from each EVCA class, yielding a to- 
tal of 50 articles for analysis from the full set 
of 1236 articles. We observed that each class 
discriminated between different article types as 
shown in Table 5. In contrast to Table 2, the ar- 
ticle types are well discriminated by verb class. 
For example, a concentration of communica -  
t ion class verbs (say, report, announce, ... ) in- 
dicated that the article type was a general an- 
nouncement of short or medium length, or a 
longer feature article with many opinions in the 
text. Articles high in mot ion  verbs were also 
announcements, but differed from the commu- 
nication ones, in that they were commonly post- 
ings of company earnings reaching a new high 
or dropping from last quarter. Agreement  and 
argument  verbs appeared in many of the same 
articles, involving issues of some controversy. 
However, we noted that articles with agreement 
verbs were a superset of the argument ones in 
that, in our corpus, argument verbs did not ap- 
pear in articles concerning joint ventures and 
mergers. Articles marked by causat ive  class 
verbs tended to be a bit longer, possibly re- 
flecting prose on both the cause and effect of 
684 
a particular action. We also used EVCA-Verber 
to investigate articles marked by the absence of 
members of each verb class, such as articles lack- 
ing any verbs in the motion verb class. However, 
we found that absence of a verb class was not 
discriminatory. 
Verb  C lass  
(sample verbs) 
Communicat ion  
(add, say, announce,  ...) 
Mot ion  
(rise, fall, decline, ...) 
Agreement  
(agree, accept, concur, 
...) 
Argument  
(argue, indicate, contend, 
.,.) 
Causative 
(cause) 
Art i c le  types  
(l isted by frequency) 
issues, reports, opinions, editorials 
posted earnings, announcements 
mergers, legal cases, transactions 
(without buying and sell ing) 
legal cases, opinions 
opinions, feature, editorials 
Table 5: EVCA-based verb class results. 
Eva luat ion  of  EVCA verb  classes. To 
strengthen the observations that articles domi- 
nated by verbs of one class reflect distinct arti- 
cle types, we verified that the verb classes be- 
haved independently ofeach other. Correlations 
for EVCA classes are shown in Table 6. These 
show a markedly lower level of correlation be- 
tween verb classes than the results for WordNet 
synsets, the range being from .265 between mo- 
tion and aspectual verbs to - .026 for motion 
verbs and agreement verbs. These low values 
of T for pairs of verb classes reflects the inde- 
pendence of the classes. For example, the com- 
mun icat ion  and exper ience  verb classes are 
weakly correlated; this, we surmise, may be due 
to the different ways opinions can be expressed, 
i.e. as factual quotes using communicat ion  
class verbs or as beliefs using exper ience  class 
verbs. 
comun motion agree argue exp I aspect~ cause 
appear .122 .076 .077 .072 .182 \[ .112 J .037 
cause .093 .083 .000 .000 .073 .096 
aspect .246 .265 .034 .110 .189 
exp .260 .130 .054 .054 
argue .162 .045 .033 
argree .071 -.026 
Table 6: Kendall's r for EVCA based verb 
classes. 
4 Resu l ts  and  Future  Work .  
Bas is  for WordNet  and EVCA compar i -  
son. This paper reports results from two ap- 
proaches, one using WordNet and other based 
685 
on EVCA classes. However, the basis for com- 
parison must be made explicit. In the case 
of WordNet, all verb tokens (n = 10K) were 
considered in all senses, whereas in the case of 
EVCA, a subset of less ambiguous verbs were 
manually selected. As reported above, we cov- 
ered 56% of the verbs by token. Indeed, when 
we attempted to add more verbs to EVCA cat- 
egories, at the 59% mark we reached a point of 
difficulty in adding new verbs due to ambigu- 
ity, e.g. verbs such as get. Thus, although our 
results using EVCA are revealing in important 
ways, it must be emphasized that the compar- 
ison has some imbalance which puts WordNet 
in an unnaturally negative light. In order to ac- 
curately compare the two approaches, we would 
need to process either the same less ambiguous 
verb subset with WordNet, or the full set of all 
verbs in all senses with EVCA. Although the re- 
sults reported in this paper permitted the vali- 
dation of our hypothesis, unless a fair compari- 
son between resources i  performed, conclusions 
about WordNet as a resource versus EVCA class 
distinctions hould not be inferred. 
Verb Pat terns .  In addition to considering 
verb type frequencies in texts, we have observed 
that verb distribution and patterns might also 
reveal subtle information in text. Verb class dis- 
tribution within the document and within par- 
ticular sub-sections also carry meaning. For ex- 
ample, we have observed that when sentences 
with movement verbs such as rise or fall are fol- 
lowed by sentences with cause and then a telic 
aspectual verb such as reach, this indicates that 
a value rose to a certain point due to the actions 
of some entity. Identification of such sequences 
will enable us to assign functions to particular 
sections of contiguous text in an article, in much 
the same way that text segmentation program 
seeks identify topics from distributional vocab- 
ulary (Hearst, 1994; Kan et al, 1998). We can 
also use specific sequences of verbs to help in 
determining methods for performing semantic 
aggregation of individual clauses in text gener- 
ation for summarization. 
Future  Work .  Our plans are to extend the 
current research in terms of verb coverage and 
in terms of article coverage. For verbs, we plan 
to (1) increase the verbs that we cover to include 
phrasal verbs; (2) increase coverage of verbs 
by categorizing additional high frequency verbs 
into EVCA classes; (3) examine the effects of 
increased coverage on determining article type. 
For articles, we plan to explore a general parser 
so we can test our hypothesis on additional texts 
and examine how our conclusions scale up. Fi- 
nally, we would like to combine our techniques 
with other indicators to form a more robust sys- 
tem, such as that envisioned in Biber (1989) or 
suggested in Kessler et al (1997). 
Conclus ion.  We have outlined a novel ap- 
proach to document analysis for news articles 
which permits discrimination of the event pro- 
file of news articles. The goal of this research is 
to determine the role of verbs in document anal- 
ysis, keeping in mind that event profile is one of 
many factors in determining text type. Our re- 
sults show that Levin's EVCA verb classes pro- 
vide reliable indicators of article type within the 
news domain. We have applied the algorithm to 
WSJ data and have discriminated articles with 
five EVCA semantic lasses into categories such 
as features, opinions, and announcements. This 
approach to document type classification using 
verbs has not been explored previously in the 
literature. Our results on verb analysis coupled 
with what is already known about NP identi- 
fication convinces us that future combinations 
of information will be even more successful in 
categorization of documents. Results such as 
these are useful in applications such as passage 
retrieval, summarization, and information ex- 
traction. 
Re ferences  
D. Appelt, J. Hobbs, J. Bear, D. Isreal, and M. Tyson. 
1993. Fastus: A finite state processor for information 
extraction from real world text. In Proceedings of the 
13th International Joint Conference on Artificial In- 
telligence (LICAI), Chambery, l~rance. 
Regina Barzilay and Michael Elhadad. 1997. Using lex- 
ical chains for text summarization. In Proceedings 
of the Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization Work- 
shop (ISTS'97), ACL, Madrid, Spain. 
Douglas Biber. 1989. A typology of english texts. Lan- 
guage, 27:3-43. 
Christiane Fellbaum. 1990. English verbs as a semantic 
net. International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):278- 
301. 
Maarti A. Hearst. 1994. Multi-paragraph segmentation 
of expository text. In Proceedings of the 32th Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguis- 
tics. 
Evan Hill and John J. Breen. 1977. Reporting ~ Writ- 
ing the News. Little, Brown and Company, Boston, 
Massachusetts. 
Graeme Hirst and David St-Onge. 1998. Lexical chains 
as representations of context for the detection and cor- 
686 
rection of malapropisms. WordNet: An electronic lex- 
ical database and some of its applications. 
Ray Jackendoff. 1983. Semantics and Cognition. MIT 
University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Min-Yen Kan, Judith L. Klavans, and Kathleen R. McK- 
eown. 1998. Linear segmentation and segment rele- 
vance. Unpublished Manuscript. 
Jussi Karlgren and Douglass Cutting. 1994. Recogniz- 
ing text genres with simple metrics using discrimi- 
nant analysis. In Fifteenth International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING '9~), Kyoto, 
Japan. 
Maurice G. Kendall. 1970. Rank Correlation Methods. 
Griffin, London, England, 4th edition. 
Brent Kessler, Geoffrey Nunberg, and Hinrich Schiitze. 
1997. Automatic detection of text genre. In Proceed- 
ings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association of 
Computational Linguistics, Madrid, Spain. 
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna- 
tions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ohio. 
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 1997. Identifying top- 
ics by position. In Proceedings of the 5th A CL Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 
283-290, Washington, D.C., April. 
Dekang Lin. 1993. University of Manitoba: Descrip- 
tion of the NUBA System as Used for MUC-5. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Message Un- 
derstanding MUC-5, pages 263-275, Baltimore, Mary- 
land. ARPA. 
Mitch Marcus et al 1994. The Penn Treebank: Anno- 
tating Predicate Argument Structure. ARPA Human 
Language Technology Workshop. 
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell- 
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 
1990. Introduction to WordNet: An on-line lexical 
database. International Journal of Lexicography (spe- 
cial issue), 3(4):235-312. 
Jane Morris and Graeme Hirst. 1991. Lexical coher- 
ence computed by thesaural relations as an indicator 
of the structure of text. Computational Linguistics, 
17(1):21-42. 
1992. Message Understanding Conference -- MUC. 
Giinter Neumann, Rolf Backofen, Judith Baur, Marcus 
Becker, and Christian Braun. 1997. An information 
extraction core system for real world german text pro- 
cessing. In Proceedings of the 5th A CL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 209-216, 
Washington, D.C., April. 
David D. Palmer and David S. Day. 1997. A statistical 
profile of the named entity task. In Proceedings of 
the 5th A CL Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing, pages 190-193, Washington, D.C., April. 
Philip Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information: A 
Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships. Ph.D. 
thesis, Department of Computer and Information Sci- 
ence, University of Pennsylvania. 
Nina Wacholder, Yael Ravin, and Misook Choi. 1997. 
Disambiguation of proper names in text. In Proceed- 
ings of the 5th ACL Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, volume 1, pages 202-209, Wash- 
ington, D.C., April. 
