DiMLex: A lexicon of discourse markers 
for text generation and understanding 
Manfred Stede and Car la  Umbach 
Technische Universitgt Berlin 
Projektgruppe KIT 
Sekr. FR 6-10 
Franklinstr. 28/29 
D-10587 Berlin, Germany 
email: {stede\[umbach}@cs.tu-berlin.de 
Abst ract  
Discourse markers ('cue words') are lexical 
items that signal the kind of coherence relation 
holding between adjacent text spans; for exam- 
ple, because, since, and for this reason are dif- 
ferent markers for causal relations. Discourse 
markers are a syntactically quite heterogeneous 
group of words, many of which are traditionally 
treated as function words belonging to the realm 
of grammar rather than to the lexicon. But for 
a single discourse relation there is often a set 
of similar markers, allowing for a range of para- 
phrases for expressing the relation. To capture 
the similarities and differences between these, 
and to represent them adequately, we are devel- 
oping DiMLex, a lexicon of discourse markers. 
After describing our methodology and the kind 
of information to be represented in DiMLex, we 
briefly discuss its potential applications in both 
text generation and understanding. 
1 Introduction 
Assuming that text can be formally described 
(and represented) by means of discourse rela- 
tions holding between adjacent portions of text 
(e.g., \[Mann, Thompson 1988\]), we use the term 
discourse marker for those lexical items that (in 
addition to non-lexical means uch as punctua- 
tion, aspectual and focus shifts, etc.) can sig- 
nal the presence of a relation at the linguistic 
surface. Typically, a discourse relation is asso- 
ciated with a wide range of such markers; con- 
sider, for instance, the following variety of CON- 
CESSIONS, which all express the same underly- 
ing propositional content. The words treated 
here as discourse markers are underlined. 
We were in SoHo; {nevertheless\[ nonetheless 
I however \] still \] yet}, we found a cheap bar. 
We were in SoHo, but we found a cheap bar 
anyway. 
Despite the fact that we were in SoHo, we 
found a cheap bar. 
Notwithstanding the fact that we were in 
SoHo, we found a cheap bar. 
Although we were in SoHo, we found a cheap 
bar. 
If one accepts these sentences as paraphrases, 
then the various discourse markers all need to be 
associated with the information that they sig- 
nal a concessive relationship between the two 
propositions involved. Next, the fine-grained 
differences between similar markers need to be 
represented; one such difference is the degree of 
specificity: for example, but can mark a general 
CONTRAST or  a more specific CONCESSION. ~,~e 
believe that a dedicated iscourse marker lexi- 
con holding this kind of information can serve 
as a valuable resource for natural anguage pro- 
cessing. Our efforts in constructing that lexicon 
are described in Section 2. 
From the perspective of text generation, ot 
all paraphrases listed above are equally felici- 
tous in specific contexts. In order to choose 
the most appropriate variant, a generator needs 
knowledge about he fine-grained differences be- 
tween similar markers for the same relation. 
Furthermore, it needs to account for the interac- 
tions between marker choice and other genera- 
tion decisions and hence needs knowledge about 
the syntagmatic constraints associated with dif- 
ferent markers. We will discuss this perspective 
in Section 3. 
From the perspective of text understanding, 
a sophisticated system should be able to derive 
the discourse relations holding between adjacent 
text spans, and also to notice the additional 
semantic and pragmatic implications temming 
from the usage of a particular discourse marker. 
We will briefly characterize such applications in 
Section 4. 
1238 
2 Building a Discourse Marker  
Lex icon  
2.1 The  idea 
The traditional distinction between content 
words and function words (or open-class and 
closed-class items) relies on the stipulation that 
the former have their "own" meaning indepen- 
dent of the context in which they are used, 
whereas the latter assume meaning only in con- 
text. Then, content words are assigned to the 
realm of the lexicon, whereas function words are 
treated as a part of grammar. 
For dealing with discourse markers, we do not 
regard this distinction as particularly helpful, 
though. As we have illustrated above and will 
elaborate below, these words can carry a wide 
variety of semantic and pragmatic overtones, 
which render the choice of a marker meaning- 
driven, as opposed to a mere consequence of 
structural decisions. Furthermore, a number of 
lexical relations that are customary used to as- 
sign structure to the universe of "open class" 
lexical items, most prominently synonymy, ple- 
sionymy ("near-synonymy"), antonymy, hy- 
ponymy and polysemy, can be applied to dis- 
course markers as well: 
? Synonymy: It can be argued that true 
synonyms do not exist at all. However, 
the German words obzwar and obschon 
(both more formal variants of obwohl = al- 
though) certainly come very close to being 
synonymous. 
? Plesionymy: although and though, accord- 
ing to Martin \[1992\], differ in formality; al- 
though and even though differ in terms of 
emphasis. 
? Antonomy: if/unless, according to Barker 
\[1994\], have opposite polarity, as in He will 
not attend unless he finishes his paper vs. 
He will attend if he finishes his paper. 
? Hyponomy: Some markers are more spe- 
cific than others; recall the example of but 
given above. Knott and Mellish \[1996\] deal 
with the issue of "taxonomizing" discourse 
markers. 
? Polysemy: Other than being more or less 
specific, some markers can signal quite dif- 
ferent relations; e.g., while can be used for 
TEMPORAL CO-OCCURRENCE, and also for 
CONTRAST. 
Accordingly, we propose that the proper place 
for describing discourse markers is a dedicated 
lexicon that provides a classification of their 
syntactic, semantic and pragmatic features and 
characterizes the relationships between similar 
markers. To this end, our group is developing 
a Discourse Marker LEXicon (DiMLex), which 
aims at assembling the various information as- 
sociated with markers and describing it on a 
uniform level of representation. Our initial fo- 
cus is on German, but English will also be a 
target language. 
2.2 Methodo logy  
Methodological considerations pertain to the 
two tasks of determining the set of words we 
regard as discourse markers and thus are to be 
included in the lexicon, and determining the lex- 
ical entries for these words. 
Finding the "right" set of discourse markers 
is not an easy task, since the common lexico- 
graphic practice of taking part of speech as the 
primary criterion for inclusion or exclusion does 
not apply. Knott and Mellish \[1996\] provide an 
apt summary of the situation. Their 'test for 
relational phrases' is a good start, but geared 
towards the English language (we are investigat- 
ing German as well), and furthermore it catches 
only items relating clauses; in Despite the heavy 
rain, we went for a walk it would not detect a 
cue phrase. 
To arrive at a more comprehensive s t, we 
began by consulting standard grammars uch'  
as Quirk et al \[1972\] and Helbig and Buscha 
\[1991\], which provide descriptions of function 
words grouped according to semantic lass - -  
but these are far from "complete". A very 
good source for German is \[Brausse t al. in 
prep.\], which investigates a huge set of connec- 
tives from a grammatical viewpoint. 
As for determining lexical descriptions, the 
research literature offers a large number of help- 
ful, even though quite heterogeneous, sources. 
There are several detailed studies of individ- 
ual groups of markers, such as \[Vander Linden, 
Martin 1995\] for PURPOSE markers. Besides, 
the Linguistics literature offers fine-grained 
analyses of individual markers, which are far too 
numerous to list. We are drawing upon all these 
sources, trying to place them in a single unified 
framework. The overall goal can be character- 
ized as the aim to synthesize two strands of re- 
1239 
search that so far are rather disconnected: 
? "Top-down": Text linguistics considers 
markers as a means to signal coherence, 
and provides us with insights on the se- 
mantic and pragmatic properties of marker 
classes. 
? "Bottom-up": Grammars as well as the 
linguistic research literature provide syn- 
tactic, semantic and stylistic properties of 
individual markers, comparative studies of 
related markers, etc. 
2.3 The  lexicon 
Although our classification of lexical features is 
still under development, we give here a tenta- 
tive list of such features in order to illustrate the 
range of phenomena under consideration. The 
list is loosely ordered from syntactic to seman- 
tic and pragmatic features; for now, we do not 
explicitly assign such categories. 
The part of speech of a marker (conjunctive, 
subordinating conjunction, coordinating con- 
junction, preposition) determines the possibil- 
ities of positioning the marker within the con- 
stituent: conjunctives (especially the German 
'Konjunktionaladverbien') can float to various 
positions, whereas the positions of others are 
fixed. The linear order of the conjuncts is fixed 
for some markers and flexible for others; this is 
independent of the aforementioned two features. 
Some markers how a specific behavior towards 
negation, e.g., the German sondern (which cor- 
responds to certain uses of but) requires an ex- 
plicit negation in the antecedent clause. Some 
markers impose constraints on tense and aspect 
of the clauses, either by requiring specific tem- 
poral/aspectual ttributes in one clause, or by 
constraining the relationship between the two 
conjuncts (e.g., after). 
Several grammars uggest classifications of 
markers according to the semantic relation they 
express: adversative, alternative, substitution, 
causal, conditional, etc. Within these groups, 
some markers exhibit opposite polarity, i.e., 
have an incorporated negation or not (e.g., if 
versus unless). Commentability s a feature that 
often distinguishes a single marker within a se- 
mantic class in that it can be negated or fo- 
cused on by scalar particles (e.g., in German, 
the causal weil is commentable, whereas denn 
is not). 
Moving towards pragmatics, the intention be- 
hind using a marker can vary. A well-known ex- 
ample is the contrast between German aber and 
sondern (in English, they both correspond to 
but), where the former merely states a contrast, 
whereas the latter corrects an assumption on 
the hearer's ide (e.g., \[Helbig, Buscha 1991\]). 
Another dimension concerns the presuppositions 
associated with markers; a well-known case is 
the contrast between because and since, where 
only the latter marks the subsequent proposi- 
tion as given. The German CAUSE markers well 
and denn differ in terms of the illocutions they 
connect: the former applies to propositions, the 
latter to epistemic judgements \[Brausse et al, in 
prep.\]. Certain very similar markers differ only 
stylistically. One German example was given 
above, and another one is the English notwith- 
standing, which is more formal than despite but 
moreover is more flexible in positioning, as it 
can be postponed. 
The final but crucial feature to be mentioned 
here is the discourse relation expressed by a 
marker. RST \[Mann, Thompson 1988\] offers 
an inspiring theory of such relations, but we do 
not fully subscribe to this account. Rather, we 
think that the relationship between semantic re- 
lations (see above) and pragmatic ones needs to 
be clarified (e.g., lasher 1993\]), which can be 
done by teasing apart the various dimensions 
incoporated in RST's definitions, for example 
in the spirit of Sanders et al \[1992\]. 
Once the range of dimensions has been de- 
scribed, we will deal with questions of repre- 
sentation; we envisage using some inheritance- 
based formalism that allows for a compact 
representation of individual descriptions, hy- 
ponymic relations between them, and polyse- 
mous entries. 
3 Us ing  D iMLex  in text  generat ion  
Present text generation systems are typically 
not very good at choosing discourse mark- 
ers. Even though a few systems have incor- 
porated some more sophisticated mappings for 
specific relations (e.g., in DRAFTER \[Paris et 
al. 1995\]), there is still a general tendency to 
treat discourse marker selection as a task to 
be performed as a "side effect" by the gram- 
mar, much like for other function words such as 
prepositions. 
1240 
To improve this situation, we propose to view 
discourse marker selection as one subtask of the 
general lexical choice process, so that - -  to con- 
tinue the example given above - -  one or an- 
other form of CONCESSION can be produced in 
the light of the specific utterance parameters 
and the context. Obviously, marker selection 
also includes the decision whether to use any 
marker at all or leave the relation implicit (e.g., 
\[Di Eugenio et al 1997\]). When these decisions 
can be systematically controlled, the text can 
be tailored much better to the specific goals of 
the generation process. 
The generation task imposes a particular view 
of the information coded in DiMLex: the en- 
try point to the lexicon is the discourse relation 
to be realized, and the lookup yields the range 
of alternatives. But many markers have more 
semantic and pragmatic onstraints associated 
with them, which have to be verified in the 
generator's input representation for the marker 
to be a candidate. Then, discourse markers 
place (predominantly s ntactic) constraints on 
their immediate context, which affects the in- 
teractions between marker choice and other re- 
alization decisions. And finally, markers that 
are still equivalent after evaluating these con- 
straints are subject to a choice process that 
can utilize preferential (e.g. stylistic) criteria. 
Therefore, under the generation view, the infor- 
mation in DiMLex is grouped into the following 
three classes: 
- -  Applicability conditions: The necessary 
conditions for using a discourse marker, i.e., the 
features or structural configurations that need 
to be present in the input specification. 
- -  Syntagmatic onstraints: The constraints 
regarding the combination of a marker and the 
neighbouring constituents; most of them are 
syntactic and appear at the beginning of the list 
given above (part of speech, linear order, etc.). 
- -  Paradigmatic features: Features that label 
the differences between similar markers haring 
the same applicability conditions, such as stylis- 
tic features and degrees of emphasis. 
Very briefly, we see discourse marker choice 
as one aspect of the sentence planning task 
(e.g., \[Wanner, novy 1996\]). In order to ac- 
count for the intricate interactions between 
marker choice and other generation decisions, 
the idea is to employ DiMLex as a declara- 
tive resource supporting the sentence planning 
process, which comprises determining sentence 
boundaries and sentence structure, linear order- 
ing of constituents (e.g., thematizations), and 
lexical choice. All these decisions are heavily 
interdependent, and in order to produce truly 
adequate text, the various realization options 
need to be weighted against each other (in con- 
trast to a simple, fixed sequence of making the 
types of decisions), which presupposes a flexible 
computational mechanism based on resources 
as declarative as possible. This generation ap- 
proach is described in more detail in a separate 
paper \[Grote, Stede 1998\]. 
4 Us ing  D iMLex  in text  
unders tand ing  
In text understanding, discourse markers erve 
as cues for inferring the rhetorical or seman- 
tic structure of the text. In the approach pro- 
posed by Marcu \[1997\], for example, the pres- 
ence of discourse markers is used to hypothe- 
size individual textual units and relations hold- 
ing between them. Then, the overall discourse 
structure tree is built using constraint satisfac- 
tion techniques. For tasks of this kind, DiMLex 
can supply the set of cue words to be looked 
for and support the initial disambiguation of 
cues in the text. Depending on the depth of 
the syntactic and semantic analysis carried out 
by the text understanding system, different fea- 
tures provided by DiMLex can be taken into 
account. Certain structural configurations can 
be tested without any deep understanding; for 
instance, the German marker w~ihrend is gen- 
erally ambiguous between a CONTRAST and a 
TEMPORALCOOCCURRENCE reading, but when 
followed by a noun phrase, only the latter read- 
ing is available (wiihrend corresponds not only 
to the English while but also to during). 
Similarly, we envisage applications of DiM- 
Lex for dialogue processing. For example, 
within the VERBMOBIL project, Stede and 
Schmitz \[1997\] have analysed the various prag- 
matic functions that German discourse parti- 
cles fulfill in dialogue; many of these particles 
are discourse markers, and DiMLex can provide 
valuable information for their disambiguation, 
which in turn facilitates the recognition of un- 
derlying speech acts. 
1241 
5 Summary and Outlook 
Discourse markers, words that signal the pres- 
ence of a coherence relation between adjacent 
text spans, play important roles in human text 
understanding and production. Due to their be- 
ing classified as "non-content words" or "func- 
tion words", however, they have not received 
sufficient attention in natural language process- 
ing yet. In response to this situation, we are as- 
sembling pieces of information on German and 
English discourse markers from grammars, dic- 
tionaries, and the linguistics research literature. 
This information is classified and organized into 
a discourse marker lexicon, DiMLex. 
The first phase of our project runs until mid- 
1999. At present, we are on the theoretical 
side focusing our attention on German CON- 
TRAST and CONCESSION markers; on the imple- 
mentational side, we have assembled a genera- 
tion testbed that allows for exploring the role of 
DiMLex in producing paragraph-size text. By 
the end of the first phase, we plan to have com- 
pleted a system that produces German and En- 
glish text, with a prototypical DiMLex specified 
for contrastive markers. For a potential follow- 
up phase of the project, we envisage enlarging 
DiMLex to other groups of markers; working 
out systematic lexical representations within a 
suitable formalism; and giving more attention 
to the requirements for text understanding in 
addition to those of generation. 
Re ferences  
N. Asher. Reference to abstract objects in Discourse. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993. 
K. Barker. "Clause-level relationship analysis in the 
TANKA system." Technical report, Dept. of Com- 
puter Science, University of Ottawa, TR-94-07, 
1994. 
U. Brausse, E. Breindl-Hiller, R. Pasch. "Hand- 
buch der deutschen Konnektoren." Institut fiir 
deutsche Sprache, Mannheim. In preparation. 
B. Di Eugenio, J. Moore, M. Paolucci. "Learning 
features that predict cue usage." In:. Proceedings 
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 8th 
Conference of the European Chapter of the ACL, 
Madrid, July 1997. 
B. Grote, M. Stede. "Discourse marker choice in sen- 
tence planning." To appear in: Proceedings of the 
9th International Workshop on Natural Language 
Generation, Niagara-on-the-lake/Canada, 1998. 
G. Helbig, J. Buscha. Deutsche Grammatik: Ein 
Handbuch f~r den AusMnderunterricht. Berlin, 
Leipzig: Langenscheidt, Verlag Enzyklop~.die, 
1990. 
A. Knott, C. Mellish. "A feature-based account of 
the relations ignalled by sentence and clause con- 
nectives." In: Language and Speech 39 (2-3), 1996. 
W. Mann, S. Thompson. "Rhetorical structure the- 
ory: Towards a functional theory of text organi- 
zation." In: TEXT, 8:243-281, 1988 
D. Marcu. "The rhetorical parsing of natural lan- 
guage text." In: Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Meeting of the ACL and 8th Conference of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the ACL, Madrid, July 1997. 
J. Martin. English Text - System and Structure. 
Philadelphia/Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1992. 
C. Paris, K. Vander Linden, M. Fischer, A. Hart- 
ley, L. Pemberton, R. Power, D. Scott. "A sup- 
port tool for writing multilingual instructions." 
In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI- 
95), Montreal, 1995. 
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, J. Svartvik. 
A Grammar of Contemporary English. Harlow: 
Longman, 1992 (20th ed.) 
T. Sanders, W. Spooren, L. Nordman. "Towards a 
taxonomy of coherence relations." In: Discourse 
Processes 15, 1992. 
M. Stede, B. Schmitz. "Discourse particles and rou- 
tine formulas in spoken language translation." In: 
Proceedings of the ACL/ELSNET Workshop on 
Spoken Language Translation, Madrid, 1997. 
K. Vander Linden, J. Martin. "Expressing rhetorical 
relations in instructional text" In: Computational 
Linguistics 21(1):29-58, 1995. 
L. Wanner, E. Hovy. "The HealthDoc sentence plan- 
ner." In: Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Her- 
stmonceux Castle, June 1996. 
1242 
