Constraints over Lambda-Structures in Semantic 
Underspecif icat ion 
Markus  Egg  and Joach im N iehren*  and Peter  Ruhrberg  and Fe iyu  Xu  
Department of Computational Linguistics / *Programming Systems Lab 
Universit/it des Saarlandes, Saarbriicken, Germany 
{egg, peru, feiyu}~coli, uni-sb, de 
niehren~ps, uni-sb, de 
Abst rac t  
We introduce a first-order language for seman- 
tic underspecification that we call Constraint 
Language for Lambda-Structures (CLLS). A A- 
structure can be considered as a A-term up 
to consistent renaming of bound variables (a- 
equality); a constraint of CLLS is an underspec- 
ified description of a A-structure. CLLS solves 
a capturing problem omnipresent in underspec- 
ified scope representations. CLLS features con- 
straints for dominance, lambda binding, paral- 
lelism, and anaphoric links. Based on CLLS we 
present a simple, integrated, and underspecified 
treatment of scope, parallelism, and anaphora. 
1 In t roduct ion  
A central concern of semantic underspecifica- 
tion (van Deemter and Peters, 1996) is the un- 
derspecification f the scope of variable bind- 
ing operators uch as quantifiers (Hobbs and 
Shieber, 1987; Alshawi, 1990; Reyle, 1993). 
This immediately raises the conceptual problem 
of how to avoid variable-capturing when instan- 
tiating underspecified scope representations. In 
principle, capturing may occur in all formalisms 
for structural underspecification which repre- 
sent binding relations by the coordination of 
variables (Reyle, 1995; Pinkal, 1996; Bos, 1996; 
Niehren et al, 1997a). Consider for instance the 
verb phrase in 
(1) Manfred \[vF knows every student\] 
An underspecified description of the composi- 
tional semantics of the VP in (1) might be given 
along the lines of (2): 
(2) X--Cl(Vx(student(x)-+C2(know(Z, x)))) 
The meta-variable X in (2) denotes ome tree 
representing a predicate logic formula which is 
underspecified for quantifier scope by means of 
two place holders C1 and C2 where a subject- 
quantifier can be filled in, and a place holder 
Z for the subject-variable. The binding of the 
object-variable x by the object-quantifier Vx is 
coordinated through the name of the object- 
variable, namely 'x'. Capturing occurs when 
a new quantifier like 3x is filled in C2 whereby 
the binding between x and Vx is accidentally 
undone, and is replaced with a binding of x by 
3x. 
Capturing problems raised by variable coordi- 
nation may be circumvented in simple cases 
where all quantifiers in underspecified descrip- 
tions can be assumed to be named by distinct 
variables. However, this assumption becomes 
problematic in the light of parallelism between 
the interpretations of two clauses. Consider for 
instance the correction of (1) in (3): 
(3) No, Hans \[vP knows every student\] 
The description of the semantics of the VP in 
(3) is given in (4): 
(4) Y=C3(Vy(student(y)-+C4(know( Z', y) ) ) ) 
But a full understanding of the combined 
clauses (1) and (3) requires a grasp of the se- 
mantic identity of the two VP interpretations. 
Now, the VP interpretations (2) and (4) look 
very much Mike but for the different object- 
variable, namely 'y' instead of 'x'. This illus- 
trates that in cases of parallelism, like in cor- 
rections, different variables in parallel quanti- 
fied structures have to be matched against each 
other, which requires some form of renaming 
to be done on them. While this is unprob- 
lematic for fully specified structures, it presents 
serious problems with underspecified structures 
like (2) and (4), as there the names of the vari- 
353 
ables are crucial for insuring the right bindings. 
Any attempt o integrate parallelism with scope 
underspecification thus has to cope with con- 
flicting requirements on the choice of variable 
names. Avoiding capturing requires variables 
to be renamed apart but parallelism needs par- 
allel bound variables to be named alike. 
We avoid all capturing and renaming prob- 
lems by introducing the notion of A-structures, 
which represent binding relations without nam- 
ing variables. A A-structure is a standard pred- 
icate logic tree structure which can be con- 
sidered as a A-term or some other logical for- 
mula up-to consistent renaming of bound vari- 
ables (a-equality). Instead of variable names, 
a A-structure provides a partial function on 
tree-nodes for expressing variable binding. An 
graphical illustration of the A-structure corre- 
sponding to the A-term Ax.like(x,x) is given (5). 
(5) ( ', Axlike(x,x) 
Formally, the binding relation of the A-structure 
in (5) is expressed through the partial function 
A (5) defined by A(5)(v2) = v0 and A(5)(v3) = v0. 
We propose a first-order constraint language for 
A-structures called CLLS which solves the cap- 
turing problem of underspecified scope repre- 
sentations in a simple and elegant way. CLLS 
subsumes dominance constraints (Backofen et 
al., 1995) as known from syntactic processing 
(Marcus et al, 1983) with tree-adjoining gram- 
mars (Vijay-Shanker, 1992; Rogers and Vijay- 
Shanker, 1994). Most importantly, CLLS con- 
straints can describe the binding relation of a A- 
structure in an underspecified manner (in con- 
trast to A-structures like (5), which are always 
fully specified). The idea is that A-binding be- 
haves like a kind of rubber band that can be 
arbitraryly enlarged but never broken. E.g., (6) 
is an underspecified CLLS-description of the A- 
structure (5). 
Xo,~*X~ AA(X~)=X4A .~ .?  Xo 
Xl:lam(X2)A // lain I X1 
(6) X2,~*X3A ' * X2 
I Z3:,ke(X ,Xs)^ , 
X4:var A X5:var var,,~.~X4 vat ~ X5 
The constraint (6) does not determine a unique 
A-structure since it leaves e.g. the space be- 
tween the nodes X2 and X3 underspecified. 
Thus, (6) may eventually be extended, say, to 
a constraint that fully specifies the A-structure 
for the A-term in (7). 
(7) Ay.Az.and(person(y), like(y, z) ) 
Az intervenes between Ay and an occurrence of 
y when extending (6) to a representation f (7) 
without the danger of undoing their binding. 
CLLS is sufficiently expressive for an integrated 
treatment of semantic underspecification, par- 
allelism, and anaphora. To this purpose it 
provides parallelism constraints (Niehren and 
Koller, 1998) of the form X/X', ,~Y/Y I reminis- 
cent to equality up-to constraints (Niehren et 
al., 1997a), and anaphoric bindings constraints 
of the form ante(X)=X'. 
As proved in (Niehren and Koller, 1998), CLLS 
extends the expressiveness of context unifica- 
tion (Niehren et al, 1997a). It also extends 
its linguistic coverage (Niehren et al, 1997b) 
by integrating an analysis of VP ellipses with 
anaphora s in (Kehler, 1995). Thus, the cov- 
erage of CLLS is comparable to Crouch (1995) 
and Shieber et al (1996). We illustrate CLLS 
at a benchmark case for the interaction of scope, 
anaphora, and ellipsis (8). 
(8) Mary read a book she liked before Sue did. 
The paper is organized as follows. First, we 
introduce CLLS in detail and define its syntax 
and semantics. We illustrate CLLS in sec. 3 by 
applying it to the example (8) and compare it 
to related work in the last section. 
2 A Const ra in t  Language for 
A -St ructures  (CLLS)  
CLLS is an ordinary first-order language inter- 
preted over A-structures. A-structures are par- 
ticular predicate logic tree structures we will in- 
troduce. We first exemplify the expressiveness 
of CLLS. 
2.1 E lements  of CLLS 
A A-structure is a tree structure xtended by 
two additional relations (the binding and the 
linking relation). We represent A-structures 
as graphs. Every A-structure characterizes a 
unique A-term or a logical formula up to consis- 
tent renaming of bound variables (a-equality). 
E.g., the A-structure (10) characterizes the 
higher-order logic (HOL) formula (9). 
354 
(9) (many(language))(Ax.speak(x)(jolm)) 
(10) 
many ~ 
Two things are important here: the label '~' 
represents explicitly the operation of function 
application, and the binding of the variable x by 
the A-operator Ax is represented by an explicit 
binding relation A between two nodes, labelled 
as var and lain. As the binding relation is ex- 
plicit, the variable and the binder need not be 
given a name or index such as x. 
We can fully describe the above A-structure 
by means of the constraints for immediate 
dominance and labeling X:f (X1, . . . ,  Xn), (e.g. 
X1:@(X2,)(3) and X3:lam(X4) etc.) and bind- 
ing constraints A(X)=Y. It is convenient to dis- 
play such constraints graphically, in the style of 
(6). The difference of graphs as constraints and 
graphs as A-structures i important since under- 
specified structures are always seen as descrip- 
tions of the A-structures that satisfy them? 
Dominance .  As a means to underspecify A-
structures, CLLS employs constraints for domi- 
nance X~*Y. Dominance is defined as the tran- 
sitive and reflexive closure of immediate dom- 
inance. We represent dominance constraints 
graphically as dotted lines. E.g., in (11) we have 
the typical case of undetermined scope. It is 
analysed by constraint (12), where two nodes 
X1 and X2, lie between an upper bound Xo 
and a lower bound X3. The graph can be lin- 
earized by adding either a constraint XI~*X2 
or X2~*X1, resulting in the two possible scop- 
ing readings for the sentence (11). 
(11) Every linguist speaks two Asian 
languages. 
(12) ..... ".X.o. 
? "  ~ X  
' 2 
e_ l  t_a_ l  
,' .x4 
| " ' " '  ..-" l | " .. .. ? ,, 
~ var~-~ 
speak 
Paral le l ism. (11) may be continued by an el- 
liptical sentence, as in (13). 
(13) Two European ones too. 
We analyse lliptical constructions by means of 
a parallelism constraint of the form 
(14) X, /Xp~YdY p 
which has the intuitive meaning that the seman- 
tics Xs of the source clause (12) is parallel to 
the semantics Yt of the elliptical target clause, 
up-to the exceptions Xp and Yp, which are the 
semantic representations of the so called paral- 
lel elements in source and target clause. In this 
case the parallel elements are the two subject 
NPs. 
(11) and (13) together give us a 'Hirschbiihler 
sentence' (Hirschbiihler, 1982), and our treat- 
ment in this case is descriptively equivalent to 
that of (Niehren et al, 1997b). Our paral- 
lelism constraints and their equality up-to con- 
straints have been shown to be (non-trivially) 
intertranslatable (Niehren and Koller, 1998) if 
binding and linking relations in A-structures are 
ignored. 
For the interaction of binding with parallelism 
we follow the basic idea that binding relations 
should be isomorphic between two similar sub- 
structures. The cases where anaphora interact 
with ellipsis are discussed below. 
Anaphor ic  links. We represent anaphoric 
dependencies in A-structures by another explicit 
relation between odes, the linking relation. An 
anaphor (i.e. a node labelled as ana) may be 
linked to an antecedent ode, which may be la- 
belled by a name or var, or even be another 
anaphor. Thus, links can form chains as in (15), 
where a constraint such as ante(X3)=X2 is rep- 
resented by a dashed line from X3 to X2. 
The constraint (15) analyzes (16), where the 
second pronoun is regarded as to be linked to 
the first, rather than linked to the proper name: 
(15) 
like ? ~ ~ ~ i  ~2 
rnother_of ~ ana ~ X3 
(16) John i said he~ liked hisj mother 
355 
In a semantic interpretation of A-structures, 
analoguously to a semantics for lambda terms, 1
linked nodes get identical denotations. Intu- 
itively, this means they are interpreted as if 
names, or variables with their binding relations, 
would be copied down the link chain. It is cru- 
cial though not to use such copied structures 
right away: the link relation gives precise con- 
trol over strict and sloppy interpretations when 
anaphors interact with parallelism. 
E.g., (16) is the source clause of the many- 
pronouns-puzzle, a problematic ase of interac- 
tion of ellipsis and anaphora. (Xu, 1998), where 
our treatment of ellipsis and anaphora was de- 
veloped, argues that link chains yield the best 
explanation for the distribution of strict/sloppy 
readings involving many pronouns. 
The basic idea is that an elided pronoun can 
either be linked to its parallel pronoun in the 
source clause (referential parallelism) or be 
linked in a structurally parallel way (structural 
parallelism). This analysis agrees with the pro- 
posal made in (Kehler, 1993; Kehler, 1995). It 
covers a series of problematic ases in the lit- 
erature such as the many-pronouns-puzzle, cas- 
caded ellipsis, or the five-reading sentence (17): 
(17) John revised his paper before the teacher 
did, and so did Bill 
The precise interaction of parallelism with bind- 
ing and linking relations is spelled out in sec. 
2.2. 
2.2 Syntax  and  Semant ics  of  CLLS 
We start with a set of labels E= 
{@2, lam I ' var  0 ' ana 0 ' before 2, maryO, readO, , ,  .}, 
ranged over by \]ji, with arity i which may be 
omitted. The syntax of CLLS is given by: 
::= XJ (X l , . . . ,X , )  ( \ ] J "ES)  
I X<*Y 
I A(x)=Y 
I ante(X)=Y 
I X/X'~Y/Y' 
\[ ~ A~' 
The semantics of CLLS is given in terms 
of first order structures L, obtained from 
underlying tree structures, by adding rela- 
tions eL for each CLLS relation symbol ? E 
{~*, A(.)= ", ante(.)=., /.~-/-, :@, :lam, :vat,...}. 
1We abstain from giving such a semantics here, as we 
would have to introduce types, which are of no concern 
here, to keep the semantics imple. 
A (finite) tree structure, underlying L, is given 
by a set of nodes u, u', ... connected by paths 
~r, ~ff, ... (possibly empty words over positive in- 
tegers), and a labelling \]junction I from nodes 
to labels. The number of daughters of a node 
matches the arity of its label. The relationship 
Y:fL(Vl, ..., Yn) holds iff l(v)=\]j and v.i = vi for 
i = 1..n, where v.~r stands for the node that is 
reached from v by following the path 7r (if de- 
fined). To express that a path lr is defined on 
a node v in L we write v.rSL. We write ~r<r' 
for ~r being an initial segment of 7d. The domi- 
nance relation v<~v' holds if 37r v.Tr = v'. If ~r 
is non-empty we have proper dominance v<+v '.
A A-structure L is a tree structure with two 
(partially functional) binary relations AL(')= ", 
for binding, and anteL(')=', for anaphor-to- 
antecedent linking. We assume that the follow- 
ing conditions hold: (1) binding only holds be- 
tween variables (nodes labelled var) to A-binders 
(nodes labelled lain); (2) every variable has ex- 
actly one binder; (3) variables are dominated 
by their binders; (4) only anaphors (nodel la- 
belled ana) are linked to antecendents; (2) ev- 
ery anaphor has exactly one antecendent; (5) 
antecedents are terminal nodes; (6) there are 
no cyclic link chains; (7) if a link chain ends at 
a variable then each anaphor in the chain must 
be dominated by the binder of that variable. 
The not so straight forward part of the seman- 
tics of CLLS is the notion of parallelism, which 
we define for any given A-structure L as follows: 
iff there is a path ~r0 such that: 
1. rr0 is the "exception path" from the top 
node of the parallel structures the the two 
exception positions: v{=Vl.~ro A v~=v2.~ro 
2. the two contexts, which are the trees be- 
low Vl and v2 up-to the trees below the ex- 
ception positions v{ and v~, must have the 
same structure and labels: 
Vr  -~0<r  ~ ((v, .~$L ~ v2 . rSL)A  
(Vl.Tr.~L =:~ l(Vl.Tr ) ---- l(v2.Tr)))) 
3. there are no 'hanging' binders from the con- 
texts to variables outside them: 
VvVv' * + ' * ' AL (v ' )=v)  ~(Vl<~LV<~ L Vl <~LV A 
4. binding is structurally isomorphic within 
the two contexts: 
356 
V rr V rr' -~ir o < ~r A v l  . Tr.L L A -~'tr o <_Tr' A v l  . lr '  J~ L :=~ 
5. two variables in identical positions within 
their context and bound outside their con- ~_.~.:y,. " 
text must be bound by the same binder: ,--~'~. I~-~ v,,w-(,,o>,, / - '% :;*-1 x., 
(AL(Vl.rr)=v ?~ AL(v2.~r)=v) ~'ana ? X,2~ ~ :. 
6. two anaphors in identical positions within ~x .. 
their context must have isomorphic links x ". 
resents the semantics of the elided part of the 
target clause.) 
(18) ..X9" . . . . '  
b ~ x  t 
? " , xTg o  
: 
: 
: 
within their context, or the target sentence 
anaphor is linked to the source sentence 
anaphor: 
VvVTr -mr0_<Tr A Vl.Tr,~L A anteL(Vl.Tr)=v =:> 
(37r'(v=vl.~r'A-=rr0<rr'AanteL (v=.rr)----v2nr') 
V anteL(u2.r)=Ul.rr) 
3 In teract ion  o f  quant i f ie rs ,  
anaphora ,  and  el l ips is  
In this section, we will illustrate our analysis 
of a complex case of the interaction of scope, 
anaphora, and ellipsis. In the case (8), both 
anaphora nd quantification i teract with ellip- 
sis. 
(8) Mary read a book she liked before Sue did. 
(8) has three readings (see (Crouch, 1995) for 
a discussion of a similar example). In the first, 
the indefinite NP a book she liked takes wide 
scope over both clauses (a particular book liked 
by Mary is read by both Mary and Sue). In the 
two others, the operator before outscopes the in- 
definite NP. The two options result from the two 
possibilities of reconstructing the pronoun she 
in the ellipsis interpretation, viz., 'strict' (both 
read some book that Mary liked) and 'sloppy' 
(each read some book she liked herself). 
The constraint for (8), displayed in (18), is an 
underspecified representation f the above three 
readings. It can be derived in a compositional 
fashion along the lines described in (Niehren et 
al., 1997b). Xs and Xt represent the semantics 
of the source and the target clause, while X16 
and X21 stand for the semantics of the paral- 
lel elements (Mary and Sue) respectively. For 
readability, we represent the semantics of the 
complex NP a book she liked by a triangle dom- 
inated by X2, which only makes the anaphoric 
content 212 of the pronoun she within the NP 
explicit. The anaphoric relationship between 
the pronoun she and Mary is represented by the 
linking relation between X12 and X16. (X20 rep- 
? read ~~7~1 ~Xz6 
Xs/XI6~X~/X21 
The first reading, with the NP taking wide 
scope, results when the relative scope between 
XI and XI5 is resolved such that XI dominates 
X15. The corresponding solution of the con- 
straint is visualized in (19). 
(19) 
za,  x=, 
read ~'~ var~-.X"z~ read ~ var~'~ j 
The parallelism constraint Xs/Xl6,,~Xt/X21 is 
satisfied in the solution because the node Xt 
dominates a tree that is a copy of the tree dom- 
inated by Xs. In particular, it contains a node 
labelled by var, which has to be parallel to Xlr, 
and therefore must be A-linked to X3 too. 
The other possible scoping is for XlS to domi- 
nate X1. The two solutions this gives rise to are 
drawn in (20) and (21). Here X1 and the in- 
terpretation of the indefinite NP directly below 
enter into the parallelism as a whole, as these 
nodes lie below the source node Xs. Thus, there 
are two anaphoric nodes: X12 in the source and 
its 'copy' II12 in the target semantics. For the 
copy to be parallel to XI2 it can either have 
a link to X12 to have a same referential value 
(strict reading, see (20)) or a link to X21 that 
is structurally parallel to the link from X12 to 
X16, and hence leads to the node of the parallel 
element Sue (sloppy reading, see (21)). 
357 
(20) ~ x ,  
I"" ~"r, ary.,, X~6"~. ' ~/sue * _X 
4 Re la ted  Work  
CLLS allows a uniform and yet internally struc- 
tured approach to semantic ambiguity. We use 
a single constraint formalism in which to de- 
scribe different kinds of information about the 
meaning of an utterance. This avoids the prob- 
lems of order dependence of processing that for 
example Shieber et al (1996) get by inter- 
leaving two formalisms (for scope and for el- 
lipsis resolution). Our approach follows Crouch 
(1995) in this respect, who also includes par- 
allelism constraints in the form of substitution 
expressions directly into an underspecified se- 
mantic formalism (in his case the formalism of 
Quasi Logical Forms QLF). We believe that the 
two approaches are roughly equivalent empiri- 
cally. But in contrast o CLLS, QLF is not for- 
malised as a general constraint language over 
tree-like representations of meaning. QLF has 
the advantage of giving a more direct handle 
on meanings themselves - at the price of its rel- 
atively complicated model theoretic semantics. 
It seems harder though to come up with solu- 
tions within QLF that have an easy portability 
across different semantic frameworks. 
We believe that the ideas from CLLS tie in quite 
easily with various other semantic formalisms, 
such as UDRT (Reyle, 1993) and MRS (Copes- 
take et al, 1997), which use dominance relations 
similar to ours, and also with theories of Logical 
Form associated with GB style grammars, such 
as (May, 1977). In all these frameworks one 
tends to use variable-coordination (or coindex- 
ing) rather than the explicit binding and linking 
relations we have presented here. We hope that 
these approaches can potentially benefit from 
the presented idea of rubber bands for binding 
and linking, without having to make any dra- 
matic changes. 
Our definition of parallelism implements some 
ideas from Hobbs and Kehler (1997) on the be- 
havior of anaphoric links. In contrast o their 
proposal, our definition of parallelism is not 
based on an abstract notion of similarity. Fur- 
thermore, CLLS is not integrated into a general 
theory of abduction. We pursue a more modest 
aim at this stage, as CLLS needs to be con- 
nected to "material" deduction calculi for rea- 
soning with such underspecified semantic rep- 
resentation in order to make progress on this 
front. We hope that some of the more ad hoc 
features of our definition of parallelism (e.g. ax- 
iom 5) may receive a justification or improve- 
ment in the light of such a deeper understand- 
ing. 
Context  Uni f icat ion.  CLLS extends the 
expressiveness of context unification (CU) 
(Niehren et al, 1997a), but it leads to a more 
direct and more structured encoding of seman- 
tic constraints than CU could offer. There are 
three main differences between CU and CLLS. 
1) In CLLS variables are interpreted over nodes 
rather than whole trees. This gives us a di- 
rect handle on occurrences of semantic material, 
where CU could handle occurrences only indi- 
rectly and less efficiently. 2) CLLS avoids the 
capturing problem. 3) CLLS provides explicit 
anaphoric links, which could not be adequately 
modeled in CU. 
The insights of the CU-analysis in (Niehren 
et al, 1997b) carry over to CLLS, but the 
awkward second-order quations for expressing 
dominance in CU can be omitted (Niehren and 
Koller, 1998). This omission yields an enormous 
simplification and efficiency gain for processing. 
Tractabi l i ty .  The distinguishing feature of 
our approach is that we aim to develop ef- 
ficiently treatable constraint languages rather 
than to apply maximally general but intractable 
formalisms. We are confident that CLLS can be 
implemented in a simple and efficient manner. 
First experiments which are based on high-level 
concurrent constraint programming have shown 
promising results. 
358 
5 Conc lus ion  
In this paper, we presented CLLS, a first-order 
language for semantic underspecification. It 
represents ambiguities in simple underspecified 
structures that are transparent and suitable for 
processing. The application of CLLS to some 
difficult cases of ambiguity has shown that it is 
well suited for the task of representing ambigu- 
ous expressions in terms of underspecification. 
Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by the SFB 378 
(project CHORUS) at the Universit~t des Saar- 
landes. The authors wish to thank Manfred 
Pinkal, Gert Smolka, the commentators and 
participants at the Bad Teinach workshop on 
underspecification, and our anonymous review- 
ers. 
Re ferences  
Hiyan Alshawi. 1990. Resolving quasi logical 
form. Computational Linguistics, 16:133-144. 
R. Backofen, J. Rogers, and K. Vijay-Shanker. 
1995. A first-order axiomatization of the theory 
of finite trees. J. Logic, Language, and Informa- 
tion, 4:5-39. 
Johan Bos. 1996. Predicate logic unplugged. In 
Proceedings lOth Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 
133-143. 
Ann Copestake, Dan Flickinger, and Ivan 
Sag. 1997. Minimal Recursion Seman- 
tics. An Introduction. Manuscript, avail- 
able at ftp ://csli-ftp. stanford, edu/ 
linguist ic s/sag/mrs, ps. gz. 
Richard Crouch. 1995. Ellipsis and quantifica- 
tion: A substitutional pproach. In Proceedings 
EACL'95, pages 229-236, Dublin. 
Paul Hirschbiihler. 1982. VP deletion and 
across the board quantifier scope. In J. Puste- 
jovsky and P. Sells, editors, NELS 12, Univ. of 
Massachusetts. 
Jerry R Hobbs and Andrew Kehler. 1997. A 
theory of parallelism and the case of VP-ellipsis. 
In Proceedings A CL '97, pages 394-401, Madrid. 
J.R. Hobbs and S. Shieber. 1987. An algo- 
rithm for generating quantifier scoping. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 13:47-63. 
Andrew Kehler. 1993. A discourse copying al- 
gorithm for ellipsis and anaphora resolution. In 
Proceedings of EA CL. 
Andrew Kehler. 1995. Interpreting Cohesive 
Forms in the Context of Discourse Inference. 
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University. 
M. Marcus, D. Hindle, and M. Fleck. 1983. D- 
theory: Talking about talking about trees. In 
Proceedings of the 21st ACL, pages 129-136. 
Robert May. 1977. The Grammar of Quantifi- 
cation. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge 
Mass. 
Joachim Niehren and Alexander Keller. 1998. 
Dominance Constraints in Context Unification, 
January. http: / /w~w, ps. un?- sb. de/Papers /  
abst ract  s/Dominance, html. 
J. Niehren, M. Pinkal, and P. Ruhrberg. 1997a. 
On equality up-to constraints over finite trees, 
context unification, and one-step rewriting. 
In Proceedings 14th CADE. Springer-Verlag, 
Townsville. 
J. Niehren, M. Pinkal, and P. Ruhrberg. 1997b. 
A uniform approach to underspecification a d 
parallelism. In Proceedings A CL '97, pages 410- 
417, Madrid. 
Manfred Pinkal. 1996. Radical underspecifica- 
tion. In Proceed. lOth Amsterdam Colloquium, 
pages 587-606. 
Uwe Reyle. 1993. Dealing with ambiguities 
by underspecification: construction, represen- 
tation, and deduction. Journal of Semantics, 
10:123-179. 
Uwe Reyle. 1995. Co-indexing labelled DRSs 
to represent and reason with ambiguities. In 
S. Peters and K. van Deemter, editors, Semantic 
Ambiguity and Underspecification. CSLI Publi- 
cations, Stanford. 
J. Rogers and K. Vijay-Shanker. 1994. Extract- 
ing trees from their descriptions: an application 
to tree-adjoining grammars. Computational In- 
telligence, 10:401-421. 
Stuart Shieber, Fernando Pereira, and Mary 
Dalrymple. 1996. Interaction of scope and el- 
lipsis. Linguistics and Philosophy, 19:527-552. 
Kees van Deemter and Stanley Peters. 1996. 
Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification. 
CSLI, Stanford. 
K. Vijay-Shanker. 1992. Using description of 
trees in tree adjoining grammar framework. 
Computational Linguistics, 18. 
Feiyu Xu. 1998. Underspecified representa- 
tion and resolution of ellipsis. Master's thesis, 
Universit~it des Saarlandes. h t tp  ://www. col?. 
uni- sb. de/'feiyu/thesis, html. 
359 
