A Freely Available Morphological Analyzer, Disambiguator 
and Context Sensitive Lemmatizer for German 
Wolfgang Lezius 
University of Paderbom 
Cognitive Psychology 
D-33098 Paderborn 
lezius@psycho.uni- 
paderbom.de 
Reinhard Rapp 
University of Mainz 
Faculty of Applied Linguistics 
D-76711 Germersheim 
rapp@usun 1.fask.uni- 
mainz.de 
Manfred Wettler 
University of Paderbom 
Cognitive Psychology 
D-33098 Paderborn 
wettler@psycho.uni- 
paderbom.de 
Abstract 
In this paper we present Morphy, an inte- 
grated tool for German morphology, part-of- 
speech tagging and context-sensitive lem- 
matization. Its large lexicon of more than 
320,000 word forms plus its ability to pro- 
cess German compound nouns guarantee a 
wide morphological coverage. Syntactic 
ambiguities can be resolved with a standard 
statistical part-of-speech tagger. By using 
the output of the tagger, the lemmatizer can 
determine the correct root even for ambi- 
guous word forms. The complete package is 
freely available and can be downloaded 
from the World Wide Web. 
Introduction 
Morphological analysis is the basis for many 
NLP applications, including syntax parsing, 
machine translation and automatic indexing. 
However, most morphology systems are com- 
ponents of commercial products. Often, as for 
example in machine translation, these systems 
are presented as black boxes, with the morpho- 
logical analysis only used internally. This makes 
them unsuitable for research purposes. To our 
knowledge, the only wide coverage morpho- 
logical lexicon readily available is for the Eng- 
lish language (Karp, Schabes, et al, 1992). 
There have been attempts to provide free mor- 
phological analyzers to the research community 
for other languages, for example in the 
MULTEXT project (Armstrong, Russell, et al, 
1995), which developed linguistic tools for six 
European languages. However, the lexicons 
provided are rather small for most language~. In
the case of German, we hope to significantly 
improve this situation with the development of a 
new version of our morphological analyzer 
Morphy. 
In addition to the morphological analyzer, 
Morphy includes a statistical part-of-speech tag- 
ger and a context-sensitive lemmatizer. It can be 
downloaded from our web site as a complete 
package including documentation and lexicon 
(http://www-psycho.uni-paderborn.de/lezius/). 
The lexicon comprises 324,000 word forms 
based on 50,500 stems. Its completeness has 
been checked using Wahrig Deutsches WOrter- 
buch, a standard ictionary of German (Wahrig, 
1997). Since Morphy is intended not only for 
linguists, but also for second language learners 
of German, the current version has been imple- 
mented with Delphi for a standard Windows 95 
or Windows NT platform and great effort has 
been put in making it as user friendly as possi- 
ble. For UNIX users, an export facility is pro- 
vided which allows generating a lexicon of full 
forms together with their morphological de- 
scriptions in text format. 
1 The Morphology System 
Since German is a highly inflectional language, 
the morphological lgorithms used in Morphy 
are rather complex and can not be described here 
in detail (see Lezius, 1996). In essence, Morphy 
is a computer implementation f the morpho- 
logical system described in the Duden grammar 
(Drosdowsky, 1984). 
An overview on other German morphology 
systems, namely GERTWOL, LA-Morph, 
Morph, Morphix, Morphy, MPRO, PC-Kimmo 
743 
and Plain, is given in the documentation for the 
Morpholympics (Hausser, 1996). The Morpho- 
lympics were an attempt to compare and evalu- 
ate morphology systems in a standardized com- 
petition. Since then, many of the systems have 
been further developed. The version of Morphy 
as described here is a new release. Improve- 
ments over the old version include an integrated 
part-of-speech tagger, a context-sensitive lem- 
matizer, a 2.5 times larger lexicon and more 
user-friendliness through an interactive Win- 
dows-environment. 
The following subsections describe the three 
submodules of the morphological analyzer. 
These are the lexical system, the generation 
module and the analysis module. 
1.1 Lexical System 
The lexicon of Morphy is very compact as it 
only stores the base form for each word together 
with its inflection class. Therefore, the complete 
morphological information for 324,000 word 
forms takes less than 2 Megabytes of disk space. 
In comparison, the text representation of the 
same lexicon, which can be generated via Mor- 
phy's export facility, requires 125 MB when full 
morphological descriptions are given. 
Since the lexical system has been specifically 
designed to allow a user-friendly extension of 
the lexicon, new words can be added easily. To 
our knowledge, Morphy is the only morphology 
system for German whose lexicon can be ex- 
panded by users who have no specialist know- 
ledge. When entering a new word, the user is 
asked the minimal number of questions neces- 
sary to infer the grammatical features of the new 
word and which any native speaker of German 
should be able to answer. 
1.2 Generation 
Starting from the root form of a word and its 
inflection type as stored in the lexicon, the gen- 
eration system produces all inflected forms. 
Morphy's generation algorithms were designed 
with the aim of producing 100% correct output. 
Among other morphological characteristics, the 
algorithms consider vowel mutation (Haus - 
H/iuser), shift between Band ss (FaB - Fasser), e- 
omission (segeln - segle), infixation of infinitive 
markers (weggehen - wegzugehen), as well as 
pre- and infixation of markers of participles 
(gehen - g.egangen; weggehen - wegg.egangen). 
1.3 Analysis 
For each word form of a text, the analysis sys- 
tem determines its root, part of speech, and - if 
appropriate - its gender, case, number, person, 
tense, and comparative degree. It also segments 
compound nouns using a longest-matching rule 
which works from right to left and takes linking 
letters into account. To compound German 
nouns is not trivial: it can involve base forms 
and/or inflected forms (e.g. Haus-meister but 
H~iuser-meer); in some cases the compounding 
is morphologically ambiguous (e.g. Stau-becken 
means water reservoir, but Staub-ecken means 
dust corners); and the linking letters e and s are 
not always determined phonologically, but in 
some cases simply occur by convention (e.g. 
Schwein-e-bauch but Schwein-s-blase and 
Schwein-kram). 
Since the analysis system treats each word 
separately, ambiguities can not be resolved at 
this stage. For ambiguous word forms, all pos- 
sible lemmata nd their morphological descrip- 
tions are given (see Table 1 for the example 
Winde). If a word form can not be recognized, 
its part of speech is predicted by a guesser which 
makes use of statistical data derived from Ger- 
man suffix frequencies (Rapp, 1996). 
morphological description lemma 
SUB NOM SIN FEM Winde 
SUB GEN SIN FEM Winde 
SUB DAT SIN FEM Winde 
SUB AKK SIN FEM Winde 
SUB DAT SIN MAS Wind 
SUB NOM PLU MAS Wind 
SUB GEN PLU MAS Wind 
SUB AKK PLU MAS Wind 
VER SIN IPE PRA winden 
VER SIN 1PE K J1 winden 
VER SIN 3PE KJI winden 
VER SIN IMP winden 
Table 1: Morphological nalysis for Winde. 
Morphy's algorithm for analysis is motivated 
by linguistic considerations. When analyzing a 
word form, Morphy first builds up a list of pos- 
sible roots by cutting off all possible prefixes 
and suffixes and reverses the process of vowel 
mutation if umlauts are found (shifts between B 
744 
and ss are treated analogously). Each root is 
looked up in the lexicon, and - if found - all 
possible inflected forms are generated. Only 
those roots which lead to an inflected form 
identical to the original word form are selected 
(Lezius, 1996). 
Naturally, this procedure is much slower than 
a simple algorithm for the lookup of word forms 
in a full form lexicon. It results in an analysis 
speed of about 300 word forms per second on a 
fast PC, compared to many thousands using a 
full form lexicon. However, there are also ad- 
vantages: First, as mentioned above, the lexicon 
can be kept very small, which is an important 
consideration for a PC-based system intended 
for Internet-distribution. More importantly, the 
processing of German compound nouns and the 
implementation f derivation rules - although 
only partially completed at this stage - fits better 
into this concept. For the processing of very 
large corpora under UNIX, we have imple- 
mented a lookup algorithm which operates on 
the Morphy-generated full form lexicon. 
The coverage of the current version of Mor- 
phy was evaluated with the same test corpus that 
had been used at the Morpholympics. This cor- 
pus comprises about 7.800 word forms in total 
and consists of two political speeches, a frag- 
ment of the LIMAS-corpus, and a list of special 
word forms. The present version of Morphy 
recognized 94.3%, 98.4%, 96.2%, and 88.9% of 
the word forms respectively. The corresponding 
values for the old version of Morphy, with a 2.5 
times smaller lexicon, had been 89.2%, 95.9%, 
86.9%, and 75.8%. 
2 The Disambiguator 
Since the morphology system only looks at iso- 
lated word forms, words with more than one 
reading can not be disambiguated. This is done 
by the disambiguator or tagger, which takes 
context into account by considering the condi- 
tional probabilities of tag sequences. For exam- 
ple, in the sentence "he opens the can" the verb- 
reading of can may be ruled out because a verb 
can not follow an article. 
After the success of statistical part-of-speech 
taggers for English, there have been quite a few 
attempts to apply the same methods to German. 
Lezius, Rapp & Wettler (1996) give an overview 
on some German tagging projects. Although we 
considered a number of algorithms, we decided 
to use the trigram algorithm described by 
Church (1988) for tagging. It is simple, fast, 
robust, and - among the statistical taggers - still 
more or less unsurpassed in terms of accuracy. 
Conceptually, the Church-algorithm works as 
follows: For each sentence of a text, it generates 
all possible assignments of part-of-speech tags 
to words. It then selects that assignment which 
optimizes the product of the lexical and contex- 
tual probabilities. The lexical probability for 
word N is the probability of observing part of 
speech X given the (possibly ambiguous) word 
N. The contextual probability for tag Z is the 
probability of observing part of speech Z given 
the preceding two parts of speech X and Y. It is 
estimated by dividing the trigram frequency 
XYZ by the bigram frequency XY. In practice, 
computational limitations do not allow the enu- 
meration of all possible assignments for long 
sentences, and smoothing is required for infre- 
quent events. This is described in more detail in 
the original publication (Church, 1988). 
Although more sophisticated algorithms for 
unsupervised learning - which can be trained on 
plain text instead on manually tagged corpora -
are well established (see e.g. Merialdo, 1994), 
we decided not to use them. The main reason is 
that with large tag sets, the sparse-data-problem 
can become so severe that unsupervised training 
easily ends up in local minima, which can lead 
to poor results without any indication to the user. 
More recently, in contrast to the statistical tag- 
gers, rule-based tagging algorithms have been 
suggested which were shown to reduce the error 
rate significantly (Samuelsson & Voutilainen, 
1997). We consider this a promising approach 
and have started to develop such a system for 
German with the intention of later inclusion into 
Morphy. 
The tag set of Morphy's tagger is based on the 
feature system of the morphological analyzer. 
However, some features were discarded for tag- 
ging. For example, the tense of verbs is not con- 
sidered. This results in a set of about 1000 dif- 
ferent tags. A fragment of 20,000 words from 
the Frankfurter Rundschau Corpus, which we 
have been collecting since 1992, was tagged 
with this tag set by manually selecting the cor- 
rect choice from the set of possibilities generated 
745 
by the morphological nalyzer. In the following 
we refer to this corpus as the training corpus. Of 
all possible tags, only 456 actually occurred in 
the training corpus. The average ambiguity rate 
was 5.4 tags per word form. 
The performance of our tagger was evaluated 
by running it on a 5000-word test sample of the 
Frankfurter Rundschau-Corpus which was di- 
stinct from the training text. We also tagged the 
test sample manually and compared the results. 
84.7% of the tags were correctly tagged. Al- 
though this result may seem poor at first glance, 
it should be noted that the large tag sets have 
many fine distinctions which lead to a high error 
rate. If a tag set does not have these distinctions, 
the accuracy improves ignificantly. In order to 
show this, in another experiment we mapped our 
large tag set to a smaller set of 51 tags, which is 
comparable to the tag set used in the Brown 
Corpus (Greene & Rubin, 1971). As a result, the 
average ambiguity rate per word decreased from 
5.4 to 1.6, and the accuracy improved to 95.9%, 
which is similar to the accuracy rates reported 
for statistical taggers with small tag sets in vari- 
ous other languages. Table 2 shows a tagging 
example for the large and the small tag set. 
Word 
Ich PRO PER NOM SIN 1PE 
meine VER 1PE SIN 
meine POS AKK SIN FEM ATT 
Frau SUB AKK FEM SIN 
SZE 
large tag set small tag set 
PRO PER 
VER 
POS ATT 
SUB 
SZE 
Table 2: Tagging example for both tag sets. 
3 The Lemmat izer  
For lemmatization (the reduction to base form), 
the integrated design of Morphy turned out to be 
advantageous. In the first step, the morphology- 
module delivers all possible lemmata for each 
word form. Secondly, the tagger determines the 
grammatical categories of the word forms. If, for 
any of the lemmata, the inflected form corre- 
sponding to the word form in the text does not 
agree with this grammatical category, the re- 
spective lemma is discarded. For example, in the 
sentence "ich meine meine Frau" ("I mean my 
wife"), the assignment of the two middle words 
to the verb meinen and the possessive pronoun 
mein is not clear to the morphology system. 
However, since the tagger assigns the tag se- 
quence "pronoun verb pronoun noun" to this 
sentence, it can be concluded that the first oc- 
currence of meine must refer to the verb meinen 
and the second to the pronoun mein. 
Unfortunately, this may not always work as 
well as in this example. One reason is that there 
may be semantic ambiguities which can not be 
resolved by syntactic onsiderations. Another is 
that the syntactic information delivered by the 
tagger may not be fine grained enough to resolve 
all syntactic ambiguities, l Do we need the fine 
grained distinctions of the large tag set to re- 
solve ambiguities, or does the rough information 
from the small tag set suffice? To address these 
questions, we performed an evaluation using 
another test sample from the Frankfurter Rund- 
schau-Corpus. 
We found that - according to the Morphy lexi- 
con- of all 9,893 word forms in the sample, 
9,198 (93.0%) had an unambiguous lemma. Of 
the remaining 695 word forms, 667 had two 
possible lemmata nd 28 were threefold ambi- 
guous (Table 3 gives some examples). Using the 
large tag set, 616 out of the 695 ambiguous word 
forms were correctly lemmatized (88.6%). The 
corresponding fi ures for the small tag set were 
slightly better: 625 out of 695 ambiguities were 
resolved correctly (89.9%). When the error-rate 
is related to the total number of word forms in 
the text, the accuracy is 99.2% for the large and 
99.3% for the small tag set. 
The better performance when using the small 
tag set is somewhat surprising since there are a 
few cases of ambiguities inthe test corpus which 
can only be resolved by the large tag set but not 
by the small tag set. For example, since the 
small tag set does not consider a noun's case, 
gender, and number, it can not decide whether 
Filmen is derived from der Film ("the film") or 
from das Filmen ("the filming"). On the other 
hand, as shown in the previous ection, the tag- 
ging accuracy is much better for the small tag 
set, which is an advantage in lemmatization a d 
obviously compensates for the lack of detail. 
I For example the verb fuhren can be either a sub- 
junctive form offahren ("to drive") or a regular form 
offiihren ("to lead"). Since neither the large nor the 
small tag set consider mood, this ambiguity can not 
be resolved. 
746 
However, we believe that with future improve- 
ments in tagging accuracy lemmatization based 
on the large tag set will eventually be better. 
Nevertheless, the current implementation f the 
lemmatizer gives the user the choice of selecting 
between either tag set. 
Begriffen Begriff, begreifen 
Dank danken, dank (prep.), Dank 
Garten garen, Garten 
Trotz Trotz, trotzen, trotz 
Weise Weise, weise, weisen 
Wunder Wunder, wundern, wund 
Table 3: Word forms with several lemmata. 
Conclusions 
In this paper, a freely available integrated tool 
for German morphological analysis, part-of- 
speech tagging and context sensitive lemmatiza- 
tion was introduced. The morphological ana- 
lyzer is based on the standard Duden grammar 
and provides wide coverage due to a lexicon of 
324,000 word forms and the ability to process 
compound nouns at runtime. It gives for each 
word form of a text all possible lemmata nd 
morphological descriptions. The ambiguities of 
the morphological descriptions are resolved by 
the tagger, which provides about 85% accuracy 
for the large and 96% accuracy for the small tag 
set. The lemmatizer uses the output of the tagger 
to disambiguate word forms with more than one 
possible lemma. It achieves an overall accuracy 
of about 99.3%. 
Acknowledgements 
The work described in this paper was conducted 
at the University of Paderborn and supported by 
the Heinz Nixdorf-Institute. The Frankfurter 
Rundschau Corpus was generously donated by 
the Druck- und Verlagshaus Frankfurt am Main. 
We thank Gisela Zunker for her help with the 
acquisition and preparation of the corpus. 
References 
Armstrong, S.; Russell, G.; Petitpierre, D.; Robert, G. 
(1995). An open architecture for multilingual text 
processing. In: Proceedings of the ACL SIGDAT 
Workshop. From Texts to Tags: Issues in Multilin- 
gual Language Analysis, Dublin. 
Church, K.W. (1988). A stochastic parts program and 
noun phrase parser for unrestricted text. Second 
Conference on Applied Natural Language Proc- 
essing, Austin, Texas, 136-143. 
Drosdowski, G. (ed.) (1984). Duden. Grammatik der 
deutschen Gegenwartssprache. Mannheim: 
Dudenverlag. 
Greene, B.B., Rubin, G.M. (1971). Automatic 
Grammatical Tagging of English. Internal Report, 
Brown University, Department of Linguistics: 
Providence, Rhode Island. 
Hausser, R. (ed.) (1996). Linguistische Verifikation. 
Dokumentation zur Ersten Morpholympics. 
Niemeyer: Ttibingen. 
Karp, D.; Schabes, Y.; Zaidel, M.; Egedi, D. (1992). 
A freely available wide coverage mophologicai 
analyzer for English. In:. Proceedings of the 14th 
International Conference on Computational Lin- 
guistics. Nantes, France. 
Lezius, W. (1996). Morphologiesystem Morphy. In: 
R. Hausser (ed.): Linguistische Verifikation. Do- 
kumentation zur Ersten Morpholympics. Niemeyer: 
Tfibingen. 25-35. 
Lezius, W.; Rapp, R.; Wettler, M. (1996). A mor- 
phology system and part-of-speech tagger for 
German. In: D. Gibbon (ed.): Natural Language 
Processing and Speech Technology. Results of the 
3rd KONVENS Conference, Bielefeld. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 369-378. 
Merialdo, B. (1994). Tagging English text with a 
probabilistic model. Computational Linguistics, 
20(2), 155-171. 
Rapp, R. (1996). Die Berechnung yon Assoziationen: 
ein korpuslinguistischer Ansatz. Hildesheim: Olms. 
Samuelsson, C., Voutilainen, A. (1997). Comparing a 
linguisti c and a stochastic tagger. Proceedings of 
the 35th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 8th Con- 
ference of the European Chapter of the ACL. 
Wahrig, G. (1997). Deutsches WOrterbuch. Gtiters- 
loh: Bertelsmann. 
Appendix: Abbreviations 
AKK accusative PLU plural 
ATT attributive usage POS possessive 
DAT dative PRA present tense 
FEM feminine PRO pronoun 
GEN genitive SIN singular 
IMP imperative SUB noun 
KJI subjunctive 1 SZE punctuation mark 
MAS masculine VER verb 
NOM nominative 1PE 1st person 
PER personal 3PE 3rd person 
747 
Zusammenfassung 
Die morphologische Analyse ist eine wichtige 
Grundlage vieler Anwendungen zur Verarbei- 
tung nattirlicher Sprache, beispielsweise des 
Syntax-Parsing oder der maschinellen Uberset- 
zung. Leider wurden die verfiigbaren Systeme 
h~iufig fiir rein kommerzielle Zwecke entwickelt 
oder sind als Bestandteile gr66erer Pakete nicht 
einzeln lauff~ihig. Nach unseren Informationen 
steht lediglich far das Englische ein umfassen- 
des und dennoch frei verftigbares morphologi- 
sches Lexikon zur Verftigung. 
Allerdings gab es Versuche, auch for andere 
Sprachen frei verf'tigbare Morphologieprogram- 
me bereitzustellen. Beispielsweise wurde im 
Rahmen des vonder Europ~iischen Union gef6r- 
derten MULTEXT-Projektes ein morphologi- 
sches Tool entwickelt, das f'tir sechs Amtsspra- 
chen, darunter auch Deutsch, konzipiert wurde. 
Die bereitgestellten Lexika sind jedoch in den 
meisten F~illen icht sehr umfangreich. 
Demgegentiber umfa6t das Lexikon der aktu- 
ellen Version unseres Morphologie-Tools Mor- 
phy etwa 50.500 St~imme und damit tiber 
320.000 Vollformen. Es wurde anhand es Wah- 
rig-W~Srterbuches mit 120.000 Stichw6rtern auf 
Vollst~indigkeit i berpriift, wobei jedoch extrem 
seltene oder als veraltet betrachtete WSrter nicht 
beriicksichtigt wurden. Zudem wurden Kompo- 
sita in der Regel nicht in das Lexikon aufge- 
nommen, da sie von Morphy zur Laufzeit zerlegt 
werden. 
Neben der morphologischen Analyse und 
Synthese enth~ilt Morphy einen Wortarten- 
Tagger sowie einen kontextsensitiven Lemmati- 
sierer. Da das Programm nicht nur ftir Lingui- 
sten, sondern auch zur Untersttitzung des 
Fremdsprachenerwerbes konzipiert ist, wurde 
Morphy f'tir Standard-PCs unter Windows ent- 
wickelt. Ffir Anwender anderer Betriebssysteme 
besteht die MSglichkeit, ein Vollformenlexikon 
im Textformat zu exportieren. 
748 
