An Empirical Investigation of Proposals in Collaborative 
Dialogues 
Barbara  D i  Eugen io  Pamela  W.  Jo rdan  
Johanna D.  Moore  R ichmond H.  Thomason 
Learn ing  Research  & Deve lopment  Center ,  and  Intel l igent Sys tems Program 
Univers i ty  of  P i t t sburgh  
P i t t sburgh ,  PA 15260, USA 
{dieugeni, jordan, jmoore, thomason}@isp, pitt. edu 
Abst ract  
We describe a corpus-based investigation of propos- 
als in dialogue. First, we describe our DR/compliant 
coding scheme and report our inter-coder reliability 
results. Next, we test several hypotheses about what 
constitutes a well-formed proposal. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Our project's long-range goal (see http://www.isp. 
pitt .edu/' intgen/) is to create a unified architecture 
for collaborative discourse, accommodating both in- 
terpretation and generation. Our computational p- 
proach (Thomason and Hobbs, 1997) uses a form 
of weighted abduction as the reasoning mechanism 
(Hobbs et al, 1993) and modal operators to model 
context. In this paper, we describe the corpus study 
portion of our project, which is an integral part 
of our investigation i to recognizing how conversa- 
tional participants coordinate agreement. From our 
first annotation trials, we found that the recogni- 
tion of "classical" speech acts (Austin, 1962; Searle, 
1975) by coders is fairly reliable, while recognizing 
contextual relationships (e.g., whether an utterance 
accepts a proposal) is not as reliable. Thus, we ex- 
plore other features that can help us recognize how 
participants coordinate agreement. 
Our corpus study also provides a preliminary as- 
sessment of the Discourse Resource Initiative (DR/) 
tagging scheme. The DRI is an international "grass- 
roots" effort that seeks to share corpora that have 
been tagged with the core features of interest to 
the discourse community. In order to use the core 
scheme, it is anticipated that each group will need to 
refine it for their particular purposes. A usable draft 
core scheme is now available for experimentation (see 
http://www.georgetown.edu/luperfoy/Discourse- 
Treebank/dri-home.html). Whereas several groups 
are working with the unadapted core DR/ scheme 
(Core and Allen, 1997; Poesio and Traum, 1997), 
we have attempted to adapt it to our corpus and 
particular esearch questions. 
First we describe our corpus, and the issue of 
tracking agreement. Next we describe our coding 
scheme and our intercoder reliability outcomes. Last 
we report our findings .on tracking agreement. 
2 T rack ing  Agreement  
Our corpus consists of 24 computer-mediated 
dialogues 1 in which two participants collaborate on 
a simple task of buying furniture for the living and 
dining rooms of a house (a variant of the task in 
(Walker, 1993)). The participants' main goal is to 
negotiate purchases; the items of highest priority are 
a sofa for the living room and a table and four chairs 
for the dining room. The problem solving task is 
complicated by several secondary goals: 1) Match 
colors within a room, 2) Buy as much furniture as 
you can, 3) Spend all your money. A point system 
is used to motivate participants to try to achieve as 
many goals as possible. Each subject has a bud- 
get and inventory of furniture that lists the quanti- 
ties, colors, and prices for each available item. By 
sharing this initially private information, the partici- 
pants can combine budgets and select furniture from 
either's inventory. The problem is collaborative in 
that all decisions have to be consensual; funds are 
shared and purchasing decisions are joint. 
In this context, we characterize an agreement as 
accepting a partner's uggestion to include a specific 
furniture item in the solution. In this paper we will 
focus on the issue of recognizing that a suggestion 
has been made (i.e. a proposal). The problem is not 
easy, since, as speech act theory points out (Austin, 
1962; Searle, 1975), surface form is not a clear indi- 
cator of speaker intentions. Consider excerpt (1): 2 
(1) A: \[35\]: i have a blue sofa for 300. 
\[36\]: it's my cheapest one. 
B: \[37\]: I have 1 sofa for 350 
\[38\]: that is yellow 
\[39\]: which is my cheapest, 
\[40\]: yours sounds good. 
\[35\] is the first mention of a sofa in the conversa- 
x Participants work in separate rooms and communicate via 
the computer interface. The interface prevents interruptions. 
2We broke the dialogues into utterances, partly following 
the algorithm in (Passonneau, 1994). 
325 
tion and thus cannot count as a proposal to include 
it in the solution. The sofa A offers for considera- 
tion, is effectively proposed only after the exchange 
of information in \[37\]--\[39\]. 
However, if the dialogue had proceeded as below, 
\[35'\] would count as a proposal: 
(2) B: \ [32 ' \ ] :  I have 1 sofa fo r  350 
\[33'\]: that  is yellow 
\[34'\]: which is my cheapest. 
A: \[35'\]: i have a blue sofa for 300. 
Since context changes the interpretation of \[35\], our 
goal is to adequately characterize the context. For 
this, we look for guidance from corpus and domain 
features. Our working hypothesis is that for both 
participants context is partly determined by the do- 
main reasoning situation. Specifically, if the suitable 
courses of action are highly limited, this will make 
an utterance more likely to be treated as a proposal; 
this correlation is supported by our corpus analysis, 
as we will discuss in Section 5. 
3 Cod ing  Scheme 
We will present our coding scheme by first describing 
the core DR/ scheme, followed by the adaptations 
for our corpus and research issues. For details about 
our scheme, see (Di Eugenio et al, 1997); for details 
about features we added to DR/, but that are not 
relevant for this paper, see (Di Eugenio et al, 1998). 
3.1 The  DRI  Cod ing  Scheme 
The aspects of the core DR/scheme that apply to 
our corpus are a subset of the dimensions under 
Forward- and Backward-Looking Functions. 
3.1.1 Forward-Look ing  Functions 
This dimension characterizes the potential effect 
that an utterance Ui has on the subsequent dialogue, 
and roughly corresponds to the classical notion of 
an illocutionary act (Austin, 1962; Searle, 1975). As 
each Ui may simultaneously achieve multiple effects, 
it can be coded for three different aspects: State- 
ment, Influence-on-Hearer, Influence-on-Speaker. 
Statement.  The primary purpose of Statements is 
to make claims about the world. Statements are sub- 
categorized as an Assert when Speaker S is trying to 
change Hearer H's beliefs, and as a Reassert if the 
claim has already been made in the dialogue. 
In f luence-on-Hearer  ( I -on-H).  A Ui tagged with 
this dimension influences H's future action. DR/dis- 
tinguishes between S merely laying out options for 
H's future action (Open-Option), and S trying to get 
H to perform a certain action (see Figure 1). Infe- 
R?quest includes all actions that request informa- 
tion, in both explicit and implicit forms. All other 
actions 3are Action-Directives. 
3Although this may cause future problems (Tuomela, 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
i' I s  S discussing potential act ions of  H?  
',--Is S ~'-th-g-to get H to d . . . . .  thing? : Open-Op.on  
....... ;;-/ ....... -%.o..o. 
Is 14 supposed to provide information'? 
\[ . . . .  3 ( ^otio..Diroo.vo 
Figure 1: Decision Tree for Influence-on-Hearer 
Influence-on-Speaker ( I -on-S).  A Ui tagged with 
this dimension potentially commits S (in varying de- 
grees of strength) to some future course of action. 
The only distinction is whether the commitment is
conditional on H's agreement (Offer) or not (Com- 
mit). With an Offer, S indicates willingness to com- 
mit to an action if H accepts it. Commits include 
promises and other weaker forms. 
3.1.2 Backward Functions 
This dimension indicates whether Ui is unsolicited, 
or responds to a previous Uj or segment. 4 The tags 
of interest for our corpus are: 
? Answer:  Ui answers a question. 
? Agreement: 
1. Ui Accept/Rejects if it indicates S's attitude to- 
wards a belief or proposal embodied in its an- 
tecedent. 
2. Ui Holds if it leaves the decision about the pro- 
posal embodied in its antecedent open pending 
further discussion. 
3.2 Refinements to Core Features 
The core DRI manual often does not operationalize 
the tests associated with the different dimensions, 
such as the two dashed nodes in Figure 1 (the shaded 
node is an addition that we discuss below). This 
resulted in strong disagreements regarding Forward 
Functions (but not Backward Functions) during our 
initial trials involving three coders. 
Statement,  In the current DR/manual ,  the test 
for Statement is whether Ui can  be followed by 
"That's not true.". For our corpus, only syntactic 
imperatives or interrogatives were consistently fil- 
tered out by this purely semantic test. Thus, we 
refined it by appealing to syntax, semantics, and do- 
main knowledge: Ui is a Statement if it is declarative 
1995), DR I  considers joint actions as decomposable into in- 
dependent Influence-on-Speaker / Hearer dimensions. 
4Space constraints prevent discussion of segments. 
326 
and it is 1) past; or 2) non past, and contains a sta- 
tive verb; or 3) non past, and contains a non-stative 
verb in which the implied action: 
? does not require agreement in the domain; 
? or is supplying agreement. 
For example, We could start in the living room is 
not tagged as a statement if meant as a suggestion, 
i.e. if it requires agreement. 
I -on -H  and  I -on-S.  These two dimensions de- 
pend on the potential action underlying U~ (see the 
root node in Figure 1 for I-on-H). The initial dis- 
agreements with respect o these functions were due 
to the coders not being able to consistently identify 
such actions; thus, we provide a definition for ac- 
tions in our domain, s and heuristics that correlate 
types of actions with I-on-H/I-on-S. 
We have two types of potential actions: put fur- 
niture item X in room Y and remove furniture item 
X from room Y. We subcategorize them as specific 
and general. A specific action has all necessary pa- 
rameters pecified (type, price and color of item, and 
room). General actions arise because all necessary 
parameters are not set, as in I have a blue sofa ut- 
tered in a null context. 
Heur i s t i c  for I -on -H  (the shaded node in Fig- 
ure 1). If H's potential action described by Ui is 
specific, Ui is tagged as Action-Directive, otherwise 
as Open-Option. 
Heur i s t i c  for I -on-S.  Only a Ui that describes S's 
specific actions is tagged with an 1-on-S tag. 
Finally, it is hard to offer comprehensive guidance 
for the test is S trying to get H to do something? in 
Figure 1, but some special cases can be isolated. For 
instance, when S refers to one action that the partic- 
ipants could undertake, but in the same turn makes 
it clear the action is not to be performed, then S is 
not trying to get H to do something. This happens in 
excerpt (1) in Section 2. A specific action (get B's 
$350 yellow sofa) underlies \[38\], which qualifies as 
an Action-Directive just like \[35\]. However, because 
of \[40\], it is clear that B is not trying to get A to use 
B's sofa. Thus, \[38\] is tagged as an Open-Option. 
3.3 Cod ing  for p rob lem solv ing features  
In order to investigate our working hypothesis about 
the relationship between context and limits on the 
courses of action, we coded each utterance for fea- 
tures of the problem space. Since we view the prob- 
lem space as a set of constraint equations, we decided 
to code for the variables in these equations and the 
number of possible solutions given all the possible 
assignments of values to these variables. 
The variables of interest for our corpus are the ob- 
jects of type t in the goal to put an object in a room 
(e.g. varsola, vartabte or  varchairs). For a solution to 
5Our definition of actions does not apply to Into-Requests, 
as the latter are easy to recognize. 
327 
\[\[ Stat. \[I-on-H II-on-S H Answer \[Agr. II 
II "831 .72 I .72 II .79 I .54 II 
Table 1: Kappas for Forward and Backward Func- 
tions 
exist to the set of constraint equations, each varl in 
the set of equations must have a solution. For exam- 
ple, if 5 instances of sofas are known for varsola, but 
every assignment of a value to varsoIa violates the 
budget constraint, then varsola and the constraint 
equations are unsolvable. 
We characterize the solution size for the problem 
as determinate if there is one or more solutions and 
indeterminate otherwise. It is important o note 
that the set of possible values for each vari is not 
known at the outset since this information must be 
exchanged uring the interaction. If S supplies ap- 
propriate values for vari but does not know what H 
has available for it then we say that no solution is 
possible at this time. It is also important o point 
out that during a dialogue, the solution size for a set 
of constraint equations may revert from determinate 
to indeterminate ( .g. when S asks what else H has 
available for a vari). 
4 Analysis of the Coding Results 
Two coders each coded 482 utterances with the 
adapted DRI features (44% of our corpus). Table 1 
reports values for the Kappa (K) coefficient of agree- 
ment (Carletta, 1996) for Forward and Backward 
Functions .6 
The columns in the tables read as follows: if utter- 
ance Ui has tag X, do coders agree on the subtag? 
For example, the possible set of values for I-on-H 
are: NIL (Ui is not tagged with this dimension), 
Action-Directive, Open-Option, and Info-Request. 
The last two columns probe the subtypes of Back- 
ward Functions: was Ui tagged as an answer to the 
same antecedent? was Ui tagged as accepting, re. 
jecting, or holding the same antecedent? T 
K factors out chance agreement between coders; 
K=0 means agreement is not different from chance, 
and K=I  means perfect agreement. To assess the 
import of the values 0 <: K < 1 beyond K's sta- 
tistical significance (all of our K values are signifi- 
cant at p=0.000005), the discourse processing com- 
munity uses Krippendorf's cale (1980) 8, which dis- 
eFor problem solving features, K for two doubly coded 
dialogues was > .8. Since reliability was good and time was 
short, we used one coder for the remaining dialogues. 
7In general, we consider 2 non-identical antecedents as 
equivalent if one is a subset of the other, e.g. if one is an 
utterance Uj and the other a segment containing Uj. 
SMore forgiving scales exist but have not yet been dis- 
cussed by the discourse processing community, e.g. the one 
in (Rietveld and van Hour, 1993). 
II Stat. I I-on-H I I-on-S II Answer I Agr. II 
I\] "681 . 71 I N/Sa II .81 I .43 II 
aN/S means  not  s igni f icant 
Table 2: Kappas from (Core and Allen 97) 
counts any variable with K < .67, and allows tenta- 
tive conclusions when .67 < K < .8 K, and definite 
conclusions when K>.8. Using this scale, Table 1 
suggests that Forward Functions and Answer can be 
recognized far more reliably than Agreement. 
To assess the DRI effort, clearly more experiments 
are needed. However, we believe our results show 
that the goal of an adaptable core coding scheme is 
reasonable. We think we achieved good results on 
Forward Functions because, as the DRI enterprise 
intended, we adapted the high level definitions to 
our domain. However, we have not yet done so for 
Agreement since our initial trial codings did not re- 
veal strong disagreements; now given our K results, 
refinement is clearly needed. Another possible con- 
tributing factor for the low K on Agreement is that 
these tags are much rarer than the Forward Func- 
tion tags. The highest possible value for K may be 
smaller for low frequency tags (Grove et al, 1981). 
Our assessment is supported by comparing our re- 
sults to those of Core and Allen (1997) who used the 
unadapted DRI manual - -  see Table 2. Overall, our 
Forward Function results are better than theirs (the 
non significant K for I-on-S in Table 2 reveals prob- 
lems with coding for that tag), while the Backward 
Function results are compatible. Finally, our assess- 
ment may only hold for task-oriented collaborative 
dialogues. One research group tried to use the DRI 
core scheme on free-flow conversations, and had to 
radically modify it in order to achieve reliable coding 
(Stolcke et al, 1998). 
5 T rack ing  Propose  and  Commit  
It appears we have reached an impasse; if human 
coders cannot reliably recognize when two partici- 
pants achieve agreement, he prospect of automat- 
ing this process is grim. Note that this calls into 
question analyses of agreements based on a single 
coder's tagging effort, e.g. (Walker, 1996). We think 
we can overcome this impasse by exploiting the relia- 
bility of Forward Functions. Intuitively, a U~ tagged 
as Action-Directive + Offer should correlate with 
a proposal - -  given that all actions in our domain 
are joint, an Action-Directive tag always co-occurs 
with either Offer (AD+O) or Commit (AD?C). Fur- 
ther, analyzing the antecedents of Commits hould 
shed light on what was treated as a proposal in the 
dialogue. Clearly, we cannot just analyze the an- 
tecedents of Commit to characterize proposals, as a 
Det Indet Unknown 
AD+O 25 7 0 
Open-Option 2 2 0 
AD+C 10 2 0 
Other 4 2 4 
Table 3: Antecedents of Commit 
proposal may be discarded for an alternative. 
To complete our intuitive characterization of a 
proposal, we will assume that for a Ui to count as 
a well-formed proposal (WFP), the context must be 
such that enough information has already been ex- 
changed for a decision to be made. The feature so- 
lution size represents such a context. Thus our first 
testable characterization f a WFP is: 
1.1 Ui counts as a WFP if it is tagged as Action- 
Directive + Offer and if the associated solution 
size is determinate. 
To gain some evidence in support of 1.1, we 
checked whether the hypothesized WFPs appear as 
antecedents of Commits? Of the 32 AD?Os in Ta- 
ble 3, 25 have determinate solution size; thus, WFPs 
are the largest class among the antecedents of Com- 
mit, even if they only account for 43% of such an- 
tecedents. Another indirect source of evidence for 
hypothesis 1.1 arises by exploring the following ques- 
tions: are there any WFPs that are not committed 
to? if yes, how are they dealt with in the dialogue? 
If hypothesis 1.1 is correct, then we expect hat each 
such Ui should be responded to in some fashion. In 
a collaborative setting such as ours, a partner can- 
not just ignore a WFP as if it had not occurred. 
We found that there are 15 AD+Os with determi- 
nate solution size in our data that are not commit- 
ted to. On closer inspection, it turns out that 9 
out of these 15 are actually indirectly committed to. 
Of the remaining 6, four are responded to with a 
counterproposal (another AD+O with determinate 
solution size). Thus only two are not responded to 
in any fashion. Given that these 2 occur in a di- 
alogue where the participants have a distinctively 
non-collaborative style, it appears hypothesis 1.1 is 
supported. 
Going back to the antecedents of Commit (Ta- 
ble 3), let's now consider the 7 indeterminate 
AD?Os. They can be considered as tentative pro- 
posals that need to be negotiated. 1? To further re- 
fine our characterization f proposals, we explore the 
hypothesis: 
9Antecedents of Commits are not tagged. We recon- 
structed them from either variable tags or when Ui has both 
Commit  and Accept tags, the antecedent of the Accept. 
1?Becanse of our heuristics of tagging specific actions as 
ActionDirectives, these utterances are not Open-Options. 
328 
1.2 When the antecedent of a Commit is an AD+O 
and indeterminate, the intervening dialogue 
renders the solution size determinate. 
In 6 out of the 7 indeterminate antecedent 
AD+Os, our hypothesis verified (see excerpt (1), 
where \[35\] is an AD+ 0 with indeterminate solution 
size, and the antecedent to the Commit in \[40\]). 
As for the other antecedents of Commit in Table 3, 
it is not surprising that only 4 Open-Options occur 
given the circumstances in which this tag is used (see 
Figure 1). These Open-Options appear to function 
as tentative proposals like indeterminate AD+ Os, as 
the dialogue between the Open-Option and the Com- 
mit develops according to hypothesis 1.2. We were 
instead surprised that AD+Cs are a very common 
category among the antecedents of Commit (20%); 
the second commit appears to simply reconfirm the 
commitment expressed by the first (Walker, 1993; 
Walker, 1996), and does not appear to count as a 
proposal. Finally, the Other column is a collection 
of miscellaneous antecedents, such as Info-Requests 
and cases where the antecedent is unclear, that need 
further analysis. For further details, see (Di Eugenio 
et al, 1998). 
6 Future  Work  
Future work includes, first, further exploring the fac- 
tors and hypotheses discussed inSection 5. We char- 
acterized WFPs as AD+Os with determinate solu- 
tion size: a study of the features of the dialogue pre- 
ceding the WFP will highlight how different options 
are introduced and negotiated. Second, whereas our 
coders were able to reliably identify Forward Func- 
tions, we do not expect computers to be able to do so 
as reliably, mainly because humans are able to take 
into account the full previous context. Thus, we are 
interested in finding correlations between Forward 
Functions and "simpler" tags. 
Acknowledgements 
This material is based on work supported by the Na- 
tional Science Foundation under Grant No. IRI-9314961. 
We wish to thank Liina Pyllk~inen for her contributions 
to the coding effort, and past and present project mem- 
bers Megan Moser and Jerry Hobbs. 
Re ferences  
John L. Austin. 1962. How to Do Things With 
Words. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classi- 
fication tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational 
Linguistics, 22(2). 
Mark G. Core and James Allen. 1997. Coding 
dialogues with the DAMSL annotation scheme. 
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Actions 
in Human and Machines, Cambridge MA. 
Barbara Di Eugenio, Pamela W. Jordan, and Li- 
ina PylkkLrmn. 1997. The COCONUT project: 
Dialogue annotation manual, http://www.isp. 
pitt.edu/'intgen/research-papers. 
Barbara Di Eugenio, Pamela W. Jordan, Rich- 
mond H. Thomason, and Johanna D. Moore. 
1998. The Acceptance cycle: An empirical inves- 
tigation of human-human collaborative dialogues. 
Submitted for publication. 
William M. Grove, Nancy C. Andreasen, Pa- 
tricia McDonald-Scott, Martin B. Keller, and 
Robert W. Shapiro. 1981. Reliability studies 
of psychiatric diagnosis, theory and practice. 
Archives General Psychiatry, 38:408-413. 
Jerry Hobbs, Mark Stickel, Douglas Appelt, and 
Paul Martin. 1993. Interpretation asabduction. 
Artificial Intelligence, 63(1-2):69-142. 
Klaus Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: an In- 
troduction to its Methodology. Beverly Hills: Sage 
Publications. 
Rebecca J. Passonneau. 1994. Protocol for coding 
discourse referential noun phrases and their an- 
tecedents. Technical report, Columbia University. 
Massimo Poesio and David Traum. 1997. Rep- 
resenting conversation acts in a unified seman- 
tic/pragmatic framework. AAAI Fall Symposium 
on Communicative Actions in Human and Ma- 
chines, Cambridge MA. 
T. Rietveld and R. van Hout. 1993. Statistical Tech- 
niques .for the Study of Language and Language 
Behaviour. Mouton de Gruyter. 
John R. Searle. 1975. Indirect Speech Acts. In 
P. Cole and J.L. Morgan, editors, Syntax and Se- 
mantics 3. Speech Acts. Academic Press. 
A. Stolcke, E. Shriberg, R. Bates, N. Coccaro, D. Ju- 
rafsky, R. Martin, M. Meteer, K. Ries, P. Taylor, 
and C. Van Ess-Dykema. 1998. Dialog act model- 
ing for conversational speech. AAAI Spring Sym- 
posium on Applying Machine Learning to Dis- 
course Processing. 
Richmond H. Thomason and Jerry R. Hobbs. 1997. 
Interrelating interpretation a d generation i an 
abductive framework. AAAI Fall Symposium on 
Communicative Actions in Human and Machines, 
Cambridge MA. 
Raimo Tuomela. 1995. The Importance of Us. Stan- 
ford University Press. 
Marilyn A. Walker. 1993. Informational Redun- 
dancy and Resource Bounds in Dialogue. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Pennsylvania, December. 
Marilyn A. Walker. 1996. Inferring acceptance and 
rejection in dialogue by default rules of inference. 
Language and Speech, 39(2). 
329 
