Definiteness Predictions for Japanese Noun Phrases* 
Ju l ia  E. He ine  
Computer l inguist ik  
Universit~it des Saarlandes 
66041 Saarbriicken 
Germany 
heine@coli.uni-sb.de 
Abst rac t  
One of the major problems when translating 
from Japanese into a European language such as 
German or English is to determine definiteness 
of noun phrases in order to choose the correct 
determiner in the target language. Even though 
in Japanese, noun phrase reference is said to de- 
pend in large parts on the discourse context, we 
show that in many cases there also exist lin- 
guistic markers for definiteness. We use these 
to build a rule hierarchy that predicts 79,5% 
of the articles with an accuracy of 98,9% from 
syntactic-semantic properties alone, yielding an 
efficient pre-processing tool for the computa- 
tionally expensive context checking. 
1 In t roduct ion  
One of the major problems when translating 
from Japanese into a European language such 
as German or English is the insertion of articles. 
Both German and English distinguish between 
the definite and indefinite article, the former, 
in general, indicating some degree of familiarity 
with the referent, the latter referring to some- 
thing new. Thus by using a definite article, the 
speaker expects the hearer to be able to iden- 
tify the object he is talking about, whilst with 
the use of an indefinite article, a new referent 
is introduced into the discourse context (Heim, 
1982). 
In contrast, the reference of Japanese noun 
phrases depends in large parts on the discourse 
" I would like to thank my colleagues Johan Bos, BjSrn 
Gambiick, Yoshiki Mori, Michael Paul, Manfred Pinkal, 
C.J. Rupp, Atsuko Shimada, Kristina Striegnitz and 
Karsten Worm for their valuable comments and support. 
This research was supported by the German Ministry of 
Education, Science, Research and Technology (BMBF) 
within the Verbmobil framework under grant no. 01 IV 
701 R4. 
context, taking a previous mention of an object 
and all properties that can be inferred from it, 
as well as world knowledge as indicators for def- 
inite reference. Any noun phrase whose referent 
cannot be recovered from the discourse context 
will in turn be taken as indefinite. However, 
noun phrases can also be explicitly marked for 
definiteness, forcing an interpretation of the ref- 
erent independent of the discourse context. In 
this way, it is possible to trigger accommodation 
of previously unknown specific referents, or to 
get an indefinite reading even if an object of the 
same type has already been introduced. 
For machine translation, it is important o 
find a systematic way of extracting the syntactic 
and semantic information responsible for mark- 
ing the reference of noun phrases, in order to 
correctly choose the articles to be used in the 
target language. 
For this paper, we propose a rule hierarchy 
for this purpose, that can be used as a pre- 
processing tool to context checking. All noun 
phrases marked for definiteness in any way are 
assigned their referential property, leaving the 
others underspecified. 
After giving a short outline of related work in 
the next section, we will introduce our rule hier- 
archy in section 3. The resulting algorithm will 
be evaluated in section 4, and in section 5 we 
will address implementational issues. Finally, in 
section 6 we give a conclusion. 
2 Re la ted  Work  
The problem of article selection when translat- 
ing from Japanese into any language requiring 
the use of articles has only been addressed sys- 
tematically by a few authors. 
(Murata and Nagao, 1993) define a heuristic 
rule base for definiteness assignment, consisting 
of 86 weighted rules. These rules use surface in- 
519 
formation in a sentence to estimate the referen- 
tial property of each noun. During processing, 
each applicable rule assigns confidence weights 
to the three possible referential properties 'defi- 
nite', 'indefinite' and 'generic'. These values are 
added up for each property, and the one with 
the highest score will be assigned to the noun 
in question. If no rule applies, the default value 
is 'indefinite'. This approach assigns the correct 
value in 85,5% of the cases when used with the 
training data, and 68,9% with unseen data. 
(Bond et al, 1995) show how the percentage 
of noun phrases generated with correct use of 
articles and number in a Japanese to English 
machine translation system can be increased by 
applying heuristic rules to distinguish between 
'generic', 'referential' and 'ascriptive' uses of 
noun phrases. These rules are ordered in a hi- 
erarchical manner, with later rules over-ruling 
earlier ones. In addition, for each noun phrase 
use there are specific rules, based on linguis- 
tic information, that assign definiteness to the 
noun phrases. Overall, in their system, inser- 
tion of the correct article can be improved by 
12% yielding a correctness level of 77%. 
In contrast to these approaches relying on 
monolingual indicators alone, (Siegel, 1996) 
proposes to assign definiteness during the trans- 
fer process. In a first stage, all lexically de- 
fined definiteness attributes are assigned. To 
all cases not covered by this, a set of preference 
rules is applied, if their translation equivalent 
in the target language is a noun. In addition to 
linguistic indicators from both the source and 
target language, the rules also take a stack of 
referents mentioned previously in the discourse 
into account. This combined approach is very 
successful, assigning the correct definiteness at- 
tributes to 98% of all relevant noun phrases in 
the training data. 
In the approach described in the next sec- 
tion, we have taken up the idea of using both 
linguistic and contextual information for the as- 
signment of definiteness attributes to Japanese 
noun phrases. However, instead of using merely 
a rule base, we propose a monotone algorithm 
based on a linguistic rule hierarchy followed by 
a context checking mechanism. 
3 The  Ru le  H ierarchy  
The rule hierarchy we introduce in this paper 
has been devised from a systematic survey of 
some data from a Japanese corpus consisting of 
appointment scheduling dialogues3 Since dia- 
logues in this domain tend to be short, on av- 
erage consisting of just 14 utterances, most def- 
inite references have to be introduced by way 
of accommodation rather than referring back to 
the discourse context. Moreover, references to 
events have a particular tendency to be non- 
specific, i.e. stating their existence rather than 
explicating their identity. Non-specific refer- 
ences are by definition indefinite, whether the 
referent has been previously introduced to the 
context or not. 
Neither accommodation nor non-specific ref- 
erence can be realized without linguistic in- 
dicators, since they would otherwise interfere 
with the context-based distinction between def- 
inite and indefinite reference within a discourse. 
The appointment scheduling domain is there- 
fore ideal for a case study aimed at extracting 
linguistic indicators for definiteness. 
3.1 Overv iew 
Explicit marking for definiteness takes place on 
several syntactic levels, namely on the noun it- 
self, within the noun phrase, through counting 
expressions, or on the sentence level. For each 
of these syntactic levels, a set of rules can be 
defined by generalizing over the linguistic indi- 
cators that are responsible for the definiteness 
attributes carried by the noun phrases in the 
corpus. Each of these rules consists of one or 
more preconditions, and a consequent that as- 
signs the associated efiniteness attribute to the 
respective noun phrase when the preconditions 
are met. 
As it turns out, none of the rules defined 
on the same syntactic level interfere with each 
other, since they either assign the same value, 
or their preconditions cannot possibly be met at 
the same time. Thus the rules can be grouped 
together into classes corresponding to the four 
1In this survey, all the noun phrases from 10 dialogues 
were analyzed in detail, determining the regularities that 
led to definiteness predictions. These were then formu- 
lated into a set of rules and arranged in a hierarchical 
manner to rule out wrong predictions. A more detailed 
description of the methods used and a full list of the rules 
can be found in (Heine, 1997). 
520 
syntactic levels they are defined on. There is 
a clear hierachy between the four classes, with 
all rules of one class given priority over all rules 
on a lower level, as shown in figure 1. Note that 
even though the rule classes are defined in terms 
of syntactic levels, the sequence of rule classes 
in our hierarchy does not correspond in any way 
to syntactic structure. 
nominal phrase 
noun rules 
otherwise I 
clausal rules I 
otherwise I 
NP rules I 
otherwise I 
counting expressions 
otherwise 
definiteness attribute 
definiteness 
attribute 
definiteness 
attribute 
definiteness 
D attribute 
context checking definite 
default value 
D 
indefinite 
Figure 1: Definiteness Algorithm 
3.2 Noun ru les  
On the noun level, the lexical properties of the 
noun or one of its direct modifiers can determine 
the reference of the noun in question. 
There are a number of nouns, that can be 
marked as definite on their lexical properties 
alone, either because they refer to a unique ref- 
erent in the universe of discourse, or because 
they carry some sort of indexical implications. 
The referent is thus described uniquely with 
respect to some implicitly mentioned context. 
For example, there exist a number of nouns 
that implicitly relate the referent with either the 
hearer or the speaker, depending on the pres- 
ence or absence of honorifics 2, respectively. In 
the appointment scheduling domain, the most 
frequently used words of this class are (go)yotei 
(your/my schedule), (o)kangae (your/my opin- 
ion) and (go)tsugoo (for you/me). 
Indexical time expressions like konshuu (this 
week) or raigatsu (next month) refer to a spe- 
cific period of time that stands in a certain re- 
lation to the time of utterance. Even though 
they do not necessarily have to stand with an 
article in the target language, the reference is 
still definite, as in the following example: 
(1) ra i shuu  desu ne 
next week to be isn't it 
'That is ( the)  next  week,  isn't it?' 
The interpretation of a modified noun is typi- 
cally restricted to a specific referent by the mod- 
ification, thus making it definite in reference. 
Restrictive modifiers of this type are, for exam- 
ple, specifiers like demonstratives and posses- 
sives, as well as time expressions and attribu- 
tive relative clauses, as shown in the following 
examples. 
(2) tooka  no shuu desu 
tenth GEN week to  be 
'That is the  week  of  the  tenth . '  
(3) n i juurokun ich i  kara  ha j imaru  
twentysixth from to begin 
shuu wa ikaga deshoo ka 
week TOPIC how to be QUESTION 
2In Japanese, there are two honorific prefixes, go and 
o, that can be used to politely refer to things related 
to the hearer. However, there are no such prefixes to 
humbly refer to things relating to oneself. 
521 
'How is the  week  beginning the 26th?' 
However, indefinite pronouns, as for exam- 
ple hoka (another), also fall into the category of 
modifiers, but explicitly assign indefinite refer- 
ence to the noun they modify. These are usually 
used to introduce a new referent into a context 
already containing one or more referents of the 
same type. 
(4) hoka no hi erabashite itadaite mo 
different day choose receive also 
ii n desu ga 
good DISCREL 
'Could I ask you to choose a different 
day?' 
At present, there are nine rules belonging to 
the noun class, only one of which assigns indef- 
inite reference whilst all others assign definite 
reference to the noun in question. 
3.3 C lausa l  ru les 
On the sentence level, verbs may carry strong 
preferences for the definiteness of one or more 
of their arguments, omewhat in the way of do- 
main specific patterns. Generally, these pat- 
terns serve to specify whether a complement to 
a certain verb is more likely to be definite or 
indefinite in a semantically unmarked interpre- 
tation. For example, in a sentence like 5, kaigi 
ga haitte or imasu corresponds to the pattern 
'EVENT ga hairu' ('have an EVENT scheduled'), 
where the scheduled event denoted by EVENT is 
indefinite for the unmarked reading. 
(5) kayoobi wa gogo sanji made 
Tuesday TOPIC  pm 3 o'clock until 
kaigi ga ha i t te  orimasu node 
meeting NOM have scheduled since 
'since I have a meet ing  scheduled until 3 
pm on Tuesday' 
On the other hand, in sentence 6, kaigi ga 
owarimasu is an instance of the pattern 'EVENT 
ga owaru' ('the EVENT will end'), where, in the 
unmarked reading, the event that ends is pre- 
supposed to be a specific entity, whether it is 
previously known or not. 
(6) juuni j i  ni kaigi ga 
12 o'clock at meeting NOM 
owar imasu  node 
to end since 
'since the  meet ing  will end at 12 o'clock' 
The object of an existential question or a 
negation is by default indefinite, since these sen- 
tence types usually indicate the (non)existence 
of the noun in question. Thus, for example, in 
the two sentence patterns 'x wa arimasu ka' ('Is 
there an x?') and 'x wa arimasen' ( 'There is no 
x.') the object instantiating x is indefinite, un- 
less marked otherwise. 
In addition to these sentence patterns, there 
are a number of nouns that can be followed by 
the copula suru to form a light verb construc- 
tion. These constructions usually come without 
a particle and are treated as compound verbs, 
as for example uchiawase suru ('to arrange'). 
However, these nouns can also occur with the 
particle o, as in uchiawase o suru, introducing 
an ambiguity whether this expression should be 
treated as a light verb construction or as a nor- 
mal verb complement structure. Since this am- 
biguity can best be resolved at some later point, 
the noun should be marked as being indefinite, 
irrespective of whether it will eventually be gen- 
erated as a noun or a verb in the target lan- 
guage. 
(7) raishuu ikoo de 
next week f rom. . ,  onwards 
uch iawase  o shitai 
arrangement ACC want to make 
n desu ga 
DISCREL 
'I would like to make an ar rangement  
from next week onwards' 
To override any of these default values, the noun 
will have to be explicitly marked, using any of 
the markers on the noun level. Thus we take 
the clausal rules to be between the top level 
noun rules and all other rules further down the 
hierarchy. 
From the appointment scheduling domain, 
eight sentence patterns were extracted, where 
six assign the default indefinite and two indi- 
cate definite reference. Thus, together with the 
522 
light verb constructions, there are nine rules in 
this class. 
3.4 Noun phrase  rules 
The postpositional particles that complete a 
noun phrase in Japanese serve primarily as case 
markers, but can also influence the interpreta- 
tion of the noun with respect to definiteness. 
However, the definiteness predictions triggered 
by the use of particles can be fairly weak and are 
easily overridden by other factors, thus placing 
the rules emerging from these patterns near the 
bottom of the hierarchy. 
The main postpositions indicating definite 
reference are the topicalization particle wa in 
its non-contrastive use s, the boundary mark- 
ers kara (from) and made (to) and the genitive 
marker no, especially in conjunction with hoo 
(side), as indicated by the following examples. 
(s) chotto idoo no jikan 
unfortunately transfer GEN time 
ga torenaiyoo desu ne 
NOM take not DISCREL 
'Unfortunately, there is no time for the  
t ransfer . '  
(9) genkoo no hoo mada tochuu 
manuscript GEN side not yet ready 
dankai desu keredomo 
state to be DISCREL 
'The  manuscr ip t  is not ready yet.' 
All of the four noun phrase rules in the cur- 
rent framework indicate definite reference. 
3.5 Count ing  express ions  
As it turns out, there is one more level to the 
rule hierarchy. Even though counting expres- 
sions are semantically modifiers, they do not 
syntactically modify the noun itself but rather 
the entire noun phrase. They do not have to be 
adjacent o the noun phrase they modify, since 
they are marked by a counting suffix indicating 
the type of objects counted. 
~This means, that definite reference is indicated by 
the main use of the particle wa, namely as a topic marker, 
stressing the discourse referent the conversation is about. 
There is another, contrastive use of wa, which introduces 
something in contrast o another discourse referent. Nat- 
urally, this use may introduce a related, albeit previously 
unknown - -  and thus indefinite - -  referent. 
(10) nijuuhachinichi g a gogo ni 
twentyeighth NOM afternoon in 
kaigi ga i kken haitte orimasu 
meeting ACC one be scheduled 
'There is one /a  meet ing  scheduled on 
the twentyeighth.' 
Semantically, counting expressions imply the 
existence of a certain number of the objects 
counted, in the same way that the indefinite ar- 
ticle does. These expressions are therefore taken 
to be indefinite by default, but can be made 
definite by any of the other rules. Counting ex- 
pressions thus make up a class of their own on 
the lowest level of the hierarchy. 
3.6 Underspec i f ied  values 
As might be expected from the concept of pre- 
processing, there will be a number of noun 
phrases that cannot be assigned a definiteness 
attribute by any of the rules described above. 
These will remain underspecified for definite- 
ness until an antecedent can be found for them 
by the context checking mechanism, or until 
they are assigned a default value. 
By introducing a value for underspecification, 
it is possible to postpone the decision whether 
a noun phrase should be marked definite or in- 
definite, without losing the information that it 
must be marked eventually. Since default values 
are only introduced when a value is still under- 
specified after the assignment mechanism has 
finished, there is no need to ever change a value 
once it has been assigned. This means, that 
the algorithm can work in a strictly monotone 
manner, terminating as soon as a value has been 
found. 
4 Eva luat ion  
4.1 Per fo rmance  of the  a lgor i thm 
The performance of our framework is best de- 
scribed in terms of recall and precision, where 
recall refers to the proportion of all relevant 
noun phrases that have been assigned a correct 
definiteness attribute, whilst precision expresses 
the percentage of correct assignments among all 
attributes assigned. 
The hierarchy was designed as a pre-process 
to context checking, extracting all values that 
can be assigned on linguistic grounds alone, but 
leaving all others underspecified. It is therefore 
523 
occurrences 
correct 
incorrect 
precision 
noun rules clausal rules NP rules count rules total 
159 62 53 1 275 
158 
1 
99,4% 
60 53 1 272 
2 0 0 3 
96,8% 100% 100% 98,9% 
Table 1: Precision of the rules 
to be expected that its coverage, i.e. the per- 
centage of noun phrases assigned a value by the 
hierarchy, is relatively low. However, since we 
propose that the decision algorithm should be 
monotone, it is vitally important for the pre- 
cision to be as near to 100% as possible. Any 
wrong assignments at any stage of the process 
will inevitably lead to incorrect ranslation re- 
sults. 
To evaluate the hierarchy, we tested the per- 
formance of our rule base on 20 unseen dia- 
logues from the corpus. All noun phrases in the 
dialogues were first annotated with their defi- 
niteness attributes, followed by the list of rules 
with matching preconditions. As a second step, 
the rules applicable to each noun phrase were 
ordered according to their class, and the pre- 
diction of the one highest in the hierarchy was 
compared with the annotated value. 
In the test data, there are 346 noun phrases 
that need assignment ofdefiniteness attributes. 4 
Table 1 shows the number of noun phrase oc- 
currences covered by each rule class, i.e. the 
number of times one of the noun phrases was 
assigned a definiteness attribute by any of the 
rules from each class. This value was then fur- 
ther divided into the number of correct and in- 
correct assignments made. From this, the pre- 
cision was calculated, dividing the number of 
values correctly assigned by the number of val- 
ues assigned at all. Overall, with a precision 
of 98,9%, the aim of high accuracy has been 
achieved. 
Dividing the number of correct assignments 
by the number of noun phrases that need assign- 
4Additionally, there are 388 time expressions (i.e. 
dates, times, weekdays and times of day) that under cer- 
tain conditions also need an article during generation. 
However, these were excluded from the statistics, since 
nearly all of them were found to be trivially definite, 
somehow artificially pushing the recall of the rules in 
the hierarchy up to 88,8%. 
ment, we get a recall of 78,6%. Thus, within the 
appointment scheduling domain, the hierarchy 
already accounts for 79,5% of all relevant noun 
phrases, leaving just 20,5% for the computation- 
ally expensive context checking. 
Of the 71 noun phrases left underspecified, 40 
have definite reference, suggesting 'definite' as 
the default value if the hierarchy was to be used 
as the sole means of assigning definiteness at- 
tributes. This means, that a system integrating 
this algorithm with an efficient context check- 
ing mechanism should have a recall of at least 
90%, since this is what can already be achieved 
by using a default value. 
4.2 Compar ison  to previous approaches  
The performance of our framework has been 
found to be better than both of the heuris- 
tic rule based approaches introduced in sec- 
tion 2, even before context checking. However, 
our framework was defined and tested on the 
restrictive domain of appointment scheduling. 
Most of the really difficult cases for article se- 
lection, as for example generics, do not occur in 
this domain, whilst both (Murata and Nagao, 
1993) and (Bond et al, 1995) build their the- 
ories around the problem of identifying these. 
There are no statistics on the performance of 
their systems on a corpus that does not contain 
any generics. 
The transfer-based approach of (Siegel, 1996) 
also covers data from the appointment schedul- 
ing domain, using both linguistic and contextual 
information for assigning defininteness. How- 
ever, her results can still not be compared with 
our approach, since we do not have any fig- 
ures on how high the recall of our algorithm 
is with context checking in place. In addition, 
the performance data given for our hierarchy 
was derived from unseen data rather than the 
data that were used to draw up the rules, as in 
Siegel's case. 
524 
Even though no direct comparison is possible 
because of the different est methods and data 
sets used, we have been able to show that an 
approach using a monotone rule hierarchy that 
can be easily integrated with a context checking 
mechansim leads to very good results. 
5 Imp lementat ion  
The current framework has been designed as 
part of the dialogue and discourse processing 
component of the Verbmobil machine transla- 
tion system, a large scale research project in 
the area of spontaneous speech dialogue trans- 
lation between German, English and Japanese 
(Wahlster, 1997). Within the modular sys- 
tem architecture, the dialogue and discourse 
processing is situated in between the compo- 
nents for semantic construction (Gamb~ck et 
al., 1996) and semantic-based transfer (Dorna 
and Emele, 1996). It uses context knowledge to 
resolve semantic representations possibly under- 
specified with respect o syntactic or semantic 
ambiguities. 
At this stage, all the information eeded for 
definiteness assignment is easily accessible, en- 
abling the rules in our hierarchy to be imple- 
mented one-to-one as simple implications. Since 
all information is accessible at all times, the ap- 
plication of the rules can be ordered according 
to the hierarchy. Only if none of the rules given 
in the hierarchy are applicable, will the context 
checking process be started. If an antecedent 
can be found for the relevant noun phrase, it 
will be assigned efinite reference, otherwise it 
is taken to be indefinite. 
The algorithm will terminate as soon as a 
value has been assigned, thus ensuring mono- 
tonicity and efficiency, as 45% of all noun 
phrases are already assigned a value by one of 
the noun rules at the top of the hierarchy. 
6 Conc lus ion  
In this paper, we have developed an efficient 
algorithm for the assignment of definiteness at- 
tributes to Japanese noun phrases that makes 
use of syntactic and semantic information. 
Within the domain of appointment schedul- 
ing, the integration of our rule hierarchy reduces 
the need for computationally expensive context 
checking to 20,5% of all relevant noun phrases, 
as 79,5% are already assigned a value with a 
precision of 98,9%. 
Even though the current framework is to a 
large extent domain specific, we believe that 
it may be easily extended to other domains by 
adding appropriate rules. 
Re ferences  
Francis Bond, Kentaro Ogura, and Tsukasa 
Kawaoka. 1995. Noun phrase reference in 
Japanese-to-English machine translation. In 
Sixth International Conference on Theoretical 
and Methodological Issues in Machine Trans- 
lation, pages 1-14. 
Michael Dorna and Martin C. Emele. 1996. 
Semantic-based transfer. In Proceedings 
of the 16th Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, volume 1, pages 316-321, 
Kcbenhavn, Denmark. ACL. 
BjSrn Gamb~ck, Christian Lieske, and Yoshiki 
Mori. 1996. Underspecified Japanese seman- 
tics in a machine translation system. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 11th Pacific Asia Conference 
on Language, Information and Computation, 
pages 53-62, Seoul, Korea. 
Irene Heim. 1982. The Semantics of Definite 
and Indefinite Noun Phrases. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Massachusetts. 
Julia E. Heine. 1997. Ein Algorithmus zur 
Bestimmung der Definitheitswerte japanis- 
chef Nominalphrasen. Diplomarbeit, Uni- 
versit~t des Saarlandes, Saarbrficken. avail- 
able at: http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/--,heine/ 
arbeit.ps.gz (in German). 
Masaki Murata and Makoto Nagao. 1993. De- 
termination of referential property and num- 
ber of nouns in Japanese sentences for ma- 
chine translation into English. In Proceedings 
of the Figh International Conference on The- 
oretical and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation, pages 218-225. 
Melanie Siegel. 1996. Preferences and defaults 
for definiteness and number in Japanese to 
German machine translation. In Byung-Soo 
Park and Jong-Bok Kim, editors, Selected Pa- 
pers from the 11th Pacific Asia Conference on 
Language, Information and Computation. 
Wolfgang Wahlster. 1997. Verbmobil - Erken- 
nung, Analyse, Transfer, Generierung und 
Synthese von Spontansprache. Verbmobil 
Report 198, DFKI GmbH. (in German). 
525 
