Term-list Translation 
using Mono-l ingual Word Co-occurrence Vectors* 
Genich i ro  Kiku i  
NTT In format ion  and Communicat ion  Systems Labs. 
1-1 Hikar inooka,  Yokosuka-Shi ,  Kanagawa,  Japan  
e-mai l :  k iku i@is l .nt t .co. jp  
Abst ract  
A term-list is a list of content words that charac- 
terize a consistent ext or a concept. This paper 
presents a new method for translating a term-list by 
using a corpus in the target language. The method 
first retrieves alternative translations for each input 
word from a bilingual dictionary. It then determines 
the most 'coherent' combination of alternative trans- 
lations, where the coherence of a set of words is 
defined as the proximity among multi-dimensional 
vectors produced from the words on the basis of 
co-occurrence statistics. The method was applied 
to term-lists extracted from newspaper articles and 
achieved 81% translation accuracy for ambiguous 
words (i.e., words with multiple translations). 
1 In t roduct ion  
A list of content words, called a term-list, is widely 
used as a compact representation f documents in in- 
formation retrieval and other document processing. 
Automatic translation of term-lists enables this pro- 
cessing to be cross-linguistic. This paper presents a
new method for translating term-lists by using co- 
occurrence statistics in the target language. 
Although there is little study on automatic trans- 
lation of term-lists, related studies are found in the 
area of target word selection (for content words) in 
conventional full-text machine translation (MT). 
Approaches for target word selection can be clas- 
sifted into two types. The first type, which has been 
adopted in many commercial MT systems, is based 
on hand assembled disambiguation rules, and/or dic- 
tionaries. The problem with this approach is that 
creating these rules requires much cost and that they 
are usually domain-dependent 1 
The second type, called the statistics-based ap- 
proach, learns disambiguation k owledge from large 
corpora. Brown et al presented an algorithm that 
* This  research was done when the author  was at Center 
for the Study of Language and Information(CSLI) ,  Stanford 
University. 
1In fact, this is part ly shown by the fact that  many  MT 
systems have subst i tutable  domain-dependent  (or "user" ) dic- 
t ionaries . 
relies on translation probabilities estimated from 
large bilingual corpora (Brown et al, 1990)(Brown 
et al, 1991). Dagan and Itai (1994) and Tanaka and 
Iwasaki (1996) proposed algorithms for selecting tar- 
get words by using word co-occurrence statistics in 
the target language corpora. The latter algorithms 
using mono-lingual corpora are particularly impor- 
tant because, at present, we cannot always get a 
sufficient amount of bilingual or parallel corpora. 
Our method is closely related to (Tanaka and 
Iwasaki, 1996) from the viewpoint that they both 
rely on mono-lingual corpora only and do not re- 
quire any syntactic analysis. The difference is that 
our method uses "coherence scores", which can cap- 
ture associative relations between two words which 
do not co-occur in the training corpus. 
This paper is organized as follows, Section 2 de- 
scribes the overall translation process. Section 3 
presents a disambiguation algorithm, which is the 
core part of our translation method. Section 4 and 
5 give experimental results and discussion. 
2 Term-list Translation 
Our term-list translation method consists of two 
steps called Dictionary Lookup and Disambiguation. 
1. Dictionary Lookup: 
For each word in the given term-list, all the al- 
ternative translations are retrieved from a bilin- 
gual dictionary. 
A translation candidate is defined as a combi- 
nation of one translation for each input word. 
For example, if the input term-list consists of 
two words, say wl and w~, and their transla- 
tion include wll for wl and w23 for w2, then 
(w11, w23) is a translation candidate. If wl and 
w~ have two and three alternatives respectively 
then there are 6 possible translation candidates. 
2. Disambiguation: 
In this step, all possible translation candidates 
are ranked according to a measure that reflects 
the 'coherence' of each candidate. The top 
ranked candidate is the translated term-list. 
670 
In the following sections we concentrate on the 
disambiguation step. 
3 Disambiguation Algorithm 
The underlying hypothesis of our disambiguation 
method is that a plausible combination of transla- 
tion alternatives will be semantically coherent. 
In order to find the most coherent combination 
of words, we map words onto points in a multidi- 
mensional vector space where the 'proximity' of two 
vectors represents he level of coherence of the corre- 
sponding two words. The coherence of n words can 
be defined as the order of spatial 'concentration' of 
the vectors. 
The rest of this section formalizes this idea. 
3.1 Co-occur rence  Vector  Space: WORD 
SPACE 
We employed a multi-dimensional vector space, 
called WORD SPACE (Schuetze, 1997) for defin- 
ing the coherence of words. The starting point of 
WORD SPACE is to represent a word with an n- 
dimensional vector whose i-th element is how many 
times the word wi occurs close to the word. For 
simplicity, we consider w~ and wj to occur close in 
context if and only if they appear within an m-word 
distance (i.e., the words occur within a window of 
m-word length), where m is a predetermined natu- 
ral number. 
Table 1 shows an artificial example of co- 
occurrence statistics. The table shows that the 
word ginko (bank, where people deposit money) co- 
occurred with shikin (fund) 483 times and with hashi 
(bridge) 31 times. Thus the co-occurrence vector 
of ginko (money bank) contains 483 as its 89th ele- 
ment and 31 as its 468th element. In short, a word 
is mapped onto the row vector of the co-occurrence 
table (matrix). 
Table 1: An example of co-occurrence statistics. 
col. no. 
word 
(Eng.) 
89 . . .  468 
... shikin ... hashi 
(fund) (bridge) 
ginko 
(bank:money) 
teibo 
(bank:fiver) 
. . . . . .  483 31 
120 
Using this word representation, we define the 
proximity, proz, of two vectors, ~, b, as the cosine 
of the angle between them, given as follows. 
= g)/( I  II D'I) (1) 
If two vectors have high proximity then the corre- 
sponding two words occur in similar context, and in 
our terms, are coherent. 
This simple definition, however, has problems, 
namely its high-dimensionality and sparseness of 
data. In order to solve these problems, the original 
co-occurrence vector space is converted into a con- 
densed low dimensional real-valued matrix by using 
SVD (Singular Value Decomposition). For example, 
a 20000-by-1000 matrix can be reduced to a 20000- 
by-100 matrix. The resulting vector space is the 
WORD SPACE 2 
3.2 Coherence  of  Words  
We define the coherence of words in terms of a geo- 
metric relationship between the corresponding word 
vectors. 
As shown above, two vectors with high proximity 
are coherent with respect o their associative prop- 
erties. We have extended this notion to n-words. 
That is, if a group of vectors are concentrated, then 
the corresponding words are defined to be coherent. 
Conversely, if vectors are scattered, the correspond- 
ing words are in-coherent. In this paper, the concen- 
tration of vectors is measured by the average prox- 
imity from their centroid vector. 
Formally, for a given word set W, its coherence 
coh(W) is defined as follows: 
1 
eoh(W) - I W I y~ prox(~(w),~(W)) (2) 
wEW 
e(w)  = (3) 
wEW 
\ [WI  = the number of  words inW (4) 
3.3  Disambiguat lon  Procedure  
Our disambiguation procedure is simply selecting 
the combination of translation alternatives that has 
the largest cob(W) defined above. The current im- 
plementation exhaustively calculates the coherence 
score for each combination of translation alterna- 
tives, then selects the combination with the highest 
score.  
3.4  Example  
Suppose the given term-list consists of bank and 
river. Our method first retrieves translation alter- 
natives from the bilingual dictionary. Let the dictio- 
nary contain following translations. 
2The WORD SPACE method is closely related to La- 
tent Semantic Indexing (LSI)(Deerwester t al., 1990), where 
document-by-word matrices are processed by SVD instead of 
word-by-word matrices. The difference between these two is 
discussed in (Schuetze and Pedersen, 1997). 
671 
source translations 
bank --~ ginko (bank:money), 
teibo(bank:river) 
interest --+ rishi (interest:money), 
kyoumi(interest :feeling) 
Combining these translation alternatives yields 
four translation candidates: 
(ginko, risoku), (ginko, kyoumi), 
(teibo, risoku), (teibo, kyoumi). 
Then the coherence score is calculated for each 
candidate. 
Table 2 shows scores calculated with the co- 
occurrence data used in the translation experiment 
(see. Section 4.4.2). The combination of ginko 
(bank:money) and risoku(interest:money) has the 
highest score. This is consistent with our intuition. 
Table 2: An example of scores 
rank candidate score (coh) 
1 (ginko, risoku) 0.930 
2 (teibo, kyoumi) 0.897 
3 (ginko, kyoumi) 0.839 
4 (teibo, risoku) 0.821 
4 Exper iments  
We conducted two types of experiments: re- 
translation experiments and translation experi- 
ments. Each experiment includes comparison 
against he baseline algorithm, which is a unigram- 
based translation algorithm. This section presents 
the two types of experiments, plus the baseline al- 
gorithm, followed by experimental results. 
4.1 Two Types  of  Exper iments  
4.1.1 Trans la t ion  Exper iment  
In the translation experiment, erm-lists in one lan- 
guage, e.g., English, were translated into another 
language, e.g., in Japanese. In this experiment, hu- 
mans judged the correctness of outputs. 
4.1.2 Re- t rans la t ion  Exper iment  
Although the translation experiment recreates real 
applications, it requires human judgment 3. Thus 
we decided to conduct another type of experiment, 
called a re-translation experiment. This experiment 
translates given term-lists (e.g., in English) into a 
second language (e.g., Japanese) and maps them 
back onto the source language (e.g., in this case, En- 
glish). Thus the correct ranslation of a term list, in 
the most strict sense, is the original term-list itself. 
3 If a bi l ingual paral lel  corpus is available, then correspond- 
ing translat ions could be used for correct results. 
This experiment uses two bilingual dictionaries: a
forward dictionary and a backward ictionary. 
In this experiment, a word in the given term-list 
(e.g. in English) is first mapped to another lan- 
guage (e.g., Japanese) by using the forward dictio- 
nary. Each translated word is then mapped back 
into original language by referring to the backward 
dictionary. The union of the translations from the 
backward ictionary are the translation alternatives 
to be disambiguated. 
4.2 Baseline Algor i thm 
The baseline algorithm against which our method 
was compared employs unigram probabilities for dis- 
ambiguation. For each word in the given term-list, 
this algorithm chooses the translation alternative 
with the highest unigram probability in the target 
language. Note that each word is translated inde- 
pendently. 
4.3 Exper imenta l  Data  
The source and the target languages of the trans- 
lation experiments were English and Japanese re- 
spectively. The re-translation experiments were con- 
ducted for English term-lists using Japanese as the 
second language. 
The Japanese- 
to-English dictionary was EDICT(Breen, 1995) and 
the English-to-Japanese dictionary was an inversion 
of the Japanese-to-English dictionary. 
The co-occurrence statistics were extracted from 
the 1994 New York Times (420MB) for English 
and 1990 Nikkei Shinbun (Japanese newspaper) 
(150MB) for Japanese. The domains of these texts 
range from business to sports. Note that 400 articles 
were randomly separated from the former corpus as 
the test set. 
The initial size of each co-occurrence matrix was 
20000-by-1000, where rows and columns correspond 
to the 20,000 and 1000 most frequent words in the 
corpus 4. Each initial matrix was then reduced by us- 
ing SVD into a matrix of 20000-by-100 using SVD- 
PACKC(Berry et al, 1993). 
Term-lists for the experiments were automatically 
generated from texts, where a term-list of a docu- 
ment consists of the topmost n words ranked by their 
tf-idf scores 5. The relation between the length n of 
term-list and the disambiguation accuracy was also 
tested. 
We prepared two test sets of term-lists: those ex- 
tracted from the 400 articles from the New York 
Times mentioned above, and those extracted from 
4 Stopwords are ignored. 
5The tf-idf score of a word w in a text is tfwlog(N-~), 
where tfwis the occurrence of w in the text, N is the num- 
ber of documents in the collection, and Nw is the number of 
documents contain ing w. 
672 
articles in Reuters(Reuters, 1997), called Test-NYT, 
and Test-REU, respectively. 
4.4 Resul ts  
4.4.1 re - t rans la t ion  exper iment  
The proposed method was applied to several sets 
of term-lists of different length. Results are shown 
in Table 3. In this table and the following tables, 
"ambiguous" and "success" correspond to the total 
number of ambiguous words, not term-lists, and the 
number of words that were successfully translated 6. 
The best results were obtained when the length of 
term-lists was 4 or 6. In general, the longer a term- 
list becomes, the more information it has. However, 
a long term-list ends to be less coherent (i.e., con- 
tain different opics). As far as our experiments are 
concerned, 4 or 6 was the point of compromise. 
Table 3: Result of Re-translation for Test-NYT 
length success/ambiguous (rate) 
2 98/141 (69.5%) 
4 240/329 (72.9%) 
6 410/555 (73.8%) 
8 559/777 (71.9%) 
10 691/981 (70.4%) 
12 813/1165 (69.8%) 
Then we compared our method against he base- 
line algorithm that was trained on the same set of 
articles used to create the co-occurrence matrix for 
our algorithm (i.e., New York Times). Both are ap- 
plied to term-lists of length 6 made from test-NYT. 
The results are shown in Table 4. Although the ab- 
solute value of the success rate is not satisfactory, 
our method significantly outperforms the baseline 
algorithm. 
Table 4: Result of Re-translation for Test-NYT 
Method success/ambiguous (rate) 
baseline 236/555 (42.5%) 
proposed 410/555 (73.8%) 
We, then, applied the same method with the same 
parameters (i.e., cooccurence and unigram data) to 
Test-REU. As shown in Table 5, our method id bet- 
ter than the baseline algorithm although the success 
rate is lower than the previous result. 
Table 5: Result of re-translation for Test-REU 
Method success/ambiguous (rate) 
baseline 162/565 (28.7%) 
proposed 351/565 (62.1%) 
6If 100 term-l ists were processed and each term-list con- 
tains 2 ambiguous words, then the "total" becomes 200. 
Table 6: Result of Translation for Test-NYT 
Method success/ambiguous (rate) 
baseline 74/125 (72.6%) 
proposed 101/125 (80.8%) 
4.4.2 t rans la t ion  exper iment  
The translation experiment from English to 
Japanese was carried out on Test-NYT. The training 
corpus for both proposed and baseline methods was 
the Nikkei corpus described above. Outputs were 
compared against the "correct data" which were 
manually created by removing incorrect alternatives 
from all possible alternatives. If all the translation 
alternatives in the bilingual dictionary were judged 
to  be correct, then we counted this word as unam- 
biguous. 
The accuracy of our method and baseline algo- 
rithm are shown on Table6. 
The accuracy of our method was 80.8%, about 8 
points higher than that of the baseline method. This 
shows our method is effective in improving trans- 
lation accuracy when syntactic information is not 
available. In this experiment, 57% of input words 
were unambiguous. Thus the success rates for entire 
words were 91.8% (proposed) and 82.6% (baseline). 
4.5 Er ror  Analysis  
The following are two major failure reasons relevant 
to our method 7 
The first reason is that alternatives were seman- 
tically too similar to be discriminated. For ex- 
ample, "share" has at least two Japanese trans- 
lations: "shea"(market share) and "kabu" (stock ). 
Both translations frequently occur in the same con- 
text in business articles, and moreover these two 
words sometimes co-occur in the same text. Thus, 
it is very difficult to discriminate them. In this case, 
the task is difficult also for humans unless the origi- 
nal text is presented. 
The second reason is more complicated. Some 
translation alternatives are polysemous in the target 
language. If a polysemous word has a very general 
meaning that co-occurs with various words, then this 
word is more likely to be chosen. This is because the 
corresponding vector has "average" value for each 
dimension and, thus, has high proximity with the 
centroid vector of multiple words. 
For example, alternative translations of "stock ~' 
includes two words: "kabu" (company share) and 
"dashz" (liquid used for food). The second trans- 
lation "dashz" is also a conjugation form of the 
Japanese verb "dasff', which means "put out" and 
"start". In this case, the word, "dash,", has a cer- 
7Other reasons came from errors in pre-processing includ- 
ing 1) ignoring compound words, 2) incorrect handl ing of cap- 
italized words etc. 
673 
tain amount of proximity because of the meaning 
irrelevant to the source word, e.g., stock. 
This problem was pointed out by (Dagan and Itai, 
1994) and they suggested two solutions 1) increas- 
ing the size of the (mono-lingual) training corpora 
or 2) using bilingual corpora. Another possible solu- 
tion is to resolve semantic ambiguities of the training 
corpora by using a mono-lingual disambiguation al- 
gorithm (e.g., (?)) before making the co-occurrence 
matrix. 
5 Related Work 
Dagan and Itai (1994) proposed a method for choos- 
ing target words using mono-lingual corpora. It first 
locates pairs of words in dependency relations (e.g., 
verb-object, modifier-noun, etc.), then for each pair, 
it chooses the most plausible combination of trans- 
lation alternatives. The plausibility of a word-pair is 
measured by its co-occurence probability estimated 
from corpora in the target language. 
One major difference is that their method re- 
lies on co-occurrence statistics between tightly and 
locally related (i.e., syntactically dependent) word 
pairs, whereas ours relies on associative proper- 
ties of loosely and more globally related (i.e., co- 
occurring within a certain distance) word groups. 
Although the former statistics could provide more 
accurate information for disambiguation, it requires 
huge amounts of data to cover inputs (the data 
sparseness problem). 
Another difference, which also relates to the data 
sparseness problem, is that their method uses "row" 
co-occurrence statistics, whereas ours uses statistics 
converted with SVD. The converted matrix has the 
advantage that it represents the co-occurrence r la- 
tionship between two words that share similar con- 
texts but do not co-occur in the same text s. SVD 
conversion may, however, weaken co-occurrence r - 
lations which actually exist in the corpus. 
Tanaka and Iwasaki (1996) also proposed a 
method for choosing translations that solely relies on 
co-occurrence statistics in the target language. The 
main difference with our approach lies in the plau- 
sibility measure of a translation candidate. Instead 
of using a "coherence score", their method employs 
proximity, or inverse distance, between the two co- 
occurrence matrices: one from the corpus (in the 
target language) and the other from the translation 
candidate. The distance measure of two matrices 
given in the paper is the sum of the absolute dis- 
tance of each corresponding element. This defini- 
tion seems to lead the measure to be insensitive to 
the candidate when the co-occurrence matrix is filled 
with large numbers. 
s"Second order co-occurrence". See (Schuetze, 1997) 
6 Conc lud ing  Remarks  
In this paper, we have presented a method for trans- 
lating term-lists using mono-lingual corpora. 
The proposed method is evaluated by translation 
and re-translation experiments and showed a trans- 
lation accuracy of 82% for term-lists extracted from 
articles ranging from business to sports. 
We are planning to apply the proposed method to 
cross-linguistic nformation retrieval (CLIR). Since 
the method does not rely on syntactic analysis, it 
is applicable to translating users' queries as well as 
translating term-lists extracted from documents. 
A future issue is further evaluation of the pro- 
posed method using more data and various criteria 
including overall performance of an application sys- 
tem (e.g., CLIR). 
Acknowledgment  
I am grateful to members of the Infomap project at 
CSLI, Stanford for their kind support and discus- 
sions. In particular I would like to thank Stanley 
Peters and Raymond Flournoy. 
Re ferences  
M.W. Berry, T. Do, G. O'Brien, V. Krishna, 
and S. Varadhan. 1993. SVDPACKC USER'S 
GUIDE. Tech. Rep. CS-93-194, University ofTen- 
nessee, Knoxville, TN,. 
J.W. Breen. 1995. EDICT, Freeware, Japanese.to- 
English Dictionary. 
P. Brown, J. Cocke, V. Della Pietra, F. Jelinek, R.L. 
Mercer, and P. C. Roosin. 1990. A statistical 
approach to language translation. Computational 
Linguistics, 16(2). 
P. Brown, V. Della Pietra, and R.L. Mercer. 1991. 
Word sense disambiguation using statisical meth- 
ods. In Proceedings of ACL-91. 
I. Dagan and A. Itai. 1994. Word sense disambigua- 
tion using a second language monolingual corpus. 
Computational Linguistics. 
S. Deerwester, S.T. Dumais, and R. Harshman. 
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour- 
nal of American Society for Information Science. 
Reuters. 1997. Reuters-21578, Distribution 1.0. 
available at http://www.research.att.com/~lewis. 
H. Schuetze and Jan O. Pedersen. 1997. A 
cooccurrence-based thesaurus and two applica- 
tions to information retrieval. Information Pro- 
cessing ~ Management. 
H. Schuetze. 1997. Ambiguity Resolution in Lan- 
guage Learning. CSLI. 
K. Tanaka and H. Iwasaki. 1996. Extraction of lexi- 
cal translations from non-aligned corpora. In Pro- 
ceedings of COLING-96. 
674 
