Bitext Correspondences through Rich Mark-up 
Raque l  Mar t lnez  
Departamento de Sis. Inform?ticos y ProgramaciSn, Facultad de Matem?ticas 
Universidad Complutense de Madrid 
e -mai l  : raquel?eucmos,  s im. ucm. es 
Joseba  Aba i tua  
Facultad de Filosofia y Letras 
Universidad e Deusto, Bilbao 
e-mai l  : abaitua~fi l ,  deusto, es 
Arantza  Casillas 
Departamento de Autom~tica,  Universidad e Alcal~ de Henares 
e -mai l  : a rantza?aut ,  a l ca la ,  es 
Abst rac t  
Rich mark-up can considerably benefit he process 
of establishing bitext correspondences, that is, the 
task of providing correct identification and align- 
ment methods for text segments that are transla- 
tion equivalences of each other in a parallel corpus. 
We present a sentence alignment algorithm that, by 
taking advantage ofpreviously annotated texts, ob- 
tains accuracy rates close to 100%. The algorithm 
evaluates the similarity of the linguistic and extra- 
linguistic mark-up in both sides of a bitext. Given 
that annotations are neutral with respect to typolog- 
ical, grammatical nd orthographical differences be- 
tween languages, rich mark-up becomes an optimal 
foundation to support bitext correspondences. The 
main originality of this approach is that it makes 
maximal use of annotations, which is a very sensible 
and efficient method for the exploitation of parallel 
corpora when annotations exist. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Adequate encoding schemes applied to large 
bodies of text in electronic form have been a 
main achievement in the field of humanities 
computing. Research in computational linguis- 
tics, which since the late 1980s has resorted to 
methodologies involving statistics and probabil- 
ities in large corpora, has however largely ne- 
glected the existence and provision of extra in- 
formation from such encoding schemes. In this 
paper we present an approach to sentence align- 
ment that crucially relies on previously intro- 
duced annotations in a parallel corpus. Fol- 
lowing (Harris 88), corpora containing bilingual 
texts have been called "bitexts" (Melamed 97), 
(Martlnez et al 97). 
The utility of annotated bitexts will be 
demonstrated by the proposition of a methodol- 
ogy that crucially takes advantage of rich mark- 
up to resolve bitext correspondences, that is, 
the task of providing correct identification and 
alignment methods for text segments that are 
translation equivalencies of each other (Chang 
& Chen 97). Bitext correspondences provide a 
great source of information for applications such 
as example and memory based approaches to 
machine translation (Sumita & Iida 91), (Brown 
et al 93), (Collins et al 96); bilingual termi- 
nology extraction (Kupiec 93), (Eijk 93), (Da- 
gan et al 94), (Smajda et al 96); bilingual 
lexicography (Catizione et al 93), (Daille et 
al. 94), (Gale & Church, 91b); multilingual in- 
formation retrieval (SIGIR 96), and word-sense 
disambiguation (Gale et al 92), (Chan & Chen 
97). Moreover, the increasing availability of 
running parallel text in annotated form (e.g. 
WWW pages), together with evidence that poor 
mark-up (as HTML) will progressively be re- 
placed by richer mark-up (e.g. SGML/XML), 
are good enough reasons to investigate methods 
that benefit from such encoding schemes. 
We first provide details of how a bitext sam- 
ple has been marked-up, with particular em- 
phasis on the recognition and annotation of 
proper nouns. Then we show how sentence 
alignment relies on mark-up by the application 
of a methodology that resorts to annotations to 
determine the similarity between sentence pairs. 
812 
This is the 'tags as cognates' algorithm, TasC. 
2 B i text  tagg ing  and  segmentat ion  
A large bitext has been compiled consisting of a 
collection of administrative and legal bilingual 
documents written both in Spanish and Basque, 
with close to 7 million words in each language. 
For the experiments, we have worked on a rep- 
resentative subset of around 500,000 words in 
each language. Several stages of automatic tag- 
ging, based on pattern matching and heuristics, 
were undertaken, rendering different descriptive 
levels: 
General encoding (paragraph, sentence, 
quoted text, dates, numbers, abbrevia- 
tions, etc.). 
? Document specific tags that identify doc- 
ument types and define document internal 
organisation (sections, divisions, identifica- 
tion code, number and date of issue, issuer, 
lists, itemised sections, etc.). 
? Proper noun tagging (identification and 
categorisation of proper nouns into several 
classes, including: person, place, organi- 
sation, law, title, publication and uncate- 
gorised). 
This collection of tags (shown in Table 1) re- 
flects basic structural and referential features, 
which appear consistently at both sides of the 
bitext. Although the alignment of smaller seg- 
ments (multi-word lexical units and colloca- 
tions) will require more expressive tagging, such 
as part-of-speech tagging (POS), for the task 
of sentence alignment, this is not only unnec- 
essary, but also inappropriate, since it would 
introduce undesired language dependent infor- 
mation. The encoding scheme has been based 
on TEI's guidelines for SGML based mark-up 
(Ide & Veronis 95). 
2.1 P roper  noun tagg ing  
As for many other text processing applications, 
proper noun tagging plays a key role in our 
approach to sentence alignment. It has been 
reported that proper nouns reach up to 10% 
of tokens in text (newswire text (Wakao et al 
96) and (Coates-Stephens 92)) and one third of 
noun groups (in the Agence France Presse flow 
(Wolinski et al 95)). We have calculated that 
proper nouns constitute a 15% of the tokens in 
our corpus. The module for the recognition of 
proper nouns relies on patterns of typography 
(capitalisation and punctuation) and on contex- 
tual information (Church 88). It also makes use 
of lists with most common person, organisation, 
law, publication and place names. The tagger 
annotates a multi-word chain as a proper noun 
when each word in the chain is uppercase initial. 
A closed list of functional words (prepositions, 
conjunctions, determiners, etc.) is allowed to 
appear inside the proper noun chain, see exam- 
ples in Table 2. A collection of heuristics dis- 
card uppercase initial words in sentence initial 
position or in other exceptional cases. 
In contrast with other known classifications 
(e.g. MUC-6 95), we exclude from our list 
of proper nouns time expressions, percentage 
expression, and monetary amount expressions 
(which for us fall under a different descriptive 
level). However, on top of organisation, person 
and location names, we include other entities 
such as legal nomenclature, the name of publi- 
cations as well as a number of professional titles 
whose occurrence in the bitext becomes of great 
value for alignment. 
2.2 B i text  asymmetr ies  
Because our approach to alignment relies on 
consistent tagging, bitext asymmetries of any 
type need to be carefully dealt with. For exam- 
ple, capitalisation conventions across languages 
may show great divergences. Although, in the- 
ory, this should not be the case between Spanish 
and Basque, since officially they follow identical 
conventions for capitalisation (which are by the 
way the same as in French), in practise these 
conventions have been interpreted very differ- 
ently by the writers of the two versions (lawyers 
in Spanish and translators in Basque). In the 
Basque version, nouns referring to organisations 
saila 'Department', professional titles diputatua 
'Deputy', as well as many orographic or geo- 
graphical sites arana 'Valley', are often written 
in lowercase, while in the Spanish original doc- 
uments these are normally written in uppercase 
(see Table 2). These nouns belong to the type 
described as 'trigger' words by (Wakao et al 
96), in the sense that they permit the identifi- 
cation of the tokens urrounding them as proper 
nouns. Then, it has been required to resort to 
contextual information. The results of the reso- 
lution of these singularities are shown in Table 
813 
\[\[ Descriptive l vels Tagset \[\] 
II General encoding <p>, <s>, <num>, <date> <abbr>, <q> I 
Document especific <div>, <classCode> <keywords>, <dateline>, <list><seg> 
Proper nouns <rs> 
Table 1: Tagset used for sentence alignment 
Proper Noun Classes Spanish Basque 
Person Ana Ferndndez Gutierrez-Crespo Ana Ferndndez Gutierrez-Crespo 
Place Valle de Arratia Arratiko arana 
Organisation Departamento de Presidencia Lehendakaritza Saileko 
Law Real Decreto Legislativo Legegintzazko Erret Dekretuko 
Title Diputado Foral de Urbanisrno Hirigintza foru diputatua 
Publication Boletln Oficial de Bizkaia Bizkaiko Aldizkari Ofizialean 
Uncategorised A nexo eraskin 
Table 2: Examples 
. 
3 Us ing  tags  as cognates  for 
sentence  a l ignment  
Algorithms for sentence alignment abound and 
range from the initial pioneering proposals of 
(Brown et al 91), (Gale & Church 91a), 
(Church 93), or (Kay & Roscheisen 93), to the 
more recent ones of (Chang & Chen 97), or 
(Tillmann et al 97). The techniques employed 
include statistical machine translation, cognates 
identification, pattern recognition, and digital 
signal and image processing. Our algorithm, 
as (Simard et al 92), and (Melamed 97) em- 
ploys cognates to align sentences; and similar to 
(Brown et al 91), it also uses mark-up for that 
purpose. Its singularity does not lie on the use 
of mark-up as delimiter of text regions (Brown 
et al 91) in combination with other techniques, 
but on the fact that it is the sole foundation 
for sentence alignment. We call it the 'tags 
as cognates' algorithm, TasC. This algorithm is 
not disrupted by word order differences or small 
asymmetries in non-literal translation, and, un- 
like other reported algorithms (Melamed 97), 
it possesses the additional advantage of being 
portable to any pair of languages without the 
need to resort to any language-specific heuris- 
tics. Provided an adequate and consistent bi- 
text mark-up, sentence alignment becomes a 
simple and accurate process also in the case of 
typologically disparate or orthographically dis- 
tinct language pairs for which techniques based 
on lexical cognates may be problematic. One of 
of proper nouns 
the best consequences of this approach is that 
the burden of language dependent processing is
dispatched to the monolingual tagging and seg- 
mentation phase. 
3.1 Simi lar i ty calculus between b i texts  
The alignment algorithm establishes similarity 
metrics between candidate sentences which are 
delimited by corresponding mark-up. Dice's co- 
efficient is used to calculate these similarity met- 
rics (Dice 45). The coefficient returns a real nu- 
meric value in the range 0 to 1. Two sentences 
which are totally dissimilar in the content of 
their internal mark-up will return a Dice score 
of 0, while two identical contents will return a 
Dice score of 1. 
For two text segments, P and Q, one in each 
language, the formula for Dice's similarity coef- 
ficient will be: 
Dice(P, Q) -- 2FpQ 
Fp + FQ 
where FpQ is the number of identical tags that 
P and Q have in common, and Fp and FQ are 
the number of tags contained by each text seg- 
ment P and Q. 
Since the alignment algorithm determines 
the best matching on the basis of tag 
similarity, not only tag names used to 
categorise different cognate classes (num- 
ber, date, abbreviation, proper noun, etc.), 
but also attributes contained by these tags 
may help identify the cognate itself: <num 
num=57>57</num>. Furthermore, attributes 
814 
Proper Noun Classes 
Person 
Place 
Organisation 
Law 
Title 
Publication 
Uncategorised 
Total 
Spanish Basque 
Precision I Recall 1% Spanish PN Precision I Recall 1% Basque PN 
100% 100% 
100% 100% 
99.2% 97.8% 
99.2% 99.2% 
100% 100% 
100% 100% 
100% 100% 
4.48% 
6.38% 
23.96% 
47.93% 
6.55% 
2.58% 
8.10% 
100% 100% 4.76% 
100% 100% 6.95% 
100% 100% 24.17% 
100% 100% 46.15% 
97.2% 97.2% 6.59% 
100% 100% 2.74% 
100% 100% 8.60 
100% II 99.8% 199.8%\[ 100% II 99.4%199.1%\[ 
Table 3: Results of proper noun identification 
may serve also to subcategorise proper noun 
tags: <rs  type=place>Bi lbao</rs>.  
Such subcategorisations areof great value to 
calculate the similarity metrics. If mark-up is 
consistent, he correlation between tags in the 
candidate text segments will be high and Dice's 
coefficient will come close to 1. For a randomly 
created bitext sample of source sentences, Fig- 
ure 1 illustrates how correct candidate align- 
ments have achieved the highest Dice's coeffi- 
cients (represented by '*'s), while next higher 
coefficients (represented by 'o's ) have achieved 
significant lower values. It must be noted that 
the latter do not correspond to correct values. 
The difference mean between Dice's coeffi- 
cients corresponding to correct alignments and 
next higher values is: 
n 
~(DCc i  - DCwi)  
M = i=1 = 0.45 
n 
Where for a given source sentence i, DCci 
represents Dice's coefficient corresponding to its 
correct alignment and DCwi  represents he next 
higher value of Dice's coefficients for the same 
source sentence i. In all the cases, this difference 
is greater than 0.2. 
For consistently marked-up bitexts, these re- 
sults show that sentence alignment founded on 
the similarity between annotations can be ro- 
bust criterion. 
Figure 2 illustrates how the Dice's coefficient 
is calculated between candidate sentences to 
alignment. 
3.2 The  s t ra tegy  of the  TasC algor i thm 
The alignment of text segments can be for- 
malised by the matching problem in bipartite 
_ 
0.5 
$ DC of correct  a l ignment  given a source sentence 
o The  next h igher  DC for the same source sentence 
o 
o o co oO co co oo  o 
o o o~ o o o 
~000 0 000  0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 0 
0 0 0 0 
o%~ 
o 
o 
o 
0 o 
Figure 1: Values of Dice's coefficient between 
corresponding sentences 
graphs. Let G = (V, E, U) be a bipartite graph, 
such that V and U are two disjoint sets of 
vertices, and E is a set of edges connecting 
vertices from V to vertices in U. Each edge in 
E has associated a cost. Costs are represented 
by a cost matrix. The problem is to find a 
perfect matching of G with minimum cost. 
The minimisation version of this problem is 
well known in the literature as the assignment 
problem. 
Applying the general definition of the prob- 
lem to the particular case of sentence alignment: 
V and U represent two disjoint sets of vertices 
corresponding to the Spanish and Basque sen- 
tences that we wish to align. In this case, each 
edge has not a cost but a similarity metric quan- 
tified by Dice's coefficient. The fact that ver- 
tices are materialised by sentences detracts gen- 
815 
Spanish Sentence: 
<s id=sESdoc5-4>Habi4ndose d tectado en 
el anuncio publicado en el ndmero<num 
num=79> 79 </num> de fecha <date 
date=2?/04>27 de abril</date> de este <rs 
type=publication>Boletfn</rs>, la omisi6n 
del primer p~rrafo de la <rs type=law>Orden 
Foral</rs> de referencia, se procede a su ~ntegra 
publicaci6n. < / s > 
Basque Sentence: 
<s id=sEUdoc5-5>Agerkaria honetako <date 
dat e=27/04>apirilaren 27ko</date> <num 
num=79>79k.an </num> argitaratutako ira- 
garkian aipameneko <rs type=law>Foru 
Aginduaren</rs> lehen lerroaldea ez dela geri 
detektatu ondoren beraren argitarapen osoa 
egitera jo da.</s> 
The common tags are: <date date=27/04>, <num num=79>, <rs type=law> 
The Dice's similarity coefficient will be: Dice(P,Q)= 2x3 / 4+3 = 0.857 
Figure 2: Similarity calculus between candidate sentences 
erality to the assignment problem and makes it 
possible to add constraints to the solutions re- 
ported in the literature. These constraints take 
into account the order in which sentences in 
both the source and target exts have been writ- 
ten, and capture the prevailing fact that trans- 
lators maintain the order of the original text 
in their translations, which is even a stronger 
property of specialised texts, 
By default, a whole document delimits the 
space in which sentence alignment will take 
place, although this space can be customised 
in the algorithm. The average number of sen- 
tences per document is approximately 18. Two 
types of alignment can take place: 
? 1 to 1 alignment: when one sentence in the 
source document corresponds to one sen- 
tence in the target document (94.39% of 
the cases). 
? N to M alignment: when N sentences in 
the source document correspond to M sen- 
tences in the target document (only 5.61% 
of the cases). It includes cases of 1-2, 1-3 
and 0-1 alignments. 
Both alignment ypes are handled by the algo- 
rithm. 
3.3 
The 
. 
The algorithm 
TasC algorithm works in two steps: 
It obtains the similarity matrix S from 
Dice's coefficients corresponding to can- 
didate alignment options. Each row in 
S represents the alignment options of a 
source sentence classified in decreasing or- 
der of similarity. In this manner, each col- 
umn represents a preference position (1 the 
best alignment option, 2 the second best 
and so on). Therefore, each Si,j is the 
identification of one or more target sen- 
tences which match the source sentence i 
in the preference position j. In order to 
obtain the similarity matrix, it is not nec- 
essary to consider all possible alignment 
options. Constraints regarding sentence 
ordering and grouping greatly reduce the 
number of cases to be evaluated by the al- 
gorithm. In the algorithm each source sen- 
tence xi is compared with candidate target 
sentences yj as follows: (xi, Yi); (xi, YjYj+I 
. . . ,  where YjYj+I represents the concate- 
nation of yj with Yj+I. The algorithm 
module that deals with candidate align- 
ment options can be easily customised to 
cope with different bitext configurations 
(since bitexts may range from a very simple 
one-paragraph text to more complex struc- 
tures). In the current version of the al- 
gorithm seven alignment options are taken 
into account. 
2. The TasC algorithm solves an assignment 
problem with several constraints. It aligns 
sentences by assigning to each ith source 
sentence the Si,j target option with min- 
imum j value, that is, the option with 
more similarity. Furthermore, the algo- 
r ithm solves the possible conflicts when a 
sentence matches with other sentences al- 
ready aligned. The average cost of the al- 
gorithm, experimentally contrasted,  is lin- 
ear in the size of the input, although in the 
worst case the cost is bigger. 
The result of sentence alignment is reflected 
in the bitext by the incorporation of the at- 
tribute ' cor resp  to sentence tags, as can be seen 
816 
Cases 
1-1  
N-M 
%Corpus 
94.39% 
% Accuracy 
100% 
5.61% 99.68% 
Table 4: TasC Algorithm results 
in Figure 3. This attribute points to the cor- 
responding sentence identification code in the 
other language. 
4 Eva luat ion  
The current version of the algorithm has been 
tested against a subcorpus of 500,000 words in 
each language consisting of 5,988 sentences and 
has rendered the results shown in Table 4. 
The accuracy of the 1 to 1 alignment is 100%. 
In the N to M case only 1 error occurred out of 
314 sentences, which reaches 99.68% accuracy. 
The algorithm to sentence alignment has been 
designed in such a modular way that it can eas- 
ily change the tagset used for alignment and the 
weight of each tag to adapt it to different bitext 
annotations. The current version of the algo- 
rithm uses the tagset shown in Table 1 without 
weights. 
5 Future  work  
Once sentences have been aligned, the next 
step is the alignment of sentence-internal seg- 
ments. The sentence will delimit the search 
space for this alignment, and hence, by reduc- 
ing the search space, the alignment complexity 
is also reduced. 
5.1 P roper  noun a l ignment  
Proper nouns are a key factor for the efficient 
management of the corpus, since they are the 
basis for the indexation and retrieval of doc- 
uments in the two versions. For this reason, 
at present we are concerned with proper noun 
alignment, something which is not usually done 
in the mapping of bitexts. The alignment is 
achieved by resorting to: 
? The identification of cognate nouns, aided 
by a set of phonological rules that apply 
when Spanish terms are taken to produce 
loan words in Basque. 
? The restriction of cognate search space to 
previously aligned sentences, and 
* The application of the TasC algorithm 
adapted to proper noun alignment. 
5.2 A l ignment  of  co l locat ion 
The next step is the recognition and alignment 
of other multi-word lexical units and colloca- 
tions. Due to the still unstable translation 
choices of much administrative t rminology in 
Basque, on top of the considerable typological 
and structural differences between Basque and 
Spanish, many of the techniques reported in the 
literature (Smadja et al 96), (Kupiec 93) and 
(Eijk 93) cannot be effectively applied. POS 
tagging combined with recurrent bilingual glos- 
sary lookup is the approach we are currently 
experimenting with. 
6 Conc lus ions  
We have presented a sentence alignment ap- 
proach that, by taking advantage of previously 
introduced mark-up, obtains accuracy rates 
close to 100%. This approach is not disrupted 
by word order differences and is portable to any 
pair of languages without the need to resort to 
any language specific heuristics. Provided and 
adequate and consistent bitext mark-up, sen- 
tence alignment becomes an accurate and ro- 
bust process also in the case of typologically 
distinct language pairs for which other known 
techniques may be problematic. The TasC algo- 
rithm has been designed in such a modular way 
that it can be easily adapted to different bitext 
configurations as well as other specific tagsets. 
7 Acknowledgements  
This research is being partially supported by the 
Spanish Research Agency, project ITEM, TIC- 
96-1243-C03-01. 
Re ferences  
Brown, P., Lai, J.C., Mercer, R. (1991). Aligning Sentences in 
Parallel Corpora. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting 
of the Association .for Computational Linguistics, 169-176, 
Berkeley, 1991. 
Brown, P., Della Pietra, V., Della Pietra, S., Mercer, R. 
(1993). The mathematics of statistical machine transla- 
tion: parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics 
19(2):263-301 1993. 
Catizone, R., Russell, G., Warwick, S. (1993). Deriving Trans- 
lation Data from Bilingual Texts. Proccedings of the First 
International Lexical Acquisition Workshop, Detroit, MI, 
1993. 
Chang, J. S., Chen, M. H. (1997). An Alignment Method for 
Noisy Parallel Corpora based on Image Processing Tech- 
niques. Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 297-304, 1997. 
817 
Spanish Sentence: 
<s  id=sESdoc5-4 corresp=sEUdoc5-5>Habi4n-  
dose detectado en el anuncio publicado en el 
ndmero<num num=79> 79 </num> de fecha 
<date  date=27/04>27 de abril</date> de 
este <rs type=pub l i ca t  ion>Bo le t fn</ rs>,  
la omisi6n del primer phrrafo de la <rs 
type=law>Orden Foral</rs> de referencia 
se procede a su integra publicaci6n.</s> 
Basque Sentence: 
<s id=sEUdoc5-5 corresp=sESdoc5-4>Agerkaria 
honetako <date date=27/04> apirilaren 
27ko</date> <num num=79>79k.an </num> 
argitaratutako iragarkian aipameneko <rs  
type=law>Foru  Ag induaren</rs> lehen ler- 
roaldea ez dela geri detektatu ondoren beraren 
argitarapen osoa egitera jo da .</s> 
Figure 3: Results of sentence alignment expressed by the corresp attribute 
Church, K.W. (1988). A Stochastic parts program and noun 
phrase parser for unrestricted text. Proceedings of the Sec- 
ond Conference on Applied Natural Language Processing, 
136-143, 1988. Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Church, K.W. (1993). Char_Align: A Program for Aligning 
Parallel Texts at the Character Level. Proceedings of the 
31th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Columbus, USA 1993. 
Coates-Stephen, S. (1992). The Analysis and Acquisition of 
Proper Names for Robust Text Understanding, Ph.D. De- 
partment of Computer Science of City University, London, 
England, 1992. 
Collins, B., Cunningham, P., Veale, T. (1996). An Exam- 
ple Based Approach to Machine Translation. Expand- 
ing MT Horizonts: Proceedings of the Second Confer- 
ence of the Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas:AMTA-96, 125-134, 1996. 
Daille, B., Gaussier, E., Lange, J.M. (1994). Towards Auto- 
matic Extraction of Monolingual and Bilingual Terminol- 
ogy. Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, 515-521, Kyoto, Japan. 
Dagan, I., Church, K. (1994). Termigh: Identifying and trans- 
lating Technical Terminology. Proceedings Fourth Confer- 
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing (ANLP-94), 
Stuttgart, Germany, 34-40, 1994. Association for Compu- 
tational Linguistics. 
Dice, L.R. (1945). Measures of the Amount of Ecologic Asso- 
ciation Between Species. Ecology, 26, 297-302. 
Eijk, P. van der. (1993). Automating the acquisition of Bilin- 
gual Terminology. Proceedings Sixth Conference of the Eu- 
ropean Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistic, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 113-119, 1993. 
Gale, W., Church, K.W. (1991a). A Program for Aligning 
Sentences in Bilingual Corpora. Proceedings of the 29th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin- 
guistics, 177-184, Berkeley, 1991a. 
Gale, W., Church, K. W. (1991b). Identifying Word Corre- 
spondences in Parallel Texts. Proceedings of the DARPA 
SNL Workshop, 1991. 
Gale, W., Church, K. W., Yarowsky, D. (1992). Using Bilin- 
gual Materials to Develop Word Sense Disambiguation 
Methods. Proceedings of the 4th International Confer- 
ence on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation (TMI-92), 101-112, Montreal, Canada 1992. 
Harris, B. (1988). Bi-Text, a New Concept in Translation The- 
ory. Language Monthly #54, 1988. 
Ide,N., Veronis, J. (1994). MULTEXT (Multilingual Text 
Tools and Corpora.) Proceedings of the International 
Workshop on Sharable Natural Language Resources, 90- 
96, 1994. 
Ide, N., Veronis, J. (1995). The Text Encoding Initiative: 
Background and Contexts. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1995. 
Kay, M., Roscheisen, M. (1993). Text-Translation Alignment. 
Computational Linguistics, 19:1, 121-142, 1993. 
Kupiec, J. (1993). An algorithm for finding noun phrase cor- 
respondences in bilingual corpora. Proceedings of the 31st 
Annual Meeting of the ACL, Columbus, Ohio, 17-22. As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics 1993. 
Martinez, R., Casillas, A., Abaitua, J. (1997). Bilingual paral- 
lel text segmentation a d tagging for specialized ocumen- 
tation. Proceedings of the International Conference Recent 
Advances in Natural Language Processing, RANLP'97, 
369-372, 1997. 
Melamed, I.D. (1997). A Portable Algorithm for Mapping 
Bitext Correspondence. Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
305-312, 1997. 
MUC-6. (1995). Proceedings of the Sixth Message Under- 
standing Conference (MUC-6). Morgan Kaufman. 
SIGIR. (1996). Workshop on Cross-linguistic Multilingual In- 
formation Retrieval, Zurich, 1996. 
Simard, M., Foster, G.F., Isabelle, P. (1992). Using Cognates 
to Align Sentences in Bilingual Corpora. Proceedings of 
the Fourth International Conference on Theoretical and 
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation, Montreal, 
67-81, 1992. 
Smadja, F., McKeown, K., Hatzivassiloglou, V.(1996). Trans- 
lating Collocations for Bilingual Lexicons: A Statistical 
Approach. Computational Linguistics Volume 22, No. 1, 
1996. 
Sumita, E., Iida, H. (1991). Experiments and prospect of 
example-based machine translation. Proceedings of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics. Berkeley,185-192, 
1991. 
Tillmann, C., Vogel, S., Ney, H., Zubiaga, A. (1997). A DP 
based Search Using Monotone Alignments in Statistical 
Translation. Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 289-296, 
1997. 
Wakao, T., Gaizauskas, R., Wilks, Y. (1996). Evaluation of 
an Algorithm for the Recognition and Classification of 
Proper Names. Proceedings of the 16th International Con- 
ference on Computational Linguistics (COLING96),418- 
423, 1996. 
Wolinski, F., Vichot, F., Dillet, B. (1995). Automatic Process- 
ing of Proper Names in Texts. The Computation and Lan- 
guage E-Print Archive, http : //xxx.lanl.gov/list/cmp - 
lg/9504001 
818 
