Embedding New Information into Referring Expressions 
Hua Cheng 
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of  Edinburgh 
E l7,  80 South Bridge, Edinburgh EH1 1HN, U.K. 
Email: huac@dai.ed.ac.uk 
Abstract 
This paper focuses on generating referring expres- 
sions capable of serving multiple communicative 
goals. The components ofa referring expression are 
divided into a referring part and a non-referring part. 
Two rules for the content determination and con- 
struction of the non-referring part are given, which 
are realised in an embedding algorithm. The signi- 
ficant aspect of our approach is that it intends to gen- 
erate the non-referring part given the restrictions im- 
posed by the referring part, whose realisation is, on 
the other hand, affected by the non-referring part. 
1 Components of a Referring Expression 
The referring expression is a very important and 
complex construction in languages. It can serve 
multiple communicative goals including referring to 
an object, providing new information about it, and 
expressing the speaker's emotional attitude towards 
it (Appelt, 1985). Although a formal model of re- 
ferring built within the framework of a general the- 
ory of speech acts and rationality is given in (Appelt 
and Kronfeld, 1987), and this can be used to explain 
how referring acts achieve multiple goals, there is a 
gap between the general model and the planning of 
the linguistic content of a referring expression. 
We divide the constituents in a referring ex- 
pression I into two parts based on their com- 
municative goals and the rules for their content 
determination and realisation. They are a re- 
ferring part, which intends to refer to an ob- 
ject and a non-referring part, which intends to 
provide additional new information about the ob- 
ject. For example, in "the actual writing style of 
Xuanzong, who was a well-known calligrapher", 
the bold faced items belong to the referring part, and 
the underlined ones to the non-referring part. 
The division is a pragmatic one and the two parts 
are closely related to each other. On the one hand, 
the referring part puts both syntactic and semantic 
~Only singular referring expressions that are primarily for 
referring to physical objects are considered here. 
constraints on the presenting of the non-referring 
part. The syntactic onstraint concerns mainly the 
available syntactic slots around the head. The se- 
mantic constraint will be introduced in section 3. 
On the other hand, the possibility of adding a non- 
referring part can make some realisations of a ref- 
erent preferred over others. When generating re- 
ferring expressions, multiple factors should be con- 
sidered, which include Centering Theory (Grosz et 
aL, 1995) and stylistic preferences such as avoid- 
ing too many repetitions. If we are to satisfy all 
constraints to some extent, we may need to con- 
sider more than one possible realisation of a refer- 
ent, choosing among those that do not significantly 
affect the coherence of the text. Then one of the 
realisations that is most suitable for adding new in- 
formation can be selected. 
A great amount of work has been done on gener- 
ating various types of referring expressions, which 
addresses the referring part, while little has ad- 
dressed the generation issues with respect o the 
other part, except hat in (Scott and de Souza, 1990), 
the relation between embedding and rhetorical rela- 
tions is discussed and several heuristics for combin- 
ing sentences using embedding are given. But this 
is far from enough for generating an appropriate r - 
ferring expression. 
2 System Architecture 
We design an algorithm to generate referring ex- 
pressions consisting of both parts. The referring pan 
is generated by the referring process (Dale, 1992), 
while the non-referring pan is generated by a sub- 
type of the aggregation process called embedding, 
which selects suitable facts and realises them as 
components within the structure of a referring ex- 
pression. The algorithm fits into the text planner of 
ILEX (Oberlander et al, 1998). 
ILEX is an adaptive hypertext system generating 
museum object descriptions. In ILEX, pieces of do- 
main knowledge that may be worth expressing in a 
text are represented as nodes and links in a graph 
called the Content Potential. Two kinds of nodes 
1478 
useful for referring expression generation are entity 
nodes and fact nodes 2. A fact is represented as Pre- 
dicate(Argl,Arg2). A revised version of Text Struc- 
ture (TS) (Meteer, 1992) is used as an intermediate 
level of representation between the text planner and 
the sentence realiser, which provides yntactic on- 
straints to the text planner while abstracting away 
from linguistic details. The Text Structure uses a 
unified representation for structures both above and 
below sentence level, so that abstract sentence plan- 
ning can be done in text planning. 
The text generation process follows roughly four 
steps: 1) The text planner selects a set of facts to be 
expressed and the best rhetorical relations between 
them 3. 2) The text planner builds the TS for each 
fact in the set. For each entity in a chosen fact, 
the referring process produces a list of possible real- 
isations that will unambiguously refer (the referring 
part). Based on the constraints imposed by the re- 
ferring part, the embedding process finds from the 
set al the unexpressed facts whose Argls are that 
entity 4, and makes embedding decisions including 
what to embed, what syntactic form the embedded 
parts should take and which realisation for the entity 
is preferred, according to the principles in the next 
section. This step iterates until the TS for all facts is 
built. 3) The aggregation process goes through the 
TS for parataxis possibilities. 4) The appropriately 
simplified TS is sent to the surface realiser, where 
the natural anguage text is generated. 
We distinguish between two types of parataxis: 
semantic and textual. Semantic parataxis concerns 
facts that have two identical semantic onstituents 
or a rhetorical relation between them, while tex- 
tual parataxis deals with any adjacent facts from text 
planning, with no rhetorical connection between. In 
step 3), both types of parataxis are performed. 
3 Generating the Non-Referring Part 
A referring expression is primarily for referring to 
an entity. So the addition of a non-referring part 
should not interfere with this primary function. We 
summarise two principles that the non-referring part 
must obey, which have been realised in our embed- 
ding algorithm in a simple way. 
2Each entity node corresponds to a domain object; each fact 
node represents a relation between two entities and can be ex- 
pressed as a single sentence in language. 
3Details of the text planning algorithm can be found in 
(Oberlander tal., 1998). 
4The chosen fact actually forms the nucleus of Elaboration, 
and the facts collected by embedding form the satellites. 
1. The non-referring part should not confuse 
the reader about the referent indicated by the 
referring part. That is, if the referring part can 
uniquely identify the referent, the reader should not 
be confused over which object he referring expres- 
sion is about because of the addition of the non- 
referring part. For example, in the description of a 
currently focal object which is a necklace, we might 
say "The necklace is made from gold". Suppose 
we also want to inform the readers that the necklace 
has floral motifs. We should use "The necklace, 
which has floral motifs, is made from gold" rather 
than "The necklace with floral motifs is made from 
gold" because the latter may make the readers think 
that the sentence is about a necklace which is not 
the focal object. 
Based on both the properties of English and 
our analysis of real museum descriptions, we find 
that additional information is provided by evaluat- 
ive adjectives, non-restrictive clauses, and almost 
all grammatical constituents in an indefinite and a 
demonstrative noun phrase. These characteristics 
are captured by embedding rules. For example, the 
definition of one rule that embeds a prepositional 
phrase is: 
(def-embed-rule 
:name with-phrase ;the name of this rule 
:priority 4 
:type prep-phrase ;the type of embedding 
: constraints 
((:type pred Generalized-Possession) 
(:type refer (:or demonstrative indefinite))) 
:RT ((:rel-parent Adjunct) 
(:textual-sem With-Prep-phrase))) 
In the definition, priority is the order in which the 
rule should be tried, where those rules producing 
simpler syntactic forms always have higher prior- 
ity (Scott and de Souza, 1990); constraints is the 
restrictions that must be satisfied by the predicate 
and arguments of the embedded fact and the real- 
isation of the referring part. In the above example, 
the required semantic ategory of the predicate is 
specified, which is used to select suitable facts for 
embedding; RT is the resource tree for building the 
TS for the embedded component. 
Assume we have two facts Fl=style(J1, Organic) 
and F2=hasqual(J1,Floral-motif). Without using 
embedding, we might generate "The necklace is in 
the Organic style. It has floral motifs". Suppose 
F1 and F2 are selected by the text planner and the 
embedding process respectively, and the referring 
form of the entity Jl can be demonstrative, defin- 
ite or pronoun. Applying the above embedding rule, 
1479 
we would realise F2 as a post-modifier of the Argl 
of F1, and choose demonstrative, as "This necklace 
with floral motifs is in the Organic style ". 
2. The non-referring part should not reduce 
the readability of the text. There are several re- 
strictions concerning readability: 
1) Complexity of a referring expression: the gen- 
erated expressions hould not be too complex to 
read. We use a fixed number of syntactic slots to 
restrict the maximum amount of information that 
can be expressed. But the actual complexity is de- 
cided by user models. At present we only distin- 
guish between adults and children. According to 
observations in psycholinguistic research, embed- 
ded clauses in subjects are a major obstacle to com- 
prehensibility (Coleman, 1962). So for children, the 
system generates fewer non-restrictive clauses than 
for adults and none at all in subjects. 
2) Compatibility with other aggregation possibil- 
ities: only semantic paratactic and hypotactic rela- 
tions between facts are considered here. Complex 
embedded components like non-restrictive clauses 
may interrupt he semantic onnection between a
set of sentences. For example, if we do not 
consider such connections while making embed- 
ding decisions, we would generate a sentence like: 
"This jewel is made of gold, sapphire, a kind of 
precious tone and enamel which is often used to 
produce a shiny surface". It is not good compared 
with: "This jewel is made of gold, sapphire and 
enamel. Sapphire is a kind of precious stone, and 
enamel is often used to produce a shiny surface". 
Adjectives would not have such negative ffect 
in most cases, especially when the paratactic parts 
have syntactically symmetrical modifications, like 
"The bracelet has a slightly flared band and a swell- 
ing midsection." Prepositional phrases fall between 
adjectives and relative clauses in their effect. 
Also when one fact is to be embedded, it is 
necessary to check if there are facts semantic- 
ally related to it, which should be embedded to- 
gether. For instance, it is bad to say "The necklace, 
which is made from gold, is in the Organic style. It 
is also made from enamel". 
So before embedding a fact, our embedding al- 
gorithm considers the possibilities of other types 
of aggregation, and only embeds if the embedded 
properties can be realised as a syntactic form other 
than a non-restrictive clause in possible paratactic 
nuclei, and all of the semantically related facts can 
be embedded at the same time. This means that em- 
bedding has a lower priority than parataxis and hy- 
potaxis, which reflects the relationship between the 
weakest rhetorical relation, Elaboration, and other 
types of rhetorical relations. 
4 Future  Work  
This paper discusses our ongoing work on how 
to embed new information into a referring expres- 
sion. While the restrictions concerning the second 
principle are currently implemented in a procedural 
way, it is possible to formalise them as constraints 
within the embedding rules. 
An interesting problem is the relation between 
embedding and entity-based coherence, which ex- 
ists between spans of text in virtue of shared entities 
(Oberlander t al., 1998). When a fact is embedded 
into another one, the entity inside it may become un- 
available for an entity-based move, and the smooth 
transfer from this fact to its elaborating facts is cut 
off. The effect of embedding on local and global co- 
herence is to be exploited more in future work, and 
a comprehensive evaluation is indispensable. 
Acknowledgement This research is supported by a 
University of Edinburgh Studentship. The author appre- 
ciates the comments from Dr. Chris Mellish, Dr. Mick 
O'Donnell and the four anonymous reviewers. 
References 
Appelt, D. 1985. Planning English Referring Ex- 
pression. Artificial Intelligence, 26:1-33. 
Appelt, D and Kronfeld, A. 1987. A Computational 
Model of Referring. In Proceedings of the Tenth 
IJCAL 640-647. 
Coleman, E. 1962. Improving Comprehensibil- 
ity by Shortening Sentences. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 46:131-134. 
Dale, R. 1992. Generating Referring Expressions: 
Constructing Descriptions in a Domain of Ob- 
jects and Processes. MIT Press. 
Grosz, B, et al 1995. Centering: A Framework 
for Modelling the Local Coherence of Discourse. 
Computational Linguistics, 21:203-226. 
Meteer, M. 1992. Expressibility and The Problem 
of Efficient Text Planning. Pinter Publishers Ltd. 
Oberlander, J. et al in press. Information Structure 
and Non-canonical Syntax in Descriptive Texts. 
Text Representation: Linguistic and Psycholin- 
guistic Aspects. Benjamins Publisher. 
Scott, D. and de Souza, C. 1990. Getting the Mes- 
sage Across in RST-based Text Generation. Cur- 
rent Research in NLG, 47-73. 
1480 
