Word Sense Disambiguation using Optimised Combinations of 
Knowledge Sources 
Yor ick  Wi lks  and  Mark  S tevenson  
Depar tment  of  Computer  Science,  
Un ivers i ty  of  Sheff ield, 
Regent  Cour t ,  211 Por tobe l lo  S t reet ,  
Sheff ield, S1 4DP 
Un i ted  K ingdom 
{yorick, marks}@dcs, shef. ac .uk 
Abst ract  
Word sense disambiguation algorithms, with few ex- 
ceptions, have made use of only one lexical know- 
ledge source. We describe a system which performs 
word sense disambiguation on all content words in 
free text by combining different knowledge sources: 
semantic preferences, dictionary definitions and sub- 
ject/domain codes along with part-of-speech tags, 
optimised by means of a learning algorithm. We also 
describe the creation of a new sense tagged corpus by 
combining existing resources. Tested accuracy of our 
approach on this corpus exceeds 92%, demonstrat- 
ing the viability of all-word disambiguation rather 
than restricting oneself to a small sample. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes a system that integrates a num- 
ber of partial sources of information to perform word 
sense disambiguation (WSD) of content words in 
general text at a high level of accuracy. 
The methodology and evaluation of WSD are 
somewhat different from those of other NLP mod- 
ules, and one can distinguish three aspects of this 
difference, all of which come down to evaluation 
problems, as does so much in NLP these days. First, 
researchers are divided between a general method 
(that attempts to apply WSD to all the content 
words of texts, the option taken in this paper) and 
one that is applied only to a small trial selection of 
texts words (for example (Schiitze, 1992) (Yarowsky, 
1995)). These researchers have obtained very high 
levels of success, in excess of 95%, close to the fig- 
ures for other "solved" NLP modules, the issue being 
whether these small word sample methods and tech- 
niques will transfer to general WSD over all content 
words. 
Others, (eg. (Mahesh et al, 1997) (Harley and 
Glennon, 1997)) have pursued the general option 
on the grounds that it is the real task and should 
be tackled directly, but with rather lower success 
rates. The division between the approaches prob- 
ably comes down to no more than the availability 
of gold standard text in sufficient quantities, which 
is more costly to obtain for WSD than other tasks. 
In this paper we describe a method we have used for 
obtaining more test material by transforming one re- 
source into another, an advance we believe is unique 
and helpful in this impasse. 
However, there have also been deeper problems 
about evaluation, which has led sceptics like (Kil- 
garriff, 1993) to question the whole WSD enterprise, 
for example that it is harder for subjects to assign 
one and only one sense to a word in context (and 
hence the produce the test material itself) than to 
perform other NLP related tasks. One of the present 
authors has discussed Kilgarriff's figures elsewhere 
(Wilks, 1997) and argued that they are not, in fact, 
as gloomy as he suggests. Again, this is probably 
an area where there is an "expertise ffect": some 
subjects can almost certainly make finer, more inter- 
subjective, sense distinctions than others in a reli- 
able way, just as lexicographers do. 
But there is another, quite different, source of un- 
ease about the evaluation base: everyone agrees that 
new senses appear in corpora that cannot be as- 
signed to any existing dictionary sense, and this is 
an issue of novelty, not just one of the difficulty of 
discrimination. If that is the case, it tends to under- 
mine the standard mark-up-model-and-test method- 
ology of most recent NLP, since it will not then be 
possible to mark up sense assignment in advance 
against a dictionary if new senses are present. We 
shall not tackle this difficult issue further here, but 
press on towards experiment. 
2 Knowledge Sources and Word 
Sense  Disambiguat ion 
One further issue must be mentioned, because it 
is unique to WSD as a task and is at the core of 
our approach. Unlike other well-known NLP mod- 
ules, WSD seems to be implementable by a number 
of apparently different information sources. All the 
following have been implemented as the basis of ex- 
perimental WSD at various times: part-of-speech, 
semantic preferences, collocating items or classes, 
thesaural or subject areas, dictionary definitions, 
synonym lists, among others (such as bilingual equi- 
valents in parallel texts). These phenomena seem 
1398 
different, so how can they all be, separately or in 
combination, informational clues to a single phe- 
nomenon, WSD? This is a situation quite unlike syn- 
tactic parsing or part-of-speech tagging: in the lat- 
ter case, for example, one can write a Cherry-style 
rule tagger or an HMM learning model, but there is 
no reason the believe these represent different ypes 
of information, just different ways of conceptualising 
and coding it. That seems not to be the case, at first 
sight, with the many forms of information for WSD. 
It is odd that this has not been much discussed in 
the field. 
In this work, we shall adopt the methodology 
first explicitly noted in connection with WSD by 
(McRoy, 1992), and more recently (Ng and Lee, 
1996), namely that of bringing together a number of 
partial sources of information about a phenomenon 
and combining them in a principled manner. This is 
in the AI tradition of combining "weak" methods for 
strong results (usually ascribed to Newell (Newell, 
1973)) and used in the CRL-NMSU lexical work on 
the Eighties (Wilks et al, 1990). We shall, in this 
paper, offer a system that combines the three types 
of information listed above (plus part-of-speech fil- 
tering) and, more importantly, applies a learning 
algorithm to determine the optimal combination of 
such modules for a given word distribution; it being 
obvious, for example, that thesaural methods work 
for nouns better than for verbs, and so on. 
3 The  Sense  Tagger  
We describe a system which is designed to assign 
sense tags from a lexicon to general text. We use 
the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English 
(LODCE)(Procter, 1978), which contains two levels 
of sense distinction: the broad homograph level and 
the more fine-grained level of sense distinction. 
Our tagger makes use of several modules which 
perform disambiguation and these are of two types: 
filters and partial taggers. A filter removes enses 
from consideration, thereby reducing the complex- 
ity of the disambiguation task. Each partial tagger 
makes use of a different knowledge source from the 
lexicon and uses it to suggest a set of possible senses 
for each ambiguous word in context. None of these 
modules performs the disambiguation alone but they 
are combined to make use of all of their results. 
3.1 Preprocessing 
Before the filters or partial taggers are applied the 
text is tokenised, lemmatised, split into sentences 
and part-of-speech tagged using the Brill part-of- 
speech tagger (Brill, 1992). 
Our system disambiguates only the content words 
in the text 1 (the part-of-speech tags assigned by 
1We define content words as nouns, verbs, adjectives and 
adverbs, prepositions are not included in this class. 
Brill's tagger are used to decide which are content 
words). 
3.2 Par t -o f - speech  
Previous work (Wilks and Stevenson, 1998) showed 
that part-of-speech tags can play an important role 
in the disambiguation ofword senses. A small exper- 
imentwas carried out on a 1700 word corpus taken 
from the Wall Street Journal and, using only part-of- 
speech tags, an attempt was made to find the correct 
LDOCE homograph for each of the content words 
in the corpus. The text was part-of-speech tagged 
using Brill's tagger and homographs whose part-of- 
speech category did not agree with the tags assigned 
by Brill's system were removed from consideration. 
The most frequently occuring of the remaining ho- 
mographs was chosen as the sense of each word. We 
found that 92% of content words were assigned the 
correct homograph compared with manual disam- 
biguation of the same texts. 
While this method will not help us disambiguate 
within the homograph, since all senses which com- 
bine to form an LDOCE homograph ave the same 
part-of-speech, it will help us to identify the senses 
completely innapropriate for a given context (when 
the homograph's part-of-speech disagrees with that 
assigned by a tagger). 
It could be reasonably argued that this is a dan- 
gerous strategy since, if the part-of-speech tagger 
made an error, the correct sense could be removed 
from consideration. As a precaution against his we 
have designed our system so that if none of the dic- 
tionary senses for a given word agree with the part- 
of-speech tag then they are all kept (none removed 
from consideration). 
There is also good evidence from our earlier WSD 
system (Wilks and Stevenson, 1997) that this ap- 
proach works well despite the part-of-speech tagging 
errors, that system's results improved by 14% using 
this strategy, achieved 88% correct disambiguation 
to the LDOCE homograph using this strategy but 
only 74% without it. 
3.3 D ic t ionary  Def in i t ions 
(Cowie et al, 1992) used simulated annealing to op- 
timise the choice of senses for a text, based upon 
their textual definition in a dictionary. The optim- 
isation was over a simple count of words in common 
in definitions, however, this meant hat longer defin- 
itions were preferred over short ones, since they have 
more words which can contribute to the overlap, and 
short definitions or definitions by synonym were cor- 
respondingly penalised. We attempted to solve this 
problem as follows. Instead of each word contribut- 
ing one we normalise its contribution by the number 
of words in the definition it came from. The Cowie 
et. al. implementation returned one sense for each 
ambiguous word in the sentence, without any indic- 
1399 
ation of the system's confidence in its choice, but, we 
have adapted the system to return a set of sugges- 
ted senses for each ambiguous word in the sentence. 
We found that the new evaluation function led to an 
improvement in the algorithm's effectiveness. 
3.4 P ragmat ic  Codes  
Our next partial tagger makes use of the hierarchy 
of LDOCE pragmatic odes which indicate the likely 
subject area for a sense. Disambiguation is carried 
out using a modified version of the simulated anneal- 
ing algorithm, and attempts to optimise the num- 
ber of pragmatic odes of the same type in the sen- 
tence. Rather than processing over single sentences 
we optimise over entire paragraphs and only for the 
sense of nouns. We chose this strategy since there 
is good evidence (Gale et al, 1992) that nouns are 
best disambiguated by broad contextual considera- 
tions, while other parts of speech are resolved by 
more local factors. 
3.5 Se lect ional  Rest r i c t ions  
LDOCE senses contain simple selectional restric- 
tions for each content word in the dictionary. A 
set of 35 semantic lasses are used, such as S = Hu- 
man, M = Human male, P = Plant, S -- Solid and so 
on. Each word sense for a noun is given one of these 
semantic types, senses for adjectives list the type 
which they expect for the noun they modify, senses 
for adverbs the type they expect of their modifier 
and verbs list between one and three types (depend- 
ing on their transitivity) which are the expected se- 
mantic types of the verb's subject, direct object and 
indirect object. Grammatical links between verbs, 
adjectives and adverbs and the head noun of their 
arguments arer identified using a specially construc- 
ted shallow syntactic analyser (Stevenson, 1998). 
The semantic lasses in LDOCE are not provided 
with a hierarchy, but, Bruce and Guthrie (Bruce and 
Guthrie, 1992) manually identified hierarchical re- 
lations between the semantic classes, constructing 
them into a hierarchy which we use to resolve the 
restrictions. We resolve the restrictions by return- 
ing, for each word, the set of sense which do not 
break them (that is, those whose semantic ategory 
is at the same, or a lower, level in the hierarchy). 
4 Combin ing  Knowledge Sources  
Since each of our partial taggers uggests only pos- 
sible senses for each word it is necessary to have some 
method to combine their results. We trained de- 
cision lists (Clark and Niblett, 1989) using a super- 
vised learning approach. Decision lists have already 
been successfully applied to lexical ambiguity res- 
olution by (Yarowsky, 1995) where they perfromed 
well. 
We present he decision list system with a num- 
ber of training words for which the correct sense 
is known. For each of the words we supply 
each of its possible senses (apart from those re- 
moved from consideration by the part-of-speech 
filter (Section 3.2)) within a context consisting 
of the results from each of the partial taggers, 
frequency information and 10 simple collocations 
(first noun/verb/preposition to the left/right and 
first/second word to the left/right). Each sense is 
marked as either appropr ia te  (if it is the correct 
sense given the context) or inappropr ia te .  A learn- 
ing algorithm infers a decision list which classifies 
senses as appropriate or inappropriate in con- 
text. The partial taggers and filters can then be run 
over new text and the decision list applied to the 
results, so as to identify the appropriate senses for 
words in novel contexts. 
Although the decision lists are trained on a fixed 
vocabulary of words this does not limit the decision 
lists produced to those words, and our system can 
assign a sense to any word, provided it has a defini- 
tion in LDOCE. The decision list produced consists 
of rules such as "if the part-of-speech is a noun and 
the pragmatic odes partial tagger eturned a confid- 
ent value for that word then that sense is appropriate 
for the context". 
5 P roduc ing  an  Eva luat ion  Corpus  
Rather than expend a vast amount of effort on 
manual tagging we decided to adapt two existing 
resources to our purposes. We took SEMCOR, a 
200,000 word corpus with the content words manu- 
ally tagged as part of the WordNet project. The 
semantic tagging was carried out under disciplined 
conditions using trained lexicographers with tag- 
ging inconsistencies between manual annotators con- 
trolled. SENSUS (Knight and Luk, 1994) is a large- 
scale ontology designed for machine-translation a d 
was produced by merging the ontological hierarch- 
ies of WordNet and LDOCE (Bruce and Guthrie, 
1992). To facilitate this merging it was necessary 
to derive a mapping between the senses in the two 
lexical resources. We used this mapping to translate 
the WordNet-tagged content words in SEMCOR to 
LDOCE tags. 
The mapping is not one-to-one, and some Word- 
Net senses are mapped onto two or three LDOCE 
senses when the WordNet sense does not distinguish 
between them. The mapping also contained signific- 
ant gaps (words and senses not in the translation). 
SEMCOR contains 91,808 words tagged with Word- 
Net synsets, 6,071 of which are proper names which 
we ignore, leaving 85,737 words which could poten- 
tially be translated. The translation contains only 
36,869 words tagged with LDOCE senses, although 
this is a reasonable size for an evaluation corpus 
given this type of task (it is several orders of mag- 
nitude larger than those used by (Cowie et al, 1992) 
1400 
(Harley and Glennon, 1997) (Mahesh et al, 1997)). 
This corpus was also constructed without the ex- 
cessive cost of additional hand-tagging and does not 
introduce any inconsistencies which may occur with 
a poorly controlled tagging strategy. 
6 Resu l ts  
To date we have tested our system on only a por- 
tion of the text we derived from SEMCOR, which 
consisted of 2021 words tagged with LDOCE senses 
(and 12,208 words in total). The 2021 word occur- 
ances are made up from 1068 different ypes, with 
an average polysemy of 7.65. As a baseline against 
which to compare results we computed the percent- 
age of words which are correctly tagged if we chose 
the first sense for each, which resulted in 49.8% cor- 
rect disambiguation. 
We trained a decision list using 1821 of the occur- 
ances (containing 1000 different types) and kept 200 
(129 types) as held-back training data. When the 
decision list was applied to the held-back data we 
found 70% of the first senses correctly tagged. We 
also found that the system correctly identified one 
of the correct senses 83.4% of the time. Assuming 
that our tagger will perform to a similar level over all 
content words in our corpus if test data was avilable, 
and we have no evidence to the contrary, this figure 
equates to 92.8% correct agging over all words in 
text (since, in our corpus, 42% of words tokens are 
ambiguous in LDOCE). 
Comparative valuation is generally difficult in 
word sense disambiguation due to the variation in 
approach and the evaluation corpora. However, it is 
fair to compare our work against other approaches 
which have attempted to disambiguate all content 
words in a text against some standard lexical re- 
source, such as (Cowie et al, 1992), (Harley and 
Glennon, 1997), (McRoy, 1992), (Veronis and Ide, 
1990) and (Mahesh et al, 1997). Neither McRoy 
nor Veronis & Ide provide a quantative evaluation of 
their system and so our performance annot be eas- 
ily compared with theirs. Mahesh et. al. claim high 
levels of sense tagging accuracy (about 89%), but our 
results are not directly comparable since its authors 
explicitly reject the conventional markup-training- 
test method used here. Cowie et. al. used LDOCE 
and so we can compare results using the same set of 
senses. Harley and Glennon used the Cambridge In- 
ternational Dictionary of English which is a compar- 
able resource containing similar lexical information 
and levels of semantic distinction to LDOCE. Our 
result of 83% compares well with the two systems 
above who report 47% and 73% correct disambig- 
uation for their most detailed level of semantic dis- 
tinction. Our result is also higher than both systems 
at their most rough grained level of distinction (72% 
and 78%). These results are summarised in Table 1. 
In order to compare the contribution of the separ- 
ate taggers we implemented a simple voting system. 
By comparing the results obtained from the voting 
system with those from the decision list we get some 
idea of the advantage gained by optimising the com- 
bination of knowledge sources. The voting system 
provided 59% correct disambiguation, at identify- 
ing the first of the possible senses, which is little 
more than each knowledge source used separately 
(see Table 2). This provides a clear indication that 
there is a considerable benefit to be gained from 
combining disambiguation evidence in an optimal 
way. In future work we plan to investigate whether 
the apparently orthogonal, independent, sources of 
information are in fact so. 
7 Conc lus ion  
These experimental results show that it is possible 
to disambiguate all content word in a text to a high 
level of accuracy (92%). Our system uses an optim- 
ised combination of lexical knowledge sources which 
appears to be a sucessful strategyu for this prob- 
lem. The results reported here are slightly lower 
than those for system which concentrate on small 
sets of words. Our future research aims to reduce 
this gap further. 
Acknowledgments  
The work described in this paper has been supported 
by the European Union Language Engineering project 
"ECRAN - Extraction of Content: Research at Near- 
market" (LE-2110). 
Re ferences  
E. Brill. 1992. A simple rule-based part of speech 
tagger. In Proceeding of the Third Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 152- 
155, Trento, Italy. 
R. Bruce and L. Guthrie. 1992. Genus disambigu- 
ation: A study in weighted preference. In Proceed- 
ings of COLING-92, pages 1187-1191, Nantes, 
France. 
P. Clark and T. Niblett. 1989. The CN2 Induction 
Algorithm. Machine Learning Journal, 3(4):261- 
283. 
J. Cowie, L. Guthrie, and J. Guthrie. 1992. Lex- 
ical disambiguation using simulated annealing. 
In Proceedings of COLING-92, pages 359-365, 
Nantes, France. 
W. Gale, K. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. One 
sense per discourse. In Proceedings ofthe DARPA 
Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 
233-237, Harriman, NY, February. 
A. Harley and D. Glennon. 1997. Sense tagging in 
action: Combining different ests with additive 
weights. In Proceedings ofthe SIGLEX Workshop 
1401 
System Resource Ambiguity level 
(Cowie et al, 1992) 
(Harley and Glennon, 1997) 
Reported system 
LDOCE 
CIDE 
LDOCE 
homograph 
sense 
'coarse' level 
'fine' level 
sense 
Table 1: Comparison of tagger with similar systems 
Result 
72% 
47% 
78% 
73% 
83% 
Knowledge Sources 
Dictionary definitions 
Pragmatic odes 
Selectional Restrictions 
All 
58.1% 
55.1% 
57% 
59% 
Table 2: Results from different knowledge sources 
"Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics", pages 74- 
78, Washington, D.C., April. 
A. Kilgarriff. 1993. Dictionary word sense distinc- 
tions: An enquiry into their nature. Computers 
and the Humanities, 26:356-387. 
K. Knight and S. Luk. 1994. Building a large know- 
ledge base for machine tanslation. In Proceedings 
of AAAI-94, pages 185-109, Seattle, WA. 
K. Mahesh, S. Nirenburg, S. Beale, E. Viegas, 
V. Raskin, and B. Onyshkevych. 1997. Word 
sense disambiguation: Why have statistics when 
we have these numbers? In Proceedings of 
the 7th International Conference on Theoretical 
and Methodological Issues in Machine Transla- 
tion, pages 151-159, Santa Fe, NM, June. 
S. McRoy. 1992. Using multiple knowledge sources 
for word sense disambiguation. Computational 
Linguistics, 18(1):1-30. 
A. Newell. 1973. Computer models of thought and 
language. In Schank and Colby, editors, Artificial 
Intelligence and the Concept of Mind. Freeman, 
San Francisco. 
H. T. Ng and H. B. Lee. 1996. Integrating multiple 
knowldge sources to disambiguate word sense: An 
exemplar-based approach. In Proceedings of A CL- 
96, pages 40-47, Santa Cruze, CA. 
P. Procter, editor. 1978. Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English. Longman Group, Essex, 
England. 
H. Sch/itze. 1992. Dimensions of meaning. In Pro- 
ceedings of Supercomputing '92, pages 787-796, 
Minneapolis, MN. 
M. Stevenson. 1998. Extracting syntactic relations 
using heuristics. In Proceedings of the European 
Summer School on Logic, Language and Informa- 
tion '98, Saarbr/icken, Germany. (to appear). 
J. Veronis and N. Ide. 1990. Word sense disambig- 
uation with very large neural networks extracted 
from machine readable dictionaries. In Proceed- 
ings of COLING-90, pages 389-394, Helsinki, Fin- 
land. 
Y. Wilks and M. Stevenson. 1997. Combining in- 
dependent knowledge sources for word sense dis- 
ambiguation. In Proceedings of the Third Con- 
ference on Recent Advances in Natural Langauge 
Processing Conference (RANLP-97), pages 1-7, 
Tzigov Chark, Bulgaria. 
Y. Wilks and M. Stevenson. 1998. The grammar 
of sense: Using part-of-speech tags as a first step 
in semantic disambiguation. Journal of Natural 
Language Engineering, 4(1):1-9. 
Y. Wilks, D. Fass, CM. Guo, J. McDonald, T. Plate, 
and B. Slator. 1990. A tractable machine dic- 
tionary as a basis for computational semantics. 
Journal of Machine Translation, 5:99-154. 
Y. Wilks. 1997. Senses and Texts. Computers and 
the Humanities. 
D. Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word-sense dis- 
ambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Pro- 
ceedings of ACL-95, pages 189-196, Cambridge, 
MA. 
1402 
