Diagram Understanding Using Integration of 
Layout Information and Textual Information 
Yasuh iko  Watanabe 
Ryukoku  Un ivers i ty  
Seta, Otsu  
Sh iga ,  Japan  
watanabe@r ins . ryukoku .ac . jp  
Makoto Nagao 
Kyoto Univers i ty  
Yosh ida ,  Sakyo-ku  
Kyoto ,  Japan  
nagao@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
1 In t roduct ion  
Pattern information and natural anguage informa- 
tion used together can complement and reinforce 
each other to enable more effective communication 
than can either medium alone (Feiner 91) (Naka- 
mura 93). One of the good examples is a pictorial 
book of flora (PBF).  In the PBF, readable xplana- 
tions which combine texts, pictures, and diagrams 
are achieved, as shown in Figure 1 and 2. Taking 
advantage of this, we propose here a new method 
for analyzing the PBF diagrams by using natural 
language information. 
In the PBF, many kinds of information about 
plants are generally stored in the following media: 
? picture, 
? explanation text, and 
? diagram. 
Pictures and explanation texts describe the shape, 
botany, and environment of each plant, as shown in 
Figure 1. On the contrary, as shown in Figure 2, 
diagrams describe very clearly the following kinds 
of information: 
? correspondence b tween each part of the plant 
and its name 
? part-whole relationship and synonymous words 
As a result, diagrams are quite important in or- 
der to understand the explanation of each plant. 
For example, pictures and explanation texts cannot 
convey the information which is necessary to answer 
the following questions: 
? which part of plant is "takuyou (stipules)"? 
? what shape is "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)"? 
Consequently, we have to investigate the method 
for understanding diagrams. 
It is certain that diagrams are effective means 
of communication. However, it is also true that 
we feel difficulties when we try to understand ia- 
grams without he explanation by natural anguage. 
From this, we conclude that natural anguage infor- 
mation is important o understand iagrams. Corn 
sequently, we propose a new framework for the in- 
spiraea cantoniensis 
~: - -~ ,  ~ 1.5m ~'~- 
2-5cm, W 6-20mm~ a~j, 
Figure 1: An example ofa PBF article (in Japanese) 
chumyaku (midrib) 
youeki (axii) ! 
mitsusen youhei (petiole) ! 
(nectary) ~ takuyou (stipules) 
-- ha (leaf) 
Figure 2: An examples of PBF diagrams (leaf) 
tegration of pattern (layout) information and natu- 
ral language information for semantic understand- 
ing the PBF diagrams. In this study, for the obser- 
vation and experiments, we use a PBF (in Japanese) 
the subject of which are wild flowers of Japan. 
1374 
! 
/ \  
daenkei hishinkei shinkei 
('ellipsoidal) ('lanceolate) ~cordate\ shap  ) 
k shape \ shape 
ha no katachi (leaf shape) 
Figure 3: The shape of leaf 
2 Diagram Understanding 
2.1 PBF  Diagram Understanding 
A diagram in the PBF consists of its title and ele- 
ments. A title shows the subject of the diagram and 
it is generally located under the diagram. Elements 
may be classified into three types: 
? symbol, 
? sketch, 
? word. 
Symbols (arrow, line, parenthesis, etc.) connect di- 
agram elements. Sketches represent the features of 
a plant readably and accurately. The features rep- 
resented by sketches are explained by words in the 
diagram. Observing the PBF diagrams, the infor- 
mation explained by words is classified into five cat- 
egories, such as: 
1. names of plant parts. 
(example) "takuyou (stipules)" in Figure 2 
2. types of plant parts. 
(example) "taika (follicle)" and "mikanjyoka 
(hespidium)" in Figure 4 
3. properties of plant parts. 
(example) "daenkei (ellipsoidal shape)" in Fig- 
ure 3 
4. names of plant species. 
(example) "katsura" and "natsumikan" in Fig- 
ure 4 
5. additional explanation. 
(example) "shinpi no chuou ga sakeru (carpel 
splits open in its center)" in Figure 5 
Diagram understanding is the semantic interpreta- 
tion of the elements in the diagram. As mentioned, 
in the PBF diagrams, the information represented 
by sketches is explained by words. From this, we 
?can' 
'katsura ' 
taika (follicle) mikanjyoka (hespidlum) 
kajitsu" (fruit). 
Figure 4: The variety of fruits 
houhairekkai 
(Ioculicidal dehiscence) 
shinpi no chuou ga sakeru 
(carpel splits open in its center) 
rekka i  (dehiscence) 
Figure 5: The process of dehiscence 
conclude that the semantic interpretation of the 
PBF diagrams is the classification of words in a di- 
agram into these five categories. 
For this purpose, we propose anew framework for 
the semantic interpretation of words in the PBF di- 
agrams by using not only the pattern (layout) infor- 
mation but also the natural anguage information. 
The reason is as follows: there is no composing rule 
that strongly restricts the positions of elements and 
the semantic relations between elements. In other 
words, there are many ways of composing diagrams 
to explain an idea. For this reason, it is difficult to 
interpret he PBF diagrams only by using the pat- 
tern (layout) information. For example, "daenkei 
(ellipsoidal shape)", "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)", 
and "shinkei (cordate shape)" in Figure 3 represent 
the properties of the plant part, on the contrary, 
"taika (follicle)" and "mikanjyoka (hespidium)" in 
Figure 4 represent the types of the plant part. In 
spite of the semantic difference, all these words are 
located under the corresponding sketches, respec- 
tively. 
2.2 Related Work 
There are a few research topics related to diagram 
understanding. (Plant 89) (Futrelle 90) recognized 
the semantic structure of diagrams as the extension 
of diagram analysis. But they analyzed diagrams 
1375 
by using knowledge about diagrams which is quite 
separate from natural language information. On 
the contrary, (Nakamura 93) analyzed iagrams in 
the encyclopedia dictionary by using its explanation 
texts and the thesaurus information. But it is diffi- 
cult to analyze the PBF diagrams in the same way 
as (Nakamura 93) did. The reasons are as follows: 
? It is certain that the explanation texts in the 
PBF are closely related to the PBF diagrams. 
However, these texts do not describe the con- 
tents of diagrams but the features of plants. 
That is, there is no explanation text for the 
PBF diagrams. 
? Words in the PBF diagrams are generally tech- 
nical terms which are not registered in the 
common thesaurus. 
To solve these problems, we propose a new frame- 
work to analyze the PBF diagrams by using many 
kinds of clue expressions in the PBF explanation 
texts. 
3 In fo rmat ion  fo r  PBF  D iagram 
Unders tand ing  
3.1 Layout Informat ion 
For analyzing the PBF diagrams, we utilize two 
kinds of layout information. These are: 
? type of relationships between diagram elements 
? similarity of spatial relationships between di- 
agram elements 
Every word in the PBF diagrams is related to the 
other elements (sketches or other words). The re- 
lationships between words and the corresponding 
elements are classified into 2 types: 
connection is the relationship between the word 
and its corresponding element. These are con- 
nected together by a symbol. For example, the 
relationship between "takuyou (stipules)" and 
the "leaf" sketch in Figure 2 is connection. 
adjacency is the relationship between the word 
and its corresponding element. These are ad- 
jacent to each other and not connected by 
a symbol. For example, the relationship be- 
tween "natsumikan" and the right sketch in 
the Figure 4 is adjacency. 
A word connected by a symbol represents a name 
of the plant part. Consequently, in this case, the 
spatial relationship between the word and the corre- 
sponding element is not important for the semantic 
interpretation. For example, the semantic interpre- 
tation of "mitsusen (nectary)" in Figure 2 would 
remain unchanged even if "mi~susen" was located 
on the right of the "leaf" sketch. 
On the contrary, a word which is not connected 
by a symbol may represent any type of informa- 
tion. Consequently, in this case, the spatial rela- 
tionship between the word and the corresponding 
element is important for the semantic interpreta- 
tion. For example, it is inadequate to replace the 
position between "mikanjyoka" and "natsumikan" 
in Figure 4. It is because the replacement breaks the 
similarity of the spatial relationship which "mikan- 
jyoka (hespidium)" and "taika (follicle)" have. In 
this way, words in the PBF diagrams which repre- 
sent the same kind of information, often have the 
same spatial relationship. From this, we utilize the 
similarity of the spatial relationships for the prop- 
agation of the semantic interpretation i  this way: 
suppose that words A and B have the same spatial 
relationship. If A is given the semantic interpreta- 
tion but B is not, the semantic interpretation f A 
is given to B. 
3.2 Natural Language Information 
As mentioned previously, the PBF texts do not ex- 
plain the PBF diagrams but describe many kinds 
of plants. The explanation texts, however, include 
many clues which are useful to classify the words in 
the PBF diagrams into the five semantic ategories. 
In order to realize the semantic analysis, we uti- 
lize two kinds of natural anguage information for 
diagram understanding. These are: 
? titles of the PBF articles. 
? typical expressions which show implicitly the 
semantic interpretation of words in the PBF 
diagram. 
Titles of the PBF articles represent names of the 
species. Typical expressions which we utilize for 
analyzing the diagrams are such as: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
where A is a word in the diagram, "ha" and "ga" are 
Japanese postpositions, and "suru" accompanies a 
noun and verbalizes it. These five expression pat- 
terns are useful to interpret the words in the PBF 
diagrams. For example, words which represent the 
names of plant parts are found in expressions (a), 
(b), and (c), as shown in text (S-l) --. (S-3), but 
not in expressions (d) and (e). 
(S- I )  ha (leaf) ha daenkei (ellipsoidal shape) 
(S-2) kibu ni (at the base) ha milsusen (nectary) 
ga aru (exist) 
(S-3) rimen ni (in the back) ha myaku (vein) ni 
sotte (along) ke (hair) ga missei (glow tightly) 
suru  
On the contrary, words which represent the prop- 
erties are found in the expressions (d) and (e), as 
shown in texts (S-4) and (S-5), but not in expres- 
sions (a), (b), and (c). 
1376 
meshibe (pistil) /~  oshibe 
oshibe \[ ~-meshibe ~ 
ryoseibana mebana obana 
( hermaphrocllte~ (#emale'~ f mill, "~1 flower / \flower J \flowerJ 
hono (flower) 
Figure 6: A diagram of flower 
mtbene ,be 
male \(hermaphr?dlte~flower , ,flower(female~fl (flower) 
hana (flower) 
Figure 7: ID number of each word and sketch 
in Figure 6 
ID Number 
Word01 
? Word02 
Word03 
Word04 
Writing 
Corresponding 
element 
Writing 
meshibe 
oshibe 
ryoseibana 
mebana 
obana 
type of 
correspondence 
meshibe Sketch01 connection 
oshibe 
ryoseibana 
Sketch01 
Sketch01 
Sketch02 meshibe 
connection 
adjacency 
connection 
position 
bottom 
Word05 mebana Sketch02 adjacency bottom 
Word06 Sketch03 
Word07 
adjacency 
adjacency 
oshibe 
obana Sketch03 
above right 
bottom 
(a) layout information of Figure 6 
expression pattern I 
Title (a) \] (b) \[ (c) \[ (d) \[ /e ) 
0 46 23 0 0 0 
0 194 37 5 0 0 
0 4 0 0 1 0 
0 26 2 0 1 0 
0 41 1 0 3 0 
(Note) expression pattern 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A q- ga + aru 
(c) A + ga -t- verbalized noun ? suru 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
(b) natural anguage information of Figure 6 
Figure 8: An example of the layout and natural anguage information 
(S-4) kajitsu (fruit) ha kyukei (spherical shape) 
(S-5) kajyo (inflorescence) ha tyousei (terminal) 
SUr/L 
4 Process  o f  PBF  D iagram 
Unders tand ing  
4.1 Representat ion of Layout Informat ion 
Layout information is represented by hand in the 
following way. 
Step 1. give ID number to all words and sketches 
in the diagram. 
Step 2. describe the following kinds of information 
for each word in the diagram. 
1. ID number 
2. writing 
3. ID number of the corresponding element 
4. type of correspondence (connection or ad- 
jacency) 
5. relative position from the center of the 
corresponding element when the type of 
correspondence is adjacency (we use 8 di- 
rections for the description: top, above 
right, right, below right, bottom, below 
left, left, above left) 
Figure 7 shows the given ID number of each word 
and sketch in Figure 6. Figure 8 (a) represents he 
layout information of Figure 6. For example, Fig- 
ure 8 (a) shows that "ryoseibana (hermaphrodite 
flower)" in Figure 6 has Word03 as the ID number, 
corresponds with Sketch01 (a sketch in the left of 
Figure 6), and is located under Sketch01. More- 
over, by checking the information on the position, 
words which have the same spatial relationship can 
be detected. For example, Figure 8 (a) shows that 
there are words under the left sketch, under the 
central sketch, and in the above right and under 
the right sketch. Using this information, Word03 
("ryoseibana"), Word05 ("mebana"), and Word07 
1377 
Word01 
Word02 
Word03 
Word04 
Word05 
Word06 
Word07 
Figure 9: 
6 
Writing 
meshibe 
oshibe 
ryoseibana 
meshibe 
mebana 
oshibe 
obana 
name of plant parts Rule 1 
name of plant parts Rule 1 
type of plant parts Rule 5 
name of plant parts Rule 1 
type of plant parts Rule 5 
name of plant parts Rule 4 
type of plant parts Rule 5 
Results of the semantic analysis for Figure 
("obana") are detected as the words which have 
the same spatial relationship with the correspond- 
ing sketch. 
4.2 Extract ion and Representat ion of
Natural  Language Informat ion 
Natural anguage information, which is useful to in- 
terpret he words in the PBF diagrams, such as, 
titles and expression patterns, is extracted and rep- 
resented in the following way: 
Step 1. Extract titles from the explanation texts. 
Step 2. Japanese morphological nalysis. We used 
JUMAN(Kurohashi 97) as a Japanese mor- 
phological analyzer. 
Step 3. Extract the following expression patterns 
by pattern matching from the results of the 
Japanese morphological nalysis. 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + sum 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
where A is a word in a diagram. 
Step 4. Describe the results of Step 1 and 3 as the 
natural language information. 
Figure 8 (b) shows the natural language information 
of Figure 6. The number of each expression pattern 
in Figure 8 (b) shows the frequency of it in the PBF 
explanation texts. 
4.3 Semantic Analysis by Integrat ion of 
Layout Informat ion and Natura l  
Language Informat ion 
In this section, we describe the process of seman- 
tic analysis for the PBF diagrams by using the inte- 
gration of layout and natural language information. 
The semantic analysis is realized by applying the 
following rules in order: (Figure 9 shows the results 
of the semantic analysis for Figure 6) 
Rule 1. \[Rule for names of plant parts by using 
symbols\] 
A word which is connected to the other ele- 
ment by a symbol is interpreted as a name of 
the plant part. For example, "meshibe" (Word01 
and Word04) and "oshibe" (Word02) in Figure 
6, each of which is connected with its corre- 
sponding sketch by an arrow, are interpreted 
as the name of the plant part by this rule. 
Rule 2. \[Rule for names of plant species\] 
A word is interpreted as a name of the plant 
species, when it is: 
(a) a title of the PBF articles, or 
(b) written in Katakana letters 1 
For example, "ka~snra" and "natsumikaa" in 
Figure 4 are interpreted as the name of the 
species by this rule. It should be noted that 
"katsura", that is a wild kind, is one in the 
titles of the PBF articles. On the contrary, 
"natsumikan", that is a cultivated kind, is not 
a title in the PBF. It is because the subject 
of the PBF which we used is wild flowers in 
Japan. As a result of this, "katsura" and "nat- 
sumikan" are interpreted by the condition above 
(a) and (b) in this rule, respectively. 
Rule 3. \[Rule for properties of plant parts\] 
A word in a diagram is interpreted as a prop- 
erty of the plant part when it is found in the 
expression pattern (d) and (e) described in 
Section 3.2, such as: 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
and never found in the rest of the expression 
patterns in Section 3.2. For example, "daenkei 
(ellipsoidal shape)", "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)", 
and "shinkei (cordate shape)" in Figure 3 are 
interpreted as the properties of the plant part 
by this rule. 
Rule 4. \[Rule for names of plant parts by using the 
expression patterns\] 
A word in a diagram is interpreted as a name 
of the plant part when it is found in the ex- 
pression patterns (a), (b), and (c) described in 
Section 3.2, such as: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + sum 
and never found in the rest of expression pat- 
terns in Section 3.2. For example, "oshibe" 
(Word06) in Figure 6 is interpreted asthe name 
of the plant part by this rule. 
1In Japanese PBF, names of species are generally 
written in Katakana letters. For example, "katsura" 
and "natsurnikan" in Figure 4 are written in Katakana 
letters. 
1378 
Relation 
connection 
adjacency 
name of 
a plant part 
success failure 
74 0 
1 7 
Table 1: Results of the semantic analysis 
property of type of name of 
a plant part a plant part species 
success failure success failure success failure 
112 0 33 5 23 1 
additional 
explanation 
success failure 
3 o .j 
Rule 5. \[Rule for types of plant parts\] 
Words in a diagram are interpreted asthe types 
of the plant part when the following conditions 
are satisfied. 
1. Each sketch is related to one of these 
words. 
2. These words have the same spatial rela- 
tionship with the corresponding sketch. 
3. These words have the same Kanji char- 
acter at the end of the writing. 
4. Some of these words are found in the 
expression pattern (a), (b), and (c) de- 
scribed in Section 3.2: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
For example, "ryoseibana (hermaphrodite flower)" 
"mebana (female flower)", and "obana (male 
flower)" in Figure 6 are interpreted asthe types 
of the plant part by this rule. 
Rule  6. \[Propagation f semantic interpretation\] 
A word which cannot be interpreted by the 
rules 1-5 is given the same semantic informa- 
tion as the word which has the same spatial 
relationship. The way of detecting the words 
which have the same spatial relationship isde- 
scribed in Section 4.1. 
Rule 7. \[Rule for additional explanation\] 
An additional explanation generally includes 
? postposition 
? adjective 
? verb 
? adverb 
Taking advantage ofthis, words are interpreted 
as an additional explanation when the result of 
their Japanese morphological nalysis includes 
the above types of a part-of-speec h. For ex- 
ample, "shinpi no chnou ga sakeru (carpel splits 
open in its center)" in Figure 5 is interpreted 
as an additional explanation by this rule. 
5 Exper imenta l  Resu l ts  
To evaluate our approach, we used 31 PBF dia- 
grams in an experiment. These 31 diagrams in- 
cluded 175 sketches and 259 words. Table 1 shows 
tantaioshibe nitaioshibe 
( monadelphous ~ ('dlaaelphous ~ stamens / \ stamens / 
nikyooshibe tataioshibe 
( dldynamous~ (polyadelphous stamens \] \ stamens \] 
oshibe (stamen) 
(a) A diagram of stamen 
syuyakuoshibe 
( syngeneslous ~ stamens J 
shiyuzakkyosei (polygamous) 
(b) A diagram of polygamous 
Figure 10: Examples of incorrect analysis 
ryoseibana ryoseibana 
mebana 
the results of the semantic analysis of these dia- 
grams. 
Figure 10 gives two examples of the failures in 
this experiment. The words in Figure 10 (a) repre- 
sent the types of "oshibe (stamen)", and could not 
be interpreted by our approach. This is because 
these words, such as "nitaioshibe (diadelphous sta- 
mens)", are rarely used in the PBF texts, and could 
not be found in five kinds of expression patterns 
in Section 3.2. The words in Figure 10 (b), "ryo- 
seibana (hermaphrodite flower)", "mebana (female 
flower)", and "obana (male flower)" represent the 
names of the plant part. But these words could 
1379 
not be interpreted by the rule 4 in our method be- 
cause these words are found in the expressions, such 
as: 
(S-6) daibubun (most of the flower) ha ryoseibana 
(hermaphrodite flower) 
(8-7) chuou no lkko (a flower in the center) ha 
mebana (female flower) 
(8-8) sokuhou no 2ko (two flowers in the corner) 
ha obana (male flower) 
6 Conc lus ion  
At the moment, the pattern (layout) information 
is extracted and represented by hand. To realize 
an automatic extraction and representation f the 
pattern (layout) information, we have to investigate 
the following methods: 
? a method for extracting the diagram elements 
? a method for detecting the corresponding re- 
lations between the diagram elements 
Fortunately, a large amount of diagrams is created 
and stored on computers. Taking advantage ofthis, 
we may avoid the difficulties in extracting the dia- 
gram elements by image processing. For this rea- 
son, we would like to investigate the method for 
detecting the spatial relationship between the dia- 
gram elements. 
Re ferences  
Feiner, McKeown: Automating the Generation of Coor- 
dinated Multimedia Explanations, IEEE Computer, 
Voi.24 No.10, (1991). 
Futrelle: Strategies for diagram understanding: Gener- 
alized equivalence, spatial/object pyramids and ani- 
mate vision, Proc. 10th ICPR, (1990) 
Kurohashi, Nagao: JUMAN Manual version 3.4 (in Japanese), 
Nagao Lab., Kyoto University, (1997) ~ 
Nagao: Methods of Image Pattern Recognition (in Japanese), 
CORONA, (1983). 
Nakamura, Furukawa, Nagao: Diagram Understanding 
Utilizing Natural Language Text, 2nd International 
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 
(1993). 
Plant, Scrievner, Schappo, Woodcock: Usage and gen- 
erality of knowledge in the interpretation f diagrams, 
Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol.2 No.2, (1989). 
2The source file and the explanation (in Japanese) 
of Japanese morphological analyzer JUMAN can be ob- 
tained using anonymous FTP from 
ftp : I/pine. kuee. kyoto-u, ac. jplpub/juman/juman3.4, tar. gz 
1380 
