Context Management with Topics for Spoken Dialogue Systems 
Kristiina Jokinen and H idek i  Tanaka  and Ak io  Yokoo 
ATR Interpret ing Te lecommunicat ions Research Laborator ies  
2-2 Hikaridai,  Seika-cho, Soraku-gun 
Kyoto  619-02 Japan  
email : {kj okinen\[tanakah\[ayokoo}~itl, air. co. jp 
Abst ract  
In this paper we discuss the use of discourse con- 
text in spoken dialogue systems and argue that the 
knowledge of the domain, modelled with the help of 
dialogue topics is important in maintaining robust- 
ness of the system and improving recognition accu- 
racy of spoken utterances. We propose a topic model 
which consists of a domain model, structured into a 
topic tree, and the Predict-Support algorithm which 
assigns topics to utterances on the basis of the topic 
transitions described in the topic tree and the words 
recognized in the input utterance. The algorithm 
uses a probabilistic topic type tree and mutual infor- 
mation between the words and different opic types, 
and gives recognition accuracy of 78.68% and preci- 
sion of 74.64%. This makes our topic model highly 
comparable to discourse models which are based on 
recognizing dialogue acts. 
1 In t roduct ion  
One of the fragile points in integrated spoken lan- 
guage systems is the erroneous analyses of the initial 
speech input. 1 The output of a speech recognizer has 
direct influence on the performance of other mod- 
ules of the system (dealing with dialogue manage- 
ment, translation, database search, response plan- 
ning, etc.), and the initial inaccuracy usually gets 
accumulated in the later stages of processing. Per- 
formance of speech recognizers can be improved by 
tuning their language model and lexicon, but prob- 
lems still remain with the erroneous ranking of the 
best paths: information content of the selected ut- 
terances may be wrong. It is thus essential to use 
contextual information to compensate various errors 
in the output, to provide expectations of what will 
be said next and to help to determine the appropri- 
ate dialogue state. 
However, negative ffects of an inaccurate context 
have also been noted: cumulative rror in discourse 
context drags performance of the system below the 
rates it would achieve were contextual information 
1 Alexandersson (1996) remarks that with a 3000 word lex- 
icon, a 75 % word accuracy means that in practice the word 
lattice does not contain the actually spoken sentence, 
not used (Qu et al, 1996; Church and Gale, 1991). 
Successful use of context thus presupposes appro- 
priate context management: (1) features that define 
the context are relevant for the processing task, and 
(2) construction of the context is accurate. 
In this paper we argue in favour of using one 
type of contextual information, topic information, 
to maintain robustness of a spoken language sys- 
tem. Our model deals with the information content 
of utterances, and defines the context in terms of 
topic types, related to the current domain knowl- 
edge and represented in the form of a topic tree. 
To update the context with topics we introduce the 
Predict-Support algorithm which selects utterance 
topics on the basis of topic transitions described in 
the topic tree and words recognized in the current 
utterance. At present, the algorithm is designed as 
a filter which re-orders the candidates produced by 
the speech recognizer, but future work encompasses 
integration of the algorithm into a language model 
and actual speech recognition process. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 re- 
views the related previous research and sets out our 
starting point. Section 3 presents the topic model 
and the Predict-Support algorithm, and section 4 
gives results of the experiments conducted with the 
model. Finally, section 5 summarises the properties 
of the topic model, and points to future research. 
2 Previous research  
Previous research on using contextual information 
in spoken language systems has mainly dealt with 
speech acts (Nagata nd Morimoto, 1994; Reithinger 
and Maier, 1995; MSller, 1996). In dialogue sys- 
tems, speech acts seem to provide a reasonable first 
approximation of the utterance meaning: they ab- 
stract over possible linguistic realisations and, deal- 
ing with the illocutionary force of utterances, can 
also be regarded as a domain-independent aspect of 
communication. 2 
2Of course, most dialogue systems include domain depen- 
dent acts to cope with the particular equirements of the do- 
main, cf.Alexandersson (1996). Speech acts are also related 
to the task: information providing, appointment negotiat- 
631 
However, speech acts concern a rather abstract 
level of utterance modelling: they represent the 
speakers' intentions, but ignore the semantic on- 
tent of the utterance. Consequently, context models 
which use only speech act information tend to be 
less specific and hence less accurate. Nagata and 
Morimoto (1994) report prediction accuracy of 61.7 
%, 77.5 % and 85.1% for the first, second and third 
best dialogue act (in their terminology: Illocution- 
ary Force Type) prediction, respectively, while Rei- 
thinger and Maier (1995) report the corresponding 
accuracy rates as 40.28 %, 59.62 % and 71.93 %, 
respectively. The latter used structurally varied i- 
alogues in their tests and noted that deviations from 
the defined ialogue structures made the recognition 
accuracy drop drastically. 
To overcome prediction i accuracies, speech act 
based context models are accompanied with the in- 
formation about he task or the actual words used. 
Reithinger and Maier (1995) describe plan-based re- 
pairs, while MSller (1996) argues in favour of domain 
knowledge. Qu et al (1996) show that to minimize 
cumulative contextual errors, the best method, with 
71.3% accuracy, is the Jumping Context approach 
which relies on syntactic and semantic nformation 
of the input utterance rather than strict prediction of
dialogue act sequences. Recently also keyword-based 
topic identification has been applied to dialogue 
move (dialogue act) recognition (Garner, 1997). 
Our goal is to build a context model for a spo- 
ken dialogue system, and we emphasise especially 
the system's robustness, i.e. its capability to pro- 
duce reliable and meaningful responses in presence 
of various errors, disfluencies, unexpected input and 
out-of-domain utterances, tc. (which are especially 
notorious when dealing with spontaneous speech). 
The model is used to improve word recognition ac- 
curacy, and it should also provide auseful basis for 
other system odules. 
However, we do not aim at robustness ona merely 
mechanical level of matching correct words, but 
rather, on the level of maintaining the information 
content of the utterances. Despite the vagueness 
of such a term, we believe that speech act based 
context models are less robust due to the fact that 
the information content of the utterances is ignored. 
Consistency ofthe information exchanged in (task- 
oriented) conversations is one of the main sources for 
dialogue coherence, and so pertinent inthe context 
management besides speech acts. Deviations from a 
predefined dialogue structure, multifunctionality of 
utterances, various ide-sequences, di fluencies, etc. 
cannot be dealt with on a purely abstract level of 
illocution, but require knowledge of the domain, ex- 
pressed in the semantic ontent of the utterances. 
ion, argumentation etc. have different communicative pur- 
poses which are reflected in the set of necessary speech acts. 
Moreover, in multilingual applications, like speech- 
to-speech translation systems, the semantic ontent 
of utterances plays an important role and an inte- 
grated system must also produce asemantic analysis 
of the input utterance. Although the goal may be a 
shallow understanding only, it is not enough that the 
system knows that the speaker uttered a "request": 
the type of the request is also crucial. 
We thus reckon that appropriate context manage- 
ment should provide descriptions of what is said, 
and that the recognition of the utterance topic is an 
important task of spoken dialogue systems. 
3 The Topic Model 
In AI-based dialogue modelling, topics are associ- 
ated with a particular discourse ntity, focus, which 
is currently in the centre of attention and which 
the participants want to focus their actions on, e.g. 
Grosz and Sidner (1986). The topic (focus) is a 
means to describe thematically coherent discourse 
structure, and its use has been mainly supported by 
arguments regarding anaphora resolution and pro- 
cessing effort (search space limits). Our goal is to 
use topic information i  predicting likely content of  
the next utterance, and thus we are more interested 
in the topic types that describe the information con- 
veyed by utterances than the actual topic entity. 
Consequently, instead of tracing salient entities in 
the dialogue and providing heuristics for different 
shifts of attention, we seek a formalisation of the 
information structure of utterances in terms of the 
new information that is exchanged in the course of 
the dialogue. 
The purpose of our topic model is to assist speech 
processing, and so extensive and elaborated reason- 
ing about plans and world knowledge is not avail- 
able. Instead a model that relies on observed facts 
(= word tokens) and uses statistical information is
preferred. We also expect he topic model to be gen- 
eral and extendable, so that if it is to be applied to 
a different domain, or more factors in the recogni- 
tion of the information structure of the utterances 3 
are to be taken into account, the model could easily 
adapt to these changes. 
The topic model consists of the following parts: 
1. domain knowledge structured into a topic tree 
2. prior probabilities of different topic shifts 
3. topic vectors describing the mutual information 
between words and topic types 
4. Predict-Support algorithm to measure similar- 
ity between the predicted topics and the topics 
supported by the input utterance. 
Below we describe ach item in detail. 
3For instance, sentential stress and pitch accent are im- 
portant in recognizing topics in spontaneous speech. 
632 
Figure 1: A partial topic tree. 
3.1 Topic  t rees  
Originally "focus trees" were proposed by (McCoy 
and Cheng, 1991) to trace foci in NL generation sys- 
tems. The branches of the tree describe what sort 
of shifts are cognitively easy to process and can be 
expected to occur in dialogues: random jumps from 
one branch to another are not very likely to occur, 
and if they do, they should be appropriately marked. 
The focus tree is a subgraph of the world knowledge, 
built in the course of the discourse on the basis of 
the utterances that have occurred. The tree both 
constrains and enables prediction of what is likely 
to be talked about next, and provides a top-down 
approach to dialogue coherence. 
Our topic tree is an organisation of the domain 
knowledge in terms of topic types, bearing resem- 
blance to the topic tree of Carcagno and Iordanskaja 
(1993). The nodes of the tree 4 correspond to topic 
types which represent clusters of the words expected 
to occur at a particular point of the dialogue. Fig- 
ure 1 shows a partial topic tree in a hotel reservation 
domain. 
For our experiments, topic trees were hand-coded 
from our dialogue corpus. Since this is time- 
consuming and subjective, an automatic lustering 
program, using the notion of a topic-binder, is cur- 
rently under development. 
Our corpus contains 80 dialogues from the bilin- 
gual ATR Spoken Language Dialogue Database. 
4We will continue talking about a topic tree, although in 
statistical modelling, the tree becomes a topic network where 
the shift probability between odes which are not daughters 
or sisters of each other is close to zero. 
The dialogues deal with hotel reservation and tourist 
information, and the total number of utterances i
4228. (Segmentation is based on the information 
structure so that one utterance contains only one 
piece of new information.) The number of different 
word tokens is 27058, giving an average utterance 
length 6,4 words. 
The corpus is tagged with speech acts, using a 
surface pattern oriented speech act classification of 
Seligman et al (1994), and with topic types. The 
topics are assigned to utterances on the basis of the 
new information carried by the utterance. New in- 
formation (Clark and Haviland, 1977; Vallduvl and 
Engdahl, 1996) is the locus of information related to 
the sentential nuclear stress, and identified in regard 
to the previous context as the piece of information 
with which the context is updated after uttering the 
utterance. Often new information includes the verb 
and the following noun phrase. 
More than one third of the utterances (1747) con- 
tain short fixed phrases (Let me confirm; thank you; 
good.bye; ok; yes), and temporizers (well, ah, uhm). 
These utterances do not request or provide informa- 
tion about the domain, but control the dialogue in 
terms of time management requests or convention- 
alised dialogue acts (feedback-acknowledgements, 
thanks, greetings, closings, etc.) The special topic 
type IAM, is assigned to these utterances to signify 
their role in InterAction Management. The topic 
type MIX is reserved for utterances which contain in- 
formation ot directly related to the domain (safety 
of the downtown area, business taking longer than 
expected, a friend coming for a visit etc.), thus mark- 
ing out-of-domain utterances. Typically these utter- 
ances give the reason for the request. 
The number of topic types in the corpus is 62. 
Given the small size of the corpus, this was consid- 
ered too big to be used successfully in statistical cal- 
culations, and they were pruned on the basis of the 
topic tree: only the topmost nodes were taken into 
account and the subtopics merged into approproate 
mother topics. Figure 2 lists the pruned topic types 
and their frequencies in the corpus. 
tag count ~ interpretation 
iam 1747 41.3 Interaction Management 
room 826 19.5 Room, its properties 
stay 332 7.9 Staying period 
name 320 7.6 Name, spelling 
res 310 7.3 Make/change/extend/ 
cancel reservation 
paym 250 5.9 Payment method 
contact 237 5.6 Contact Info 
meals 135 3.2 Meals (breakfast, dinner) 
mix 71 1.7 Single unique topics 
Figure 2: Topic tags for the experiment. 
633 
3.2 Topic shifts 
On the basis of the tagged dialogue corpus, proba- 
bilities of different opic shifts were estimated. We 
used the Carnegie Mellon Statistical Language Mod- 
eling (CMU SLM) Toolkit, (Clarkson and Rosen- 
feld, 1997) to calculate probabilities. This builds a 
trigram backoff model where the conditional proba- 
blilities are calculated as follows: 
p(w3\[wl, w2) = 
p3(wl, w2, w3) 
bo_wt2(wl, w2) x p(w31w2) 
p(w3lw2) 
if trigram exists 
if bigram (wl,w2) 
exists 
otherwise. 
p(w21wl) = 
p2(wl, w2) if bigram exists 
bo_wtl(wl) ? pl(w2) otherwise. 
3.3 Topic vectors 
Each word type may support several topics. For in- 
stance, the occurrence of the word room in the utter- 
ance I'd like to make a room reservation, supports 
the topic MAKERESERVATION, but in the utterance 
We have only twin rooms available on the 15th. it 
supports the topic ROOM. To estimate how well the 
words support he different topic types, we measured 
mutual information between each word and the topic 
types. Mutual information describes how much in- 
formation a word w gives about a topic type t, and 
is calculated as follows (ln is log base two, p(tlw )
the conditional probability of t given w, and p(t) 
the probability of t ) :  
I(w,t) = In p(w,t) - -  In p(t\[w) 
p(w) .  p(t) p(t) 
If a word and a topic are negatively correlated, 
mutual information is negative: the word signals 
absence of the topic rather than supports its pres- 
ence. Compared with a simple counting whether the 
word occurs with a topic or not, mutual information 
thus gives a sophisticated and intuitively appealing 
method for describing the interdependence between 
words and the different topic types. 
Each word is associated with a topic vector, which 
describes how much information the word w carries 
about each possible topic type ti: 
topvector( mi( w, t l ), mi( w, t 2 ), ..., mi( w, t ,  ) ) 
For instance, the topic vector of the word room is: 
topvector  (room, \[mi (0. 21409750769169117, cont  act  ) ,  
mi (-5. 5258041314543815, iam), 
mi (-3. 831955835588453 ,meals ) ,  
mi (0 ,mix), 
mi ( ml * 2697134113673~ ~ na ive  ) 
mi (-2. 720924523199709, paym) , 
mi (0. 9687353561881407 , res ) ,  
mi ( I .  9035899442740105, room), 
mi (-4.130179669884547, stay)  \] ). 
The word supports the topics ROOM and MAKE- 
RESERVATION (res), but gives no information about 
MIX (out-of-domain) topics, and its presence is 
highly indicative that the utterance is not at least 
IAM or STAY. It also supports CONTACT because 
the corpus contains utterances like I 'm in room 213 
which give information about how to contact he 
customer who is staying at a hotel. 
The topic vectors are formed from the corpus. %Ve 
assume that the words are independently related to 
the topic types, although in the case of natural lan- 
guage utterances this may be too strong a constraint. 
3.4 The Predict -Support  Algor i thm 
Topics are assigned to utterances given the previous 
topic sequence (what has been talked about) and 
the words that carry new information (what is actu- 
ally said). The Predict-Support Algorithm goes as 
follows: 
1. Prediction: get the set of likely next topics in 
regard to the previous topic sequences using the 
topic shift model. 
2. Support: link each Newlnfo word wj of the in- 
put to the possible topics types by retrieving 
its topic vector. For each topic type ti, add up 
the amounts of mutual information rni(wj;ti) 
by which it is supported by the words wj, and 
rank the topic types in the descending order of 
mutual information. 
3. Selection: 
(a) Default: From the set of predicted topics, 
select he most supported topic as the cur- 
rent topic. 
(b) What-is-said heuristics: If the predicted 
topics do not include the supported topic, 
rely on what is said, and select the most 
supported topic as the current topic (cf. 
the Jumping Context approach in Qu et 
al. (1996)). 
(c) What-is-talked-about heuristics: If the 
words do not support any topic (e.g. all the 
words are unknown or out-of-domain), rely 
on what is predicted and select the most 
likely topic as the current opic. 
3 shows schematically how the algorithm Figure 
works. 
634 
U 1 - w11,  w12,  ..., W lm - - -> T 1 
U 2 - w21"  w22,  ..., W2m ---> T 2 
U 3 - w31,  w32,  ..., W3m - - -> T 3 
Un  
Prediction: 
T n - max p(Tk  I Tk_2Tk .  1) 
Tk 
m Wnl  , wn2 ....... wnm - -> T n 
mi(W*nl  .Ta) . mi( 'Wrt2,T a ) . . . .  i (Wnm.T  a ) 
mi (Wnl  ,T b )  miff,*V n2 ,T  b)  ? . . m i0&'nm,T  b)  
rn i (Wnl  ,T k) mi(Wn2,T k) . . . mi(Wnm,Tk)  
m Support: 
mi(Un,Tk  ) = ~ mi0 /Vn i ,Tk  ) T n - max  mi (Un ,T  k) 
i= l  T k 
Select:. 
Default: T n =max ml(Un,T k) and Tn= max p(TkITk.2Tk_l)} 
T k T k 
Whnt/s s~/d: T n -max mi(Un,T k) 
Tk 
What is tnl'~d about: Tn = max p(T k I Tk.2Tk. 1 ) 
Tk 
Figure 3: Scheme of the Predict-Support Algorithm. 
Using the probabilities obtained by the trigram 
backoff model, the set of likely topics is actually a 
set of all topic types ordered according to their like- 
lihood. However, the original idea of the topic trees 
is to constrain topic shifts (transitions from a node 
to its daughters or sisters are favoured, while shifts 
to nodes in separate branches are less likely to oc- 
cur unless the information under the current node 
is exhaustively discussed), and to maintain this re- 
strictive property, we take into consideration only 
topics which have probability greater than an arbi- 
trary limit p. 
Instead of having only one utterance analysed 
at the time and predicting its topic, a speech rec- 
ognizer produces a word lattice, and the topic is 
to be selected among candidates for several word 
strings. We envisage the Predict-Support algorithm 
will work in the described way in these cases as well. 
However, an extra step must be added in the se- 
lection process: once the topics are decided for the 
n-best word strings in the lattice, the current topic 
is selected among the topic candidates as the high- 
est supported topic. Consequently, the word string 
associated with the selected topic is then picked up 
as the current utterance. 
We must make two caveats for the performance 
of the algorithm, related to the sparse data prob- 
lem in calculating mutual information. First, there 
is no difference between out-of-domain words and 
unknown but in-domain words: both are treated as 
providing no information about the topic types. If 
such words are rare, the algorithm works fine since 
the other words in the utterance usually support 
the correct opic. However, if such words occur ?re- 
quently, there is a difference in regard to whether 
the unknown words belong to the domain or not. 
Repeated out-of-domain words may signal a shift to 
a new topic: the speaker has simply jumped into 
a different domain. Since the out-of-domain words 
do not contribute to any expected topic type, the 
topic shift is not detected. On the other hand, if 
unknown but in-domain words are repeated, mu- 
tual information by which the topic types are sup- 
ported is too coarse and fails to make necessary dis- 
tinctions; hence, incorrect opics can be assigned. 
For instance, if lunch is an unknown word, the ut- 
terance Is lunch included? may get an incorrect 
topic type ROOMPRICE since this is supported by 
the other words of the utterance whose topic vec- 
tors were build on the basis of the training corpus 
examples like Is tax included? 
The other caveat is opposite to unknown words. 
If a word occurs in the corpus but only with a par- 
ticular topic type, mutual information between the 
word and the topic becomes high, while it is zero 
with the other topics. This co-occurrence may just 
be an accidental fact due to a small training cor- 
pus, and the word can indeed occur with other topic 
types too. In these cases it is possible that the algo- 
rithm may go wrong: if none of the predicted topics 
of the utterance is supported by the words, we rely 
on the What-is-said heuristics and assign the highly 
supported but incorrect opic to the utterance. For 
instance, if included has occurred only with ROOM- 
PRICE, the utterance Is lunch included? may still 
get an incorrect opic, even though lunch is a known 
word: mutual information mi(included, RoomPrice) 
may be greater than mi(lunch, Meals). 
4 Exper iments  
We tested the Predict-Support algorithm using 
cross-validation  our corpus. The accuracy results 
of the first predictions are given in Table 4. PP is 
the corpus perplexity which represents the average 
branching factor of the corpus, or the number of al- 
ternatives from which to choose the correct label at 
a given point. 
For the pruned topic types, we reserved 10 ran- 
domly picked dialogues for testing (each test file con- 
tained about 400-500 test utterances), and used the 
other 70 dialogues for training in each test cycle. 
The average accuracy rate, 78.68 % is a satisfactory 
result. We also did another set of cross-validation 
tests using 75 dialogues for training and 5 dialogues 
for testing, and as expected, a bigger training cor- 
pus gives better recognition results when perplexity 
stays the same. 
To compare how much difference a bigger num- 
ber of topic tags makes to the results, we con- 
ducted cross-validation tests with the original 62 
topic types. A finer set of topic tags does worsen 
635 
Test type PP 
Topics = 10 
train = 70 files 3.82 
Topics = 10 
train = 75 files 3.74 
Topics = 62 
train = 70 files 5.59 
Dacts = 32 
train = 70 files 6.22 
PS-aigorithm BO model 
78.68 41.30 
80.55 40.33 
64.96 41.32 
58.52 19.80 
Figure 4: Accuracy results of the first predictions. 
the accuracy, but not as much as we expected: the 
Support-part of the algorithm effectively remedies 
prediction inaccuracies. 
Since the same corpus is also tagged with speech 
acts, we conducted similar cross-validation tests 
with speech act labels. The recognition rates are 
worse than those of the 62 topic types, although 
perplexity is almost the same. We believe that this 
is because speech acts ignore the actual content of 
the utterance. Although our speech act labels are 
surface-oriented, they correlate with only a few fixed 
phrases (I would like to; please), and are thus less 
suitable to convey the semantic focus of the utter- 
ances, expressed by the content words than topics, 
which by definition deal with the content. 
As the lower-bound experiments we conducted 
cross-validation tests using the trigram backoff- 
model, i.e. relying only on the context which records 
the history of topic types. For the first ranked pre- 
dictions the accuracy rate is about 40%, which is on 
the same level as the first ranked speech act predic- 
tions reported in Reithinger and Mater (1995). 
The average precision of the Predict-Support al- 
gorithm is also calculated (Table 5). Precision is the 
ratio of correctly assigned tags to the total number 
of assigned tags. The average precision for all the 
pruned topic types is 74.64%, varying from 95.63% 
for ROOM to 37.63% for MIx. If MIx is left out, 
the average precision is 79.27%. The poor precision 
for MIX is due to the unknown word problem with 
mutual information. 
Topic type Precision Topic type Precision 
contact 55.75 paym 83.25 
iam 
meals 
name 
79.13 res 62.13 
82.13 room 95.63 
88.12 stay 88.00 
mix 37.63 Average 74.64 
Figure 5: Precision results for different opic types. 
The results of the topic recognition show that the 
model performs well, and we notice a considerable 
improvement in the accuracy rates compared to ac- 
curacy rates in speech act recognition cited in section 
2 (modulo perplexity). Although the rates are some- 
what optimistic as we used transcribed ialogues (= 
the correct recognizer output), we can still safely 
conclude that topic information provides a promis- 
ing starting point in attempts to provide an accurate 
context for the spoken dialogue systems. This can 
be further verified in the perplexity measures for the 
word recognition: compared to a general anguage 
model trained on non-tagged ialogues, perplexity 
decreases by 20 % for a language model which is 
trained on topic-dependent dialogues, and by 14 % 
if we use an open test with unknown words included 
as well (Jokinen and Morimoto, 1997). 
At the end we have to make a remark concerning 
the relevance of speech acts: our argumentation is 
not meant to underestimate heir use for other pur- 
poses in dialogue modelling, but rather, to empha- 
sise the role of topic information in successful con- 
text management: in our opinion the topics provide 
a more reliable and straighforward approximation of
the utterance meaning than speech acts, and should 
not be ignored in the definition of context models 
for spoken dialogue systems. 
5 Conc lus ions  
The paper has presented a probabilistic topic model 
to be used as a context model for spoken dialogue 
systems. The model combines both top-down and 
bottom-up approaches to topic modelling: the topic 
tree, which structures domain knowledge, provides 
expectations of likely topic shifts, whereas the infor- 
mation structure of the utterances i linked to the 
topic types via topic vectors which describe mutual 
information between the words and topic types. The 
Predict-Support Algorithm assigns topics to utter- 
ances, and achieves an accuracy rate of 78.68 %, and 
a precision rate of 74.64%. 
The paper also suggests that the context needed to 
maintain robustness of spoken dialogue systems can 
be defined in terms of topic types rather than speech 
acts. Our model uses actually occurring words and 
topic information of the domain, and gives highly 
competitive results for the first ranked topic predic- 
tion: there is no need to resort to extra information 
to disambiguate the three best candidates. Con- 
struction of the context, necessary to improve word 
recognition and for further processing, becomes thus 
more accurate and reliable. 
Research on statistical topic modelling and com- 
bining topic information with spoken language sys- 
tems is still new and contains everal aspects for fu- 
ture research. We have mentioned automatic do- 
main modelling, in which clustering methods can 
be used to build necessary topic trees. Another re- 
search issue is the coverage of topic trees. Topic 
trees can be generalised in regard to world knowl- 
edge, but this requires deep analysis of the utterance 
meaning, and an inference mechanism to reason on 
conceptual relations. We will explore possibilities to 
636 
extract semantic ategories from the parse tree and 
integrate these with the topic knowledge. We will 
also investigate further the relation between topics 
and speech acts, and specify their respective roles in 
context management for spoken dialogue systems. 
Finally, statistical modelling is prone to sparse data 
problems, and we need to consider ways to overcome 
inaccuracies in calculating mutual information. 
Re ferences  
J. Alexandersson. 1996. Some ideas for the auto- 
matic acquisition of dialogue structure. In Dia- 
logue Management in Natural Language Process- 
ing Systems, pages 149-158. Proceedings of the 
1 lth Twente Workshop on Language Technology, 
Twente. 
D. Carcagno and Lidija Iordanskaja. 1993. Content 
determination and text structuring: two interre- 
lated processes. In H. Horacek and M. Zock, edi- 
tors, New Concepts in Natural Language Genera- 
lion, pages 10-26. Pinter Publishers, London. 
K. W. Church and W. A. Gale. 1991. Probabil- 
ity scoring for spelling correction. Statistics and 
Computing, (1):93-103. 
H. H. Clark and S. E. Haviland. 1977. Comprehen- 
sion and the given-new contract. In R. O. Freedle, 
editor, Discourse Production and Comprehension, 
Vol. 1. Ablex. 
P. Clarkson and R. Rosenfeld. 1997. Statistical 
language modeling using the CMU-Cambridge 
toolkit. In Eurospeech-97, pages 2707-2710. 
P. Garner. 1997. On topic identification and di- 
alogue move recognition. Computer Speech and 
Language, 11:275-306. 
B. J. Grosz and C. L. Sidner. 1986. Attention, in- 
tentions, and the structure of discourse." Compu- 
tational Linguistics, 12(3):175-204. 
K. Jokinen and T. Morimoto. 1997. Topic informa- 
tion and spoken dialogue systems. In NLPRS-97, 
pages 429-434. Proceedings of the Natural Lan- 
guage Processing Pacific Rim Symposium 1997, 
Phuket, Thailand. 
K. McCoy and J. Cheng. 1991. Focus of attention: 
Constraining what can be said next. In C. L. 
Paris, W. R. Swartout, and W. C. Moore, ed- 
itors, Natural Language Generation in Artificial 
Intelligence and Computational Linguistics, pages 
103-124. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, 
Massachusetts. 
J-U. MSller. 1996. Using DIA-MOLE for unsuper- 
vised learning of domain specific dialogue acts 
from spontaneous language. Technical Report 
FBI-HH-B-191/96, University of Hamburg. 
M. Nagata and T. Morimoto. 1994. An information- 
theoretic model of discourse for next utterance 
type prediction. In Transactions of Information 
Processing Society of Japan, volume 35:6, pages 
1050-1061. 
Y. Qu, B. Di Eugenio, A. Lavie, L. Levin, and C. P. 
Ros~. 1996. Minimizing cumulative rror in dis- 
course context. In Dialogue Processing in Spoken 
Dialogue Systems, pages 60-64. Proceedings of the 
ECAI'96 Workshop, Budapest, Hungary. 
N. Reithinger and E. Maier. 1995. Utilizing statisti- 
cal dialogue act processing in verbmobil. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, 
pages 116-121. 
M. Seligman, L. Fais, and M. Tomokiyo. 1994. 
A bilingual set of communicative act labels for 
spontaneous dialogues. Technical Report ATR 
Technical Report TR-IT-81, ATR Interpreting 
Telecommunications Research Laboratories, Ky- 
oto, Japan. 
E. Vallduvi and E. Engdahl. 1996. The linguistic 
realization of information packaging. Linguistics, 
34:459-519. 
637 
