Combining Multiple, Large-Scale Resources in a Reusable Lexicon 
for Natural Language Generation 
Hongyan J ing  and Kath leen  McKeown 
Department of Computer Science 
Columbia University 
New York, NY 10027, USA 
{hjing, kathy} @cs.columbia.edu 
Abst rac t  
A lexicon is an essential component in a gener- 
ation system but few efforts have been made 
to build a rich, large-scale lexicon and make 
it reusable for different generation applications. 
In this paper, we describe our work to build 
such a lexicon by combining multiple, heteroge- 
neous linguistic resources which have been de- 
veloped for other purposes. Novel transforma- 
tion and integration of resources i  required to 
reuse them for generation. We also applied the 
lexicon to the lexical choice and realization com- 
ponent of a practical generation application by 
using a multi-level feedback architecture. The 
integration of the lexicon and the architecture 
is able to effectively improve the system para- 
phrasing power, minimize the chance of gram- 
matical errors, and simplify the development 
process ubstantially. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Every generation system needs a lexicon, and in 
almost every case, it is acquired anew. Few ef- 
forts in building a rich, large-scale, and reusable 
generation lexicon have been presented in liter- 
ature. Most generation systems are still sup- 
ported by a small system lexicon, with limited 
entries and hand-coded knowledge. Although 
such lexicons are reported to be sufficient for 
the specific domain in which a generation sys- 
tem works, there are some obvious deficiencies: 
(1) Hand-coding is time and labor intensive, and 
introduction of errors is likely. (2) Even though 
some knowledge, such as syntactic structures 
for a verb, is domain-independent, often it is 
re-encoded each time a new application is un- 
der development. (3) Hand-coding seriously re- 
stricts the scale and expressive power of gener- 
ation systems. As natural anguage generation 
is used in more ambitious applications, this sit- 
uation calls for an improvement. 
Generally, existing linguistic resources are not 
suitable to use for generation directly. First, 
most large-scale linguistic resources so far were 
built for language interpretation applications. 
They are indexed by words, whereas, an ideal 
generation lexicon should be indexed by the se- 
mantic concepts to be conveyed, because the in- 
put of a generation system is at semantic level 
and the processing during generation is based 
on semantic oncepts, and because the mapping 
in the generation process is from concepts to 
words. Second, the knowledge needed for gen- 
eration exists in a number of different resources, 
with each resource containing a particular type 
of information; they can not currently be used 
simultaneously in a system. 
In this paper, we present work in building a 
rich, large-scale, and reusable lexicon for gener- 
ation by combining multiple, heterogeneous lin- 
guistic resources. The resulting lexicon contains 
syntactic, semantic, and lexical knowledge, in- 
dexed by senses of words as required by gener- 
ation, including: 
A complete list of syntactic subcategoriza- 
tions for each sense of a verb to support 
surface realization. 
A large variety of transitivity alternations 
for each sense of a verb to support para- 
phrasing. 
Frequency of lexical items and verb subcat- 
egorizations and also selectional constraints 
derived from a corpus to support lexical 
choice. 
Rich lexical relations between lexical con- 
cepts, including hyponymy, antonymy, and 
so on, to support lexical choice. 
607 
The construction of the lexicon is semi- 
automatic, and the lexicon has been used for 
lexical choice and realization in a practical gen- 
eration system. In Section 2, we describe the 
process to build the generation lexicon by com- 
bining existing linguistic resources. In Section 
3, we show the application of the lexicon by ac- 
tually using it in a generation system. Finally, 
we present conclusions and future work. 
2 Const ruct ing  a generat ion  lex icon 
by  merg ing  l ingu is t i c  resources  
2.1 Linguist ic resources 
In our selection of resources, we aim primarily 
for accuracy of the resource, large coverage, and 
providing a particular type of information es- 
pecially useful for natural anguage generation. 
four linguistic resources: 
1. The WordNet on-line lexical database 
(Miller et al, 1990). WordNet is a well 
known on-line dictionary, consisting of 
121,962 unique words, 99,642 synsets (each 
synset is a lexical concept represented by 
a set of synonymous words), and 173,941 
senses of words. 1 It is especially useful for 
generation because it is based on lexical 
concepts, rather than words, and because 
it provides several semantic relationships 
(hyponymy, antonymy, meronymy, entail- 
ment) which are beneficial to lexical choice. 
2. English Verb Classes and Alternations 
(EVCA) (Levin, 1993). EVCA is an ex- 
tensive linguistic study of diathesis alter- 
nations, which are variations in the realiza- 
tion of verb arguments. For example, the 
alternation "there-insertion" transforms A
ship appeared on the horizon to There ap- 
peared a ship on the horizon. Knowledge 
of alternations facilitates the generation of 
paraphrases. (Levin, 1993) studies 80 al- 
ternations. 
3. The COMLEX syntax dictionary (Grish- 
man et al, 1994). COMLEX contains 
syntactic information for 38,000 English 
words. The information includes subcat- 
egorization and complement restrictions. 
4. The Brown Corpus tagged with WordNet 
senses (Miller et al, 1993). The original 
1As of Version 1.6, released in December 1997. 
Brown corpus (Ku~era and Francis, 1967) 
has been used as a reference corpus in many 
computational pplications. Part of Brown 
Corpus has been tagged with WordNet 
senses manually by the WordNet group. 
We use this corpus for frequency measure- 
ments and exacting selectional constraints. 
2.2 Combin ing  l inguist ic resources 
In this section, we present an algorithm for 
merging data from the four resources in a man- 
ner that achieves high accuracy and complete- 
ness. We focus on verbs, which play the most 
important role in deciding phrase and sentence 
structure. 
Our algorithm first merges COMLEX and 
EVCA, producing a list of syntactic subcate~ 
gorizations and alternations for each verb. Dis- 
tinctions in these syntactic restrictions accord- 
ing to each sense of a verb are achieved in the 
second stage, where WordNet is merged with 
the result of the first step. Finally, the corpus 
information is added, complementing the static 
resources with actual usage counts for each syn- 
tactic pattern. This allows us to detect rarely 
used constructs that should be avoided during 
generation, and possibly to identify alternatives 
that are not included in the lexical databases. 
2.2.1 Merg ing  COMLEX and EVCA 
Alternations involve syntactic transformations 
of verb arguments. They are thus a means to 
alleviate the usual lack of alternative ways to 
express the same concept in current generation 
systems. 
EVCA has been designed for use by humans, 
not computers. We need therefore to convert 
the information present in Levin's book (Levin, 
1993) to a format that can be automatically 
analyzed. We extracted the relevant informa- 
tion for each verb using the verb classes to 
which the various verbs are assigned; members 
of the same class have the same syntactic behav- 
ior in terms of allowable alternations. EVCA 
specifies a mapping between words and word 
classes, associating each class with alternations 
and with subcategorization frames. Using the 
mapping from word and word classes, and from 
word classes to alternations, alternations for 
each verb are extracted. 
We manually formatted the alternate pat- 
terns in each alternation in COMLEX format. 
608 
The reason to choose manual formatting rather 
than automating the process is to guarantee 
the reliability of the result. In terms of time, 
manual formatting process is no more expensive 
than automation since the total number of alter- 
nations is smail(80). When an alternate pattern 
can not be represented by the labels in COM- 
LEX, we need to added new labels during the 
formatting process; this also makes automating 
the process difficult. 
The formatted EVCA consists of sets of ap- 
plicable alternations and subcategorizations for
3,104 verbs. We show the sample entry for the 
verb appear in Figure 1. Each verb has 1.9 alter- 
nations and 2.4 subcategorizations on average. 
The maximum number of alternations (13) is 
realized for the verb "roll". 
The merging of COMLEX and EVCA is 
achieved by unification, which is possible due 
to the usage of similar representations. Two 
points are worth to mention: (a) When a more 
general form is unified with a specific one, the 
later is adopted in final result. For example, the 
unification of PP2 and PP-PRED-RS 3 is PP- 
PRED-RS. (b) Alternations are validated by the 
subcategorization information. An alternation 
is applicable only if both alternate patterns are 
applicable. 
Applying this algorithm to our lexical re- 
sources, we obtain rich subcategorization a d 
alternation information for each verb. COM- 
LEX provides most subcategorizations, while 
EVCA provides certain rare usages of a verb 
which might be missing from COMLEX. Con- 
versely, the alternations in EVCA are validated 
by the subcategorizations in COMLEX. The 
merging operation produces entries for 5,920 
verbs out of 5,583 in COMLEX and 3,104 in 
EVCA. 4 Each of these verbs is associated with 
5.2 subcategorizations and 1.0 alternation on 
average. Figure 2 is an updated version of Fig- 
ure 1 after this merging operation. 
2.2.2 Merging COMLEX/EVCA with 
WordNet  
WordNet is a valuable resource for generation 
because most importantly the synsets provide 
2The verb can take a prepositional phrase 
SThe verb can take a prepositional phrase, and the 
subject of the prepositional phrase is the same as the 
verb's 
42,947 words appear in both resources. 
appear: 
((INTm%NS) 
(LOCPP) 
(pp) 
(ADJ-PFA-PART) 
(INTKANS THEKE-V-SUBJ :ALT There - Inser t ion)  
(LOCPP THEKE-V-SUBJ-LOCPP :ALT There - Inser t ion)  
(LOCPP LOCPP-V-SUBJ :ALT Locat ive_ Invers ion) )  
Figure h Alternations and subcategorizations 
from EVCA for the verb appear. 
~ppefl~r: 
( (PP -T0- INF-KS  :PVAL ( " to" ) )  
(PP-PKED-RS :PVAL ("to .... of" "under .... against" 
"in favor of' ' "before" "at")) 
(EXTRAP-T0-NP-S) 
(INTRANS) 
(INTRANS THERE-V-SUBJ :ALT There-Insertion) 
(L0CPP THEKE-V-SUBJ-L0CPP :ALT There-Insertion) 
(LOCPP L0CPP-V-SUBJ :ALT Locative_Inversion))) 
Figure 2: Entry for the verb appear after merg- 
ing COMLEX with EVCA. 
a mapping between concepts and words. Its in- 
clusion of rich lexical relations also provide basis 
for lexical choice. Despite of these advantages, 
the syntactic information in WordNet is rela- 
tively poor. Conversely, the result we obtained 
after combining COMLEX and EVCA has rich 
syntactic information, but this information is 
provided at word level thus unsuitable to use 
for generation directly. These complementary 
resources are therefore combined in the second 
stage, where the subcategorizations and alter- 
nations from COMLEX/EVCA for each word 
are assigned to each sense of the word. 
Each synset in WordNet is linked with a list 
of verb frames, each of which represents a sim- 
ple syntactic pattern and general semantic on- 
straints on verb arguments, e.g., Somebody -s 
something. The fact that WordNet contains this 
syntactic information(albeit poor) makes it pos- 
sible to link the result from COMLEX/EVCA 
with WordNet. 
The merging operation is based on a compat- 
ibility matrix, which indicates the compatibility 
of each subcategorization in COMLEX/EVCA 
with each verb frame in WordNet. The sub- 
609 
categorizations and alternations listed in COM- 
LEX/EVCA for each word is then assigned to 
different senses of the word based on their com- 
patibility with the verbs frames listed under 
that sense of the word in WordNet. For exam- 
ple, if for a certain word, the subcategorizations 
PP-PRED-RS and NP are listed for the word 
in COMLEX/EVCA, and the verb frame some- 
body -s  PP  is listed for the first sense of the 
word in WordNet, then PP-PRED-RS will be 
assigned to the first sense of the word while NP 
will not. We also keep in the lexicon the gen- 
eral constraint on verb arguments from Word- 
Net frames. Therefore, for this example, the 
entry for the first sense of w indicates that the 
verb can take a prepositional phrase as a com- 
plement, the subject of the verb is the same 
as the subject of the prepositional phrase, and 
the subject should be in the semantic ategory 
"somebody". As you can see, the result incorpo- 
rates information from three resources and but 
is more informative than any of them. An alter- 
nation is considered applicable to a word sense 
if both alternate patterns have matchable verb 
frames under that sense. 
The compatibility matrix is the kernel of the 
merging operations. The 147"35 matrix (147 
subcategorizations from COMLEX/EVCA, 35 
verb frames from WordNet) was first manually 
constructed based on human understanding. In
order to achieve high accuracy, the restrictions 
to decide whether a pair of labels are compatible 
are very strict when the matrix was first con- 
structed. We then use regressive testing to ad- 
just the matrix based on the analysis of merging 
results. During regressive testing, we first merge 
WordNet with COMLEX/EVCA using current 
version of compatibility matrix, and write all 
inconsistencies to a log file. In our case, an in- 
consistency occurs if a subcategorization r al- 
ternation in COMLEX/EVCA for a word can 
not be assigned to any sense of the word, or 
a verb frame for a word sense does not match 
any subcategorization for that word. We then 
analyze the log file and adjust the compatibil- 
ity matrix accordingly. This process repeated 
6 times until when we analyze a fair amount of 
inconsistencies in the log file, they are no more 
due to over-restriction of the compatibility ma- 
trix. 
Inconsistencies between WordNet and COM- 
appear: 
sense  1 give an impression 
((PP-T0-INF-RS :PVAL ("to") :SO ((sb, - ) ) )  
(TO-INF-RS :SO ((sb, -))) 
(NP-PRED-RS :SO ((sb, -))) 
(ADJP-PRED-RS :$0 ((sb, -) (sth, -))))) 
sense 2 become visible 
((PP-TO-INF-RS :PVAL ("to") 
:SO ((sb, --) (sth, -))) 
o , ,  
(INTRANS THERE-V-SUBJ 
: ALT there-insertion 
:SO ((sb, -) (sth, -)))) 
sense  8 have an outward expression 
((NP-PRED-RS :SO ((sth, -))) 
(ADJP-PRED-RS :SO ((sb, -) (sth, -)))) 
Figure 3: Entry for the verb appear after merg- 
ing WordNet with the result from COMLEX 
and EVCA. 
LEX/EVCA result unmatching subcategoriza- 
tions or verb frames. On average, 15% of sub- 
categorizations and alternations for a word can 
not be assigned to any sense of the word, mostly 
due to the incompleteness of syntactic informa- 
tion in WordNet; 2% verb frames for each sense 
of a word does not match any subcategoriza- 
tions for the word, either due to incomplete- 
ness of COMLEX/EVCA or erroneous entries 
in WordNet. 
The lexicon at this stage is a rich set of sub- 
categorizations and alternations for each sense 
of a word, coupled with semantic onstraints of 
verb arguments. For 5,920 words in the result 
after combining COMLEX and EVCA, 5,676 
words also appear in WordNet and each word 
has 2.5 senses on average. After the merging 
operation, the average number of subcatego- 
rizations is refined from 5.2 per verb in COM- 
LEX/EVCA to 3.1 per sense, and the average 
number of alternations i refined from 1.0 per 
verb to 0.2 per sense. Figure 3 shows the result 
for the verb appear after the merging operation. 
2.3 Corpus  analys is  
Finally, we enriched the lexicon with language 
usage information derived from corpus analy- 
sis. The corpus used here is the Brown Corpus. 
The language usage information in the lexicon 
include: (1) frequency of each word sense; (2) 
frequency of subcategorizations for each word 
sense. A parser is used to recognize the subcat- 
egorization of a verb. The corpus analysis in- 
610 
formation complements he subcategorizations 
from the static resources by marking potential 
superfluous entries and supplying entries that 
are possibly missing in the lexicai databases; (3) 
semantic onstraints of verb arguments. The 
arguments of each verb are clustered based on 
hyponymy hierarchy in WordNet. The seman- 
tic categories we thus obtained are more specific 
compared to the general constraint(animate or 
inanimate) encoded in WordNet frame represen- 
tation. The language usage information is espe- 
cially useful in lexicai choice. 
2.4 Discussion 
Merging resources is not a new idea and pre- 
vious work has investigated integration of re- 
sources for machine translation and interpreta- 
tion (Klavans et al, 1991), (Knight and Luk, 
1994). Whereas our work differs from previ- 
ous work in that for the first time, a generation 
lexicon is built by this technique; unlike other 
work which aims to combine resources with sim- 
ilar type of information, we select and combine 
multiple resources containing different ypes of 
information; while others combine not well for- 
matted lexicon like LDOCE (Longman Dictio- 
nary of Contemporary English), we chose well 
formatted resources (or manually format he re- 
source) so as to get reliable and usable results; 
semi-automatic rather than fully automatic ap- 
proach is adopted to ensure accuracy; corpus 
analysis based information is also linked with 
information from static resources. By these 
measures, we are able to acquire an accurate, 
reusable, rich, and large-scale lexicon for natu- 
ral language generation. 
3 App l i ca t ions  
3.1 Architecture 
We applied the lexicon to lexical choice and 
lexical realization in a practical generation sys- 
tem. First we introduce the architecture of lexi- 
cal choice and realization and then describe the 
overall system. 
A multi-level feedback architecture as shown 
in Figure 4 was used for lexical choice and real- 
ization. We distinguish two types of concepts: 
semantic oncepts and lexicai concepts. A se- 
mantic concept is the semantic meaning that a 
user wants to convey, while a lexical concept is a 
lexical meaning that can be represented by a set 
I Sentence Planner I 
~i uoncepts to Le?ical Concepts 
11 ~01 Lexical Concepts 
"~} \[ Mapping from Lexicall i ~  
..~ii \[ Concepts to Words \[ - - - -~rdNe)  
~Generafi~o 
and Syntactic Paraphrases - - - ~  
\[ Surface Realizatio~ 
Natural Language Output 
Figure 4: The Architecture for Lexical Choice 
and Realization 
of synonymous words, such as synsets defined in 
WordNet. Paraphrases are also distinguished 
into 3 types according to whether they are at 
the semantic, lexical, or syntactic level. For ex- 
ample, if asked whether you will be at home 
tomorrow, then the answers "I'll be at work to- 
morrow", "No, I won't be at home.', and "I'm 
leaving for vacation tonight" are paraphrases at
the semantic level. Paraphrases like "He bought 
an umbrella" and "He purchased an umbrella" 
are at the lexical level since they are acquired 
by substituting certain words with synonymous 
words. Paraphrases like "A ship appeared on 
the horizon" and "On the horizon appeared a
ship" are at the syntactic level since they only 
involve syntactic transformations. Therefore, 
all paraphrases introduced by alternations are 
at syntactic level. Our architecture includes lev- 
els corresponding to these 3 levels of paraphras- 
ing. 
The input to the lexical choice and realiza- 
tion module is represented assemantic oncepts. 
In the first stage, semantic paraphrasing is car- 
ried out by mapping semantic oncepts to lex- 
ical concepts. Generally, semantic level para- 
phrases are very complex. They depend on the 
611 
situation, the domain, and the semantic rela- 
tions involved. Semantic paraphrases are repre- 
sented eclaratively in a database file which can 
be edited by the users. The file is indexed by 
semantic oncepts and under each entry, a list 
of lexical concepts that can be used to realize 
the semantic oncept are provided. 
In the second stage, we use the lexical re- 
source that we constructed to choose words for 
the lexical concepts produced by stage 1. The 
lexicon is indexed by lexical concepts that point 
to synsets in WordNet. These synsets repre- 
sent a set of synonymous words and thus, it is 
at this stage that lexical paraphrasing is han- 
dled. In order to choose which word to use for 
the lexical concept, we use domain-independent 
constraints that are included in the lexicon as 
well as domain-specific constraints. Syntactic 
constraints that come from the detailed sub- 
categorizations linked to each word sense is a 
domain-independent constraint. Subcategoriza- 
tions are used to check that the input can be 
realized by the word. For example, if the in- 
put has 3 arguments, then words which take 
only 2 arguments can not be selected. Seman- 
tic constraints on verb argument derived from 
WordNet and the corpus are used to check the 
agreement of the arguments. For example, if 
the input subject argument is an animate, then 
words which take only inanimate subject can 
not be selected. Frequency information derived 
from the corpus is also used to constrain word 
choice. Besides the above domain-independent 
constraints other constraints pecific to a do- 
main might also be needed to choose an ap- 
propriate word for the lexical concept. Intro- 
ducing the combined lexicon at this stage al- 
lows us to produce many lexical paraphrases 
without much effort; it also allows us to sep- 
arate domain-independent a d domain-specific 
constraints in lexical choice so that domain- 
independent constraints can be reused in each 
application. 
The third stage produces a structure repre- 
sented as a high level sentence structure, with 
subcategorizations and words associated with 
each sentence. At this stage, information in 
the lexical resource about subcategorization a d 
alternations are applied in order to generate 
syntactic paraphrases. Output of this stage is 
then fed directly to the surface realization pack- 
age, the FUF/SURGE system (Elhadad, 1992; 
Robin, 1994). To choose which alternate pat- 
tern of an alternation to use, we use information 
such as focus of the sentence as criteria; when 
the two alternates are not distinctively different, 
such as "He knocked the door" and "He knocked 
at the door", one of them is randomly chosen. 
The application of subcategorizations i  the lex- 
icon at this stage helps to check that the output 
is grammatically correct, and alternations can 
produce many syntactic paraphrases. 
The above refining processing is interactive. 
When a lower level can not find a possible can- 
didate to realize the high level representation, 
feedback is sent to the higher level module, 
which then makes changes accordingly. 
3.2 P lanDOC 
Using the proposed architecture, we applied the 
lexicon to a practical generation system, PIan- 
DOC. PlanDOC is an enhancement to Bell- 
core's LEIS-PLAN TM network planning prod- 
uct. It transforms lengthy execution traces 
of engineer's interaction with LEIX-PLAN into 
human-readable summaries. 
For each message in PlanDOC, at least 3 
paraphrases are defined at semantic level. For 
example, '~rhe base plan called for one fiber ac- 
tivation at CSA 2100" and "There was one fiber 
activation at CSA 2100" are semantic para- 
phrases in PlanDOC domain. At the lexical 
level, we use synonymous words from WordNet 
to generate lexical paraphrases. A sample lexi- 
cal paraphrase for "The base plan called for one 
fiber activation at CSA 2100" is "The base plan 
proposed one fiber activation at CSA 2100". 
Subcategorizations and alternations from the 
lexicon are then applied at the syntactic level. 
After three levels of paraphrasing, each mes- 
sage in PlanDOC on average has over 10 para- 
phrases. 
For a specific domain such as PlanDOC, an 
enormous proportion of a general exicon like 
the one we constructed is unrelated thus un- 
used at all. On the other hand, domain-specific 
knowledge may need to be added to the lexicon. 
The problem of how to adapt a general exicon 
to a particular application domain and merge 
domain ontologies with a general exicon is out 
of the scope of this paper but discussed in (Jing, 
1998). 
612 
4 Conclus ion 
In this paper, we present research on building a 
rich, large-scale, and reusable l xicon for gener- 
ation by combining multiple heterogeneous lin-
guistic resources. Novel semi-automatic rans- 
formation and integration were used in combin- 
ing resources to ensure reliability of the result- 
ing lexicon. The lexicon, together with a multi- 
level feedback architecture, is used in a practical 
generation system, PlanDOC. 
The application of the lexicon in a generation 
system such as PlanDOC has many advantages. 
First, paraphrasing power of the system can be 
greatly improved ue to the introduction ofsyn- 
onyms at the lexical concept level and alterna- 
tions at the syntactic level. Second, the integra- 
tion of the lexicon and the flexible architecture 
enables us to separate the domain-dependent 
component of the lexical choice module from 
domain-independent components so they can 
be reused. Third, the integration of the lexi- 
con with the surface realization system helps in 
checking for grammatical errors and also sim- 
plifies the interface input to the realization sys- 
tem. For these reasons, we were able to develop 
PlanDOC system in a short time. 
Although the lexicon was developed for gen- 
eration, it can be applied in other applications 
too. For example, the syntactic-semantic con- 
straints can be used for word sense disambigua- 
tion (Jing et al, 1997); The subcategoriza- 
tion and alternations from EVCA/COMLEX 
are better resources for parsing; WordNet en- 
riched with syntactic information might also be 
of value to many other applications. 
Acknowledgment  
This material is based upon work supported by 
the National Science Foundation under Grant 
No. IRI 96-19124, IRI 96-18797 and by a grant 
from Columbia University's Strategic Initiative 
Fund. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions 
or recommendations expressed in this material 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
reflect he views of the National Science Foun- 
dation. 
References 
Michael Elhadad. 1992. Using Argumenta- 
tion to Control Lexical Choice: A Functional 
Unification-Based Approach. Ph.D. thesis, 
Department of Computer Science, Columbia 
University. 
Ralph Grishman, Catherine Macleod, and 
Adam Meyers. 1994. COMLEX syntax: 
Building a computational lexicon. In Proceed- 
ings of COLING'9$, Kyoto, Japan. 
Hongyan Jing, Vasileios Hatzivassilogiou, Re- 
becca Passonneau, and Kathleen McKeown. 
1997. Investigating complementary methods 
for verb sense pruning. In Proceedings of 
A NL P '97 Lexical Semantics Workshop, pages 
58-65, Washington, D.C., April. 
Hongyan Jing. 1998. Applying wordnet to nat- 
ural language generation. In To appear in 
the Proceedings of COLING-ACL'98 work- 
shop on the Usage of WordNet in Natural 
Language Processing Systems, University of 
Montreal, Montreal, Canada, August. 
J. Klavans, R. Byrd, N. Wacholder, and 
M. Chodorow. 1991. Taxonomy and poly- 
semy. Technical Report Research Report RC 
16443, IBM Research Division, T.J. Wat- 
son Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 
10598. 
Kevin Knight and Steve K. Luk. 1994. Build- 
ing a large-scale knowledge base for machine 
translation. In Proceedings of AAAI'9,~. 
H Ku6era and W. N. Francis. 1967. Computa- 
tional Analysis of Present-day American En- 
glish. Brown University Press, Providence, 
RI. 
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and 
Alternations: A Preliminary Investigation. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois. 
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane 
Fellbaum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. 
Miller. 1990. Introduction to WordNet: An 
on-line lexical database. International Jour- 
nal of Lexicography (special issue), 3(4):235- 
312. 
George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee 
Tengi, and Ross T. Bunker. 1993. A semantic 
concordance. Cognitive Science Laboratory, 
Princeton University. 
Jacques Robin. 1994. Revision-Based Gener- 
ation of Natural Language Summaries Pro- 
riding Historical Background: Corpus-Based 
Analysis, Design, Implementation, and Eval- 
uation. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Com- 
puter Science, Columbia University. Also 
Technical Report CU-CS-034-94. 
613 
