{tappe, 
Coherence in Spoken Discourse* 
Heike Tappe and Frank Schilder 
Computer Science Department 
Hamburg University 
Vogt-Krlln-Str. 30 
D-22527 Hamburg 
Germany 
schi Ider}@informatik. uni-hamburg, de 
Abstract 
This paper explores the possibilities and limits of a 
discourse grammar applied to spontaneous speech. 
Most discourse grammars (e.g. SDRT, Asher, 1993; 
RST, Mann & Thompson, 1988) tend to be descrip- 
tive theories of written discourse which presuppose 
a coherent structure. This structure is the outcome 
of a goal directed planning process on the part of 
the producer. In order to obtain a better understand- 
ing of the planning process we analyse spoken dis- 
course elicited in an experimental setting. Subjects 
describe the pixel-per-pixel development of sketch- 
maps on a computer screen. This forces the speak- 
ers to conceptualise the perceived state of affairs, 
plan their discourse, and produce a description of 
the drawing at the same time. Thus we find evi- 
dence for the planning process in the recorded ata 
and can show that the discourse structures are less 
globally coherent than those underlying written text. 
In our paper we discuss to what extent a flexible dis- 
course grammar based on a Tree Description Gram- 
mar (TDG) (Schilder, 1997) can handle such data. 
I Introduction 
We investigate in this paper to what extent a dis- 
course grammar is capable of analysing sponta- 
neous speech that is obviously not as well structured 
as written text. The example text discussed contains 
questions and remarks which do not seem to be part 
of the discourse. Nevertheless, we believe that the 
entire spoken discourse is to be represented by one 
discourse structure. Evidence for this assumption 
comes from the observation that anaphoric refer- 
ences are made between questions which apparently 
* This work is partly funded by the German Science Founda- 
tion (DFG), research project 'Conceptualization Processes in
Language Production: an Empirically Founded Model on the 
Basis of Event Description' (Funding Number: HA 1237/10- 
1). 
comment on the planning process and the actual de- 
scription of the sketch-map. 
Following Schilder (1997) a discourse gram- 
mar based on a Tree Description Grammar (TDG) 
(Kallmeyer, 1996) is used for the analysis of an ex- 
ample text. TDG is employed to encode the dy- 
namics of the discourse structure. Other discourse 
theories like Segmented Discourse Representation 
Theory (SDRT) (Asher, 1993) or Rhetorical Struc- 
ture Theory (RST) (Mann & Thompson, 1988) offer 
only a descriptive xplanation. 
The remaining part of the paper is organised as 
follows. Section 2 contains a description of the ex- 
perimental setting in which the example discourse 
was obtained (Habel and Tappe, forthcoming). Sec- 
tion 3 provides an outline of the example before a 
short introduction to the discourse grammar is given 
in section 4. Section 5 offers the formalisation of 
the example discourse and section 6 concludes and 
describes areas for ongoing research. 
2 Method  and material 
2.1 Method 
Subjects were presented with sketch-maps. These 
were previously drawn by students who had been 
asked to sketch the route between the Computer Sci- 
ence Department and the main campus of their uni- 
versity. Since the two landmarks are approximately 
6 km apart, all of the sketch-maps included some 
means of transport. The drawings were made on a 
drawing tablet and subsequently stored on a com- 
puter hard-disc. In the verbalisation-phase replays 
of the drawings were used as stimulus material. A 
new group of subjects was presented with one of the 
drawings. They had to carefully watch what hap- 
pened and simultaneously describe what they were 
seeing, while the graphical objects became visible 
on the previously empty screen in the same chrono- 
logical order they were produced. The verbalisers 
were familiar with the route between the two Uni- 
1294 
versity buildings, yet they did not know what mate- 
rial they were going to be confronted with. 
2.2 Material 
For the present analysis we chose a fragment of one 
of the online-verbalisations, consisting of the first 
seven utterances describing the sketch-map segment 
that is illustrated in figure 1. 
Figure 1: The sketch-map 
The graphical objects in this sketch represent the 
following objects: the Computer Science depart- 
ment and the streets leading from the building. This 
part of the sketch-map is described by a 32 year old, 
right-handed computer scientist. 
3 Analys is  of  the text f ragment  
The text fragment contains a variety of features that 
are characteristic of spoken rather than of written 
discourse. In this section we will look at each of the 
utterances in greater detail and show how the dis- 
course coherence is maintained by the speaker. He 
starts talking as soon as he sees the rectangle being 
drawn on the screen. The first utterance (U1) can 
be characterised as a statement about the speaker's 
current mental state: 
UI: Ja, ich weiB ja schon worum es geht, (Yes, I already 
know what this is all about,) 
The speaker hereby expresses a self-belief the con- 
tent of which can be circumscribed as follows: I (the 
speaker) know which states-of-affairs I am about o 
see on the computer screen. This utterance serves 
as a kind of background for what follows. With 
his statement, the speaker commits himself to prove 
that he really knows what is going on. With the sub- 
sequent utterance (U2) he demonstrates that he has 
at least some intuition about the stimulus material: 
He assigns the rectangle the name of the depicted 
real world object. 
U2: also das wird das Informatikgebtiude... mitder Be- 
schreibung daneben. (well this is going to be the build- 
ing of the Computer Science department.., with the an- 
notation ext o it) 
Accordingly, he fulfills part of the felicity condi- 
tions that accompany assertions about the posses- 
sion of knowledge, i.e. he elaborates on the con- 
tent of his belief-state. The elaboration-relation 
between (U1) and (U2) is triggered by the dis- 
course marker also. With the next utterance the 
speaker adds further information to his states-of- 
affairs-description. 
U3: und die StraSen die jetzt angefangen werden zu 
malen...(and the streets that are now started to be 
drawn... )
Therefore, we can categorise the relation between 
(U2) and (U3) as a narration-relation. This relation 
does not add a new perspective or a new theme to the 
ongoing discourse, but rather supports its continua- 
tion. On contrast, (U4) establishes a break in the 
ongoing discourse. The discourse marker eigentlich 
signals that the speakers has build up an expectation 
about the continuation of the drawing event on the 
basis of his belief state. 
U4: Eigentlich wiirde ich erwarten,(Actually I would ex- 
pect) 
The content of the belief state is - -  as mentioned 
before - -  that the speaker believes to know what 
will be drawn. Yet, this belief state ends here, be- 
cause even though the speaker ightly interprets the 
developing double lines to represent streets (cf. U3 
above) his further expectation is not met. The con- 
tent of this expectation is expressed in (U5): 
U5: daB irgendwo die Bushaltestelle noch eingezeichnet 
wird, da im... (that the bus stop was drawn into it some- 
where, there in the... ) 
Obviously the speaker expects that the drawing will 
contain a symbol representing a bus-stop near to the 
building. This is not the case. Therefore the rhetor- 
ical relation between (U4) and (U1) is that of a ter- 
mination. We see that rhetorical relations do not 
necessarily hold between adjacent utterances only, 
but that an utterance may open a subtree that can be 
closed off by an utterance that is verbalised a couple 
of utterances later. (U5) breaks off with a preposi- 
tional phrase that lacks the location argument (...da 
im...). The speaker is quite obviously insecure about 
the name of the street that contains the bus-stop. 
(U6) reveals his insecurity. 
U6: (a) wie heist das Ding, heist das Gazellenkamp? (b) 
Ja, ne? ... (what is it called, is it called Gazellenkamp? 
Yes, isn't it?.. .  ) 
The structure in U6 is very typical for spoken dis- 
1295 
course. It is not in a strict sense part of the ongoing 
discourse, but the verbalisation of vocabulary search 
and planning processes. We hold that the interrog- 
ative intonation functions as a signal, allowing the 
integration of a substructure that is not connected 
to the previous discourse via a prototypical rhetor- 
ical relation. The substructure itself can be inter- 
preted as a meta-comment about the ongoing men- 
tal processes. This substructure is closed off by (U7) 
which begins with aber ('but'). 
U7:Aber .... keine Bushaltestelle (But... no bus stop) 
This discourse marker allows the speaker to return 
to the branching node of the discourse structure 
where the digression was introduced. 
4 Discourse grammar 
4.1 Tree descriptions 
A definition of TDG is given by Kallmeyer (1996) 
who introduces tree descriptions consisting of con- 
straints for finite labelled trees. A dominance rela- 
tion (<~*) between ode labels indicates that these 
two labels can be equated or have a path of arbitrary 
length inserted between them. The second relation 
between odes is the parent relation (<~) which is 
irreflexive, asymmetric and intransitive. 
The tree's root node D labelled kl in figure 2, 
for example, dominates another node labelled k2. 
According to the definition of <~* these two nodes 
may be equal or an arbitrary number of other nodes 
may be in between them. An adjoining operation 
kl :D 
I 
I 
k2:D 
k3:D k4:D 
I 
I 
ks:D 
I 
kr:S 
Figure 2: A labelled tree description 
is easily defined because of this property. Fur- 
ther tree descriptions can be inserted between such 
nodes. The descriptions which are, formally speak- 
ing, negation-free formulae of constraints on the 
nodes, are conjoined. The nodes where the adjunc- 
tion takes place are set to equal.i 
~Figure 3shows an example. 
4.2 A flexible discourse grammar 
According to Schilder (1997), feature value struc- 
tures are added to the tree logic in order to enrich 
it with rhetorical relations and further discourse in- 
formation. One non-terminal symbol is used for the 
D(iscourse) segments, whereas the terminals are the 
S(entences). 
Two features are added to the tree description to 
encode the semantic ontent of the sentence and the 
'topic' information expressed in a discourse. Firstly, 
S gets associated with the meaning of a sentence 
via a feature CONT(ENT) containing all discourse 
referents and the conditions imposed on them. 2
Secondly, afeature PROMI(NENT) is added that is 
used to define the notion of openness within a dis- 
course. This feature refects the fact that one situa- 
tion described by an utterance (e.g. situation el de- 
scribed by U1) is subordinated by another one when 
combined via a rhetorical relation. It furthermore 
exhibits the restriction of the further utterances to 
the right frontier of the discourse tree (cf. (Webber, 
1991)). 
For the discourse structure two types of tree de- 
scriptions have to be distinguished. One tree struc- 
ture allows attachment on two levels of the right 
frontier of the tree. This tree is called subordinated 
tree and the structure is schematically indicated in 
figure 2. The other one is a subordinating structure 
that is triggered by discourse relations such as nar- 
ration or result. Further attachment is only possible 
at the last uttered sentence. 3 
5 Formalisat ion 
The discourse structure obtained for the first three 
sentences of the example text is reflected in figure 
3. At first an elaboration relation is established be- 
tween (U1) and (U2). The imposed iscourse struc- 
ture (i.e. a subordinated tree as in figure 2) allows 
attachment at two levels. Note furthermore that the 
elaboration relation holds between the mental state 
of the producer (i.e. I already know what this is all 
about) and the description of what is happening on 
the screen. 4 
(U3) is connected with (U2) via narration. The 
adjunction operation in figure 3 shows how the 
2We presume that his content isrepresented by a discourse 
representation structure as standard DRT would predict (Kamp 
and Reyle, 1993). 
3See the right ree in figure 3. 
4These rhetorical relations are underlined in the figure to 
highlight their different status. 
1296 
? 
I 
I 
I 
I 
o 
I 
l'IET: narr(I-~\] , )J 
I 
,, 
D\[PROMI: 
I 
s \[CONT: \[\]\] 
Figure 3: Two discourse segments combined 
D\[ ROM, 
I 
newly generated sentence is incorporated in the cur- 
rent discourse structure. 
Although the production took place under a cer- 
tain amount of pressure, the right frontier principle 
was never violated. The speaker never went back 
or made anaphoric references to discourse referents 
being behind this frontier. 
Having demonstrated how the production of the 
discourse structure can be formally described for the 
first three utterances, we now want to focus on a 
particularly interesting problem exhibited by the se- 
quence (U4) to (U6). This sequence contains rhetor- 
ical questions, which describe the ongoing planning 
process of the speaker. 5 
The sequence starts with an expectation 
(i.e. (U4)) the subject utters. Again the proposition 
expressed is related to the mental state of the 
speaker. Interestingly enough, he has to return to 
the top level of the discourse tree and continue 
from there. Consequently, the discourse segment 
containing (U2) and (U3) is 'cut off' and not 
available for further attachment. 
Embedded within the expectation is an utterance 
describing the ongoing planning and searching pro- 
cess. The verbalised questions reflect he request o 
the mental exicon and the mental map the subject 
has got of this area. 
The discourse grammar consequently has to be 
SNote that such a sequence would never be found in a writ- 
ten text. 
extended in order to maintain a coherent discourse 
structure for the modelling of the producer. Thus 
rhetorical relations describing planning processes 
are introduced. With these, the discourse gram- 
mar becomes capable of representing a coherent dis- 
course structure for the spoken language despite the 
fact that the entire discourse segment does not seem 
as coherent as written text. 
Figure 4 contains the discourse structure after the 
search for the street name has come to an end. One 
rhetorical relation introduced is p(lan)_comment 
which describes the ongoing planning process. It 
also involves a search for the correct word in the 
lexicon. The rhetorical quest(ion) is asked whether 
the correct word has been chosen and this question 
answered by the subject. The summarising yes, isn't 
it (i.e. (U6b)) ends the search process and closes the 
discourse structure at the right frontier. 
Interestingly enough, the clue given by the dis- 
course marker but uttered in (U7) is absolutely es- 
sential. The speaker indicates with this marker that 
he wants to return to the top level of the discourse 
tree and to add a contrast relation to the expectation. 
The construction of the discourse structure contin- 
ues therefore at the top level of the tree in figure 4. 
6 Conclusion 
We have shown that spoken discourse can be for- 
malised by a discourse grammar based on TDG. 
Even planning processes that surface as rhetor- 
1297 
(U1-U3) 
D 
I 
I 
DI pRoMI: \[~\] \] \[RI~T: term(\[~\],\[~) 
I s\[ o T 
D 
! 
I 
I 
D\[ PROMI: \[~\] 
RHET: p_corament(\['~'\],\[~ 
. . . . . . - - - - - . . - _ ____  
D\[PROMI: fffl\] 
I S\[CONr: S\]
D\[ PROMI: \[~\] 
RHET: quest(\['~'\],\[~ 
D\[PROMI: I-~-I\] 
I S\[coNr: r~\] 
Figure 4: The planning process within the discourse structure 
ical questions can be incorporated into the dis- 
course structure generated. New rhetorical relations 
were introduced that should prove useful for NLP- 
applications. In ongoing research we focus on the 
interaction between planning sequences, discourse 
structure and intentional structure. 
References 
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to abstract Ob- 
jects in Discourse, volume 50 of Studies in Lin- 
guistics and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic Pub- 
lishers, Dordrecht. 
Christopher Habel and Heike Tappe. forthcoming. 
Processes of segmentation and linearization in 
describing events. In Ch. von Stutterheim and 
R. Meyer-Klabunde, editors, Processes in lan- 
guage production. 
Laura Kallmeyer. 1996. Underspecification i  
Tree Description Grammars. Arbeitspapiere des 
Sonderforschungsbereichs 340 81, University of 
Tiibingen, Ttibingen, December. 
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse 
to Logic: Introduction to Modeltheoretic Seman- 
tics of Natural Language, volume 42 of Studies 
in Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht. 
William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1988. 
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional 
theory of text organisationn. Text, 8(3):243-281. 
Frank Schilder. 1997. Temporal Relations in En- 
glish and German Narrative Discourse. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, Centre for Cog- 
nitive Science. 
Bonnie L. Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension 
in the interpretation of discourse deixis. Lan- 
guage and Cognitive Processes, 6(2): 107-135. 
1298 
