A Connectionist  Approach to Preposit ional Phrase Attachment 
for Real World Texts 
J osep  M.  Sopena and Agust i  LLoberas  and Joan  L.  Mo l iner  
Laboratory  of Neurocomput ing  
Un ivers i ty  of Barce lona  
Pg. Vall d 'Hebron ,  171 
08035 Barce lona  (Spain)  
e-mai l :  {pep ,  agust  i ,  j oan)?axon, ps i .  ub.  es  
Abst ract  
Ill this paper we describe a neural network-based 
approach to prepositional phrase attachment disam- 
biguation for real world texts. Although the use of 
semantic lasses in this task seems intuitively to be 
adequate, methods employed to date have not used 
them very effectively. Causes of their poor results 
are discussed. Our model, which uses only classes, 
scores appreciably better than the other class-based 
methods which have been tested on the Wall Street 
Journal corpus. To date, the best result obtained 
using only classes was a score of 79.1%; we obtained 
an accuracy score of 86.8%. This score is among the 
best reported in the literature using this corpus. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Structural ambiguity is one of the most serious prob- 
lems faced by Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
systems. It occurs when the syntactic information 
does not suffice to make an assignment decision. 
Prepositional phrase (PP) attachment is, perhaps, 
the canonical case of structural ambiguity. What 
kind of information should we use in order to solve 
this ambiguity? In most cases, the information 
needed comes from a local context, and the attach- 
lnent decision is based essentially on the relation- 
ships existing between predicates and arguments, 
what Katz y Fodor (1963) called selectional restric- 
tions. For example, in the expression: (V accommo- 
date) (gP Johnson's election) (PP as a director), 
the PP is attached to the NP. However, in the ex- 
pression: (V taking) (NP that news) (PP as a sign 
to be cautions), the PP is attached to the verb. In 
both expressions, the attachment site is decided on 
tile basis of verb and noun seleetional restrictions. 
In other eases, the information determining the PP 
attachment comes from a global context. In this pa- 
per we will focus on the disambiguation mechanism 
based on selectional restrictions. 
Previous work has shown that it is extremely diffi- 
cult to build hand-made rule-based systems able to 
deal with this kind of problem. Since such hand- 
made systems proved unsuccessful, in recent years 
two main methods have appeared capable of auto- 
1233 
matic learning from tagged corpora: automatic rule 
based methods and statistical methods. In this pa- 
per we will show that, providing that the problem is 
correctly approached, an NN can obtain better re- 
sults than any of the methods used to date for PP 
attachment disambiguation. 
Statistical methods consider how a local context 
can disambiguate PP attachment estimating the 
probability from a corpus: 
p(verb attachlv NP1 prep NP2) 
Since an NP can be arbitrarily complex, the prob- 
lem can be simplified by considering that only the 
heads of the respective phrases are relevant when de- 
ciding PP attachment. Therefore, ambiguity is re- 
solved by means of a model that takes into account 
only phrasal heads: p(verb attachlverb nl prep n2). 
There are two distinct methods for establishing the 
relationships between the verb and its arguments: 
methods using words (lexical preferences) and meth- 
ods using semantic lasses (selectional restrictions). 
2 Us ing  Words  
The attachment probability 
p(verb attach\]verb nl prep n2) 
should be computed. Due to the use of word co- 
occurrence, this approach comes up against the se- 
rious problem of data sparseness: the same 4-tuple 
(v nl prep n2) is hardly ever repeated across the 
corpus even when the corpus is very large. Collins 
and Brooks (1995) showed how serious this problem 
can be: almost 95% of the 3097 4-tuples of their 
test set do not appear in their 20801 training set 4- 
tuples. In order to reduce data sparseness, Hindle 
and Rooth (1993) simplified the context, by consid- 
ering only verb-preposition (p(prep\]verb)), and nl- 
preposition (p(prep\]nl)) co- occurrences, n2 was ig- 
nored in spite of the fact that it may play an im- 
portant role. In the test, attachment to verb was 
decided if p(preplverb ) > p(prep\]noun); otherwise 
attachment to nl is decided. Despite these limita- 
tions, 80% of PP were correctly assigned. 
Another method for reducing data sparseness has 
been introduced recently by Collins and Brooks 
(1995). These authors showed that the problem of 
PP attachment ambiguity is analogous to n-gram 
language models used in speech recognition, and 
that one of the most common methods for language 
modelling, the backed-off estimate, is also applica- 
ble here. Using this method they obtained 84.5% 
accuracy on WSJ data. 
3 Us ing  C lasses  
Working with words implies generating huge param- 
eter spaces for which a vast amount of memory space 
is required. NNs (probably like people) cannot deal 
with such spaces. NNs are able to approximate 
very complex functions, but they cannot memorize 
huge probability look-up tables. The use of seman- 
tic classes has been suggested as an alternative to 
word co-occurrence. If we accept the idea that all 
the words included in a given class mu'st have simi- 
lar (attachment) behaviour, and that there are fewer 
semantic lasses than there are words, the problem 
of data sparseness and memory space can be consid- 
erably reduced. 
Some of the class-based methods have used Word- 
Net (Miller et al, 1993) to extract word classes. 
WordNet is a semantic net in which each node 
stands for a set of synonyms (synset), and domi- 
nation stands for set inclusion (IS-A links). Each 
synset represents an underlying concept. Table 1 
shows three of the senses for the noun bank. Ta- 
ble 2 shows the accuracy of the results reported 
in previous work. The worst results were obtained 
when only classes were used. It is reasonable to 
assume a major source of knowledge humans use 
to make attachment decisions is the semantic lass 
for the words involved and consequently there must 
be a class-based method that provides better re- 
sults. One possible reason for low performance using 
classes is that WordNet is not an adequate hierarchy 
since it is hand-crafted. Ratnaparkhi et al (1994), 
instead of using hand-crafted semantic lasses, uses 
word classes obtained via Mutual Information Clus- 
tering (MIC) in a training corpus. Table 2 shows 
that, again, worse results are obtained with classes. 
A complementary explanation for the poor results 
using classes would be that current methods do not  
use class in fo rmat ion  very  ef fect ively for sev- 
eral reasons: 1.-In WordNet, a particular sense be- 
longs to several classes (a word belongs to a class if 
it falls within the IS-A tree below that class), and so 
determining an adequate level of abstraction is diffi- 
cult. 2.- Most words have more than one sense. As 
a result, before deciding attachment, it is first nec- 
essary to determine the correct sense for each word. 
3.- None of the preceding methods used classes for 
verbs. 4.- For reasons of complexity, the complete 
4-tuple has not been considered simultaneously ex- 
cept in Ratnaparkhi et a1.(1994). 5.- Classes of a 
1234 
given sense and classes of different senses of different 
words can have complex interactions and the pre- 
ceding methods cannot take such interactions into 
account. 
4 Encod ing  and  Network  
Arch i tec ture .  
Semantic lasses were extracted from Wordnet 1.5. 
In order to encode each word we did not use Word- 
Net directly, but constructed a new hierarchy (a sub- 
set of WordNet) including only the classes that cor- 
responded to the words that belonged to the training 
and test sets. We counted the number of times the 
different semantic lasses appear in the training and 
test sets. The hierarchy was pruned taking these 
statistics into account. Given a threshold h, classes 
which appear less than h% were not included. In 
this way we avoided having an excessive number of 
classes in the definition of each word which may have 
been insufficiently trained due to a lack of examples 
in the training set. We call the new hierarchy ob- 
tained after the cut WordNei'. Due to the large 
number of verb hierarchies, we made each verb lex- 
icographical file into a tree by adding a root node 
corresponding to the file name. According to Miller 
et al (1993), verb synsets are divided into 15 lex- 
icographical files on the basis of semantic criteria. 
Each root node of a verb hierarchy belongs to only 
one lexicographical fi e. We made each old root node 
hang from a new root node, the label of which was 
the name of its lexicographical fi e. In addition, we 
codified the name of the lexicographical file of the 
verb itself. 
There are essentially two alternative procedures 
for using class information. The first one consists of 
the simultaneous presentation of all the classes of all 
the senses of all the words in the 4-tuple. The in- 
put was divided into four slots representing the verb, 
nl, prep, and n2 respectively. In slots nl and n2, 
each sense of the corresponding noun was encoded 
using all the classes within the IS-A branch of the 
WordNet'hierarchy, from the corresponding hierar- 
chy root node to its bottom-most node. In the verb 
slot, the verb was encoded using the IS_A_WAY_OF 
branches. There was a unit in the input for each 
node of the WordNet subset. This unit was on if 
it represented a semantic lass to which one of the 
senses of the word to be encoded belonged. As for 
the output ,  there were only two units representing 
whether the PP attached to the verb or not. 
The second procedure consists of presenting all the 
classes of each sense of each word serially. However, 
the parallel procedure have the advantage that the 
network can detect which classes are related with 
which ones in the same slot and between slots. We 
observed this advantage in preliminary studies. 
Feedforward networks with one hidden layer and 
Table 1: WordNet information for the noun 'bank'. 
Sense 1 
Sense 2 
Sense 3 
group --~ people --* organ izat ion  --* ins t i tu t ion  --~ f inanc ia l _ ins t i tu t .  
ent i ty  ~ object ---* a r t i fac t  ---* fac i l i ty  ---* depository 
ent i ty  ---* object ---* natural_object ---* geo log ica l_ format ion  ---* slope 
Table 2: Test size and accuracy results reported in previous works. 'W' denotes words only, 'C' class only and 
'W+C' words+classes. 
Author \[ W \[ C \[ W+C \[ Classes Test size 
Hindle and Rooth (93) 80 
Resnik and Hearst(93) 81.6 79.3 83.9 
Resnik and Hearst (93) 75 a 
Ratnaparkhi et al (94) 81.2 79.1 81.6 
Brill and Resnik (94) 80.8 81.8 
Collins and Brooks (95) 84.5 
Li and Abe (95) 85.8 ? 84.9 
- 88O 
WordNet 172 
WordNet 500 
MIC 3O97 
WordNet 500 
- 3097 
WordNet 172 
aAccuracy obtained by Brill and Resnik (94) using Resnik's method on a larger test. 
bThis accuracy is based on 66% coverage. 
a full interconnectivity between layers were used in 
all the experiments. The networks were trained with 
backpropagation learning algorithm. The activation 
function was the logistic function. The number of 
hidden units ranged from 70 to 150. This network 
was used for solving our classification problem: at- 
tached to noun or attached to verb. The output 
activation of this network represented the bayesian 
posterior probability that the PP of the encoded sen- 
tence attaches to the verb or not (Richard and Lipp- 
mann (1991)). 
5 T ra in ing  and  Exper imenta l  
Resu l t s .  
21418 examples of structures of the kind 'VB N1 
PREP N2' were extracted from the Penn-TreeBank 
Wall Street Journal (Marcus et al 1993). Word- 
Net did not cover 100% of this material. Proper 
names of people were substituted by the WordNet 
class someone, company names by the class busi- 
ness_organization, and prefixed nouns for their stem 
(co-chairman ---* chairman). 788 4-tuples were dis- 
carded because of some of their words were not in 
WordNet and could not be substituted. 20630 codi- 
fied patterns were finally obtained: 12016 (58.25%) 
with the PP attached to N1, and 8614 (41.75%) to 
VB. 
We used the cross-validation method as a mea- 
sure of a correct generalization. After encoding, 
the 20630 patterns were divided into three subsets: 
training set (18630 patterns), set A (1000 patterns), 
and set B (1000 patterns). This method evaluated 
performance (the number of attachment errors) on a 
1235 
pattern set (validation set) after each complete pass 
through the training data (epoch). Series of three 
runs were performed that systematically varied the 
random starting weights. In each run the networks 
were trained for 40 epochs. In each run the weights 
of the epoch having the smallest error with respect 
to the validation set were stored. The weights corre- 
sponding to the best result obtained on the valida- 
tion test in the three runs were selected and used to 
evaluate the performance in the test set. First, we 
used set A as validation set and set B as test, and 
afterwards we used set B as validation and set A as 
test. This experiment was replicated with two new 
partitions of the pattern set: two new training sets 
(18630 patterns) and 4 new validation/test ets of 
1000 patterns each. 
Results showed in table 3 are the average accu- 
racy over the six test sets (1000 patterns each) used. 
We performed three series of runs that varied the in- 
put encoding. In all these encodings, three tree cut 
thresholds were used: 10~o, 6~ and 2~o. The num- 
ber of semantic lasses in the input encoding ranged 
from 139 (10% cut) to 475 (2%) In the first encod- 
ing, the 4-tuple without extra information was used. 
The results for this case are shown in the 4-tuple 
column entry of table 3. In the second encoding, 
we added the prepositions the verbs select for their 
internal arguments, ince English verbs with seman- 
tic similarity could select different prepositions (for 
example, accuse and blame). Verbs can be classi- 
fied on the basis of the kind of prepositions they 
select. Adding this classification to the WordNet  I 
classes in the input encoding improved the results 
(4-tuple + column entry of table 3). 
The 2% cut results were significantly better (p < 
0.02) than those of the 6% cut for 4-tuple and 4- 
tuple + encodings. Also, the results for the 4-tuple + 
condition were significanly better (p < 0.01). 
For all simulations the momentum was 0.8, initial 
weight range 0.1. No exhaustive parameter explo- 
ration was carried out, so the results can still be 
improved. 
Some of the errors committed by the network can 
be attributed to an inadequate class assignment by 
WordNet. For instance, names of countries have 
only one sense, that of location. This sense is not ap- 
propriate in sentences like: Italy increased its sales 
to Spain; locations do not sell or buy anything, and 
the correct sense is social_group. Other mistakes 
come from what are known as reporting and aspec- 
tual verbs. For example in expressions like reported 
injuries to employees or iniliated lalks with the Sovi- 
ets the nl has an argumental structure, and it is the 
element hat imposes electional restrictions on the 
PP. There is no good classification for these kinds 
of verbs in WordNet. Finally, collocations or id- 
ioms, which are very frequent, (e.g. lake a look, pay 
atlention), are not considered lexical units in the 
WSJ corpus. Their idiosyncratic behaviour intro- 
duces noise in the selectional restrictions acquisition 
process. Word-based models offer a clear advantage 
over class-based methods in these cases. 
6 D iscuss ion  
When sentences with PP attachment ambiguities 
were presented to two human expert judges the mean 
accuracy obtained was 93.2% using the whole sen- 
tence and 88.2% using only the 4-tuple (Ratnaparkhi 
et al, 1994). Our best result is 86.8%. This accu- 
racy is close to human performance using the 4-tuple 
alone. Collins and Brooks (1995) reported an accu- 
racy of 84.5% using words alone, a better score than 
those obtained with other methods tested on the 
WSJ corpus. We used the same corpus as Collins 
and Brooks (WSJ) and a similar sized training set. 
They used a test set size of 3097 patterns, whereas 
we used 6000. Due to this size, the differences be- 
tween both results (84.5% and 86.81%) were proba- 
bly significant. Note that our results were obtained 
using only class information. Ratnaparkhi et al 
(1994)'s results are the best reported so far using 
only classes (for 100% coverage): 79.1%. From these 
results we can conclude that improvements in the 
syntactic disambiguation problem will come not only 
from the availability of better hierarchies of classes 
but also from methods that use them better. NNs 
seem especially well designed to use them effectively. 
How do we account for the improved results? 
First, we used verb class information. Given the 
set of words in the 4-tuple and a way to repre- 
1236 
sent senses and semantic lass information, a syn- 
tactic disambiguation system (SDS) must find some 
regularities between the co-occurrence of classes 
and the attachment point. Presenting all of the 
classes of all the senses of the complete 4-tuple 
simultaneously, assuming that the training set is 
adequate, the network can detect which classes 
(and consequently which senses) are related with 
which others. As we have said, due to its com- 
plexity, current methods do not consider the com- 
plete 4-tuple simultaneously. For example, Li 
and Abe (1995) use p(verb altachlv prep n2) or 
p(verb attachlv nl prep)). The task of selecting 
which of the senses contributes to making the cor- 
rect attachment could be difficult if the whole 4- 
tuple is not simultaneously present. A verb has 
many senses, and each one could have a different 
argumental structure. In the selection of the cor- 
rect sense of the verb, the role of the object (nl)  
is very important. Deciding the attachment site by 
computing p(verb attachlv prep n2) would be inad- 
equate. It is also inadequate to omit n2. Rule based 
approaches also come up against this problem. In 
Brill and Resnik (1994), for instance, for reasons of 
run-time efficiency and complexity, rules regarding 
the classes of both nl  and n2 were not permitted. 
Using a parallel presentation it is also possible to 
detect complex interactions between the classes of 
a particular sense (for example, exceptions) or the 
classes of different senses that cannot be detected 
in the case of current statistical methods. We have 
detected these interactions in studies on word sense 
disambiguation we are currently carrying out. For 
example, the behavior of verbs which have the senses 
of process and state differs from that of verbs which 
have the sense of process but not of state, and vicev- 
ersa. 
A parallel presentation (of classes as well of senses) 
gives rise to a highly complex input. A very impor- 
tant characteristic of neural networks is their capa- 
bility of dealing with multidimensional inputs (Bar- 
ton, 1993). They can compute very complex statis- 
tical functions and they are model free. Compared 
to the current methods used by the statistical or 
rule-based approaches to natural language process- 
ing, NNs offer the possibility of dealing with a much 
more complex approach (non-linear and high dimen- 
sional). 
References .  
Barron, A. (1993). Universal Approximation Bounds for 
Superposition of a Sigmoidal Function. IEEE Transac- 
tions on Information Theory, 39:930-945. 
Brill, E. & Resnik, P. (1994). A Rule-Based Approach 
to Prepositional Phrase Attachment Disambiguation. In
Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conferences 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING-9J). 
Collins, M. & Brooks, J. (1995). Prepositional Phrase 
Table 3: Accuracy results for different input encoding and tree cuts. 
Cut 4-tuple 4-tuple + 
10% 83.17 4-0.9 85.15 4-0.8 
6% 84.07 4-0.7 85.32 4-0.9 
2% 85.12 +1.0 86.81 4-0.9 
attachment. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora. 
Hindle, D. & Rooth, M. (1993). Structural Ambigu- 
ity and Lexical Relations. Computational Linguistics, 
19:103-120. 
Katz, J. & Fodor, J. (1963). The Structure of Seman- 
tic Theory. Language, 39: 170-210. 
Li, H. & Abe, N. (1995). Generalizing Case Frames us- 
ing a Thesaurus and the MDL Principle. In Proceedings 
of the International Workshop on Parsing Technology. 
Marcus, M., Santorini, B. & Marcinkiewicz, M. 
(1993). Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: 
The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19:313- 
330. 
Miller, G., Beckwith, R., Felbaum, C., Gross, D. & 
Miller, K. (1993). Introduction to WordNet: An On- 
line Lexical Database. Anonymous FTP, internet: clar- 
ity.princeton.edu. 
Ratnaparkhi, A., Reynar, J. & Roukos, S. (1994). A 
Maximum Entropy Model for Prepositional Phrase At- 
tachment. In Proceedings of the ABPA Workshop on 
Human Language Technology. 
Resnik, P. & Hearst, M. (1993). Syntactic Ambiguity 
and Conceptual Relations. In Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora. 
1237 
