An Estimate of Referent of Noun Phrases in Japanese Sentences 
Masak i  Murata  Makoto  Nagao  
Communicat ions  Research  Laboratory  Kyoto  Un ivers i ty  
588-2, Iwaoka, Nishi-ku, Kobe, 651-2401, Japan Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-01, Japan 
Abst rac t  
In machine translation and man-machine dialogue, 
it is important o clarify referents of noun phrases. 
We present a method for determining the referents 
of noun phrases in Japanese sentences by using the 
referential properties, modifiers, and possessors 1 of 
noun phrases. Since the Japanese language has 
no articles, it is difficult to decide whether a noun 
phrase has an antecedent or not. We had previously 
estimated the referential properties of noun phrases 
that correspond to articles by using clue words in 
the sentences (Murata and Nagao 1993). By using 
these referential properties, our system determined 
the referents of noun phrases in Japanese sentences. 
Furthermore we used the modifiers and possessors 
of noun phrases in determining the referents of noun 
phrases. As a result, on training sentences we ob- 
tained a precision rate of 82% and a recall rate of 
85% in the determination of the referents of noun 
phrases that have antecedents. On test sentences, 
we obtained a precision rate of 79% and a recall rate 
of 77%. 
1 In t roduct ion  
This paper describes the determination of the ref- 
erent of a noun phrase in Japanese sentences. In 
machine translation, it is important o clarify the 
referents of noun phrases. For example, since the 
two "OJI ISAN (old man)" in the following sentences 
have the same referent, the second "OJI ISAN (old 
man)" should be pronominalized in the translation 
into English. 
OJIISAN-WA JIMEN-NI KOSHI-WO-OROSHITA. 
(old man) (ground) (sit down) 
(The old man sat down on the ground.) 
YAGATE OJIISAN-WA NEMUTTE-SHIMATTA. 
(soon) (old man) (fall asleep) 
(He (= the old man) soon fell asleep.) 
(1) 
When dealing with a situation like this, it is neces- 
sary for a machine translation system to recognize 
that the two "OJI ISAN (old man)" have the same 
referent. In this paper, we propose a method that 
determines the referents of noun phrases by using 
(1) the referential properties of noun phrases, (2) the 
modifiers in noun phrases, and (3) the possessors of 
entities denoted by the noun phrases. 
1 The possessor of a noun phrase is defined as the entity 
which is the owner of the entity denoted by the noun phrase. 
For languages that have articles, like English, we 
can use articles ("the", "a", and so on) to decide 
whether a noun phrase has an antecedent or not. 
Ill contrast, for languages that have no articles, like 
Japanese, it is difficult to decide whether a noun 
phrase has an antecedent. We previously estimated 
the referential properties of noun phrases that cor- 
respond to articles for the translation of Japanese 
noun phrases into English (Murata and Nagao 1993). 
By using these referential properties, our system de- 
termines the referents of noun phrases in Japanese 
sentences. Noun phrases are classified by referential 
property into generic noun phrases, definite noun 
phrases, and indefinite noun phrases. When the ref- 
erential property of a noun phrase is a definite noun 
phrase, the noun phrase can refer to the entity de- 
noted by a noun phrase that has already appeared. 
When the referential property of a noun phrase is an 
indefinite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase, the 
noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted by a 
noun phrase that has already appeared. 
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun 
phrases using only the referential property. This is 
because even if the referential property of a noun 
phrase is a definite noun phrase, the noun phrase 
does not refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase 
which has a different modifier or possessor. There- 
fore, we also use the modifiers and possessors of noun 
phrases in determining referents of noun phrases. 
In connection with our approach, we would like to 
emphasize the following points: 
? So far little work has been done on determining 
the referents of noun phrases in Japanese. 
? Since the Japanese language has no articles, it is 
difficult to decide whether a noun phrase has an 
antecedent or not. We use referential properties 
to solve this problem. 
? We determine the possessors of entities denoted 
by noun phrases and use them like modifiers in 
estimating the referents of noun phrases. Since 
the method uses the sematic relation between 
an entity and the possessor, which is a language- 
independent knowledge, it can be used in any 
other language. 
2 Referent ia l  P roper ty  o f  a Noun 
Phrase  
The following is an example of noun phrase 
anaphora. "OJI ISAN (old man)" in the first sen- 
912 
tence and "OJIISAN (old man)" in the second sen- 
tenee refer to the same old man, and they are in 
anaphoric relation. 
OJIISAN TO OBAASAN-GA SUNDEITA. 
(an old man) (and) (an old woman) (lived) 
(There lived an old man and an old woman.) 
OJIISAN-WA YAMA-HE SHIBAKARI-NI ITTA. 
Indef in i te  noun phrase  An indefinite noun 
phrase denotes an arbitrary member of the class of 
the noun phrase. For example, "INU(dog)" in the 
following sentence is an indefinite noun phrase. 
INU-GA SANBIKI IRU. 
(dog) (three) (there is) 
(There are three dogs.) 
(5) 
(old man) (mountain) (to gather firewood) (go) An indefinite noun phrase cannot refer to the entity 
(The old man went to the mountains to gather firewood.) denoted by a noun phrase that has already appeared. 
(2) 
When the system analyzes the anaphoric relation 
of noun phrases like these, the referential proper- 
ties of noun phrases are important. The referential 
property of a noun phrase here means how the noun 
phrase denotes the referent. If the system can rec- 
ognize that the second "OJIISAN (old man)" has 
the referential property of the definite noun phrase, 
indicating that the noun phrase refers to the con- 
textually non-ambiguous entity, it will be able to 
judge that the second "OJIISAN (old man)" refers 
to the entity denoted by the first "OJIISAN (old 
man). The referential property plays an important 
role in clarifying the anaphoric relation. 
We previously classified noun phrases by referen- 
tial property into the following three types (Murata 
and Nagao 1993). 
gener ic  NP { 
NP non gener ic  NP def inite NP 
indef in i te NP 
Gener ic  noun phrase  A noun phrase is classified 
as generic when it denotes all members of the class 
described by the noun phrase or the class itself of 
the noun phrase. For example, "INU(dog)" in the 
following sentence is a generic noun phrase. 
INU-WA YAKUNI-TATSU. 
(dog) (useful) 
(Dogs are useful.) 
(3) 
A generic noun phrase cannot refer to the entity de- 
noted by an indefinite or definite noun phrase. Two 
generic noun phrases can have the same referent. 
Def in i te  noun phrase  A noun phrase is classi- 
fied as definite when it denotes a contextually non- 
ambiguous member of the class of the noun phrase. 
For example, "INU(dog)" in the following sentence 
is a definite noun phrase. 
INU-WA MUKOUHE ITTA. 
(dog) (away) (go) 
(The dog went away.) 
(4) 
A definite noun phrase can refer to the entity de- 
noted by a noun phrase that has already appeared. 
3 How to  Determine  the  Referent  o f  
a Noun Phrase  
To determine referents of noun phrases, we made the 
following three constraints. 
1. Referential property constraint 
2. Modifier constraint 
3. Possessor constraint 
When two noun phrases which have the same head 
noun satisfy these three constraints, the system 
judges that the two noun phrases have the same ref- 
erent. 
3.1 Referent ia l  P roper ty  Const ra in t  
First, our system estimates the referential property 
of a noun phrase by using the method described 
in one of our previous papers (Murata and Nagao 
1993). The method estimates a referential property 
using surface expressions in the sentences. For ex- 
ample, since the second "OJIISAN (old man)" in 
the following sentences i accompanied by a particle 
"WA (topic)" and the predicate is in the past tense, 
it is estimated to be a definite noun phrase. 
OJIISAN-WA JIMEN-NI KOSHI-WO-OROSHITA. 
(old man) (ground) (sit down) 
(The old man sat down on the ground.) 
YAGATE OJIISAN-WA NEMUTTE-SHIMAIMATTA. 
(soon) (old man) (fall asleep) 
(He soon fell asleep.) 
(6) 
Next, our system determines the referent of a 
noun phrase by using its estimated referential prop- 
erty. When a noun phrase is estimated to be a def- 
inite noun phrase, our system judges that the noun 
phrase refers to the entity denoted by a previous 
noun phrase which has the same head noun. For 
example, the second "OJIISAN" in the above sen- 
tences is estimated to be a definite noun phrase, and 
our system judges that it refers to the entity denoted 
by the first "OJIISAN". 
When a noun phrase is not estimated to be a deft- 
nite noun phrase, it usually does not refer to the en- 
tity denoted by a noun phrase that has already been 
913 
mentioned. Our method, however, might fail to es- 
timate the referential property, so the noun phrase 
might refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase 
that has already been mentioned. Therefore, when 
a noun phrase is not estimated to be a definite noun 
phrase, our system gets a possible referent of the 
noun phrase and determines whether or not the noun 
phrase refers to it by using the following three kinds 
of information. 
? the plausibility(P) of the estimated referential 
property that is a definite noun phrase 
When our system estimates a referential prop- 
erty, it outputs the score of each category (Mu- 
rata and Nagao 1993). The value of the plausi- 
bility (P) is given by the score. 
the weight (W) of the salience of a possible 
referent 
The weight (W) of the salience is given by the 
particles such as "WA (topic)" and "GA (sub- 
ject)". The entity denoted by a noun phrase 
which has a high salience, is easy to be referred 
by a noun phrase. 
the distance (D) between the estimated noun 
phrase and a possible referent 
The distance (D) is the number of noun phrases 
between the estimated noun phrase and a pos- 
sible referent. 
When the value given by these three kinds of infor- 
mation is higher than a given threshold, our system 
judges that the noun phrase refers to the possible 
referent. Otherwise, it judges that the noun phrase 
does not refer to the possible referent and is an in- 
definite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase. 
3.2 Mod i f ie r  Const ra in t  
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun 
phrases by using only the referential property. 
When two noun phrases have different modi- 
tiers, they usually do not have the same referent. 
For example, "MIGI(right)-NO HOO(cheek)" and 
"HIDARI(left)-NO HOO(cheek)" in the following 
sentences do not have the same referent. 
KONO OJIISAN-NO KOBU-WA MIGI-NO HOO-NI ATTA. 
(this) (old man) (lump) (right) (cheek) (be on) 
(This old man's lump was on his right cheek.) 
TENGU-WA, KOBU-WO HIDARI-NO HOO-NI TSUKETA. 
(tengu) ~ (lump) (left) (cheek) (put on) 
(The "tengu" put a lump on his left cheek) 
(7) 
Therefore, we made the following constraint: A 
noun phrase that has a modifier cannot refer to the 
2A tengu is a kind of monster. 
entity denoted by a noun phrase that does not have 
the same modifier. A noun phrase that does not 
have a modifier can refer to the entity denoted by a 
noun phrase that has any modifier. 
The constraint is incomplete, and is not truly ap- 
plicable to all cases. There are some exceptions 
where a noun can refer to the entity of a noun that 
has a different modifier. But we use the constraint 
because we can get a higher precision than if we did 
not use it. 
3.3 Possessor  Const ra in t  
When a noun phrase has a semantic marker PAR (a 
part of a body), 3 our system tries to estimate the 
possessor of the entity denoted by the noun phrase. 
We suppose that the possessor of a noun phrase is 
the subject or the noun phrase's nearest opic that 
has a semantic mark,er HUM (human) or a seman- 
tic marker AN I (animal). For example, we examine 
two instances of "HOO (cheek)" in the following sen- 
tences, which have a semantic marker PAR, 
OJIISAN-NIWA \[OJIISAN-NO\] 4 HIDARI-NO 
(old man) (old man's) (left) 
HOO-NI KOBU-GA ATTA. 
(cheek) (lump) (be on) 
(This old man had a lump on his left cheek.) 
SORE-WA KOBUSHI-HODO-NO KOBU-DATTA. 
(it) (person's fist) (lump) 
(It is about the size of a person's fist.) 
OJIISAN-GA \[OJIISAN-NO\] HOO-WO 
(old man (subject)) (old man's) (cheek) 
HUKURAMASETE IRUYOUNI-MIETA. 
(puff) (look as if) 
(He looked as if he had puffed out his cheek.) 
The possessor of the first "HOO (cheek)" is deter- 
mined to be "OJI ISAN (old man)" because "OJI- 
ISAN (old man)", which has a semantic marker 
HUM (human), is followed by a particle "NIWA 
(topic)" and is the topic of the sentence. The posses- 
sor of the second "HOO (cheek)" is also determined 
to be "OJI ISAN (old man)" because "OJI ISAN (old 
man)" is the subject of the sentence. 
We made the following constraint, which is simi- 
lar to the modifier constraint, by using possessors. 
When the possessor of a noun phrase is estimated, 
the noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted 
by a noun phrase that does not have the same pos- 
sessor. When the possessor of a noun phrase is not 
estimated, the noun phrase can refer to the entity 
denoted by a noun phrase that has any possessor. 
3In this paper, we use the Noun Semantic Marker Dictio- 
naxy (Watanabe t a1.1992). 
4 The words in brackets \[\] are omitted in the sentences. 
914 
For example, since the two instances of "HOO 
(cheek)" in the above sentences have the same pos- 
sessor "OJI ISAN (old man)", our system correctly 
judges that they have the same referent. 
4 Anaphora Resolution System 
4.1 P rocedure  
Before referents are determined, sentences are trans- 
formed into a case structure by the case structure 
analyzer (Kurohashi and Nagao 1994). 
Referents of noun phrases are determined by us- 
ing heuristic rules which are made from information 
such as the three constraints mentioned in Section 3. 
Using these rules, our system takes possible referents 
and gives them points. It judges that the candidate 
having the maximum total score is the referent. This 
is because a number of types of information are com- 
bined in anaphora resolution. VCe can specify which 
rule takes priority by using points. 
The heuristic rules are given in the following form. 
Condition :=~ { Proposal Proposal .. } 
Proposal := ( Possible-Referent Point ) 
Here, Condition consists of surface expressions, e- 
mantic constraints and referential properties. In 
Possible-Referent, a possible referent, "Indefinite", 
"Generic", or other things are written. "Indefinite" 
means that the noun phase is an indefinite noun 
phrase, and it does not refer to the entity denoted by 
a previous noun phrase. Point means the plausibility 
value of the possible referent. 
4.2 Heur i s t i c  Ru le  for Es t imat ing  Referents  
We made 8 heuristic rules for the resolution of noun 
phrase anaphora. Some of them are given below. 
R1 When a noun phrase is modified by the words 
"SOREZORE-NO (each)" and "ONOONO-NO 
(each)", 
{(Indefinite, 25)} 
R2 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a defi- 
nite noun phrase, and satisfies the modifier and 
possessor constraints, and the same noun phrase 
X has already appeared, 
{(The noun phrase X, 30)} 
R3 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a generic 
noun phrase, 
{(Generic, 10)} 
R4 When a noun phrase is estimated to  be an in- 
definite noun phrase, 
{(Indefinite, 10)} 
R5 When a noun phrase X is not estimated to be a 
definite noun phrase, 
{ (A noun phrase X which satisfies the modifier 
and possessor constraints, P + W - D + 4)} 
The values P, W, D are as defined in Section 
3.1. 
5 Exper iment  and  D iscuss ion  
5.1 Exper iment  
Before determining the referents of noun phrases, 
sentences were at first transformed into a case struc- 
ture by the case structure analyzer (Kurohashi and 
Nagao 1994). Tile errors made by the case analyzer 
were corrected by hand. Table 1 shows the results 
of determining the referents of noun phrases. 
To confirm that the three constraints (referential 
property, modifier, and possessor) are effective, we 
experimented under several different conditions and 
compared them. The results are shown in Table 2. 
Precision is the fraction of noun phrases which were 
judged to have antecedents. Recall is the fraction of 
noun phrases which have antecedents. 
In these experiments we used training sentences 
and test sentences. The training sentences were used 
to make the heuristic rules in Section 4.2 by hand. 
The test sentences were used to confirm the effec- 
tiveness of these rules. 
In Table 2, Method 1 is the method mentioned in 
Section 3 which uses all three constraints. Method 2 
is the case in which a noun phrase can refer to the 
entity denoted by a noun phrase, only when the esti- 
mated referential property is a definite noun phrase, 
where the modifier and possessor constraints are 
used. Method 3 does not use a referential prop- 
erty. It only uses information such as distance, topic- 
focus, modifier, and possessor. Method 4 does not 
use the modifier and possessor constraints. 
The table shows many results. In Method 1, both 
the recall and the precision were relatively high in 
comparison with the other methods. This indicates 
that the referential property was used properly in the 
method that is described in this paper. Method 1 
was higher than Method 3 in both recall and pre- 
cision. This indicates that the information of refer- 
ential property is necessary. In Method 2, the re- 
call was low because there were many noun phrases 
that were definite but were estimated to be indefinite 
or generic, and the system estimated that the noun 
phrases cannot refer to noun phrases. In Method 4, 
the precision was low. Since the modifier and pos- 
sessor constraints were not used, and there were 
many pairs of two noun phrases that did not co- 
refer, such as "HIDARI(left)-NO HOO(cheek)" and 
"MIGI(right)-NO HOO(cheek)", these pairs were in- 
correctly interpreted to be co-references. This indi- 
cates that it is necessary to use the modifier and 
possessor constraints. 
5.2 Examples  of  E r rors  
We found that it was necessary to use modifiers and 
possessors in the experiments. But there are some 
cases when the referent was determined incorrectly 
because the possessor of a noun was estimated in- 
correctly. 
915 
Table 1: Results 
Precision Recall 
Training sentences 82% (130/159) 85% (130/153) 
Test sentences 79% (89/113) 77?/0 (89/115) 
Training sentences {example sentences (43 sentences), a folk tale "KOBUTORI JIISAN" (Nakao 1985) (93 
sentences), an essay in "TENSEIJINGO" (26 sentences), an editorial (26 sentences), an article in "Scien- 
tific American (in Japanese)"(16 sentences)} 
Test sentences {a fork tale "TSURU NO ONGAESHI" (Nakao 1985) (91 sentences), two essays in "TEN- 
SEIJINGO" (50 sentences), an editorial (30 sentences), "Scientific American(in Japanese)" (13 sentences)} 
Table 2: Comparison 
Method 1 Method 3 
Training sentences 
Test sentences 
Precision 
Recall 
Precision 
Recall 
82%(130/159) 
85%(130/153) 
79% (89/113) 
77% (89/115) 
Method 2 
92%(117/127) 
76%(117/153) 
92% ( 78/ 85) 
68% (78/115) 
72%(123/170) 
80%(123/153) 
69% (79/114) 
69% (79/115) 
Method 4 
65%(138/213) 
90%(138/153) 
58% (92/159) 
80% (92/115) 
Method 1 : The method used in this work 
Method 2 : Only when it is estimated to be definite can it refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase 
Method 3 : No use of referential property 
Method 4 : No use of modifier constraint and possessor constraint 
Sometimes a noun can refer to the entity denoted 
by a noun that has a different modifier. In such 
cases, the system made an incorrect judgment. 
OJIISAN-WA CHIKAKU-NO OOKINA SUGI-NO 
(old man) (near) (huge) (cedar) 
KI-NO NEMOTO-NI ARU ANA-DE 
(tree) (base) (be at) (hole) 
AMAYADORI-WO SURU-KOTO-NI-SHITA. 
(take shelter from the rain) (decide to do) 
(So, he decided to take shelter from the rain in a hole 
which is at the base of a huge cedar tree nearby.) 
(an omission of the middle part) 
TSUGI-NOHI, KONO OJIISAN-WA YAMA-HE ITTE, 
(next day) (this) (old man) (mountain) (go to) 
(The next day, this man went to the mountain, ) 
SUGI-NO KI-NO NEMOTO-NO ANA-WO MITSUKETA. 
(cedar) (tree) (at base) (hole) (found) 
(and found the hole at the base of the cedar tree.) 
Tile two instances of "ANA (hole)" in these sen- 
tences refer to the same entity. But our system 
judged that they do not refer to it because tlae mod- 
ifiers of the two instances of "ANA (hole)" are dif- 
ferent. In order to correctly analyze this case, it is 
necessary to decide whether the two different expres- 
sions are equal in meaning. 
6 Summary  
This paper describes a method for tile determination 
of referents of noun phrases by using their referen- 
tial properties, modifiers, and possessors. Using this 
method on training sentences, we obtained a preci- 
sion rate of 82% and a recall rate of 85% in the de- 
termination of referents of noun phrases that have 
antecedents. On test sentences, we obtained a pre- 
cision rate of 79% and a recall rate of 77%. This 
confirmed that the use of tile referential properties, 
modifiers, and possessors ofnoun phrases is effective. 
Re ferences  
Sadao Kurohashi, Makoto Nagao. 1994. A Method of 
Case Structure Analysis for Japanese Sentences based 
on Examples in Case Frame Dictionary. the Insti- 
tute of Electronics, Information and Communication 
Enginners Transactions on Information and Systems 
E77-D(2), pages 227-239. 
Masaki Murata, Makoto Nagao. 1993. Determination of
referential property and number of nouns in Japanese 
sentences for machine translation i to English. In Pro- 
ceedings of the 5th TMI, pages 218-225, Kyoto, Japan, 
July. 
Kiyoaki Nakao. 1985. The Old Man with a Wen. Eiyaku 
Nihon Mukashibanashi Series, Vol. 7, Nihon Eigo Ky- 
ouiku Kyoukai (in Japanese). 
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Sadao Kurohashi, Makoto Nagao. 
1992. Construction of semantic dictionary by IPAL 
dictionary and a thesaurus, (in Japanese). In Proceed- 
ings of the -~5th Convention of IPSJ, pages 213-214, 
Tokushima, Japan, July. 
916 
