An Underspecified Segmented Discourse Representation Theory (USDRT) 
Frank Schilder 
Computer Science Department 
Hamburg University 
Vogt-K611n-Str. 30 
D-22527 Hamburg 
Germany 
schilder@informatik, uni-hamburg, de 
1 Introduction 
A theory of discourse interpretation has to deal with 
a set of problems including anaphora resolution and 
the hierarchical ordering of discourse structure: 
(1) Several students organised a dinner party for 
Peter. Some students wrote fancy invitation 
cards. Some other students bought exotic food. 
But Peter didn't like it. 
There are two conceivable readings for (1). Either 
(a) it refers to the party or (b) Peter only disliked 
the food. Discourse grammars like Segmented Dis- 
course Representation Theory (SDRT) offer an ex- 
planation for this phenomenon. SDRT - -  an exten- 
sion ofDRT (Kamp and Reyle, 1993) - -  describes a 
complex propositional structure of Discourse Rep- 
resentation Structures (DRSs) connected via dis- 
course relations. The hierarchical ordering imposed 
by relations like narration or elaboration can be 
used to make predictions about possible attachment 
sites within the already processed iscourse as well 
as suitable antecedents of anaphora. 
The next section discusses the question of 
whether the SDRT formalisation used for discourse 
structure should also capture the ambiguities, as 
expressed in (1), for instance, via an underspec- 
ified representation. Section 3 introduces a tree 
logic proposed by Kallmeyer called TDG. Follow- 
ing Schilder (1997), this formalism is employed for 
the representation f the discourse structure. Sec- 
tion 4 presents the conjoined version of SDRT and 
TDG. This is a novel combination of the discourse 
grammar and a tree logic indicating the hierarchical 
discourse structure. Finally, a USDRT formalisation 
of the discourse xample discussed is given. 
2 From DRT to SDRT 
One obvious shortcoming DRT is that it lacks the 
rhetorical information that structures the text. This 
rhetorical information, expressed by discourse rela- 
tions such as narration or background, has a crucial 
effect on anaphora resolution, lexical disambigua- 
tion, and spatial-temporal information. SDRT ex- 
tends DRT in order to amend this insufficiency. 
Following Asher (1996) DRSs and SDRSs will 
be labelled ({K1, . . . ,  Kn}). Formally, an SDRS is 
recursively defined as a pair of sets containing la- 
belled DRSs or SDRSs, and the discourse relations 
holding between them. 
Definition 1 (SDRS) Let K1 : ~ l , . . .Kn  : C~n 
be a labelled DRSs or SDRSs and R a set of dis- 
course relations. The tuple <U, Con) is an SDRS 
if (a) U is a labelled DRS and Con = O or (b) 
U = {K1. . . ,  Kn} and Con is a set of SDRS con- 
ditions. An SDRS condition is a discourse relation 
suchas D(K1 , . . .  ,Kn),  where D 6 R. 
For the basic case (i.e. (K, 0)) K labels a DRS rep- 
resenting the semantic ontext of a sentence. A 
discourse relation introduces furthermore a hierar- 
chical ordering indicated by a graph representation. 
The nodes represent the labelled SDRSs and the 
edges are discourse relations. Apart from the dis- 
course relations, which impose a hierarchical or- 
dering, 'topic' relations add more structure to this 
graph. If a sentence a is the topic of another sen- 
tence/3, this is formalised as a ~ /~.l This sym- 
bol also occurs in the graph, indicating a further 
SDRS condition. The graph representation illus- 
trates the hierarchical structure of the discourse and 
in particular the open attachment site for newly pro- 
cessed sentences. Basically the constituents on the 
so-called 'right frontier' of the discourse structure 
are assumed to be available for further attachment 
(Webber, 1991). 
Assuming a current label (i.e. the one added af- 
ter processing the last clause/sentence), a notion of 
I A further SDRS condition is Focus Background Pair (FBP) 
which is introduced by background. 
1188 
D-Subordination is defined by Asher (1996, p. 24). 
Generally speaking, all constituents which domi- 
nate the current label are open. A further restric- 
tion is introduced by the term D-Freedom which ap- 
plies to all labels which are directly dominated by 
a topic, unless the label assigns the current node. 
Formally speaking, this can be phrased as: a label 
K is D-free in an SDRS ~ iff current(~) = K or 
-~3K~(K ~~ K) E Con (see figure 1). SDRT ex- 
K~:a ~-____~& d-free 
Kl1:~ Klo:~ 
# 
Klol:e 
Klo11:( Klolo:~ 
Figure 1: Openness and D-Freedom 
ploits discourse relations to establish a hierachical 
ordering of discourse segments. A constituent graph 
indicates the dependencies between the segment, es- 
pecially highlighting the open attachment points. 
How the discourse relations uch as narration or 
elaboration are derived is left to an axiomatic the- 
ory called DICE (Discourse in Commonsense En- 
tailment) that uses a non-montonic logic. Taking the 
reader's world knowledge and Gricean-style prag- 
matic maxims into account, DICE provides a formal 
theory of discourse attachment. The main ingre- 
dients are defaults describing laws that encode the 
knowledge we have about he discourse relation and 
discourse processing. 2 
The following discourse which is similar to 
example (1) exemplifies how SDRT deals with 
anaphora resolution within a sequence of sentences 
(Asher, 1996): 
(2) (kl) After thirty months, America is back in 
space. (k2) The shuttle Discovery roared off the 
pad from Cape Kennedy at 10:38 this morning. 
(k3) The craft and crew performed flawlessly. 
(k4) Later in the day the TDRS shuttle com- 
munication satellite was sucessfully deployed. 
(k5) This has given a much needed boost to 
NASA morale. 
:Formally, this is expressed by means of the Comonsense 
Entailment (CE) (Asher and Morreau, 1991). 
Note that this in (k5) can refer back either to (a) the 
entire Shuttle voyage or (b) the launch of the TDRS 
satellite in (k4). It can also be shown that this cannot 
be linked to the start of the shuttle described in (k2). 
The hierachical structure of the two 
first sentences is established by an elab- 
oration relation. As a consequence, the 
SDRS labelled by K1 is the topic of /(2 
(i.e. ({K1,K2}, {elaboration(K1, K2),K1 
K2})). The next sentence (k3) is a comment o 
the situation described in the preceding sentence. 
However, anew constituent K~ has to be introduced 
into the discourse structure. This SDRS labelled 
by K~ subsumes the two DRSs in K2 and K3. As 
a side effect, the label K2 within the discourse 
relation elaboration(K1,K2) is changed to the 
newly introduced label K~ and a further edge is 
introduced between this SDRS and K3. It has to 
K1 
Elaboration 
KI 
~~-~~i  Comment 
Figure 2: The third sentence attached 
be pointed out that this modification of the entire 
SDRS involves an overwriting of the structure 
derived so far. The SDRT update function has to be 
designed such that these changes are accordingly 
incorporated. Note furthermore that the introduc- 
tion of an additional edge from K~ to K3 is not 
assigned with a discourse relation. 
In order to proceed with the SDRS construction, 
we have to consider which constituents are available 
for further attachment. According to the definition 
of D-Freedom and D-Subordination, the SDRS la- 
belled by K1,//'2 and K3 are still available. 3 
We derive using DICE that the next sentence (k4) 
is connected to (k2) via narration. The resulting 
constituent graph is shown in figure 3. A com- 
mon topic as demanded by Asher (1996, p. 28) 
does not occur in the graph representation. Finally, 
only two attachment sites are left, namely K1 and 
/(4. The discourse relation result can connect both 
3Note that without the label K~ the constituent i  K2 would 
not be open any more, since it were dominated by the topic in 
K1 (cf. definition of D-free). 
1189 
K1 
Elaboration 
K{ 
1(2 ~ K4 
Comment 
K3 
Figure 3: Sentence (k4) processed 
SDRSs with the SDRS derived for (k5). Conse- 
quently, two antecedents for the anaphora this can 
be resolved and the theory predicts two conceivable 
derivations: One SDRS contains the SDRS labelled 
by//'5 attached to K1, whereas the second conceiv- 
able SDRS exhibits K5 connected to//'4. 
Summing up, the formalism includes the follow- 
ing shortcomings: (a) The representation f an un- 
derspecified discourse is not possible in SDRT. All 
readings have to be generated. (b) The formalism 
is not monotonic. Updates may overwrite preceed- 
ing constituents. As it can be seen from figure 2 
a new SDRS K~ substituted K2. 4 (c) The con- 
stituent graph contains a set of different SDRS con- 
' ditions (i.e. discourse relations, ~, and FBP). It is 
not clear how these different conditions interact and 
it seems difficult to predict heir effect on the dis- 
course structure. Note that the update on narration 
requires a common topic which connects the two 
SDRSs according to the axioms stipulated within 
SDRT. However the ~ relation is not shown in the 
constituent graph. 
I will develop further ideas introduced by under- 
specified semantic formalisms which have been pro- 
posed in recent years (e.g. (Reyle, 1995)) in order 
to provide an underspecified representation for dis- 
course structure. I will employ a first order tree 
logic by Kallmeyer (1996) to define an underspeci- 
fled SDRT, in the following sections. 
3 Tree Descriptions 
Tree Description Grammars (TDGs) were inspired 
by so-called quasi-trees (Vijay-Shanker, 1992). The 
grammar formalism is described as a constraint- 
based TAG-like grammar by Kallmeyer (1996). The 
logic used for TDGs is a quantifier-free first order 
41t may be possible that the topic relation is transitive to- 
gether with the d-subordination. However, this would contra- 
dict with the definition of D-Freedom (i.e. ~3K'  (K' ~1. K)) 
logic consisting of variables for the nodes, four bi- 
nary relations and the logical connectives -% A, V. 5 
Definition 2 (TDG) A Tree Description Grammar 
(TDG) is a tuple G = (N,T ,  <1, <*, -.<, ~,  S), such 
that: 
(a) N and T are disjoint finite sets for the nonter- 
minal and terminal symbols. 
(b) <~ is the parent relation (i.e. immediate domi- 
nance) which is irreflexive, asymmetric and intran- 
sitive. 
(c) <~* is the dominance relation which is the tran- 
sitive closure of ,~. 
(d) -.4 is the linear precedence relation which is ir- 
reflexive, asymmetric and transitive. 
(e) ~ is the equivalence relation which is reflexive, 
symmetric and transitive. 
(f) S is the start description. 
The tree descriptions are formulae in TDGs reflect- 
ing the dominance relations between subtrees. Such 
formulae have to be negation-free and at least one 
k E K must dominate all other k' E K. In order 
to combine two tree descriptions an adjunction op- 
eration is used which simply conjoins the two tree 
descriptions. Graphically, this operation can take 
place at the dotted lines indicating the dominance 
relation (i.e. <~*).The straight line describes the par- 
ent relation (,~). No adjunction can take place here. 
Figure 4 illustrates how the labels K~x and Kt r, and 
s2 and K~ 2 are set to equal respectively. 
KT 
KIal ~ sl KR1 J  
K'R 
S3 
Figure 4: Two tree descriptions combined 
We are now able to use this tree logic to describe 
the hierachical ordering within SDRT. This extends 
5See Kallmeyer (1996) for a detailed escription of how a 
sound and complete notion of syntactic consequence an be de- 
fined for this logic. 
1190 
the original approach, as we are also able to describe 
ambiguous structures. 
4 Underspeci f ied SDRT (USDRT) 
Similar to proposals on underspecified semantic for- 
malisms, the SDRSs are labelled and dominance re- 
lations hold between these labels. Note that also a 
precedence r lation is used to specify the ordering 
between daughter nodes. 
Definition 3 (USDRS) Let S be a set of DRSs, L a 
set of labels, R a set of discourse relations. Then U 
is a USDRS confined to the tuple (S, L, R) where U 
is a finite set consisting of the following two kinds 
of conditions: 
1. structural information 
(a) immediate dominance relation: K1 <~ K2, where 
K1,K2 EL  
(b) dominance relation: K1 <3" K2, where 
K1,K2 eL  
(c) precedence relation: K1 -< K2, where 
KI ,K2 eL  
(d) equivalence relation: K1 .~ K2, where 
KI ,K2 eL  
2. content information 
(a) sentential: sl : drs, where Sl 6 L, drs 6 S 
(b) segmental: K1 : P (s l , . . . ,Sn) ,  where 
P is an n-place discourse relation in R, and 
g l ,S l , . . . ,Sn  6 L 
Generally speaking, adiscourse relation P provides 
the link between DRSs or SDRSs. Similar to the 
standard SDRT account, this relation has to be de- 
rived by considering world knowledge as well as ad- 
ditional discourse knowledge, and is derived within 
DICE. I do not consider any changes of the stan- 
dard theory in this respect. The structural infor- 
mation, however, is encoded by the tree descrip- 
tions as introduced in section 3. The most gen- 
eral case describing two situations connected by a 
(not yet known) discourse relation is formalised as 
shown in figure 5. 6 The description formula for 
this tree is K-r <~* K~I A KT1 <~ Kat  A KR1 <1 
KRI '  AKm <1 K~i A K~I <~* sl A K~I <~* s2. 
Comparing this representation with the SDRT con- 
stituent graph, the following similarities and differ- 
ences can be observed. First of all, the question of 
where the open attachment sites are found is easily 
observable in the structural restriction given by the 
6The dashed line describes the underspecification with re- 
spect o the precedence r lation (-<). 
K-r 
,K'I 
81:Or 
K~I : topic(sl, s2) 
I 
Kin :  relation(K'al , K~I) 
gl 
82:/3 
Figure 5: Underspecified discourse structure 
tree description. Graphically, the open nodes are in- 
dicated by the dotted lines. Secondly, atopic node is 
introduced, immediately dominating the discourse 
segment. No distinction between D-Subordination 
and D-Freedom has to be made, because the topic 
is open for further attachment as well. This is the 
main change to the discourse structure proposed by 
Schilder (1997). This account encodes the topic 
information in an additional feature called PROM1. 
However, it gives no formal definition of this term. 
I stick therefore to the topic definition Asher gives. 
But instead a uniform treatment of the hierarchi- 
cal ordering can be given by the tree logic used. 
Thirdly, the discourse segment is dominated by 
the discourse relation that possesses two daughter 
nodes. The structure is flexible enough to allow fur- 
ther attachment here. No overwriting of a derived 
structure, as for the SDRT account, is necessary. 
If a discourse relation is derived, further con- 
straints are imposed on the discourse structure. Ba- 
sically, two cases can be distinguished: (a) A subor- 
dinating structure is triggered by discourse relations 
like narration or result. Consequently, the second 
situation becomes the topic (i.e. K~I : /3) and the 
precedence r lation between K~I and K~I is intro- 
duced. In addition, the open attachment site on the 
right frontier gets closed (i.e. K~ 1 ~ K2). (b) A 
subordinated structure which comes with discourse 
relations like elaboration or background contains 
the first situation as a topic (i.e. K~I : a). For 
this structure a precedence r lation between K~I 
and K~I also holds, but instead of the right fron- 
tier, the left frontier is closed (i.e. K~ 1 ~ K1). 
Generally speaking, the analysis proposed for (2) 
follows the SDRT account, especially regarding the 
derivation of the discourse relations. The first two 
sentences are connected via elaboration. However, 
the analysis differs with respect to the obtained is- 
course structure. Since sentence (kl) (i.e. the se- 
mantic content a) is the topic of this text segment 
1191 
I 
S l :Ot  
KTRI:Ot 
I 
KRI : elab( KtR3, K~3) 
K3 
~.~/. 
KT 
KRT4:E 
I 
KR4 : res(KtR4,K~4) 
K~I KtR4 K~4 ~ K5 
i .................................... I 
KTR3 : 6 Ss :~ 
I 
KR3 : 
nar(g s, K?3) 
I 
84:~ 
Figure 6: The discourse in (2) underspecified 
(i.e. (kl) and (k2)), a copy of a ends up in KT1 . 
The resulting tree description contains two node 
pairs where the dominance relation holds, indicated 
by the dotted line in the graphical representation. 
Hence there are two possible attachment sites. 7
The construction of the discourse sequence con- 
tinues in the same way until sentence (k5). The am- 
biguity for this can be expressed as illustrated in fig- 
ure 6. Sentence (k5) (i.e. 8s : ~) is connected via re- 
sult with either K~I : o~ (i.e. this refers to the entire 
voyage in (kl)) or KT3 (i.e. only the launch of the 
satellite is referred to by this). Note furthermore that 
the latter reading requires that (k5) is an elabora- 
tion of (kl). Thus the USDRT analysis provides an 
underspecified representation f the discourse struc- 
ture which covers the two possible readings of (2). 
5 Conc lus ion 
I have shown how the SDRT account can be ex- 
tended by tree descriptions to represent the dis- 
course structure. The formalism proposed has the 
following advantages over previous approaches: a
uniform description of the hierarchical discourse 
structure, the ability to express ambiguities within 
this structure, and the dominance relation specify- 
ing the open nodes for further attachment. 
References 
N. Asher and M. Morreau. 1991. What some 
generic sentences mean. In Hans Kamp, edi- 
tor, Default Logics for Linguistic Analysis, num- 
7See figure 4 on page 3 which represents he first three sen- 
tences of this discourse. 
ber R.2.5.B in DYANA Deliverable, pages 5-32. 
Centre for Cognitive Science, Edinburgh, Scot- 
land. 
Nicholas Asher. 1996. Mathematical treatments 
of discourse contexts. In Paul Dekker and 
Martin Stokhof, editors, Proceedings of the 
Tenth Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 21-40. 
ILLC/Department of Philosophy, University of 
Amsterdam. 
Laura Kallmeyer. 1996. Underspecification i
Tree Description Grammars. Arbeitspapiere des 
Sonderforschungsbereichs 340 81, University of 
T~bingen, Tiibingen, December. 
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Discourse 
to Logic: Introduction to Modeltheoretic Seman- 
tics of Natural Language, volume 42 of Studies 
in Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Uwe Reyle. 1995. On reasoning with ambigui- 
ties. In 7 th Conference of the European Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 
Dublin. 
Frank Schilder. 1997. Temporal Relations in En- 
glish and German Narrative Discourse. Ph.D. 
thesis, University of Edinburgh, Centre for Cog- 
nitive Science. 
K. Vijay-Shanker. 1992. Using descriptions of trees 
in a tree adjoining rammar. Computational Lin- 
guistics, 18(4):481-517. 
Bonnie L. Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension 
in the interpretation of discourse deixis. Lan- 
guage and Cognitive Processes, 6(2): 107-135. 
1192 
