Unlimited Vocabulary Grapheme to Phoneme Conversion for 
Korean TTS 
Byeongchang Kim and WonI1 Lee and Geunbae Lee and Jong-Hyeok  Lee 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
Pohang University of Science & Technology 
Pohang, Korea 
{bckim, bdragon, gblee, jhlee)@postech.ac.kr 
Abst ract  
This paper describes a grapheme-to-phoneme 
conversion method using phoneme connectivity 
and CCV conversion rules. The method 
consists of mainly four modules including 
morpheme normalization, phrase-break detec- 
tion, morpheme to phoneme conversion and 
phoneme connectivity check. 
The morpheme normalization is to replace 
non-Korean symbols into standard Korean 
graphemes. The phrase-break detector assigns 
phrase breaks using part-of-speech (POS) 
information. In the morpheme-to-phoneme 
conversion module, each morpheme in the 
phrase is converted into phonetic patterns 
by looking up the morpheme phonetic pat- 
tern dictionary which contains candidate 
phonological changes in boundaries of the 
morphemes. Graphemes within a morpheme 
are grouped into CCV patterns and converted 
into phonemes by the CCV conversion rules. 
The phoneme connectivity table supports 
grammaticality checking of the adjacent wo 
phonetic morphemes. 
In the experiments with a corpus of 4,973 
sentences, we achieved 99.9% of the grapheme- 
to-phoneme conversion performance and 97.5% 
of the sentence conversion performance. The 
full Korean TTS system is now being imple- 
mented using this conversion method. 
1 Introduction 
During the past few years, remarkable improve- 
ments have been made for high-quality text- 
to-speech systems (van Santen et al, 1997). 
One of the enduring problems in developing 
high-quality text-to-speech system is accurate 
grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (Divay and 
Vitale, 1997). It can be described as a function 
mapping the spelling of words to their phonetic 
symbols. Nevertheless, the function in some al- 
phabetic languages needs ome linguistic knowl- 
edge, especially morphological nd phonologi- 
cal, but often also semantic knowledge. 
In this paper, we present a new grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion method for unlimited vo- 
cabulary Korean TTS. The conversion method 
is divided into mainly four modules. Each mod- 
ule has its own linguistic knowledge. Phrase- 
break detection module assigns phrase breaks 
onto part-of-speech sequences using morpho- 
logical knowledge. Word-boundaries before 
and after phrase breaks should not be co- 
articulated. So, accurate phrase-break ssign- 
ments are essential in high quality TTS sys- 
tems. In the morpheme-to-phoneme conver- 
sion module, boundary graphemes ofeach mor- 
pheme in the phrase are converted to phonemes 
by applying phonetic patterns which contain 
possible phonological changes in the boundaries 
of morphemes. The patterns are designed us- 
ing morphological nd phonotactic knowledge. 
Graphemes within a morpheme are converted 
into phonemes by CCV (consonant consonant 
vowel) conversion rules which are automatically 
extracted from a corpus. After all the conver- 
sions, phoneme connectivity able supports the 
grammaticality of the adjacency of two phonetic 
morphemes. This grammaticality comes from 
Korean phonology rules. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
briefly explains the characteristics of spoken Ko- 
rean for general readers. Section 3 and 4 in- 
troduces our grapheme-to-phoneme conversion 
method based on morphological nd phonolog- 
ical knowledge of Korean. Section 5 shows 
experiment results to demonstrate he perfor- 
mance and Section 6 draws some conclusions. 
675 
2 Features of Spoken Korean  
This section briefly explains the linguistic har- 
acteristics of spoken Korean before describing 
the architecture. 
A Korean word (called eojeol) consists of more 
than one morpheme with clear-cut morpheme 
boundaries (Korean is an agglutinative lan- 
guage). Korean is a postpositional language 
with many kinds of noun-endings, verb-endings, 
and prefinal verb-endings. These functional 
morphemes determine the noun's case roles, 
verb's aspect/tenses, modals, and modification 
relations between words. The unit of pause in 
speech (phrase break) is usually different from 
that in written text. No phonological change 
occur between these phrase breaks. Phonologi- 
cal changes can occur in a morpheme, between 
morphemes in a word, and even between words 
in a phrase break as described in the 30 general 
phonological rules for Korean(Korean Ministry 
of Education, 1995). These changes include con- 
sonant and vowel assimilation, dissimilation, in- 
sertion, deletion, and contraction. For exam- 
ple, noun "kag-ryo" pronounced as "kangnyo" 
(meaning "cabinet") is an example of phono- 
logical change within a morpheme. Noun 
plus noun-ending "such+gwa", in which "such" 
means "charcoal" and "gwa" means "and" in 
English, is sounded as "sudggwa", which is 
an example of the inter-morpheme phonologi- 
cal change. "Ta-seos gae", which means "five 
items", is sounded as "taseot ggae", in which 
phonological changes occur between words. In 
addition, phonological changes can occur condi- 
tionally on the morphotactic environments but 
also on phonotactic environments. 
3 Arch i tec ture  of the 
Grapheme- to -Phoneme Conver ter  
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is a basic step 
to the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion since 
phonological changes depend on morphotactic 
and phonotactic environments. The POS tag- 
ging system have to handle out-of-vocabulary 
(OOV) words for accurate grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion of unlimited vocabulary 
(Bechet and E1-Beze, 1997). Figure 1 shows 
the architecture of our grapheme-to-phoneme 
converter integrated with the hybrid POS 
tagging system (Lee et al, 1997). The hybrid 
POS tagging system employs generalized OOV 
word handling mechanisms in the morpho- 
logical analysis, and cascades tatistical and 
rule-based approaches in the two-phase training 
architecture for POS disambiguation. 
table J I connectivity checker 
"reefing 
| 
Figure 1: Architecture of the grapheme-to- 
phoneme converter in TTS applications 
Each morpheme tagged by the POS tagger 
is normalized by replacing non-Korean symbols 
by Korean graphemes to expand numbers, ab- 
breviations, and acronyms. The phrase-break 
detector segments he POS sequences into sev- 
eral phrases according to phrase-break detec- 
tion rules. In the phoneme converter, each mor- 
pheme in the phrase is converted into phoneme 
sequences by consulting the morpheme pho- 
netic dictionary. The OOV morphemes which 
are not registered in the morpheme phonetic 
dictionary should be processed in two differ- 
ent ways. The graphemes in the morpheme 
boundary are converted into phonemes by con- 
sulting the morpheme phonetic pattern dictio- 
nary. The graphemes within morphemes are 
converted into phonemes according to CCV con- 
version rules. To model phoneme's connectabli- 
ties between morpheme boundaries, the sepa- 
rate phoneme connectivity table encodes the 
phonological changes between the morpheme 
with their POS tags. Outputs of the grapheme- 
to-phoneme converter, that is, phoneme se- 
676 
quences of the input sentence, can be directly 
fed to the lower level signal processing module 
of TTS systems. Next section will give detail de- 
scriptions of each component of the grapheme- 
to-phoneme converter. The hybrid POS tagging 
system will not be explained in this paper, and 
interested readers can see the reference (Lee et 
al., 1997). 
4 Component  Descr ip t ions  of  the  
Conver ter  
4.1 Morpheme Normal izat ion 
The normalization replaces non-Korean sym- 
bols by corresponding Korean graphemes. Non- 
Korean symbols include numbers (e.g. 54, - 
12, 5,400, 4.2), dates (e.g. 20/1/97, 20-Jan- 
97), times (e.g. 12:46), scores (e.g. 74:64), 
mathematical expressions (e.g. 4+5, 1/3), tele- 
phone numbers, abbreviations (e.g. km, ha) and 
acronyms (e.g. UNESCO, OECD). Especially, 
acronyms have two types: spelled acronyms 
such as OECD and pronounced ones like a word 
such as UNESCO. 
The numbers are converted into the correspond- 
ing Korean graphemes using deterministic fi- 
nite automata. The dates, times, scores, ex- 
pressions and telephone numbers are converted 
into equivalent graphemes using their formats 
and values. The abbreviations and acronyms 
are enrolled in the morpheme phonetic dictio- 
nary, and converted into the phonemes using 
the morpheme-to-phoneme conversion module. 
4.2 Phrase-Break Detect ion 
Phrase-break boundaries are important to 
the subsequent processing such as morpheme- 
to-phoneme conversion and prosodic feature 
generation. Graphemes in phrase-break 
boundaries are not phonologically changed 
and sounded as their original corresponding 
phonemes in Korean. 
A number of different algorithms have been 
suggested and implemented for phrase break 
detection (Black and Taylor, 1997). The 
simplest algorithm uses deterministic rules and 
more complicated algorithms can use syntactic 
knowledge and even semantic knowledge. We 
designed simple rules using break and POS 
tagged corpus. We found that, in Korean, the 
average length of phrases is 5.6 words and over 
90% of breaks are after 6 different POS tags: 
conjunctive ending, auxiliary particle, case 
particle, other particle, adverb and adnominal 
ending. The phrase-break detector assigns 
breaks after these 6 POS tags considering the 
length of phrases. 
4.3 Morpheme- to -Phoneme Conversion 
The morphemes registered in the morpheme 
phonetic dictionary can be directly converted 
into phonemes by consulting the dictionary en- 
tries. However, separate method to process the 
OOV morphemes which are not registered in the 
dictionary is necessary. We developed a new 
method as shown Figure 2. 
Apply 
direct morpheme-to-phoneme conversion 
and phonological connectivity assignment 
Morpheme t~muee~ 
dictionary 
Convert graphemes in morpheme boundaries 
and assign phonological connectivity 
Moq~eme phoneae 
dictionary 
Ill I l l  
Convert graphemes 
within morphemes CCV conversion rule 1 ,i 
Figure 2: Morpheme-to-phoneme conversion for 
unlimited vocabularies 
The morpheme phonetic dictionary contains 
POS tag, morpheme, phoneme connectivity 
(left and right) and phoneme sequence for each 
entry. We try to register minimum number 
of morpheme in the dictionary. So it contains 
only the morphemes which are difficult to pro- 
cess using the next OOV morpheme conversion 
modules. Table 1 shows example entries for 
the common oun "pang-gabs", meaning "price 
of a room" in hotel reservation dialogs. The 
common oun "pang-gabs" can be pronounced 
as "pang-ggam", pang-ggab" or "pang-ggabss" 
according to first phoneme of the adjacent mor- 
phemes. 
To handle the OOV morphemes, morpheme 
phonetic pattern dictionary is developed to con- 
tain all the general patterns of Korean POS 
tags, morphemes, phoneme connectivity and 
phoneme sequences. Boundary phonemes of 
the OOV morphemes can be converted to their 
candidate phonemes, and the phonological con- 
nectivity for them can be acquired by consult- 
ing this morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary. 
677 
Table 1: Example entries of the morpheme phonetic dictionary 
POS tag morpheme phoneme sequence left connectivity right connectivity 
common oun pang-gabs pang-ggam 'p' no change 'bs' changed to 'm' 
common noun pang-gabs pang-ggab 'p' no change 'bs' changed to 'b' 
common oun pang-gabs pang-ggabss 'p' no change 'bs' changed to 'bss' 
Table 2: Example entries of morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary 
POS tag morpheme phoneme sequence left connectivity right connectivity 
t ,d  t t ,n  irregular verb 
irregular verb 
irregular verb 
irregular verb 
t ,Z 
Y,d 
Y,Z 
tt,Z 
Y,n 
Y,Z 
't' changed to 'tt' 
't' changed to 'tt' 
no change 
no change 
'd' changed to 'n' 
no change 
'd' changed to 'n' 
no change 
Example entries corresponding to the irregular 
verb "teud", meaning "hear", are shown in Ta- 
ble 2. Meta characters, 'Z', 'Y', 'V', '*' desig- 
nate single consonant, consonant except silence 
phoneme, vowel, any character sequence with 
variable length in the order. The table shows 
that the first grapheme 't' can be phonologically 
changed to 'tt' according to the last phoneme 
of the preceding morpheme (left connectivity), 
and the last grapheme 'd' can be phonologically 
changed to 'n' according to the first phoneme 
of the following morpheme(right connectivity). 
The morpheme phonetic pattern dictionary con- 
tains similar 1,992 entries to model the general 
phonological rules for Korean. 
The graphemes within a morpheme for OOV 
morphemes are converted into phonemes using 
the CCV conversion rules. The CCV conversion 
rules are the mapping rules between grapheme 
to phoneme in character tri-gram forms which 
are in the order of consonant(C) consonant(C) 
vowel(V) spanning two consecutive syllables. 
The CCV rules are designed and automatically 
learned from a corpus reflecting the following 
Korean phonological facts. 
? Korean is a syllable-base language, i.e., 
Korean syllable is the basic unit of the 
graphemes and consists of first consonant, 
vowel and final consonant (CVC). 
? The number of possible consonants for 
each syllable can be varied in grapheme- 
to-phoneme conversion. 
? The number of vowels for each syllable is 
not changed. 
? Phonological changes of the first consonant 
are only affected by the final consonant 
of the preceding syllable and the following 
vowel of the same syllable. 
? Phonological changes of the final consonant 
are only affected by the first consonant of 
the following syllable. 
? Phonological changes of the vowel are not 
affected by the following consonant. 
The boundary graphemes of the OOV mor- 
phemes are phonologically changed according 
to the POS tag and the boundary graphemes 
of the preceding and following morphemes. On 
the other hand, the inner grapheme conversion 
is not affected by the POS tag, but only by 
the adjacent graphemes within the same mor- 
pheme. The CCV conversion rules can model 
the fact easily, but the conventional CC conver- 
sion rules (Park and Kwon, 1995) cannot model 
the influence of the vowels. 
4.4 Phoneme Connect iv i ty  Check 
To verify the boundary phonemes' con- 
nectablity to one another, the separate phoneme 
connectivity table encodes the phonologically 
connectable pair of each morpheme which has 
phonologically changed boundary graphemes. 
This phoneme connectivity table indicates the 
grammatical sound combinations in Korean 
678 
phonology using the defined left and right con- 
nectivity information. 
The morpheme-to-phoneme conversion can gen- 
erate a lot of phoneme sequence candidates for 
single morpheme. We put the whole phoneme 
sequence candidates in a phoneme graph where 
a correct phoneme sequence path can be se- 
lected for input sentence. The phoneme connec- 
tivity check performs this selection and prunes 
the ungrammatical phoneme sequences in the 
graph. 
5 Imp lementat ion  and Exper iment  
Resul ts  
We implemented simple phrase-break detection 
rules from break and POS tagged corpus col- 
lected from recording and transcribing broad- 
casting news. The rules reflect he fact that av- 
erage length of phrases in Korean is 5.6 words 
and over 90% of breaks are after 6 specific POS 
tags, described in the texts. 
We constructed a 1,992 entry morpheme pho- 
netic pattern dictionary for OOV morpheme 
processing using standard Korean phonological 
rules. The morpheme phonetic dictionary was 
constructed for only the morphemes that are 
difficult to handle with these standard rules. 
The two dictionaries are indexed using POS 
tag and morpheme pattern for fast access. To 
model the boundary phonemes' connectablity 
to one another, the phoneme connectivity able 
encodes 626 pair of phonologically connectable 
morphemes. 
The 2030 entry rule set for CCV conversion was 
automatically earned from phonetically tran- 
scribed 9,773 sentences. The independent pho- 
netically transcribed 4,973 sentences are used 
to test the performance of the grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion. Of the 4,973 sentences, 
only 2.5% are incorrectly processed (120 sen- 
tences out of 4,973), and only 0.1% of the 
graphemes in the sentences are actually incor- 
rectly converted. 
6 Conclusions 
This paper presents a new grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion method using phoneme 
connectivity and CCV conversion rules for un- 
limited vocabulary Korean TTS. For the effi- 
cient conversion, new ideas of morpheme pho- 
netic and morpheme phonetic pattern dictio- 
nary are invented and the system demon- 
strates remarkable conversion performance for 
the unlimited vocabulary texts. Our main con- 
tributions include presenting the morpholog- 
ically and phonologically conditioned conver- 
sion model which is essential for morpholog- 
ically and phonologically complex agglutina- 
tive languages. The other contribution is the 
grapheme-to-phoneme conversion model com- 
bined with the declarative phonological rule 
which is well suited to the given task. We 
also designed new CCV unit of grapheme-to- 
phoneme conversion for unlimited vocabulary 
task. The experiments show that grapheme- 
to-phoneme conversion performance is 97.5% 
in sentence conversion, and 99.9% in each 
grapheme conversion. We are now working on 
incorporating this grapheme-to-phoneme con-
version into the developing TTS systems. 
References 
F. Bechet and M. E1-Beze. 1997. Auto- 
matic assignment ofpart-of-speech to out-of- 
vocabulary words for text-to-speech process- 
ing. In Proceedings of the EUROSPEECH 
'97, pages 983-986. 
Alan W. Black and Paul Taylor. 1997. As- 
signing phrase breaks from part-of-speech 
sequences. In Proceedings of the EU- 
ROSPEECH '97, pages 995-998. 
Michel Divay and Anthony J. Vitale. 1997. Al- 
gorithms for grapheme-phoneme translation 
for English and French: Applications. Com- 
putational Linguistics, 23(4). 
Korean Ministry of Education. 1995. Korean 
Rule Collections. Taehan Publishers. (in Ko- 
rean). 
Geunbae Lee, Jeongwon Cha, and Jong-Hyeok 
Lee. 1997. Hybrid POS tagging with general- 
ized unknown-word handling. In Proceedings 
of the IRAL '97, pages 43-50. 
S.H. Park and H.C. Kwon. 1995. Implementa- 
tion to phonological teration module for a 
Korean text-to-speech. In Proceedigns of the 
~th conference on Korean and Korean infor- 
mation processing. (in Korean). 
Jan P.H. van Santen, Richard W. Sproat, 
Joseph P. Olive, and Julia Hirschberg. 
1997. Progress in Speech Synthesis. Springer- 
Verlag. 
679 
