Designing a Task-Based Evaluation Methodology 
for a Spoken Machine Translation System 
Kav i ta  Thomas  
Language Technologies Inst i tute 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh,  PA 15213, USA 
kavita@cs, cmu. edu 
Abst rac t  
In this paper, I discuss issues pertinent o the 
design of a task-based evaluation methodology 
for a spoken machine translation (MT) sys- 
tem processing human to human communica- 
tion rather than human to machine communi- 
cation. I claim that system mediated human to 
human communication requires new evaluation 
criteria and metrics based on goal complexity 
and the speaker's prioritization of goals. 
1 In t roduct ion  
Task-based evaluations for spoken language sys- 
tems focus on evaluating whether the speaker's 
task is achieved, rather than evaluating utter- 
ance translation accuracy or other aspects of 
system performance. Our MT project focuses 
on the travel reservation domain and facilitates 
on-line translation of speech between clients and 
travel agents arranging travel plans. Our prior 
evaluations (Gates et al, 1996) have focused 
on end-to-end translation accuracy at the ut- 
terance level (i.e., fraction of utterances trans- 
lated perfectly, acceptably, and unacceptably). 
While this method of evaluation conveys trans- 
lation accuracy, it does not give any information 
about how many of the client's travel arrange- 
ment goals have been conveyed, nor does it take 
into account the complexity of the speaker's 
goals and task, or the priority that they assign 
to their goals; for example, the same end-to-end 
score for two dialogues may hide the fact that 
in one dialogue the speakers were able to com- 
municate their most important goals while in 
the other they were only able to communicate 
successfully the less important goals. 
One common approach to evaluating spoken 
language systems focusing on human-machine 
dialogue is to compare system responses to cor- 
rect reference answers; however, as discussed 
by (Walker et al, 1997), the set of reference 
answers for any particular user query is tied 
to the system's dialogue strategy. Evaluation 
methods independent of dialogue strategy have 
focused on measuring the extent to which sys- 
tems for interactive problem solving aid users 
via log-file evaluations (Polifroni et al, 1992), 
quantifying repair attempts via turn correction 
ratio, tracking user detection and correction of 
system errors (Hirschman and Pao, 1993), and 
considering transaction success (Shriberg et al, 
1992). (Danieli and Gerbino, 1995) measure 
the dialogue module's ability to recover from 
partial failures of recognition or understanding 
(i.e., implicit recovery) and inappropriate utter- 
ance ratio; (Simpson and Fraser, 1993) discuss 
applying turn correction ratio, transaction suc- 
cess, and contextual appropriateness to dialogue 
evaluations, and (Hirschman et ah, 1990) dis- 
cuss using task completion time as a black box 
evaluation metric. 
Current literature on task-based evaluation 
methodologies for spoken language systems pri- 
marily focuses on human-computer interactions 
rather than system-mediated human-human in-
teractions. For a multilingual MT system, 
speakers communicate via the system, which 
translates their responses and generates the out- 
put in the target language via speech synthesis. 
Measuring solution quality (Sikorski and Allen, 
1995), transaction success, or contextual appro- 
priateness is meaningless, ince we are not in- 
terested in measuring how efficient ravel agents 
are in responding to clients' queries, but rather, 
how well the system conveys the speakers' goals. 
Likewise, task completion time will not cap- 
ture task success for MT dialogues ince it is 
dependent on dialogue strategies and speaker 
styles. Task-based evaluation methodologies for 
569 
MT systems must focus on whether goals are 
communicated, rather than whether they are 
achieved. 
2 Goa ls  o f  a Task -Based  Eva luat ion  
Methodo logy  for an MT System 
The goal of a task-based evaluation for an MT 
system is to convey whether speakers' goals 
were translated correctly. An advantage of fo- 
cusing on goal translation is that it allows us to 
compare dialogues where the speakers employ 
different dialogue strategies. In our project, we 
focus on three issues in goal communication: 
(1) distinction of goals based on subgoal com- 
plexity, (2) distinction of goals based on the 
speaker's prioritization, and (3) distinction of 
goals based on domain. 
3 Pr io r i t i za t ion  o f  Goals  
While we want to evaluate whether speakers' 
important goals are translated correctly, this is 
sometimes difficult to ascertain, since not only 
must the speaker's goals be concisely describ- 
able and circumscribable, but also they must 
not change while she is attempting to achieve 
her task. Speakers usually have a prioritization 
of goals that cannot be predicted in advance and 
which differs between speakers; for example, if 
one client wants to book a trip to Tokyo, it may 
be imperative for him to book the flight tickets 
at the least, while reserving rooms in a hotel 
might be of secondary importance, and finding 
out about sights in Tokyo might be of lowest 
priority. However, his goals could be prioritized 
in the opposite order, or could change if he finds 
one goal too difficult to communicate and aban- 
dons it in frustration. 
If we insist on eschewing unreliability issues 
inherent in asking the client about the priority 
of his goals after the dialogue has terminated 
(and he has perhaps forgotten his earlier prior- 
ity assignment), we cannot rely on an invariant 
prioritization of goals across speakers or across 
a dialogue. The only way we can predict the 
speaker's goals at the time he is trying to com- 
municate them is in cases where his goals are not 
communicated and he attempts to repair them. 
We can distinguish between cases in which.goal 
communication succeeds or fails, and we can 
count the number of repair attempts in both 
cases. The insight is that speakers will attempt 
to repair higher priority goals more than lower 
priority goals, which they will abandon sooner. 
The number of repair attempts per goal quan- 
tifies the speaker's priority per goal to some de- 
gree. 
We can capture this information in a sim- 
ple metric that distinguishes between goals that 
eventually succeed or fail with at least one re- 
pair attempt. Goals that eventually succeed 
with tg repair attempts can be given a score 
of 1/tg,  which has a maximum score of 1 when 
there is only one repair attempt, and decays to 
0 as the number of repair attempts goes to infin- 
ity. Similarly, we can give a score of-(1 - 1/tg)  
to goals that are eventually abandoned with tg 
repair attempts; this has a maximum of 0 when 
there is only a single repair attempt and goes 
to -1 as tg goes to infinity. So the overall dia- 
logue score becomes the average over all goals of 
the difference between these two metrics, with 
a maximum score of 1 and a minimum score of 
--1. 
1 for successful goal 
score(goa l )  = - (1 tg (1) - ~) for unsuccessful goal 
score(d ia logue)  -- 1 n mgoals Z score(goal) (2) 
goals 
4 Complex i ty  o f  Goa ls  
Another factor to be considered is goal com- 
plexity; clearly we want to distinguish between 
dialogues with the same main goals but in which 
some have many subgoals while others have few 
subgoals with little elaboration. For instance, 
one traveller going to Tokyo may be satisfied 
with simply specifying his departure and arrival 
times for the outgoing and return laps of his 
flight, while another may have the additional 
subgoals of wanting a two-day stopover in Lon- 
don, vegetarian meals, and aisle seating in the 
non-smoking section. In the metric above, both 
goals and subgoals are treated in the same way 
(i.e., the sum over goals includes ubgoals), and 
we are not weighting their scores any differently. 
While many subgoals require that the main 
goal they fall under be communicated for them 
to be communicated, it is also true that for some 
speakers, communicating just the main goal and 
not the subgoal may be a communication fail- 
ure. For example, if it is crucial for a speaker 
570 
to get a stopover in London, even if his main 
goal (requesting a return flight from New York 
to Tokyo) is successfully communicated, hewill 
view the communication attempt a failure un- 
less the system communicates the stopover suc- 
cessfully also. On the other hand, communi- 
cating the subgoal (e.g., a stopover in London), 
without communicating the main goal is non- 
sensical - the travel agent will not know what 
to make of "a stopover in London" without the 
accompanying main goal requesting the flight to 
Tokyo. 
However, even if two dialogues have the same 
goals and subgoals, the complexity of the trans- 
lation task may differ; for example, if in one 
dialogue (A) the speaker communicates a single 
goal or subgoal per speaker turn, while in the 
other (B) the speaker communicates the goal 
and all its subgoals in the same speaker turn, 
it is clear that the dialogue in which the entire 
goal structure is conveyed in the same speaker 
turn will be the more difficult translation task. 
We need to be able to account for the average 
goal complexity per speaker turn in a dialogue 
and scale the above metric accordingly; if dia- 
logues A and B have the same score according 
to the given metric, we should boost the score 
of B to reflect that it has required a more rigor- 
ous translation effort. A first attempt would be 
to simply multiply the score of the dialogue by 
the average subgoal complexity per main goal 
per speaker turn in the dialogue, where Nmg is 
the number of main goals in a speaker turn and 
Nsg is the number of subgoals. In the metric 
below, the average subgoal complexity is 1 for 
speaker turns in which there are no subgoals, 
and increases as the number of subgoals in the 
speaker turn increases. 
score'(dialogue) = score(dialogue) ? 
1 .Nsg + Nmg 
numspkturns ~--~" \[ ~r--m~ \] (3) spkturns 
5 Our  Task -Based  Eva luat ion  
Methodo logy  
Scoring a dialogue is a coding task; scorers will 
need to be able to distinguish goals and subgoals 
in the domain. We want to minimize train- 
ing for scorers while maximizing agreement be- 
tween them. To do so, we list a predefined set 
of main goals (e.g., making flight arrangements 
or hotel bookings) and group together all sub- 
goals that pertain to these main goals in a two- 
level tree. Although this formalization sacrifices 
subgoal complexity, we are unable to determine 
this without predefining a subgoal hierarchy and 
we want to avoid predefining subgoal priority, 
which is set by assigning a subgoal hierarchy. 
After familiarizing themselves with the set of 
main goals and their accompanying subgoals, 
scorers code a dialogue by distinguishing in a 
speaker turn between the main goals and sub- 
goals, whether they are successfully communi- 
cated or not, and the number of repair attempts 
in successive speaker turns. Scorers must also 
indicate which domain each goal falls under; we 
distinguish goals as in-domain (i.e., referring to 
the travel-reservation domain), out-of-domain 
(i.e., unrelated to the task in any way), and 
cross-domain (i.e., discussing the weather, com- 
mon polite phrases, accepting, negating, open- 
ing or closing the dialogue, or asking for re- 
peats). 
The distinction between domains is impor- 
tant in that we can separate in-domain goals 
from cross-domain goals; cross-domain goals of- 
ten serve a meta-level purpose in the dialogue. 
We can thus evaluate performance over all goals 
while maintaining a clear performance measure 
for in-domain goals. Scores should be calculated 
separately based on domain, since this will indi- 
cate system performance more specifically, and 
provide a useful metric for grammar develop- 
ers to compare subsequent and current domain 
scores for dialogues from a given scenario. 
In a large scale evaluation, multiple pairs of 
speakers will be given the same scenario (i.e., a 
specific task to try and accomplish; e.g., flying 
to Frankfurt, arranging a stay there for 2 nights, 
sightseeing to the museums, then flying on to 
Tokyo}; domain scores will then be calculated 
and averaged over all speakers. 
Actual evaluation is performed on transcripts 
of dialogues labelled with information from sys- 
tem logs; this enables us to see the original ut- 
terance (human transcription} and evaluate the 
correctness of the target output. If we wish 
to, log-file evaluations also permit us to eval- 
uate the system in a glass-box approach, evalu- 
ating individual system components separately 
(Simpson and Fraser, 1993). 
571 
6 Conc lus ions  and  Future  Work  
This work describes an initial attempt to ac- 
count for some of the significant issues in a task- 
based evaluation methodology for an MT sys- 
tem. Our choice of metric reflects separate do- 
main scores, factors in subgoal complexity and 
normalizes all counts to allow for comparison 
among dialogues that differ in dialogue strat- 
egy, subgoal complexity, number of goals and 
speaker-prioritization f goals. The proposed 
metric is a first attempt, and describes work in 
progress; we have attempted to present he sim- 
plest possible metric as an initial approach. 
There are many issues that need to be ad- 
dressed; for instance, we do not take into ac- 
count optimality of translations. Although we 
are interested in goal communication and not 
utterance translation quality, the disadvantage 
to the current approach is that our optimality 
measure is binary, and does not give any infor- 
mation about how well-phrased the translated 
text is. More significantly, we have not resolved 
whether to use metric (1) for both subgoals and 
goals together, or to score them separately. The 
proposed metric does not reflect that commu- 
nicating main goals may be essential to com- 
municating their subgoals. It also does not ac- 
count for the possible complexity introduced by 
multiple main goals per speaker turn. We also 
do not account for the possibility that in an 
unsuccessful dialogue, a speaker may become 
more frustrated as the dialogue proceeds, and 
her relative goal priorities may no longer be re- 
flected in the number of repair attempts. We 
may also want to further distinguish in-domain 
scores based on sub-domain (e.g., flights, ho- 
tels, events). Perhaps most importantly, we still 
need to conduct a full-scale evaluation with the 
above metric with several scorers and speaker 
pairs across different versions of the system to 
be able to provide actual results. 
7 Acknowledgements  
I would like to thank my advisor Lori Levin, 
Alon Lavie, Monika Woszczyna, and Aleksan- 
dra Slavkovic for their help and suggestions with 
this work. 
guage system. In Proceeedings of the 1995 
AAAI Spring Symposium on Empirical Meth- 
ods in Discourse Interpretation and Genera- 
tion, pages 34-39. 
L.Hirschman, D.Dahl, D.P.McKay, 
L.M.Norton, M.C.Linebarger. 1990. Be- 
yond class A: A proposal for automatic 
evaluation of discourse. In Proceedings of 
the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 
pages 109-113. 
L.Hirschman and C.Pao. 1993. The cost of er- 
rors in a spoken language system. In Pro- 
ceedings of the Third European Conference 
on Speech Communication and Technology, 
pages 1419-1422. 
J.Polifroni, L.Hirschman, S.Seneff, and V.Zue. 
1992. Experiments in evaluating interactive 
spoken language systems. In Proceedings of 
the DARPA Speech and NL Workshop, pages 
28-31. 
E.Shriberg, E.Wade, and P.Price. 1992. 
Human-machine problem solving using spo- 
ken language systems (sls): Factors affecting 
performance and user satisfaction. In Pro- 
ceedings of the DARPA Speech and NL Work- 
shop, pages 49-54. 
T.Sikorski and J.Allen. 1995. A task- 
based evaluation of the TRAINS-95 dia- 
logue system. Technical report, University of 
Rochester. 
A.Simpson, and N.A.Fraser. 1993. Black box 
and glass box evaluation of the SUNDIAL 
system. In Proceedings of the Third Euro- 
pean Conference on Speech Communication 
and Technology, pages 1423-1426. 
M.Walker, D.J.Litman, C.A.Kamm, and 
A.Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A framework 
for evaluating spoken dialogue agents. Tech- 
nical Report TR 97.26.1, AT and T Technical 
Reports. 
D.Gates, A.Lavie, L.Levin, A.Waibel, 
M.Gavalda, L.Mayfield, M.Woszczyna, 
P.Zhan. 1996. End-to-end Evaluation in 
JANUS: a Speech-to-speech Translation 
System. In Proceedings of the 12th Euro- 
pean Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Workshop on Dialogue, Budapest, Hungary. 
References  
M.Danieli and E.Gerbino. 1995. Metrics for 
evaluating dialogue strategies in a spoken lan- 
572 
