Automatic Identification of Word Translations 
from Unrelated English and German Corpora 
Reinhard Rapp 
University of Mainz, FASK 
D-76711 Germersheim, Germany 
rapp @usun2.fask.uni-mainz.de 
Abstract 
Algorithms for the alignment of words in 
translated texts are well established. How- 
ever, only recently new approaches have 
been proposed to identify word translations 
from non-parallel or even unrelated texts. 
This task is more difficult, because most 
statistical clues useful in the processing of 
parallel texts cannot be applied to non-par- 
allel texts. Whereas for parallel texts in 
some studies up to 99% of the word align- 
ments have been shown to be correct, the 
accuracy for non-parallel texts has been 
around 30% up to now. The current study, 
which is based on the assumption that there 
is a correlation between the patterns of word 
co-occurrences in corpora of different lan- 
guages, makes a significant improvement to
about 72% of word translations identified 
correctly. 
1 Introduction 
Starting with the well-known paper of Brown et 
al. (1990) on statistical machine translation, 
there has been much scientific interest in the 
alignment of sentences and words in translated 
texts. Many studies how that for nicely parallel 
corpora high accuracy rates of up to 99% can be 
achieved for both sentence and word alignment 
(Gale & Church, 1993; Kay & R/Sscheisen, 
1993). Of course, in practice - due to omissions, 
transpositions, insertions, and replacements in
the process of translation - with real texts there 
may be all kinds of problems, and therefore ro- 
bustness i  still an issue (Langlais et al, 1998). 
Nevertheless, the results achieved with these 
algorithms have been found useful for the corn- 
pilation of dictionaries, for checking the con- 
sistency of terminological usage in translations, 
for assisting the terminological work of trans- 
lators and interpreters, and for example-based 
machine translation. By now, some alignment 
programs are offered commercially: Translation 
memory tools for translators, such as IBM's 
Translation Manager or Trados' Translator's 
Workbench, are bundled or can be upgraded 
with programs for sentence alignment. 
Most of the proposed algorithms first con- 
duct an alignment of sentences, that is, they lo- 
cate those pairs of sentences that are translations 
of each other. In a second step a word alignment 
is performed by analyzing the correspondences 
of words in each pair of sentences. The algo- 
rithms are usually based on one or several of the 
following statistical clues: 
1. correspondence of word and sentence order 
2. correlation between word frequencies 
3. cognates: similar spelling of words in related 
languages 
All these clues usually work well for parallel 
texts. However, despite serious efforts in the 
compilation of parallel corpora (Armstrong et 
al., 1998), the availability of a large-enough par- 
allel corpus in a specific domain and for a given 
pair of languages i still an exception. Since the 
acquisition of monolingual corpora is much 
easier, it would be desirable to have a program 
that can determine the translations of words 
from comparable (same domain) or possibly 
unrelated monolingnal texts of two languages. 
This is what translators and interpreters usually 
do when preparing terminology in a specific 
field: They read texts corresponding to this field 
in both languages and draw their conclusions on 
word correspondences from the usage of the 
519 
terms. Of course, the translators and interpreters 
can understand the texts, whereas our programs 
are only considering a few statistical clues. 
For non-parallel texts the first clue, which is 
usually by far the strongest of the three men- 
tioned above, is not applicable at all. The second 
clue is generally less powerful than the first, 
since most words are ambiguous in natural an- 
guages, and many ambiguities are different 
across languages. Nevertheless, this clue is ap- 
plicable in the case of comparable texts, al- 
though with a lower reliability than for parallel 
texts. However, in the case of unrelated texts, its 
usefulness may be near zero. The third clue is 
generally limited to the identification of word 
pairs with similar spelling. For all other pairs, it 
is usually used in combination with the first 
clue. Since the first clue does not work with 
non-parallel texts, the third clue is useless for 
the identification of the majority of pairs. For 
unrelated languages, it is not applicable anyway. 
In this situation, Rapp (1995) proposed using 
a clue different from the three mentioned above: 
His co-occurrence clue is based on the as- 
sumption that there is a correlation between co- 
occurrence patterns in different languages. For 
example, if the words teacher and school co- 
occur more often than expected by chance in a 
corpus of English, then the German translations 
of teacher and school, Lehrer and Schule, 
should also co-occur more often than expected 
in a corpus of German. In a feasibility study he 
showed that this assumption actually holds for 
the language pair English/German even in the 
case of unrelated texts. When comparing an 
English and a German co-occurrence matrix of 
corresponding words, he found a high corre- 
lation between the co-occurrence patterns of the 
two matrices when the rows and columns of 
both matrices were in corresponding word order, 
and a low correlation when the rows and col- 
umns were in random order. 
The validity of the co-occurrence clue is ob- 
vious for parallel corpora, but - as empirically 
shown by Rapp - it also holds for non-parallel 
corpora. It can be expected that this clue will 
work best with parallel corpora, second-best 
with comparable corpora, and somewhat worse 
with unrelated corpora. In all three cases, the 
problem of robustness - as observed when 
applying the word-order clue to parallel corpo- 
ra -  is not severe. Transpositions of text seg- 
ments have virtually no negative effect, and 
omissions or insertions are not critical. How- 
ever, the co-occurrence clue when applied to 
comparable corpora is much weaker than the 
word-order clue when applied to parallel cor- 
pora, so larger corpora and well-chosen sta- 
tistical methods are required. 
After an attempt with a context heterogeneity 
measure (Fung, 1995) for identifying word 
translations, Fung based her later work also on 
the co-occurrence assumption (Fung & Yee, 
1998; Fung & McKeown, 1997). By presup- 
posing a lexicon of seed words, she avoids the 
prohibitively expensive computational effort en- 
countered by Rapp (1995). The method des- 
cribed here - although developed independently 
of Fung's work -  goes in the same direction. 
Conceptually, it is a trivial case of Rapp's 
matrix permutation method. By simply assuming 
an initial lexicon the large number of permu- 
tations to be considered is reduced to a much 
smaller number of vector comparisons. The 
main contribution of this paper is to describe a 
practical implementation based on the co-occur- 
rence clue that yields good results. 
2 Approach 
As mentioned above, it is assumed that across 
languages there is a correlation between the co- 
occurrences of words that are translations of 
each other. If - for example - in a text of one 
language two words A and B co-occur more of- 
ten than expected by chance, then in a text of 
another language those words that are transla- 
tions of A and B should also co-occur more fre- 
quently than expected. This is the only statisti- 
cal clue used throughout this paper. 
It is further assumed that there is a small 
dictionary available at the beginning, and that 
our aim is to expand this base lexicon. Using a 
corpus of the target language, we first compute a
co-occurrence matrix whose rows are all word 
types occurring in the corpus and whose col- 
unms are all target words appearing in the base 
lexicon. We now select a word of the source 
language whose translation is to be determined. 
Using our source-language corpus, we compute 
520 
a co-occurrence vector for this word. We trans- 
late all known words in this vector to the target 
language. Since our base lexicon is small, only 
some of the translations are known. All un- 
known words are discarded from the vector and 
the vector positions are sorted in order to match 
the vectors of the target-language matrix. With 
the resulting vector, we now perform a similar- 
ity computation to all vectors in the co-occur- 
rence matrix of the target language. The vector 
with the highest similarity is considered to be 
the translation of our source-language word. 
3 Simulation 
3.1 Language Resources 
To conduct he simulation, a number of resour- 
ces were required. These are 
1. a German corpus 
2. an English corpus 
3. a number of German test words with known 
English translations 
4. a small base lexicon, German to English 
As the German corpus, we used 135 million 
words of the newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine 
Zeitung (1993 to 1996), and as the English 
corpus 163 million words of the Guardian (1990 
to 1994). Since the orientation of the two 
newspapers i  quite different, and since the time 
spans covered are only in part overlapping, the 
two corpora can be considered as more or less 
unrelated. 
For testing our results, we started with a list 
of 100 German test words as proposed by Rus- 
sell (1970), which he used for an association 
experiment with German subjects. By looking 
up the translations for each of these 100 words, 
we obtained a test set for evaluation. 
Our German/English base lexicon is derived 
from the Collins Gem German Dictionary with 
about 22,300 entries. From this we eliminated 
all multi-word entries, so 16,380 entries re- 
mained. Because we had decided on our test 
word list beforehand, and since it would not 
make much sense to apply our method to words 
that are already in the base lexicon, we also re- 
moved all entries belonging to the 100 test 
words. 
3.2 Pre-processing 
Since our corpora are very large, to save disk 
space and processing time we decided to remove 
all function words from the texts. This was done 
on the basis of a list of approximately 600 
German and another list of about 200 English 
function words. These lists were compiled by 
looking at the closed class words (mainly ar- 
ticles, pronouns, and particles) in an English and 
a German morphological lexicon (for details see 
Lezius, Rapp, & Wettler, 1998) and at word 
frequency lists derived from our corpora. 1 By 
eliminating function words, we assumed we 
would lose little information: Function words 
are often highly ambiguous and their co-occur- 
rences are mostly based on syntactic instead of 
semantic patterns. Since semantic patterns are 
more reliable than syntactic patterns across 
language families, we hoped that eliminating the 
function words would give our method more 
generality. 
We also decided to lemmatize our corpora. 
Since we were interested in the translations of 
base forms only, it was clear that lemmatization 
would be useful. It not only reduces the sparse- 
data problem but also takes into account hat 
German is a highly inflectional language, 
whereas English is not. For both languages we 
conducted a partial lemmatization procedure 
that was based only on a morphological lexicon 
and did not take the context of a word form into 
account. This means that we could not lem- 
matize those ambiguous word forms that can be 
derived from more than one base form. How- 
ever, this is a relatively rare case. (According to 
Lezius, Rapp, & Wettler, 1998, 93% of the to- 
kens of a German text had only one lemma.) Al- 
though we had a context-sensitive lemmatizer 
for German available (Lezius, Rapp, & Wettler, 
1998), this was not the case for English, so for 
reasons of symmetry we decided not to use the 
context feature. 
I In cases in which an ambiguous word can be both a 
content and a function word (e.g., can), preference 
was given to those interpretations that appeared to 
occur more frequently. 
521 
3.3 Co-occurrence Counting 
For counting word co-occurrences, in most other 
studies a fixed window size is chosen and it is 
determined how often each pair of words occurs 
within a text window of this size. However, this 
approach does not take word order within a 
window into account. Since it has been empiri- 
cally observed that word order of content words 
is often similar between languages (even be- 
tween unrelated languages uch as English and 
Chinese), and since this may be a useful statisti- 
cal clue, we decided to modify the common ap- 
proach in the way proposed by Rapp (1996, p. 
162). Instead of computing a single co-occur- 
rence vector for a word A, we compute several, 
one for each position within the window. For 
example, if we have chosen the window size 2, 
we would compute a first co-occurrence vector 
for the case that word A is two words ahead of 
another word B, a second vector for the case that 
word A is one word ahead of word B, a third 
vector for A directly following B, and a fourth 
vector for A following two words after B. If we 
added up these four vectors, the result would be 
the co-occurrence vector as obtained when not 
taking word order into account. However, this is 
not what we do. Instead, we combine the four 
vectors of length n into a single vector of length 
4n. 
Since preliminary experiments showed that a 
window size of 3 with consideration of word 
order seemed to give somewhat better results 
than other window types, the results reported 
here are based on vectors of this kind. However, 
the computational methods described below are 
in the same way applicable to window sizes of 
any length with or without consideration of 
word order. 
3.4 Associat ion Formula  
Our method is based on the assumption that 
there is a correlation between the patterns of 
word co-occurrences in texts of different lan- 
guages. However, as Rapp (1995) proposed, this 
correlation may be strengthened by not using the 
co-occurrence counts directly, but association 
strengths between words instead. The idea is to 
eliminate word-frequency effects and to empha- 
size significant word pairs by comparing their 
observed co-occurrence counts with their ex- 
pected co-occurrence counts. In the past, for this 
purpose a number of measures have been pro- 
posed. They were based on mutual information 
(Church & Hanks, 1989), conditional probabili- 
ties (Rapp, 1996), or on some standard statisti- 
cal tests, such as the chi-square test or the log- 
likelihood ratio (Dunning, 1993). For the pur- 
pose of this paper, we decided to use the log- 
likelihood ratio, which is theoretically well 
justified and more appropriate for sparse data 
than chi-square. In preliminary experiments it
also led to slightly better results than the con- 
ditional probability measure. Results based on 
mutual information or co-occurrence counts 
were significantly worse. For efficient compu- 
tation of the log-likelihood ratio we used the fol- 
lowing formula: 2
kiiN 
- 2 log ~ = ~ ki~ log c~Rj 
i,j~{l,2} 
ki lN --  kl2N = kll log c-~-+kl2 log c, R2 
? k21N -- k22 N + k21 log ~ + g22 log c2R2 
where 
C 1 =kll +k12 C 2 =k21 +k22 
R l = kit + k2t Rz = ki2 + k22 
N=kl l+k12+k21+k22 
with parameters kij expressed in terms of corpus 
frequencies: 
kl~ = frequency of common occurrence of 
word A and word B 
kl2 = corpus frequency of word A - kll 
k21 = corpus frequency of word B - kll 
k22 = size of corpus (no. of tokens) - corpus 
frequency of A - corpus frequency of B 
All co-occurrence vectors were transformed us- 
ing this formula. Thereafter, they were nor- 
malized in such a way that for each vector the 
sum of its entries adds up to one. In the rest of 
the paper, we refer to the transformed and nor- 
malized vectors as association vectors. 
2 This formulation of the log-likelihood ratio was pro- 
posed by Ted Dunning during a discussion on the 
corpora mailing list (e-mail of July 22, 1997). It is 
faster and more mnemonic than the one in Dunning 
(1993). 
522 
3.5 Vector Similarity 
To determine the English translation of an un- 
known German word, the association vector of 
the German word is computed and compared to 
all association vectors in the English association 
matrix. For comparison, the correspondences 
between the vector positions and the columns of 
the matrix are determined by using the base 
lexicon. Thus, for each vector in the English 
matrix a similarity value is computed and the 
English words are ranked according to these 
values. It is expected that the correct ranslation 
is ranked first in the sorted list. 
For vector comparison, different similarity 
measures can be considered. Salton & McGill 
(1983) proposed a number of measures, uch as 
the Cosine coefficient, the Jaccard coefficient, 
and the Dice coefficient (see also Jones & Fur- 
nas, 1987). For the computation of related terms 
and synonyms, Ruge (1995), Landauer and 
Dumais (1997), and Fung and McKeown (1997) 
used the cosine measure, whereas Grefenstette 
(1994, p. 48) used a weighted Jaccard measure. 
We propose here the city-block metric, which 
computes the similarity between two vectors X 
and Y as the sum of the absolute differences of 
corresponding vector positions: 
S:Z\[Xi  -Yi\[ i=l 
In a number of experiments we compared it to 
other similarity measures, such as the cosine 
measure, the Jaccard measure (standard and bi- 
nary), the Euclidean distance, and the scalar 
product, and found that the city-block metric 
yielded the best results. This may seem sur- 
prising, since the formula is very simple and the 
computational effort smaller than with the other 
measures. It must be noted, however, that the 
other authors applied their similarity measures 
directly to the (log of the) co-occurrence vec- 
tors, whereas we applied the measures to the as- 
sociation vectors based on the log-likelihood 
ratio. According to our observations, estimates 
based on the log-likelihood ratio are generally 
more reliable across different corpora and lan- 
guages. 
3.6 Simulation Procedure 
The results reported in the next section were 
obtained using the following procedure: 
1. Based on the word co-occurrences in the 
German corpus, for each of the 100 German 
test words its association vector was com- 
puted. In these vectors, all entries belonging 
to words not found in the English part of the 
base lexicon were deleted. 
2. Based on the word co-occurrences in the 
English corpus, an association matrix was 
computed whose rows were all word types of 
the corpus with a frequency of 100 or higher 3
and whose columns were all English words 
occurring as first translations of the German 
words in the base lexicon. 4
3. Using the similarity function, each of the 
German vectors was compared to all vectors 
of the English matrix. The mapping between 
vector positions was based on the first trans- 
lations given in the base lexicon. For each of 
the German source words, the English vo- 
cabulary was ranked according to the re- 
suiting similarity value. 
3 The limitation to words with frequencies above 99 
was introduced for computational reasons to reduce 
the number of vector comparisons and thus speed up 
the program. (The English corpus contains 657,787 
word types after lemmatization, which leads to 
extremely large matrices.) The purpose of this 
limitation was not to limit the number of translation 
candidates considered. Experiments with lower 
thresholds showed that this choice has little effect on 
the results to our set of test words. 
4 This means that alternative translations of a word 
were not considered. Another approach, as conducted 
by Fung & Yee (1998), would be to consider all 
possible translations li ted in the lexicon and to give 
them equal (or possibly descending) weight. Our 
decision was motivated by the observation that many 
words have a salient first translation and that this 
translation is listed first in the Collins Gem Dictio- 
nary German-English. We did not explore this issue 
further since in a small pocket dictionary only few 
ambiguities are listed. 
523 
4 Results and Evaluation 
Table 1 shows the results for 20 of the 100 Ger- 
man test words. For each of these test words, the 
top five translations as automatically generated 
are listed. In addition, for each word its ex- 
pected English translation from the test set is 
given together with its position in the ranked 
lists of computed translations. The positions in 
the ranked lists are a measure for the quality of 
the predictions, with a 1 meaning that the pre- 
diction is correct and a high value meaning that 
the program was far from predicting the correct 
word. 
If we look at the table, we see that in many 
cases the program predicts the expected word, 
with other possible translations immediately 
following. For example, for the German word 
Hiiuschen, the correct translations bungalow, 
cottage, house, and hut are listed. In other cases, 
typical associates follow the correct ranslation. 
For example, the correct translation of Miid- 
chen, girl, is followed by boy, man, brother, and 
lady. This behavior can be expected from our 
associationist approach. Unfortunately, in some 
cases the correct translation and one of its 
strong associates are mixed up, as for example 
with Frau, where its correct ranslation, woman, 
is listed only second after its strong associate 
man. Another example of this typical kind of 
error is pfeifen, where the correct translation 
whistle is listed third after linesman and referee. 
Let us now look at some cases where the pro- 
gram did particularly badly. For Kohl we had 
expected its dictionary translation cabbage, 
but -  given that a substantial part of our news- 
paper corpora consists of political texts - we do 
not need to further explain why our program 
lists Major, Kohl, Thatcher, Gorbachev, and 
Bush, state leaders who were in office during 
the time period the texts were written. In other 
cases, such as Krankheit and Whisky, the simu- 
lation program simply preferred the British us- 
age of the Guardian over the American usage in 
our test set: Instead of sickness, the program 
predicted disease and illness, and instead of 
whiskey it predicted whisky. 
A much more severe problem is that our cur- 
rent approach cannot properly handle ambigui- 
ties: For the German word weifl it does not pre- 
dict white, but instead know. The reason is that 
weifl can also be third person singular of the 
German verb wissen (to know), which in news- 
paper texts is more frequent than the color 
white. Since our lemmatizer is not context-sen- 
sitive, this word was left unlemmatized, which 
explains the result. 
To be able to compare our results with other 
work, we also did a quantitative valuation. For 
all test words we checked whether the predicted 
translation (first word in the ranked list) was 
identical to our expected translation. This was 
true for 65 of the 100 test words. However, in 
some cases the choice of the expected transla- 
tion in the test set had been somewhat arbitrary. 
For example, for the German word Strafle we 
had expected street, but the system predicted 
road, which is a translation quite as good. 
Therefore, as a better measure for the accuracy 
of our system we counted the number of times 
where an acceptable translation of the source 
word is ranked first. This was true for 72 of the 
100 test words, which gives us an accuracy of 
72%. In another test, we checked whether an ac- 
ceptable translation appeared among the top 10 
of the ranked lists. This was true in 89 cases, s 
For comparison, Fung & McKeown (1997) 
report an accuracy of about 30% when only the 
top candidate is counted. However, it must be 
emphasized that their result has been achieved 
under very different circumstances. On the one 
hand, their task was more difficult because they 
worked on a pair of unrelated languages (Eng- 
lish/Japanese) using smaller corpora and a ran- 
dom selection of test words, many of which 
were multi-word terms. Also, they predeter- 
mined a single translation as being correct. On 
the other hand, when conducting their evalua- 
tion, Fung & McKeown limited the vocabulary 
they considered as translation candidates to a 
few hundred terms, which obviously facilitates 
the task. 
5 We did not check for the completeness of the 
translations found (recall), since this measure depends 
very much on the size of the dictionary used as the 
standard. 
524 
German test 
word 
Baby 
Brot 
Frau 
gelb 
H~iuschen 
Kind 
Kohl 
Krankheit 
M~idchen 
Musik 
Ofen 
pfeifen 
Religion 
Schaf 
Soldat 
StraBe 
siiB 
Tabak 
weiB 
Whisky 
expected trans- 
lation and rank 
baby 1 
bread 1 
woman 2 
yellow 1 
cottage 2 
child 1 
cabbage 17074 
sickness 86 
baby 
bread 
man 
yellow 
bungalow 
child 
Major 
disease 
top five translations as automatically generated 
child mother daughter father 
cheese meat food butter 
woman boy friend wife 
blue red pink green 
cottage house hut village 
daughter son father mother 
Kohl Thatcher Gorbachev Bush 
illness Aids patient doctor 
girl 1 girl 
music 1 music dance 
stove 3 heat oven stove house 
whistle 3 linesman referee whistle blow offside 
religion 1 
sheep 1 
soldier 1 
street 2 
boy man brother lady 
theatre musical song 
burn 
religion culture faith religious belief 
sheep cattle cow pig goat 
soldier army troop force civilian 
road street city town walk 
sweet smell delicious taste love sweet 1 
tobacco 1 
white 46 
whiskey 11 
tobacco cigarette consumption nicotine drink 
know say thought see think 
whisky beer Scotch bottle wine 
Table 1: Results for 20 of the 100 test words (for full list see http://www.fask.uni-mainz.de/user/rappl) 
5 Discussion and Conclusion 
The method escribed can be seen as a simple 
case of the gradient descent method proposed by 
Rapp (1995), which does not need an initial 
lexicon but is computationally prohibitively ex- 
pensive. It can also be considered as an exten- 
sion from the monolingual to the bilingual case 
of the well-established methods for semantic or 
syntactic word clustering as proposed by 
Schtitze (1993), Grefenstette (1994), Ruge 
(1995), Rapp (1996), Lin (1998), and others. 
Some of these authors perform a shallow or full 
syntactical analysis before constructing the co- 
occurrence vectors. Others reduce the size of the 
co-occurrence matrices by performing a singular 
value decomposition. However, in yet un- 
published work we found that at least for the 
computation of synonyms and related words 
neither syntactical analysis nor singular value 
decomposition lead to significantly better esults 
than the approach described here when applied 
to the monolingual case (see also Grefenstette, 
1993), so we did not try to include these me- 
thods in our system. Nevertheless, both methods 
are of technical value since they lead to a re- 
duction in the size of the co-occurrence matri- 
ces. 
Future work has to approach the difficult 
problem of ambiguity resolution, which has not 
been dealt with here. One possibility would be 
to semantically disambiguate he words in the 
corpora beforehand, another to look at co-oc- 
currences between significant word sequences 
instead of co-occurrences between single words. 
To conclude with, let us add some specula- 
tion by mentioning that the ability to identify 
word translations from non-parallel texts can be 
seen as an indicator in favor of the associationist 
view of human language acquisition (see also 
Landauer & Dumais, 1997, and Wettler & Rapp, 
1993). It gives us an idea of how it is possible to 
derive the meaning of unknown words from 
texts by only presupposing a limited number of 
known words and then iteratively expanding this 
knowledge base. One possibility to get the pro- 
525 
cess going would be to learn vocabulary lists as 
in school, another to simply acquire the names 
of items in the physical world. 
Acknowledgements 
I thank Manfred Wettler, Gisela Zunker-Rapp, 
Wolfgang Lezius, and Anita Todd for their sup- 
port of this work. 
References 
Armstrong, S.; Kempen, M.; Petitpierre, D.; Rapp, 
R.; Thompson, H. (1998). Multilingual Corpora for 
Cooperation. Proceedings of the 1st International 
Conference on Linguistic Resources and Evalua- 
tion (LREC), Granada, Vol. 2, 975-980. 
Brown, P.; Cocke, J.; Della Pietra, S. A.; Della Pietra, 
V. J.; Jelinek, F.; Lafferty, J. D.; Mercer, R. L.; 
Rossin, P. S. (1990). A statistical approach to ma- 
chine translation. Computational Linguistics, 16(2), 
79-85. 
Church, K. W.; Hanks, P. (1989). Word association 
norms, mutual information, and lexicography. In: 
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the As- 
sociation for Computational Linguistics. Vancou- 
ver, British Columbia, 76-83. 
Dunning, T. (1993). Accurate methods for the sta- 
tistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational 
Linguistics, 19(1), 61-74. 
Fung, P. (1995). Compiling bilingual lexicon entries 
from a non-parallel English-Chinese corpus. Pro- 
ceedings of the 3rd Annual Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, Boston, Massachusetts, 173-183. 
Fung, P.; McKeown, K. (1997). Finding terminology 
translations from non-parallel corpora. Proceedings 
of the 5th Annual Workshop on Very Large Cor- 
pora, Hong Kong, 192-202. 
Fung, P.; Yee, L. Y. (1998). An IR approach for 
translating new words from nonparallel, compa- 
rable texts. In: Proceedings ofCOLING-ACL 1998, 
Montreal, Vol. 1,414-420. 
Gale, W. A.; Church, K. W. (1993). A program for 
aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. Computa- 
tional Linguistics, 19(3), 75-102. 
Grefenstette, G. (1993). Evaluation techniques for 
automatic semantic extraction: comparing syntactic 
and window based approaches. In: Proceedings of 
the Workshop on Acquisition of Lexical Knowledge 
from Text, Columbus, Ohio. 
Grefenstette, G. (1994). Explorations in Automatic 
Thesaurus Discovery. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Jones, W. P.; Furnas, G. W. (1987). Pictures of rele- 
vance: a geometric analysis of similarity measures. 
Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science, 38(6), 420-442. 
Kay, M.; Rfscheisen, M. (1993). Text-Translation 
Alignment. Computational Linguistics, 19(1), 121- 
142. 
Landauer, T. K.; Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to 
Plato's problem: the latent semantic analysis theory 
of acquisition, induction, and representation of 
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2), 211- 
240. 
Langlais, P.; Simard, M.; V6ronis, J. (1998). Methods 
and practical issues in evaluating alignment ech- 
niques. In: Proceedings of COLING-ACL 1998, 
Montreal, Vol. l, 711-717. 
Lezius, W.; Rapp, R.; Wettler, M. (1998). A freely 
available morphology system, part-of-speech tag- 
ger, and context-sensitive l mmatizer for German. 
In: Proceedings of COLING-ACL 1998, Montreal, 
Vol. 2, 743-748. 
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic Retrieval and Clustering of 
Similar Words. In: Proceedings of COLING-ACL 
1998, Montreal, Vol. 2, 768-773. 
Rapp, R. (1995). Identifying word translations in non- 
parallel texts. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Meeting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 320-322. 
Rapp, R. (1996). Die Berechnung von Assoziationen. 
Hildesheim: Olms. 
Ruge, G. (1995). Human memory models and term 
association. Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR Con- 
ference, Seattle, 219-227. 
Russell, W. A. (1970). The complete German lan- 
guage norms for responses to 100 words from the 
Kent-Rosanoff word association test. In: L. Post- 
man, G. Keppel (eds.): Norms of Word Association. 
New York: Academic Press, 53-94. 
Salton, G.; McGill, M. (1983). Introduction to Mod- 
em Information Retrieval. New York: McGraw- 
Hill. 
Schiitze, H. (1993). Part-of-speech induction from 
scratch. In: Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meet- 
ing of the Association for Computational Lingu- 
istics, Columbus, Ohio, 251-258. 
Wettler, M.; Rapp, R. (1993). Computation of word 
associations based on the co-occurrences of words 
in large corpora. In: Proceedings of the 1st Work- 
shop on Very Large Corpora: Columbus, Ohio, 84- 
93. 
526 
