Using Linguistic Knowledge in Automatic Abstracting 
Horacio Saggion 
Ddpartement d'Informatique et Recherche Opdrationnelle 
Universitd e Montrdal 
CP 6128, Succ Centre-Ville 
Montrdal, Qudbec, Canada, H3C 3J7 
Fax: +1-514-343-5834 
saggion@iro, umontreal, ca 
Abst rac t  
We present work on the automatic generation of
short indicative-informative abstracts of scien- 
tific and technical articles. The indicative part 
of the abstract identifies the topics of the docu- 
ment while the informative part of the abstract 
elaborate some topics according to the reader's 
interest by motivating the topics, describing en- 
tities and defining concepts. We have defined 
our method of automatic abstracting by study- 
ing a corpus professional bstracts. The method 
also considers the reader's interest as essential 
in the process of abstracting. 
1 Introduction 
The idea of producing abstracts or summaries 
by automatic means is not new, several 
methodologies have been proposed and tested 
for automatic abstracting including among 
others: word distribution (Luhn, 1958); rhetor- 
ical analysis (Marcu, 1997); and probabilistic 
models (Kupiec et al, 1995). Even though 
some approaches produce acceptable abstracts 
for specific tasks, it is generally agreed that 
the problem of coherent selection and expres- 
sion of information in automatic abstracting 
remains (Johnson, 1995). One of the main 
problems is how to ensure the preservation of
the message of the original text if sentences 
picked up from distant parts of the source text 
are juxtaposed and presented to the reader. 
Rino and Scott (1996) address the problem of 
coherent selection for gist preservation, however 
they depend on the availability of a complex 
meaning representation which in practice is 
difficult to obtain from the raw text. 
In our work, we are concerned with the auto- 
matic generation ofshort indicative-informative 
abstract for technical and scientific papers. We 
base our methodology on a study of a corpus of 
professional bstracts and source or parent doc- 
uments. Our method also considers the reader's 
interest as essential in the process of abstract- 
ing. 
2 The  Corpus 
The production of professional bstracts has 
long been object of study (Cremmins, 1982). In 
particular, it has been argued that structural 
parts of parent documents such as introduc- 
tions and conclusions are important in order to 
obtain the information for the topical sentence 
(Endres-Niggemeyer et al, 1995). We have been 
investigating which kind of information is re- 
ported in professional bstracts as well as where 
the information lies in parent documents and 
how it is conveyed. In Figure 1, we show a pro- 
fessional bstract from the "Computer and Con- 
trol Abstracts" journal, this kind of abstract 
aims to alert readers about the existence of a 
new article in a particular field. The example 
contains information about the author's inter- 
est, the author's development and the overview 
of the parent document. All the information 
reported in this abstract was found in the in- 
troduction of its parent document. 
In order to study the aforementioned aspects, 
we have manually aligned sentences of 100 pro- 
fessional bstracts with sentences ofparent doc- 
uments containing the information reported in 
the abstract. In a previous tudy (Saggion and 
Lapalme, 1998), we have shown that 72% of the 
information i  professional bstracts lies in ti- 
tles, captions, first sections and last sections of 
parent documents while the rest of the informa- 
tion was found in author abstracts and other 
sections. These results uggest that some struc- 
tural sections are particularly important in or- 
der to select information for an abstract but also 
596 
The production of understandable and maintainable expert systems using the current gen- 
eration of multiparadigm development tools is addressed. This issue is discussed in the 
context of COMPASS, a large and complex expert system that helps maintain an elec- 
tronic telephone xchange. As part of the work on COMPASS, several techniques to aid 
maintainability were developed and successfully implemented. Some of the techniques were 
new, others were derived from traditional software ngineering but modified to fit the rapid 
prototyping approach of expert system building. An overview of the COMPASS project is 
presented, software problem areas are identified, solutions adopted in the final system are 
described and how these solutions can be generalized is discussed. 
Figure h Professional Abstract: CCA 58293 (1990 vol.25 no.293). Parent Document: "Maintain- 
ability Techniques in Developing Large Expert Systems." D.S. Prerau et al IEEE Expert, vol.5, 
no.3, p.71-80, June 1990. 
that it is not enough to produce a good infor- 
mative abstract (i.e. we hardly find the results 
of an investigation i  the introduction of a re- 
search paper). 
3 Conceptual and Linguistic 
I n fo rmat ion  
The complex process of scientific discovery 
that starts with the identification of a research 
problem and eventually ends with an answer to 
the problem (Bunge, 1967), would generally be 
disseminated in a technical or scientific paper: 
a complex record of knowledge containing, 
among others, references to the following con- 
cepts the author, the author's affiliation, others 
authors, the authors' development, the authors' 
interest, the research article and its components 
(sections, figures, tables, etc.), the problem un- 
der consideration, the authors' solution, others' 
solution, the topics of the research article, the 
motivation for the study, the importance of the 
study, what the author found, what the author 
think, what others have done, and so forth. 
Those concepts are systematically selected for 
inclusion in professional abstracts. We have 
noted that some of them are lexically marked 
while others appear as arguments of predicates 
conveying specific relations in the domain of 
discourse. For example, in an expression such 
as "We found significant reductions in ..." the 
verb "find" takes as an argument a result and 
in the expression "The lack of a library severely 
limits the impact of..." the verb "limit" entails 
a problem. 
We have used our corpus and a set of more 
than 50 complete technical articles in order 
to deduce a conceptual model and to gather 
lexical information conveying concepts and 
relations. Although our conceptual model does 
not deal with all the intricacies of the domain, 
we believe it covers most of the important in- 
formation relevant for an abstract. In order to 
obtain linguistic expressions marking concepts 
and relation, we have tagged our corpus with 
a POS tagger (Foster, 1991) and we have used 
a thesaurus (Vianna, 1980) to semantically 
classify the lexical items (most of them are 
polysemous). Figure 2, gives an overview of 
some concepts, relations and lexical items so 
far identified. 
The information we collected allow the defini- 
tion of patterns of two kinds: (i) linguistic pat- 
terns for the identification of noun groups and 
verb groups; and (ii) domain specific patterns 
for the identification of entities and relations 
in the conceptual model This allows for the 
identification of complex noun groups such as 
"The TIGER condition monitoring system" in 
the sentence "The TIGER gas turbine condition 
monitoring system addresses the performance 
monitoring aspects" and the interpretation of 
strings such as "University of Montreal" as a 
reference to an institution and verb forms such 
as "have presented" as a reference to a predi- 
cate possibly introducing the topic of the docu- 
ment. The patterns have been specified accord- 
ing to the linguistic constructions found in the 
corpus and then expanded to cope with other 
valid linguistic patterns, though not observed 
in our data. 
597 
Concepts/Relations Explanation Lexical Items 
make know The author mark the topic of the document describe, expose, present, ... 
study The author is engaged in study analyze, examine, explore, ... 
express interest The author is interested in address, concern, interest,... 
experiment The author is engaged in experimentation experiment, test, try out, ... 
identify goal The author identify the research goal necessary, focus on, ... 
explain The author gives explanations explain, interpret, justify,... 
define a concept is being defined define, be, ... 
describe entity is being described compose, form, ... 
authors The authors of the article We, I, author,... 
paper The technical article article, here, paper, study, ... 
institutions authors' affiliation University, UniversitY, ... 
other researchers Other researchers Proper Noun (Year), ... 
problem The problem under consideration difficulty, issue, problem, ... 
method The method used in the study equipment, methodology, ... 
results The results obtained result, find, reveal, ... 
'hypotheses The assumptions ofthe author assumption, hypothesis .... 
Figure 2: Some Conceptual nd Linguistic Information 
4 Generating Abstracts 
It is generally accepted that there is no such 
thing as an ideal abstract, but different kinds of 
abstracts for different purposes and tasks (McK- 
eown et al, 1998). We aim at the generation 
of a type of abstract well recognized in the lit- 
erature: short indicative-informative abstracts. 
The indicative part identifies the topics of the 
document (what the authors present, discuss, 
address, etc.) while the informative part elabo- 
rates some topics according to the reader's inter- 
est by motivating the topics, describing entities, 
defining concepts and so on. This kind of ab- 
stract could be used in tasks such as accessing 
the content of the document and deciding if the 
parent document is worth reading. Our method 
of automatic abstracting relies on: 
? the identification of sentences containing 
domain specific linguistic patterns; 
? the instantiation of templates using the se- 
lected sentences; 
? the identification of the topics of the docu- 
ment and; 
? the presentation of the information using 
re-generation techniques. 
The templates represent different kinds of 
information we have identified as important for 
inclusion in an abstract. They are classified in: 
indicative templates used to represent con- 
cepts and relations usually present in indicative 
abstracts uch as "the topic of the document", 
"the structure of the document", "the identifi- 
cation of main entities", "the problem", "the 
need for research", "the identification of the 
solution", "the development of the author" 
and so on; and informative templates rep- 
resenting concepts that appear in informative 
abstracts uch as "entity/concept definition", 
"entity/concept description", "entity/concept 
relevance", "entity/concept function", "the 
motivation for the work", "the description 
of the experiments", "the description of the 
methodology", "the results", "the main con- 
clusions" and so on. Associated with each 
template is a set of rules used to identify 
potential sentences which could be used to 
instantiate the template. For example, the 
rules for the topic of the document emplate, 
specify to search the category make know in the 
introduction and conclusion of the paper while 
the rules for the entity description specify the 
search for the describe category in all the text. 
Only sentences matching specific patterns are 
retained in order to instantiate the templates 
and this reduces in part the problem of poly- 
semy of the lexical items. 
598 
The overall process of automatic abstracting 
shown in Figure 3 is composed of the following 
steps: 
Pre-processing and Interpretation: 
The raw text is tagged and transformed in a 
structured representation allowing the following 
processes to access the structure of the text 
(words, groups of words, titles, sentences, 
paragraphs, sections, and so on). Domain 
specific transducers are applied in order to 
identify possible concepts in the discourse 
domain (such as the authors, the paper, ref- 
erences to other authors, institutions and so 
on) and linguistic transducers are applied in 
order to identify noun groups and verb groups. 
Afterwards, semantic tags marking discourse 
domain relations and concepts are added to the 
different elements of the structure. 
Additionally, the process extracts noun groups, 
computes noun group distribution (assigning 
a weight to each noun group) and generates 
the topical structure of the paper: a structure 
with n + 1 components where n is the number 
of sections in the document. Component i 
(0 < i < n) contains the noun groups extracted 
from the title of section i (0 indicates the title of 
the document). The structure is used in the se- 
lection of the content for the indicative abstract. 
Indicative Selection: Its function is to 
identify potential topics of the document and to 
construct a pool of "propositions" introducing 
the topics. The indicative templates are used 
to this end: sentences are selected, filtered 
and used to instantiate the templates using 
patterns identified during the analysis of the 
corpus. The instantiated templates obtained in 
this step constitute the indicative data base. 
Each template contains, in addition to their 
specific slots, the following: the topic candidate 
slot which is filled in with the noun groups of 
the sentence used for instantiation, the weight 
slot filled in with the sum of the weights of 
the noun groups in the topic candidate slot 
and, the position slot filled in with the position 
of the sentence (section number and sentence 
number) which instantiated the template. In 
Figure 4, the "topic of the document" template 
appears instantiated using the sentence "this 
paper describes the Active Telepresence System 
with an integrated AR system to enhance 
the operator's ense of presence in hazardous 
environments." 
In order to select he content for the indicative 
abstract the system looks for a "match" be- 
tween the topical structure and the templates 
in the indicative data base: the system tries 
all the matches between noun groups in the 
topical structure and noun groups in the topic 
candidate slots. One template is selected for 
each component of the topical structure: the 
template with more matches. The selected 
templates constitute the content of the indica- 
tive abstract and the noun groups in the topic 
candidate slots constitute the potential topics. 
Informative Selection: this process 
aims to confirm which of the potential top- 
ics computed by the indicative selection are 
actual topics (i.e. topics the system could 
informatively expand according to the reader 
interest) and produces a pool of "proposi- 
tions" elaborating the topics. All informative 
templates are used in this step, the process 
considers sentences containing the potential 
topics and matching informative patterns. The 
instantiated informative templates constitute 
the informative data base and the potential 
topics appearing in the informative templates 
form the topics of the document. 
Generation: This is a two step process. 
First, in the indicative generation, the tem- 
plates selected by the indicative selection are 
presented to the reader in a short text which 
contains the topics identified by the informative 
selection and the kind of information the user 
could ask for. Second, in the informative 
generation, the reader selects some of the 
topics asking for specific types of information. 
The informative templates associated with the 
selected topics are used to present he required 
information to the reader using expansion 
operators such as the "description" operator 
whose effect is to present he description of the 
selected topic. For example, if the "topic of 
the document" template (Figure 4) is selected 
by the informative selection the following 
indicative text will be presented: 
599 
1 
NOUN GROUPS 
J 
POTENTLAL TOPICS 
INPORMATIVB 
~ O N  
RAW ~ 
I PRE PROCESSINO 
~ITIERI~RTA'r\[ON 
TEXT ~ A T I O N  
_ I INDICATIVE 
1 
TOPICAL $TRUCrUR~ 
INDICA"IIVlg (~0~ 
1 i . . . . . .  
INDICATIVE 
II~PORMATIVB DATA BASE ~ USER l "~ . . . .  INDICATIVE ABSTRACT 
INPORMA'nVE ~ ~' 
i GENEZ~ATION $1~..EC'I'~D TOPICS 
t 
INPORMATIVE ABSTRACT 
Figure 3: System Architecture 
Templates and Instantiated Slots 
Topic ol the document template Entity description template 
Main predicate: "describes": DESCRIBE 
Where: nil 
Who: "This paper": PAPER 
What:  "the Active Telepresence System with an 
integrated AR system to enhance the operator's 
sense of presence in hazardous environments" " 
Position: Number 1 from "Conclusion" Section 
Topic candidates: "the Active Telepresence Sys- 
tem", "an integrated AR system", "the operator's 
sense", "presence", hazardous environments" 
Weight :... 
Main predicate: "consist of" : CONSIST OF 
Topical entity: "The Active Telepresence Sys- 
tem" 
Related entities: "three distinct elements", the 
stereo head", "its controller", the display device" 
Position: Number 4 from "The Active Telepres- 
ence System" Section 
Weight:... 
Figure 4: Some Instantiated Templates for the article "Augmenting reality for telerobotics: unifying real 
and virtual worlds" J. Pretlove, Industrial Robot, voi.25, issue 6, 1998. 
Describes the Active Telepresence System 
with an integrated AR system to enhance 
the operator's sense of presence in hazardous 
environments. 
Topics: Active Telepresence System (de- 
scription); AR system (description); AR 
(definition) 
If the reader choses to expand the description 
of the topic "Active Telepresence System", the 
following text will be presented: 
The Active Telepresence System consists of 
three distinct elements: the stereo head, its 
controller and the display device. 
The pre-processing and interpretation step 
axe currently implemented. We axe testing the 
600 
processes of indicative and informative selection 
and we are developping the generation step. 
5 Discussion 
In this paper, we have presented a new method 
of automatic abstracting based on the re- 
sults obtained from the study of a corpus 
of professional abstracts and parent docu- 
ments. In order to implement the model, we 
rely on techniques in finite state processing, 
instantiation of templates and re-generation 
techniques. Paice and Jones (1993) have 
already used templates representing specific 
information in a restricted omain in order 
to generate indicative abstracts. Instead, we 
aim at the generation of indicative-informative 
abstracts for domain independent texts. Radev 
and McKeown (1998) also used instantiated 
templates, but in order to produce summaries 
of multiple documents. They focus on the 
generation of the text while we are address- 
ing the overall process of automatic abstracting. 
We are testing our method using long tech- 
nical articles found on the "Web." Some out- 
standing issues axe: the problem of co-reference, 
the problem of polysemy of the lexical items, 
the re-generation techniques and the evaluation 
of the methodology which will be based on the 
judgment of readers. 
Acknowledgments  
I would like to thank my adviser, Prof. Guy 
Lapalme for encouraging me to present his 
work. This work is supported by Agence Cana- 
dienne de D~veloppement International (ACDI) 
and Ministerio de Educaci6n de la Naci6n de la 
Repdblica Argentina, Resoluci6n 1041/96. 
References 
M. Bunge. 1967. Scienti-fc Research I. The 
Search for System. Springer-Verlag New York 
Inc. 
E.T. Cremmins. 1982. The Art o-f Abstracting. 
ISI PRESS. 
B. Endres-Niggemeyer, E. Maier, and A. Sigel. 
1995. How to implement a naturalistic model 
of abstracting: Four core working steps of an 
expert abstractor. Information Processing ?J 
Management, 31(5):631-674. 
G. Foster. 1991. Statistical exical disam- 
biguation. Master's thesis, McGill University, 
School of Computer Science. 
F. Johnson. 1995. Automatic abstracting re- 
search. Library Review, 44(8):28-36. 
J. Kupiec, J. Pedersen, and F. Chen. 1995. A 
trainable document summarizer. In Proc. o-f 
the 18th ACM-SIGIR Conference, pages 68- 
73. 
H.P. Luhn. 1958. The automatic creation of lit- 
erature abstracts. IBM Journal o? Research 
Development, 2(2):159-165. 
D. Marcu. 1997. From discourse structures to 
text summaries. In The Proceedings of the 
A CL'97/EA CL'97 Workshop on Intelligent 
Scalable Text Summarization, pages 82-88, 
Madrid, Spain, July 11. 
K. McKeown, D. Jordan, and V. Hatzivas- 
siloglou. 1998. Generating patient-specific 
summaries of on-line literature. In Intelli- 
gent Text Summarization. Papers from the 
1998 AAAI  Spring Symposium. Technical Re- 
port SS-98-06, pages 34-43, Standford (CA), 
USA, March 23-25. The AAAI Press. 
C.D. Paice and P.A. Jones. 1993. The iden- 
tification of important concepts in highly 
structured technical papers. In R. Korfhage, 
E. Rasmussen, and P. Willett, editors, Proc. 
o-f the 16th ACM-SIGIR Conference, pages 
69-78. 
D.R. Radev and K.R. McKeown. 1998. Gener- 
ating natural language summaries from mul- 
tiple on-line sources. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 24(3):469-500. 
L.H.M. Rino and D. Scott. 1996. A discourse 
model for gist preservation. In D.L. Borges 
and C.A.A. Kaestner, editors, Proceedings o-f 
the 13th Brazilian Symposium on Artificial 
Intelligence, SBIA '96, Advances in Artificial 
Intelligence, pages 131-140. Springer, Octo- 
ber 23-25, Curitiba, Brazil. 
H. Saggion and G. Lapalme. 1998. Where does 
information come from? corpus analysis for 
automatic abstracting. In RIFRA'98. Ren- 
contre Internationale sur l'extraction le Fil- 
trate et le Rdsumd Automatique, pages 72-83. 
F. de M. Vianna, editor. 1980. Roger's II. The 
New Thesaurus. Houghton Mifflin Company, 
Boston. 
601 
