Should we Translate the Documents  or the Queries in 
Cross- language Information Retrieval? 
J. Scott McCarley 
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center 
P.O. Box 218 
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 
jsmc@watson.ibm.com 
Abstract 
Previous comparisons of document and 
query translation suffered difficulty due to 
differing quality of machine translation in 
these two opposite directions. We avoid 
this difficulty by training identical statistical 
translation models for both translation di- 
rections using the same training data. We in- 
vestigate information retrieval between En- 
glish and French, incorporating both trans- 
lations directions into both document trans- 
lation and query translation-based informa- 
tion retrieval, as well as into hybrid sys- 
tems. We find that hybrids of document 
and query translation-based systems out- 
perform query translation systems, even 
human-quality query translation systems. 
1 Introduct ion 
Should we translate the documents or the 
queries in cross-language information re- 
trieval? The question is more subtle than 
the implied two alternatives. The need for 
translation has itself been. questioned : al- 
though non-translation based methods of 
cross-language information retrieval (CLIR), 
such as cognate-matching (Buckley et al, 
1998) and cross-language Latent Semantic 
Indexing (Dumais et al, 1997) have been 
developed, the most common approaches 
have involved coupling information retrieval 
(IR) with machine translation (MT). (For 
convenience, we refer to dictionary-lookup 
techniques and interlingua (Diekema et al, 
1999) as "translation" even if these tech- 
niques make no attempt to produce coherent 
or sensibly-ordered language; this distinction 
is important in other areas, but a stream 
of words is adequate for IR.) Translating 
the documents into the query's language(s) 
and translating the queries into the docu- 
ment's language(s) represent wo extreme 
approaches to coupling MT and IR. These 
two approaches are neither equivalent nor 
mutually exclusive. They are not equivalent 
because machine translation is not an invert- 
ible operation. Query translation and doc- 
ument translation become quivalent only if 
each word in one language is translated into 
a unique word in the other languages. In fact 
machine translation tends to be a many-to- 
one mapping in the sense that finer shades 
of meaner are distinguishable in the original 
text than in the translated text. This effect 
is readily observed, for example, by machine 
translating the translated text back into the 
original anguage. These two approaches are 
not mutually exclusive, either. We find that 
a hybrid approach combining both directions 
of translation produces uperior performance 
than either direction alone. Thus our answer 
to the question posed by the title is both. 
Several arguments suggest hat document 
translation should be competitive or supe- 
rior to query translation. First, MT is 
error-prone. Typical queries are short and 
may contain key words and phrases only 
once. When these are translated inappro- 
priately, the IR engine has no chance to 
recover. Translating a long document of- 
fers the MT engine many more opportuni- 
ties to translate key words and phrases. If 
only some of these are translated appropri- 
ately, the IR engine has at least a chance 
of matching these to query terms. The sec- 
ond argument is that the tendency of MT 
208 
engines to produce fewer distinct words than 
were contained in the original document (the 
output vocabulary is smaller than the in- 
put vocabulary) also indicates that machine 
translation should preferably be applied to 
the documents. Note the types of prepro- 
cessing in use by many monolingual IR en- 
gines: stemming (or morphological nalysis) 
of documents and queries reduces the num- 
ber of distinct words in the document index, 
while query expansion techniques increase 
the number of distinct words in the query. 
Query translation is probably the most 
common approach to CLIR. Since MT is fre- 
quently computationally expensive and the 
document sets in IR are large, query transla- 
tion requires fewer computer esources than 
document ranslation. Indeed, it has been 
asserted that document ranslation is sim- 
ply impractical for large-scale retrieval prob- 
lems (Carbonell et al, 1997), or that doc- 
ument translation will only become practi- 
cal in the future as computer speeds im- 
prove. In fact, we have developed fast MT 
algorithms (McCarley and Roukos, 1998) ex- 
pressly designed for translating large col- 
lections of documents and queries in IR. 
Additionally, we have used them success- 
fully on the TREC CLIR task (Franz et 
al., 1999). Commercially available MT sys- 
tems have also been used in large-scale doc- 
ument translation experiments (Oard and 
Hackett, 1998). Previously, large-scale at- 
tempts to compare query translation and 
document ranslation approaches to CLIR 
(Oard, 1998) have suggested that document 
translation is preferable, but the results have 
been difficult to interpret. Note that in order 
to compare query translation and document 
translation, two different ranslation systems 
must be involved. For example, if queries are 
in English and document are in French, then 
the query translation IR system must incor- 
porate English=~French translation, whereas 
the document ranslation IR system must 
incorporate French=~English. Since famil- 
iar commercial MT systems are "black box" 
systems, the quality of translation is not 
known a priori. The present work avoids 
this difficulty by using statistical machine 
translation systems for both directions that 
are trained on the same training data us- 
ing identical procedures. Our study of doc- 
ument translation is the largest comparative 
study of document and query translation of 
which we are currently aware. We also inves- 
tigate both query and document translation 
for both translation directions within a lan- 
guage pair. 
We built and compared three information 
retrieval systems : one based on document 
translation, one based on query translation, 
and a hybrid system that used both trans- 
lation directions. In fact, the "score" of a 
document in the hybrid system is simply the 
arithmetic mean of its scores in the query 
and document ranslation systems. We find 
that the hybrid system outperforms either 
one alone. Many different hybrid systems 
are possible because of a tradeoff between 
computer esources and translation quality. 
Given finite computer esources and a col- 
lection of documents much larger than the 
collection of queries, it might make sense 
to invest more computational resources into 
higher-quality query translation. We inves- 
tigate this possibility in its limiting case: the 
quality of human translation exceeds that 
of MT; thus monolingual retrieval (queries 
and documents in the same language) rep- 
resents the ultimate limit of query transla- 
tion. Surprisingly, we find that the hybrid 
system involving fast document ranslation 
and monolingual retrieval continues to out- 
perform monolingual retrieval. We thus con- 
clude that the hybrid system of query and 
document translation will outperform a pure 
query translation system no matter how high 
the quality of the query translation. 
2 Trans la t ion  Mode l  
The algorithm for fast translation, which 
has been described previously in some de- 
tail (McCarley and Roukos, 1998) and used 
with considerable success in TREC (Franz 
et al, 1999), is a descendent of IBM Model 
1 (Brown et al, 1993). Our model captures 
important features of more complex models, 
such as fertility (the number of French words 
209 
output when a given English word is trans- 
lated) but ignores complexities such as dis- J 
tortion parameters that are unimportant for 
IR. Very fast decoding is achieved by imple- 
menting it as a direct-channel model rather 
than as a source-channel model. The ba- 
sic structure of the English~French model 
is the probability distribution 
fl...A, le,,co text(e,)). (1) 
of the fertility ni of an English word ei and a 
set of French words fl...f,~ associated with 
that English word, given its context. Here 
we regard the context of a word as the pre- 
ceding and following non-stop words; our ap- 
proach can easily be extended to other types 
of contextual features. This model is trained 
on approximately 5 million sentence pairs of 
Hansard (Canadian parliamentary) and UN 
proceedings which have been aligned on a 
sentence-by-sentence basis by the methods 
of (Brown et al, 1991), and then further 
aligned on a word-by-word basis by meth- 
ods similar to (Brown et al, 1993). The 
French::~English model can be described by 
simply interchanging English and French no- 
tation above. It is trained separately on the 
same training data, using identical proce- 
dures. 
3 Information Retrieval 
Experiments 
The document sets used in our experiments 
were the English and French parts of the doc- 
ument set used in the TREC-6 and TREC- 
7 CLIR tracks. The English document 
set consisted of 3 years of AP newswire 
(1988-1990), comprising 242918 stories orig- 
inally occupying 759 MB. The French doc- 
ument set consisted of the same 3 years of 
SDA (a Swiss newswire service), compris- 
ing 141656 stories and originally occupy- 
ing 257 MB. Identical query sets and ap- 
propriate relevance judgments were available 
in both English and French. The 22 top- 
ics from TREC-6 were originally constructed 
in English and translated by humans into 
French. The 28 topics from TREC-7 were 
originally constructed (7 each from four dif- 
ferent sites) in English, French, German, and 
Italian, and human translated into all four 
languages. We have no knowledge of which 
TREC-7 queries were originally constructed 
in which language. The queries contain three 
SGML fields (<topic>, <description>, 
<narrative>), which allows us to' con- 
trast short (<description> field only) and 
long (all three fields) forms of the queries. 
Queries from TREC-7 appear to be some- 
what "easier" than queries from TREC-6, 
across both document sets. This difference 
is not accounted for simply by the number of 
relevant documents, ince there were consid- 
erably fewer relevant French documents per 
TREC-7 query than per TREC-6 query. 
With this set of resources, we performed 
the two different sets of CLIR experiments, 
denoted EqFd (English queries retrieving 
French documents), and FqBd (French 
queries retrieving English documents.) In 
both EqFd and' FqEd we employed both 
techniques (translating the queries, trans- 
lating the documents). We emphasize 
that the query translation in EqFd was 
performed with the same English=~French 
translation system as the document transla- 
tion in FqEd, and that the document trans- 
lation EqFd was performed with the same 
French=~English translation system as the 
query translation in FqEd. We further em- 
phasize that both translation systems were 
built from the same training data, and thus 
are as close to identical quality as can likely 
be attained. Note also that the results 
presented are not the TREC-7 CLIR task, 
which involved both cross-language informa- 
tion retrieval and the merging of documents 
retrieved from sources in different languages. 
Preprocessing ofdocuments includes part- 
of-speech tagging and morphological anal- 
ysis. (The training data for the transla- 
tion models was preprocessed i entically, so 
that the translation models translated be- 
tween morphological root words rather than 
between words.) Our information retrieval 
systems consists of first pass scoring with 
the Okapi formula (Robertson et al, 1995) 
on unigrams and symmetrized bigrams (with 
210 
en, des, de, and - allowed as connectors) fol- 
lowed by a second pass re-scoring using local 
context analysis (LCA) as a query expan- 
sion technique (Xu and Croft, 1996). Our 
primary basis for comparison of the results 
of the experiments was TREC-style average 
precision after the second pass, although we 
have checked that our principal conclusions 
follow on the basis of first pass scores, and 
on the precision at rank 20. In the query 
translation experiments, our implementation 
of query expansion corresponds to the post- 
translation expansion of (Ballasteros and 
Croft, 1997), (Ballasteros and Croft, 1998). 
All adjustable parameters in the IR sys- 
tem were left unchanged from their values 
in our TREC ad-hoc experiments (Chan et 
al., 1997),(Franz and Roukos, 1998), (Franz 
et al, 1999) or cited papers (Xu and Croft, 
1996), except for the number of documents 
used as the basis for the LCA, which was 
estimated at 15 from scaling considerations. 
Average precision for both query and docu- 
ment translation were noted to be insensitive 
to this parameter (as previously observed in 
other contexts) and not to favor one or the 
other method of CLIR. 
4 Resu l ts  
In experiment EqFd, document ranslation 
outperformed query translation, as seen in 
columns qt and dt of Table 1. In experiment 
FqEd, query translation outperformed oc- 
ument translation, as seen in the columns 
qt and dt of Table 2. The relative perfor- 
mances of query and document ranslation, 
in terms of average precision, do not differ 
between long and short forms of the queries, 
contrary to expectations that query transla- 
tion might fair better on longer queries. A 
more sophisticated translation model, incor- 
porating more nonlocal features into its def- 
inition of context might reveal a difference 
in this aspect. A simple explanation is that 
in both experiments, French=eeEnglish trans- 
lation outperformed English=~French trans- 
lation. It is surprising that the difference 
in performance is this large, given that the 
training of the translation systems was iden- 
tical. Reasons for this difference could be 
in the structure of the languages themselves; 
for example, the French tendency to use 
phrases such as pomme de terre for potato 
may hinder retrieval based on the Okapi for- 
mula, which tends to emphasize matching 
unigrams. However, separate monolingual 
retrieval experiments indicate that the ad- 
vantages gained by indexing bigrams in the 
French documents were not only too small 
to account for the difference between the re- 
trieval experiments involving opposite trans- 
lation directions, but were in fact smaller 
than the gains made by indexing bigrams 
in the English documents. The fact that 
French is a more highly inflected language 
than English is unlikely to account for the 
difference since both translation systems and 
the IR system used morphologically ana- 
lyzed text. Differences in the quality of pre- 
processing steps in each language, such as 
tagging and morphing, are more difficult to 
account for, in the absence of standard met- 
rics for these tasks. However, we believe 
that differences in preprocessing for each lan- 
guage have only a small effect on retrieval 
performance. Furthermore, these differences 
are likely to be compensated for by the train- 
ing of the translation algorithm: since its 
training data was preprocessed i entically, 
a translation engine trained to produce lan- 
guage in a particular style of morphing is 
well suited for matching translated docu- 
ments with queries morphed in the same 
style. A related concern is "matching" be- 
tween translation model training data and 
retrieval set - the English AP documents 
might have been more similar to the Hansard 
than the Swiss SDA documents. All of these 
concerns heighten the importance of study- 
ing both translation directions within the 
language pair. 
On a query-by-query basis, the scores are 
quite correlated, as seen in Fig. (1). On 
TREC-7 short queries, the average preci- 
sions of query and document translation are 
within 0.1 of each other on 23 of the 28 
queries, on both FqEd and EqFd. The re- 
maining outlier points tend to be accounted 
for by simple translation errors, (e.g. vol 
211 
EqFd qt dt qt + dt ht ht + dt 
trec6.d 
trec6.tdn 
trec7.d 
trec7.tdn 
0.2685 0.2819 0.2976 0.3494 0.3548 
0.2981 0.3379 0.3425 0.3823 0.3664 
0.3296 0.3345 0.3532 0.3611 0.4021 
0.3826 0.3814 0.4063 0.4072 0.4192 
Table 1: Experiment EqFd: English queries retrieving French documents 
All numbers are TREC average precisions. 
qt : query translation system 
dt : document ranslation system 
qt + dt : hybrid system combining qt and dt 
ht : monolingual baseline (equivalent to human translation) 
ht + dt : hybrid system combining ht and dt 
FqEd 
trec6.d 
trec6.tdn 
trec7.d 
trec7.tdn 
qt 
0.3271 
0.3666 
0.4014 
0.4541 
dt 
0.2992 
0.3390 
0.3926 
0.4384 
qt + dt 
0.3396 
0.3743 
0.4264 
0.4739 
ht 
0.2873 
0.3889 
0.4377 
0.4812 
ht + dt 
0.3369 
0.4016 
0.4475 
0.4937 
Table 2: Experiment FqEd: French queries retrieving English documents 
All numbers are TREC average precisions. 
qt : query translation system 
dt : document ranslation system 
qt + dt : hybrid system combining qt and dt 
ht : monolingual baseline (equivalent to human translation) 
ht + dt : hybrid system combining ht and dt 
d'oeuvres d'art --4 flight art on the TREC- 
7 query CL,036.) With the limited number 
of queries available, it is not clear whether 
the difference in retrieval results between the 
two translation directions is a result of small 
effects across many queries, or is principally 
determined by the few outlier points. 
We remind the reader that the query 
translation and document translation ap- 
proaches to CLIR are not symmetrical. In- 
formation is distorted in a different manner 
by the two approaches, and thus a combi- 
nation of the two approaches may yield new 
information. We have investigated this as- 
pect by developing a hybrid system in which 
the score of each document is the mean of its 
(normalized) scores from both the query and 
document translation experiments. (A more 
general linear combination would perhaps be 
more suitable if the average precision of the 
two retrievals differed substantially.) We ob- 
serve that the hybrid systems which combine 
query translation and document translation 
outperform both query translation and doc- 
ument translation individually, on both sets 
of documents. (See column qt + dt of Tables 
1 and 2.) 
Given the tradeoff between computer e- 
sources and quality of translation, some 
would propose that correspondingly more 
computational effort should be put into 
query translation. From this point of view, 
a document translation system based on fast 
MT should be compared with a query trans- 
lation system based on higher quality, but 
slower MT. We can meaningfully investigate 
this limit by regarding the human-translated 
versions of the TREC queries as the ex- 
treme high-quality limit of machine trans- 
lation. In this task, monolingual retrieval 
(the usual baseline for judging the degree 
to which translation degrades retrieval per- 
formance in CLIR) can be regarded as the 
extreme high-quality limit of query trans- 
212 
o8 ! 
g 0.4 i ,. 
0.0 0 ,  ? 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Query trans. 
Figure 1: Scatterplot of average precision of document translation vs. query translation. 
lation. Nevertheless, document translation 
provides another source of information, since 
the context sensitive aspects of the transla- 
tion account for context in a manner distinct 
from current algorithms of information re- 
trieval. Thus we do a further set of experi- 
ments in which we mix document translation 
and monolingual retrieval. Surprisingly, we 
find that the hybrid system outperforms the 
pure monolingual system. (See columns ht 
and ht +dr of Tables 1 and 2.) Thus we 
conclude that a mixture of document trans- 
lation and query translation can be expected 
to outperform pure query translation, even 
very high quality query translation. 
5 Conclusions and Future 
Work 
We have performed experiments o compare 
query and document translation-based CLIR 
systems using statistical translation models 
that are trained identically for both trans- 
lation directions. Our study is the largest 
comparative study of document translation 
and query translation of which we are aware; 
furthermore we have contrasted query and 
document translation systems on both direc- 
tions within a language pair. We find no 
clear advantage for either the query trans- 
lation system or the document translation 
system; instead French=eeEnglish translation 
appears advantageous over English~French 
translation, in spite of identical procedures 
used in constructing both. However a hy- 
brid system incorporating both directions 
of translation outperforms either. Further- 
more, by incorporating human query trans- 
lations rather than machine translations, 
we show that the hybrid system contin- 
ues to outperform query translation. We 
have based our conclusions by comparing 
TREC-style average precisions of retrieval 
with a two-pass IR system; the same con- 
clusions follow if we instead compare preci- 
sions at rank 20 or average precisions from 
first pass (Okapi) scores. Thus we conclude 
that even in the limit of extremely high qual- 
ity query translation, it will remain advan- 
tageous to incorporate both document and 
query translation into a CLIR system. Fu- 
ture work will involve investigating trans- 
lation direction differences in retrieval per- 
formance for other language pairs, and for 
statistical translation systems trained from 
comparable, rather than parallel corpora. 
6 Acknowledgments  
This work is supported by NIST grant no. 
70NANB5H1174. We thank Scott Axel- 
rod, Martin Franz, Salim Roukos, and Todd 
Ward for valuable discussions. 
213 
References 
L. Ballasteros and W.B. Croft. 1997. 
Phrasal translation and query expansion 
techniques for cross-language information 
retrieval. In 20th Annual ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Information Retrieval. 
L. Ballasteros and W.B. Croft. 1998. Re- 
solving ambiguity for cross-language r - 
trieval. In 21th Annual ACM SIGIR Con- 
ference on Information Retrieval. 
P.F. Brown, J.C. Lai, and R.L. Mercer. 
1991. Aligning sentences in parallel cor- 
pora. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computa- 
tional Linguistics. 
P. Brown, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, 
and R. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of 
statistical machine translation : Param- 
eter estimation. Computational Linguis- 
tics, 19:263-311. 
C. Buckley, M. Mitra, J. Wals, and 
C. Cardie. 1998. Using clustering and 
superconcepts within SMART : TREC-6. 
In E.M. Voorhees and D.K. Harman, ed- 
itors, The 6th Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC-6). 
J.G. Carbonell, Y. Yang, R.E. Frederk- 
ing, R.D. Brown, Yibing Geng, and 
Danny Lee. 1997. Translingual informa- 
tion retrieval : A comparative evaluation. 
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Interna- 
tional Joint Conference on Artificial In- 
telligence. 
E. Chan, S. Garcia, and S. Roukos. 1997. 
TREC-5 ad-hoc retrieval using k nearest- 
neighbors re-scoring. In E.M. Voorhees 
and D.K. Harman, editors, The 5th Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-5). 
A. Diekema, F. Oroumchian, P. Sheridan, 
and E. Liddy. 1999. TREC-7 evaluation 
of Conceptual Interlingua Document Re- 
trieval (CINDOR) in English and French. 
In E.M. Voorhees and D.K. Harman, ed- 
itors, The 7th Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC-7). 
S. Dumais, T.A. Letsche, M.L. Littman, and 
T.K. Landauer. 1997. Automatic cross- 
language retrieval using latent semantic 
indexing. In AAAI Symposium on Cross- 
Language Text and Speech Retrieval. 
M. Franz and S. Roukos. 1998. TREC-6 ad- 
hoc retrieval. In E.M. Voorhees and D.K. 
Harman, editors, The 6th Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC-6). 
M. Franz, J.S. McCarley, and S. Roukos. 
1999. Ad hoc and multilingual informa- 
tion retrieval at IBM. In E.M. Voorhees 
and D.K. Harman, editors, The 7th Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-7). 
J.S. McCarley and S. Roukos. 1998. Fast 
document ranslation for cross-language 
information retrieval. In D. Farwell., 
E. Hovy, and L. Gerber, editors, Machine 
Translation and the Information Soup, 
page 150. 
D.W. Oard and P. Hackett. 1998. Docu- 
ment translation for cross-language t xt 
retrieval at the University of Maryland. 
In E.M. Voorhees and D.K. Harman, ed- 
itors, The 6th Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC-6). 
D.W. Oard. 1998. A comparative study of 
query and document translation for cross- 
language information retrieval. In D. Far- 
well., E. Hovy, and L. Gerber, editors, 
Machine Translation and the Information 
Soup, page 472. 
S.E. Robertson, S. Walker, S. Jones, M.M. 
Hancock-Beaulieu, and M. Gatford. 1995. 
Okapi at TREC-3. In E.M. Voorhees and 
D.K. Harman, editors, The 3d Text RE- 
trieval Conference (TREC-3). 
Jinxi Xu and W. Bruce Croft. 1996. Query 
expansion using local and global docu- 
ment analysis. In 19th Annual ACM SI- 
GIR Conference on Information Retrieval. 
214 
