WHAT MAKES SAM RUN? 
SCRIPT BASED TECHNIQUES 
FOR QUESTION ANSWERING 
Wendy Lehnert 
Yale Univers i ty 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The A~I. group at Yale has developed a 
program SAM (Scr ip tApp l ie r  Mechanism) which 
models processes in story understanding~ 
The basic theoretical  construct underly ing 
SAM is the notion of a script (Schank & 
Abelson 75)~ Script based knowledge is 
mundane information which tends to lie in 
the periphery of consciousness~ Going to a 
restaurant, watching a footbal l  game, taking 
a bus, and paying bills are examples of 
script activit ies. Scripts describe 
situations which are frequently encountered 
with negligible or predictable variat ions~ 
People in situational scripts are seldom 
conscious of script related actions~ The 
acts which define a script are things which 
people automatical ly  do or expect to occurs 
Since a person who has not seen a football  
game will not fully comprehend stories about 
football games, we assume script based 
knowledge is used in story understandings 
SAM uti l izes a restaurant script in 
order to paraphrase, summarize, and answer 
questions concerning stories about eating 
out in a restaurant~ The question answering 
techniques described in this paper were 
devised as SAM evolved~ 
The fol lowing story is an input  story 
which SAM has processed: 
John went to a restaurant~ The 
hostess seated Johns The hostess gave 
John a menus The waiter came to the 
table~ John ordered lobsters John 
was served quickly~ John left a large 
tip~ John left the restaurants 
SAM responds in a sample question answering 
session: 
Q~ Why did John go to a restaurant? 
A .  So John could eat. 
Q~ Did the waiter give John a menu? 
A. No, the hostess gave John a menu. 
Q. Why did the hostess give John a menu? 
A. So John could orders 
Q. What happened when the hostess gave 
John a menu? 
A~ John read the menu. The waiter saw 
that John was at the table~ The waiter  
went to the table~ 
Q. What did John eat? 
A~ Lobster. 
Q. Who brought John the lobster? 
A. The waiter brought John the lobster. 
Q. What happened when John ate the 
lobster? 
16. 
A, John indicated to the waiter  that he 
would like a checks The waiter gave 
John the checks John remembered that 
the waiter had served the lobster 
quickly~ John left the waiter a large 
tips 
Q~ Did John enjoy the lobster? 
A~ Probably~ 
Q. Who paid the bil l? 
A~ John. 
Q. Why did John pay the bil l? 
A, So he could leave. 
II. INTERPRETING QUESTIONS: 
FOCUS 
ESTABLISHING 
A recurr ing issue in natural language 
processing which is part icu lar ly  evident in 
quest ion answering is the problem of focus~ 
What is interest ing about a statement? Where 
is attent ion directed? What aspects of a 
statement are s igni f icant? Many quest ions 
have more than one acceptable answer and to 
a large extent people manage to agree on 
which answers seem most natural. The 
appropr iateness  of a response is a function 
of focus~ Questions usual ly have a focus 
(or emphasis) which renders one response 
more appropr iate than another~ 
Consider the sample input story above  
and the quest ion "Did the waiter give John a 
menu?" The most natural  answer to this is 
"No, the hostess gave John a menu." To 
arr ive at this response we must go beyond 
the original  yes or no quest ion and answer a 
second quest ion "Who gave John a menu? 
DID THE WAITER GIVE JOHN A MENU? 
/ \ 
YES NO 
\ 
WELL THEN, WHO DID? 
\ 
THE HOSTESS 
The interest ing problem here is how we 
picked up this second questions By going on 
to ask who gave John the menu we have 
interpreted the or iginal  quest ion to focus 
on the actor who executes the transfer of 
the menus How did this emphasis arise? We 
could have gone on to ask "Well then, what 
did the waiter give John?" or even "Well 
then, what did the waiter do?" Emphasis in 
this direct ion would el icit answers like: 
No, the'waiter  gave John a checks 
No, the waiter brought John his meal~ 
No, the waiter took John's orders 
While each of these' is an acceptable answer, 
they are less natural  than: 
No, the hostess gave John a menus 
So to arrive at the best answer we have to 
focus on the actor being the most important 
or interest ing component of the question. 
How do we do this? 
CONJECTURE: 
WHEN GIVEN A CHOICE OF FOCUS, 
TAKE VARIATION OVER EXPECTATION. 
Th iscon jec ture  is based on the premise that 
variables are more interest ing than 
constants, i.e. the unexpected is more 
worthy of attent ion than the expected. 
In general, implementing such a rule 
may be hard, but within the context of a 
script, it's easy. Every script is 
character ized by a set or sequence of 
act ions specif ic to that script. In a 
restaurant the patron expects to receive a 
menu, sit down at a table, order, eat, pay, 
etc. Expected acts such as these are 
constants within the script. We are 
surpr ised to hear things like: 
John went to a restaurant but he 
didn't eat. 
John went to a restaurant and didn't 
pay the check. 
When John went to the restaurant he 
sat on the floor. 
In these cases our expectat ions have been 
violated because the script constants of 
eating, paying, and sitt ing at a'table have 
been contradicted or over-ruled~ When given 
a question, we examine the quest ion  
statement in order to establ ish which 
components comprise a script constant. Once 
we know which script constant matches our 
question statement, we take the object of 
focus to be that element of the question 
statement which is not a part of the script 
? constant (if one exists). Since this 
extraneous element should be a script 
variable (being non-constant) we have 
establ ished the appropr iate focus. 
In our example, the act of transferr ing 
a menu to the patron is a script constant. 
We expect an ATRANS of the menu to John. 
Who gives him the menu is a script variable 
since we would not be surprised to hear it 
was the hostess or a waiter. Perhaps even 
the cook gave him the menu or he got it 
himself. A similar s i tuat ion occurs when 
John gets the check. We expect him to get a 
check, but the actor of the transfer is 
variable. Of course these variables assume 
default bindings in the absence of expl icit  
data; unless I hear otherwise, I assume the 
waiter  brings the check. 
Whenever the answer to a did-quest ion 
is "No", it is natural  to augment the 
negative response with a correct ion or 
explanat ion of some sort. There are two 
classi f iable situations when the init ial 
response is negative. In one case a focus 
exists and can be determined by our rule (as 
in the waiter giving John the menu). In the 
other case no focus is found in the 
question. No focus is found in "Did John 
17. 
sit down?" or "Did John pay the check?" 
because the actions in question are full 
script constants with no possibi l i ty of 
var iat ion within the expectat ions of the 
script. In  such instances where no focus 
exists the expectat ions of the script have 
been violated. (John should have sat down 
and he should have paid the checks) Whenever 
expectat ions are violated, the natural  
quest ion to be asked is "How come?" This is 
equivalent to "Why didn't John sit down?" or 
"Why didn't John pay the check?" Answers to 
these wil l  either be wierd-or iented answers 
or inter ference-or iented answers (see part 
IV). When the or iginal  quest ion statement 
does have a focus, the answer is found by 
matching the constant part of the statement 
against the script acts. Once a script act 
is matched, we instant iate the variable 
b~ndings and return the result ing 
conceptual izat ion as the best augmentat ive 
answer. 
So in applying the rule of var iat ion 
over expectat ion (V/E) to the question "Did 
the waiter  give John a menu" we identi fy 
giving John a menu as a script constant and 
the actor binding as a script variable. 
Therefore the focus of attent ion falls on 
the actor, and we augment the minimal ly  
correct response "No" with the most natural  
addit ion, "the hostess gave John a menu." 
Script variables also occur in 
instrumental i ty,  manner, mode, and time 
fil lers, e.g. "Why did John drive to the 
restaurant?" If we're in the restaurant 
script, we expect John to get to the 
restaurant.  How he gets there is variables 
Applying V/E to the question, we establ ish 
the focus to be on driving. "Did John eat 
his meal in 10 minutes?" We expect John to 
eat his meal. How long it takes him is 
variable. Applying V/E we determine the 
focus to be on the time it took John to eat. 
If more than one variable occurs in a 
question, some hierarchy must be invoked to 
establ ish the focus. In answering "Why did 
John drive to the restaurant at 4:00A.M~?" 
we presumably find that going at 4:00A.M. 
is more interest ing than driving. People 
need to be able to resolve focus in order to 
understand what a question is driving at~ 
"Why did John rol ler skate to the restaurant 
at 4:00A.M.?" tends to have the effect of 
two different questions: "Why did he rol ler 
skate?" and "Why did he go at 4:00A.M.?" The 
ambiguity in this question results from the 
ambiguity of focus. We have trouble 
deciding which is more interesting, the mode 
of transportation, or the hour. When focus  
is not resolved a question seems confused or 
i l l -def ined. 
III~ ANSWERING WHAT-HAPPENED-WHEN-QUESTIONS 
Part of SAM's internal representat ion 
for the input story is a causal chain of 
conceptual dependency diagrams (Schank 75). 
A causal chain is an a l ternat ing sequence of 
states and actions in which each state 
enables the fol lowing action and each action 
results in the fol lowing state. 
Understanding the relat ionship between two 
conceptual izat ions is at 
ref lected by the abi l i ty 
causal chain between them~ 
least in part 
to construct a 
If I hear that John had a bad car 
accident, I am not surprised to hear that 
his car was wrecked, or that he was injured, 
or that Mary doesn't want to ride with him 
any more. These all relate to the accident 
as causal consequences~ Even when 
expectat ions are violated as in "John was in 
a car accident. He was overjoyed." We try 
to make sense out of it by construct ing the 
most feasible causal chain we can: Maybe the 
car was worthless anyway and John was not 
too badly hurt but he was insured and 
they're giving him a big sett lement and he 
can really use the money for some reasons 
When SAM processes an input story, 
causal chains are establ ished between 
consecutive input conceputal izat ions~ 
Generating causal chains in a s ituat ional  
script is easy because the script contains 
all the expected actions which wil l  fill in 
a chain between any two acts of the scripts 
A major part of the script data base 
consists of various causal paths throughout 
portions of the restaurant script. When SAM 
receives a what-happened-when question, it 
matches the act in question against its 
corresponding script counterpart and simply 
returns that portion of the causal chain 
representat ion of the story which begins 
with the act in question and ends at the 
next conceptual izat ion mentioned in the 
input story~ 
IV. ANSWERING WHY-QUESTIONS 
Once we have interpreted a question by 
establ ishing its focus, we stil l have to 
answer the questions The most interest ing 
class of questions in this respect seem to 
be why-quest ions~ There appear to be 
roughly four types of answers to 
why-quest ions~ Two are script based and two 
require data outside of scripts~ The script 
based answers have implementable heurist ics 
(currently incorporated in SAM)~ 
(I) WIERD-ORIENTED ANSWERS 
(non-script based) 
In any script context we may get an 
unexpected occurrence which is relevant to 
the scripts Answers dependent on the wierd 
occurrence may relate back to it in a number 
of ways. Consider the fol lowing examples: 
Ex.1: John went to a restaurant and broke 
his wrist when the chair he was sitt ing 
on collapsed. John sued the restaurant. 
Q. Why did John sue the restaurant? 
A. His chair col lapsed and he was 
injured. 
Ex.2: John went to a restaurant and found 
out that everyone got a free drink of 
their choicer John ordered the cheapest 
drink they had. 
Q. Why did John order a cheap drink? 
A? I have no idea. 
Ex.3: John went to a restaurant and ordered 
a hamburger. When the waiter was 
carrying it from the kitchen he dropped 
it on the floors John ate the hamburger 
and lefts 
Q~ Why did John eat the hamburger? 
A~ He must not have known it was 
dropped~ 
In Ex~1, a causal chain can be 
constructed between the wierd occurrence and 
the act in questions The act in question is 
consistent with our expectat ions after the 
wierd ocurrence; the chair col lapsing and 
result ing injury are the causal antecedents 
of John suing the restaurant~ 
In Ex~2, no causal chain can be 
constructed between the wierd occurrence and 
the act in question, so we are at a loss to 
answer the questions 
In Ex~3, our expectat ions are vio lated 
as in Ex~2, but here we can account for the 
discrepancy, and we use the explanat ion as 
our answer~ We expect a causal chain which 
includes John refusing the hamburgers Since 
this construct ion is contradicted when we 
hear that John ate the hamburger, we 
reconstruct the causal chain and account for 
the val idity of the new construct ion in our 
answers 
The di f f icult ies in arr iv ing at answers 
of this type are apparent: 
I) Since scripts normal ly  run in the 
background of a story line and are rarely 
in the foreground, we need to be able to 
identi fy wierd occurrences as 
d ist inguished from commonplace 
occurrences which are irrelevant to the 
script~ For example, how do we know that 
smoke coming from a wall is wierd and 
smoke coming from an open barbecue pit in 
a steak house is OK~ Similarly, if John 
stands up and starts making a toast, this 
is not wierd unless perhaps there is no 
one else at his tables Some very strong 
inference mechanisms or higher level 
structures must come into play in the 
problem of recogniz ing wierdness~ 
2) We need to know if the act in question is 
consistent with the wierd ocurrence (as 
in Ex~1) or if it v iolates expectat ions 
(as  in Ex~2)~ This is equivalent to 
knowing when a causal chain can be 
constructed between two conceptual izatons 
and when no such chain exists~ 
3) If our expectat ions have been violated, 
we  need to be able to construct feasible 
explanat ions whenever possible (as in 
Ex~3). Construct ing a feasible 
explanat ion is equivalent to construt ing 
a bel ievable causal chain. In Ex~3, the 
causal chain behind our explanat ion is 
arr ived at by suppressing the inference 
that John knew about the waiter dropping 
his hamburgers Since this is the key to 
a valid causal construct ion, we zero in 
on it for our answers 
In general the problems of recogniz ing 
an unusual occurrence or construct ing a 
causal chain are major issues which are far 
from resolved~ 
18. 
(2) EXTERNALLY-ORIENTED ANSWERS 
(non-script based) 
Questions like "Why did John walk to 
the restaurant?" or "Why did John order a 
hamburger?" require data from outside of the 
script. Litt le can be sa id  about these 
general script exits until we have developed 
some data structures outside of scripts~ 
(3). GOAL-ORIENTED ANSWERS (script based) 
These occur in one of two ways: 
I )  The focus Of the question (as 
determined by V/E) is a variable whose 
default binding is a character in the 
script. 
2) The question has no focus (via V/E)~ 
QI: Why did John go to the restaurant? 
(focus:nil) 
Q2: Why did John go to a table? 
(focus:nil) 
Q3: Why did the hostess give John a menu?  
(focus:hostess) 
Q4: Why did the waiter give John a check? 
(focus:waiter) 
Q5: Why did John pay the check? 
(focus:nil) 
Each script has a static goal structure 
which consists of scr iptgoals and a set of 
subgoals. The subgoals may exist on 
different levels of detail. The hierarchy 
of the restaurant script has only one level 
of subgoals and one scriptgoal.  The goal 
structure for the restaurant script looks 
like: 
EATING 
GOING TO BEING ORDERING PAYING --~ LEAVING 
RESTAURANT SEATED / / / 
GOING TO GETTING GETTING 
A TABLE A MENU A CHECK 
The top level  of this structure contains the 
scr iptgoal  of eating~ The second level 
represents the subgoals of the restaurant 
script and the third level contains other 
acts found in the script (not all shown). 
Goal-or iented answers are derived by the 
fol lowing rules: 
a) If the act in question is a subgoal, go 
to the next goal in the next level up. 
If no such goal exists, go to the next 
goal in the same level. 
b) If the act in quest ion is not 'a 
subgoal, go to the next goal in the 
lowest level of subgoals. 
c) If the act in question is a scriptgoal,  
there is nogoa l -o r iented  answer. It 
probably has an external ly-or iented 
answer.? 
Using the goal a lgor i thm we 
questions QI-Q5. 
AI: So he could eat. 
A2: So he could sit down. 
A3: So he could order. 
A4: So he could pays 
A5: So he could leave. 
can answer 
Notice that this goal structure is 
or iented with respect to the central 
character of the script, in this case the 
restaurant patron. If we were in a 
restaurant script with respect to the waiter 
we would answer Q4 with something like 
"Because it's his Job" or "Because John was 
done eating". Intr insic to all scripts is a 
point of view. 
(4) INTERFERENCE-ORIENTED ANSWERS 
(script based) 
These are similar to wierd-or iented 
answers but are dist inguished by being more 
commonplace. The restaurant script contains 
alternat ive paths which contain occurrences 
of goal interference. For example, if no 
tables are available, we have interference 
with the goal of being seated. 
Ex.1: John went to a restaurant and 
ordered a hotdog. The waiter said they 
didn't have any. So John ordered a 
hamburger. 
Ex.2: John went to a restaurant and was 
told he'd have to wait an hour for a 
,table. John left. 
Ex.3: John went to a restaurant. He read 
the menu, became very angry and left. 
A goal interference predicts an action 
which will be either a resolut ion or 
consequence of the interference. Therefore 
any question which points to such a 
resolut ion or consequence is explained by 
the interfer ing occurrence. 
QI: Why did John order a hamburger? 
At: The waiter said they didn't have 
hotdogs. 
any 
Q2: Why did John leave? 
A2: He was told he'd have to wait 
for a table. 
an hour 
Q3: Why did John leave? 
A3: He became very angry. 
19. 
/ 
1 
V. THE THEORETICAL SIDE OF SAM 
The problems of interpret ing a question 
or f inding the best answer to a why-quest ion 
are both character ized by the necessity of 
knowing what is interest ing about the 
question. Interpretat ion is faci l i tated by 
establ ishing focus. Answering a 
why-quest ion may entail  examination and 
construct ion of causal chains or knoweldge 
of goal hierarchies. In any case, the 
solution to what is interest ing lies within 
some structural  representat ion of the story. 
When we are within the confines of a script, 
the problem is relat ively trivial since the 
structures we need are predetermined and 
static. Outside of a script we need dynamic 
processes which can generate the needed 
representat ion as we go along. To date, 
systems based on uncontrol led inferencing 
and proposit ional  reasoning have failed to 
be effective precisely because no higher 
level structures were invoked to give the 
processing direction. The di f ference 
between a blind inferencing mechanism and a 
clever one is this crucial abi l i ty to 
determine what is deserving of attention. 
By studying the structures implicit  in 
scripts, we may gain some insight concerning 
what types of guidance mechanisms exist and 
how analogous structures may be generated in 
contexts beyond scripts. 
The proposed heurist ic of var iat ion 
over expectat ion is theoret ical ly  
s ignif icant insofar as it suggests an 
alternat ive to what might be called a 
proposit ional  approach to memory retrieval. 
Suppose we know that the host gave John a 
menu, and we need to answer "Did the waiter 
give John the menu?" How are we to answer 
this question without recourse to scripts or 
the idea of focus? Suppose we approached the 
problem proposit ional ly.  One possible line 
of analysis might entail  the fol lowing 
reasoning: 
(i) The act of t ransfer ing a menu to a 
restaurant patron usual ly occurs once in 
the course of a dinner out. 
(ii) The act of t ransfer ing a menu to a 
restaurant patron is executed by one 
actor only. 
(iii) The host and the waiter  are two 
different actors. 
Given these three supposit ions and some 
deductive reasoning capacity, we are in a 
posit ion to conclude that the answer to the 
question is "No". 
There are a number of problems with an 
approach of this type. In the first place, 
it is probably impossible to implement. We 
need some very clever inferencing to pull 
(i) out of the blue. Then deduction and 
inferencing must combine in some myster ious 
way to extract (ii) from (i). All in all, 
the whole argument smells like theorem 
proving, a technique which has proved 
ineffect ive and is certainly not the way 
people work. But ignoring all these 
objections, even if you could implement it, 
the fact remains that this has simply not 
done a very good Job of answering the 
question. It yields only a minimal ly  
20. 
correct response and has no indication of 
the point of the question; there is no way 
of knowing how to augment the init ial  
response "No". 
By examining non-scr ipt based 
approaches to this question, it seems clear 
that the best possible answer can be derived 
only from a data base which enables us to 
establ ish the focus of the question. There 
is no way that the natural  answer to this 
quest ion can be found without some sense of 
what is interest ing about the question. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In the area of memory organizat ion, 
there is much controversy over categor ies of 
world knowledge and corresponding models of 
memory. At present, there is an ongoing 
debate concerning ep isod ic  vs. semantic 
memory (Tulving 72). Episodic memory 
emphasizes exper ient ia l  knowledge of the 
world, while semantic memory accomodates 
abstract ions derived from experience. It is 
general ly  conceded that people must have 
both episodic and semantic knowledge. 
Content ion arises when retr ieval  mechanisms 
are descr ibed which bias one data structure 
over another (Schank 74~ Ortony 75). The 
problem of  course is which types of 
knowledge are used for what purposes and 
how. 
Ana lys i s  of memory retr ieval  mechanisms 
usual ly  proceeds along one of two routes. 
On one hand, there is speculat ion about 
memory retr ieval  in general, without 
reference to things people actual ly do. On 
the other hand, there are psychological  
exper iments which study very specif ic tasks 
that people never encounter  outside of a 
psychologica l  test. Neither approach has 
taught us much about the nature of human 
memory. The development of computer models 
has the dist inct advantage of forcing us to 
ident i fy and account for memory processes 
which people rea l ly  have and use all the 
time. 
Trying to answer whether or not the 
waiter  gave John a menu led to the concept 
of focus and a heur ist ic  for determining 
focus. Quest ion answer ing using focus works 
because it is founded on recogniz ing what 
people find interest ing. As people live 
from day to day, they exper ience various 
act iv i t ies  and situations. Some of these 
act iv i t ies  are more engaging than others, 
and some s i tuat ions are more interest ing 
than others. If we can discover a metr ic 
which assesses the relat ive interest -appeal  
of assorted human experiences, then we can 
use this metric to establ ish general focus 
in story understanding.  Whatever metric we 
design wil l  have to examine exper ient ia l  
data bases since the phenomenon of being 
interested in something is inherent in 
exper ience and cannot be derived. 
A system relying on purely semantic 
data will never know where to focus because 
the exper ient ia l  element of what is 
interest ing has been dist i l led out of its 
data base. It might be argued that perhaps 
a function exists which would operate on a 
semantic network of propositions and 
evaluate the focus of a statement or story. 
Suppose this could be done. Then what is 
the point of abstracting experiential data 
in the first place? Why develop a purely 
semantic conceptual representation if we re 
Just going to tu rnaround and recreate the 
experiential data that's been thrown away? 
No  one is denying that people have the 
ability to abstract principles from 
experience and acquire knowledge which is 
not episodic in nature. We all know that 
most swans are white and Ancient Greece was 
polytheistic. The issue is a question of 
exactly where and how semantic knowledge is 
used in natural language processing. SAM 
has demonstrated the power of episodic 
memory organization in the task of story 
understanding and question answering. While 
it is certainly not true that episodic 
memory is go ingto  account for the memory 
organization underlying all thought 
processes, we are constructing models which 
illustrate a theory of episodic memory in 
language processing. 
REFERENCES 
Ortony, A., How Episodic is Semantic Memory? 
In Proceedings of ~beoretical ~sues  in 
Natural L~n~ua~e Processing, Cambridge 
MA, 1975. 
Schank, R.C., and Abelson, R.P., Scripts, 
Plans, and Knowledge. Presented at the 
4th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Tbilisi, USSR. 
August, 1975. 
Schank, R.C., Is there a Semantic Memory? 
Castagnola, Switzerland: Istituto per 
gli Studi Semantici e Cognitivi, 1974 
(mimeo). 
Schank, R.C., The Structure of Episodes in 
Memory. In  D.G. Bobrow and A.M. 
Collins (eds.), ReDresentat lon  and 
Understanding. New York: Academic 
Press, 1975. 
Tulving, E., Episodic and Semantic Memory. 
In E. Tulvlng and W. Donaldson (eds.), 
of Memory. New York: 
Academic Press, 1972. 
21. 
