BAD-MOUTHING FRAMES 
Jerry Feldman 
Univers i ty of Rochester 
Rochester NY 
It appears that many people in the 
AI /psychol inguist ics  community are like my 
old friend (in California) who said: "How 
can I understand something unless I believe 
it for a while." This seems to me to 
indicate the role of "paradigms" such as 
"frames" in the study of thought. Since I 
do not, myself, work that way and also do 
not (despite years of the New York Review) 
function well as a critic of scientif ic 
developments, I wil l  l imit myself  to three 
rather concrete sets of remarks. These 
concern vision, interact ions with the world 
and net models in the context of "frames". 
Much of the discussion of Minsky's 
frames paper is concerned with visual 
perception. There are a number of 
conclusions about visual perception and 
visual memory that result from the frames 
paradigm which appear to me to be wrong and 
even wrongheaded. The notion that we store 
a large number of separate views in purely 
symbolic form is one such. There is a good 
deal of evidence that people do use 
three-d imensional  models (e.g. Shepard) and 
that they regular ly integrate several views 
into a single visual model which seems to be 
the predominate one (e.g. stereopsis, motion 
parallax). There are other examples of this 
sort, some of which are clearly the scars of 
old battles against perceptions, analog 
myst ic ism and the like. None of these are 
beyond incorporat ion into a frames paradigm. 
That this is true results from and 
i l luminates the main di f f iculty with the 
frames paradigm as a theory -- it seems to 
be extensible to include anything at all. 
Without going as far as Popper ( ); we can 
ask that a theory be at least conceptual ly  
refutable. We propose an ant i - f rames 
hypothesis  below. 
Another serious problem with a frames 
approach to vision lies in the strong 
assumption of default values for slots. The 
assumption is that, when viewing a new 
scene, we are basical ly just ver i fy ing our 
frame picture of it. Here a l itt le 
intel lectual  history is called for. Early 
efforts in machine perception (and much 
perceptual  psychology) were concerned with 
visual processes which operated independent 
of context. We studied edge detectors, 
pattern c lassi f iers and algor i thms for 
part i t ioning general stra ight- l ine drawings. 
This not only proved diff icult but offered 
no promise of extension to typical 
real-world scenes. There then came a 
concerted effort to overcome (or circumvent) 
perception problems by giving programs lots 
of domain knowledge. This has been carr ied 
to the extreme of visual perception without 
vision, viz. anything black and on a desk 
is a telephone. The frames paper seems to 
approach vision in this way. Once again, 
there is substantial  evidence (and 
overwhelming intuit ion) that this is not 
what occurs. For example, people can 
92 
I 
understand total ly unexpected images 
presented for quite short periods. A recent mm 
study by Potter indicates that verbal | descr ipt ions (which could give rise to very 
many images) are almost as eff ic ient as a 
preview for choosing a target in such a set. mm 
To return to the questions posed at R 
the beginning, one does not need to 
know exactly what a thing wil l  look 
like to detect it in a I /3-second i 
glimpse. In fact, knowing the | exact appearance of a target was 
l itt le better than knowing only its 
general  meaning, which suggests tht 
a scene is processed rapidly to an 
abstract level of meaning before m 
intent ional  select ion occurs 
(Potter 1975). 
i 
Well; even Minsky doesn't claim the g 
frames paper is right -- only that it should 
help us ask the right questions. In machine 
perception, it seems to be having a ? 
s igni f icant impact which I consider | 
negat ive .  Frames and the whole idea of 
vision as most ly problem solving seem to 
have subverted work on the understanding of a 
images. It has always been tempting to | avoid the hard detai led problems of real 
images for the higher realms of abstract 
problem solving. The frames paper has had 
the effect (it real ly has) of sanct ioning 
this retreat. i 
My second comment is an extension of 
this last point -- the actual effects of the mm 
world on a "frames" process is much too | weak. This has been a major concern of mine 
lately. Quoting from a recent paper: 
| 
"The wheel less student problem S 
models the real- l i fe problem of 
buying a used automobi le (in the 
United States). A typical In 
procedure is first to read g newspaper advert isements and 
bul let in boards to assess the 
s i tuat ion generally. Then, at m 
re lat ively low cost, one can ? 
te lephone various purveyors of cars i and inquire about them. At some 
point, one must actual ly go to the 
effort of seeing and driving ? 
certain of these. There are g 
profess ional  diagnost ic services 
which can be employed (at 
considerable cost) to further test 
the car. In each of these steps, ? 
one must decide when to stop that m 
stage and go on to the next one. 
One does not, of course, proceed in 
strict order; there wil l  normal ly ? 
be a l ternat ives at several  | dif ferent levels of invest igat ion.  
Notice that the "plan" itself  
is trivial: read, telephone, look, B 
drive, profess ional ly  test and buy. i It is the appl icat ion of this plan 
to the world s i tuat ion which is 
diff icult.  We believe that much 
intel l igent act iv i ty  is | 
character ized by complex 
I 
appl icat ions of simple plans and 
this bel ief  has led to concentrate 
on the closely related questions of 
plan e laborat ion and execution." 
The point to be made here is that the 
world does not hold stil l for us. Theories 
which propose a narrow channel between the 
mind and the world have considerable value, 
but we wil l  have to move beyond them to 
achieve real explanatory or robotic power. 
It is the relat ively static nature of 
the frames paradigm which makes me most 
uncomfortable.  I consider the main 
substant ive claim of the frames paradigm to 
be that knowledge is stored in re lat ively 
coherent chunks which change only slowly over 
time. The opposing hypothesis is the older 
"net" model which says that the col lect ion of 
knowledge being brought to bear at a given 
instant is a rapidly changing function of the 
situation. Once again, we can blur the 
dist inction, but then I don't know what the 
frames paradigm is. 
Let us consider this question of static 
versus dynamic clumping of knowledge. We can 
assume, in both cases, that knowledge can 
include procedures, contexts and any other 
clever things that we dream up (Bobrow and 
Winograd have dreamed up dozens). The 
quest ion is whether the high bandwidth 
connect ions among knowledge primit ives can be 
fairly static. There are important reasons 
for hoping the frames hypothesis is true for 
animals or could be employed by machines. 
The general advantages of part i t ioning 
complexity are well  known (Simon, Alexander).  
For any current or projected computers there 
is a memory hierarchy which strongly favors 
coherent chunks of knowledge re lat ively 
loosely coupled with other chunks. 
Unfortunately,  I see great di f f iculty with 
static frames of anywhere near the scale 
discussed by Minsky. 
Try to introspect as you slowly read the 
fol lowing sentence: 
"Imagine yoursel f  walking into a 
room; it is the master bedroom of a 
quiet Victor ian house, in a slum of 
Bombay, which has just had a fire 
and been rebuilt in modern style, 
except for the master bedroom which 
is only half remodeled having its 
decorat ive panel l ing intact but 
badly visible because of the thick 
smoke." 
The sentence above causes several 
shifts and ref inements of the image. The 
question is, of course, where are the 
frames. It is possible that there are a 
very large number of room frames embodying 
all the combinator ia l  poss ib i l i t ies hinted 
at above. Alternat ively,  there could be a 
single room frame that incorporated all 
these possibi l i t ies.  Neither of these 
a l ternat ives str ikes me as plausible. What 
seems to happen is that we build our model 
dynamical ly  as we process the sentence. The 
anti - frame hypothesis  here is that the 
93 
connect ions which are most impor tant  
(heavily used, etc.) are not speci f iable in 
advance. 
Let us return to the problem of buying 
a used car. I believe that what happens is 
roughly as follows. We construct a 
goal -or iented subsystem making use of our 
knowledge of cars, buying, our locale, 
fr iends who know about cars, etc. This 
subsystem seems to have great internal 
coherence and rely only s l ight ly on our 
total world knowledge about e.g. buying. 
The used-car -buy ing subsystem probably gets 
drast ical ly  changed each time it is 
re invoked with only a few general pr inciples 
carried over from its last incarnation. 
While it is active, the subsystem effects 
much of our percept ion of the real world and 
of our thinking. We notice different 
things, seek dif ferent people, make 
dif ferent mental  associat ions,  etc. My mind 
boggles at trying to model a system of such 
f lexibi l i ty,  but the frames hypothesis (as I 
understand it) seems more l ikely to lead me 
astray than to help. 
REFERENCES 
Feldman, J. and Sproull, R., "The Hungry 
Monkey", Technical  Report 3, Univers i ty 
of Rochester, 1975. 
Minsky, M., "A Framework for Represent ing 
Knowledge", MIT AI Lab Memo no. 306, 
1974. 
Popper, K., The Logic of  Scient i f ic  
Discovery. London: Hutchinson, 1959. 
Potter, K., "Meaning in Visual Search", 
Science, 187, p.965, 1975. 
Shepard, R., and Meltzer, J., "Mental 
Rotat ion of 3d Objects", Science, 171, 
p.701, 1971. 
