SPEAKING WITH MANYTONGUES:  
SOME PROBLEMS IN MODELING SPEAKERS 
OF ACTUAL DISCOURSE 
John H. Cl ippinger, Jr. 
Teleos 
Cambridge MA 02138 
I. INTRODUCTION 
"It is as if our languages were 
confounded; when we want a thought, 
they bring us a word; when we ask 
for a word; they bring us a dash; 
and when we expect a dash, there 
comes a piece of bawdy." 
L ichtenberg 
Any discussion of natural  language 
processing models eventual ly  makes reference 
to the extent to which a part icular  model or 
class of models accurately descr ibes an 
aspect of human language processing. While 
there has been considerable work done in 
natural  language comprehending systems and 
subsequent d iscussion of their 
appropr iateness  as descr ipt ive models, there 
has not been a paral le l  effort in the area 
of discourse generation. Moreover, most 
work done in language comprehension and 
generat ion systems has been highly 
restr icted to very special ized speech 
situations, and has not seen as its pr imary 
object ive the model ing of a specif ic speaker 
or l istener. While there are good  
methodologica l  reasons for working with 
restr icted examples and l imited domains, an 
argument can be made that such a restr icted 
and normative focus can result in d istorted 
notions about the character and complexity 
of natural  speech generat ion and 
comprehension.  
In this paper I would like to break 
with some establ ished pract ices in 
ar t i f i c ia l  inte l l igence and l inguistics, and 
examine some of the propert ies of 
t ranscr ibed natural  d iscourse in order to 
suggest the types of mechan isms and 
frameworks that might be most appropr iate to 
a descr ipt ion of human discourse behavior. 
The paper consists of three parts: the first 
wil l  begin with a brief analysis of a sample 
of a "therapeut ic  discourse" and then focus 
on some pr inc ipal  issues in model ing natural  
discourse; the fol lowing sect ion wil l  
br ief ly descr ibe the manner in which this 
part icu lar  d iscourse episode was modeled in 
the program ERMA, and the final sect ion wil l  
discuss the l imitat ions of my own approach 
and suggest others that may be more 
complete. 
II. AN EXAMPLE OF NATURAL DISCOURSE 
For all the work done in l inguist ics,  
it is only re lat ive ly  recent ly that 
l inguists -- especia l ly  soc io l inguists  -- 
have begun to look at actual language use. 
Like undergraduates in psychology 
experiments,  there has been a tendency to 
use l imited samples of speakers as data 
sources -- more often than not, l inguists 
themselves. A l though this trend is 
beginning to reverse itself, it nonetheless 
68 
has resulted in some distort ions about the 
use and character of' language. For by 
solely focusing upon the grammatica l i ty  or 
wel l - formedness of an utterance, attent ion 
is often averted from the reasons a 
part icular  utterance was made, and why it 
took the part icular  form it did. Below is a 
fragment of a transcr ibed episode in 
therapeut ic  discourse which was used in 
construct ing the ERMA model and which I 
believe, is rich in data about discourse 
behavior. 
You know, for some reason, I, huh, 
just thought about, uh, about the 
bill and payment agsin. That (pause 
2 seconds) that, uh (pause 4 
seconds) I was, uh, thinking that 
I -- of asking you whether it 
wouldn't  be all right for (pause 2 
seconds), you know, not to give me a 
bill. That is, uh-I would 
(hesitates) since I usual ly 
by -- well, I immediate ly  thought of 
object ions to this, but my idea was 
that I would simply count up the 
number of hours and give you a check 
at the end of the month. 
Notice that the informat ion content of 
this reques is quite l imited; the patient 
wants to bill hersel f  and pay by check at 
the end of the month. But this rather 
l imited request is couched in a most 
extraord inary network of dubitat ives -- "you 
know," "for some reason," "wouldn't be all 
r ight," "that is," "was thinking,"  etc. 
Similarly, the entire third sentence acts 
like a dubitative, and in effect was 
produced in ant ic ipat ion of the therapist 's  
reaction; obviously, the patient is worr ied 
about what her therapist  might think. 
Notice too that the patient starts a 
sentence ("That is, uh-I would since I 
usual ly  by-wel l ,")  and then in i t iat ies 
another sentence. It is quite apparent that 
this part icu lar  speaker is monitor ing most 
of what she says -- th inking about it, and 
then react ing to it. Moreover, she does not 
seem to know what she is f inal ly going to 
say from the start, but modif ies, qual i f ies,  
and corrects hersel f  as she speaks. Hence 
she seems to be invoking a number of 
di f ferent and often contradictory  cr i ter ia  
in her product ion of discourse. She doesn't  
so much generate discourse -- as that 
implies too neat and l inear a process -- as 
she regulates it; she makes a statement, 
retracts it, qual i f ies it, and then restates 
it. In fact, as the remaining sect ion of 
this d iscourse episode makes clear, she had 
only a l imited understanding about why she 
made the request in the first place. It 
turns out that she in i t iated the request to 
reduce the formal i ty  of the therapeut ic  
sett ing in order to faci l i tate " intercourse" 
between hersel f  and the therapist.  Not only 
would it appear that there are a number of 
di f ferent and conf l ict ing control  mechanisms 
operat ing during the course of d iscourse 
production, but also during its inception, 
when the not ion of the request was first 
being considered. 
What I think that this example 
demonstrates is the extent to which 
! 
I 
a 
! 
I 
! 
1 
! 
! 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
! 
! 
! 
I 
I 
I 
cognit ive and l inguist ic behaviors are 
incredibly intertwined. For not only does 
the cognit ive component itself appear to be 
fragmented and at odds with itself, but each 
of these fragments -- or control 
mechanisms -- seem to have access to 
l inguistic knowledge, which they in turn can 
use for their own purposes. Hence entire 
constituents can be formed and inserted en 
masse, ("you know," "for some reason",) or 
entire sentences generated by relat ively 
independent mechanisms. Moreover, similar 
l inguistic items seem to have different 
meanings according to how they are used, and 
therefore would require mult iple 
representations. For example, the first 
sentence is a type of foregrounding remark 
and was constructed to acquaint the 
listener, the therapist in this case, with 
the reason for a change in topic. The word 
"thought" here refers to a prior mental 
action of the speaker and differs 
considerably from the "was thinking" of the 
second sentence, which in this case acts as 
a qual i f ier or dubitative. Any intel l igent 
system must of course know the dif ference of 
uses and hence, meanings, between the two. 
Moreover, the derivat ion of the two similar 
words would differ; the first one would be 
derived from the concept for thinking and 
psychology at that. But independent of such 
a move I am at a loss to see how discourse 
behavior can be adequately described at the 
l inguistic level alone. 
III. THE ERMA MODEL OF DISCOURSE BEHAVIOR 
The ERMA (err-umm-ah) (Clippinger, 
1974; Brown, 1974), program Was written to 
simulate a speaker of a therapeutic 
discourse from beginning to end: the 
motivat ion of the discourse, its censoring, 
reformulation, expression, and 
introspection. The intent was to have a 
program which repl icated the thought and 
discourse processes of the modeled 
speaker -- including her hesitat ions and 
mistakes. The program was init ial ly written 
in CONNIVER (McDermott Sussman, 1973) and 
makes extensive use of two of its key 
features; methods and contexts. 
f~orm~-F~ve major "stages of the discourse 
ation au~_~, expression process were 
~ ident i f ied i  and represented a~ CONNIVER 
-~-6~ntex-t-s.-r- Calvin, Machiavell i ,  Cicero, 
Freud, and Real ization. Each had their own 
programs and datums, and accordingly, often 
their own opinions about what should be said 
and how it should be said. The discourse 
therefore come from the cognit ive component ~ stream, so to speak, has its source in a 
proper, whereas the second has more of a Y ~~c ia l _~r~.~ program which in i t iates topic 
thematic ~eaning and would be inserted as a ~ . ~  concepts T6Tac~on,  and then flows through 
means of qual i fy ing a statement. ~ ~ e a c ~  of these contexts -- often back and 
forth before achieving its final expression. 
While it is quite possible to model or ~ When a concept (more will be said about what 
describe isolated instances of such ~ a concept is later) is placed within the 
examples, I am quite skeptical about the ?~ ~,~a lv in  context, programs there examine that 
long term value of such models independent ~ ~ o n c e p t  to determine its acceptabi l i ty  for 
of a more general framework or theory. ~ ~ ,  expression. The concept can be censored 
There is, I believe, a need for more global right off or it can be passed on to the 
theories about what discourse is and does, .~  Machiavel l i  context with suggestions as to 
for without such a framework, there is a 
tendency for c lass i f icatory schemes to 
become too closed and too special ized and 
hence incompatible with related work. This 
is part icular ly  true if the process of 
discourse formation is a highly 
interdependent one, as I believe it is, and 
decisions made at one level interact w i th  
those made at another. 
I rules, and forms are organized. This is part icular ly true of thematic information 
which is especial ly  variable and sensit ive 
i to the intent ions and idiosyncracies of the 
speaker and his setting. Consequently, in 
order to understand why certain thematic 
forms were used, as against others, or why a 
part icular form is appropr iate in one 
I context and not another, it is necessary to 
understand both the mult iple intentions of 
the speaker and the~s~ra~_n~s he or she 
felt were in effect. To some extent, to 
answer such quest ions entails a move from 
l inguist lcs to psychology -- maybe analyt ic 
how it should be modif ied. For example, in 
the case of the discourse sample previously 
discussed, the mot ivat ing concept expressed 
a desire for intercourse with the therapist. 
This request is found to be unacceptable,  
and the reason given is the fact that the 
therapy situation is a formal one governed 
by the exchange of payments. Another 
program in Calvin then tries to see what 
A more global theory of discourse would 
by necessity have to take into account the i ~'~" ~ 
fact that discourse behavior is an| 
intent ional  act iv i ty which attempts to| 
affect some trade off between the speaker's| 
goals, his constraints, his competency, and| 
those of his audience. For it is within| 
this sett ing that the more manifest aspects 
of discourse or speech are cast and it is 
within this sett ing that l inguist ic options, 
would happen if the exchange re lat ionship 
~r' ' were "negated" or el iminated. It sends this 
new concept to the Machiavel l i  context, who 
as a special ist  in such matters, tries to 
figure out how this would be accomplished. 
Various programs there consider different 
possibi l i t ies,  one of which is to ask the 
therapist not to give the patient a bill. 
This suggest ion in turn is sent to the 
Cicero context to assess its possible impact 
upon the therapist. A program there says 
that it would shock the therapist and sends 
back the concept for further consideration. 
Once back in Machiavel l i  again, programs 
there, who special ize in reducing negative 
or shocking impacts of statements, make 
their suggest ions as to how the request can 
be made, with a minimum of offense. It is 
at this point in the program that cognit ive 
and thematic considerat ions becom@ mixed. 
For a l though the program is stlrl worklng 
with concepts, which may or may not have 
acceptable lexical real ization, it is making 
suggest ions as to how the concepts should be 
marked for expression and how certain 
69 
I 
qual i fy ing const ituents can be inserted to 
modify the l istener s interpretation. These 
suggest ions are then again sent to the 
Cicero context, where barring no further 
objections, they are made into state 
concepts and sent onto the Real izat ion 
context for lexical real izat ion and 
ordering. However, even after lexical 
real izat ion is completed, the possibi l i ty 
exists for further interrupt ion and 
reformulation, as Calvin has one final look 
at what is to be said. He can either stop 
an expression altogether, for example, where 
the patient starts to say "I shouldn't be 
given a bill" but stops herself  and instead 
says "of asking you whether it wouldn't  
be...", or he can make last minute 
suggestions, which in turn are translated by 
special programs into inter ject ions such as, 
"you know," "huh," "I mean." 
In order to produce even this l imited 
discourse the program had to be able to 
dist inguish between several levels of 
cognition: thinking about how to achieve a 
part icular goal ( irrespective of whether it 
would be real ized into discourse); thinking 
about what to say (a state concept) and 
thinking about how to say it ( lexical 
real ization).  At each of these levels 
different points of view were involved; 
Calvin regular ly objected to what Cicero 
found acceptable, and Machiavel l i ,  though 
apol it ical ,  often found himself  caught in 
between. If one adds in the Freud context, 
used for introspection, then the clash of 
opinions can become all the more strident. 
While it is doubtful  that all forms of 
discourse behavior involve such a mult i tude 
of personal i t ies and agents, it is apparent, 
I believe, that discourse can be produced 
from a number of dif ferent sources and that 
higher level cognit ive decis ions effect 
lower level l inguist ic decisions and vice 
versa. 
Since the discourse production process 
was found to be so diverse and interactive, 
it was absolutely necessary to have an 
extremely f lexible means for represent ing 
concepts. The basic notion is similar to 
that of frames (Minsky, 1974; Winograd, 
1974) where a "generic concept" is used to 
represent a general or stereotypic meaning 
and a "token concept" is used to represent 
an instant iat ion of the generic concept. 
House, for example, would be treated as the 
generic concept, and the big red house would 
be the token concept where "big" and "red" 
would be concepts on the property list. 
Information about what the concept was would 
be carr ied on one set of indicators such as 
CHARACTERISTIC,  and how it was to be used by 
another, DENOTER, PROCESS, DE-EMPHASIZE, 
STRESS, etc. Similarly, information about 
concepts" re lat ionship to other concepts 
would also be represented by indicators and 
their property lists: RELATED-CONCEPT, 
MOTIVATION, CAUSE, EFFECT, UNACCEPTABLE, 
etc. In all, about thirty dif ferent types 
of indicators were used. 
Token concepts could be combined 
together to form "conceptual  clauses," where 
a process or "relator" concept occupied the 
pr imary  posit ion and all other concepts 
70 
fi l led the slot of arguments specify ing a 
role with respect to the relator concept. 
These conceptual clauses could become 
arbitrar i ly  complex where each argument 
could potent ia l ly  contain other embedded 
conceptual clauses. Consequently, it was 
quite possible for the program to contain a 
thought which could not be expressed with 
the same meaning it had internally. 
All processing of concepts is performed 
by a modif ied form of CONNIVER methods 
called mult ip le body interrupts developed by 
Richard Brown (Brown, 1974). They are fired 
when a concept's part icular  pattern matches 
their invocat ion pattern within a given 
context. Therefore control  within the 
program is transferred through the sending 
and receiving of concepts and the addit ion 
and removal of property lists and 
indicators. For the most part, the 
inte l l igence of these programs is very 
special ized, as they only worked with token 
concepts for relat ively specif ic purposes. 
Certain ly if the program were to be expanded 
and general ized, these programs would also 
have to be general ized, but how much I am 
uncertain. For example, it might be 
tempting to have one program perform all 
foregrounding. However, I think that this 
would be d isadvantageous in the long run, as 
the type of foregrounding required in 
discourse seems to vary according to the 
context in which the statement is being 
prepared, and therefore should be performed 
locally. 
The organizat ion of the grammar, I 
believe, also demonstrates the extent to 
which cognit ive and l inguist ic factors are 
interdependent.  Init ial ly, I had planned to 
use Hal l iday's  systemic grammar (Halliday, 
1968), as I found his funct ional  
representat ion of grammar, and especia l ly  
his work on thematic structure to be 
consistent with my own thinking about 
discourse structure. However, as I began to 
adapt it to the model I found that his level 
of descr ipt ion was inappropr iate to what I 
was attempting to do. The first problem was 
that it was not conceptual ly  based, and 
therefore too t ight ly wedded to a rather 
closed descr ipt ion of l inguist ic structures 
at the clausal level. The second problem 
was that his descr ipt ions of thematic 
structure were not str ict ly functional,  and 
therefore rather than supplying informat ion 
about how a part icular  construct ion could be 
used to achieve a part icular  effect, they 
instead told what it was. Information about 
whether a part icular  concept is given or new 
within the ERMA program, for example, is not 
given a priori but suppl ied through feedback 
by audience sensit ive programs that comment 
on what the audience knows or can be 
expected to know. Consequently,  if the 
program is act ing half way inte l l igent ly  and 
tracking on what it is saying, it will take 
care of matters such as topic and comment 
implicit ly.  It is my bel ief that notions 
like theme and rheme, topic and comment, and 
the al ike are only known upon ref lect ion 
about what has been said, and essent ia l ly  
are tangentia l  to the interests of the 
speaker while speaking. The grammar I ended 
up designing is conceptual ly  based, and 
I 
1 
I 
I 
! 
1 
! 
! 
! 
I 
! 
! 
I 
! 
I 
while borrowing from Fi l lmore's notion of 
cases (Fillmore, 1968), employes a 
c lass i f icat ion scheme which is ordered 
according to the effects various l inguist ic 
options achieve rather than simply what they 
are. 
Con.iectures and Conclusions 
While the study of discourse structure 
and cognit ion is now being act ively pursued 
by l inguists (Hymes and Gumperz, 1972; 
Labov, 1975; Lakoff, 1971; Hall iday, 1973), 
phi losophers (Ricoeur, 1970, Searle, 1971), 
and computat ional  l inguists (MacDonald, 
1975; Hayes, 1973; Schank, 1974; Phil ips, 
1973, Schmidt, 1973), there have not to my 
knowledge been any models developed which 
attempt to model the discourse behavior of a 
specif ic speaker. As a consequence, it is 
diff icult to place the ERMA model or theory 
within any given paradigm of research on 
discourse, as the frameworks, objectives, 
and methods within this field are as nearly 
varied as the people working in it. 
Moreover, it is my bel ief that computat ional  
l inguist ics -- not to mention discourse 
s imulat ion -- has yet to find its paradigm, 
for there remains a welter of data yet to be 
organized or explained, and no overr id ing 
consensus as to how it should be done. 
Therefore seen from this light, a 
discussion of the l imitat ions and the goals 
of the ERMA model assumes a somewhat 
different cast, as I believe that the local 
and more technical  decis ions made in 
developing the model are of less relevance 
to an integrated understanding of human 
discourse than are some basic theoret ical  
decisions which were made. For at present 
there is no basic methodological  consensus 
on how discourse should be descr ibed -- or 
even what it is, for that matter, and hence 
any subsequent discussion of mechanisms 
alone would be, I believe, ungrounded. 
Therefore, I first want to make clear my own 
theoret ical  incl inat ions and then discuss 
some of the approaches of others to see how 
disourse behavior can be more 
comprehensively  represented. First off, I 
regard the discourse process as a regulatory 
one, whereby the speaker attempts to achieve 
some effect through his communicat ion of the 
medium of language. In speaking he has 
intent ions as well as counter- intent ions 
which he attempts to real ize under the 
constraints of his own intel lectual  and 
l inguist ic competency as well as those of 
his l istener. He can l isten to what he 
says, and he can modify what he says at 
virtual ly any point in the discourse stream. 
He makes his l inguist ic select ions according 
to the communicat ive effect he feels they 
wil l  have; hence he is less concerned with 
the grammatical i ty  or wel l - formedness of his 
utterance than with their effect iveness; in 
fact he might find being ungrammatical  an 
effect ive means of expression. Moreover, he 
can be inventive as he speaks and listens, 
devising more abbreivated and special ized 
expressions according to context and intent. 
In developing the ERMA model I 
attempted to embody as many of these notions 
of d iscourse behavior as possible, but I 
71 
found that as I got further into working out 
a representat ion of the processes involved 
in producing the sample text, that I needed 
more empir ical  evidence for my model ing 
decisions. For example, why does the 
speaker hesitate at a part icular point and 
not another, or why does she use "I mean," 
as against "You know," or how do I know that 
her request for a change in the bi l l ing 
arrangement is real ly a displaced request 
for intercourse? While I did examine other 
transcripts, roughly two hundred of them, to 
detect patterns, I lacked a suf f ic ient ly  
developed framework to really organize and 
focus my search. This lack of both 
empir ical  evidence and a more comprehensive 
and systematic understanding of d iscourse 
behavior in general led me to represent some 
of the discourse mechanisms and processes in 
a somewhat ad hoc fashion. For example, for 
the purposes of a general theory, it would 
have beendes i rab le  to segregate in more 
detail  the dif ferent possible stages of 
discourse formation and product ion and be 
able to justify these dist inct ions on sound 
theoret ical  or empir ical  grounds. 
Similarly, I would have liked to have had 
some basis for c lassi fy ing the types of 
roles indicators play, and hence provide a 
more general understanding of their part in 
shaping discourse. But as it were, there 
were so many sizable gaps in my knowledge 
about natural  discourse that it was far too 
easy to make any number of simplifying, if 
not erroneous, assumptions about how 
discourse was formed and produced without 
any immediate penalty. 
Consequent ly  I would like to make an 
argument for more empir ical  research into 
the character of natura l -unedited discourse, 
preferably those forms of discourse that 
exhibit mistakes and errors. I think that 
such inquir ies in turn wil l  provide a basis 
for designing and select ing the 
representat ional  structures and procedures 
appropr iate to model natural discourse. 
Certa in ly  this cannot be done independent of 
some more general  computat ional  theory, but 
it is cr it ical  that this theory be not too 
speci f ied or closed to preclude a full view 
of d iscourse data. 
Finally, I would like to br ief ly 
comment on two recent approaches in 
art i f ic ia l  inte l l igence which might begin to 
fill in the gaps in my own work. One of the 
hazards of research in this area is that by 
the time you complete your work someone else 
has already come up with an improvement on 
your own ideas. The notion of frames 
(Minsky, 1974; Winograd, 1975) is a case in 
point. Although ERMA uses a knowledge 
representat ion simi lar to that of frames, 
her cognit ive ski l ls are too special ized and 
too localized; she is quite incapable of 
making inferent ia l  loops. Moreover, the 
ERMA model has no systematic overal l  
organizat ion to her bel ief system, and 
hence, it is di f f icult  at times to v isual ize 
from a distance what is taking place. There 
is also the quest ion as to whether the 
product ion of d iscourse is best organized 
according to re lat ive ly  set contexts, such 
as Machiavel l i  and Calvin, or whether the 
concepts themselves should determine their 
own formation and production contexts. I 
can see how something like a frame's 
representation might be able to resolve some 
of these problems because of its means for 
integrating general and specific knowledge. 
But exactly how I am uncertain. Perhaps, 
instead of having the program think in terms 
of concepts, it would think in terms of 
frame systems, which in turn would carry 
their own opinions as to how the discourse 
should be expressed. Similarly, these frame 
systems would be a part of larger frame 
systems, which would ovesee the overall and 
more general aspects of discourse 
regulation. 
I would also like to adapt some key 
notions of Sussman's model of skill 
acquisition (Sussman, i973) to a discourse 
model, as I feel that the process of 
producing a discourse and acquiring a skill 
-- albeit manipulating blocks, are 
intrinsically similar. Morever, his notions 
of representing actions in terms of their 
effects as well as his treatment of learning 
as a feedback process involving debugging 
and patching procedures, is similar in kind 
to my own notion of discourse production as 
a feedback regulated process. However, the 
added advantage of his approach is that the 
knowledge that his model has or acquires is 
a function of its own experience. This is 
substantially different from ERMA, where her 
knowledge is not learned to any substantial 
degree but programmed in from the start. 
This I feel to be a basic limitation, as it 
is my belief that at least part of an 
understanding of what discourse behavior is 
entails understanding how it was derived; 
especially, if one is concerned with the 
more subtle psychological factors that 
underlie therapeutic dicourse. For example, 
the manner in which the discourse formation 
contexts and procedures are organized 
reflect the learning and the experience of 
the speaker over time. Consequently, if we 
are ever going to adequately explain the 
organization of a discourse formation 
process of a real speaker, we are going to 
have to be able to identify those mechanisms 
which generated the discourse procedures and 
contexts in the first place. This is not 
just because it would be nice to have a 
means of describing the evolution of 
discourse styles and conventions over time, 
but because a single speaker will in the 
course of speaking use such deeper level 
mechanisms to both invent and to interpret 
new discourse. 
In conclusion, I would like to 
encourage the developement of more 
comprehensive computational theories of 
discourse that link diachronic descriptions 
and concerns with synchronic ones. If this 
is done with sufficient empirical content, I 
feel it is quite possible to create good 
descriptive and perhaps even predictive 
models of human discourse behavior in the 
near future. 
72 
REFERENCES 
Brown, R., The Use o__ff Multiple Body 
Interrupts i__nn Discourse Generation, 
Unpublished Undergraduate Thesis, MIT, 
1974. 
Clippinger, J., A Discourse S~eaking Program 
as a Preliminary Theory of Discourse 
Behavior and a Limited Theory of 
Psychoanalytic Discourse, unpublished 
dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania, 1974. 
Fillmore, C., "The Case for Case" in Bach, 
E., Harms, R., eds., Universals in 
Linguistic Theory, Holt, Rinehart, and 
Winston, 1968. 
Halliday, M.A.K., "Notes on Transitivity and 
Theme in English," Journal of 
Linguistics, 3, 1967, p. 37-81, 119-244, 
179-216. 
..... "The functional basis of language," in 
Bernstein, B., ed., Class, Codes and 
Control, Vol. II, Routledge, Kegan, and 
Paul, London, p. 343-365, 1973. 
Hays, D., "Language and Interpersonal 
Relationships,', Daedalus, Summer, 1973, 
p. 203-217. 
..... Textual Or a ization, MS~, 1973. 
Hymes, D., Gumperz, J., eds, Directions i__n_n 
Sociolinguistics; The Ethnography of 
Communication, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1972. 
Labov, W., Therapeutic Discourse, 
forthcoming. 
Lakoff, G., "Conversational Postulates", 
Papers from the Seventh Regional Meeting 
o__\[f the Chicago Linguistic ~ociety, 
Chicago Linguistic Society, 1971. 
MacDonald, D., Preliminary Report on a 
Program ~or Generating Natural Languge~ 
MIT AI Laboratory, 1975. 
McDermott, D., Sussman, G., Conniver 
Reference Manual, MIT AI Laboratory, 
1973. 
Minsky, M., A Framework for Representing 
Knowledge, MIT AI Laboraaory, AI Memo 
No. 306, 1974. 
Philips, B., "Topic Analysis,,, Proceedings 
o_ff the 197~ International Conference o__~n 
Com utational Linguistics, 1973. 
Ricoeur, P., "The Model of the Text: 
Meaningful Action as a Text," in Social 
Research, Vol. 38/Number 3, Autumn 
1971. 
Schank, R., Understandin ParaS ,  
Technical Report 5, Instituto per gli 
Studi Semantici e Cognitive, Castagnola, 
Switzerland, 1974. 
I 
! 
I 
i 
i 
I 
! 
i 
i 
t 
Searle, J., ed., The Philosophy of Language, 
Oxford University Press, 1971. 
Schmidt, C.F., D'Addamio, J., A Model of the 
Common Sense Theory of Intention, MS., 
1973. 
Sussman, G., ~ Computational Model of Skill 
Acquisition, MIT AI, TR-297, 1973. 
Winograd, T., Frame Representations and the 
Declarative/Procedural Controversy, in 
Bobrow and Collins (eds) Representation 
and Understanding, Academic Press, 1975. 
73 
