COMMENTS ON LEXICAL ANALYSIS* 
George A. Mil ler 
How lexical information should be 
represented in a computer program for 
processing natural language depends both on 
the goals that the program is intended to 
achieve and on the lexical information 
itself. Although programs can be imagined 
that might use lexical information in 
different ways, the information base that is 
exploited must be invariant over a l ternat ive 
programs. 
The present paper is concerned with the 
lexical information that must be 
represented, rather than with programming 
devices for represent ing it. First, an 
analysis scheme will  be i l lustrated through 
a study of a single Engl ish verb. Then the 
scheme will  be used as background for a 
discussion of some fundamental  theoret ical  
issues. 
Hand:. An exercise in Lexical  Analvsis 
Consider the verb "hand" as it is used 
in: 
(I) a. She handed her hat to him. 
b. She handed him her hat. 
A paraphrase of (I) that captures all of the 
components of meaning to be disuussed here 
is: 
(2) She had her hat prior to some time t at 
which she used her hand to do something 
that caused her hat to travel to him, 
after which time he had her hat. 
The di f ference between (la) and (Ib) is 
usual ly regarded as syntactic, (Ib) der iv ing 
from the structure under ly ing (la) as a 
consequence of a dat ive-movement 
t ransformat ion that inverts the order of the 
direct and indirect objects and deletes 
"to". Some people, however, detect a 
di f ference in meaning: "She handed her hat 
to him," they say, merely suggests that he 
took it, whereas "She handed him her hat" 
asserts that he took it -- the sense 
expressed in (2). If one respects this 
d i f ference in meaning, and also holds to the 
semantic neutral i ty of such grammatical  
t ransformat ions as dative movement, then 
presumably one must d ist inguish two 
dif ferent meanings of "hand" -- one 
resembl ing 'offer" and another 
o f fe r -and- take . "  If one does not respect 
this meaning difference, both (la) and (Ib) 
have the "of fer-and-take" sense. In either 
case, it is the sense paraphrased in (2) 
that wil l  be considered here. 
Let the verb "hand" be represented as 
an operator, HAND, taking three arguments: 
the grammatical  subject x, the indirect 
*Preparat ion of this paper has been 
supported by grants to The Rockefel ier  
Univers i ty from the Grant Foundat ion and 
f rom the Public Health Service, GM21796. 
The style of lexical analysis that is 
i l lustrated here was developed in 
col laborat ion with P.N. Johnson-Laird and 
wil l  appear in more detail  in Mi l ler and Johnson-Laird (in press). 
object y, and the direct object z: 
HAND(x,y,z).  Then (I) can be represented 
(to a first approximation) by: 
(3) (~X,F,z)\[WOMAN(x) &MAN(y) &HAND(x,F,Z)\]  
WOMAN, MAN, and HAT are not uninterest ing 
concepts -- in particular, men and women 
have" hands ( inal ienable possession), 
whereas hats do not, and men and women can 
have" hats (either accidental  possession or 
ownership),  but not vice versa -- but the 
present discussion is confined to HAND, 
which wil l  be analyzed to i l lustrate the 
need for certain very genera l  lexical 
concepts. 
HAPPEN: Consider first the temporal 
shape of the handing episode in (I). It 
begins in the state: "she has her hat and he 
does not have it". Then an event occurs at 
time t which results in a change of state. 
And the episode ends in the state: "she does 
not have her hat and he does have it". This 
character izat ion raises two questions: how 
to represent changes of state, and how to 
reduce the redundancy of the state 
descr ipt ions.  
A statement forming operator R (Rescher 
& Urquhart, 1971) Can be used to represent 
changes of state. R takes a temporal ly  
indef in i te statement S and forms a new 
statement R (S) to the effect that "S is 
real ized at t." In order to indicate a 
change of state at moment t, another 
operator -- call it HAPPEN -- is needed to 
form a new statement to the effect that 
"notS is real ized at t-1 and S is , real ized 
at t": 
(4) HAPPEN(S) = (~t)\[R~_i(notS) & R~(S)\] 
HAPPEN is a very general operator, 
character ist ic  of verbs that denote events. 
Note that the first conjunct of (4) wil l  
ord inar i ly  be presupposed; that is to say, 
"S didn't happen" is not ord inar i ly  taken to 
mean "R~(S) for all t." 
The two state character izat ions -- "she 
had it and he didn't" and "she didn't have 
it and he did" -- are clearly redundant. 
The fact that a hat cannot be in two places 
at the same time (which must be part of a 
language user's general knowledge) merely 
compounds the redundancy of such state 
descr ipt ions for double-object  verbs of 
motion. However ,  it is a general 
character ist ic  of double-object  verbs, not 
l imited to motion verbs like "hand", that, 
in some sense of the ambiguous verb "have", 
the event ends with the indirect object 
"having" the direct object (Green, 1974). 
In the case of "hand", either x or y, but 
not both, wil l  have z at any moment t; since 
y has z after t, x cannot also have it. On 
the other hand, if x "tells" y some 
informat ion z, x does no~t stop having z 
after t. What is common to both, however, 
is that y does not have z before t. Thus, 
the simplest state descr ipt ion is 
S = HAVE(y,z),  in which case the antecedent 
state would be notS. Since nots seems to be 
presupposed by HAND, (4) would be satisf ied. 
On this analysis, therefore, some part of 
30 
I 
I 
i 
! 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
the meaning of "hand" must be: 
(5) HAPPEN(HAVE(y,z))  = GET(y,z) 
Discussion of HAVE will be omitted here; see 
Bendix (1966) or Mil ler and Johnson-Laird. 
Actually, of course, two things happen 
in handing: the object changes location as 
well as possessor. Indeed, the former 
change seems to be causal ly related to the 
latter. So, in order to complete the 
analysis, it is necessary to conside~ also 
what happens at t that results in the 
transit ion from notHAVE(y,z) to HAVE(y,z). 
Roughly, x uses x's hand to d~ something, 
and what x does causes z to travel to y. 
This paraphrase introduces four new 
operators -- USE, DO, CAUSE, and 
TRAVEL -- which can combine as follows to 
provide addit ional  parts of HAND: 
(6) USE(x,hand,S x) & 
CAUSE(S~,(TO(TRAVEL))(Z,F))  
Because the concepts associated with these 
operators -- instrumental ity,  agency, 
causality, and motion -- are required in the 
analysis of many English verbs, they will be 
discussed individually. 
USE: The first conjunct of (6) 
corresponds to "x uses hand to S~" or, more 
generally, USE(x,w,S,) is "x uses w to Sx," 
as in "Tom used a knife to open the box." A 
fuller paraphrase would be: "x intent ional ly 
does something S that causes w to do 
something S" that allows Sx." "Use" 
contrasts with instumental  "with" in being 
intentional:  "He broke the window with his 
elbow" is not synonymous with "He used his 
elbow to break the window." If we introduce 
an operator ACT to represent intentional  
acts, then USE can be defined: 
(7) USE(x,w,S~) = ACT(x,S) & 
CAUSE(S,DO(w,S'))  & 
ALLOW(S',S~) 
This formulat ion adds two more 
operators -- ACT and ALLOW -- for which an 
account must be given. 
ACT: Intention wil l  be taken as an 
unanalyzed primit ive and represented by 
INTEND(x,g), where x is understood to be 
animate and g is understood to be a goal 
that x intends to achieve. It is further 
assumed that intentions can stand in a 
causal relat ion to behavior,  so: 
(8) ACT(x,S) : CAUSE( INTEND(x,g) ,DO(x,S))  
ACT and DO are closely related: ACT is the 
intent ional  counterpart of unintent ional  DO. 
DO: Let S denote a statement whose 
grammatical  subject is x and whose predicate 
phrase is an event descr ipt ion (i.e., whose 
predicate entails HAPPEN). Then the 
relat ion between x and the event will be 
DO(x,S). DO is essent ia l ly  a place holder. 
That is to say, DO will be restr icted to 
contexts in which S can be a dummy 
variable -- see (7) for example, where 
DO(w,S') can be paraphrased as "w does 
something."  If S cannot be a dummy 
variable -- if what x does is relevant to 
the meaning -- then DO will  be replaced by  
an operator that makes the action explicit. 
CAUSE: Causation is too complex for 
brief expl ication. The fol lowing 
formulat ion is simply l ifted from Mil ler and 
Johnson-Laird: 
(9) CAUSE(S,S') = 
BEFORE(HAPPEN(S) ,HAPPEN(S' ) )  & 
notPOSSIBLE(S & notS') 
This formulat ion adds two more 
operators -- BEFORE and POSSIBLE -- for 
which accounts are needed. It is obvious 
that the plausibi l i ty  of (9) must depend 
very heavi ly on POSSIBLE and on how a 
language user acquires general knowlldge 
about what combinat ions of events are 
possible or impossible. Lacking any clear 
psychological  theory, POSSIBLE can be taken 
as a primitive, undef ined term. 
ALLOW: "Cause" and "allow" are closely 
related, as a comparison of (9) with the 
fol lowing formulat ion shoud show: 
(10) ALLOW(S,S')  = 
BEFORE(HAPPEN(S) ,HAPPEN(S' ) )  & 
notPOSSIBLE (notS & S') 
Note that, although it is impossible for S" 
to occur unless S has occurred, the 
occurrence of S does not insure the 
subsequent occurrence of S'; that is to say, 
(S and notS') may well be possible. 
BEFORE: Sentences of the form "S before 
S'" can be interpreted to mean that there is 
some moment t such that S has been real ized 
at t and S" has not yet been 
real ized -- that there is an interval 
between the first real izat ion of S and the 
first real izat ion of S'. In terms of the 
temporal operator R: 
(11) BEFORE(S,S" (~to)\[(3t)\[t<t~ & R~(S)\] 
&)nit & R~(S') \ ] J  (3t)\[t<t~ 
TRAVEL: According to Mil ler (1972), 
verbs of motion const i tute a semantic field 
of Engl ish having "change of location" or, 
more briefly, "travel", as the core concept. 
It is suff ic ient evidence that something has 
traveled if one notices that it has appeared 
where it wasn't before, or if one notices 
that it is no longer where it was before. 
These condit ions are accommodated by: 
(12) TRAVEL(z) = (~F)\[HAPPEN(AT(z,F))  
or HAPPEN(notAT(z,y)) \ ]  
for an appropr iate choice of the location y 
as the origin or dest inat ion of motion. The 
first disjunct represents "z travels to y" 
and the second "z travels from y. 
Mil ler and Johnson-Laird adopt the 
convention of using A(B(x)) for sentent ial  
adverbials  and (A(B))(x) for predicate 
adverbials,  so the notation: 
31 
(13) (TO(TRAVEL))(z,y) : HAPPEN(AT(z,y))  
ref lects a judgment that "to y" is a 
predicate adverbial  in z traveled to y. 
This analysis of TRAVEL, however, introduces 
sti l l  another operator, AT. 
AT: The form "z is at y" seems to mean 
that z is included in the character ist ic  
region of interact ion with y. Mil ler and 
Johnson=laird give: 
(14) AT(z,y) = INCL(z,REGION(y))  & 
not INCL(y,REGION(z))  
The second conjunct is required to 
dist inguish "at" from "with'. If z and y 
are commensurate,  so that INCL is 
symmetr ical  between them, "with" is the 
preferred preposit ion. 
The two operators used to define AT can 
both be taken as pr imit ive concepts. The 
relat ion of spatial  inclusion that is 
supposed to be captured by INCL probably 
derives rather direct ly from perception of 
spatial  relations. REGION, an operator 
indicat ing the character ist ic  region of 
interact ion with its argument, derives from 
~eneral knoweldge of objects and their uses. 
HAND: Enough machinery has now been 
introduced to provide some rat ional izat ion 
for the fol lowing formulation: 
(15) HAND(x,y,z)  : USE(x,hand,Sx) & 
CAUSE(Sx, (TO(TRAVEL)) (Z,F) )  
& CAUSE(TRAVEL(z) ,GET(y,z) )  
Apparent ly  some users of 
another meaning for "hand': 
Engl ish have 
(16) (TO(HAND))(x,z,y)  : USE(x,hand,Sx) & 
CAUSE(S~,(TO)TRAVEL)) (Z,F) )  
& ALLOW(TRAVEL(z) ,GET(y,z) )  
according to which x's action merely al lows 
y to get z, rather than causes y to get z. 
As detai led as this analysis is, some 
omissions are obvious. For example, the 
noun "hand" introduced in (6) as the 
instrument x uses is not only undefined, but 
no expl ic it  indicat ion is given that the 
hand x uses is x s own hand. This relat ion 
of inal ienable possession could be 
introduced, of course, by adding an 
appropr iate HAVE relat ion between x and the 
hand in question, but one feels that this 
goes beyond the l imits of lexicology -- the 
fact that people have hands and enjoy a 
special  user s pr iv i lege with respect to 
them is surely part of one s general 
knowledge about people. Also omitted is any 
recognit ion of one s intuit ion that, when x 
hands z to y, not only does x use his hand 
to del iver z, buy y also uses his hand to 
receive it -- one would not ordinar i ly  say, 
for example, "I handed him his dinner" if 
what one had done was to use one's hand to 
feed the food into his mouth. The 
character ist ic  region of interact ion with 
the recipient is, in this case, his hand. 
Moreover, "hand" seems to impl icate y's 
conscious acknowledgement that he has 
received z -- one would not ordinar i ly  say 
32 
:~I handed it to him" if what one had done 
was to slip it surrept i t ious ly  into his coat 
pocket. Some of these features of "hand" 
could be introduced by definin~ GET in the 
third conjunct of (16) to something like: 
USE(y,hand,ACCEPT(y,z) ) ,  with an appropr iate 
formula for ACCEPT. Also omitted are any 
expl ic it  grounds for d ist inguishing handing 
from throwing -- something more would have 
to be said about the temporal shape of the 
transfer. No doubt there are stil l other 
omissions. Since the present discussion of 
"hand" is merely an expository device to 
motivate the introduct ion of certain very 
general semantic operators, however, the 
def in i t ion offered in (15) will be left 
incomplete. 
The general problem of completeness 
requires comment. How far one should go in 
adding such features to a lexical analysis 
is an important quest ion of lexicology for 
which a pr incipled answer could be most 
useful. There is at present no way to 
refute the claim that, after all general 
components of meaning have been specif ied as 
fully as possible, there wil l  always be a 
res iduum of meaning unique to each 
part icular  lexical item. 
Some Theoret ical  A l ternat ives 
Beginning with the Engl ish verb "hand', 
several paths were fol lowed in search of its 
lexical primitives. What turned up were 
such things as the symbols of f i rst -order 
predicate calculus, the concept of state, 
the generic concept of possession, the modal 
operators R~ and POSSIBLE, the psychological  
operator INTEND, and the spatial  operators 
INCL and REGION. This is not an exhaust ive 
list, but it is i l lustrat ive. In each case, 
a level of general knowledge was reached 
that went beyond the usual bounds of a 
lexicon. In terms of these primit ive 
operators it was then possible to offer 
formulas for such general and important 
operators as HAPPEN, USE, ACT, DO, CAUSE, 
ALLOW, BEFORE, TRAVEL, and AT; these; in 
turn, made possible a first approximat ion of 
HAND. 
What is the status of these various 
operators? In what sense are any of them 
lexical ly  "pr imit ive"? Or, to ask a closely 
related question, what is the status of the 
- that occurs in so many of the 
der ivat ions? 
Two kinds of answer can be suggested, 
one too s t rongand the other too weak. 
Somewhere between them seems the best place 
to search. 
COMPLETE DECOMPOSITION: Probably the 
strongest claim one cou\].d hope to make would 
resemble the fundamental  theorem of 
ar ithmetic,  e.g, any lexical item can be 
expressed as a unique (Cartesian?) product 
of prime lexical items. In this case, = 
would be a reflexive, symmetric, and 
transit ive relat ion -- synonymy -- between 
lexical items. Since one reason for playing 
the lexical decomposit ion game seems to be 
the hope of reducing lexical var iety to a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
relat ively small set o f  concepts, some 
workers might also insist that the number of 
lexical primes be finiie. (Note, 
incidential ly,  that the number of different 
primes into which an integer can be factored 
has l ittle to do with the "complexity" of 
that integer, except in very special tasks; 
that is to say, for most tasks, reaction 
times to an integer would not correlate with 
its number of prime factors. Presumably the 
same could be said of the lexical version of 
this hypothesis.)  
COMPLETE INDIVIDUALITY: Probably the 
weakest claim one would care to make is that 
each individual lexical item is a unique 
prime in its own right; just as one person 
cannot be decomposed into some combination 
of other persons, so no lexical item can be 
decomposed into others. Various shared 
properties might be used to partit ion the 
lexicon, and varous relations might be found 
to hold between many pairs of lexical items, 
but such properties and relations could not 
be regarded as conceptual atoms from which 
lexical items are bult or to which they can 
be reduced. In this case, = would not 
hold between lexical items, although it 
might be a convenient metal inguist ic  
relation between various properties, 
relations, or other theoretical  statements. 
(Note again that no correlat ions would be 
expected between reaction times and 
"complexity", since all individual lexical 
items are, presumably, equally complex.) 
Although some theorists might be 
interpreted as embracing one or the other of 
these alternaties, it seems more plausible 
to regard them as upper and lower bounds. 
Complete decomposit ion is implausible in 
view of the di f f iculty lexicographers have 
in providing complete definit ions; there is 
usual ly some residuum of meaning, often but 
not necessar i ly  affective, that vit iates the 
equivalence relation. Complete 
indiv idual i ty is inadequate to explain the 
rich and relat ively consistent patterns of 
propert ies and relations that have been 
described. 
So, one is led to speculate about 
intermediate alternatives. For example: 
Suppose there were many lexical items having 
the character ist ic  that, whenever they 
occurred in a simple declarat ive statement, 
that statement's ver i f icat ion required the 
execution of some part icular cognit ive 
(perceptual or memorial) test. That test 
would, of course, part it ion the lexicon into 
those items thatneeded it vs. those that 
did not, as the individual i ty hypothesis 
suggests. One might go further, however, 
and argue that the need to perform this test 
and its acceptable outcome must be indicated 
expl ic i t ly  in the information associated 
with those lexical items and so, in a real 
sense, it can be said to be " incorporated" 
into their meanings (Gruber, 1965). The 
goal of analysis would be to determine which 
items incorporated it, or in short, to 
decompose such items into that test plus 
anything else required for verif ication. 
This program falls short of complete 
decomposit ion in that: (I) it is a 
decomposit ion of words into cognit ive 
33 
entities, like tests, rather than into other 
words; (2) the method of incorpoation is 
left unspecif ied, but would surely be more  
complex than taking a Cartesian product; and 
(3) there is no guarantee that decomposit ion 
will be complete without introducing more 
cognit ive entit ies than there are lexical 
items to be defined, i.e., the problem of 
the residuum is unresolved. But a sort of 
l imited decomposit ion would be possible. 
LIMITED DECOMPOSITION: Every lexical 
item incorporates several primitive lexical 
concepts, but no primitive lexical concept 
is expresed directly in a single lexical 
item. Certain patterns of these primitive 
concepts recur frequently, and so give the 
impression of underlying concepts into which 
surface words could be decomposed. 
Indiv idual i ty and the appearance of residual 
meanings result from the existence of unique 
lexical primit ives not expressed direct ly by 
any single word and not entering into 
recurrent patterns. Although underlying 
concepts (patterns of primitives) would 
reflect the considerable order that has been 
repeatedly noticed in the lexicon and in 
select ional  restr ict ions for word 
combinations, it is not obvious that there 
can be any unique solution to the 
decomposit ion problem (any alternative 
formulat ions may seem equally plausible) and 
theoret ical  economy is highly unl ikely 
(there will not be fewer lexical primit ives 
than there are lexical items). 
The style of lexical analysis 
i l lustrated above for the English verb 
"hand" is taken as providing evidence for 
the plausibi l i ty of such an intermediate 
theoret ical  position. 
REFERENCES 
Bendix, E.H. Componentia l  Analysis of 
GeneralVocabulary:  The Semantic 
Structure of  A Set of  Verbs i__nn English, 
Hindi, and Japanese. The Hague, 
Netherlands: Mouton, 1966. 
Green, G.M. Semantics and Syntactic 
Regularity. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1974. 
Gruber, J.S. Studies in lexical relations. 
Unpubl ished doctoral dissertation, 
Massachusetts  Inst itute of Technology, 
Cambridge: 1965. 
Miller, G.A. English verbs of motion: A 
case s tudy in semantics and lexical 
memory. In A.W. Melton & E. Martin 
(eds.), Codin~ Processes i__nn Human 
MemorF. Washington: Winston, 1972. 
Miller, G.A., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. 
PerceDtion and Language Cambridge: 
Harvard Univers i ty Press (in press). 
Rescher, N. & Urquhart, A. Temporal  Logic, 
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1971 
