SOME THOUGHTS ON SCHEMATA 
Wallace L. Chafe 
Univers i ty of Cal i fornia 
Berkeley CA 
I will try to summarize here a few 
ideas and questions that have arisen from 
efforts over the past few years to develop a 
model of what I call verbal izat ion: the set 
of processes by which a person converts 
nonverbal knowledge into a verbal output. I 
have been thinking mainly in terms of a 
person who has experienced somethin~ which 
he later decides to tell about, a lthough the 
examples given below will  be of 
verbal izat ions of secondhand experience, 
acquired from hearing someone else tell 
about it. Even in the latter cases, 
however, I wil l  assume that much of the 
knowledge being talked about has been stored 
in nonverbal  form, so that the same kinds of 
verbal izat ion processes must be applied. 
I find the most interest ing processes 
in verbal izat ion to be those in which the 
speaker has to make a choice of some kind. 
The need to make choices arises because 
experience is part icular -- it involves 
tokens which are local ized in time and 
space -- whereas language has to operate in 
terms of types. Elements of experience have 
to be interpreted as instances of types in 
order to be verbalized. And much of this 
kind of interpretat ion takes place while the 
speaker is speaking. He may have in mind, 
for example, some part icular event or 
object, but he cannot express that idea in 
words until he has decided on an 
interpretat ion that wil l  help to communicate 
more or less ef fect ively what he is thinking 
of. Evident ly some interpretat ion of this 
kind takes place during perception, and 
probably some of it is accompl ished while 
the mater ia l  is stored in memory. There 
remains much more, however, that has to be 
decided on while the speaker is talking. 
The most direct evidence that this is so 
comes from (I) the fact that the same 
speaker may be found to make different 
choices in verbal iz ing "the same thing" at 
different times and (2) the fact that 
speakers hesitate a great deal in speaking, 
these hesitat ions occurr ing at points where 
such decis ions are being made. 
While all these choices are alike in 
that they involve the interpretat ion of a 
part icular  as an instance of a type, they 
seem to be c lassi f iable into three dist inct 
kinds, defined by the nature of the 
part iculars as well  as by the nature and 
function of the types to which the 
part iculars are assigned. I like to think 
of verbal izat ion as beginning with a speaker 
who has, at the outset, a holist ic idea of 
some incident or story he wants to 
communicate through language. This init ial 
chunk is too full of content to be 
communicated direct ly in anything more than 
a gross summary ("A funny thing happened to 
me this morning"),  and must therefore be 
broken down into smaller chunks. This 
process of "subchunking" is evidently 
governed by the existence in the speaker's 
mind of patterns which I have been cal l ing 
schemata. He might, for example, interpret 
89 
the init ial  chunk as an instance of schema 
X, which then dictates that certain smaller 
chunks may or must be included. Each of 
these smaller chunks may in turn be 
interpreted as an instance of some schema, 
and so on in a largely hierarchical  fashion. 
My discussion here wil l  mainly involve 
these schemata, but I need to say a l ittle 
about the other two kinds of choices that 
are made during verbal izat ion. What the 
speaker is aiming at in breaking down larger 
chunks into smaller ones is to arrive at 
chunks that are of opt imum size to be 
converted into sentences. When he has 
reached that stage, the speaker is able to 
take a chunk and, instead of schematiz ing it 
further, to interpret it as an instance of 
what I have been cal l ing a frame (in the 
sense of "case frame"). Typical ly the chunk 
at this stage wil l  be an event. Instead of 
choosing a schema, then, by which this event 
wil l  be broken down into subevents, the 
speaker chooses a frame by which the 
part ic ipants in the event are factored out 
and assigned roles within it -- roles such 
as agent, patient, or beneficiary. 
The third and last kind of choice that 
has to be made during verbal izat ion is 
mot ivated by the need to find words or 
phrases that wil l  communicate the ideas the 
speaker has of events and of the individuals 
involved in them. This is the kind of 
process that has been cal led categorizat ion.  
The choice of a category, while it is stil l 
far from being fully understood, has been 
studied more than the other two kinds of 
choices and has at least the potential  of 
shedding some light on the nature of all 
three. 
I wil l  try at this point to i l lustrate 
something of the nature of schemat izat ion 
(and, in passing, of framing and 
categorizat ion) with reference to the 
fol lowing American Indian folktale. It was 
recorded in the Caddo language (in several 
versions by the same narrator at different 
times), but the points to be made can be 
i l lustrated in Engl ish translat ion. 
The Wildcat and the Turkey 
It is said that once, long ago, Mr. 
Wildcat was digging roots in order to make a 
garden. Present ly  he heard someone talking. 
Mr. Turkey was standing there. Mr. Turkey 
said, "Well, well. You are busy. What are 
you doing?" '! I 'm digging roots to make a 
garden. What are you doing?" "Nothing. I'm 
just looking around." "You'l l  be in my way," 
said Mr. Wildcat, and he caught him, 
plucked him, and said "Go over to my house 
where my wife is. Tell her to cook you so I 
can eat you for lunch." 
Mr. Turkey went off and came to where 
Mrs. Wildcat was. She was pushing a cradle 
and singing. Mr. Turkey said, "Your 
husband over there sent me to tell you that 
you should make some parched corn for me. 
After you've made it I'll go along." She got 
the corn, made the parched corn for him 
quickly, and he left. 
He went some distance, unti l  he came to 
a place way over there where a l ittle deer 
was lyinK by a big log. Mr. Turkey cl imbed 
up on top. The little deer yawned and said, 
"kakkudikE;nu?,nu?."  \[This means in Caddo 
"I'm sleepy." The last syllable, nu?, which 
the deer repeated, means "turkey".\] "Oh," 
said the turkey, "he knows my name!" The 
deer kept yawning and repeating, 
"kakkudik~:nu?,nu?."  
Just at that time Mr. Wildcat arr ived 
home. "Did you cook him?" he asked. "What 
do you mean?" asked Mrs. Wildcat. "The 
turkey I sent." "No. He came and said I 
should fix him some parched corn. After I 
made it for him he put it on his back and 
left." 
Mr. Wi ldcat fol lowed him and caught up 
with him some distance away. 
That is why he eats him raw. 
The init ia l  chunk from the speaker's 
memory, the chunk which const i tutes the 
entire story, seems first to have been 
broken down into the plot -p lus-moral  schema. 
That is, the speaker knew -- or 
decided -- that this was a story to be 
organized into a plot fol lowed by a brief 
sentence in which the plot was said to be an 
explanat ion of some well known general 
phenomenon; in this case the fact that 
wi ldcats eat turkeys raw. There is much to 
be said regarding this init ial  schema, 
including the possib i l i ty  that it is not a 
native American schema at all, but one that 
was introduced from Afr ica by way of Uncle 
Remus type stories. But the point here is 
that this story is one instance of a schema 
that came to be very frequent ly used among 
these and other Indians. 
The first breakdown of the plot i tself  
is into five episodes, each clearly 
def inable in spat io- temporal  terms. That 
is, each has to do with something that 
happened at a coherent location during a 
coherent segment of time. It may be that 
the schema to which the organizat ion of 
these episodes conforms is unique to this 
part icular  story. On the other hand,  
further study of Caddo stories might show 
that the set-up in Mr. Wi ldcat 's  garden, 
fol lowed by the trick played on Mrs. 
Wildcat, fo l lowed by the d ivers io~ with the 
deer, fo l lowed by the discovery of the 
trick, and ending with the disposi t ion of 
the turkey conforms to a more general ly  used 
schema. It would not, at least, be 
surpr is ing to find other stories in which 
these elements are put together in the same 
way. 
In any case the schema by which each of 
these episodes is i tself  broken down is one 
that is used very frequently. This is what 
may be cal led the visit schema. In it, 
protagonist  A is engaged in some background 
~ct iv i tv  as the episode opens. Then comes 
protagonist  B's arr ival  on the scene. There 
fol lows a conversat ion between the two. 
Then some action is taken, usual ly by 
protagonist  A but af fect ing protagonist  B, 
and f inal ly there is the departure of the 
latter. This visit schema appears over and  
over, not only in this story but in numerous 
other stories that these people tell. 
Furthermore, it appears to be a favorite 
pattern for the organizat ion of much of 
Caddo real experience, in which vis i t ing is 
an extremely common activity. Certa in ly it 
is of considerable interest that schemata 
are not just ways of' organiz ing what one 
talks about, and not even just ways of 
interpret ing .reality, but also ways of 
organiz ing one s everyday behavior. 
Given this schematic organizat ion,  we 
might also use this example to glance at 
framing and categorizat ion, the other two 
verbal izat ion processes involving choice. 
As an i l lustrat ion of framing we can take 
the clause in the last sentence of the 
second paragraph which reads, "\[she\] made 
the parched corn for him." In this version 
the speaker chose to frame the event in 
terms of an agent (Mrs. Wildcat),  a patient 
(the parched corn), and a benef ic iary (Mr. 
Turkey). At another time when this speaker 
to ld  the same story she expressed the same 
event with the words, "She pounded it." Here 
the frame was different, being no longer 
benefact ive but expressing rather an action 
performed on an object. And in this version 
a di f ferent categor izat ion was chosen also. 
The event was interpreted as an instance of 
pounding, not of making. 
But to return to schemata, there are a 
number of unanswered or only part ia l ly  
answered quest ions regarding schematizat ion,  
of which I wil l  mention here only three. 
First, what are the essential  ingredients of 
a schema? Studies of actual verbal izat ions 
suggest that a schema must define a set of 
event (and situation) types (such as 
background activity, arr ival  etc). A chunk 
of (direct or recal led) exper ience is 
evident ly  interpreted as an instance of the 
schema when some of the events included in 
the chunk conform to these types. How a 
person establ ishes such conformity is not at 
all clear, but presumably the process is 
s imi lar  to that involved in categor izat ion.  
A schema must also involve the relat ions 
between these included events: temporal  and 
causal relations, for example. In the visit 
schema the arr ival  must occur while the 
background act iv i ty  is in progress, and so 
on. One would like to know more about the 
kinds of re lat ions that are found here. And 
the chunks within a schema quite c lear ly 
have di f ferent degrees of sal ience. In the 
visit schema the arr ival  and conversat ion 
events seem to have the highest sal ience, as 
judged by the fact that they are usual ly  
ment ioned whi le other elements may not be. 
It would be nice to know more about the 
determinants and effects of sal ience. 
The second quest ion is best understood 
against the background of another example. 
(One problem with discussing discourse is 
that each example occupies an entire page.) 
90 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
London Bridge 
Once there was a man in Winchester who 
dreamed that if he went to London Bridge he 
would hear something that would be very 
useful to him. A week later he had the same 
dream again, and a week after that he had 
the dream a third time. So he decided he 
would see whether there was anything to it. 
He traveled to London and stood on London 
Bridge for many hours, until his patience 
was nearly exhausted. Final ly he was 
accosted by another man who asked him why he 
had been wait ing there so long. After some 
hesitation, he told about his dreams. The 
other man laughed, and said that he too had 
had a curious dream the night before, to the 
effect that if he went to a town named 
Winchester and dug under a certain tree he 
would find a pot of gold. He r idiculed the 
whole idea, however, and said that he did 
not even know where Winchester  was. The 
first man decided there might be some 
advantage in secrecy, and said that he did 
not know either. But he immediately 
returned home and dug under the tree which 
the man in London had described. He found a 
pot full of gold, and on the lid of the pot 
was an inscr ipt ion in a language which he 
did not understand. The pot together with 
its lid were put on display at the vi l lage 
inn, and one day a scholar stopped at the 
inn and was able to translate the 
inscripion. It said, "Look lower; where 
this stood, is another twice as good." The 
man who had found the pot heard of this and 
returned to the tree, where further digging 
uncovered another pot which contained twice 
as much gold as the first. 
At the highest level this story 
consists of two major parts, the second of 
which begins with the words, "and on the lid 
of the pot was an inscr ipt ion. . ."  If the 
story ended before these words (as in fact 
in some versions it does), it would stil l be 
a perfect ly good and complete story. But of 
special interest is the fact that there is a 
schema in the first part which is used again 
in the second. This schema consists of a 
puzzle being presented (through the dreams 
or through the inscript ion),  of a solut ion 
to the puzzle being provided by some 
stranger, and of a payoff result ing from the 
solution. But this schema seems less 
obvious than the visit schema in the Caddo 
story. It is not so directly defined by the 
overt events, and is something that people 
who hear the story are not l ikely to be 
immediately aware of. It is also less 
direct ly ref lected in the way the story is 
told. (One may note that the two instances 
of this schema, the two major parts of the 
story, are not even separated by a sentence 
boundary, let alne a paragraph boundary.) 
The question, then, is whether some schemata 
are more abstract than others. Again, the 
determinants and effects of the degree of 
abstractness are not whol ly clear. 
The third quest ion is a methodologica l  
one. I don't bel ieve it is real ist ic  to 
search for a discovery procedure for 
schemata. Given a part icular verbal izat ion 
91 
there is unl ikely to be a recipe anyone can 
apply to it to come up with a schemat ic  
analysis. Like other theoret ical  entities, 
a schema takes imaginat ion and intuit ion to 
ferret out. But we might nevertheless hope 
that there are object ive ways of val idat ing 
and demonstrat ing the existence of a schema, 
once hypothesized, so that different 
invest igators wil l  agree. I gave the London 
Bridge story to a class of fifty people who 
had been told a l ittle bit about what 
schematc analysis involves, to see how many 
of them would come up with the 
puzz le-so lut ion-payof f  analysis to which my 
own intuit ion had led me. Just over one 
quarter of the class produced analyses 
essent ia l ly  identical  to mine. Probably the 
percentage could be raised with further 
training of the analysts. But one is left 
with the quest ion of how object ive any such 
analysis is, and how the methodology of 
schema research can be made to conform to 
acceptable scient i f ic  standards. 
