ON RETRIEVING INFORMATION 
FROM VISUAL IMAGES* 
Stephen Michael Kosslyn 
The Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore MD 
What shape are a German shepherd's 
ears? By way of developing a set of common 
intuitions, it would be appreciated if the 
reader would answer this query. Most people 
report that in order to answer this question 
(answer: pointed), a visual image of the 
dog's head was generated and the ears 
inspected. The present paper is concerned 
with this phenomenon, with how information 
is represented in, and later extracted from, 
visual images. The present theoretical 
framework is in part presented in Kosslyn 
(in press), which unfortunately is not 
available for public consumption at the time 
of this writing. Thus, it seems valuable at 
present to reiterate briefly these ideas in 
the course of further developing them. 
Theoretical Framework 
A computer ~raDhics metaphor: A visual 
image is considered to bear the same basic 
relationship to its underlying structure as 
a pictorial display on a cathode ray tube 
(CRT) does to the computer program that 
generates it. The underlying "deep" 
structure is abstract and not experienced 
directly, whereas the image itself seems 
pictorial in nature. We are not claiming, 
however, that the psychological analogue to 
the CRT displays pictures as such; rather, 
this structure is characterized as 
supporting internal representations 
(whatever they may be like) similar to those 
that engender the experience of perceiving a 
picture when a person is viewing one. Thus, 
an image of a triangle need not be reflected 
by anything actually triangular occurring in 
the brain. 
The mind's e~e: Once an image is 
constructed, we claim it then maybe 
interpreted in terms of various conceptual 
categories. Following our metaphor, if we 
think of an image as a design like that on a 
CRT, the "mind's eye" may be regarded in 
terms of sets of processes that detect 
patterns (e.g., lines, angles, closed areas 
of various sorts, etc.), and relationships 
between patterns, in this display. This 
sort of classification may utilize a series 
of "procedures" (in Winograd's 1973, 1975, 
sense) that test for the criteria associated 
with membership in given conceptual 
categories (like "pointedness," or "leg"). 
The present claim is that the same 
procedures may be used appropriately for 
classifying both internal representations 
arising during perception which engender 
experience of a visual percept, and internal 
representations experienced as a visual 
mental image. 
*I wish to thank Steve Palmer and Jim 
Pomerantz for helpful criticism and 
suggestions. Some of the work described 
herein was accomplished with the aid of 
Biomedical Sciences Grant 5 SO5 RRO7041-09 
awarded to the Johns Hopkins University by 
the Division of Research Resources, DHEW. 146 
An image space: The psychological 
analogue to the CRT in our metaphor can be 
thought of as having spatial boundaries, 
although not necessarily ones as rigidly 
defined as are the edges of a CRT; mental 
images, many claim, can only be expanded in 
subjective size to a certain point before 
they seem to "overflow." We should note, 
however, that the display mechanism is 
inextricably linked to the processor, the 
"mind's eye," that operates on its contents. 
It could be argued that spatial constraints 
imposed on subjective size of images are due 
to the "scope" of this processor. At the 
present juncture, the size of the display 
mechanism and the spatial extent available 
for further analysis are indistinguishable 
from each other; we may just as well 
consider material outside the processor's 
scope as having overflowed an internal 
display screen. 
Capacity limitations: Our metaphor 
suggests two loci where capacity limitations 
might occur: I) Perhaps only a limited 
number of underlying units (which represent 
parts of an image), or limited proportion of 
the underlying structure, may be able to be 
activated simultaneously; 2) In addition, 
perhaps the analogue display itself is 
limited in terms of how much area or detail 
can be represented at any one time. 
Consider an analogy to a CRT display that 
requires a figure to be "refreshed" 
(re-painted) repeatedly by an electron gun 
in order to be maintained. That is, a 
stream of electrons is directed at a point 
behind the tube, and causes the phosphor 
coating on the screen at that point to glow. 
The stream is then moved elsewhere, or 
terminated, and the phosphor begins to fade; 
unless this point is again exposed to the 
electron beam, it soon will cease to glow 
altogether. If a displayed picture is 
composed of too many points, they will begin 
to fade noticeably ("flicker") between 
exposures to the electron beam. 
In addition to being simpleminded, it 
undoubtedly is wrong to consider a human's 
visual image in terms of a sequence of 
points, let alne as a sequence of points 
individually plotted. A better way to 
conceptualize imagery might be in terms of 
hierarchical representations. Subroutines 
for displaying lines, arcs, and a set of 
basic patterns might serve as primitives; 
these basic units could be built into the 
system or learned. All that need be stored 
in a particular perceptual memory is the 
highest levels of description, which can be 
used to direct the low-level subroutines to 
plot a display of the represented entity. 
Such notions might help us to understand why 
images seem composed of parts which never 
are only "half-present." A hierarchical 
conception also is more reasonable vis-a-vis 
storage requirements; having to store the 
locations of each and every segment of a 
figure would soon place excessive demands on 
memory as one accumulated image encodings. 
Thus, limits in the capacity of the analogue 
display mechanisms might best be thought 
about in terms of how many surface Parts of 
an image can be displayed simultaneously 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
before imaging resembles a "mental juggling 
act," with pieces sl ipping in and out. 
Miscel laneous implications: The basic 
computer graphics metaphor provides 
intuit ively appeal ing (to many), ways of 
viewing many other aspects of imaging. The 
"vividness" of an image can be considered to 
depend on (I) how much detail  is stored in 
the underly ing structure and represented on 
the image, and (2) how often the parts of 
an image are refreshed from long&term 
memory. The experience of "focusing" on 
part of an image may reflect selective 
al locat ion of display capacity to a 
part icular portion of an image. "Scanning" 
an image, then, would involve sequential  
focusing which shifts serial ly and 
continuously across an image. Many other 
imagery phenomena are easi ly thought about 
in this general framework; this exercise, 
however, soon loses its appeal as it becomes 
increasingly apparent that greater 
expl ic i tness and specif ic ity regarding the 
human system is required in order to 
conceptual ize some of the more interest ing 
imagery f indings and introspect ions (e.g., 
mental rotation of images). Rather than 
fill out our model by making more-or- less 
arbitrary decisions, it seems most 
propit ious to discover how useful the model 
is, as developed thus far. In the course of 
explor ing empirical impl icat ions we should 
encounter data that will help us determine 
how best to make our conceptual izat ions more 
expl icit  and rigorous. 
Some Experimental  F i~ ings  
Basic methodology: Impl icat ions of the 
computer graphics metaphor have been 
explored primari ly with the use of one sort 
of methodology. Subjects typical ly are 
asked to construct an image according to 
some speci f icat ion (regarding size and/or 
context, depending on the experiment).  Some 
seconds thereafter, a possible 
character ist ic  of the imaged animal, object 
and/or scene is presented. The subject is 
to evaluate, as quickly as possible, whether 
or not that character ist ic  is appropr iate 
for the probed image. For example, if he is 
asked to image a lion and then hears "feet", 
he is to look on his image for feet. If the 
object imaged does in fact have the probed 
property, he is told, it ought to be locable 
on the image. Upon finding the feet, the 
subject responds "true" by pushing a button; 
if the property is not appropriate for the 
imaged entity, he depresses another button 
to respond "false." The measure of interest 
is the time required to evaluate his image. 
It is emphasized that this is an "internal 
detection task" where we are interested in 
how long it takes to use the image, to "see" 
parts, and we are not interested simply in 
how quickly a person can make the correct 
assessment by any avai lable means. 
The effects of size: As objects become 
smaller, their const ituent parts become more 
diff icult to discern perceptually. Many 
factors contr ibute to this effect. One 
147 
factor may be that the procedures that 
categorize perceptual information need a 
minimal spatial extent upon which to operate 
eff iciently. If so, our metaphor leads us 
to expect that propert ies of re lat ively 
small images also should be more diff icult  
to identify. And in fact this is true. 
Kosslyn (in press) reports six experiments 
where parts required more time to identify 
when the object was imaged subject ively 
small compared to when the object was imaged 
subject ively larger. This result was 
obtained when people adjusted the subjective 
size of a single image (of an animal) 
directly, and when size was manipulated 
indirectly. In the latter cases, size of a 
probed image was manipulated by asking the 
subject to image the target object adjacent 
to a much larger or smaller object. For 
example, when subjects imaged an elephant 
and rabbit together -- correct ly 
proport ioned -- the rabbit was smaller than 
when it was instead imaged next to a fly. 
In this situation, more time was required to 
determine that a rabbit has ears, by 
referr ing to imaged rabbit, when it was 
adjacent to the elephant. In another 
experiment, this result was reversed simply 
by asking subjects to image target animals 
either next to huge fi les or tiny elephants. 
These results have been interpreted in 
terms of the parts of larger images 
themselves being larger. We would expect, 
by this logic, that larger parts -- in and 
of themse lves - -  ought to be detected more 
easi ly on a given image than smaller parts. 
Kosslyn (1974) reports an experiment where 
probed parts of animals were selected such 
that the smaller part (e.g., "claws" for 
cat) was more strongly associated with the 
animal in question than the larger property 
("head," for cat). This situation al lows 
one to dist inguish between imagery use and 
accessing abstract representat ions of the 
sort described by Coll ins and Qui l l ian 
(1969). If imagery is used, the larger part 
ought to be evaluated more quickly. If 
imagery is not used, not the smaller -- but 
more strongly associated -- part should be 
Judged appropr iate more quickly (c.f. 
Conrad, 1972; Smith, Shoben, & Rips, 1974). 
These results were obtained in all 3 
condit ions tested (which dif fered in terms 
of when a subject generated the inspected 
image relative to the time of probe). 
The effects of  load: Another phenomenon 
suggested by the computer graphics metaphor 
is that as more parts are added to an image, 
it ought to become more degraded due to 
capacity l imitations. More time ought to be 
required to identi fy parts of more degraded 
images. And in fact this seems to be true: 
An animal property is evaluated more quickly 
when the animal is imaged next to a 4-cell  
matr ix (that is, imaged as if it were 
painted on a wall  to the animal's left) than 
when the animal is imaged next to a 16-celi 
matrix. Similarly, propert ies of animals 
imaged next to images of two digits (painted 
on an imaginary wall) were evaluated faster 
than when four digits were in the image. In 
this situation, quest ions about the presence 
of part icular  digits in the image also were 
answered more quickly when two rather than 
four digits occur red .  By varying the 
relative size of an animal and the number of 
cells in the matrix (or number of digits) 
imaged next to it, it was demonstrated that 
size and number of parts had independent 
effects on time to verify properties of the 
image (see Kosslyn, in press; 1974). 
Time to generate images: The present 
metaphor suggests that images are 
constructed, that the construct ive processes 
consume time, and that subject ively larEer 
images display more identi f iable details 
than smaller images. These notions are 
supported by the results of a simple 
experiment: Subjects were asked simply to 
indicate when they had in  consciousness a 
mental image of a given animal at one of 
four possible relative subjective sizes. As 
the subjective size increased, so did the 
time necessary to construct the image. 
Presumably, greater spatial  extents take 
longer to fill in. Because these extents 
are greater, however, propert ies of 
subject ively larger images are more readi ly 
recognizable and detectable than propert ies 
of subject ively smaller images. 
The maximal size of images: The present 
metaphor suggests that images cannot be 
expanded in subject ive size indef in i te ly 
before seeming to "overflow". Kosslyn & 
Ralph (in preparation) tested one 
impl icat ion of this idea. If one mov@s an 
object in an image "closer," it wil l  seem to 
expand subject ively until  it f inally no 
longer is all in view at one time. If size 
is constrained, then images of smaller 
objects ought to be able to be moved 
subject ively closer prior to overf lowing. 
Thus, for example, a mouse ought to be 
visual ized in its entirety at a much closer 
range than an elephant; if the elephant were 
imaged equivalent ly  close one might "see" 
only a patch of gray hide. This in fact was 
the result obtained in 5 experiments where 
people est imated ( in~ various ways) the 
distance of imaged objects at the point of 
overflow. The correlat ion between the 
longest axis of the imaged object (which 
accounted for the l ion's share of the 
variance in a regression analysis) and 
est imated distance ranged from .86 to .98. 
We present ly are using these data to measure 
the "internal visual angle" of the mind's 
eye (if you will), hoping that it remains 
relat ively constant when one images 
different sized objects as large 
subject ively as possible. 
Erasing and reolacing visual images: 
Our metaphor obviously does not commit us to 
wel l -speci f ied posit ions on all issues 
concerning imagery. The phosphor which 
glows and allows display on a cathode ray 
tube may fade relat ively quickly or slowly, 
depending on the variety. For human 
imagery, we would expect the psychological  
analogue to this display mechanism also to 
have fade characterist ics.  Since images do 
require effort to display internally, it 
would seem economical  to have a mechanism 
designed to maintain them for a non-tr iv ial  
148 
amount of time thereafter. Thus, we might 
expect that images, once formed, take time 
to fade. During this "rebound period" new 
images should be diff icult to construct. 
Smaller, or less area consuming, images 
should be easier to replace with a 
subsequent image because more "blank" space 
is avai lable in which to begin immediate 
construct ion of the new image. With larger 
images, in contrast, the existent image must 
fade before a new one may begin to be 
constructed. Prel iminary results from two 
experiments lend support to this notion. 
In the first experiment subjects were 
given 4 digits (randomly selected) and asked 
to form a visual image of the digits in two 
rows of two each. On half of the trials, 
the digits were to be imaged as large 
subject ively as possible while stil l  keeping 
all of the digits in mind simultaneously,  
and on the remaining half of the trials they 
were to be imaged at the smallest size 
possible while stil l  remaining identif iable. 
Fo l low ing  construct ion of the appropr iate 
images, a subject received one of two types 
of trials. In one case, a digit was 
presented, and he was to "see" if it was 
included in the imaged set. In the other 
case, in constrast, an anlmal-property pair 
(e.g., l ion-feet) was presented. In this 
c ircumstance a subject was to forget about 
the digits and verify whether or not the 
animal had that property by referr ing to an 
image of the beast. If the digit was 
included in, or property appropr iate for, 
the image, the  subject was to respond "true" 
as quickly as possible (after consult ing an 
image), otherwise he was to respond "false." 
The results for digit probes were as before: 
A probed digit included in a large image was 
detected more quickly than when the sought 
digit was represented in a small image. The 
data of real interest, however, were times 
to evaluate animal -property pairs fol lowing 
large or small images of digits. For "true" 
pairs, interest ingly,  more time was in fact 
required when subjects had constructed a 
large, compared to small, image of digits. 
This result is consistent with the 
hypothesis  that images require time to fade. 
The second experiment was identical  to 
the first except that subjects did not vary 
the subject size of the imaged digits. 
Instead, the digits either were imaged as if 
they were bulky forms cut out of plywood, 
with very l ittle space between them, or as 
if they were drawn with very narrow lines. 
All digits were to be imaged at the same 
size, however. Not surpr is ingly  (given the 
results of the first experiment),  
an imal -property  pairs required more time to 
evaluate if the preceding image portrayed 
bulky plywood digits. Before any firm 
conclusions or inferences may be drawn from 
these data, however, appropr iate controls 
must be conducted. When imagery is not 
required for evaluat ing an animal -property  
pair, for example, the imaginal size or form 
of preceding digits should be irrelevant. 
In addit ion to this sort of control, we 
present ly are conduct ing a number of s imilar 
experiments and repl icat ions. 
I 
I 
I 
! 
! 
I 
! 
I 
Concluding Remarks 
A computer graphics metaphor of imagery 
seems to have some usefu lness.  Although 
this treatment is not really an "analogue" 
model, as such, it also is not simply a 
"proposit ional" model either. One might 
object to the necessity of an analogue 
surface representation, and attempt to model 
imagery in terms of networks of proposit ions 
or the like. Although something like our 
display must be postulated, it seems to me, 
in order to explain the phenomenology of 
experiencing an image, it need not 
necessar i ly  be required to account for how 
imagery functions in human cognit ive 
processes (see Baylor, 1971; Moran, 1973, 
Pylyshyn, 1973). It is the task of future 
experiments to justify inclusion of an 
analogue stage in image processing. Two 
sorts of research currently are in progress 
in my lab that bear on this issue. 
The analogue supposit ion would receive 
support if we demonstrated that pictorial 
propert ies of imagery actual ly have some 
psychological  consequences. Some results 
reported in Kosslyn & Alper (in preparation) 
seem to implicate the pictorial  propert ies 
of imagery as an important factor in memory. 
In these experiments people imaged pairs of 
objects with both objects pictured either at 
normal, appropr iate relative sizes or with 
the second object imaged tiny relative to 
the first. When subjects imaged in the 
latter way, their memory for the second 
object named in a pair (when given the name 
of the first object as a recall  cue) was 
much poorer than when size was not 
distorted. Similarly, if the name of an 
object that was imaged tiny was used as a 
recall cue, recall  of the first object in 
the pair (itself imaged at full size) also 
was impaired. This result was obtained even 
when we told people how the objects should 
be interact ing in their images (thus, the 
size effect is not an artifact of dif ferent 
relat ions being incorporated in the two size 
conditions). If the surface pictorial  
propert ies of imagery are merely 
epiphenomenal,  these results are dif f icult  
to explain. If images, once constructed, 
then may be encoded into memory, these 
results are not surpr is ing given Kosslyn's 
(in press) f indings (i.e., smaller things 
are "harder to see"). The Kosslyn & Ralph 
results on image overf lowing cited earl ier 
also seem diff icult to account for without 
reference to some sort of analogue display. 
The second sort of data that seems to 
argue for a level of analogue display 
concerns the scanning of visual images. 
Earl ier work (Kosslyn, 1973) demonstrated 
that if one must scan further on an image to 
locate a property, more time is required to 
verify the appropr iateness of that property 
for the imaged object. Only three distances 
were used in this experiment, however, and 
simple network models seem capable of 
account ing for the data (in terms of 
distances between nodes in the net). The 
present work involves requir ing scanning 
across 21 different interpoint distances 
between locations on an imaged map. If the 
actual distances predict time to shift from 
one point to another, a network model seems 
hard pressed to account for these results. 
Such a representat ion might postulate that  
dummy nodes exist between those representing 
the locations; longer distances would be 
separated in the net by more intervening 
nodes. Another experiment currently 
underway seems to preclude easy appl icat ion 
of such a model to all instances of image 
scanning. This experiment involves scanning 
from the mouth to the eyebrows (and then 
categoriz ing them in various ways) on an 
imaged face. Four versions of each face are 
used, which vary in how low, how close to 
the mouth, the eyes and eyebrows are (the 
same sized head always is drawn, result ing 
in the appearance of individuals with 
more-or- less large foreheads in the 
different versions). No details of a face 
are changed from version to version other 
than actual metric distance between the 
mouth and eye regions. This variat ion would 
not seem likely to distort an underly ing 
proposit ional  representat ion of a face in a 
way that would lead one to predict shorter 
times to scan shorter distances on an image 
in  less time. If these results prove 
re l iab le ,  imagery phenomena may not be as 
simply explained as some of us had hoped. 
REFERENCES 
Baylor, G.W., "A treatise on the mind's 
eye." Unpubl ished Ph.D. thesis, 
Carnegie-Mel lon University, 1971. 
Collins, A.M., & Quil l ian, M.R., "Retr ieval 
time from semantic memory.', Journal of  
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
1969, Vol. ~, 240-247. 
Conrad, C., "Cognit ive economy in semantic 
memory.', Journal o f  Experimental  
Psychology, 1972, Vol. 92, 149-154. 
Kosslyn, S.M., "Scanning visual images: Some 
structural  implications.,, Percept ion 
and Psvchophysics,  1973, Vol. 14, 
NO. I, 90-94. ~-- 
Kosslyn, S.M., "Construct ing visual images: 
An exercise in neo-mental ism.,  
Unpubl ished Ph.D. thesis, Stanford 
University, 1974. 
Kosslyn, S.M., " Information representat ion 
in visual images.', Cognit ive 
Psychology, in press. 
Moran, T.P., "The symbolic nature of visual 
imagery." Paper presented at the Third 
Internat ional  Conference on Art i f ic ia l  
Intel l igence, Stanford University, 
August, 1973. 
Pylyshyn, Z.W., "What the mind's eye tells 
the mind's brain: A crit ique of mental 
imagery.,, Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 
Vol. 80, No. I, 1-24. 
Smith, E.E., Shoben, E.J., Rips, L.J., 
"Structure and process in semantic 
memory: A feature model for semantic 
decisions.,, Psychological  Review, 1974, 
Vol. 81, No. 3, 214-241. 
149 
Winograd, T., 
Language. 
1973. 
Understanding Natural 
New York: Academic Press, 
Winograd, T., "Frame representatons and the 
declarative/procedural controversy." In 
Bobrow and Collins (eds.) 
Representation and Understanding. New 
York: Academic Press, 1975. 
150 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
i 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
