CREATIVITY IN VERBALIZATION AS 
EVIDENCE FOR ANALOGIC KNOWLEDGE 
Wallace L. Chafe 
Department of L inguist ics 
Univers i ty of Cal i fornia 
Berkeley CA 90406 
An issue which I take to be of great 
interest at the present time is whether 
human knowledge can be adequately 
represented in terms of a network of 
proposit ions. The alternat ive is that 
knowledge has a s ignif icant analog 
component, which I understand to mean that 
continuous di f ferences in the real world are 
s tored  in a continuous mental 
representation. Three views are possible. 
A strict proposit ional ist  would say that a 
proposit ional  network is adequate to account 
for everything in memory. A strict 
analogist  would claim that everything is 
stored analogical ly.  But I suppose that 
many people are wi l l ing to admit some 
combinat ion of these two views, and al low 
that the mind has the capacity for both 
kinds of knowledge. 
Evidence for analogic storage is in 
part introspective.  Many people seem to be 
able to observe themselves using mental 
imagery for thinking about the wor ld ,  and 
even for solving logical problems. Although 
it is easy to demonstrate that mental images 
are not "pictures" in any l iteral sense, 
nevertheless they do seem to retain some of 
the analogic qual ity of reality. Those 
whose thinking has a strong imaglnal 
component are predisposed to bel ieve that 
both language and proposit ions are 
derivative, in the sense that they are ways 
of talking about or descr ibing something 
more basic which shows up in consciousness 
in the form of imagery. But there is a 
counterargument which says that the basic 
processes of the mind take place outside of 
consciousness, and that we deceive ourselves 
if we think we can observe cognit ive 
processes directly. Furthermore, it has 
been noted that imagery does not al low us to 
indiv iduate objects and events that were not 
indiv iduated when first perceived. The 
famil iar demonstrat ion of the power  of 
imagery in which you are asked how many 
windows are in your l iving room or the like, 
and then you seem to go through a process of 
imaging the room and counting the windows, 
can in fact be used to show how much 
preprocess ing has taken place. For one is 
evident ly able to count in one's mind only 
those objects which have already been 
attended to and individuated, just as one 
might count the nodes in a proposit ional  
network. Images don't seem to al low for 
further individuation,  but are dependent on 
whatever indiv iduat ing took place at the 
time of perception. 
But what needs to be done is to sort 
out those interpret ive processes which must 
take place during perception, if they are to 
take place at all, and those which can stil l  
be performed on mater ia l  stored in memory. 
If there are processes of the latter kind, 
and if they depend on analogic propert ies of 
144 
the stored material, then the analogic view 
will have strong support. Roger Shepard and 
his coworkers, for example, seem to have 
demonstrated that such processes do exist in 
people's abi l i ty to cont inuously rotate 
mental objects. I want to suggest that the 
way people talk about things provides 
another demonstrat ion of this kind. 
In my earl ier paper I suggested that 
verbal izat ion -- the set of processes by 
which a speaker turns stored experience into 
words -- requires that choices be made at 
var ious points. These choices, I suggested, 
are of three kinds. I cal led them 
schematiz ing, framing, and categoriz ing. 
What is of interest here is that all three 
of these processes are interpret ive in just 
the sense we are looking for. All of them 
require the speaker to interpret stored 
material,  related to part icular events and 
objects, as instances of stored prototypes. 
All of these processes may take place at the 
time of perception, but they do not have to. 
In fact, it is clear both from hesitat ions 
in speech and from the frequency with which 
people use dif ferent verbal izat ions for the 
same mater ia l  at dif ferent times that many 
of these choices are made only while the 
material  is being verbal ized. 
Categor izat ion is the clearest example, 
if only because the data are more extensive. 
It has been known for a long time that items 
stored in memory differ in their degree of 
"codabi l i ty":  the degree to which they can  
readi ly be categorized. Highly codable 
items tend to be named with short words, to 
be named with single words rather than 
phrases, to be named without hesitat ion, to 
be given the same names by dif ferent people, 
and to be named the same way by the same 
person on dif ferent occasions. Items of low 
codabi l i ty  show the opposite symptoms. It 
is these latter items that are of interest 
here. 
Imagine a person who has observed a 
scene and indiv iduated events and objects 
within it. Certain of these indlv iduated 
events and objects are l ikely to be highly 
codable, and undoubtedly  the observer will 
have categor ized them immediately as part of 
his percept ion of the scene. There might, 
for example, be a typical table which he 
immediately categor izes as a table. On the 
other hand, there might also be objects and 
events which he has indiv iduated but not 
categorized, or categor ized only in a highly 
general way (as a piece of furniture, for 
example). He wil l  have stored his knowledge 
of this object with enough analogic 
informat ion included to enable him to search 
for an appropr iate categor izat ion at a later 
time when he refers to that knowledge in 
speaking. At that time he wil l  arr ive at a 
point in the verbal izat ion where he real izes 
the necessi ty of expressing his knowledge of 
the object in words. Typical ly at that 
point he wil l  hesitate so that he can 
compare his mental representat ion of the 
object with his mental representat ion of 
avai lable category prototypes, wil l  decide 
on the best match, wil l  perhaps add 
modif iers to improve the match, and will 
f inal ly u t te r  something llke "a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
lozenge-shaped green marble coffee table". 
This choice, made in the course of speaking, 
may or may not be remembered on a subsequent 
occasion when he has to verbal ize the same 
knowledge again. At that time he may have 
to think about how to categorize it all over 
again, and may very well choose differently.  
It is important that categor izat ion is 
often a more-or- less  affair, not a matter of 
yes-or-no. The choice seems to be made on 
the basis of comparing the "experient.ial 
content" associated with the indiv iduated 
item with the exper ient ia l  content 
associated with the category. The match 
between the two takes place on a cont inuous 
scale. If both individual  items and 
categories have associated with them a 
content which al lows such cont inuous 
comparisons to be made, the best conclusion 
seems to be that the content itself  has 
analogic properties. 
I wil l  just mention here that the two 
other kinds of choices which may be made 
during verbal izat ion -- the choices of what 
I have cal led frames and schemata -- seem to 
lead to the same conclusion. While, for 
example, a part icular  chunk of exper ience 
may be interpreted as an instance of a 
specif ic schema while it is being 
experienced, the schemat izat ion process is 
something that can be appl ied while one is 
talking. I take this to be evidence that 
people must be able to store enough analogic 
informat ion about an exper ience that they 
are able to interpret it later as an 
instance of some schema. The same can be 
said for framing. A part icular  event might 
be framed on one occasion as "Jim f inal ly 
planted the seeds" and on a later occasion 
as "Our garden f inal ly got started", where 
the objects and their roles are quite 
different. The speaker's memory for this 
event was f lexible enough to al low for these 
two interpretat ions.  
In short, a l though some interpret ive 
processes such as indiv iduat ion seem to be 
conf ined to the perceptual  stage of 
informat ion processing, others such as 
categor izat ion,  framing, and schemat izat ion 
are appl ied for the first time, in some 
cases at least, whi le a person is 
verbal iz ing knowledge recal led from memory. 
In order for this to take place it would 
seem that some nonpropos i t ional  
representat ion of knowledge must exist. 
145 
