GENERATION AS A SOCIAL ACTION 
Bertram C. Bruce 
BBN 
On his first visit to 
kindergarten, while mother was stil l  
with him, Bruce, age five, looked 
over the paintings on the wall and 
asked loudly, "Who made these ugly 
pictures?" 
Mother was embarrassed. She 
looked at her son disapprovingly,  and 
hastened to tell him, "It's not nice 
to call the pictures ugly when they 
are so pretty." 
The teacher, who understood the 
meaning of the question, smiled and 
said, "In here you don't have to 
paint pretty pictures. You can paint 
mean pictures if you feel like it." A 
big smile appeared on Bruce's face, 
for now he had the answer to his 
hidden question: "What happens to a 
boy who doesn't paint so well?" 
- from Between Parent and Chi ld 
Haim Ginott, 1961 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This paper is about the "why" and the 
"how" of natural  language generation. 
Specif ical ly,  why does a person choose to 
communicate one idea rather than another (or 
none at all), and how does this choice get 
translated into a part icular utterance? I 
want to present a few of the major issues 
and then suggest some ways of viewing the 
problem. 
In the example above, the chi ld's 
quest ion is understandable in terms of his 
wants and fears and bel iefs about the world. 
In order to explain why he asked the 
quest ion he did, we must view his utterance 
as an action, rather than Just a string of 
words. A str ing of words, per se, is not 
associated with any plan or goal. But an 
act ion is; in fact, the full representat ion 
of an action seems to require a 
representat ion of both its actual and its 
intended effects, its actual and its assumed 
precondit ions. 
This viewpoint further Justif ies the 
study of what Searle, Austin and others have 
cal led the "speech act." The product ion of a 
natural  language utterance is best 
understood as an action which alters the 
state of the world, rather than as a mapping 
from a given meaning representat ion into a 
surface structure. Indeed, many of the 
problems of deep structure representat ion,  
such as focus and presupposit ion,  are more 
prof i tably attacked in terms of action and 
plan structures. 
Generat ion can then be seen as a two 
stage process. First, a plan is formulated 
which requires a communicat ion with others. 
Second, the communicat ion is made in terms 
of convent ions which al low complex 
intent ions to be expressed easily. These 
64 
stages are inextr icab2y linked since the 
language conventions for expressing 
intent ions make implic~\]t references to plans 
of both the speaker and hearer. At the same 
time knowledge of the conventions can be 
used in plan formation, 
II. GENERATION AS A SOCIAL ACTION 
Before discussing some of the 
conventions used to express intentions, it 
wil l  be useful to consider the notion of a 
social action. A social action is one whose 
def init ion refers to beliefs, wants, fears, 
or intentions. There may be non-social  
actions. For example, eating can be 
descr ibed without reference to the diner's 
bel iefs about the substance he puts in his 
mouth. But the descr ipt ion itself  implies 
bel iefs about the action which may or may 
not be shared. Another observer might say 
that the al leged diner is just pretending, 
or picking at the food,, or wolf ing it down. 
A descr ipt ion of eating is a special  
case  of INFORMING. It implies that the 
speaker bel ieves that the diner is eating, 
and thus, that he bel ieves that the diner 
intends to chew, swallow, and whatever else 
const i tutes the physical  act of eating. In 
other words, the act of descr ib ing encodes 
bel iefs about plans. Speech is a social 
act ion because the def in i t ion of a speech 
act requires reference to the bel iefs of 
both the speaker and the hearer. Implicit  
in each speech act is the goal of the 
speaker in making the utterance. 
There are actions other than speech 
acts for which the notion of bel ief  and 
intent ion are necessary. For example, 
HELPING is a social act ion in which the 
actor does something which furthers a plan 
inferred for someone else. I bel ieve that 
generat ion can best be understood as a 
social action, i.e., the problem is first to 
understand how to represent and process any 
act ion def ined in terms of bel iefs and 
intentions, then to further specify that 
understanding for language generation. 
III. HOW TO REPRESENT A SOCIAL ACTION 
The problem with a social act ion is 
that it cannot be represented by any 
predetermined, f inite structure. Instead, 
its representat ion requires elements such as 
bel iefs about plans, where plans are 
themselves defined in terms of bel iefs and 
other plans. Rather than a structure 
itself, the def in i t ion of a social act ion is 
best thought of as a set of operat ions to be 
performed on a bel ief  system. For example, 
a REQUEST requires the modi f icat ion to a 
bel ief system such that (equivalently, is 
valid if) there is a plan of the speaker 
which has as either a goal or a subgoal a 
condit ion which the speaker bel ieves would 
result from the action requested. Such an 
operat ion may require formulat ion of a plan 
or modi f icat ion of exist ing plans. 
The recognit ion and representat ion of 
plans is a complex and by no means ful ly 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
! 
\ 
! 
i 
understood process. It requires a variety 
of types of knowledge to be applied. For 
instance, mot ivat ion rules must be used to 
determine whether a goal is appropr iate for 
a person. Normative rules are used to  
account for behavior done under a sense of 
obl igation. Wants are propert ies  of persons 
which are used in inferr ing their goals in a 
given situation. These concepts and others 
are discussed in the references \[I-3\]. In 
the remainder of this paper I want to focus 
on one part icular aspect of generat ion as a 
social action, namely, "How is intent ion 
encoded?" 
How does a speaker indicate the purpose 
of his utterance to his l isteners? In the 
example in the beginning of this paper, the 
child is only part ia l ly  successful  in making 
his intention known, and to the extent that 
he fails, he also fails to achieve his 
goals. In this case at least one of his 
goals seems to be reassurance that even if 
he doesn't paint well he won't be rejected. 
Note that in recogniz ing his intention, 
Bruce's teacher also makes other inferences. 
He/she probably assumes that Bruce bel ieves 
that he doesn't paint well; that he fears 
that he may be punished for painting "mean 
pictures;" and that he bel ieves that the 
painter of the "ugly picture" stands in the 
same social re lat ionship to the techer as 
does Bruce. These inferences are both 
consequences and determinants of the 
perceived intention. 
IV. HOW TO ENCODE INTENTION 
Presupposit ions.  What can a speaker do 
to ensure that his purpose, and 
consequently,  its associated inferences, are 
communicated to his l isteners? One way is to 
establ ish, in the discourse previous ~o the 
utterance, the presupposit ions for the 
purpose. For example, the purpose of 
REQUESTING INFORMATION has the 
presuppos i t ion  that the speaker does not 
know the information. In the k indergarten 
example, Bruce is making a dif ferent 
REQUEST, in this case, for reassurance. 
There is a different set of presupposi t ions 
which needs to be establ ished. We can 
assume that the teacher's fami l iar i ty with 
chi ldren entering k indergarten makes it 
easier for him/her to establ ish such 
presupposi t ions as that Bruce fears that the 
teacher may do bad things to him. If the 
l istener fails to establ ish the 
presupposit ions,  as Bruce's mother does, 
then the communicat ion fails. Bruce would 
need to emphasize his fears to his mother in 
order to have his utterance understood. 
L inguist ic  Conventions. A second way 
that intent ions are encoded is through use 
of l inguist ic conventions. For example, to 
indicate a REQUEST of any kind, the quest ion 
form is typical ly  used. A request often has 
a r is ing intonation, future tense or a 
modal, inverted word order, or a special  
word like "please." Many intentions, such as 
REQUEST, have a special  associated verb, 
e.g., "I request that you.. ." 
65 
Discourse Structure. A third way to 
encode intent ions is to take advantage of 
higher order l inguist ic conventions about  
discourse structure. There are places in a 
discourse where quest ions make sense, others 
where explanat ions are expected. Knowledge 
of typical  discourse structures al lows 
persons to condense and simpli fy utterances, 
avoiding the explicit  establ ishment of 
presupposi t ions or explicit  use of words 
like "promise." 
While there is probably not a 
"discourse grammar" which would define 
"wel l - formedness of discourses," it is 
useful to have a model of how social actions 
typical ly  fit together, and thus a model of 
discourse structure. Such a model can be 
viewed as a heurist ic which suggests l ikely 
act ion sequences. By focusing the search 
involved in recogniz ing intentions it 
faci l i tates generat ion and subsequent 
understanding.  
I have used the term "social action 
paradigm" (SAP) \[I\] for such a model of the 
flow of social actions. A SAP is a pattern 
o f  behavior (its body) with constraints (its 
header) on the appl icabi l i ty  of the body. 
The header checks condit ions on the 
s i tuat ion in which the body is to be 
applied. At the same time, it binds 
var iables in the SAP body to elements 
(people, times, locations, things) of the 
situation. A typical  SAP body is shown in 
the attached figure. In the figure, 
REQUEST, SUGGEST, PROMISE, etc. are social 
actions; A and R are persons; and X is an 
action. F~(X) is an alternat ive to X; F~(X) 
is informat ion which relates to the doing of 
X; and ~ (X) is a reason for not doing X. 
The SAP body says that A can REQUEST 
that R do X. Fol lowing the REQUEST, R may 
SUGGEST an al ternat ive to X, may PROMISE to 
do X, may do X, may REFUSE to do X, or may 
REQUEST addit ional  information. Fol lowing 
R's REFUSAL or inaction, A may DEMAND that R 
EXPLAIN, and so on. 
Both speakers in a discourse can be 
expected to know various SAP's. For 
instance, knowing that a SUGGESTION often 
fol lows a REQUEST it is not necessary to 
encode the SUGGESTION expl icit ly.  A person 
does not have to say, "I suggest instead 
that you.. ."  
V. HOW TO FIT IT ALL TOGETHER 
The pr incipal  point of this paper is 
that generat ion needs to be understood as an 
act ion in a social context. Let us examine 
such a context to see how a person's plan is 
carr ied out by encoding his intentions. 
The context: Bil l  and Catherine are 
growing a vegetable garden. They have 
planted the seeds and have seen the first 
plants appear. The rhubarb is being 
attacked by small insects which have eaten 
holes in the leaves. Catherine notices the 
holes. 
A REQUEST R to X I 
I 
R SUGGEST A FI(X) I I R REQUEST A (A INFORM R F 2 (X)) 
RP.O~,S.~X I I .R..US.~X l 
1 
A THANK R X I R EXPLAIN A F3(X) 
J 
I I A ACCEPT R F3(X)X 
A Social Action Paradigm 
I 
Ii 
! 
i 
! 
i 
L/ 
! 
II 
I 
i, 
I 
I 
f-- 
I 
II 
i 
I 
Cather ine's  plan: Catherine's goal of 
having rhubarb to eat is threatened by the 
insects. In this case let's assume that she 
formulates a plan to poison the insects with 
Bil l 's assistance. She assumes that Bill 
has the same goals as she does with regard 
to the garden. Furthermore, let's assume 
that she doesn't know what poison to use but 
bel ieves that Bill does, and that Bill 
doesn't know about the holes. Thus 
Cather ine's  plan involves INFORMING Bill 
about the holes so that he will be mot ivated 
either to put poison on the rhubarb or to 
tell her what poison to use. Another 
appropr iate action for .this plan is a 
REQUEST to Bill to do something about the 
holes (and the insects). 
Encoding Catherfne's INFORM/REQUEST: 
Cather ine needs to do two things. One is to 
give information to Bill which she bel ieves 
he does not have. This is cal led an INFORM. 
The other is to ask Bil l  to do something on 
the basis of his new knowledge. This is 
called a REQUEST. She can do these things 
with two utterances. However, if she 
bel ieves that Bill doesn't want the holes, 
that he wil l  infer that either she needs to 
know what poison to use or that he must 
apply the poison himself, and that he 
bel ieves that she bel ieves these things, 
then one utterance may be sufficient. Thus 
Catherine may just say, 
"Bill, the rhubarb's got holes." 
In that case she is relying on shared 
presupposit ions about her utterance to carry 
the informat ion about intention. On the 
other hand she could use explicit  l inguist ic 
conventions as in, 
"I inform you, Bill, that the 
rhubarb's got holes. I request 
that you either tell me which 
poison to use or apply poison to it 
yourself ."  
Bi l l 's plan: While Bill has basical ly  
the same goals as Cather ine let's assume he 
doesn't know much about plants, part icu lar ly  
rhubarb. When Catherine tells him that the 
rhubarb has holes he fails to make the 
inference that insects are eating the plant. 
Without that inference her last utterance 
might appear as an INFORM but not a REQUEST. 
Thus he has no reason to modify his plans 
about the garden. However he might wel l  
wonder why she said such a thing and 
formulate a plan to satisfy his curiosity. 
An act ion for his plan could be to REQUEST 
Cather ine to explain her last utterance. 
Encoding Bi l l 's REQUEST: Fol lowing an 
INFORM a common action is a REQUEST to the 
first speaker to EXPLAIN his INFORM. This 
fact is expressed in the SAP's which include 
INFORM's. The general expectat ion of such a 
REQUEST coupled with a commonly used 
l ingustic convent ion makes it possible for 
Bil l  to express his REQUEST succinctly: 
"So?" 
67 
Cather ine's  plan: Real izying that Bill 
misses the point of her INFORM/REQUEST 
Cather ine also real izes that her plan needs 
further action. She has to infer from 
Bi l l 's REQUEST that he is not making the 
appropr iate inferences himself  and needs to 
be told direct ly that there are insects on 
the rhubarb which need to be poisoned. 
Encoding Catherine's second 
INFORM/REQUEST: Catherine stil l bel ieves 
that Bill wil l  recognize her implicit  
REQUEST and that the problem with her first 
utterance was that facts were left out which 
Bil l  needed. Thus she says, 
"It's covered with l itt le bugs!" 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The l itt le dialogue introduced above 
could be continued in any of several 
directions. One l ikely cont inuat ion might 
be: 
"I guess we oughta dust it then." 
"I don't know what to use." 
"How about the rose bush powder?" 
"On rhubarb?" 
"Sure, a bug's a bug." 
"OK. But you do it. I don't know how 
much to use." 
For each utterance in this sequence there is 
an associated plan and set of beliefs. At 
the same time there is heavy use of 
presupposit ions,  l inguist ic  conventions, and 
SAP's to improve the speed and ease of 
communicat ion.  
These comments provide only a part ial  
answer to the quest ion of why Catherine 
Says, "The rhubarb's  got holes," or why 
Bruce says, "who made these ugly pictures?", 
They give but a sketch of how words are 
selected to encode intentions. I hope, 
though, that the comments have supported a 
considerat ion of generat ion as a social 
act ion occurr ing in the context of the 
speaker's and l istener 's  intent ions and 
beliefs. 
REFERENCES 
\[I\] Bruce, Bertram C., "Bel ief Systems and 
Language Understanding",  Report No. 2973, 
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc., Cambridge, 
Mass., January 1975. 
\[2\] Bruce, Bertram C., and C.F. Schmidt, 
"Episode Understanding and Bel ief  Guided 
Parsing", Computer Science Department,  
Rutgers, 1974, NIH Report CBM-TR-32. 
\[3\] Schmidt, C.F., "Model ing of Bel ief  
Systems, Sect ion 3". Second Annual 
Report of the Rutgers Special  Research 
Resource on Computers in Biomedicine,  
1973. Computer Science Department, 
