ON UNDERSTANDINGPOETRY*  
D. L. Waltz 
University of I l l inois 
Urbana IL 
By choosing to analyze examples of 
language which are unconventional  and cannot 
always be grasped instantly by people, I 
believe that otherwise hidden processes 
active in language understanding can be 
exposed for examination. This paper 
addresses speci f ical ly  the problems of how 
much knowledge is attached to a word, how 
much meaning is contained in syntactic 
structures, and ult imately what kinds of 
processing mechanisms are  necessary to 
understand things which may be said in 
English. 
I would like to make several main 
points: first, that while processing is 
general ly organized around verbs, the target 
structure, or structure that a speaker 
wishes to transmit to the hearer, may very 
well not be organized around verbs; second, 
that the part of speech of a word and the 
syntactic structure of a sentence have 
little in genera l  to do with their meanings; 
third, that words may in general have large 
framelike structures attached to them which 
guide processing; and fourth, that language 
understanding, especial ly  of novel language 
like poetry and metaphors, often involves 
the forcing of agreement between two or more 
frames to form a target structure. F inal ly 
I will say a few words about relevant 
current AI programs and about how easi ly 
they might be extended to handle such 
l inguist ic phenomena. 
Unfortunately,  this paper points out 
many more problems than it solves, and does 
not offer any more than a sketch of 
necessary processing mechanisms. 
Target Structures 
Case grammar theories as developed 
especia l ly  by Fi l lmore (1968) and 
Celce-Murc ia  (1972) have argued convincingly 
that sentence processing is centered around 
the verb. However the meaning which a 
speaker wishes to transmit to a hearer may 
in fact not be centered around verbs at all. 
As Minsky (1974) writes: 
In more extended discourse. . . I  
think that verb-centered structures 
often become subordinate or even 
disappear. The "topic" or theme of 
a paragraph is as l ikely to be a 
scene as to be an action, as l ikely 
to be a character izat ion of a 
person as to be something he is 
doing. Thus in understanding 
discourse, the synthesis of 
verb-structure with its 
case-arguments may be a necessary 
but transient phase. As sentences 
*This work was supported by the 
Off ice of Naval Research under 
Contract NO0014-67-A-0305-O026,  at 
the Coordinated Science Laboratory, 
Univers i ty of I l l inois, Urbana. 20 
are understood, the result ing 
substructures must be transferred 
to a growing "scene-frame" to build 
up the larger picture. 
By "target structure" I will refer roughly 
to what Minsky has cal led here "the larger 
picture." 
However it may not always be the case 
that large target structures are built up 
incremental ly  in a discourse. Sometimes a 
large target structure may be created by a 
single sentence, as in 
I) The gir l 's room seemed to the 
priest like the inner circle of 
Dante's Inferno. 
! 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
Here in a few words one can evoke a picture 
of a dark, foul-smell ing, hot and oppressive 
place, and the target structure is something 
like a list of such character ist ics  assigned 
to "the gir l 's room." This target structure 
bears l itt le resemblance to any "deep 
structure" I can imagine obtaining by merely 
pars ing  this sentence. 
The Meaning of  Syntactic Structures i 
m Even in much simpler sentences, the 
target structure may not bear much relat ion 
to the "deep structures" of the sentences. --i 
This is most clearly demonstrated in the | case of pictured descr ipt ions of the world, 
where the parts of speech of words are not 
an accurate guide to their meanings. For 
example, why should explode and burn be 
verbs, while noise and l ightning are nouns? | 
Whorf (1940) discusses such examples at 
length, and argues persuasively that our use 
of nouns and verbs to describe the world i 
does not ref lect the inherent  structure of | the world, but rather ref lects our 
l inguist ic training. 
Whorf  goes even further, to argue that 
we tend to "see" l ightning as  a thing | 
because it is a noun, but burning as an 
act ion because it is a verb. Thus in this 
view, the words we have to describe the 
world warp our percept ion of the world. If m this is true, then it may be that our 
percept ion is largely symbolic, as Minsky 
(1974) suggests, and syntactic structures 
may be meaningful  in the sense that frames ? 
would be in i t ia l ly  composed of syntactic | 
structure fragments. The fact is that 
Engish is rather inconsistent in the types 
of words and structures it uses to descr ibe mm 
phenomena, and therefore inconsistent in the g meanings of syntactic relations. This fact 
may be int imately related to the fact that 
it is di f f icult  to choose logical ly adequate 
arcs and links for represent ing relat ions ? 
between nodes of semantic nets, as S demonstrated convinc ingly  in Woods (1975). 
In any case, it seems to me that one should 
be wary about assigning much meaning to a m 
syntact ic structure. | 
I 
! 
How Much Meaning is Attached to a Word? 
The amount of structure one must 
postulate to be attached to a Word varies 
t remendously depending on the part icular 
word and the context of its use. Here I 
wil l  try to show certain simple cases in 
which quite large amounts of knowledge must 
be attached to words. Take for example the 
fol lowing sentences: 
(2) John is a physician. 
(3) John is a Renaissance man. 
In the first sentence (2), it seems that 
parsing plus simple semantic mechanisms can 
extract much of the meaning, if one assumes 
that "x is a y" means "x is a member of the 
set of all y." A system embodying these 
mechanisms (like Raphael (1968)) could 
properly set up "member" and "superset" 
links between John and physician. I wil l  
argue later that this analysis of meaning is 
insuff ic ient,  but for now let us assume that 
it at least captures much of the intended 
meaning of this sentence. 
However, such an analysis will c learly 
not suff ice for sentence (3). Why not? 
Part ia l ly because membership in the set of 
"Renaissance men" is not neatly del ineated 
as is membership in the set of physicians; 
it would seem exceedingly strange to set up 
a single node in a semantic net labeled 
"Renaissance men." Another reason is that 
the sentence seems to real ly be a statement 
of the speaker's opinion, and as such a 
hearer would need to have separate nodes for 
"Harriet 's list of Renaissance men," 
"Lyndon's list of Renaissance men" and so on 
for each speaker who has so c lassi f ied a 
person to the hearer. Of course this too 
seems ludicrous. The under ly ing meaning 
conveyed by the sentence is not purely a 
matter of opinion on the part of the 
speaker, but something like "John is 
knowledgeable and accompl ished in a number 
of di f ferent f ields," a matter (potential ly) 
testable by the hearer. That this is the 
true import of the sentence can be 
demonstrated by the fact that 
(4) John is a Renaissance man, but he 
has no knowledge about AI. 
provides a reasonable contrast of 
proposit ions, whereas 
(5) John is a Renaissance man, but 
Harriet doesn't think so. 
does not seem to be a reasonable contrast. 
Sentence (4) suggests something else of 
interest. After 
(3) John is a Renaissance man. 
we expect something like 
(6) He plays oboe in the Boston 
symphony, won the Nobel Prize in 
physics, has written 30 
best-sel l ing novels, and won the 
1972 U.S. Demol i t ion Derby 
Championship. 
21 
Sentence (6) supports the original  assert ion 
and gives a part icular instant iat ion of the 
general concept of "Renaissance man '~ 
appropr iate for John. I bel ieve that 
sentence (3) sets up something like the 
skeleton of a frame for "Renaissance man" as 
its target structure, leading one to expect 
further explanat ion or expansion to fill in 
the empty slots of the frame. 
Let us now reconsider sentence (2). 
When one says that "John is a physician," 
does one merely set up in the hearer links 
between two nodes named John and physic ian? 
Consider the fol lowing sentences: 
(7) John is a physician, but he does 
not know much about medication. 
(8) John is a physician, but he does 
not mind taking orders. 
I bel ieve that these sentences i l lustrate 
the fact that in understanding "John is a 
physician" one is not merely sett ing up a 
link between two nodes but is in fact 
ass igning to John a number of default 
attr ibutes of physicians, i.e., the hearer 
takes the word physic ian to refer 
s imultaneous ly  to an entire complex of 
attr ibutes, knowledge, actions and 
att itudes. Thus (7) provides a reasonable 
contrast, since one would expect a physic ian 
to know about medication. A l istener might 
infer from (8) that the speaker presupposed 
that all physic ians resent taking orders. 
But more than presupposit ion of the speaker 
is at work here; the sentence 
(9) John is a physician, but he resents 
taking orders. 
seems a ludicrous contrast, almost like "He 
may be fat but he runs slowly." One thing we 
know about doctors is that they ordinar i ly  
do not take orders, so it is quite plausible 
that they might not like to take orders. 
The point here is that even such unl ikely 
inferences as (8) seem to be included 
automat ica l ly  in the sentence "John is a 
physic ian."  That there is a limit to such 
inferences is i l lustrated by the fact that 
(10) John is a physician, but he has a 
low bowling average. 
and 
(11) John is a physician, but he has a 
high bowling average. 
both seem equal ly to be non-sequiturs.  
Understanding Poetry 
The types of language which are most 
diff icult  for us to understand may best 
i l lustrate the amounts of knowledge that 
must be attached to words and the methods 
for combining this knowledge or t ransferr ing 
complexes of knowledge from one domain to 
another (as in metaphor).  Everyday language 
communicates famil iar  relations, events and 
attitudes, and does so in famil iar ways. In 
the terms of this paper, the target 
structures of such communicat ion already 
exist as frames which need only 
instant iat ions and except ions to become 
complete representations.  As  such, the full 
meanings of words rarely become evident. 
Let us consider some examples which require 
overhaul or forcing together of ex ist ing 
structures. 
An accident is an inevitable 
occurrence due to the action of 
immutable natural laws. 
-Ambrose Bierce, The Devil 's 
Dict ionary 
What makes this funny is that it points 
out a confl ict between essential  facts in 
our frames which explain personal actions, 
and our frames which explain physical 
events. One cannot s imultaneously hold the 
view that accidents are the result of random 
chance and the view that "God does not throw 
dice," yet we do. A system which is not 
aware of the humor in this unresolvable 
confl ict cannot be said to understand the 
passage. 
Inebriate of air am I, 
And debauchee of dew, 
Reeling, through endless summer days, 
From inns of molten blue. 
-Emily Dickinson, 
from "I taste a l iquor never brewed" 
In order to understand this passage one 
must force together frames for dr inking 
immoderately invoked by inebriate, 
debauchee, r eel in~ and inns and for 
exper iencing nature, invoked by air, dew, 
endless summer days, and molten blue 
(skies). (See Charniak (1972) for a 
discussion of the di f f iculty of invoking a 
frame when it is not mentioned expl ic i t ly  by 
name.) In this case note the di f f iculty of 
saying something similar in a sentence: "I 
get drunk from experiencing nature" does not 
seem to produce anything like the same 
target structure for me, probably because I 
am not forced to interweave the two frames 
as I am in the poem. 
A great deal of communicat ion,  not only 
in poetry, depends on the use of analogies 
akin to the example above. Ortony (1975) 
has postulated three main functions which 
metaphors (as well as similes and analogies) 
serve in language; first, they al low one to 
transfer large amounts of information from 
one domain to another without expl ic i t ly  
spel l ing out all the details; second, they 
al low one to communicate the otherwise 
inexpl icable;  and third, they often make 
dist inct ions more vivid by adding otherwise 
missing perceptual  or emotional  content. 
His examples further support the general 
thesis of large amounts of knowledge being 
potent ia l ly  attached to each word. For 
instance. 
(12) The thought sl ipped my mind like a 
squirrel  behind a tree. 
enables one to express the fact that 
thoughts are sometimes elusive, quick, 
decept ively easy to catch, camoflaged, etc. 
and to say so in a very compact fashion. 
Such an idea cannot be stated direct ly since 
22 
we have no l iteral language for the behavior 
of thought; to say that "the thought escaped 
me" is sti l l  to rely on a metaphor. 
Finally, analogies are useful for 
creating or teaching new frames. While the 
account below is invented, I have had a 
number of such exchanges with my daughter. 
Adult: A veter inar ian is a doctor for 
animals. 
Child: Does he give the animals 
lo l l ipops? Does he use a 
stethoscope? etc. 
Clearly what is happening in such an 
exchange is that the child is creat ing a new 
frame for veterinarian, and is test ing to 
see just how much can be transferred from 
her doctor frame. Questions often center on 
things that are diff icult to imagine 
transferr ing,  e.g., an animal eating a 
lollipop. 
Relatio________nn t__go Current A_!I 
A number of pieces of research, the 
work on conceptual  dependency diagrams of 
Schank et al(1973), Schank (1973), the work 
on bel ief  systems of Colby (1973), Abelson 
(1973) and McDermott (1974) as well as the 
a lready ment ioned work of Charniak (1972) in 
understanding chi ldren's stories and 
Minsky's (1974) work on frames, stand out as 
most relevant to solving the kinds of 
problems I have presented. In addit ion, 
Col l ins et al(1974) have invest igated the 
problem of teaching geographical  concepts by 
use of analogies. I will, however, discuss 
only Schank's work in more detail  here. 
In Schank's schemes, verbs can have 
quite complex structures attached to them, 
which are not necessar i ly  closely related to 
the syntact ic deep structure of the 
sentences in which they occur, but which are 
related to what I have called target 
structures. For example, Schank represents 
the sentence 
(13) John grew the corn with fert i l izer. 
as a conceptual  dependency diagram which I 
read as something like 
(14)  John took fert i l izer  out of a bag 
and put it on the corn's ground, 
and this caused the corn to become 
larger. 
Clear ly the structure attached to the 
transit ive verb rgf_q~ const i tutes a frame of 
sorts, which could potent ia l ly  be used to 
transfer meaning to a new domain. It is not 
too dif f icult  to imagine a program which 
could accept a sentence like 
(15) Rais ing cattle is like growing 
corn, except that instead of 
spreading fert i l izer,  one feeds the 
catt le grain. 
and use its knowledge of rg_c_q~ to produce a 
new frame for raise (cattle). Schank's 
system can also draw inferences from 
sentences, e.g, "The corn wil l  become ripe,,, 
"John probably wants to eat the corn," etc. 
I 
I 
I 
l 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
from sentence (13). 
Some key problems still have not been 
addressed, however. First, the inference 
process does not know when to stop 
generating inferences, whereas I believe 
people have quite stable and definite ideas 
about how far inferences should be drawn 
from a sentence. Second, as illustrated in 
a number of earlier examples, nouns (e.g., 
physician) may have substantial amounts of 
structure attached to them. In Schank's 
work, only verbs are represented ~ by 
substantial structures. Third, while Schank 
has done work on piecing together sentences 
which form a coherent and expected discourse 
(a process he calls knitting), he has not to 
my knowledge worked on attempting to fit 
together apparently unrelated follow-up 
sentences. Indeed, without much more 
detailed frames for words, I believe that 
there is no way to understand the more 
tenuous connections between ideas that we 
discover routinely every day. 
Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank Andrew Ortony for 
suggesting a number of the ideas in this 
paper to me. 
REFERENCES 
Abelson, R.P., "The Structure of Belief 
Systems," in Schank and Colby (eds.), 
Computer Models of Thought and Language, 
W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973. 
Celce-Murcia, M., "Paradigms for Sentence 
Recognition," UCLA Dept. of Lingustics, 
1972. 
Charniak, E., "Toward a Model of 
Story Comprehension," MIT 
AI-TR-266, 1972. 
Children's 
AI Lab 
Colby, K.M., "Simulations of Belief 
Systems," in Schank and Colby (eds.), 
ComDuter Models of Thought a~d Language, 
W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973. 
Collins, A., Warnock, E.H., Aiello, N. and 
Miller, M.L., "Reasoning from Incomplete 
Knowledge," unpublished draft, BBN, 
Cambridge, MA, June 1974. 
Fillmore, C., "The Case for Case" in Bach 
and Harms (eds.), Universals i__~n 
Lingustic Theory, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1968. 
McDermott, D.V., "Assimilation of New 
Information by a Natural 
Language-Understanding System," MIT AI 
Lab AI-TR-291, 1974. 
Minsky, M.L., "A Framework for 
Knowledge," MIT AI Lab 
1974. 
Representing 
Memo no. 306, 
Ortony, A., "Why Metaphors are Necessary and 
Not Just Nice," in Educational Theorv, 
Vol. 25, No. I, Winter 1975. 
23 
Raphael, B., "SIR: a Program for Semantic 
Information Retrieval," in Minsky (ed.) 
Semantic Information Processing, MIT  
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968. 
Schank, R.C., Goldman, N., Rieger, C.J., and 
Riesbeck, C., "MARGIE: Memory, Analysis, 
Response Generation, and Inference on 
English," Adv. Papers of the 3IJCAI, 
Stanford Univ., 1973. 
Schank, R.C., "Identificaton of 
Conceptualizations Underlying Natural 
Language," in Schank and Colby (ed.), 
Computer Models of Thought and Language, 
W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, 1973. 
Whorf, B.L., "Science and Lingustics (1940)" 
in Language, Thought and Reality, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, 1964. 
Woods, W.A., "What's in a Link: Foundations 
for Semantic Networks," in Bobrow and 
Collins, Representation and 
Understanding, New York: Academic Press, 
1975. 
