! 
I 
i 
i 
I 
! 
I 
! 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
THE NATURE OF PERCEPTUAL REPRESENTATION: 
AN EXAMINATION OF THE 
ANALOG/PROPOSITIONAL CONTROVERSY 
Stephen E. Palmer 
Department of Psychology 
University of California, Berkeley 
In recent years a number of theorists 
have proposed that perceptual information 
can be represented in terms of propositi6nal 
(or relational) data structures (e.g., 
Baylor, 1971; Palmer, 1975: Winston, 1973). 
This development has provoked considerable 
controversy among psychologists and computer 
scientists over the type of representation 
most suitable for perceptual information, 
especially in the case of perceptual imagery 
(e.g., Bower, 1972; Kosslyn & Pommerantz, in 
preparation; Pylyshyn, 1973). The arguments 
typically pit some form of "analog" 
representation against some form of 
"propositional" representation. The tack 
often taken is to contrast a reasonable 
version of the favored type against an 
unreasonable version of the other type. 
This is particularly easy to do since there 
is considerable latitude within the 
categories of "analog" and "propositional" 
representations. While the arguments 
between the opposing schools of thought have 
been provocative and useful as an initial 
enterprise, their continuation in the 
present vein seems unlikely to produce 
eventual agreement on the nature of 
perceptual representation. 
It is clearly in the spirit of this 
conference to analyze the problem in terms 
of the underlying issues to reach consensus 
at more basic levels. In this paper I 
discuss briefly a number of issues relevant 
to representing perceptual knowledge: is 
perceptual representation uninterpreted or 
interpreted, complete or partial, implicit 
or explicit, holistic or atomic, 
quantitative or qualitative, absolute or 
relative? I do not pretend that the problems 
considered here are exhaustive. (See Bobrow 
(1975) for some other issues to be 
resolved.) I have chosen to discuss the 
problems I see as being most central to  the 
current analog/propositional controversy. 
For each topic I make a few theoretical, 
empirical, and methodological observations 
that seem to merit consideration. The 
conclusion I reach on many issues is that 
some kind of synthesis or compromise is 
required. Throughout the discussion I 
present my current approach to perceptual 
representation (see also Palmer, 1975) which 
illustrates how synthesis and compromise can 
be achieved within a single formal system. 
Structural and Parametric Information 
Before turning to the issues, I want to 
make a distinction between two fundamentally 
different types of information: structural 
(or organizational) and parametric (or 
dimensional) information. Structural 
information refers to the organization of 
perceptual elements into groups. 
151 
Figure-ground and part-whole relationships 
are paradigm examples of structural 
information. Parametric information refers 
to the values of the stimulus along various 
perceivable dimensions. Color, size, shape, 
position, orientation and so forth are 
examples of parametric information. 
Perhaps the most basic distinction 
between these two types of information is 
that parameters are properties of both the 
perceptual representation and the stimulus 
itself, while structure is a property of the 
representation alone. If the parameters of 
two perceptual representations are 
different, they necessarily correspond to 
two physically different stimuli. If the 
structure of two perceptual representations 
are different, they might correspond to the 
very same stimulus. Figure I i l lustrates 
this point by showing a case in which 
structure and parameters are combined 
orthogonally. 
I do not want to give the impression 
that structural and parametric information 
are independent. Clearly, the parameters of 
a stimulus affect its perceived structure. 
This fact is manifest in the work of Gestalt 
psychologists and codified in their laws of 
organization. Context and world knowledge 
can also affect the assignment of structural 
organization -- e.g., the figure ~ will be 
structured as a single unit in the context 
of~O~l and as two units in the context of 
13y7. 
It is also true that perceived 
structure can affect the representation of 
parameters. Someone perceiving the 
"parallelogram" organization of the form in 
Figure I might perceive it as taller and 
thinner than someone who perceived the same 
form with the "triangle" organization. Once 
again, context and world knowledge can 
affect the parameters of a perceptual 
representation -- e.g., the height of two 
people in an Ames room. 
It is important to make clear the 
distinction between structural and 
parametric information because failure to do 
so can lead to mistaken conclusions about 
the nature of perceptual representation. A 
case in point is the frequency with which 
the results of mental rotation experiments 
(e.g., Cooper, 1975; Cooper & Shepard, 1973: 
Shepard & Metzler, 1971) are cited as 
evidence that perceptual representations and 
processes are "analog" and continuous in all 
respects. When the process of rotation is 
considered in light of the 
structural/parametric distinction, it is 
seen that it deals only with changes in 
parameters -- namely, the orientation of 
the figure in space. The structure of the 
figure presumably remains constant, and thus 
does not contribute to the measured reaction 
times. 
To demonstrate the operation of 
structural variables in perceptual and 
imaginal processes, I have developed a 
"mental synthesis" task. In mental 
synthesis, subjects are required to imagine 
synthesizing two spatially separated parts 
by moving the right part onto the left part 
(see Figure 2), such that they know what the 
resulting figure looks like. The data of 
interest are the times required to 
synthesize two "good" parts of the 
to-be-synthesized figure (parts AI and A2 in 
Figure 2) versus two "bad" parts (BI and 
B2). The results are unequivocal. 
Synthesizing the bad parts took more than 
twice as long as synthesizing the good 
parts, even when the to-be-moved parts were 
virtually identical, as in Figure 2. I do 
not yet know exactly what is happening in 
the mental synthesis task, but I submit that 
it cannot be accounted for by the simple 
parametric transformation of translational 
motion. Once the parametric change in 
position is performed, structural 
manipulations (e.g., local and global 
grouping of segments) must be done in order 
to construct the perceptual representation 
of the synthesized figure. I suggest that 
structural and parametric operations are 
fundamentally different because the types of 
information upon  which they operate are 
fundamentally different. As a result, 
structural and parametric information will 
be considered separately at appropriate 
points in the discussion that follows. 
The Uninterpreted/Interpreted Issue 
One fundamental issue which often 
arises in debates over analog versus 
propositional representation is that of 
interpretation. Are the contents of 
perceptual representations "raw" sensory 
data or ,,interpreted" conceptual structures? 
Before such a question can be answered, we 
must be clear about what ,,interpretation" 
means. 
I view the interpretation of sensory 
data as having several levels, each being 
characterized by additional inferences which 
add meaning to the data being processed. At 
the lowest level there is the raw sensory 
data -- the stimulation of the retinal 
mosaic, if you wish. Some minimal 
interpretation is added when these raw data 
are organized into areas and low-level 
perceptual properties are extracted; this 
blue, rectangular portion of the scene  is 
some sort of unit as distinct from that 
green oval portion nearby. (I do not wish 
to imply that the verbal description given 
is the same as the evolving perceptual 
representation. The representation of the 
regions has information about the particular 
colors and particular shapes.) These 
low-level interpretations in terms of 
colors, shapes, sizes, and so forth provide 
information from which the observer 
identifies the areas as objects; the blue 
area is identified as a car and the green 
area as a tree. 
I think at this level we would all 
agree that the sensory data have been 
"interpreted," but there can be yet further 
interpretations. For example, suppose the 
car is identified as that of the observer's 
friend, and it is parked in the observer's 
driveway. The observer will very likely 
make the further inference that the friend 
152 
has come to visit. One might now object 
that this is no longer a "perceptual" 
interpretation, but the fact is that it will 
influence subsequent perceptions. The 
person standing at the door will more quicky 
be identified as the friend than if the car 
had not been noticed. 
Thus, there can be many levels of 
interpretation and for each there can be a 
representation. Which one is called the 
perceptuai representation is a matter of 
personal preference and may be responsible 
for some of the misunderstandings between 
those who argue about the nature of 
perceptual representation. My own 
preference is to consider them all 
perceptual representations, but at different 
points along a sensory-cognitive dimension. 
The representations are increasingly 
modality-specific at the sensory end and 
increasingly modality-independent at the 
cognitive end. For example, the inference 
that the friend had come to visit might be 
equally well made by recognizing the 
particular sound the friend's car made as it 
came into the driveway, or by recognizing 
the friend's distinctive knocking pattern on 
the front door. 
it should be clear that I am advocating 
an integrated approach to sensation, 
perception, and cognition (see also Norman & 
Bobrow, 1975) which is somewhat at variance 
with modularized, box-theory approaches. 
Within this framework, the nature of 
perceptual representation is different at 
different interpretive levels. At the 
sensory end, I view the representation as 
being very much analog, even in the strong 
form. At the cognitive end, I view the 
representation as being very much 
propositional, also in the strong form. But 
it is about the middle levels that most of 
the arguments seem to take place, and here 
neither pure analog or pure propositional 
representation seem to make much sense. 
There must be a transition between the two 
which is likely to be some sort of hybrid. 
In the discussion that follows, it should be 
assumed that I am considering a level of 
perceptual representation in which the 
stimulus has already been operated upon by 
low-level perceptual processes, but has not 
yet been conceptually categorized. 
The Complete/Partial Issue 
The picture-metaphor is usually 
characterized as a complete representation. 
It is complete in the sense that an analog 
image contains (explicitly or implicitly) 
all the information present in the stimulus. 
The quasi-l inguistic description is usually 
a partial representation, since it would be 
cumbersome (at best) if it described all the 
information in the stimulus. 
I think it can be stated flatly that 
there are very few (if any) objects or 
scenes about which people have complete 
perceptual knowledge. A complete 
representation of some object implies that 
its perceptual representation can be 
discriminated from that of any different 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
object, regardless of their  similarity, 
context, or any other factors. This simply 
is not the case. For example, I performed 
an informal study for perceptual memory of a 
building in which all of the subjects had 
worked for at least two years. They could 
not discriminate an accurate drawing of the 
building from three qualitatively similar 
drawings which differed substantially in the 
overall height-to-width ratio and the number 
of windows per floor (see Norman, 1975). In 
fact, the most preferred drawing was the 
least accurate one, and the least preferred 
drawing was the most accurate one. 
The real issue is not whether 
perceptual knowledge is complete or partial, 
but what part of the information is encoded 
and why it is selected. I favor an approach 
based on pragmatic considerations of 
contextual factors. The building mentioned 
above stands among a group of other gray, 
concrete buildings similar in architectural 
style, but quite different in overall size, 
height, specific detail, and (of course) 
position. What information is required to 
descriminate this building from the others? 
Relative position alone would be sufficient, 
or height, or size, or any combination of 
these three parameters. One simply does not 
need to know details like the exact 
height-to-width ratio or the number of 
windows per floor to find it. 
The strongest form of the pragmatic 
view implies that only discriminative 
information will be represented at any given 
level. The models  developed by Quillian 
(1968) and Winston (1973) for representing 
categories and their instances follow this 
general principle. I am suggesting that it 
might be fruitful to extend this strategy to 
contextually dependent descriptions (of., 
Norman & Bobrow, 1975; Bobrow & Norman, 
1975). That is, a person may not encode the 
perceptual description of a building in 
terms of its similarities and differences 
relative to all other buildings, but 
relative to Just those buildings from which 
it must be discriminated in its given 
context or set of contexts. 
This strongly pragmatic view leads to 
certain testable predictions. Suppose that 
a subject is presented with a designated 
target stimulus, S~, in a set of other 
stimuli, and is told that he or she will 
later be asked to pick the target item from 
that set. Performance on subsequent 
recognition tests for S~ and various 
distractor items should depend strongly on 
the context in which they originally 
appeared. For example, the discriminabil ity 
of distractors that differ from S~ on some 
dimension should depend whether that 
dimension was a discriminative feature of S t 
within the presented contextual set. 
Reaction time measures might provide some 
insight into what information was stored 
explicitly (in the representation of the 
target item) and what information was stored 
implicitly (in the contextual 
representation). 
This is but one example of the kind of 
experiments that might provide insight into 
the rules that govern the specific ? 
information content of perceptual 
representations in context. 
The Explicit/Implicit Issue 
One of the thorniest problems faced by 
anyone dealing with perceptual 
representation is that of explicit versus 
implicit representation of information. In 
large measure, the difficulty is that of 
separating structure from process. If a 
person can perform a task on a perceptual 
representation requiring certain 
information, it cannot be readily determined 
whether the information was stored 
explicitly and simply retrieved, or whether 
it was stored implicitly and then made 
explicit by some inferential process that 
would not otherwise have been invoked. The 
analog "picture-metaphor,, constitutes a 
representation in which virtually all 
information (except point locations) is 
implicit. The propositional 
quasi-l inguistic description is a 
representation in which a good deal of 
information (but not all) is explicit. 
Given the astonishing flexibility of 
the perceptual information processing 
system, I doubt that many (if any) 
hard-and-fast generalizations can be made 
about what information is represented 
explicitly and what implicitly~ It depends 
strongly on the requirements of the task 
being ~erformed. In reading coherent, 
connected discourse, for example, it may be 
that only global information is represented 
explicitly because expectations derived from 
linguistic context are strong enough to 
allow identification without detailed 
processing of low-level components. In 
comparing two novel figures for a 
same/different Judgment, however, the 
low-level components may be represented 
specifically because their use is required 
for the task. Perhaps the best one can hope 
for is to draw conclusions about the 
representation of information in a given 
contextual situation with certain analyzable 
task requirements and possible strategies. 
The Holistic/Atomie Issue 
The issue of whether perception in 
holistic or compossed of smaller components 
has a long history in psychology, most 
notably in the confrontations between the 
structuralist and Gestalt movements. This 
problem has been resurrected to some extent 
in the analog/propositional controversy. 
The strong form of analog representation is 
decidedly holistic, while the strong form of 
propositional representation is atomic (or 
componential). 
S - - ~ i - D ~ ~ .  Consider the 
simple form shown in Figure 3. It is quite 
easily decomposed into a triangle and 
rectangle in a particular arrangement. 
These parts, in turn, have lower-level 
components in the angles and lines of which 
153 
they are composed. Recent data (Palmer, 
1974; Reed, 1974) have demonstrated that 
people can find a "good" or "natural" part 
within a figure (i.e., a subset of the 
figure corresponding to a single structural 
unit such as triangle ABE) much more quickly 
and accurately than a "bad" or "unnatural" 
part(i.e., a subset which crosses structural 
boundaries, such as segments AB, BE, and 
DE). I find it difficult to explain such 
results without positing some representation 
of component structure. 
The Gestalt maxim "the whole is more 
than the sum of its parts," however, cannot 
easily be denied. Placing a series of 
points in the configuration of a line, for 
examPle , adds new dimensions to the 
figure -- the "emergent" properties of 
length and orientation which are undefined 
for the individual points that comprise it. 
Similarly, arranging three lines to form a 
triangle produces properties like 
closedness, area, and symmetry which are not 
proprties of the lines alone. The thrust of 
this argument is that if emergent properties 
are to be given explicit representation, 
there must be a mechanism for encoding both 
parts and wholes. 
A simple formalism for doing this is 
the hierarchical network (c.f. Baylor,1971; 
Palmer, 1975; Winston, 1973). At each level 
a node representing the global unit 
dominates its local parts. An example is 
given in Figure 3. The node \[ABCDE\] 
represents the whole figure, nodes \[ABE\] and 
\[BCDE\] represent the triangle and rectangle 
parts, nodes \[AB\], \[BC\],\[CD\], etc. 
represent the lines comprising the parts of 
the triangle and rectangle, and nodes \[A\], 
\[B\], \[C\], etc. represent the individual 
points. There are several aspects of the 
representation worth noting. The first is 
that if all the points were shown, then the 
lowest level of the structure would 
correspond to an "analog" representation. 
It is not until the second level that any 
interpretive information is 
represented -- e.g., the grouping of polnts 
into lines. Second, the structure is a 
network rather than a tree. A given unit 
can be part of more than one higher order 
unit -- e.g., segment \[BE\] is an element of 
both the triangle and the rectangle. Third, 
I have not yet specified the nature of the 
structural units or the connectors between 
them. The nodes might stand for feature 
lists, propositional structures, or even 
mini-templates. The connections might be 
uni- or bi-directional associations, 
explicit part/whole relations, or parametric 
relations such as relative position, 
orientation and size. 
P~rameters. Any structural unit can be 
characterized by values along certain 
dimensions -- its size, shape, color, 
position, and so forth. In the 
picture-metaphor, all such dimensions are 
represented holistically and implicitly in 
the image. They are encoded inte~rally and 
can only be separated by some set of 
? processes which extract this information 
from thhe holistic image. In the 
language-metaphor representation, most 
154 
dimensional information is encoded 
componentially and explicitly -- e.g., SIZE 
(OBJECT, LARGE), COLOR (OBJECT, RED), and so 
forth. Here the parameters are represented 
seoarabl~ and can only be integrated by some 
process that combines them into a composite 
unit (such as a point in a multidimensional 
space). What evidence is there for the 
integrality or separability of perceptual 
parameters. 
Both personal experience and 
psychological results suggest that people 
sometimes can remember, say, the location 
and shape of an object without remembering 
its orientation (cf., Frost & Wolf, 1973). 
At least under certain circumstances, then, 
some kinds of parametric information must be 
separable, since there is no reasonable 
mechanism by which components of integrally 
stored information can be differentially 
forgotten. 
There are certain dimensions, however, 
that seem to function integrally. Perhaps 
the clearest example is that of color. Hue, 
saturation, and brightness function as a 
package which is only "unpacked" into its 
components under unusual circumstances. 
(The reader is referred to Garner (1974) for 
a clear and elegant presentation of the 
differences between integral and separable 
dimensions in terms of experimental tasks.) 
There is also some evidence that distantly 
related parameters (e.g., color, size, and 
shape) can function integrally in simple 
same/different tasks. Egeth (1966) and 
Nickerson (1967) have reported reaction-time 
results with multidimensional stimuli which 
are consistent with a matching process that 
first evaluates all parameters integrally 
and then evaluates each component separately 
(see Reed, 1973, PP. 58-61). 
Given the evidence, I conclude that 
parametric information should have both 
holistic (integral) and atomic (separable) 
levels of representation, with certain 
constraints. For example, Figure 4 shows a 
possible representation for a rectangle of a 
given size and color. The node representing 
the whole object has parametric information 
associated with it -- color and size. Thus, 
these dimensions are integrated at the 
object node, such that it could be evaluated 
as a point in a multidimensional space. 
Color and size, however, are separated at 
the next level, and could be processed 
separately if required by the task. At this 
level, the components of color (hue, 
saturation, and brightness) and size (length 
and width) are represented as integral 
units, such that each could be evaluated as 
a point in different multidimensional 
spaces. These components are then separated 
at the lowest level. Thus they could be 
processed separately if necessary. 
I do not know whether this formulation 
is consistent with all of the data, but the 
general thrust seems right. Certain types 
of parametric information (e.g., length and 
width) are represented integrally at one 
level and separately at a lower level. 
Other types of information (e.g, length and 
hue) are never represented as a 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
sel f -contained integral unit~ To the extent 
that this is a reasonable scheme for 
representing parameters, we must begin to 
examine the structural aspects of parametric 
information. 
The Qual i tat ive/quant i tat ive Issue 
Another recurrent theme in debates over 
the relative merits of analog and 
proposit ional  representat ion is that of 
whether qual i tat ive or quant i tat ive 
information is encoded. The typical claims 
are that analog representat ions are 
quantitat ive while proposit ional  
representaions are qual itat ive. 
Structure. Structural re lat ionships 
themselves -- e.g., PART OF (EYE, FACE) -- 
are qual i tat ive in nature. If perceptual  
structure is to be represented explicit ly, 
there must be a qual i tat ive mechanism for 
doing so. I am not certain, however, that 
it does not have quantitat ive aspects. A 
part icular perceptual  element might- be 
grouped within two different units wlth 
different "strengths", especial ly during the 
init ial  process of assigning structure. 
I have proposed that the "goodness" of 
a set of components as a structural unit is 
determined by context-sensl t ive associat ions 
between its elements (Palmer, 1974). 
Suppose there is a pattern composed o f  
elements A, B, C, D, E, and F within which 
A, B, and C are a possible structural  unit. 
The more strongly A, B, and C are associated 
with each other, according to Gestalt 
p r inc ip les  of organization, the "better" 
they are as a part within the figure. The 
more weakly A, B, and C are associated with 
D, E, and F, the "better" they are as a part 
within the figure. This idea has much in 
common with hierarchical  c luster ing 
programs. I conceive of the process of 
organizat ion as one in which quantitat ive, 
low-level associat ions between elements 
interact with each other -- strengthening 
and weakening various groupings -- unt i l  a 
stable organizat ion determines "the" 
structure perceived. 
A similar s i tuat ion may occur in  
categorical  assignments. People are able to 
make discrete decisions about whether a 
robin is a bird. However, current evidence 
suggests that quantitat ive processes are at 
work prior to the decision (see Smith, 
Shobin & Rips, 1975). Certain birds are 
rated as "better" examplars than others 
(Rosch, in press) and the "better" the bird, 
the faster it can be categorized (Rips, 
Shobin, & Smith, 1974). The point is that 
the qual i tat ive discrete result of a 
cognit ive process may be reached by 
quantitat ive processing of quant i tat ive 
information. 
Parameters. There are two separate 
issues for parametric information with 
regard to quant i tat ive versus qual i tat ive 
information. The first concerns the nature 
of the dimensions themselves; the second 
concerns the nature of the values along the 
dimensions. 
Clearly, the perceptual dimensions (or 
"qualit ies") of the representaion are 
qualitative. Color is undeniably dif ferent 
in nature from location or shape or any 
other perceptual  parameter. If this 
dimensional information is to be encoded 
explicit ly, the representat ion of each 
dimension must be qual i tat ively distinct. 
The nature of dimensional values is a 
more complex problem. Is the color of some 
object to be represented by a quantitat ive 
value or is it to be represented by a 
qual i tat ive category such as COLOR (OBJECT, 
RED)? The quest ion is really about the 
nature of general izat ion along dimensions. 
Suppose I show someone a patch of a color 
between red and orange, but enough toward 
red that the observer would call it "red" if 
forced to choose. What wil l  the subsequent 
recognit ion errors look like? If the color 
is represented by coordinates in the color 
space, then the errors should be distr ibuted 
as a simple function of distance from the 
color presented. If the color is 
represented by a qualitative, categor ical  
description, then the errors should be 
distr ibuted either uniformly within the 
category boundaries or as a simple function 
of distance from the categorical  prototype, 
depending on whether the categories are 
defined by boundaries or prototypes. 
Although I do not know of such an 
experiment, I expect that the results would 
be more like the quantitat ive predict ion 
than the qual l tat ive-categor lca l  one. It  
seems likely, though, that if there were a 
drift or skew in the errors, it should be 
toward the center of the category into which 
the presented st imulus fell. To 
some extent, I favor quant i tat ive 
representaion of parametric values because 
it seems simpler and more natural. Metric 
operations on parameters, for example, are 
simpler to accompl ish with quant i tat ive 
values. Of course, one can approximate a 
quant i tat ive scale by having many small 
categories, but beyond some reasonably small 
number, the categories lose their 
qual i tat ive nature and begin to look more 
like a quant i tat ive dimension. That is, the 
categories become funct ional ly quantitat ive. 
The Absolute/Relat ive l~s~e 
Can the information in a perceptual  
representat ion be best character ized as 
encoded in an absolute form or an encoded 
relative to some other information? Given 
the emphasis I have placed on contextual  
factors, it should come as no surprise that 
I strongly favor the relative approach. But 
once again, there are constraints which 
limit the general izat ions that can be made. 
Structure. The structural  organizat ion 
of perceptual  representat ion is c learly a 
relative concept. It would be fool ish to 
think that any part icular set of perceptual  
elements wil l  always be grouped together. 
The Gestalt demonstrat ions of "hidden 
figures" are unequivocal  evidence that 
organizat ion depends on (in fact, is largely 
determined by) contextual  factors. 
S imi la r ly ,  my own research on the 
155 
part-structure of f igures shows that a given 
set of segments will only be perceived as a 
structural  unit within certain contextual  
segments (Palmer, 1974). In my view, no 
reasonable case can be made for absolute 
determination of structural organization. 
Parameters. The issue is more complex 
for parametr ic information. Since people 
can recognize most objects at various 
orientations, perspectives, and distances, 
relative encoding seems desirable. But it 
is a fact that people are not equal ly good 
at recogniz ing objects from all or ientat ions 
and perspectives. There seem to be 
preferred or ientat ions and perspect ives for 
most objects which depend on experience with 
them. There are even some rather subtle 
recognit ions (e.g., a par t i cu la r  person's 
face) which cannot be made if the absolute 
or ientat ion is too different from that 
normally experienced. (The reader is 
referred to Rock's (1974) studies of 
or ientat ion for further information.)  How 
are we to resolve these apparent 
inconsistencies? 
One type of solution is shown in Figure 
5 for or ientat ion information. Both 
"absolute" and relative or ientat ions of the 
face and eyes are encoded. The "absolute" 
or ientat ion (shown in brackets) of a 
structure is encoded as the or ientat ion of 
its long axis (from broad to narrow) 
relative to the ground. The important 
parameters for the representat ion of the  
face schema or frame are the re lat ionships 
(shown in ovals) betwen the "absolute" 
or ientat ions of the eyes and face. If the 
face were rotated, the absolute or ientat ions 
of each structure change, but their 
or ientat ions relative to each other remain 
constant. Thus, the representat ion is not 
or ientat ion specif ic, and a face can, in 
principle, be recognized as a face in any 
orientation. 
The absolute or ientat ions have two 
functions. In the expectat ion-dr iven mode, 
the or ientat ion of a known (or hypothesized) 
structure wil l  determine the or ientat ion of 
an expected structure via the re lat ionships 
between them. For example, if some set of 
data have been tentat ively interpreted as a 
face at +45, then the expected or ientat ion 
of the eyes are +135 and -45 as computed 
from the encoded relat ionships. The other 
function of absolute or ientat ion information 
is to suggest possible interpretat ions for 
sensory data in the data-dr iven mode. It is 
here that the preferred or ientat ion wil l  
affect perceptual  identi f icat ion. A face, 
for example, is more l ikely to be suggested 
as a possible interpretat ion for an oval at 
180 ? or ientat ion than at a 90" orientation. 
According to this account, the di f f icul ty in 
recogniz ing forms at atypical  or ientat ions 
is due to a reduction in the ef fect iveness 
of the data-dr iven mode. For all objects 
that have typical  absolute or ientat ions,  
however, using them to generate possible 
interpretat ions is an eff ic ient heurist ic.  
A price is paid when the or ientat ion is 
wrong, but the net effect is probably 
favorable. 
156 
Simply stated, I propose that 
parametric information be represented 
relative to its immediate structural  
context: superordinate whole and the other 
component parts at that level. Some 
problems remain. Should all types of 
parametric information be represented in 
this way, or are there some types (e.g. 
color) that are better represented 
absolutely. What constitutes a level within 
a given object, and what level of one object 
corresponds to a given level of another 
object when they appear together? Kosslyn's 
(1974) recent experiments in imagery lead me 
to the view that levels within a scene may 
be defined by parameters like the overal l  
size of the perceptual  element. If the 
perceptual  system analyzes only at one level 
of resolut ion at a time, then those 
perceptual  elements that fall within that 
level will be encoded together and relat ive 
to each other. 
Conclusion 
It was my or iginal  intent to c lar i fy 
Some issues involved in the 
analog/propos i t ional  debate in order to 
reach a deeper level of understanding about 
the nature of perceptual  knowledge. After 
having made this attempt, I wonder whether 
anything has real ly been clarif ied. At 
first glance, the big, messy problem of 
whether perceptual  representat ions are 
analog or proposit ional  has become a series 
of a lmost-as-messy,  l itt le problems. To 
make matters worse, these l itt le problems 
are subtly intertwined within the fabric of 
a complex and integrated system. Even so, I 
think we are on firmer ground with the more 
basic problems and their interre lat ionships  
than we were before. This does not mean 
that we should focus myopical ly  on the 
smal ler problems, for in the end they must 
fit together into a coherent whole. In 
analogy with the view presented earl ier that 
there are both separable parts and 
integrated wholes, we must work at both 
levels in our attempts to understand the 
nature of perceptual  representat ion.  
During the course of the discussion, I 
have presented my own approach to an 
integrated system for represent ing 
perceptual  knowledge. At present, it is but 
a sketch of what a complete theory might 
look like. (The system is presented in 
greater detai l  in another paper (Palmer, 
1975) to which the reader is referred for 
further information.)  In developing this 
formal izat ion I have tried to bui ld- in a 
number of general properties. A few of the 
desirable features are as follows. 
I. F lex ib i l~t? and ~eneral iSy. The 
proposed system blends analog, feature, and 
proposit ional  representat ion into a single 
formalism, even though the representat ional  
format is i tsel f  proposit ional.  As noted 
earlier, the primit ive point- level  
representat ion is (second-order) isomorphic 
with the st imulus and can be viewed as an 
analog representat ion.  At each level within 
the network, the structural  units of the 
representat ion are associated with the 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
global features of that unit at its holistic 
level of resolution. The various units are 
organized into structural networks 
characteristic of many propositional 
systems. The blend is achieved naturally 
from a simple rule: each structural unit (or 
"schema" or "frame") is represented globally 
by its holistic parameters and locally by 
its structural parts. 
2. Variable resolution. The proposed 
networks are capable of representing 
different level of resolution through the 
different structural levels at which they 
are described. Each scene, object, or part 
has many possible levels at which it can be 
examined. The appropriate level of analysis 
w i l l  vary with the stimulus itself (e.g., 
its size on the retina), the task at hand, 
and the contextual information available. 
3. Functional autonomy. The inclusion 
of global properties for each structural 
unit gives them functional independence 
(within limits). In the data-driven mode, 
any unit may be activated directly by 
sensory data via the global parameters 
without first activating the lower level 
units. This means that analysis can begin 
at virtually any level within the network. 
In the expectatlon-driven mode, any unit can 
look for confirmation of its global 
parameters before requesting more finely 
resolved information from lower structural 
levels. 
4. Interactive capability. The 
structural and parametric relationships 
within the network provide communication 
mechanisms through which the units can 
interact in both data-driven and 
expectation-drlven modes. The current state 
of one unit can be communicated to related 
units such that positive results for related 
units serve to strengthen each other. This 
allows for a "bootstrap convergence" process 
among the units of a schema during 
interpretation. 
5. Contextual denendence. The 
structure of the network and the relative 
representation mechanisms give contextual 
factors paramount importance in a simple but 
powerful way. Given a non-random world in 
which contextual regularities are frequent, 
the ability to use this information is 
desirable, possibly even necessary. 
Regardless of whether my particular 
approach proves to be a good way to realize 
these objectives, I have confidence that 
they are important in the design of a 
workable model of perceptual representation 
and processing. 
REFERENCES 
Baylor, G.W., A treatise on the mind's eye: 
an empirical investigation of visual 
mental imagery. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Carnegie-Mellon 
University, 1971. 
157 
Bobrow, D.G., Dimensions of representation. 
In D.G. Borrow and A.M. Collins (eds.) 
Representation and Understanding. New 
York: Academic Press, 1975. 
Bobrow, D.G. and Norman, D.A., Some 
prinicples of memory schemata. In D.G. 
Bobrow and A.M. Collins (eds.) 
Re resentation and Understandin . New 
York: Academic Press 1975. 
Bower, G.H., Mental imagery and associative 
learning. In L.W. Gregg (ed.) 
Cognition in _~rn in~ an___~d Memory. New 
York: Wiley, 1972. 
Cooper, L.A., Mental transformation of 
random two-dimensional shapes. 
Psvchol__~, 1975. 
Cooper, L.A. and Shepard, R.N., 
Chronometric studies of the rotation of 
mental images. In W.G. Chase (ed.) 
Visual Information Processing. New 
York: Academic Press, 1973. 
Egeth,H.W., Parallel versus serial processes 
in multidimensional stimulus 
discrimination. ~ and 
~svchoDhvsics, 1966, i, 245-252. 
Frost, N. and Wolf, J., How "visual" is 
visual memory? Paper presented at the 
14th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic 
Society, St. Louis, Missouri, November 
1973. 
Garner, W.R., The ~ ~f Informatio 
Structure. Potomac, Maryland: 
Erlbaum, 1974. 
Kosslyn, S.M., Constructing visual images: 
An exercise in neo-mentalism. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation 
Stanford University, 1974. 
Kosslyn, S.M. and Pommerantz, J.R., Mental 
imagery reconsidered: An analysis of 
Pylyshyn's critique, in preparation. 
Nickerson, R.S., Same-dlfferent reaction 
times with multi-attribute stimulus 
differences. ~ and Motor 
Sk i~,  1967, 24, 543-554. 
Norman, D.A. and Bobrow, D.G., On the role 
of active memory processes in perception 
and cognition. In C.N. Cofer (ed.) T~ 
St r_~ of Human ~emoFy. San 
Francisco: W.~. Freeman, 1975. 
Norman, D.A. and Rumelhart, D.E., Memory 
and Knowledge. in D.A. Norman, D.E. 
Rumelhart, and LNR Research Group. 
in ~ .  San 
Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1975. 
Palmer, S.E., Structural aspects of 
perceptual organization. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, University of 
California, San Diego, 1974. 
Palmer, S.E., Visual perception and world 
knowledge. In D.A. Norman, D.E. 
Rumelhart, and LNR Research Group, 
i_nn ~ .  San 
Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1975, 
Pylyshyn, Z.W., What the mind's eye tells 
the mind's brain: A critique of mental 
imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 
80, 1-24. 
Quillian, M.R., Semantic Memory. In M. 
Minsky (ed.) Semantic Information 
Processing. Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
MIT Press, 1968. 
Reed, S.K., PsFchological Processes . i_nn 
Pattern Recognition. New York: Academic 
Press, 1973. 
Reed, S.K., Structural descriptions and the 
limitation of visual images. Memory and 
Cognition, 1974, ~, 329-336. 
Rips, L.J., Sh~ben, E.J. and Smith E.E., 
Semantic distance and the verification 
of semantic relations. Journal of 
Verbal Learning an~ Verbal Behavior, 
1973, 12, 1-20. 
Rock, I., Orientation an~ Form. New York: 
Academic Press, 1974. 
Rosch, E., Cognitive representations of 
semantic categories. Journal of  
Experimental Psychology. General, in 
Dress. 
Shepard, R.N. and Metzler, J., Mental 
rotation of three-dimensional objects. 
Scienqg, 1971, 171, 701-703. 
Smith, E.E., Shoben, E.J. and Rips, L.J., 
Structure and processing in semantic 
memory; A feature model for semantic 
decisions. Psycological Review, 1974, 
81, 214-241. 
Winston, P.H., Learning to identify toy 
block structures. In R.L. Solso (ed.) 
Coqtemporary Issues in Cognitive 
Psychology: The Loyola Symposium. 
Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973. 
158 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
1 
I 
I 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure i: 
An illustration of structural and 
parametric differences? 
Figure 2: 
An example of stimuli used in the 
mental synthesis task and corresponding 
synthesis times (Palmer, 1974). 
Figure 3: 
An example of structural organization 
showing points, lines, parts, and the 
whole figure, 
Figure 4: 
The structure of integral and 
separable parameters, 
Figure 5: 
An il lustration of relative and absolute 
representation of orientation parameters 
for a FACE and two EYES. 
Same 
STRUCTURE 
Different 
Synthesized 
Figure 
Good 
Parts 
? o ? 
? ? ? o 
MEAN SYNTHESES 
TIME (in seconds) 
Figure All 20 
shown figures 
2.16 2.04 
Bad Parts 
? ? 0 ? 
5.03 5.05 
A 
E ~ 'B  
D C 
? y? \  
\[~\] \[ ~eD~.\] 
\[~\] [~\] [~\] [Be\] \[c~\] [DE\] 
\[El \[B\] \[C\] 
C\] \ [ \ ]  C \ ] .  C\] \ [ \ ]  
0 
-90 ~ +90 
\[FACE\] 
~ \[~_18o\] -~  
159 
