THE CLOWNS MICROWORLD* 
Robert F. Simmons 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Texas 
ABSTRACT 
About f ifteen years of active research 
in natural language quest ion-answer ing 
systems has provided reasonably 
concise and elegant formulations of 
computat ional  semantics far 
understanding English sentences and 
questions about various microworlds. 
These include the Woods Lunar Data 
Base, the Winograd world of a pictured 
hand and blocks, the Heidorn world of 
a fueling station, the Hendrix, 
Slocum, Thompson world of 
transactions, John Seely Brown's power 
circuit and Schank's sketches of 
motivated humans. (See Woods et al
1972, Winograd 1972, Hendrix et al
1973, Heidorn 1972, Schank 1975 and 
Brown et al1974.) In each of these 
worlds, a natural language processor 
is able to understand an ordinary 
subset of Engl ish and use it 
conversat ional ly  to accept data and to 
respond to commands and questions. 
Ignoring early work largely lost in the 
archives of corporate memos, Wino~rad's 
language processor is essent ia l ly  a first 
report ing of how to map English sentences 
into diagrammatic pictures. Apart from 
potential  applications, the pictures are of 
great value in providing a universal ly  
understood second language to demonstrate 
the system's interpretat ion of the Engl ish 
input. While we are stil l  struggl ing in 
early stages of how to compute from Engl ish 
descr ipt ions or instructions, there is much 
to be gained from studying the subset of 
Engl ish that is picturable. Translat ion of 
Engl ish into other more general languages 
such as predicate calculus, LISP, Russian, 
Basic Engish, Chinese, etc. can provide the 
same feedback as to the system's 
interpretat ion and must suff ice for the 
unpicturable set of English. But for 
teaching purposes, computing pictures from 
language is an excellent instrument. 
We began with the notion that it should 
be quite easy to construct a microworld 
concerning a clown, a pedestal and a pole. 
The result ing system* could draw pictures 
for such sentences as: 
A clown holding a pole balances on his head 
in a boat. 
A clown on his arm on a pedestal balances a 
small clown on his head. 
Figure I shows examples of diagrams produced 
in response to these sentences. 
*Supported in part by NSF Grant GJ509E 
*(see Simmons & Bennett -Novak 1975 
grammar and semantics of this system.) 
for 
17 
We progressed then to sentences 
concerning movement by adding land, water, a 
l ighthouse, a dock and a boat. We were then  
able to draw pictures such as Figure 2 to 
represent the meanings of: 
A clown on his head sails a boat from the 
dock to the l ighthouse. 
In the context of graphics, two 
dimensional line drawings are attract ive in 
their s impl ic ity of computation. An object 
is defined as a LOGO graphics program that 
draws it (see Papert 1971). A scene is a 
set of objects related in terms of contact 
points. A scene can be described by a set 
of predicates: 
(BOAT ABOVE WATER) 
(ATTACH BOATx? WATER,y) 
(DOCK ABOVE WATER) (DOCK LEFTOF WATER) 
(BOAT RIGHTOF DOCK) 
(ATTACH DOCK~ WATERxy) 
(ATTACH BOATxy~ky DOCKxy ) 
Or ientat ion functions for adjust ing start ing 
points and headings of the programs that 
draw the objects are required and these 
imply some tr igonometr ic  functions. A LISP 
package of about 650 lines has been 
developed by Gordon Bennett-Novak to provide 
the picture making capabil ity. 
What is mainly relevant to the 
computat ion of language meanings is that a 
semantic structure suff ic ient to transmit 
data to the drawing package is easi ly 
represented as a property list associated 
with an art i f ic ial  name for the scene. For 
example, "A CLOWN ON A PEDESTAL" results in 
the fol lowing structure: 
(CI, TOK CLOWN, SUPPORTBY C2, ATTACH(CI 
FEETXY C2 TOPXY)) 
(C2, TOK PEDESTAL, SUPPORT CI, ATTACH(C2 
TOPXY CI FEETXY)) 
(CLOWN, EXPR(LAMBDA(). . . )  FEET XY, SIZE 3, 
STARTPT XY, HEADING A) 
(PEDESTAL, EXPR(LAMBDA() . . . )  TOP XY, SIZE 3, 
STARTPT XY, HEADING A) 
A larger scene has more objects, more attach 
relations, and may include addit ional  
relat ions such as INSIDE, LEFTOF, RIGHTOF, 
etc. In any case the scene is semant ical ly  
represented as a set of objects connected by 
relat ions in a graph (i.e. a semantic 
network) that can easi ly be stored as 
objects on a property list with relat ional  
attr ibutes that connect them to other such 
objects. 
A small grammar rich in embedding 
capabi l i t ies is coded in Woods" form of 
Augmented Transit ion Net (Woods 1970) for a 
set of ATN functions to interpret. As each 
constituent is completed the operat ions 
under the grammar arcs create portions of 
property list structure. When a clause is 
completed, semantic routines associated with 
verbs and preposit ions sort the various 
Subject Object and Complement const ituents 
into semantic roles and connect them by 
semantic relations. A verb of motion 
creates a net of relat ions that are valid in 
all t imeframes and in addit ion encodes a 
process model that changes the semantic net 
from one timeframe to another. 
Nouns such as "clown", "l ighthouse", 
"water", etc. are programs that construct 
images on a display screen. Other nouns 
such as "top", "edge", "side" etc are 
defined as functions that return contact 
points for the pictures. Adjectives and 
adverbs provide data on size and angles of 
support. Preposit ions and verbs are defined 
as semantic functions that expl icate spatial  
relat ions among noun images. Generally, a 
verb produces a process model that encodes a 
series of scenes that represent initial, 
intermediate and final displays of the 
changes the verb describes. 
The system is programmed in UTLISP for 
CDC equipment and uses an IMLAC display 
system. It current ly occupies 32K words of 
core and requires less than a second to 
translate a sentence into a picture. 
DISCUSSION 
Nouns such as "circus", "party", 
"ballgame" etc. have not yet been  
attempted. They imply part ia l ly ordered 
sets of process models and are the most 
excit ing next step in this research. More 
complex verbs like "return" or "make a 
roundtr ip" imply a sequence of interact ing 
process models. Thus, "a clown sailed from 
the l ighthouse to the dock and returned by 
bus" offers interest ing problems in 
discover ing the arguments for MOVE*-return 
as well as in the design of a higher level 
process model whose intermediate condit ions 
include the models of MOVE*-sai l  and 
MOVE*-return.  
As it stands, the CLOWNS system has 
served as a vehicle for developing and 
expressing our ideas of how to construct a 
t ight ly integrated language processing 
system that provides a clearcut syntactic 
stage with coordinate semantic processing 
introduced to reduce ambiguity. Two stages 
of semantic processing are apparent; the 
first is the use of preposit ions and verbs 
to make explicit the geometric relat ions of 
"support", "leftof", etc. among the objects 
symbol ized by the nouns; the second is the 
t ransformat ion of these geometric relat ions 
into connected sets of x-y coordinates that 
can be displayed as a scene. Schank's 
notion of primit ive actions is ref lected in 
our approach to programming high level verbs 
such as MOVE* to encompass the idea of 
motion carried in verbs such as "sail", 
"ride", etc. Woods" ATN approach to 
syntact ic analysis is central to this system 
and in sharp contrast to the approach of 
Schank and Riesbeck who attempt to minimize 
formal syntactic processing. Our process 
model ref lects the ideas developed by 
Hendrix (1974) in his development of a 
18 
I 
logical structure for Engl ish semantics. 
The system is not l imited to its I 
present grammar nor to its present I vocabulary of images. Picture programs to 
construct addit ional  objects are easi ly 
constructed and the semantic routines for J 
addit ional  verbs and preposit ions can be I defined for the system with relative ease. 
The system has been used successfu l ly  m 
to communicate methods for natural language ,~ 
computaton to graduate students and to m 
undergraduates.  It appears to have 
immediate possibi l i t ies for teaching the 
structure of English, for teaching precision ;~  
of Engish expression, and for teachng | foreign languages through pictures. 
Eventual ly  it may be useful in conjunct ion 
with very good graphic systems for ~m 
generat ing animated i l lustrat ions for ? 
p icturable text. g 
In my mind CLOWNS shows the power and 
value of the microworld approach to the 
study of Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence. By I narrowing one's focus to a tiny world that 
can be completely described, one can define 
a subset of Engl ish in great depth. This is 
in contrast to the study of text where the I situat ions descr ibed are so complex as to forbid exhaust ive analysis. The translat ion 
into a v isual ized microworld provides an 
immediate display in a two-dimensional  j 
language of the interpretat ions dictated by I the syntactic and semantic systems and thus 
a scient i f ic  measur ing  instrument for the 
accuracy of the interpretat ion.  
I Although there is potential  for expansion of the system into the world of 
useful appl icat ions, I believe the primary 
value of this experiment with the CLOWNS , 
world is to show that there exist order ly I and stra ightforward ways of economical ly  
computing translat ions from subsets of 
Engl ish to procedures that do useful Work. 
This is not a new f inding but I believe the ? 
implementat ion is cons iderably  simpler than i 
most previous ones. 
REFERENCES I 
Brown, Burton, R.R. & Bell, A.G., "SOPHIE: 
A Sophist icated Instruct ional  Environment 
for Teaching Electronic Troubleshoot ing",  I BBN Report # 2790, Apri l  1974. 
Heidorn, George E., "Natural Language Inputs 4 
to a Simulat ion Programming System," 
NPS-55HD, Naval Post Graduate School, | 
Monterey, Calif. 1972. 
Hendrix, G., "Prel iminary Constructs for the i 
Mathematical  Model ing of Engl ish I Meanings."  Univers i ty  of Texas, 
Department of Computer Sciences, Working 
Draft, Apri l  1974. (not for 
distr ibut ion) I 
Hendrix, G.G., Thompson, Craig and Slocum, 
Jonathan. "Language Processing via 
Canonical  Verbs and Semantic Models." im 
Proc. 3rd Int. Jt. Conference o__nn I Art i f ic ia l  Intel l igence, Stanford 
I 
University, Menlo Park, Calif., 1973. 
Papert, S., "Teaching Children to be 
Mathematicians vs. Teaching About 
Mathematics." Int. J. Math. Educ. i__nn 
Science & Tech., New York: Wiley & Sons, 
1972; MIT, A.I. Memo. No. 249, July 
1971. 
Schank, Roger, Conceptual 
Processing, North-Holland 
Company 1975 (In Press). 
Information 
Publishing 
Simmons, R.F. and Bennett-Novak, G., 
"Semantically Analyzing an English Subset 
for the Clowns Microworld", Dept. Comp. 
Sci. Univ. Texas, Austin, 1975. 
Winograd, Terry, Understanding Natural 
Language, New York: Academic Press, 1972. 
Woods, W.A., Kaplan, R.A., & Nash-Webber, 
B., "The Lunar Sciences Natural Language 
Information System: Final Report: BBN 
Report # 2378, June, 1972, Bolt Beranek 
and Newman Inc., Cambridge, MA. 
Woods, Wm. A., "Transition Network Grammars 
for Natural Language Analysis," Comm. 
ACM, 13, Oct. 1970. 
" ~i J q 
Figure 2. A Motion Verb 
Figure i. State Verbs 19 
