PRIMITIVES AND WORDS 
Yorick Wilks 
Ist i tuto per Gli Studi 
Semantici  e Cognit iv i  
Castagnola, Switzer land 
We may useful ly dist inguish between 
internal and external  questions when 
discussing the use of primit ives for 
represent ing natural  language content and 
doing related semantic computations. Here I 
shall give a few examples of internal 
questions; go on to explain why I shall  turn 
immediately to external  questions; and 
f inal ly discuss two of the latter: the 
just i f icat ion of pr imit ives in general, and 
the dist inction, if any, between pr imit ives 
and words. 
What I mean by "internal quest ions" 
about pr imit ives are detai led considerat ions 
about what semantic pr imit ives to choose, or 
how to insert them into larger structures in 
part icular  cases so as to represent some 
complex concept or conceptual  relation, etc. 
These are quest ions that can only arise when 
the general notion of semantic primit ive has 
already been accepted. It is not possible 
to discuss such internal  questions while one 
is at the same time answering external  
questions, such as the just i f icat ion of 
semantic pr imit ives i__Dn general. 
There are fair ly st ra ight forward 
internal  cr i ter ia for the select ion and 
maintenance of a pr imit ive vocabulary: the 
vocabulary should not be obviously  
redundant, with two pr imit ives covering the 
same, or nearly the same, range of meaning. 
If one could show of anyone's suggested set 
of pr imit ives that this was so, it would 
fol low that he did not have a good set. 
Secondly, a pr imit ive vocabulary should not 
be obviously or iented towards a part icu lar  
subject area, if it is at the same time 
claimed to be a general  set. So, for 
example, if, in a proffered set of pr imit ive 
actions, we saw a major i ty  of pr imit ives 
concerned with human bodi ly actions such as 
moving, expel l ing, ingesting, etc., we might 
well  wonder how such a system would cope 
with the express ion of general actions such 
as "divide", "separate", "specify", 
"undertake", "delay", etc. 
Now there would be a drawback in 
center ing a contr ibut ion,  for a meeting as 
general as this one, on only internal  
questions. To my knowledge there are only 
two effect ive systems (in the AI approach to 
natural  language understanding*)  that make 
use of primit ives, namely Schank's (1973a) 
and my own (Wilks 1972), and therefore any 
such concentrat ion would be something of a 
*It wi l l  be clear here that I refer only to 
AI systems. There were, of course, working 
primit ive systems in the earl ier days of 
Computat ional  L inguist ics,  of which the best 
known was perhaps Gardin's  (1965), and in 
Generat ive L inguist ics  there is the well  
known work of Fodor, Katz, Postal, Lakoof, 
McCawley, etc. 
38 
private fight. External\[ questions, however, 
are of wider interest and it is my 
content ion that, if we fol low certain 
external quest ions through, we can see that 
other workers in natural language 
understanding are also using primit ives, 
though they may not be aware of the fact. 
One issue bridges the gap between 
internal  and external  questions in an 
interest ing way, and wil l  serve me here as a 
new point of departure. A point of 
di f ference between Schank's view and my own 
has always been over the appearance in 
semantic representat ions of what appeared to 
be simply the surface words of the language. 
So, for example, in a representat ion of 
"John shot Mary" by Schank (1973b) there 
wil l  normal ly appear the Engl ish word "gun". 
Whereas, in my representat ions,  all one sees 
are structur ings of the 80 primitives, and 
"gun" is not one of them. I have suggested 
that Schank's diagrams are therefore of 
mixed type, as between pr imit ives and words. 
However, I now believe this cr i t ic ism of 
mine to have been badly put, and to rest 
upon a confusion, namely that there is some 
clear d ist inct ion between pr imit ives and 
non-pr imit ives (i.e. surface vocabulary).  
Histor ical ly,  what happened in Schank's 
system is clear: he wanted a surface- f ree 
semantic representat ion without words in it, 
and has gradual ly  achieved this, most 
recent ly by the e l iminat ion of many 
noun-words in favour of Fodor and Katz type 
primit ive lists, as developed by Weber. I 
am proposing now in my own system to reverse 
the process, as it were, and start ing from 
an inventory of only pr imit ives (about 54 in 
1967, now grown to 80, see Wilks (1972)) to 
begin to insert nonprimit ives,  i.e. words, 
into the formula structures that define word 
senses, but with one important proviso that 
I shall now explain. 
Let us consider the Engl ish act ion 
"fire at", as a single unit, and its 
express ion in terms of more pr imit ive 
concepts. I have expressed it unti l  now 
(1975a) as the formula, or tree structure, 
below: 
(*HUM SUBJ) (STRIK GOAL) (, CAUSE) / \  
(THING MOVE) 
The structure need not detain us except 
to note that the r ight-most pr imit ive CAUSE 
is the head, or pr incipal  primitive, of the 
action, and the r ightmost THING that is 
caused-to-move is, of course, the bullet, 
whi le the leftmost THING, that is the 
INSTRument, is the gun. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
What I now propose to do is to insert 
Engl ish words into the formula: in 
part icular the words "gun" and "bullet", as 
follows (in list form): 
((*HUM SUBJ) ((*ANI OBJE) ((STRIK GOAL) 
((gun INST) ((bullet MOVE) CAUSE))))) 
but to do this if and only if there are also 
formulas elsewhere in the system defining 
the meanings of "gun" and "bullet" Thus, 
in the decomposit ion of a formula, two kinds 
of entit ies may be encountered, pr imit ives 
and "words", and if an atom is found that is 
not a primit ive then it must be a word and 
so a formula must exist elsewhere for it. 
Now, there is a danger of c i rcular i ty in all 
this: in that, looking for the formula 
defining "gun" as that atom appear ing in the 
formula for "fire at", we might find a 
formula that told us (in primitives) that a 
gun was an object used by human beings for 
firing at something. True, but since the 
head (rightmost element) of the formula for 
"gun" wil l  be THING, this re-entrant method 
of formula construct ion cannot give less 
information than formulas consist ing only of 
primitives, as mine have until now. 
Now, does this method of re-entrant 
formulas -- re-entrant in the sense of 
mentioning formulas inside each other (as 
that for "fire at" now mentions that for 
"gun" and "bullet") -- force me to withdraw 
the "mixed-type" cr i t ic ism I made in the 
past of Schank's descript ions. Well, yes 
and no. No, in that Schank's use of, say, 
the word "gun" in the conceptual  dependency 
representat ion for "shoot" was not 
re-entrant in the sense I have defined it. 
There was, if I understand him, no formula 
elsewhere for "gun" in his example: there 
was the Engl ish lexeme and no more. Hence, 
if a program parsing his system searched in 
a text for "gun" as the instrument of 
"shoot", and found "bow and arrow", it would 
be helpless because it did not find exact ly 
what it was looking for -- it would have no 
descript ive formula for the sense of "gun" 
to help it know when it had found roughly 
the same sort of thing. Just as in "John 
shot her with a colt", it would have no 
information with which to separate the horse 
and gun senses of "colt": it would either 
find the sought Engl ish lexeme or, as in 
these cases, not. 
But then again, on the other hand, the 
cr i t ic ism i__ss changed because the claim that 
there should not i__nn princiDle be mixed type 
(word and primit ive) semantic descr ipt ions 
is impl ic i t ly withdrawn by the above 
proposal for re-entrant formulas. Now there 
need be no serious "theoret ical"  
considerat ions involved in such a proposal. 
It can be seen as simply a notat ional  
convenience: in that "gun" in a formula for 
"shoot" is now just a shorthand form for the 
formula for "gun" exist ing elsewhere in the 
system. This makes the formulas easier to 
read for a human user by avoiding the 
insert ion of too much repetit ive mater ia l  in 
terms of pr imit ives into the body of the 
formula itself. 
39 
Yet, there is a more fundamental  point 
buried in all this, very much an external  
question, and one which led me to mis -s ta te  
my cr i t ic ism of mixed type descr ipt ions in 
the past. Let me now go into this a little: 
though it is not, as I shall show, intended 
to lead to conclus ions that should give any 
comfort, either to those who have used mixed 
type descr ipt ions in the past or to those 
who wish to avoid primit ive descr ipt ions 
altogether.  
My basic error was to defend the use of 
pr imit ives by impl ic i t ly  assuming that they 
were in some way essent ia l ly  different from 
natural  language words, and therefore, that 
structures of pr imit ives were in some way 
different from structures of natural  
language words, which is to say, assuming 
that a semantic descr ipt ion in terms of 
pr imit ives was something other than a 
reduced micro - language,  with all the normal 
weaknesses and vaguenesses of a natural  
language. I now see more clearly that that 
is not and cannot be so. Or, to put the 
message of this posit ion paper in a slogan 
form, there is no escape from a natural  
language and certainly not via the primit ive 
route. 
Let me take first the .iustification 
aspect of this. Those of us who have used 
pr imit ives for some time have all I think 
made use of the innocent notat ional  
convention of wr it ing primit ives in upper 
case letters thus: MAN, CAUSE, TRANS, etc. 
And I would not wish to change this; it is 
useful for indicat ing whether we are, at any 
given moment, descr ib ing a structure in the 
primit ive or the surface language. The 
trouble is that such a usage does inevitably 
carry the suggest ion that the upper case 
entit ies are something other than (over and 
above, or "deeper" than, but anyway 
different from) the ordinary words they look 
like. And this, of course, is error, pure 
and simple. There have certainly been 
claims from some quarters that these 
ent it ies are quite other: that CAUSE has 
almost a halo around it, and represents, or 
refers to, some other kind of entity in the 
brain or mind directly. 
At its crudest, this is just the old 
referent ia l ist  fal lacy moved up a level, as 
it were. The low level fallacy, sti l l  al ive 
and well, is that the meanings of words are 
physical  objects. "Chair", the story goes, 
s ignif ies by referr ing to things like the 
one I am sitt ing on, and so therefore do 
"mind", "action", "fr iendship" and 
"cunning", though perhaps in a s l ight ly more 
roundabout way. I do not want to discuss 
this view here, but only to point out that 
the view of pr imit ives under d iscussion 
holds that primit ives, like words, have 
their meaning/s ign i f i cance in the same sort 
of way, but in their cases by referr ing to 
certain i l l -def ined mental  entities. I have 
argued in detai l  e lsewhere (Wilks 1974) that 
this could not conceivably be so, or be 
known even if it were so. 
But this comic-str ip  phi losophy is not 
the heart of the matter: what this view of 
pr imit ives does, in real terms, is to lead 
to research that attempts to justify 
part icular sets of primit ives direct ly in 
some way, and these days that usual ly means 
psychological ly*.  But what I am arguing is 
that, if formulas, templates, conceptual  
dependency structures, etc. are simply 
usages of a language of primitives, then no 
direct .justification of the vocabulary makes 
sense, and certainly not any just i f icat ions 
of a correct vocabulary, any more than it 
would make sense to try to establ ish the 
correct vocabulary of Engl ish or any other 
natural language. It fol lows from this bhat 
there can be a variety of pr imit ive 
languages for semantic descriptions, no one 
necessar i ly  better or worse than any other, 
any more than my vocabulary is better or 
worse than yours if I know 100 Engl ish words 
you don't, and you know 101 that I don't. 
In the case of each primit ive vocabulary, 
the only ult imate test will be the success 
or fai lure of l inguist ic  computat ions that 
make use of it. 
Now there are l imits to this sweeping 
paral lel  between primit ive and natural  
languages. Clearly, and as I ment ioned 
earlier, a pr imit ive vocabulary should not 
have synonymous primit ives, whereas in a 
natural language it is often a point of 
aesthet ic  pride to have as large a range of 
semi-synonyms as possible: "cemetery" and 
"graveyard" in English, for example. Again, 
there is at least one interest ing piece of 
indirect just i f icat ion of a pr imit ive 
vocabulary, namely the project at Systems 
Development Corporat ion that put the whole 
of Webster 's  Third Internat ional  Dict ionary 
onto tape and counted the rank frequency 
list of words used in the def in i t ion of 
other words. That was, ignoring very 
frequent words like "a" and "the", down to 
the 80th rank order, pretty close to my own 
list of pr imit ives, and natural ly  I was 
pleased. That is what I, like anyone else, 
would have hoped for; since pr imit ives are 
in fact used to define the senses of other 
words, we should be happy to be close to the 
list used unconsc ious ly  by the makers of a 
large and eff ic ient dict ionary. 
Nevertheless,  and in spite of these two 
caveats, it seems to me that a pr imit ive 
vocabulary is nothing other than a small 
natural  language, and therefore not open to 
methods of just i f icat ion unavai lable to any 
other natural  language, and that it is a 
mistake to pretend otherwise. To sum up, if 
words of a natural  language like Engl ish are 
not just i f ied nor gain s igni f icance by their 
direct reference to things, but only by 
their function within the overal l  language, 
then we may expect precisely the same to be 
*I cannot see that the notion of the 
"psychological  just i f icat ion of pr imit ives" 
makes sense, though I would be happy to be 
shown. I do not of course refer here to 
work like ( Johnson-Laird 1974) showing that 
humans seem not to store surface language. 
Such results are quite consistent with a 
"primit ive hypothesis",  but do not support 
it, since they are also consistent with the 
hypothesis  that human semantic 
representat ion is not l inguist ic at all, but 
consists of, say, binary numbers! 
40 
true of a language of primitives, and no 
amount of wr it ing in upper case letters is 
going to change that fact. 
Now, if I take this to heart, that 
there is no di f ference at bottom between 
pr imit ives and other words, then I find that 
another cr i t ic ism I have made impl ic i t ly  or 
expl ic i t ly  in the past must also be 
completely recast. This concerns the 
init ial  representat ion of sentences in 
PLANNER-type formalisms, where it seems not 
unnatural  to represent "John is at the 
station" as (AT JOHN STATION). 
I have been tempted to cr i t ic ise such 
representat ions,  to myself  at least, on the 
grounds that they were simply the Engl ish 
words of the sentence (or something very 
like them) rearranged in some plausible way, 
and that therefore nothing had been shown or 
structured. But, as I said, if I take to 
heart the point that pr imit ive vocabular ies 
are not essent ia l ly  di f ferent from those 
compris ing more obviously surface words, 
then I cannot mainta in that cr i t ic ism in the 
same way. Why shouldn't  "John", "at" and 
"station" be somebody's pr imit ive 
vocabulary? 
Now the structural  cr i t ic ism of this 
method of coding up sentences is unaffected. 
That is to say, l itt le is revealed by such a 
method of expression, unless done in a very 
systematic  manner*, and it normal ly rel ies 
over much on our intuit ive apprec iat ion of 
the structure of the or ig inal  sentence, in 
such a way as to be not real ly the 
structur ing of an example but a mere 
repro ject ion of the example itself. To see 
this, one only has to think of what it would 
be like to express the first sentence of 
this paragraph by such a method, the one 
beginning "Now the structural  
cr i t ic ism.. .etc." .  
However, the point at issue here is not 
this structural  one but that of the status 
Of the items in the descript ion: as I raised 
the question, but did not answer it, why 
should those Engl ish words not be declared 
to be part of the pr imit ive vocabulary? For, 
if as I have just argued no serious 
dist inct ion of type can be mainta ined 
between words and other primitives, what 
could be wrong with that? 
Well, it is easy to see what is wrong, 
given that one accepts one other principle: 
namely, that one s system, whatever  it is, 
should be extensib le in a non-tr iv ia l  
manner. What weare  now discussing is the 
fal lacy of the map, to adapt a ph i losophica l  
cliche. We have a system claiming to 
represent the structure of natural  language 
but which in fact represents it in the way a 
map would if its scale was 
one-mi le- to-one-mi le .  There would be 
something wrong** with such a map, that much 
is clear, and s imi lar ly  there is something 
wrong with a system which is only extensib le 
on the same scale as what it represents:  it 
adds to its pr imit ives (ordinary words in 
*The only attempt I know to do this sort of 
thing systemat ica l ly  is (Sandewall  1972). 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
this case) at the same rate as it adds to 
the sentences covered. I am not trying to 
smuggle back any of the dist inct ion between 
primit ives and non-pr imit ive words that I 
have abjured, but am only pointing out that, 
if one chooses surface words as one s 
primitives, there is nothing theoret ical ly 
wrong, but just the practical (and in view 
insuperable) di f f icult ies of (I) inabi l i ty 
to state signif icant semantic 
general izations, and (2) the inabi l i ty to 
extend one s coverage of the language in 
anything other than a mi le-to-mile manner. 
It is for this reason that it still seems 
possible, to me, to give up believing in any 
difference in principle between primit ives 
and other words but still advocate strongly 
the use of a sensible selection of words as 
a reduced, or primitive, sublanguage for 
semantic expression. 
One final point, which is not argument 
but merely the drawing of a bead on a more 
distant target. It is the case that the use 
of a PLANNER, or Predicate Calculus, type of 
representat ion in "semi-Engl ish" that I have 
just discussed is int imately associated with 
the view that the study of reasoning is 
dissociable, or decouplable, from the study 
of the semantic structure of natural 
language, and can be pursued in isolation. 
In (Wilks 1975b) I have raised a number of 
doubts about that view, but here I want to  
add another which follows directly from the 
argument of this paper. 
If it is true, as I have argued here, 
that there is no escape from a natural 
language into some other realm, and that a 
language of representat ion is just another 
natural language whether of primitives or of 
"semi-English", then it follows that there 
is no special extra-terrestr ia l  sphere for 
the examination of reasoning*, but only 
translat ions into another natural language. 
Hence there is no reasoning about natural 
language separate from natural language, and 
all we can do is to choose the language in 
which we prefer to model the reasoning and 
over which we prefer to compute. Thus, to 
compress things somewhat, we have the choice 
between computing about reasoning in a 
pr imit ive- l ike language, or one reducible to 
it by the "re-entrant" method I described, 
or in one like PLANNER semi-Engl ish in which 
little is made explicit, and which would 
require another system to make its internal 
relat ionships explicit for any but the most 
tr ivial examples. 
**One way out I have not discussed here is 
for someone to argue that, for the 
representat ion of language, the 
mi le-to-a-mi le scale is not a fallacy, 
because no signif icant l inguist ic 
general izat ions are possible. 
*I am not denying here that some 
non- l inguist ic  forms may expl icate our 
reasoning about, say, posit ion in space or 
numerical  relat ionships; nor am I denying 
that there is reasoning in the sphere of 
vision, which is also possessed by dogs, and 
cannot therefore be l inguistic. Granted all 
that, I am arguing that the sort of 
reasoning required to understand the 
argument of this paper, or of a standard 
newspaper editorial,  must (a) be l inguist ic 
in nature, but (b) will not be expl icated in 
an interest ing and non-c ircular  manner by a 
system using ony semi-English. 
It may turn out that it is more 
sensible to say that language understanding 
depends on reasoning, rather than  
vice-versa. Everyone in A.I. seems to 
believe it without question, and I have done 
no more here than raise a few small doubts 
that it might, after all, turn out to be the 
other way round. 
REFERENCES 
Gardin, J., SYNTOL, in Artandi (ed) Rutgers 
Series on Systems for the Intel lectual  
Organizat ion of Information, New Jersey, 
1965. 
Johnson-Laird, P., "Memory for Words", 
Nature, 1974. 
Sandewali, E., "PCF-2, A f i rst-order 
calculus for expressing conceptual 
information", Dept. Computer Science, 
Uppsala Univ., 1972. 
Schank, R., "The Fourteen Primitive Actions 
and their Inferences", Stanford Univ., AI 
Lab. Memo No. 183, 1973a. 
Schank, R., " Ident i f i ca t ion  of 
Conceptual izat ions underlying Natural 
Language", in Schank and Colby (eds), 
ComPuter Models of Thought and Language, 
San Francisco, 1973b. 
Wilks, Y., Grammar, Meanin~ and the Machine 
Analysis of  Language, London, 1972. 
Wilks, Y., "One Small Head", Foundations of  
Language, 1974. 
Wilks, Y., "An intel l igent analyser and 
understander for English", Comm. ACM, 
1975a. 
Wilks, Y., "Natural Language Systems within 
the AI Paradigm", Stanford Univ. AI Lab, 
Memo No. 337, 1975b. 
41  
