HOW EPISODIC IS SEMANTIC MEMORY? 
Andrew Ortony 
University of I l l inois at Urbana-Champaign 
At the end of his Phi losophical  
Invest igat ions Wittgenstein (1963) notes 
that the confusion and barrennes of 
psychology is to be explained not by the 
youth of the science but by the conceptual  
confusions that underl ie it. I think one 
could easi ly make a case for saying that 
questions concerning the dist inct ion 
proposed by Tulving (1972) between episodic 
and semantic memory general ly involve 
precisely such conceptual  confusions. What 
I propose to do in this paper is first to 
i l lustrate such a confusion, and then to 
suggest a possible way round it. 
Addressing the question, "Is there a 
semantic memory?", Schank (1974, 1975) 
argues that there is not. Semantic memory, 
he claims, has been treated by psychologists 
as being made up of words and relat ionships 
between them, and has been proposed as a 
means of represent ing both the meanings of 
sentences and the knowledge required to 
understand them. This he believes is wrong; 
what we should actual ly do is to separate 
out a language- independent aspect, call it 
conceptual memory, dist inguish it from 
lexical memory, and identi fy it with 
episodic memory because the.re lat ionships 
between concepts in it "could only have been 
acquired by personal experience."  
Consequent ly  the dist inct ion between 
semantic and episodic memory disappears, 
which is all to the good since semantic 
memory is an i l l -conceived notion. 
The first confusion in this posit ion is 
factual rather than conceptual. It is 
s imply not the case that psychologists who 
have worked on semantic memory proposed it 
as an associat ive network of words. All the 
workers cited by Schank expl ic i t ly deny this 
in their work. The dist inct ion which he 
wants to make, whi le valid enough in itself, 
is implicit  in all exist ing models, and is 
quite expl ic i te in the most recent 
formulat ion of Qui l l ian's model proposed by 
Col l ins and Loftus (in press), where 
a l lowance is made for a dist inct ion between 
lexical and conceptual  associat ions, just as 
Schank proposes. It is clearly a mistake to 
confuse knowledge of words with knowledge of 
word meanings. In all models the role of 
the dict ionary on lexicon or lexical network 
is to represent knowledge about words which 
is not pr imari ly semantic, but, to quote 
Col l ins and Loftus: "... is organized along 
lines of phonemic (and to some extent 
orthographic)  s imi lar i ty."  
Schank bel ieves that semantic memory 
(excluding lexical memory) doesn't exist, 
and it seems that one of his chief reasons 
for this bel ief  is that the contents of 
semantic memory are acquired through 
personal experience. Now Schank might be 
right that the semant ic /episodic  dist inct ion 
is not worth very much, is not useful, is 
mis leading or whatever, but that the set of 
associat ions and other relations represented 
in a language- independent  memory "could only 
55 
have been acquired by personal exper ience" 
is quite irrelevant, in a sense, probably 
false, and certa in ly does not justify the  
conclusion that Schank draws, namely that 
"conceptual memory is episodic in nature." 
The dist inct ion envisaged by Tulving 
was not one which could be inval idated by 
merely c laiming a posit ion of extreme 
empiricism. Tulving expressed the 
dist inct ion as that between a kind of mental 
thesaurus, and an autobiographical  record of 
temporal ly -dated events. Generaly speaking 
memory model lors have not made much use of 
the dist inction. Quil l ian (1968, 1969), 
Rumelhart  and Norman (1973) and Anderson and 
Bower (1973), for example, all seem, in 
fact, to adopt the posit ion advocated by 
Schank precisely because they make no sharp 
dist inct ion between repressentat ions of 
sentence meanings and of world knowledge 
required for understanding. The most 
notable exception is Winograd (1972) who 
maintains a separate record of the discourse 
to help with handl ing anaphoric references. 
It is widely bel ieved that semantic 
memory is character ized by rigid 
h ierarchical  structures giving special  
prominence to the notion of superset. Once 
one makes this assumption it follows rather 
quickly that there are defects in the notion 
of semantic memory because it cannot handle 
a variety of problems which appear to 
or iginate from a r igidly h ierarchica l ly  
organized knowledge base. It is, I think, 
in this line of reasoning that the first 
confusion hides. Yet, all that fol lows 
from, for example, the observat ion that 
people cannot ratt le off the fifty states of 
the union is that they don't have all of 
them equal ly access ib le from the concept of 
state; it says nothing about semantic versus 
episodic memory. Nor, incidental ly, does it 
show that the superset relat ion is 
useless -- rather, it shows that there may 
be a l imited number of readily accessib le 
inverse superset relations, or exemplar 
relations. 
Schank r ight ly objects that using a 
r igidly h ierarchical  system and storing in 
it "plunger," "hammer" and "saw" 
ind iscr iminate ly  under a node for "tool" 
fails to represent the greater semantic 
c loseness between "hammer" and "saw" than 
between one of them and "plunger." His 
solut ion is to replace one static 
representaton with another, so that while 
his representat ion captures that greater 
proximity between "hammer" and "saw", it 
fails to represent the s imi lar i ty of 
"hammer" and "plunger" that might be 
relevant in a context involving tools with 
(relatively) long handles. If we want to 
capture semantic s imi lar i t ies of this kind 
we should not attempt to choose one static 
representat ion in preference to another. 
Rather we should be prepared to al low 
comprehension and retr ieval  processes to 
help out. One such candidate is a spreading 
act ivat ion model (c.f. Col l ins & Loftus, in 
press; Ortony, 1975); a model which al lows 
act ivat ion from various sources 
(speci f ical ly input str ing and context) to 
summate and act ivate concepts which might 
not have been act ivated above threshold by 
one source alone. If one makes assumptions 
such as these about the processes that 
operate on the structures, it can be readi ly 
seen that one need not worry too much about 
which part icular static representat ion one 
uti l izes in memory. Probably there is 
l ittle to choose betwen them. Providing we 
have ~ way of represent ing all the 
information pert inent to a concept that we 
need, act ivat ion levels, associat ive 
strengths and cr i ter ia l i ty  can be invoked by 
appropr iate ly  defined processes to pull out 
those re lat ionships which dominate in 
part icular  contexts. It might well be that 
the part icular structures that represent 
what people know depend for their re lat ional  
character ist ics  not so much on rules for the 
construct ion of canonical  forms as on the 
part icular  detai ls of the indiv idual 's  
experience. Thus a man who cons istent ly  
uses forks to open cans might be expected to 
have his concept of fork unusual ly c losely 
associated with his concept of can-opener 
(if he has one). Viewed this way, it would 
seem that one man's plunger might indeed be 
another man s hammer; a possibi l i ty  which 
should not be ruled out by imposing 
arbitrary structural  constraints.  
Being f lexible and being arbitrary are 
not the same thing. Sometimes, of course, 
one can be both. A case in point is 
Schank's concept ion of context. On the one 
hand it seems to be merely a 
conceptual izat ion,  for the only links 
permitted within a context are those of 
conceptual  dependency plus the causal links. 
On the other hand "there is a sense in which 
all of memory can be considered to be one 
big context."  With a notion of context which 
is so f lexible it is di f f icult  to see what 
purposes it serves. Schank wants to say 
that "going to a museum in Berl in" and 
"going to a museum in Boston" is an example 
of an intra-context  associat ion, whi le 
"going to a museum in Berl in" and "going to 
an old hotel (in Berl in?)" is an example of 
an inter-context  associat ion.  The reason is 
that the former pair are simply examples of 
"going to a museum" episodes whereas the 
second pair are only related because of 
"shared propert ies."  But one might as well  
argue that "hotel going" and "museum going" 
are within the same context because they 
both fall with in the general paradigm of 
"things I do when I'm away from home," or 
"vis i t ing strange or interest ing bui ld ings."  
There s imply are no compel l ing reasons to 
make the d ist inct ion that Schank is 
searching for on the basis of context -sh l f ts  
of the kind he describes. The confusion 
which I think under l ies this reasoning is 
further exempl i fed by the analysis of the 
protocols of his daughter, Hana. Schank 
wants to argue that Hana doesn't Jump around 
between contexts, yet in the context of 
birds f lying Hana jumps to "plane" because, 
Schank says, planes fly too, but that is 
just a case of shared propert ies on Schank's 
own analysis, so it must, after all, 
const i tute t ravers ing an inter-context llnk. 
Nobody would deny that there are some 
very ser ious problems to be dealt with 
concerning the structure of knowledge and 
56 
the processes that operate on them. There 
are serious problems concerning context. 
There is no doubt that in different contexts 
different re lat ionships and semantic 
connect ions between concepts are going to be 
relevant to comprehension and memory (c.f. 
Anderson & Ortony, 1975). There is also no 
doubt, as Woods (1975) points out in his 
excel lent paper, that memoria l  
representatons are going to have to be both 
intensional  and extensional  \[2\]. Current 
models have yet to make this d ist inct ion 
a l though it is quite obvious that one must 
keep dist inct representat ions for noun 
phrases derived from predicates, and for 
names. Not very recent ly  the d ist inct ion 
between Richard Nixon (extension) and The 
President of the United States ( intension) 
became qu i te  self -evident.  Ortony and 
Anderson (1974) descr ibe an exper iment in 
which subjects showed a marked tendency to 
make recogni t ion errors depending on whether  
the noun phrase in a study sentence required 
an intensional  or extensional  
in terpreta t ion .  
Cons iderat ions such as these are 
Certa in ly important in model ing memory, but 
they do not relate to the semant ic /ep isod ic  
d ist inct ion in any obvious way. It is 
important to know which problems go 
together, and to know how and why (that is 
the beauty of Woods" paper). I think that a 
d ist inct ion between episodic and semantic 
memory is also important, not because of 
tenuous connect ions to problems of knowledge 
representat ion but because of more global 
cons iderat ions concerning the nature of 
knowledge. Before explor ing this in more 
detail, however, let us c lar i fy what is 
supposed to be d ist inguished from what. A 
d ist inct ion between episodic and semantic 
memory represents a di f ference not so much 
between dif ferent kinds of memory but 
between di f ferent kinds of knowledge in 
memory. It is the contents of memory that 
we dist inguish, not the memory itself. 
What I am going to suggest may seem to 
some not to be a d ist inct ion between 
semantic and episodic memory at all. On the 
other hand I think it captures some, at 
least, of what Tulving intended and is a 
useful  and important d ist inct ion for AI and 
psycho logy  alike. 
The current ly  fashionable re ject ion of 
the notion of an episodic /semant ic  memory 
dist inct ion seems to be based on the idea 
that since everything we know, we know from 
experience, ther? is l i tt le point in and no 
room for the dist inct ion. Here lurks 
another conceptual  confusion -- a confusion 
of knowledge from exper ience with knowledge 
o f  experience. Phi losophers have long 
argued that a l though all knowledge might 
ar ise from exper ience it is not necessar i ly  
all given in experience. 
Consider the di f ference between a 
personal  diary and an encyclopaedia.  
Typical ly  an encyclopaedia contains 
informat ion about a great var iety of 
topics -- or concepts. Informat ion in an 
encyc lopaedia  const i tutes knowledge about 
the concepts entered in it and consequent ly  
! 
| 
| 
I| 
i 
I 
i 
I 
I 
! 
| 
I 
can be used to make inferences involving 
them. A personal diary, on the other hand, 
const itutes a different kind of 
knowledge -- knowledge about the individual 
whose diary it is. It would be possible, no 
doubt, to produce an encyclopaedia from a 
personal diary, but it would take a lot of 
work, a lot of inference and a lot of 
assumptions. What I want to suggest is that 
the knowledge in semantic memory can be 
thought of as the kind of knowledge which 
one would find if one were to produce an 
encyclopaedia from his personal diary. It 
is knowledge which has been reorganized 
around concepts from knowledge or ig inal ly  
encoded around events. It has the further 
character ist ic  that it is not embedded in 
proposit ional  verbs; it has been freed from 
their bonds by using inferential  heurist ics; 
it contains knowledge which can be 
represented by such proposit ions as "All 
bachelors are unmarried," "Most swans are 
white," etc. We all have knowledge of this 
kind, but we couldn't possibly have acquired 
knowledge about all bachelors or even most 
swans by personal experience. Of course, 
there was a personal experience involved 
when the putative knowledge was acquired, 
but precisely this is the dist inct ion we 
must make. Probably I read in a book that 
all bachelors are unmarr ied (a d ict ionary 
perhaps). So there was a personal 
experience to the effect that "I read in a 
dict ionary that all bachelors are 
unmarr ied."  But we cannot ident i fy the 
knowledge that we learned x under such and 
such circumstances,  with the knowledge x, 
str ipped of source and circumstances. What 
our teacher tells us, or what we read only 
l icenses us to claim that we know that our 
teacher told us, or that we read 
something -- it does not, alone, l icense us 
to know, as true, what it was we heard or 
read. So, while all input can be tagged as 
to source, semantic memory somehow 
represents the untagged information, and 
that untagged informat ion is not a record of 
personal experience. It is a record of 
personal exper ience str ipped of whatever 
makes it personal. It is derived from 
personal exper ience but does not represent 
it. It represents, as it were, knowledge 
without the guarantee. 
Some years ago BBC TV showed a program 
in which was descr ibed the growing of 
spaghett i  on spaghett i  trees in the south of 
Italy. Most of us would probably reject 
this notion as an absurd fabrication, but 
not so for all the viewers; some "took it 
ser iously."  A proposit ion descr ibing the 
personal exper ience might be something like 
"I saw a TV progrm which al leged that 
spaghett i  grows on trees," which we can 
write as "I saw S'" where S" itself can be 
represented as "A TV show al lege(d) that S" 
and where S represents the proposit ion 
"Spaghett i  grows on trees." 
The role of episodic memory in my sense 
is to store a record of the exper ience in 
the general form "I exper ienced S'". My 
content ion is that bel ievers and 
non-bel ievers of the spaghett i  story alike 
would have stored some such representat ion,  
namely a representat ion of S" tagged with 
autobiographica l  information such as 
modal i ty of input, relative time and so on. 
Except perhaps for acidheads and avid 
Cartesians, most of us are wi l l ing to trust 
our senses most of the time -- we are 
wil l ing, that is, to infer S" from "I saw 
S'", but S" sti l l  contains source 
information. Focus now on the knowledge 
representable by the proposit ion, S, 
"Spaghett i  grows on trees." If we were to 
incorporate this piece of knowledge in the 
data base it could be used in all kinds of 
inferences about spaghetti  (the crop depends 
on climate, the cost of harvest ing it may 
vary, it is a fruit or vegetable, etc.). 
However, in general  there is no simple way 
of inferr ing S from S" and certainly no such 
inferences about spaghetti  can be made from 
S" alone. The role I want to attr ibute to 
semantic memory is that of a repository of 
knowledge with the character ist ics  of S, 
knowledge, that is, which has been str ipped 
of its autobiographica l  reference, and its 
source and c i rcumstances of acquis i t ion 
information too; always the result of 
inference. 
Those of us who real ized that the 
spaghett i  sequence was just another skit 
from the sat ir ical  program Monty Python's 
Flying Circus did not encode something like 
S in semantic memory -- at most we encoded 
or represented something like S" which 
represents source- f ree information or 
knowledge about a TV show but does not 
represent source-free spaghetti  information! 
Those who were duped, on the other hand, 
str ipped S" of its source and c i rcumstances 
and represented the knowledge expressed by 
S. Thus knowledge in semantic memory is 
derived from, but fundamental ly  di f ferent 
from knowledge in episodic memory. Putative 
knowledge which is potent ia l ly  semantic 
always arr ives embedded in episodic 
knowledge; it can always be represented as 
being governed by a proposit ional  verb. 
I know a lot of things about England 
and a few things about Lord Nelson. One of 
the things about Nelson that I know is that 
he said "England expects every man to do his 
duty," but that is not one of things I know 
about England. England's expectat ions were 
either never suf f ic ient ly  relevant or never 
suf f ic ient ly  true for me to have freed them 
from Nelson's claims. The knowledge that I 
have about Nelson may be in semantic memory 
because it is free from the bonds of its 
source -- in forgett ing the source I may 
have assumed it to be true -- but it only 
gets into semantic memory if it is assumed 
to be true (enough). 
I ear l ier urged that semantic memory is 
centered around concepts and that episodic 
is centered around events. I think there is 
a sense in which episodic memory is centered 
around a concept, the concept of "self". If 
I were to become famous, many of the things 
in my personal diary might be entered in an 
encyc lopaedia  under an entry for me. 
Personal exper iences are all the exper iences 
of an indiv idual  and since there has to be a 
concept of self in memory one might argue 
that episodic memory is merely the structure 
of knowledge associated with the concept of 
57 
the individual.  Such a conclusion I find 
quite unobject ionable.  It suggests that all 
input and output is mediated through a 
concept of the self. Input, in it ia l ly 
represented there, may be transferred to 
other concepts under certain condit ions 
thereby freeing it of its autobiographical  
reference (that doesn't necessari ly mean it 
gets automat ica l ly  destroyed in its or iginal  
form). Output can be represented as "I said 
that.. ." or by some other performative verb. 
It is interest ing that a character ist ic  
feature of generat ive semantics is that all 
sentences are dominated by a verb 
represent ing the speech act -- such a view 
is of course quite a natural consequence of 
the prominence that I am suggest ing be 
attached to the concept of self. 
There are a couple of other reasons 
which incl ine me to support this 
dist inction. First there is a mass of 
experimental  research on encoding 
speci f ic i ty which strongly suggests the need 
for some such dist inct ion (see, for example, 
Watkins & Tulving, 1975). Secondly there is 
the rather mundane observat ion that we 
frequently come across people who have "bad" 
memories. The problem with such people is 
not that they have inferior, or di luted 
knowledge-bases -- they are not lacking in 
knowledge. Their problem is the maintenance 
of a record of personal input/output 
experiences. They tend to absorb what they 
consider important, they are perfect ly able 
to learn, but they can't remember where they 
put their car, or to whom they lent a book, 
or from whom they heard something. If all 
semantic memory were episodic, they would 
have to be stupid as well as forgetfull  
There remains (as always) a number of 
unanswered quest ions if one takes this 
approach. The most important one, of 
course, is how and when does information get 
into semantic memory, and how and when does 
it get lost from episodic memory. Answers 
to these quest ions are beyond the scope of 
this paper, but some speculat ions at least 
about the first might start things off. In 
order to infer S from S" inference based on 
some or all of the fol lowing considerat ions 
wil l  have to be made: Is it relevant? This 
suggests that not everything we experience 
is worth recording in semantic memory (what 
I ate for dinner on some arbitrary day, for 
example). How rel iable is the source? If a 
three year old child tells me that all men 
are daddies I may find it relevant to what I 
need or want to know about the child, but I 
am not l ikely to trust him as an information 
source about universal  qual i t ies of men. To 
what extent does it confl ict with what I 
a lready bel ieve? The child's claim faces 
another problem on this score. One must 
assume that the knowledge base can tolerate 
some degree of inconsistency, but as Quine 
(1952) suggests, some things may be much 
more diff icult to give up or revise than 
others. Relevance or cr i ter ia l i ty  indices 
will handle this, together with degrees of 
truth. Is there independent corroborat ion? 
If some putative fact or procedure seems, on 
the basis of what is already known, very 
unl ikely to be true, independent evidence 
for it may boost its degree of truth for me. 
5B 
There are doubtless other considerat ions 
(many can probably be gleened from the 
belief and att itude l iterature) but the 
general point is that an assessment of a 
degree of bel ief  has to be made. If a 
threshold is reached the thing has some 
posit ive degree of trutlh and can be str ipped 
of the source and c ircumstance information 
(perhaps with some modif icat ion),  and once 
this is achieved all is in order to free it 
from its bound form and to treat it as a 
bone fide piece of knowledge to be 
incorporated into the exist ing structure in 
semantic memory. Clearly an analysis of 
speech acts wil l  be required since the rules 
for freeing the putatiwe knowledge will be 
different for performatves such as 
"convince", "promise", "prove," etc. 
The problems that we face are dif f icult  
and complex. I am confident that they can 
be solved, but  I am equal ly convinced that 
to solve them in a sat is factory way is going 
to require that our models develop from 
ideas which are both eplstemologica l ly  and 
psychologica l ly  sound. I have tried in this 
paper to put forward some arguments and to 
develop some ideas towards this end. 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J.R., & Bower, G.H. Human 
~ssociat ive memory. Washington, D.C.: 
Winston & Sons, 1973. 
Anderson, R.C., & Ortony, A., On putt ing 
apples into bottles: A problem of 
polysemy. Cognit ive Psychology, 1975, in 
press. 
Coll ins, A.M., & Loftus, E.F., 
act ivat ion theory of 
act ivat ion. Psvchologlcal  
press 
A spreading 
spreading 
Review, in 
Ortony, A., Explorat ions in memory. Urbana, 
Ill.: Univers i ty  of I l l inois 1975 (mimeo) 
Ortony, A., & Anderson, R.C., Def in i te 
descr ipt ions and semantic memory. 
Urbana, Ill.: Univers i ty  of I l l inois 1974 
(mimeo) 
Quine, W.V.O., MeSho~s of logic London: 
Routledge & Kagan Paul, 1952, PP. 
xi-xvii.  
Rumelhart, D., & Norman, D., Active semantic 
networks as a model of human memory, in 
Proceedings of  the Thir~ Internat ional  
Conference o f  Art i f ic ia l  Intel l i~ence, 
Stanford, 1973, pp. 450-457. 
Schank, R.C., Is there a semantic memory. 
Castagnola, Switzerland: Inst i tuto per 
gli Studi Semantic i  e Cognitivi,  1974 
(mlmeo) 
Schank, R.C., The structure of episodes in 
memory. In D.G. Bobrow and A.M. 
Col l ins (Eds.), Re resent tion and 
understanding. New York: Academic Press, 
1975. 
| 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
J~  
I 
I 
ii 
I 
ii 
I 
I 
I 
II 
l 
Tulving, E., Episodic and semantic memory. 
In E. Tulving and W. Donaldson (Eds.), 
Organization of memory. New York: 
Academic Press, 1972, pp. 381-403. 
Watkins, M.J., & Tulving, E., Episodic 
memory: When recognition fails. Journal 
of Experimental Psycholo~v: General, 
1975, 104, 5-29. 
Winograd, T., Understanding natural 
language, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 1972. 
Wittgenstein, L., ~hilosophical 
investigations, translation by G.E. 
Anscombe, Oxford: Blackwell 1963. 
WOodS, W.A., What's in a link: Foundations 
for semantic networks. Cambrdige, Ma: 
Bolt Beranek and Newman, 1975 (mimeo) 
59 
