DOES A STORY UNDERSTANDER 
NEED A POINT OF VIEW? 
Robert P. Abelson 
Yale University 
At the Carbonell Memorial Conference in 
1974, there was a good deal of informal 
discussion of the use by people of analogue 
simulations in knowledge retrieval or 
question-answering. We asked each other 
questions like, "How many traffic lights are 
there along your usual route from the 
railroad station to your house?" Or, "Can a 
salt shaker be used as a stool?". The 
former type of question usually gives rise 
to introspective reports of a mental 
simulation of the traversal of the requested 
route, replete with visual imagery. The 
latter type of question may or may not give 
rise to a mental simulation. Some people 
report knowing propositlonally that a salt 
shaker cannot be used as a stool because its 
size is insufficient. Others report 
mentally playing through the motor sequence 
of sitting on a salt shaker, whence they 
rudely discover the negative answer. 
People with different cognitive styles 
can become quite exercised over whether the 
propositional or simulational account is the 
"correct" psychological description of this 
type of question-answering. People who 
experience difficulty constructing visual or 
motor images are prone to be strong 
propositionalists (e.g., Pylyshyn, 1973). I 
had a recent argument on this issue with a 
well-known psychologist not given to visual 
imagery. "Can a salt shaker be a stool?", I 
asked her. "No," she said immediately, 
"Obviously not. I t 's  the wrong size. I 
knew that right away because the features of 
a salt shaker don't match the crlticlal 
features of a stool. I didn't need any 
visual imagery". 
I then found a subtler example to test 
her: "Can a shoe be a hammer?". She  
hesitated. Absent-mindedly making a 
repeated hammering motion up and down with 
her hand, as though grasping a hypothetical 
shoe, she answered, "Well, yes." I pounced 
at her gesture. "Aha! Why were you moving 
your hand like that?" "Oh, I often gesture 
like this," she replied, switching slyly to 
a side-to-side motion. "No, not llke that 
(side-to-side) I said, "like thief" (up and 
down). She reluctantly conceded the point. 
Score one against the proposltionalists. 
Of course the idea that a knowledge 
system can know by doing is familiar in 
artif icial intell igence under the rubric of 
"procedural knowledge" (Winograd, 1972; 
Rumelhart, Lindsay, & Norman, 1972). It is 
also basic tenet of Piaget's psychology of 
knowledge. Nevertheless, the procedures 
involved in particular mental simulations 
are not well understood. While in principle 
it may be possible to separate the concept 
of simulation from the discussion of 
non-lingulstic codes or images, in practice 
the two areas seem intertwined. In this 
paper I will discuss the mental simulation 
140 
of spatial traversals, as provoked by 
stories of individuals going from here to 
there and encountering various events and 
objects along the way. 
T~e Si~ulatio~ of Traversals 
Our assumption is that when an  
individual hears a story about a traversal 
through a spatial territory, he will tend to 
construct a simulation of this traversal, 
employing some mixture of linguistic and 
spatial elements in this construction. This 
assumption has considerable intuitive 
appeal, although it may not appeal to the 
intuitions of everybody, and indeed, need 
not be true of everybody. 
There are at least two interesting 
consequences of this assumption, both 
amenable to experimentation. One is that 
the simulation process will recruit imagined 
acts and objects not present in the story 
but necessary for carrying out the 
simulation. A simple example arises in the 
following story fragment: "He stood watching 
the house from outside the white picket 
fence. Finally, he opened the gate and went 
into the yard..." Most listeners to these 
lines report the spontaneous invention of 
some particular kind of latch used to open 
the gate. It is either "seen" or 
represented by a motor sequence, or both. 
Another type of example is the following. 
"As Jack approached the intersection, he 
could make out the sign reading "Broad 
Street'. Turning the corner, he quickly 
spotted the drug store he had been looking 
for". To the subsequent question whether 
Jack turned left or right at the corner, 
most people report having a definite opinion 
that one or the other was correct, or at any 
rate was the way they saw it. 
It would be interesting to demonstrate 
and delimit a strong version of this 
phenomenon, wherein subjects would feel 
certain that particular details had actually 
occurred in the traversal story even when 
they hadn't. Some cognitive psychologists 
have documented a milder confusion between 
presented and remembered information, in 
which conclusions strongly implied by a text 
are stored as though they were explicit in 
the text (Bransford, Barclay, & Franks, 
1972; Kintsch, 1974). It has also recently 
been conjectured by Schank and Abelson 
(1975) for textual contexts replete with 
cliche -- "situational scripts" such as 
eating in a restaurant -- that listeners 
will insert missing obvious details without 
later realzing that they have done so. The 
similar pheonomenon conjectured here would 
be even more striking because the inserted 
details would be essentially gratuitous: the 
stories do not imply any particular type of 
gate latch or direction of turn, etc. 
I would llke to be able to report to 
you that we had indeed done an experiment 
successfully establishing this phenomenon. 
Then we could debate whether it was 
something special to simulaton and 
non-l inguistlcal ly coded materials (as I 
would hope it would be), or whether it had 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
i 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
! 
I 
I 
I 
I 
to do more general ly with what Minsky (1974) 
would call "f i l l ing in default values" in 
knowledge frames. Unfortunately I am not 
able to report this. We tried one 
experiment last summer but were unable to 
introduce a long enough time delay to permit 
subjects to lose the short-term surface cues 
permitt ing the discr iminat ion whether a 
given detail was actual ly in the story or 
not. We are going to try again soon. 
What I can report to you is an 
experiment on a second phenomenon. If in 
theory we accept s imulat ion as a reasonable 
process by which a traversal can be 
understood, we must face the ambiguity that 
there are different vantage Points from 
which a Riven simulation ~? b ge conducted. 
The most obvious vantage dif ference is 
between a simulat ion of the individual  
himself performing the traversal, and a 
s imulat ion of someone watching that 
individual. This dist inction, as we shall 
see, can have important consequences for 
memory of the story. 
Points of  View of the Self ~nd the Observer: 
A__nn Experiment 
A l istener s imulat ing a traversal from 
the point of view of the story character 
will presumably generate motor images as 
well as visual images such as might appear 
to the actor. On the other hand, a 
simulator from an observer's point of view 
would presumably not be disposed toward 
motor or other body sensation images, and 
his visual images would have a different 
perspective from that of the actor. For 
example, very large objects might be in 
focus for a distant observer, but not well 
perceived by an actor too close to them. 
These considerat ions served as the basis for 
an experiment designed and run in 
col laborat ion with Richard Pinto. 
A 68-sentence story about a character 
leaving a hotel and strol l ing a block down 
the street was read in common to subjects 
given three different instructions. All 
subjects were told to close their eyes and 
"imagine, as best and as vividly as you can, 
along with what you hear". Each sentence 
was to be rated on a scale of vividness. 
(this instruct ion was intended to disguise 
the memory nature of the study.) Addit ional  
instruct ions were given to const itute two 
different vantage point conditions. In the 
Self group, subjects were told to imag ine  
themselves being the main character in the  
story. In the Balcony group, subjects were 
told to imagine themselves watching from a 
fourth-f loor hotel balcony. A No Vantage 
Point group got no specif ic vantage point 
instruction. 
There were three crucial kinds of 
details in the story: "far visual" details, 
items which in real ist ic perception can best 
be seen from far away (such as a sign over a 
bank); "near visual" details, natural to 
view from close range (such as a 
wristwatch);  and "body sensation" details 
(such as aggravat ing a sore arm, or drinking 
hot coffee). We hypothesized that when 
141 
faced with a long, meandering story, the 
l istener in the Self condit ion would tend 
preferent ia l ly  to absorb "body sensation" 
details, and the l istener in the Balcony 
condit ion would tend preferent ia l ly  to 
absorb "far visual" details. The matter is 
not so simple for "near visual" details. In 
a pilot study, we found that Balcony 
subjects sometimes reported "f loating down" 
off the balcony from time to time, as it 
were, to peer v icar iously over the actor's 
shoulder at details otherwise too small to 
imagine seeing clearly from a distance. 
(Such f lexible perspective is reasonable in 
the light of Kcsslyn's (1974) experiments on 
visual image size, showing that it is 
d isadvantageous to retrieve detai led 
information from small visual images.) 
Table I gives the mean proport ions of 
the three different types of details 
correct ly recal led by subjects in each 
experimental  condition, on a 21-item cued 
recall test administered approximately 
twenty minutes after hearing the story. Our 
predict ions were clearly supported. The 
Balcony group averaged 17.6% better recall 
Of far visual detai ls than the Self group, 
and the Self group averaged 15.0% better 
recal l  of body sensat ional  details than the 
Balcony group. There were no dif ferences 
for near visual details. For each type of 
detail, the No Vantage Point group did about 
as badly as whichever of the other two 
groups had the "wrong" vantage point. 
One other  dependent measure in the 
study produced interest ing results. 
Preceding the cued recall test was a free 
recall  task in which all subjects were asked 
to try to recreate the story as best they 
could, llne for line. Each recalled line 
was scored for whether it captured the gist 
of a corresponding original  story line. 
Subjects often left out whole scenes, and 
reversed the order or events, although they 
did not often invent details which were not 
there. The pattern with the Balcony group 
relat ively more correct than the Self group 
on far visual detai ls as opposed to body 
sensat ion detai ls was present in these free 
recall  data, although not as strongly as in 
cued recall, and not stat ist ica l ly  
signif icant.  A very signif icant di f ference 
was present, however, in proport ion correct 
On all types of items (including "fi l lers") 
for the No Vantage Point group. The total 
proport ions correct were .344 for No Vantage 
Point, .560 for Self, and .571 for Balcony. 
The corresponding proport ions over cr it ical  
items on cued recall (Table I) were .508 for 
No Vantage Point, .572 for Self, and .572 
for Balcony. In other words, the No Vantage 
Point group exhibits an acute disadvantage 
in free recall  which it does not suffer in 
cued recall. Some of the story mater ia l  
which is avai lable in memory presents an 
access problem for the No Vantage Point 
group. 
One further result is worthy of 
mention. All subjects were given Betts" 
Test of v iv idness of visual imagery. The 
super ior i ty of the Balcony over the Self 
group on far visual details was sharply 
enhanced in subsamples scoring high on 
general visual imagery (a 32.6% superiority, 
vs. a mere 2.4% superiority among 
non-imager subsamples). This supports the 
reasonable supposition that processing style 
depends upon the proclivities of the 
individuals as well as the task orientation 
given whole groups of subjects. 
The overall pattern of these results is 
I think very difficult to explain from a 
propositionalist point of view. All 
subjects heard exactly the same story. They 
were all told to imagine along with w~at 
they heard, so that one cannot argue that 
some subjects were oriented toward 
linguistic and others toward non-linguistic 
codes. All that was different between 
subject groups was the vantage point from 
which imagination was to be exercised. The 
results, it seems to me, support not only 
the existence of non-linguistic codes, but 
even more theory-bogglingly, the existence 
of di@ferent forms of non-lin~uis$ic codes 
which depend on the point of view of the 
listener. Having made this strong 
statement, I hasten to add the disclaimer 
that I intend the word "existence" in a very 
weak sense. To pursue whether 
non-linguistic codes are fundamentally 
different mental entities from linguistic 
codes is to walk into a hopeless 
metaphysical quagmire. Minsky (1974) has 
compellingly argued that visual scenes can 
in principle be described by frames which 
are essentially conceptual networks. 
Nevertheless it may be very useful" to 
distinguish vision-based concepts from other 
concepts, because there is a specialized 
character to processes which operate on 
them, such as mental rotat ion,  image 
magnification, etc. This heuristic argument 
has recently been put forward by Kosslyn and 
Pomerantz (1975).  In other words, I am 
arguing that different specialized 
processing modes are keyed to different 
vantage points, and have different 
consequences for what is best remembered. 
Furthermore, the No Vantage Point group 
seems to suffer in free recall from the lack 
of a special processing mode. Perhaps the 
vantage point provides a set of higher-order 
nodes in the network representing the story, 
facil itating access to the lower-order, 
story details. 
What ~r~ the Imolications for Artificial 
Intel~imence? 
On the surface, this experiment may 
seem barren of implications for artificial 
intelligence, because smart programs might 
ideally be able to reduce all sentences in a 
story to an interconnected meaning 
representation for which there is no memory 
loss. Looking deeper, there are two 
responses to such a complacent view. First 
of all, even if there were no memory loss, 
there is still the problem of the 
non-uniqueness of the meaning 
representation. From a different point of 
view, the meaning of the same story can be 
different. In AI parlance, one might say 
that different frames are invoked, or that 
different inferences (or different numbers 
of inferences) are attached to the story 
142 
network. The extent to which this 
psychological truism will prove important in 
AI applications remains to be seen, but I 
believe that it is short-sighted to overlook 
this non-uniqueness problem. 
A more radical view is that programs 
should not be designed to preserve all the 
details of understood texts, that they 
should in fact throw away "less interesting" 
information -- or at least bury it in remote 
storage so that it doesn ' t  clutter the 
working memory whenever the story is 
referenced. From this perspective, the 
Constraints of human memory are seen as an 
advantage to intelligence, rather than as a 
deficiency. People's skill in forgetting 
things, particularly over the long run, 
might provide a good model for AI systems to 
strive for. 
The trick lies in knowing what to 
forget, and that is where the vantage point 
might come in. From a vantage point on a 
balcony, the kinaesthetic and tactile 
sensations of the main character are 
nonessential, and it is natural to spend 
less effort processing them. (Perhaps there 
is also a processing cost in switching 
processing modes.) From the point of view of 
the main character, items best "understood" 
by encoding them from long visual 
perspective are the least natural and most 
effortful. 
What we are saying here is perhaps 
nothing more nor less than the conventional 
wisdom that the understanding process ought 
not to be sensitive to the understander s 
style and purpose. Yet vantage point is a 
more specific variable than the vaguer 
concept of purpose, and more amenable to 
experimental manipulation. We hope in 
future experiments to manipulate vantage 
point in more subtle ways, such as by 
telling stories with several characters, 
inducing subjects to identify emotionally 
with one or another character because of 
similarity to self. Of course the different 
characters will have different spatial 
perspectives in the story, and therefore 
will experience different body and visual 
sensations. 
REFERENCES 
Bransford, J.D., Barclay, J.R., and Franks, 
J.J., Sentence memory: A constructive vs. 
interpretive approach. Cognitive 
Psvcholomv, 1972, ~, 193-209. 
Kintsch, W., The Reoresentation of Meaninm 
in Memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum 
Associates, 1974. 
Kosslyn, S., Effects of imagined object size 
on response time in mental imagery tasks. 
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford 
University, 1974. 
Kosslyn, S., and Pomerantz, J., Mental 
imagery reconsidered: An analysis of 
Pylyshyn's critique. Mimeographed. 
Johns Hopkins University, 1975. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
! 
I 
I 
i 
! 
I 
! 
I 
I 
I 
! 
Minsky, M., A framework .for representing 
knowledge. Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Artificial Intelligence 
Laboratory Memo No. 306, 1974. 
Pylyshyn, Z.W., What the mind's eye tells 
the mind's brain: A critique of mental 
imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 
80, 1-24. 
Rumelhart, D., Lindsay, P., and Norman, D., 
A process model for long-term memory. In 
E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds,.), 
Organization of Memory. New York: 
Academic Press, 1972. 
Schank, R.C., and Abelson, R.P., Scripts, 
plans, and knowledge. Presented at the 
4th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Tbilisi, August, 
1975. 
Winograd, T., Understanding Natural 
Language. New York: Academic Press, 
1972. 
Table I 
Mean proportions of correct recalls of story details 
Self 
Balcony 
No vantage point 
TyPe of Detail 
Far visual Near visual Body Sensation (Overall) 
.417 .616 .660 (.572) 
? 593 .613 .510 (.572) 
.476  .572 .476 (.508) 
(p-value, Self 
vs. Balcony) (<.05) (ns) (<.05) (ns) 
143 
