Topic Levels 
Joseph E. Gr imes 
Cornel l  Univers i ty  and 
Summer Institute of L inguist ics 
Now that the sentence is no longer 
the edge of our world, we see more c lear ly  
than ever how total ly  responsive speech is 
to the s i tuat ion that cal ls it forth and 
to the people involved in it. Bare content 
is shaped and packaged to meet many 
requirements at once. 
I have tried to sort out two broad 
categor ies  of these requirements.  The 
first, cohesion, is hearer or iented. It is 
the inf luence on form of the speaker 's  own 
assumpt ions about what the hearer knows at 
each instant of the communicat ion  process. 
The second, staging, is speaker or iented. 
It ref lects how the speaker ca l ibrates the 
importance of d i f ferent  parts of what he 
himsel f  intends to say. I find it helpful 
to tie down the d iscuss ion of both 
cohesion and staging to d i f ferences in 
l inguist ic  form; there may be other 
psychologica l  or phi losophica l  overtones 
to cohes ion and staging that have no such 
d i rect  repercussions,  but gett ing at those 
overtones is another matter.  
One of the areas where we are making 
progress in the l inguist ic  study of 
d iscourse is in seeing how speaker and 
hearer always seek a common ground of 
reference. This area, however,  is h idden 
in a terminological  thicket. Char les 
Hockett  (1959.201) or ig inal ly  identi f ied 
it as topic, in which, in his terms, 'the 
speaker announces a topic and then says 
something about it.' Gundel (1974) has 
fol lowed this usage, and I think it the 
best label for now even though it gets 
confused with topical izat ion,  which may or 
may not be part of the same package. Much 
earl ier some of the Prague School 
theorists (summarized in Danes 1974), and 
later Hal l iday (1967), used theme for a 
similar concept, and now Grosz (1977) has 
used focus for something not very 
di f ferent.  Each of these three terms, 
topic, theme, and focus, has also been 
used for at least two other kinds of 
phenomena by reputable l ingu{sts, so 
eventual ly  we are going to have to put 
together a road map to all the 
a l ternat ives;  but just because the terms 
are confused is no reason to conclude that 
no headway is being made. 
The idea that I am going to cont inue 
to refer to as ~ is this: for 
communicat ion  to succeea, speaker and 
hearer have to establ ish common ground. 
This common ground is usual ly  a presumed 
agreement about the identity of certa in 
objects in the real world. It may also be 
agreement about certa in events or about 
certa in re lat ions that hold. As far as its 
l inguist ic  express ion goes, I think it 
s igni f icant  that its formal makeup appears 
to revolve around nominals  most of the 
time, treat ing things that are not 
necessar i ly  objects  as if they were. 
One reason the common ground 
phenomenon seems so important is that 
without its narrowing effect, the hearer 
might not be able to manage the numerous 
semantic a l ternat ives that could be 
developed from each express ion in the text 
constructed by the speaker. Gundel has 
pointed out the ut i l i ty in this regard of 
a formulat ion attempted by Searle 
(1969.126) :  
For any speaker S, any object  X and 
any predicate P, it is a necessary 
condi t ion of S's having predicated p 
of X in the utterance of a sentence 
contain ing P, that X should have 
been successfu l ly  referred to in 
that utterance and all the 
presuppos i t ions  of P should be true 
of X. 
Searle's X is very much like what I 
am call ing the topic, in that unless the 
hearer can relate to it referent ia l ly ,  he 
can neither agree nor d isagree with 
whatever else may be said about it. 
Gundel i l lustrates how even an 
isolated sentence like George ate a plate 
o__ff shr imp cannot be ass imi lated as part of 
a real communicat ion  unless the hearer has 
some way of knowing which of the people 
named George is being referred to; once he 
knows that, he can react with yes he did 
or no he didn't  or oh, the sign of a new 
conste l - la t l - -~of  -fnformation in memory 
(Winograd 1972). 
Grosz has made a useful d is t inct ion  
104 
between the hearer 's  memory for concepts,  
which tends to be long term and global to 
a text, and the hearer 's  memory for 
l inguist ic  form, whfch tends to be short 
term and local to a segment of text. Her 
d is t inct ion interlocks with the one 
Hal l iday and Hasan (1976) make between 
reference and subst i tut ion.  What  they 
call reference identi f ies concepts,  
objects outs ide of language, and even 
pieces of language itself, as they are 
ment ioned once they have been introduced. 
What they call subst i tut ion includes 
el l ipsis; it refers to the react ivat ion of 
stretches of speech from earl ier in the 
text in order to talk about s i tuat ions 
that have not a l ready been referred to, 
but which have enough in common with 
others that have been referred to that the 
same l inguist ic  express ion can apply to 
the new situat ion.  
It is the first of these, memory for 
concept rather than form, from which the 
speaker appears to take what he hopes is 
common ground between himself  and his 
hearer. This se lect ion from the field 
avai lable for global  reference is what is 
behind Gundel 's  observat ion  that the topic 
has to be access ib le to the hearer. (The 
most access ib le  things are 
character i s t i ca l ly  the standard elements 
of the communicat ion situation: I, you, 
here, and now.) 
In the course of a temt, be it 
monologue or dialogue, the referent ia l  
common ground that is used as the core of 
communicat ion may change. This is true of 
the global  topic and apparent ly  of local 
topics as well. The initial core of 
reference may be des ignated very simply, 
for example by a s ingle noun phrase, with 
no d i f fe rent ia t ion  of parts or funct ions 
at the beginning.  Gundel even shows that 
the topic of some sentences may be 
implicit,  not ment ioned in that sentence, 
but neverthe less  to be taken into account 
if the sentence is to make sense. 
Once the topic of a text is put into 
play, that topic may be developed in at 
least three d i f ferent  ways that have been 
descr ibed so far in the l i terature:  it may 
be expanded, shifted, or split. 
Expansion adds things to the core of 
reference. Shift adds new referents to 
the core and leaves others off, so that 
what is taken as common ground at one 
point in the text d i f fers  from what was 
taken as common ground earl ier.  Spl i t t ing 
the core results in local topics being 
brought into play in relat ion to global  
topics; or rather, higher level topics are 
spl it  into a higher level part and a lower 
level part, a process which if repeated 
may yield more than two levels in the same 
text. 
Topic expansion is i l lustrated in a 
story from Time magazine (June 21, 1976, 
p. 56). The da--te-of the issue needs to be 
taken as the initial topic; there is no 
other common ground to begin with between 
the writer and the reader. This is normal 
in news stories: consider how impossib le 
it is to agree or d isagree with anything 
like The Giants  beat the Dodgers until one 
knows the occasion. The tit le of this 
piece is Teton: Eyewitness to Disaster .  
For a reader who knows his geography,  
Teton identi f ies a place, whi le  for one 
w-~ does not, there is at least a good 
chance that it is a place name or the name 
of a person. The idea of referent ia l  
common ground gives us for starters a 
reasonable guess at an event that happened 
the week before the appearance of the 
magazine,  and poss ib ly  a place, as a 
l imit ing field within which to place the 
interpretat ion of the rest of the message.  
The text begins with a paragraph set 
off in italic type and quotat ion marks, in 
which the speaker is not identi f ied: "This 
wet spot on the side of the dam started 
spurt ing a l i tt le water ..." The noun 
phrase that begins the sentence is 
def inite,  as is the dam contained within 
it. The def in i teness  here suggests that 
the writer expects the reader to be able 
to find the reference because it is 
access ib le  within the l imits a l ready set. 
If he fol lows that suggest ion and takes 
Teton as the name of the dam and accepts 
this as ident i fy ing something new with in 
that field, his reference succeeds. (The 
side is leg i t imate ly  def in i te  once we 
identi fy the dam by what Hal l iday and 
Hasan call lexical cohesion; dams have 
sides.) As far as pinning down a core of 
reference is concerned, the text so far 
has. i ts  topic bui l t  up as c lear ly  as if 
the art ic le had begun much more dully, as 
for example Last week at a place cal led 
Teton where there is a dam, a wet spot 
appeared on its side. 
The text goes on "... and I asked my 
mother, 'D_oo you think we shou-~ Hotl--i-~-y the 
author it ies?'  She said: 'I don't  
think ...'" Here the person who is making 
the report is ment ioned expl ic i t ly  for the 
first time, as is the mother to whom the 
quest ion is addressed. This complex of the 
observers,  the wet spot on the dam, the 
location, and the time pers ists  as the 
referent ia l  core or topic through the 
course of over a column. It is bui l t  up by 
small references to g ive an expanded 
topic. 
Topic shift d i f fers  from expansion in 
that some referent ia l  e lements appear to 
be dropped from the topic as the text 
progresses;  some things that were treated 
as part of the common ground in the 
earl ier part of the text are not so 
treated later. Schank (1977) focuses on 
the intersect ion of the referent ia l  field 
of one sentence and that of its successor,  
and tries to def ine some (but not all) 
ways in which that intersect ion relates 
to the referent ia l  f ield of the next 
i05 
sentence. His initial def in i t ion of topic 
as 'any object,  person, location, act ion, 
state, or time that is ment ioned in the 
sentence to be responded to' is probably  
too inclusive, because it does not take 
into account Sear le 's  factor of successfu l  
reference; but once a text is begun, 
Sear le 's  boundary condi t ion is no longer 
needed, because the reference has been 
establ ished by the text itself. 
For Schank a new topic is 'derived 
from the or ig inal  input but is not 
identical  to it', in that reference may 
shift  from a speci f ic  e lement ment ioned in 
the earl ier sentence to the class of which 
it is a part in the later sentence, or 
vice versa. The element in the later 
sentence may also be a d i f ferent  
conceptua l i za t ion  that is l ike the first 
in kind; Schank cal ls  this supertopic .  It 
may also be 'a comment that can be 
inferred from the interact ion of two 
conceptua l i zat ions ' ,  or metatopic .  Schank 
suggests  more specif ic  rules that he hopes 
wil l  character ize  the way topics shift  in 
the course of a text. 
The key concept,  however,  is his 
observat ion  that a sentence out of context  
cannot  be said to have a topic, because 
for him the topic ar ises only out of the 
interact ion of ad jacent  sentences by the 
process of intersect ion.  If he is right, 
or close to right, it is reasonable that 
some of the things that are treated as 
topic earl ier in the text be g iven 
d i f ferent  treatment later in the same 
text, because they are no longer taken as 
part of the referent ia l  common ground 
between the speaker and hearer. 
The idea of spl i t t ing up the 
referent ia l  field embraced by the topic 
into higher and lower level topics has 
been treated in two d i f ferent  ways, each 
of which may be val id in its place. Grosz 
recognizes the phenomenon,  and g ives an 
intr iguing example (1977.23) of a pronoun 
it which refers back to a global  topic 
last ment ioned half  an hour earl ier,  even 
though a whole ser ies of local topics has 
come between the pronoun and its 
antecedent .  In her d iscuss ion  of global  
and local topics, however,  she tends to 
equate the first with memory  for concepts  
and the second with memory for forms, 
ch ief ly  because she finds the domain of 
e l l ips is  to be restr icted to a local 
segment of text, and to always involve 
memory  for forms. 
Meyer (1974) and Clements (1976), 
however,  find the g loba l - loca l  phenomenon 
operat ing independent ly  of e l l ips is  or 
other subst i tute- l ike  memory  for form. 
They construct  a topical h ierarchy 
consist ing of a global  topic, whatever  
local topics are talked about as part of 
the d iscuss ion of the global  topic, and 
whatever lower level topics are talked 
about as part of the d iscuss ion of those 
local topics, in what apparent ly  gives a 
recurs ive ly  def inable topic tree of 
unrestr icted depth. In this model ,  
psycholog ica l  tests of recal l  show that 
subordinate posit ion in the topic tree 
regular ly  gives worse recall  than 
superord inate posit ion. 
The def in i t ion  of topic used by Meyer 
and Clements is ear l ier  than Gundel 's ,  so 
that one could expect the var iance in 
their results to be reduced by at tent ion  
to her pr inc ip les  for recogniz ing topics. 
Topic for Clements is more l ike Hal l iday 's  
theme, ord inar i ly  the first thing in the 
sentence. His topic h ierarchy comes from 
three rules: 
(i) Topic rule: 
Ident i fy  the topic of each 
clause and simple sentence. 
(ii) O ld /new rule: 
Decide whether the topic is new 
(never prev ious ly  mentioned) or 
old (mentioned in an earl ier  
topic or comment).  If new -- 
assign it one level below the 
previous topic. If old -- 
assign it the same level as its 
f irst ment ion.  
(iii) Coord inat ion  rule: 
If a topic is coord inated with 
an earl ier topic or comment,  
ass ign it the same level as 
that earl ier  topic or comment.  
The work of C lements and Meyer lends 
credence to the idea that there may be a 
h ierarchy of topics in a text, all 
referent ia l  in Hal l iday and Hasan's sense, 
rather than dependent  only on short term 
memory for form. Some observat ions  from 
Koine Greek, the vernacular  Greek of the 
first century  before Chr ist  to the third 
century  after, appear to bear this out. 
Word order is used much less in Koine 
than it is in Engl ish to speci fy  
grammat ica l  relat ions, because the case 
system of nouns carr ies that load. One of 
the funct ions which word order expresses 
seems to be that of ident i fy ing shifts in 
topic (Grimes 1975). Noun phrases in the 
nominat ive case that precede the main verb 
of a c lause regular ly  make that nominat ive  
the topic; that is, they signal the reader 
to take it as part of the referent ia l  core 
that is to be the common ground between 
him and the writer.  
The con junct ions  of Koine Greek also 
play a part in the topical structure.  
There are three kinds of conjunct ions:  
coord inat ing,  subord inat ing,  and 
resumptive.  The coord inat ing con junct ions  
include most of the ones t rans latab le  as 
'and' or 'but' The subord inat ing 
conj unct ions include the ' because ' and 
'if' var iet ies.  The resumpt ive ara, dio, 
and occas iona l ly  idou mean something like 
106 
'now, back to the main point'.  They reset 
the topic level from wherever it was to 
the global topic. 
Working along with the con junct ion 
system is the system of grammat ica l  
subordinat ion.  It uses re lat iv izers,  
complement izers ,  part ic ip les ,  and verbal 
nouns to signal that certain propos i t ions  
are peripheral  in the author 's  perspect ive  
on what he has to say. All these 
subordinat ing grammatica l  mechanisms are 
used constant ly  in the ancient Koine 
documents,  even though it would be 
perfect ly  possib le to express what they 
express in str ings of independent c lauses 
with no subordinat ion.  
The result is texts with a r ichly 
e laborated grammatical  structure, with 
some clauses at four or even five levels 
of subordinat ion.  The general  d is t inct ion  
between global and local applies, but 
recursively:  at any level of 
subordinat ion,  it appears poss ib le  to have 
yet another level of subord inat ion 
attached. 
When we turn, however,  to languages 
that make d is t inct ions  of topic level 
expl ic i t  in their pronominal  systems, we 
find no greater  e laborat ion than a 
d is t inct ion between global and local 
topics. Bacair i  of Brazil  (Wheatley 1973) 
is such a language. The terms Wheat ley  
uses in his descr ipt ion  are 'thematic - 
athematic' and 'focal - nonfocal' ;  but it 
seems clear from perusal of his paper that 
we would now want to call the thematic 
category the topic, and the focal category 
global.  Someone who has been identi f ied as 
part of the common ground between speaker 
and hearer for a text as a whole is 
referred to by the pronoun maca 'thematic 
focal animate'; someone who Ts--6opic for a 
local segment but is not the global  topic 
at the same time is referred to by auaca 
'thematic nonfocal animate'; someone who 
is global topic, but is referred to within 
a stretch that has a local topic active, 
is mauanca  or maunca 'a themat ic  focal 
animate' ,  and those who are topic neither 
at the global  level nor at the local level 
are referred to by uanca 'athematic 
nonfocal  animate' There are inanimate 
counterparts  for all four pronouns. 
On the thematic side -- that is, in 
the pronouns used for topics -- there is a 
s i tuat ional  or deict ic  use that confuses 
the picture. The pronoun inara 'thematic 
nondeict ic  animate' is only textual ly  
def ined, with an anaphor ic  antecedent  that 
is taken always from the preceding 
sentence, not from the topical structure 
of the text as a whole. On the other hand 
there is a pronoun mira 'thematic deict ic  
animate' which appl ies only to animate 
things that can be seen and are near the 
speaker. In between the nondeict ic  and 
the deict ic  are the s i tuat iona l  uses of 
maca and auaca .  The first denotes someone 
far away but in sight, and the second 
denotes someone nearer to the speaker but 
not as near as mira. 
There are s i tuat ions in which these 
two pronouns appear to fl ip their 
reference; what they actua l ly  do is change 
the basis of the reference from the 
s i tuat ion to the text. Thus I can begin a 
text by ident i fy ing a boy over there as 
maca because he is re lat ive ly  far away, 
and a woman standing closer as auaca 
because she is not so far away. But i-f 
what I have to say revolves around the 
woman rather than the boy, I wil l  switch 
after a few sentences to the textual 
def in i t ion of the pronouns and use maca 
for the woman because she is more central  
to what I have to say, and auaca  to the 
boy when I treat him as a loc- -~ topic. 
However, we have no informat ion about the 
use of these pronouns to topical ize at 
more than two levels at a time. 
Longuda of Niger ia has a less 
e laborate pronoun system with respect to 
topics than that of Bacair i  (Newman, in 
press), but neverthe less  it d i s t ingu ishes  
topic from nontopic.  There is actua l ly  a 
series of pronoun-aspect  part ic les that 
appear in sequence in texts to identi fy 
act ions of the central  character and 
d ist inguish them from the act ions of 
others.  In some parts of a text the 
character  singled out by the pronouns is 
the one the text is about; he is treated 
as the global  topic. Where local topics 
are introduced, however,  the topic pronoun 
set switches over to the local topic, and 
the referent of the global  topic is 
referred to by the same nontopic pronoun 
as all the other characters.  
For example, in a story about a 
rabbit, most of the story uses the topic 
pronoun series for the rabbit and a 
nontopic pronoun for everybody else, 
including an elephant who interacts with 
the rabbit. One section, however,  is 
about what the elephant did. In that 
sect ion it is the elephant who gets the 
topic pronoun series, and the rabbit gets 
the nontopic series, even if it is the 
rabbit whom the story is about global ly.  
When the sect ion about the elephant ends, 
the topic pronoun series reverts to the 
global  topic, the rabbit. 
Evidence from languages like these 
proves the l inguist ic  real ism of a 
d is t inct ion  between one kind of topic and 
another. It also agrees in the main with 
the kinds of analys is  we have been making 
for English; apparent ly  we are fair ly 
close to the right track, in terms of 
those languages that put this kind of 
thing right out on the surface. What is 
not yet clear is the number of levels of 
topic we may deal with in a text: 
Clements' s analys is  of Engl ish and my 
analys is  of Greek point toward more than 
two s imultaneous levels of topic, whi le  
107 
the languages that distinguish levels of 
topic in their pronoun systems seem to 
support two levels. 
Bibliography 
Clements, Paul. 1976. The effects of 
staging on recall from prose. Cornell 
University Ph.D. thesis. 
Danes, Frantisek, ed. 1974. Papers on 
functional sentence perspective 
(Janua Linguarum series minor no. 
147). The Hague: Mouton. 
Grimes, Joseph E. 1975. 'Signals of 
discourse structure in Koine'. In 
George MacRae, ed. Society for 
Biblical Literature 1975 Seminar 
Papers, Vol. i. Missoula, Montana: 
Scholars Press, 151-164. 
Grosz, Barbara. 1977. The representation 
and use of focus in dialogue 
understanding (Technical Note 151). 
Menlo Park: Stanford Research 
Institute. 
Gundel, Jeannette. 1974. The role of topic 
and comment in linguistic theory. 
University of Texas Ph.D. thesis. 
Halliday, Michael A. K. 1967. 'Notes on 
transitivity and theme in English, 
Part 2' Journal of Linguistics 
3:199-244. 
and Ruqaiya Hasan. 1976. Cohesion 
in English. London: Longman Group 
Limited. 
Hockett, Charles F. 1959. A course in 
modern linguistics. New York: The 
Macmillan Company. 
Meyer, Bonnie J. F. 1974. The organization 
of prose and its effects on recall. 
Cornell University Ph.D. thesis. 
Newman, John F. in press. 'Participant 
orientation in Longuda folktales'. In 
Joseph E. Grimes, ed. Papers on 
Discourse. Dallas: Summer Institute 
of Linguistics. 
Schank, Roger. 1977. 'Rules and topics in 
conversation'. Cognitive Science 
1:4.421-442. 
Searle, John. 1969. Speech acts. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Wheatley, James. 1973. 'Pronouns and 
nominal elements in Bacairi 
discourse'. Linguistics 104:105-115. 
Winograd, Terry. 1972. Understanding 
natural language. New York: Academic 
Press. 
108 
