The Relation of Grammar to Cognition--a Synopsis 
Leonard Talmy 
Program in Cognitive Science / Center for Human Information Processing / UC San Diego 
Abstract 
A sentence (or other portion of discourse) is 
taken to evoke in the listener a meaning complex, 
here called a "cognitive representation". The lex- 
ical elements of the sentence, to simplify, by and 
large specify the content of the cognitive represen- 
tation, while the grammatical elements specify its 
structure. Thus, looking systematically at the 
actual notions specified by grammatical elements can 
give us a handle for ascertaining the very makeup of 
(l~nguistic-) cognitive structuring. We accordingly 
examine a number of grammatically specified notions, 
observe the categories and systems in which they 
pattern, and speculate on broader cognitive connec- 
tions. 
Some provisional findings have already emerged. 
Grammatical specifications for structure are prepon- 
derantly relat iv ist ic  or topological, and exclude the 
fixed or metrically Euclidean. The categories in 
which grammatical notions pattern include: 
plexity perspectival mode 
state of boundedness level of synthesis 
state of dividedness level of exemplarity 
degree of extensionality axial characteristics 
pattern of distribution scene-breakup " 
Grammatical specification of structuring appears to 
be the same, in certain abstract characteristics, as 
the structuring of visual perception. 
O. Introduction 
A sentence (or other portion of discourse) is 
taken to evoke in the listener a particular kind of 
experiential complex--here to be termed a "cognitive 
representation" or "CR".I There appears to be a sig- 
nificant way in which different portions of the lan- 
guage input specify, or code for, different portions 
of the CR. The major finding is that--for a f i r s t  
approximation--the lexical fraction of a sentence 
codes mainly for the content, or substance, of a CR, 
while the grammatical fraction of a sentence codes 
mainly for the structure of a CR. Determining the 
structure within a realm of phenomena has been a cen- 
tral concern for analytic science, including linguis- 
tics and psychology. With grammar seen in the above 
l ight,  i t  can be used in determining the structure, 
of the language-related portion of human cognition, 
with possible connections to further portions. In 
particular, Iookingsystematically at the actual not- 
ions specified by grammatical elements can give us a 
handle for ascertaining the xery nakeup of (linguis- 
t ic-)  cognitive structuring. ~ The beginnings of such 
an endeavor are the aims of this paper. 
Several ideas here require some immediate lab- 
oration. The distinction between lexical and gram- 
matical is made entirely formally--i.e., without any 
reference to meaning--on the basis of the distinc- 
tion between open-class and closed-class. 3 All open- 
class elements--i.e., the stems of nouns, verbs, and 
adjectives4--are considered lexical. Everything else 
is considered grammatical. Included here are all 
closed-class morphemes and words--inflections, par- 
t ic les, adpositons, conjunctions, demonstratives, 
etc.--as well as syntactic constructions, grammatical 
relations~ categorial identities, word order, and 
intonation. Terminologically here, "grammatical 
element" will be used to refer to any of these. 
The nature of content and of structure, and the 
distinction between them, are not understood well 
enough to be addressed analytically in this paper and 
must be le f t  to our intuit ive sense of the matter.5 
Taking them for granted, however, we can now more 
finely characterize the linguistic-cognitive cross- 
relationships noted earlier. While most of a CR's 
content is specified by the lexical fraction of a 
sentence, the lexical items do usually specify some 
structural notions along with the contentful ones. 
The grammatical elements of a sentence more unalloy- 
edly specify only structural notions;~and specify them 
more determinately in the case of conflict with a 
lexical item, establishing perhaps the majority of a 
CR's structure. 6 
In other work in the present direction--notably 
Fillmore's (e.g., 1975, 1976)--concern has also been 
with ascertaining structre, but the sentence elements 
used as starting-points have generally been lexical 
items with prominently inmixed structural specifica- 
tions (like buy and sell)~ The present work, in part 
a complement to the other, takes advantage of gram- 
mar's greater directness and completeness:in speci- 
fying structure~ 
This paper is divided into three sections. In 
the f i r s t ,  a sampling of grammatical elements is ex- 
amined for the notions that they specify, both as an 
introduction to out method and for the aim of notic- 
ing properties common to such notions as well as pro- 
perties excluded from them. In the second, we pre- 
sent a number of the categories in which grammatically 
specified notions have been observed to pattern. In 
the th ird,  we speculate on broader cognitve connec- 
tions. 
14 
1. The Nature of Grammatically Specified Notions 
In this section we examine a small sampling of 
grammatical elements for the part icular  component 
notions that they specify. The sample wi l l  give a 
heurist ic indication of the kinds of notions that get 
grammatically specified as well as of kinds of no- 
tions that possibly never do. The excluded kinds 
wi l l  be seen as readi ly specif iable by lexical  ele- 
ments. A further comparison between the character- 
i s t ics  of grammatically specified notions and of 
lex ica l ly  specified ones is then made. To indicate 
the major f inding at the outset, i t  seems that gram- 
matical specif ications for structure are preponder- 
antly re la t iv i s t i c  or topological,  and exclude the 
fixed or metr ical ly Euclidean. 
For a f i r s t  simple case, many languages have in- 
f lect ions for the noun (English has -B and -s) 
that specify the uniplex or the multipTex instant ia-  
t ion of the object specified by the noun. By con- 
t rast ,  no languages appear to have inf lect ions that 
specify the redness or blueness, e tc . - - i .e . ,  the par- 
t i cu lar  color- -of  the object specified by a noun. 
In the preceding, the underlined are instances of 
"notions". The f i r s t  set are grammatically specif ied 
a~d can be readily seen to play a structuring role 
in a CR. 7 The second set are perhaps never found 
specified by grammatical elements, though they are 
everywhere found specified by lexical  elements \[such 
as (red and blue). 
For another case we consider a deict ic  l ike the 
English this or that as in This chair is broken. A 
grammatical element of this type specifie~ the loca- 
tion of an indicated object as being, in ef fect ,  on 
the speaker-side or the non-speaker-side of a concep- 
tual part i t ion drawn through space (or time or other 
qual i tat ive dimension). This integral specif icat ion 
can be analyzed as containing the following component 
notions (enclosed by quotes): 
( I)  
a-b. a 'par t i t ion '  that divides a space into 
' reg ions ' / ' s ides '  
c-e. the 'locatedness' (a part icular  re lat ion)  of a 
'point '  (or object ideal izable as a point) 
'within'  a region 
f-g. (a side that is the) 'same' as or 'd i f fe rent '  
from 
h-i .  a 'current ly indicated' object and a 'current ly 
communicating' ent i ty  
Notions that might at f i r s t  be ascribed to such deicq 
t ics ,  such as of distance or perhaps size, prove not 
to be, on the evidence of sentence-pairs l ike (2): 
(2) a. This speck is smaller than that speck. 
b. This planet is smaller than that planet. 
The CRs evoked by (2a) and (b) d i f fe r  greatly,  in- 
volving t iny objects mill imeters apart or huge objects 
parsecs apart. Yet the sentences d i f fe r  only lex ic-  
a l ly ,  not grammatically. Hence, the CRs' notions as 
to the magnitude of size or distance cannot be traced 
to the deict ics (or to other grammatical elements) in 
the sentences. Thus, the notional specif ications of 
a this or a that appear, in part, to be genuinely 
topological: the establishment of a part i t ion remains 
a constant, but i ts  position can vary unlimitedly (or, 
using topology's character izabi l i ty  as "rubber-sheet 
geometry", the par t i t ion 's  distance away can be 
stretched indef in i te ly )  without any constraints im- 
posed by the deict ics '  specif ications per se. This 
f inding about the deict ics alerts us to noticing 
whether any grammatical elements make specif ications 
about magnitude. A spot check through English and 
various other languages suggests that--whi le there are 
apparentl~ grammatical specif ications for re lat ive 
magnitudeS--there are possibly never any for absolute 
or quantif ied magnitude, whether of size, distance, 
or other parameters. 
For a third case, we consider the type of adposi- 
t ion that specif ies,  for a moving object, certain 
characterist ics of path and of point- or frame-of- 
reference. An example of this type is English through 
as used, e.g. ,  in: 
(3) a. I walked through the water. 
b. I walked through the timeber ( i .e . ,  woods). 
In this usage, through specif ies,  broadly, 'motion 
along a l ine that is within a medium'. The component 
notions contained here include: 
(4) 
a-e. 
f .  
g. 
h- i .  
'mot ion ' - - i .e . ,  'one-to-one correspondences' 
between 'adjacent' points of 'space' and 
adjacent points of 'time' 
motion that describes a ' l i ne '  
the locatedness of a l ine within a 'medium' 
a medium, i .e . ,  a region of three-dimensional 
space set apart by the locatedness within i t  
of 'material '  that is in a 'pattern of dis- 
tr ibut ion' ,  of a certain range of character 
( s t i l l  to be determined) 
Again, with (3a) and (b) d i f fer ing  only lex ica l ly ,  any 
notional differences in the i r  CRs cannot be attr ibuted 
to through. Thus, not within the specif icational 
purvue of that element are: the 'kind nf substance' 
comprising the medium and the 'sensorimotor character- 
i s t i cs '  attendant on executing the motion--as, here, 
those attendant on wading vs. weaving amidst obstacles. 
With other sentence pairs l ike 
(5) a/b. I crawled/ran through the timber. 
(6) a/b, I zig-zagged/arced throught the timber. 
i t  can be further determined that 'rate of motion' and 
'shape/contour of l inear path' are also not specified 
by the grammatical element. 
As one step in a program to ascertain any proper- 
t ies common to grammatically specified notions, the 
notions just  found are gathered together in Table I. 
For heur ist ic  purposes, the notions are very provis- 
ional ly divided into three groups on the basis of 
the i r  re lat ion to topology. In group (a) are the 
notions that properly belong, or are readi ly definable, 
in the actual mathematical system of topology. In 
group (b), the notions might not be part of topology 
proper but in tu i t i ve ly  seem l ike those that are--and 
might be includable in a related mathematical system 
that could be constructed. In group (c) are the no- 
tions that fa l l  outside of any usual conception of a 
mathematical system. The number of notions in the 
f i r s t  two groups combined is 13, while the th i rd  has 
6--an indication of a preponderant propensity for 
grammatical elements to specify quasi-topological no- 
tions. The rat io  in this direct ion is in fact im- 
proved i f  we consider that even several notions in 
group (c)--the bottom three--resemble topological ones 
in the sense of involving re la t iv i s t i c  relationships 
between quantit ies rather than absolutely f ixed 
quantit ies.  
15 
(7) Table 1: Some notions found to be specified 
by grammatical elements 
a. topological b. topology-like 
partition 
region/side 
point 
line 
locatedness 
within 
uniplexity 
multiplexity 
one-to-one 
correspondences 
same 
dif ferent 
pattern of distr ibut ion 
"adjacency" of points 
(monotonicity) 
c. non-topological 
matter 
space 
time 
motion 
medium 
currently indicated/ 
communicating entity 
For a complementary program of ascertaining any 
properties excluded from grammatical specification, 
the notions found above not'~to be specified by the 
elements investigated are listed in Table 2. Rather 
than topological, topology-like, or relat ivist ic,  
these notions involve Euclidean-geometric oncepts 
(e.g., set distance,:size, contour), quantified mea- 
sure, and various particularities of a quantity--in 
sum, characteristics that are absolute or fixed. 
(8) Table 2: Some notions seemingly never specified 
grammatically 
absolute/quantified magnitude kind of substance 
(of distance, size, etc.) speed 
shape/contour of line color 
sensorimotor characteristics 
The provisional conclusion to be drawn from these 
findings is that, i f  grammatical specifications largely 
correspond to (linguistic-) cognitive structuring, then 
the nature of that structuring is largely relativ- 
ist ic or topological rather than fixed or absolute. 
In a search for contrasts between grammatical and 
lexical specification, a difference that presents 
i tsel f  at this point is that the relativism vs. abso- 
lutism restrictions do not apply to the latter. Lex- 
ical items can specify topological and relat ivist ic 
concepts, as the very words listed in Table 1 attest 
to. And they can also specify Euclidean or absolute 
concepts. Thus, for the notion of color in Table 2, 
there are such lexical items as red, b\]ue; for con ~ 
tour, there are circle, straight; for quantified 
magnitude, there are inch, mile; for sensorimotor 
characteristics, there are wade, nimble, effort. 
For a further contrast between the grammatical 
and the lexical type of specification, we consider 
the full complement of both element-types in a single 
whole sentence, viz., that selected in (9): 
(9) A rustler lassoed the steers. 
We f i rs t  l i s t  the grammatical elements p~esent in the 
sentence~and the notions that they specify: 
(10) 
a. -edz 
b. the: 
c. a: 
'occurring at a time before that of 
the present communication' 
'has ready identif iabi l i ty for the 
addressee' 
'not before in discussion or otherwise 
readily indentifiable for addressee' 
d. -s: 'multiplex object' 
e. a...-~: 'uniplex object' 
f. the grammatical category of "verb" for lasso: 
'eventhood' 
g/h. the gram. category of "noun" for rustler/steer: 
'objecthood' (one possible spec. of "N") 
i / j .  the grammatical relations of "subject"/"object" 
for rustler/steer: 
~t~7~-pat ient  ' (among possible specs.) 
k. active voice: 
'point-of-view at the agent' 
I. intonation, word-order, state of auKiliaries: 
'the speaker-"knows" the situation 
to be true and asserts i t '  
The lexical items in the sentence can have their spec- 
ifications characterized as follows: 
( I I )  A complex of concepts involving: 
a. rustler: 
b. steer: 
c. lasso: 
property ownership, i l legal i ty,  mode 
of activity 
appearance, physical makeup, relation 
to animal k~ngdom 
institution of breeding for intended 
purposes, esp. human consumption 
certain materials (a body and a lasso) 
in certain configurations 
movement sequences of materials' parts 
concomitant mental intentions, direc- 
tings, monitorings, etc. 
In surveying the l is ts ,  we can see these differ- 
ences emerge: The grammatical elements are more num- 
erous and their specifications seem simpler and more 
structural. Together, their specifications seem to 
determaine the main organizational and communicational 
delineations of the CR evoked by the sentence. The 
lexical elements are fewer in number, but their specG 
ifications are more complex and seem to comprise most 
of the content of the CR. The lexical specifications 
are complex in three ways: compared to a grammatical 
specification, each has a) more total information, 
b) greater intricacy of information, and c) more dif ~ 
ferent types of information together. 
These grammatical-lexical differences can be set 
into further relief by in turn varying one element- 
typewhile keeping the other constant. Thus, varying 
only the grammatical elements of (9), as is done in 
(12), seems to alter the organizational and communic- 
ational characteristics of the scene but to leave its 
basic contents intact: 
(12) Will the rustlers lasso a steer? 
Varying only (9)'s lexical elements, as in (13), shifts 
us to a new scene altogether, and yet the essential 
breakup of the scene and of the communicative setting 
seem to remain the same: 
(13) A machine cancelled the stamps. 
2. Categories of Grammatically Specified Notions 
The preceding sampling of grammatical elements 
has yielded a set of notions helpfultoward discovering 
common properties. But the set has been small and 
haphazardly arrived at. With a broader and more sys- 
tematic investigation, patterns of organization become 
evident. Grammatically specified notions can be seen 
to pattern in categories, and the categories, ' in turn, 
16 
in integrated systems. In this section we look at 
some of these categories and systems. 
The grammatical elements here wi l l  not be treated 
in isolat ion,  but in association with lexical  items. 
That is,  the grammatically specified structural no ~ 
tions wi l l  be considered in interaction with that 
por t ion  of lexical specif icat ion that is also struc- 
tural .  This interaction entai ls cognitive processing, 
and d i f ferent  cases of such processing wi l l  be con- 
sidered along the way. 
The note on methodology should be made that our 
direct ion of analysis has been from grammatical spec- 
i f i ca t ion  to category, not the reverse. That is,  the 
categories considered below were discovered to be 
relevant to the specif ications of various grammatical 
elements. They were not part of some a pr ior i  concep- 
tual schema which then sought corroborative examples~ 
2.1 Dimension / Kind of Quantity 
The category of "dimension" has two member no- 
t ions, 'space' and It ime'. The kind of "quantity" 
that exists in space i s - - in  respectively continuous 
or discrete form--'matter' or 'objects ' .  The kind 
of quantity existing in time is 'action' or 'events' 
("action" is meant to refer to any obtaining circum- 
stance= not just  (wi l led) motion). In tabular form, 
these notions relate thus: 
(13) space: matter /objects  
time: action/events 
A number of grammatical and lexical  referents are 
specif ic with regard to one or the other pole of this 
category. But since the category cross-cuts the ones 
treated next, we wi l l  not exemplify i t  here but wi l l  
endeavor in the following to present both space and 
time examples side by side. 
2.2 Plexity 
The category here to be termed "plexi ty"  is a 
quantity's state of ar t icu lat ion into equivalent ele- 
ments. Where the quantity consists of only one such 
element, i t  is "uniplex",  and where i t  consists of 
more than one, i t  is "mult iplex".  When the quantity 
involved is matter, p lex i ty  is,  of course, equivalent 
to the tradi t ional  category of "number" with i ts  com- 
ponent notions "singular" and "p lura l" .  But the pre- 
sent notions are intended to capture the generaliza- 
t ion from matter over to action, which the tradi t ional  
ones do not.9 
Specifications as to p lexi ty are made by both 
lexical items and grammatical elements, and the in- 
terplay between the two when they are both in associa- 
tion must be noted. Example English lexical items 
that basically specify a uniplex referent are-- for  
matter and action, respect ively--bird and (to) sigh. 
They can occur with grammatical elements that them- 
selves specify a unip lexi ty ,  l ike those underlined 
in (14a) (many languages have here a more regular, 
overt system of markers than!:English). But they can 
also occur with grammatical elements that specify a 
mult ip lex i ty ,  as in (14b). In this association, such 
elements can be thought to tr igger a part icular  cog- 
n i t ive operation-- in this case, one of "multiplexing". 
By this operation, an original solo referent is,  in 
ef fect ,  copied onto various points of space or time. 
(14) matter action 
a. uniplex A bird flew in. He s i t  (once). 
b. m~Itiplex Birds flew in. He kept sighing. 
The reverse of the preceding circumstances is 
also to be found in language. First, there are lex- 
ical items that intrinsically specify a multiplexity. 
English examples are furniture or timber ( i .e.,  'stan- 
ding trees') for matter and breathe for action, as 
used in (15a). And, too, there are grammatical ele- 
ments able to appear in association here, as in (15b), 
that signal an operation the reverse of multiplexing-- 
one that can be called '*unit-excerpting". By this 
operation, a single one of the specified equivalent 
units is taken and set in the foreground of attention. 
(15) 
a. multiplex 
b. 
matter 
action 
Furniture overturned in the 'quake. 
She breathed without pain. 
piece o_f_ffurniture overturned... 
She took a breath/breathed in . . .  
The grammatical elements that above signaled multi-  
plexing-- -s and keep -~- -have  a d i rect ly  manifested 
surface form. The ones signaling unit-excerpting are 
in part abstract in form, as represented in (16): 
(16) matter action 
(a) Nunit of + Vdummy-~-)--~\[ \[ + X\]N 
eg: a piece of furniture take a breath 
or: + Prtcle (eg: in)  
2.3 State of Boundedness 
Another category of attr ibutes specified both 
grammatically and lex ica l ly  for a quantity is i ts  
"state of boundedness" When a quantity is specif ied 
as "unbounded", i t  is conceived as continuing on in- 
de f in i te ly  with no necessary character ist ic of f in i te -  
ness in t r ins ic  to i t .  When a quantity is specified 
as "bounded", i t  is conceived as demarcated of f  as an 
individuated unit ent i ty .  
Among English examples of lexical items, water 
and (to) sleep seem basically to specify unbounded 
quantit ies,  whereas sea and (to) dress seem basically 
to specify bounded ones. These specif ications are 
demonstrated by the words' respectively unacceptable 
and acceptable occurrence with the grammatical element 
in  NPextent_of_t\]me , which specifies boundedness: 
(17) matter 
action 
a. unbounded *We flew over water in I hr. 
*She slept in 8 hrs. 
b. bounded We flew over a sea in I hr. 
She dressed in 8 mins. 
Now, there are grammatical elements suitable for 
co-occurrence with unbounded-type lexical items which 
therewith, in ef fect ,  t r igger a cognitive operation 
of "bound@ng". By this operation, a portion of the 
specified unbounded quantity is demarcated and placed 
in the foreground of attention. Examples of such 
grammatical elements in English are: 
(18) matter (a) Nbounded_quantity of 
action for Nextent_of_time + 
Part icular cases of them in use are: 
(19) We flew over a bodz of water in 1 hr. 
She slept for 8 hrs. 
17 
The question arises whether the reverse of the 
preceding circumstances is ever to be found in lan- 
guage. Entailed would be the existence of grammat- 
ical elements that, when used with lexical items 
specifying a bounded quantity, Would trigger an oper- 
ation of "debounding". By this, e.g., the referent 
of sea would be shifted to 'pelagic water', and that 
o f -~tear ,  to take another lexical bounded case, 
would shift to 'lachrymal f luid'. It  seems likely 
that such grammatical elements exist; the closest 
candidate known to the author is the French suffix 
-age, but this has a range of meanings and many oc- 
currence restrictions--and oes not, e.g., happen to 
combine with the French words for "sea" or "tear".10 
2.4 State of Dividedness 
The category of "state of dividedness" refers to 
a quantity 's internal consistency. A quantity is 
'~discrete" (or "part icu late")  i f  there are breaks in 
its oo~inuity. Otherwise, the quantity is "contin- 
uous". ~ Both lexical and grammatical elements are 
sensitive, in their specifications, to the distinc- 
tions of this category. But there appear to be no 
grammatical elements that solely specify discreteness 
or continuity for a quantity, and also none that sig- 
nal an operation for reversing a^quantity's lex~cally 
specified state of dividedness, zz In consequence, 
there is difficulty in demonstrating this category 
explicitly by itself, and so we defer its treatment 
until the next section, where i t  can be seen in in- 
teraction with the other categories. 
2.1 - 2.4 The Disposition of a Quantity 
The preceding four categories of attr ibutes al l  
pertain to a quantity simultaneously and, taken to- 
gether, can be considered to constitute a system of 
attr ibutes that may be termed a quantity 's "disposi- 
t ion".  The part icular  intersections of the several 
attr ibutes wi l l  be the main object of attention here. 
These, f i r s t ly ,  can be schematized as in (19): 
(19)  discrete continuous 
e ~ 6 ~,!/, ,,%/ 
' ' 'illi/iIfI  , " "  " ,  , .  r} " ' I .  a, 7 : I ~:::unbounded 
multiplex < 
Q~. . .  O <C-~ b?unded 
A B "~f 
uniplex .'- o ~ a 
+ the d is t inct ion between matter and action, 
which cross-cuts al l  of the above ~F 
Each intersection of attr ibutes indicated here has 
been found specified by various lexical  items. An 
example or two (most seen ear l ier )  is given for each 
intersection in (20):14 
(20) A: timber/furniture B: water 
(to) breathe (to) sleep 
A: (a) family B: (a) sea/tear 
(to) button up (to) zip up 
a: (a) bird 
(to) sigh 
Now i f  the particular contentful referent for 
which one chooses a lexical item happens to be wedded, 
by that lexical item, to an unwanted set of structural 
specifications, there generally are grammatical means 
available for altering this to a desired set. Such 
means range in directness from specifying the single 
apt alteration to involving a circuitous sequence of 
operations. A number of starting- and ending-points 
for alterations, and the means for accomplishing them, 
are indicated in (21): 
(21) 
~--~A a stand of timber 
breathe for  1 hr. 
A-~,a a piece of furnit. 
take a breath/ 
breathe in 
B~B a body df water 
sleep for 1 hr. 
A --~a a member of a fmly 
go through a step 
of buttoning up 
A~A members of a fmly  B-~B 
(A - *a  -~A) 
button on and on 
a~A trees 
keep sighing 
tears (*tearage) 
(B -~a -~A -~-B) 
zip on and on 
a -~A a stand of trees 
(a -~A -~ A) 
sigh for a while 
2.5 Degree of Extensionality 
Impl ic i t  in the vert ical  dimension of the sche- 
matic arrangement in (19) is a further category I~  that 
can be called "degree of extensional i ty".  This cate- 
gory has three member notions, terms for which are 
given in (22) together with schematics of the notions 
for the l inear dimension: 
(22) point bounded extent unbounded extent 
Lexical items with e i ther a matter or an action ref -  
erent can make concurrent structural  specif ications 
for  the i r  referent as to i ts  basic degree of exten- 
s ional i ty .  Three examples--specifying objects of 
d i f fe rent  l inear  extensional i t ies- -are the words 
(23) speck ladder r iver  
Now a lexical  referent that is perhaps most bas- 
i ca l l y  to be conceived as of one part icu lar  degree of 
extensional i ty can, by various grammatical specif ica- 
tions that induce a sh i f t ,  be idealized as being of 
some other degree of extensional ity.  For a f i r s t  ex- 
ample, consider the event referent of climb a ladder, 
which seems basical ly of bounded l inear ~en- t -~of  
time), as is in fact manifested in (24) in conjunction 
with the grammatical element " in+ NPextent_of_time": 
(24) She climbed up the f i re - ladder  in 5 mins. 
With a d i f fe rent  accompanying grammatical element, 
l ike the "at + NPpoint-of-time" in (25),(as well as 
d i f fe rent  ~ntextua l  speci f icat ions) ,  the event ref -  
erent of the preceding can be shifted toward ideal iz -  
18 
ation as a point of t ime- - i .e . ,  as being point-dura- 
t ional :  
(25) Moving along on the training course, 
she climbed the f i re- ladder at exactly midday. 
This sh i f t  in the cognized extensional ity of the ew 
ent can be thought to involve a cognitive process of 
"reduction" or of "taking the long-range view". The 
sh i f t  can also go in the other direction. The event 
referent can be idealized as an unbounded extent from 
the effect of grammatical elements l ike "keep - ing",  
"-er and -er" ,  and "as + S", as in (26): 
(26) She kept climbing higher and higher up the 
f i re- ladder  as we watched. 
Here there would seem to have taken place a cognitive 
process of "magnification" or of "taking the close-up 
view". In such a process, a perspective is estab~ 
lished whereby the existence of any exter ior  bounds 
fa l l s  outside of view and attent ion--or ,  at most, are 
asymptotically approachable. 
The preceding event referent was continuous, 
but a discrete case can exhibit  the same shi f ts  of 
extensional ity.  One such case, perhaps to be con- 
sidered as most basical ly of bounded extent, is shown 
with that degree of extensional ity in (27a). But the 
referent can also be idealized as a point, as in (27b) 
( i t  is clear that the cows here did not a l l  die at the 
same moment, and yet the spread of their  death times 
is conceptually collapsed into such a single moment). 
Or, the referent can be idealized as an unbounded ex- 
tent, as in (27c): 
(27) a. The cows a l l  died in a month. 
b. When the cows al l  died, we sold our farm. 
c. The cows kept dying (and dying) 
unt i l  the serum f ina l ly  arrived. 
The al ternat ive ideal izations of extensional ity 
just seen as specif iable for an event referent are 
generally also avai lable for an object referent. 
Thus, e.g.,  the referent of (a) box can be specified 
for ideal izat ion as a point or as a bounded extent 
(of area or volume). Some grammatical elements making 
such specifications~are i l lus t ra ted  in (28). Also set  
forth here are the homologies between these and the 
event-specific elements: 
(28) 
point The box is 20 f t .  away from the wal l .  
I read the book 20 yrs. ago. 
bounded extent The box is 2 f t .  across. 
I read the book in 2 hrs. 
(point Within) The ball is in the box. 
bounded extent She arrived as I was reading the book. 
2.6 Pattern of Distr ibut ion 
The pattern of d is t r ibut ion of matter throughi: 
space or of action through time is a further category 
of notions that can be both grammatically and lex ic -  
a l l y  specified.16 For action through time--the only 
dimension we wi l l  be looking at now--this category 
together with the preceding one largely constitute 
the t radi t ional  category of "aspect". 
Several of the main patterns of d is t r ibut ion for 
action through time are shown schematically in (29) 
(the dots here, representing situatedness in comple- 
mentary states, should rea l ly  be adjacent, but they 
are sketched apart with a connecting l ine to show the 
crossing of state- interfaces).  Shown, too, are ex- 
ample verbs whose basic d is t r ibut ional  specif ications 
are as in the corresponding schematic: 
(29) 
one-way one-way fu l l -  steady- gradient 
non- resettable cycle state 
resettable ~ 
. . . . .  . , ,  
die fa l l  f lash sleep widen 
carry 
One can determine that these lexical  items have the 
specif ications indicated by noting the grammatical 
elements with which they can and cannot occur (or, to 
put the la t te r  case in our terms: ...grammatical ele- 
ments toward whose specif ications they w i l l  not 
sh i f t ) .  A fu l l  demonstration is not in order here, 
but a few examples show the pr inciple:  The resettable 
type of a one-way event is distinguished from the 
non-resettable type by i t s  compatibi l i ty in sentences 
l i ke :  He fe l l  3 times, which the other lacks: *He 
died 3 times. This same one-way form is distinguished 
from a fu l l - cyc le  form by i t s  ab i l i ty  to appear in 
sentences l ike :  He fe l l  and then got up, which the 
la t te r  cannot do: *The beacon flashed and then went 
of f .  
We can now consider the cirsumstance where a verb 
of one type appears with grammatical elements of an- 
other type and shi f ts  in certain of i ts  specif ications 
of d is t r ibut ion.  For an example we again take die, 
whose basic specif ications can be adjudged as point- 
durational one-way non-resettable--schematizable, now 
more precisely, as: ~ . This verb is used with i t s  
basic specif ications in a sentence l ike  (30a). 
(30) a. He died as she looked on. 
b. He was (slowly) dying as she looked on. 
But in a sentence l ike  (30b), the grammatical ele- 
ment "be+ -in__ng_" induces a sh i f t .  In ef fect ,  the 
inf in i tes imal  interval between the two states involved 
for d ie - -v i z . ,  'al iveness' and 'deadness'--is spread 
out, with the creation thereby of an extent-durational 
gradient. This is the sh i f t  in the d ist r ibut ion pat- 
tern's structural type. But concomitantly, a sh i f t  
in the basic contentful referent is engendered. In- 
stead of 'dying' ,  the new gradient refers to 'mori- 
bundity'.  The d ist inct ion becomes clear in noting 
that one can have been dying without having died, 
and, cor re la t ive ly ,  one can have died without having 
been dying.17 
2.7 Perspectival Mode 
A specified action (which, in our terms, can as 
equally be s tat ic  as involve change) has been seen to 
have i ts  own, perhaps most basic, pattern of d i s t r i -  
bution through time. But, as i t  turns'out, there can 
be independent specif ication for a mode of attending 
to the action that has a d is t inc t  temporal pattern 
of d is t r ibut ion ,  one that is e ither equal or unequal 
to the action's. In what we shall now consider, 
there are two types of such "attentional" or "per- 
spectival mode" v i z . :  
19 
(31) The assuming of: 
a. a steady-state long-range perspective point 
with synoptic scope of attention 
b, a moving close-up perspective point 
with local spope of attention 
To i l lustrate, we f i r s t  consider an example with 
a basically steady-state referent, viz.,  objects in 
location. The (31a) type of perspectival mode--the 
one more congruent with such a referent--holds in 
(32a), multiply specified/determined there by the 
set of grammatical elements shown underlined. But 
by substituting grammatical elements coding for the 
(31b) perspectival mode, as is done in (32b), the 
scene evoked can be shifted to one where one's mental 
gaze or one's own projected location jumps in turn 
from object to object. In effect, a steady-state 
multiplexity of objects has been converted to a 
sequential multiplexity of events, viz.,  of concep- 
tualized encounters with the objects. 
(32) a. There are houses here and there in the valley. 
b. There is a house every now and then through 
the val ley. 
In a comparable case, the moving-perspective form, 
shown in (33b), is the only mode that can be spec- 
i~fied using everyday language. One must resort to 
scientif ic language, as in (33a), in order to estab- 
ish the synoptic perspective: 
133) 
a. The telephone poles' heights form a gradient that 
correlates with their locations on the road. 
b. The telephone poles get tal ler  the further down 
the road they are. 
The reverse of the preceding circumstances is 
also encountered. An example involving a sequential 
multiplexity of events is shown in (34a) with the more 
congruent moving-perspective mode specified. In (34b), 
the same referent instead becomes the object of syn- 
optic viewing. In metaphorical terms, the effect here 
is as i f  the vertical time line is t i l ted up into pre- 
sent-moment horizontality for integrated or summational 
assessment. 
(34) 
a. I took an aspir in time after  time during/ 
in the course of the last  hour. 
b. I have taken a number of  aspirins in 
the last  hour.18 
2.8 Level of Synthesis 
The category to be considered now pertains to 
bounded quantities, l ike those schematized in the 
A/B row in (19). One form of locution already seen 
to specify such quantities is the particular type of 
"NP of NP" construction il lustrated in (35a). Here 
the second NP specifies the identity of the quantity 
involved, i tsel f  conceptualized as without intrinsic 
bounds, while the f i r s t  NP specifies the bounding 
(or "portion--taking") per se of the quantity: 
(35) a. a set of trees 
b. a cluster of trees 
a body of water 
a puddle/drop of water 
Now, beyond the fact alone of bounding off a portion, 
the f i r s t  NP can additionally specify the particular 
configuration or form that the portion takes, as in 
(35b). 19 Especially with regard to internally dis= 
crete quantities--as with a cluster of trees--the two 
NPs can here be seen as coding for two different 
"levels of synthesis": The later NP specifies an 
unsynthesized multiplexity, while the earlier NP spe- 
cifies a particular geatalt synthesized therefrom. 
There is a further cognitive distinction involved 
here that language usually makes: either level of 
synthesis can be placed in the foreground of attention 
while the other level is placed in the background. 
One grammatical form that specifies this involves 
placing the foregrounded NP-type f i r s t ,  as shown in" 
(36a)~ With the use of this grammatical device, 
moreover, predications can be made that pertain 
solely to one level of synthesis or the other, as 
seen in (36b)i 
(36) a. the cluster of trees / the trees in the cluster 
b. That cluster of trees is small. 
The trees in that cluster are small. 
There are certain surface forms, furthermore, whose 
referents are keyed to applying to only one or the 
other level of synthesis. Thus, together (toward 
each other) tends to correlate with multiple objects, 
while~_gn (upon i tsel f )  tends to correlate with a 
composite thereof: 
(37) The bricks in the pyramid came crashing 
together/?in. 
The pyramid of bricks came crashing 
in (upon itself)/?together. 
The preceding has involved shifting attention 
from a multiplexity to the gestalt that i t  consti- 
tutes. Also encountered in language are means for 
specifying the reverse: shifting attention from a 
gestalt to the components that constitute i t .  This 
procedure can take place when the starting lexical 
item specifies an entity taken ~o be already at the 
more synthetic level, as is the case with iceberg in 
(38a). By grammatical devices like those seen in 
(38b), such an entity can be broken down from con- 
ception as a coherent whole and presented in terms 
of component parts and their interrelations: 
(38) a. The iceberg broke in two. 
b. The two halves of the iceberg broke apart 
(*in two). 
Again we encounter a surface form--in two--that cor- 
relates with only one level of synthesis and not the 
other. 20 
2.9 Level of Exemplarity 
The specification for a multiplexity of objects 
can have a further cognitive distinction made per- 
taining to i t .  This distinction does notaffeCt the 
basic reference to all the members of the multiplex- 
i ty,  but addresses how attention is directed therein. 
Eithe~ the ful l  complement of the multiplexity is in 
the foreground of attention, with perhaps individual 
items here and there singled out in the background 
of attention~ Or a single exemplar out of the multi- 
plexity is placed in the foreground of attention, 
with the remaining items more dimly conceived in the 
background of attention. Perhaps most languages have 
several grammatical devices for specifying this dis- 
tinction as to the "level of exemplarity". But Eng- 
lish stands out in the extensiveness of its forms: 
20 
there are d i f ferent  pairs of grammatical elements 
that mark the d is t inct ion for a number of d i s t inc t  
types of mult ip lexi ty.  A rather fu l l  l i s t  of these 
pairs is i l lus t rated in (39): 
(39) 
a. Oysters have siphons/a siphon. 41 
An oyster has siphons/a sipohon. L? 
b. All oysters have siphons/a siphon. 
Every oyster has siphons/a siphon. 
c. All the members raised thei r  hand(s). 
d. Each member aised his hand(s). 
d. Many members raised thei r  hand(s). 
Many a member raised his hand(s). 
e. Some members here and there raised thei r  hand(s). 
A member here and there raised his hand(s). 
f. Members one after  another raised their  hand(s). 
One member after  another raised his hand(s). 
g. Hardly any members raised their  hand(s). 
Hardly a member raised his hand(s). 
h. No members raised their  hand(s). 
No member (Not a member) raised his hand(s). 
i .  She held a gun in both hands. 
She held a gun in either hand. 23 
2.10 Other Categories and Processes 
More notional categories and cognitive processes 
have been worked up than there is opportunity to pre- 
sent here. Some of this other material is treated 
in an ear l ier  work, Talmy (1977) (which i t se l f  lacks 
some of the material presented here). But we wi l l  
b r ie f ly  indicate some of the concepts involved. 
The adjectives in a pair l ike sick/well behave 
d i f fe rent ly  in association with grammatical elements 
specifying vectoral degree, as shown in (40). In this 
they paral lel  the behavior of certain spatial expres- 
sions l ike at the border/past the border: 
(40) He's s l lght ly~ "s ick /past "  the border.'~ 
~wel l / *a t  the border. 
(~wel l /a t  the border. 5 
He's a lmost~ ~ 
\ [ : s i ck / 'pas t  the border~ 
This behavior can be accounted for by positing that 
such adjectives are not simply "opposites", but, ra- 
ther, imply for some semantic notion, e.g. ,  that of 
'heal th ' ,  a part icular  abstract topological axis of 
which each adjective labels a certain portion. The 
forms here seem in part icular  to imply a l ine bounded 
at one end; well refers to the end-point while sick 
refers to the remainder of the l ine.  These are the 
lexical items' "axial character ist ics" ,  i . e . ,  the 
part icular (topological) relations ~ach has to a par- 
t i cu lar  semantic axis and to other items al~ng the 
same axis. Certain grammatical elements, l ike those 
underlined in (40), also specify axial characteris- 
t ics.  Used incompatibly, they can cause a sh i f t  in 
an associated adject ive's specif ications. Thus, in 
(41), sick seems to label an end-point, and of a 
d i f fe rent  axis as wel l ,  that of ' fee l ing bad': 
(41) (After eating the shrimp, he fe l t  worse and 
worse and) he was almost sick at one point/ 
he f ina l ly  got sick in 5 hrs. 
Lexical expressions l ike cottage and hotel room 
may be taken to have "associated character ist ics"- -  
here, respectively, those of 'permanent res idence '  
and 'temporary lodging'. These attr ibutes may mesh 
or conf l i c t  with the specif ications of another ele- 
ment in the same sentence, e.g. ,  with the directional 
adverb home, which specif ies a permanent residence. 
In the cese of conf l i c t ,  as in (42b), the lexical item 
is operated on by a cognitive process that leaves i ts  
essential characterist ics intact but replaces i ts  in- 
cidental character ist ics:  
(42) a. He drove home to his cottage in the suburbs. 
b. He drove home to his hotel room. 
The "scene-breakup characterist ics" of a lexical 
item l ike  serve refer to i ts  basic specif ication of 
a dyadic event, in part icu lar ,  a social event invol- 
ving the two roles of 'host' and 'guest ' ,  as is mani- 
fested in (43a). But in a sentence l ike (43b), such 
a lexical  item shifts  to specifying a monadic event 
comparable to a basically monodic lexical  expression 
l ike  that in (43c). This sh i f t  in (42b) takes place 
in accommodation of the subject-p lus-ref lex ive's  
s ingle-ro le speci f icat ion.  (lhough this grammatical 
element is determinative in setting the role-number 
as monadic, the verb's influence remains: blended in 
here is the metaphoric suggestion of a dyad, as i f  
both 'host' and 'guest' are to be found in the " I " ) :  
(43) a. The host served me some dessert from the kitchen. 
b. I served myself some dessert from the kitchen. 
c. I went and got some dessert from the kitchen. 
A major aim in cognitive l inguist ics  must be to 
investigate the interactions between le~ical and 
grammatical specif ications arising in a single sent- 
ence. Included here are the cognitive accommodations 
that take place where there are conf l ic t ing specifc- 
cations. A number of interactions have been provision- 
a l ly  ident i f ied ,  and four seem def in i te ly  established: 
operations, sh i f ts ,  blends (of two kinds: superimposed 
and intro jected) ,  and juxtaposit ions. The last  three 
of these are treated at length in Talmy (1977). 
2.11 Nesting 
The operations and shi f ts  seen in 2.1 - 2.6 need 
not take place singly. The output of one can serve 
as the input to another, up to as many as f ive hier- 
archical levels of l!nesting". While there are a num- 
ber of interest ing examples of this for d i f ferent  
types of matter and action, we wi l l  go d i rect ly  to 
i l l us t ra t ing  one of the longest cases; 
(44) 
a. The beacon flashed (as I glanced over). 
b. The beacon kept flashing. 
c. The beacon flashed 5 times in a row. 
d. The beacon kept f lashing 5 times at a stretch. 
e. The beacon flashed 5 times at a stretch for 3 hrs. 
In (44a), the lexical  verb flash appears with i ts  
basic structural specif ication as a point-durational 
fu l l - cyc le  uniplex event. This undergoes the process 
of mult iplexing, to y ie ld the unbounded mult ip lex i ty  
in (44b). This then undergops bounding in (44c). 
This bounded mult ip lexi ty is then~first  put through 
21 
the process of reduction to become idealized as a 
point, and this is in turn multiplexed, yielding 
(44d). This new unbounded mult ip lex i ty  is f ina l ly  
then bounded in (44e). The nesting of structural 
specif ications in this last stage can be represented 
schematically as in (45): 
3. Further Cognitive Connections 
Grammatically specified structuring appears to 
be similar,  in certain of i ts  characterist ics and 
functions, to the structuring in other cognitive do- 
mains, notably that of visual perception. In part i -  
cular, the character ist ic  of being quasi-topological 
can be pointed to, and three major functions can be 
ident i f ied:  c lass i f i cat ion ,  synoptics, and continuity.  
The thinking here is not equally far along on al l  i; 
these matters, but something of i ts  directions can 
be indicated. 
Grammatical specif ications can be seen to con- 
s t i tu te  a c lass i f icat ion with regard to the vast var- 
iety of learned, conceived, and perceived material. 
They gather d i f ferent  portions of the material toge- 
ther into subdivisions d i s t inc t  from each other. By 
th is ,  any part icular  currently cognized element is 
associated with i ts  impl ic i t  "subdivision-mates". 
An i l l us t ra t ive  case here are the twenty-odd motion- 
related p~epositions in English, such as through and 
into,  which together subdivide the domain of 'paths 
considered with respect to reference-objects' This 
domain covers a great and varied range, but any par s 
t i cu la r  "path" fa l l s  within the purvue of one or an - 
other preposition, associated there with other "paths". 
The associations are often language-specific and some- 
times seem arbi t rary or idiosynchratic. Thus, as s~en 
ear l ie r ,  classed together by through are such dissim- 
i l a r  cases as a straightforward l iquid-part ing course 
(walking through water) and a zig<zag obstacle-avoid- 
ing course (walking through timber). The question 
arises why such dist inct ions should be effaced by 
the grammatical system, while they are observed by 
the lexical and other cognitive systems. Why are 
grammatical elements--say, such prepostions--not a 
large and open class marking indef in i te ly  many dis~i 
t inctions? One may speculate that the cognitive 
function of such c lass i f i cat ion l ies in rendering 
contentful material manipulable-- i .e. ,  amenable to 
transmission, storage, and processing--and that i ts  
lack would render content an inef fect ive agglomeration. 
The original assumption made in this paper about 
grammatical specif icat ion involved the synoptic func- 
t ion. That is,  the grammatical elements of any par- 
t i cu lar  sentence together specify the structure of 
the cognitive representati6n evoked by that sentence. 
Their specif ications act as a scaffolding or framework 
across which contentful material can be splayed or 
draped. I t  can be speculated that such structure is 
necessary for a disparate quanti~y of contentful mat- 
er ia l  to cohere in any sensible way or to be simul- 
taneously cognized as a gestalt .  
In the course of discourse, a great welter of 
notions pass in rapid succession. But there are sev- 
eral ways in which a cognitive continuity is main- 
tained through this f lux and a coherent gestalt  is 
summated over time. For one, there are cognitive 
processes whereby the successive notions generally can 
be sensibly connected together or f i t  into a concep- 
tual matrix. For another, rhetorical  specif ications 
- -a l l  the yes, buts, on the other hands, and a num- 
ber of subtler elements not generally recognized for 
th i s - -d i rec t  the i l locut ionary flow and make up the 
" logical"  tissue of the discourse. Through th is ,  gram- 
matical elements appear to play a determinative role. 
Their specif ications establish a structural level with 
greater temporal constancy amidst more f leet ing asp- 
ects of content. 
These forms of grammatically specified structuring 
seem to paral lel  forms discernable in the operation of 
visual perception. 24 F i rst ,  the perception of any 
part icu lar  object is mediated by i ts  association with 
related objects in a c lass i f icatory  schema. 
Secondly, the welter of visual sensations cognized 
at any given moment for some whole scene is rendered 
coherent by the perception of structural delineations 
running through i t .  One specialized form of this is 
discernable when one intends to move through a space, 
say, from one to the opposite corner of a restaurant. 
The sensations of tables, chairs,etc,  are, in e f fect ,  
perceived in s impl i f ied spatial arrangements as i f  from 
an aerial view, and the plot of a course one could 
fol low through that is sensed. 
Thirdly,  in the course of motion through space 
over time, there is a great f lux of visual sensations 
rushing past, but a sense of continuity is maintained 
by the perception of structure running through the 
successive scenes. Two levels of "scene-structure 
constancy" are maintained. In the f i r s t ,  the perceived 
delineations afford greater permanence than the sensory 
f lux ,  but do slowly sh i f t .  This is the level where, 
say, in walking past a table, i ts  perceived outl ine 
is maintained but shi f ts  gradually from a quadri lateral 
to a trapezoid and back to a quadri lateral .  A deeper 
level of greater constancy is also maintained, from 
which the table continues to be perceived as a rect~ 
angle no matter where one is in re lat ion to i t .  For 
a f inal  paral le l  with grammatical speci f icat ion,  the 
topology-l ike nature of visual perception is evident 
here. For certain abstract characterist ics of a scene 
and i ts  contents are maintained constant while other, 
more metrical and Euclidean characterist ics are free 
to vary without relevance thereto. 
4. Notes 
1. The word "evoke" is used because the relat ionship 
is not d i rect .  The CR is an emergent, compounded by 
~arious cognitive processes out of the sentence ele- 
ments' referent ia l  meanings, understanding of the pre- 
sent s i tuat ion,  general knowledge, etc. 
Our term "cognit ive representation" is similar 
in purport to Fi l lmore's (1975)"scene" but is chosen 
over that more spec i f i ca l ly  visual term. The l inguis-  
t i ca l l y  evoked somplex can have much from other sense 
modalities (notably som/kinesthetic and auditory) as 
well as meta-modal aspects. 
2. Comprehension, rather than production, is the d i r -  
ection we l im i t  ourselves to in the  in i t ia l  endeavor. 
This direct ion would seem to y ie ld more immediately 
re l iab le  f indings, since i ts  start ing point is with 
more overt ly manifest, hence handleable, forms l ike  
grammatical elements rather than with meanings and 
experiential  complexes, which rely more on introspec- 
t ion and reports of introspection. Nevertheless, each 
direct ion does involve both the manifest and the ex- 
per ient ial  sides of language. 
3. This is a classical l i ngu is t i c  d is t inct ion.  A 
class in which morphemes are formally gathered is con- 
sidered open i f  i t  is quite large and easily augment- 
22 
able re lat ive  to other classes. A class is considered 
closed i f  i t  is re lat ive ly  small and fixed in member- 
ship. 
4. Also includable here are " lexical  complexes" l ike  
lodge a complaint or zero in on. Excluded are adverbs, 
which seem in al l  languages to derive from the other 
three open classes rather than from any open class 
of spec i f ica l ly  adverbial stems. 
5. Since the term "structure" has broad usage, we 
can help focus in on the intended sense with a l te r -  
native terms: "principles of organization", "pattern 
of del ineations", "schematic framework". 
6. The fact of dual lexical specif ications that can 
lead to conf l i c t  is a mojor issue that wi l l  be treated 
below under shi f ts .  Some grammatical elements also 
cross the l ine and makecontentful specif ications along 
with structural ones. This is a more tangential issue 
that can be touched on here. The crossing ranges from 
the incorporation of a single contentful notion to the 
orderly interweaving of contentful and sturctural 
notions. Thus, upon.in We rode/sailed/rushed upon the 
enemy incorporates the notion of 'a t tack ' ,  seemingly 
equivalent to the paraphrase ' into attack upon' The 
closed-class adverb tomorrow is equivalent to the 
phrase 'during the day that occurs next after  the day 
during which I am now speaking', an example of an 
organized inter lacing. 
7. One can note, for example, the ef fect  on one's 
internal cognitive representation in considering f i r s t  
the sentence I looked at the dog and then I looked at 
the dogs. The addition of the grammatical element -s  
has a major ef fect  on the delineational breakup of- -  
tp ~ut i t  v is~al ly- - the scene before the mind's eye. 
8. For example, augmentative and diminutive in f lec-  
t ions, insofar as they refer  to actual size, seem to 
specify size re lat ive ly  greater or lesser than the 
norm for an object. And grammatical elements spec- 
i fy ing distance ( l ike English way and just  appearing, 
e.g. ,  before up there) appear to specify notions of 
' fa r '  and 'near' that are re la t ive  to the current ': 
s i tuat ion.  
9. I t  is true that there are the tradi t ional  terms 
"semelfactive" and " i terat ive"  referr ing,  respectively, 
to one and more than one instant iat ion of an event. But 
there is no real equivalent tonumber: "aspect" in- 
cludes too much else about the temporal structure of 
action. And in any case, none of the t radi t ional  
terms refer  generally to both the dimensions. 
10. The mechanism actually resorted to by both English 
and French in many such cases, including that of tear, 
is the use of the plural ,  as in: 
( i )  TearLflowed through that channel in Hades. 
There seems t6 be a sequence of cognitiye oper- 
ations here in getting from a bounded to an unbounded 
quantity. Speculatively, the bounded quantity is 
f i r s t  treated as a uniplex ent i ty ,  i t  is then mult i -  
plexed, the resultant ent i t ies  are conceived as spa- 
t ia l l y  juxtaposed, and their  boundaries are las t ly  
effaced. 
11. The present category may be prone to confusion 
with the preceding one. Contributory here is the 
normal meaning range of continuous, which as easi ly 
covers 'boundlessness' as i t  does ' internal  seamless- 
ness' However, the two categories can vary indepen- 
dently. Thus, in the preceding section, the lexical  
examples given for unboundedness, water and sleep, hap- 
pened also to be interna l ly  continuous; but the same 
demonstration of unboundedness could have been made 
with internal ly  discrete examples l ike  timber and breathe 
12. Theredo exist  certain mechanisms for such reversal. 
Thus, taking an unbounded case, the continuity-spec- 
i fy ing word water can be shifted toward being cognized 
as discrete by the locution part ic les of water, as in: 
( i )  Water/Particles of water f i l l ed  the vessel. 
However, the grammatical complex used here does not 
d i rect ly  specify the sh i f t  but, l ike the one in Note I0, 
seems to involve a several-atage route of cognitive 
operations. 
13. For schematizing action along the one-dimensional 
time axis, an adaptation of the two-dimensional A, B, 
A, and B diagrams would be necessary--and can be 
readi ly visual~zed. 
14. The lexical  types for several of these intersec- 
t ions, i t  should be noted, do have tradit ional  terms. 
Thus, nominal forms of the a, A, and B types, respec- 
t i ve ly ,  have been called count nouns, col lect ive nouns, 
and mass nouns. And verbal forms of the a and B types, 
respectively, have been called punctual and durative 
verbs. The matrix presented here augments, systemat- 
izes, and generalizes the tradi t ional  notions. 
15. I t  may be considered an extension of the cate- 
gory of state-of-boundedness via the incorporation 
of the notion of uniplexity.  
16. This category might be considered an extension 
Or generalization of the "disposit ion of a quantity". 
Clearly, this category and the preceding f ive al l  belong 
together in treating the greater disposit ion 6f a 
quantity, but the relationships have not yet all  been 
worked out. 
17. Our main purpose here is to note the sh i f t  in 
structure type. The sh i f t  in content, which wi l l  
doubtless prove to have some regula~tv i s  not c lear ly 
understood at this point. 
18. A major function of perfect forms in language in- 
deed appears to be the one involved here. More par- 
t i cu la r ly ,  the perfect seems able to specify the temp 
oral counterpart of matter located within a bounded 
extent of space, as in ( i ) .  That is,  a sentence con- 
taining the perfect, as in ( i i ) ,  suggests a paraphrase 
l ike that in ( i i i ) ,  which is homologous with ( i ) :  
( i )  There were 5 aspirins on the table. 
( i i )  I have taken 5 aspirins in the last hour. 
( i i i )  There were 5 aspir in-takings in the last hour. 
(In support of this interpretat ion,  as pointed~.out o 
me by Peyton Todd, the perfect can be noted always to 
involve a temporal span bounded at both ends.) 
19. All three not ion- - ident i ty  of a quantity, portion- 
taking of a quantity, configuration of the port ion--  
are generally specified simultaneously.(or, "conflatedly" 
--see Talmy (1975)) by lexical  items that would f i t  
in the A/B row of (20). For example, (a) tear spec- 
i f i es  not only a certain shape of Quantum, but also the 
23 
material involved: lachrymal f luid. Such words gener- 
ally do not participate in an "NP of NP" construction 
- - l ike *a tear of milk--unless they in fact accede to 
a shift toward the type of word represented in drop. 
20. There is a foursome of apt terms that can be ap- 
plied to the two levels of synthesis in the two direc- 
tions of shift ,  as indicated in ( i) .  Employed here 
is the term "Figure" as i t  is used in my other work 
(Talmy 1978, 1976): 
( i) cluster: "composite Figure" 
trees: "multiple Figures" 
iceberg: "meta- 
Figure" 
2 halves: "component 
Figures" 
21. For the plural form oysters, the plural form si-  
phons is ambiguous as to whether there are one or more 
siphons per oyster. All the other combinations unam- 
biguously indicate the number of siphons per oyster. 
Thus, the exemplar form is always unambiguous in this 
reagard--one of its advantages over the full-complement 
form. This same arrangement holds through the l i s t .  
22. I have long wondered what the differences between 
each and ev__ve~Tmight be. One apparent difference shows 
u-phere. Each seems to be the exemplar counterpart 
of all the but not of all without the (*Each oyster. 
has a siphon makes a poor generic assertion). 
Ts not constrained in this way, though i t  does strike 
me as more comfortably the counterpar t of all without 
the. 
23. One more pair can be added to this l i s t  by adjoin- 
ing two complementary unpaired forms from two different 
languages. The English form some, as in some friends 
of mine, requires the plural and has no singular coun- 
terpart. The Italian form ~ualque, as in qualque amico 
mio, requires the singular and lacks a plural. 
24. It  seems l ikely that the language-related portions 
of the brain could have evolved to their present func- 
tions only in the presence of these already existing 
cognitive mechanisms and have incorporated their oper- 
ation. 
5. References 
Fillmore, C. 1975. An alternative to checklist theories 
of meaning. In: Berkeley studies in syntax and sem- 
antics, vol 1. University of California, Berkeley. 
. . . . .  . 1976. The need for a frame semantics within 
linguistics. In: Statistical methods in l inguistics. 
Stockholm: Skriptor. 
Talmy, L. 1975. Semantics and syntax of motion. In: 
Syntax and semantics, vol. 4. J. Kimball, ed. Acad- 
emic Press. 
. . . . .  . 1976. Semantic ausative types. In: Syntax 
and semantics, vol. 6. M. Shibatani, ed. Academic 
Press. 
. . . .  . 1977. Rubber-sheet cognition in language. In: 
Papers from the 13th regional meeting, Chicago 
l inguistic society. University of Chicago. 
. . . . .  . 1978. Figure and Ground in complex sentences. 
In: Universals of human language. Greenberg, Ferguson, 
Moravcsik, eds. Stanford Univers i ty .  
24 
