Knowledge Acquisition for Natural Language.Generation 
Ehud Re i te r  and Roma Rober tson  
Dept  o f  Comput ing  Science 
Univ of  Aberdeen,  Scot land  
{ere i te r ,  r rober ts}@csd,  abdn.  ac .  uk 
L ies l  Osman 
Dept  of  Medic ine and Therapeut ics  
Univ of Aberdeen,  Scot land  
I. osman@abdn, ac .  uk 
Abst ract  
We describe the knowledge acquisition (KA) tech- 
niques used to build the STOP system, especially 
sorting and think-aloud protocols. That is, we de- 
scribe the ways in which we interacted with domain 
experts to determine appropriate user categories, 
schemas, detailed content rules, and so forth for 
STOP. Informal evaluations of these techniques sug- 
gest that they had some benefit, but perhaps were 
most successful as a source of insight and hypothe- 
ses, and should ideally have been supplemented by 
other techniques when deciding on the specific rules 
and knowledge incorporated into STOP. 
1 In t roduct ion  
An important aspect of building natural-language 
generat ion  (NLG) systems is knowledge acquisition. 
This is the process of acquiring the specific knowl- 
edge needed in a particular application about the 
domain, the language used in the domain genre, 
the readers of the texts, and so forth. Such knowl- 
edge influences, for example, the system's content 
selection rules (whether represented asschemas, pro- 
duction rules, or plan operators); the system's mi- 
croplanning choice rules (lexicalisation, referring ex- 
pression generation, aggregation); and perhaps even 
the system's grammar (if a genre grammar is needed, 
as is tile case, for example, with weather eports). 
To date, knowledge acquisition for NLG systems 
has largely been based on corpus analysis, infor- 
mal interactions with experts, and informal feed- 
back from users (Reiter et al, 1997; Reiter and Dale, 
2000). For example, the PlanDoc developers (McK- 
eown et al, 1994) interviewed users to get a gen- 
eral understanding of the domain and user require- 
ments; asked a single expert to write some example 
output texts; and then analysed this corpus in vari- 
ous ways. Other KA techniques used in the past for 
building NLG systems include letting domain experts 
specify content rules in pseudo-code (Goldberg et al, 
1994) and ethnographic techniques such as observing 
doctors and patients in real consultations (Forsythe, 
1995). 
As part of the .?,ToP project (Reiter et al, 1999) to 
generate personalised smoking-cessation leaflets, we 
investigated using some of the structured KA tech- 
niques developed by the expert-system community 
(see, for example, (Scott et al, 1991)) for acquiring 
the knowledge needed by an NLG system. In this 
paper we summarise our experiences. Very briefly, 
our overall conclusion is that in STOP, structured KA 
was probably useful for getting insight into and for- 
mulating hypotheses about the knowledge needed by 
an NaG system. However, formulating detailed rules 
purely on the basis of such KA was not ideal, and it 
would have been preferable to use other information 
as well during this process, such as statistics about 
smokers and feedback from smoker evaluations of 
draft STOP leaflets. 
2 Background:  The  STOP System 
The STOP system generates personalised smoking- 
cessation leaflets, based on the recipient's responses 
to a questionnaire about smoking beliefs, concerns, 
and experiences. STOP leaflets consist of four A5 
pages, of which only the two inside pages are fully 
generated; an example of the inside pages of a STOP 
leaflet are shown in Figure 2. Internally, STOP is 
a fairly conventional shallow NLG system, with its 
main innovation being the processing used to control 
the length of leaflets (Reiter, 2000). STOP has been 
evaluated in a clinical trial, which compared cessa- 
tion rates among smokers who received STOP leaflets; 
smokers who received anon-personalised leaflet with 
similar structure and appearance to a STOP leaflet: 
and smokers who did not receive any leaflet (but did 
fill out a questionnaire). Unfortunately, we cannot 
discuss the results of the clinical trial in this paper I . 
One of the research goals of the STOP project was 
to explore the use of expert-system knowledge acqtfi- 
sition techniques in buitding anNLO system. These 
knowledge acquisition sessions were primarily car- 
ried out with the following experts: 
1Our medical colleagues intend to publish a paper about 
the clinical trial in a medical journal,  and have requested 
that we not publish anything about the results of the trial in 
a computing journal or conference until they have published 
in a medical journal. 
217 
o three doctors (two general practitioners, one 
consultant in Thoracic Medicine) 
o one psychologist pecialising in health informa- 
tion leaflets 
o one nurse 
None of these experts were paid for their time. We 
also did a small amount of KA with a (paid) graphic 
designer on layout and typography issues. 
2.1 Unusual  Aspects  o f  STOP f rom a KA 
"Perspective 
KA research in the expert-system community has 
largely focused on applications uch as medical di- 
agnosis, where (1) there is a single correct solution, 
and (2) the task being automated is one currently 
done by a human expert. STOP is a different ype 
of application in that (1) there are many possible 
leaflets which can be generated (and the system can- 
not tell which is best), and (2) no human currently 
writes personalised smoking-cessation leaflets (be- 
cause manually writing such leaflets is too expen- 
sive). Point (2) in particular was repeatedly em- 
phasised by the experts we worked with. The doc- 
tors and the nurse were experts on oral consultations 
with smokers, and the health psychologist was an ex- 
pert on writing non-personalised health information 
leaflets, but none of them had experience writing 
personalised smoking-cessation leaflets. 
Many NLG systems have similar characteristics. 
The flexibility of language means that there are al- 
most always many ways of communicating informa- 
tion and fulfilling communicative goals in a gen- 
erated text; in other words, there are many pos- 
sible texts that can be generated. Furthermore, 
while some synthesis tasks, such as configuration and 
scheduling, can be formalised as finding an optimal 
solution under a well-defined numerical evaluation 
function, this is difficult in NLG because of our poor 
understanding of how to computationally evaluate 
texts for effectiveness. 
With regard to human expertise, some NLG sys- 
tems do indeed generate documents, uch as weather 
reports and customer-service letters, which are cur- 
rently written by humans. But many systems are 
similar to STOP in that they generate texts - -  such as 
descriptions of software models (Lavoie et al, 1997) 
and customised escriptions of museum items (0ber- 
lander et al, 1998) - -  which are useful in principle 
but are not currently writ l}en by humans, perhaps 
because of cost or response-time issues. 
3 KA  Techn iques  Used  in STOP 
3.1 Sort ing 
Sorting is a standard KA technique for building up 
taxonomies. Experts in a sorting exercise are given 
a set of entities, and asked to divide the set into 
subsets, and 'think aloud' into a tape recorder as 
they do so. 
In STOP, we used sorting to build a classification of 
smokers. We started off with an initial classification 
which was motivated by the Stages of Change psy- 
chological theory (Prochaska nd diClemente, 1992): 
this divided smokers into the three categories of Pre- 
contemplators (not intending to quit anytime soon), 
Contemplators ( eriously considering quitting), and 
Preparers (definitely decided to quit, and soon). We 
wished to refine these categories, especially Precon- 
templator (which includes 67% of smokers in the Ab- 
erdeen area), and used sorting to do so. The basic 
exercise consisted of giving a doctor three sets of 
questionnaires (a set from Precontemplators; a set 
from Contemplators; and a set from Preparers), and 
asking him or her to subdivide each set into sub- 
sets. We repeated this exercise with three different 
doctors. 
The results of this exercise were complex, and the 
doctors were not in full agreement. After some anal- 
ysis, we proposed to them that we subdivide all three 
categories on the basis of desire to quit. Precon- 
templators in particular would be divided up into 
people who neither want nor intend to quit (Com- 
mitted Smokers); people who have mixed feelings 
about smoking but don't yet intend to quit (Clas- 
sic Precontemplators); and people who would like to 
quit but aren't intending to quit, typically because 
they don't think they'll succeed (Lacks Confidence). 
The three doctors agreed that this was a reasonable 
subcategorisation, and we proceeded on this basis. 
In particular, we operationalised this categorisation 
as follows: 
o We added the question Would you like to stop 
if it was easy to the questionnaire. People 
who answered No were put into the 'Commit- 
ted Smoker' category. For people who answered 
Not Sure or Yes, we looked at their decisional 
balance, that is the number of likes and dislikes 
they had about smoking, and placed them into 
Lacks Confidence if their dislikes clearly out- 
numbered their likes, and Classic Precontem- 
plator otherwise. 
We defined different high-level schemas for 
each of these categories; these schemas essen- 
tially specified which sections and (in some 
cases) paragraphs hould be included in the 
leaflet, but not tile detailed content of individ- 
ual paragraphs: Under these schemas; Commit- 
ted Smokers got short non-argumentative let- 
ters which gently reminded smokers of some 
of the drawbacks of smoking, and suggested 
some sources of information if the smoker ever 
changed his/her mind; Classic Precontempla- 
tors got letters which focused on the draw- 
backs of smoking; and Lacks Confidence smok- 
218 
ers got letters which focused on confidence- 
building and:deali.ng.~.with.'barriers to :quitting 
(such as addiction or fear of weight gain). The 
example leaflet shown in Figure 2, incidentally, 
is for a Lacks Confidence smoker. 
3.1.1 Eva luat ion  
After the clinical trial was underway, we attempted 
to partially evaluate the sorting-derived categories 
by doing a statisticalanalysis of the differences be- 
tween smokers in the groups. In other words, we 
hypothesised that if our categories were correct in 
distinguishing different types of smokers, then we 
should observe differences in characteristics such as 
addiction and confidence between the groups. Of 
course, this is not an ideal evaluation because it does 
not test the hypothesis that the different classes of 
smokers we proposed should receive different types 
of leaflets; but this is a difficult hypothesis to test 
directly. 
In any case, our analysis uggested that the smok- 
ers in each group did indeed have different character- 
istics. However, it also suggested that we might have 
done as well (in terms of creating subgroups with dif- 
ferent characteristics) by subcategorising purely on 
the Would you like to stop if it was easy question, 
and ignoring likes and dislikes about smoking. The 
analysis also suggested that it might have been use- 
ful to subcategorise on the basis of addiction, which 
we did not do. In fact during the sorting exercises 
the doctors did mention dividing into groups par- 
tially on the basis of the difficulty that individuals 
would have in quitting, but we did not implement 
this. 
The statistical analysis also suggested some ways 
of possibly improving the content schemas. For 
example, the analysis showed that the Committed 
Smoker category included many light smokers who 
probably smoked for social reasons; it might have 
been useful to specifically address this in the STOP 
leaflets ('quit now, before you become addicted'). 
In retrospect, then, the sorting exercise was use- 
ful in proposing ideas about how to divide Stages 
of Change categories, and in new questions to ask 
smokers. However, the process of .defining detailed 
category classification rules and content schemas 
would have benefited greatly from statistical data 
about smokers in our target region. In STOP we 
did not have such data until after the clinical trial 
had started (and smokers had returned their ques- 
tionnaires), by which time the system could not be 
changed. So it would have been difficult to base 
smoker classification on statistical smoker data in 
STOP; but certainly we would recommend such an 
approach in projects where good data is available at 
the outset. 
3.2 Th ink -a loud  Protocols 
- .The-detaited.coatent.-and" phrasing of :STOi :i letters 
was largely based on think-aloud example sessions 
with experts. In these sessions, health professionals 
would be given a questionnaire and asked to write 
a letter or leaflet for this person. They were also 
asked to 'think aloud' into a tape recorder while they 
did this, explaining their reasoning. Again this is a 
standard expert-system technique for KA. 
3.2.1 Example  
...... -k simpte-exainpte=~:the think-aloud process is as fol- 
lows. One of the doctors wrote a letter for a smoker 
who had tried to quit before, and managed to stop 
for several weeks before starting again. The doc- 
tor made the following comments in the think-aloud 
transcript: 
Has he tried to stop smoking before? Yes, 
and the longest he has managed to stop - -  
he has ticked the one week right up to three 
months and that's encouraging in that he 
has managed to stop at least once before, 
because it is always said that the people 
who have had one or two goes are more 
likely to succeed in the future. 
He also included the following paragraph in the 
letter that he wrote for this smoker: 
I see that you managed to stop smoking on 
one or two occasions before but have gone 
back to smoking, but you will be glad to 
know that this is very common and most 
people who finally stop smoking have had 
one or two attempts in the past before 
they finally succeed. What it does show is 
that you are capable of stopping even for a 
short period, and that means you are much 
more likely to be able to stop permanently 
than somebody who has never ever stopped 
smoking at all. 
After analysing this session, we proposed two 
rules: 
* IF (previous attempt o quit) THEN (message: 
more likely to succeed) 
e IF (previous attempt o quit) THEN (message: 
most people who quit have a few unsuccessful 
attempts first) 
The final system incorporated a imle (based Off . . . .  
several KA sessions, not just the above one) that 
stated that if the smoker had tried to quit before, 
then the confidence-building section of the leaflet 
(which is only included for some smoker categories, 
see Section 3A) should include a short message 
about previous attempts to quit. This message 
should mention length of previous cessation if this 
219 
was greater than one week; otherwise, it should men- 
tion recency of previous,,attempt if .this was within..:-- 
the past 6 months. The actual text generated from 
this rule in the example leaflet of Figure 2 is 
Although you don't feel confident hat you 
would be able to stop if you were to try, 
you have several things in your favour. 
? You have stopped before for more than 
a month. 
Note that the message (text)-produced by-the ac- 
tual STOP code is considerably simpler than the text 
originally written by the expert. This is fairly com- 
mon, as is simplifications in the logic used to decide 
whether to include a message in a leaflet or not. In 
some cases this is due to the expert having much 
more knowledge and expertise than the computer 
system (Reiter and Dale, 2000, pp 30-36). Con- 
sider, for example, the following extract from the 
same think-aloud session 
The other thing I notice is that he lives in 
\[Address\] which I would suspect is quite a 
few floors up and that he is probably get- 
ting quite puffy on the stairs . . .  and if he 
gets more breathless he'll end up being a 
prisoner in his own house because he'll be 
able to get down, but he won't be able to 
get up again 
This type of reasoning perhaps requires too much 
general 'world knowledge' about addresses, stairs, 
and breathlessness to be implementable in a com- 
puter system. 
3.2.2 Eva luat ion  
Afterwards, we attempted to partially evaluate the 
rules derived from think-aloud sessions by showing 
STOP leaflets to smokers and other smoking profes- 
sionals, and asking for comments. The results were 
mixed. In terms of content, some smokers found 
the content of the leaflets to be useful and appropri- 
ate for them, but others said they would have liked 
to see different types of information. For example, 
STOP leaflets did not go into the medical details of 
smoking (as none of the think-aloud expert-written 
letters contained such information), and while this 
seemed like the right choice for many smokers, a few 
smokers did say that they would have liked to see 
more medical information about smoking. Reactions 
to style were also mixed. For example, based on KA 
sessions we adopted a positive tone and did not try 
to scare smokers; and again this seemed right for 
most smokers, but some smokers said that a more 
'brutal' approach would be more effective for them. 
An issue which our experts (and other project 
members) disagreed on was whether leaflets should 
always use stmrt and simple sentences, or whether 
sentence length and complexity should be varied de- 
,pending, on the '  characteristics of'.the smoker. In  
the STOP implementation we decided to always use 
moderately simple sentences, and not vary sentence 
complexity for different users. After the clinical trial 
started, we performed a small experiment to test this 
hypothesis. In this experiment, we took a computer- 
generated leaflet and asked one expert (who be- 
lieved that short sentences with simple words should 
always be used) to revise the computer-generated 
.leaflet o .make it as.~easy to  readas  possible, and 
another expert (who believed that more complex 
sentences were sometimes appropriate, and such 
sentences could in some cases make letters seem 
friendlier and more understanding) to revise the 
computer-generated l aflet to make it friendlier and 
more understanding. The revisions made by the ex- 
perts were primarily microplanning ones (using NLG 
terminology) - -  that is, aggregation, ellipsis, lexical 
choice, and syntactic choice. We then showed the 
two expert-revised leaflets to 20 smokers and asked 
them which they preferred. The smokers essentially 
split 50-50 on this question (8 preferred the easy-to- 
read leaflet, 9 preferred the friendly-understanding 
leaflet, 3 thought both were the same). This sug- 
gests that in principle it indeed may be useful to 
vary microplanning choices for different leaflet re- 
cipients. We hope to further investigate this issue in 
future research. 
Overall, a general finding of the evaluation was 
that there were many kinds of variations (includ- 
ing whether to include detailed medical information, 
whether to adopt a 'positive' or 'brutal '  tone, and 
how complex sentences hould be) which were not 
performed by STOP but might have increased leaflet 
effectiveness if they had been performed. These 
types of variations were either not observed at all 
in the think-aloud sessions, or were observed in ses- 
sions with some experts but not others. 
In terms of KA methodology, perhaps the key les- 
son is similar to the one from the sorting sessions; the 
think-aloud KA sessions were very useful in suggest- 
ing ideas and hypotheses about STOP content and 
phrasing rules, but we should have used other in- 
formation sources, such as smoker evaluations and 
small comparison experiments, to help refine and 
test these rules. 
3.3 Other  techniques  
Some of the other KA techniques we tried are briefly 
described below. These had less influence on the 
system than the sorting and think-aloud exercises 
described above. 
3.3.1 Exper t  Rev is ion  
We gave experts leaflets produced by the STOP 
system and asked them to critique and revise 
them. This was especially useful in suggesting local 
220 
changes, such as what phrases or sentences hould Paragraph from Nov 97 KA exercise: 
be used to communicate .a.particular~message._ For  Finally, .if :yotL.~.do: make: an. ~atter~pt.t0 =stop,  you 
example, an early version of the STOP system used 
the phrase there are lots of good reasons for stop- 
ping. One of the experts commented uring a-re- 
vision session that the phrasing should be changed 
to emphasise that the reasons listed (in this particu- 
lar section of the STOP leaflet) were ones the smoker 
himself had selected in the questionnaire he filled 
out. This eventually led to the revised wording It 
is encouraging that.you have_ many.good~ reasons/or : 
stopping, which is in the first paragraph of the ex- 
ample leaflet in Figure 2. 
Revision was less useful in suggesting larger 
changes to the system, and after the clinical trial 
was underway, one of our experts commented that 
he might have been able to suggest larger changes 
if we had explained the system's reasoning to him, 
instead of just giving him a leaflet o revise. In other 
words, just as we asked experts to 'think-aloud' as 
they wrote leaflets, in order to understand their rea- 
soning, it would be useful if we could give the experts 
something like the computer-system 'thinking aloud' 
as it produced a leaflet, so they could understand its 
reasoning. 
3.3.2 Group act iv i t ies  
Because xperts often disagreed, we tried a variety of 
activities where a group of experts either discussed 
or collaboratively authored a leaflet, in the hopes 
that this would help resolve or at least clarify con- 
flicting opinions. This seemed to work best when we 
asked two experts to collaborate, and was less sat- 
isfactory with larger groups. Several experts com- 
mented that the larger (that is, more than 2-3 peo- 
ple) group sessions would have benefited from more 
structure and perhaps a professional facilitator. 
3.3.3 Smoker  feedback 
As mentioned in Section 3.2, we showed several 
smokers the leaflet STOP produced for them, and 
asked them to comment on the leaflet. In addi- 
tion to its role as an evaluation exercise for other 
KA techniques, we hoped that these sessions would 
in themselves give us ideas for leaflet content and 
phrasing rules. This was again less successful than 
we had hoped. Part of the problem was the smokers 
knew very little about STOP (unlike our expeits, who" 
were all familiar with the project), and-often made 
comments which were not useful for improving the 
system, such as \[ did stop .for t0 -days til-my -daugh- 
ter threw a wobbly and then I wanted a cigarette and 
bought some and after smoking for over 30 years I've 
tried acupuncture and hypnosis all to no avail. 
We were also concerned that most of our com- 
ments came from well-educated and articulate smok- 
ers (for example, university students). It was harder 
to get feedback-from less well-educated smokers (for 
could consider using nicotine patches. For people 
like yourself who smoke 10-20 cigarettes per day, 
patches double your chances of success if you are 
determined to stop. You can get more information 
on patches from your local pharmacist or GP. 
Paragraph from Feb 99 KA exercise: 
You. smoke 1.1=20 .cigare?tes..a d y,.:and, smokeyour -  
first cigarette within 30 minutes of waking. These 
facts suggest you are moderately addicted to nico- 
tine, and so you might get withdrawal symptoms for 
a time on stopping. It would be worth considering 
using nicotine patches when you stop; these double 
the chances of success for moderately heavy smokers 
such as yourself who make a determined attempt o 
stop smoking. Your pharmacist or GP can give you 
more information about this. 
Figure 1: Paragraphs written by the same doctor for 
the same smoker in different KA exercises 
example, single mothers living in public housing es- 
tates). This led to the worry that the feedback we 
were getting was not representative of the popula- 
tion of smokers as a whole. 
3.4 KA  and the Smoker  Quest ionna i re  
KA sessions also effected the smoker questionnaire 
(STOP'S input) as well as the text-generation com- 
ponent of the system. We started with an initial 
questionnaire which was largely based on a liter- 
ature review of previous projects, and then modi- 
fied it based on the information that experts used in 
KA sessions. For example, the original questionnaire 
asked people who had tried to quit before what quit- 
ting techniques they had used in their previous at- 
tempts. However, in KA sessions the experts eemed 
primarily interested in previous experiences with one 
particular technique, nicotine replacement (nicotine 
patches or gum); so we replaced the general question 
about previous quitting techniques with two ques- 
tions whichfocused on experiences with nicotine re- 
placement. 
..... 4 . .S tab i l i ty  o f  Knowledge  
In order to determine how stable the results of NiX 
sessions were, we asked one of our doctors to repeat 
in February 1999 a think-aloud exercise which he 
had originally done in November 1997. This exer- 
cise required examining and writing letters for two 
smokers. The letters and accompanying think-aloud 
from the 1999 exercise were somewhat different from 
221 
the letters and think-aloud from the 1997 exercise; in 
very general terms, the 19991etters_hadsimilar. co e 
content, but expressed the information differently, in 
a perhaps (this is very difficult to objectively mea- 
sure) more 'empathetic' manner. An extract from 
this experiment is shown in Figure 1. 
We asked a group of seven smokers to compare 
one of the 1999 letters with the corresponding letter 
from the 1997 exercise. Five preferred the 1999 let- 
ter; one preferred the 1997 letter; one thought both 
were similar. Written comments from the smokers 
suggested that they found the'1999 letter ~riendlier 
and more understanding than the 1997 letter. 
In summary, it appears that our experts may 
themselves have been learning how to write effec- 
tive smoking-cessation leaflets during the course of 
the STOP project. In retrospect this is perhaps not 
surprising iven that none of them had written such 
leaflets before the project started. 
5 Eva luat ion o f  KA 
An issue that arose several times during the project 
was whether we could formally evaluate the effec- 
tiveness of KA techniques, in an analogous way to 
the manner in which we formally evaluated the ef- 
fectiveness of STOP in a clinical trial which com- 
pared smoking-cessation rates in STOP and non- 
STOP groups. Unfortunately, it was not clear to us 
how to do this; how can one evaluate a develop- 
ment methodology such as KA? In principle, perhaps 
it might be possible to ask two groups to develop 
the same system, one using KA and one not, and 
then compare the effectiveness of the resultant sys- 
tems (perhaps using a STOP-like clinical trial), and 
also engineering issues such as development cost and 
time-to-completion. This would be an expensive n- 
deavour, however, as it would be necessary to pay 
for two development efforts. Also, the size of a clin- 
ical trial depends on the size of the effect it is trying 
to validate, and a clinical trial which compared (for 
example) the effectiveness of two kinds of computer- 
generated smoking-cessation leaflet might need to 
be substantially larger (and hence more expensive) 
than a clinical trial that tested the effectiveness of a 
computer-generated l aflet against a no-leaflet con- 
trol group. 
An even more fundamental problem is that in or- 
der for such an experiment to produce meaningful re- 
sults, it would be necessary to control for differences 
-in skill, expertise, enthusiasm.,-and \]suck between ~the 
development teams. It might be necessary to re- 
peat this exercise several times, perhaps randomly 
choosing which development team will use KA and 
which will not. Of course, repeating the experiment 
N times will increase the total cost by a factor of N. 
As we did not have the resources to do the above, 
we elected instead to focus on the smaller 'informal' 
evaluations described above. We also conducted a 
? small. :experiment where we asked, a"~gr~ottp :of-five 
smoking-cessation counsellors to compare lea/lets 
produced by an early prototype of STOP with leaflets 
produced by the system used in the  clinical trial. 
60% of the counsellors thought he clinical trial sys- 
tem's leaflets were more likely to be effective, with 
the other 40% thinking the two systems produced 
letters of equal effectiveness. This suggests (al- 
though does not prove) that the development ef- 
fort behind the .clinical_ trial system .improved leaflet 
effectiveness. However, we cannot deterrnifie how 
much of the improvement was due to KA and how 
much was due to other development activities. 
6 Cur rent  Work  
We are currently in the process of analysing the re- 
sults of the clinical trial (which we cannot discuss in 
this paper), to see if it sheds any light on the effec- 
tiveness of KA. This is not straightforward because 
the clinical trial was not designed to give feedback 
about KA, but there nevertheless seem to be some 
useful lessons here, which we hope to report in sub- 
sequent publications. 
We also are applying the KA techniques used in 
STOP to a project in a different domain, to see how 
domain-dependent our findings are. A first attempt 
to do this, in a domain which involved giving advice 
to university students, failed because the relevant 
expert, who initially seemed very enthusiastic, did 
not give us enough time for KA. This highlights the 
practical observation that KA requires a substantial 
amount of time from the expert(s), who must either 
be paid or otherwise motivated to participate in the 
sessions. In this case we could not pay the expert, 
but instead tried to motivate him by pointing out 
that a successful system would be useful to him in 
his job; this was not in the end sufficient motivation 
to get the expert to make time for KA in his (busy) 
schedule. 
After the above failure we switched to another do- 
main, giving feedback to adults who are taking basic- 
literacy courses. In this domain, we are working with 
a company, Cambridge Training and Development, 
which is paying experts for their time when appro- 
priate. This work is currently in progress. One inter- 
esting KA idea which has already emerged from this 
work is observing tutors working with students (we 
did not in STOP observe doctors discussing smok- 
ing with-their.patients); this~is.similar to the ethno- 
graphic techniques uggested by Forsythe (1995). 
7 Conc lus ion  
The expert system community believes that it is 
worth interacting with experts using structured KA 
techniques, instead of just informally chatting to 
them or non-interactively studying what they do (as 
222 
happens in a traditional corpus analysis). We be- 
lieve 'structured KA techniques ran also:he, useful in 
developing NLG systems, but they are not a panacea 
and need to be used with some caution. 
In retrospect, KA was probably most effective in 
STOP when used as a source of hypotheses about 
smoker categories, detailed content rules, the phras- 
ing of messages, and so forth. But ideally these hy- 
potheses hould have been tested and refined using 
statistical data about smokers and small-scale val- 
uation exercises . . . . .  :.- : ., 
Of course, a key problem in STOP was that we 
were trying to produce texts (personalised smoking- 
cessation leaflets) which were not currently produced 
by humans; and hence there were perhaps no real hu- 
man experts on producing STOP texts. It would be 
interesting to see if structured KA techniques were 
more effective for developing systems which pro- 
duced texts that humans do currently write, such 
as weather forecasts and instructional texts. 
Acknowledgements 
Many thanks to James Friend, Scott Lennox, Mar- 
tin Pucchi, Margaret Taylor, and all of the other 
experts who worked with us. Thanks also to Yaji 
Sripada and the anonymous reviewers for their very 
helpful comments. This research was supported 
by the Scottish Office Department of Health un- 
der grant K/OPR/2/2/D318,  and the Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research Council under grant 
GR/L48812. 
References  
Diana Forsythe. 1995. Using ethnography in the 
design of an explanation system. Expert Systems 
with Applications, 8(4):403-417. 
Eli Goldberg, Norbert Driedger, and Richard Kit- 
tredge. 1994. Using natural-language process- 
ing to produce weather forecasts. IEEE Expert, 
9(2):45-53. 
Benoit Lavoie, Owen Rainbow, and Ehud Re- 
iter. 1997. Customizable descriptions of object- 
oriented models. In Proceedings of the Fifth Con- 
ference on Applied Natural-Language Processing 
(ANLP-1997), pages 253-256. 
Kathleen McKeown, Karen Kukich, and James 
Shaw. 1994. Practical issues in automatic doc- 
ument generation. In Proceedings of the Fourth 
, Conference on Applied Natural-Language Process- 
in9 (ANLP-1994), pages '7-14. 
Jon Oberlander, Mick O'Donnell, Alistair Knott, 
and Chris Mellish. 1998. Conversation i the mu- 
seum: experiments in dynamic hypermedia with 
the intelligent labelling explorer. New Review of 
Hypermedia nd Multimedia, 4:11-32. 
James Prochaska and Carlo diClemente. 1992. 
Stages of Change in the Modification of Problem 
? Beh'aviors. Sage. 
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Nat- 
ural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ehud Reiter, Alison Cawsey, Liesl Osman, and 
Yvonne Roff. 1997. Knowledge acquisition for 
content selection. In Proceedings of the Sixth Eu- 
ropean Workshop on Natural Language Genera- 
tion, pages 117-126, Duisberg, Germany. 
.Ehud,  Reiter~ :.Roma .Robertson,~ and Liesl Os- 
man. 1999. Types of knowledge required to per- 
sonalise smoking cessation letters. In Werner 
Horn et al, editors, Artificial Intelligence and 
Medicine: Proceedings of AIMDM-1999, pages 
389-399. Springer-Verlag. 
Ehud Reiter. 2000. Pipelines and size constraints. 
Computational Linguistics. Forthcoming. 
A. Carlisle Scott, Jan Clayton, and Elizabeth Gib- 
son. 1991. A Practical Guide to Knowledge Ac- 
quisition. Addison-Wesley. 
" 3 z2~ 
m 
*,~, ; ?;:~ 
~ : 
E B  
0 
E 
m m  
0 
E 
.C~.. 
~.~ ,~ 
_~ ~8 8 BE= o=~_- 
?E  8.~o 
~- ,~ ~ = ~ o ~  ~_~ o_m 
"-- . ; : 3 0 3 3  ~ o~~ o~Eo~o 
__ .~ ~ ~,~ >,.~_ 00 
0 
> 
"e) o 
-~o  
= 30. -  -~ t,/~ I--. e .~  oo- , - - -  
? ~o  ~_  . ~  ~ . E ~  o~. . . .=_a .o  ' o~ 
",,,,I2, E ,  . . i : ,E :  . "  ' : ? ">  "(D" "~0'-~ " "~ 'I~311"\[-" "O~ ~> E E '  '~  ~ >,~ .T:: ~ ? "~ ? ~. - . -~m o =o 
e"~ = ? - - ' . o  ._o E~ ~- ,-., 
~- 0 9 O. .C:  ..: ~ e E ? 
.~_ E ~ 0 :~., 0 0 -E  E L.. ~ ~ ~" ~- ~ c: 
~ 0 ~.u ,~.-, ~ -ID 0 -0  '~  (D E ~ ::3 '~ o .~E.c  o 
o E c >,~.  >,~0 E~ o-o  = mE = ~0 =08. ~ ._O~o_O?= 
,~.~ 0 o '~ =~'~ ~ ~' -  o o..~ ~ ~= 
~_~ o_o '~ o 
? ~ ,oE~.o  ~ ~ = - -  . . . . .  0 
. -~ .^~o~ ~o,?~'~ ~ ? ~ = 
o ~o ? o "e~=~.?:~ ~,e ,o -~=~ = ~-  ~ 
T~8 @ @ ~ = E~O O "-- 
..E O O ~ ~ 
=Oo ~,  5~o-  _~ ' -  - _.m E ~ ~  = .~ 
X 0 ~Y ,..~. >., >'~, > 0 
"-- c0 -~  >' .0 -~ 0 0 0  E 0 
d.o .~ c~ ~ x ~  
.~ ~ ~ E~o~=-  ~ ~ 
.~_.~_ >,F= o .~_ F=' F'~" . ~ _
: 0~-  ~ 
? ~ ~ . 
Noo  
~ . ~  .... 
0 L~ 9_~a D ~ E' E.-~ ~ > 0 
0 o ~ _~E '~-  ~ "0 
~ O O CO > oE~ . -~  >.~ 
~>~.~ = , ~  o 
-oo  tO 
3 ~. .E  J3 
0 o ~ -o ~ = ~- O 
0 E >-  0_>.~ >-  
.= ~ 
O O ~ O_ :3 
~ ~ o 
~~ ~ ~ ~-~- 
' ~ "0  0 I:: ..~ 
? -~ ~ 
o &o  _ 8 ~- 
"0---- ~ 0 >,  
- ? ?~o ~ 
~.  .~  
? ~ O. .0  0..  
0 O3 E -~ 0"0  ~ ? 0 0 69  
~ ~..  ~ :::3 >., O ~ ~ ~ 
O > > EL"~ 
0 '.u ,r- .,C ..,~. 
~-  = 
Figure 2: Inside pages of an examplo STOP leaflet 
224 
