Concept Identif ication and Presentat ion in the Context  of  
Technical Text Summarizat ion 
Horac io  Sagg ion*and Guy  Lapa lme 
Ddpartement d' Informatique et Recherche Op~rationnelle 
Universit~ de Montreal 
CP 6128, Succ Centre-Ville 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3C 3J7 
Fax: +1-514-343-5834 
{sagg ion ,  lapalme}@iro,  umontrea l ,  ca 
Abst rac t  
We describe a method of text summarization 
that produces indicative-informative abstracts 
/ 
for technical papers. The abstracts are gener- 
ated by a process of conceptual identification, 
topic extraction and re-generation. We have 
carried out an evaluation to assess indicative- 
ness and text acceptability relying on human 
judgment. The results o far indicate good per- 
formance in both tasks when compared with 
other summarization technologies. 
1 In t roduct ion  
We have specified a method of text summa- 
rization which produces indicative-informative 
abstracts for technical documents. The method 
was designed to identify the "topics" of a 
document and present them in an indicative 
abstract. Eventually, they can be elaborated in  
.specific ways. 
In Figure 1, we present an indicative abstract 
for the document "Facilitating designer-. 
? customer communication i the World Wide 
Web" (Internet Research: Electronic Net- 
working Applications and Policy, Vol 8, Issue 
5,1998) produced with our implementation 
of this method. The abstract includes a list 
of topics which are terms appearing in the 
automatic abstract (e.g. WebShaman)  or 
obtained from the source document by the 
process of term expansion (e.g. WWW 
technique obtained from technique).  It also 
* The first author is supported by Agence Canadienne 
de D~veloppement International (ACDI) and FundaciSn 
Antorchas (A-13671/1-47), Argentin a. He was previ- 
ously supported by Ministerio de EducaciSn de la Naci6n 
de la Repfiblica Argentina (ResoluciSn 1041/96) and De- 
partamento de ComputaciSn, Facultad e Ciencias Exac- 
tas y Naturales, UBA, Argentina. 
includes term elaborations which can be used 
to answer specific questions about the topics 
such as what  is topic? how top ic  is used? 
who developed topic? and what  are the  
advantages of topic? 
. 
In this paper, we will describe how we dealt 
with the problem of content selection and 
presentation and how we have evaluated our 
method of text summarization. 
2 Text  Summar izat ion  
The process of producing a summary from 
a source text consists of the following steps: 
(i) the interpretation of the text; (ii) the 
extraction of the relevant information which 
ideally includes the "topics" of the source; (iii) 
the condensation of the extracted information 
and construction of a summary representation; 
and (iv) the presentation of the summary rep- 
resentation to the reader in natural anguage. 
While some techniques exist for producing 
summaries for domain independent texts 
(Luhn, 1958; Marcu, 1997) it seems that 
domain specific texts require domain specific 
techniques (DeJong, 1982; Paice and Jones, 
1993). In our case, we are dealing with techni- 
cal articles which are the result of the complex 
process of scientific inquiry that starts with 
the. identification of a knowledge problem and 
eventually culminates with the discovery of 
an answer to it. Even if authors of technical 
articles write about several concepts in their 
articles, not all of them are topics. In order to 
address the issue of topic identification, content 
selection and presentation, we have studied 
alignments (manually produced) of sentences 
from professional bstracts with sentences from 
Abst ract  In t roduc ing  the Topics 
! 
! 
Virtual prototyping is a technique which has been suggested for use in, for example, telecommuni- 
cation product development asa high-end technology to achieve a quick digital model that could 
be used in the same way as a real prototype. Presents the design rationale of WebShaman, starting 
from the concept design perspective by introducing a set of requirements to support communication 
via a concept model between i dustrial designer and a customer. In the article, the authors uggest 
that virtual prototyping in collaborative use between designers i a potential technique to facilitate 
design and alleviate the problems created by geographical distance and complexities in the work 
between different parties. The technique, was implemented in the VRP project, allows compo- 
nent level manipulation ofa virtual prototype in a WWW (World Wide Web) browser. The user 
services, the software architecture, and the techniques ofWebShaman were developed iteratively 
during the fieldwork in order to illustrate the ideas and the feasibility of the system. The server is 
not much different from the other servers constructed tosupport synchronous collaboration. 
Identif ied Topics: 3D mode l  - V IRP I  p ro jec t  - WWW - WW-vV techn ique  - WebShaman - 
CAD sys tem - conceptua l .mode l -  cus tomer  - ob jec t -o r iented  mode l -  p roduct  - p roduct  
concept  - p roduct  des ign  - requ i rement  - s imu la t ion  mode l  - smar t  v i r tua l  p ro to type  
- so f tware  component  - sys tem-  techn ique  - techno logy  - use  - v i r tua l  component -  
v i r tua l  p ro to type  - v i r tua l  p ro to type  sys tem-  v i r tua l  p ro to typ ing  
I n fo rmat ion  about  the  Top ics  
An example of a conceptual model, a pen-shaped 'w i re less  user  in ter face  for a mobile 
telephone. 
A v i r tua l  p ro to type  is a computer -based  s imulat ion  of a prototype or a subsystem with a 
degree of functional realism, comparable to that of a physical prototype. 
A computer system implementing the high-end aspects  o f  v i r tua l  prototyping has been 
deve loped in the VRP project (VRP, 1998) at VTT Electronics, in Oulu, Finland. 
The two-and-a-half-year VIRPI pro jec t  cons is ts  o f  th ree  parts. 
Nowadays, CAD (computer -a ided  des ign)  sys tems are  used  as an aid in industrial, mechan- 
ical and electronics design for the specification and deve lopment  o f  a product .  
A v i r tua l  p ro to type  sys tem can  be  used  for concept testing in the early phase of product 
development. 
Figure h Indicative Abstract, Topics and Topic Elaboration 
I 
I 
i 
l 
i 
H 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
source documents. One of the alignments is 
presented in Table 1. The first column contains 
the information of the professional abstract. 
The second and third columns contain the infor- 
mation from the source document that matches 
the sentences of the professional bstract, and 
its location in the source document. We have 
produced 100 of these tables containing a 
total of 309 sentences of professional bstracts 
aligned with 568 sentences ofsource documents. 
These alignments allowed us to identify on 
one hand, concepts, relations and types of 
information usually conveyed in abstracts; and 
on the other hand, valid transformations in 
the source in order to produce a compact and 
coherent ext. The transformations include 
verb transformation, concept deletion, concept 
reformulation, structural deletion, parenthetical 
deletion, clause deletion, acronym expansion, 
2 
Professional  Abst ract  
Presents a more efficient 
Distributed Breadth-First 
Search algorithm for an 
asynchronous communication 
network. 
Source Document  
Efficient distributed breadth-first earch algo- 
rithm. 
In this paper we have presented a more effi- 
cient distributed algorithm which construct a
breadth-first search tree in an asynchronous 
communication network 
P /T  
-/Title 
Lst/- 
Presents a model and gives an First we present a model and give overview of lst/- 
overview of related research, related research. 
Analyzes the complexity of the algo- We analyse the complexity of our algorithm, lst/- 
rithm, and gives some examples of per- and give some examples of performance on 
formance on typical networks, typical networks. 
Table 1: LISA Abstract 1955 - Source Document: "Efficient distributed breadth-first search algo- 
rithm." S.A.M. Makki. Computer Communications, 19(8) Jul 96, p628-36. 
abbreviation, merge and split. In our corpus, 
89% of the sentences from the professional 
abstracts included at least one transformation. 
Results of the corpus study are detailed in 
(Saggion and Lapalme, 1998) and (Saggion and 
Lapalme, 2000). 
We have identified a total of 52 different 
types of information (coming from the corpus 
and from technical articles) for technical text 
summarization that we use to identify some of 
the main themes. These types include: the 
explicit topic of the document, the  situa- 
tion, the  ident i f icat ion of the  problem, the  
' identif ication of the  solution, the  research 
goal ,  the  explicit topic of a section, the  
? authors '  deve lopment ,  he  inferences, the  
descr ipt ion of a topical entity, the  def init ion 
? of a topical entity, the  re levance of a topical 
enthy, the  advantages,  etc. Information 
types are classified as indicative or informative 
depending on the type of abstract they con- 
tribute to (i.e. the  topic of a document is 
indicative while the  descr ipt ion of a topical 
entity is informative). Types of information are 
identified in sentences of the source document 
using co-occurrence of concepts and relations 
and specific linguistic patterns. Technical 
articles from different domains refer to specific 
concepts and relations (diseases and treatments 
in Medicine, atoms and chemical reactions 
in Chemistry, and theorems and proofs in 
Mathematics). We have focused on concepts 
and relations that are common across domains 
such as problem, solution, research need, 
experiment, relevance, researchers~ etc. 
3 Text  In terpretat ion  
Our approach to text summarization is based 
on a superficial analysis of the source docu- 
ment and on the implementation f some text 
re-generation techniques such as merging of top- 
ical information, re-expression of concepts and 
acronym expansion. The article (plain text 
in English without mark-up) is segmented in 
main units (title, author information, author 
abstract, keywords, main sections and refer- 
ences) using typographic information and some 
keywords. Each unit is passed through a bi- 
pos statistical tagger. In each unit, the sys- 
tem identifies titles, sentences and paragraphs, 
and then, sentences are interpreted using finite 
state transducers identifying and packing lin- 
guistic constructions and domain specific con- 
structions. Following that, a conceptual dictio- 
nary that relates lexical items to domain con- 
cepts and relations is used to associate seman- 
tic tags to the different structural elements in 
the sentence. Subsequently, terms (canonical 
form of noun groups), their associated semantic 
(head of the noun group) and theirs positions 
are extracted from each sentence and stored in 
an AVL tree (te~ t ree)  along with their fre- 
quency. A conceptual  index is created which 
specifies to which particular type of informa- 
tion each sentence could contribute. Finally, 
terms and words are extracted from titles and 
3 
stored in a list (the top ica l  s t ructure)  and 
acronyms and their expansions are recorded. 
3.1 Content  Select ion 
In order to represent types of information we use 
templates. In Table 2, we present he Topic 
of the  Document ,  Topic of the  Sect ion 
and Signal ing In fo rmat ion  templates. Also 
presented are some indicative and informative 
patterns. Indicative patterns contain variables, 
syntactic constructions, domain concepts and 
relations. Informative patterns also include one 
specific position for the topic under considera- 
tion. Each element of the pattern matches one 
or more elements of the sentence (conceptual, 
syntactic and lexical elements match one ele- 
ment while variables match zero or more). 
3.1.1 Ind icat iveness  
The system considers entences ~hat were iden- 
tified as carrying indicative information (their 
position is found in the conceptual  index). 
Given a sentence? S and a type of information 
T the system verifies if the sentence matches 
some of the patterns associated with type T. 
For each matched pattern, the system extracts 
information from the sentence and instantiates 
a template of type T. For example, the 
Content slot of the prob lem ident i f icat ion 
template is instantiated with all the sentence 
? :(avoiding references, structural elements and 
parenthetical expressions) while the What slot 
'of the topic of the  document  template is 
instantiated with a parsed sentence fragment 
? to the left or to the right of the make known 
relation depending on the attribute voice of the 
verb (active vs. passive). All the instantiated 
templates constitute the Indicative Data Base 
(IDB). 
The system matches the topical structure 
with the topic candidate slots from the IDB. 
The system selects one template for each term 
in that structure: the one with the greatest 
weight (heuristics are applied if there are more 
than one). The selected templates constitute 
the indicative content and the terms ap- 
pearing in the topic candidate slots and their 
expansions constitute the potential topics 
of the document. Expansions are obtained 
looking for terms in the term tree sharing 
the semantic of some terms in the indicative 
4 
content.  
The ind icat ive  content  is sorted using 
positional information and the following con- 
ceptual order: s i tuat ion ,  need for research,  
problem,  solut ion, ent i ty  in t roduct ion ,  
topical  in format ion,  goal of concep- 
tua l  ent i ty,  focus of conceptua l  ent i ty,  
methodo log ica l  aspects,  inferences and 
s t ruc tura l  in format ion.  Templates of the 
same type are grouped together if they ap- 
peared in sequence in the list. The types 
considered in this process are: the  topic, 
sect ion topic and s t ruc tura l  in format ion.  
The sorted templates constitute the text  plan. 
3.1.2 Informativeness 
For each potential: topic and sentence where 
it appears (that information is found on the 
term tree) the system verifies if the sentence 
contains an informative marker (conceptual 
index) and satisfies an informative pattern. If 
so, the potential topic is considered a topic 
of the document and a link will be created be- 
tween the topic and the sentence which will be 
part of the informative abstract. 
4 Content  P resentat ion  
Our approach to text generation is based 
on the regularities observed in the corpus 
of professional abstracts and so, it does not 
implement a general theory of text generation 
by computers. Each element in the text  p lan 
is used to produce a sentence. The structure of 
the sentence depends on the type of template. 
The information about the s i tuat ion,  the  
problem, the need for research,  etc. is 
reported as in the original document with few 
modifications (concept re-expression). Instead 
other types require additional re-generation: 
for the topic of the  document  template the 
generation procedure is as follows: (i) the verb 
form for the predicate in the Pred icate  slot 
is generated in the present  tense (topical 
information is always reported in present 
tense), 3rd person of s ingu lar  in ac t ive  
voice at the beginning of the sentence; 
(ii) the parsed sentence fragment from the N'hat 
slot is generated in the middle of the sentence 
(so the appropriate case for the first element 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
Topic of the Document  
topic Type: 
Id: 
Predicate: 
Where: 
Who: 
What: 
Position: 
Topic candidates: 
Weight: 
integer identifier 
instance of make known 
instance of {research paper, study, work, research} 
instance of{research paper, author,  study, work, research,  none} 
parsed sentence fragment 
section and sentence id
list of terms from the What filler 
number 
Topic o f  Sect ion  
Type: 
Id: 
Predicate:  
Section: 
Argument: 
Position: 
Topic candidates: 
Weight: 
sec_desc 
integer identifier 
instance of make known 
instance of paper component 
parsed sentence fragment 
section and sentence id
list of terms from the Argument filler 
number 
Type: 
Id: 
Predicate : 
Structural : 
Argument : 
Po s it ion: 
Topic candidates : 
Weight : 
structure-2 
integer identifier 
instance of show graphical material 
instance of structural element 
parsed sentence fragment 
section and sentence id 
list of terms from the Argument filler 
number 
Signaling 
(indicative) 
Topic  (indica- 
tive) 
SKIP1 + s t ructura l  + SKIP2 + show graphica l ly  + ARGUMENT + eos 
noun group + author + make known + prepos i t ion + research paper + 
DESCRIPT ION + eos 
Author 's  Goal SKIP1 + goal of author + def ine + GOAL + eos 
(indicative) 
Goal of SKIP  + goal + preposi t ion + TOPIC + def ine + GOAL + eos 
TOPIC (in- 
formative) 
Definition SKIP  + TOPIC + def ine + noun group 
of TOPIC 
(informative) 
Table 2: Templates and Patterns. 
has, to be generated); and (iii) a full stop is 
generated. This schema of generation avoids 
the formulation of expressions like "X will be 
presented", "X have been presented" or "We 
have presented here X" which are usually found 
on source documents but which are awkward 
in the context of the abstract ext-type. Note 
that each type of information prescribes its 
own schema of generation. 
Some elements in the parsed sentence frag- 
ment require re-expression while others are 
presented in "the words of the author." If the 
system detects an acronym without expansion 
in the string it would expand it and record that 
situation in order to avoid repetitions. Note 
that as the templates contain parsed sentence 
fragments, the correct punctuation has to 
be re-generated. For merged templates the 
generator implements the following patterns 
of production: if n adjacent emplates are to 
be presented using the same predicate, only 
one verb will be generated whose argument is 
the conjunction of the arguments from the n 
templates. If the sequence of templates have 
no common predicate, the information will 
be presented as a conjunction of propositions. 
These patterns of sentence production are 
exemplified in Table 3. 
The elaboration of the topics is presented 
upon reader's demand. The information is pre- 
sented in the order of the original text. The in- 
formative abstract is the information obtained 
by this process as it is shown in Figure 1. 
5 L imi ta t ions  o f  the  Approach  
Our approach is based on the empirical ex- 
amination of abstracts published by second 
services. In our first study, we examined 100 
abstracts and source documents in order to 
deduce a conceptual and linguistic model for 
the task of summarization of technical articles. 
Then, we expanded the corpus with 100 more 
items in order to validate the model. We 
believe that the concepts, relations and types 
.of information identified account for interesting 
,phenomena appearing in the corpus and con- 
stitute a sound basis for text summarization. 
'Nevertheless, we have identified only a few 
? linguistic expressions used in order to express 
-particular elements of the conceptual model 
(241 domain verbs, 163 domain nouns, 129 
adj.ectives , 174 indicative patterns, 87 informa- 
tive patterns). This is because we are mainly 
concerned with the development of a general 
method of automatic abstracting and the task 
of constructing such linguistic resources i time 
consuming as recent work have shown (Minel 
et al, 2000). 
The implementation f our method relies? on 
State-of-the-art techniques in natural anguage 
processing including noun and verb group iden- 
tification and conceptual tagging. The inter- 
preter relies on the output produced by a shal- 
low text segmenter and on a statistical POS- 
tagger. Our prototype only analyses entences 
for the specific purpose of text summarization 
and implements some patterns of generation ob- 
served in the corpus. Additional analysis could 
be done on the obtained representation to pro- 
duce better esults. 
6 Re la ted  Work  
(Paice and Jones, 1993) have already addressed 
the issue of content identification and expression 
in technical summarization using templates, but 
while they produced indicative abstracts for a 
specific domain, we are producing domain inde- 
pendent indicative-informative abstracts. Being 
designed for one specific domain, their abstracts 
are fixed in structure while our abstracts are 
dynamically constructed. Radev and McKeown 
(1998) also used instantiated templates, but in 
order to produce summaries of multiple docu- 
ments in one specific domain. They focus on 
the generation of the text while we are address- 
ing the overall process of automatic abstracting. 
Our concern regarding the presentation of the 
information is now being addressed by other re- 
searchers as well (Jing and McKeown, 1999). 
7 Eva luat ing  Content  and  Qua l i ty  in  
Text  Summar izat ion  
Abstracts are texts used in tasks such as assess- 
ing the content of the document and deciding 
if the source is worth reading. If text summa- 
rization systems are designed to fulfill those re- 
quirements, the generated texts have to be eval- 
uated according to their intended function and 
its quality. The quality and success of human 
produced abstracts have already been addressed 
in the literature (Grant, 1992; Gibson, 1993) us- 
ing linguistic criteria such as cohesion and co- 
herence, thematic structure, sentence structure 
and lexical density. But in automatic text sum- 
marization, this is an emergent research topic. 
(Minel et al, 1997) have proposed two meth- 
ods of evaluation addressing the content of the 
abstract and its quality. For content evalua- 
tion, they asked human judges to classify sum- 
maries in broad categories and also verify if 
the key ideas of source documents are appropri- 
ately expressed in the Summaries. For text qual- 
ity, they asked human judges to identify prob- 
lems such as dangling anaphora nd broken tex- 
tual segments and also to make subjective judg- 
ments about readability. In the context of the 
TIPSTER program, (Firmin and Chrzanowski, 
6 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Re-Generated Sentences Sentences from Source Documents 
Illustrates the principle of virtual prototyping and 
the different echniques and models required. 
Presents the mechanical and electronic design o\] 
the robot harvester including all subsystems, 
namely, fruit localisation module, harvesting arm 
and gripper-cutter as well as the integration of 
subsystems and the specific mechanical design of 
the picking arm addressing the reduction of 
undesirable dynamic effects during high velocity 
operation. 
Shows configuration of the robotic fruit harvester 
Agribot and schematic view of the detaching tool. 
PAWS (the programmable automated welding sys- 
tem) was designed to provide an automated means 
of planning, controlling, and performing critical 
welding operations for improving productivity and 
quality. 
Describes HuDL (local autonomy) in greater 
detail; discusses ystem integration and the 1MA 
(the intelligent machine architecture); and also 
gives an example implementation. 
Figure 1 Virtual prototyping models and techniques 
illustrates the principle of virtual prototyping and the 
different techniques and models required. 
After a brief introduction, we present the mechanical 
and electronic design of the robot harvester includ- 
ing all subsystems, namely, fruit localisation module, 
harvesting arm and gripper-cutter aswell as the inte- 
gration of subsystems. 
Throughout this work, we present the specific mechan- 
ical design of the picking arm addressing the reduction 
of undesirable dynamic effects during high velocity op- 
eration. 
The final prototype consists of two jointed harvesting 
arms mounted on a human guided vehicle as shown 
schematically in Figure 1 Configuration ofthe robotic 
. fruit' harvester Agribot. 
Schematic representation f the operations involved in 
the detaching step can be seen in Figure 5 Schematic 
view of the detaching tool and operation. 
PAWS was designed to provide an automated means of 
planning, controlling, and performing critical welding 
operations for improving productivity and quality. 
Section 2 describes HuDL in greater detail and section 
3 discusses system integration and the IMA. 
An example implementation is given in section 4 and 
section 5 contains the conclusions. 
Table 3: Re-Generated Sentences 
1999) and (Mani et al, 1998) also used a cat -  
.egorization task using TREC topics. For text 
quality, they addressed subjective aspects uch 
? as the length of the summary, its intelligibility 
and its usefulness. We have carried out an eval- 
? uation of our summarization method in order to 
assess the function of the abstract and its text 
quality. 
7.1 Exper iment  
We compared abstrac?s produced by our 
method with abstracts produced by Mi- 
crosoft'97 Summarizer and with others 
published with source documents (usually au- 
thor abstracts). We have chosen Microsoft'97 
Summarizer because, even if it only produces 
extracts, it was the only summarizer available 
in order to carry out this evaluation and 
because it has already been used in other eval- 
uations (Marcu, 1997; Barzilay and Elhadad, 
1997). 
In order to evaluate content, we presented 
judges with randomly selected abstracts and 
five lists of keywords (content indicators). The 
judges had to decide to which list of keywords 
the abstract belongs given that different lists 
share some keywords and that they belong 
to the same technical domain. Those. lists 
were obtained from the journals where the 
source documents were published. The idea 
behind this evaluation is to see if the abstract 
convey the very essential content of the source 
document. 
In Order to evaluate the quality of the text, we 
asked the judges to provide an acceptability 
score between 0-5 for the abstract (0 for un- 
acceptable and 5 for acceptable) based on the 
following criteria taken from (Rowley, 1982) 
(they were only suggestions to the evaluators 
and were not enforced): good spelling and 
grammar; clear indication of the topic of 
7 
the  source document; impersonal style; one 
paragraph; conciseness; readable and under- 
standable; acronyms are presented along with 
their expansions; and other criteria that the 
judge considered important as an experienced 
reader of abstracts of technical documents. 
We told the judges that we would consider 
the abstracts with scores above 2.5 as accept- 
able. Some criteria are more important han 
other, for example judges do not care about 
impersonal style but care about readability. 
7.1.1 Mater ia ls  
Source  Documents :  we used twelve source 
documents from the journal Industrial Robots 
found on the Emerald Electronic Library (all 
technical articles). The articles were down- 
loaded in plain text format. These documents 
are quite long texts with an average of 23K 
characters (minimum of l lK  characters and a 
maximum of 41K characters). They contain 
an average of 3472 words (minimum of 1756 
words and a maximum of 6196 words excluding 
punctuation), and an average of 154 sentences 
(with a minimum of 85 and a maximum of 288). 
Abstracts :  we produced twelve abstracts us- 
:ing our method and computed the compression 
,ratio in number of words, then we produced 
twelve abstracts by Microsoft'97 Summarizer 1 
us ing  a compression rate at least as high as 
our (i.e. if our method produced an abstract 
with a compression rate of 3.3% of the source, 
we produced the Microsoft abstract with a 
compression rate of 4% of the source). We 
extracted the twelve abstracts and the twelve 
lists of keywords publ ished with the source 
documents. We thus obtained 36 different 
abstracts and twelve lists of keywords. 
Forms:  we produced 6 different forms each con- 
taining six different abstracts randomly 2 chosen 
out of twelve different documents (for a total of 
36 abstracts). Each abstract was printed in a 
1We had to format the source document in order for 
the Microsoft Summarizer to be able to recognize the 
structure of the document (titles, sections, paragraphs 
and sentences). 
2Random numbers for this evaluation were produced 
using software provided by SICSTus Prolog. 
different page. It included 5 lists of keywords, a
field to be completed with the quality score as- 
sociated to the abstract and a field to be f i l led 
with comments about the abstract. One of the 
lists of keywords was the one published with the 
source document, he other four were randomly 
selected from the set of 11 remaining keyword 
lists, they were printed in the form in random 
order. One page was also available to be com- 
pleted with comments about the task, in partic- 
ular with the time it took to the judges to com- 
plete the evaluation. We produced three copies 
of each form for a total of 18 forms. 
7.1.2 Sub jec ts  
We had a total of 18 human judges or eval- 
uators. Our evaluators were 18 students of 
the M.Sc. program in Information Science at 
McGill Graduate School of Library & Informa- 
tion Studies. All of the subjects had good read- 
ing and comprehension skills in English. This 
group was chosen because they have knowledge 
about what constitutes a good abstract and 
they are educated to become professionals in In- 
formation Science. 
7.1.3 Eva luat ion  Procedure  
The evaluation was performed in one hour ses- 
sion at McGill University. Each human judge 
received a form (so he/she evaluated six dif- 
ferent abstracts) and an instruction booklet. 
No other material was required for the evalu- 
ation (i.e. dictionary). We asked the judges to 
read carefully the abstract. They had to decide 
which was the list of keywords that matched 
the abstract (they could chose more than one 
or none at all) and then, they had to associate 
a numeric score to the abstract representing its 
quality based on the given criteria. This pro- 
cedure produced three different evaluations of 
content and text quality for each of the 36 ab- 
stracts. The overall evaluation was completed 
in a maximum of 40 minutes. 
7.2 Resu l ts  
For each abstract, we computed the average 
quality using the scores given by the judges. 
We considered that the abstract indicated the 
essential content of the source document if two 
or more judges were able to chose the correct 
list of keywords for the abstract. The results for 
individual articles and the average information 
8 
I 
I 
i 
i 
g 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
Microsoft Abstract 
# Art. Indic? Quality 
1 yes 2.66 
2 no 1.36 
3 no 1.16 
4 yes 3.00 
5 no 2.16 
6 yes 2.16 
7 no 0.83 
8 yes 2.33 
9 yes 2.16 
10 yes 2.16 
11 yes 2.40 
12 no 1.16 
Average 70% 1.98 
\] Average l 
Our Method 
Indic? Quality 
yes 2.93 
yes 3.66 
no 3.00 
yes 4.00 
no 1.76 
yes 4.00 
yes 2.50 
yes 3.00 
no 2.66 
yes 4.00 
no 2.70 
no 3.33 
70% 3.15 
S.D. Abstract 
Indic? Quality 
yes 4.16 
yes 4.00 
no 4.06 
yes 4.33 
yes 4.00 
no 4.53 
yes 4.40 
yes 4.00 
yes 3.66 
yes 3.31 
no 4.26 
no 4.00 
80% 4.04 
Results with Different Documents and Subjects 
80% I 1.46\[ 80%\] 3.23\[ 100% \[ 4.25 I 
Table 4: Results of Human Judgment about Indicativeness and Text Quality 
are shown in Table 4. For a given source docu- 
ment and type of abstract, the value in column 
'Indic?' contains the value 'yes' if the majority 
of the evaluator have chosen the source docu- 
ment list of keywords for the abstract and 'no' 
on the contrary. The value in column 'Qual- 
ity' is the average acceptability for the abstract. 
Content:  In 80% of the cases, the abstracts 
published with the source documents were 
correctly classified by the evaluators. Instead, 
the automatic abstracts were correctly classi- 
fied in 70% of the cases. It is worth noting 
"that the automatic systems did not use the 
? journal abstracts nor the lists of keywords or  
the.information about the journal. 
Quality: The figures about text acceptabil- 
ity indicate that the abstracts produced by 
Microsoft'97 Summarizer are below the accept- 
abil!ty level of 2.5, the abstracts produced by 
our method are above the acceptability level of 
2.5 and that the human abstracts are highly 
acceptable. 
In a run of this experiment using 30 ab- 
stracts from a different set of 10 articles and 15 
judges from \]~cole de Biblioth6conomie et des 
Sciences de l'Information (EBSI) at Universit6 
de Montr@al we have obtained similar results 
(last row in Table 4). 
8 Conc lus ions  
In this paper, we have presented a method of 
text summarization which produces indicative- 
informative abstracts. We have described the 
techniques we are using to implement our 
method and some experiments howing the 
viability of the approach. 
Our method was specified for summarization 
of one specific type of text: the scientific and 
technical document. Nevertheless, it is domain 
independent because the concepts, relations 
and types of information we use are common 
across different domains. The question of the 
coverage of the model will be addressed in 
our future work. Our method was designed 
without any particular reader in mind and 
with the assumption that a text does have 
a "main" topic. If readers were known, the 
abstract could be tailored towards their specific 
profiles. User profiles could be used in order to 
produce the informative abstracts elaborating 
those specific aspects the reader is "usually" 
interested in. This aspect will be elaborated in
future work. 
The experiments reported here addressed 
9 
the evaluation of the indicative abstracts using 
a categorization task. Using the automatic 
abstracts reader have chosen the correct 
category for the articles in 70% of the cases 
compared with 80% of the cases when using the 
author abstracts. Readers found the abstracts 
produced by our method of better quality than 
a sentence-extraction based system. 
Acknowledgments  
We would like to thank three anonymous re- 
viewers for their comments which helped us im- 
prove the final version of this paper. We are 
grateful to Professor Mich~le Hudon from Uni- 
versit~ de Montreal for fruitful discussion and to 
Professor John E. Leide from McGill University 
and to Mme Gracia Pagola from Universit~ de 
Montreal for their help in recruiting informants 
for the experiments. 
References 
R. Barzilay and M. Elhadad. 1997. Using 
Lexical Chains for Text Summarization. In
Proceedings of the A CL/EA CL '97 Workshop 
on Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization, 
pages 10-17, Madrid, Spain, July. 
G. DeJong. 1982. An Overview of the FRUMP 
System. In W.G. Lehnert and M.H. Ringle, 
editors, Strategies for Natural Language Pro- 
cessing, pages 149-176. Lawrence Erlbaum 
. Associates, Publishers. 
T. Firmin and M.J. Chrzanowski. 1999. An 
Evaluation of Automatic Text Summariza- 
tion Systems. In I. Mani and M.T. Maybury,. 
editors, Advances in Automatic Text Summa- 
~ization, pages 325-336. 
T.R. Gibson. 1993. Towards a Discourse The- 
ory of Abstracts and Abstracting. Depart- 
ment of English Studies. University of Not- 
tingham. 
P. Grant. 1992. The Integration of Theory and 
Practice in the Development of Summary- 
Writting Strategies. Ph.D. thesis, Universit~ 
de Montreal. Facult~ des ~tudes up~rieures. 
H. Jing and K.R. McKeown. 1999. The Decom- 
position of Human-Written Summary Sen- 
tences. In M. Hearst, Gey. F., and R. Tong, 
editors, Proceedings of SIGIR '99. 22nd Inter- 
national Conference on Research and Devel- 
opment in Information Retrieval, pages 129- 
136, University of California, Beekely, Au- 
gust. 
H.P. Luhn. 1958. The Automatic Creation of " 
Literature Abstracts. IBM Journal of Re- 
search Development, 2(2):159-165. 
I. Mani, D. House, G. Klein, L. Hirshman, 
L. Obrst, T. Firmin, M. Chrzanowski, and 
B. Sundheim. 1998. The TIPSTER SUM- 
MAC Text Summarization Evaluation. Tech- 
nical report, The Mitre Corporation. 
D. Marcu. 1997. From Discourse Structures 
to Text Summaries. In The Proceedings of 
the A CL '97lEA CL '97 Workshop on Intelli- 
gent Scalable Text Summarization, pages 82- 
88, Madrid, Spain, July 11. 
J-L. Minel, S. Nugier, and G. Piat. 1997. Com- 
ment Appr~cier la Qualit~ des R~sum~s Au- 
tomatiques de Textes? Les Exemples des Pro- 
tocoles FAN et MLUCE et leurs R~sultats 
sur SERAPHIN. In ldres Journdes Scientific- 
ques et Techniques du Rdseau Francophone 
de l'Ingdnierie de la Langue de I'AUPELF- 
UREF., pages 227-232, 15-16 avril. 
J-L. Minel, J-P. Descl~s, E. Cartier, 
G. Crispino, S.B. Hazez, and A. Jack- 
iewicz. 2000. R~sum~ automatique par 
filtrage s~mantique d'informations dans des 
textes. TSI, X(X/2000):l-23. 
C.D. Paice and P.A. Jones. 1993. The Iden- 
tification of Important Concepts in Highly 
Structured Technical Papers. In R. Korfhage, 
E. Rasmussen, and P. Willett, editors, Proc. 
of the 16th ACM-SIGIR Conference, pages 
69-78. 
D.R. Radev and K.R. McKeown. 1998. Gen- 
erating Natural Language Summaries from 
Multiple On-Line Sources. Computational 
Linguistics, 24(3):469-500. 
J. Rowley. 1982. Abstracting and Indexing. 
Clive Bingley, London. 
H. Saggion and G. Lapalme. 1998. Where does 
Information come from? Corpus Analysis for 
Automatic Abstracting. In RIFRA'98. Ren- 
contre Internationale sur l'extraction le Fil- 
trage et le Rdsumd Automatique, pages 72-83. 
H. Saggion and G. Lapalme. 2000. Evaluation 
of Content and Text Quality in the Context 
of Technical Text Summarization. In Pro- 
ceedings of RIAO'2000, Paris, France, 12-14 
April, 2000. 
10 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I! 
I, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i, 
