Evaluating text quality: judging output texts without a clear source 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We consider how far two attributes of 
text quality commonly used in MT 
evaluation ? intelligibility and fidelity ? 
apply within NLG. While the former 
appears to transfer directly, the latter 
needs to be completely re-interpreted. 
We make a crucial distinction between 
the needs of symbolic authors and 
those of end-readers. We describe a 
form of textual feedback, based on a 
controlled language used for specifying 
software requirements that appears well 
suited to authors? needs, and an 
approach for incrementally improving 
the fidelity of this feedback text to the 
content model. 
1 Introduction 
Probably the most critical questions that need to 
be addressed when evaluating automatically 
generated texts are: does the text actually say 
what it?s supposed to say and is it fluent, 
coherent, clear and grammatical? The answers to 
these questions say something important about 
how good the target texts are and ? perhaps 
more to the point ? how good the system that 
generated them is. There is no a priori reason 
why the target texts should be any better or 
worse when they result from natural language 
generation (NLG) or from machine translation 
(MT): indeed, they could result from the same 
language generator. Given this, it may be natural 
to assume that NLG could appropriately adopt 
evaluation methods developed for its more 
mature sister, MT. However, while this holds 
true for issues related to intelligibility (the 
second critical question), it does not apply as 
readily to issues of fidelity (the first question). 
We go beyond our recent experience of 
evaluating the AGILE system for producing 
multilingual versions of software user manuals 
(Hartley, Scott et al, 2000; Kruijff et al, 2000) 
and raise some open questions about how best to 
evaluate the faithfulness of an output text with 
respect to its input specification. 
2 Evaluating intelligibility 
The use of rating scales to assess the 
intelligibility of MT output has been widespread 
since the early days in the field. Typically, 
monolingual raters assign a score to each 
sentence in the output text. However, this does 
not amount to an agreed methodology, since the 
number of points on the scale and their 
definition have varied considerably. For 
example, Carroll (1966) used a nine-point scale 
where point 1 was defined as ?hopelessly 
unintelligible? and point 9 as ?perfectly clear 
and intelligible?; Nagao and colleagues (Nagao 
et al, 1985), in contrast, used a five-point scale, 
while Arnold and his colleagues (Arnold et al, 
1994) suggest a four-point discrimination. In 
evaluating the intelligibility of the AGILE output, 
we asked professional translators and authors 
who were native speakers of the languages 
concerned?Bulgarian, Czech and Russian?to 
score individual text fragments on a four-point 
scale. The evaluators were also asked to give a 
summative assessment of the output?s suitability 
as the first draft of a manual. 
In a single pass, AGILE is capable of 
generating several types of text, each 
Anthony Hartley and Donia Scott 
Information Technology Research Institute, 
University of Brighton 
UK 
{firstname.lastname}@itri.bton.ac.uk
constituting a section of a typical software user 
manual?i.e., overview, short instructions, full 
instructions, and functional descriptions?and 
appearing in one of two styles (personal/direct 
or impersonal/indirect). We evaluated all of 
these text types using the same method. The 
intelligibility evaluation was complemented by 
an assessment of the grammaticality of the 
output, conducted by independent native 
speakers trained in linguistics. Following an 
approach widely used in MT (e.g., Lehrberger 
and Bourbeau, 1987), the judges referred to a 
list of error categories for their annotations. 
 
3 Evaluating fidelity 
In MT, evaluating fidelity (or ?accuracy?) 
entails a judgment about the extent to which two 
texts ?say the same thing?. Usually, the two 
texts in question are the source (i.e., original) 
text and the (machine-)translated text and the 
judges are expert translators who are again 
invited to rate the relative information content of 
pairs of sentences on an anchored scale (e.g., 
Nagao et al, 1985). But others (e.g., Caroll, 
1966) have also compared the informativeness 
of the machine translation and a human 
translation deemed to serve as a benchmark. 
Interestingly, both of these researchers found a 
high correlation between the intelligibility 
evaluations and the fidelity evaluations, which 
suggests that it may be possible to infer fidelity 
from the (less costly) evaluation of 
intelligibility. However, at the current state-of-
the-art this approach does not guarantee to 
detect cases where the translation is perfectly 
fluent but also quite wrong. 
For NLG, the story is rather different. 
Lacking a source text, we are denied the 
relatively straightforward approach of detecting 
discrepancies between artifacts of the same type: 
texts. The question is, instead, whether the 
generated text ?says the same thing? as the 
message ? i.e., the model of the intended 
semantic content together with the pragmatic 
force of the utterance. 
The message is clearly only available 
through an external representation. In translation 
generally, this external representation is the 
source text and the task is commonly 
characterized as identifying the message ? 
which originates in the writer?s mental model ? 
in order to re-express it in the target language. In 
an NLG system, the one external representation 
that is commonly available is the particular 
domain model that serves as input to the 
generation system. This model may have been 
provided directly by an artificial agent, such as 
an expert system. Alternatively, it may have 
been constructed by a human agent as the 
intended instantiation of their mental model. 
Yet, whatever its origins, directly comparing 
this intermediate representation to the output 
text is problematic. 
A recent survey of complete NLG systems 
(Cahill et al, 1999) found that half of the 18 
systems examined accepted input directly from 
another system1. A typical example is the 
Caption Generation System (Mittal et al, 1998), 
which produces paragraph-sized captions to 
accompany the complex graphics generated by 
SAGE (Roth et al, 1994). The input to generation 
includes definitions of the graphical constituents 
that are used to by SAGE to convey information: 
?spaces (e.g., charts, maps, tables), graphemes 
(e.g., labels, marks, bars), their properties (e.g., 
color, shape) and encoders?the frames of 
reference that enable their properties to be 
interpreted/translated back to data values (e.g., 
axes, graphical keys).?2 For obvious reasons, 
this does not readily lend itself to direct 
comparison with the generated text caption. 
In the remaining half of the systems 
covered, the domain model is constructed by the 
user (usually a domain expert) through a 
technique that has come to be known as 
symbolic authoring: the ?author? uses a 
specially-built knowledge editor to construct the 
symbolic source of the target text. These editors 
are interfaces that allow authors to build the 
domain model using a representation that is 
more ?natural? to them than the artificial 
language of the knowledge base.3 The purpose 
of these representations is to provide feedback 
intended to make the content of the domain 
model more available to casual inspection than 
the knowledge representation language of the 
                                                           
1 By complete systems, we refer to systems that determine 
both ?what to say? and ?how to say it?, taking as input a 
specification that is not a hand-crafted simulation of some 
intermediate representation. 
2 Mittal et al, 1998, pg. 438. 
3 See Scott, Power and Evans, 1998. 
domain model. As such, they are obvious 
candidates as the standard against which to 
measure the content of the texts that are 
generated from them. 
We first consider the case of feedback 
presented in graphical mode, and then the option 
of textual feedback, using the WYSIWYM 
technology (Power and Scott, 1998; Scott, 
Power and Evans, 1998). We go on to make 
recommendations concerning the desirable 
properties of the feedback text. 
4 Graphical representations of content 
Symbolic authoring systems typically make use 
of graphical representations of the content of the 
domain model?for example, conceptual graphs 
(Caldwell and Korelsky, 1994). Once trained in 
the language of the interface, the domain 
specialist uses standard text-editing devices such 
as menu selection and navigation with a cursor, 
together with standard text-editing actions (e.g., 
select, copy, paste, delete) to create and edit the 
content specification of the text to be generated 
in one or several selected languages. 
The user of AGILE, conceived to be a 
specialist in the domain of the particular 
software for which the manual is required (i.e., 
CAD/CAM), models the procedures for how to 
use the software. AGILE?s graphical user 
interface (Hartley, Power et al, 2000) closely 
resembles the interface that was developed for 
an earlier system, DRAFTER, which generates 
software manuals in English and French (Paris 
et al, 1995). The design of the interface 
represents the components of the procedures 
(e.g., goals, methods, preconditions, sub-steps, 
side-effects) as differently coloured boxes. The 
user builds a model of the procedures for using 
the software by constructing a series of nested 
boxes and assigning labels to them via menus 
that enable the selection of concepts from the 
underlying domain ontology. 
4.1 The input specification for the user 
As part of our evaluation of AGILE, we asked 18 
IT professionals4 to construct a number of 
predetermined content models of various 
degrees of complexity and to have the system 
                                                           
4 There were six for each of the three Eastern European 
languages; all had some (albeit limited) experience of 
CAD/CAM systems and were fluent speakers of English. 
generate text from them in specified styles in 
their native language. Since the evaluation was 
not conducted in situ with real CAD/CAM 
system designers creating real draft manuals, we 
needed to find a way to describe to the 
evaluators what domain models we wanted them 
to build. Among the possible options were to 
give them a copy of either: 
? the desired model as it would appear to 
them in the interface (e.g., Figure 1); 
? the target text that would be produced 
from the model (e.g., Figure 2); 
? a ?pseudo-text? that described the model 
in a form of English that was closer to 
the language of the AGILE interface than 
to fluent English (e.g., Figure 3). 
 
Figure 1: Graphical display of content model 
 
Figure 2: Target text 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Pseudo-text input specification 
 
We rejected the first option because it 
amounted to a task of replication which could be 
accomplished successfully even without users 
having any real understanding of the meaning of 
Draw a line by specifying its start and end points. 
To draw a line 
Specify the start point of the line. 
Specify the end point of the line. 
the model they were building. Therefore, it 
would shed no light on how users might be able 
to build a graphical model externalising their 
own mental model. 
We discarded the second because a text may 
not necessarily make any explicit linguistic 
distinction between different components of the 
model?for example, between a precondition on 
a method and the first step in a method 
consisting of several steps5.  Thus, in general, 
target texts may not reflect every distinction 
available in the underlying domain model 
(without this necessarily causing any confusion 
in the mind of the reader). As a result of such 
underspecification, they are ill-suited to serving 
as a staring point from which a symbolic author 
could build a formal model. 
We opted, then, for providing our evaluators 
with a pseudo-text in which there was an 
explicit and regular relationship between the 
compo seudo-
textua of the 
pseudo
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F
4.2 
This p
of ju
betwe
           
5 For ex
make su
medium
pluck th
hours.? 
We focused on (a), which was of course 
mediated by (c); that is, we focused on the issue 
of creating an accurate model. This is an easier 
issue than that of the fidelity of the output text to 
the model (b), while the representations in (d) 
are too remote from one another to permit useful 
comparison. 
To measure the correspondence between the 
actual models and the desired/target models, we 
adopted the Generation String Accuracy (GSA) 
metric (Bangalore, Rambow and Whittaker, 
2000; Bangalore and Rambow, 2000) used in 
evaluating the output of a NLG system. It 
extends the simple Word Accuracy metric 
suggested in the MT literature (Alshawi et al, 
1998), based on the string edit distance between 
some reference text and the output of the 
system. As it stands, this metric fails to account 
for some of the special properties of the text 
generation task, which involves ordering word 
tokens. Thus, corrections may involve re-
ordering tokens. In order not to penalise a 
misplaced constituent twice?as both a deletion 
and an insertion?the generation accuracy 
metric treats the deletion (D) of a token from 
one location and its insertion (I) at another 
location as a single movement (M). The 
remaining deletions, insertions, and substitutions 
(S) are counted separately. Generation accuracy 
is given by the following equation, where R is 
the number of (word) tokens in the reference nents of the procedures and their p
l expression.   Figure 4 is one 
-texts used in the evaluation. 
Draw an arc 
 First, start-tool the ARC command. 
M1. Using the Windows 
operating system: choose the 3 
Points option from the Arc 
flyout on the Draw toolbar. 
M2. Using the DOS or UNIX 
operating system: igure 4: fragment of a typical pseudo-text 
Evaluating the fidelity of the output 
articular set-up afforded us the possibility 
dging the fidelity of the ?translation? 
en the following representations: 
a) desired model and model produced 
b) model produced and output text 
c) pseudo-text and model produced 
d) pseudo-text and the output text 
                                                
ample, between: ?To cook a goose: Before starting, 
re the goose has been plucked. Put the goose in a 
 oven for 1.5 hours.? and ?To cook a goose: First 
e goose. Then put it in a medium oven for 1.5 
text.







+++
?= R
SDIMAccuracyGeneration 1  
For Bangalore and his colleagues, the 
reference text is the desired text; it is a gold 
standard given a priori by a corpus representing 
the target output of the system. The generation 
accuracy of a string from the actual output of the 
system is computed on the basis of the number 
of movements, substitutions, deletions and 
insertions required to edit the string into the 
desired form. 
In our case, the correspondence was 
measured between models rather than texts, but 
we found the metric ?portable?. The tokens are 
no longer textual strings but semantic entities. 
Although this method provided a useful 
quantitative measure of the closeness of the fit 
of the actual generated text to what was 
intended, it is not without problems, some of 
choose the Arc option from 
the  Draw menu. 
choose 3 Points option. 
 Specify the start point of the arc.
which apply irrespective of whether the metric is 
applied to texts or to semantic models. For 
example, it does not capture qualitative 
differences between the generated object and the 
reference object, that is, it does not distinguish 
trivial from serious mistakes. Thus, representing 
an action as the first step in a procedure rather 
than as a precondition would have less impact 
on the end-reader?s ability to follow the 
instructions than would representing a goal as a 
side-effect.6 
5 Textual representations of content 
Once the model they represent becomes 
moderately complex, graphical representations 
prove to be difficult to interpret and unwieldy to 
visualise and manipulate (Kim, 1990; Petre, 
1995). WYSIWYM offers an alternative, textual 
modality of feedback, which is more intuitive 
and natural. As we will discuss below, there is a 
sense in which, in its current form, the feedback 
text may be too natural. 
5.1 Current status of  WYSIWYM feedback 
text 
The main purpose of the text generated in 
feedback mode, as currently conceived, is to 
show the symbolic author the possibilities for 
further expanding the model under development. 
As with AGILE?s box representation, 
clicking on a coloured ?anchor? brings up a 
menu of legitimate fillers for that particular slot 
in the content representation. Instantiating green 
anchors is optional, but all red anchors must be 
instantiated for a model to be potentially 
complete (Figure 5). Once this is the case, 
authors tend to switch to output mode, which 
produces a natural text reflecting the specified 
model and nothing else. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: fragment of a typical feedback text 
 
                                                           
6 See Hartley et al(2000) for further discussion of this 
issue and the results of the AGILE evaluation. 
In WYSIWYM systems the same generator 
is used to produce both the feedback and output 
texts; this means that the feedback text can be as 
fluent as the output text. In its current 
instantiations, this is precisely what is produced, 
even when the generator is capable of producing 
texts of rather different styles for the different 
purposes.7 
5.2 Feedback in a controlled language 
The motivation for generating a new type of 
feedback text comes from two sources. 
The first is the pseudo-texts that we 
constructed by hand for the AGILE evaluation. 
As far as the form of the models actually 
constructed is concerned, they proved 
consistently reliable guides for the symbolic 
authors. Where they proved inadequate was in 
their identification of multiple references to the 
same domain model entity; several authors 
tended to create multiple instances of an entity 
rather than multiple pointers to a single instance. 
Let us now turn from the testing scenario, where 
authors have a defined target to hit, and consider 
instead a production setting where the author is 
seeking to record a mental model. It is a simple 
matter to have the system generate a second 
feedback text, complementing the present one, 
this time in the style of the pseudo-texts8 for the 
purpose of describing unambiguously, if 
rebarbatively, the state of a potentially complete 
model. 
The second is Attempto Controlled English 
(ACE: Fuchs and Schwitter, 1996; Fuchs, 
Schwertel and Schwitter, 1999), which allows 
domain specialists to interactively formulate 
software requirements specifications. The 
specialists are required to learn a number of 
compositional rules which they must then apply 
when writing their specifications. These are 
parsed by the system. 
For all sentences that it accepts, the system 
creates a paraphrase (Figure 6) that indicates its 
interpretations by means of brackets. These 
interpretations concern phenomena like 
anaphoric reference, conjunction and 
disjunction, attachment of prepositional phrases, 
relative clauses and quantifier scope. The user 
                                                           
7 As, for example, in the ICONOCLAST system (see 
http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk/projects/iconoclast). 
8 Modulo the reference problems, for which a solution is 
indicated below 
1. Do <red>this action</red> by using 
<green>this method</green>. 
2. Schedule <red>this event</red> by 
using <green>this method</green>. 
3. Schedule the appointment by using 
<green>this method</green>. 
either accepts the interpretation or rephrases the 
input to change it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: ACE paraphrases 
 
The principle of making interpretations 
explicit appears to be good one in the NLG 
context too, especially for the person 
constructing the domain model. Moreover, in 
the context where the output text is required to 
be in a controlled language, the use of 
WYSIWYM relieves the symbolic author of the 
burden of learning the specialized writing rules 
of the given control language. 
Optimising the formulation of the controlled 
language feedback is matter of iteratively 
revising it via the testing scenario, using GSA as 
the metric, until authors consistently achieve 
total fidelity of the models they construct with 
the reference models. 
6 Conclusions 
So how can go about judging whether the 
products of NLG systems express the intended 
message? A first step towards this goal is to 
enable symbolic authors to satisfy themselves 
that they have built the domain model they had 
in mind. Graphical feedback is too difficult to 
interpret, while natural language output that is 
optimised for the end-reader may not show the 
unequivocal fidelity to the domain model that 
the symbolic author requires. 
We have suggested that textual feedback in 
a form close to a controlled language used for 
specifying software requirements is a good 
candidate for this task. We have further outlined 
a method for incrementally refining this 
controlled language by monitoring symbolic 
authors? ability to construct reference domain 
models on the basis of controlled language 
feedback. The trade-off between transparency 
and naturalness in the output text intended for 
the end-reader will involve design decisions 
based on, among other things, reader profiling. 
Assessing the fidelity of the end-reader text to 
the model is also a necessary step, but not one 
that can be conflated with or precede that of 
validating the accuracy of the model with 
respect to the author?s intentions. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The work described in the paper has been 
supported by EC INCO-COPERNICUS project 
PL961104 AGILE ?Automatic generation of 
Instructions in Languages of Eastern Europe?. 
The authors express their gratitude to all the 
partners of, and participants in, the AGILE 
project, upon whose work this paper reports. 
 
References 
Alshawi, H., Bangalore, S. and Douglas, S. (1998). 
Automatic acquisition of hierarchical transduction 
models for machine translation. Proceedings of the 
36th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and the 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-ACL?98), Montreal, 
Canada, pp. 41 ? 47 
Arnold, D., Balkan, L., Lee Humphreys, R., Meijer, 
S. and Sadler, L. (1994). Machine translation: an 
introductory guide. Blackwell. 
Bangalore, S. and Rambow, O. (2000). Exploiting a 
Hierarchical Model for Generation. Proceedings of 
the 18th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING?2000), 
Saarbruecken, Germany, pp. 42 ? 48. 
Bangalore, S., Rambow, O. and Whittaker, S. (2000). 
Evaluation Metrics for Generation. Proceedings of 
the 1st International Conference on Natural 
Language Generation, Mitzpe Ramon, Israel, pp. 1 
? 8. 
Cahill, L., Doran, C., Evans, R., Mellish, C., Paiva, 
D., Reape, M., Scott, D. and Tipper, N. (1999). In 
search of a reference architecture for NLG 
systems. Proceedings of the 7th European 
Workshop on Natural Language Generation 
(EWNLG'99), Toulouse, France, pp 77 ? 85. 
Caldwell, T. and Korelsky, T. (1994). Bilingual 
generation of job descriptions from quasi-
conceptual forms. Proceedings of the Fourth 
Conference on Applied Natural Language 
Processing (ANLP?94), pp. 1 ? 6. 
Input: 
The customer enters a card and a numeric personal 
code. If it is not valid then SM rejects the card. 
 
Paraphrase: 
The customer enters a card and [the customer 
enters] a numeric personal code. If [the personal 
code] is not valid then [SimpleMat] rejects the card.
Carroll, J.B. (1966). An experiment in evaluating the 
quality of translations. In J. Pierce. Language and 
machines: computers in translation and 
linguistics. Report by the Automatic Language 
Processing Advisory Committee (ALPAC). 
Publication 1416. National Academy of Sciences 
National Research Council, pp. 67 ? 75. 
Fuchs, N.E. and Schwitter, R. (1996). Attempto 
Controlled English (ACE). Proceedings of the 1st 
International Workshop on Controlled Language 
Applications (CLAW?96), Leuven, Belgium. 
Fuchs, N.E., Schwertel, U. and Schwitter, R. (1999). 
Attempto Controlled English (ACE) Language 
Manual Version 3.0, Technical Report 99.03, 
Department of Computer Science, University of 
Zurich, August 1999. 
Hartley, A., Power, R., Scott, D. and Varbanov, S. 
(2000). Design specification of the user interface 
for the AGILE final prototype. Deliverable INTF2 
of INCO-COPERNICUS project PL961104 
AGILE: ?Automatic. Generation of Instructions in 
Languages of Eastern Europe?. Available at 
http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk. 
Hartley, A., Scott, D., Kruijff-Korbayova, I., Sharoff, 
S. et al (2000). Evaluation of the final prototype. 
Deliverable EVAL2 of INCO-COPERNICUS 
project PL961104 AGILE: ?Automatic. Generation 
of Instructions in Languages of Eastern Europe?. 
Available at http://www.itri.bton.ac.uk. 
Kim, Y. (1990). Effects of conceptual data modelling 
formalisms on user validation and analyst 
modelling of information requirements.  PhD 
thesis, University of Minnesota. 
Kruijff, G-J., Teich, E., Bateman, J., Kruijff-
Korbayova, I. et al (2000). Multilinguality in a 
text generation system for three Slavic languages. 
Proceedings of the 18th International Conference 
on Computational Linguistics (COLING?2000), 
Saarbruecken, Germany, pp. 474 ? 480. 
Lehrberger, J. & Bourbeau, L. (1987) Machine 
translation: linguistic characterisitics of MT 
systems and general methodology of evaluation. 
John Benjamins. 
Mittal, V.O, Moore, J., Carenini, G. and Roth, S. 
(1998). Describing Complex Charts in Natural 
Language: A Caption Generation System. 
Computational Linguistics, 24(3), pp. 431 ? 468. 
Nagao, M. Tsujii, J. and Nakamura, J. (1985). The 
Japanese government project for machine 
translation. Computational Linguistics, 11(2-3), 
pp. 91 ? 109. 
Paris, C., Vander Linden, K., Fischer, M., Hartley, 
T., Pemberton, L., Power, R. and Scott, D. (1995). 
A Support Tool for Writing Multilingual 
Instructions. Proceedings of the Fourteenth 
International Joint Conference in Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI?95), pp. 1395 ? 1404.  
Petre, M. (1995). Why looking isn?t always seeing: 
readership skills and graphical programming, 
Communications of the ACM, 38(6), pp. 33 ? 42. 
Power, R. and Scott, D. (1998) Multilingual 
Authoring Using Feedback Texts. Proceedings of 
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics and the 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics, Montreal, Canada, pp. 1053 ? 1059. 
Roth, S.F., Kolojejchick, J., Mattis, J. and Goldstein, 
J. (1994) Interactive graphics design using 
automatic presentation knowledge.  Proceedings 
of CHI?94: Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, Boston, M.A. 
Scott, D.R., Power, R., and Evans, R. (1998) 
Generation as a Solution to Its Own Problem. 
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation (INLG'98), Niagara-
on-the-Lake, Canada, pp. 256 ?265. 
 
 
 
