Toward a Large Spontaneous Mandarin Dialogue Corpus 
 
Shu-Chuan TSENG 
Institute of Linguistics,  
Academia Sinica, Nankang 
115 Taipei, Taiwan, 
tsengsc@gate.sinica.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper addresses recent results on 
Mandarin spoken dialogues and introduces 
the collection of a large Mandarin 
conversational dialogue corpus. In the 
context of data processing, principles of 
transcription are proposed and accordingly a 
transcription tool is specifically developed 
for Mandarin spoken conversations.   
Introduction 
Large speech corpora have become indispensable 
for current linguistic research and information 
science applications dealing with spoken data 
(Gibbon et al 1997). Concretely, they provide 
real phonetic data and empirical data-driven 
knowledge on linguistic features of spoken 
language. The corpus presented here is composed 
of conversational dialogues. Conversations 
contain a considerable variety of linguistic 
phenomena as well as phonetic-acoustic 
variations. Furthermore, they open up a wide 
range of research issues such as dialogue acts, 
turn-taking, lexical use of spoken language and 
prosodic use in conversation. From a diachronic 
point of view, such a large dialogue corpus 
archives the contemporary daily conversational 
use of a given language.  
 
1 General Issues on Mandarin Dialogues 
In the following, issues on Mandarin dialogues 
relevant to spontaneous dialogue annotation are 
summarized and discussed. It includes lexical 
distribution, discourse markers, turn-taking and 
prosodic characterization. 
 
1.1 Lexical Distribution in Spoken Mandarin 
Results presented by Tseng (2001) show that 
speakers of Mandarin adopt some 30 words for 
building core structures of utterances in 
conversation, independently of individual 
speakers. All subjects used these words more 
than three times. The occurrences of these 30 
core words make up about 80% of the overall 
tokens in conversation. Interestingly but also 
expected in conversational dialogues, the 
distribution of token frequency across all subjects 
is highly symmetric (Tseng 2001). For instance, 
verbs ?is located?, ?is?, ?that is?, ?say?, ?want? 
and ?have? were frequently used, so were 
pronouns ?s/he?, ?you? and ?I?. The negation 
?don?t have? was a high-frequency word, so were 
words ?right?, ?this/these? and ?that/those?. 
Grammatical particles as well as discourse 
particles were also among the core words. 
 
1.2 Discourse Markers 
It is now well known that what differentiates 
written texts from spontaneous speech most is the 
use of discourse particles. Among the core words, 
eleven words were discourse particles, or they 
were used as discourse markers. In the literature, 
there is still no consistent definition for discourse 
markers (Hirschberg and Litman 1993). 
Discourse markers can be defined as follows: 
elements whose original semantic meaning tends 
to decrease and their use in spoken discourse 
becomes more pragmatic and indicative of 
discourse structuring are discourse markers. In 
addition to several adverbs and determiners, 
discourse particles can also be categorized as 
discourse markers. They are very often observed 
in Mandarin spoken conversations as mentioned 
in Tseng (2001) and Clancy et al (1996). 
 
 In Tseng (2001), each subject used on average 
1.6 discourse particles per turn. This result leads 
to the consideration, if there is a need to add 
special categories for discourse particles or 
particle-like words for spoken Mandarin. 
Discourse particles were found to have different 
and specific discourse use in conversation. 
Namely, there exist discourse particles appearing 
preferably in turn-beginning position and some 
other discourse particles may exclusively mark 
the location of repairs. Regarding the small size 
of data used in Tseng (2001), it is one of the 
reasons why the ongoing project is necessary for 
research of Mandarin spontaneous conversations. 
 
1.3 Taking Turns in Dialogues 
In spontaneous conversation, turn-taking usually 
takes place arbitrarily to the extent that every 
individual interacts differently with the others 
under different circumstances. Thus, how to 
annotate overlapping sequences is one of the 
essential tasks in developing annotation systems. 
In Mandarin conversation, there are words 
preferably used in turn-initial position (Tseng 
2001, Chui 2000). They normally have their own 
discourse-related pragmatic function associated 
with their positioning in utterances. Similarly, 
how to mark up turn-initial positions is also 
directly connected with the annotation 
convention.  
 
 
1.4 Prosody in Spoken Mandarin  
Lexical tones are typically characteristic of 
spoken Mandarin. The interaction of lexical tones 
and the other prosodic means such as stress and 
intonation are related to a number of research 
issues, particularly in conversation. Falling tones 
may not show falling tendency anymore, when 
the associated words are used for specific 
discourse functions such as for indicating 
hesitation or the beginning of a turn (Tseng 
2001). 
2 Mandarin Conversational Dialogue Corpus 
This section deals with the design and collection 
of a large Mandarin dialogue corpus currently 
produced in Academia Sinica. 
 
2.1 Design and Methodology 
The long-term goal of this project is to collect 
domain-independent Mandarin spoken dialogues. 
They are daily conversations with specific topics 
given for each stage of recording. Since the 
design of scenario aims to collect natural and 
spontaneous conversations, limitations on the 
topics are reduced to a minimum. Different from 
task-oriented dialogues such as air-planning or 
instruction-construction tasks (Kowtko and Price 
1989, Sagerer et al 1994), subjects participating 
in this project were told to converse as naturally 
as possible. The scenario is similar to a situation 
where two strangers meet at the first time, try to 
find common topics interested by both of them 
and have a chat. 
 
Figure 1: Corpus Domain Design 
 
    topic 1                                      WHAT-WHERE 
                      topic 2                               
   topic 3                                       WHAT-WHEN             
              topic 5        topic 4          WHAT-WHO 
                                                    WHERE-HOW  
                                                       WHAT-WHY               
 
As illustrated in Figure 1, this stage of corpus 
collection consists of WHAT-WHERE 
component. The subjects have to determine on 
WHAT topic they?d like to talk. Usually, they do 
not stick to only one topic. Sometime in 
conversation, the participants asked each other 
WHERE the events mentioned in their 
conversation happened or WHERE they could 
take part in the events. There are two reasons for 
this design. First, we will extend the local 
domains to WHAT-WHEN, WHAT-WHO, 
WHERE-HOW as well as WHAT-WHY 
combinations in the next five years to cover 
important dialogue components used for daily 
talks in Taiwan. This aims to archive the use of 
contemporary spoken Mandarin from varied 
daily-life perspectives. Second, casual 
conversations usually do not require correctness 
of information. To make sure that we will obtain 
at least some ?seriously spoken? materials, the 
subjects should interact with attention to fulfil the 
WHERE task, namely the route-asking and 
route-describing task. 
 
2.2 Subjects and Instructions 
60, 23 male and 37 female, Taipei residents of 
Taipei City who volunteered to participate in the 
project were recorded in pairs. Age ranges from 
16 to 45. Subjects did not know each other and 
their task was to introduce themselves first. Then 
they chose topics from those given on the 
instruction sheet or they were also free of 
choosing any other not-listed topics to talk about. 
In addition, they asked some questions about 
routes within conversation. The topics given to 
the subjects are family, work, shopping, food, 
travelling, politics and economics. Both subjects 
can be information-acquirer or information-giver. 
However, they were told that the person who 
asked route questions had to make sure that s/he 
has completely understood the described routes.  
 
2.3 Recording 
The dialogues were recorded by a SONY 
TCD-D10 Pro II DAT tape recorder with 
Audio-Technica ATM-33a handheld/stand 
cardioid condenser microphones at a sampling 
rate of 48 kHz. Each subject was recorded on a 
separate channel on a DAT tape. There was no 
time constraint given in advance. Once the 
subjects completed their task and wished to end 
the conversation, the recording was stopped. 
Total length of corpus is about 25 hours 
recording. 
3 An Extensible Transcription Tool 
3.1 Functional Considerations  
This section discusses three principles for 
constructing word-based database for Mandarin 
dialogues from audio data to lexical database. 
Three functions have to be included in a 
transcription system, either directly or potentially: 
1) connecting the tasks of transcribing, 
annotating and labelling of sound data, 2) being 
able to deal with overlapping turns and 3) making 
available possible tiers for later time-alignment. 
 
There are three working levels for processing 
spoken data: transcribe, annotate and label. First, 
transcription is the transliteration of audio data. 
Normally, it is verbatim transcription in plain text 
form. A transcription tool has exclusively been 
developed for broadcast spoken data, named 
Transcriber (Barras et al 2001). Audio data can 
be nicely combined with the other information. 
However, it lacks flexible possibility for defining 
new annotation tags. It is especially difficult to 
use Transcriber to transcribe Mandarin 
conversations because of the written system of 
Mandarin. For the understanding of content and 
for the completeness of written system, Chinese 
characters are as representative and important as 
Latin transcriptions.  
 
Secondly, to annotate spoken data is to add 
linguistic explanations to the plain transcript to 
represent linguistic structures at selected levels. 
And lastly, to label sound data is to temporally 
align transcript texts with speech signals. The 
tool we develop for our corpus collection aims to 
transcribe and annotate the speech data as well as 
to build potential temporal tiers for future 
labelling work. Traditional annotations of spoken 
data orient at turn-structured separation of 
utterances or sets of utterances (Sagerer et al 
1994). This leads to the following 
inconveniences. The beginning and ending 
boundaries between utterances are not 
represented, because it is presupposed that the 
current ending boundary is the beginning 
boundary of the next unit. While doing temporal 
alignment, pauses between utterance units and 
speakers may be missing. From the point of view 
of searching mechanism, an annotation system 
should also satisfy the demand on classifying 
sequences produced by given speakers or 
sequences produced in a given time period. Thus, 
it will be statistically effective and useful to 
output annotated transcription data in a database 
format. 
3.2 TransList 
Recorded dialogues are currently being 
transcribed by using a computer-aided program 
TransList, specifically developed for transcribing 
Mandarin conversations. The interface is 
illustrated in Figure 2. Input contents include 
location of sound file, subject, start and end times 
of the transcribed segment in the correspondent 
sound file, the person who transcribes the 
segment. The actual transcription is done twofold: 
in characters and in Pinyin.  
 
Figure 2: TransList 
 
 
 
Tag list can be flexibly extended to annotate 
different phenomena any time while doing the 
transcription. Each transcribed segment is 
referred to its original sound file. However, a 
direct connection to processing audio files is not 
available yet. Regarding the output format of 
TransList, two variations are currently in use. 
One is conversation-typed format. In other words, 
all sound files split from one conversation form 
an independent text file. In order of time and 
subject, the program outputs a turn-oriented 
format, as illustrated in the next section.  More 
important is the second output format. All 
transcribed segments belonging to one 
conversation will be listed in a database, having 
the following columns: characters, pinyin, sound 
file and all added tags. Words marked up by 
different tags will all have the values of added 
tags as their attribute in the database. By doing 
this, we plan to do word segmentation and 
tagging for spoken Mandarin. An automatic word 
segmentation and tagging system is currently 
available for written Mandarin (Chen et al 1996). 
We intend to test this program for spontaneous 
Mandarin. By outputting the transcription in 
database format, we will make the continuing 
data processing and searching more effective. 
 
3.3 An Output Example 
This section gives an example produced by 
TransList.  
 
<A 1 6473> cong shili yao dao shili meishuguan dehua 
women jiushi keyi zhiyao ni en jiushi cong women xuexiao 
yeshi yiyang da ersanliu zui fangbian de a </A 1 16200><B 1 
16230> mhm </B 1 16380><A 2 16530> ranhou da dao 
yeshi dao gongguan huan danshuixian ranhou ni zhiyao zuo 
dao dagai yuanshanzhan1</A 2 22230> 
 
In the above example, the brackets <> and </> 
mark up the beginning and ending boundaries of 
a speaker production sequence. A and B stand for 
speakers. Turns are not explicitly separated, but 
marked up in the annotation. Numbers after the 
speaker abbreviations indicate numbers of 
production sequences by the speaker. Thus, 
whether it is a turn-taking or it is a overlapping 
can be evaluated by means of the third parameter 
time (msec). With respect to tags added into the 
transcribed segments, it is optional to include or 
                                                     
1 <A 1 6473> from city want go city gallery in the case we 
just can just you en just from our school too is same take 236 
most convenient PRT a </A 1 16200> <B 1 16230> mhm 
</B 1 16380> <A 2 16530> afterwards take to too to 
Gongguan change Danshui-Line afterwards you just take to 
approximately Yuanshan-Station </A 2 22230> 
to exclude the annotation tags. As shown in 
Figure 2, these can be non-speech sounds, repairs 
or discourse markers (Heeman and Allen 1999).  
Conclusion 
This paper discussed general issues on Mandarin 
spoken dialogues and analysed components of a 
new developed transcription and annotation tool 
for spoken Mandarin. 
References  
Barras, C. et al (2001) Transcriber: Development and 
Use of a Tool for Assisting Speech Corpora 
Production. Speech Communication. 33. Pp. 5-22. 
Chen, K.-J. et al (1996) SINICA CORPUS: Design 
Methodology for Balanced Corpora. PACLIC 11. 
Pp.167-176. 
Chui, K.-W. (2000) Ritualization in Evolving 
Pragmatic Functions: A Case Study of DUI. In 
Proc. of the 7th International Symposium on 
Chinese Language and Linguistics. Pp. 177-192. 
Clancy, P. et al (1996) The Conversational Use of 
Reactive Tokens in English, Japanese and 
Mandarin. Journal of Pragmatics. Pp. 355-387. 
Gibbon, D., Moore, R. and Winski, R. (1997) 
Handbook of Standards and Resources for Spoken 
Language Systems. Mouton de Gruyter. 
Heeman, P. and Allen, J. (1999) Speech Repairs, 
Intonational Phrases and Discourse Markers: 
Modelling Speakers? Utterances in Spoken 
Dialogue. Computational Linguistics, 25/4. Pp. 
527-571. 
Hirschberg, J. and Litman, D. (1993) Empirical 
Studies on the Disambiguation of Cue Phrases. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(3), pp. 501-530. 
Kowtko, J. C. and Price, P.J. (1989) Data Collection 
and Analysis in the Air Planning Domain. In Proc. 
of the DARPA Speech and Natural Language 
Workshop. Pp. 119-125. 
Sagerer G. and Eikmeyer H. and Rickheit G. (1994) 
?Wir bauen jetzt ein Flugzeug?: Konstruieren im 
Dialog. Arbeitsmaterialien, Technical Report. 
SFB360 ?Situierte K?nstliche Kommunikation. 
University of Bielefeld, Germany. 
Tseng, S.-C. (2001) Highlighting Utterances in 
Chinese Spoken Discourse. In Language, 
Information and Computation. PACLIC 15. Pp. 
163-174. 
 
 
