Interaction of Tools and Metadata-Descriptions1 for
Multimedia Language Resources
Daan Broeder
Max-Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan1 6525 XD
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
daan.broeder@mpi.nl
Peter Wittenburg
Max-Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan1 6525 XD
Nijmegen
The Netherlands
peter.wittenburg@mpi.nl
1We distinguish metadata from annotation data, knowing that many don?t make this difference. While metadata in this
context is meant to describe the whole language resource, the annotation is a time synchronous description of what is
happening and is spoken during a recording
Abstract
The increasing amount and complexity of
multi-media/multi-modal language
resources (MMLR) poses a problem in
many respects. This paper wants to discuss
metadata descriptions that can be used to
easy find and locate suitable MMLRs in the
Internet and how these descriptions may be
used to discover and apply suitable tools on
the data.
1 Introduction
We succeeded in reaching a consensus within a
representative part of the linguistic community
in Europe about a standard for such metadata
descriptions. A machine readable
implementation of this standard will then allow
us to build up a searchable and browsable space.
Our presentation is based on the work executed
within the framework of the international
EAGLES/ISLE [1,2] project that is named IMDI
(ISLE Metadata Initiative), on practical work
with meta descriptions at the MPI for
Psycholinguistics, on a collaborative enterprise
to create a browsable corpus demo of material 7
European institutes and on suggestions with
respect to metadata within the DOBES [3] and
the CGN [4] projects.
2 Metada for Language Resources
The idea of describing a whole document with
the help of a few characteristic metadata
elements is not new. Well-known corpora such
as Childes [5] have used header information to
describe the content, the speakers and the
language being spoken etc. The Text Encoding
Initiative [6] and the CES group [7] have
specified in detail the tag set with which a whole
text document can be described. However, all
early initiatives were not meant to be a general
standard for the description of MM LRs and
allow the formation of a searchable and
browsable space on the Internet IMDI desires.
This is what recent initiatives in other domains
such as Dublin Core (DC) [8] and MPEG7 [9]
want to achieve: XML-based machine-readable
information about certain documents that is
openly accessible in the net such that easy
retrieval is possible. New initiatives by the W3C
such as RDF [10] support these intentions.
Within IMDI we have made an overview about
header and metadata elements used so far by the
language resource community. This overview
and the concrete needs within large European
projects will be used to develop and test a first
proposal on the way to come to a hopefully
widely accepted standard. Compliance with the
standard has to guarantee that metadata
descriptions created by different people at
different locations adhere to the same syntax and
to the same semantic definitions of the metadata
elements included. The standard has to offer
possibilities of adding metadata elements
defined by sub communities, projects or even
individuals. From other initiatives we know that
these goals can only be achieved if the set of
metadata elements is not too exhaustive. This
does not mean that only limited information can
be stored. For instance the metadata description
standard certainly includes an element to enter
the name of the language spoken, but other very
elaborate information about that language can be
made available in other data types pointed to by
hyperlinks to other data perhaps conforming to
more specialised schemas.
IMDI is now entering a phase where the
metadata element categories and the metadata
elements to be included have been discussed
with interested members of the MMLR
community for about a year and become stable.
Two resource types were selected to start with:
(1) multimedia corpora and (2) lexicons, the
discussion about the lexicon resources is at the
moment less far developed than that concerning
the corpora. Within the IMDI initiative we
started the search for a suitable set of metadata
elements by trying to identify the characteristics
of such resources that people such as
researchers, developers, students, or even the
general public would choose to use to find
exactly those resources they are looking for.
Very helpful was the study of the creation
process and the construction of a structured
metadata set as a reflection of an ontology of
these resources. We know that resources
themselves are not openly available, but at least
the metadata description should inform the
community about their existence, about
intellectual property rights and modes of usage.
Two main categories of metadata can be
identified:
? Basic information on the content of the
resource: the content language of the
resource, and administrative information
about the resource.
? Resource descriptions that define the
type and structure of the resource.
A full listing of all IMDI elements is given in
Appendix A, but for definitions and
substructures we refer to [1]. The relevant
elements for the resources themselves are:
Table 1 elements
for media files
Table 2
elements for
annotation
units
C: constrained
OV: open vocabulary
CCV: closed constrained vocabulary
For annotation units multiple units may reside in
one file. The relevant elements for
characterising the resources in a way that is
important to tools (a discussion that we will
come to later) are:
o Reference to the resource itself
o Size (of media file, if the tool has a
limit)
o Format (for media files somewhat more
simple then for annotation units)
o Type (for annotation unit the type of
analysis result e.g. morphology,
phonetics ?)
o Different encodings
Resource Link (c)
Media Resource Link (c)
Annotator (string)
Date (c)
Type (ov)
Format (ov)
Content Encoding (string)
Character Encoding (c)
Resource Link (c)
Size (string)
Type (ccv)
Format (ov)
Quality (ccv)
Recording Conditions (string)
Position (c)
3 Strategies for Metadata Standards
The way IMDI has developed its metadata
vocabulary can be described as bottom up.
IMDI chose to try to first understand the
linguistic community?s needs by making an
overview of metadata used by different projects
and corpora, speak with representatives of many
institutions and try to distill a metadata set from
it that focuses on retrieval aspects. For IMDI the
needs of the creators are the start and end point
since the creators are also the major consumer
group of language resources. So the question for
IMDI posed itself was ?how to enable resource
discovery of useful language resources that can
be used for certain studies etc?. This approach
leads to a metadata set whose terminology fits
the domain and a vocabulary that is considerable
richer than the for instance the DC set.
Interesting enough another initiative named
OLAC [11] that wants to create metadata for
language resources has taken the DC set as a
starting point. The OLAC approach can be
called a top-down one and seems motivated by
the wish to join the ?very important? Open
Archives Initiative (OAI) [12] without having
too much work in mapping different metadata
sets. OLAC wants to use a slightly more
specialised version of the OAI metadata set and
because OAI uses Dublin Core as default
metadata set the choice of an extended DC set
for OLAC is understandable. Of course the
question remains if this is sufficient to
characterise language resources in a sufficient
specific manner.
The discussion showed that both approaches are
important especially when the ontology of the
domain is not very well understood. IMDI starts
with analyzing the domain and leads to a more
narrow and specialised categorization scheme.
DC on the other hand offers very broad
categories the semantics of which are often
sloppily defined. Both approaches lead to
specific inherent retrieval problems. We have to
consider two views; (1) People from inside the
domain searching for resources (2) People from
outside the domain. People from inside have
intimate knowledge of the domain ontology and
want more specific categories. People from
outside need broader categories to assure that
the resources they search fall in the larger ?hit
list?. The discussion about OLAC DC qualifiers
led partly to the same discussions that were
carried out in IMDI. This is not surprising, since
OLAC somehow has to address the needs of the
field and the participants at the meeting were
mainly linguists. The OLAC top-down approach
which starts with a smaller vocabulary than
IMDI will have less problems when addressing
the interoperability with metadata sets such as
DC. However this advantage disappears when
OLAC will add more specific elements and
qualifiers to accurately describe the domain.
4 Tools and Metadata
It was the initial idea that the metadata
descriptions could also have elements that
describe specific tools that can be used to act on
the resources themselves. However since
resources and tools form orthogonal dimensions
it is better to have the metadata description only
describe resources and not a set of tools that will
change in time anyway. A more elegant solution
is to describe the type and structure of the
resources in sufficient detail so that ?browser?
tools used to access the metadata description can
decide which ones of the available tools are
suitable to handle the data. This can be either
based on local user configurable information or
on some sort of remote tool registry. At the
moment IMDI is experimenting with a scheme
of (semi) mime-types to characterise language
resources. We foresee that users will want to
customise the mapping of tools to resource types
to their own taste just as they are able to do with
WWW-browsers.
Needed for such a scheme is that tool
repositories note the types (mime-types) and
encoding, character encoding for which the tools
are suitable (see the lists in table 1 and 2). It has
to be investigated in detail how far tool
registries and resource collections structured by
metadata descriptions can be created in a way
such that especially na?ve users can overcome
the frustrating problems of accessing the right
resources with suitable tools. This problem is
not solved and is one of the greatest obstacles
for increasing the reusability of the huge
treasure of resources. IMDI has taken limited
tests with a number of tools to study the
interaction between mime-type tagged resources
and selecting from a tool palette. We have no
doubt that this is the way to go.
A special question is the form of the
infrastructure. Where will we store the metadata
descriptions and/or resources and how are tool
registries such as from DFKI [13] made known
to the distributed resource universe? During the
IMDI project a preliminary solution is found for
creating a registry authority for metadata. This
registry authority has to build a web-portal,
check the quality of the produced meta
descriptions, create intuitively understandable
browsable hierarchies based on the meta
descriptions and link the meta descriptions to
other type of information and resources The
registry authority will also provide tools such as
a constrained editor that allows the user to create
meta descriptions and a suitable browser which
can operate on the metadata description files.
The IMDI project will also work on
requirements for the registry authority and the
metadata tools.
At the moment the time has come for IMDI to
investigate if and how the metadata description
browser can access remote software registries to
assist users in the choice of tools to use for
resources. This would be a logical extension to
the local configurable mapping of tools on
resource types that is needed anyway for non-
networked situations.
References
[1] http://www.mpi.nl/ISLE
[2] P. Wittenburg, D. Broeder & B. Sloman:
Meta-Descriptions for Language Resources
- EAGLES/ISLE - A Proposal for a Meta-
Description Standard for Language
Resources.
http://www.mpi.nl/ISLE/documents/papers/
white_paper_11.pdf.
[3] DOBES http://www.mpi.nl/DOBES
[4] Corpus Gesproken Nederlands
http://www.nwo.nl/gw/introductie/
[5] CHAT http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
[6] TEI http://www.uic.edu/orgs/tei/
[7] CES http://www.cs.vassar.edu/CES
[8] DC http://purl.org/dc/documents/
[9] MPEG7 http://mpeg7
[10] RDF http://www.w3.org/RDF/
[11] OLAC http://www.language-archives.org/
[12] OAI http://www.openarchives.org/
[13] DFKI-softwareregistry
http://registry.dfki.de/
Appendix A: IMDI Metadata Vocabulary for Language Resources.
Session
Name (string) Resources (group)
Title (string) Media File + (group)
Date (c) Resource Link (c)
Continent (ccv) Size (string)
Country (ccv) Type (ccv)
Region (string) Format (ov)
Address (string) Quality (ccv)
Description + (sub) Recording Conditions (string)
Keys (sub) Position (c)
Project (group) Access (sub)
Name (string) Description + (sub)
Title (string) Annotation Unit + (group)
Id (string) Resource Link (c)
Contact (group) Media Resource Link (c)
Description + (group) Annotator (string)
Collector (group) Date (c)
Name (string) Type (ov)
Contact (sub) Format (ov)
Description + (sub) Content Encoding (string)
Content (group) Character Encoding (c)
Communication Context (group) Access (sub)
Interactivity (ccv) Language (sub)
Planning Type (ccv) Anonymous (ccv)
Involvement (ccv) Description + (sub)
Genre (group) Media Carrier +
Interactional (ovl) Id (string)
Discursive (ovl) Format (ov)
Performance (ovl) Quality (ccv)
Task (ocv) Position (c)
Modalities (ocv) Access (sub)
Languages (group) Description + (sub)
Description + (sub) Anonymous (group)
Language + (sub) Resource Link (c)
Description + (sub) Access (sub)
Keys (sub) References (group)
Participants (group) Description + (sub)
Description + (sub)
Participant (group)
Type (ov)
Name + (string)
Full name (string)
Role (ov)
Language + (sub)
Age (c)
Sex (ccv)
Education (string)
Anonymous (ccv)
Description + (sub)
Keys (sub)
