Crosslingual Language Technologies for Knowledge Creation
and Knowledge Sharing
Hans Uszkoreit
DFKI Language Technology Lab
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3
66123 Saarbruecken, Germany
uszkoreit@dfki.de
www.dfki.de/~hansu/
A large and fast growing part of corporate
knowledge is encoded in electronic texts.
Although digital information repositories are
becoming truly multimedial, human language
will remain the only medium for preserving and
sharing complex concepts, experiences and
ideas.  It is also the only medium suited for
expressing metainformation. For a human reader
a text has a rich structure, for a data processing
machine it is merely a string of symbols.
Classical information retrieval helps to sort and
find information in large libraries of documents
by matching strings of characters. Effective
information management is a building block of
modern knowledge management. However,
language technology can contribute much more
than methods for finding information.
A number of areas in which language
technologies can improve knowledge
management are described in Maybury (in this
volume). We will concentrate on examples in
which language technologies can facilitate the
creation of new knowledge from large volumes
of textual information and the sharing of
knowledge accross language boundaries.
1 Knowledge Sharing
One of the true challenges of KM is the
development and implementation of schemes
that make people share knowledge and use such
shared knowledge in critical situations.  Offering
incentives for the sharing of knowledge is not
sufficient. The valuable information needs to be
offered in situations where it is needed. It also
needs to be evaluated in such situations because
any effective incentive scheme might lead to
information overflow if the quality of the
provided information cannot be assessed.
Language technology can provide means for
associating shared knowledge with the relevant
decision situations by automatically linking it to
the critical elements within decision triggers, i.e,
electronic documents in the workflow that
demand and record a decision.
Together with some simple statistical methods
this method can also support a scheme for
evaluating shared information with a minimum
of additional effort.  The language technology
that can be applied for this purpose we call
automatic relational hyperlinking.  Relational
hyperlinks differ from the simple hyperlinks of
HTML in that they are composed out of a
number of named links that can be selected from
a menu.
Language technology is needed for identifying
and disambiguating the concepts in documents
that need to be linked. To this end, techniques
from information extraction are employed such
as named entity recognition. When automatic
hyperlinking associates information to decision
situations, an evaluation can be enforced without
an additional burden on the user.
Automatic hyperlinking can also be applied for
transforming information into knowledge-like
structures. By densely interconnecting
informational elements, three criteria are met
that distinguish knowledge from other forms of
information: immediate accessability, grounding
of pieces of knowledge and associative
structure. The important fourth criterion is the
suitability for inferencing, however in this
application scenario inferencing is not
performed by the machine but by the human
user of the service.
This method has been applied in the system
Hypercode of the DFKI LT Lab.  The original
purpose of this system which was developed for
a large German bank is to facilitate work with
legacy code. Hypercode provides dense
associative relational hyperlinking to program
code and documentation. By densely
interlinking code and documentation, the
knowledge encoded in the documentation
becomes much more accessible and usable. The
methods of Hypercode were also applied for
enriching a new WWW-based information
service of the Saarland State Government for
start-up companies.
2 Crosslingual Knowledge
Management
Globalization forces companies to become
multilingual.  The language of customer
interaction should be the preferred language of
the customer.  The language for knowledge
sharing should be preferred language of the
experts who voluntarily provide the knowledge.
On the other hand, the language of knowledge
sharing has to be a language that the potential
users of the information understand. The
languages of provider and users may differ.
Moreover, in a multinational enterprise there
may be user communities that extend across
several native languages.  Translation is costly
and may delay the exploitation of shared
knowledge.  Automatic translation offers alter-
native solutions.  Even the best machine trans-
lation systems cannot translate unseen texts
without grammatical or stylistic errors.
However, for the purpose of knowledge sharing
often a so called content translation or an
indicative translation will suffice. Such a
translation can be provided by existing
translation systems.  Factual errors can be
avoided by augmenting the general purpose
translation systems with specialized terminology
and transfer rules. We will exemplify the
utilization of specialized indicative machine
translation for multilingual expert groups by a
project for a large multinational automobile
manufacturer.
Finally we will provide an overview of other
crosslingual language technologies and their
potential for crosslingual knowledge manage-
ment. In this context, we will point to a number
of European R&D projects in which consortia
composed of academic and industrial partners
improve or adapt language technologies such as
information retrieval, information extraction and
summarization for knowledge management
applications in multilingual applications
scenarios.
References
Glushko, R. J. (1989): Transforming Text Into
Hypertext For a Compact Disc Encyclopedia,
In: Proceedings of CHI '89, ACM Press.
Jacobs, P. (1997) Text Interpretation: Extracting
Information. In: R.A. Cole, J. Mariani, H.
Uszkoreit, A.Zaenen, V. Zue (eds.): Survey of
the State of the Art in Human Language
Technology, Cambridge University Press and
Giardini.
Piskorski, J.  and G. Neumann (2000) An
Intelligent Text Extraction and Navigation
System. In : Proceedings of 6th International
Conference on Computer-Assisted Information
Retrieval (RIAO-2000), Paris.
Pustejovsky, J., B. Boguraev, M. Verhagen, P.
Buitelaar,. and M. Johnston (1997): Semantic
Indexing and Typed Hyperlinking. In:
Proceedings of the American Association for
Artical Intelligence Conference, Spring
Symposium, NLP for WWW.. Stanford
University, CA, 120-128.
   
