Overcoming the customization bottleneck using example-based MT
Stephen D. Richardson, William B. Dolan, Arul Menezes, Monica Corston-Oliver?
Microsoft Research ?Butler Hill Group
One Microsoft Way 4610 Wallingford Ave. N.
Redmond, WA 98052 Seattle WA 98103
{steveri, billdol, arulm}@microsoft.com moco@butlerhill.com
Abstract
We describe MSR-MT, a large-scale
hybrid machine translation system
under development for several
language pairs. This system?s ability to
acquire its primary translation
knowledge automatically by parsing a
bilingual corpus of hundreds of
thousands of sentence pairs and
aligning resulting logical forms
demonstrates true promise for
overcoming the so-called MT
customization bottleneck. Trained on
English and Spanish technical prose, a
blind evaluation shows that MSR-MT?s
integration of rule-based parsers,
example based processing, and
statistical techniques produces
translations whose quality exceeds that
of uncustomized commercial MT
systems in this domain.
1 Introduction
Commercially available machine translation
(MT) systems have long been limited in their
cost effectiveness and overall utility by the need
for domain customization. Such customization
typically includes identifying relevant
terminology (esp. multi-word collocations),
entering this terminology into system lexicons,
and making additional tweaks to handle
formatting and even some syntactic
idiosyncrasies. One of the goals of data-driven
MT research has been to overcome this
customization bottleneck through automated or
semi-automated extraction of translation
knowledge from bilingual corpora.
To address this bottleneck, a variety of
example based machine translation (EBMT)
systems have been created and described in the
literature. Some of these employ parsers to
produce dependency structures for the sentence
pairs in aligned bilingual corpora, which are
then aligned to obtain transfer rules or examples
(Meyers et al 2000; Watanabe et al 2000).
Other systems extract and use examples that are
represented as linear patterns of varying
complexity (Brown 1999; Watanabe and Takeda
1998; Turcato et al 1999).
For some EBMT systems, substantial
collections of examples are also manually
crafted or at least reviewed for correctness after
being identified automatically (Watanabe et al
2000; Brown 1999; Franz et al 2000). The
efforts that report accuracy results for fully
automatic example extraction (Meyers et al
2000; Watanabe et al 2000) do so for very
modest amounts of training data (a few thousand
sentence pairs). Previous work in this area thus
raises the possibility that manual review or
crafting is required to obtain example bases of
sufficient coverage and accuracy to be truly
useful.
Other variations of EBMT systems are
hybrids that integrate an EBMT component as
one of multiple sources of transfer knowledge
(in addition to other transfer rule or knowledge
based components) used during translation
(Frederking et al 1994; Takeda et al 1992).
To our knowledge, commercial quality MT
has so far been achieved only through years of
effort in creating hand-coded transfer rules.
Systems whose primary source of translation
knowledge comes from an automatically created
example base have not been shown capable of
matching or exceeding the quality of
commercial systems.
This paper reports on MSR-MT, an MT
system that attempts to break the customization
bottleneck by exploiting example-based (and
some statistical) techniques to automatically
acquire its primary translation knowledge from a
bilingual corpus of several million words. The
system leverages the linguistic generality of
existing rule-based parsers to enable broad
coverage and to overcome some of the
limitations on locality of context characteristic
of data-driven approaches. The ability of MSR-
MT to adapt automatically to a particular
domain, and to produce reasonable translations
for that domain, is validated through a blind
assessment by human evaluators. The quality of
MSR-MT?s output in this one domain is shown
to exceed the output quality of two highly rated
(though not domain-customized) commercially
available MT systems.
We believe that this demonstration is the first
in the literature to show that automatic training
methods can produce a commercially viable
level of translation quality.
2 MSR-MT
MSR-MT is a data-driven hybrid MT system,
combining rule-based analysis and generation
components with example-based transfer. The
automatic alignment procedure used to create
the example base relies on the same parser
employed during analysis and also makes use of
its own small set of rules for determining
permissible alignments. Moderately sized
bilingual dictionaries, containing only word
pairs and their parts of speech, provide
translation candidates for the alignment
procedure and are also used as a backup source
of translations during transfer. Statistical
techniques supply additional translation pair
candidates for alignment and identify certain
multi-word terms for parsing and transfer.
The robust, broad-coverage parsers used by
MSR-MT were created originally for
monolingual applications and have been used in
commercial grammar checkers.1 These parsers
produce a logical form (LF) representation that
is compatible across multiple languages (see
section 3 below). Parsers now exist for seven
languages (English, French, German, Spanish,
Chinese, Japanese, and Korean), and active
development continues to improve their
accuracy and coverage.
1 Parsers for English, Spanish, French, and German
provide linguistic analyses for the grammar checker
in Microsoft Word.
Figure 1. MSR-MT architecture.
Generation components are currently being
developed for English, Spanish, Chinese, and
Japanese. Given the automated learning
techniques used to create MSR-MT transfer
components, it should theoretically be possible,
provided with appropriate aligned bilingual
corpora, to create MT systems for any language
pair for which we have the necessary parsing
and generation components. In practice, we
have thus far created systems that translate into
English from all other languages and that
translate from English to Spanish, Chinese, and
Japanese. We have experimented only
preliminarily with Korean and Chinese to
Japanese.
Results from our Spanish-English and
English-Spanish systems are reported at the end
of this paper. The bilingual corpus used to
produce these systems comes from Microsoft
manuals and help text. The sentence alignment
of this corpus is the result of using a commercial
translation memory (TM) tool during the
translation process.
The architecture of MSR-MT is presented in
Figure 1. During the training phase, source and
target sentences from the aligned bilingual
corpus are parsed to produce corresponding LFs.
The normalized word forms resulting from
parsing are also fed to a statistical word
association learner (described in section 4.1),
which outputs learned single word translation
pairs as well as a special class of multi-word
pairs. The LFs are then aligned with the aid of
translations from a bilingual dictionary and the
learned single word pairs (section 4.2). Transfer
mappings that result from LF alignment, in the
form of linked source and target LF segments,
are stored in a special repository known as
MindNet (section 4.3). Additionally, the learned
multi-word pairs are added to the bilingual
dictionary for possible backup use during
translation and to the main parsing lexicon to
improve parse quality in certain cases.
At runtime, MSR-MT?s analysis parses
source sentences with the same parser used for
source text during the training phase (section
5.1). The resulting LFs then undergo a process
known as MindMeld, which matches them
against the LF transfer mappings stored in
MindNet (section 5.2). MindMeld also links
segments of source LFs with corresponding
target LF segments stored in MindNet. These
target LF segments are stitched together into a
single target LF during transfer, and any
translations for words or phrases not found
during MindMeld are searched for in the
updated bilingual dictionary and inserted in the
target LF (section 5.3). Generation receives the
target LF as input, from which it produces a
target sentence (section 5.4).
3 Logical form
MSR-MT?s broad-coverage parsers produce
conventional phrase structure analyses
augmented with grammatical relations (Heidorn
et al 2000). Syntactic analyses undergo further
processing in order to derive logical forms
(LFs), which are graph structures that describe
labeled dependencies among content words in
the original input. LFs normalize certain
syntactic alternations (e.g. active/passive) and
resolve both intrasentential anaphora and long-
distance dependencies.
MT has proven to be an excellent application
for driving the development of our LF
representation. The code that builds LFs from
syntactic analyses is shared across all seven of
the languages under development. This shared
architecture greatly simplifies the task of
aligning LF segments (section 4.2) from
different languages, since superficially distinct
constructions in two languages frequently
collapse onto similar or identical LF
representations. Even when two aligned
sentences produce divergent LFs, the alignment
and generation components can count on a
consistent interpretation of the representational
machinery used to build the two. Thus the
meaning of the relation Topic, for instance, is
consistent across all seven languages, although
its surface realizations in the various languages
vary dramatically.
4 Training MSR-MT
This section describes the two primary
mechanisms used by MSR-MT to automatically
extract translation mappings from parallel
corpora and the repository in which they are
stored.
4.1 Statistical learning of single word-
and multi-word associations
The software domain that has been our
primary research focus contains many words
and phrases that are not included in our general-
domain lexicons. Identifying translation
correspondences between these unknown words
and phrases across an aligned dataset can
provide crucial lexical anchors for the alignment
algorithm described in section 4.2.
In order to identify these associations, source
and target text are first parsed, and normalized
word forms (lemmas) are extracted. In the
multi-word case, English ?captoid? processing is
exploited to identify sequences of related,
capitalized words. Both single word and multi-
word associations are iteratively hypothesized
and scored by the algorithm under certain
constraints until a reliable set of each is
obtained.
Over the English/Spanish bilingual corpus
used for the present work, 9,563 single word and
4,884 multi-word associations not already
known to our system were identified using this
method.
Moore (2001) describes this technique in
detail, while Pinkham & Corston-Oliver (2001)
describes its integration with MSR-MT and
investigates its effect on translation quality.
4.2 Logical form alignment
As described in section 2, MSR-MT acquires
transfer mappings by aligning pairs of LFs
obtained from parsing sentence pairs in a
bilingual corpus. The LF alignment algorithm
first establishes tentative lexical
correspondences between nodes in the source
and target LFs using translation pairs from a
bilingual lexicon. Our English/Spanish lexicon
presently contains 88,500 translation pairs,
which are then augmented with single word
translations acquired using the statistical method
described in section 4.1. After establishing
possible correspondences, the algorithm uses a
small set of alignment grammar rules to align
LF nodes according to both lexical and
structural considerations and to create LF
transfer mappings. The final step is to filter the
mappings based on the frequency of their source
and target sides. Menezes & Richardson (2001)
provides further details and an evaluation of the
LF alignment algorithm.
The English/Spanish bilingual training
corpus, consisting largely of Microsoft manuals
and help text, averaged 14.1 words per English
sentence. A 2.5 million word sample of English
data contained almost 40K unique word forms.
The data was arbitrarily split in two for use in
our Spanish-English and English-Spanish
systems. The first sub-corpus contains over
208,000 sentence pairs and the second over
183,000 sentence pairs. Only pairs for which
both Spanish and English parsers produce
complete, spanning parses and LFs are currently
used for alignment. Table 1 provides the
number of pairs used and the number of transfer
mappings extracted and used in each case.
Spanish-
English
English-
Spanish
Total sentence pairs 208,730 183,110
Sentence pairs used 161,606 138,280
Transfer mappings
extracted
1,208,828 1,001,078
Unique, filtered
mappings used
58,314 47,136
Table 1. English/Spanish transfer mappings from
LF alignment
4.3 MindNet
The repository into which transfer mappings
from LF alignment are stored is known as
MindNet. Richardson et al (1998) describes
how MindNet began as a lexical knowledge
base containing LF-like structures that were
produced automatically from the definitions and
example sentences in machine-readable
dictionaries. Later, MindNet was generalized,
becoming an architecture for a class of
repositories that can store and access LFs
produced for a variety of expository texts,
including but not limited to dictionaries,
encyclopedias, and technical manuals.
For MSR-MT, MindNet serves as the
optimal example base, specifically designed to
store and retrieve the linked source and target
LF segments comprising the transfer mappings
extracted during LF alignment. As part of daily
regression testing for MSR-MT, all the sentence
pairs in the combined English/Spanish corpus
are parsed, the resulting spanning LFs are
aligned, and a separate MindNet for each of the
two directed language pairs is built from the LF
transfer mappings obtained. These MindNets
are about 7MB each in size and take roughly 6.5
hours each to create on a 550 Mhz PC.
5 Running MSR-MT
MSR-MT translates sentences in four processing
steps, which were illustrated in Figure 1 and
outlined in section 2 above. These steps are
detailed using a simple example in the following
sections.
5.1 Analysis
The input source sentence is parsed with the
same parser used on source text during MSR-
MT?s training. The parser produces an LF for
the sentence, as described in section 3. For the
example LF in Figure 2, the Spanish input
sentence is Haga clic en el bot?n de opci?n. In
English, this is literally Make click in the button
of option. In fluent, translated English, it is
Click the option button.
Figure 2. LF produced for Haga clic en el bot?n
de opci?n.
5.2 MindMeld
The source LF produced by analysis is next
matched by the MindMeld process to the source
LF segments that are part of the transfer
mappings stored in MindNet. Multiple transfer
mappings may match portions of the source LF.
MindMeld attempts to find the best set of
matching transfer mappings by first searching
for LF segments in MindNet that have matching
lemmas, parts of speech, and other feature
information. Larger (more specific) mappings
are preferred to smaller (more general)
mappings. In other words, transfers with context
will be matched preferentially, but the system
will fall back to the smaller transfers when no
matching context is found. Among mappings of
equal size, MindMeld prefers higher-frequency
mappings. Mappings are also allowed to match
overlapping portions of the source LF so long as
they do not conflict in any way.
After an optimal set of matching transfer
mappings is found, MindMeld creates Links on
nodes in the source LF to copies of the
corresponding target LF segments retrieved
from the mappings. Figure 3 shows the source
LF for the example sentence with additional
Links to target LF segments. Note that Links
for multi-word mappings are represented by
linking the root nodes (e.g., hacer and click) of
the corresponding segments, then linking an
asterisk (*) to the other source nodes
participating in the multi-word mapping (e.g.,
usted and clic). Sublinks between
corresponding individual source and target
nodes of such a mapping (not shown in the
figure) are also created for use during transfer.
Figure 3. Linked LF for Haga clic en el bot?n de
opci?n.
5.3 Transfer
The responsibility of transfer is to take a linked
LF from MindMeld and create a target LF that
will be the basis for the target translation. This
is accomplished through a top down traversal of
the linked LF in which the target LF segments
pointed to by Links on the source LF nodes are
stitched together. When stitching together LF
segments from possibly complex multi-word
mappings, the sublinks set by MindMeld
between individual nodes are used to determine
correct attachment points for modifiers, etc.
Default attachment points are used if needed.
Also, a very small set of simple, general, hand-
coded transfer rules (currently four for English
to/from Spanish) may apply to fill current (and
we hope, temporary) gaps in learned transfer
mappings.
In cases where no applicable transfer
mapping was found during MindMeld, the
nodes in the source LF and their relations are
simply copied into the target LF. Default (i.e.,
most commonly occurring) single word
translations may still be found in the MindNet
for these nodes and inserted in the target LF, but
if not, translations are obtained, if possible, from
the same bilingual dictionary used during LF
alignment.
Figure 4 shows the target LF created by
transfer from the linked LF shown in Figure 3.
Figure 4. Target LF for Click the option button.
5.4 Generation
A rule-based generation component maps
from the target LF to the target string (Aikawa
et al 2001). The generation components for the
target languages currently handled by MSR-MT
are application-independent, having been
designed to apply to a range of tasks, including
question answering, grammar checking, and
translation. In its application to translation,
generation has no information about the source
language for a given input LF, working
exclusively with the information passed to it by
the transfer component. It uses this information,
in conjunction with a monolingual (target
language) dictionary to produce its output. One
generic generation component is thus sufficient
for each language.
In some cases, transfer produces an
unmistakably ?non-native? target LF. In order to
correct some of the worst of these anomalies, a
small set of source-language independent rules
is applied prior to generation. The need for such
rules reflects deficiencies in our current data-
driven learning techniques during transfer.
6 Evaluating MSR-MT
In evaluating progress, we have found no
effective alternative to the most obvious
solution: periodic, blind human evaluations
focused on translations of single sentences. The
human raters used for these evaluations work for
an independent agency and played no
development role building the systems they test.
Each language pair under active development is
periodically subjected to the evaluation process
described in this section.
6.1 Evaluation Methodology
For each evaluation, five to seven evaluators
are asked to evaluate the same set of 200 to 250
blind test sentences. For each sentence, raters
are presented with a reference sentence in the
target language, which is a human translation of
the corresponding source sentence. In order to
maintain consistency among raters who may
have different levels of fluency in the source
language, raters are not shown the source
sentence. Instead, they are presented with two
machine-generated target translations presented
in random order: one translation by the system
to be evaluated (the experimental system), and
another translation by a comparison system (the
control system). The order of presentation of
sentences is also randomized for each rater in
order to eliminate any ordering effect.
Raters are asked to make a three-way choice.
For each sentence, raters may choose one of the
two automatically translated sentences as the
better translation of the (unseen) source
sentence, assuming that the reference sentence
represents a perfect translation, or, they may
indicate that neither of the two is better. Raters
are instructed to use their best judgment about
the relative importance of fluency/style and
accuracy/content preservation. We chose to use
this simple three-way scale in order to avoid
making any a priori judgments about the
relative importance of these parameters for
subjective judgments of quality. The three-way
scale also allows sentences to be rated on the
same scale, regardless of whether the
differences between output from system 1 and
system 2 are substantial or negligible.
The scoring system is similarly simple; each
judgment by a rater is represented as 1 (sentence
from experimental system judged better), 0
(neither sentence judged better), or -1 (sentence
from control system judged better). For each
sentence, the score is the mean of all raters?
judgments; for each comparison, the score is the
mean of the scores of all sentences.
6.2 Evaluation results
Although work on MSR-MT encompasses a
number of language pairs, we focus here on the
evaluation of just two, Spanish-English and
English-Spanish. Training data was held
constant for each of these evaluations.
6.2.1 Spanish-English over time
Spanish-English
systems
Mean preference
score (7 raters)
Sample
size
MSR-MT 9/00
vs.
MSR-MT 12/00
0.30 ? 0.09
(at 0.95)
200
sentences
MSR-MT 12/00
vs.
MSR-MT 4/01
0.28 ? 0.07
(at 0.99)
250
sentences
This table summarizes two evaluations
tracking progress in MSR-MT?s Spanish-
English (SE) translation quality over a seven
month development period. The first evaluation,
with seven raters, compared a September 2000
version of the system to a December 2000
version. The second evaluation, carried out by
six raters, examined progress between
December 2000 and April 2001.
A score of -1 would mean that raters
uniformly preferred the control system, while a
score of 1 would indicate that all raters preferred
the comparison system for all sentences. In each
of these evaluations, all raters significantly
preferred the comparison, or newer, version of
MSR-MT, as reflected in the mean preference
scores of 0.30 and 0.28. These numbers confirm
that the system made considerable progress over
a relatively short time span.
6.2.2 Spanish-English vs. alternative system
Spanish-English
systems
Mean preference
score (7 raters)
Sample
size
MSR-MT 9/00 vs.
Babelfish
-0.23 ? 0.12
(at 0.95)
200
sentences
MSR-MT 12/00
vs. Babelfish
0.11 ? 0.10
(at 0.95)
200
sentences
MSR-MT 4/01 vs.
Babelfish
0.32 ? 0.11
(at .99)
250
sentences
This table summarizes our comparison of
MSR-MT?s Spanish-English (SE) output to the
output of Babelfish (http://world.altavista.com/).
Three separate evaluations were performed, in
order to track MSR-MT?s progress over seven
months. The first two evaluations involved
seven raters, while the third involved six.
The shift in the mean preference score from
-0.23 to 0.32 shows clear progress against
Babelfish; by the second evaluation, raters very
slightly preferred MSR-MT in this domain. By
April, all six raters strongly preferred MSR-MT.
6.2.3 English-Spanish vs. alternative system
English-Spanish
systems
Mean preference
score (5 raters)
Sample
size
MSR-MT 2/01
vs. L&H
0.078 ? 0.13
(at 0.95)
250
sentences
MSR-MT 4/01
vs. L&H
0.19 ? 0.14
(at 0.99)
250
sentences
The evaluations summarized in this table
compared February and April 2001 versions of
MSR-MT?s English-Spanish (ES) output to the
output of the Lernout & Hauspie (L&H) ES
system (http://officeupdate.lhsl.com/) for 250
source sentences. Five raters participated in the
first evaluation, and six in the second.
The mean preference scores show that by
April, MSR-MT was strongly preferred over
L&H. Interestingly, though, one rater who
participated in both evaluations maintained a
slight but systematic preference for L&H?s
translations. Determining which aspects of the
translations might have caused this rater to
behave differently from the others is a topic for
future investigation.
6.3 Discussion
These results document steady progress in
the quality of MSR-MT?s output over a
relatively short time. By April 2001, both the SE
and ES versions of the system had surpassed
Babelfish in translation quality for this domain.
While these versions of MSR-MT are the most
fully developed, the other language pairs under
development are also progressing rapidly.
In interpreting our results, it is important to
keep in mind that MSR-MT has been
customized to the test domain, while the
Babelfish and Lernout & Hauspie systems have
not.2 This certainly affects our results, and
2Babelfish was chosen for these comparisons only
after we experimentally compared its output to that
of the related Systran system augmented with its
computer domain dictionary. Surprisingly, the
means that our comparisons have a certain
asymmetry. As our work progresses, we hope to
evaluate MSR-MT against a quality bar that is
perhaps more meaningful: the output of a
commercial system that has been hand-
customized for a specific domain.
The asymmetrical nature of our comparison
cuts both ways, however. Customization
produces better translations, and a system that
can be automatically customized has an inherent
advantage over one that requires laborious
manual customization. Comparing an
automatically-customized version of MSR-MT
to a commercial system which has undergone
years of hand-customization will represent a
comparison that is at least as asymmetrical as
those we have presented here.
We have another, more concrete, purpose in
regularly evaluating our system relative to the
output of systems like Babelfish and L&H: these
commercial systems serve as (nearly) static
benchmarks that allow us to track our own
progress without reference to absolute quality.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper has described MSR-MT, an
EBMT system that produces MT output whose
quality in a specific domain exceeds that of
commercial MT systems, thus attacking head-on
the customization bottleneck. This work
demonstrates that automatic data-driven
methods can provide commercial-quality MT.
In future work we hope to demonstrate that
MSR-MT can be rapidly adapted to very
different semantic domains, and that it can
compete in translation quality even with
commercial systems that have been hand-
customized to a particular domain.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the efforts of
the MSR NLP group in carrying out this work.
References
Aikawa, T., M. Melero, L. Schwartz, and A. Wu
2001 ?Multilingual natural language
generation,? Proceedings of 8th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation,
Toulouse.
generic SE Babelfish engine produced slightly better
translations of our technical data.
Brown, R. 1999. ?Adding linguistic knowledge
to a lexical example-based translation
system,? Proceedings of TMI 99.
Franz, A., K. Horiguchi, L. Duan, D. Ecker, E.
Koontz, and K. Uchida 2000. ?An integrated
architecture for example-based machine
translation,? Proceedings of COLING2000.
Frederking, R., S. Nirenburg, D. Farwell, S.
Helmreich, E. Hovy, K. Knight, S. Beale, C.
Domashnev, D. Attardo, D. Grannes, and R.
Brown 1994. ?Integrating translations from
multiple sources within the Pangloss Mark
III machine translation system,? Proceedings
of AMTA94.
Heidorn, G., K. Jensen, S. Richardson, and A.
Viesse 2000. In R. Dale, H. Moisl and H.
Somers (eds) Handbook of Natural Language
Processing. Marcel Dekker Inc.
Meyers, A., M. Kosaka, and R. Grishman. 2000.
?Chart-based transfer rule application in
machine translation,? Proceedings of
COLING98.
Menezes, A. and S. Richardson 2001. ?A best-
first alignment algorithm for automatic
extraction of transfer mappings from
bilingual corpora,? Proceedings of the
Workshop on Data-Driven Machine
Translation, ACL 2001.
Moore, R. 2001 ?Towards a Simple and
Accurate Statistical Approach to Learning
Translation Relationships Among Words,?
Proceedings of the Workshop on Data-
Driven Machine Translation, ACL 2001.
Pinkham, J and M. Corston-Oliver 2001
?Adding Domain Specificity to an MT
system,? Proceedings of the Workshop on
Data-Driven Machine Translation, ACL
2001.
Richardson, S. D., W. Dolan, and L.
Vanderwende 1998. ?MindNet: Acquiring
and Structuring Semantic Information from
Text,? Proceedings of COLING-ACL ?98,
Montreal.
Takeda, K., N. Uramoto, T. Nasukawa, and T.
Tsutsumi 1992. ?Shalt 2?a symmetric
machine translation system with conceptual
transfer,? Proceedings of COLING92.
Turcato, D., P. McFetridge, F. Popowich, and J.
Toole 1999. ?A unified example-based and
lexicalist approach to machine translation,?
Proceedings of TMI 99.
Watanabe, W. Kurohashi, S. and E. Aramaki
2000. ?Finding structural correspondences
from bilingual parsed corpus for corpus-
based translation,? Proceedings of
COLING2000.
Watanabe, H. and K. Takeda 1998. ?A pattern-
based machine translation system extended
by example-based processing,? Proceedings
of COLING98.
