Example-based machine translation using DP-matching between 
word sequences 
Eiichiro Sumita 
ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories 
2-2 Hikaridai, Seika, Soraku,  
Kyoto 619-0288,  
Japan 
sumita@slt.atr.co.jp
 
 
Abstract 
We propose a new approach under the 
example-based machine translation 
paradigm. First, the proposed approach 
retrieves the most similar example by 
carrying out DP-matching of the input 
sentence and example sentences while 
measuring the semantic distance of the 
words. Second, the approach adjusts 
the gap between the input and the most 
similar example by using a bilingual 
dictionary. We show the results of a 
computational experiment. 
1 Introduction 
Knowledge acquisition from corpora is viable for 
machine translation. The background is as follows:  
 Demands have been increasing for machine 
translation systems to handle a wider range of 
languages and domains.  
 MT requires bulk knowledge consisting of rules 
and dictionaries.  
 Building knowledge consumes considerable 
time and money.  
 Bilingual/multilingual translations have become 
widely available. 
 
There are two approaches in corpus-based 
translation: 
1. Statistical Machine Translation (SMT): SMT 
learns models for translation from corpora and 
dictionaries and searches for the best translation 
according to the models in run-time (Brown et 
al., 1990; Knight, 1997; Ney et al, 2000). 
2. Example-Based Machine Translation (EBMT): 
EBMT uses the corpus directly. EBMT retrieves 
the translation examples that are best matched 
to an input expression and adjusts the examples 
to obtain the translation (Nagao, 1981; Sadler 
1989; Sato and Nagao, 1990; Sumita and Iida, 
1991; Kitano, 1993; Furuse et al, 1994; 
Watanabe and Maruyama, 1994; Cranias et al, 
1994; Jones, 1996; Veale and Way, 1997; Carl, 
1999, Andriamanankasina et al, 1999; Brown, 
2000). 
 
Figure 1 Configuration 
(1) Sentence-
Aligned
Bilingual 
Corpus
(2) Bilingual 
Dictionary
(3) Thesauri
Retrieval + Adjustment
Input
sentence
Target
sentence
This paper pursues EBMT and proposes a 
new approach by using the distance between 
word sequences. The following sections show 
the algorithm, experimental results, and 
implications and prospects. 
2 The proposed method 
2.1 Configuration  
As shown in Figure 1, our resources are (1) a 
bilingual corpus, in which sentences are aligned 
beforehand; (2) a bilingual dictionary, which is used 
for word alignment and translation; and (3) thesauri 
of both languages, which are used for aiding word 
alignment and incorporating the semantic distance 
between words into the word sequence distance. 
2.2 Algorithm 
The translation process consists of four steps:1  
I. Retrieve the most similar translation pair; 
II. Generate translation patterns; 
III. Select the best translation pattern; 
IV. Substitute target words for source words. 
 
Here, we illustrate the algorithm using translation 
from Japanese to English step by step. 
2.2.1 Retrieval - Step I 
This step scans the source parts of all example 
sentences in the bilingual corpus. By measuring the 
distance (dist shown below) between the word 
sequences of the input and example sentences, it 
retrieves the examples with the minimum distance, 
provided the distance is smaller than the given 
threshold. Otherwise, the whole translation fails with 
no output. 
 
According to equation (1), dist is calculated as 
follows: The counts of the Insertion (I), Deletion (D), 
and Substitution (S) operations are summed up and 
the total is normalized by the sum of the length of the 
source and example sequences.  
                                                           
1 Step I corresponds to Retrieval in Figure 1 and steps II, 
III, and IV correspond to Adjustment. 
Substitution (S) considers the semantic distance 
between two substituted words and is called 
SEMDIST. SEMDIST is defined as the division of K 
(the level of the least common abstraction in the 
thesaurus of two words) by N (the height of the 
thesaurus) according to equation (2) (Sumita and Iida, 
1991). It ranges from 0 to 1. 
Let?s observe the following two sentences,2 (1-j) 
the input and (2-j) the source sentence of the 
translation example, where the hatched parts 
represent the differences between the two sentences.  
 
(1-j) iro/ga/ki/ni/iri/masen 
[color/SUB/favor/OBJ/enter/POLITE-NOT] 
{I do not care for the color.} 
 
(2-j) dezain/ga/ki/ni/iri/masen 
[design/SUB/favor/OBJ/enter/ POLITE-NOT] 
{I do not care for the design.} 
 
Because ?iro? and ?dezain? are completely dissimilar 
in the thesauri used in the experiment, SEMDIST is 1, 
and therefore, the dist between them is (0+0+2*1) / 
(6+6) = 0.167. The dist is calculated efficiently by a 
standard dynamic programming technique (Cormen 
1989).   
This step is an application of the so-called DP-
matching, which is often used in speech recognition 
research. 
2.2.2 Pattern Generation - Step II 
First, the step stores the hatched parts of the input 
sentence in memory for the following translation. 
Second, the step aligns the hatched parts of source 
sentence (2-j) to corresponding target sentence (2-e) 
of the translation example by using lexical resources. 
3 We do not align non-hatched parts word by word. 
We assume that non-hatched parts correspond 
together as a whole. This keeps most parts of the 
example unchanged in order to avoid mixing errors 
or unnaturalness in the translation. 
 
(2-j) dezain/ga/ki/ni/iri/masen 
(2-e) I do not like the design.  
 
                                                           
2 A Japanese sentence has no word boundary marker such 
as the blank character in English so we put ? / ? between 
Japanese words. The brackets show the English literal 
translation word by word and the braces show the sentence 
translation in English. 
3 We do not consider on the alignment mechanism in this 
proposal. We have a free hand in selecting an appropriate 
alignment method out of a spectrum (Manning and Hinrich, 
1999) ranging from statistical to lexical types. In the 
experiment, we rely on a bilingual dictionary and thesauri 
in both languages. 
N
KSEMDIST
SEMDISTDIdist LL exampleinput
=
+
++
=

)2(
2)1(
We obtain the following translation pattern, 
where the variable X is used to connect source 
(2-j-p) and target (2-e-p) and store instance (1-j-
b) in the input sentence. 
 
(2-j-p) X/ga/ki/ni/iri/masen 
(2-e-p) I do not like the X 
(1-j-b) X = ?iro? 
2.2.3 Pattern Selection - Step III  
We may retrieve more than one example, and, 
moreover, translation patterns can differ. We have to 
select the most suitable one from among these 
translation patterns. We use a heuristic rule for this 
purpose. 
 
1. Maximize the frequency of the translation 
pattern. 
2. If this cannot be determined, maximize the sum 
of the frequency of words in the generated 
translation patterns.  
3. If this cannot be determined, select one 
randomly as a last resort. 
2.2.4 Word Substitution - Step IV   
This step is straightforward. By translating the source 
word of the variable using the bilingual dictionary, 
and instantiating the variable within the target part of 
the selected translation pattern by target word (1-e-b), 
we finally get target sentence (1-e). 
 
(1-e-b) X = ?color? 
(1-e) I do not like the color. 
3 Experiment 
To see whether this rough approach works or not, we 
conducted a computational experiment using a large-
scale bilingual corpus. In this section, we show the 
experimental conditions, performance, and error 
analysis.  
Table 1 Corpus Statistics  
Sentences 204,108
(J) 8.3Sentence Length 
(E) 6.1
(J) 1,689,449Words 
(E) 1,235,747
(J) 19,640Vocabulary 
(E) 15,374
 
3.1 Experimental Conditions  
Bilingual Corpus 
We built a collection of Japanese sentences and their 
English translations, which are usually found in 
phrasebooks for foreign tourists. Because the 
translations were made sentence by sentence, the 
corpus was sentence-aligned by birth. We lemmatized 
and POS-tagged both the Japanese and English 
sentences using our morphological analysis programs. 
The total sentence count was about 200 K. 4  The 
statistics are summarized in Table 1. 
 
Test set 
A quality evaluation was done for 500 sentences 
selected randomly from the above-mentioned corpus 
and the remaining sentences were used as translation 
examples for the experiment. 
 
Bilingual Dictionary 
We also used a bilingual dictionary previously 
developed for another MT system in the travel 
domain (Sumita et al1999). 
 
 
Thesaurus 
We used thesauri whose hierarchies are based on the 
Kadokawa Ruigo-shin-jiten (Ohno 1984) for distance 
calculation and word alignment.  
3.2 Results  
Here, we show coverage and accuracy results as 
evidence that our proposed machine translation 
system works. 
3.2.1 Coverage  
Our approach does not produce any translation when 
there is no example whose dist is within the given 
threshold, which was 1/3 in the experiment. 
Table 2 Coverage and Sentence Length 
% Average length
Exactly 46.4 5.6
Approximately 42.8 7.7
No Output 10.8 11.0
Total 100.0 7.0
 
 Our approach covers about 90% of 500 
randomly selected sentences. As shown in Table 2, 
one half of 90% is matched exactly and the other half 
is matched approximately (dist < 1/3). 
                                                           
4  We call a sequence of sentences uttered by a single 
speaker an utterance. Our corpus is in fact aligned utterance 
by utterance. Strictly speaking, ?sentence? in this paper 
should be replaced by ?utterance.?  
 The characteristics of no output sentences 
are clearly explained by the average length. Our 
approach is not good with longer sentences because 
our algorithm has no explicit step of decomposing an 
input sentence into sub-sentences and because the 
longer the sentence, the smaller the possibility that 
there exists a similar sentence in the example 
database.  
We assume that a coverage of 90% is 
important because this means that if 200 K sentences 
were input into the system, the system would produce 
a translation 90% of the time. In other words, the 
system would help the user 90% of the time to 
communicate with foreign people (assuming the user 
to be in a foreign country). 
3.2.2 Accuracy 
Quality Ranking 
Each translation is graded into one of four ranks5 
(described below) by a bilingual human translator 
who is a native speaker of the target language, 
American English: 
(A) Perfect: no problems in either information or 
grammar; (B) Fair: easy-to-understand with some 
unimportant information missing or flawed grammar; 
(C) Acceptable: broken but understandable with 
effort; (D) Nonsense: important information has been 
translated incorrectly. 
 
Table 3 Translation Accuracy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
5  This ranking was developed for evaluation in spoken 
language translation. For more details, see (Sumita et al, 
1999). 
 
Result 
As shown in Table 3, our proposal achieved a high 
accuracy of about 80% (A, B, C ranks in total). The 
remaining 20% are divided into ranks D and F (No 
output).  
 
Long Sentence Problem  
Figure 2 shows6 that the accuracy clearly decreases 
as the dist increases. This implies two points: (1) 
dist can indicate the quality of the produced 
translation, in contrast with the fact that MT systems 
usually do not provide any confidence factor on their 
results. The user is safe if he/she confines 
himself/herself to using translations with a small dist 
value; (2) The current algorithm has a problem in 
handling distant examples, which usually relate to the 
long sentence problem. 
3.2.3 Error Analysis 
As shown in the previous two subsections, the most 
dominant problem is in dealing with relatively longer 
sentences. We point out here that even for shorter 
sentences there are problems, although they are less 
frequent, as follows: 
 
 Idioms or collocations 
Even when the dist between the two sentences is 
small, i.e., they are quite similar in the source 
language, the meanings of the sentences can vary and 
the translation can be different in the target language. 
This case is not so frequent, but is possible by idioms 
or collocations as exemplified in the following 
sample. 
                                                           
6 The horizontal axis indicates the number of sentences. 
 Rank % 
A 41.4 
B 25.2 
Good 
C 11.8 
D 10.8 Bad 
F(No output) 10.8 
0 50 100 150 200 250
1/3> d >=0.3
0.3> d >=0.2
0.2> d >=0.1
0.1> d >=0
EXACT
A
B
C
D
F
Figure 2 Accuracy by Distance 
 
1. kata/o/tsume/teitadake/masu/ka 
[shoulders/OBJ/shorten-or-sit-
closely/REQUEST/POLITE/QUESTION] 
{Could you tighten the shoulders up?} 
2. seki/o/tsume/teitadake/masu/ka 
[seat/OBJ/shorten-or-close-
up/REQUEST/POLITE/QUESTION] 
{Could you move over a little?} 
The replaceability between ?kata? and ?seki? does 
not hold for these two similar sentences. To avoid 
this problem, a feedback mechanism of erroneous 
translations built into the system is one possible 
solution. 
 
 Noise in data 
The proposed approach accepts the translation 
example blindly. If the translation is wrong or 
inappropriate, the output is directly made defective. 
The next two translations show contextual 
inappropriateness. The source parts of the two 
examples are exactly the same, but the target part of 
the first example is neutral and that of the second 
example is specific, i.e., valid only in a special 
situation. Preventing this requires cleaning the 
example database, preferably by machine, or 
collecting sufficiently large-scale data to suppress the 
influence of noisy examples. 
 
1. hai/ari/masu = Yes, we do. 
[yes/exist/POLITE] 
2. hai/ari/masu = Yes, we have a shuttle bus. 
[yes/exist/POLITE] 
4 Discussion 
Here, we explain the implications of the experimental 
results and discuss the future extension. 
 
4.1 Limitations 
Our proposal has the limitations listed below, but we 
would like to note that we have obtained high 
coverage and accuracy for the phrasebook task.  
 Database limitation: If a nearest neighbor 
within the threshold does not exist in the 
example database, we cannot perform 
translation. One positive note is that we were 
able to build the necessary example database for 
the phrasebook task, which is not a toy.  
 Context limitation: We cannot translate context-
dependent words, because contexts are often 
hard to embed in an example database. For 
example, Japanese ?konnichiwa? corresponds to 
?Good morning? or  ?Good afternoon? in English 
depending on the time of utterance. It is in 
general difficult to embed such kinds of 
situational information into the example 
database. 
 Implementation limitation: We have no method 
for dividing an input into chunks (such as 
clauses) at present, so long sentences cannot be 
dealt with. In addition, no investigation has 
been made on robustness with respect to 
recognition errors yet. However, DP-matching 
is expected to be effective. 
4.2 Generality vs. Quality 
There is no commercial system that can translate 
phrasebook sentences at this level of accuracy. 
Figure 3 shows a comparison of our proposal and a 
commercial machine translation system that accepts 
travel conversations. Table 4 shows sample 
translations by the above two systems. The upper 
translation was produced by our proposed system and 
the lower translation was produced by the 
commercial system.  
The reason behind the performance difference 
for this task is that the commercial one was built as a 
general-purpose system and phrasebook sentences 
are not easy to translate into high-quality results by 
using such a general-purpose architecture.  
However, we must admit that general-purpose 
architectures are effective and we do not mean to 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
A commercial MT
Proposed MT A
B
C
D
F
Figure 3 Comparison of Proposed EBMT and a Commercial MT 
criticize them by using this comparison. It is 
reasonable to suggest that general-purpose 
architectures are not the most suitable option for 
achieving high-quality translations in restricted 
domains.  
4.3 Development Cost and Its Reduction in 
the Future 
We do not need grammars and transfer rules but we 
do need a bilingual corpus and lexical resources. 
The adaptability of our approach to 
multilingual translation is promising. Because we 
have already succeeded in J-to-E, one of the most 
difficult translation pairs, we have little concern 
about other pairs. If we can create an n lingual corpus, 
we can make n(n-1) MT systems. 
To enable such a dream within a shorter 
timeframe, we have to reduce the necessary resources 
such as bilingual dictionaries and thesauri by 
automating the construction of lexical knowledge.  
We are aiming at such additional cost 
reduction.  
We also want to eliminate restrictions, e.g., 
sentence-aligned and morphologically tagged 
example database. By doing so, the applicability of 
our approach can be increased. This is another 
important challenge. 
A further challenging goal is to establish 
technology enabling the use of a small-scale corpus. 
4.4 Related Research 
Here, we would like to compare our proposal and 
related research in four points: level of knowledge, 
application of dynamic programming, the use of 
thesauri, and the task. 
 
Knowledge of EBMT 
Many EBMT studies (Sato and Nagao, 1990; Sato, 
1991; Furuse et al, 1994; Sadler, 1989) assume the 
existence of a bank of aligned bilingual trees or a set 
of translation patterns. However, building such 
knowledge is done by humans and is very expensive. 
Methods for automating knowledge building are still 
being developed. In contrast, our proposal does not 
rely on such a high-level analysis of the corpus and 
requires only word-level knowledge, i.e., 
morphological tags and dictionaries. 
 
Dynamic programming 
Dynamic programming has been used within the 
EBMT paradigm (1) for technical term translation 
(Sato, 1993), and (2) for translation support (Cranias 
et al, 1994).  
Sato translates technical terms, which are 
usually compound nouns, while we translate 
sentences. He uses a corpus in which translation units 
of a pair of technical terms are aligned, while we do 
not require the alignment of translation units. He 
defines the matching score and we define the 
distance between word sequences, which are 
different. However, both are computed by a standard 
dynamic programming technique.  
Based on surface structures and content 
words, Cranias defined a similarity score between 
texts and introduced the idea of clustering the 
translation memory to speed up the retrieval of 
similar translation examples. The score is again 
computed by a standard dynamic programming 
technique, but Cranias provides not a translation but 
only a retrieval.  
 
But made to want to change these yen into dollars.
I?d like to change yen into dollars.korera/no/en/wo/doru/ni/ryougae/shi/tai/n/desu/ga
[these/of/yen/OBJ/dollar/IND-
OBJ/exchange/do/want/PARTICLE/be/but]
English isn?t good.
I?m not good at English.eigo/wa/tokui/dehaari/masen
[English/TOPIC/strong/be/ POLITE/NEGATION]
Don?t I let me know a way of using a washing machine.
Will you show me how to use the washing machine?Sentaku/ki/no/tsukai/kata/o/oshie/tekure/masen/ka
[washing/machine/of/use/way/OBJ/teach/REQUEST/PO
LITE/NEGATION/QUESTION]
The roasting addition and subtraction of the steak.
How would like your steak?suteeki/no/yaki/kagen/wa
[steak/of/grill/degree/TOPIC]
Is it possible to have bread more?
Could I have some more bread?pan/o/motto/itadake/masu/ka
[bread/OBJ/more/get/POLITE/QUESTION]
Table 4 Sample translations by two MTs 
Thesaurus 
Brown (2000) uses equivalence classes to 
successfully improve the coverage of EBMT. He 
proposed a method of automatically generating 
equivalence classes using clustering techniques, 
while we use hand-coded thesauri (in the experiment). 
Such automation is very attractive, and the author is 
planning to follow in Brown?s line, in spite of  a fear 
that low frequent words will not be dealt with 
effectively by clustering techniques. Brown uses a 
hard condition, i.e., whether a word is included in an 
equivalence class or not, while we provide the 
relative distance between two words. It is unknown 
which method is better for EBMT. We do not plan on 
sticking with the current implementation using hand-
coded thesauri, as we realize that further research on 
these open problems is indispensable. 
 
Phrasebook task 
The phrasebook task was first advocated for the task 
of speech translation by (Stentiford and Steer, 1987). 
They pointed out that when communicating within a 
limited domain such as international telephone 
communications, it is nearly possible to specify all of 
the required message concepts. They used a keyword-
based approach to access concepts to overcome 
speech recognition errors. On the other hand, we use 
DP-matching techniques for this end.7 The scalability 
of the keyword-based approach has raised questions 
because enlarging a corpus directly increases the 
chances of conflict in identifying the concepts to be 
conveyed.  
5 Concluding Remarks 
We proposed a new approach using DP-matching for 
retrieving examples within EBMT and demonstrated 
its coverage and accuracy through a computational 
experiment for a restricted domain, i.e., a phrasebook 
task for foreign tourists.  
There is much room for our translation 
method to improve: (1) decomposing input sentences 
will improve the coverage, and (2) indexing or 
clustering the example database will drastically 
improve the efficiency of the current na?ve 
implementation. 
 
Acknowledgement 
First, the author thanks anonymous reviewers for 
their useful comments. The author?s heartfelt thanks 
go to Kadokawa-Shoten for providing the Ruigo-
Shin-Jiten. Thanks also go to Dr. Seiichi 
                                                           
7  We believe our approach is robust against speech 
recognition errors, but we have not yet applied it to speech 
recognition results.  
YAMAMOTO, President and Mr. Satoshi SHIRAI, 
Department Head, for providing the author with the 
chance to pursue this research.  
References 
Andriamanankasina, T., Araki, K. and Tochinai, T. 
1999. Example-Based Machine Translation of Part-
Of-Speech Tagged Sentences by Recursive Division. 
Proceedings of MT SUMMIT VII. Singapore.  
 
Brown, P. F., Cocke, J., Della Pietra, S. A.,  Della 
Pietra, V. J., Jelinek, F., Lafferty, J.,  Mercer, R. L.,  
and Roossin, P. S. 1990. A Statistical Approach to 
Machine Translation. Computational Linguistics 
16(2). 
 
Brown, R. D. 2000. Automated Generalization of 
Translation Examples. In Proceedings of the 
Eighteenth International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING-2000), pp. 125-
131. Saarbr?cken, Germany, August 2000. 
 
Carl, M.  1999. Inducing Translation Templates for 
Example-Based Machine Translation, Proc. Of MT-
Summit VII. 
 
Cormen, H. T., Leiserson, C. E. and Rivest, L. R. 
1989. Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press, p. 1028. 
 
Cranias, L., Papageorgiou, H. and Piperidis, S. 1994. 
A Matching Technique in Example-Based Machine 
Translation. Institute for Language and Speech 
Processing, Greece. Paper presented to Computation 
and Language. 
 
Furuse, O., Sumita, E. and Iida, H. 1994. Transfer-
Driven Machine Translation Utilizing Empirical 
Knowledge. Transactions of IPSJ, Vol. 35, No. 3, pp. 
414-425 (in Japanese). 
 
Jones, D. 1996. Analogical Natural Language 
Processing. UCL Press. London, 155p.  
 
Kitano, H. 1993. A Comprehensive and Practical 
Model of Memory-Based Machine Translation. Proc. 
of IJCAI-93. pp. 1276-1282. 
 
Knight, K. 1997. Automating Knowledge Acquisition 
for Machine Translation, AI Magazine, 18/4.  
 
Manning, D., C. and Hinrich, S. (1999) Chapter 5 of 
Foundations of statistical natural language 
processing, MIT Press, p. 680. 
 
 Nagao, M. 1981. A Framework of a Mechanical 
Translation between Japanese and English by 
Analogy Principle, in Artificial and Human 
Intelligence, A. Elithorn and R. Banerji (eds.)  North-
Holland, pp. 173-180, 1984. 
 
Ney, H., Och, F. J. and Vogel, S. 2000. Statistical 
Translation of Spoken Dialogues in the Vermobil 
System, Proc. Of MSC2000, pp. 69-74.  
 
Ohno, S. and Hamanishi, M. 1984. Ruigo-Shin-Jiten, 
Kadokawa, p. 932 (in Japanese). 
 
Sadler, V. Working with Analogical Semantics, 1989). 
Foris Publications, p. 256.  
 
Sato, S. and Nagao, M. 1990. Toward Memory-based 
Translation. In the proceedings of the International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, COLING-
90, Helsinki, Finland, August 1990.  
 
Sato, S. 1991. MBT2: A Method for Combining 
Fragments of Examples in Example-Based 
Translation. JJSAI, Vol. 6, No. 6, pp. 861-871 (in 
Japanese). 
 
Sato, S. 1993. Example-Based Translation of 
Technical Terms. Proc. of TMI-93, pp. 58-68,. 
 
Stentiford, F. M. W. and Steer, M. G. 1987. A Speech 
Driven Language Translation System, Proc. of 
European Conference on Speech Technology, Vol. 2, 
pp. 418-421. 
 
Sumita, E. and Iida, H. 1991. Experiments and 
Prospects of Example-Based Machine Translation. 
Proc. of ACL-91, pp. 185-192. 
 
Sumita, E., Yamada, S., Yamamoto, K., Paul, M., 
Kashioka, H., Ishikawa, K. and Shirai, S. 1999. 
Solutions to Problems Inherent in Spoken-language 
Translation: The ATR-MATRIX Approach, Proc. of 
7th MT Summit, pp. 229-235. 
 
Veale, T. and Way, A. 1997. Gaijin: A Template-
Driven Bootstrapping Approach to Example-Based 
Machine Translation, in the Proceedings of 
NeMNLP'97, New Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, Sofia, Bulgaria. 
 
Watanabe, H. and Maruyama, H. 1994. A 
Transfer System Using Example-Based Approach. 
IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, Vol. 
E77-D, No. 2, pp. 247-257. 
 
