Reconciling Initiative and Discourse Structure
Susan E. Strayer and Peter A. Heeman
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
OGI School of Science and Engineering
Oregon Health & Science University
20000 NW Walker Rd Beaverton, OR 97006, USA
susan strayer@yahoo.com heeman@cse.ogi.edu
Abstract
In this paper we consider how ini-
tiative is managed in dialogue. We
propose that initiative is subordi-
nate to the intentional hierarchy of
discourse structure. In dialogues
from the TRAINS corpus we nd
that inside a segment initiated by
one speaker, the other speaker only
makes two types of contributions: a
special kind of acknowledgment we
call forward acknowledgments, and
short contributions that add content
to the segment. The proposal has
important implications for dialogue
management: a system only needs
to model intentional structure, from
which initiative follows.
1 Introduction
The dialogue manager of a spoken language
system is responsible for determining what
contributions a system can make and when it
can make them. The question is, what should
the dialogue manager pay attention to in or-
der to accomplish this? Two areas of research
have shaped our understanding of what hap-
pens in dialogue: research in dialogue struc-
ture and in mixed initiative.
Grosz and Sidner (1986) proposed a theory
of discourse structure to account for why an
utterance was said and what was meant by it.
Their theory has three components: linguis-
tic structure, intentional structure and atten-
tional state. Intentions are key to accounting
for discourse structure, dening discourse co-
herence, and \providing a coherent conceptu-
alization of the term `discourse' itself." The
intentional structure describes the purpose of
the discourse as a whole, and the relation-
ship of the purpose of each discourse seg-
ment to the main discourse purpose or other
discourse segment purposes. All utterances
within a segment contribute to the purpose
of that segment. This theory, however, does
not comment on initiative within the segment.
Nor does it specify when and how speakers
should start a segment or end the current one.
Hence, it underspecies what speakers can do
in dialogue.
Research in initiative works to account for
which speaker is driving the conversation at
any given point. For example, in a question-
answer pair, the speaker asking the question
is said to have the initiative (Whittaker and
Stenton, 1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990;
Novick and Sutton, 1997). Whittaker and
Stenton segmented dialogues where initiative
shifts from one speaker to the other. They
found that initiative "did not alternate from
speaker to speaker on a turn by turn basis,
but that there were long sequences of turns in
which [initiative] remained with one speaker.
In a mixed initiative system, the dialogue
manager needs to track initiative in order to
know when the system should add signicant
content, and when it should let the user take
over. However, no theory has oered a good
account of why a speaker would want to take
the initiative, or keep it once they have it.
In the rest of this paper we rst describe
previous work in discourse structure and in
initiative and describe our coding of them.
Next, we explore the relationship between dis-
course structure and initiative. As previous
studies have found (Whittaker and Stenton,
1988; Walker and Whittaker, 1990), there is
a close correlation between them, but the re-
lationship is not direct. We then explore how
initiative can shift within a subdialogue and
nd two types of contributions that a speaker
can make in a discourse segment: a special
kind of acknowledgment we call forward ac-
knowledgment, and short contributions that
add content to the segment. We propose that
initiative is subordinate to intentional struc-
ture. Additionally, our proposal is better able
to account for question-answer pairs and how
initiative returns to the original speaker after
an embedded subdialogue. It will have impor-
tant implications for dialogue management: a
system only needs to model intentional struc-
ture, from which initiative follows.
2 Discourse Structure and
Initiative Analysis
Our proposal for managing initiative builds
on two main areas of research, discourse struc-
ture and initiative. We start by discussing
the work of Grosz and Sidner (1986), which
ties speaker's intentions to linguistic struc-
ture, then discuss the work of Whittaker, et
al. in initiative. We introduce our coding
of three dialogues in the TRAINS corpus,
a corpus of human-human task-oriented di-
alogues, in which two participants work to-
gether to formulate a plan involving the man-
ufacture and transportation of goods (Allen et
al., 1995; Heeman and Allen, 1995). In these
dialogues, one speaker is the user (u), who has
a goal to solve, and the other speaker is the
system (s), who knows the detailed informa-
tion involved in how long it takes to ship and
manufacture goods.
2.1 Discourse Structure
Discourse structure is used to analyze dia-
logue from the top down, starting with the
purpose of the discourse as a whole, then the
purpose of each discourse segment, in order to
understand how each utterance ts into the
dialogue. The theory of discourse structure
developed by Grosz and Sidner (1986) pro-
poses that discourse structure is made up of
three components: linguistic structure, inten-
tional structure, and attentional state. Our
work focuses on the rst two components.
The linguistic structure is a hierarchical seg-
mentation of the dialogue into discourse seg-
ments. Segment boundaries are identied by
changes in tense and aspect, pause lengths,
speech rate, and discourse markers, such as
\anyway," \by the way," \so," and \rst of
all." The intentional structure is a hierarchy
of segment purposes. Each discourse segment
has a purpose, and the purpose of each seg-
ment contributes to the purpose of its parent.
Intentional structure is key to understanding
what the discourse is about and explains its
coherency.
Subdialogue coding: In our study, the
rst author segmented dialogues into subdi-
alogues based on the purpose of the utter-
ance (Smith and Gordon, 1997; Traum and
Hinkelman, 1992). We established two classes
of subdialogues: task subdialogues, segments
that describe subtasks in the dialogue, and
clarication subdialogues, local segments that
clarify a gap in understanding, either to re-
quest missing information or to supply miss-
ing information to the other speaker. The seg-
ment initiator gives the rst utterance in the
segment and establishes its purpose.
1
The
left side of Figure 1 gives an example of a
discourse segment (or subdialogue) with two
embedded clarication subdialogues, and the
segment initiator for each subdialogue. Gen-
erally, we found the dialogue structure in the
dialogues we analyzed to be quite at, with
few embedded structures. Typically, task
subdialogues occurred at the same level, and
clarication subdialogues were embedded in
a task subdialogue, as seen in the example in
Figure 1.
2.2 Initiative
Initiative is held by the speaker who is driv-
ing the conversation at any given point in the
conversation (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988,
1
The segment initiator corresponds to the initi-
ating conversational participant (ICP) of Grosz and
Sidner's theory. The non-initiator corresponds to the
other conversational participant (OCP).
Segment
Initiator Speaker Utterance Initiative
u u where pick up um one of the tankers there umph- with uh oranges that
will be used
u
s mm-hm
u for the t- u
s s okay to move the oranges we need a boxcar s
u okay
u we'll bring a boxcar from Elmira with the engine three u
s okay
u um so we'll get to Corning with the engine three and the boxcar will get
to Corning and we'll pick up uh
u
u u can a tanker and a boxcar be pulled by an engine u
s yes
u so okay so we'll pick up a tank of uh the tanker of OJ orange- oranges u
s ok- right
Figure 1: Example of Discourse Structure and Initiative Segments (d921-5.2: utt25-utt36).
Walker and Whittaker, 1990; Novick and Sut-
ton, 1997). It has been used to analyze dis-
course from the bottom up, starting with
utterances. We start with adjacency pairs
(Scheglo and Sacks, 1973), which consist of a
rst part, uttered by one of the speakers, and
a second part, uttered by the other. The rst
part sets up expectations for the second part,
and hence the speaker of the rst part can be
viewed as being in control of the dialogue dur-
ing both parts of the adjacency pair. Below
we give the annotation scheme used by Whit-
taker, et al (Whittaker and Stenton, 1988;
Walker and Whittaker, 1990) for annotating
initiative based on utterance type.
Assertions: Declarative utterances used to
state facts. The speaker has initiative,
except when it is a response to a ques-
tion.
Questions: Utterances intended to elicit in-
formation from others. The speaker has
initiative, except when it follows a ques-
tion or command.
Commands: Intended to induce actions in
others. The speaker has initiative.
Prompts: Utterances with no propositional
content (e.g., \yeah," \okay"). These ut-
terances do not exhibit initiative.
Whittaker and Stenton used the initiative
codings as a basis for segmenting dialogues.
They used dialogues between an expert and
a client about diagnosing and repairing soft-
ware faults. They found that not only did
initiative pass back and forth between the
speakers (unlike single-initiative dialogues),
but that initiative often stayed with a speaker
for on average of eight speaker turns.
Whittaker and Stenton (1988) looked at the
correlation of control boundaries to discourse
markers, and Walker and Whittaker (1990)
looked at anaphoric reference. These are the
same kinds of linguistic evidence that Grosz
and Sidner (1986) said marks discourse seg-
ment boundaries. In fact, Walker and Whit-
taker claimed that initiative segments are the
discourse segments of Grosz and Sidner's the-
ory, with the speaker with initiative being the
initiator of the segment, who establishes the
discourse segment purpose. However, they ac-
knowledged that \there can be topic shifts
without change of initiation, change of [ini-
tiative] without topic shift." In fact, when
we look at the dialogue excerpt given in Fig-
ure 1, we see that the initiative segmentation
identied the rst subdialogue, but not the
second. However, Walker and Whittaker did
not specify the relationship between initiative
and discourse structure.
Initiative coding In our study, the rst
author coded initiative using the annotation
scheme of Whittaker and Stenton (1988). The
right side of Figure 1 shows the annotation for
utterances where speakers demonstrate initia-
tive. For utterances where the speaker does
Table 1: Correlation of Segment Boundaries
Initiative vs Segment Initiator Initiative vs
Subdialogue vs Subdialogue Segment Initiator
Boundaries 113 113 46
Hits 47 46 41
Misses 66 67 5
False Positives 35 0 41
Recall 42% 41% 89%
Precision 57% 100% 50%
not demonstrate initiative, initiative is said to
belong to the last speaker that demonstrated
it. Hence, when the system uttered \mm-
hm" in the second utterance, which does
not demonstrate initiative, initiative does not
change from the user. We also show initia-
tive segment boundaries, which are identied
by changes in initiative. Here, we see that
initiative swings back and forth between the
system and the user several times, leading to
three initiative segments.
3 Relationship between Initiative
and Discourse Structure
Walker and Whittaker (1990) suggested that
changes in initiative correspond to changes
in discourse structure, but they did not de-
termine the exact relationship between them.
In this section we analyze the dierences be-
tween initiative segments and discourse struc-
ture for three dialogues from the TRAINS
corpus. We nd that there is a close rela-
tionship, but not a direct one.
3.1 Segment Boundary Comparison
In this section, we compare initiative bound-
aries (where initiative shifts from one speaker
to the next) to subdialogue boundaries (where
a new subdialogue begins) using recall and
precision.
2
An initiative boundary is scored
as a hit if there is a corresponding subdia-
logue boundary. It is scored as a false posi-
tive if there is no subdialogue boundary. A
subdialogue boundary is scored as a miss if
it has no initiative boundary. For example,
2
Recall = Hits / (Hits + Misses )
Precision = Hits / ( Hits + False Positives )
in Figure 1, there are two hits (the bound-
ary between the 3rd and 4th utterances and
the boundary between the 5th and 6th utter-
ances), two misses (the boundary between the
8th and 9th utterances and the boundary be-
tween the 10th and 11th utterances), and no
false positives. The second column of Table
1, \Initiative versus Subdialogues", gives the
results. We see that both recall and precision
are very low for initiative boundaries relative
to discourse boundaries. However, compar-
ing initiative segments to discourse segments
is not fair. The misses in Figure 1 should be
expected since the initiator of the last subdi-
alogue is the same as the higher level subdia-
logue.
To show the eect of the unfairness, we
contrast changes in segment initiator to dis-
course segment boundaries in the third col-
umn of Table 1, \Segment Initiator versus
Subdialogue." Not surprisingly, we obtained
a precision of 100%: by denition, the seg-
ment initiator is only set at the beginning of
each discourse segment. However, we only ob-
tained a recall rate of 41%. This means only
41% of discourse segment boundaries are ini-
tiated by a dierent speaker. We should not
expect these boundaries to have a change in
initiative, since there is no change in segment
initiator. A fair comparison should contrast
changes in initiative only to changes in dis-
course segment initiator. The results of doing
this is shown in the fourth column, \Initia-
tive versus Segment Initiator." Here we see
much better results for recall; however, pre-
cision is still very low. We will return to the
low precision rates in Section 4.
Table 2: Initiative Held by Segment Initiator
Clarication Task
Total Subdialogues Subdialogues
Subdialogues 91 45 46
First utterance 91 (100%) 45 (100%) 46 (100%)
Whole subdialogue 77 (85%) 45 (100%) 32 (70%)
Segment
Initiator Initiative Speaker Utterance
u u u okay so we have to take oranges from Corning and
bring them to Elmira
s right
u u and then back to Bath by
s s + by noon +
u u + mid- + by noon
Figure 2: Forward acknowledgment (d92a-5.2: utt14-18).
3.2 Shifts Within Discourse Segments
Although the recall rate in the last column
of Table 1 is very good, it shows there are
some changes in discourse segment initiator
that are not matched by changes in initia-
tive. The question is, does this happen at the
beginning of the segment, the end, or in the
middle? We looked at how often the segment
initiator is the same as the speaker with ini-
tiative for the rst utterance in each discourse
segment. As seen in Table 2, this does give us
a 100% correct rate, meaning that a discourse
segment can only be initiated by the speaker
also taking the initiative. This is not unex-
pected, since the speaker needs to contribute
something new, otherwise it would not count
as the beginning of a new discourse segment.
However, the initiative does not always stay
with the initiator for the entire segment, as
seen in the last row of Table 2.
4 Reconciling Initiative Inside
Discourse Segments
The rst utterance of each discourse segment
shows perfect agreement between the initiator
of the segment and speaker with initiative, as
seen in Table 2. But what happens during
the course of the segment? In this section we
focus on subdialogues where the non-initiator
makes a contribution and the initiator nishes
the segment.
4.1 Forward Acknowledgments
In the TRAINS corpus there are times
when listeners were so synchronized with the
speaker that could they anticipate what the
speaker was going to say and ll it in be-
fore the he said it. Figure 2 gives an exam-
ple, where the system lled in \by noon" for
the user. Typical acknowledgments are utter-
ances that indicate understanding of an ut-
terance made by the other speaker and do
not contribute content. Our phenomena of
forward acknowledgments also indicate under-
standing, but of what the other speaker is
about to say, even before he says it. By ll-
ing in what the other speaker was about to
say, the speaker indicates understanding and
also moves the conversation forward. In both
examples of forward acknowledgments in the
three dialogues, the initiator nished the ut-
terance of the other speaker.
Forward acknowledgments are coded as
demonstrating initiative, because they add
content. However, this initiative is subordi-
nate to the initiative of the main segment, so
they are show as being embedded in the par-
ent segment.
Segment
Initiator Initiative Speaker Utterance
u u u and then take those uh t- to Dan- and then go to
Dansville
s s so that's + uh let's see and + that's one one more hour
u + and +
u u yeah and we can un- we can
s s drop o at + the +
u u + drop + o th- that boxcar and take well
dr-
u yeah drop o the boxcar + of +
s s + and then + take two empty
ones
u u right two empty ones down to Avon
s + oh +
u u + and + pick up the the bananas
s right
Figure 3: Other contribution (d93-19.5, utt83-utt93)
4.2 Other-Contributions
The rest of the utterances coded with initia-
tive made by the non-initiator of the segment
were more substantial contributions. Here,
the speaker added content to the discourse
segment that is not predicted from the ini-
tiator's speech. We refer to these as other-
contributions, and they often occur where the
two speakers are closely collaborating and are
highly synchronized.
3
In Figure 3, we show a
dialogue excerpt in which the two speakers
are so closely synchronized that they pick up
parts of each others utterances and build on
it. Initiative shifts back and forth between the
two speakers, but, in fact, we think this phe-
nomenon of other-contributions is related to
the phenomena that Schirin (1987) referred
to as shared turns.
4.3 Eect on Initiative
Table 3 shows what happens to initiative af-
ter the non-initiator makes a contribution
demonstrating initiative. There were 25 of
3
It is interesting to note the amount of overlapping
speech (marked with a '+') in these examples of other-
contributions. It might be the case that when speak-
ers are highly synchronized, they are more bound to
loosen the restrictions on turn-taking. This is some-
thing we hope to investigate in the future.
Table 3: After Contribution by Non-Initiator
Contributions by Non-Initiator 25
New subdialogue 7
Embedded subdialogue 1
Initiative returns to segment initiator 14
Initiative held by non-initiator 3
these cases. In 7 of them, the next utter-
ance demonstrating initiative occurred in a
new subdialogue, and in one case it occurred
in an embedded subdialogue. We focus on the
remaining 17 cases where the next utterance
demonstrating initiative occurred within the
same discourse segment. In 14 of these, initia-
tive returned to the segment initiator, usually
in the very next utterance (13 out of 14). In
only 3 cases does initiative stay with the non-
initiator. This result is contrary to previous
theories of initiative (Walker and Whittaker,
1990; Chu-Carroll and Brown, 1997), which
would expect initiative to stay with the non-
initiator.
4.4 Discussion
Forward acknowledgments and other-
contributions are exceptions to the general
rule that initiative tends to reside with the
same speaker. Based on the results of our
small preliminary study, we propose that
initiative is subordinate to the intentional
structure of the discourse theory of Grosz
and Sidner. Initiative is held by the segment
initiator. The non-initiator can make utter-
ances that contribute to the purpose of the
current discourse segment, namely forward
acknowledgments and other-contributions,
but initiative remains with the segment
initiator. Hence, initiative does not need to
be tracked, because it is held by the initiator
of the discourse segment.
This proposal allows either speaker to con-
tribute to the purpose of a discourse segment,
which accounts not only for forward acknowl-
edgments and other-contributions, but also
can account for embedded subdialogues and
the answer to a question in a question-answer
pair. It can be argued that embedded subdi-
alogues initiated by either speaker contribute
to the purpose of its parent subdialogue. For
example, in Figure 1, the subdialogue initi-
ated by the system (s) contributes to the pur-
pose of the parent subdialogue by pointing
out a problem with the user's plan to move
oranges, which the user then adjusts. The
clarication subdialogue initiated by the user
(u) checks that the plan the user is developing
will work, and so it also supports the general
purpose of developing the plan.
The proposal also can also be used to sim-
plify how initiative is used in question-answer
pairs. Whittaker and Stenton (1988) assigned
initiative to the speaker of statements, except
when it was the answer to a question, in which
case it belonged to the speaker asking the
question. In our view, a question-answer pair
is a subdialogue with the initiative belonging
to the questioner. The answer is coded with
initiative, but it is an other-contribution, and
so this initiative is subordinate to the ques-
tioner's initiative.
Other researchers have struggled with
structure in initiative. Chu-Carroll and
Brown (1997) referred to initiative as dialogue
initiative, and proposed a second level, task
initiative, to model who is adding domain
actions. In contrast to our proposal, which
makes initiative subordinate to intentional
structure, they proposed that dialogue ini-
tiative is subordinate to their task initiative.
Hence, their model could incorrectly pre-
dict who has initiative after the non-initiator
makes a contribution. As was shown in Ta-
ble 3, after the non-initiator makes an other-
contribution within a subdialogue, generally
initiative returns to the segment initiator of
the subdialogue, instead of staying with the
non-initiator. Chu-Carroll and Brown also
used task initiative to model how cooperative
a system should be. With novice users, the
system would tend to have task initiative and
thus make domain actions, but not so with ex-
perts. This is similar to Smith and Gordon's
(1997) use of four levels of initiative, which
set how much initiative was given to the sys-
tem and how much was given to the user in
one of four levels. Although a system needs
to reason about how helpful it needs to be, it
is unclear whether this can be done through
a single variable that is tied to dialogue ini-
tiative.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed that initia-
tive is subordinate to intentional structure in
dialogue. We have backed up this claim by ex-
amining utterances that demonstrate initia-
tive made by the non-initiator of the discourse
segment. We found that after these utter-
ances, initiative returns to the segment initia-
tor in almost all cases. The reconciliation of
initiative and discourse segments means that
we now understand how initiative and dia-
logue level intentions are related and have a
clearer picture of how both participants can
contribute to discourse intentions.
Based on our results, initiative in itself does
not need to be tracked. Initiative belongs to
the speaker who started the current discourse
segment. Therefore, a dialogue manager only
needs to model intentional structure.
6 Future Work
Our preliminary study was based on a small
set of data coded by one of the authors. Plans
for future work include annotating more dia-
logues with multiple coders to ensure the re-
sults reported here are reproducible. We also
intend to analyze what happens to initiative
after an embedded subdialogue is completed
to verify that initiative stays with the seg-
ment initiator of the parent segment. We also
want to better understand the few cases where
stays with the non-initiator (the three cases in
Table 3).
In addition to more TRAINS dialogues,
we will code dialogues from other corpora,
such as Maptask (Anderson et al, 1991) and
Switchboard (Godfrey et al, 1992). This
will help ensure that we do not introduce id-
iosyncrasies of the TRAINS corpus into our
theory. Rather than just code initiative, we
will use the DAMSL annotation scheme (Core
and Allen, 1997). This scheme annotates
the forward and backward-looking functions of
each utterance, from which initiative can be
derived. Reliable intercoder agreement has
been obtained with this coding scheme. For
coding discourse structure, several schemes
have been proposed (Passonneau and Litman,
1997; Flammia, 1998; Nakatani et al, 1995;
Traum and Nakatani, 1999) ranging from cod-
ing at segmentation on monologues to hier-
archical segmentation of dialogues. We will
use these annotation schemes as a foundation,
and monitor our annotation results to ensure
we achieve good intercoder reliability.
Our theory necessitates that we better un-
derstand the structure of discourse, how it is
built, and the actions and rules that a dis-
course manager can use to aect the discourse
structure. We also need to understand the
reasoning process that determines whether a
participant will make an other-contribution or
start a new subdialogue. Since dialogue is
a collaborative eort (Cohen and Levesque,
1994; Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986), we also
need to explore how the participants collabo-
rate on the discourse structure.
7 Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge funding
from the Intel Research Council. The au-
thors also thank David Traum and members
of the Centers for Spoken Language Under-
standing and Human Computer Communica-
tion at OGI for helpful discussions and com-
ments.
References
J. Allen, L. Schubert, G. Ferguson, P. Heeman,
C. Hwang, T. Kato, M. Light, N. Martin, B.
Miller, M. Poesio, and D. Traum. 1995. The
Trains project: A case study in building a con-
versational planning agent. Journal of Experi-
mental and Theoretical AI, 7:7{48.
A. Anderson, M. Bader, E. Bard, E. Boyle, G. Do-
herty, S. Garrod, S. Isard, J. Kowtko, J. McAl-
lister, J. Miller, C. Sotillo, H. Thompson, and
R. Weinert. 1991. The HCRC map task corpus.
Language and Speech, 34(4):351{366.
J. Chu-Carroll and M. Brown. 1997. Tracking
initiative in collaborative dialogue interaction.
In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Madrid, Spain, July.
H. Clark and D. Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Referring
as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22:1{39.
P. Cohen and H. Levesque. 1994. Preliminaries
to a collaborative model of dialogue. Speech
Communications, 15(3{4):265{274, December.
M. Core and J. Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs with
the DAMSL annotation scheme. In Working
notes of the AAAI Fall Symposium on Com-
municative Action in Humans and Machines.
G. Flammia. 1998. Discourse segmentation of
spoken dialogue: an empirical approach. Doc-
toral dissertation, Department of Electrical and
Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for
research and development. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Audio, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 517{
520.
B. Grosz and C. Sidner. 1986. Attention, inten-
tions, and the structure of discourse. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 12(3):175{204.
P. Heeman and J. Allen. 1995. The Trains spo-
ken dialog corpus. CD-ROM, Linguistics Data
Consortium, April.
C. Nakatani, B. Grosz, D. Ahn, and J. Hirschberg.
1995. Instructions for annotating discourse.
Technical Report 21-95, Center for Research
in Computing Technology, Harvard University,
Cambridge MA, September.
D. Novick and S. Sutton. 1997. What is
mixed-initiative interaction? In 1997 AAAI
Spring Symposium on Computational Models
for Mixed Initiative Interaction, pages 24{26,
Stanford University, March. AAAI Press.
R. Passonneau and D. Litman. 1997. Discourse
segmentation by human and automated means.
Computational Linguistics, 103{139.
E. Scheglo and H. Sacks. 1973. Opening up clos-
ings. Semiotica, 7:289{327.
D. Schirin. 1987. Discourse Markers. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York.
R. Smith and S. Gordon. 1997. Eects of vari-
able initiative on linguistic behavior in human-
computer spoken natural language dialogue.
Computational Linguistics, 23(1):141{168.
D. Traum and E. Hinkelman. 1992. Conversation
acts in task-oriented spoken dialogue. Compu-
tational Intelligence, 8(3):575{599. Special Is-
sue on Non-literal language.
D. Traum and C. Nakatani. 1999. A two-level ap-
proach to coding dialogue for discourse struc-
ture: Activities of the 1998 working group
on higher-level structures. In Proceedings of
the ACL'99 Workshop Towards Standards and
Tools for Discourse Tagging, pages 101{108,
June.
M. Walker and S. Whittaker. 1990. Mixed initia-
tive in dialogue: An investigation into discourse
segmentation. In Proceedings of the 28th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 70{78.
S. Whittaker and P. Stenton. 1988. Cues and con-
trol in expert client dialogues. In Proceedings
of the 26th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 123{130.
