Learning to identify animate references
Constantin Ora?san
School of Humanities, Languages
and Social Sciences
University of Wolverhampton
C.Orasan@wlv.ac.uk
Richard Evans
School of Humanities, Languages
and Social Sciences
University of Wolverhampton
R.J.Evans@wlv.ac.uk
Abstract
Information about the animacy of
nouns is important for a wide range of
tasks in NLP. In this paper, we present
a method for determining the animacy
of English nouns using WordNet and
machine learning techniques. Our
method firstly categorises the senses
from WordNet using an annotated
corpus and then uses this information
in order to classify nouns for which
the sense is not known. Our evaluation
results show that the accuracy of the
classification of a noun is around 97%
and that animate entities are more
difficult to identify than inanimate
ones.
1 Introduction
Information on the gender of noun phrase (NP)
referents can be exploited in a range of NLP
tasks including anaphora resolution and the
applications that can benefit from it such as
coreference resolution, information retrieval,
information extraction, machine translation,
etc. The gender of NP referents is explicitly
realised morphologically in languages such as
Romanian, French, Russian, etc. in which the
head of the NP or the NP?s determiner undergoes
predictable morphological transformation or
affixation to reflect its referent?s gender. In the
English language, the gender of NPs? referents is
not predictable from the surface morphology.
Moreover, in (Evans and Ora?san, 2000) it was
argued that it is not always desirable to obtain
information concerning the specific gender of
a NP?s referent in English. Instead, it is more
effective to obtain the animacy of each NP. We
define animacy as the property of a NP whereby
its referent, in singular rather than plural number,
can be referred to using a pronoun in the set
fhe, him, his, himself, she, her, hers, herselfg.
During the course of this paper, we will discuss
animate and inanimate senses of nouns and verbs.
We use these expressions to denote the senses
of nouns that are the heads of NPs referring to
animate/inanimate entities and the senses of verbs
whose agents are typically animate/inanimate
entities.
In our previous work, we investigated the use
of WordNet in order to determine the animacy of
entities in discourse. There, we used the fact that
each noun and verb sense is derived from unique
classes called unique beginners. We classified
each unique beginner as being a hypernym of a
set of senses that were for the most part either
animate or inanimate (in the case of nouns) or
indicative of animacy/inanimacy in their subjects
(in the case of verbs). In classifying a noun, the
number of its senses that belong to an animate
class is compared with the number belonging
to an inanimate class, and this information is
used to make the final classification. In addition,
if the noun is the head of a subject, the same
information is computed for the verb. Our
assumption was that a noun with many animate
senses is likely to be used to refer to an animate
entity. For subjects, the information from the
main verb was used to take into consideration the
context of the sentence. That system, referred
to in this paper as the previous system also used
a proper name gazetteer and some simple rules
which mainly assisted in the classification of
named entities. For reasons explained in Section
4.2, these additions to the basic algorithm were
ignored in the comparative evaluation described
there.
Experiments with that algorithm showed it to
be useful. Applied to a system for automatic
pronominal anaphora resolution, it led to a
substantial improvement in the ratio of suitable
and unsuitable candidates in the sets considered
by the anaphora resolver (Evans and Ora?san,
2000).
However, the previous system has two main
weaknesses. The first one comes from the fact
that the classes used to determine the number
of animate/inanimate senses are too general, and
in most cases they do not reliably indicate the
animacy of each sense in the class. The second
weakness is due to the naive nature of the rules
that decide if a NP is animate or not. Their
application is simple and involves a comparison
of values obtained for a NP with threshold values
that were determined on the basis of a relatively
small number of experiments.
In this paper, we present a new method for
animacy identification which uses WordNet and
machine learning techniques. The remainder
of the paper is structured as follows. Section
2 briefly describes some concepts concerning
WordNet that are used in this paper. In Section 3,
our two step method is described. An evaluation
of the method and discussion of the results is
presented in Section 4. We end the paper by
reviewing previous related work and drawing
some conclusions.
2 Background information
As previously mentioned, in this research
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is used to identify
the animacy of a noun. In this section several
important concepts from WordNet are explained.
WordNet is an electronic lexical resource
organized hierarchically by relations between
sets of synonyms or near-synonyms called
synsets. Each of the four primary classes of
content-words, nouns, verbs, adjectives and
adverbs are arranged under a small set of so-
called unique beginners. In the case of nouns
and verbs, which are the concern of the present
paper, the unique beginners are the most general
concepts under which the entire set of entries is
organized on the basis of hyponymy/hypernymy
relations. Hypernymy is the relation that holds
between such word senses as vehicle
1
-ship
1
or
human
1
-politician
1
, in which the first items
in the pairs are more general than the second.
Conversely, the second items are more specific
than the first, and are their hyponyms.
It is usual to regard hypernymy as a vertically
arranged relationship, with general senses
positioned higher than more specific ones in an
ontology. In WordNet, the top-most senses are
called unique beginners. Senses at the same
vertical level in the ontology are also clustered
horizontally through the synonymy relation in
synsets. In this paper, the term node is used
interchangeably with synset.
As explained in Section 3.1, our method
requires that the nodes in WordNet are classified
according to their animacy. Given the size of
WordNet, this task cannot be done manually and
a corpus where words are annotated with their
senses was necessary. A corpus that meets these
requirements is SEMCOR (Landes et al, 1998),
a subset of the Brown Corpus in which the nouns
and the verbs have been manually annotated with
their senses from WordNet.
3 The method
In this section a two step method used to classify
words according to their animacy is presented. In
Section 3.1, we present an automatic method for
determining the animacy of senses from WordNet
on the basis of an annotated corpus. Once the
senses from WordNet have been classified, a
classical machine learning technique uses this
information to determine the animacy of a noun
for which the sense is not known. This technique
is presented in Section 3.2.
3.1 The classification of the senses
As previously mentioned, the unique beginners
are too general to be satisfactorily classified as
animate or inanimate. However, this does not
26
6
4
HYPERNYM
ani
h
= ani
i
inani
h
= inani
i
3
7
7
5
2
6
6
4
Sense
1
ani
1
inani
1
3
7
7
5
2
6
6
4
Sense
2
ani
2
inani
2
3
7
7
5
2
6
6
4
Sense
3
ani
3
inani
3
3
7
7
5
  
2
6
6
4
Sense
n
ani
n
inani
n
3
7
7
5
Figure 1: Example of hypernymy relation between senses in WordNet
Sense
1
Sense
2
Sense
3
... Sense
n
Observed ani
1
ani
2
ani
3
... ani
n
Expected ani
1
+ inani
1
ani
2
+ inani
2
ani
3
+ inani
3
... ani
n
+ inani
n
Table 1: Contingency table for testing if a hypernym is animate
mean that it is not possible to uniquely classify
more specific senses as animate or inanimate. In
this section, we present a corpus-based method
which classifies the synsets from WordNet
according to their animacy.
The NPs in a 52 file subset of the SEMCOR
corpus were manually annotated with animacy
information and then used by an automatic system
to classify the nodes. These 52 files contain 2512
animate entities and 17514 inanimate entities.
The system attempts to classify the senses
from WordNet that explicitly appear in the
corpus directly, on the basis of their frequency.1
However, our goal is to design a procedure which
is also able to classify senses that are not found
in the corpus. To this end, we decided to use a
bottom up procedure which starts by classifying
the terminal nodes and then continues with more
general nodes. The terminal nodes are classified
using the information straight from the annotated
files. When classifying a more general node,
the following hypothesis is used: ?if all the
1Due to linguistic ambiguities and tagging errors, not all
the senses at this level can be classified adequately in this
way.
hyponyms of a sense are animate, then the sense
itself is animate?. However, this does not always
hold because of annotation errors or rare uses of
a sense and instead, a statistical measure must be
used to test the animacy of a more general node.
Several measures were considered and the most
appropriate one seemed to be chi-square.
Chi-square is a non-parametric test which can
be used for estimating whether or not there is
any difference between the frequencies of items
in frequency tables (Oakes, 1998). The formula
used to calculate chi-square is:

2
=
X
(O  E)
2
E
(1)
where O is the observed number of cases and E
the expected number of cases. If 2 is less than
or equal to a critical level, we may conclude that
the observed and expected values do not differ
significantly.
Each time that a more general node is to be
classified, its hyponyms are considered. If all the
hyponyms observed in the corpus2 are annotated
as either animate or inanimate (but not both), the
2Either directly or indirectly via the hyponymy relations.
Generalisation rejected.... for hypernym Def:(any living entity)
Ani 16 Inani 3 person (sense 1)
++++Def: (a human being; "there was too much for one person to do")
Ani 0 Inani 11 animal (sense 1)
++++Def: (a living organism characterized by voluntary movement)
Figure 2: Example of generalisation rejected
Generalisation accepted .... for hypernym Def:(the continuum of
experience in which events pass from the future through the
present to the past)
Ani 0 Inani 9 past (sense 1)
++++Def: (the time that has elapsed; "forget the past")
Ani 0 Inani 6 future (sense 1)
++++Def: (the time yet to come)
Figure 3: Example of generalisation accepted
more general node is classified as its hyponyms
are. However, for the aforementioned reasons,
this rule does not apply in all cases. In the
remaining cases the chi-square test is applied.
For each more general node which is about to
be classified, two hypotheses are tested: the first
one considers the node animate and the second
one inanimate. The system classifies the node
according to which test is passed. If neither are
passed, it means that the node is too general and
it and all its hypernyms can equally refer to both
animate and inanimate entities.
For example, a more general node can have
several hyponyms as shown in Figure 1. In that
case, the hypernym has n hyponyms. We consider
each sense to have two attributes: the number
of times it has been annotated as animate (ani
i
)
and the number of times it has been annotated
as inanimate (inani
i
). For more general nodes,
these attributes are the sum of the number of
animate/inanimate instances of its hyponyms.
When the node is tested to determine whether or
not it is animate, a contingency table like Table
1 is built. Given that we are testing to see if the
more general node is animate or not, for each of
its hyponyms, the total number of occurrences of
a sense in the annotated corpus is the expected
value (meaning that all the instances should be
animate) and the number of times the hyponym is
annotated as referring to an animate entity is the
observed value. Formula 1 is used to compute
chi-square, and the result is compared with the
critical level obtained for n-1 degrees of freedom
and a significance level of .05. If the test is
passed, the more general node is classified as
animate. In a similar way, more general nodes
are tested for inanimacy. Figures 2 and 3 show
two small examples in which the generalisation
is rejected and accepted, respectively.
In order to be a valid test of significance, chi-
square usually requires expected frequencies to be
5 or more. If the contingency table is larger than
two-by-two, some few exceptions are allowed as
long as no expected frequency is less than one and
no more than 20% of the expected frequencies are
less than 5 (Sirkin, 1995). In our case it is not
possible to have expected frequencies less than
one because this would entail no presence in the
corpus. If, when the test is applied, more than
20% of the senses have an expected frequency
less than 5, the two similar senses with the lowest
frequency are merged and the test is repeated.3 If
no senses can be merged and still more than 20%
of the expected frequencies are less than 5, the
test is rejected.
3.2 The classification of a word
The classification described in the previous
section is useful for determining the animacy of a
sense, even for those which were not previously
found in the annotated corpus, but which are
hyponyms of a node that has been classified.
However, nouns whose sense is unknown cannot
be classified directly and therefore an additional
level of processing is necessary. In this section,
we show how TiMBL (Daelemans et al, 2000)
3Two senses are considered similar if they both have the
same attribute equal to zero.
was used to determine the animacy of nouns.
TiMBL is a program which implements several
machine learning techniques. After trying the
algorithms available in TiMBL with different
configurations, the best results were obtained
using instance-based learning with gain ratio as
the weighting measure (Quinlan, 1993; Mitchell,
1997). In this type of learning, all the instances
are stored without trying to infer anything from
them. At the classification stage, the algorithm
compares a previously unseen instance with
all the data stored at the training stage. The
most frequent class in the k nearest neighbours
is assigned as the class to which that instance
belongs. After experimentation, it was noticed
that the best results were obtained when k=3.
In our case the instances used in training
and classification consist of the following
information:
 The lemma of the noun which is to be
classified.
 The number of animate and inanimate senses
of the word. As we mentioned before, in
the cases where the animacy of a sense is
not known, it is inferred from its hypernyms.
If this information cannot be found for any
of a word?s hypernyms, information on the
unique beginners for the word?s sense is
used, in a manner similar to that used in
(Evans and Ora?san, 2000).
 If the word is the head of a subject, the
number of animate/inanimate senses of
its verb. For those senses for which the
classification is not known, an algorithm
similar to the one described for nouns is
employed. These values are 0 for heads of
non-subjects.
 The ratio of the number of animate singular
pronouns (e.g he or she) to inanimate
singular pronouns (e.g. it) in the whole text.
The output of this stage is a list of nouns
classified according to their animacy.
4 Evaluation and discussion
In this section we examine the performance
of the system, particularly with respect to the
classification of nouns; investigate sources of
errors; and highlight directions for future research
and improvements to the system.
4.1 The performance of the system
The system was evaluated with respect to two
corpora. The first one consists of the files selected
from the SEMCOR corpus stripped of the sense
annotation. The second one is a selection of
texts from Amnesty International (AI) used in our
previous research. These texts have been selected
because they include a relatively large number of
references to animate entities. By including the
texts from the second corpus we could compare
the results of our previous system with those
obtained here. In addition, we can assess the
results of the algorithm on data which was not
used to determine the animacy of the senses. The
characteristics of the two corpora are presented in
Table 2.
In this research three measures were used
to assess the performance of the algorithm:
accuracy, precision and recall. The accuracy is
the ratio between the number of items correctly
classified and the total number of items to be
classified. This measure assesses the performance
of the classification algorithm, but can be slightly
misleading because of the greater number of
inanimate entities in texts. In order to alleviate
this problem, we computed the precision and
recall for each type of classification. The
precision with which the method classifies
animate entities is defined as the ratio between
the number of entities it correctly classifies
as animate and the total number of entities it
classifies as animate (including the ones wrongly
assigned to this class). The method?s recall
over this task is defined as the ratio between the
number of entities correctly classified as animate
by the method and the total number of animate
entities to be classified. The precision and recall
for inanimate entities is defined in a similar
manner.
We consider that by using recall and precision
for each type of entity we can better assess the
performance of the algorithms. This is mainly
because the large number of inanimate entities are
considered separately from the smaller number of
animate entities. In addition to this, by separating
Corpus No of words No. of animate entities No of inanimate entities
SEMCOR 104612 2512 17514
AI 15767 537 2585
Table 2: The characteristics of the two corpora used
Animacy Inanimacy
Experiment Accuracy Precision Recall Precision Recall
Baseline on SEMCOR 37.62% 8.40% 74.44% 88.41% 31.64%
Baseline on AI 31.01% 18.07% 76.48% 79.27% 20.60%
Previous system on AI 64.87% 93.88% 36.09% 81.00 % 99.14%
New System on SEMCOR 97.51% 88.93% 91.03% 98.74% 98.41%
New System on AI 97.69% 94.28% 92.17% 98.38% 98.83%
Table 3: The results of the evaluation
the evaluation of the classification of animate
entities from the one for inanimate entities we can
assess the difficulty of each classification.
Table 3 presents the results of the method on
the two data sets. For the experiment with the
SEMCOR corpus, we evaluated it using five-fold
cross-validation. We randomly split the whole
corpus into five disjoint parts, using four parts for
training and one for evaluation. We repeated the
training-evaluation cycle five times, making sure
that the whole corpus was used. Note that for
each iteration of the cross-validation, the learning
process begins from scratch. The results reported
were obtained by averaging the error rates from
each of the 5 runs. In the second experiment, all
52 files from the SEMCOR corpus were used for
training and the texts from Amnesty International
for testing.
In addition to the results of the method
presented in this paper, Table 3 presents the
results of a baseline method and of the method
previously proposed in (Evans and Ora?san, 2000).
In the baseline method, the probability that an
entity is classified as animate is proportional
to the number of animate third person singular
pronouns in the text.
As can be seen in Table 3 the accuracy of the
baseline is very low. The results of our previous
method are considerably higher, but still poor
in the case of animate entities with many of
these being classified as inanimate.4 This can
4Due to time constraints and the large amount of effort
be explained by the fact that most of the unique
beginners were classified as inanimate, and
therefore there is a tendency to classify entities
as inanimate. The best results were obtained
by the new method over both corpora, the main
improvement being noticed in the classification
of animate entities.
Throughout this section we referred to the
classification of ambiguous nouns without trying
to assess how successful the classification of the
synsets in WordNet was. Such an assessment
would be interesting, but would require manual
classification of the nodes in WordNet, and
therefore would be somewhat time consuming.
Even though this evaluation was not carried out,
the high accuracy of the system suggests that the
current classification is useful.
4.2 Comments and error analysis
During the training phase of TiMBL, the program
computes the importance of each feature for
the classification. The most important feature
according to the gain ratio is the number of
animate senses of a noun followed by the number
of inanimate senses of the noun. This was
expected given that our method is based on the
idea that in most of the cases the number of
animate and inanimate senses determines the
animacy of a noun. However, this would mean
that the same noun will be classified in the same
required to transform the input data into a format usable
by the previous method, it was not possible to assess its
performance with respect to the SEMCOR corpus.
way regardless of the text. Therefore, three text
dependent features were introduced. They are the
number of animate and inanimate senses of the
predicate of the sentence if the noun is a subject,
and the ratio between the number of animate
third-person singular pronouns and inanimate
third-person singular pronouns in the text. In
terms of importance, gain ratio ranks them fourth,
fifth and sixth, respectively, after the lemma of
the noun. The lemma of the noun was included
because it was noticed that this improves the
accuracy of the method.
During the early stages of the evaluation, the
classification of personal names proved to be a
constant source of errors. Further investigation
showed that the system performed poorly on all
types of named entities. For the named entities
referring to companies, products, etc. this can
be explained by the fact that in many cases they
are not found in WordNet. However, in most
cases the system correctly classified them as
inanimate, having learned that most unknown
words belong to this class. Entities denoted by
personal names were constantly misclassified
either because the names were not in WordNet or
else they appeared with a substantial number of
inanimate senses (e.g. the names Bob and Maria
do not have any senses in WordNet which could
relate them to animate entities). In light of these
errors we decided not to present our system with
named entities. With no access to more accurate
techniques, we considered non-sentence-initial
capitalised words as named entities and removed
them from the evaluation data. Even when this
crude filtering was applied, we still presented
a significant number of proper names to our
system. This partially explains its lower accuracy
with respect to the classification of animate
entities.
By attempting to filter proper names, we
could not compare the new system with the one
referred to as the extended algorithm in (Evans
and Ora?san, 2000). In future, we plan to address
the problem of named entities by using gazetteers
or, alternatively, developing more sophisticated
named entity recognition methods.
Another source of errors is the unusual usage
of senses. For example someone can refer to their
pet with he or she, and therefore according to
our definition they should be considered animate.
However, given the way the algorithm is designed
there is no way to take these special uses into
consideration.5
Another problem with the method is the fact
that all the senses have the same weight. This
means that a word like pupil, which has two
animate senses and one inanimate, is highly
unlikely to be classified as inanimate, even if
it used to refer to a specific part of the eye.6
The ideal solution to this problem would be to
disambiguate the words, but this would require an
accurate disambiguation method. An alternative
solution is to weight the senses with respect to
the text. In this way, if a sense is more likely to
be used in a text, its animacy/inanimacy will have
greater influence on the classification process. At
present, we are trying to integrate the word sense
disambiguation method proposed in (Resnik,
1995) into our system. We hope that this will
particularly improve the classification of animate
entities.
5 Related work
Most of the work on animacy/gender recognition
has been done in the field of anaphora resolution.
The automatic recognition of NP gender on
the basis of statistical information has been
attempted before (Hale and Charniak, 1998).
That method operates by counting the frequency
with which a NP is identified as the antecedent of
a gender-marked pronoun by a simplistic pronoun
resolution system. It is reported that by using
the syntactic Hobbs algorithm (Hobbs, 1976)
for pronoun resolution, the method was able to
assign the correct gender to proper nouns in a
text with 68.15% precision, though the method
was not evaluated with respect to the recognition
of gender in common NPs. The method has
two main drawbacks. Firstly, it is likely to be
ineffective over small texts. Secondly, it seems
5However, it is possible to reclassify the nodes from
WordNet using an annotated corpus where the pets are
animate, but this would make the system consider all the
animals which can be pets animate.
6Actually the only way this word would be classified as
inanimate is if it is in the subject position, and most of the
senses of its main verb are inanimate. This is explained by
the way the senses are weighted by the machine learning
algorithm.
that the approach makes the assumption that
anaphora resolution is already effective, even
though, in general, anaphora resolution systems
rely on gender filtering.
In (Denber, 1998), WordNet was used to
determine the animacy of nouns and associate
them with gender-marked pronouns. The details
presented are sparse and no evaluation is given.
Cardie and Wagstaff (1999) combined the use of
WordNet with proper name gazetteers in order
to obtain information on the compatibility of
coreferential NPs in their clustering algorithm.
Again, no evaluation was presented with respect
to the accuracy of this animacy classification
task.
6 Conclusions and future work
In this paper, a two step method for animacy
recognition was proposed. In the first step, it
tries to determine the animacy of senses from
WordNet on the basis of an annotated corpus. In
the second step, this information is used by an
instance based learning algorithm to determine
the animacy of a noun. This area has been
relatively neglected by researchers, therefore a
comparison with other methods is difficult to
make. The accuracy obtained is around 97%,
more than 30% higher than that obtained by our
previous system.
Investigation of the results showed that in
order to obtain accuracy close to 100%, several
resources have to be used. As we point out in
Section 4.2, a method which is able to weight
the senses of a noun according to the text,
and a named entity recogniser are necessary.
The requirement for such components helps to
emphasise the problematic nature of NP animacy
recognition. We believe that such an investment
should be made in order to go forward with this
useful enterprise.
References
Claire Cardie and Kiri Wagstaff. 1999. Noun
phrase coreference as clustering. In Proceedings of
the 1999 Joint SIGDAT conference on Emphirical
Methods in NLP and Very Large Corpora (ACL?99),
pages 82 ? 89, University of Maryland, USA.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavarel, Ko van der Sloot,
and Antal van den Bosch. 2000. Timbl: Tilburg
memory based learner, version 3.0, reference guide,
ilk technical report 00-01. ILK 00-01, Tilburg
University.
Michael Denber. 1998. Automatic resolution of
anaphora in english. Technical report, Eastman
Kodak Co, Imaging Science Division.
Richard Evans and Constantin Ora?san. 2000.
Improving anaphora resolution by identifying
animate entities in texts. In Proceedings of
the Discourse Anaphora and Reference Resolution
Conference (DAARC2000), pages 154 ? 162,
Lancaster, UK, 16 ? 18 November.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Eletronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.
John Hale and Eugene Charniak. 1998. Getting useful
gender statistics from english textx. Technical
Report CS-98-06, Brown University.
Jerry Hobbs. 1976. Pronoun resolution. Research
report 76-1, City College, City University of New
York.
Shari Landes, Claudia Leacock, and Randee I. Tengi.
1998. Building semantic concordances. In
Fellbaum (Fellbaum, 1998), pages 199 ? 216.
Tom M. Mitchell. 1997. Machine learning. McGraw-
Hill.
Michael P. Oakes. 1998. Statistics for Corpus
Linguistics. Edinburgh Textbooks in Empirical
Linguistics. Edinburgh University Press.
J. Ross Quinlan. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine
Learning. Morgan Kaufmann.
Philip Resnik. 1995. Disambiguating noun groupings
with respect to Wordnet senses. In David Yarovsky
and Kenneth Church, editors, Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages
54?68, Somerset, New Jersey. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
R. Mark Sirkin. 1995. Statistics for the social
sciences. SAGE Publications.
