Preface
Mike Rosner
Dept. CSAI
University of Malta
MSD06
Malta
mros@cs.um.edu.mt
This workshop is something of an accident. The
original intention was to have two separate
workshops, one devoted to educational issues in
NL technologies, and the other to infrastructures
for sharing computational language resources.
Each of these proposed workshops had a history
of their own.
The general problems of sharing, re-use and
distribution of resources and tools has been with
us for a long time. Only recently, however, have
we seen the emergence of archives not only of
significant size, but of a variety that reflects an
amazing degree of specialisation in terms of
both type of content, type of language, type of
user and so on. The development of such
"designer" archives is due partly to the
availability of cheap computing power and mass
storage (that even University laboratories can
afford!), partly to a shift in perspective towards
empirical methods, and partly to the ever-
increasing ease with which such materials can
be accessed via Internet. Good examples of
existing initiatives in this area are, on the data
side, ELRA/ELDA, LDC, TELRI and elsnet
resource catalogues and repositories. On the
tools side we have, amongst others, the ACL
Natural Language Software Registry (hosted at
DFKI) which was set up as a repository for tools
for the distinct fields of Human Language
Technology (HLT).
Mere proliferation of data is not necessarily
conducive to improved practice, however, and at
a workshop at ACL 2000 in Hong Kong
dedicated to Infrastructures for Global
Collaboration there was an agreement between
the main professional organisations in NLP and
Speech (ACL and ISCA), and elsnet, and the
other meeting participants, that it would be
useful to aim at a broadly supported, joint
repository or catalogue for tools and materials
for the language and speech communities. That
is roughly the background to the infrastructures
workshop.
The education workshop has a somewhat
different history. The first point to note is that
teaching in this area, whether it be from the
perspective of Computational Linguistics, NLP
or AI, involves a high proportion (approximately
40% according to DeSmedt's (1999) survey) of
practical exercises and projects, the organisation
of which depends on the availability
computational infrastructure. All of those
involved in teaching eventually discover the
same basic problem: there are relatively few
resources, both tools and data, that are directly
useable as the basis for instruction, compared to
the total volume of resources that are actually
available. That is, in general, the educationally
useful yield that results from trawling the net, is
pitifully low, and may be getting lower as the
supply increases. The main reason for this is that
most of the material has evolved to fulfil the
needs of research, not education. Consequently,
the best strategy is often to just go on
reinventing our own wheels for our own
purposes: hardly an optimal use of existing
resources.
An ELSNET-sponsored workshop was held at
EACL99 in Bergen to address these issues.
Some excellent individual efforts at providing
tools that buck the trend were presented there
(see Rosner 1999). However, the main
conclusion, which, incidentally, is echoed in
DeSmedt's survey, is that certain non-transient
infrastructures needed to be instigated to raise
the public perception of educational issues in
Computational Linguistics. There was talk of
founding an entity within EACL that could take
on the function of coordinating training-related
activities - as has already happened in ISCA.
Well, this has not happened yet, but it is salutary
to note that something else has: one non-
transient infrastructure, founded in January 2000
under the auspices of elsnet, is the European
Masters in Language and Speech, which is
probably the first example of a tertiary level
"qualification" that transcends national
boundaries.
A second conclusion at the EACL workshop
was the need for a repository of shared
materials, appropriately indexed for educational
usage. Some effort towards that end has been
achieved through JEWELS, an EU-supported
website for educational materials in Language
and Speech.
It seems clear that another infrastructure that is
badly needed to support such initiatives is an
entity whose primary tasks would be the
creation of a maintainable multilingual
taxonomy of the subject matter in order to
enable a consistent naming policy to be agreed
upon concerning both courses, and the
corresponding resources.
This workshop will build on the consensus
reached at these previous workshops. As can be
seen from the presentations, there are two clear
foci: one upon sharable tools, the other on
instruments for sharing tools and resources in
general. A third theme concerns how to build
upon existing initiatives as sources of data or
inspiration.
The main goal of the workshop is to discuss
methods for the improvement and extension of
existing repositories; the educational uses of
repositories; the closer interlinking between
different kinds of repositories (tools and
resources); global infrastructures for the
achievement of joint actions. However, we
expect the scope of the workshop to be much
wider than that, as the issues addressed are of
general interest to everybody who believes that
sharing tools and resources is essential for the
progress of research and education in our field.
To conclude, some words of thanks: to Thierry
Declerck, Steven Krauwer and the other
members of the workshop committee who all
doubled as referees, for their help, patience and
comments.
Our final acknowledgement goes to elsnet, but
not just for sponsoring our invited speaker. If
one looks carefully at many of the other
initiatives that have been mentioned in this short
introduction, it clear that the support shown for
this workshop is no mere coincidence, but part
of a dastardly long-term strategy to promote the
status of our theme and also related ones within,
and somewhat beyond the bounds of
Computational Linguistics.
Long may this strategy continue!
References
de Smedt. K. et. al. European Studies on
Computational Linguistics, University of Bergen
1999.
Rosner M. (ed). Proceedings of the Workshop on
Computer and Internet Supported Education
in Language and Speech Technology, EACL-99.
ACL NL Software Registry, http://registry.dfki.de
LDC (Linguistic Data Consortium)
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu
TELRI (Trans European Language Resources
Infrastructure) http://www.telri.de
ELSNET http://www.elsnet.org/resources.html
ELRA/ELDA http://www.icp.inpg.fr/ELRA
JEWELS website http://www.elsnet.org/jewels.html
.

