Adding Domain Specificity to an MT system
Jessie Pinkham
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98152
jessiep@microsoft.com
Monica Corston-Oliver
Butler Hill Group
moco@butlerhill.com
Abstract
In the development of a machine
translation system, one important issue
is being able to adapt to a specific
domain without requiring time-
consuming lexical work. We have
experimented with using a statistical
word-alignment algorithm to derive
word association pairs (French-English)
that complement an existing multi-
purpose bilingual dictionary. This word
association information is added to the
system at the time of the automatic
creation of our translation pattern
database, thereby making this database
more domain specific. This technique
significantly improves the overall
quality of translation, as measured in an
independent blind evaluation.
1 Introduction
The machine translation system described
here is a French-English translation system
which uses a French broad coverage analyzer, a
large multi-purpose French dictionary, a large
French-English bilingual lexicon, an application
independent English natural language generation
component and a transfer component. The
transfer component consists of high-quality
transfer patterns automatically acquired from
sentence-aligned bilingual corpora using an
alignment grammar and algorithm described in
detail in Menezes (2001) (see Figure 1 for an
overview of the French-English MT system).
The transfer component consists only of
correspondences learned during the alignment
process. Training takes place on aligned
sentences which have been analyzed by the
French and English analysis systems to yield
dependency structures specific to our system
entitled Logical Forms (LF). The LF structures,
when aligned, allow the extraction of lexical and
structural translation correspondences which are
stored for use at runtime in the transfer database.
The transfer database can also be thought of as
an example-base of conceptual structure
representations. See Figure 2 for an illustration
of the training process.
The transfer database for French-English was
trained on approximately 200,000 pairs of
aligned sentences from computer manuals and
help files. In these aligned pairs, the French text
was produced by human translators from the
original English version.
Sample sentences from the training set are:
French training sentence:
Dans le menu D?marrer, pointez sur
Programmes, sur Outils d'administration
(commun), puis cliquez sur Gestionnaire des
utilisateurs pour les domaines.
English training sentence:
On the Start menu, point to Programs, point
to Administrative Tools (Common), and then
click User Manager for Domains.
The French-English lexicon is used during
the training period of the transfer component to
establish initial, tentative, word correspondences
during the alignment process. The sources for
the bilingual dictionary were: Cambridge
University Press English-French, Soft-Art
English-French, and Langenscheidt French-
English and English-French dictionaries. The
English-French translation data was reversed to
create French-English pairs in order to augment
the size of the dictionary, with a final translation
count of 75,000 pairs.
However, quick examination of the sample
sentence above shows that many terms are
highly specific to the domain, e.g menu
D?marrer <-> Start menu. To further add to
the specificity of the vocabulary available to the
alignment process, we added translation pairs
extracted from the actual domain, using
statistical word/phrase assignment, as described
below. This resulted in one file of automatically
created French English translation
correspondences, or word associations (WA),
and a second file of specialized multi-word
translation correspondences which we term Title
Associations (TA). These files, of size 30,000
and 2600 respectively, added to the quality of
the alignments and to overall translation quality.
2 Domain Specificity
2.1 Word-Association list
Moore (2001) describes a method for learning
translation relationship between words from
bilingual corpora. The five step process is
restated here:
1. Extract word lemmas from the Logical
Form created by parsing the raw
training data.
2. Compute association scores for
individual lemmas.
3. Hypothesize occurrences of compounds
in the training data, replacing lemmas
constituting hypothesized occurrences
of a compound with a single token
representing the compound.
4. Recompute association scores for
compounds and remaining individual
individual lemmas.
5. Recompute association scores, taking
into account only co-occurrences such
that there is no equally strong or
stronger association for either item in
the aligned logical-form pair.
The word-association list (WA) was created by
applying this method to our training data set of
200,000 aligned French-English sentences of
computer manual and help file data. A French
linguist determined the best cutoff for the raw
data, i.e. determined the association score which
would determine the cutoff, and otherwise left
the file unedited for inclusion in the transfer
training stage. For internal reasons, we used
only associations which are conceptually single
word to single word, where a single word can be
defined as an item returned as one unit by the
analyzer, even though it might be a multi-word
item in the source text, e.g base_de_donn?e <->
database. The files included 30,000 pairs, which
in their totality, were judged to be 60%
accurate1.
Figure 2
The word association file was used only in
training (see Figure 2) to enhance the
opportunity for alignment during the detection
of transfer patterns.
Examples of WA pairings :
? cliquer click
? processeur CPU
? ?clairage lighting
? http://www.mcafee.com
http://www.mcafee.com
? nettoyer scavenge
? conversion translation
? Requ?te/?dition query/edit
2.2 Title Association list
The second file used was a specialized file
created using the same algorithm, but allowing
multi-word titles that are all in capitals in
English to associate with multiple words in
French that have mixed capitalization on major
content words. Because these phrases are
identified by using capitalization, they are also
referred to as Captoids (Moore, 2001). Items
such as Organizational Units, which occur with
complete capitalization in English, are
1 The size of of the WA file of 42,486 reported in Moore
2001 includes multiple word associations which were not
used in this experiment.
associated with the French translation, Unit?s d'
organisation, a unit which is less easily
identified on its own, due to the mixed case.
The information yields approximately 2600
pairs of this type:
Unit?s d' organisation <->
Organizational Units
Voir aussi <-> Related Topics
This title association file (TA) is used in
training of the transfer patterns but are also
added to the processing of the French training
text; they are treated as multi-word lexical
entries similar to any French dictionary entry.
They become part of the translation dictionary
as well. The inclusion of Voir aussi as a lexical
noun phrase at the analysis stage (French)
allows it to parse correctly, and permits the
correct translation. Many of the occurrences of
Title association pairs are menu names which
are syntactically verb phrases (Voir aussi) and
would have parsed less well without the TA file.
(1)
Source: Pour plus d'informations sur l'utilisation
du Gestionnaire de p?riph?riques, consultez
Voir aussi.
Reference: For more information about using
Device Manager, see Related Topics.
ALL translation: For more information about
using of the manager of devices, see Related
Topics.
NONE translation: See for more information
on using of the Device Manager; also See.
However, the evaluation shows that the
overall effect of title associations is much less
than that of word associations, presumably
because the frequency of these items is low in
the overall test set.
3 Experiment and Methodology
In order to evaluate the relative quality of the
translations with and without the word
association and title association strategies, we
performed several evaluations of machine
translation quality. These evaluations were
performed by an independent organization that
provides support for NL application
development; the evaluators are completely
independent of development activities.
We performed two separate sets of
evaluations. In the first, we evaluated the full
version of our system with the Word
Association and Title Association components
against versions of the system from which we
had removed those components. We thus
expected that versions of the system with the
WA and TA components would outperform
those without.
In the second evaluation, we tested the
versions of our system with and without the WA
and TA components against a benchmark
system (the latest release of the French-English
Systran system, run with settings appropriate for
the computer domain) to see whether the
addition of the combination of these components
would significantly improve our scores with
respect to that benchmark.
3.1 Evaluation design
For each condition to be tested, seven
evaluators were asked to evaluate the same set
of 250 blind test sentences. For each sentence,
raters were presented with a reference sentence,
the original English translation from which the
human French translation was derived. In order
to maintain consistency among raters who may
have different levels of fluency in the source
language, raters were not shown the original
French sentence (for similar methodologies, see
Ringger et al, 2001; White et al, 1993). Raters
were also shown two machine translations, one
from the system with the component being
tested (System 1), and one from the comparison
system (System 2). Because the order of the two
machine translation sentences was randomized
on each sentence, evaluators could not
determine which sentence was from System 1.
The order of presentation of sentences was also
randomized for each rater in order to eliminate
any ordering effect.
The raters were asked to make a three-way
choice. For each sentence, the raters were to
determine which of the two automatically
translated sentences was the better translation of
the (unseen) source sentence, assuming that the
reference sentence was a perfect translation,
with the option of choosing ?neither? if the
differences were negligible. Raters were
instructed to use their best judgment about the
relative importance of fluency/style and
accuracy/content preservation. We chose to use
this simple three-way scale in order to avoid
making any a priori judgments about the relative
importance of these parameters for subjective
judgments of quality. The three-way scale also
allows sentences to be rated on the same scale,
regardless of whether the differences between
output from system 1 and system 2 were
substantial or relatively small; and regardless of
whether either version of the system produced
an adequate translation.
The scoring system is similarly simple; each
judgment by a rater was represented as 1
(sentence from System 1 judged better), 0
(neither sentence judged better), or -1 (System 2
judged better). The score for each condition is
the mean of the scores of all sentences for all
raters.
4 Results
4.1 Results with multiple versions of our
system
In order to isolate the effects of the WA and TA
components on the system as a whole, we built 3
new versions of the system:
? NONE: Includes neither TA nor WA.
? No TA: Includes WA but not TA.
? No WA: Includes TA but not WA.
We evaluated each of these versions of the
system against our baseline system (ALL),
which contains both the WA and TA
components. Our hypothesis was that the
removal of each of the two components would
cause the experimental systems to significantly
underperform the ALL system.
We evaluated 250 sentences2 in each
condition in which the output strings for System
1 (ALL) and System 2 (NONE, NoWA, and
NoTA, respectively) were not identical. In other
words, this analysis shows the amount of
improvement between the systems in only those
sentences which show any change at all in each
condition. For each condition, we calculated the
statistical significance of the hypothesis that ALL
system is better than the comparison system (e.g.
that the score is greater than 0), taking into
account both variations in the sentence sample,
and variations across the judgments of individual
raters.
2 The data used for testing is blind, i.e. withheld from
development and not included in the training set.
Conditio
n
Score Sample
Size
Significance
ALL/NONE 0.233 +/- .095 250 > .99999
ALL/NoWA 0.267 +/- .09 250 > .99999
ALL/NoTA 0.063 +/- .093 250 .91
Table 1: Results with differences only
The results show that, for sentences affected by
the combination of the WA and TA components,
the ALL condition is significantly better than the
NONE condition, at a significance level of 0.95.
In addition, for sentences affected by the
presence of the WA component only, the ALL
condition is significantly better than the No WA
condition. However, the ALL condition is not
significantly better the NoTA condition.
Another question of interest is the effect of
the experimental components on the corpus as a
whole, rather than just on the sentences that
changed; it is possible that the effects we found
might have become diluted below the
significance threshold because of sparsity of the
differences across the whole corpus. Rather than
do additional evaluations, we determined the
proportion of differences in each condition, and
extrapolated a larger sample, assuming that
sentences which were absolutely identical would
receive a score of 0, using the same 250
judgments as in the previous analysis.
Condition iffs
hecked
otal diffs
n test set
f 2965
ercent
f diffs
n test set
Projected
sample
size to get
250 diffs
NONE /ALL 250 1307 19.13 567
NoWA/ALL 250 1170 21.37 634
NoTA/ALL 250 280 89.29 2647
Table 2: Projected sample sizes
As expected, the results using the projected
sample were still positive, though the scores
were lower due to the larger sample size. Again,
the improvements in the NONE/ALL and
NoWA/ALL conditions are significant across
the whole data set.
Condition Score Sample
size
Significance
NONE /ALL 0.103 +/-
.04
567 > .99999
NoWA/ALL 0.105 +/-
.035
634 > .99999
NoTA/ALL 0.006 +/-
.008
2647 .90
Table 3: Results across whole sample
4.2 Results against benchmark system
In a second analysis, we tested to see if the
experimental changes to the system improved
the performance of our system against our
regular benchmark. We selected a random
sample of 250 sentences, and translated them
using first the ALL, and then the NONE,
versions of our system. We also translated them
using the benchmark system. We predicted that
sentences translated using the ALL system
would be significantly better than the sentences
translated using the NONE system in its
performance against the benchmark.
Condition Score Sample
size
NONE /benchmark -0.18 +/- .1 250
ALL/benchmark -0.14 +/- .11 250
Table 4: Results against Benchmark system.
The difference between these two scores is on
the border of significance using a one-tailed
paired t-test (p = .051825; t = -1.6334).
5 Discussion
The premise of the experiment described here
was that pairs of translations which were
automatically derived from the training data
would increase the number of transfer pairings
found and improve the quality of translation.
The results show that the combination of the
word association list and title association list
does in fact give us an improvement in quality
of translation.
We have measured the change in size in the
transfer database, and found that the database
shows increased numbers of transfer patterns
retained (transfer patterns seen only once were
discarded) when the word association file is
used, for instance:
Condition Unique transfers kept
NONE 316518
ALL 368853
Table 5: Increase in patterns kept
We have found from informal observation
that increased number of transfers in the transfer
database correlates with better performance,
particularly if the translation correspondence
includes more than one word.
Whereas the WA and TA files have been
judged elsewhere on the quality of the
translation pairs themselves (Moore 2001), we
are primarily interested in whether the data
interacts in a positive way with a full-scale
automatic alignment process. The result might
appear disappointing at first glance, since it is
barely significant. However, our experience is
that a gain of .04 against the benchmark
represents a noticeable difference in quality
translation from the user?s perspective.
It is important to note as well that this result
was achieved even in the presence of a sizeable
translation dictionary. We found that the
combination of the bilingual dictionary and the
structural mapping in the alignment process had
already enabled a number of ?domain specific?
translation correspondences, e.g. journal <-> log
as in example (2) below. In a sense, the
alignment algorithm had been able to overcome
some domain specific lexical gaps on its own.
The evaluation results give us a number of
illustrations of improved transfer patterns. The
only difference between the output categorized
as NONE and the output categorized as ALL is
the use of a transfer database trained with both
the WA and TA files included.
(2)
Source: Le tableau ci-dessous explique la
fonction des diff?rentes options disponibles
dans l'onglet Journal des transactions de la
bo?te de dialogue Propri?t?s de la base de
donn?es.
Reference: This table shows the options and
their functions available on the Transaction
Log tab of the Database Properties dialog
box.
ALL translation: The table explains the
function of different options available in the
Transaction Log tab of the dialog Properties
box of the database below.
NONE translation: The table explains the
function of different options available in the
tab transactions Log of the dialog Properties
box of the database below.
The pattern which caused the improvement is
the correspondence (Journal des transactions
<-> Transaction Log) was learned on different
pairs of sentences during the alignment phase
due to the presence of the word log introduced
by the word association file.
Without the addition of log at alignment time,
the alignment process mapped Journal to Log,
but not the more complex mapping for Journal
des transactions. Compare the translations from
the FE dictionary to the pairs from the word
association file (where ordering represents
frequency of each translation). Note that the
WA list has learned the most relevant technical
translation (log), which was lacking in the FE
dictionary, but also the most frequent general
translation (journal):
FE dictionary
(journal)=(journal magazine diary newspaper)
Word association list
(journal)=(log journal newspaper)
A similar case below (3) shows that the
inclusion of the word push as a translation of
?mission in the word association file allows for a
correct pattern in the transfer database:
r?plication par ?mission
push replication
(3)
Source: Pour configurer un serveur WINS afin
d'utiliser une r?plication par ?mission, vous
pouvez faire votre choix parmi plusieurs
options configurables de la console WINS.
Reference: To configure a WINS server to use
push replication, you can choose from
several WINS console configurable options.
ALL translation: For configuring a WIN server
to use a push replication, you can do your
choice among options configurable of the
WIN console.
NONE translation: For configuring a WIN
server to use a replication by program, you
can do your choice among options
configurable of the console WIN.
FE dictionary: (?mission)=(program
transmission broadcasting emission
broadcast issue uttering)
Word association list: (?mission)=(issue push
Transmit transmit issuance)
This example is quite interesting, because the
link of push to ?mission is helpful, even though
is would be judged incorrect in a standard
evaluation of the pairings themselves
We have described the improvements so
far as increases in domain specificity, but the
effect is more wide-spread. We find that the
added information allows for creation and
retention of such generally better patterns as
those in example (4):
(4)
Source: Assurez-vous qu'il y a du papier dans
l'imprimante.
Reference: Make sure there is paper in your
printing device.
ALL translation: Make sure that there is a
paper in the printer.
NONE translation: Provide that a paper in the
printer becomes.
We note the improved transfer patterns for Make
sure and there is.
The incidence of faulty translation patterns
learned because of incorrect word-associations
has been difficult to measure, but appears to be
low. One instance was the learned
correspondence of ?teindre <-> off (instead of
turn_off). We believe this could be avoided by
more accurate preservation of information from
our Logical Form representation in step one of
the Moore algorithm.
5.1 Future improvements
The experiment presented here is the first
step in our search for techniques that contribute
to the quality of the translations by providing
domain specific additions.
We are working to find the most productive
method for pruning low accuracy pairs (but still
without hand-editing). We have already seen
that if the data is truncated to maximize the
accuracy of the word associations, the impact on
the translation quality drops off, presumably
because the high frequency pairs in the word
association file contribute fewer unknown
translations than the larger noisier file. This
suggests that in the process of seeding an
automatic alignment process such as ours, recall
is more important than precision.
.
References
Frederking, Robert, and Ralf Brown. 1996. The
Pangloss-Lite Machine Translation System.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the
Association for Machine Translation in the
Americas. 268-272.
Frederking, Robert, et al 1994. Integrating
Translations From Multiple Sources Within
the Pangloss Mark III Machine Translation
System. In Technology Partnerships for
Crossing the Language Barrier: Proceedings
of the First Conference of the Association of
Machine Translation in the Americas. 73-80.
Melamed, I. Dan. 1996. Automatic Construction
of Clean Broad-Coverage Translation
Lexicons. In Proceedings of the Second
Conference of the Association for Machine
Translation in the Americas. 125-134.
Menezes, Arul and Steve Richardson. 2001. A
Best-First Alignment Algorithm for
Automatic Extraction of Transfer Mappings
from Bilingual Corpora. In Proceedings of the
Data-Driven MT workshop, ACL 2001.
Moore, Robert C. 2001. Towards a Simple and
Accurate Statistical Approach to Learning
Translation Relationships Between Words. In
Proceedings of the Data-Driven MT
workshop, ACL 2001.
Ringger, Eric K., Monica Corston-Oliver, and
Robert C. Moore. 2001. Using Word-
Perplexity for Automatic Evaluation of
Machine Translation. Unpublished ms.
Hideo Watanabe, Sadao Kurohashi and Eiji
Aramaki. 2000. Finding Structural
Correspondences from Bilingual Parsed
Corpus for Corpus-based Translation. In
Proceedings of COLING: The 18th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics. 906-912.
White, John S., Theresa A. O'Connell, and Lynn
M. Carlson. 1993. Evaluation of machine
translation. In Human Language Technology:
Proceedings of a Workshop (ARPA). 206-
210.
