International Standards for Multilingual Resource Sharing: The
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working Group
Nicoletta Calzolari, Alessandro Lenci, Antonio Zampolli
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR, Pisa
Consorzio Pisa Ricerche
Universit? di Pisa, Dipartimento di Linguistica
[glottolo,lenci,eagles]@ilc.pi.cnr.it
Abstract
The ISLE project is a continuation
of the long standing EAGLES
initiative, carried out under the Human
Language Technology (HLT)
programme in collaboration between
American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International
Research Co-operation, supported by
NSF and EC. We concentrate in this
paper on the current position of the
ISLE Computational Lexicon Working
Group. We provide a short description
of the EU SIMPLE lexicons built on
the basis of previous EAGLES
recommendations. We then point at a
few basic methodological principles
applied in previous EAGLES phases,
and describe a few principles to be
followed in the definition of a
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(MILE).
1 Introduction: the EAGLES
initiative
1.1. What is EAGLES/ISLE?
The ISLE project is a continuation of the
long standing EAGLES initiative (Calzolari et
al., 1996), carried out through a number of
subsequent projects funded by the European
Commission (EC) since 1993. EAGLES stands
for Expert Advisory Group for Language
Engineering Standards and was launched within
EC Directorate General XIII's Linguistic
Research and Engineering (LRE) programme,
continued under the Language Engineering (LE)
programme, and now under the Human
Language Technology (HLT) programme as
ISLE, since January 2000. ISLE stands for
International Standards for Language
Engineering, and is carried out in collaboration
between American and European groups in the
framework of the EU-US International Research
Co-operation, supported by NSF and EC. ISLE
was built on joint preparatory EU-US work of
the previous 2 years towards setting up a
transatlantic standards oriented initiative for
HLT.
The objective of the project is to support
HLT R&D international and national projects,
and HLT industry by developing, disseminating
and promoting widely agreed and urgently
demanded HLT standards and guidelines for
infrastructural language resources (see Zampolli,
1998, and Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit
them and LE products. The aim of
EAGLES/ISLE is thus to accelerate the
provision of standards, common guidelines, best
practice recommendations for:
? very large-scale language resources (such as
text corpora, computational lexicons, speech
corpora (Gibbon et al, 1997), multimodal
resources);
? means of manipulating such knowledge, via
computational linguistic formalisms, mark-
up languages and various software tools;
? means of assessing and evaluating
resources, tools and products (EAGLES,
1996).
The basic idea behind EAGLES work is for
the group to act as a catalyst in order to pool
concrete results coming from current major
International/ National/industrial projects.
Relevant common practices or upcoming
standards are being used where appropriate as
input to EAGLES/ISLE work, particularly in the
areas of computational lexicons, text, speech,
and multimodal annotation, and evaluation.
Numerous theories, approaches, and systems are
being taken into account, where appropriate, as
any recommendation for harmonisation must
take into account the needs and nature of the
different major contemporary approaches.
EAGLES is also drawing strong inspiration
from the results of major projects whose results
have contributed to advancing our understanding
of harmonisation issues.
1.2 A quick Overview of the ISLE
Work
The current ISLE project (see
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_H
ome_Page.htm) targets the three areas of
multilingual computational lexicons, natural
interaction and multimodality (NIMM), and
evaluation of HLT systems. These areas were
chosen not only for their relevance to the HLT
call but also for their long-term significance.
? For multilingual computational lexicons,
ISLE is working to: extend EAGLES work
on lexical semantics, necessary to establish
inter-language links; design and propose
standards for multilingual lexicons; develop
a prototype tool to implement lexicon
guidelines and standards; create exemplary
EAGLES-conformant sample lexicons and
tag exemplary corpora for validation
purposes; and develop standardised
evaluation procedures for lexicons.
? For NIMM, a rapidly innovating domain
urgently requiring early standardisation,
ISLE work is targeted to develop guidelines
for: the creation of NIMM data resources;
interpretative annotation of NIMM data,
including spoken dialogue in NIMM
contexts; and annotation of discourse
phenomena.
? For evaluation, ISLE is working on: quality
models for machine translation systems; and
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an
ISO based framework (ISO 9126, ISO
14598).
Three Working Groups, and their sub-
groups, carry out the work, according to the
already proven EAGLES methodology, with
experts from both the EU and US, working and
interacting within a strongly co-ordinated
framework. International workshops are used as
a means of achieving consensus and advancing
work. Results will be widely disseminated and
published, after due validation in collaboration
with EU and US HLT R&D projects, National
projects, and industry.
1.3. The Computational Lexicon
Working Group
We concentrate in the following on the
current position of the ISLE Computational
Lexicon Working Group (CLWG).
EAGLES work towards de facto standards
has already allowed the field of Language
Resources to establish broad consensus on key
issues for some well-established areas ? and
will allow similar consensus to be achieved for
other important areas through the ISLE project
? providing thus a key opportunity for further
consolidation and a basis for technological
advance. EAGLES previous results have already
become de facto standards. To mention several
key examples: the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE
resources (morphological/syntactic/semantic
lexicons and corpora for 12 EU languages,
Ruimy et al, 1998, Lenci et al, 1999, Bel et al,
2000) rely on EAGLES results (Sanfilippo, A. et
al., 1996 and 1999), and are now being enlarged
at the national level through many National
Projects; the ELRA Validation Manuals for
Lexicons (Underwood and Navarretta, 1997)
and Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on
EAGLES guidelines; morpho-syntactic tagging
of corpora in a very large number of EU,
international and national projects ? and for
more than 20 languages ? is conformant to
EAGLES recommendations (Leech and Wilson,
1996).
The first priority of the CLWG in the first
phase of the ISLE project was to do a
comprehensive survey of existing multilingual
lexicons. To this end the European and the
American members decided, among others, i) to
prepare a grid for lexicon description to classify
the content and structure of the surveyed
resources on the basis of a number of agreed
parameters of description, and ii) to provide a
list of cross-lingual lexical phenomena that
could be used to focus the survey. The inventory
(survey) of what exists and is available
(semantic and bilingual/multilingual lexicons,
printed bilingual dictionaries) is now being
completed, and will be made soon available on
the Web. Each participant engaged for surveying
a number of resources. A list of the main
applications that use lexical resources was also
established, to focus the survey and subsequent
recommendations around them. Each summary
of a particular bilingual or multilingual
dictionary includes: i) a description of the
surveyed dictionary structure (on the basis of the
common grid), ii) for one or two examples from
the cross-lingual lexical phenomena, an
explanation of how these examples are handled
by this dictionary.
2 The structure of the prospective
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
The main goal of the CLWG is the definition
of a Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry
(henceforth MILE). This is the main focus of the
second year of the project, the so called
?recommendation phase?.
2.1 Basic EAGLES principles
We remind here just a few basic
methodological principles derived from and
applied in previous EAGLES phases. They have
proven useful in the process of reaching
consensual de facto standards in a bottom-up
approach and will be at the basis also of ISLE
work.
The MILE is envisaged as a highly modular
and possibly layered structure, with different
levels of recommendations. Such an architecture
has been proven useful in previous EAGLES
work, e.g in the EAGLES morphosyntactic
recommendations (Monachini and Calzolari,
1996), which embody three levels of linguistic
information: obligatory, recommended and
optional (optional splits furthermore into
language independent and language dependent).
This modularity would enhance: the flexibility
of the representation, the easiness of
customisation and integration of existing
resources (developed under different theoretical
frameworks or for different applications), the
usability by different systems which are in need
of different portions of the encoded data, the
compliance with the proposed standards also of
partially instantiated entries.
The MILE recommendations should also be
very granular, in the sense of reaching a
maximal decomposition into the minimal basic
information units that reflect the phenomena we
are dealing with. This principle was previously
recommended and used to allow easier
reusability or mappability into different
theoretical or system approaches (Heid and
McNaught, 1991): small units can be assembled,
in different frameworks, according to different
(theory/application dependent) generalisation
principles. Such basic notions must be
established before considering any system-
specific generalisations, otherwise our work
may be too conditioned by system-specific
approaches. For example, ?synonymy? can be
taken as a basic notion; however, the notion of
?synset? is a generalisation, closely associated
with the WordNet approach. ?Qualia relations?
are another example of a generalisation, whereas
?semantic relation? is a basic notion. Modularity
is also a means to achieve better granularity.
On the other side, past EAGLES experience
has shown it is useful in many cases to accept
underspecification with respect to
recommendations for the representation of some
phenomenon (and hierarchical structure of the
basic notions, attributes, values, etc.), i) to allow
for agreement on a minimal level of specificity
especially in cases where we cannot reach wider
agreement, and/or ii) enable mappability and
comparability of different lexicons, with
different granularity, at the minimal common
level of specificity (or maximal generality). For
example, the work on syntactic
subcategorisation in EAGLES proved that it was
problematic to reach agreement on a few
notions, e.g. it seemed unrealistic to agree on a
set of grammatical functions. This led to an
underspecified recommendation, but
nevertheless one that was useful.
One of the first objectives of the CLWG will
be to discover and list the (maximal) set of
(minimal/more granular) basic notions needed
to describe the multilingual level. This task will
be facilitated by the survey of existing lexicons,
accompanied by the analysis of the requirements
of a few multilingual applications, and by the
parallel analysis of typical multilingual complex
phenomena. Most or part of these basic notions
should be already included in previous EAGLES
recommendations, and, with different
distribution, in the existing and surveyed
lexicons. We have therefore to revisit earlier
linguistic layers (previous EAGLES work,
essentially monolinguistic) to see what we need
to change/add or what we can reuse for the
multilingual layer. The multilingual layer thus
depends on monolingual layers.
2.2 The MILE architecture
The MILE is intended as a meta-entry, acting
as a common representational layer for
multilingual lexical resources. The key-ideas
underlying the design of a meta-entry can be
summarized as follows. Different theoretical
frameworks appear to impose different
requirements on how lexical information should
be represented. One way of tackling the issue of
theoretical compatibility stems from the
observation that existing representational
frameworks mostly differ in the way pieces of
linguistic information are mutually implied,
rather than in the intrinsic nature of this
information. To give a concrete example, almost
all theoretical frameworks claim that lexical
items have a complex semantic organization, but
some of them try to describe it through a
multidimensional internal structure (cf. the
qualia structure in the Generative Lexicon,
Pustejovsky 1995), others by specifying a
network of semantic relations (cf. WordNet,
Miller et al 1990), and others in terms of
argumental frames (cf FrameNet, Baker et al
1998; Lexical Conceptual Structures, Jackendoff
1992; etc.). A way out of this theoretical
variation is to augment the expressive power of
the lexical representation language both
horizontally, i.e. by distributing the linguistic
information over mutually independent "coding
layers", and vertically, by further specifying the
information conveyed by each such layer. This
solution will contribute to solve the issues raised
by theoretical variation by defining a common
level onto which different types of resources
will be mapped without loss of information.
This appears to be a necessary condition to
guarantee an efficient re-use and interchange of
lexical data, often coming from resources
developed according to very different
architectural and theoretical criteria.
With respect to this issue, the MILE is
designed to meet the following desiderata:
? factor out linguistically independent (but
possibly correlated) primitive units of
lexical information;
? make explicit information which is
otherwise only indirectly accessible by NLP
systems;
? rely on lexical analysis which have the
highest degree of inter-theoretical
agreement;
? avoid framework-specific representational
solutions.
All these requirements serve the main purpose
of making the lexical meta-entry open to task-
and system-dependent parameterization.
The MILE is modular along at least three
dimensions:
? modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of MILE
? modularity in the microstructure
? modularity in the specific microstructure of
the MILE word sense.
A. Modularity in the macrostructure and
general architecture of the MILE ? The
following modules should be at least envisaged,
referring to the macrostructure of a multilingual
system:
1. Meta-information - versioning of the
lexicon, languages, updates, status, project,
origin, etc. (see e.g. OLIF (Thurmair, 2000),
GENELEX).
2. Possible architecture(s) of bilingual/
multilingual lexicon(s): we must analyse the
interactions of the different modules, and the
general structure in which they are inserted, both
in the interlingua- and transfer-based
approaches, and in possibly hybrid solutions. An
open issue is also the relation between the
source language (SL) and target language (TL)
portions of a lexicon.
B. Modularity in the microstructure of the
MILE ? The following modules should be at
least envisaged, referring to the global
microstructure of MILE:
1. Monolingual linguistic representation -
this includes the morphosyntactic, syntactic, and
semantic information characterizing the MILE
in a certain language. It generally corresponds to
the typology of information contained in
existing lexicons, such as PAROLE-SIMPLE,
(Euro)WordNet (EWN), COMLEX, and
FrameNet. Following the general organizations
of computational lexicons like PAROLE-
SIMPLE, which in turn instantiates the
GENELEX framework (GENELEX, 1994), at
the monolingual level the MILE sorts out the
linguistic information into three layers,
respectively for morphological, syntactic and
semantic dimensions. Typologies of information
to be part of this module include (not an
exhaustive list):
? Phonological layer
? phonemic transcription
? prosodic information
? Morphological layer
? Grammatical category
? Inflectional class
? Modifications of the lemma
? Mass/count, 'pluralia tantum'
? Syntactic layer
? Idiosyncratic behaviour with respect to
specific syntactic rules (passivisation,
middle, etc.)
? Auxiliary
? Attributive vs. predicative function,
gradability
? Subcategorization frames
? Grammatical functions of the positions
? Morphosyntactic and/or lexical features
? Information on control and raising
properties
? Semantic layer
? Characterization of senses through links
to an ontology
? Domain information
? Argument structure, semantic roles,
selectional preferences on the arguments
? Event type
? Link to the syntactic positions
? Basic semantic relations between word
senses (i.e. synonymy, hyponymy,
meronymy)
? Description of word-sense in terms of
more specific, semantic/world-
knowledge relations among word-senses
(such as EWN relations, SIMPLE
Qualia Structure, FrameNet Frame
Elements, etc.)
? Information about regular polisemous
alternation
? Information concerning cross-part of
speech relations (e.g. intelligent -
intelligence; writer - to write)
The expressive power of the semantic layer is of
the utmost importance for the multilingual layer.
A general issue discussed in ISLE concerns
whether consensus has to be pursued at the
generic level of ?type? of information or also at
the level of its ?values? or actual ways of
representation. The answer may be different for
different notions, e.g. try to reach the more
specific level of agreement also on values for
types of meronymy, but not for types of
ontology.
2. Collocational information - This module
includes more or less typical and/or fixed
syntagmatic patterns including the lexical head
defined by the MILE, which can contribute to
characterise its use, or to perform more subtle
and/or domain specific characterisations. It
includes at least:
? Typical collocates
? Support verb construction
? Phraseological or multiwords constructions
? Compounds
? Corpus-driven examples
This module ? not yet dealt with in the
previous EAGLES - is critical in a multilingual
context both to characterise a word-sense in a
more granular way and to make it possible to
perform a number of operations, such as WSD
or translation in a specific context. Here,
synergies with the NSF-XMELLT project on
multi-word expressions are exploited. First
proposals for the representation of support verbs
and noun-noun compounds in multilingual
computational lexicons are laid out, and now
tested on some language pairs.
3. Multilingual apparatus ? This
represents the focal part of the CLWG activities,
which will concentrate its main effort in
proposing a general framework for the
expression of multilingual transfers. Some of the
main issues at stake here are:
? identify a typology of the most common
cases of problematic transfer (actually this
task has been partially performed during the
survey phase of the project);
? identify which conditions must be
expressible and which transformation
actions are necessary, in order to establish
the correct multilingual mappings;
? select which types of information these
conditions must access in the modules (1)
and (2) above;
? identify the various methods of establishing
SL --> TL equivalence
? examine the variability of granularity
needed when translating in different
languages, and the architectural implications
of this.
C. Modularity in the specific
microstructure of the MILE word-sense (word-
sense is the basic unit at the multilingual level) ?
Senses should also have a modular structure (i.e.
the above distinction between modules (B.1.)
and (B.2.) must be intended at word-sense
level):
1. Coarse-grained (general purpose)
characterisation in terms of prototypical
properties, captured by the formal means in
(B.1.) above, which serves to partition the
meaning space in large areas and is sufficient for
some NLP tasks.
2. Fine-grained (domain or text
dependent) characterisation mostly in terms of
collocational/syntagmatic properties (B.2.),
which is especially useful for specific tasks,
such as WSD and translation. Different types of
information may have a sort of different
operational specialisation.
3 Methodological and organisational
issues
As in previous EAGLES, it is considered
helpful to base the recommendations on the
requirements stemming from a few application
systems. The CLWG agreed to focus on two
major broad categories of application: machine
translation (MT) and cross-lingual information
retrieval (CLIR).
As said above, the CLWG has agreed that we
should base any multilingual description on
monolingual descriptions. MILE should
therefore include previous EAGLES
recommendations for other layers. We must
evaluate the usefulness of these layers with
respect to multilingual tasks, focusing in
particular on MT and CLIR tasks. Obviously an
additional module is needed, where
correspondences between languages are defined,
including conditions on syntactic structures
involving lexical entries. The linking module
(transfer) may not be the same for different
applications: it may be simpler for CLIR, which
may be a subset of the one needed for MT. For
CLIR, an ontology or semantic hierarchy is
however required.
We are also adopting an approach that would
lead to a formalisation of the information
contained in traditional bilingual dictionaries,
such as restrictions on translation, collocations
and examples.
The CLWG agreed the following were
appropriate tasks to concentrate on, in order to
discover basic notions for MILE:
1. Analyse information given to the human
user in bilingual/monolingual dictionaries
that allows selection of correct equivalence.
2. Analyse (if these can be obtained)
instructions/guidelines supplied to
lexicographers for writing bilingual entries.
3. Investigate, in corpus concordances, which
are the clues that allow to
disambiguate/decide on proper sense for
translation.
4. Elaborate a typology of transfer
conditions/actions and investigate lexical
requirements.
5. Look at multilingual lexical requirements
for approaches based on interlingual
concepts/ontologies.
6. Rank our typology in terms of scale of
difficulty of disambiguation
3.1. Types of information to be
addressed
Regarding the various types of information to
be addressed, the following "workflow" was
agreed:
1. notion already exists in previous work
(EAGLES, PAROLE/SIMPLE, EWN, etc.):
? evaluate the notion to see if it is
generally adequate
? evaluate its usefulness for multilingual
purposes
2. notion does not exist as recommendation
and is not otherwise used in applications
(e.g. collocation type), or there are notions
from other layers that we have not already
considered:
? decide which method is needed to do
work on it
? prioritise: what is used already in
multilingual lexicons (but not covered in
EAGLES, e.g. covered in OLIF) and
also then look at what needed in near
future
? record what needs further development.
A starting point will be the previous
EAGLES recommendations, as instantiated in
PAROLE/SIMPLE, for which ? as said above -
there is a unique DTD for all the 12 languages
involved. This will be revised and augmented
after work done on various types of information.
ISLE will also implement a lexicographic tool,
with which a sample of lexical entries will be
encoded according to the MILE structure.
Assignments for in-depth analysis of the
information types were done, and work is now
carried out by the various CLWG members.
Results of on-going work will provide: (i.) a list
of types of information that should be encoded
in each module; (ii.) linguistic specifications and
criteria; (iii.) a format for their representation in
multilingual lexicons; (iv.) their respective
weight/importance in a multilingual lexicon
(towards a layered approach to
recommendations).
4 Conclusions
Lexicon construction is a costly enterprise,
and a major goal is to set up general initiatives
to ease and optimise this process. The crescent
needs of lexical data, both of general and of
domain-specific nature, makes lexicon
development an always incremental and
potentially open effort, often to be carried out in
distributed environments and through the joint
work of multiple actors. It is therefore necessary
to facilitate lexicon versioning and authoring,
the fast integration and scalability of the
resources, the fast integration of domain and
general linguistic knowledge, as well as the
integration of the work of human lexicographers
with the information automatically extracted
from corpora and dictionaries. The main purpose
of the ISLE CLWG is to provide a satisfactory
answer to these needs, by establishing a general
infrastructure for lexical resources sharing. Its
backbone is represented by the MILE, a lexical
meta-entry, whose definition is now the focus of
the CLWG activities. The MILE is a modular
architecture for the representation of
multilingual lexical data, and aims at becoming
a common parlance for the representation and
encoding of lexical data.
References
Baker, Collin F., Fillmore, Charles J., and Lowe,
John B. (1998). "The Berkeley FrameNet project";
in Proceedings of the COLING-ACL, Montreal,
Canada.
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, A.,
Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, I., Peters,
W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., Zampolli, A. (2000).
SIMPLE: A General Framework for the
Development of Multilingual Lexicons. LREC
Proceedings, Athens.
Burnard, L., Baker, P., McEnery, A. & Wilson, A.
(1997). An analytic framework for the validation
of language corpora. Report of the ELRA Corpus
Validation Group.
Calzolari, N. (1998). An Overview of Written
Language Resources in Europe: a few Reflections,
Facts, and a Vision, in A. Rubio, N. Gallardo, R.
Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation, Granada, pp.217-224.
Calzolari, N., Mc Naught, J., Zampolli, A. (1996).
EAGLES Final Report: EAGLES Editors?
Introduction. EAG-EB-EI, Pisa.
EAGLES (1996). Evaluation of Natural Language
Processing Systems. Final Report, Center for
Sprogteknologi, Copenhagen. Also available at
http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html.
GENELEX Consortium, (1994). Report on the
Semantic Layer, Project EUREKA GENELEX,
Version 2.1.
Gibbon, D., Moore R., Winski, R. (1997). Handbook
of Standards and Resources for Spoken Language
Systems, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York.
Heid, U., McNaught, J. (1991). EUROTRA-7 Study:
Feasibility and Project Definition Study on the
Reusability of Lexical and Terminological
Resources in Computerised Applications. Final
report.
Jackendoff, R. (1992), Semantic Structures,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Leech, G., Wilson, A. (1996). Recommendations for
the morphosyntactic annotation of corpora, Eag-
tcwg-mac/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Lenci, A., Busa, F., Ruimy, N., Gola, E., Monachini,
M., Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1999). Linguistic
Specifications. SIMPLE Deliverable D2.1. ILC
and University of Pisa.
Miller G.A, Beckwidth R., Fellbaum C., Gross D.,
and Miller K.J. (1990), "Introduction to WordNet:
An On-line Lexical Database", International
Journal of Lexicography, III, No.4: 235-244.
Monachini, M., Calzolari, N. (1996). Synopsis and
comparison of morphosyntactic phenomena
encoded in lexicons and corpora. A common
proposal and applications to European languages,
Eag-clwg-morphsyn/r, ILC-CNR, Pisa.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The Generative Lexicon.
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Ruimy, N., Corazzari, O., Gola, E., Spanu, A.,
Calzolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1998). The European
LE-PAROLE Project: The Italian Syntactic
Lexicon, in Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Language resources and
Evaluation, Granada: 241-248.
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1996). EAGLES
Subcategorization Standards. See
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/syntax.
html
Sanfilippo, A. et al (1999). EAGLES
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding. See
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2
Thurmair, G. (2000). OLIF Input Document, June
2000. See http://www.olif.net/main.htm
Underwood, N. & Navarretta, C. (1997). A Draft
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final ELRA
Report, Copenhagen.
Zampolli, A. (1998). Introduction, in A. Rubio, N.
Gallardo, R. Castro, A. Tejada (eds.), Proceedings
of the First International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Granada.
