Multilingual Sentence Generation
Takako Aikawa
Maite Melero
Lee Schwartz
Andi Wu
Microsoft Research
One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98008, USA
takakoa@microsoft.com
maitem@microsoft.com
leesc@micorosft.com
andiwu@microsoft.com
Abstract
This paper presents an overview of a
robust, broad-coverage, and
application-independent natural
language generation system. It
demonstrates how the different
language generation components
function within a multilingual
Machine Translation (MT) system,
using the languages that we are
currently working on (English,
Spanish, Japanese, and Chinese).
Section 1 provides a system
description. Section 2 focuses on the
generation components and their core
set of rules. Section 3 describes an
additional layer of generation rules
included to address application-
specific issues. Section 4 provides a
brief description of the evaluation
method and results for the MT system
of which our generation components
are a part.
1 System Description
We present a natural language generation
method in the context of a multi-lingual MT
system. The system that we have been
developing is a hybrid system with rule-based,
example-based, and statistical components.
Analysis and generation are performed with
linguistic parsers and syntactic realization
modules, the rules of which are coded by hand.
Transfer is accomplished using transfer
rules/mappings automatically extracted from
aligned corpora.
The MT process starts with a source sentence
being analyzed by the source-language parser,
which produces as output a syntactic tree. This
tree is input to the Logical Form module, which
produces a deep syntactic representation of the
input sentence, called the LF (Heidorn, G. E.,
2000). The LF uses the same basic set of
relation types for all languages. Figure 1 gives
the syntactic tree and LF for the simple English
sentence, ?I gave the pencils to John?.
Tree
LF
Figure 1
The LF is the final output of the analysis phase
and the input to the transfer phase.
Transfer extracts a set of mappings from the
source-target language MindNet (Richardson,
2000), a translation knowledge database, and
applies these mappings to the LF of the source
sentence to produce a target LF. The translation
MindNet for a language pair is a repository of
aligned LFs and portions of LFs (produced by
analyzing sentence-aligned corpora). An
alignment of two LFs is a set of mappings
between a node or set of nodes (and the relations
between them) in the source LF and a node or
set of nodes (and the relations between them) in
the target LF (Menezes & Richardson, 2001).
In the translation process, the transfer
component searches the alignments in the
MindNet for those that match portions of the LF
of the sentence being translated. Mappings with
larger context are preferred to mappings with
smaller context and higher frequency mappings
are preferred to lower frequency mappings. The
lemmas in any portion of the LF of the input
sentence that do not participate in a mapping are
mapped to a target lemma using a bilingual
dictionary. The target LF fragments from the
transfer mappings and dictionary mappings are
stitched together to produce the target LF
(Menezes & Richardson, 2001). For our
example in Figure 1, the transfer component
produces the following target LFs for Spanish,
Japanese, and Chinese (Figure 2).1
Source sentence: I gave the pencils to John.
Transferred Spanish LF:
Transferred Japanese LF:
Transferred Chinese LF:
Figure 2
The transferred LF is the input to the generation
component, which we will discuss in detail
below.
2 Syntactic Generation Component
The different language generation modules in
our system are syntactic realization components
that take as input an LF characteristic of the
language to be generated and produce a
syntactic tree and surface string for that
language. In this sense, they are functionally
similar to the REALPRO system (Lavoie and
Rambow, 1997).
1 English gloss is provided in Figure 2 for readability
purposes only.
The generation modules are not designed
specifically for MT, but rather are application-
independent. They can take as input an LF
produced by a dialog application, a critiquing
application, a database query application, an MT
application, etc. They only require a
monolingual dictionary for the language being
generated and an input LF that is characteristic
of that language. For each language there is
only one generation component that is used for
all applications, and for MT, it is used for
translation from all languages to that language.
At the beginning of generation, the input LF
is converted into a basic syntactic tree that
conforms to the tree geometry of the NLP
system. The nodes in LF become subtrees of this
tree and the LF relations become
complement/adjunct relationships between the
subtrees. This basic tree can be set up in
different ways. For English, Spanish, and
Chinese, we set it up as strictly head-initial with
all the complements/adjuncts following the
head, resembling the tree of a VSO language.
For Japanese, we set it up as strictly head-final,
with all the complements/adjuncts preceding the
head. Figure 3 gives the basic Spanish
generation tree produced from the Spanish
transferred LF in Figure 2.
Figure 3
The generation rules apply to the basic tree,
transforming it into a target language tree. In the
application of the rules, we traverse the tree in a
top-down, left-to-right, depth-first fashion,
visiting each node and applying the relevant
rules. Each rule can perform one or more of the
following operations:
(1) Assign a syntactic label to the node. For
example, the ?DECL? label will be assigned
to the root node of a declarative sentence.
(2) Modify a node by changing some
information within the node. For example, a
pronoun might be marked as reflexive if it is
found to be co-referential with the subject of
the clause it is in.
(3) Expand a node by introducing new node(s)
into the tree. For example, the ?Definite?
(+Def) feature on a node may become a
determiner phrase attached to the syntactic
subtree for that node.
(4) Delete a node. For example, for a pro-drop
language, a pronominal subject may be
removed from the tree.
(5) Move a node by deleting it from Position A
and inserting it in Position B. For example,
for an SVO language, the subject NP of a
sentence may be moved from a post-verbal
position to a pre-verbal position.
(6) Ensure grammatical agreement between
nodes. For example, if the subject of a
sentence is first person singular, those
number and person features will be assigned
to the main verb.
(7) Insert punctuation and capitalization.
The nodes in the generated tree are linked to
each other by relations such as ?head?, ?parent?
and ?sibling?. The entire tree is thus visible
from any given node via these relations. When
a rule is applied to a node, the decisions made in
that rule can be based not just on features of that
node, but also on features of any other node in
the tree. This basically eliminates the need for
backtracking, which would be necessary only if
there were local ambiguities resulting from the
absence of global information. In this sense, our
approach is similar to that of other large-scale
generators (Tomita and Nyberg, 1988).
The generation rules operate on a single tree.
Rule application is deterministic and thus very
efficient. If necessary, the tree can be traversed
more than once, as is the case in the generation
modules for the languages we are currently
working on. There is a ?feeding? relationship
among the rules. The rules that assign
punctuation and capitalization, for example, do
not apply until all the movement rules have
applied, and movement rules do not apply until
nodetypes and functional roles are assigned.
To improve efficiency and to prevent a rule
from applying at the wrong time or to the wrong
structure, the rules are classified into different
groups according to the passes in which they are
applied. Each traversal of the tree activates a
given group of rules. The order in which the
different groups of rules are applied depends on
the feeding relations.
For the simple example in Figure 2 above,
the Spanish, Chinese, and Japanese generation
components all have an initial pass that assigns
nodetypes and functional roles and a final pass
that inserts punctuation marks.
In addition, the Spanish component, in a first
pass that identifies syntactic functions, deletes
the pronominal subject and inserts a dative clitic
pronoun. It also inserts the definite article and
the personal marker ?a?. In a second pass, it
checks agreement between indirect object and
doubled clitic as well as between subject and
verb, assigning the appropriate person, number,
and gender agreement information to the
terminal nodes.
Reordering operations, such as moving the
clitic in front of the verb, if the verb is finite, or
after, if it is non-finite, come later. The last pass
takes care of euphonic issues, such as
contractions or apocopated adjectives. Figure 4a
shows the resulting tree.
Figure 4a
The Chinese component has a node-
modification pass, which adds the FUNCW
node headed by (le) to indicate past tense. In
this pass the direct object is also turned into a
prepositional phrase introduced by (ba) to
show the definiteness of the NP. Following this
pass, a movement pass moves the subject in
front of the verb.
Figure 4b
The Japanese component has a pass in which
case-markers or modifiers are inserted. In
Figure 4c, the nominative, the accusative, and
the dative case markers are inserted in the
subject, direct object, and indirect object NPs,
respectively. Also, the demonstrative
corresponding to English "that" is inserted at the
beginning of the definite NP (pencil).
Figure 4c
After the grammatical rules apply, the
morphological rules apply to the leaf nodes of
the tree. Since each node in the tree is a feature
matrix and agreement information has already
been assigned by the generation rules,
morphological processing simply turns the
feature matrices into inflected forms. For
instance, in our Spanish example, the verb ?dar?
with the ?past?, ?singular? and ?1st person?
features is spelled out as ?di?. Once all the
words are inflected, the inflected form of each
leaf node is displayed to produce the surface
string. This completes the generation process,
as exemplified for Spanish in Figure 5.
Figure 5
3 Application-Driven Generation
The example used in the previous sections is
quite simple, and not representative of the actual
problems that arise in MT. Applications, such
as MT, that automatically create input for the
generation component for a language will not
always produce ideal LFs for that language, i.e.,
LFs that could have been produced by the
analysis modules for that language.
We have designed the generation
components, therefore, to add a degree of
robustness to our applications. To some extent,
and based only on information about the
language being generated, the generation
components will fix incomplete or inconsistent
LFs and will verify that the structures they
generate comply with the constraints imposed
by the target language.
The core generation rules are designed to be
application-independent and source-language-
independent. Expanding the rule base to cover
all the idiosyncrasies of the input would
contaminate the core rules and result in loss of
generality. In order to maintain the integrity of
the core rules while accommodating imperfect
input, we have opted to add a pre-generation
layer to our generation components.
Pre-generation rules apply before the basic
syntactic tree is built. They can modify the
input LF by adding or removing features,
changing lemmas, or even changing structural
relations. Below we give examples of problems
solved in the pre-generation layers of our
different language generation modules. These
illustrate not just the source-language
independence, but also the application-
independence of the generation modules.
We start with the English generation
component, which was used in experimental
question-answering applications before being
used in MT. Among the pre-generation rules in
this component is one that removes the marker
indicating non-restrictive modification (Nonrest)
from LF nodes that are not in a modification
relationship to another LF node. So, for
example, when the question-answering
application is presented with the query ?When
did Hitler come to power,? the NLP system
analyzes the question, produces an LF for it,
searches its Encarta Mindnet (which contains
the LFs for the sentences in the Encarta
encyclopedia), retrieves the LF fragment in
Figure 6, and sends it to the English generation
component.
Figure 6
The LF that is the input to generation in this
example is a portion of the LF representation of
a complete sentence that includes the phrase
?Hitler, who came to power in 1933.? The part
of that sentence that answers the question is the
nonrestrictive relative clause ?who came to
power in 1933.? Yet, we do not want to
generate the answer as a non-restrictive relative
clause (as indicated by Nonrest in the LF), but
as a declarative sentence. So, rather than pollute
the core generation rules by including checks for
implausible contexts in the rule for generating
nonrestrictive modifiers, a pre-generation rule
simply cleans up the input. The rule is
application-independent (though motivated by a
particular application) and can only serve to
clean up bad input, whatever its source.
An example of a rule motivated by MT, but
useful for other applications, is the pre-
generation rule that changes the quantifier ?less?
to ?fewer?, and vice versa, in the appropriate
situations. When the LF input to the English
generation component specifies ?less? as a
quantifier of a plural count noun such as ?car,?
this rule changes the quantifier to ?fewer?.
Conversely, when an input LF has ?fewer?
specified as a quantifier of a mass noun such as
?luck?, the rule changes it to ?less.? This rule
makes no reference to the source of the input to
generation. This has the advantage that it will
apply in a grammar-checking application as well
as in an MT application (or any other
application). If the input to English generation
were the LF produced for the ungrammatical
sentence ?He has less cars,? the generation
component would produce the correct ?He has
fewer cars,? thereby effectively grammar
checking the sentence. And, if the ultimate
source of the same input LF were the Spanish
sentence ?Juan tiene menos coches, ? the result
would be the same, even if ?menos? which
corresponds to both ?less? and ?fewer? in
English, were not transferred correctly. Another
type of problem that a generation component
might encounter is the absence of necessary
information. The Spanish generation
component, for instance, may receive as input
underspecified nominal relations, such as the
one exemplified in Figure 7, in which a noun
(registro) is modified by another noun
(programa). The relationship between the two
nouns needs to be made explicit, in Spanish, by
means of a preposition when the modifying
noun is not a proper noun. Absent the necessary
information in the incoming LF, a pre-
generation rule introduces the default
preposition ?de? to specify this relationship.
Figure 7
Another example of a pre-generation rule, this
time from Japanese, deals with the unspecified
1st/2nd person pronominal subject for particular
types of predicates. The 1st/2nd person pronoun
( ) is not used as the subject in
sentences that express the speaker?s/the
listener?s desire (unless there is some
focus/contrast on the subject). So, one of the
Japanese pre-generation rules deletes the subject
in the input LF that involves such a predicate.
For instance, below is the input LF, the modified
LF, and the string produced from the English
sentence ?I want to read the book.?
Figure 8
From Chinese, we give an example of a rule that
actually changes the structure of an LF. In our
system, it is possible for the source and target
languages to have different LF representations
for similar structures. In English and other
European languages, for example, the verb ?BE?
is required in sentences like ?He is smart?. In
Chinese, however, no copula is used. Instead,
an adjectival predicate is used. While we might
attempt at the LF level to unify these
representations, we have not yet done so.
Moreover, the LF in our system is not intended
to be an interlingua representation. Differences
between languages and their LFs are tolerated.
Therefore, Chinese uses a pre-generation rule to
transform the be-predicate adjective LF into its
Chinese equivalent as shown in Figure 9, though
we soon expect transfer to automatically do this.
Figure 9
4 Evaluation
The generation components described in the
previous sections are part of an MT system that
has been run on actual Microsoft technical
documentation. The system is frequently
evaluated to provide a measure of progress and
to yield feedback on its design and development.
In evaluating our progress over time and
comparing our system with others, we have
performed several periodic, blind human
evaluations. We focus here on the evaluation of
our Spanish-English and English-Spanish
systems.
For each evaluation, several human raters
judge the same set of 200-250 sentences
randomly extracted from our technical corpora
(150K sentences).2 The raters are not shown the
source language sentence; instead, they are
presented with a human translation, along with
two machine-generated translations. Their task
is to choose between the alternatives, using the
human translation as a reference.
Table 1 summarizes a comparison of the
output of our Spanish-English system with that
of Babelfish (http://world.altavista.com/).
Table 2 does the same for our English-Spanish
system and Lernout & Hauspie?s English-
Spanish system (http://officeupdate.lhsl.com/).
In these tables, a rating of 1 means that raters
uniformly preferred the translation produced by
our system; a rating of 0 means that they did not
uniformly prefer either translation; a rating of -1
means that they uniformly preferred the
translation produced by the alternative system.3
Beside each rating is a confidence measure for
the mean preference at the .99 level (Richardson,
S., et al(2001)).
Spanish-English
Systems
Mean preference
score (7 raters)
Sample
size
Our 4/01 (2001)
MT vs. Babelfish
0.32 ? 0.11
(at .99)
250
sentences
Table 1. Our Spanish-English MT vs. Babelfish
English-Spanish
Systems
Mean preference
score (5 raters)
Sample
size
Our 4/01 (2001)
MT vs. L&H
0.19 ? 0.14
(at 0.99)
250
sentences
Table 2. Our English-Spanish MT vs. Lernout &
Hauspie
2 The human raters used for these evaluations work for an
independent agency and played no development role
building the systems they test.
3 In interpreting our results, it is important to keep in mind
that our MT system has been customized to the test domain,
while the Babelfish and Lernout & Hauspie systems have
not.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have presented an overview of
the natural language generation component
developed at Microsoft Research and have
demonstrated how this component functions
within a multilingual Machine Translation
system. We have provided motivation for the
generation architecture, which consists of a set
of core rules and a set of application-driven pre-
generation rules, within a wide-coverage, robust,
application-independent, multilingual natural
language processing system. In addition we
have presented evaluation figures for Spanish-
English and English-Spanish, two of the
language pairs of the MT system in which our
generation components are used.
6 References
Heidorn, G. E. (2000): Intelligence Writing
Assistance. In Dale R., Moisl H., and Somers
H. (eds.), A Handbook of Natural Language
Processing: Techniques and Applications for
the Processing of Language as Text. Marcel
Dekker, New York, 1998 (published in
August 2000), pages 181-207.
Jensen, K., Heidorn G., and Richardson S.
(eds.) (1993): Natural Language Processing:
The PLNLP Approach, Boston, Kluwer.
Lavoie, Benoit and Owen Rambow. (1997): A
fast and portable realizer for text generation.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on
Applied Natural-Language Processing
(ANLP-1997), pages 265-268.
Melero, M. and Font-Llitjos, A. (2001):
Construction of a Spanish Generation module
in the framework of a General-Purpose,
Multilingual Natural Language Processing
System. In Proceedings of the VII
International Symposium on Social
Communication, Santiago de Cuba.
Reiter, E. and Dale, R. (2000): Building Natural
Language Generation Systems, Cambridge
University Press.
Richardson, S., et al(2001): Overcoming the
customization bottleneck using example-
based MT, Paper submitted for Data-driven
MT Workshop at ACL 2001, Toulouse,
France.
Richardson, S. (2000): The evolution of an NLP
System. NLP Group Microsoft Research,
Presentation at the LREC?2000 Athens,
Greece.
Tomita, M. and Nyberg E. (1988): The GenKit
and Transformation Kit User?s Guide.
Technical Report CMU-CMT-88-MEMO,
Centre for Machine Translation, Carnegie
Mellon University.
