MEANING: a Roadmap to Knowledge Technologies 
 
German Rigau. TALP Research Center. UPC. Barcelona. rigau@lsi.upc.es 
Bernardo Magnini. ITC-IRST. Povo-Trento. magnini@itc.it 
Eneko Agirre. IXA group. EHU. Donostia. eneko@si.ehu.es  
Piek Vossen. Irion Technologies. Delft. Piek.Vossen@irion.nl  
John Carroll. COGS. U. Sussex. Brighton. johnca@cogs.susx.ac.uk 
 
Abstract  
Knowledge Technologies need to extract 
knowledge from existing texts, which 
calls for advanced Human Language 
Technologies (HLT). Progress is being 
made in Natural Language Processing but 
there is still a long way towards Natural 
Language Understanding. An important 
step towards this goal is the development 
of technologies and resources that deal 
with concepts rather than words. The 
MEANING project argues that we need to 
solve two complementary and 
intermediate tasks to enable the next 
generation of intelligent open domain 
HLT application systems: Word Sense 
Disambiguation and large-scale 
enrichment of Lexical Knowledge Bases. 
Innovations in this area will lead to HLT 
with deeper understanding of texts, and 
immediate progress in real applications of 
Knowledge Technologies. 
Introduction 
The field of Information Society Technologies 
(IST) is one of the main thematic priorities of 
the European Commission for the 6th Framework 
programme. In this field, Knowledge 
Technologies (KT) aim to provide meaning to 
the petabytes of information content our 
societies will generate in the near future. 
Information and knowledge management 
systems need to evolve accordingly, to enable 
the next generation of intelligent open domain 
Human Language Technologies (HLT) that will 
deal with the growing potential of the 
knowledge-rich and multilingual society. 
In order to develop a trustable semantic web 
infrastructure and a multilingual ontology 
framework to support knowledge management a 
wide range of techniques are required to 
progressively automate the knowledge lifecycle. 
In particular, this involves extracting high-level 
meaning from the large collections of content 
data and its representation and management in a 
common knowledge base. 
Even now, building large and rich knowledge 
bases takes a great deal of expensive manual 
effort; this has severely hampered Knowledge-
Technologies and HLT application development. 
For example, dozens of person-years have been 
invest into the development of wordnets1 for 
various languages, but the data in these 
resources is still not sufficiently rich to support 
advanced concept-based HLT applications 
directly. Furthermore, resources produced by 
introspection usually fail to register what really 
occurs in texts. Applications will not scale up to 
working in the open domain without more 
detailed and rich general-purpose, which should 
perhaps include domain-specific linguistic 
knowledge.  
The MEANING project identifies two 
complementary intermediate tasks which we 
think are crucial in order to enable the next 
generation of intelligent open domain HLT 
application systems: Word Sense 
Disambiguation (WSD) and large-scale 
enrichment of Lexical Knowledge Bases.  
                                                     
1 A wordnet is a conceptually structured knowledge 
base of word senses. The English WordNet (Miller 
90, Fellbaum 98) has been developed at Princeton 
University over the past 14 years. EuroWordNet 
(Vossen 1998) is a multilingual database with 
wordnets for several European languages (Dutch, 
Italian, Spanish, German, French, Czech and 
Estonian). Balkanet is building wordnets for the 
Balkan languages following the EuroWordNet 
design. 
The advance in these two areas will allow for 
large-scale extractions of shallow meaning from 
texts, in the form of relations among concepts. 
WSD provides the technology to convert 
relations between words into relations between 
concepts. Rich and large-scale Lexical 
Knowledge Bases will have be the repositories 
of extracted relations and other linguistic 
knowledge.  
However, progress is difficult due to the 
following interdependence: 
? In order to achieve accurate WSD, we need 
far more linguistic and semantic knowledge 
than is available in current lexical 
knowledge bases (e.g. current wordnets).  
? In order to enrich Lexical Knowledge Bases 
we need to acquire information from 
corpora, which have been accurately tagged 
with word senses.  
Providing innovative technology to solve this 
problem will be one of the main challenges to 
access KTs.  
Following this introduction section 1 presents 
the major research goals in HLT. Section 2 
presents the MEANING roadmap. Finally, 
section 4 draws the conclusions. 
1 Major research goals in HLT 
In order to extend the state-of-the-art in human 
language technologies (HLT) future research 
must devise: (1) innovative processes and tools 
for automatic acquisition of lexical knowledge 
from large-scale document collections; (2) novel 
techniques for accurately selecting the sense of 
open-class words in a large number of 
languages; (3) ways to enrich existing 
multilingual linguistic knowledge resources with 
new kinds of lexical information by 
automatically mapping information across 
languages. We present each one in turn. 
1.1 Dealing with knowledge acquisition 
The acquisition of linguistic knowledge from 
corpora has been a very successful line of 
research. Research in the acquisition of 
subcategorization information, selectional 
preferences, in thematic role assignments and 
diathesis alternations (Agirre and Mart?nez 
2001, 2002, McCarthy and Korhonen, 1998; 
Korhonen et al, 2000; McCarthy 2001), domain 
information (Magnini and Cavagli? 2000), topic 
signatures (Agirre et al 2001b), lexico-semantic 
relations between words (Agirre et al 2002) etc. 
has obtained encouraging results. The 
acquisition process usually involves large bodies 
of text, which have been previously processed 
with shallow language processors.  
Much of the use of the acquired knowledge 
has been hampered by the fact that the texts are 
not sense-disambiguated, and therefore, only 
knowledge for words can be acquired, that is, 
subcategorization for words, selectional 
preferences for words, etc. It is a well 
established fact that much of the linguistic 
behavior of words can be better explained if it is 
keyed to word senses.  
For instance, the subcategorization frames of 
verbs are highly dependent of the sense of the 
verb. Some senses of a given verb allow for a 
particular combination of complements, while 
others do not (McCarthy, 2001). The same is 
applicable to selectional preferences; traditional 
approaches that learn selectional preferences for 
a verb, tend to mix e.g. all subjects for differents 
senses, even if verbs can have different 
selectional preferences for each word sense 
(Agirre & Martinez, 2002). 
Having texts automatically sense-tagged with 
high accuracy will produce significantly better 
acquired knowledge at a sense level, including 
subcategorization frequencies, domain 
information, topic signatures, selectional 
preferences, specific lexico-semantic relations, 
thematic role assignments and diathesis 
alternations. It will also facilitate the 
investigation on automatic methods for dealing 
with new senses not present in current wordnets 
and clustering of word senses. Furthermore, 
linguistic information keyed to word senses that 
are linked to interlingual concepts (as proposed 
in the EuroWordNet model), can be easily 
integrated in a multilingual Lexical Knowledge 
Base (cf. section 2.3) 
2.2 Dealing with WSD 
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task 
of assigning the appropriate meaning (sense) to a 
given word in a text or discourse. Ide and 
Veronis (1998) argue that word sense ambiguity 
is a central problem for many established HLT 
applications (for example Machine Translation, 
Information Extraction and Information 
Retrieval). This is also the case for associated 
sub-tasks (i.e. reference resolution and parsing). 
For this reason many international research 
groups are working on WSD, using a wide range 
of approaches. However, no large-scale broad-
coverage accurate WSD system has been built 
up to date2. With current state-of-the-art 
accuracy in the range 60-70%, WSD is one of 
the most important open problems in Natural 
Language Processing. 
A promising current line of research uses 
semantically annotated corpora to train Machine 
Learning (ML) algorithms to decide which word 
sense to choose in which contexts. The words in 
these annotated corpora are tagged manually 
with semantic classes taken from a particular 
lexical semantic resource (most commonly 
WordNet). Many standard ML techniques have 
been tried, such as Bayesian learning, Exemplar 
based learning, Decision Lists, and recently 
margin-based classifiers like Boosting and 
Support Vector Machines (Escudero et al, 
2000a, 2000b, 2000c, 2000d, 2001; Mart?nez 
and Agirre, 2000). These approaches are termed 
"supervised" because they learn from previously 
sense annotated data and therefore they require a 
large amount of human intervention to annotate 
the training data. 
Supervised WSD systems are data hungry. 
They suffer from the "knowledge acquisition 
bottleneck", it takes them mere seconds to digest 
all of the processed corpus contained in training 
materials that take months to annotate manually. 
So, although Machine Learning classifiers are 
undeniably effective, they are not feasible until 
we can obtain reliable unsupervised training 
data. Ng (1997) estimates that the manual 
annotation effort necessary to build a broad 
coverage word-sense annotated English corpus 
is about 16 person-years; and this effort would 
have to be replicated for each different language. 
Unfortunately, many people think that Ng?s 
estimate might fell short, as the annotated corpus 
thus produced is not guaranteed to enable high 
accuracy WSD.  
Some recent work is focusing on reducing 
the acquisition cost and the need for supervision 
                                                     
2 See the conclusions of the SENSEVAL-2 
competition: http://www.sle.sharp.co.uk/senseval2/ 
in corpus-based methods for WSD. Leacock et 
al. (1998) and Mihalcea and Moldovan (1999) 
automatically generate arbitrarily large corpora 
for unsupervised WSD training, using the 
synonyms or definitions of word senses 
provided in WordNet to formulate search engine 
queries over the Web. In another line of 
research, (Yarowsky, 1995) and (Blum and 
Mitchell, 1998) have shown that it is possible to 
reduce the need for supervision with the help of 
large amounts of unannotated data. Applying 
these ideas, (Agirre and Mart?nez, 2000) has 
developed knowledge-based prototypes for 
obtaining accurate examples from the web for 
specific WordNet synsets, as well as, large 
quantities of unannotated examples. 
But in order to make significant advances in 
WSD system accuracy, systems need to be able 
to use types of lexical knowledge that are not 
currently available in wide-coverage lexical 
knowledge bases: for example subcategorisation 
frequencies for predicates (particularly verbs) 
rely on word senses, selectional preferences of 
predicates for classes of arguments, amongst 
others (Carroll and McCarthy, 2000; McCarthy 
et al, 2001; Agirre and Mart?nez, 2002;).  
2.3 Dealing with multilingualism  
Language diversity is at the same time a 
valuable cultural heritage worth preserving, and 
an obstacle to achieving a more cohesive social 
and economic development. This situation has 
been further stressed as a major challenge in IST 
research lines. Improving language 
communication capabilities is a prerequisite for 
increasing industrial competitiveness, this way 
leading to a sound growth in key economic 
sectors.  
However, this obstacle can be helpful 
because all languages realize the meaning in 
different ways. We can benefit from this fact 
using a novel multilingual mapping process that 
exploits the EuroWordNet architecture. In 
EuroWordNet local wordnets are linked via an 
Inter-Lingual-Index (ILI) allowing the 
connection from words in one language to 
translation equivalent words in any of the other 
languages. In that way, technological advances 
in one language can help the other.  
For instance, for Basque, being an 
agglutinative language with very rich 
morphological-syntactic information, it is 
possible to extract semantic relations that would 
be more difficult to capture in other languages. 
Below we can see an example of the relation 
betwewen silversmith and silver, extracted from 
the Basque words zilargile ? zilar respectively. 
This relation has been disambiguated into the 
?maker_of? lexico-semantic relation (Agirre & 
Lersundi, 2000).  
On the contrary, Basque is not largely present 
in the web as the others. Using this approach it is 
possible to balance both gaps.  
Although the technology to provide 
compatibility across wordnets exits (Daud? et al 
1999, 2000, 2001), new research is needed for 
porting and uploading the various types of 
knowledge across languages, and new ways to 
test the validity of the ported knowledge in the 
target languages.  
3. The MEANING Roadmap 
The improvements mentioned above have been 
explored separately with relative success. In 
fact, no research group in isolation has tried to 
combine all this aforementioned factors. We 
designed the MEANING project3 convinced that 
only a combination of all relevant knowledge 
and resources will be able to produce significant 
advances in this crucial research area.  
MEANING will treat the web as a (huge) 
corpus to learn information from, since even the 
largest conventional corpora available (e.g. the 
Reuters corpus, the British National Corpus) are 
not large enough to be able to acquire reliable 
information in sufficient detail about language 
behaviour. Moreover, most languages do not 
have large or diverse enough corpora available. 
MEANING proposes an innovative 
bootstrapping process to deal with the inter-
dependency between WSD and knowledge 
acquisition: 
1. Train accurate WSD systems and apply 
them to very large corpora by coupling 
knowledge-based techniques on the existing 
EuroWordNet (e.g. to populate it with 
domain labels, to induce automatically 
                                                     
                                                     3 Started in March 2002, MEANING IST-2001-
34460 "Developing Multilingual Web-scale 
Language Technologies" is a three years research 
project funded by the EC. 
training examples) with ML techniques that 
combine very large amounts of labeled and 
unlabeled data. When ready, use also the 
knowledge acquired in 2. 
2. Use the obtained accurate WSD data in 
conjunction with shallow parsing techniques 
and domain tagging to extract new linguistic 
knowledge to incorporate into 
EuroWordNet. 
This method will be able to break this 
interdependency in a series of cycles thanks to 
the fact that the WSD system will be based on 
all domain information, sophisticated linguistic 
knowledge, large numbers of automatically 
tagged examples from the web, and a 
combination of annotated and unannotated data. 
The first WSD system will have weaker 
linguistic knowledge, but the sole combination 
of the rest of the factors will produce significant 
performance gains. Besides, some of the 
required linguistic knowledge can be acquired 
from unnanotated data, and can therefore be 
acquired without using any WSD system. Once 
acceptable WSD is available, the acquired 
knowledge will be of a higher quality, and will 
allow for better WSD performance. 
Multilingualism will be also helpful for 
MEANING. The idiosyncratic way the meaning 
is realised in a particular language will be 
captured and ported to the rest of languages 
involved in the project4 using EuroWordNet as a 
Multilingual Central Repository in three 
consecutive phases (see figure 1). 
For instance, selectional preferences acquired 
for verb senses based on the English corpora, 
can be uploaded into the Multilingual Central 
Repository. As the selectional prefenrece 
relation is keyed to concepts in the repository, 
this knowledge can be ported to the other 
languages. Of course, the ported knowledge 
needs to be checked in order to evaluate the 
validity of this approach.  
Below, we can see the selectional preference 
for the first sense of know from (Agirre & 
martinez, 2002). The first sense of know is 
univocally linked to <know, cognize,
cognise>, which in EuroWordNet is linked to 
4 MEANING will work with three major European 
languages (English, Spanish and Italian) and two 
minority languages (Catalan and Basque).  
w
S
a
B
s
0
0
0
0
0
4
W
s
m
p
m
c
e
Multilingual Central Repository 
EANING is going to constitute 
wledge resource for a number of 
sses that need large amounts of 
to be effective tools (e.g. web 
P tools and software of the next 
l benefit from the MEANING 
Multilingual
Central Repository
Italian
EWN
Basque
EWN
Spanish
EWN
English
EWN
Basque
Web Corpus
Italian
Web Corpus
English
Web Corpus
Catalan
EWN
Spanish
Web Corpus
Catalan
Web Corpus
ACQ
ACQACQ
ACQ
UPLOADUPLOAD
UPLOADUPLOAD
PORT
PORT
PORT
PORT
WSD
WSD
WSD
WSD
 access applications are based on 
NG will open the way for access 
gual web based on concepts, 
lications with capabilities that 
ceed those currently available. 
ill facilitate development of 
pen domain Internet applications 
tion/Answering, Cross Lingual 
etrieval, Summarisation, Text 
Event Tracking, Information 
achine Translation, etc.). 
EANING will supply a common 
cture to Internet documents, thus 
owledge management of web 
ommon conceptual structure is a ord senses conocer_1 and saber_1 in 
panish, con?ixer_1 and saber_1 in Catalan 
nd antzeman_1, jakin_2 and ezagutu_1 in 
asque.  
ense 1: know, cognize -- (be
cognizant or aware of a fact or a
specific piece of information;
possess knowledge or information
about;
,1128 <communication> 
,0615 <measure quantity amount quantum> 
,0535 <attribute> 
,0389 <object physical_object> 
,0307 <cognition knowledge> 
 Conclusions 
here the acquisition of knowledge  from large-
cale document collections will be  one of the 
ajor challenge for the next generation of text 
rocessing applications, MEANING emphasises 
ultilingual  content-based access to web 
ontent. Moreover, it can provide a keystone 
nabling technologies for the semantic web. In 
particular, the 
produced by M
the natural kno
semantic proce
linguistic data 
ontologies). NL
generation wil
outcomes.  
Figure 1: MEANING data flow. 
Current web
words; MEANI
to the multilin
providing app
significantly ex
MEANING w
concept-based o
(such as Ques
Information R
Categorisation, 
Extraction, M
Furthermore, M
conceptual stru
facilitating kn
content. This c
decisive enabling technology for allowing the 
semantic web. 
Acknowledgements 
The MEANING project is funded by the 
European Commission (IST-2001-34460). 
References 
Agirre E. and Lersundi M. Extracci?n de relaciones 
l?xico-sem?nticas a partir de palabras derivadas 
usando patrones de definici?n. Proceedings of the 
Annual SEPLN meeting. Spain, 2000. 
Agirre E., Lersundi M. and Mart?nez D. A 
Multilingual Approach to Disambiguate 
Prepositions and Case Suffixes. Proceeding of the 
Workshop ?Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent 
Successes and Future Directions? organized by 
ACL 2002.  
Agirre E. and Mart?nez D. Exploring automatic word 
sense disambiguation with decision lists and the 
Web.  Proceedings of the Workshop ?Semantic 
Annotation And Intelligent Annotation? organized 
by COLING 2000. Luxembourg. 2000.  
Agirre E. and Martinez D. Learning class-to-class 
selectional preferences. Proceedings of the 
Workshop "Computational Natural Language 
Learning" (CoNLL-2001). In conjunction with 
ACL'2001/EACL'2001. Toulouse. 2001. 
Agirre E., Ansa O., Mart?nez D. and Hovy E. 
Enriching WordNet concepts with topic signatures. 
Proceedings of the NAACL workshop on WordNet 
and Other lexical Resources: Applications, 
Extensions and Customizations. Pittsburg. 2001. 
Agirre E. and Martinez D. Integrating selectional 
preferences in WordNet. Proceedings of the first 
International WordNet Conference. Mysore, India, 
2002. 
Blum A. and Mitchel T. Combining labelled and 
unlabeled data with co-training. In Proceedings of 
the 11th Annual Conference on Computational 
Learning Theory. 1998. 
Carroll, J. and McCarthy, D. Word sense 
disambiguation using automatically acquired 
verbal preferences. Computers and the Humanities. 
Senseval Special Issue, Vol. 34, No 1-2. 2000. 
Daud? J., Padr? L. and Rigau G., Mapping 
Multilingual Hierarchies using Relaxation 
Labelling, Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Very 
Large Corpora (EMNLP/VLC'99). Maryland, 
1999.  
Daud? J., Padr? L. and Rigau G., Mapping WordNets 
Using Structural Information , 38th Anual Meeting 
of the ACL. Hong Kong, 2000.  
Daud? J., Padr? L. and Rigau G., A Complete WN1.5 
to WN1.6 Mapping, Proceedings of NAACL 
Workshop "WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: 
Applications, Extensions and Customizations". 
Pittsburg, PA, 2001. 
Escudero G., M?rquez L. and Rigau G., Boosting 
Applied to Word Sense Disambiguation. 
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on 
Machine Learning. Barcelona. 2000.  
Escudero G., M?rquez L. and Rigau G., Naive Bayes 
and Exemplar-Based approaches to Word Sense 
Disambiguation Revisited.  Proceedings of the 14th 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Berlin. 2000.  
Escudero G., M?rquez L. and Rigau G., A 
Comparison between Supervised Learning 
Algorithms for Word Sense Disambiguation. 
Proceedings of Fourth Computational Natural 
Language Learning Workshop. Lisbon. 2000.  
Escudero G., M?rquez L. and Rigau G., An Empirical 
Study of the Domain Dependence of Supervised 
Word Sense Disambiguation Systems. Proceedings 
of Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing and Very 
Large Corpora. Hong Kong. 2000. 
Escudero G., M?rquez L. and Rigau G., Using 
LazyBoosting for Word Sense Disambiguation. 
Proceedings of 2nd International Workshop 
?Evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation 
Systems?, SENSEVAL-2. Toulouse. 2001. 
Fellbaum C. editor. WordNet An Electronic Lexical 
Database. The MIT Press. 1998. 
Ide, N. and V?ronis, J. Introduction to the special 
issue on word sense disambiguation: The state of 
the art. Computational Linguistics, 24 (1), 1998. 
Korhonen A., Gorrell, G. and McCarthy D. Statistical 
Filtering and Subcategorization Frame 
Acquisition. In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora. 
Hong Kong. 2000. 
Leacock, C. Chodorow, M. and Miller, G.A. Using 
Corpus Statistics and WordNet Relations for Sense 
Identication, Computational Linguistics, 24(1), 
1998. 
Magnini B. and Cavagli? G., Integrating subject field 
codes into WordNet. In Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation, Athens. 2000. 
Mart?nez D. and Agirre E. One Sense per Collocation 
and Genre/Topic Variations. Proceedings of the 
Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods 
in Natural Language Processing and Very Large 
Corpora. Hong Kong, 2000. 
McCarthy, D. and Korhonen, A. Detecting verbal 
participation in diathesis alternations. Proceedings 
of the 17th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics and 36th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics COLING-ACL'98. Montreal. 1998.  
McCarthy D., Lexical Acquisition at the Syntax-
Semantics Interface: Diathesis Aternations, 
Subcategorization Frames and Selectional 
Preferences. Ph.D. thesis, University of Sussex. 
2001. 
McCarthy D., Carroll J. and Preiss J. Disambiguating 
noun and verb senses using automatically acquired 
selectional preferences. Proceedings of the 
SENSEVAL-2 Workshop at ACL/EACL'01, 
Toulouse. 2001. 
Mihalcea R. and Moldovan D. An automatic method 
for generating sense tagged corpora. In 
Proceedings of American Association for Artificial 
Intelligence. 1999. 
Miller G. Five papers on WordNet, Special Issue of 
International Journal of Lexicogrphy 3(4). 1990. 
Ng. H. T. Getting Serious about Word Sense 
Disambiguation. In Proceedings of Workshop 
?Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, what 
and how??, Washington, 1997. 
Vossen P. EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database 
with Lexical Semantic Networks, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht. 1998. 
Yarowsky D., Unsupervised word sense 
disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 1995. 
