Information Extraction from Voicemail Transcripts
Martin Jansche
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
jansche.1@osu.edu
Steven P. Abney
AT&T Labs ? Research
180 Park Avenue
Florham Park, NJ 07932, USA
abney@research.att.com
Abstract
Voicemail is not like email. Even such ba-
sic information as the name of the caller/
sender or a phone number for returning
calls is not represented explicitly and must
be obtained from message transcripts or
other sources. We discuss techniques for
doing this and the challenges these tasks
present.
1 Introduction
When you?re away from the phone and someone
takes a message for you, at the very least you?d ex-
pect to be told who called and whether they left a
number for you to call back. If the same call is
picked up by a voicemail system, even such basic in-
formation like the name of the caller and their phone
number may not be directly available, forcing one to
listen to the entire message1 in the worst case. By
contrast, information about the sender of an email
message has always been explicitly represented in
the message headers, starting with early standard-
ization attempts (Bhushan et al, 1973) and including
the two decade old current standard (Crocker, 1982).
Applications that aim to present voicemail messages
through an email-like interface ? take as an example
the idea of a ?uniform inbox? presentation of email,
voicemail, and other kinds of messages2 ? must deal
with the problem of how to obtain information anal-
ogous to what would be contained in email headers.
1The average message length in the corpus described below
is 36 seconds.
2Similar issues arise with FAX messages, for example.
Here we will discuss one way of addressing this
problem, treating it exclusively as the task of extract-
ing relevant information from voicemail transcripts.
In practice, e.g. in the context of a sophisticated
voicemail front-end (Hirschberg et al, 2001) that is
tightly integrated with an organization-wide voice-
mail system and private branch exchange (PBX), ad-
ditional sources of information may be available: the
voicemail system or the PBX might provide infor-
mation about the originating station of a call, and
speaker identification can be used to match a caller?s
voice against models of known callers (Rosenberg
et al, 2001). Restricting our attention to voicemail
transcripts means that our focus and goals are sim-
ilar to those of Huang et al (2001), but the features
and techniques we use are very different.
While the present task may seem broadly similar
to named entity extraction from broadcast news (Go-
toh and Renals, 2000), it is quite distinct from the
latter: first, we are only interested in a small subset
of the named entities; and second, the structure of
the voicemail transcripts in our corpus is very dif-
ferent from broadcast news and certain aspects of
this structure can be exploited for extracting caller
names.
Huang et al (2001) discuss three approaches:
hand-crafted rules; grammatical inference of subse-
quential transducers; and log-linear classifiers with
bigram and trigram features used as taggers (Ratna-
parkhi, 1996). While the latter are reported to yield
the best overall performance, the hand-crafted rules
resulted in higher recall. Our phone number extrac-
tor is based on a two-phase procedure that employs a
small hand-crafted component to propose candidate
phrases, followed by a classifier that retains the de-
sirable candidates. This allows for more or less inde-
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    Language Processing (EMNLP), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 320-327.
                         Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
pendent optimization of recall and precision, some-
what similar to the PNrule classifier learner (Agar-
wal and Joshi, 2001; Joshi et al, 2001). We shall see
that hand-crafted rules achieve very good recall, just
as Huang et al (2001) had observed, and the prun-
ing phase successfully eliminates most undesirable
candidates without affecting recall too much. Over-
all performance of our method is better than if we
employ a log-linear model with trigram features.
The success of the method proposed here is also
due to the use of a rich set of features for candi-
date classification. For example, the majority of
phone numbers in voicemail messages has either
four, seven, or ten digits, whereas nine digits would
indicate a social security number. In our two-phase
approach it is straightforward for the second-phase
classifier to take the length of a candidate phone
number into account. On the other hand, standard
named entity taggers that use trigram features do not
exploit this information, and doing so would entail
significant changes to the underlying models and pa-
rameter estimation procedures.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A
brief overview of the data we used in ?2 is followed
by a discussion of methods for extracting two kinds
of caller information in ?3. Methods for extracting
telephone numbers are discussed in ?4, and ?5 sum-
marizes and concludes.
2 Voicemail Corpus
Development and evaluation was done using a pro-
prietary corpus of almost 10,000 voicemail mes-
sages that had been manually transcribed and
marked up for content. Some more details about
this corpus can be found in (Bacchiani, 2001). The
relevant content labeling is perhaps best illustrated
with an (anonymized) excerpt form a typical mes-
sage transcript:
?greeting? hi Jane ?/greeting? ?caller? this
is Pat Caller ?/caller? I just wanted to I
know you?ve probably seen this or maybe
you already know about it . . . so if you
could give me a call at ?telno? one two
three four five ?/telno? when you get the
message I?d like to chat about it hope
things are well with you ?closing? talk to
you soon ?/closing?
This transcript is representative of a large class of
messages that start out with a short greeting fol-
lowed by a phrase that identifies the caller either
by name as above or by other means (?hi, it?s me?).
A phone number may be mentioned as part of the
caller?s self-identification, or is often mentioned
near the end of the message. It may seem natu-
ral and obvious that voicemail messages should be
structured in this way, and this prototypical struc-
ture can therefore be exploited for purposes of lo-
cating caller information or deciding whether a digit
string constitutes a phone number. The next sections
discuss this in more detail.
The corpus was partitioned into two subsets, with
8120 messages used for development and 1869 for
evaluation. Approximately 5% of all messages are
empty. Empty messages were not discarded from
the evaluation set since they constitute realistic sam-
ples that the information extraction component has
to cope with. The development set contains 7686
non-empty messages.
3 Caller Information
Of the non-empty messages in the development set,
7065 (92%) transcripts contain a marked-up caller
phrase. Of those, 6731 messages mention a name in
the caller phrase. Extracting caller information can
be broken down into two slightly different tasks: we
might want to reproduce the existing caller annota-
tion as closely as possible, producing caller phrases
like ?this is Pat Caller? or ?it?s me?; or we might only
be interested in caller names such as ?Pat Caller? in
our above example. We make use of the fact that
for the overwhelming majority of cases, the caller?s
self-identification occurs somewhere near the begin-
ning of the message.
3.1 Caller Phrases
Most caller phrases tend to start one or two words
into the message. This is because they are typi-
cally preceded by a one-word (?hi?) or two-word
(?hi Jane?) greeting. Figure 1 shows the empiri-
cal distribution of the beginning of the caller phrase
across the 7065 applicable transcripts in the devel-
opment data. As can be seen, more than 97% of
all caller phrases start somewhere between one and
seven words from the beginning of the message,
though in one extreme case the start of the caller
phrase occurred 135 words into the message.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
observed max.: 135
entropy: 1.48 bits
density
cumulative
Figure 1: Empirical probability of a caller phrase
starting x words into the message
These observations strongly suggest that when ex-
tracting caller phrases, positional cues should be
taken into account. This is good news, especially
since intrinsic features of the caller phrase may not
be as reliable: a caller phrase is likely to contain
names that are problematic for an automatic speech
recognizer. While this is less of a problem when
evaluating on manual transcriptions, the experience
reported in (Huang et al, 2001) suggests that the
relatively high error rate of speech recognizers may
negatively affect performance of caller name ex-
traction on automatically generated transcripts. We
therefore avoid using anything but a small number
of greetings and commonly occurring words like
?hi?, ?this?, ?is? etc. and a small number of common
first names for extracting caller phrases and use po-
sitional information in addition to word-based fea-
tures.
We locate caller phrases by first identifying their
start position in the message and then predicting
the length of the phrase. The empirical distribu-
tion of caller phrase lengths in the development data
is shown in Figure 2. Most caller phrases are be-
tween two and four words long (?it?s Pat?, ?this is
Pat Caller?) and there are moderately good lexical
indicators that signal the end of a caller phrase (?I?,
?could?, ?please?, etc.). Again, we avoid the use of
names as features and rely on a small set of fea-
tures based on common words, in addition to phrase
length, for predicting the length of the caller phrase.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
observed max.: 47
entropy: 3.11 bits
density
cumulative
Figure 2: Empirical probability of a caller phrase
being x words long
We have thus identified two classes of features
that allow us to predict the start of the caller phrase
relative to the beginning of the message, as well as
the end of the caller phrase relative to its start. Since
we are dealing with discrete word indices in both
cases, we treat this as a classification task, rather
than a regression task. A large number of classifier
learners can be used to automatically infer classifiers
for the two subtasks at hand. We chose a decision
tree learner for convenience and note that this choice
does not affect the overall results nearly as much as
modifying our feature inventory.
Since a direct comparison to the log-linear named
entity tagger described in (Huang et al, 2001) (we
refer to this approach as HZP log-linear below) is
not possible due to the use of different corpora and
annotation standards, we applied a similar named
entity tagger based on a log-linear model with tri-
gram features to our data (we refer to this approach
as Col log-linear as the tagger was provided by
Michael Collins). Table 1 summarizes precision (P),
recall (R), and F-measure (F) for three approaches
evaluated on manual transcriptions: row HZP log-
linear repeats the results of the best model from
(Huang et al, 2001); row Col log-linear contains
the results we obtained using a similar named entity
tagger on our own data; and row JA classifiers shows
the performance of the classifier method proposed in
this section.
Like Huang et al (2001), we count a proposed
caller phrase as correct if and only if it matches
the annotation of the evaluation data perfectly. The
numbers could be made to look better by using con-
tainment as the evaluation criterion, i.e., we would
count a proposed phrase as correct if it contained an
actual phrase plus perhaps some additional material.
While this may be more useful in practice (see be-
low), it is not the objective that was maximized dur-
ing training, and so we prefer the stricter criterion
for evaluation on previously annotated transcripts.
P R F
HZP log-linear .89 .80 .84
Col log-linear .83 .78 .81
JA classifiers .73 .68 .71
Table 1: Performance of caller phrase extraction
(manual transcriptions)
While the results for the approach proposed
here appear clearly worse than those reported by
Huang et al (2001), we hasten to point out that this
is most likely not due to any difference in the cor-
pora that were used. This is corroborated by the fact
that we were able to obtain performance much closer
to that of the best, finely tuned log-linear model from
(Huang et al, 2001) by using a generic named entity
tagger that was not adapted in any way to the par-
ticular task at hand. The log-linear taggers employ
n-gram features based on family names and other
particular aspects of the development data that do
not necessarily generalize to other settings, where
the family names of the callers may be different or
may not be transcribed properly. In fact, it seems
rather likely that the log-linear models and the fea-
tures they employ over-fit the training data.
This becomes clearer when one evaluates on un-
seen transcripts produced by an automatic speech
recognizer (ASR),3 as summarized in Table 2. Rows
HZP strict and HZP containment repeat the figures
for the best model from (Huang et al, 2001) when
evaluated on automatic transcriptions. The differ-
ence is that HZP strict uses the strict evaluation cri-
terion described above, whereas HZP containment
uses the weaker criterion of containment, i.e., an
extracted phrase counts as correct if it contains ex-
actly one whole actual phrase. Row JA containment
summarizes the performance of our approach when
3An automatic transcription is the single best word hypoth-
esis of the ASR for a given voicemail message.
evaluated on 101 unseen automatically transcribed
messages. Since we did not have any labeled au-
tomatic transcriptions available to compare with the
predicted caller phrase labels using the strict crite-
rion, we only report results based on the weaker
criterion of containment. In fact, we count caller
phrases as correct as long as they contain the full
name of the caller, since this is the common denom-
inator in the otherwise somewhat heterogeneous la-
beling of our training corpus; more on this issue in
the next section.
P R F
HZP strict .24 .16 .19
HZP containment .73 .41 .52
JA containment .74 .66 .70
Table 2: Performance of caller phrase extraction (au-
tomatic transcriptions)
The difference between the approach in (Huang et
al., 2001) and ours may be partly due to the perfor-
mance of the ASR components: Huang et al (2001)
report a word error rate of ?about 35%?, whereas
we used a recognizer (Bacchiani, 2001) with a word
error rate of only 23%. Still, the reduced perfor-
mance of the HZP model on ASR transcripts com-
pared with manual transcripts is points toward over-
fitting, or reliance on features that do not generalize
to ASR transcripts. Our main approach, on the other
hand, uses classifiers that are extremely knowledge-
poor in comparison with the many features of the
log-linear models for the various named entity tag-
gers, employing no more than a few dozen categori-
cal features.
3.2 Caller Names
Extracting an entire caller phrase like ?this is Pat
Caller? may not be all that relevant in practice: the
prefix ?this is? does not provide much useful infor-
mation, so simply extracting the name of the caller
should suffice. This is more or less a problem with
the annotation standard used for marking up voice-
mail transcripts. We decided to test the effects of
changing that standard post hoc. This was relatively
easy to do, since proper names are capitalized in
the message transcripts. We heuristically identify
caller names as the leftmost longest contiguous sub-
sequence of capitalized words inside a marked-up
caller phrase. This leaves us with 6731 messages
with caller names in our development data.4
As we did for caller phrases, we briefly examine
the distributions of the start position of caller names
(see Figure 3) as well as their lengths (see Figure 4).
Comparing the entropies of the empirical distribu-
tions with the corresponding ones for caller phrases
suggests that we might be dealing with a simpler
extraction task here. The entropy of the empirical
name length distribution is not much more than one
bit, since predicting the length of a caller name is
mostly a question of deciding whether a first name
or full name was mentioned.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
observed max.: 138
entropy: 2.20 bits
density
cumulative
Figure 3: Empirical probability of a caller name
starting x words into the message
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
observed max.: 8
entropy: 1.17 bits
density
cumulative
Figure 4: Empirical probability of a caller name be-
ing x words long
4The vast majority of messages that do not mention a name
as part of their caller phrase employ the caller phrase ?it?s me?,
which would be easy to detect and treat separately.
The performance comparison in Table 3 shows
that we are in fact dealing with a simpler task. No-
tice however that our method has not changed at all.
We still use one classifier to predict the beginning
of the caller name and a second classifier to predict
its length, with the same small set of lexical features
that do not include any names other than a handful
of common first names.
P R F
phrase .730 .684 .706
name .860 .871 .865
Table 3: Caller phrase vs. name extraction (manual
transcriptions)
4 Phone Numbers
The development data contain 5303 marked-up
phone numbers, for an average of almost 0.7 phone
numbers per non-empty message. These phone
numbers fall into the following categories based on
their realization:
? 4472 (84%) consist exclusively of spoken num-
bers
? 679 (13%) consist of spoken numbers and the
words ?area?, ?code?, and ?extension?
? 152 (3%) have additional material, due to cor-
rections, hesitations, fragments, and question-
able markup
Note that phone numbers in the North American
Numbering Plan are either ten or seven digits long,
depending on whether the Numbering Plan Area
code is included or not. Two other frequent lengths
for phone numbers in the development data are four
(for internal lines) and, to a lesser extent, eleven
(when the long distance dialing prefix is included,
as in ?one eight hundred . . . ?).
This allows us to formulate the following baseline
approach: find all maximal substrings consisting of
spoken digits (?zero? through ?nine?) and keep those
of length four, seven, and ten. Simple as it may
seem, this approach (which we call digits below)
performs surprisingly well. Its precision is more
than 78%, partly because in our corpus there do not
occur many seven or ten digit numbers that are not
phone numbers.
Named entity taggers based on conditional mod-
els with trigram features are not particularly suited
for this task. The reason is that trigrams do not pro-
vide enough history to allow the tagger to judge the
length of a proposed phone number: it inserts begin-
ning and end tags without being able to tell how far
apart they are. Data sparseness is another problem,
since we are dealing with 1000 distinct trigrams over
digits alone, so a different event model that replaces
all spoken digits with the same representative token
might be better suited, also because it avoids over-
fitting issues like accidentally learning area codes
and other number patterns that are frequent in the
development data.
However, there is a more serious problem. Even
if the distance between the start and end tags that a
named entity tagger predicts could be taken into ac-
count, this would not help with all spoken renditions
of phone numbers. For example, ?327-1025? could
be read aloud using only six words (?three two seven
ten twenty five?), and might be incorrectly rejected
because it appears to be of a length that is not very
common for phone numbers.
We therefore approach the phone number extrac-
tion task differently, using a two-phase procedure.
In the first phase we use a hand-crafted grammar to
propose candidate phone numbers. This avoids all
of the problems mentioned so far, yet the complex-
ity of the task remains manageable because of the
rather simple structure of most phone numbers in
our development data noted above. The advantage
is that it allows us to simultaneously convert spo-
ken digits and numbers to a numeric representation,
whose length can then be used as an important fea-
ture for deciding whether to keep or throw away a
candidate. Note that such a conversion process is
desirable in any case, since a text-based application
would presumably want to present digit strings like
?327-1025? to a user, rather than ?three two seven
ten twenty five?. This conversion step is not entirely
trivial, though: for example, one might transcribe
the spoken words ?three hundred fourteen ninety
nine? as either ?300-1499? or ?314.99? depending on
whether they are preceded by ?call me back at? vs. ?I
can sell it to you for?, for example. But since we are
only interested in finding phone numbers, the extrac-
tion component can treat all candidates it proposes
as if they were phone numbers.
Adjustments of the hand-crafted grammar were
only made in order to increase recall on the devel-
opment data. The grammar should locate as many
actual phone numbers in the development corpus as
possible, but was free to also propose spurious can-
didates that did not correspond to marked-up phone
numbers. While it has recently been argued that
such separate optimization of recall and precision is
generally desirable for certain learning tasks (Agar-
wal and Joshi, 2001; Joshi et al, 2001), the main
advantage in connection with hand-crafted compo-
nents is simplified development. Since we noted
above that 97% of all phone numbers in our devel-
opment data are expressed fairly straightforwardly
in terms of digits, numbers, and a few other words
particular to the phone number domain, we might
expect to achieve recall figures close to 97% without
doing anything special to deal with the remaining
3% of difficult cases. It was very easy to achieve this
recall figure on the development data, while the ratio
of proposed phone numbers to actual phone numbers
was about 3.2 at worst.5
A second phase is now charged with the task of
weeding through the set of candidates proposed dur-
ing the first phase, retaining those that correspond to
actual phone numbers. This is a simple binary clas-
sification task, and again many different techniques
can be applied. As a baseline we use a classifier
that accepts any candidate of length four or more
(now measured in terms of numeric digits, rather
than spoken words), and rejects candidates of length
three and less. Without this simple step (which we
refer to as prune below), the precision of our hand-
crafted extraction grammar is only around 30%, but
by pruning away candidate phone numbers shorter
than four digits precision almost doubles while re-
call is unaffected.
We again used a decision tree learner to automat-
ically infer a classifier for the second phase. The
features we made available to the learner were the
length of the phone number in numeric digits, its
5It would of course be trivial to achieve 100% recall by ex-
tracting all possible substrings of a transcript. The fact that our
grammar extracts only about three times as many phrases as
needed is evidence that it falls within the reasonable subset of
possible extraction procedures.
distance from the end of the message, and a small
number of lexical cues in the surrounding context of
a candidate number (?call?, ?number?, etc.). This ap-
proach (which we call classify below) increases the
precision of the combined two steps to acceptable
levels without hurting recall too much.
A comparison of performance results is presented
in Table 4. Rows HZP rules and HZP log-linear re-
fer to the rule-based baseline and the best log-linear
model of (Huang et al, 2001) and the figures are
simply taken from that paper; row Col log-linear
refers to the same named entity tagger we used in the
previous section and is included for comparison with
the HZP models; row JA digits refers to the simple
baseline where we extract strings of spoken digits of
plausible lengths. Our main results appear in the re-
maining rows. The performance of our hand-crafted
extraction grammar (in row JA extract) was about
what we had seen on the development data before,
with recall being as high as one could reasonably ex-
pect. As mentioned above, using a simple pruning
step in the second phase (see JA extract + prune)
results in a doubling of precision and leaves recall
essentially unaffected (a single fragmentary phone
number was wrongly excluded). Finally, if we use
a decision tree classifier in the second phase, we
can achieve extremely high precision with a minimal
impact on recall. Our two-phase procedure outper-
forms all other methods we considered.
P R F
HZP rules .81 .83 .82
HZP log-linear .90 .83 .86
Col log-linear .88 .93 .91
JA digits .78 .70 .74
JA extract .30 .96 .45
JA extract + prune .59 .96 .73
JA extract + classify .94 .94 .94
Table 4: Performance of phone number extraction
(manual transcriptions)
We evaluated the performance of our best models
on the same 101 unseen ASR transcripts used above
in the evaluation of the caller phrase extraction. The
results are summarized in Table 5, which also re-
peats the best results from (Huang et al, 2001), us-
ing the same terminology as earlier: rows HZP strict
and HZP containment refer to the best model from
(Huang et al, 2001) ? corresponding to row HZP
log-linear in Table 4 ? when evaluated using the
strict criterion and containment, respectively; and
row JA containment refers to our own best model
? corresponding to row JA extract + classify in Ta-
ble 4.
P R F
HZP strict .56 .52 .54
HZP containment .85 .79 .82
JA containment .95 .94 .95
Table 5: Performance of phone number extraction
(automatic transcriptions)
It is not very plausible that the differences be-
tween the approaches in Table 5 would be due to
a difference in the performance of the ASR compo-
nents that generated the message transcripts. From
inspecting our own data it is clear that ASR mistakes
inside phone numbers are virtually absent, and we
would expect the same to hold even of an automatic
recognizer with an overall much higher word error
rate. Also, for most phone numbers the labeling is
uncontroversial, so we expect the corpora used by
Huang et al (2001) and ourselves to be extremely
similar in terms of mark-up of phone numbers. So
the observed performance difference is most likely
due to the difference in extraction methods.
5 Conclusion and Outlook
The novel contributions of this paper can be summa-
rized as follows:
? We demonstrated empirically that positional
cues can be an important source of information
for locating caller names and phrases.
? We showed that good performance on the task
of extracting caller information can be achieved
using a very small inventory of lexical and po-
sitional features.
? We argued that for extracting telephone num-
bers it is extremely useful to take the length
of their numeric representation into account.
Our grammar-based extractor translates spoken
numbers into such a numeric representation.
? Our two-phase approach allows us to efficiently
develop a simple extraction grammar for which
the only requirement is high recall. This places
less of a burden on the grammar developers
than having to write an accurate set of rules like
the baseline of (Huang et al, 2001).
? The combined performance of our simple ex-
traction grammar and the second-phase clas-
sifier exceeded the performance of all other
methods, including the current state of the art
(Huang et al, 2001).
Our results point towards approaches that use a
small inventory of features that have been tailored
to specific tasks. Generic methods like the named
entity tagger used by Huang et al (2001) may not
be the best tools for particular tasks; in fact, we do
not expect the bigram and trigram features used by
such taggers to be sufficient for accurately extract-
ing phone numbers. We also believe that using all
available lexical information for extracting caller in-
formation can easily lead to over-fitting, which can
partly be avoid by not relying on names being tran-
scribed correctly by an ASR component.
In practice, determining the identity of a caller
might have to take many diverse sources of infor-
mation into account. The self-identification of a
caller and the phone numbers mentioned in the same
message are not uncorrelated, since there is usually
only a small number of ways to reach any particular
caller. In an application we might therefore try to use
a combination of speaker identification (Rosenberg
et al, 2001), caller name extraction, and recognized
phone numbers to establish the identity of the caller.
An investigation of how to combine these sources of
information is left for future research.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Michiel Bacchiani, Michael
Collins, Julia Hirschberg, and the SCANMail group
at AT&T Labs. Special thanks to Michiel Bacchiani
for help with ASR transcripts and to Michael Collins
for letting us use his named entity tagger.
References
Ramesh C. Agarwal and Mahesh V. Joshi. 2001. PNrule:
A new classification framework in data mining (A case
study in network intrusion detection). In First SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining, Chicago,
IL.
Michiel Bacchiani. 2001. Automatic transcription of
voicemail at AT&T. In International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Salt Lake
City, UT.
Abhay Bhushan, Ken Pogran, Ray Tomlinson, and Jim
White. 1973. Standardizing network mail headers.
Internet RFC 561.
David H. Crocker. 1982. Standard for the format of
ARPA internet text messages. Internet RFC 822,
STD 11.
Yoshihiko Gotoh and Steve Renals. 2000. Informa-
tion extraction from broadcast news. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series
A, 358:1295?1310.
Julia Hirschberg, Michiel Bacchiani, Don Hindle, Phil
Isenhour, Aaron Rosenberg, Litza Stark, Larry Stead,
Steve Whittaker, and Gary Zamchick. 2001. SCAN-
Mail: Browsing and searching speech data by content.
In 7th European Conference on Speech Communica-
tion and Technology, Aalborg, Denmark.
Jing Huang, Geoffrey Zweig, and Mukund Padmanab-
han. 2001. Information extraction from voicemail. In
39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Toulouse, France.
Mahesh V. Joshi, Ramesh C. Agarwal, and Vipin Ku-
mar. 2001. Mining needles in a haystack: Classify-
ing rare classes via two-phase rule induction. In ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, Santa Barbara, CA.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy model
for part-of-speech tagging. In Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, Philadelphia, PA.
Aaron Rosenberg, Julia Hirschberg, Michiel Bacchiani,
S. Parthasarathy, Philip Isenhour, and Larry Stead.
2001. Caller identification for the SCANMail voice-
mail browser. In 7th European Conference on Speech
Communication and Technology, Aalborg, Denmark.
