A New Taxonomy for the Quality of Telephone Services
Based on Spoken Dialogue Systems
Sebastian Mo?ller
Institute of Communication Acoustics
Ruhr?University Bochum
D?44780 Bochum, Germany
moeller@ika.ruhr-uni-bochum.de
Abstract
This document proposes a new taxon-
omy for describing the quality of services
which are based on spoken dialogue sys-
tems (SDSs), and operated via a telephone
interface. It is used to classify instru-
mentally or expert?derived dialogue and
system measures, as well as quality fea-
tures perceived by the user of the service.
A comparison is drawn to the quality of
human?to?human telephone services, and
implications for the development of evalu-
ation frameworks such as PARADISE are
discussed.
1 Introduction
Telephone services which rely on spoken dialogue
systems (SDSs) have now been introduced at a large
scale. For the human user, when dialing the num-
ber it is often not completely clear that the agent
on the other side will be a machine, and not a hu-
man operator. Because of this fact, and because the
interaction with the SDS is performed through the
same type of user interface (e.g. the handset tele-
phone), comparisons will automatically be drawn to
the quality of human?human communication over
the same channel, and sometimes with the same pur-
pose. Thus, while acknowledging the differences in
behaviors from both ? human and machine ? sides,
it seems justified to take the human telephone inter-
action (HHI) as one reference for telephone?based
human?machine interaction (HMI).
The quality of interactions with spoken dialogue
systems is difficult to determine. Whereas structured
approaches have been documented on how to design
spoken dialogue systems so that they adequately
meet the requirements of their users (e.g. by Bernsen
et al, 1998), the quality which is perceived when in-
teracting with SDSs is often addressed in an intuitive
way. Hone and Graham (2001) describe efforts to
determine the underlying dimensions in user quality
judgments, by performing a multidimensional anal-
ysis on subjective ratings obtained on a large number
of different scales. The problem obviously turned
out to be multi?dimensional. Nevertheless, many
other researchers still try to estimate ?overall system
quality?, ?usability? or ?user satisfaction? by sim-
ply calculating the arithmetic mean over several user
ratings on topics as different as perceived TTS qual-
ity, perceived system understanding, and expected
future use of the system. The reason is the lack of
an adequate description of quality dimensions, both
with respect to the system design and to the percep-
tion of the user.
In this paper, an attempt is made to close this
gap. A taxonomy is developed which allows qual-
ity dimensions to be classified, and methods for their
measurement to be developed. The starting point for
this taxonomy was a similar one which has fruitfully
been used for the description of human?to?human
services in telecommunication networks (e.g. tra-
ditional telephony, mobile telephony, or voice over
IP), see Mo?ller (2000). Such a taxonomy can be
helpful in three respects: (1) system elements which
are in the hands of developers, and responsible for
specific user perceptions, can be identified, (2) the
     Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 142-153.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
dimensions underlying the overall impression of the
user can be described, together with adequate (sub-
jective) measurement methods, and (3) prediction
models can be developed to estimate quality ? as it
would be perceived by the user ? from purely instru-
mental measurements. While we are still far from
the last point in HMI, examples will be presented of
the first two issues.
The next section will discuss what is understood
by the term ?quality?, and will present the taxon-
omy for HMI. In Section 3, quality features under-
lying the aspects of the taxonomy are identified, and
dialogue- and system-related measures for each as-
pect are presented in Section 4, based on measures
which are commonly documented in literature. Sec-
tion 5 shows the parallels to the original taxonomy
for HHI. The outlook gives implications for the de-
velopment of evaluation and prediction models, such
as the PARADISE framework.
2 Quality of Service Taxonomy
It is obvious that quality is not an entity which could
be measured in an easy way, e.g. using a techni-
cal instrument. The quality of a service results from
the perceptions of its user, in relation to what they
expect or desire from the service. In the following,
it will thus be made use of the definition of quality
developed by Jekosch (2000):
?Quality is the result of the judgment of
a perceived constitution of an entity with
regard to its desired constitution. [...] The
perceived constitution contains the totality
of the features of an entity. For the per-
ceiving person, it is a characteristic of the
identity of the entity.?
The entity to be judged in our case is the service
the user interacts with (through the telephone net-
work), and which is based on a spoken dialogue sys-
tem. Its quality is a compromise between what s/he
expects or desires, and the characteristics s/he per-
ceives while using the service.
At this point, it is useful to differentiate between
quality elements and quality features, as it was also
proposed by Jekosch. Whereas the former are sys-
tem or service characteristics which are in the hands
of the designer (and thus can be optimized to reach
high quality), the latter are perceptive dimensions
forming the overall picture in the mind of the user.
Generally, no stable relationship which would be
valid for all types of services, users and situations
can be established between the two. Evaluation
frameworks such as PARADISE establish a tem-
porary relationship, and try to reach some cross?
domain validity. Due to the lack of quality elements
which can really be manipulated in some way by the
designer, however, the framework has to start mostly
from dialogue and system measures which cannot be
directly controlled. These measures will be listed in
Section 4.
The quality of a service (QoS) is often addressed
only from the designer side, e.g. in the definition
used by the International Telecommunication Union
for telephone services (ITU?T Rec. E.800, 1994).
It includes service support, operability, security and
serveability. Whereas these issues are necessary for
a successful set?up of the service, they are not di-
rectly perceived by the user. In the following tax-
onomy, the focus is therefore put on the user side.
The overall picture is presented in Figure 1. It il-
lustrates the categories (white boxes) which can be
sub?divided into aspects (gray boxes), and their rela-
tionships (arrows). As the user is the decision point
for each quality aspect, user factors have to be seen
in a distributed way over the whole picture. This
fact has tentatively been illustrated by the gray cans
on the upper side of the taxonomy, but will not be
further addressed in this paper. The remaining cate-
gories are discussed in the following.
Walker et al (1997) identified three factors which
carry an influence on the performance of SDSs, and
which therefore are thought to contribute to its qual-
ity perceived by the user: agent factors (mainly re-
lated to the dialogue and the system itself), task fac-
tors (related to how the SDS captures the task it has
been developed for) and environmental factors (e.g.
factors related to the acoustic environment and the
transmission channel). Because the taxonomy refers
to the service as a whole, a fourth point is added
here, namely contextual factors such as costs, type
of access, or the availability. All four types of factors
subsume quality elements which can be expected to
carry an influence on the quality perceived by the
user. The corresponding quality features are sum-
marized into aspects and categories in the following
quality
of
service
environmental
factors
agent
factors
task
factors
contextual
factors
speechi/o
quality
dialogue
cooperativity
dialogue
symmetry
communication
efficiency comfort
task
efficiency
usability serviceefficiency
economical
benefit
user
satisfaction
utility
acceptability
attitude experi-enceemotions
flexibility motivation,goals
task/domain
knowledge
transm.channel
backgr.noise
roomacoustics
taskcoverage
domaincov .
taskflexibility
taskdif ficulty
costs
availability
openinghours
access
intelligibility
naturalness
listening-effort
systemunderst.
informativeness
truth&evidence
relevance
manner
backgr.know .
meta-comm.handl.
initiative
interactioncontrol
partnerasymmetry
personality
cognitivedemand
tasksuccess
taskease
easeofuse
enjoyability
serviceadequacy
addedvalue
futureuse
user
factors
linguistic
backgr.
speed/p ace
dialogueconciseness
dialoguesmoothness
valuability
systemknowledge
dialoguestrategy
dialogueflexibility
Figure 1: QoS schematic for task?oriented HCI.
lower part of the picture.
The agent factors carry an influence on three qual-
ity categories. On the speech level, input and output
quality will have a major influence. Quality features
for speech output have been largely investigated in
the literature, and include e.g. intelligibility, natu-
ralness, or listening?effort. They will depend on the
whole system set?up, and on the situation and task
the user is confronted with. Quality features related
to the speech input from the user (and thus to the
system?s recognition and understanding capabilities)
are far less obvious. They are, in addition, much
more difficult to investigate, because the user only
receives an indirect feedback on the system?s capa-
bilities, namely from the system reactions which are
influences by the dialogue as a whole. Both speech
input and output are highly influenced by the envi-
ronmental factors.
On the language and dialogue level, dialogue co-
operativity has been identified as a key requirement
for high?quality services (Bernsen et al, 1998). The
classification of cooperativity into aspects which
was proposed by Bernsen et al, and which is re-
lated to Grice?s maxims (Grice, 1975) of cooperative
behavior in HHI, is mainly adopted here, with one
exception: we regard the partner asymmetry aspect
under a separate category called dialogue symme-
try, together with the aspects initiative and interac-
tion control. Dialogue cooperativity will thus cover
the aspects informativeness, truth and evidence, rel-
evance, manner, the user?s background knowledge,
and meta?communication handling strategies.
Adopting the notion of efficiency used by ETSI
and ISO (ETSI Technical Report ETR 095, 1993),
efficiency designates the effort and resources ex-
panded in relation to the accuracy and complete-
ness with which users can reach specified goals. It
is proposed to differentiate three categories of effi-
ciency. Communication efficiency relates to the ef-
ficiency of the dialogic interaction, and includes ?
besides the aspects speed and conciseness ? also
the smoothness of the dialogue (which is sometimes
called ?dialogue quality?). Note that this is a signif-
icant difference to many other notions of efficiency,
which only address the efforts and resources, but not
the accuracy and completeness of the goals to be
reached. Task efficiency is related to the success of
the system in accomplishing the task; it covers task
success as well as task ease. Service efficiency is
the adequacy of the service as a whole for the pur-
pose defined by the user. It also includes the ?added
value? which is contributed to the service, e.g. in
comparison to other means of information (compa-
rable interfaces or human operators).
In addition to efficiency aspects, other aspects ex-
ist which relate to the agent itself, as well as its
perception by the user in the dialogic interaction.
We subsume these aspects under the category ?com-
fort?, although other terms might exist which bet-
ter describe the according perceptions of the user.
Comfort covers the agent?s ?social personality? (per-
ceived friendliness, politeness, etc.), as well as the
cognitive demand required from the user.
Depending on the area of interest, several notions
of usability are common. Here, we define usabil-
ity as the suitability of a system or service to fulfill
the user?s requirements. It considers mainly the ease
of using the system and may result in user satisfac-
tion. It does, however, not cover service efficiency or
economical benefit, which carry an influence on the
utility (usability in relation to the financial costs and
to other contextual factors) of the service. Walker
et al (1998) also state that ?user satisfaction ratings
[...] have frequently been used in the literature as an
external indicator of the usability of an agent.? As
Kamm and Walker (1997), we assume that user sat-
isfaction is predictive of other system designer ob-
jectives, e.g. the willingness to use or pay for a ser-
vice. Acceptability, which is commonly defined on
this more or less ?economic? level, can therefore be
seen in a relationship to usability and utility. It is
a multidimensional property of a service, describing
how readily a customer will use the service. The ac-
ceptability of a service (AoS) can be represented as
the ratio of potential users to the quantity of the tar-
get user group, see definitions on AoS adopted by
EURESCOM (EURESCOM Project P.807 Deliver-
able 1, 1998).
From the schematic, it can be seen that a large
number of aspects contribute to what can be called
communication efficiency, usability or user satisfac-
tion. Several interrelations (and a certain degree of
inevitable overlap) exist between the categories and
aspects, which are marked by arrows. The interrela-
tions will become more apparent by taking a closer
look to the underlying quality features which can be
associated with each aspect. They will be presented
in the following section.
3 Classification of Quality Features
In Tables 1 and 2, an overview is given of the qual-
ity features underlying each aspect of the QoS tax-
onomy. For the aspects related to dialogue coop-
erativity, these aspects partly stem from the design
guideline definitions given by Bernsen et al (1998).
For the rest, quality features which have been used
in experimental investigations on different types of
dialogue systems have been classified. They do not
solely refer to telephone?based services, but will be
valid for a broader class of systems and services.
By definition, quality features are percepts of the
users. They can consequently only be measured
by asking users in realistic scenarios, in a subjec-
tive way. Several studies with this aim are reported
in the literature. The author analyzed 12 such in-
vestigations and classified the questions which were
asked to the users (as far as they have been reported)
according to the quality features. For each aspect
given in Tables 1 and 2, at least two questions could
be identified which addressed this aspect. This clas-
sification cannot be reproduced here for space rea-
sons. Additional features of the questionnaires di-
rectly address user satisfaction (e.g. perceived sat-
isfaction, degree of enjoyment, user happiness, sys-
tem likability, degree of frustration or irritation) and
acceptability (perceived acceptability, willingness to
use the system in the future).
From the classification, it seems that the taxon-
omy adequately covers what researchers intuitively
would include in questionnaires investigating usabil-
ity, user satisfaction and acceptability.
4 Classification of Dialogue and System
Measures
Experiments with human subjects are still the only
way to investigate quality percepts. They are, how-
ever, time?consuming and expensive to carry out.
For the developers of SDSs, it is therefore interesting
to identify quality elements which are in their hands,
and which can be used for enhancing the quality for
the user. Unfortunately, only few such elements are
known, and their influence on service quality is only
partly understood. Word accuracy or word error rate,
which are common measures to describe the perfor-
mance of speech recognizers, can be taken as an ex-
ample. Although they can be measured partly in-
strumentally (provided that an agreed?upon corpus
with reference transcriptions exists), and the system
designer can tune the system to increase the word
accuracy, it cannot be determined beforehand how
this will affect system usability or user satisfaction.
For filling this gap, dialogue? and system?related
measures have been developed. They can be de-
termined during the users? experimental interaction
with the system or from log?files, either instrumen-
tally (e.g. dialogue duration) or by an expert eval-
uator (e.g. contextual appropriateness). Although
they provide useful information on the perceived
quality of the service, there is no general relation-
ship between one or several such measures, and spe-
cific quality features. The PARADISE framework
(Walker et al, 1997) produces such a relationship
for a specific scenario, using multivariate linear re-
gression. Some generalizablility can be reached, but
the exact form of the relationship and its constitut-
ing input parameters have to be established for each
system anew.
A generalization across systems and services
might be easier if a categorization of dialogue and
system measures can be reached. Tables 3 and 4 in
the Appendix report on the classification of 37 dif-
ferent measures defined in literature into the QoS
taxonomy. No measures have been found so far
which directly relate to speech output quality, agent
personality, service efficiency, usability, or user sat-
isfaction. With the exception of the first aspect, it
may however be assumed that they will be addressed
by a combination of the measures related to the un-
derlying aspects.
5 Comparison to Human-Human Services
It has been stated earlier that the QoS taxonomy
for telephone?based spoken dialogue services has
been derived from an earlier schematic address-
ing human?to?human telephone services (Mo?ller,
2000). This schematic is depicted in Figure 2, with
slight modifications on the labels of single cate-
gories from the original version.
In the HHI case, the focus is placed on the cate-
gories of speech communication. This category (re-
Table 1: Dialogue?related quality features.
Aspect Quality Features
Dialogue Informativeness ? Accuracy / Specificity of Information
Cooperativity ? Completeness of Information
? Clarity of Information
? Conciseness of Information
? System Feedback Adequacy
Truth and ? Credibility of Information
Evidence ? Consistency of Information
? Reliability of Information
? Perceived System Reasoning
Relevance ? System Feedback Adequacy
? Perceived System Understanding
? Perceived System Reasoning
? Naturalness of Interaction
Manner ? Clarity / Non?Ambiguity of Expression
? Consistency of Expression
? Conciseness of Expression
? Transparency of Interaction
? Order of Interaction
Background ? Congruence with User?s Task/Domain Knowl.
Knowledge ? Congruence with User Experience
? Suitability of User Adaptation
? Inference Adequacy
? Interaction Guidance
Meta?Comm. ? Repair Handling Adequacy
Handling ? Clarification Handling Adequacy
? Help Capability
? Repetition Capability
Dialogue Initiative ? Flexibility of Interaction
Symmetry ? Interaction Guidance
? Naturalness of Interaction
Interaction ? Perceived Control Capability
Control ? Barge?In Capability
? Cancel Capability
Partner ? Transparency of Interaction
Asymmetry ? Transparency of Task / Domain Coverage
? Interaction Guidance
? Naturalness of Interaction
? Cognitive Demand Required from the User
? Respect of Natural Information Packages
Speech I/O Speech Output ? Intelligibility
Quality Quality ? Naturalness of Speech
? Listening?Effort Required from the User
Speech Input ? Perceived System Understanding
Quality ? Perceived System Reasoning
Table 2: Communication?, task? and service?related quality features.
Aspect Quality Features
Communic. Speed ? Perceived Interaction Pace
Efficiency ? Perceived Response Time
Conciseness ? Perceived Interaction Length
? Perceived Interaction Duration
Smoothness ? System Feedback Adequacy
? Perceived System Understanding
? Perceived System Reasoning
? Repair Handling Adequacy
? Clarification Handling Adequacy
? Naturalness of Interaction
? Interaction Guidance
? Transparency of Interaction
? Congruence with User Experience
Comfort Agent ? Politeness
Personality ? Friendliness
? Naturalness of Behavior
Cognitive ? Ease of Communication
Demand ? Concentration Required from the User
? Stress / Fluster
Task Task Success ? Adequacy of Task / Domain Coverage
Efficiency ? Validity of Task Results
? Precision of Task Results
? Reliability of Task Results
Task Ease ? Perceived Helpfulness
? Task Guidance
? Transparency of Task / Domain Coverage
Service Service ? Access Adequacy
Efficiency Adequacy ? Availability
? Modality Adequacy
? Task Adequacy
? Perceived Service Functionality
? Perceived Usefulness
Added Value ? Service Improvement
? Comparable Interface
Usability Ease of Use ? Service Operability
? Service Understandability
? Service Learnability
quality
of
service
speechcommunication
factors
service
factors
contextual
factors
voicetransmission
quality
easeof
communication
conversation
effectiveness
communication
efficiency
service
efficiency
usability
economical
benefit
user
satisfaction
utility
acceptability
loudnessratings
roomnoise
circuitnoise
listenersidetone
impulsivenoise
listenerecho
frequencydistortion
codecs
transmissionerrors
interruptions
fading
investmentcost s
operationcost s
accountconditions
user
factors
attitude emotions experi-ence
motivation,
goals
typeofterminal
ergonomics
design
availability
set-uptime
responsetime
reliability
compatibility
talkerecho
talkersidetone
puredelay
Figure 2: QoS schematic for human?to?human telephone services.
placing environmental and agent factors of the HMI
case) is divided into a one?way voice transmission
category, a conversational category (conversation ef-
fectiveness), and a user?related category (ease of
communication; comparable to the category ?com-
fort? in the HMI case). The task and service cate-
gories of the interaction with the SDS are replaced
by the service categories of the HHI schematic. The
rest of the schematic is congruent in both cases, al-
though the single aspects which are covered by each
category obviously differ.
The taxonomy of Figure 2 has fruitfully been used
to classify three types of entities:
  quality elements which are used for the set?up
and planning of telephone networks (some of
these elements are given in the gray boxes of
Figure 2)
  assessment methods commonly used for mea-
suring quality features in telecommunications
  quality prediction models which estimate sin-
gle quality features from the results of instru-
mental measurements
Although we seem to be far from reaching a compa-
rable level in the assessment and prediction of HMI
quality issues, it is hoped that the taxonomy of Fig-
ure 1 can be equally useful with respect to telephone
services based on SDSs.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
The new taxonomy was shown to be useful in clas-
sifying quality features (dimensions of human qual-
ity perception) as well as instrumentally or expert?
derived measures which are related to service qual-
ity, usability, and acceptability. Nonetheless, in both
cases it has not been validated against experimen-
tal (empirical) data. Thus, one cannot guarantee that
the space of quality dimensions is captured in an ac-
curate and complete way.
There are a number of facts reported in liter-
ature, which make us confident that the taxon-
omy nevertheless captures general assumptions and
trends. First of all, in his review of both subjective
evaluations as well as dialogue- or system-related
measures, the author didn?t encounter items which
would not be covered by the schematic. This litera-
ture review is still going on, and it is hoped that more
detailed data can be presented in the near future.
As stated above, the separation of environmental,
agent and task factors was motivated by Walker et al
(1997). The same categories appear in the character-
ization of spoken dialogue systems given by Fraser
(1997) (plus an additional user factor, which obvi-
ously is nested in the quality aspects due to the fact
that it is the user who decides on quality). The
context factor is also recognized by Dybkj?r and
Bernsen (2000). Dialogue cooperativity is a cat-
egory which is based on a relatively sophisticated
theoretical as well as empirical background. It has
proven useful especially in the system design and
set?up phase, and first results in evaluation have
also been reported (Bernsen et al, 1998). The di-
alogue symmetry category captures the remaining
partner asymmetry aspect, and has been designed
separately to additionally cover initiative and inter-
action control aspects. To the authors knowledge,
no similar category has been reported. The relation-
ship between the different efficiency measures and
usability, user satisfaction and utility was already
discussed in Section 2.
In the PARADISE framework, user satisfaction is
composed of maximal task success and minimal di-
alogue costs (Walker et al, 1997), ? thus a type
of efficiency in the way it was defined here. This
concept is still congruent with the proposed taxon-
omy. On the other hand, the separation into ?effi-
ciency measures? and ?quality measures? (same fig-
ure) does not seem to be fine?graded enough. It is
proposed that the taxonomy could be used to clas-
sify different measures beforehand. Based on the
categories, a multi?level prediction model could be
envisaged, first summarizing similar measures (be-
longing to the same category) into intermediate in-
dices, and then combining the contributions of dif-
ferent indices into an estimation of user satisfaction.
The reference for user satisfaction, however, cannot
be a simple arithmetic mean of the subjective ratings
in different categories. Appropriate questionnaires
still have to be developed, and they will take profit
of multidimensional analyses as reported by Hone
and Graham (2001).
References
Niels Ole Bernsen, Hans Dybkj?r, and Laila Dybkj?r.
1998. Designing Interactive Speech Systems: From
First Ideas to User Testing. Springer, D?Berlin.
Morena Danieli and Elisabetta Gerbino. 1995. Metrics
for evaluating dialogue strategies in a spoken language
system. In: Empirical Methods in Discourse Inter-
pretation and Generation. Papers from the 1995 AAAI
Symposium, USA?Stanford CA, pages 34?39, AAAI
Press, USA?Menlo Park CA.
Laila Dybkj?r and Niels Ole Bernsen. 2000. Usability
issues in spoken dialogue systems. Natural Language
Engineering, 6(3-4):243?271.
ETSI Technical Report ETR 095, 1993. Human Factors
(HF); Guide for Usability Evaluations of Telecommu-
nication Systems and Services. European Telecommu-
nications Standards Institute, F?Sophia Antipolis.
EURESCOM Project P.807 Deliverable 1, 1998. Jupiter
II - Usability, Performability and Interoperability Tri-
als in Europe. European Institute for Research
and Strategic Studies in Telecommunications, D?
Heidelberg.
Norman Fraser. 1997. Assessment of Interactive Sys-
tems. In: Handbook on Standards and Resources for
Spoken Language Systems (D. Gibbon, R. Moore and
R. Winski, eds.), pages 564?615, Mouton de Gruyter,
D?Berlin.
H. Paul Grice, 1975. Logic and Conversation, pages 41?
58. Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts (P.
Cole and J. L. Morgan, eds.). Academic Press, USA?
New York (NY).
Kate S. Hone and Robert Graham. 2001. Subjective As-
sessment of Speech?System Interface Usability. Proc.
7th Europ. Conf. on Speech Communication and Tech-
nology (EUROSPEECH 2001 ? Scandinavia), pages
2083?2086, DK?Aalborg.
ITU?T Rec. E.800, 1994. Terms and Definitions Related
to Quality of Service and Network Performance In-
cluding Dependability. International Telecommunica-
tion Union, CH?Geneva, August.
Ute Jekosch. 2000. Sprache ho?ren und beurteilen:
Ein Ansatz zur Grundlegung der Sprachqualita?tsbe-
urteilung. Habilitation thesis (unpublished), Univer-
sita?t/Gesamthochschule Essen, D?Essen.
Candance A. Kamm and Marilyn A. Walker. 1997.
Design and Evaluation of Spoken Dialogue Systems.
Proc. 1997 IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding, USA?Santa Barbara
(CA), pages 14?17.
Candance Kamm, Shrikanth Narayanan, Dawn Dutton,
and Russell Ritenour. 1997. Evaluating Spoken
Dialogue Systems for Telecommunication Services.
Proc. 5th Europ. Conf. on Speech Communication and
Technology (EUROSPEECH?97), 4:2203?2206, GR?
Rhodes.
Diane J. Litman, Shimei Pan, and Marilyn A. Walker.
1998. Evaluating Response Strategies in a Web?
Based Spoken Dialogue Agent. Proc. of the 36th
Ann. Meeting of the Assoc. for Computational Linguis-
tics and 17th Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-ACL 98), CAN-Montreal.
Sebastian Mo?ller. 2000. Assessment and Prediction of
Speech Quality in Telecommunications. Kluwer Aca-
demic Publ., USA?Boston.
Joseph Polifroni, Lynette Hirschman, Stephanie Sen-
eff, and Victor Zue. 1992. Experiments in Eval-
uating Interactive Spoken Language Systems. In:
Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work-
shop, pages 28?33.
Patti J. Price, Lynette Hirschman, Elizabeth Shriberg, and
Elizabeth Wade. 1992. Subject?Based Evaluation
Measures for Interactive Spoken Language Systems.
In: Proc. DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work-
shop, pages 34?39.
Andrew Simpson and Norman M. Fraser. 1993. Black
Box and Glass Box Evaluation of the SUNDIAL Sys-
tem. Proc. 3rd Europ. Conf. on Speech Communi-
cation and Technology (EUROSPEECH?93), 2:1423?
1426, D?Berlin.
Helmer Strik, Catia Cucchiarini, and Judith M. Kessens.
2001. Comparing the Performance of Two CSRs:
How to Determine the Significance Level of the Dif-
ferences. Proc. 7th Europ. Conf. on Speech Communi-
cation and Technology (EUROSPEECH 2001 ? Scan-
dinavia), pages 2091?2094, DK?Aalborg.
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candance A.
Kamm, and Alicia Abella. 1997. PARADISE: A
Framework for Evaluating Spoken Dialogue Agents.
Proc. of the ACL/EACL 35th Ann. Meeting of the As-
soc. for Computational Linguistics, pages 271?280.
Marilyn A. Walker, Diane J. Litman, Candace A. Kamm,
and Alicia Abella. 1998. Evaluating Spoken Dialogue
Agents with PARADISE: Two Case Studies. Com-
puter Speech and Language, 12(3).
A Classification of Dialogue and System
Measures
Table 3: Classification of measures (1). #: average number of ... per dialogue. For references, see cap-
tion of Table 4.
Aspect Dialogue / System Measure
Dialogue ? CA: contextual appropriateness (SF93, F97)
Cooperativity
Informativeness ? # user questions (P92)
? # help requests from the user (W98)
Truth and ? # questions correctly/incorrectly/partially/failed to
Evidence be answered (P92)
? DARPA score, DARPA weighted error (P92)
Relevance ? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
Manner ? # system turns (W98)
? no. of words per system turn
Background ? # help requests (W98)
Knowledge ? # cancel attempts from the user (W98)
? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
? # time-out prompts (W98)
Meta?Comm. ? # system error messages (Pr92)
Handling ? # help requests (W98)
? # cancel attempts from the user (W98)
? CR: correction rate (SCR) (F97, SF93)
? IR: implicit recovery (DG95)
Dialogue Initiative ? # user questions (P92)
Symmetry ? # system questions
? CR: correction rate (SCR, UCR) (F97, SF93)
Interaction ? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
Control ? # help requests (W98)
? # cancel attempts from the user (W98)
? CR: correction rate (UCR) (F97, SF93)
? # time-out prompts (W98)
Partner ? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
Asymmetry ? # time-out prompts (W98)
Speech I/O Speech Output ?
Quality Quality
Speech Input ? word accuracy, word error rate (SF93)
Quality ? sentence accuracy, sentence error rate (SF93)
? number or errors per sentence (S01)
? word error per sentence (S01)
?

,
	

,
	
,

 (K97)
? UER: understanding error rate
? # ASR rejections (W98)
? IC: information content (SF93)
? # system error messages (Pr92)
Table 4: Classification of measures (2). #: average number of ... per dialogue. References: DG95: Danieli
and Gerbino (1995); F97: Fraser (1997); K97: Kamm et al (1997); P92: Polifroni et al (1992); Pr92: Price
et al (1992); SF93: Simpson and Fraser (1993); S01: Strik et al (2001); W98: Walker et al (1998).
Aspect Dialogue / System Measure
Communic. Speed ? TD: turn duration (STD, UTD) (F97)
Efficiency ? SRD: system response delay (Pr92)
? URD: user response delay (Pr92)
? # timeout prompts (W98)
? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
Conciseness ? DD: dialogue duration (F97, P92)
(Litman et al, 1998: ? # turns (# system turns, # user turns) (W98)
dialogue efficiency)
Smoothness ? # system error messages (Pr92)
(Litman et al, 1998: ? # cancel attempts from the user (W98)
dialogue quality) ? # help requests (W98)
? # ASR rejections (W98)
? # barge-in attempts from the user (W98)
? # timeout prompts (W98)
Comfort Agent ?
Personality
Cognitive ? # timeout prompts (W98)
Demand ? URD: user response delay (Pr92)
Task Task Success ? TS: task success (DG95, F97, SF93)
Efficiency ?  : kappa coefficient (W98)
? task solution (P92)
? solution correctness (P92)
? solution quality
Task Ease ? # help requests (W98)
Service Service ?
Efficiency Adequacy
Added Value ?
Usability Ease of Use ?
User
Satisfaction ?
