Teaching NLP/CL through Games: the Case of Parsing 
 
Hans van Halteren  
Department of Language and Speech 
University of Nijmegen 
P.O.Box 9103, NL-6500 HD, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
hvh@let.kun.nl 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper advocates the use of games 
in teaching NLP/CL in cases where 
computational experiments are 
impossible because the students lack 
the necessary skills. To show the 
viability of this approach, three games 
are described which together teach 
students about the parsing process. 
The paper also shows how the specific 
game formats and rules can be tuned 
to the teaching goals and situations, 
thus opening the way to the creation 
of further teaching games. 
1 Introduction 
Experience is the best teacher, as proverbial 
wisdom tells us. This should bode well for 
teaching NLP/CL, where the implementation is 
normally as important as the theory, and 
students can get hands-on experience with most 
of the field. They can use existing NLP/CL 
systems, seeing what inputs can be dealt with, 
what outputs are produced, and what the effects 
of different parameters settings are. They can 
even (re)implement parts of systems, or whole 
systems of their own. So, at a first glance 
NLP/CL appears to be the ideal field for 
teaching by means of experiments. However, 
there are also circumstances which make 
personal experimentation impossible. One 
obvious limitation is shortage of time. 
Experiments, especially ones in which a system 
is thoroughly examined, tend to take up a 
prohibitive amount of time for most course 
schedules. This can be worked around by 
focusing the experiments on the more important 
and/or more widely instructive aspects. Harder 
to work around is the situation where 
experiments are impossible because the students 
lack the necessary knowledge. Students cannot 
program a system if they have insufficient 
programming skills; they cannot alter 
computational grammars if they have 
insufficient linguistic skills. This problem 
typically occurs in introductory courses, e.g. for 
general linguistics students, where the necessary 
knowledge is acquired only later (or never at 
all). If we want to keep the added value of 
personal experience, we will have to cast the 
intended experiencing into a different form. 
In this paper I propose the use of games, 
another time-honored learning method, even for 
linguistics (cf. Grammatical Game in Rhyme (A 
Lady, 1802), teaching parts of speech, or, more 
recently, WFF ?N PROOF games like Queries ?n 
Theories (Allen et al, 1970), teaching formal 
grammars). I will not go into computer games or 
simulations (e.g. VISPER; Nouza et al, 1997), 
assuming these to be sufficiently known, but 
will focus on three major types of ?unplugged? 
games instead: card games, board games and 
roleplaying games. In the following sections, I 
give an example of each type. Together, these 
examples form an introduction to parsing and 
parsers, showing what kind of grammatical units 
are used (card game), how sentences can be 
broken down into these units by following a 
recursive transition network (RTN; board game) 
and how a parser can decide which route to take 
within the RTN (roleplaying game). 
In all three games I use the descriptive model 
underlying the TOSCA/ICE parser (cf. Oostdijk, 
2000), which in turn took its inspiration from the 
widely used descriptive grammars of Quirk et al 
(1972, 1985). This is a constituent structure 
model where each constituent is labelled with a 
syntactic category (signifying what type of 
constituent it is) and a syntactic function 
(signifying what the constituent?s role is in the 
                       July 2002, pp. 1-9.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
              Natural Language Processing and Computational Linguistics, Philadelphia,
         Proceedings of the Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodologies for Teaching
immediately dominating constituent).1 
Furthermore, all utterances and analyses in the 
games are taken from actual syntactically 
analysed corpus material, to be exact from a 
single 20,000 word sample taken from a crime 
novel (Allingham, 1965). This choice of text 
material and descriptive model is not just made 
out of convenience. I feel that it is important that 
the students work with ?real? examples, and not 
with especially constructed sentences and/or toy 
grammars. 
2 
                                                     
A Card Game on Syntactic 
Building Blocks 
The introduction to parsing starts with a card 
game about syntactic constituents and their 
interrelations. After all, if we want the students 
to understand what a parser does, they will first 
have to learn about the building blocks that are 
used in syntactic analysis. Even if they have 
already taken a syntax course, it will be 
necessary to familiarize them with the specific 
grammatical units used in our own ?parser? (i.e. 
those from the TOSCA/ICE model). As the 
main goal is familiarization with the 
terminology, we do not want to spend too much 
time on this. Also, this may be the students? first 
encounter with syntactic analysis, so they should 
be able to focus on the sentences and not be 
distracted by game rules. These two demands 
lead us to create a short (half hour) card game 
with simple rummy-like rules, Ling Rummy. 
The Ling Rummy deck consists of 54 cards,2 
each of which (see Figure 1) depicts a syntactic 
function (e.g. CO = object complement), a 
terminal syntactic category (e.g. ART = article), 
a non-terminal syntactic category (e.g. NP = 
noun phrase), and an utterance. The goal of the 
game is to form combinations of three cards, a 
constituent in the utterance shown on the first 
card having a category shown on the second and 
the function shown on the third card (e.g. in 
Figure 1 ?absolutely quiet? is an adjective 
phrase (AJP) functioning as an object 
complement (CO)). This means that the 
elements on the same card need not be related, 
but that elements needed for combinations must 
actually be spread out carefully over different 
cards, so it remains possible to form all of the 
less frequent combinations with cards from one 
single deck.  
Figure 1: Three game cards from Ling Rummy 
with a scoring combination 
1 A list of the categories and functions used in this 
paper can be found in Appendix A. 
2 Card decks are typically printed in sheets of 54 or 
55 cards. 54 is also a good number for do-it-yourself 
construction, as 54 cards can be printed as 6 sheets 
(A4 or letter)  with 9 cards each. For Ling Rummy, a 
single 54-card deck suffices. 
At the start of the game, the players are dealt 
nine cards. Then follow three rounds of play. In 
each round a student first draws a new card, 
either from the draw pile or from earlier 
discards, then scores one combination and 
finally discards one card. Forming a 
combination brings a number of points, which is 
determined by multiplying the point scores for 
the function and the category (e.g. CO:4 x AJP:3 
= 12). If no combination can be formed, three 
non-combining cards must be ?scored? and ten 
points are deducted from the player?s score.  
The limitation to three rounds of play helps 
keep up the pace of the game, but also puts 
pressure on the players to focus on all 
combinations. During the first round, there are 
generally several options and the highest scoring 
one can be selected. During the second round, 
the players have to find a balance between 
getting a high score in this round and avoiding a 
point deduction during the last round. During 
the last round, finally, the players usually have 
to look for that vital combination-completing 
card in the discards or else hope for a lucky 
draw.   
After reading a short description of the 
function and category indications (somewhat 
more extensive than that in Appendix A), the 
students learn all they need to learn by playing 
the game, typically in groups of three or four. 
They have to analyse all the utterances in their 
hand and in the available discards in order to 
form the best-scoring combinations, and they 
have to check the combinations played by their 
opponents.3 If there is a disagreement among the 
players, they can refer to an accompanying 
booklet containing the analyses as made during 
the original annotation of the corpus. If the 
students have a problem with the analysis found 
in the booklet, they will have to call on the 
teacher for arbitration and/or more explanation. 
The students are likely to give special 
attention to the less frequent functions and 
categories because of their higher scores. More 
frequent combinations do not really need all that 
much attention, but are guaranteed to get some 
anyway when the student wants to avoid the 
point deduction in the last round and needs to 
prepare a sure combination. As all functions and 
categories, as well as most combinations, have 
to be present in the single deck, their frequencies 
deviate from those in real text. As a result, the 
students will not get the right feeling for those 
frequencies by playing this game. However, 
some indication is given by the difference in 
scores. Furthermore, the students do not play 
this game long enough to develop erroneous 
intuitions about frequencies and the actual 
frequencies get sufficient attention in the board 
game which follows. 
3 
                                                     
A Board Game on Syntactic 
Analysis 
The next step in getting to know parsers is the 
actual complete analysis of whole utterances in 
the way that a parser is supposed to do it. This 
necessarily takes some more time, say one to 
two hours. Also, much more information needs 
to be presented at the same time, which is not 
possible in a card game format but acceptable in 
a board game. The rules can be a bit more 
complicated as well, but not much, as the focus 
has to remain on syntax. However, in this 
particular case, a rule mechanism is needed to 
force the players to pay attention to each others? 
analysis activities and not only to their own. 
This interaction can be achieved by having 
                                                     
3 In the standard game, a scoring player points out the 
combination and the others merely check if they 
agree whether the combination is correct. It is also 
possible to have the other players try to find a 
combination in the three cards themselves, possibly 
for a (partial) score.  However, this would lead to a 
much slower game. 
players control elements that other players need 
in their analysis activities. 
There are at least two natural models for this 
type of control. The first is a kind of trading 
game where grammar rewrites are pictured as 
trading a constituent for its immediate 
constituents, with transaction costs (partially) 
dependent on the likelihood of the rewrite. The 
players might be able to have monopolies in 
certain rewrites and would have to be paid by 
other players wishing to do those rewrites. The 
exact rules can be adopted from one of the many 
money, stock or property trading games in 
existence. The second option is a kind of travel 
game. The analysis process is then pictured as a 
journey along a network, e.g. a recursive 
transition network (RTN; Woods, 1970). Again, 
players can control parts of the analysis process, 
by owning sections of the network, which are 
needed by other players during their journey. 
Again, there is sufficient inspiration for exact 
rules, now to be found in one of the many 
railroad games in existence. I have chosen the 
second option, the railroad-type game. The main 
reason is that a trading game tends to lead to too 
much interaction, typically when players keep 
spending way too much time on getting better 
deals. This takes attention away from the actual 
focus of the game, the analysis, far more than is 
desired in our setting. Furthermore, the RTN 
representation is a much more attractive 
visualization of the parsing process, which is of 
course very important for a board game. The 
main disadvantage of the chosen option is that 
RTN?s are hardly ever used in this specific form 
any more. However, their link to context free 
grammars should be readily understandable for 
most students. Also, similar networks are still in 
use, e.g. in the form of finite state machines. 
The details of the resulting game, called the 
RTN Game, are inspired on the railroad game  
Box Cars (Erickson and Erickson, 1974, later 
republished as Rail Baron, Erickson et al, 
1977), in which players move their train markers 
between cities in the United States and can buy 
historical railroads like the Southern Pacific. In 
the RTN Game, the map of the United States is 
replaced by a number of subboards, depicting 
networks for Adjective Phrase (Figure 2), 
Adverb Phrase, Noun Phrase, Prepositional 
Phrase, Sentence (Figure 3)4 and Utterance, and 
4 The Sentence subboard is different from the others 
players move their pawns through the networks 
in accordance with the analysis of specific 
sentences. They can buy network arcs on the 
board and get paid if anyone uses their arcs. As 
for Ling Rummy, the optimum number of 
players is four, but the game will work well with 
three or five players. 
The main activity during the game, then, is 
moving along the board, which corresponds to 
analysing specific utterances. The utterances are 
again taken from the abovementioned corpus 
sample. However, since the game board should 
not become too cluttered, the RTN has to be 
limited in complexity, and the most infrequent 
constructions are left out. The remaining RTN 
covers about half of the utterances, several 
hundred of which are provided on game cards. A 
few simple examples can be seen on the Ling 
Rummy cards in Figure 1. However, there are 
also more involved utterances, one of the 
longest being All that had been proved so_far 
was that thought could be transferred from one 
mind to another sometimes, and that the process 
could be mechanically assisted, at_least 
as_far_as reception was concerned.5 The 
correct analyses for all utterances (i.e. the 
analyses selected by the linguist who annotated 
the sample) are provided in an accompanying 
booklet which can be consulted if problems 
arise. 
                                                                               
                                                     
in that it has three exit paths, one for intransitive 
sentence patterns (John sleeps), one for transitive 
sentence patterns (John sees Peter) and one for 
intensive sentence patterns (John is ill). These three 
cannot be spread out over several boards because 
there are arcs for coordinated  structures which jump 
back from the separate parts to the common part. 
At the start of the game, the players each get 
three utterance cards from which they can select 
one to analyse. The analysis consists of moving 
a pawn (at a die-roll determined speed) along 
the nodes of the RTN in accordance to the 
structure of the utterance. Whenever the pawn 
encounters an arc marked with a recursion sign 
(@), there is a jump to another network. The 
current position of the pawn is marked on the 
larger @ next to the arc and the pawn is then 
placed at the start of the corresponding network 
subboard. After the recursion is finished, the 
pawn returns to the marked position. When 
moving along an arc, the players have to pay for 
the use of that arc, e.g. in the AJP network 
(Figure 2) a premodifying AVP costs 20 (and 
leads to a detour along the AVP network). The 
cost for each arc is determined by its frequency 
of use in the corpus sample; higher cost 
corresponds to lower frequency. After 
completion of the analysis of an utterance, the 
player receives about one and a half times the 
total cost of that utterance, so that player capital 
grows throughout the game. Also, after 
receiving payment, a player is allowed to buy an 
arc (which has to be paid to the ?bank? and 
always costs 20), and from that moment on 
receives the payment from anyone using that 
arc. Immediately after buying a new arc, the 
player again draws three utterance cards and 
selects one of them. The game ends after a fixed 
amount of time, the winner being the player with 
the highest amount of money.  
Figure 2: The Adjective Phrase subboard in The 
RTN Game, showing network nodes and arcs 
marked with a) a syntactic function, b) a 
syntactic category , c) an @ if the category is 
non-terminal and hence needs recursion, d) the 
cost for the arc, e) spaces to mark possession of 
the arc and f) a space to mark the current 
analysis position when recursing 
In the RTN Game, the players? choices 
consist of buying the right arcs and selecting the 
right utterances to analyse. Both types of 
5 Compound words have been connected with 
underscores, e.g. as_far_as, and have to be treated as 
if they are single words. 
choices force the desired involvement with other 
players? activities. If another player?s current 
utterance route contains a high-value arc, buying 
that arc will bring an instant return, and it is 
therefore useful to (partly) analyse the other 
players? utterances. If no short-term gain is 
identified, an arc has to be selected which has 
good long term prospects. Thinking about these 
prospects brings insight into grammatical 
probabilities, as the costs of the arcs depend on 
the frequencies of occurrence. For utterance 
selection, the aspects to be considered are the 
ownership of the needed arcs and the time it will 
take to traverse the network, i.e. how long it 
takes before something new can be bought. 
Again, analysis skills and probabilistic 
reasoning are honed. Even more than in Ling 
Rummy, there may be disagreements about 
analyses, which can either be resolved by 
referring to the accompanying booklet with 
?gold standard? analyses or by discussion with 
the teacher. 
Throughout the game, the students 
experience what a parser does and in which 
terms it ?sees? the analysis process. They do not 
yet experience what the parser cannot do, as all 
the utterances in the game can be parsed with 
the RTN on the board. However, this experience 
can now be provided with a few simple 
questions, such as ?Which utterances in text X 
cannot be parsed with this RTN?? or ?How 
would the RTN have to be extended to parse 
utterance Y??. Their experience with the 
existing RTN should form a sufficient basis for 
a discussion of such subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: See separate figure at end of file 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The Sentence subboard in The RTN Game (cf. Figure 2 and Footnote 4).   
A Role-Playing Game on Parsing 
Algorithms  
4 
When playing the RTN game, the students have 
total information about the sentence, as well as 
their linguistic and world knowledge, and should 
therefore be able to choose the right path 
through the network immediately, even though 
the utterance may be globally or locally 
ambiguous. They may or may not realize that a 
parser has more limited knowledge and hence 
more trouble picking a route. This realization 
can again be induced with a few direct 
questions, such as ?In utterance X, how can the 
parser know whether to pick arc Y or Z at point 
P??. However, if there is sufficient time, it may 
be more useful to let the students each take the 
role of a parser component and get a wider 
experience. This can be done in a roleplaying 
game called Analyses and Ambiguities (A&A).  
In A&A, each player plays a component of a 
parser, either one of the constituent-based 
components that are also present in the RTN 
Game or a lower-level component like a 
to . 
E  
a  
in t 
a t 
h f 
th t 
lo -
m  
c  
u  
in  
d  
v  
a  
tr f 
r f 
backtracking. By experiencing the process at 
this level, the students learn how the individual 
components have to do their work.  
You are the AJP (adjective phrase) component of the
parser. You will be called upon to give information about
the presence and extent of AJP?s in an input utterance. 
 
You know that an AJP is composed of (in this order) 
1. zero or more premodifiers, each realized by an
AVP (P=20%) 
2. a head, realized by an adjective 
3. zero or more postmodifiers, each realized by
either a PP (P=5%), an S (P=5%) or an AVP
(P=1%) 
 
However, you cannot see the input itself. If you need to
know if any potential constituents of an AJP exist at
specific positions in the input, you will have to ask your
fellow phrase structure components about the existence
of PP?s, S?s or AVP?s, or the lexical-morphological
component about what kind of word is present at a
certain position in the input. 
 
Apart from the knowledge above, and the 
communication channels to the other components, you 
have access to processing power (your brain) and your 
own bit of memory (paper, blackboard or whiteboard). 
In addition, the controlling intelligence of the 
parser is played by all the players together. They 
decide as a group how to use the component 
knowledge to perform the overall parsing task. 
If necessary, they can create a central 
administration area (e.g. on a blackboard) to 
control the process as a whole. If there are 
students without roles, the group might assign 
one of them to take on the role of a new 
component, such as a separate recursion 
administrator or an analysis tree builder. 
 The group can experiment with various 
strategies like top-down or bottom-up parsing, 
look-ahead, parallel parsing, shared forests and 
probabilistic ordering. At the start, they should 
be allowed to come up with these strategies 
themselves, but it is likely that some hints from 
the teacher will be needed at some point. 
Alternatively, different teams can be instructed 
to investigate different strategies, e.g. top-down 
versus bottom-up, and given time to develop a 
system using the given strategies. After each 
team has finished, they can demonstrate their 
resulting system to the whole group and the 
relative merit of the systems can be discussed. 
Figure 4: Instructions for the AJP player in 
A&A 
The natural group size for the use of A&A is 
the number of components in the system, i.e. 
eight if playing the six RTN?s plus a tokenizer 
and a lexical-morphological analyzer. With 
more students there is a choice between splitting 
the component parts into subparts, or having the 
additional students only take part in the group 
discussion. However, care must be taken that all 
students are actively involved in the game, and 
experience shows that attention tends to wander 
if the group is larger than ten to fifteen 
students.6  
                                                     
6 A&A itself has not been used with students as yet, 
but the same teaching technique is used at the 
computer science department, where it is well-
appreciated by the students (Wupper, 1999). Here, 
the technique is known as technodrama, indicating 
parallels with the psychodrama used in psychology. 
More information, including  video?s of students in 
action, although only in Dutch, can be found at  
www.cs.kun.nl/ita/onderwijs/onderwijsvormen/ 
technodrama/uitleg.html.  kenizer or a lexical-morphological analyzer
ach component has only limited knowledge
bout the world and a limited access to the
put. The AJP component, e.g., will know tha
n AJP may start with premodifying AVP?s, bu
as to call on the AVP component to find out i
ere are actually AVP?s present at the curren
cation. Also, it has to call on the lexical
orphological component to find out if the
urrent word is an adjective and can hence be
sed as a adjective phrase head. After gaining
formation about the accessibility of the
ifferent arcs, it may have to choose between
arious competing routes. Finally, it has to keep
n administration in order to be able to keep
ack of its various instantiations in case o
ecursion, and possibly for purposes o
5 
                                                     
Conclusion 
In any course where the students are to be taught 
about parsing by personal experience, the three 
games described in this paper can be used 
directly as a teaching aid.7 For lower level 
courses, Ling Rummy and The RTN Game can 
be completed with a few simple extra 
assignments to give a good impression of what a 
parser does, what goes on inside and how an 
underlying grammar should be constructed, all 
within two to three hours. For more 
computationally minded students, the 
algorithmic complexities of the parsing process 
can be learned through A&A, probably taking 
another hour or two. In both cases, neither 
previous skills nor access to computing facilities 
are necessary. 
It should be noted that all three games are as 
yet at the playtesting stage. We plan to use Ling 
Rummy and The RTN Game for the first time in 
an actual classroom setting during a first-year 
linguistics course later this year. The most 
important lesson I hope to learn then is how 
university students react to being asked to play 
?games?. I expect the majority to react well, but 
some might well scoff at such ?childish? 
activities. For these students, the presentation 
may have to be altered. A minimal alteration is a 
mere change in terminology. The word games 
can be weakened, e.g. into game-like activities, 
or avoided altogether, leading to terms like 
simulation or technodrama (cf. Footnote 6). A 
step further would be to remove all game 
elements, like scoring. The same game boards 
and cards can also be used for straightforward 
simulations and/or exercises. However, I expect 
the removal of the game elements to have a 
detrimental effect on the average student?s 
involvement.  
If the games are received well, the road is 
open to further teaching games. The description 
of the games in this paper is therefore meant as 
more than just an introduction to these specific 
games. It is also intended as a demonstration of 
7 The games are currently completely in English 
(subject matter, game materials and instructions). A 
version of Ling Rummy for Dutch grammatical 
analysis is under consideration. All games are freely 
available for teaching purposes, the only condition 
being that evaluative feedback is provided. Contact 
the author if you are interested.  
how to translate your teaching goals into games, 
and how conditions on the teaching goals and 
situation should influence the game format and 
rules. The game should after all not become an 
end in itself, but should clearly be a vehicle for 
teaching the appropriate lessons. In some cases 
it may be impossible to create a game that is 
both playable and teaches the desired lessons, 
but it is my contention that games can certainly 
be developed for many more aspects of 
NLP/CL. 
 
References 
A Lady. 1802. Grammatical Game in Rhyme. 
Cheapside, London: Saml. Conder. 
Allen, L.E., P. Kugel and J.K. Ross. 1970. 
Queries ?n Theories. Fairfield, IA: WFF ?N 
PROOF Learning Games Associates. 
Allingham, M. 1965. The Mind Readers. 
London: Chatto & Windus. 
Erickson, T.F. Jr. and R.S. Erickson. 1974. 
Box Cars. Atlanta, Georgia: Erickson. 
Erickson, T.F. Jr., R.S. Erickson, R. 
Hamblen and M. Uhl. 1977. Rail Baron. 
Baltimore, Maryland: The Avalon Hill Game 
Co. 
Nouza, J., N. Holada and D. Hajek. 1997. An 
Educational and Experimental Workbench for 
Visual Processing of Speech Data. In Proc. 
Eurospeech?97, Rhodes, Greece, September 
1997, pages 661-664. 
Oostdijk, N. 2000. English descriptive 
linguistics at a cross-roads. English Studies, Vol. 
81,2:127-141.  
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. 
Svartvik. 1972. A Grammar of Contemporary 
English. London: Longman. 
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. 
Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar of 
the English Language. London: Longman. 
Woods, W.A. 1970. Transition network 
grammars for natural language analysis. CACM 
13(10): 591-606. 
Wupper, H. 1999. Anatomy of Computer 
Systems - Experiences with a new introductory 
informatics course. Report CSI-R9914. 
Nijmegen: CSI. 
 Appendix A 
In the examples and figures in this paper, 
syntactic categories and functions are often 
indicated by their abbreviated name. This 
appendix contains a list of these abbreviations 
and the corresponding full names. 
 
The various categories are: 
 
Adj Adjective 
Adv Adverb 
AJP Adjective Phrase 
Art Article 
Aux Auxiliary verb 
AVP Adverb Phrase 
Con Connective (adverb) 
Conj Conjunction 
Lv Lexical verb 
N Noun 
NP Noun Phrase 
PP Prepositional Phrase 
S Sentence 
To Infinitival to 
 
 The various functions are: 
 
A Adverbial 
AV Auxiliary verb 
CO Object complement 
COOR Coordinator 
CS Subject complement 
HD Head 
MV Main verb 
OD Direct object 
OI Indirect object 
PC Prepositional  
complement 
POM Postmodifier 
PREM Premodifier 
PRTCL Particle 
SU Subject 
SUB Subordinator 
 

