 SPEECH-RELATED TECHNOLOGIES 
Where will the field go in 10 years? 
Niels Ole Bernsen, NISLab, Denmark (editor) 
Abstract 
This paper is a draft position paper for discussion at the ELSNET Brainstorming Workshop 
2000-2010 in Katwijk aan Zee, The Netherlands, on 23-24 November, 2000. The paper first 
describes some general emerging trends which are expected to deeply affect, or even 
transform, the field of speech technology research in the future, including trends towards 
advanced systems research, natural interactivity, multimodality, and medium-scale science. A 
timeline survey of future speech-related technologies is then presented followed by analysis 
of some of the implications of the proposed timelines. Timeline projections may turn out to 
have been false, of course, but even their turning out to be true is subject to future actions 
which are (not) taken to make them true. Accordingly, the final part of the paper discusses 
some actions which would seem desirable from the point of view of strengthening the 
position of European speech-related research. 
1. Introduction 
The term speech-related research has been chosen to designate the topic of the present paper 
for lack of ability to invent a more appropriate term, if there is one. At least, the term partly 
manages to convey the author?s expectation that the field of speech research will change 
rather dramatically in the coming ten years as speech technologies become merged with other 
technologies into a field which, so far, lacks a name. 
According to many observers, the coming decade will be the decade of speech technologies. 
Computer systems, whether stationary or mobile, wired or wireless, will increasingly offer 
users the opportunity to interact with information and people through speech. This has been 
made possible by the arrival of relatively robust, speaker-independent, spontaneous (or 
continuous) spoken dialogue systems in the late 1990s as well as through the constantly 
falling costs of computer speed, bandwidth, storage, and component miniaturisation. The 
presence of a speech recogniser in most appliances combined with distributed speech 
processing technologies will enable users to speak their native tongue when interacting with 
computer systems for a very large number of purposes. Although no doubt exaggerated as just 
presented, there probably is some truth to this vision of a breakthrough in the application of 
speech technologies in the coming years. If this is the case, it would seem worthwhile that we 
lift our sights and take a long-term view of the issues ahead. This may help setting a 
reasonable research agenda for the coming years of advanced speech systems research and 
development, one which does not succumb to the usual hype associated with fashionable 
technologies. Today, some believe that ?the speech problem? has been solved already. Some 
believe that speech, because of its naturalness, is the solution to every conceivable problem of 
user-system interaction. On the other hand, surprising as it may seem, some human factors 
and interactive systems experts believe that we have just arrived at the touch-tone telephony 
stage and share no notion of the actual state-of-the-art in the field with its practitioners. Since 
 all of those beliefs are far from the truth, it is important to provide a more balanced picture of 
the state-of-the-art in speech technologies in order to set the stage for solid progress. 
In what follows, Section 2 presents some trends in the speech-related research field. Section 3 
excels in guesswork by estimating the times of appearance of a range of novel speech-related 
technologies. Section 4 discusses implications of the timelines presented in Section 3. Section 
5 proposes a series of actions which would appear appropriate given the preceding discussion. 
2. Some Trends 
The speech field is making progress on a broad scale as demonstrated by the 900 or so papers 
and posters presented at the recent International Conference on Spoken Language Processing 
(ICSLP) in Beijing, October 2000. [To be illustrated by listing topics.] Three points may be 
made on the preceding list of current topics in speech research. Firstly, the wealth of topics 
that are being addressed in current fundamental and applied research obviously demonstrates 
that ?the speech problem? has not been solved but continues to pose a series of major research 
challenges. [Mention some of them.] Secondly, the breadth of the speech topics that are being 
addressed could be taken as evidence that the speech field is simply doing business as usual, 
albeit on a larger and more ambitious scale than ever before. Thirdly, however, it is clear from 
the topics list that the speech field is no longer separate from many other fields of research 
but is in a process of merging into something which might perhaps be called the general field 
of interactive technologies. This latter trend, it may be argued, is the single most important 
factor which will influence the speech field in the future and which already suggests that the 
field is in a state of profound transformation. 
Interactive technologies 
It is relatively straightforward to explain why the speech field is gradually merging into the 
general field of interactive technologies. Since speech now works for a broad range of 
application purposes, a rapidly growing fraction of the speech research community are 
becoming involved in advanced interactive systems research rather than continuing to work 
on improving the speech components which form part of those systems. In advanced 
interactive systems research, speech is increasingly being used not as a stand-alone interactive 
modality as in, e.g., spoken language dialogue systems over the telephone, speech dictation 
systems, or text-to-speech systems, but as a modality for exchanging information with 
computer systems in combination with other modalities of information representation and 
exchange. Moreover, speech is not just an interactive technology among many others. 
Spontaneous speech is an extremely powerful input/output modality for interacting with 
computer systems, a modality which, furthermore, is available and natural to the large 
majority of users without any need for training in using it for interactive purposes. 
The ongoing shift from speech components research to research on integrating speech in 
complex interactive systems has a number of important implications for the speech field. 
Speech researchers are becoming systems researchers and engineers. Far more than 
components research, systems research and engineering is exposed to the full complexity of 
today?s world of information and telecommunications technologies. Few, if any, groups can 
build full systems on their own from scratch. To stay competitive, they have to follow closely 
the global developments in relevant systems architectures, platforms, toolkits, available 
components of many different kinds, de facto standards, work in standards committees, 
market trends etc. They need larger and much more interdisciplinary teams in order to keep 
up with competitive developments. They need access to platforms and component 
technologies in order to avoid having to do everything by themselves. And they need 
expertise in software systems engineering best practice as specialised to the kind of systems 
 they are building, including expertise in systems and usability evaluation. As we shall see in 
Section 4, they need even more than this, such as hardware access or expertise, development 
resources, behavioural research in new domains, and skills in form and contents design.  
Compared to traditional research on improving a particular speech component technology, the 
world of advanced interactive systems research would appear to be orders of magnitude more 
complex. Moreover, that world is quite diffuse for the time being. It does not have a single 
associated research community, being inhabited instead by researchers from most traditional 
ITC (Information Technologies and Telecommunications) research communities. The world 
of advanced interactive systems research does not have any clear evolutionary direction, 
being characterised rather through ever-changing terms of fashion, such as ?ubiquitous 
computing?, ?things that think?, ?wearable computing?, ?the disappearing computer? or 
?ambient intelligence?. Significantly, all or most of those terms tend to refer to combined 
hardware and software systems rather than to components, and none of them refer to the 
traditional communities in the ITC field, such as speech processing, natural language (text) 
processing, machine vision, robotics, computer graphics, neural networks, machine learning, 
or telecommunication networks. Indeed, most of our current stock of inspired and visionary 
terms for describing the future of interactive technologies tends to be rather vague with regard 
to the technologies which they include or, if any, exclude. 
Rather than trying to clarify what might be meant by the terms of fashion mentioned above, it 
may be useful to look at two other developments in conceptualising the field of advanced 
interactive systems research of which speech research has begun to form a part. To be sure, 
the concepts to be discussed are expressed by fashion terms as well, but at least it would seem 
that those concepts are of a more systematic and theoretically stable nature at this point. 
Natural interactivity 
When being together, most humans interact through speech when they exchange information. 
The telephone allows them to use spoken interaction at a distance as well, and the function of 
the telephone will soon be shared, or even taken over, by computing systems. When humans 
interact through speech, it does not matter if they are just a twosome or if they are more than 
two together. Moreover, except when speaking over the telephone, speech is not their only 
modality for information exchange. Gesture, lip movements, facial expression, gaze, bodily 
posture, and object manipulation all contribute to adding information, however redundant, to 
the spoken message. Together with speech, those modalities constitute full natural human-
human communication. Moving beyond current technologies, we envision not just a single 
human speaking on the telephone or to a (desktop) computer in order to get a particular task 
done. Rather, the vision is one in which multiple humans speak together whether or not they 
are in the same physical location whilst using the system as an increasingly equal partner in 
communication. The system mediates their communication when needed, understands full 
natural communication, and produces full natural communication itself, increasingly acting as 
its human counterparts in communication. In order to take this vision into account, it would 
seem timely to abandon the traditional model of interaction which is called ?human-computer 
interaction?, and replace it with the more general model of natural human-human-system 
interaction (HHSI). Natural HHSI, it appears, it a necessary end-point of current research in 
speech technologies. Thus, natural interactivity may serve as an important, even if distant, 
guidepost for the role of speech research in the complex world of interactive systems 
research. 
The received picture of the role of theory in engineering goes something like this. It is hardly 
ever possible to deduce from theory a complete specification of the artefact that would 
constitute an optimal solution to some engineering problem. The reason is that the complexity 
 of the problem space involved always exceeds the power of theory. On the other hand, 
without theory (of physics, chemistry, computation etc.), it would not have been possible to 
build many of the artefacts we use in our daily lives. Thus, theory has a necessary supporting 
function in engineering. This is clear in the case of natural interactivity. To achieve the 
ultimate goal of natural HHSI, we need far better theory than is available at present: about 
how humans behave during natural interaction, about the behavioural phenomena which are 
relevant to the development of fully natural interactive systems, about how these phenomena 
are interrelated, about how they should be encoded etc. We also need a novel theory of 
natural communication which can replace speech acts theory and discourse theory by taking 
the notion of a complete communicative act as its basic notion. 
Multimodality 
The trend towards multimodal interactive systems reflects the trend towards blending of 
traditional research communities noted above as well as the increasing role of speech in future 
interactive systems. Multimodal systems are systems which offer the user combinations of 
input/output modalities for (or ways of) exchanging information with computer systems. 
Given the naturalness and expressive power of speech, speech input and speech output have 
the potential for becoming key modalities in future interactive systems. However, compared 
to natural interactivity, our current understanding of multimodality is much less capable of 
providing guideposts for future advanced interactive systems research in general and research 
on multimodal systems which include speech modalities in particular. Much too little is 
known about how to create good modality combinations which include speech for a variety of 
interactive purposes. This topic has become an active field of research, however (Bernsen 
1997a, Benoit et al 2000, Bernsen 2001). Further progress in this field is likely to 
complement research on natural interactivity in providing guideposts for speech-related 
research in the complex world of advanced interactive systems. In fact, these two research 
directions are intertwined in so far as it remains an open issue for which application purposes 
technologies, such as, e.g., animated speaking characters might provide useful solutions. 
Medium-scale science 
The final trend to be mentioned is the trend towards medium-scale science in advanced 
interactive systems research. Increasingly, it is becoming evident that the standard 3/4/5-team, 
low-budget, 3-year isolated advanced systems research project is often an inefficient means of 
achieving significant research progress. In many projects, the participants share discouraging 
experiences, such as the following: even if small, the project is only able to start almost one 
year after its conception because of the administrative processing needed to release the 
funding for the project; when the project begins, the participants discover that their objectives 
have already been achieved elsewhere; the participants spend the first half of the project 
trying to identify the best platform to work from only to discover that they cannot get access 
to it; the participants spend half of the project building and putting together a low-quality 
version of the contextual technologies they need before they can start addressing their core 
research objectives; at the start of the project, the participants realise that it will take too long 
to produce the data resources they need, such as tagged corpora, and decide instead to work 
with sub-optimal resources which they can get for free; etc. One way to avoid, or reduce the 
number of, such experiences is to launch larger-scale concerted research efforts which have a 
better chance of moving beyond the state of the art. World-wide, experiments are currently 
underway on how to carry out such medium-scale science. In the US DARPA Communicator 
project which addresses spoken language and multimodal dialogue systems, for instance, all 
participants start from shared core technologies without having to build these themselves 
(http://fofoca.mitre. org/). In the German SmartKom project which addresses multimodal 
 communication systems, the budget is large enough for the participants to build and integrate 
the technologies needed (http://smartkom.dfki.de/start.html). In the European Intelligent 
Information Interfaces (i3, http://www.i3net.org/) and CLASS (http://www.class-tech.org/) 
initiatives, whilst the traditional 3-year small-scale project topology has been preserved, 
major efforts are being made to promote cross-project collaboration, synergy, and critical 
mass.  
For reasons too obvious to mention, relatively small-scale research should continue to exist, 
of course. Still, the complexity of the world of advanced interactive systems research is not 
likely to go away. This raises the question of whether we need more medium-scale science 
and less small-scale science in order to make efficient use of the funds available for advanced 
interactive systems research. If this question is answered in the affirmative, the important 
issue becomes how best to do medium-scale science, i.e. which model(s) to adopt for the 
larger-scale research efforts to come. 
3. Estimated Technology Timelines 
This section attempts to estimate the time of first appearance of a broad selection of generic 
and/or landmark speech technologies including natural interactivity technologies and 
multimodal technologies involving speech. Some qualifications are necessary to the proper 
interpretation of the proposed predictions. Despite the numerous uncertainties involved in 
estimating technology progress, timelines, when properly estimated, qualified, and peer 
reviewed, do seem a useful means of conveying a field?s expectations to the outside world 
and serving as a basis for actions to be undertaken to support research in the field. 
Qualifications 
(a) As in all timeline forecasts, there is some uncertainty in the forecasts below with respect to 
whether the technology is deployable or will in fact have been deployed in products at the 
suggested time. The claim for the figures below rather tend towards the deployable 
interpretation which is the one closest to the point of view of research. The actual deployment 
of a deployable technology is subject to an additional number of factors some of which are 
unpredictable, such as company technology exploitation strategies, pricing strategies, and the 
market forecasts at deployability time. Thus, several years may pass before some of the 
technologies below go from deployability to actually being used in mass products. This 
implies that one cannot from the estimations below construct scenarios for the Information 
Society in which people in general will be using the described technologies at the times 
indicated. In other words, the years below refer to ?earliest opportunity? for actual 
deployment in what may be sometimes rather costly systems to be embraced by relatively few 
customers. Similarly, given the fact that there are thousands of languages in the world, it goes 
without saying that a technology has been established when it works in at least one of the top 
languages, a ?top language? being defined as a language used by developers in the more 
affluent parts of the world. 
(b) Another point related to (a) above is to do with underlying ?production platforms?. For 
many advanced, and still somewhat futuristic, speech and language -related systems, it is one 
thing to have produced a one-of-a-kind demonstrator system but quite another to have 
produced the system in a way which enables oneself or others to relatively quickly produce 
more-of-the-same systems in different application domains. An example is the so-called 
intelligent multimedia presentation systems which will be discussed in more detail in Section 
4. Several examples exist, such as the German WIP system and corresponding systems from 
the USA. However, as long as we haven?t solved the problem of how to produce this kind of 
system in a relatively quick and standardised way, intelligent multimedia presentation 
 systems are not going to be produced in numbers but will remain research landmarks. The 
timeline list below mostly avoids mentioning systems of this kind, assuming for the kinds of 
systems mentioned that the ?production platform? issue has been solved to some reasonable 
extent at the time indicated. 
(c) There is some, inevitable because of the brevity of the timeline entries, vagueness in what 
the described technologies can actually do.  
(d) It is assumed that, after a certain point in time which could be, say, 2006, the distinction 
between technology use for the web and technology use for other purposes will have 
vanished.  
(e) There is no assumption about who (which country, continent, etc.) will produce the 
described landmark results. However, given the virtually unlimited market opportunities for 
the technologies listed as a whole, it is expected that a consolidated technology timeline list 
will command keen interest among decision makers from industry and funding agencies.  
(f) There is nothing about (software) agent technologies below. It is simply assumed that what 
is currently called software agent technologies will be needed to achieve the results described 
and will be available as needed. 
(g) In principle, of course, any technology timeline list is subject to basic uncertainty due to 
the ?if anything is done about it? ?factor. If nothing will be done, nothing will happen, of 
course. However, most of the technologies listed below are being researched already and the 
rest will no doubt be investigated in due course. The uncertainty only attaches to who will get 
there first with respect to any given technology, who will produce the product winners, and 
how much effort will be invested in order to achieve those results before anybody else. 
Technology timelines 
Basic technologies 
Hypotheses lattices, island parsing, spotting in all shapes and sizes for spoken  
dialogue 2001 
Continuous speech recognisers in OSs for workstations in top languages 2002 
Continuous speech recognisers in mobile devices (10000 words vocabulary) in   
top languages 2003 
High quality competitive (with concatenated speech) formant speech synthesis   
in top languages 2003 
Task-oriented spoken dialogue interpretation by plausibility in context and situation 2003 
Generally usable cross-language text retrieval 2003 
Multilingual authoring in limited domains by constructing conceptual representations  2003 
Usable ontological lexicons for limited domains 2003 
Usable translation systems for written dialogues (multilingual chatting) 2003 
Useful speaker verification technology 2004 
Seamless integration of spoken human/machine and human/human communication 2004 
First on-line prosodic formant speech synthesis in top languages 2004 
Simple task-oriented animated character spoken dialogue for the web 2004 
Concept-to-speech synthesis 2004 
Stylistically correct presentation of database content 2004 
Superficial semantic processing based on ontological lexicons 2004 
 Max. 2000 words vocabulary task-oriented animated character dialogue for the web 2005 
Prosodic formant speech synthesis replaces concatenated speech in top languages 2005 
Full free linguistic generation (from concepts) 2005 
Robust, general meta-communication for spoken dialogue systems 2005 
Writer-independent handwriting recognition 2005 
Learning at the semantic and dialogue levels in spoken dialogue systems 2006 
Useful multiple-speaker meeting transcription systems 2006 
Task-oriented fully natural animated characters (speech, lips, facial expression,   
gesture) output (only) 2007 
Context sensitive summarization (responsive to user's specific needs) 2007 
Answering questions by making logical inferences from database content 2007 
Speech synthesis with several styles and emotions in top languages 2008 
Continuous speech understanding in workstations with standard dictionaries   
(50000 words) in top languages 2008 
Controlled languages with syntactic and semantic verification for specific domains 2008 
Large coverage grammars with automatic acquisition for syntactic and semantic   
processing for limited applications 2008 
Task-oriented fully natural speech, lips, facial expression, gesture  
input understanding and output generation 2010 
Systems 
First personalised spoken dialogue applications (book a personal service over the phone) 2002 
Useful speech recognition-based language tutor 2003 
Useful portable spoken sentence translation systems 2003 
Useful broadcast transcription systems for information extraction 2003 
First pro-active spoken dialogue with situation awareness 2003 
Current spoken dialogue systems technology for the web (office, home) 2004 
Satisfactory spoken car navigation systems 2004 
Current spoken dialogue systems technology for the web (in cars) 2005 
Useful special-purpose spoken sentence translation systems (portable, web etc.) 2005 
High quality translation systems for limited domains with automatic acquisition 2005 
Small-vocabulary (>1000 words) spoken conversational systems 2005 
Medium-complexity (wrt. semantic items and their allowed combinations) task-oriented  
spoken dialogue systems 2005 
Multiple-purpose personal assistants (spoken dialogue, animated characters) 2006 
Task-oriented spoken translation systems for the web 2006 
Useful speech summarisation systems in top languages 2006 
Useful meeting summarisation systems 2008 
Usable medium-vocabulary speech/text translation systems for all non-critical   
situations 2010 
Medium-size vocabulary conversational systems 2010 
 Tools, platforms, infrastructure 
Standard tool for cross-level, cross-modality coding of natural interactivity data 2002 
Infrastructure for rapid porting of spoken dialogue systems to new domains 2003 
Platform for generating intelligent multimedia presentation systems with spoken   
interaction 2005 
Science-based general portability of spoken dialogue systems across domains and tasks 2006 
 
Other problems which were strongly felt when producing the list above include: (i) the fact 
that there is plenty of continuity in technology development. ?Continuity? may not be the 
right term because what happens is that what is later perceived as a new technological step 
forward is constituted by a large number of smaller steps none of which could be mentioned 
in a coarse-grained timeline exercise such as the one above. General speaker identification, 
robust speech recognition in hard-to-model noise conditions, ?real? speaker-independent 
recognition (almost) no matter how badly people speak, or pronounce, some language, are all 
examples of minute-step progress. (ii) Another problem is to do with speech in fancy-termed 
circumstances, such as ?ambient intelligence? applications. It may be that there is a hard-core 
step of technological progress which is needed to achieve speech-related ambient intelligence 
but then again, may be there isn?t. Maybe this is all a matter of using the timelined speech 
technologies above for a wide range of systems and purposes. Similarly, it is tempting to ask, 
for instance: ?When will I have a speech-driven personal assistant??. But everything depends 
on what the personal assistant is supposed to be able to do. Some personal assistant 
technologies exist already. Thus, it does not seem possible to timeline the appearance of 
speech-driven personal assistants even if this might be attractive for the purpose of 
advertising the potential of speech technologies. 
How well is Europe doing? 
No attempt has been made, so far, to annotate the technology timelines with indications of 
how well, or how badly, European research is doing and hence how likely it is that a 
particular technology will be made deployable in Europe before anywhere else. In most of the 
timelined cases above, this would seem to depend primarily on the financial resources and 
research support mechanism which will be available to European research in the coming 
decade. In some cases, the US is presently ahead of Europe, such as with respect to 
continuous speech recognisers in workstations or broadcast transcription systems. In other 
cases, Europe has the lead, such as in building a standard tool for cross-level, cross-modality 
coding of natural interactivity data, continuous speech recognisers in mobile devices, 
advanced spoken dialogue systems, and spoken car navigation systems. 
Beyond 2010 
Beyond 2010 lie the dreams, such as unlimited-vocabulary spoken conversational systems, 
unlimited-vocabulary spoken translation systems, unlimited on-line generation of integrated 
natural speech, lips, facial expression and gesture communication, unlimited on-line 
understanding of natural speech, lips, facial expression and gesture communication by 
humans, summarisation-to-specification of any kind of communication, multimodal systems 
solutions on demand, and, of course, full natural interactive communication. 
4. Implications of the Timelines 
When analysing the implications of the timelines in Section 3, a number of uncertainties come 
up with respect to how the market for speech products will develop. At present, most speech 
 products are being marketed by some 5-10 major companies world-wide. These companies 
are growing fast as are hundreds of small start-up companies many of which use basic 
technologies from the larger technology providers. It may be assumed that this market 
structure will not continue in the future. Rather, speech recognition and synthesis 
technologies would seem likely to become cheap, or even free and open source, components 
which will come with all manner of software and hardware systems. The implication is that 
all ITC providers who want to, will provide value-added speech products and that the basic 
speech technologies will not be dominated by a small number of large suppliers. Some 
important share of the speech market, including de facto standards in various areas, will 
probably be picked up by large custom software and mobile phone technology suppliers, such 
as Microsoft and Nokia, but that is likely to happen in any realistic scenario for the coming 
decade. The conclusion is that, during the coming decade, speech will be everywhere, in all 
sorts of products made by all sorts of companies. But will speech be everywhere in bulk? This 
raises a second uncertainty. 
In one scenario, speech will be present in all or most ITC products by 2010, and speech will 
be popular and will be used as much as input keys, input buttons, and output graphics displays 
are being used today. In another scenario, however, speech uptake will be slow and arduous. 
Several reasons could be given for the latter scenario. Thus, (a) it may take quite some time 
before speech recognition is being perceived by users to be sufficiently robust to make users 
switch to speech where speech is better ideally. (b) It may take quite some time before the 
field and the market has sorted out when to use speech as a stand-alone modality and when to 
use speech in combination with other input/output modalities. If these two (a + b) take-up 
curves do not grow in any steep manner, speech may still be widespread by 2010, but speech 
will still not be as important an input/output modality as it is likely to become later on. For the 
time being, we would appear to have too little information to be able to decide between the 
two scenarios just discussed. There is simply not enough data available on user uptake of 
speech technologies to enable a rational decision to be made. 
Exploitation today 
Already today, there is a great exploitation potential for speech technologies because of the 
simple facts that (i) the technologies which already exist in a few top languages could be 
ported to hundreds of other languages, and (ii) the types of applications which already exist 
can be instantiated into numerous other applications of similar complexity. At this end of the 
speech technology spectrum, the emphasis is on flexible and versatile production platforms, 
quality products, and low-cost production rather than on research. This is particularly true of 
low-complexity over-the-phone spoken language dialogue information systems using 
continuous speech input. Users would seem to have adopted these systems to a reasonable 
extent already. The same degree of user acceptance does not appear to characterise the uptake 
of, e.g., spoken language dictation systems or simple spoken command systems for operating 
screen menus.  Even if purchased by widely different groups of users, the former would 
appear to be used primarily by professionals, such as lawyers and medical doctors, and the 
latter hardly seems to be used at all. Also, text-to-speech systems for the disabled and 
increasingly for all users, do appear to have a significant exploitation potential already. 
Key technologies: speech-only 
The timelines in Section 3 highlight a series of key speech-only technologies which are still at 
the research stage, including: 
? prosody in on-line speech synthesis; 
? multi-speaker broadcast and meeting transcription; 
 ? speech summarisation; 
? speech translation; and 
? conversational spoken dialogue. 
Prosody in on-line speech synthesis 
Prosody in on-line speech synthesis is probably important to the speed of take-up of speech 
technologies because users would appear likely to prefer prosodic speech output to non-
prosodic speech output. However, there do not seem to exist firm estimates as to how much 
prosody matters. Reasonably clear and intelligible non-prosodic text-to-speech already exists 
for some top languages and might turn out to be satisfactory for most applications in the 
short-to-medium term.  
Multi-speaker broadcast and meeting transcription 
Multi-speaker broadcast transcription forms the topic of massive US-initiated research at the 
moment and appears likely to start becoming widely used in practice relatively soon. Like 
meeting transcription technology, multi-speaker broadcast transcription technology has a 
large potential for practical application as well as for acting as a driving force in speech and 
natural language (text) processing research. Once multi-speaker broadcast speech audio and 
meeting speech audio can be useably transcribed so that first application paradigms for these 
technologies have been achieved, the transcriptions can be further processed by other 
technologies, such as speech summarisation and speech translation technologies. It would be 
very valuable for European speech research if Europe could launch a meeting transcription 
technology evaluation campaign before the US (evaluation campaigns will be discussed 
below). 
Speech summarisation 
Speech summarisation is being experimented with already, often by using text or transcribed 
speech instead of raw speech data. Speech and text summarisation technology including 
intelligent speech and text search would seem to hold enormous potential by enabling users to 
obtain at-a-glance information on the contents of large repositories of information. The same 
applies to related technologies, such as question-answer systems which enable the user to 
obtain answers to specific questions from large repositories of information. Progress in these 
fields is difficult because of the difficulty of the research which remains to be done. However, 
the difficulties ahead are counter-balanced by expectations that far-less-than-perfect solutions 
could help to establish first application paradigms which, in their turn, might help accelerate 
progress. 
Speech translation 
Despite the embattled 40-year history of language (text) translation systems, speech 
translation is now being researched across the world because of the realisation that far-less-
than-perfect paragraph-by-paragraph translation could yield useful applications in the shorter 
term. In their turn, those first application paradigms could serve as drivers of further progress. 
The German Verbmobil project (http://verbmobil.dfki.de/), for instance, demonstrated just 
how difficult human-human spoken dialogue translation is. Once application paradigms have 
been achieved, however, speech translation technology would appear set to gain an enormous 
market. Still, it may take quite some time before there is a massive growth in the market for 
speech translation products, due to the difficulty of the research which remains to be done.  
Conversational spoken dialogue 
For some time, the term ?conversational spoken dialogue? has been a catch-all for next-step 
spoken language dialogue systems, such as those explored in the DARPA Communicator 
 project. However, the DARPA Communicator agenda remains focused on task-oriented 
dialogue, such as flight ticket reservation. Even if conducted through mixed initiative spoken 
dialogue in which the human and the machine exchange dialogue initiative in the course of 
their dialogue about the task, task-oriented spoken dialogue might not qualify as 
conversational spoken dialogue. Conversational spoken dialogue is mixed-initiative, to be 
sure, but in conversational spoken dialogue there is no single task and no limited number of 
distinct tasks which have to be accomplished. Rather, spoken conversation systems may be 
characterised as topic-oriented. It is the breadth and complexity of the topic(s) on which the 
system is able to conduct conversation which determine its strength. Research on spoken 
conversation systems is still limited. Obviously, however, spoken conversation systems hold 
an enormous application potential because they represent the ultimate generalisation of the 
qualities which everybody seem to appreciate in task-oriented mixed initiative spoken 
language dialogue systems.  
Key technologies: multimodal systems 
In addition to speech-only technologies, the timelines in Section 3 highlight a series of 
multimodal speech systems technologies which are still at the research stage in most cases, 
including: 
? intelligent multimodal information presentation including speech; 
? natural interactivity; 
? immersive virtual reality and augmented reality. 
Intelligent multimodal information presentation including speech 
Intelligent multimodal information presentation including speech is a mixed bag of complex 
technologies which do not seem to have any clear research direction at the present time. The 
reason is that the term multimodality, as pointed out in Section 2 above, refers to a virtually 
unlimited space of combinations of (unimodal) modalities. Thus, Modality Theory (Bernsen 
1997b, 2001) has identified an exhaustive developers? toolbox of unimodal input/output 
modalities in the media of graphics (or vision), acoustics (or hearing), and haptics (or touch) 
consisting of more than a hundred unimodal modalities. The number of possible combinations 
of these unimodal input/output modalities is evidently staggering and, so far, at least, no way 
has been found to systematically generate a subset of good and useful modality combinations 
which could be recommended to system developers. The best current approach is to list 
modality combinations which have been found useful already in experimental or development 
practice. Obviously, given the limited exploration of the space of possible modality 
combinations which has taken place so far, those combinations constitute but a tiny fraction 
of the modality combinations which eventually will be used in HHSI. The same lack of 
systematicity applies to the subset of useful modality combinations which include speech 
output and/or speech input. Thus, for instance, it is known that speech and static graphics 
image output is a useful modality combination for some purposes and that the same holds for 
combined speech and pen input into various output domains as well as for speech and 
pointing gesture input into, e.g., a static graphics map output domain. The qualifying term 
intelligent is being used to distinguish intelligent multimodal information presentation 
systems from traditional multimedia presentations. In traditional multimedia presentations, 
the user uses keyboard and mouse (or similar devices) to navigate among a fixed set of output 
options all of which have been incorporated into the system at design-time. In intelligent 
multimodal information presentation systems, the system itself generates intelligent 
multimodal output at run-time. This may happen through run-time language and/or speech 
generation coordinated with run-time graphics image generation and in many other ways as 
 well. Some years ago, a reference model for intelligent multimodal information presentation 
systems was proposed by an international consortium of developers (Computer Standards and 
Interfaces 18, 6-7, 1997). Since then, little systematic development has happened, it appears, 
which is probably due to the fact that the field is as open-ended at it is. Still, it would appear 
that (i) the field of intelligent multimodal information presentation systems is an extremely 
promising approach to complex interactive information presentation, such as in interactive 
systems for instruction tasks for which several output modalities are needed, including 
speech. In order to advance research in this field, research is needed on Modality Theory in 
order to identify potentially useful modality combinations as well as on next-step 
architectures and platforms for intelligent multimodal information presentation. 
Natural interactivity 
As argued in Section 2, fully natural interactive systems represent a necessary vision for a 
large part of the field of interactive systems. Furthermore, spontaneous speech input/output is 
fundamental to natural interactive systems. Given this (latter) fact, it would seem that speech 
research is set to take the leading role in the development of increasingly natural interactive 
systems. Already today, this research and development process can be broken down into a 
comprehensive, semi-ordered agenda of research steps. The steps include, at least, (i) 
fundamental research on human communicative behaviour, including identification of the 
relevant phenomena which are being coordinated in human behaviour across abstraction 
levels and modalities, such as speech prosody and facial expression; validated coding 
schemes for these phenomena; and standard tools for coding the phenomena in order to create 
research and training resources in an efficient and re-usable fashion; (ii) speech and graphics 
integration in order to achieve full run-time coordination of spoken output with lip 
movement, facial expression, gaze, gesture and hand manipulation, and bodily posture; (iii) 
speech and machine vision integration in order to enable the system to carry out run-time 
understanding of spoken input in combination with lip movement, facial expression, gaze, 
gesture and hand manipulation, and bodily posture; and (iv) conversational spoken dialogue 
as discussed above. Other relevant technologies include, i.a., machine learning and 3D 
graphics modelling of human behaviour. Although research in underway on (i) through (iv), 
there is no doubt that the field might benefit strongly from a focused effort which could 
connect the disparate research communities involved and set a stepwise agenda for achieving 
rapid progress. The application prospects are virtually unlimited, as witnessed by the 
consensus in the field that increased natural interaction tends to generate increased trust in 
HHSI.  
Immersive virtual reality and augmented reality 
It is perhaps less clear what are the speech technology application prospects of immersive 
virtual reality. Today, immersive virtual reality requires that users are wired up with 3D 
goggles, force feedback data gloves, data suits, and/or wired surfaces and other wired 
equipment, such as flight cockpits or bicycles. At the present time, it seems uncertain to 
which extent and for which purposes immersive virtual reality technologies will be found 
useful in the future. The primary purposes for which these technologies are being used to day 
are advanced technology exhibition and demonstration, and the building of rather expensive 
simulation setups, such as flight simulators. Furthermore, it is far from clear which role(s) 
speech will come to play in immersive virtual environments. These remarks also apply to 
augmented reality technology. 
Other research and supporting measures needed 
In order to promote efficient research progress on advanced interactive systems which include 
speech as a modality, technology research is far from sufficient. As pointed out in Section 2, 
 present and future advanced systems research takes place in an extremely complex context in 
which leading research efforts must incorporate global state-of-the-art developments in many 
different fields. World-leading speech-related systems research should be accompanied by the 
following kinds of research, at least: 
? state-of-the-art generic platforms; 
? generic architectures; 
? hardware; 
? specialised best practice in development and evaluation; 
? standard re-usable resources; 
? behavioural research; 
? neural basis for human natural communicative behaviour; 
? design of form and contents; 
? porting technologies to languages, cultures and the web; 
? the disabled; 
? maintenance for uptake. 
State-of-the-art generic platforms 
In order to effectively aim at exploitable results from early on, speech-related systems 
research needs to build upon existing state-of-the-art generic platforms including APIs. If a 
state-of-the-art generic platform is not available to the researchers, either because it does not 
yet exist or because it is inaccessible for proprietary reasons, researchers have to build it 
themselves. This is not possible in small-scale research projects which have an additional 
research agenda which presupposes a working platform. The consequence is that the research 
project will either build upon some sub-optimal platform in order to complete the research 
agenda, or build a better platform but not complete the research agenda. Both consequences 
are unacceptable, of course, but the former may work temporarily if the research aims are 
very advanced ones. However, when the research aims have been achieved or, at least, 
somehow explored, there will typically be no practical way of continuing the research in order 
to produce a state-of-the-art generic platform which could bring the research results towards 
the market. Two implications seem to follow: (i) it would be highly desirable if companies 
could be encouraged to make their most advanced platforms accessible to researchers. (ii) If a 
state-of-the-art generic platform is missing altogether, it should either be produced in a 
separate project or projects should be made so large as to include platform development. Both 
implications would seem to require a transformation of existing European research funding 
mechanisms. 
Generic architectures 
It would seem likely that overall research speed and efficiency in Europe could be accelerated 
by research on generic architectures for future systems, such as conversational spoken 
dialogue systems, intelligent multimodal information presentation systems which include 
speech, or natural interactive systems. In the absence of research initiatives on generic 
architectures for future systems, research projects are likely to specify idiosyncratic 
architectures which may satisfy their present needs but which do not sufficiently take into 
account global developments nor prepare for the next steps in advanced systems development. 
For the time being, there does not appear to be any European speech-related initiative in this 
field apart from the CLASS project which was launched in the autumn of 2000 
(http://www.class-tech.org/). For efficiency, work on generic architectures should be done as 
 a collaborative effort between many small-scale research projects and industry as in CLASS, 
or between a medium-scale research project and industry.  
Hardware 
Increasingly, advanced systems demonstrators require hardware design and development. For 
many research laboratories, this is a new challenge which they are ill-prepared to meet. 
Moreover, there is no strong tradition for involving hardware producers in the field of speech 
technologies, primarily because the need for involving them is a rather recent one. Ways must 
be found to forge links with leading hardware producers in order to make emerging hardware 
available to researchers. This problem has much in common with the platform issue discussed 
above. 
Specialised best practice in development and evaluation 
Advanced speech systems research is conducted in a software engineering space bounded by, 
on the one hand, general software engineering best development and evaluation practice and, 
on the other, emerging ISO standards and de facto standards imposed by global industrial 
competition. Between these boundaries lies software engineering best practice in development 
and evaluation specialised for various speech-related systems and component technologies. 
This field remains ill-described in the literature. Apart from the DISC project on best practice 
in the development and evaluation of spoken language dialogue systems (www.disc2.dk), 
some work on evaluation in EAGLES Working Groups during the 1990s 
(http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/ EAGLES96/home.html), various national evaluation campaigns, and 
planned work in CLASS, little work has been done in Europe. By contrast, massive work has 
been done on component evaluation in the US over the last fifteen years. The result is that the 
speech-related technology field is replete with trial and error, repetitions of mistakes, and 
generally sub-state-of-the-art approaches. These negative effects are multiplied by the 
presence in the field of a large number of developers who are new to the field. 
Admittedly, the field of software engineering best practice in development and evaluation 
specialised for various speech systems and component technologies is difficult and costly to 
do something about under present conditions. Technology evaluation campaigns are costly to 
do and require serious logistics. Yet the US experience would seem to indicate that 
technology evaluation campaigns are worth the effort if carried out for key emerging 
technologies including some of the technologies described in this paper. When a technology 
has gone to the market, industry does not want to participate any more and rather wants, e.g., 
evaluation toolkits for internal use. For emerging technologies, however, technology 
evaluation campaigns are an efficient means of producing focused progress. In fact, all 
participants tend to become winners in the campaigns irrespective of their comparative 
scorings according to the metrics employed, because everybody involved learns how to 
improve, or when to discard, their technologies and approaches. For Europe, technology 
evaluation campaigns for key emerging technologies could be a means of creating lasting 
advances on its global competitors. In order to take care of the complex logistics needed for 
the campaigns, it is worth considering to establish a European agency similar to the US NIST 
(National Institute for Standards in Technology) whose comprehensive experience with 
technology evaluation campaigns makes it comparatively easy to plan and launch campaigns 
in novel emerging technologies. Alternatively, NIST might be asked to undertake to run 
technology development and evaluation campaigns in Europe, provided that this does not 
offend political and industrial sensibilities too much. 
Effective development best practice work specialised for speech technologies is difficult to do 
under the current European funding mechanisms. The reason is that development best practice 
work requires access to many different components, systems and approaches in order to 
 create an effective environment for the discussion and identification of best practice. This 
environment can only be established across many different small-scale projects or within 
medium-scale projects. CLASS is the first example of such an environment. 
Standard re-usable resources 
The term resources covers raw data resources, annotated data resources, annotation schemes 
for data annotation, and annotation tools for efficient automatic, semi-automatic or manual 
annotation of data. Resources are crucial for many different purposes, such as research into 
coding schemes or the training of components. Also, resources tend to be costly to produce. 
This means that, if the relevant resources are not available, research projects often take the 
easy way out which is to use less relevant but existing and accessible resources for their 
research. The results are sub-optimal research results and slowed-down progress. Common to 
resources of any kind is the need for standardisation. If some resource is not up to the 
required standards, its production is often a waste of effort because the created resource 
cannot be used for anything useful. In its strategy paper from 1991, ELSNET 
(http://www.elsnet.org/) proposed the establishment of a European resources agency. This 
recommendation was adopted through the creation of ELRA (European Language Resources 
Agency http://www.icp.inpg.fr/ELRA/ home.html) in 1995. ELRA is now a world-recognised 
counterpart to the US LDC (Linguistic Data Consortium, http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/). Still, 
ELRA is far from having the capacity to produce on its own all the resources and standards 
needed for efficient research progress. By contrast with technology evaluation campaigns, 
Europe has been active in the resources area during the 1990s. Today, there is a strong need to 
continue activities in producing publicly available resources and standards for advanced 
natural language processing, natural interactive systems development, evaluation campaigns 
as described above, etc. Recently, the ISLE (International Standards for Language 
Engineering) Working Group on Natural Interactivity and Multimodality 
(http://www.isle.nis.sdu.dk) has launched cross-Atlantic collaboration in the field of resources 
for natural interactivity and multimodality. 
Behavioural research 
Humans are still far superior to current systems in all aspects of natural interactive 
communication. Furthermore, far too little is known about the natural interactive behaviour 
which future systems need to be able to reproduce as output or understand as input. There is a 
strong need for basic research into human natural communicative behaviour in order to chart 
the phenomena which future systems need to reproduce or understand. This research will 
immediately feed into the production of natural interactive resources for future systems and 
components development, as described above. 
Neural basis for human natural communicative behaviour 
Related to, but distinct from, basic research into human natural communicative behaviour is 
basic research into the neural basis for human natural communicative behaviour. In the 
heydays of cognitive science in the 1980s, many researchers anticipated steady progress in the 
collaboration between research on speech and language processing, on the one hand, and 
research into the neural machinery which produces human speech and language on the other. 
However, massive difficulties of access to how human natural communicative behaviour is 
being produced by the brain turned out to prevent rapid progress in linking neuroscience with 
speech and language processing research. Today, however, due to the availability of 
technologies such as MR imaging and PET scanning, as well as the increasing sophistication 
of the research agenda for the speech technology field, the question arises if it might be timely 
to re-open the cognitive science agenda just described. Potential results include, among 
others, input to generic architecture development (cf. above), identification of biologically 
 motivated units of processing, such as speech and lip movement coordination, and 
identification of biologically motivated modalities for information representation and 
exchange. Relevant research is already going on in the field of neuroscience but, so far, few 
links have been established to the fields of speech technologies and natural interactive 
systems more generally. 
Design of form and contents 
Yet another consequence of the increasing emphasis on systems as opposed to system 
components is the growing importance of form and contents design. It is a well-established 
fact that design and development for the web requires skills in contents design and contents 
expression which are significantly different from those which have been developed through 
centuries for text on paper. In order to develop good demonstrator systems for the web or 
otherwise, there is a need for strongly upgraded skills in the design and expression of 
multimodal digital contents. For instance, it is far from sufficient to have somehow gleaned 
that speech might be an appropriate modality for some intelligent multimodal information 
presentation instruction system and to have available a state-of-the-art development platform 
for building the system. To actually develop the system, professional expertise in form and 
contents design is required. At the present time, few groups or projects in the speech field are 
adequately staffed to meet this challenge.  
Porting technologies to languages, cultures and the web 
Right now, the gap between the ?have? countries whose researchers have access to advanced 
speech and natural interactivity components and platforms, and the ?have-not? countries 
whose researchers cannot use those technologies for their own purposes because they speak 
different languages and behave differently in natural interactive communication, seems to be 
increasing. There is therefore a need to port advanced technologies to different languages and 
cultures both in Europe and across the world. The market will close the gap eventually in its 
own way, of course. However, in order to rally the full European research potential in the 
field in a timely fashion, it would appear necessary to actively stimulate the porting of 
technologies to new languages and cultures. From a research point of view, the best way to 
make this happen might be to include in medium-to-large-scale projects the best researchers 
from ?have-not? countries even if, by definition, those researchers have to spend significant 
time catching up on basic technologies and resources before being able to actively 
contributing to the research agenda.  
There is another sense of the ?porting technologies? -phrase in which Europe as a whole risks 
falling behind global developments. It is that of porting speech, multimodal and natural 
interactivity technologies to the web. The claim here is not that this is not happening already. 
The claim is that this cannot happen fast enough. In order to increase the speed of porting 
technology to the web, it would seem necessary to strongly promote advanced components 
and systems development for the web. It is far from sufficient to wait until some non-speech 
technology has been marketed for the web, such as electronic commerce applications, and 
then try to ?add speech? to the technology. A much more pro-active stance would appear 
advisable, including a strongly increased emphasis on form and contents design as argued 
above. 
The disabled 
Advanced technologies for the disabled have a tendency to lag behind technology 
development more generally for the simple reason that the potential markets for technologies 
for the disabled are less profitable. Correspondingly, advanced technologies development for 
the disabled tends to be supported by small separate funding programmes rather than being 
integrated into mainstream programme research. In many cases, however, it would appear that 
 systems and components technologies could be developed for any particular group of users 
before being transferred into applications for many other user groups. To the extent that this is 
the case, there may be less of a reason to confine the development of technologies for the 
disabled to any particular research sub-programme. 
Maintenance for uptake 
Finally, the small-scale science paradigm of small and isolated research projects does not at 
all cater for the fact that, in the complex world of advanced systems research, a wealth of 
prototype systems, proto-standard resources, web-based specialised best practice guides, etc., 
are being produced which have nowhere to go at the end of the projects in which they were 
developed. Their chances of industrial uptake, re-use by industry and research, impact on 
their intended users, etc., might become very substantially increased if it were possible to 
maintain them and make them publicly accessible for, say, two years after the end of projects. 
For this to happen, there is a need for (i) a stable web portal which can host the results, such 
as the present HLT (Human Language Technologies) portal under development 
(http://www.HLTCentral.org); (ii) open source clauses in research contracts for technologies 
which have nowhere to go at the end of a project; and (iii) financial support for maintenance. 
These requirement are likely to impose considerable strain of current European research 
support mechanisms. However, with some legal effort and a modest amount of financial 
support, the many research results produced in the speech-related field in Europe which are 
not being taken up immediately and which are not within the remit of ELRA, could gain 
much more impact than is presently the case. 
5. Proposed Actions 
Early preparations for the European Commission?s 6th Framework Programme (FP6) 
including IST (Information Society Technologies) research are now in progress. It is 
premature to make predictions with any degree of certainty as to how the IST part of FP6 will 
shape up. Current information suggests an increased emphasis on basic research compared to 
the present FP5. In addition, it is possible that FP6 will include opportunities for the medium-
scale research initiatives which were called for on several occasions above, i.e. large-scale 
?clusters? of projects all addressing the same research topic in a coordinated fashion. Finally, 
the current covering title for FP6 IST research is ?ambient intelligence? which is one of the 
terms of fashion quoted in the present paper. Given the timelines and their analysis above, it 
does not seem to matter much which covering term is being chosen for FP6. ?Ambient 
intelligence? is as apt as several others for FP6 and future advanced interactive systems 
research but, as argued in Section 3, it is far from clear if ambient intelligence requires us to 
focus on any particular segment of future speech-related technologies. However, the possible, 
increased emphasis on basic research as well as the possibility of carrying out medium-scale 
science in speech-related technologies are to be welcomed in the light of the argument above. 
5.1 Research priorities for speech-related technologies 2000-2010 
Taking into our stride the transformations of the field of speech-related research from speech-
only to interactive systems in general, and from components research to interactive systems 
research, the top priorities in speech-related technologies research are: 
? multi-speaker meeting transcription development and evaluation campaigns; 
? speech summarisation development and evaluation campaigns; 
? speech translation prototypes, generic platforms, and generic architectures. 
Development and evaluation campaigns are highly desirable; 
 ? conversational spoken dialogue prototypes, generic platforms, and generic 
architectures. Development and evaluation campaigns are highly desirable; 
? next-step prototypes, generic platforms, and generic architectures for intelligent 
multimodal information presentation; 
? next-step prototypes, generic platforms, and generic architectures for natural 
interactive systems. 
As soon as theoretically and practically feasible, all of the above advanced speech, 
multimodal and natural interactivity technologies should be developed for the web including 
hardware, form and contents design. The fact that some top research priorities have been 
mentioned above emphatically does not preclude the desirability of continuing ?business as 
usual? in the field of speech-related research, including continued research into all of the 
technologies which have been mentioned earlier in the present paper. On the contrary, 
business as usual is actually assumed by the above top priorities list which focuses on 
technologies over and above business as usual. This also applies to next-step research into 
already deployed speech-related technologies, such as mixed initiative, task-oriented spoken 
dialogue systems. 
For basic research leading to novel concepts, theories and formalisations, the top priorities 
are: 
? basic research into human natural communicative behaviour; 
? a novel theory of natural communication which can replace speech acts theory and 
discourse theory by taking the notion of a complete communicative act as its basic 
notion; 
? research on Modality Theory in order to identify potentially useful modality 
combinations; 
? establishment of collaborative links to research into the neural basis for human natural 
communicative behaviour. 
5.2 Research organisation needed 
Medium-scale science is needed for, at least, the coordinated development of natural 
interactive systems prototypes, generic platforms, generic architectures, best practice in 
development and evaluation, and standard resources. A large, medium-scale science project 
with these objectives should include the porting of technologies to new languages and 
cultures. 
It is quite possible that the medium-scale science model could be applied to research into 
other speech-related technologies, such as speech translation technologies, conversational 
spoken dialogue systems, or speech technologies for ambient intelligence. 
For researchers in small-scale speech-related projects, in particular, the creation of a generic 
platforms and hardware ?bourse? through contributions from European industry would be of 
great importance. 
Finally, we should stop having research programme ghettos for technologies for the disabled. 
5.3 Infrastructural actions needed 
In order to promote maximum uptake of the research results produced, it would be highly 
desirable to have funding for low-cost ways of maintaining research results for later uptake. 
Given the emphasis on technology development and evaluation campaigns above, Europe 
needs to establish an evaluation and standards agency. It is not evident to the present author 
 that current political and industrial sensibilities would allow the US NIST to undertake to run 
technology development and evaluation campaigns in Europe.  
This having been said, there is much to be said for increasing global collaboration on many 
aspects of speech-related research, such as creating a coordinated global infrastructure for 
resources distribution.  
References 
Benoit, C., Martin, J. C., Pelachaud, C., Schomaker, L., and Suhm, B.: Audio-Visual and 
Multimodal Speech-Based Systems. In D. Gibbon, I. Mertens and R. Moore (Eds.): 
Handbook of Multimodal and Spoken Dialogue Systems. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers 2000, 102-203. 
Bernsen, N. O.(1997a): Towards a tool for predicting speech functionality. Speech 
Communication 23, 1997, 181-210. 
Bernsen, N. O. (1997b): Defining a Taxonomy of Output Modalities from an HCI 
Perspective. Computer Standards and Interfaces, Special Double Issue, 18, 6-7, 1997, 537-
553. 
Bernsen, N. O.: Multimodality in language and speech systems - from theory to design 
support tool. In Granstr?m, B. (Ed.): Multimodality in Language and Speech Systems. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers 2001 (to appear). 
CLASS: http://www.class-tech.org/ 
Computer Standards and Interfaces, Special Double Issue, 18, 6-7, 1997. 
DARPA Communicator: http://fofoca.mitre.org/ 
DISC www.disc2.dk 
EAGLES: http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/home.html 
ELRA: http://www.icp.inpg.fr/ELRA/home.html 
ELSNET http://www.elsnet.org/ 
i3: http://www.i3net.org/ 
ISLE: http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Page.htm 
ISLE Working Group on Natural Interactivity and Multimodality: http://www.isle.nis.sdu.dk 
HLT portal: http://www.HLTCentral.org 
LDC http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/ 
SmartKom: http://smartkom.dfki.de/start.html 
Verbmobil: http://verbmobil.dfki.de/ 
 
