Developing Guidelines for the Annotation of Anaphors in the
Chinese Treebank
Susan Converse
CIS, University of Pennsylvania
spc@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Abstract
This paper describes the CTB Coreference An-
notation Guidelines for annotating pronominal
anaphoric expressions in the Penn Chinese Tree-
bank. The goals of the annotation are: to pro-
vide training data for learning-based pronoun
resolution tools, and to provide a \gold" stan-
dard to be used in the evaluation of pronoun
resolution algorithms. The choices that were
made concerning the coindexing of pronominal
anaphors and their antecedents are discussed, as
are some questions that arose in trying to cat-
egorize those pronominal expressions that did
not refer to specic nominal entities in the text.
1 Introduction
This paper describes the CTB Coreference An-
notation Guidelines for annotating the pronom-
inal anaphoric expressions in the Penn Chinese
Treebank (CTB). The purpose of the annota-
tion is twofold: to provide training data for
learning-based pronoun resolution tools, and to
provide a \gold" standard to use in evaluating
the outputs of pronoun resolution algorithms.
There were two annotation tasks: coindex-
ing anaphors with NP antecedents whenever
possible, and classifying the non-coindexable
anaphors into categories. While the coindexing
of pronominal anaphors (including the zero pro-
noun) with their antecedents (or postcedents)
was fairly straightforward, the categorization of
those pronominal expressions that did not re-
fer to nominal entities in the text raised a some
questions which are discussed below.
2 What we are annotating
Annotations were made to the parsed les of the
June, 2001 corrected release of the Penn Chi-
nese Treebank (Xia et al, 2000). Example 1
shows a sample of the annotation, with both
(IP (NP#2-TPC (ADJP (JJ ))
(NP (NN )))
(NP-SBJ (NN ))
(VP (VV )
(QP-OBJ (CD )(CLP (M )))))
(PU )
(IP (NP-SBJ (NP#2 (PN )) overt pronoun \their"
(NP (NN )(NN )))
(VP (ADVP (AD ))
(VP (VV ))))
(PU ) dropped subject
(IP (NP#2-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*)) zero pronoun
(VP (IP-CND
(NP#EXT-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*)) zero that
(VP (ADVP (CS )) does not co-refer
(VP (VE )
(NP-OBJ (NN )))))
(PU )
(ADVP (AD ))(ADVP (AD ))
(PP-LOC (P )
(NP (NN )(NN )))
(VP (VV )
(NP-OBJ (NN )))))
The debt of state-owned enterprises has reached as high
as 700 billion yuan, and their product quality is un-
even. If there is no improvement, they will will nd it
very di?cult to participate in the competition in over-
seas markets.
Example 1: Sample of the annotation.
an overt pronoun (\their" in this context),
and a zero pronoun \*pro*" referring to a nom-
inal entity. The coindexation (#2) will be dis-
cussed in Section 4 and the annotation #EXT
on the second *pro* will be discussed below in
Section 5.1.3.
2.1 Which anaphoric expressions
Consistent with work in English (e.g., (Da-
gan and Itai, 1991; Ge et al, 1998; Lappin
and Leass, 1994; Morton, 2000)), only third-
person pronouns and demonstratives were cho-
sen to be annotated. The pronouns include re-
exives (e.g., /\oneself"), reciprocals (e.g.,
/\one another"), and possessives. For the
possessives, the only distinct possessive forms
are and (both \its/his/hers/theirs"), which
are annotated. Ordinary third-person pronouns
in possessive constructions are annotated just
as they would be in other contexts.
Unlike English, however, Chinese is a pro-
drop language, and there are zero pronouns in
addition to the overt ones. For pro drop, the
Bracketing Guidelines for the CTB (Xue and
Xia, 2000) specify use of the string \*pro*"
(small pro) to explicitly denote a zero pronoun
in a dropped subject or dropped object position
in a parse tree.
Not all empty subject positions in the CTB
parses are the result of pro drop, however. The
Bracketing Guidelines specify use of the string
\*PRO*" (big PRO) when there is a non-overt
subject in a clause that is the complement of
a control verb, such as /\decide" (subject
control) or /\cause" (object control)
1
.
The Guidelines (Section VI.4) also state that
*PRO* is to be used as the non-overt subject in
\non-nite clauses," typically clauses that are
themselves sentential subjects. Big *PRO* is
in complementary distribution with lexicalized
constituents
2
, while *pro* is not so restricted.
The coreference annotation task only deals
with the zero pronouns, or small *pro*, in the
CTB parses. The big *PRO*s are ignored, just
as they are in a coreference task in English.
2.2 What kind of antecedents
We specify that anaphors are to be coindexed
only with entities that are represented in the
text by lexicalized noun phrases, or in some
cases quantier phrases, QPs.
Antecedent entities that must be inferred, or
antecedents that are events or propositions, for
example, cannot be coindexed with any overt
NP, and are to be labeled with one of the cate-
gories described in Section 5.
1
Note that *pro* and *PRO* do not represent move-
ment. Movement is denoted using other empty category
labels. Refer to the Bracketing Guidelines, Section VI:
\Null Elements."
2
This is consistent with Government and Binding
Theory. See, for example, (Haegeman, 1994).
3 Two tasks: coindexing and
categorizing
As in other languages, pronouns not only are
used to refer to explicit nominal phrases in the
text, but also are used discourse deictically and
in an existential manner. In addition, they can
refer to nominal entities that are not explicitly
mentioned in the text, but that are available
through inference.
The approach taken to annotation was there-
fore twofold.
The rst task was to classify each overt pro-
noun, demonstrative, and small pro either as a
coindexable anaphor that was coreferential with
a noun phrase that explicitly appeared in the
text, or as an anaphor that belonged to one of
a set of categories of non-coindexable anaphors.
The second task was to assign indices to the
coindexable anaphors and their antecedents.
We will rst describe the questions that arose
in the coindexation task, then discuss the cate-
gorization of the non-coindexable pronouns.
4 Choices in coindexing overt
nominal antecedents
4.1 Nesting level
When NPs are nested, such that an embedded
NP refers to the same entity as the NP that
contains it, there is a choice between annotat-
ing the head NP at the lowest level vs. anno-
tating the top NP. The choice to annotate high,
rather than at the head NP, was made for two
reasons. One was that the head may be auto-
matically recovered from the parent. The sec-
ond was that including the modifying material
uniquely identies entities that are dierent but
that have identical lexical heads.
In Example 2, the overt NPs that are tagged
with the indices #3 and #4 have identical head
NPs, but one is actually a subset of the other.
4.2 NP apposition
The only exception to annotating high was in
a particular kind of construction with NP ap-
position, namely those NP-APP that had the
pattern
(NP (NP-APP (title/descriptive phrase))
(NP (name)))
In that case, either the title or full descrip-
tive NP alone referred to the same entity de-
noted by the name, and the taggers were asked
to annotate both the NP-APP and the head NP
containing the name.
In more complex appositive constructions,
the NP-APP usually was a list, ending in etc.,
of sample members of a set that was denoted
by the head noun. Since the list was exemplary,
rather than denitive, NPs containing such lists
were to be annotated only at the parent level.
That is, the NP-APP constituent was treated
as another modier, rather than as a referent.
4.3 NP-Predicate constructions
When the antecedent of a pronoun, demonstra-
tive, or *pro* is a subject that is followed by the
copula or and a predicate NP (NP-PRD)
with denite reference, then the annotators were
instructed to put the entity's index not only on
the subject, but also the NP-PRD. Example 3
illustrates this.
Analogous to this, there are verbs that estab-
lish identity between their subjects and objects,
usually after a change of state. These verbs are
words like \become" ( ) or \establish" ( ).
When subjects in these constructions were an-
tecedents, the annotators were asked to index
any NP-OBJ with denite reference as well.
Example 4 shows one such instance with the
verb /\become."
4.4 Quantier phrases
Although syntactically, quantier phrases
(QPs) occur in the same contexts as NPs in
the CTB, they are not necessarily equivalent
in their semantic usage. While an NP denotes
an entity, a QP usually denotes the value of a
quantiable property or attribute of an entity,
rather than the entity itself.
Note that in Example 2 the QP-OBJ \109.82
billion US$" in the rst clause was not anno-
tated. Entity #3 is \the value of imports and
exports", and the extent of that value is 109.82
billion at one particular time. But the measure
does not uniquely denote the entity.
On the other hand, quantier phrases may
sometimes be abbreviated expressions denoting
a particular set of entities, in which case the QP
constituent is annotated as if it were an NP.
Example 5 illustrates such a case. The
QP#1-SBJ is shorthand for /\70 en-
terprises".
(IP(NP#3-SBJ
(CP(WHNP-1 (-NONE- *OP*))
(IP (NP#2-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP (NP-TMP (NT )) last year
(VP (VV ) realize
(NP-OBJ (-NONE- *T*-1))))))
(NP (NN ) imports+exports
(NN ))) total value
(VP (VV ) reach
(QP-OBJ (CD ) 109.82 B
(CLP (M ))))) US$
(PU )
(IP(NP-SBJ
(CP (WHNP-2 (-NONE- *OP*))
(CP (IP (NP#3-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP (VV ) stand
(NP#4-OBJ (NP (DP (DT ))
(NP (NN )))
entire country
(NP (NN )
(NN )))
imports+exports
total value
(NP-EXT (-NONE- *T*-2))))
(DEC )))
(NP (NN ))) proportion
(VP (VRD (VV )(VV )) rise up to
(QP-OBJ (CD ))))) 39%
NP#2 is /\foreign-owned enterprises"
The value of imports and exports that they realized
last year reached 109.82 billion US$. The proportion
that this represented in the value of imports and ex-
ports of the entire country rose to 39%.
Example 2: Annotating parent instead of head
NP.
(IP (NP#2-PN-SBJ (NR ))
(VP (VC )
(NP#2-PRD (NP-PN (NR ))
(QP (OD ))
(ADJP (JJ ))
(NP (NN ))))
Chongming is China's third largest island
Example 3: NP-PRD with denite reference.
5 Categorizing non-coindexable
anaphors
As mentioned above, not all pronominal expres-
sions are coreferential with overt NP/QP con-
stituents that denote specic nominal entities.
(IP(NP#2-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP(VV )
(NP#2-OBJ (DNP(NP (NP-PN (NR ))
(NP (NN )
(NN )))
(DEG ))
(ADJP (JJ ))
(NP (NN )))))
NP#2 is /\large-scale enter-
prises with production value exceeding 100 M yuan"
They have become the backbone of Wuxi Munici-
pality's economic development
Example 4: Predicative NP-OBJ.
(IP (NP-SBJ (ADJP (JJ ))
(NP (NN )))
(VP (QP-PRD (CD )
(CLP (M )))))
(PU )
(IP (NP#EXT-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP (ADVP (AD ))
(VP (VE )
(IP-OBJ
(QP#1-SBJ (CD )
(CLP (M )))
(VP (VV )
(NP-OBJ
(DNP(NP#1 (PN ))
(DEG ))
(NP (NN ))))))))
Enterprises entering the region number 122, and already
there are seventy that have their own products.
Example 5: An annotated quantier phrase and
an existential subject.
An attempt was made to classify these \non-
coindexable" anaphors.
We therefore dened a set of categories with
which to label those anaphors that could not be
coindexed. Table 1 provides a brief summary
of the categories. A discussion of each category
follows.
5.1 The straightforward cases
5.1.1 AMB: ambiguous
This category is intended to identify cases in
which a particular anaphor, whether an overt
lexical item or a zero pronoun, could have more
than one possible interpretation, depending on
the understanding of the reader. The ambigu-
ity may be between two or more possible NP
antecedents in the text for example, or it may
be between an entity denoted by an NP in the
text and an entity that is not lexicalized but can
be inferred.
5.1.2 DD: discourse deictic
Pronouns are often used to refer to events or
propositions as well as to entities. When an
anaphor refers to an event or proposition or
to the meaning of an entire span of text, then
it is labeled DD, for discourse deictic. Note
that in addition to the demonstratives /\this"
and /\this" that one would expect to be used
for this purpose, there were situations in which
*pro* was tagged with this label as well.
5.1.3 EXT: existential
Analogous to pleonastic constructions in
English, the verbs ( ) /\(not)have" and
/\without" in Chinese can be used in an
\existential" manner. When they are, they
have the part-of-speech tag VE
3
. The label
EXT is used to tag *pro* when it is the
subject of one of these verbs (and the verb has
the reading \there are" or \there are no" ).
Examples 1 and 5 contain *pro*'s annotated in
this way.
5.1.4 INFR: inferrable
The coindexing task is very restricted in that
the only antecedents that can be assigned in-
dices are NP constituents in the same doc-
ument that denote the same entity that the
anaphor refers to. The label INFR is to be
used when the anaphor refers to an entity that
is not itself explicitly lexicalized in the text, but
can be inferred from the context or using real-
world knowledge. The entity must be a partic-
ular nominal entity, not a generic \anyperson"
or \anything" with arbitrary reading (see Sec-
tion 5.2, below).
For example, the pronoun /\they" might
be used to refer to the people in charge of some
place/institution, but the only overt NP in the
text is the place/institution itself. The real an-
tecedent of the pronoun, a reference to the peo-
ple themselves, is not overtly mentioned in the
text, so the anaphor would be labeled INFR.
3
VE denotes a verb in an existential construction.
Refer to the CTB Bracketing Guidelines, Section IV.4.1.
Table 1: Categories for pronouns that do not
have a specic or clear coreferent
AMB ambiguous: for anaphors that
can have more than one possible
antecedent, depending on the in-
terpretation of the text
DD discourse deictic: the pronom-
inal expression refers to an event,
situation, or proposition rather
than to a nominal entity
EXT existential: a *pro* that is the
subject of an existential (VE)
or or
INFR inferrable: a pronoun or *pro*
that refers to a particular nom-
inal entity that is not explicitly
lexicalized in the text, but that
can be inferred from the text
ARB arbitrary: a *pro* that does not
refer to a specic entity that can
be inferred from or is lexicalized
in the text, but instead takes an
\arbitrary" reading
5.2 More subtle cases of *pro*
5.2.1 The choice of the category ARB
The above categories describe the manifesta-
tions of discourse phenomena that are familiar
to English speakers as well as to Chinese speak-
ers. The nal category applies only to small
*pro*, and is more specic to the phenomena
observed in the parses in CTB-I.
In the rst version of the guidelines, there
were ve categories: the four just mentioned,
plus an \ANONymous" category that was
meant to account for arbitrary dropped sub-
jects in titles or slogans (analogous to the use
of \one" in English). During the initial adjudi-
cation meetings, however, it became clear that
there were occurrences of small *pro* that did
not fall neatly into any of the ve proposed cat-
egories.
Many of these *pro*'s appeared in subordi-
nate constructions that functioned like English
innitives and gerundive clauses, and they fre-
quently could not be replaced by any overt NP,
even a pronoun. For these reasons, a sixth cat-
egory, labeled UNTNS for untensed, was added
to the guidelines in an attempt to capture a
meaningful category of dropped subjects.
Unfortunately, adding this category caused
more problems than it solved. First, it was
too hard to clearly dene. The reason it was
di?cult to dene is the same reason that the
question of a nite vs. non-nite distinction in
Chinese is so problematic: there is no reliable
diagnostic of (non-)niteness in Chinese (and,
some would argue, no non-nite/nite distinc-
tion at all (Hu et al, 2001)).
In the absence of diagnostic tests, the Guide-
lines described the category using sample syn-
tactic structures. Although there are a few syn-
tactic structures such as sentence-initial pur-
pose clauses that appear to be \prototypical"
untensed constructions, there are many more
structures that require more subjective judge-
ments.
Second, even if a diagnostic test for UNTNS
were available, there were two basic di?culties
with adding the UNTNS category. The rst
problem was that just as big PRO can be coin-
dexed (e.g., in subject or object control con-
texts), in a similar way the *pro* in the \un-
tensed" syntactic structures could sometimes be
coindexed with an NP. This presented a prob-
lem with consistently annotating such a *pro*:
should it be coindexed or marked UNTNS?
The second di?culty with just adding
UNTNS to the coreference Guidelines was that
both of the categories ANON and UNTNS con-
tained *pro*'s with arbitrary reference, and
there was no clean way to dierentiate them. A
diagnostic that an ANON *pro* could be sub-
stituted by an overt NP was not su?cient.
As a result of these two overlaps (UNTNS
that could be coindexed, and arbitrary refer-
ences in both ANON and UNTNS), there was
reliably poor inter-annotator agreement in an-
notating *pro*'s belonging to these categories.
To simplify the categorization, therefore, the
decision was made on the one hand to replace
the ANON and the UNTNS categories with the
single category ARB (for \arbitrary"), and on
the other hand to instruct the annotators to
always coindex a *pro* when possible. That
is, any *pro* that can be coindexed, whether
or not it appears in an \innitival" or \gerun-
dive" construction, and whether or not it can
be replaced by an overt NP, should be coin-
dexed. Only those *pro*'s that have arbitrary
readings, with no possible specic or inferrable
(IP(PP (P ) according to
(IP (NP#ARB-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP (VV )))) understand
(PU )
(NP-SBJ (DNP (NP (DP (DT ) this
(CLP (M ))) M
(NP (NN ))) visit
(DEG )) DE
(NP (NN ))) goal
(VP(VC ) is
(PP-PRD
(P ) in order to
(IP (NP#ARB-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP
(VP (VV ) strengthen
(NP-OBJ
(ADJP (JJ )) both sides
(NP (NN ) econ.+trade
(NN )))) cooperation
(PU )
(VP (VV ) expand
... etc.
It is understood that the purpose of this visit is to
strengthen bilateral economic and trade cooperation and
to expand ...
Example 6: Arbitrary reference and zero
subject of untensed clause.
antecedent, will be marked ARB.
With respect to training a tool to do auto-
matic coreference resolution of *pro* this an-
notation decision will overgenerate coindexed
*pro*'s in the data, since some of them prob-
ably should actually be big *PRO*s. Against
that negative are the pluses of easier choices
for the annotators and better inter-annotator
agreement.
5.2.2 Some examples
There are cases in which a small *pro* does not
refer to a single, specic entity, but could be
replaced by an overt, generic expression, such
as /"someone" or /"we" in the general
sense. Example 6 illustrates one such situation
in the complement of a sentence-initial PP. The
same example illustrates another use of ARB in
a clause that could be considered \innitival".
An example of a *pro* in an untensed con-
struction that can be coindexed is shown in
Example 7. It is usually possible to coindex
a *pro* in these clause-initial modiers at the
sentence level with the matrix subject. The
(IP (PP-PRP
(P ) in order to
(IP (NP#4-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*)) (former UNTNS)
(VP (VV ) standardize
(NP-OBJ (NN ) construction
(NN ))) behavior
(PU )
(NP#4-SBJ (NN ) new region
(NN )) management committee
(VP (VV )(AS ) announced
...
In order to standardize the construction procedures, the
management committee of the new region announced ...
Example 7: Sentence-initial purpose clause.
(IP (IP-SBJ (NP#ARB-SBJ (-NONE- *pro*))
(VP (VV )
(NP-OBJ (NN ))))
(VP (VV )
(NP-OBJ (NN ))))
(PU )
(IP (NP-SBJ (QP (CD ))
(NP (NN )(NN )))
(VP (VV )
(NP-OBJ (NP (NN )
(NN )
(NN ))
(ADJP (JJ ))
(NP (NN )))))
The use of foreign capital is showing a trend toward di-
versication, and a large number of enterprises in the
special zone are entering the international capital mar-
ket for direct nancing.
Example 8: An untensed IP-SBJ.
most common clauses with dropped subjects in
this position are sentence-initial purpose clauses
with /\in order to" and adverbial IPs with
verbs like /\utilize".
Example 8 illustrates a *pro* subject of an
IP that is itself the matrix subject.
Pre-verbal modier prepositional phrases
with IP complements, like the sentence-level
adverbials, sometimes act like innitives and
sometimes like gerunds. Some have *pro* sub-
jects that can be coindexed, often with the ma-
trix subject (such as benefactive prepositional
phrases headed by /\for"). Others, such as
manner PPs with /\using" appear less likely
to be coindexable.
6 Annotation process/status
Initially 40 les were annotated by two native
speakers of Mandarin, both from Taipei, Tai-
wan. One is a trained linguist, the other is
a computer science graduate student who has
taken a syntax course. In the process of an-
notating and adjudicating, the Guidelines were
revised, to broaden the denition of INFR from
a more narrow interpretation and to add the
UNTNS category and distinguish it from the
ANON category.
Those Guidelines were used by two annota-
tors to independently annotate all the remain-
ing les in CTB-I for coindexation only. The an-
notators are two native speakers who are trained
linguists. One is from the Peoples Republic of
China, the other is the linguist from Taiwan who
did the rst 40 les.
The Guidelines were again recently revised
to document the replacement of ANON and
UNTNS by ARB and the choice to coindex
whenever possible. These changes are currently
being integrated into \gold" les as the les that
already have been coindexed are adjudicated.
A third native speaker from the PRC is inde-
pendently annotating a portion of CTB-I using
this last revision of the Guidelines, and her an-
notations will be compared to the \gold" les to
calculate some inter-annotator agreement num-
bers for this last version of the Guidelines.
7 Future work
The CTB-I is a rather limited corpus, both in
size (100K words) and in linguistic structures.
It is very declarative and concrete, and thus the
range of gurative language and \messy" lin-
guistic phenomena is relatively restricted. For
example, there were no examples of object drop
in the CTB-I, although there are examples in
CTB-II.
The expectation is that when a more balanced
corpus is tagged, the Guidelines will need to be
rened with more specic instructions concern-
ing the handling of such things as more complex
plural antecedents, quoted speech, metonymy,
and other gurative expressions.
8 Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Fu-dong Chiou, Nianwen Xue,
Szu-ting Yi, Jennifer Chia, Betsy Klipple, and
Martha Palmer.
References
Ido Dagan and Alon Itai, 1991. A Statisti-
cal Filter for Resolving Pronoun References,
pages 125{135. Elsevier Science Publishers.
Niyu Ge, John Hale, and Eugene Charniak.
1998. A statistical approach to anaphora res-
olution. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop
on Very Large Corpora, pages 161{170, Uni-
versity of Montreal, August.
Liliane Haegeman. 1994. Introduction to Gov-
ernment & Binding Theory. Blackwell, Cam-
bridge, MA, 2nd edition.
Jianhua Hu, Haihua Pan, and Liejiong Xu.
2001. Is there a nite vs. nonnite distinc-
tion in Chinese? Linguistics, 39:1117{1148.
Shalom Lappin and Herbert Leass. 1994. An
algorithm for pronominal anaphora resolu-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 20(4):535{
561. Lappin and Leass note to test.
Thomas S. Morton. 2000. Coreference for nlp
applications. In Proceedings of the 38th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 173{180, Hong
Kong, October.
Fei Xia, Martha Palmer, Nianwen Xue,
Mary Ellen Okurowski, John Kovarik, Fu-
Dong Chiou, Shizhe Huang, Tony Kroch,
and Mitch Marcus. 2000. Developing guide-
lines and ensuring consistency for Chi-
nese text annotation. In Proceedings of the
Second International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2000), Athens, Greece, May 30.
Nianwen Xue and Fei Xia. 2000. The
Bracketing Guidelines for the Penn Chinese
Treebank Project. Number 00-08. Techni-
cal Report, Institute for Research in Cog-
nitive Science, University of Pennsylvania.
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/ctb/.
