Design of Chinese Morphological Analyzer 
 
Huihsin Tseng 
Institute of Information Science 
Academia Sinica, Taipei 
kaori@hp.iis.sinica.edu.tw 
Keh-Jiann Chen 
Institute of Information Science 
Academia Sinica, Taipei 
kchen@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
 
Abstract 
This is a pilot study which aims at the design of a 
Chinese morphological analyzer which is in state 
to predict the syntactic and semantic properties of 
nominal, verbal and adjectival compounds. 
Morphological structures of compound words 
contain the essential information of knowing their 
syntactic and semantic characteristics. In 
particular, morphological analysis is a primary 
step for predicting the syntactic and semantic 
categories of out-of-vocabulary (unknown) words. 
The designed Chinese morphological analyzer 
contains three major functions, 1) to segment a 
word into a sequence of morphemes, 2) to tag the 
part-of-speech of those morphemes, and 3) to 
identify the morpho-syntactic relation between 
morphemes. We propose a method of using 
associative strength among morphemes, 
morpho-syntactic patterns, and syntactic 
categories to solve the ambiguities of 
segmentation and part-of-speech. In our 
evaluation report, it is found that the accuracy of 
our analyzer is 81%. 5% errors are caused by the 
segmentation and 14% errors are due to 
part-of-speech. Once the internal information of a 
compound is known, it would be beneficial for the 
further researches of the prediction of a word 
meaning and its function. 
 
1. Introduction 
This is the first attempt to design a morphological 
analyzer to automatically analyze the 
morphological structures of Chinese compound 
words1. Morphological structures of compound 
words contain the essential information of 
knowing their syntactic and semantic 
characteristics. In particular, morphological 
analysis is a primary step for predicting the 
syntactic and semantic categories of 
out-of-vocabulary (unknown) words. The 
existence of unknown words is a major obstacle in 
Chinese natural language processing. Due to the 
                                                 
1 Compound words here include compounds in 
traditional Chinese linguistics and morphological 
complex words. 
fact that new words are easily coined by 
morphemes in Chinese text, the number of 
unknown words is increasingly large. As a result, 
we cannot collect all the unknown words and 
manually mark their syntactic categories and 
meanings. Our hypothesis to predict the category 
and the meaning of a word is basically based on 
Frege?s principle: ?The meaning of the whole is a 
function of the meanings of the parts?. The 
meanings of morphemes are supposed to make up 
the meanings of the words. However, some words 
like idioms and proper nouns cannot be included 
in the principle. In general, unknown words could 
be divided into two different types: the type that 
has the property of semantic transparency, i.e. the 
words whose meanings can be derived from their 
morphemes and the type without meaning 
transparency, such as proper nouns. In this paper 
we are dealing with the compound words with 
semantic transparency only. For the type of 
compounds without semantic transparency, such 
as proper nouns, their morphemes and 
morphological structures do not provide useful 
information for predicting their syntactic and 
semantic categories. Therefore they are processed 
differently and independently. In addition, some 
regular types of compounds, such as numbers, 
dates, and determinant-measure compounds, are 
easily analyzed by matching their morphological 
structures with their regular expression grammars 
and the result can be used to predict their syntactic 
and semantic properties, so they will be handled 
by matching regular expressions at the stage of 
word segmentation. According to our observation, 
most Chinese compounds have semantic 
transparency except proper nouns, which means 
the meaning of an unknown word can be 
interpreted by their own morpheme components. 
The design of our morphological analyzer will 
focus on processing these compounds, but words 
without semantic transparency are excluded. It 
takes a compound word as input and produces the 
morphological structure of the word. The major 
functions are 1) to segment a word into a sequence 
of morphemes, 2) to tag the part-of-speech of 
those morphemes, and 3) to identify the 
 morpho-syntactic relation between morphemes. 
Once the morpho-syntactic structure of a 
compound is known, the head morpheme provides 
the major clue for determining its syntactic and 
semantic category. 
It seems that a Chinese morphological analyzer is 
similar to a tagging program. Indeed both systems 
have to resolve the segmentation and tagging 
ambiguities. However the major difference is that 
the morphological analyzer does not have 
contextual information of each target word. In 
other words, morphological structures of 
compounds are context independent. We cannot 
apply the same methods, such as n-gram language 
models, to resolve the ambiguities. We proposed a 
method of using the associative strength among 
morphemes, morpho-syntactic patterns, and 
syntactic categories to solve the ambiguities. 
Detail algorithms for morpheme segmentation, 
part-of-speech, and morpho-syntactic relation 
assignment are discussed in Section 2. In the final 
section, we will evaluate the morphological 
analyzer by comparing its results with those 
obtained from the analyses of 5 linguists and 
discussing the categorization of errors found. 
 
2. The Morphological Analyzer 
The morphological analyzer contains three 
functions: to segment a word, to tag the 
part-of-speech (POS) of morphemes, and to 
identify the relation between them.  
2.1 Segmentation  
The goal of this process is to segment a compound 
word into a sequence of morphemes. Since there 
are ambiguous segmentations, simple dictionary 
look-up methods may not work well. For instance, 
the compound of meiguoren (???) could be 
ambiguously segmented into either mei-guoren 
([?[??]] beautiful countryman) or meiguo-ren 
([[ ? ? ] ? ] American people), but only 
meiguo-ren ([[??]?] American-people) is the 
proper segmentation. The left-to-right longest 
matching method is commonly applied to segment 
either words or text. It works well, but there are 
still some small percent of compound words that 
cannot be properly segmented by such a simple 
algorithm. For instance, the word xin-shenghuo 
([?[??]] new life) will be segmented wrongly 
into xinsheng-huo ([[??]?] the life of a new 
student) without considering the priority of 
segmenting the affix xin (?  new) first. In 
particular, words with multi-syllabic suffixes and 
words with reduplication constructions commonly 
cause segmentation errors. Those special types of 
words should be analyzed with other methods. 
 
2.1.1 Affixes and reduplication  
In order to remedy the segmentation error caused 
by the left-to-right longest matching, we observe 
the results of the algorithm and find that there are 
two useful clues to avoid segmentation errors, i.e. 
the information of affix and reduplication.  
A word of a reduplication pattern cannot and need 
not be segmented by the longest left-to-right 
method, since it has special morphological 
structures and the reduplication patterns bring 
enough clues of knowing the syntactic functions 
of the word. Therefore we try to identify words 
that belong to reduplication patterns first. In 
general they fall into the following two types of 
patterns: reduplications and parallel words. Words, 
which do not conform to these patterns, will be 
segmented later.  
Table 1 Special types of patterns and their examples 
Patterns Pattern Maker Note and examples 
Reduplication 
word 
AA,  
AAA, ABB, AAB, 
AxA, ABAB 
AABB, AxAy, 
xByB, 
liang-liang (??), dui-dui-dui 
(???), song-kua-kua (???), 
chi-chi-kan (???),  
xiang-yi-xiang (???). 
yan-jiu-yan-jiu(????),  
chi-chi-he-he(????), 
pao-shang-pao-xia(????),  
yi-nian-zai-nian(????) 
Parallel word A-BC (AC, BC)  zhong-xiao-xue (???) 
 
Reduplication means to duplicate the one or two 
character words into multi-character words. All 
reduplication patterns we used are listed in Table 1. 
If a word belongs to a reduplication pattern, the 
meaning of the word doesn?t change too much. 
The reduplication word?s category can be 
predicted by their patterns. For example, when B 
is not a noun, a word which belongs to the pattern 
AAB is intransitive verb. The category of a word 
that belongs to the pattern of ?parallel word? is 
always a noun. The characteristic of parallel 
words is that both AC and BC are words with 
shared head word C.  
At the next step of the morpheme segmentation, 
we will consider the compounds with affixes. The 
most productive compound construction is the 
structure of a morpheme plus an affix. Hence after 
the affix is identified, it would be easier to 
segment a word into two parts. The segmentation 
algorithm works as follows. A word is segmented 
immediately only if a prefix, infix or suffix 
morpheme is found. The affix table contains 186 
 prefixes, 2 infixes and 648 suffixes. Some affixes 
of the table are multi-syllabic. To segment an affix 
with higher priority will resolve most of the errors 
caused by the left-to-right longest matching 
algorithm. For instance, if tiaoshangqu (??? 
to jump up) is segmented by the left-to-right 
longest matching method, and the result of the 
segmentation is tiaoshang-qu. The left-to-right 
longest matching method might cause error 
segmentation here. However, shangqu is one of 
the suffixes in the affix table, so in our 
morphological analyzer it would be segmented as 
tiao-shangqu. A word containing an infix is also 
not suitable for the general segmentation and it 
would be segmented into single character. There 
are some affixes examples in Table 2: 
Table2 Types of affixes and their examples 
Types of affix Morpheme Examples 
Prefix xin(?) xinsheng-huo (???) 
Infix de(?) suan-de-shang(???) 
Suffix ju(?) 
shangqu (??) 
feizao-ju(???) 
tiao-shangqu (???) 
 
2.1.2 Left-to-right longest matching 
If a word is neither reduplication nor a compound 
with an affix, it should be segmented from left to 
right with longest matching. This general method 
can segment words into morphemes and also 
provide a possible part-of-speech of each 
morpheme by looking it up in the morpheme 
dictionary. 
 
2.2 Tagging  
The work here is to provide the part-of-speech for 
each morpheme and identify a morpho-syntactic 
relation between two morphemes based on the 
information of segmentation and their pos. This is 
the most difficult part of morphological analysis. 
In achieving the goal, we face two obstacles: the 
information insufficiency of morpheme categories 
and morphemes with the multiple categories. 
Since morpheme categories are not the same as 
word categories, it is necessary to assign each 
morpheme with appropriate categories and to 
compile a morpheme dictionary. Once the 
morpheme dictionary is built, the remaining job is 
to resolve the part-of-speech ambiguities of each 
morpheme. Since the part-of-speech of the 
morpheme is independent of its word level context, 
we cannot apply n-gram like language models to 
resolve part-of-speech ambiguity of morphemes. 
Even worse, there is no structure tagging training 
data available either. An EM-like unsupervised 
training on part-of-speech morphological 
structures is also not a sensible solution, since 
morpho-syntactic structure is more sensitive to the 
semantic combination than the syntactic 
combination of morphemes. Therefore we propose 
a method of using morphemes to predict the 
possible syntactic categories of the target 
compound word and selecting the most probable 
consistent result among the candidates of 
part-of-speech structures and the predicted 
categories.  
2.2.1 Preparation of the morpheme 
dictionary 
Before we start to tag morphemes, two steps are 
carried out to resolve the obstacles. That is the 
lack for a morpheme dictionary and morpheme 
ambiguity. First, in order to resolve the lack for 
morpheme categories, it is necessary to edit an 
affix table, as mentioned in Section 2.1, which 
contains prefixes, infixes, suffixes and their 
categories. Most frequently encountered 186 
prefixes and 648 suffixes are listed in this table. 
Basically, if its morpheme has more than 2 
characters, we adopt its categories in the CKIP 
Dictionary. Conversely, if it has fewer than 2 
characters and it functions as a prefix or a suffix, 
we use the categories in the affix table.  
Below we illustrate two examples to explain the 
need of morpheme categories. Both words yu (? 
to speak) and wu (?  to dance) are verbs. 
However they could also function as morphemes. 
When they function as morphemes, they are listed 
as nouns in their category. It is worth noticing that 
the categories of a morpheme are not the same as 
those of a word, even if they are in the same form. 
Therefore, it is important to assign morphemes 
categories properly. 
Table 3 The categories of ?yu and ?wu as a suffix and as a word and 
their examples 
Suffix Category 2  as a 
suffix 
Category as a 
word 
Example 
-yu(?) Na VE ying-yu(??),  
de-yu(??) 
-wu(?) Na VC, Na jueshi-wu(???) 
                                                 
2 The category symbols here are based on CKIP(1993). 
The meaning of each category we adopt here is as 
following: A(non-predicative adjective), Na(common 
noun), Nb(proper noun), Nc(location noun), Nd(time 
noun), VA(active intransitive verb), VB(semi-transitive 
verb), VC(active transitive verb), VCL(active transitive 
verb with locative object), VD(ditransitive verb), 
VE(active transitive verb with sentential object), 
VG(classificatory verb), VH(stative intransitive verb), 
VHC(stative causative verb), VJ(stative transitive verb) 
and so on. 
 Second, in order to resolve the problem of 
morpheme ambiguity, we need a list of 
probabilities which contains all the possible 
combinations of categorical rules and their 
probabilities. For instance, in the list the 
probability P(Na+Na|Na) = 0.4692 means that the 
categorical rule of combining two common nouns 
(Na+Na) to form a common noun (Na) has the 
probability 0.4692. The probability values of each 
categorical rule were estimated from the set of 
11,322 unknown words extracted from Sinica 
Corpus 3.0. The syntactic category of each 
extracted word is known but its structure 
annotation is unknown. Therefore the probability 
of each categorical rule is roughly estimated by 
assuming that every ambiguous categorical 
combination of a word have equal probability. 
The process of computing the possibility of a 
combination is as follows: 
1) We assign morphemes in a word with all their 
possible categories found in the dictionary and the 
affix table; for example, sheyingzhan ([[??]?] 
photography exhibition), which belongs to Na 
category means ?photography exhibition?. 
Sheyingzhan could be segmented as sheying (?? 
photography) and zhan (?  exhibition). After 
segmentation, we found sheying with the 
categories Na and VA, and zhan with the category 
Na. The possible combinations of sheying-zhan 
are ?Na+Na->Na? and ?VA+Na->Na?. However, 
we don?t know which one is correct, so we 
presumably assign a frequency of 0.5 to each 
combination. 
2) After we assign morphemes their categories and 
frequencies, we add up the frequencies of 
identical combinations. A list containing possible 
categorical rules and their probabilities is then 
established. Table 4 shows a part of the 
categorical rules of VHC. 
Table 4 A partial list of categorical rules and their probabilities 
Rule Category Probabilities 
Na+VHC VHC 0.4494 
VH+VHC VHC 0.2303 
Nc+VHC VHC 0.0674 
VHC+VHC VHC 0.0449 
VA+VH VHC 0.0280 
VC+VHC VHC 0.0224 
VJ+VH VHC 0.0224 
Nd+VHC VHC 0.0112 
VC+Na VHC 0.0112 
VC+VC VHC 0.0112 
VC+VHC VHC 0.0112 
 
2.2.2 Part-of-speech 
Once the affix table and the list of categorical 
rules are prepared, we can tackle the problems of 
the obstacles we mentioned in the beginning. 
After morpheme segmentation, each morpheme is 
assigned with their proper categories according to 
the morpheme dictionary and the affix table. 
However, morphemes might be ambiguous, so if 
the category of the target word is known, the most 
probable part-of-speech combination is chosen 
based on the list of categorical rules. However in 
the real implementation, it is assumed that the 
syntactic category of a target word is not known. 
The method mentioned above would not work, 
unless its syntactic category can be predicted. In 
our implementation, we adopted the method 
proposed by Chen, Bai and Chen (1997), by using 
the association strength between morphemes and 
categories to predict the syntactic categories of 
target words. By using the mutual information 
between affixes and categories, the top one 
prediction has the accuracy of 67.00% and the top 
three accuracy of the prediction can reach about 
94.02%. We will then check the consistency 
between predicted the categories and their 
morpho-syntactic structures to make the final 
judgments on both the word category prediction 
and the morpheme category disambiguation.  
The final prediction is based on the maximal value 
of the combined probabilities of the category 
prediction and the categorical rule prediction. 
Since P(Rule|compound) = P(Cat|compound) * 
P(Rule|Cat, compound) ? P(Cat|compound) * 
P(Rule|Cat), we try to find Cat and Rule which 
maximizes P(Cati|compound) * P(Rulej|Cati), for 
all Cati and Rulej. The following is an example 
of .she-ying-zhan. 
 
==================================== 
sheying-zhan (??? photography exhibition) 
 
P(Na|sheying-zhan) *P(Na+Na|Na)= 0.6324*0.4692=0.2967  
---max 
P(Na|sheying-zhan) * P(VA+Na|Na)=0.6324 *0.0865=0.0547 
P(VC|sheying-zhan)* P(Na+Na|VC)=0.3675* 0.0069=0.0025 
P(VC|sheying-zhan)*P(VA+Na|VC)= 0.3675* 0.001=0.0003 
 
sheying-zhan=(Na+Na)->Na 
==================================== 
 
The top1 accuracy of the original category 
prediction for unknown words is 67% by mutual 
information, but after the combination of the 
morphological analyzer, the accuracy of the word 
category prediction is raised to 71%. This is 
because the morphological analyzer will check if 
the categorical combination in a word is in its 
proper category. Therefore, when the original 
unknown word prediction system predicts a word 
in a category which the morphological analyzer 
 finds the probability of its categorical combination 
in the category low, the morphological analyzer 
might reject the category and suggest the 
unknown word prediction system to choose the 
next highest-scoring category in which the 
categorical combination has higher probability. 
In the case that the syntactic category of the 
compound word is known, we will let 
P(Cat|compound) = 1 and the most probable 
part-of-speech combination will simply be the 
categorical rule Rulej such that P(Rulej|Cat) is 
maximized. 
 
2.2.3 Morpho-syntactic relation between 
morphemes 
Once the information of segmentation and 
part-of-speech is ready, the morpho-syntactic 
relation between morphemes can be identified. 
According to Chao (1968) and Li&Thompson 
(1981), there are relations between morphemes in 
compounds such as ?modifier-hear?, ?predicate 
object? and so on. The purpose of knowing 
morpho-syntactic relation between morphemes is 
to help decide the meaning of the target word. The 
morpho-syntactic relation between morphemes is 
grouped into the types listed in Table 5. Generally, 
the relation between morphemes is highly related 
to the category of an unknown word. So the 
relation we assign to morphemes must be based 
on the category of the word. When the unknown 
word is a noun, the relation between its 
morphemes is ?modifier-head?. If it?s a verb, it 
will be more complicated. There are five relation 
types in verbs. The first one is ?verb-object?, such 
as chifan (?? to eat rice).  The first morpheme 
must be a transitive one and the second one should 
be a noun. The second type of the relation is 
?modifier-head?, and it means the second 
morpheme is the semantic head of the word. The 
third type is ?resultative verb?. The second 
morpheme in this type?s word always expresses 
the result of the action. The forth type is 
?head-suffix?. The appearance of the suffix 
changes the augment structure of the head verb, 
but the representing event remains the same. 
These suffixes are ru (? to be similar to), yu (? 
by), wei (? to become), gei (? to give), chu (?
to exit) and cheng (? to become). The fifth type 
of the relation is ?modifier-head?, and there is 
only a morpheme hua (? to transform) which 
belongs to this type. Hua is the head of a word. If 
a non-predicative adjective is an adjective, there 
are two kinds of structure. First, a 
non-predicative adjective has the same structure 
as a noun. The relation between its morphemes is 
also called ?modifier-head?. Second, the relation 
between morphemes for a non-predicative 
adjective which cannot be in the predicate 
position but has verbs structures can be 
?predicate-object? or ?modifier head?. This 
information will be helpful for predicting the core 
meaning of a new word. 
Table 5 The morpho-syntactic relation between morphemes 
 The morpho-syntactic relation between 
morphemes 
Noun Modifier-head 
Verb Verb-object 
Modifier-head 
Resultative Verb (RVC) 
Head-suffix 
Modifier-head(suffix) 
Adjective An: Modifier-head 
Av: verb-object, and modifier-head 
Other directional RVC and reduplication 
 
Once the morpho-syntactic structure of a 
compound is identified, the head morpheme 
provides the major clue for determining its 
syntactic and semantic category. The compound 
word will inherit from the semantic and syntactic 
property of its head and the information will be 
beneficial for the semantic and syntactic 
categorization of new compound words in the 
future.  
 
3. Evaluation and Discussion 
The major functions of the morphological 
analyzer are to segment a word into a sequence of 
morphemes, to tag the part-of-speech of the 
morphemes, and to identify the morpho-syntactic 
relation between morphemes. The work in this 
section is to evaluate the quality of the word 
information which is processed by each function 
of the morphological analyzer. However, it is hard 
to evaluate the accuracy of the morphological 
analyzer automatically, so we compare the results 
generated by the morphological analyzer with 
results generated by human experts, which are 
made out of their language intuition. The answers 
agreed by the majority of the human experts are 
assumed to be the right answers. The closer the 
results of the morphological analyzer are to the 
human experts, the more accurate the 
morphological analyzer is.  
The testing data is the set of unknown words 
extracted from the recently collected text by the 
system of Ma, Hsieh, Yang and Chen (2001). 
There is total 4,566 unknown words in our testing 
data. However, the validity of the morphological 
information is still uncertain; therefore five 
 linguistic specialists have to manually verify the 
morphological structure of unknown words by 
filling out the survey. First, we randomly select 
100 words as a testing set and the following three 
questions are answered by these five specialists. 
 
1) What's the category of the unknown word? 
2) What are the morpheme segmentations of 
the testing words? 
3) What is the syntactic tag of each morpheme? 
 
The definition of our "standard answer" is the 
answer the majority of the subjects give. For 
example, if three out of the five subjects consider 
the category of an unknown word X as VG, the 
standard answer of X would be VG. If five 
subjects think unknown word X belongs to five 
different categories, we would ask one more 
language specialist for opinions to determine the 
category of this unknown word. The standard 
answer we obtained from this survey will be the 
standard answer of the morphological analyzer.  
The morphological analyzer contains three 
functions: to segment a word into morphemes, to 
tag pos, and to identify the relation between 
morphemes. The accuracy we mention here is the 
result from comparing the morphological result 
with the majority answer. 
================================================= 
T=the total number of test set 
R=the total number of being the same with the ?Standard answer? of 
X 
X=Subject1, Subject2, Subject3, Subject4, Subject5, Morphological 
Analyzer 
Accuracy(X)= R(X)/T 
================================================= 
Table 6 The accuracy of five subjects and morphological analyzer 
(MA) 
 S 1 S 2 S 3 S 4 S 5 Average of 5 Ss MA 
Accuracy 89% 94% 94% 86% 83% 89.2% 81% 
 
 
After comparing the result of the morphological 
analyzer with the standard answers obtained from 
the five linguists, we come to the conclusion that 
the accuracy of the morphological analyzer is 81%. 
Out of all the errors, 5% is caused by 
segmentation on proper nouns and loanwords, 
such as bilinshan (??? a name of a mountain), 
dingwan (?? a name of a place), yanyou (?? 
a name of a dynasty), maniuda (??? a name of 
a place), and hongburang (??? home run). 
These words cannot be segmented because they 
only make sense when they are treated as a unit. 
The remaining 14% is caused in the tagging 
process produced by a morpheme table which 
lacks in accuracy. For example, in some cases the 
suffix zhou (? week) is supposed to be listed as 
Nd but is instead listed as Nc. Next, there are no 
proper categories for certain morphemes, such as 
the morpheme lie (? to list as a verb, a row as a 
noun) in the word qinglie (??). In the suffix 
table, the category of lie is only Na, but the 
morpheme lie should have a VC category when 
the meaning of qinglie "to list completely" is 
adopted. Another possible error-causing factor 
would be the choice made by following the 
combination rule. When there is more than one 
possible combination, errors might appear. For 
example, there are two possible combination for 
waizhan (?? to stretch out), ?Ng+Na? and 
?Ng+VC?. Comparing the score of the two 
combinations, the combination of ?Ng+Na? is 
chosen. However, it is not the correct category of 
zhan (? to stretch).  
The best way to resolve these problems mentioned 
above is to revise the morpheme table more often. 
Since the category of the suffix and prefix is fixed, 
it might cause a reduction in morpheme ambiguity. 
We are also interested in the similarity (or the 
range of agreement with language intuition of 
each individual) between those subjects. Since the 
standard answers are the answer of the majority, 
we can compare the standard answer with each 
individual. The average rate of the similarity rate 
is 89.2%. The ten-percentage puzzle might be due 
to the ambiguity of the word and can be 
interpreted that there are indeed some words that 
are not only difficult for a machine to analyze but 
also difficult for human beings to categorize.  
 
Table 7 The error rate and examples 
 Percent-age Examples 
hongburang(???), maniuda(??
?) 
Segmentation 
Error 
5%  
yanyou(??), dingwan(??), 
bilinshan (???) 
Tagging Error 14% mihou(??) tao(?)(Nc), 
zixun(??) zhou(?)(Nc), 
wai(?) zhan(?)(Na,VC) 
 
The evaluation of the identification of the 
morpho-syntactic relation is separated from the 
evaluation of segmentation and tagging, because 
the relation between morphemes is identified 
based on previous information, such as the 
category of a word, segmentation, and the pos. 
Once the essential information is clear, the 
morpho-syntactic relation is known. Nine out of a 
hundred examples are marked by linguists as 
errors of the morpho-syntactic identifier. 
 Furthermore, the reasons causing the error of 
relation identification are 1) the category 
predication?s error, 2) the part-of-speech error, and 
3) the lack of the relation type. Firstly, since the 
relation identifier is based on the result of the 
segmentation and pos, it is understandable that the 
error here is caused by previous functions. The 
category of qipai-jia ([[??]?] initial bidding 
price) is Na, but the system predicts it as an 
intransitive verb VA. So the identifier guesses the 
relation between qipai and jia as ?verb-object? 
based on the previous information. The error of 
the category prediction system might result in 
errors of the relation identifier. Secondly, the 
relation of qing-lie (?? to clearly list) should be 
?modifier-head?, but the identifier marks it as 
?verb-object? relation because lie(?) is tagged as 
Na. When the suffix is a Na, the prefix is a verb, 
and since the category of qing-lie is predicted as a 
verb, the identifier can only predict the relation of 
qing-lie as ?Verb-object?. Therefore, the error of 
part-of-speech might cause the identifier errors. 
Thirdly, the linguists suggest the relation between 
morphemes in nian-song (??  to read) is 
?conjunction relation?. That means that both the 
semantic meaning and syntactic function of nian 
(? to read) and song (? to read) are the same. 
However, we don?t have the ?conjunction 
relation?, because we think the number of words 
which belong to the kind of the relation is very 
limited, and since both morphemes the bring same 
information, there is no difference that enables us 
to mark both of them as heads or only one of them 
as a head for the application of predicating the 
semantic and syntactic property of a word. 
Therefore, in the morphological analyzer the 
words which belong to the ?conjunction? relation 
are identified as ?head-final? relations. 
 
4. Conclusion and future work 
This is a pilot study to design a morphological 
analyzer to analyze the morphological structures 
of Chinese compound words automatically. The 
major functions are 1) to segment a word into a 
sequence of morphemes, 2) to tag the 
part-of-speech of those morphemes, and 3) to 
identify the morpho-syntactic relation between 
morphemes. We evaluate the morphological 
analyzer by comparing 5 linguists? research results 
and discuss the type of errors we find. The more 
similar the results of the morphological analyzer 
compared with the human results, the better the 
morphological analyzer is. It is found that the 
accuracy of our analyzer is 81%. In comparison 
with the performance of human experts resulting 
in an accuracy of 89%, the performance of the 
current morphological analyzer is not bad, but still 
has room for improvement. More, the types and 
the identification of relations of morphemes still 
have much room to be improved. It is also worth 
noticing that the syntactic category prediction for 
general compounds can also be improved by the 
morphological analyzer. Once the internal 
information of a compound is known, it can 
provide clues for prediction of a word meaning 
and its function. The prediction of a word?s 
meaning is very hard and will be one of the main 
themes in our future researches. 
 
5 Reference 
Bosch, Antal van den, Walter Daelemans and Ton 
Weijters. (1996) Morphological Analysis 
Classification: an Inductive-Learning Approach. 
NeMLaP. 
Chao, Yuen Ren. (1968) A grammar of spoken Chinese. 
Berkeley:University of California Press. 
Chen, Chao-jan, Ming-hung Bai and Keh-jiann Chen. 
(1997) Category Guessing for Chinese Unknown 
Words. Proceedings of the Natural Language 
Processing Pacific Rim Symposium 1997, 35-40. 
Chen Yun-chai. (2001) Corpus Analysis of 
Reduplication in Mandarin Chinese. National 
Kaohsiung Normal University: English Department.  
CKIP. (1993) Technical Report no. 93-05: The analysis 
of Chinese category. [??????] CKIP:Nankang 
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. (2002) 
Unsupervised Discovery of Morphemes. Proceedings 
of Morphological and Phonological Learning 
Workshop of ACL'02. 
Beaney, Michael.(editor) (1997) The Frege Reader. 
Oxfort: Blackwell. 
Li, Charles and Sandra A. Thompson. (1981) Mandarin 
Chinese. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ma, Weiyun, Youming Hsieh, Changhua Yang, and 
Keh-jiann Chen. (2001) ?Chinese Corpus 
Development and Management System ? [????
??????????]. Proceedings of Research 
on Computational Linguistics Conference XIV, 
175-191. 
 
