Enhanced Free Text Access to Anatomically-Indexed Data
Gail Sinclair
Informatics Division
University of Edinburgh
80 South Bridge
Edinburgh, UK EH1 1HN
carols@dai.ed.ac.uk
Bonnie Webber
Informatics Division
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, UK EH8 9LW
bonnie.webber@ed.ac.uk
Duncan Davidson
MRC Human Genetics Unit
Western General Hospital
Crewe Road
Edinburgh, UK EH4 2XU
duncan.davidson@hgu.mrc.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe our use of an existing re-
source, the Mouse Anatomical Nomen-
clature, to improve a symbolic interface
to anatomically-indexed gene expression
data. The goal is to reduce user effort in
specifying anatomical structures of inter-
est and increase precision and recall.
1 Introduction
Language Technology (LT) resources are time-
consuming and expensive to develop, and appli-
cations rarely have the luxury of calling upon re-
sources specially designed for the task at hand. For
LT applications in developmental biology such as
robust interfaces to anatomically-indexed gene ex-
pression data and text mining tools to assist in build-
ing such databases, resources already exist in the
form of anatomical nomenclatures for several model
organisms including mouse, zebrafish, drosophila
and human. (Others may follow.) These nomen-
clatures have been developed by biologists for biol-
ogists, to record in a clear, intuitive and structured
way the structures that can be distinguished at each
stage of an embryo?s development. The challenge
for LT applications in developmental biology is to
stretch them to serve other purposes as well.
In this paper, we describe how we have taken one
of these anatomical nomenclatures (mouse) and ex-
tracted from it a new resource to facilitate free text
access to anatomically-indexed data. The techniques
we have used are applicable to anatomical nomen-
clatures for other model organisms as well.
The paper is organised as follows: In Section 2,
we describe the Mouse Atlas, which is the particular
context for the interface we are developing. Sec-
tion 3 describes what we are doing to reduce the
amount of effort a user has to expend in specifying
anatomical structures of interest to them. In Sec-
tion 4, we describe how what we did to reduce user
effort also serves to provide a clearer display of the
results of searching. Then in Sections 5 and 6, we
describe what we are doing to increase the precision
and recall of user queries.
2 The Mouse Atlas
The Mouse Atlas, developed by researchers at the
Medical Research Council?s Human Genetics Unit
(MRC HGU) in Edinburgh, is a 3D atlas of mouse
embryo development (http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk).
Anatomical structures within each of the 26 Theiler
Stages of embryo development are labelled, and 3D
reconstructions of each stage can be displayed in
transverse, frontal, sagittal or arbitrary planes.
The Mouse Atlas is now being used to support in-
dexing of gene expression data, allowing the results
of gene expression experiments to be indexed with
respect to where genes are expressed in the devel-
oping embryo. There are at least two ways of using
anatomy to index gene expression data. In spatial
indexing, data is associated directly with volume el-
ements, voxels of the anatomical model. In symbolic
indexing, gene expression data is associated with a
label specifying a pre-defined region of the embryo.
A database of spatially indexed gene expres-
sion data (the EMAGE database) is being devel-
oped at the MRC HGU. A database of symboli-
cally indexed gene expression data (the Gene Ex-
pression Database or GXD) is being developed
by the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 45-52.
                         Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
(http://www.informatics.jax.org). Indexing in the
GXD uses the Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature, a
set of 26 trees of anatomical terms (one tree per
Theiler Stage) structured primarily by part-whole re-
lations (and some set-member relations).
The root node of each Theiler Stage tree corre-
sponds to the entire embryo at that stage, while other
nodes correspond to organ systems, subsystems,
spatially-localised parts of subsystems, or anatom-
ical structures. Each node within a tree has a la-
bel (its component term), but component terms are
not meant to serve as unique designators: the only
thing guaranteed to denote an anatomical structure
uniquely is the sequence of component terms that
comprises a path from the root node. Thus paths
(and only paths) can serve as keys for symbolic in-
dexing of data. For example the component term
CRANIAL labels both a child of GANGLION (i.e.,
ganglia located in the head) and a child of NERVE
(i.e., nerves located in the head). The path to this
latter child
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.NERVOUSSYSTEM.
CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEM.NERVE.
CRANIAL.TRIGEMINALV
uniquely denotes the trigeminal, or fifth cranial,
nerve1 within the Theiler Stage denoted by its root
and is used as a key for relevant data.
For accessing gene expression data, both spatial
and symbolic means are again both possible. An
elegant spatial interface is being completed at the
MRC HGU, that pairs an active window contain-
ing a view of the embryo stage of interest, with a
window containing the corresponding nomenclature
tree2. Clicking at a point in the embryo view high-
lights the most specific corresponding node of the
nomenclature being displayed (i.e., sub-trees of a
node can be either hidden or exploded). Similarly,
clicking on a term in the nomenclature highlights the
corresponding structure within the embryo along the
plane currently being displayed. A screen-shot from
the interface is shown in Figure 2. On the left of the
figure is an outline frontal drawing of the embryo, on
which a sagittal section plane is marked in red. The
centre panel shows a digital, sagittal section through
1Full stop is used to separate component names along a path.
2http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Resources/GXDQuery1
the volumetric embryo model with the delineated
left dorsal aorta coloured blue. The correspond-
ing component term is highlighted on the Mouse
Anatomical Nomenclature on the right. Users can
access the gene expression data on the highlighted
structure by another mouse click.
The current project aims at improving symbolic
access to gene expression data by providing a robust
free-text interface. In the current GXD interface3 ,
users can tree-walk through the Mouse Anatomical
Nomenclature for a given stage, to find the anatomi-
cal structure whose associated gene expression data
is of interest to them, or they can enter a term which
is matched against single component names, with all
possible substring matches returned for the user to
choose among.
Problems exist with both forms of access. It is
well known that navigating through a tree is tedious.
A more subtle problem arises from anatomy being
forced into a tree-structure that it doesn?t have. This
leads to structures being divided and the resulting
sub-structures realised in different parts of the tree ?
for example, the endocardial tube is divided into one
part that is a daughter of COMMON ATRIAL CHAM-
BER (i.e., its location), and another part which is a
daughter of OUTFLOW TRACT. So appearing to find
a structure of interest by a tree-walk, in addition to
being tedious, doesn?t by itself guarantee the user
that s/he has found it all.
In contrast, access by sub-string matching on in-
dividual component terms has problems of both re-
call and precision. A user may enter a string that
matches nothing (0% recall): (1) it may be neither a
component term nor a substring within a component
term ? e.g., while HEART is a common synonym
for the modifier ?cardiac? (and a component term
in its own right) and CARDIAC MUSCLE is a compo-
nent term, the string ?heart muscle? yields no match;
or (2) it may span multiple component terms in the
nomenclature ? e.g., while GLAND is a component
term, and PITUITARY is the component term of one
of its children (i.e., a member of the set of glands),
the string ?pituitary gland? yields no match. Or the
opposite may happen: 100% recall with low preci-
sion. For example, a search on ?hindbrain? yields
22 matches, while ?mesenchyme? yields as many as
3http://www.informatics.jax.org/menus/expression menu
Figure 1: Screen shot of Mouse Atlas interface, displaying a Theiler Stage 14 embryo.
1056 matches.
The current project aims to provide a robust free
text interface that will avoid these and other prob-
lems, (1) reducing the effort that a user needs to
expend in finding anatomical structures of inter-
est; (2) better organising search results; (3) improv-
ing recall by reducing the number of times that no
match is found; and (4) improving precision over
that which is possible using substring matching on
individual component names. To do this, we have
been extracting from the Mouse Anatomical Nomen-
clature another resource comprising a set of Natu-
ral Language (NL) phrases that uniquely denote the
parts of the embryo. To expand this set, we have
semi-automatically culled other anatomical speci-
fiers from a textbook on developmental anatomy
made available to us in electronic form. The inter-
esting challenges this has posed are described in the
remainder of the paper.
3 Reducing User Effort
As already noted, component terms in the Mouse
Anatomical Nomenclature (as in those for other
model organisms) are not unique designators for
anatomical structures: the only unique designators
are path specifications. Thus technically, the only
way a user can uniquely select an anatomical struc-
ture of interest is to enter the entire path name (or to
find it through navigating an embryo stage tree down
from its root).
However, there are developmentally valid no-
tions of uniqueness with respect to which some
of the 1416 component terms associated with the
13737 nodes in the 26 Theiler Stage trees of the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature can be taken to be
unique.4
The first such notion of uniqueness can be as-
sociated with an anatomical structure that develops
by some Theiler Stage j and then persists under
the same name through subsequent stages. In the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature, this situation cor-
responds, first off, to path specifications that differ
only in their root note (which designates the embryo
4The size of Theiler Stage trees ranges from 3 nodes in stage
2 (early development) to 1739 nodes in stage 26 (pre-birth),
with the average size being 528 nodes.
at the corresponding Theiler Stage). If the compo-
nent term at the leaf does not occur elsewhere in the
nomenclature outside this path specification, then
this component name can be classified as unique.
This notion of uniqueness was found to hold
of 1017 of the 1416 component terms, including
CARDIOGENIC PLATE, CRANIUM, etc. This meant
that approximately 11200 nodes were covered, with
somewhat over 2500 still remaining. These 1017
component terms could potentially be used to access
gene expression data associated with some or all of
the Theiler Stages through which the uniquely des-
ignated structure exists, except for a problem that we
will mention shortly.
The second notion of uniqueness is an extension
of the first. Before anatomical structures are fully
formed, they tend to be referred to by names that de-
note the same anatomical structure but also convey
that it is not fully formed ? for example, the FU-
TURE FOREBRAIN. Such component terms can be
linked with the component term of the structure they
develop into, treating the two together as a unique
designator across the extended sequence of Theiler
Stages. A user seeking gene expression data for the
FOREBRAIN without specifying a particular Theiler
Stage, could then select from stages 15-16, which
contain the FUTURE FOREBRAIN, as well as from
stages 17-26, which contain the FOREBRAIN.
In some cases, finding such terms is easy ? specif-
ically, when paths in adjacent stages differ only in
their root node and their potentially co-designating
leaf terms. In other cases, the process is complicated
by the fact that their containing anatomical struc-
tures are themselves developing and changing. This
creates additional differences in paths that should
be taken to co-designate in this lineage sense. The
difference may simply be in the particular compo-
nent term associated with a non-terminal node ? e.g.
FUTURE FOREBRAIN is a child of FUTURE BRAIN
in stages 15-16, while FOREBRAIN descends from
BRAIN in stages 17-26. These cases can be iden-
tified by verifying that the intermediate structures
are themselves in a lineage relation. But the paths
may also differ in length, the earlier stage path be-
ing longer than its corresponding path in the next
stage. This is because the earlier stage specifies the
tissue from which the structure is developing from ?
for example, the fibula develops from the lower leg
mesenchyme. So the path
EMBRYO.LIMB.HINDLIMB.LEG.LOWERLEG.
MESENCHYME.FIBULA
is a unique designator in Stage23, becoming
EMBRYO.LIMB.HINDLIMB.LEG.LOWERLEG.
FIBULA
in Stages 24 to 26. To recognise such cases, we
need to analyse what nodes contribute to differences
in path length and decide whether two component
terms co-specify on that basis.
Again, when these patterns are encountered, the
component names, providing they are not involved
in any other initial tree paths, can be classified as
being unique, further reducing the number of names
to be disambiguated. So far 44 of these lineage pat-
terns have been identified, further eliminating ap-
proximately 118 from the set of ambiguous compo-
nent terms.
The third notion of uniqueness that can be used
for identifying component terms that can serve as
unique designators can be called group uniqueness.
For example, although the component term TOOTH
appears in different path specifications, whose corre-
sponding internal nodes are not pairwise equivalent
? e.g.
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL
ORGAN.ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL
REGION.LOWER JAW.TOOTH
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL
ORGAN.ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL
REGION.UPPER JAW.TOOTH
where LOWER JAW does not co-specify with UPPER
JAW, the pairwise different nodes may correspond to
structures whose anatomical/developmental proper-
ties can, in the context of gene expression, be con-
sidered the same. This notion of group uniqueness
was found to hold of nine component terms, cover-
ing approximately 260 of the remaining nodes.
Before moving from individual component terms
that turn out to be unique designators for anatomi-
cal structures, to short sequences of such terms, we
need to point out a separate problem in actually us-
ing them in a user interface. The problem follows
from a design decision made in the development of
these anatomical nomenclatures that supports their
intended use by biologists as clear and succinct
structural descriptions of an embryo. Specifically,
while an individual component term may turn out
to be a unique specifier with respect to the Nomen-
clature, outside the context of its tree path, it may
not signify to a biologist what it is intended to. For
example, while the term LOOP has been found to
uniquely denote the same anatomical structure as
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.GUT.MIDGUT.LOOP
a biologist would never simply use ?loop? to refer
to the the loop of the midgut. Similarly, while the
term DISTAL uniquely designates the same anatom-
ical structure as
EMBRYO.LIMB.FORELIMB.JOINT.
RADIO-ULNARJOINT.DISTAL
?distal? on its own is not how any biologist would
refer to the joint of the radius and ulna bones that is
furthest from the shoulder.
For the interface we are developing, we need to
replace these albeit unique component terms with
phrases that are more natural to use in specifying
these structures.
Turning now to component terms that are not
unique in any of the senses discussed so far, it still
does not appear to be the case that a user need en-
ter an entire path specification to refer to its associ-
ated anatomical structure. In many cases, a sub-path
specification of two, or in some cases, three compo-
nent terms appears sufficient to specify the anatom-
ical structure of interest.
To find where shorter sub-paths would serve as
a source of unique designators, we enumerated all
sub-paths from nodes with a non-unique associated
component term (either leaf or internal node) to
the root of their corresponding Theiler Stage tree
(i.e., paths being specified in child-parent order).
This revealed many cases where a unique two- or
three-component path specification would disam-
biguate an otherwise ambiguous term, and allowed
us to cover another 156 component terms via the 2-
component terms and 50 via the 3-component terms.
This has left only 58 of the original 1416 component
terms (and 1159 corresponding nodes in the Nomen-
clature out of the original 13737) for us to inves-
tigate other methods of finding unique designators
for.
The question is what Natural Language phrases
these multi-component terms correspond to, since it
is such phrases that would be used in an interface,
not sequences of component terms. Slight varia-
tions in what the parent-child relations correspond
to mean there are three different phrasal patterns for
two-component sub-paths: (1) In cases where the
child and parent nodes are in a part-whole relation
and both are realised as nouns ? e.g., a child with
component term CAPSULE descending from a par-
ent LENS, or a parent CORTEX or a parent OVARY
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.SENSORYORGAN
.EYE.LENS.CAPSULE
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
RENAL/URINARYSYSTEM.METANEPHROS.
EXCRETORY COMPONENT.CORTEX.
CAPSULE
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM.FEMALE.
OVARY.CAPSULE
the multi-component term can be realised as a
phrase CHILD OF PARENT, generating the three
uniquely specifying phrases ?capsule of lens?, ?cap-
sule of cortex? and ?capsule of ovary?. Alterna-
tively, a natural phrase of the form PARENT CHILD,
(i.e. ?lens capsule?, ?cortex capsule? and ?ovary
capsule? can also be constructed as a natural way
of describing the anatomical structure that the path
denotes.
(2) In cases where the child and parent nodes are
in a part-whole relation, but the component term as-
sociated with the child is an adjective such as LEFT,
UPPER or ANTERIOR, then the pattern CHILD PAR-
ENT can be used to form an appropriate phrase. For
example, the path specification
EMBRYO.ORGANSYSTEM.CARDIOVASCULAR
SYSTEM.VENOUSSYSTEM.VENACAVA.
INFERIOR
can be accessed by the phrase ?inferior vena cava?.
(3) In cases where the child and parent nodes are
in a set-instance relation, as in the case of
EMBRYO.ORGAN SYSTEM.VISCERAL ORGAN.
ALIMENTARY SYSTEM.ORAL REGION.
GLAND.PITUITARY
again the pattern CHILD PARENT can be used to
form an appropriate phrase ? for example ?pituitary
gland? in this case. Phrases thus formed from multi-
component sub-paths may again be unique with re-
spect to an interval of Theiler Stages, or with respect
to lineage within the Theiler Stages, or with respect
to a group.
4 Improving the Display of Search Results
Currently, within the interface to the Gene Expres-
sion Database, one can search for an anatomical
structure of interest within a single tree or across all
stages. A query across all Theiler Stages (TS) results
in a list of all stages with a matching component, and
associated with each stage is a path specification ter-
minating at a matching component name. This does
not easily enable the user to locate the specific entity
they are interested in. If the term is not unique, then
the results contain all possible anatomical structures
the query could represent. For example, a sub-string
match on the phrase ?lumen? results in
4 TS12 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen
foregut diverticulum;lumen
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
5 TS13 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen
foregut diverticulum;lumen
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
7 TS14 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen (future
spinal canal, spinal canal)
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
rest of foregut;lumen
foregut;pharyngeal region;lumen
otic pit;lumen
10 TS15 term(s) matching query ?lumen?:
optic recess (lumen of optic stalk)
future spinal cord;neural tube;neural lumen (future
spinal canal, spinal canal)
hindgut diverticulum;lumen
midgut;lumen
pharynx;lumen
foregut-midgut junction;lumen
hindgut;lumen
rest of foregut;lumen
foregut;oesophageal region;lumen
otic pit;lumen
Locating an entity of interest amongst all these tree
paths can be an arduous task. Even if the term is
unique, the same entry will be repeated across mul-
tiple stages, leading to a visual search problem.
An alternative, cleaner way of presenting search
results is to take the matching component terms as
the primary display key and associate it with a list
of stages where its corresponding path specification
occurs. For non-unique search queries such as the
example above, this displays as
future spinal cord; neural tube; neural lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
foregut diverticulum; lumen:
Stages 12, 13
hindgut diverticulum; lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
midgut;lumen:
Stages 12, 13, 14, 15, ...
foregut-midgut junction; lumen:
Stages 13, 14, 15, ...
rest of foregut; lumen:
Stages 14, 15, ...
otic pit; lumen:
Stages 14, 15, ...
optic recess:
Stages 15, ...
pharynx; lumen:
Stages 15, ...
foregut; oesophageal region; lumen:
Stages 15, ...
foregut; pharyngeal region; lumen:
Stages 14
We will, of course, have to verify that this form
of display better facilitates users finding the struc-
ture(s) and stage(s) of interest to them.
5 Increasing Precision
The introduction of phrases based on more than
one component term within the Mouse Anatomy
Nomenclature significantly reduces the number of
irrelevant matches compared to searches based on
a single comonent term.
To continue our example with CAPSULE from
Section 3, the current situation is that no results
will be found if ?cortex capsule? is entered as a
search query. If the user then simply searches for
?capsule? across all stages, 31 instances will be re-
turned. However, although all sub-paths leading to
CORTEX.CAPSULE are returned, the other 87% of
the results are irrelevant to the user?s intention. If
the multi-component terms are included as uniquely
designating replacements of existing terms, 100%
recall would be maintained, while increasing preci-
sion to 100% percent.
As there is some systematicity involving parent
and child component terms, these terms can be auto-
matically generated. Within the nomenclature there
are three typical patterns. These can be formalised
as:
  the child being a descriptor of the parent e.g.
superior vena cava
  the child being a part of the parent e.g. ovary
capsule or capsule of ovary
  the child being a member of the parent set e.g.
pituitary gland.
Of course, recognising which tree path belongs to
which of the patterns above requires biological ex-
pertise, but once identified new terms can be gener-
ated that are more likely to be used naturally to re-
fer to the relevant anatomical components. Once in
place these new terms can increase recall, with high
precision.
6 Increasing Recall
While the Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature was de-
signed to specify every anatomical structure within
the developing mouse embryo, it does not contain
all the terms that developmental biologists might use
to refer to anatomical entities. Although some syn-
onyms have been explicitly recorded in the nomen-
clature, no attempt has been made to be exhaustive.
In order to increase the recall of user searches
for anatomical structures, we have undertaken to in-
crease the number and range of synonyms for ele-
ments of the nomenclature, by semi-automatically
Figure 2: Schematic of a Theiler Stage 20 embryo
analysing texts likely to contain terms related to the
developmental anatomy of the mouse.
To demonstrate the potential value of this ap-
proach, we first manually reviewed the short tex-
tual description that accompanies each Theiler stage
within the Mouse Atlas, highlighting the main fea-
tures of the stage ? for example, this text accompa-
nies the schematic of TS20 (Figure 6):
The handplate (anterior footplate) is no
longer circular but develops angles which
correspond to the future digits. The poste-
rior footplate is also distinguishable from
the lower part of the leg. It is possible
to see the pigmentation of the pigmented
layer of the retina through the transparent
cornea. The tongue and brain vesicles are
clearly visible.
We collected all the noun phrases (NPs) that could
potentially refer to an anatomical structure and
found, within the  1400 words comprising the de-
scriptions, 25 anatomical terms that were not in-
cluded in the nomenclature either as component
terms or as synonyms for component terms. Since
the same people wrote these textual descriptions as
developed the Nomenclature, it shows how difficult
it is to record all terms used for anatomical structures
without systematic effort.
To support such a systematic effort, we have
been applying basic text analysis software to
a textbook on developmental anatomy (Kaufman
and Bard, 1999), including a tokenizer, part-of-
speech tagger and NP chunker, the latter two from
the Language Technology Group (LTG) in Edin-
burgh (http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk), as well as addi-
tional scripts ? in order to identify noun phrases,
from which we then extract those most likely to re-
fer to an anatomical structure. The latter have then
been discussed with our domain expert, Davidson.
Because neither the POS tagger nor the chun-
ker were specially trained for this type of techni-
cal text, their performance was rather weak. Chun-
ker output from the chapter on the heart, produced
5547 phrases, of which 2465 were considered to be
NPs. 2.4% (i.e. 74) of the 3082 claimed non-NPs
were obvious false negatives involving the terms ve-
nacava, septum primum/secundum and ductus arte-
riosus/venous. Of the terms classified as NPs, 3.7%
(i.e. 92) were found to be false positives. Most of
these errors involved words that could be classed as
verbs or nouns adjacent to true NPs, regarded as plu-
ral nouns but which, in context, were acting as verbs,
e.g. the ostium secundum forms.
From the true NPs, we removed pronouns, num-
bers, authors names, and plural terms whose singu-
lar was also present. This left 451 NPs, of which
82 were found to be exact matches for component
terms and eight, for the synonyms in the Nomencla-
ture. These were also removed, leaving 361 possible
anatomical terms not found in the Nomenclature.
We then used a common technique to reduce this
set by only considering NPs headed by or modified
by a frequent head or modifier from within the set of
component terms (Bodenreider et al, 2002). Here,
frequent meant   3 times. For example, CAROTID,
FIBROUS and ENDOCARDIAL are frequent modi-
fiers, while ARTERY, SEPTUM and TISSUE are fre-
quent head nouns. Of the 361 remaining NPs from
the heart chapter, 115 shared a high frequency head
noun with terms already in the Nomenclature, while
105 shared a high frequency modifier with terms in
the Nomenclature. We considered these 220 NPs
probable anatomical terms, with the remaining 141
being possible anatomical terms. These two sets are
now being reviewed to identify which are synonyms
for anatomical structures identified in the Nomen-
clature, which denote structures or groups of struc-
tures that have not be recorded in the Nomenclature,
which are reduced co-referring NPs, and which are
not anatomical terms after all.
7 Future Work
One result of this work has been to catch both
structural and terminological inconsistencies in the
Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature because our ex-
tractions allow biologists to easily see differences
between one branch and another or between one tree
and another in the Nomenclature.
With respect to an enhanced interface to the gene
expression data, we are now ready to take the results
of our analyses and use them to provide a potentially
more effective way of searching for relevant anatom-
ical structures and displaying the results. We have a
method to mine for additional synonyms for anatom-
ical terms, that we will apply to additional texts, ide-
ally after re-training the POS-tagger and chunker to
better reflect the types of texts we are dealing with.
Similar Nomenclatures of developmental
anatomy exist for other model organisms, including
drosophila, zebrafish and human. These too will
be used to index gene expression data for these
organisms, eventually supporting cross-species
comparison of gene expression patterns and further
understanding of development. So we believe that
developmental anatomy provides a rich domain
in which to apply (and learn to extend) Natural
Language tools and techniques.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jonathan
Bard for supplying us with electronic versions of
two chapters from The Anatomical Basis of Mouse
Development and answering many of our questions.
References
Olivier Bodenreider, Thomas Rindflesch, and Anita Bur-
gun. 2002. Unsupervised, corpus-based method for
extending a biomedical terminology. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL Workshop on Biomedical Language,
Philadelphia PA.
Matthew H. Kaufman and Jonathan Bard. 1999. The
anatomical basis of mouse development. Academic
Press.
