Automatic Discovery of Term Similarities Using Pattern Mining
Goran NENADI?, Irena SPASI? and Sophia ANANIADOU
Computer Science, University of Salford
Salford, M5 4WT, UK
{G.Nenadic, I.Spasic, S.Ananiadou}@salford.ac.uk
Abstract
Term recognition and clustering are key topics in automatic knowledge acquisition and text mining. In
this paper we present a novel approach to the automatic discovery of term similarities, which serves as
a basis for both classification and clustering of domain-specific concepts represented by terms. The
method is based on automatic extraction of significant patterns in which terms tend to appear. The
approach is domain independent: it needs no manual description of domain-specific features and it is
based on knowledge-poor processing of specific term features. However, automatically collected
patterns are domain specific and identify significant contexts in which terms are used. Beside features
that represent contextual patterns, we use lexical and functional similarities between terms to define a
combined similarity measure. The approach has been tested and evaluated in the domain of molecular
biology, and preliminary results are presented.
Introduction
In a knowledge intensive discipline such as
molecular biology, the vast and constantly
increasing amount of information demands
innovative techniques to gather and systematically
structure knowledge, usually available only from
text/document resources. In order to discover new
knowledge, one has to identify main concepts,
which are linguistically represented by domain
specific terms (Maynard and Ananiadou (2000)).
There is an increased amount of new terms that
represent newly created concepts. Since existing
term dictionaries usually do not meet the needs of
specialists, automatic term extraction tools are
indispensable for efficient term discovery and
dynamic update of term dictionaries.
   However, automatic term recognition (ATR) is
not the ultimate aim: terms recognised should be
related to existing knowledge and/or to each other.
This entails the fact that terms should be classified
or clustered so that semantically similar terms are
grouped together. Classification and/or clustering
of terms are indispensable for improving
information extraction, knowledge acquisition, and
document categorisation. Classification can also be
used for efficient term management and populating
and updating existing ontologies in a consistent
manner. Both classification and clustering methods
are built on top of a specific similarity measure.
The notion of term similarity has been defined and
considered in different ways: terms can have
functional and/or structural similarities, though
they can be correlated by different relationships
(Grefenstette (1994), Maynard and Ananiadou
(2000)). In this paper we suggest a novel, domain-
independent method for the automatic discovery of
term similarities, which can serve as a basis for
both classification and clustering of terms. The
method is mainly based on the automatic discovery
of significant term features through pattern mining.
Automatically collected patterns are domain
dependent and they identify significant contexts in
which terms tend to appear. In addition, the
measure combines lexical and syntactical
similarities between terms.
   The paper is organised as follows. In Section 1
we overview term management approaches.
Section 2 introduces the term similarity measure
and Section 3 presents results and experiments.
1   Terminology Management
Since vast amount of knowledge still remains
unexplored, several systems have been proposed to
help scientists to acquire relevant knowledge from
scientific literature. For example, GENIES
(Friedman et al (2001)) uses a semantic grammar
and substantial syntactic knowledge in order to
extract comprehensive information about signal-
transduction pathways. Some of the systems are
terminology-based, since technical terms
semantically characterise documents and therefore
represent starting place for knowledge acquisition
tasks. For example, Mima et al (2002) introduce
TIMS, a terminology-based knowledge acquisition
system, which integrates automatic term
recognition, term variation management, context-
based automatic term clustering, ontology-based
inference, and intelligent tag information retrieval.
The system?s aim is to provide efficient access and
integration of heterogeneous biological textual data
and databases.
   There are numerous approaches to ATR. Some
methods (Bourigault (1992), Ananiadou (1994))
rely purely on linguistic information, namely
morpho-syntactic features of term candidates.
Recently, hybrid approaches combining linguistic
and statistical knowledge are becoming
increasingly used (Frantzi et al (2000), Nakagawa
et al (1998)).
   There is a range of clustering and classification
approaches that are based on statistical measures of
word co-occurrences (e.g. Ushioda (1996)), or
syntactic information derived from corpora (e.g.
Grefenstette  (1994)). However, few of them deal
with term clustering: Maynard and Ananiadou
(2000) present a method that uses manually
defined semantic frames for specific classes,
Hatzivassiloglou et al (2001) use machine learning
techniques to disambiguate names of proteins,
genes and RNAs, while Friedman et al (2001)
describe extraction of specific molecular pathways
from journal articles.
   In our previous work, an integrated knowledge
mining system in the domain of molecular biology,
ATRACT, has been developed (Mima et al
(2001)). ATRACT (Automatic Term Recognition
and Clustering for Terms) is a part of the ongoing
BioPath1 project, and its main aim is to facilitate an
efficient expert-computer interaction during term-
based knowledge acquisition. Term management is
based on integration of automatic term recognition
and automatic term clustering (ATC). ATR is
based on the C/NC-value method (Frantzi et al
                                                          
1 BioPath is a Eureka funded project, coordinated by
LION BioScience (http://www.lionbioscience.com) and
funded by the German Ministry of Research.
(2000)), a hybrid approach combining linguistic
knowledge (term formation patterns) and statistical
knowledge (term length, frequency of occurrence,
etc). The extension of the method handles
orthographic, morphological and syntactic term
variants and acronym recognition as an integral
part of the ATR process (Nenadi? et al (2002a)),
providing that all term occurrences of a term are
considered. The ATC method is based on the
Ushioda?s AMI (Average Mutual Information)
hierarchical clustering method (Ushioda (1996)).
Co-occurrence based term similarities are used as
input, and a dendrogram of terms is generated.2
2   Term Similarity Measures
In this section we introduce a novel hybrid method
to measure term similarity. Our method
incorporates three types of similarity measures,
namely contextual, lexical and syntactical
similarity. We use a linear combination of the three
similarities in order to estimate similarity between
terms. In the following subsections we describe
each of the three similarity measures.
2.1   Contextual Similarity
Determining the similarity of terms based on their
contexts is a standard approach based on the
hypothesis that similar terms tend to appear in
similar contexts. Contextual similarity, however,
may be determined in a number of ways depending
on the way in which the context is defined. For
example, some approaches consider only terms
that appear in a close proximity to each other
(Maynard and Ananiadou (2000)), while in other
approaches, grammatical roles such as object or
subject are taken into account (Grefenstette
(1994)).
   Our approach to contextual similarity is based on
automatic pattern mining. The aim is to
automatically identify and learn the most important
context patterns in which terms appear. Context
pattern (CP) is a generalised regular expression
that corresponds to either left or right context of a
term. 3 The following example shows a sample left
context pattern of the term high affinity:
                                                          
2 For the evaluation of the ATR and ATC methods
incorporated in ATRACT, see Mima et al (2001).
3 Left and right contexts are treated separately.
V:bind TERM:rxr_heterodimers PREP:with
   Let us now describe the process of constructing
CPs and determining their importance. First, we
collect concordances for all automatically
recognised terms. Context constituents, which we
consider important for discriminating terms (e.g.
noun and verb phrases, prepositions, and terms
themselves) are identified by a tagger and by
appropriate local grammars, which define syntactic
phrases (e.g. NPs, VPs). The grammatical and
lexical information attached to the context
constituents is used to construct CPs.  In the
simplest case, contexts are mapped into the
syntactic categories of their constituents. However,
the lemmatised form for each of the syntactic
categories can be used as well. For example, when
encountered in a context, the preposition with can
be either mapped to its POS tag, i.e. PREP, or
instead, the lemma can be added, in which case we
have an instantiated chunk: PREP:with.  Further,
some of the syntactic categories can be removed
from the context patterns, as not all syntactic
categories are equally significant in providing
useful contextual information (Maynard and
Ananiadou (2000)). Such CPs will be regarded as
normalised CPs. In our approach, one can define
which categories to instantiate and which to
remove. In the examples provided later in the
paper (Section 3) we decided to remove the
following categories: adjectives (that are not part
of a term), adverbs, determiners and so-called
linking words (e.g. however, moreover, etc.).
Also, we instantiated terms and either verbs or
prepositions, as these categories are significant for
discriminating terms.
   Once we have normalised CPs, we calculate the
values of a measure called CP-value in order to
estimate the importance of the CPs. CP-value is
defined similarly to the C/NC-value for terms
(Frantzi et al (2000)). It assesses a CP (p)
according to its total frequency (f(p)), its length
(|p|, as the number of constituents) and the
frequency of its occurrence within other CPs (|Tp|,
where Tp is a set of all CPs that contain p):
The CPs whose CP-value is above a chosen
threshold are deemed important. Note that these
patterns are domain-specific and that they are
automatically extracted from a domain specific
corpus. Tables 1 and 2 show samples of significant
left context patterns extracted from a MEDLINE
corpus (MEDLINE (2002)).
CPs CP-value
PREP   NP 272.65
PREP   NP   PREP 186.47
.   .   . .   .   .
PREP  NP   V:stimulate 9.32
V:indicate   NP 5.00
PREP   NP   PREP   V:involve NP 4.64
PREP   TERM:transcriptional_activity 4.47
V:require   NP   PREP 4.38
PREP TERM:nuclear_receptor PREP 4.00
Table 1: Sample of left CPs
(only terms and most frequent verbs are instantiated)
CPs CP-value
PREP:of   NP 121.49
V  NP 71.42
PREP:of   NP   V 62.83
NP   PREP:of   NP 59.72
PREP:in   NP 59.55
NP   PREP:of 43.37
PREP:of   NP  V   NP 37.64
PREP:of  TERM:transcriptional_activity 36.60
Table 2: Sample of left CPs
(only terms and prepositions are instantiated)
   At this point, each term is associated with a set of
the most characteristic patterns in which it occurs.
We treat CPs as term features, and we use a feature
contrast model (Santini and Jain (1999)) to
calculate similarity between terms as a function of
both common and distinctive features. Let us now
formally define the contextual similarity measure.
Let C1 and C2 be two sets of CPs associated with
terms t1 and t2 respectively. Then, the contextual
similarity (CS) between t1 and t2 corresponds to the
ratio between the number of common and
distinctive contexts:
2.2   Lexical Similarity
We also examine the lexical similarity between
words that constitute terms. For example, if terms
share the same head, they are assumed to have the













	


??
?
=

?
; otherwise
nestedis not
)(||
1)(log
);(log
)(
2
2
Tpbp
bfTpfp
ppfp
pCP
|\||\|||2
||2),(
212121
21
21 CCCCCC
CCttCS
++?
?
=
same concept as an (in)direct hypernym (e.g.
progesterone receptor and oestrogen
receptor). Further, if one of such terms has
additional modifiers, this may indicate concept
specialisation (e.g. nuclear receptor and
orphan nuclear receptor). Bearing that in
mind, we base the definition of lexical similarity
on having a common head and/or modifier(s).
Formally, if t1 and t2 are terms, H1 and H2 their
heads, and M1 and M2 the sets of the stems of their
modifiers, then their lexical similarity (LS) is
calculated according to the following formula:
where a and b are weights such that a > b, since we
give higher priority to shared heads over shared
modifiers.
   Note that the lexical similarity between two
different terms can have a positive value only if at
least one of them is a multiword term. Also, when
calculating lexical similarity between terms that
are represented by corresponding acronyms, we
use normalised expanded forms. 4
2.3   Syntactical Similarity
By analysing the distribution of similar terms in
corpora, we observed that some general (i.e.
domain independent) lexico-syntactic patterns
indicate functional similarity between terms. For
instance, the following example:
... steroid receptors such as
estrogen receptor, glucocorticoid
receptor,and progesterone receptor.
suggests that all the terms involved are highly
correlated, since they appear in an enumeration
(represented by the such-as pattern) which
indicates their similarity (based on the is_a
relationship). Some of these patterns have been
previously used to discover hyponym relations
between words (Hearst (1992)). We generalised
                                                          
4 For our approach to acronym acquisition and term
normalisation, see Nenadic et al (2002).
the approach by taking into account patterns in
which the terms are used concurrently within the
same context. We hypothesise that the parallel
usage of terms within the same context, as a
specific type of co-occurrence, shows their
functional similarity. Namely, all the terms within
a parallel structure have the same syntactic
function within the sentence (e.g. object or subject)
and are used in combination with the same verb or
preposition. This fact is used as an indicator of
their semantic similarity.
   In our approach, several types of lexico-
syntactical patterns are considered: enumeration
expressions, coordination, apposition, and
anaphora. However, currently we do not
discriminate between different similarity
relationships among terms (which are represented
by different patterns), but instead, we consider
terms appearing in the same syntactical roles as
highly semantically correlated.
   A sample of enumeration patterns is shown in
Table 3. 5 Manually defined patterns are applied as
syntactic filters in order to retrieve sets of similar
terms. These patterns provide relatively good recall
and precision. We also used coordination patterns
(Klavans et al (1997)) as another type of parallel
syntactic structure. Two types of argument
coordination and two types of head coordination
patterns were considered (see Table 4). However,
not all the sequences that match the coordination
patterns are coordinated structures (see Table 5).
Therefore, these patterns provide relatively good
recall, but not high precision if one wants to
retrieve terms involved in such expression.6
However, both term coordination and (nominal)
conjunction of terms indicate their similarity.
   Based on co-occurrence of terms in these parallel
lexico-syntactical patterns, we define the
syntactical similarity (SS) measure for a pair of
terms as 1 if the two terms appear together in any
of the patterns, and 0 otherwise.
                                                          
5 Non-terminal syntactic categories are given in angle
brackets. Non-terminal <&> denotes a conjunctive word
sequence, i.e. the following regular expression: (as
well as)| (and[/or])|(or[/and]). Special
characters (, ), [, ], |, and * have the usual
interpretation in regular expression notation.
6 In the experiments that we have performed, the
precision of expanding terms from coordinated
structures was 70%.
( +?
+
= ||1),( 21*21 HHabattLS
)|\||\|||2
||2
212121
21* MMMMMM
MMb
++?
?
+
<TERM>([(](such as)|like|(e.g.[,])) <TERM> (,<TERM>)* [[,] <&> <TERM>] [)]
<TERM> (,<TERM>)* [,] <&> other <TERM>
<TERM> [,] (including|especially) <TERM> (,<TERM>)* [[,] <&> <TERM>]
both <TERM> and <TERM>
either <TERM> or <TERM>
neither <TERM> nor <TERM>
Table 3: Sample of enumeration lexico-syntactic patterns
(<N>|<Adj>) (,(<N>|<Adj>))* [,] <&> (<N>|<Adj>) <TERM>
(<N>|<Adj>)/(<N>|<Adj>) <TERM>
(<N>|<Adj>) <TERM> (,<TERM>)* [,] <&> <TERM>
(<N>|<Adj>) <TERM>/<TERM>
Table 4: Sample of coordination patterns
head coordination [adrenal [glands and gonads]]
term conjunction [adrenal glands] and [gonads]
Table 5: Ambiguities of coordinated structures
2.4   Hybrid CLS Similarity
None of the similarities introduced so far is
sufficient on its own to reliably estimate similarity
between two arbitrary terms. For example, if a
term appears infrequently or within very specific
CPs, the number of its significant CPs will
influence its contextual similarity to other terms.
Further, there are concepts that have idiosyncratic
names (e.g. a protein named Bride of
sevenless), which thus cannot be classified
relying exclusively on lexical similarity. Our
experiments also show that syntactical similarity
provides high precision, but low recall when used
on its own, as not all terms appear in a parallel
lexico-syntactical expression.
   Therefore, we introduce a hybrid term similarity
measure, called the CLS similarity, as a linear
combination of the three similarity measures:
CLS(t1, t2) = ? CS(t1, t2) + ? LS(t1, t2) + ? SS(t1, t2)
The choice of the weights ?, ?, and ? in the
previous formula is not a trivial problem. In our
preliminary experiments (Section 3) we used
manually chosen values. However, the parameters
have also been fine-tuned automatically by
supervised learning method based on a genetic
algorithm approach (Spasi? et al (2002)). A
domain specific ontology has been used to evaluate
the generated similarity measures and to set the
direction of their convergence. The differences
between results based on the various parameters
are presented in the following section.
3   Results, Evaluation and Discussion
The CLS measure was tested on a corpus of 2008
abstracts retrieved from MEDLINE database
(MEDLINE (2002)) with manually chosen values
0.3, 0.3 and 0.4 for ?, ?, and ? respectively.
Random samples of results have been evaluated by
a domain expert, and the combined measure
proved to be a good indicator of semantic
similarity. Table 6 shows the similarity of term
retinoic acid receptor to a number of
terms. The examples point out the importance of
combining different types of term similarities. For
instance, the low value of contextual similarity7 for
retinoid X receptor is balanced out by the
other two similarity values, thus correctly
indicating it as a term similar to term retinoic
acid receptor. Similarly, the high value of the
contextual similarity for signal transduction
pathway is neutralised by the other two similarity
                                                          
7 The low value is caused by relatively low frequency of
the term?s occurrences in the corpus.
values, hence preventing it as being labelled as
similar to retinoic acid receptor.
Term CS SS LS CLS
nuclear receptor 0.58 1.00 0.50 0.72
retinoid X receptor 0.32 1.00 0.33 0.60
retinoic acid 0.31 0.00 1.00 0.39
receptor complex 0.52 0.00 0.50 0.31
progesteron receptor 0.35 0.00 0.50 0.25
signal transduction
pathway
0.75 0.00 0.00 0.22
Table 6: Similarity values between retinoic
acid receptor and other terms
   The combined measure also proved to be
consistent in the sense that similar terms share the
same "friends" (Maynard and Ananiadou (2000)).
For example, the similarity values of two similar
terms glucocorticoid receptor and
estrogen receptor (the value of their
similarity is 0.68) with respect to other terms are
mainly approximate (Table 7).
Term glucocotricoid
receptor
estrogen
receptor
steroid receptor 0.66 0.64
progesterone receptor 0.55 0.59
human estrogen
t
0.28 0.37
retinoid x receptor 0.27 0.36
nuclear receptor 0.30 0.33
receptor complex 0.31 0.33
retinoic acid receptor 0.27 0.28
retinoid nuclear
t
0.26 0.26
Table 7: Similarity values for glucocorticoid
receptor and estrogen receptor
  The supervised learning of parameters resulted in
the values 0.13, 0.81 and 0.06 for ?, ?, and ?
respectively (see Spasi? et al (2002)). The
measure with these values showed a higher degree
of stability relative to the ontology-based similarity
measure. Note that the lexical similarity appears to
be the most important and the syntactical similarity
to be insignificant. The ontology used as a seed for
learning term similarities contained well-
structured, standardised and preferred terms which
resulted in promoting the lexical similarity as the
most significant. On the other hand, the SS
similarity is corpus-dependent: the size of the
corpus and the frequency with which the
concurrent lexico-syntactic patterns are realised in
it, affect the syntactical similarity. In the training
corpus such patterns occurred infrequently relative
to the number of terms, which indicates that a
bigger corpus is needed in the training phase. In
order to increase the number of concurrent
patterns, we also aim at including additional
patterns that describe appositions and
implementing procedures for resolution of co-
referring terms. We also plan to experiment with
parametrising the values of syntactical similarity
depending on the number and type of patterns in
which two terms appear simultaneously.
   The main purpose of discovering term
similarities is to produce a similarity matrix to
identify term clusters. In Nenadi? et al (2002b) we
present some preliminary results on term clustering
using the CLS hybrid term similarity measure. Two
different methods (namely the nearest neighbour
and the Ward?s method) have been used, and both
achieved around 70% precision in clustering
semantically similar terms.
Conclusions and Further Research
In this paper we have presented a novel method for
the automatic discovery of term similarities. The
method is based on the combination of contextual,
lexical and syntactical similarities between terms.
Lexical similarity exposes the resemblance
between the words that constitute terms, while
syntactical similarity is based on mutual co-
occurrence in parallel lexico-syntactic patterns.
Contextual similarity is based on the automatic
discovery of significant contexts through
contextual pattern mining.   Although the approach
is domain independent and knowledge-poor,
automatically collected patterns are domain
specific and they identify significant contexts in
which terms tend to appear. However, in order to
learn domain-appropriate term similarity
parameters, we need to customise the method by
incorporating domain-specific knowledge. For
example, we have used an ontology to represent
such knowledge.
   The preliminary results in the domain of
molecular biology have shown that the measure
proves to be a good indicator of semantic similarity
between terms. Furthermore, the similarity
measure is consistent at assigning weights: similar
terms tend to share the same ?friends?, i.e. there is
a significant degree of overlapping between terms
that are similar. These results are encouraging, as
terms are grouped reliably according to their
contextual, syntactical and lexical similarities.
   Besides term clustering (presented in Nenadi? et
al. (2002b)), the similarity measure can be used for
several term-oriented knowledge management
tasks.  Our future work will focus on the term
classification and the consistent population and
update of ontologies. However, specific term
relationship identification that will direct placing
terms in a hierarchy is needed. Further, term
similarities can be used for term sense
disambiguation as well, which is essential for
resolving terminological confusion occurring in
many domains.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Dr. Sylvie Albert and Dr.
Dietrich Schuhmann from LION Bioscience for the
evaluation of the results.
References
Ananiadou S. (1994): A Methodology for Automatic
Term Recognition. Proceedings of COLING-94,
Kyoto, Japan.
Bourigault D. (1992): Surface Grammatical Analysis for
the Extraction of Terminological Noun Phrases.
Proceedings of 14th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, Nantes, France, pp. 977-
981.
Frantzi K.T., Ananiadou S. and Mima H. (2000):
Automatic Recognition of Multi-Word Terms: the C-
value/NC-value method. International Journal on
Digital Libraries, 3/2, pp. 115-130.
Friedman C., Kra P., Yu H., Krauthammer M. and
Rzhetsky A. (2001): GENIES: A Natural Language
Processing System for the Extraction of Molecular
Pathways from Journal Articles. Bioinformatics, 17/1,
pp. S74-S82.
Grefenstette G. (1994): Exploration in Automatic
Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Massachusetts, p. 302.
Hatzivassiloglou V., Duboue P. and Rzetsky A. (2001):
Disambiguating Proteins, Genes, and RNA in Text: A
Machine Learning Approach. Bioinformatics, 17/1,
pp. S97-S106
Hearst M.A. (1992): Automatic acquisition of hyponyms
from large text corpora. Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Nantes, France.
Klavans J. L., Tzoukermann E. and Jacquemin C.
(1997): A Natural Language Approach to Multi-Word
Term Conflation. Proceedings of Workshop DELOS,
Zurich, pp. 33-40.
Maynard D. and Ananiadou S. (2000): Identifying
Terms by Their Family and Friends.  Proceedings of
COLING 2000, Luxembourg, pp.530-536.
MEDLINE (2002): National Library of Medicine.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/
Mima H., Ananiadou S. and Nenadi? G. (2001):
ATRACT Workbench: An Automatic Term
Recognition and Clustering of Terms. Text, Speech
and Dialogue - TSD 2001, LNAI 2166, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, pp. 126-133.
Mima H., Ananiadou S., Nenadi? G. and Tsujii J.
(2002): A Methodology for Terminology-based
Knowledge Acquisition and Integration. Proceedings
of COLING 2002, Taiwan
Nakagawa H. and Mori, T. (2000): Nested Collocation
and Compound Noun for Term Recognition.
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Computational
Terminology COMPUTERM 98, pp. 64-70.
Nenadi? G., Spasi? I. and Ananiadou S. (2002a):
Automatic Acronym Acquisition and Term Variation
Management within Domain-specific Texts.
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, Spain, pp.
2155-2162.
Nenadi? G., Spasi? I. and Ananiadou S. (2002b): Term
Clustering using a Corpus-Based Similarity Measure.
Text, Speech and Dialogue - TSD 2002, LNAI series,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin
Santini S. and Jain R. (1999): Similarity Measures.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 21/9, pp. 871-88
Spasi? I., Nenadi? G. and Ananiadou S. (2002):
Supervised Learning of Term Similarities. IDEAL
2002, LNAI series, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
Ushioda A. (1996): Hierarchical Clustering of Words.
Proceedings of COLING ?96, Copenhagen, pp. 1159-
1162.
