Automatic Information Transfer Between English And Chinese 
Jianmin Yao, Hao Yu, Tiejun Zhao  
School of Computer Science and Technology 
Harbin Institute of Technology 
Harbin, China, 150001 
james@mtlab.hit.edu.cn 
Xiaohong Li 
Department of Foreign Studies 
Harbin Institute of Technology 
Harbin, China, 150001 
goodtreeyale@yahoo.com.cn 
 
Abstract  
The translation choice and transfer modules 
in an English Chinese machine translation 
system are introduced. The translation 
choice is realized on basis of a grammar tree 
and takes the context as a word bag, with the 
lexicon and POS tag information as context 
features. The Bayes minimal error 
probability is taken as the evaluation 
function of the candidate translation. The 
rule-based transfer and generation module 
takes the parsing tree as the input and 
operates on the information of POS tag, 
semantics or even the lexicon. 
Introduction 
Machine translation is urgently needed to get 
away with the language barrier between 
different nations. The task of machine 
translation is to realize mapping from one 
language to another. At present there are three 
main methods for machine translation systems 
[Zhao 2000]: 1) pattern/rule based systems: 
production rules compose the main body of the 
knowledge base. The rules or patterns are often 
manually written or automatically acquired from 
training corpus; 2) example based method. The 
knowledge base is a bilingual corpus of source 
slices S? and their translations T? Given a source 
slice of input S, match S with the source slices 
and choose the most similar as the translation or 
get the translation from it. 3) Statistics based 
method: it is a method based on monolingual 
language model and bilingual language model. 
The probabilities are acquired from large-scale 
(bilingual) corpora.  
Machine translation is more than a 
manipulation of one natural language (e.g. 
Chinese). Not only the grammatical and 
semantic characteristics of the source language 
must be considered, but also those of the target 
language. To sum up, the characteristics of 
bilingual translation is the essence of a machine 
translation system.  
A machine translation system usually 
includes 3 sub-systems [Zhao 1999] ? (1) 
Analysis: to analyse the source language 
sentence and generate a syntactic tree with 
syntactic functional tags; (2) Transfer: map a 
source parsing tree into a target language parsing 
tree; (3) Generation: generate the target 
language sentence according to the target 
language syntactic tree.  
The MTS2000 system developed in Harbin 
Institute of Technology is a bi-directional 
machine translation system based on a 
combination of stochastic and rule-based 
methods. Figure 1 shows the flow of the system.  
 Input English Sentence  
 Morphology Analysis  
 
Syntactic Analysis  
 
Word Translation Choice  
 
Transfer and Generation  
 
 
 
Output Chinese Sentence 
Figure 1 Flowchart of MTS2000 System  
Analysis and transfer are separated in the 
architecture of the MTS2000 system. This 
modularisation is helpful to the integration of 
stochastic method and the rule based method. 
New techniques are easier to be integrated into 
the modularised system. Two modules 
implement the transfer step and the generation 
step after analysis of the source sentence. The 
specific task of transfer and generation is to 
produce a target language sentence given the 
source language syntactic tree. In details, given 
an English syntactic tree (e.g. S[PP[ In/IN 
BNP[our/PRP$ workshop/NN]] BNP[ there/EX] 
VP[ is/VBZ NP[ no/DT NP[ NN[ machine/NN 
tool/NN] SBAR[ but/CC VP[ is/VBZ 
made/VBN PP[ in/IN BNP[ China/NNP ]]]]]]]]), 
using knowledge sources such as grammatical 
features, simple semantic features, construct a 
Chinese syntactic tree, whose terminal nodes 
compromise in sequence the Chinese translation.  
The input sentence are analysed using the 
morphology analyser, part-of-speech tagger, and 
syntactic analyser. After these steps, a syntactic 
parsing tree is obtained which has multiple 
levels with functional tags [Meng 2000]. 
Followed is the parser flow: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Parser based on Hybrid Methods 
At present, our English parser is able to 
generate syntactic tree ble 
way. The English parsin
information about relatio
in the source sentence
information of the nodes
of transfer and generatio
the nodes is the starting
generation. After syntact
transfer and generation in
choice of ambiguous 
adjustment and inserti
functional words. Trans
implemented using two
word translation choice, 
transfer and translation m
1 Parsing Based Tran
First we will give a f
translation choice in 
[Manning 1999]: Suppose the source sentence to 
be translated to be ES. In the sentence the 
ambiguous word EW has M target translations 
CW1, CW2, ... CWM. And the translations 
occurs in a specific context C with probabilities 
P(CW1 | C)?P(CW2 | C), ... P(CWM|C)?From 
the Bayes minimum error probability formula, 
we get: 
CW = argmax[P(CWk|C)] 
= argmax[logP(CWk) + logP(C|CWk) ] (1) 
Generally when the condition fulfills 
P(CW1|C)>P(CW2|C)>...>P(CWM|C), we may 
choose CW1 as the translation for EW. From the 
Na?ve Bayes formula? 
P(C|CWk) = P({vj | vj in C}|CWk) 
 = ?Vj in C P(vj|sk)              (2) 
So formula (1) can be rewritten as: 
CW = argmax[P(CWk|C)] 
Input Sentence Statistics Knowledge = argmax[logP(CWk)+?Vj in ClogP(vj|CWk)] (3) 
Where P(CWk) denotes the probability that 
CWk occurs in the corpus; P (vj| CWk) denotes 
the probability that the context feature vj 
co-occurs with translation CWk? 
A general algorithm of supervised word 
sense disambiguation is as follows: 
1. comment: Training 
2. for all senses sk of w do 
3.    for all words vj in the vocabulary do 
4.       P(vj|sk) = C(vj, sk)/C(vj) 
5.    end 
6. end 
7. for all senses sk of w do 
8.    P(sk) = C(sk)/C(w) 
9. end 
POS Tagger Manual Rule 
Base 
PPA Resolution 
Layered Parsing eein comparative usa
g 
nsh
, a
, is
n. 
 p
ic 
clu
w
on
fer 
 m
the
od
sla
orm
mParsing Trtree, with the basic 
ip among the nodes 
lso with semantic 
 input to the module 
The information of 
oint of transfer and 
parsing, the task of 
des word translation 
ords, word order 
/deletion of some 
and generation are 
odules: one is for 
 other for structure 
ification. 
tion Choice 
al description for 
achine translation 
10. comment: Disambiguation 
11. for all sense sk of w do 
12.    Score(sk) = logP(sk) 
13.    for all words vj in the context window c do
14.       score(sk) = score(sk) + logP(vj|sk) 
15.    end 
16. end 
17. choose s? = argmaxskscore(sk) 
Figure 5. Bayesian disambiguation 
From the above formal description we can 
see that the key to the stochastic word 
translation is to select proper context and context 
features Vj. Present methods often define a word 
window of some size, i.e. to suppose only words 
within the window contributes to the translation 
choice of the ambiguous word. For example, 
[Huang 1997] uses a word window of length 6 
words for word sense disambiguation; [Xun 
1998] define a moveable window of length 4 
words; [Ng 1997] uses a word window with 
offset ?2. But two problems exist for this 
method: (1) some words that are informative to 
sense disambiguation may not be covered by the 
window; (2) some words that are covered by the 
word window really contribute nothing to the 
sense choice, but only bring noise information. 
After a broad investigation for large-scale 
ambiguous words, we choose the context 
according to the correlation of the context words 
with the ambiguous word, but not only the 
distance from the word. 
From the above analysis, we choose the 
translation choice method based on syntactic 
analysis. Place the module of translation choice 
between the parser and the generator; acquire a 
context set for the ambiguous word. When 
choosing the translation, we may take the 
context set as a word bag, i.e. the grammatical 
context as word bag. No single word is 
considered but only that lexical and 
part-of-speech information are taken as context 
features. Bayes minimum error probability is 
taken as evaluation function for word translation 
choice. 
In this paper, grammatical context is 
considered for word translation choice. The 
structure related features of the ambiguous 
words are taken into account for fully use of the 
parsing result. It has the characteristics below: (1) 
The window size is not defined by human but on 
basis of the grammatical structure of the 
sentence, so we can acquire more efficiently the 
useful context features; (2) The unrelated 
context features in sentence structure are filtered 
out for translation choice; (3) The features are 
based on the structure relationship, but not 100% 
right parsing result. From the above 
characteristics, we can see the method is really 
practical. 
2 Rule Based Transfer & Generation 
For MTS2000, structural transfer is to start from 
the syntactic parsing tree and construct the 
Chinese syntactic tree. While the generation of 
Chinese is to generate a word link from the 
Chinese tree and build the translation sentence 
[Yao 2001]. This module has adopted the 
rule-based knowledge representation method. 
The design of the rule system is highly related to 
the performance of the machine translation 
system. 
The rule description language of the 
machine translation system is in the form of 
production rules, i.e. a rule composed of a 
conditional part and an operational part. The 
conditional part is a scan window of variable 
length, which uses the context constraint 
conditions such as phrases or some linguistic 
features. The operational part generates the 
corresponding translation or some corresponding 
generation features in the operational part. If the 
conditions are met, the operations will be 
performed. The representation of the rule system 
has shown a characteristic of the system, that is 
the integration of transfer and generation. The 
rule description language is similar to natural 
language and consistent with human habits. 
Multiple description methods are implemented. 
The conditional part of the rules is 
composed of node numbers and ?+? symbols 
that is used to link the nodes. The operation part 
consists of corresponding conditional parts and 
translations and also, if necessary, some action 
functions. 
For example, the rule to combine an 
adjective and a noun to generate a noun phrase is 
as follows:  
0:Cate=A + 1:Cate=N 
->0:* + 1:* + _NodeUf(N?0?1) 
in which, ?*? stands for corresponding 
translation of the nodes, _NodeUf() is a function 
that combines the nodes to generate a new node. 
The new translation is generated at the same 
time with the combination of nodes. 
In general, the English Chinese machine 
translation system has the following features in 
the transfer and generation phase: 
1) The grammatical and semantic features are 
described by a string composed of frame 
name and values linked with ?=?; 
2) The conditions may be operated by ?and?, 
?or? and ?not?; 
3) Nodes in the same level of the sentence may 
be scanned and tested arbitrarily; 
4) The action functions and test functions can 
generate corresponding features for feature 
transmission and test. 
The rules are organized into various levels. 
All the rules are put in the knowledge base with 
part-of-speech as the entry feature. The rules 
have different priorities, which decide their 
sequence in rule matching. In general, the more 
specific the rule, the higher is its priority. The 
more general the rule, the lower is its priority. 
The levels of the rules help resolve rule 
collision. 
Conclusion 
The system prototype has been implemented and 
large-scale development and refinement are 
under progress. From our knowledge of the 
system, knowledge acquisition and rule base 
organization is the bottleneck for MTS2000 
system and similar natural language processing 
systems. The knowledge acquisition for word 
translation choice needs large-scale word 
aligned bilingual corpus. We are making 
research on new word translation methods on 
basis of our 60,000-sentence aligned bilingual 
corpus. The transfer and generation knowledge 
base are facing much knowledge collision and 
redundancy problem. The organization 
technique of knowledge base is also an 
important issue in the project. 
References  
Tie-Jun Zhao, En-Dong Xun, Bin Chen, Xiao-Hu 
Liu,Sheng Li, Research on Word Sense 
Disambiguation based on Target Language 
Statistics, Applied Fundamental and Engineering 
Journal, 1999?7?1??101-110 
Meng Yao, Zhao Tiejun, Yu Hao, Li Sheng, A 
Decision Tree Based Corpus Approach to English 
Base Noun Phrase Identification, Proceedings 
International conference on East-Asian Language 
Processing and Internet Information Technology, 
Shenyang, 2000: 5-10 
Christopher D. Manning, Hinrich Sch ? tze, 
Foundation of Statistical Natural Language 
Processing. The MIT Press. pp229-262. 1999. 
Chang-Ning Huang, Juan-Zi Li, A language model 
for word sense disambiguation, 10th anniversary 
for Chinese Linguistic Society, October, 1997, 
Fuzhou  
En-Dong Xun, Sheng Li, Tie-Jun Zhao, Bi-gram 
co-occurrence based stochastic method for word 
sense disambiguation, High Technologies, 1998, 
10(8): 21-25  
Hwee Tou Ng. Exemplar-Based Word Sense 
Disambiguation: Some Recent Improvements. In 
Proceedings of the Second Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing (EMNLP-2), August 1997  
Tie-Jun Zhao etc, Principle of Machine Translation, 
Press of Harbin Institute of Technology, 2000. 
Jian-Min Yao, Jing Zhang, Hao Yu, Tie-Jun 
Zhao,Sheng Li, Transfer from an English parsing 
tree to a Chinese syntactic tree, Joint Conference of 
the Society of Computational Linguistics, 2001, 
Taiyuan.-138.  
  
