Fine-Grained Proper Noun Ontologies for Question Answering
Gideon S. Mann
Department of Computer Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland 21218
gsm@cs.jhu.edu
Abstract
The WordNet lexical ontology, which is
primarily composed of common nouns,
has been widely used in retrieval tasks.
Here, we explore the notion of a fine-
grained proper noun ontology and argue
for the utility of such an ontology in re-
trieval tasks. To support this claim, we
build a fine-grained proper noun ontol-
ogy from unrestricted news text and use
this ontology to improve performance on
a question answering task.
1 Introduction
The WordNet lexical ontology (Miller, 1990) con-
tains more than 100,000 unique noun forms. Most of
these noun forms are common nouns (nouns describ-
ing non-specific members of a general class, e.g.
?detective?). Only a small percentage1 of the nouns
in WordNet are proper nouns (nouns describing spe-
cific instances, e.g. ?[the detective] Columbo?).
The WordNet ontology has been widely useful,
with applications in information retrieval (Sussna,
1993), text classification (Scott and Matwin, 1998),
and question answering (Pasca and Harabagiu,
2001). These successes have shown that common
noun ontologies have wide applicability and utility.
There exists no ontology with similar coverage
and detail for proper nouns. Prior work in proper
noun identification has focused on ?named entity?
1A random 100 synset sample was composed of 9% proper
nouns.
recognition (Chinchor et al, 1999), stemming from
the MUC evaluations. In this task, each proper noun
is categorized, for example, as a PERSON, a LOCA-
TION, or an ORGANIZATION.
These coarse categorizations are useful, but more
finely grained classification might have additional
advantages. While Bill Clinton is appropriately
identified as a PERSON, this neglects his identity as
a president, a southerner, and a saxophone player.
If an information request identifies the object of the
search not merely as a PERSON, but as a typed
proper noun (e.g. ?a southern president?), this pref-
erence should be used to improve the search.
Unfortunately, building a proper noun ontology
is more difficult than building a common noun on-
tology, since the set of proper nouns grows more
rapidly. New people are born. As people change,
their classification must change as well. A broad-
coverage proper noun ontology must be constantly
updated. Therefore, to propose a viable system, a
method, however limited, must be presented to build
a proper noun ontology.
In this paper, we explore the idea of a fine-grained
proper noun ontology and its use in question answer-
ing. We build a proper noun ontology from unre-
stricted text using simple textual co-occurrence pat-
terns (Section3). This automatically constructed on-
tology is then used on a question answering task to
give preliminary results on the utility of this infor-
mation (Section 4).
2 Ontologies for Question Answering
Modern question answering systems rely heavily on
the fact that questions contain strong preferences for
The 1974 film ?That?s Entertainment!? was made from film clips from what Hollywood studio?
What king of Babylonia reorganized the empire under the Code that bears his name?
What rock ?n? roll musician was born Richard Penniman on Christmas Day?
What is the oldest car company which still exists today?
What was the name of the female Disco singer who scored with the tune ?Dim All the Lights? in 1979?
What was the name of the first Russian astronaut to do a spacewalk?
What was the name of the US helicopter pilot shot down over North Korea?
Which astronaut did Tom Hanks play in ?Apollo 13??
Which former Klu Klux Klan member won an elected office in the U.S.?
Who?s the lead singer of the Led Zeppelin band?
Who is the Greek goddess of retribution or vengeance?
Who is the prophet of the religion of Islam?
Who is the author of the book, ?The Iron Lady: A Biography of Margaret Thatcher??
Who was the lead actress in the movie ?Sleepless in Seattle??
Table 1: Questions Indicating a Typed Proper Noun Preference (Trivia and Trec-8/9 Questions)
the types of answers they expect. Kupiec (1993) ob-
serves that the WH word itself provides preferences
(e.g. ?Who? questions prefer PERSON answers).
He further observes that questions also include type
preferences in other parts of the question. Some-
times these preferences occur within the WH phrase
(?what color?), and sometimes they are embedded
elsewhere within the question (?what is the color
...?). In both, the question indicates a preference for
colors as answers.
Current question answering systems use ontolo-
gies when these type preferences are detected. One
simple method is as follows: when a type preference
is recognized, the preference is located within the
WordNet ontology, and children of that synset are
treated as potential answers. Given the question ?In
pool, what color is the eight ball??, and the ontol-
ogy excerpt shown in Figure 1, the system can nar-
row down the range of choices. This approach has
high precision: if the type preference can be located,
and a candidate answer is found in a child node (in a
suitable corpus context), then the candidate is likely
to be the answer.
Harabagiu et al (2000) proposes another method
for using an ontology: WordNet subtrees are linked
to types recognized by a named entity recognizer.
Their system works as follows: given the question
?What is the wingspan of a condor??, it locates
?wingspan? in the WordNet ontology. It then detects
that ?wingspan? falls into the MAGNITUDE subtree
which is linked to the QUANTITY type. This links
words in the MAGNITUDE subtree to numbers.
While the WordNet ontology is primarily com-
posed of common nouns, it contains some proper
nouns, typically those least likely to be ephemeral
(e.g. countries, cities, and famous figures in his-
tory). These can be used as any other common
nouns are used. Given the question ?Which com-
poser wrote ?The Marriage of Figaro???, the Word-
Net ontology will provide the fact that ?Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart? is a composer.
Table 1 lists sample questions where a proper
noun ontology would be useful. Some of the proper
noun types are relatively static (Greek gods, kings
of Babylonia). Other categories are more ephemeral
(lead singers, British actresses). WordNet enumer-
ates 70 Greek gods and 80 kings, but no lead singers
and no British actresses.
Ravichandran and Hovy (2002) present an alter-
native ontology for type preference and describe a
method for using this alternative ontology to extract
particular answers using surface text patterns. Their
proposed ontology is orders of magnitude smaller
than WordNet and ontologies considered here, hav-
ing less than 200 nodes.
3 Building a Proper Noun Ontology
In order to better answer the questions in Table 1, we
built a proper noun ontology from approximately 1
gigabyte of AP news wire text. To do so, we tok-
Answer white
WordNet
black grey
chromatic colorachromatic color
red blue pink
color
Preference
Type
Figure 1: Using WordNet to Directly Provide Type
Preferences
distance, length
light time altitude
quantity
Answer 7
wingspan
Named Entity Recognizer
WordNet
size
magnitude
amount
Preference
Type
Figure 2: Linking WordNet subtrees to a Named En-
tity Recognizer
enized and part-of-speech tagged the text, and then
searched for instances of a common noun followed
immediately by a proper noun. This pattern de-
tects phrases of the form ?[the] automaker Mercedes
Benz?, and is ideally suited for proper nouns. In AP
news wire text this is a productive and high preci-
sion pattern, generating nearly 200,000 unique de-
scriptions, with 113,000 different proper nouns and
20,000 different descriptions. In comparison, the
?such as? pattern (Section 5) occurs less than 50,000
times in the same size corpora. Table 2 shows the
descriptions generated for a few proper nouns using
this simple pattern.
To assess the precision of the extractions, we took
a sample of 100 patterns extracted from the AP-news
text. From these 100, 79 of the items classified as
named entities were in fact named entities, and out
of those, 60 (75%) had legitimate descriptions.
Singer
Folk Singer
Emmanuel Charlemagne
Burl Ives
Hou Dejian
Joan Baez
John Denver
Lead Singer
Axel Rose
Marjo Leinonen
John Fogerty
Jim Morrison
Bono
Figure 3: Subset of ?singer? subtree in the Induced
Proper Noun Ontology
To build the complete ontology, first each descrip-
tion and proper noun forms its own synset. Then,
links are added from description to each proper noun
it appears with. Further links are put between de-
scriptions ?X Y? and ?Y? (noun compounds and
their heads). Clearly, this method is problematic in
the cases of polysemous words or complex noun-
noun constructions (?slalom king?) and integrating
this ontology with the WordNet ontology requires
further study.
This proper noun ontology fills many of the holes
in WordNet?s world knowledge. While WordNet has
no lead singer synset, the induced proper noun on-
tology detects 13 distinct lead singers (Figure 3).
WordNet has 2 folk singers; the proper noun ontol-
ogy has 20. In total, WordNet lists 53 proper nouns
as singers, while the induced proper noun ontology
has more than 900. While the induced ontology is
not complete, it is more complete than what was pre-
viously available.
As can be seen from the list of descriptions gener-
ated by this pattern, people are described in a variety
of different ways, and this pattern detects many of
them. Table 3 shows the descriptions generated for
a common proper noun (?Bill Gates?). When the
descriptions are grouped by WordNet synsets and
senses manually resolved, the variety of descriptions
decreases dramatically (Figure 4). ?Bill Gates? can
be described by a few distinct roles, and a distribu-
tion over these descriptions provide an informative
understanding: leader (.48), businessperson (.27),
worker (.05), originator (.05), expert (.05), and rich
billionaire
rich person expert
whizhead boss
leader
mogul entrepreneur
creatorcapitalist worker 
orginatorskilled workerbusinessperson
officialchairman executive founder
officer
presiding officer
person
pioneer
Figure 4: Descriptions of Bill Gates Organized into WordNet, observed descriptions boxed
Proper Noun Count Description
Axel Rose 3 singer
2 lead singer
2 vocalist
Emma Thompson 3 actress
Mercedes-Benz 4 Luxury car maker
4 car maker
3 automaker
2 family
2 luxury
1 gold
1 service
1 subsidiary
Table 2: Proper Noun Descriptions Extracted from
News Corpora
person (.02). Steve Jobs, who has a career path sim-
ilar to Bill Gates, has a similar but distinct signature:
originator (.6), expert (.4).
One immediate observation is that some of the
descriptions may be more relevant than others. Is
Gates? role as an ?office worker? as important as his
role as a ?billionaire?? The current system makes no
decision and treats all descriptions as equally rele-
vant and stores all of them. There is no need to re-
ject descriptions since there is no human cost in su-
perfluous or distracting descriptions (unlike in sum-
marization tasks). It is important that no invalid de-
scriptions are added.
The previous examples have focused on proper
nouns which are people?s names. However, this
method works for many organizations as well, as
Proper Noun Count Description
Bill Gates 15 chairman
9 mogul, tycoon,magnate
2 officer
2 whiz, genius
1 pioneer
1 head
1 founder
1 executive
1 entrepreneur
1 boss
1 billionaire
Table 3: Bill Gates Descriptions in AP Newswire,
grouped by WordNet synset
the data in Table 2 show. However, while descrip-
tion extraction for people is high quality (84% cor-
rect descriptions in a 100 example sample), for non-
people proper names, the quality of extraction is
poorer (47% correct descriptions). This is a trend
which requires further study.
4 Using a Proper Noun Ontology in a
Question Answering Task
We generated the above ontology and used it in a
sentence comprehension task: given a question and
a sentence which answers the question, extract the
minimal short answer to the question from the sen-
tence. The task is motivated by the observation that
extracting short answers is more difficult than ex-
tracting full sentence or passage length ones. Fur-
Ontology Correct Total Precision
Answered
WordNet 127 169 75.1
IPNO 46 67 68.6
WN + IPNO 145 194 74.7
Table 4: Performance on a Test Corpus when an In-
duced Proper Noun Ontology (IPNO) is combined
with Wordnet
thermore, retrieving answers from smaller document
spaces may be more difficult than retrieving answers
from larger ones, if smaller spaces have less redun-
dant coverage of potential answers. In this sen-
tence comprehension task, there is virtually no re-
dundancy. To generate data for this task, we took
trivia games, which, along with the question, had a
full sentence explanation (Mann, 2002).
Baseline experiments used the WordNet ontology
alone. From a semantic type preference stated in
the question, a word was selected from the sentence
as an answer if was a child of the type preference.
?Black? would be picked as an answer for a ?color?
type preference (Figure 1).
To utilize the induced proper noun ontology, we
took the raw data and selected the trailing noun for
each proper noun and for each description. Thus,
for an extraction of the form ?computer mogul Bill
Gates?, we added a pattern of the form ?Gates
mogul?. We created an ontology from these in-
stances completely separate from the WordNet on-
tology.
We put this induced proper noun ontology into
the pipeline as follows: if WordNet failed to find a
match, we used the induced proper noun ontology. If
that ontology failed to find a match, we ignored the
question. In a full system, a named entity recognizer
might be added to resolve the other questions.
We selected 1000 trivia game questions at random
to test out the new two-ontology system. Table 4
shows the results of the experiments. The boost is
clear: improved recall at slightly decreased preci-
sion. Gains made by inducing an ontology from an
unrestricted text corpus (newstext) and applying it to
a unmatched test set (trivia games), suggests that a
broad-coverage general proper noun ontology may
be useful.
It is further surprising that this improvement
comes at such a small cost. The proper noun on-
tology wasn?t trimmed or filtered. The only disad-
vantage of this method is simply that its coverage
is small. Coverage may be increased by using ever
larger corpora. Alternatively, different patterns (for
example, appositives) may increase the number of
words which have descriptions. A rough error anal-
ysis suggests that most of the errors come from mis-
tagging, while few come from correct relationships
in the ontology. This suggests that attempts at noise
reduction might be able to lead to larger gains in per-
formance.
Another potential method for improving coverage
is by bootstrapping descriptions. Our test corpus
contained a question whose answer was ?Mercedes-
Benz?, and whose type preference was ?car com-
pany?. While our proper noun ontology contained
a related link (Mercedes-Benz automaker), it did
not contain the exact link (Mercedes-Benz car com-
pany). However, elsewhere there existed the links
(Opel automaker) and (Opel car company). Poten-
tially these descriptions could be combined to infer
(Mercedes-Benz car company). Formally :
(B Y) and (A Y) and (A Z)   (B Z)
(Mercedes-Benz automaker) and (Opel
automaker) and (Opel car company)  
(Mercedes-Benz car company)
Expanding descriptions using a technique like this
may improve coverage. Still, care must be taken
to ensure that proper inferences are made since this
rule is not always appropriate. Bill Gates is a ten-
billionaire; Steve Jobs isn?t.
5 Prior Work in Building Ontologies
There has been considerable work in the past
decade on building ontologies from unrestricted
text. Hearst (1992) used textual patterns (e.g. ?such
as?) to identify common class members. Cara-
ballo and Charniak (1999) and Caraballo (1999)
augmented these lexical patterns with more gen-
eral lexical co-occurrence statistics (such as rel-
ative entropy). Berland and Charniak (1999) use
Hearst style techniques to learn meronym relation-
ships (part-whole) from corpora. There has also
been work in building ontologies from structured
Correct Answer Question
(Debbie) Reynolds What actress once held the title of ?Miss Burbank??
(Jim) Lovell Which astronaut did Tom Hanks play in ?Apollo 13??
Xerxes Which Persian king moved an invasion force across the
Hellespont on a bridge of ships?
(Donna) Summer What was the name of the female Disco singer
who scored with the tune ?Dim All the Lights? in 1979?
MGM The 1974 film ?That?s Entertainment!? was made from film
clips from what Hollywood studio?
Table 5: Successes of the Proper Noun Ontology for the Question Answering task
text, notably in the AQUILEX project (e.g. Copes-
take, 90) which builds ontologies from machine
readable dictionaries.
The most closely related work is (Girju, 2001),
which describes a method for inducing a domain-
specific ontology using some of the techniques de-
scribed in the previous paragraph. This induced on-
tology is then potential useful for a matched ques-
tion domain. Our paper differs in that it targets
proper nouns, in particular people, which are over-
looked in prior work, have broad applicability, and
can be used in a cross-domain fashion. Furthermore,
we present initial results which attempt to gauge
coverage improvement as a result of the induced on-
tology.
Another related line of work is word clustering.
In these experiments, the attempt is made to cluster
similar nouns, without regard to forming a hierarchy.
Pereira et al (1993) presented initial work, cluster-
ing nouns using their noun-verb co-occurrence in-
formation. Riloff and Lehnert (1993) build seman-
tic lexicons using extraction pattern co-occurrence.
Lin and Pantel (2001) extend these methods by us-
ing many different types of relations and exploiting
corpora of tremendous size.
The important difference for this work between
the hierarchical methods and the clustering meth-
ods is that clusters are unlabelled. The hierarchi-
cal methods can identify that a ?Jeep Cherokee? is a
type of car. In contrast, the clustering methods group
together related nouns, but exactly what the connec-
tion is may be difficult to distinguish (e.g. the clus-
ter ?Sierra Club?, ?Environmental Defense Fund?,
?Natural Resources Defense Council?, ?Public Cit-
izen?, ?National Wildlife Federation?). Generating
labels for proper noun clusters may be another way
to build a proper noun ontology.
The method we use to build the fine-grained
proper name ontology also resembles some of the
work done in coarse-grained named entity recogni-
tion. In particular, Collins and Singer (1999) present
a sophisticated method for using bootstrapping tech-
niques to learn the coarse-classification for a given
proper noun. Riloff and Jones (1999) also present a
method to use bootstrapping to create semantic lexi-
cons of proper nouns. These methods may be appli-
cable for use in fine-grained proper noun ontology
construction as well.
Schiffman et al (2001) describe work on produc-
ing biographical summaries. This work attempts to
synthesize one description of a person from multi-
ple mentions. This summary is an end in itself, as
opposed to general knowledge collected. These de-
scriptions also attempt to be parsimonious in con-
trast to the rather free associations extracted by the
method presented above.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we have motivated the use of a proper
noun ontology for question answering. We de-
scribed a method for inducing pieces of this on-
tology, and then showed preliminary methods can
be useful. Prior work on proper nouns has fo-
cused on classifying them into very coarse cate-
gories (e.g. PERSON, LOCATION). As this paper
has shown, these coarse classifications can be re-
fined fortuitously, especially for the PERSON type.
This paper demonstrates that inducing a gen-
eral ontology improves question answering perfor-
mance. Previous work examined ontology induction
for a specialized domain. It is somewhat surprising
that an ontology built from unrestricted text can lead
to improvement on unmatched questions.
The experiments we performed demonstrated that
though the precision of the ontology is high, the cru-
cial problem is increasing coverage. Tackling this
problem is an important area of future work. Fi-
nally, this work opens up a potential new avenue for
work on inducing proper noun ontologies. There are
doubtlessly many more ways to extract descriptions
and to improve coverage.
References
Matthew Berland and Eugene Charniak. 1999. Finding
parts in very large corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 57?64.
S. Caraballo and E. Charniak. 1999. Determining the
specificity of nouns from text.
Sharon Caraballo. 1999. Automatic acquisition of a
hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics.
N. Chinchor, E. Brown, L. Ferro, and P. Robinson. 1999.
1999 named entity recognition task definition. Tech
Report.
Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. 1999. Unsupervised
models for named entity classification. In Proceedings
of the Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing.
Ann Copestake. 1990. An approach to building the hi-
erarchical element of a lexical knowledge base from
a machine readable dictionary. In First International
Workshop on Inheritance in NLP.
Roxana Girju. 2001. Answer fusion with on-line on-
tology development. In Student Research Workshop
Proceedings at The 2nd Meeting of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
S. Harabagiu, D. Moldovan, M. Pasca, R. Mihalcea,
M. Surdea nu, R. Bunescu, R. Girju, V. Rus, and
P. Mor. 2000. Falcon : Boosting knowledge for an-
swer engines. Proc. of TREC-9.
Marti Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms
from large text corpora. Proceedings of the Fourteenth
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING-92).
J. Kupiec. 1993. Murax: A robust linguistic approach
for question answering using an on-line encyclopedia.
In ACM-SIGIR?93.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Induction of se-
mantic classes from natural language text. In Proceed-
ings of ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, pages 317?322.
Gideon S. Mann. 2002. Learning how to answer ques-
tions using trivia games. In Proceedings of the Nine-
teenth International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING 2002).
G. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An On-line Lexical Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235?312.
Marius Pasca and Sanda Harabagiu. 2001. The informa-
tive role of wordnet in open-domain question answer-
ing. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Applications,
Extensions and Customizations, pages 138?143. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Fernando C. N. Pereira, Naftali Tishby, and Lillian Lee.
1993. Distributional clustering of english words. In
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 183?190.
Deepak Ravichandran and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Learning
surface text patterns for a question answering system.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dictionar-
ies for information extraction by multi-level bootstrap-
ping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National COn-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1044?1049.
E. Riloff and W. Lehnert. 1993. Automated Dictionary
Construction for Information Extraction from Text. In
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence for Applications, pages 93?99, Los
Alamitos, CA. IEEE Computer Society Press.
Barry Schiffman, Inderjeet Mani, and Kristian J. Concep-
cion. 2001. Producing biographical summaries: Com-
bining linguistic knowledge with corpus statistics. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Sam Scott and Stan Matwin. 1998. Text classification
using WordNet hypernyms. In Sanda Harabagiu, ed-
itor, Use of WordNet in Natural Language Processing
Systems: Proceedings of the Conference, pages 38?44.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Somerset,
New Jersey.
M. Sussna. 1993. Word sense disambiguation for free-
text indexing using a massive semantic network. In
Proceedings of CIKM ?93.
