Dialogue Act Recognition with Bayesian Networks for Dutch Dialogues
Simon Keizer, Rieks op den Akker and Anton Nijholt
Department of Computer Science
University of Twente
P.O. Box 217, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
{skeizer,infrieks,anijholt}@cs.utwente.nl
Abstract
This paper presents work on using
Bayesian networks for the dialogue act
recognition module of a dialogue sys-
tem for Dutch dialogues. The Bayesian
networks can be constructed from the
data in an annotated dialogue corpus.
For two series of experiments - using
different corpora but the same anno-
tation scheme - recognition results are
presented and evaluated.
1 Introduction
In several papers (Nijholt, 2000; Luin et al, 2001;
Nijholt et al, 2001) we reported on our virtual
music centre - the VMC - a virtual environment
inhabited by (embodied) agents and on multi-
modal interaction between human users and these
agents. Of these agents Karin is an embodied
agent users can ask for information about theatre
performances (see Figure 1).
A second agent is the navigation agent. Nav-
igation is a) way finding - the user knows where
he wants to go but doesn?t know how to go there;
or b) exploring the environment - the user walks
through the environment to obtain an overview of
the building and the objects, locations, rooms that
are in it. Related to these navigation tasks the nav-
igation assistant has the task to assist the visitor
in a) explaining how to go from his current loca-
tion to a location he is looking for and b) to give
the agent information about objects, and locations
in the environment. The navigation agent is not
present as an avatar in the environment. The user
sees the environment from a first person perspec-
tive and interacts with the agents by means of a
Dutch dialogue. The user has two views of the
environment: a) a first person view of the visible
part of the 3D virtual theatre and b) an abstract
2D map of the floor of the building the user is
visiting. This map is shown in a separate win-
dow. In a multi-modal interaction the user can
point at locations or objects on the 2D map and
either ask information about that object or loca-
tion or he can ask the assistant to bring him to the
location pointed at.
Figure 1: Karin in the VMC.
An important part of our dialogue systems for
natural language interaction with agents is the
module for recognition of the dialogue acts per-
formed by the human user (visitor). This pa-
per discusses the construction of and experiments
with Bayesian networks as implementation of this
module.
Various other work has been presented on us-
ing statistical techniques for dialogue act classi-
fication (Andernach, 1996; Stolcke et al, 2000),
and even some first efforts on using Bayesian net-
works for this task (Pulman, 1996; Keizer, 2001).
Other work on using Bayesian networks in dia-
logue systems aims more at interaction and user
modelling (Paek and Horvitz, 2000) and does not
specifically involve linguistic aspects.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2
       Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 88-94.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
provides some necessary and general background
about the use of Bayesian networks for speech act
recognition. In Section 3 we discuss experiments
with a Bayesian network for dialogue act classi-
fication based on a dialogue corpus for the Karin
agent. In Section 4 we discuss our current ex-
periments with a network for the navigation dia-
logue system that was automatically created from
a small corpus. Section 5 reflects on our findings
and presents plans for the near future.
2 Bayesian Networks and Speech Act
Recognition
Since Austin and Searle deliberately producing a
linguistic utterance (?locutionary act?) is perform-
ing a speech act (?illocutionary act?). Many re-
searchers have contributed in distinguishing and
categorising types of speech acts we can perform.
See (Traum, 2000) for a valuable discussion on
dialogue act taxonomies and an extensive bibli-
ography.
A dialogue system needs a user model. The
better the user model the better the system is able
to understand the user?s intentions from the locu-
tionary act. We consider the human participant
in a dialogue as a source of communicative ac-
tions. Actions can be some verbal dialogue act
or some non-verbal pointing act (the act of point-
ing at some object). We assume the user is ra-
tional: there is a dependency between the action
performed and the intentional state of the user. If
we restrict to communicative acts that are realized
by uttering (speaking or typing) a sentence we
can model the user by a probability distribution
P (U = u|DA = da): the probability that the user
produces an utterance u (the stochastic variable U
has value u) given that he performs a dialogue act
da ( DA has the value da). Or - maybe better: the
confidence we can have in believing that the user
uses utterance u if we know that the dialogue act
he performs is da. Since there are many distinct
wordings u for performing a given dialogue act
da and on the other hand there are distinct dia-
logue acts that can be performed by the same ut-
terance, we need more than superficial linguistic
information to decide upon the intended dialogue
act given an utterance. The task of the dialogue
act recognition (DAR) module of a dialogue sys-
tem is to answer the question: what is the most
likely dialogue act da intended by the user given
the system has observed the utterance u in a dia-
logue context c. (Notice that we have equated the
utterance produced by the user with the utterance
recognised by the system: there is no information
loss between the module that records the utter-
ance and the input of the dialogue act recognition
module.)
To make this problem tractable we further re-
strict the model by assuming that a) the user en-
gaged in a dialogue can only have the intention
to perform one of a finite number of possible di-
alogue acts; b) each of the possible natural lan-
guage utterances u produced by the user and ob-
served by the system can be represented by a fi-
nite number of feature value pairs (fi = vi); and
c) the dialogue context can be represented by a
finite number of feature value pairs (gi = ci).
Given these restrictions the DAR problem be-
comes to find that value da of DA that maximises
P ( DA = da | f1 = v1, . . . , fn = vn,
g1 = c1, . . . , gm = cm ).
For the probabilistic model from which this can
be computed we use a Bayesian network (Pearl,
1988). A Bayesian network is a directed acyclic
graph in which the nodes represent the stochastic
variables considered, while the structure (given
by the arcs between the nodes) constitutes a set
of conditional independencies among these vari-
ables: a variable is conditionally independent of
its non-descendants in the network, given its par-
ents in the network. Consider the network in Fig-
ure 2: it contains one node representing the di-
alogue act (DA), 3 nodes representing utterance
features (NumWrds, CanYou and IWant) and
a node representing a context feature (PrevDA).
From the network structure follows that for ex-
ample variable DA is conditionally independent
of variable NumWrds, given variable CanYou.
The conditional independencies make the
model computationally more feasible: finding a
specification of the joint probability distribution
(jpd) for the model reduces to finding the condi-
tional probability distributions of each of the vari-
ables given their network parents. In our example
network, the following jpd specification holds:
P (DA, NumWrds,CanYou, IWant,PrevDA) =
P (IWant) ? P (PrevDA|DA) ? P (CanYou) ?
DA
PrevDA
IWant
CanYou
NumWrds
Figure 2: A Bayesian Network for Dialogue Act
Recognition.
? P (DA|CanYou, IWant) ?
? P (NumWrds|CanYou,PrevDA)
The construction of a Bayesian network hence
amounts to choosing a network structure (the con-
ditional independencies) and choosing the condi-
tional probability distributions. In practice, the
probabilities will have to be assessed from em-
pirical data by using statistical techniques. The
structure can generated from data too, but another
option is to choose it manually: the arcs in the
network can be chosen, based on the intuition that
they represent a causal or temporal relationship
between two variables. Strictly spoken however,
a Bayesian network only represents informational
relationships between variables.
Notice that the machine learning technique
known as Naive Bayes Classifier (see for instance
(Mitchell, 1997)) assumes that all variables are
conditionally independent of each other given
the variable that has to be classified. A Naive
Bayes classifier can be seen as a special case of
a Bayesian network classifier, where the network
structure consists of arcs from the class variable
to all variables representing the features: see Fig-
ure 3.
DA
IWant CanYou NumWrdsPrevDA
Figure 3: Naive Bayes classifier as Bayesian Net-
work.
Naive Bayes classifiers will perform as good
as the Bayesian network technique only if indeed
all feature variables are conditionally indepen-
dent, given the class variable. The problem is
of course how do we know that they are condi-
tionally independent? If we don?t have complete
analytical knowledge about the (in)dependencies,
only analysing the data can give an answer to this
question. The advantage of using Bayesian net-
works is that methods exist to construct the net-
work structure as well as the conditional proba-
bilities. Moreover Bayesian networks are more
flexible in their use: unlike Bayesian classifiers
we can retrieve the posterior probabilities of all
the network variables without re-computation of
the model. The same advantage do Bayesian net-
works have over Decision Tree learning methods
like C4.5 that output a decision tree for classi-
fying instances with respect to a given selected
class variable. Experiments have shown that
Naive Bayesian classifiers give results that are as
good as or even better than those obtained by
decision tree classification techniques. Hence,
there are theoretical as well as practical reasons
to use Bayesian networks. However, since there
is hardly any experience in using Bayesian net-
works for dialogue act classification we have to
do experiments to see whether this technique also
performs better than the alternatives mentioned
above for this particular application.
The next two sections describe experiments
with 1) the SCHISMA corpus - elaborating on pre-
vious work described in (Keizer, 2001) - and 2) a
preliminary small corpus of navigation dialogues.
We motivate our choice of dialogue acts and fea-
tures and present some first results in training a
Bayesian network and testing its performance.
3 Experiments with the Schisma corpus
3.1 Dialogue acts and features
The current dialogue system for interacting with
Karin is based on analyses of the SCHISMA cor-
pus. This is a corpus of 64 dialogues, obtained
through Wizard of Oz experiments. The interac-
tion between the wizard - a human simulating the
system to be developed - and the human user was
established through keyboard-entered utterances,
so the dialogues are textual. The task at hand
is information exchange and transaction: users
are enabled to make inquiries about theatre per-
formances scheduled and if desired, make ticket
reservations.
We have manually annotated 20 dialogues
from the SCHISMA corpus, using two layers
of the DAMSL multi-layer annotation scheme
(Allen and Core, 1997), a standard for annotat-
ing task-oriented dialogues in general. The layer
of Forward-looking Functions contains acts that
characterise the effect an utterance has on the
subsequent dialogue, while acts on the layer of
Backward-looking Functions indicate how an ut-
terance relates to the previous dialogue. Because
DAMSL does not provide a refined set of dia-
logue acts concerning information-exchange, we
have added some new dialogue acts. For example,
ref-question, if-question and alts-
question were added as acts that further spec-
ify the existing info-request.
For the experiments, we selected a subset of
forward- and backward-looking functions from
the hierarchy that we judged as the most impor-
tant ones to recognise: those are listed in Table
1. In Figure 4, a fragment of an example dia-
logue between S (the server) and C (the client) is
given, in which we have indicated what forward-
and backward-looking functions were performed
in each utterance.
Forward-looking
Functions
assert
open-option
request
ref-question
if-question
alts-question
action-directive
offer
commit
conventional
expressive
otherff
Backward-looking
Functions
accept
approve
reject
disapprove
hold
acknowledge
not-understood
positive answer
negative answer
feedback
otherbf
Table 1: Dialogue Acts for SCHISMA.
The user utterances have also been tagged man-
ually with linguistic features. We have distin-
guished the features in Table 2, assuming they can
be provided for by a linguistic parser.
The dialogue context features selected include
the backward-looking function of the last system
utterance and the forward-looking function of the
previous user utterance. In the experiment with
S: Hello, how can I help you?
conventional
C: When can I see Herman Finkers?
ref-question; otherbf
S: On Saturday the 12th at 20h.
assert; pos-answer
C: I would like 2 tickets please.
action-directive; otherbf
S: Do you have a discount card?
if-question; hold
. . .
Figure 4: Dialogue fragment with forward- and
backward-looking functions.
Sentence Type
declarative
yn-question
wh-question
imperative
noun phrase
adverbial
adjective
number
interjective
continuation
Subject Type
first person
second person
third person
Punctuation
period
question mark
exclam. mark
comma
none
Table 2: Utterance features for SCHISMA.
the SCHISMA dialogues we have constructed a
network structure (see Figure 5) by hand and then
used the data of the annotated dialogues to train
the required conditional probabilities.
PBFS
FFC
SeTp
SuTp
Punct
PFFC
Figure 5: Bayesian network for DAR to be trained
with the SCHISMA dialogues.
The choice of structure is based on the in-
tuition that the model reflects how a client de-
cides which communicative action to take; al-
though the arcs themselves have no explicit
meaning - they only contribute to the set of
conditional independencies - they can be seen
here as a kind of temporal or causal relation-
ships between the variables (as mentioned ear-
lier in Section 2): given the dialogue context -
defined by the previous forward-looking function
of the client (PFFC) and the previous backward-
looking function of the server (PBFS), the client
decides which forward-looking function to per-
form (FFC); from this decision he/she formulates
a natural language utterance with certain features
including the sentence type (SeTp) the subject
type (SuTp) and punctuation (Punct).
Recalling the notion of conditional indepen-
dence in Bayesian networks described in Section
2, it follows that by choosing the network struc-
ture of Figure 5, we have made the (admittedly,
disputable) assumption that, given the forward-
looking function of the client, the three utterance
features are conditionally independent of each
other.
3.2 Results and evaluation
For assessing the conditional probability distribu-
tions, we have used the Maximum A Posteriori
(MAP) learning technique - see e.g. (Heckerman,
1999). For training we have used 330 data sam-
ples which is 75% of the available data; the re-
maining samples have been used for testing. We
have measured the performance of the network
in terms of the accuracy of estimating the cor-
rect forward-looking function for different cases
of available evidence, varying from having no ev-
idence at all to having evidence on all features.
This resulted in an average accuracy of 43.5%.
Adding complete evidence to the network for ev-
ery test sample resulted in 38.7% accuracy.
As the amount of data from the SCHISMA cor-
pus currently available is rather small, the results
cannot expected to be very good and more data
have to be collected for further experiments. Still,
the testing results show that the accuracy is signif-
icantly better than an expected accuracy of 8.3%
in the case of guessing the dialogue act randomly.
A tighter baseline commonly used is the relative
frequency of the most frequent dialogue act. For
the data used here, this gives a baseline of 32.5%,
which is still less than our network?s accuracy.
4 Experiments with the navigation
corpus
4.1 Dialogue acts and features
A small corpus of dialogues was derived from the
first implementation of a dialogue system for in-
teraction with the navigation agent. For the ex-
periments with the navigation corpus we also use
the DAMSL layers of Forward- and Backward-
looking functions. On each of these two lay-
ers we only distinguish dialogue acts on the first
level of the hierarchies (see Table 3 for the di-
alogue acts used); a more refined subcategorisa-
tion should be performed by a second step in the
DAR module. The dialogue acts in Table 1 can
be found at the deeper levels of the DAMSL hi-
erarchy, e.g. a request is a special case of a
infl addr fut act and an acknowledge
is a special case of an understanding. The
dialogue act recogniser may also use more ap-
plication specific knowledge in further identifi-
cation of the user intention. Information that
may be used is dialogue information concerning
topic/focus.
Forward-looking
Functions
statement
infl addr fut act
info request
comm sp fut act
conventional
expl performative
exclamation
Backward-looking
Functions
agreement
understanding
answer
Table 3: Dialogue Acts for Navigation.
For the navigation dialogues, we have chosen
a set of surface features of what will eventually
be spoken utterances, in contrast to the typed di-
alogues in the SCHISMA corpus. Therefore, we
don?t use a textual feature like punctuation. For
each utterance, the feature values are found au-
tomatically using a tagger (the features in the
SCHISMA dialogues were tagged manually). In
Table 4 we have listed the features with their pos-
sible values we initially consider relevant.
The dialogue context features include the
backward- and forward-looking function of the
previous dialogue act. This is always a dialogue
act performed by the system. The possible dia-
logue acts performed by the system are the same
as those performed by the user.
The network is generated from data that were
obtained by manually annotating the user ut-
terances in the navigation corpus following the
DAMSL instructions as close as possible. As
with every categorisation there are problematic
Features Values
lenq one, few, many
iswh true, false
not in prev true, false
startsWithCanYou true, false
startsWithCanI true, false
startsWithIWant true, false
containsPositive true, false
containsNegative true, false
containsOkay true, false
containsLocativePrep true, false
containsLocativeAdverb true, false
containsTell true, false
containsDo true, false
Table 4: Surface features of user utterances and
their possible values.
border cases, e.g. when to annotate with in-
direct speech acts. We used the criterion that
such an act should be recognised without task-
specific considerations. Therefore the utterance
?I want to make a phone-call? is annotated as a
statement although eventually it should be in-
terpreted as an info request (?where can I
find a phone??) in the context of a navigation di-
alogue.
After the dialogue act has been recognised the
navigation agent will make a plan for further ac-
tions and perform the planned actions. We will
not discuss that here.
4.2 Results and evaluation
In this experiment the data are used for learning
both structure and conditional probabilities of a
Bayesian network. We have used an implementa-
tion of the K2 algorithm (Cooper and Herskovits,
1992) to generate the network structure and then
- like in the SCHISMA experiment - used MAP to
assess the conditional probability distributions.
Starting from the small corpus of navigation
dialogues, a procedure has been planned to iter-
atively enlarge the corpus: given the annotated
corpus, derive a network, use the network in a
dialogue system, test the network and add these
dialogues - with the corrected backward- and
forward-looking functions - to the corpus. This
results in a more extended set of annotated dia-
logues. And we start again. After each of the
cycles we compare the results (in terms of accu-
racies) with the results of the previous cycle. This
should give more insight in the usefulness of the
features and values chosen for the Bayesian net-
work. After deciding to adapt the set of features
we automatically annotate the corpus; we derive
a new network and we test again.
The current corpus is too small to expect good
results from a generated network, especially if the
data are used for learning both the structure and
the probability distributions. From the initial cor-
pus of 81 utterances 75% was used for generating
a Bayesian network. Testing on the remaining
25% resulted in accuracy of 57.1% for classify-
ing the forward-looking function and 81.0% for
classifying the backward-looking function. Af-
ter this first cycle, new data have been generated
interactively, following the procedure described
above. The Bayesian network trained from this
new data set resulted in the improved accuracies
of 76.5% and 88.2% for classifying the forward-
and backward-looking function respectively. Fol-
lowing this training and testing procedure, we
hope to develop Bayesian networks with increas-
ing performance.
5 Discussion and conclusions
In this paper we have discussed the use of
Bayesian networks for dialogue act recognition in
a natural language dialogue system. We have de-
scribed the construction of such networks from
data in two cases: 1) using annotated dialogues
from the SCHISMA corpus - information ex-
change and transaction - and 2) using a small cor-
pus of annotated navigation dialogues.
As the amount of data currently available is
rather small (especially the navigation corpus),
the network performances measured are not too
impressive. In order to get more data, we have de-
veloped a testing environment which at the same
time enables us to enlarge the corpus. With the
increasing amount of data we hope to construct
Bayesian networks with increasing performance.
As for the SCHISMA corpus, there are 44 dia-
logues that remain to be annotated, also resulting
in more data.
One of the first and most important questions
to be answered concerns the selection of a set of
features (and their values) that set up the model.
We started with a set of features selected on in-
tuition. Then the dialogue corpus was annotated.
As a result of experiments we may conclude that
some of the features have no selective value, so
we can leave them out of the model.
In the future we would like to compare the
approach of using Bayesian networks with other
classifiers that can also be constructed from data,
e.g. decision trees or Bayesian classifiers. Figure
5 shows the accuracies of three different classi-
fiers that were generated from the current set of
navigation data.
Class Bayesian Decision Naive
variable network tree Bayes
forw funct 76.5% 50.0% 55.9%
backw funct 88.2% 64.7% 61.8%
Table 5: Accuracies of three different classi-
fiers for classifying the forward-looking func-
tion (forw funct) and backward-looking function
(backw funct), where all classifiers have been
built from the same set of navigation data.
In our future experiments we will take into ac-
count more refined performance measures like
precision and recall and confusion matrices in
which classification results for individual dia-
logue act types are shown. Such results can help
us make decisions w.r.t. the selected dialogue act
types and features.
Furthermore, non-verbal communicative ac-
tions like pointing at objects in the virtual envi-
ronment could be relevant in recognising dialog
acts and should therefore be made available as
possible features in our Bayesian network clas-
sifiers.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the referees for their com-
ments on our paper; these have been very useful
to us in preparing this final version.
References
J. Allen and M. Core. 1997. Draft of
DAMSL: Dialog Act Markup in Several Lay-
ers. URL: http://www.cs.rochester.
edu/research/trains/annotation.
T. Andernach. 1996. A machine learning approach to
the classification and prediction of dialogue utter-
ances. In Proceedings of the Second International
Conference on New Methods in Language Process-
ing (NeMLaP-2), pages 98?109, Ankara, Turkey.
G. F. Cooper and E. Herskovits. 1992. A Bayesian
method for the induction of probabilistic networks
from data. Machine Learning, 9:309?347.
D. Heckerman. 1999. A tutorial on learning with
Bayesian networks. In M. Jordan, editor, Learning
in Graphical Models. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
S. Keizer. 2001. A Bayesian approach to dialogue
act classification. In P. Ku?hnlein, H. Rieser, and
H. Zeevat, editors, BI-DIALOG 2001: Proc. of the
5th Workshop on Formal Semantics and Pragmatics
of Dialogue, pages 210?218.
J. van Luin, R. op den Akker, and A. Nijholt. 2001.
A dialogue agent for navigation support in virtual
reality. In J. Jacko and A. Sears, editors, ACM
SIGCHI Conf. CHI 2001: Anyone. Anywhere, pages
117?118, Seattle. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
T.M. Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning. Computer
Science Series. McGraw-Hill.
A. Nijholt, J. Zwiers, and B. van Dijk. 2001. Maps,
agents and dialogue for exploring a virtual world.
In N. Callaos, S. Long, and M. Loutfi, editors, 5th
World Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics
and Informatics (SCI 2001), volume VII of Human
Information and Education Systems, pages 94?99,
Orlando, July.
A. Nijholt. 2000. Multimodal interactions with
agents in virtual worlds. In N. Kasabov, editor,
Future Directions for Intelligent Systems and Infor-
mation Science, Physica-Verlag: Studies in Fuzzi-
ness and Soft Computing, chapter 8, pages 148?
173. Springer.
T. Paek and E. Horvitz. 2000. Conversation as action
under uncertainty. In 16th Conference on Uncer-
tainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI-2000), pages
455?464, San Francisco, CA, June. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers.
J. Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent
Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan
Kaufmann.
S.G. Pulman. 1996. Conversational games, belief re-
vision and Bayesian networks. In J. Landsbergen,
J. Odijk, K. van Deemter, and G. Veldhuijzen van
Zanten, editors, Computational Linguistics in the
Netherlands.
A. Stolcke et al 2000. Dialogue act modelling for au-
tomatic tagging and recognition of conversational
speech. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):339?
374.
D.R. Traum. 2000. 20 questions on dialogue act tax-
onomies. Journal of Semantics, 17(1):7?30.
