Urdu and the Parallel Grammar Project
Miriam Butt
Cent. for Computational Linguistics
UMIST
PO Box 88
Manchester M60 1QD GB
mutt@csli.stanford.edu
Tracy Holloway King
Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Rd.
Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA
thking@parc.com
Abstract
We report on the role of the Urdu grammar in the
Parallel Grammar (ParGram) project (Butt et al,
1999; Butt et al, 2002).1 The ParGram project was
designed to use a single grammar development plat-
form and a unified methodology of grammar writ-
ing to develop large-scale grammars for typologi-
cally different languages. At the beginning of the
project, three typologically similar European gram-
mars were implemented. The addition of two Asian
languages, Urdu and Japanese, has shown that the
basic analysis decisions made for the European lan-
guages can be applied to typologically distinct lan-
guages. However, the Asian languages required the
addition of a small number of new standard analy-
ses to cover constructions and analysis techniques
not found in the European languages. With these ad-
ditional standards, the ParGram project can now be
applied to other typologically distinct languages.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we report on the role of the Urdu
grammar in the Parallel Grammar (ParGram) project
(Butt et al, 1999; Butt et al, 2002). The ParGram
project originally focused on three closely related
European languages: English, French, and German.
Once grammars for these languages were estab-
lished, two Asian languages were added: Japanese
and Urdu.2 Both grammars have been successfully
integrated into the project. Here we discuss the Urdu
grammar and what special challenges it brought to
the ParGram project. We are pleased to report that
creating an Urdu grammar within the ParGram stan-
dards has been possible and has led to typologically
useful extensions to the project.
The ParGram project uses the XLE parser
1We would like to thank Mary Dalrymple, Ron Kaplan, Hi-
roshi Masuichi, and Tomoko Ohkuma for their comments.
2Norwegian was also added at this time.
and grammar development platform (Maxwell
and Kaplan, 1993) to develop deep grammars
for six languages. All of the grammars use the
Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) formalism
which produces c(onstituent)-structures (trees)
and f(unctional)-structures (AVMs) as syntactic
analyses.
LFG assumes a version of Chomsky?s Universal
Grammar hypothesis, namely that all languages are
governed by similar underlying structures. Within
LFG, f-structures encode a language universal level
of analysis, allowing for cross-linguistic parallelism.
The ParGram project aims to test the LFG formal-
ism for its universality and coverage limitations and
to see how far parallelism can be maintained across
languages. Where possible, the analyses produced
for similar constructions in each language are paral-
lel. This parallelism requires a standard for linguistic
analysis. In addition, the LFG theory itself limits the
set of possible analyses, thus restricting the possible
analyses to choose from. The standardization of the
analyses has the computational advantage that the
grammars can be used in similar applications, and
it can simplify cross-language applications (Frank,
1999).
The conventions developed within the ParGram
grammars are extensive. The ParGram project dic-
tates not only the form of the features used in the
grammars, but also the types of analyses that are
chosen for constructions. In addition, the XLE plat-
form necessarily restricts how the grammars can be
written. In all cases, the Urdu grammar has success-
fully, and straightforwardly, incorporated the stan-
dards that were originally designed for the European
languages. In addition, it has contributed to the for-
mulation of new standards of analysis. Below we
discuss several aspects of this: morphology, lexicon,
and grammar development for the Urdu grammar
within the ParGram project.
2 Morphology
The grammars in the ParGram project depend on
finite-state morphologies as input (Beesley and
Karttunen, 2002). Without this type of resource, it
is difficult to build large-scale grammars, especially
for languages with substantial morphology. For
the original three languages, such morphologies
were readily available. As they had been developed
for information extraction applications instead of
deep grammar applications, there were some minor
problems, but the coverage of these morphologies
is excellent. An efficient, broad-coverage mor-
phology was also available for Japanese (Asahara
and Matsumoto, 2000) and was integrated into the
grammar. This has aided in the Japanese grammar
rapidly achieving broad coverage. It has also helped
control ambiguity because in the case of Japanese,
the morphology determines the part of speech of
each word in the string with very little ambiguity.
While some morphological analyzers al-
ready exist for Hindi,3 e.g., as part of the
tools developed at the Language Technolo-
gies Research Centre (LTRC), IIT Hyderabad
(http://www.iiit.net/ltrc/index.html), they are not
immediately compatible with the XLE grammar
development platform, nor is it clear that the
morphological analyses they produce conform to
the standards and methods developed within the
ParGram project. As such, part of the Urdu project
is to build a finite-state morphology that will serve
as a resource to the Urdu grammar and could be
used in other applications.
The development of the Urdu morphology in-
volves a two step process. The first step is to de-
termine the morphological class of words and their
subtypes in Urdu. Here we hope to use existing re-
sources and lexicons. The morphological paradigms
which yield the most efficient generalizations from
an LFG perspective must be determined. Once the
basic paradigms and morphological classes have
been identified, the second step is to enter all words
in the language with their class and subtype informa-
tion. These steps are described below. Currently we
are working on the first step; grant money is being
sought for further development.
The finite-state morphologies used in the Par-
Gram project associate surface forms of words with
a canonical form (a lemma) and a series of morpho-
logical tags that provide grammatical information
3An on-line morphological analyzer is available at:
http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/plc/tamilweb/hindi.html
about that form. An example for English is shown
in (1) and for Urdu in (2).
(1) pushes: push +Verb +Pres +3sg
push +Noun +Pl
(2) bOlA bOl +Verb +Perf +Masc +Sg
(1) states the English surface form pushes can either
be the third singular form of the verb push or the plu-
ral of the noun push. (2) states that the Urdu surface
form bOlA is the perfect masculine singular form of
the verb bOl.
The first step of writing a finite-state morphology
for Urdu involves determining which tags are as-
sociated with which surface forms. As can be seen
from the above examples, determining the part of
speech (e.g., verb, noun, adjective) is not enough for
writing deep grammars. For verbs, tense, aspect, and
agreement features are needed. For nouns, number
and gender information is needed, as well as infor-
mation as to whether it is a common or proper noun.
Furthermore, for a number of problematic morpho-
logical phenomena such as oblique inflection on
nominal forms or default agreement on verbs, the
most efficient method of analyzing this part of the
morphology-syntax interface must be found (Butt
and Kaplan, 2002).
After having determined the tag ontology, the pat-
terns of how the surface forms map to the stem-tag
sets must be determined. For example, in English the
stem-tag set dog +Noun +Pl corresponds to the sur-
face form dogs in which an s is added to the stem,
while box +Noun +Pl corresponds to boxes in which
an es is added. At this point in time, the basic tag set
for Urdu has been established. However, the mor-
phological paradigms that correspond to these tag
combinations have not been fully explored.
Once the basic patterns are determined, the sec-
ond stage of the process begins. This stage involves
greatly increasing the coverage of the morphology
by adding in all the stems in Urdu and marking them
for which set of tags and surface forms they appear
with. This is a very large task. However, by using
frequency lists for the language and existing lexi-
cons,4 the most common words can be added first to
obtain a major gain in coverage.
In addition, a guesser can be added to guess words
that the morphology does not yet recognize (Chanod
4A web search on Hindi dictionary results in several
promising sites.
and Tapanainen, 1995). This guessing is based on
the morphological form of the surface form. For ex-
ample, if a form ending in A is encountered and not
recognized, it could be considered a perfect mascu-
line singular form, similar to bOlA in (2).
3 Lexicon
One advantage of the fact that the XLE system in-
corporates large finite-state morphologies is that the
lexicons for the languages can then be relatively
small. This is because lexicons are not needed for
words whose syntactic lexical entry can be deter-
mined based on their morphological analysis. This is
particularly true for nouns, adjectives, and adverbs.
Consider the case of nouns. The Urdu morphol-
ogy provides the following analysis for the proper
noun nAdyA.
(3) nAdyA +Noun +Name +Fem
The tags provide the information that it is a noun, in
particular a type of proper noun (Name), and is fem-
inine. The lexical entries for the tags can then pro-
vide the grammar with all of the features that it needs
to construct the analysis of nAdyA; this resulting f-
structure analysis is seen in Figures 2 and 4. Thus,
nAdyA itself need not be in the lexicon of the gram-
mar because it is already known to the morphologi-
cal analyzer.
Items whose lexical entry cannot be predicted
based on the morphological tags need explicit lex-
ical entries. This is the case for items whose subcat-
egorization frames are not predictable, primarily for
verbs. Currently, the Urdu verb lexicon is hand con-
structed and only contains a few verbs, generally one
for each subcategorization frame for use in grammar
testing. To build a broad-coverage Urdu grammar, a
more complete verb lexicon will be needed. To pro-
vide some idea of scale, the current English verb lex-
icon contains entries for 9,652 verbs; each of these
has an average of 2.4 subcategorization frames; as
such, there are 23,560 verb-subcategorization frame
pairs. However, given that Urdu employs produc-
tive syntactic complex predicate formation for much
of its verbal predication, the verb lexicon for Urdu
will be smaller than its English counterpart. On the
other hand, writing grammar rules for the productive
combinatorial possibilities between adjectives and
verbs (e.g., sAf karnA ?clean do?=?clean?), nouns and
verbs (e.g., yAd karnA ?memory do?=?remember?)
and verbs and verbs (e.g., kHA lEnA ?eat take?=?eat
up?) is anticipated to require significant effort.
There are a number of ways to obtain a broad-
coverage verb lexicon. One is to extract the informa-
tion from an electronic dictionary. This does not ex-
ist for Urdu, as far as we are aware. Another is to ex-
tract it from Urdu corpora. Again, these would have
to be either collected or created as part of the gram-
mar development project. A final way is to enter the
information by hand, depending on native speaker
knowledge and print dictionaries; this option is very
labor intensive. Fortunately, work is being done on
verb subcategorization frames in Hindi.5 We plan to
incorporate this information into the Urdu grammar
verb lexicon.
4 Grammar
The current Urdu grammar is relatively small, com-
prising 25 rules (left-hand side categories) which
compile into a collection of finite-state machines
with 106 states and 169 arcs. The size of the other
grammars in the ParGram project are shown in (4)
for comparison.
(4)
Language Rules States Arcs
German 444 4883 15870
English 310 4935 13268
French 132 1116 2674
Japanese 50 333 1193
Norwegian 46 255 798
Urdu 25 106 169
It is our intent to drastically expand the Urdu gram-
mar to provide broad-coverage on standard (gram-
matical, written) texts. The current size of the Urdu
grammar is not a reflection of the difficulty of the
language, but rather of the time put into it. Like the
Japanese and Norwegian grammars, it is less than
two years in development, compared with seven
years6 for the English, French, and German gram-
mars. However, unlike the Japanese and Norwe-
gian grammars, there has been no full-time gram-
mar writer on the Urdu grammar. Below we discuss
the Urdu grammar analyses and how they fit into the
ParGram project standardization requirements.
Even within a linguistic formalism, LFG for Par-
Gram, there is often more than one way to ana-
5One significant effort is the Hindi Verb Project run by Prof.
Alice Davison at the University of Iowa; further information is
available via their web site.
6Much of the effort in the initial years went into developing
the XLE platform and the ParGram standards. Due to these ini-
tial efforts, new grammars can be developed more quickly.
lyze a construction. Moreover, the same theoreti-
cal analysis may have different possible implemen-
tations in XLE. These solutions often differ in ef-
ficiency or conceptual simplicity. Whenever possi-
ble, the ParGram grammars choose the same anal-
ysis and the same technical solution for equivalent
constructions. This was done, for example, with im-
peratives. Imperatives are assigned a null pronomi-
nal subject within the f-structure and a feature indi-
cating that they are imperatives.
Parallelism, however, is not maintained at the cost
of misrepresenting the language. Situations arise in
which what seems to be the same construction in
different languages cannot have the same analysis.
An example of this is predicate adjectives (e.g., It
is red.). In English, the copular verb is considered
the syntactic head of the clause, with the pronoun
being the subject and the predicate adjective be-
ing an XCOMP. However, in Japanese, the adjective
is the main predicate, with the pronoun being the
subject. As such, these constructions receive non-
parallel analyses.
Urdu contains several syntactic constructions
which find no direct correlate in the European
languages of the ParGram project. Examples are
correlative clauses (these are an old Indo-European
feature which most modern European languages
have lost), extensive use of complex predication,
and rampant pro-drop. The ability to drop argu-
ments is not correlated with agreement or case
features in Urdu, as has been postulated for Italian,
for example. Rather, pro-drop in Urdu correlates
with discourse strategies: continuing topics and
known background information tend to be dropped.
Although the grammars do not encode discourse
information, the Japanese grammar analyzes pro-
drop effectively via technical tools made available
by the grammar development platform XLE. The
Urdu grammar therefore anticipates no problems
with pro-drop phenomena.
In addition, many constructions which are stal-
warts of English syntax do not exist in Asian lan-
guages. Raising constructions with seem, for exam-
ple, find no clear correlate in Urdu: the construction
is translated via a psych verb in combination with
a that-clause. This type of non-correspondence be-
tween European and South Asian languages raises
challenges of how to determine parallelism across
analyses. A similar example is the use of expletives
(e.g., There is a unicorn in the garden.) which do not
exist in Urdu.
4.1 Existing Analysis Standards
While Urdu contains syntactic constructions which
are not mirrored in the European languages, it shares
many basic constructions, such as sentential com-
plementation, control constructions, adjective-noun
agreement, genitive specifiers, etc. The basic analy-
sis of these constructions was determined in the ini-
tial stage of the ParGram project in writing the En-
glish, French, and German grammars. These analy-
sis decisions have not been radically changed with
the addition of two typologically distinct Asian lan-
guages, Urdu and Japanese.
The parallelism in the ParGram project is pri-
marily across the f-structure analyses which encode
predicate-argument structure and other features that
are relevant to syntactic analysis, such as tense and
number.7 A sample analysis for the sentence in (5)
is shown in Figures 1 and 2.
(5) nAdyA kA kuttA AyA
Nadya Gen.M.Sg dog.Nom come-Perf.M.Sg
?Nadya?s dog came.?
The Urdu f-structure analysis of (5) is similar to that
of its English equivalent. Both have a PRED for the
verb which takes a SUBJ argument at the top level
f-structure. This top level structure also has TNS-
ASP features encoding tense and aspect information,
as well as information about the type of sentence
(STMT-TYPE) and verb (VTYPE); these same fea-
tures are found in the English structure. The analy-
sis of the subject is also the same, with the posses-
sive being in the SPEC POSS and with features such
as NTYPE, NUM, and PERS. The sentence in (5) in-
volves an intransitive verb and a noun phrase with a
possessive; these are both basic constructions whose
analysis was determined before the Urdu gram-
mar was written. Yet, despite the extensive differ-
ences between Urdu and the European languages?
indeed, the agreement relations between the genitive
and the head noun are complex in Urdu but not in
English?there was no problem using the standard
analysis for the Urdu construction.
4.2 New Analysis Standards
Analyses of new constructions have been added for
constructions found in the new project languages.
7The c-structures are less parallel in that the languages differ
significantly in their word orders. Japanese and Urdu are SOV
while English is SVO. However, the standards for naming the
nodes in the trees and the types of constituents formed in the
trees, such as NPs, are similar.
CS 1: ROOT
S
KP
NP
KPposs
NP
N
nAdyA
Kposs
kA
N
kuttA
VCmain
Vmain
V
AyA
Figure 1: C-structure tree for (5)
"nAdyA kA kuttA AyA"
?A<[14:kutt]>?PRED
?kutt?PRED
massGRAINNTYPE
?Nadya?PRED
namePROPERNTYPE
+SPECIFIC
CASE gen, GEND fem, NMORPH nom, NUM sg, PERS 30
POSSSPEC
CASE nom, GEND masc, NUM sg, PERS 314
SUBJ
perfASPECT
inflMTYPEVMORPH
PASSIVE ,  decl, VFORM perf, VTYPE unacc34
Figure 2: F-structure AVM for (5)
These analyses have not only established new stan-
dards within the ParGram project, but have also
guided the development of the XLE grammar de-
velopment platform. Consider the analysis of case
in Urdu. Although the features used in the analysis
of case were sufficient for Urdu, there was a prob-
lem with implementing it. In Urdu, the case mark-
ers constrain the environments in which they occur
(Butt and King, to appear). For example, the ergative
marker ne only occurs on subjects. However, not all
subjects are ergative. To the contrary, subjects can
occur in the ergative, nominative, dative, genitive,
and instrumental cases. Similarly, direct objects can
be marked with (at least) an accusative or nomina-
tive, depending on the semantics of the clause. Min-
imal pairs such as in (6) for subjects and (7) for ob-
jects suggest a constructive (Nordlinger, 1998) ap-
proach to case.
(6) a. rAm kH ?As-A
Ram.Nom cough-Perf.M.Sg
?Ram coughed.?
b. rAm nE kH ?As-A
Ram=Erg cough-Perf.M.Sg
?Ram coughed (purposefully).?
(7) a. nAdyA nE gArI calAyI
Nadya=Erg car.Nom drive-Perf.F.Sg
hai
be.Pres.3.Sg
?Nadya has driven a car.?
b. nAdyA nE gArI kO calAyA
Nadya=Erg car=Acc drive-Perf.M.Sg
hai
be.Pres.3.Sg
?Nadya has driven the car.?
We therefore designed the lexical entries for the case
markers so that they specify information about what
grammatical relations they attach to and what se-
mantic information is needed in the clausal analysis.
The lexical entry for the ergative case, for example,
states that it applies to a subject.
These statements require inside-out functional
uncertainty (Kaplan, 1988) which had not been used
in the other grammars. Inside-out functional uncer-
tainty allows statements about the f-structure that
contains an item. The lexical entry for nE is shown
in (8).
(8) nE K @(CASE erg) line 1
(SUBJ ($) ? ) line 2
@VOLITION line 3
In (8), the K refers to the part of speech (a case
clitic). Line 1 calls a template that assigns the CASE
feature the value erg; this is how case is done in
the other languages. Line 2 provides the inside-out
functional uncertainty statement; it states that the f-
structure of the ergative noun phrase, referred to as
?, is inside a SUBJ. Finally, line 3 calls a template
that assigns the volitionality features associated with
ergative noun phrases. The analysis for (9) is shown
in Figures 3 and 4.
(9) nAdyA nE yassin ko mArA
Nadya=Erg Yassin=Acc hit-Perf.M.Sg
?Nadya hit Yassin.?
CS 1: ROOT
S
KP
NP
N
nAdyA
K
nE
KP
NP
N
yassin
K
kO
VCmain
Vmain
V
mArA
Figure 3: C-structure tree for (9)
"nAdyA nE yassin kO mArA"
?hit<[0:Nadya], [16:Yassin]>?PRED
?Nadya?PRED
namePROPERNTYPE
+SPECIFIC
CASE erg, GEND fem, NUM sg, PERS 30
SUBJ
?Yassin?PRED
namePROPERNTYPE
+SPECIFIC
CASE acc, GEND masc, NUM sg, PERS 316
OBJ
perfASPECT
inflMTYPEVMORPH
GEND masc, NUM sg, PASSIVE ,  decl, VFORM perf, VTYPE agentive32
Figure 4: F-structure AVM for (9)
There are two intesting points about this analy-
sis of case in Urdu. The first is that although the
Urdu grammar processes case differently than the
other grammars, the resulting f-structure in Figure
4 is similar to its counterparts in English, German,
etc. English would have CASE nom on the subject in-
stead of erg, but the remaining structure is the same:
the only indication of case is the CASE feature. The
second point is that Urdu tested the application of
inside-out functional uncertainty to case both theo-
retically and computationally. In both respects, the
use of inside-out functional uncertainty has proven a
success: not only is it theoretically desirable for lan-
guages like Urdu, but it is also implementationally
feasible, efficiently providing the desired output.
Another interesting example of how Urdu has ex-
tended the standards of the ParGram project comes
from complex predicates. The English, French, and
German grammars do not need a complex predicate
analysis. However, as complex predicates form an
essential and pervasive part of Urdu grammar, it is
necessary to analyze them in the project. At first, we
attempted to analyze complex predicates using the
existing XLE tools. However, this proved to be im-
possible to do productively because XLE did not al-
low for the manipulation of PRED values outside of
the lexicon. Given that complex predicates in Urdu
are formed in the syntax and not the lexicon (Butt,
1995), this poses a significant problem. The syntac-
tic nature of Urdu complex predicate formation is il-
lustrated by (10), in which the two parts of the com-
plex predicate l?kh ?write? and diya ?gave? can be
separated.
(10) a. [anjum nE] [saddaf kO] [ciTTHI]
Anjum.F=Erg Saddaf.F=Dat note.F.Nom
[likHnE dI]
write-Inf.Obl give-Perf.F.Sg
?Anjum let Saddaf write a note.?
b. anjum nE dI saddaf kO [ciTTHI likHnE]
c. anjum nE [ciTTHI likHnE] saddaf kO dI
The manipulation of predicational structures in the
lexicon via lexical rules (as is done for the English
passive, for example), is therefore inadequate for
complex predication. Based on the needs of the Urdu
grammar, XLE has been modified to allow the anal-
ysis of complex predicates via the restriction oper-
ator (Kaplan and Wedekind, 1993) in conjunction
with predicate composition in the syntax. These new
tools are currently being tested by the implementa-
tion of the new complex predicates analysis.
5 Script
One issue that has not been dealt with in the Urdu
grammar is the different script systems used for
Urdu and Hindi. As seen in the previous discussions
and the Figures, transcription into Latin ASCII is
currently used by the Urdu grammar. This is not a
limitation of the XLE system: the Japanese grammar
has successfully integrated Japanese Kana and Kanji
into their grammar.
The approach taken by the Urdu grammar is dif-
ferent from that of the Japanese, largely because two
scripts are involved. The Urdu grammar uses the
ASCII transcription in the finite-state morphologies
and the grammar. At a future date, a component will
be built onto the grammar system that takes Urdu
(Arabic) and Hindi (Devanagari) scripts and tran-
scribes them for use in the grammar. This compo-
nent will be written using finite-state technology and
hence will be compatible with the finite-state mor-
phology. The use of ASCII in the morphology al-
lows the same basic morphology to be used for both
Urdu and Hindi. Samples of the scripts are seen in
(11) for Urdu and (12) for Hindi.
(11)
(12)
6 Conclusion
The ParGram project was designed to use a single
grammar development platform and a unified
methodology of grammar writing to develop
large-scale grammars for typologically different
languages. At the beginning of the project, three
typologically similar European grammars were
used to test this idea. The addition of two Asian
languages, has shown that the basic analysis de-
cisions made for the European languages can be
applied to typologically distinct languages. How-
ever, the Asian languages required the addition of a
few new standard analyses to the project to cover
constructions and analysis techniques not found
in the European languages. With this new set of
standards, the ParGram project can now be applied
to other typologically distinct languages.
The parallelism between the grammars in the Par-
Gram project can be exploited in applications using
the grammars: the fewer the differences, the simpler
a multi-lingual application can be. For example, a
translation system that uses the f-structures as input
and output can take advantage of the fact that similar
constructions have the same analysis (Frank, 1999).
The standardization also aids further grammar de-
velopment efforts. Many of the basic decisions about
analyses and formalism have already been made in
the project. Thus, the grammar writer for a new lan-
guage can use existing technology to bootstrap a
grammar for the new language and can parse equiv-
alent constructions in the existing languages to see
how to analyze a construction. This allows the gram-
mar writer to focus on more difficult constructions
not yet encountered in the existing grammars.
References
Masayuki Asahara and Yuji Matsumoto. 2000. Ex-
tended models and tools for high-performance
part-of-speech tagger. In Proceedings of COL-
ING.
Kenneth Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2002.
Finite-State Morphology: Xerox Tools and
Techniques. Cambridge University Press. To
Appear.
Miriam Butt and Ron Kaplan. 2002. The mor-
phology syntax interface in LFG. Presented at
LFG02, Athens, Greece; to appear in the proceed-
ings (CSLI Publications).
Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King. to appear.
The status of case. In Veneeta Dayal and Anoop
Mahajan, editors, Clause Structure in South Asian
Languages. Kluwer.
Miriam Butt, Tracy Holloway King, Mar??a-Eugenia
Nin?o, and Fre?de?rique Segond. 1999. A Grammar
Writer?s Cookbook. CSLI Publications.
Miriam Butt, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King,
Hiroshi Masuichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002.
The parallel grammar project. In Proceedings of
COLING 2002. Workshop on Grammar Engi-
neering and Evaluation.
Miriam Butt. 1995. The Structure of Complex Pred-
icates in Urdu. CSLI Publications.
Jean-Pierrre Chanod and Pasi Tapanainen. 1995.
Creating a tagset, lexicon, and guesser for a
French tagger. In Proceedings of the ACL SIG-
DAT Workshop: From Texts To Tags. Issues in
Multilingual Language Analysis, pages 58?64.
Anette Frank. 1999. From parallel grammar devel-
opment towards machine translation. In Proceed-
ings of MT Summit VII, pages 134?142.
Ron Kaplan and Ju?rgen Wedekind. 1993. Restric-
tion and correspondence-based translation. In
Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 193?202.
Ron Kaplan. 1988. Correspondences and their in-
verses. Presented at the Titisee Workshop on Uni-
fication Formalisms: Syntax, Semantics, and Im-
plementation, Titisee, Germany.
John T. Maxwell, III and Ron Kaplan. 1993. The
interface between phrasal and functional con-
straints. Computational Lingusitics, 19:571?589.
Rachel Nordlinger. 1998. Constructive Case: Evi-
dence from Australian Languages. CSLI Publica-
tions.
