Using Summaries in Document Retrieval 
Mark Wasson 
LexisNexis, a Division of Reed Elsevier, plc 
9443 Springboro Pike 
Miamisburg, OH, USA 45342 
mark.wasson@lexisnexis.com 
 
Abstract  
This paper examines the role that summaries 
can play in document retrieval.  Thirty 
searches are applied to full-text and 
summaries only in large document 
collections, and the results are evaluated 
using two different evaluation scopes.  The 
results support the view that those customer 
segments who want smaller answer sets 
focused on highly relevant documents 
benefit from limiting their searches to 
summaries.  On the other hand, those 
customer segments who wish to retrieve all 
references to some topic should continue to 
search full-text. 
1 Introduction 
The goal that motivated the creation of 
Searchable LEAD in news documents in the 
LexisNexis collection was to provide some 
customer segments with a tool that helps them 
focus their retrieval results on a limited number 
of highly relevant documents, where a highly 
relevant document with respect to some query is 
a document that is substantially about the query 
topic. 
A good, general purpose document summary 
should capture the major topics presented in a 
document.  Presumably if we can capture major 
topics in summaries, then a search that is 
restricted to summaries should do a better job of 
limiting retrieval results to highly relevant 
documents about those topics. 
To support this, we created Searchable 
LEAD, a process that identifies and labels the 
leading sentences or paragraphs of news 
documents as a separate searchable LEAD field.  
A customer?s query, e.g., BUSH AND GORE, 
could easily be limited to the LEAD, e.g., 
LEAD(BUSH AND GORE), or HEADLINE 
and LEAD combination, e.g., HLEAD(BUSH 
AND GORE).  Through three separate 
experiments, the value of leading text as a 
general purpose summary for news documents 
has been verified.  This paper describes a fourth 
experiment that investigates whether and how 
searches limited to this type of summary benefit 
the targeted customers 
In many information retrieval experiments, a 
single user perspective, i.e., a single answer key, 
is used to evaluate the results.  If that 
perspective matches that of the targeted 
customer set, the evaluation is meaningful.  
However, different customer segments perform 
information seeking tasks with different goals 
and perspectives in mind, even when they are 
interested in the same topic.  Just as potential 
search tool enhancements are not one-size-fits-
all, a one-size-fits-all answer key should not be 
used to determine the value of a search aid for 
two sets of customers with fundamentally 
different goals.  In this experiment, the results of 
each query were evaluated using two different 
user perspectives, highly relevant references 
only and all references.  Through this approach 
we were able to determine whether Searchable 
LEAD satisfied the goal that motivated its 
creation. 
2 Defining a Summary for News 
Articles 
For this investigation, the leading text of news 
documents is used as a basis for creating 
document summaries ? specifically the 
definition of Searchable LEAD found in Wasson 
(1998). 
Brandow et al (1995) compared summaries 
they created using tf-idf-based sentence 
extraction to fixed amounts of leading text ? 
       Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 37-44.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
          Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization (including DUC 2002),
approximately 60, 150 and 250 words long, in 
three separate trials ? generated using a slightly 
modified version of our production Searchable 
LEAD text processing software.  In that effort, 
Searchable LEAD-based extracts were judged to 
be acceptable as summaries for general news 
articles 92% of the time.  This compared 
favorably to the 74% reported for those 
summaries created through sentence extraction.  
However, that test was limited to only 250 news 
articles. 
Wasson (1998) reported on a larger scale 
version of this evaluation, although in that work 
Searchable LEAD was used as-is.  Searchable 
LEAD-based extracts resulted in an average 
compression ratio of 13% in that test.  
Compression ratios generally ranged between 
about 5-20% for most documents, depending on 
document length; with Searchable LEAD, the 
number of leading sentences and paragraphs 
included in the leading text field was linked to 
document length.  For a shorter document, the 
Searchable LEAD might consist of only a single 
sentence.  For long documents, Searchable 
LEAD might consist of the first three paragraphs 
or more of the document. 
The Searchable LEAD-based extracts were 
evaluated on their acceptability as summaries in 
more than 2,727 documents.  For the 1,951 
general news articles in that test corpus, 
Searchable LEADs were judged to be acceptable 
as summaries 94.1% of the time, a result that is 
not appreciably different from that reported by 
Brandow et al (1995), especially when seven 
newsbrief type documents are excluded from 
their results.  For the other types of documents 
in the corpus, including lists, newsbriefs and 
transcripts, acceptability rates were somewhat to 
substantially lower, as Table 1 shows. 
Document 
Type 
Number of 
Documents 
Acceptability 
Rate 
General News 1,951 94.1% 
Lists 86 12.8% 
Newsbriefs 191 24.6% 
Transcripts 499 70.3% 
Table 1. LEAD as Summary Acceptability 
Rates for Document Types 
Zhou (1999) reported the results of an 
experiment where Searchable LEADs were 
compared to summaries created by two internal 
prototype and three commercially available 
sentence extraction summary generators in a 
document relevance judgment task, where 
evaluators used each summary to determine the 
corresponding document?s relevance to a topic.  
The result of that evaluation showed that the top 
five systems, including Searchable LEAD, 
statistically tied in this task. 
3 Related Work 
In addition to evaluating the value of both 
Searchable LEAD-based and sentence 
extraction-based extracts for their value as 
general summaries, Brandow et al (1995) also 
reported on the results of a limited experiment 
examining the differences between summary-
only versus full-text searching.  In tests 
involving twelve Boolean queries applied to a 
corpus of about 20,000 documents extracted 
from the LexisNexis NEWS library, they found 
that average precision increased from 37% for 
searches applied to full-text to 45% for searches 
applied to sentence extraction-based extracts and 
47% for searches applied to leading text-based 
extracts.  This was more than offset by large 
drops in relative recall, 100% for full-text 
compared to 56% for sentence extraction-based 
extracts and 58% for leading text-based extracts.  
(Relative recall assumes that the full-text queries 
achieved 100% recall; due to limited resources 
on the project, there was no attempt to determine 
actual recall rates.) 
In addition to its limited scale, there were 
two key problems with this evaluation.  First, 
although Brandow et al (1995) correctly 
reported that Searchable LEAD was introduced 
to enhance search precision, Searchable LEAD 
also targeted only a subset of our customer 
segments, specifically those customers who 
wanted to retrieve only highly relevant 
documents (in LexisNexis-internal jargon, we 
refer to these as on-point or major reference 
documents).  This point was not mentioned in 
Brandow et al (1995), nor was it reflected in 
their search evaluation.  Second, the 
convenience of using relative recall 
notwithstanding, this approach to measuring 
recall will generally magnify the difference in 
recall that should be expected when comparing 
full-text and summary-only search results. 
Sumita & Iida (1997) tested both leading text-
based extracts and tf-idf-based sentence extracts 
of up to three sentences in an experiment 
involving 10 queries and 600 Japanese language 
news articles.  They reported that limiting 
searches to such summaries both improved the 
effectiveness for retrieving highly relevant 
documents, but also helped exclude other 
relevant documents with lower levels of 
relevance. 
Sakai & Sparck Jones (2001) examined the 
value of summaries for general information 
retrieval and a pseudo-relevance feedback 
model, in their case using 30 queries applied to a 
nearly-39,000 document corpus derived from the 
TREC collection.  The Okapi Basic Search 
System was used.  Precision evaluation focused 
on both the top 1000 and top 10 relevance 
ranked documents retrieved.  The authors 
concluded that a summary-only search may be 
as effective as full-text for precision-oriented 
searching of highly relevant documents.  
Incorporating both summaries and full-text 
documents into their pseudo-relevance feedback 
model was significantly more effective than 
using summaries only. 
4 User Evaluation Scopes 
Most information retrieval experiments calculate 
recall, precision and the corresponding f-
measure from a single evaluation perspective or 
evaluation scope.  All documents are judged to 
be relevant or irrelevant with respect to that one 
scope.  However, commercial information 
services now report that they handle millions of 
searches a day for their customers.  It is not 
reasonable to assume that all of the people using 
those services have the same perspective on 
relevance, and yet that is often how we evaluate 
new search aids and features. 
Our customers employ a variety of search 
strategies, depending on their topics, information 
interests, and the point they are at in their 
information seeking task.  At one end, we see 
some customers just starting out on an 
information seeking task, where they typically 
are looking for a few highly relevant documents 
to help introduce themselves to the topic.  
Basically they are trying to provide themselves 
with a good starting point.  At the other extreme, 
we see customers in public relations, 
competitive intelligence or in the due diligence 
phase of their information seeking task.  These 
customers often want to retrieve all references to 
the topic, even those documents that provide 
even the most limited or mundane information. 
Although some may see this simply as the 
customary recall-precision trade-off, that is not 
the case.  A document that contains a passing 
reference to some topic is relevant to those with 
the all reference evaluation scope (retrieval of 
that document is considered successful recall), 
but it is irrelevant to those with a highly relevant 
reference evaluation scope (retrieval of that 
document is considered a precision error).  A 
document?s relevance with respect to some 
customer?s evaluation scope is what drives 
customer perceptions of the resulting recall and 
precision.  Instead of a recall-precision trade-off, 
we have multiple evaluation scopes for which 
recall and precision are determined. 
We recognize the differences in evaluation 
scopes in a single user over time when 
proposing learning systems and personalization 
tools that adapt retrieval or routing results to a 
user?s changing interests (e.g., Lam et al, 1996), 
but we do not recognize these differences when 
we use single answer key evaluations.  As a 
result, over the years, we have seen a number of 
potentially useful search enhancements 
dismissed not because they failed to show 
improvement for any targeted subset of 
customers, but rather because they failed to 
show improvement when using a single general 
evaluation standard (Harmon, 1991; Voorhees, 
1994; Sparck Jones, 1999).  Query expansion 
functionality such as some types of 
morphological or synonym expansion, for 
example, may produce a drop in precision that 
offsets any improvements to recall, but we have 
found that customer segments who require 
retrieving all references to their topic are willing 
to put up with a lot of irrelevant information to 
make sure that they see everything.  Of course, 
those customers would still like to have better 
precision, but they require better recall. 
This was also a problem with the limited 
retrieval experiment reported in Brandow et al 
(1995).  Although Searchable LEAD was 
introduced specifically to support the subset of 
users seeking only highly relevant documents, 
Brandow et al (1995) did not make this 
distinction when evaluating their test of twelve 
Boolean queries. 
For each query evaluated in the experiment 
reported here, two user evaluation scopes were 
created.  One represented Searchable LEAD?s 
targeted customer segment and its desire to 
retrieve only highly relevant documents; the 
other represented the due diligence customer 
segment, which prefers to retrieve all documents 
that contain information about the topic 
regardless of how little or how much. 
5 The Experiment 
5.1 Test Corpus 
Searchable LEAD was tested in the LexisNexis 
NEWS library, a commercial collection of full-
text news documents from thousands of sources, 
including newspapers, magazines, wire services, 
abstract services, trade journals, transcript 
services and other sources.  The document types 
in this document collection reflected these 
sources.  Date-bounded subsets of this collection 
were used, with date ranges varying in length 
from one day (typically more than 45,000 
documents searched) to two years (typically 
more than 32 million documents searched). 
5.2 Search Topics and Topic Scope 
For this investigation thirty topics were selected 
and defined.  The following are a few of the 
topics included in the set of topics: 
? General information about Exxon Corp. 
? Biographical information about Bill 
McCartney, founder of Promise Keepers 
? Office Depot revenue and earnings 
information 
? A specific Dallas Cowboys-Cincinnati 
Bengals football game 
? Expensive outhouses in national parks 
For each of the thirty topics, two scope 
statements were created, where a scope 
statement is a description of what is considered a 
relevant document with respect to the topic. 
One scope statement, the highly relevant 
reference evaluation scope, defined what would 
constitute a highly relevant document.  These 
scope statements typically combined 
quantitative measures with a number of specific 
pieces of information that must be present in a 
retrieved document for it to be considered highly 
relevant.  Requiring some specific pieces of 
information to be present added objectivity to 
the evaluation process. 
The second scope statement, the all reference 
evaluation scope, defined the minimum 
information about the topic that must be present 
in order to consider the document relevant from 
that perspective.  For a named entity topic, a 
document relevant to the all reference scope 
might include as little as a single occurrence of 
the entity?s name. 
The highly relevant reference evaluation 
scope for the Office Depot query required among 
other things revenues, earnings (loss) 
information, and related per-share information.  
The all reference evaluation scope required at 
least one of the financial performance measures, 
with revenue typically being the one found in 
retrieved documents. 
The highly relevant reference evaluation 
scope for the Dallas Cowboys-Cincinnati 
Bengals football game query required some 
specific game statistics, none of which were 
required for the all reference evaluation scope.  
Thus, a pre-game story concerning whether a 
player might play was relevant to the all 
reference evaluation scope but it was irrelevant 
to the highly relevant reference evaluation 
scope.  After all, articles written before the game 
took place obviously could not include game 
statistics. 
More than half the topics focused on named 
entities.  This is consistent with our observations 
of customer search topics applied to news data, 
and this user behavior has also been reported 
elsewhere (e.g., Thompson & Dozier, 1997).  
One effect of this was that the recall and 
precision rates we would observe in this 
experiment were higher than what is commonly 
reported for Boolean search results.  Because 
many proper names are relatively unambiguous, 
and because articles about some named entity 
almost always mention the name, some of the 
queries had much higher accuracy rates than 
might otherwise be expected, and that pulled 
overall average accuracy rates up somewhat.  
The Boolean search EXXON, for example, 
virtually assures us of 100% recall regardless of 
which evaluation scope is used.  Although 
individual Exxon service stations are mentioned 
periodically in the news, most news articles that 
mention Exxon are in fact about the major oil 
company, ensuring fairly high precision for the 
all references evaluation scope. 
5.3 Queries 
Searchable LEAD was created to be used with a 
Boolean search engine.  With 20% of news 
documents in our archives containing fewer than 
100 words, a sizeable number of documents 
have one-sentence LEADs, which would be of 
little value to search engines that rely on term 
frequency. 
Through our own experience and routine 
observations of World Wide Web searchers, 
most customer queries are quite short, typically 
one or two words or phrases, perhaps connected 
by one Boolean operator.  Similarly short 
queries were created for use in this evaluation, 
such as the following: 
? EXXON 
? BILL MCCARTNEY 
? OFFICE DEPOT AND EARNINGS 
? BENGALS AND COWBOYS 
? NATIONAL PARK AND OUTHOUSE 
In some cases, a date restriction was explicitly 
added to the query.  In all other cases, a most 
recent two-year period default date restriction 
was used. 
There was no attempt to maximize the 
accuracy of the queries tested.  Rather, the goal 
was to use queries that mimic typical user 
behavior in order to see how Searchable LEAD 
impacts typical users. 
5.4 Testing 
Each query was applied and corresponding 
retrieval results evaluated in four ways, once for 
each evaluation scope-text scope combination: 
? All reference, full-text 
? All reference, LEAD only 
? Highly relevant reference, full-text 
? Highly relevant reference, LEAD only 
The all reference/full-text combination was 
evaluated first.  Because this combination 
retrieves at least all the documents retrieved by 
any of the other  search-evaluation scope 
combinations, it was possible to use the results 
of this evaluation to create an answer key that 
could also be used by the other evaluations in 
order to ensure consistency of document 
relevance judgments with respect to evaluation 
scope for all the combinations. 
Each test query was applied to all of the 
documents in date-restricted subsets of the All 
News (ALLNWS) file in the LexisNexis NEWS 
library.  A date restriction was used to limit the 
number of documents to be examined when 
verifying the results.  In addition to applying and 
evaluating the query created for a given topic, 
additional queries were used in order to find 
potential recall errors, that is, relevant 
documents with respect to the evaluation scope 
of the topic that were missed by the original 
query.  For the Dallas Cowboys-Cincinnati 
Bengals football game topic, for example, in 
addition to the test query BENGALS AND 
COWBOYS, other queries used to search the 
date range of documents in order to identify 
potential recall errors included the following: 
? CINCINNATI AND (COWBOYS OR 
FOOTBALL) AND NOT(BENGALS 
AND COWBOYS) 
? DALLAS AND (BENGALS OR 
FOOTBALL OR OHIO) AND 
NOT(BENGALS AND COWBOYS) 
? CINERGY AND NOT(BENGALS AND 
COWBOYS) (Cinergy Field is the name of 
the football field where the game was 
played) 
All documents retrieved by such queries were 
examined for their degree of relevance in order 
to produce more accurate recall results in this 
test. 
There was no particular attempt to match the 
date range exactly to a specific event, a 
characteristic of this test (and typical user 
behavior) that often contributed to the number of 
precision errors.  For example, the Dallas 
Cowboys-Cincinnati Bengals football game 
occurred in the previous week, specifically three 
days earlier, but documents retrieved from the 
entire week were examined.  Criteria for a 
highly relevant reference to this game included 
certain game statistics.  Stories written before 
the game could not possibly include such 
information, so they were counted as precision 
errors for the highly relevant reference 
evaluation scope.  From a customer?s 
perspective, our routine reverse chronological 
presentation of retrieved documents would have 
effectively hidden such errors from customers 
until after the desired information was obtained.  
For evaluation purposes, however, the entire 
date range was evaluated. 
Full-text queries were limited to HEADLINE 
and BODY fields of documents.  LEAD only 
queries were limited to the LEAD sub-field of 
the BODY field.  Most news documents in the 
LexisNexis service also have one or more meta-
data fields that may include named entity and/or 
topic-indicating controlled vocabulary terms, in 
addition to other information.  Limiting queries 
to the HEADLINE, BODY and LEAD fields 
focused the evaluation on the impact of using 
summaries as opposed to that of using other 
possible editorial enhancements of the data. 
5.5 Evaluation 
The purpose of Searchable LEAD as a retrieval 
aid is to help some customer segments retrieve a 
highly relevant documents about some topic, and 
to minimize the number of irrelevant documents 
and documents that only contain passing 
references to the topic in the answer set.  If 
Searchable LEAD works, one would expect that 
queries restricted to the LEAD field would result 
in higher precision than queries applied to the 
full-text would. 
For the all reference evaluation scope, one 
would expect recall to fall when shifting from 
full-text to LEAD.  After all, a general summary 
like LEAD typically only includes information 
on major points in the document. 
The impact on recall for the highly relevant 
reference evaluation scope is less certain.  
Because the Searchable LEAD represents an 
acceptable summary in only 94% of general 
news articles, and a lower figure in other types 
of documents found in the LexisNexis NEWS 
library, it is also reasonable to assume that some 
decline in recall would also occur with this 
evaluation scope.  Given that relevant 
documents with this evaluation scope must 
include all the targeted information, recall errors 
as defined by this scope may actually eliminate 
information redundancy, and thus are not 
necessarily critical to the customer.  However, 
the way in which basic pieces of information are 
presented can also be revealing, so such 
redundant documents may still be useful.  
Calculating recall in these cases thus is still 
worthwhile. 
Recall and precision rates were calculated for 
each query for each evaluation scope-text scope 
combination.  For each full-text/LEAD pair, 
recall and precision rates were compared to see 
how consistent increases and decreases were 
with respect to expectations. 
6 Results 
Thirty queries were applied first to full-text and 
then limited to LEAD only.  The results of each 
approach were evaluated twice, once from the 
all reference evaluation scope and once from the 
highly relevant reference evaluation scope. 
For the customer perspective that Searchable 
LEAD targets ? the highly relevant reference 
evaluation scope ? there was a sizeable 
improvement in answer set precision, which 
increased an average of .286, from an average of 
.230 to an average of .516 when the query was 
limited to the LEAD.  As Table 2 also shows, 
recall decreased an average of .192 across the 
thirty queries.  The average standard f-measure 
across the thirty queries increased .150, from 
.300 to .450. 
 Full-text LEAD 
Avg. Recall .785 .593 
Avg. Precision .230 .516 
Avg. f-measure .300 .450 
Table 2.  Averages for thirty queries using the 
highly relevant reference evaluation 
scope. 
(NOTE:  The f-measure listed under LEAD is 
lower than both the corresponding recall and 
precision.  Keep in mind that the figures above 
represent averages for thirty queries.  The f-
measure .450 thus is not based on a recall rate of 
.593 and a precision rate of .516 but rather it is 
the average of thirty individual f-measures.  This 
also explains f-measures provided in Tables 3 
and 4.) 
When evaluated from the perspective of 
customers who want to retrieve all references to 
a topic, restricting the query to the LEAD on 
average resulted in a substantial drop in recall, 
from an average of .704 to an average of .232, a 
drop of .472 on average.  The small .082 
increase in average precision rates barely 
provides any offsetting benefits, as Table 3 
shows.  Average f-measures across the thirty 
queries dropped .324.  Customers who want to 
retrieve all references not surprisingly do not 
benefit at all from using Searchable LEAD. 
 Full-text LEAD 
Recall .704 .232 
Precision .777 .859 
f-measure .657 .333 
Table 3.  Averages for thirty queries using the 
all reference evaluation scope. 
The trends represented by the results in these 
tables were generally consistent with the results 
for individual queries.  When using the highly 
relevant reference evaluation scope, precision 
rates and f-measures increased for 26 of the 
thirty queries when shifting from full-text to 
LEAD.  When using the all reference evaluation 
scope, recall rates decreased or stayed steady 
and f-measures decreased for all thirty queries 
when shifting from full-text to LEAD. 
For all queries tested, the number of 
documents retrieved when using Searchable 
LEAD not surprisingly was lower than when 
using full-text.  Searchable LEAD-based answer 
sets on average were one fourth the size of full-
text-based answer sets, 50.6 documents vs. 
198.7 documents, respectively. 
7 Discussion 
As Table 2 and answer set size statistics show, 
targeted customers benefit when limiting their 
queries to the Searchable LEAD.  As Table 3 
suggests, non-targeted customers such as those 
who want documents with any references to the 
topics clearly should not use Searchable LEAD. 
Most information retrieval system evaluations 
do not take differing customer perspectives into 
account.  If we were to combine the results of 
our all reference and highly relevant reference 
evaluation scopes into one general evaluation 
pool as is done in Table 4, we would still note a 
significant improvement in precision.  However, 
based on the falling f-measure, some might 
conclude that summaries are simply another 
failed attempt to improve information retrieval 
with the help of natural language processing. 
For the average customer overall, that is 
probably a fair conclusion.  However, for the 
customer segments that prefer to retrieve a few 
good highly relevant documents as they start an 
information seeking task, Searchable LEAD 
helped to produce smaller answer sets that were 
more focused on the highly relevant documents 
that those customers target. 
 Full-text LEAD 
Avg. Recall .745 .413 
Avg. Precision .504 .688 
Avg. f-measure .479 .392 
Table 4.  Averages for thirty queries combining 
both the highly relevant reference and 
all reference evaluation scopes. 
As for other retrieval tasks, when creating a 
document categorization system, we did gain 
some benefits when weighting terms found in 
headlines and leading text in news documents a 
bit higher (Wasson, 2000), but that effect is 
limited to news data.  A colleague investigating 
an internal tf-idf-based search engine found no 
benefits to putting extra emphasis on terms 
found in the first paragraph of news articles, but 
that was a rather limited test.  Neither of these 
were evaluated from multiple user perspectives, 
although in the case of Wasson (2000) the 
original project goal was to identify and 
categorize only highly relevant documents 
8 Conclusion 
Customers of online services approach their 
information seeking tasks from many 
perspectives, and yet most IR evaluations are 
conducted from a single user perspective.  Using 
a single user perspective is easier, but it risks 
hiding the potential benefits of some new feature 
from key customer segments who might value it.  
News document summaries such as those in the 
form of Searchable LEAD provide a way to help 
some customer segments retrieve smaller answer 
sets that are focused on highly relevant 
documents.  But the benefits of this are only 
apparent when the results are evaluated from 
that perspective. 
It is not simply a trade-off between recall and 
precision, but one between recall and precision 
with respect to the definition of relevance that 
that different customer segments have.  An 
answer set of ten documents that mention but do 
not comment on some topic may result in 100% 
precision for the all reference evaluation scope 
but 0% precision for the highly relevant 
reference evaluation scope.  Customer segments 
can and do have such widely divergent views of 
relevance. 
This evaluation showed that a customer 
seeking to retrieve a few highly relevant 
documents about some topic would benefit from 
using Searchable LEAD, retrieving smaller 
answer sets and a higher proportion of highly 
relevant documents in that answer set.  A 
customer wanting to retrieve all documents that 
refer to the topic should avoid Searchable LEAD 
and instead continue to use full-text search. 
References  
Brandow, R., Mitze, K. and Rau, L. (1995)  
Automatic Condensation of Electronic 
Publications by Sentence Selection.  
Information Processing & Management, 31/5. 
Harmon, D. (1991) How Effective is Suffixing?  
Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 42/1. 
Lam, W., Mukhopadhyay, S., Mostafa, J., and 
Palakal, M. (1996)  Detection of Shifts in 
User Interests for Personalized Information 
Filtering.  Proceedings of the 19th Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval. 
Sakai, T., and Spark Jones, K. (2001).  Generic 
Summaries for Indexing in Information 
Retrieval.  Proceedings of the 24th Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval. 
Sparck Jones, K. (1999)  What is the Role of 
NLP in Text Retrieval.  In ?Natural Language 
Information Retrieval?, T. Strzalkowski, ed., 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands.   
Sumita, E., & Iida, H. (1997).  Information 
Retrieval Using a Statistical Abstraction 
Model.  Proceedings of the 3rd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Natural 
Language Processing. 
Thompson, P. and Dozier, C. (1997)  Name 
Searching and Information Retrieval.  
Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing. 
Voorhees, E. (1994) Query Expansion Using 
Lexical Semantic Relations.  Proceedings of 
the 17th International ACM-SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. 
Wasson, M. (1998) Using Leading Text for 
News Summaries:  Evaluation Results and 
Implications for Commercial Summarization 
Applications.  COLING-ACL ?98 Conference 
Proceedings. 
Wasson, M. (2000)  Large-scale Controlled 
Vocabulary Indexing for Named Entities.  
Proceedings of the 6th Applied Natural 
Language Processing Conference. 
Zhou, J. (1999)  Phrasal Terms in Real-World 
IR Applications.  In ?Natural Language 
Information Retrieval?, T. Strzalkowski, ed., 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands. 
