The VI framework program in Europe: 
some thoughts about Speech to Speech Translation research. 
Gianni Lazzari 
Centro per la ricerca scientifica e tecnologica ITC-irst 
Via Sommarive 18 38050 Povo Trento  
lazzari@itc.it 
 
 
Abstract 
Significant progress has been made in the 
field of human language technologies. 
Various tasks like continuous speech rec-
ognition for large vocabulary, speaker and 
language identification, spoken informa-
tion inquiry, information extraction and 
cross-language retrieval in restricted do-
mains are today feasible and different pro-
totypes and systems are running. The 
spoken translation problem on the other 
hand is still a significant challenge: 
?Good text translation was hard enough to 
pull off. Speech to speech MT was be-
yond going to the Moon ? it was Mars?? 
[Steve Silbermann, Wired Magazine]. 
Considering the major achievements of 
the last years obtained in the field and the 
related challenges, a question arise: what 
next ? Is it possible to  foresee in the next 
decade real services and applications ? 
How can we reach this goal ? Shall we re-
think the approach ? Shall we need much 
more critical mass ? How about data ? To 
answer to these questions a new prepara-
tory action, TC_STAR_P, funded in the V 
framework, has been settled in Europe. 
Goals, objective  and activities of this 
preparatory action will also be discussed 
in this paper 
1 Introduction 
In the last ten years, many projects addressed the 
speech to speech translation problem, S2ST, i.e. 
VERBMOBIL [1], C-STAR [2], NESPOLE! [3], 
EU-TRANS [4], BABYLON [5], .. Many results 
and advancements have been achieved in method-
ology, approaches and even performance. These 
projects have shown prototypes and demonstra-
tions in different communicative situations: speech 
to speech translation over the telephone, machine 
mediated translation in a face to face communica-
tion ( both in a real face to face or through  video-
conferencing). Some basic approaches have been 
explored: direct translation or data driven (both 
example based and statistical), indirect translation 
trough interlingua-interchange format (IF) and   
mixed approaches, i.e. multiengine. In terms of 
performance significant  results have been obtained 
in the VERBMOBIL project using a  statistical 
approach.  
 
Real applications using ASR technology  are used 
in many applications in every day life [6]. Dicta-
tion machines in limited domain, simple automatic 
services over telephone, command and control in 
car, spoken document retrieval from broadcast 
news. Despite the new economy bubble and some 
dramatic events, like the L&H case, speech com-
panies are still on the market. However in terms of 
technology employed, we are far from providing a 
free communication functionality which is neces-
sary when more complex automatic services are 
needed, even considering communicative situa-
tions where a small number of concepts are in-
volved (very limited domain). Automatic time 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                         Algorithms and Systems, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 129-135.
                          Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation:
table inquiry systems are working in a strictly  
menu driven approach. Automatic directory assis-
tance services can also be classified  in this class of 
applications. Here a further  complexity is given by 
the high perplexity of the directory names, but in 
the end is still a complex communicative situation. 
In fact consider the difficulty in modelling  the 
high number of sentences that can be used when 
trying to get the telephone number of an item of 
the Yellow Pages. 
 
The microelectronic and telecommunication  mar-
ket offers  new opportunity of communication by 
cells phones, pdas, laptops in a wired or wireless 
environment. The communication process in this 
case is helped or ?complicated? by multimodal 
interfaces and multimedia information. A new 
framework could be offered by the Web, which 
?integrates? potentially multimedia data with mul-
timodal communication. In this case the paradigm 
is shifted towards a multimedia, multimodal person 
to person communication, in which the meanings 
are conveyed by the language  and  enhanced with 
multimedia content and non verbal cues. The an-
swer to a given question in a multilingual conver-
sation could be more effective if given in text 
and/or visual form. In this case the problem to af-
ford becomes a combination of language under-
standing, information extraction and multimedia 
generation in the target language. Document re-
trieval, summarization and translation could also 
be involved in this communication process. All 
these technologies should be thought as pieces of a 
whole: a new model for person to person, informa-
tion mediated, communication  that brings together 
all of the resources available: verbal and non ver-
bal communication, multimedia, face to face. Ap-
proaching the multilingual communication as a 
whole means to implement each new technology as 
a brick within an entire edifice. 
 
Starting from the state of the art in speech to 
speech translation research, considering the experi-
ence carried on in setting real applications in ASR 
and having in mind the opportunities offered by 
new devices in a wired and wireless environment, 
a question arise in order to develop real multilin-
gual communication in the next decade: what next? 
Which are the main breakthroughs needed? Many 
issues need to be addressed. First of all  how can 
we reach the necessary performance required by 
the three basic technologies needed, i.e. speech 
recognition, synthesis and machine translation. 
Shall we need a shift in the paradigm of research ? 
Is it mainly a matter of amount and quality of data 
needed? How important are  issues as devices, 
multimedia information involved in a  human to 
human dialog, environmental-contextual informa-
tion provided by intelligent networks? How to in-
tegrate all these contextual information in a 
consistent way ? Many steps and advancements are 
needed in order to answer these questions. These 
are  some of the questions addressed in a project  
whose acronym is TC-SPAR_P, technology and 
corpora for speech to speech translation, recently 
funded by European Union in the last call of the V 
framework. In what follows, first of all a state of 
the art of the basic technologies involved in a 
S2ST systems is summarized, then the most impor-
tant challenges are listed and finally the TC-
STAR_P project is presented. 
 
 
 
2 State of the art  
2.1 Speech recognition 
 
In the last 15 years a number of  speech recogni-
tion tasks have been studied and evaluated. Each 
task presented different challenges. The features 
characterizing these tasks are: type of speech (well 
formed vs spontaneous), target of communication 
(computer, audience, person), bandwidth ( FWB, 
full bandwidth TWB, telephone bandwidth, FF, far 
field). Some of these tasks are dictation (WSJ), 
broadcast news, switchboard, voicemail and meet-
ings. In what follows, they are ordered in terms of  
the word error rate (wer) 
 
Dictation:          7%, well formed, computer,  FBW 
Broadcast news:  12%, various, audience,    FBW 
Switchboard : 20-30% spontaneous, person, TBW 
Voicemail:  30% spontaneous, person, TWB 
Meetings:       50-60%  spontaneous, person  FF 
 
At present the spontaneous speech is the feature 
with the largest effect on word error rate, followed 
by environment effect and domain dependence. 
 
The main challenge for the next years will be to  
develop speech recognition systems that mimics 
human performance. This means in general inde-
pendent of environment, domain and working  as 
well for spontaneous as for read speech. The focus 
areas will mainly concentrate first of all  on im-
proving the spontaneous speech models ( i.e pro-
sodic features and articolatory models, 
multispeaker speech, collect adequate amount of 
conversational speech,?), modeling and training 
techniques for multi-environment and multi-
domain. Then another key issue will be language 
modeling. It is well known  that  different static 
language models work best on specific domain. To 
implement a  language model that works well on 
many domains will be  an important achievement 
towards the goal of mimicking the human per-
formance. A very quick dynamic adaptation at the 
level of word/sentence is an important target of the 
research. Finally other factors driving progress will 
be the continuous improving of computer speed 
over time, the independence from vocabulary and 
the involvement of all the potential researchers in 
the field, not only a few institutions.  Improving 
the performance of conversational speech and in-
troducing highly dynamic language models are the 
two fundamental requirement for improving S2ST 
performances. This is maybe the most critical point 
because performing under 10%, in conversational 
speech, seems today an hard problem. 
2.2 Speech synthesis 
 
Speech synthesis is an important component in a 
speech to speech translation system. To mimics 
human voice is still  one of the most challenging 
goal for speech synthesis. The multilingual human 
to human communication  framework introduce 
new challenges,  gender, age and cultural adapta-
tion. Emotion and prosody are also very important 
issues [7] [8]. 
Today the most effective way to generate synthetic 
speech is based on the concatenation of different 
acoustic units. This approach is in contrast to tradi-
tional rule-based synthesis where the design of the 
deterministic units required explicit knowledge and 
expertise. In a corpus based approach the unit se-
lection process involves a combinatorial search 
over the entire speech corpus, and consequently, 
fast search algorithms have been developed for this 
purpose as an integral part of current synthesis sys-
tems. 
Three are the main factors of the corpus-based 
methods for a specification of the speech segments 
required for concatenative synthesis: first of all  a 
unit selection algorithm, then some objective 
measures used in the selection criteria and finally  
the design of the required speech corpus. From the 
application point of view the huge amount of 
memory necessary for exploiting the concatenation 
of  speech units,  strongly limits the class of appli-
cation. 
Prosody and speaker characteristics are,  together 
with speech segments design, the other two impor-
tant issues in speech synthesis. In order to control 
prosody, it is necessary to ensure adequate intona-
tion and stress, rhythm, tempo and accent. Seg-
mental duration control and fundamental frequency 
control  are  needed. Speech waveforms contain 
not only linguistic information but also speaker 
voice characteristics, as manifested in the glottal 
waveform of voice excitation and in the global 
spectral features representing vocal tract character-
istics. Moreover paralinguistic factors cause 
changes in speaking styles reflected in a change of 
both voice quality and prosody. 
Prosodic modeling is probably the domain from 
which most of the improvements will come. Inves-
tigation in this direction, try to master linguistic 
and extra-linguistic phenomena, will address 
probably  multicultural issues, which are very im-
portant in a multilingual human to human commu-
nication framework. 
 
2.3 Machine Translation 
Beside speech recognition and synthesis the  trans-
lation component is the core of a speech to speech 
translation system. The classical machine transla-
tion (MT)  problem, to translate  a text in a given 
language, i.e. Italian, in a target language, i.e. Chi-
nese, is a completely different problem from the 
S2PT problem First of all in the classical  MT 
problem no human is involved. The process is a 
one way process. The text is supposed to be lin-
guistically ?correct?. In the S2ST process two hu-
mans are involved, the process is bi-directional, the 
language is conversational, spontaneous,  un-
grammatical and mixed with non verbal cues. 
Moreover the  environment, in terms of acoustic 
noise and modality of interaction is a critical issue. 
A near real time translation is mandatory in S2ST. 
Then, because  humans are involved directly in the 
process, the understanding phase is carried on by 
humans in a collaborative way. Finally given that 
anyhow a machine is involved in the translation an 
important issue related to human machine commu-
nication has also to be considered. In order to af-
ford the S2ST problem all these factors have to be 
taken into account.  
Different architectures have been exploited: some 
using  an intermediate language (interlingua, inter-
change format), some  exploiting a  direct transla-
tion method. A typical example of the first case is 
represented by JANUS [9] and NESPOLE! archi-
tectures. The Italian implementation of NESPOLE!  
S2ST system architecture]  consists of two main 
processing chains: the analysis chain and the syn-
thesis chain. The analysis chain converts a Italian 
acoustic signal into a (sequence of), IF    represen-
tation(s) by going through: the recognizer, which 
produces a sequence of word hypotheses for the 
input signal; the understanding module, which ex-
ploits a multi-layer argument extractor and a statis-
tical based classifier to deliver IF representations. 
The synthesis chain starts from an IF expression 
and produces a target language  synthesized audio 
message expressing that content. It consists of two 
modules. The generator first converts the IF repre-
sentation into a more language oriented representa-
tion and then integrates it with domain knowledge 
to produce sentences in Italian. Such sentences 
feed a speech synthesizer. 
 
An example of the direct translation approach is 
represented by the ATR-MATRIX [10] architec-
ture, which exploit a cascade of a speech recog-
nizer with a direct translation algorithm, TDMT, 
whose produced text is then  synthesized. The di-
rect translation  approach is implemented using  
example based algorithms. A second example of 
direct translation, based on statistical modeling , 
has been pioneered by  IBM[11] [12], starting from 
text translation. Statistical translation has also been 
developed in the European project EU-TRANS  
and in the framework of  German project 
VERBMOBIL.  
 
At the moment research is going on in order to de-
velop unified or integrated approaches. To unify 
speech recognition, understanding, and translation 
as an entire statistical  processing is the ultimate 
goal of this approach as well stated in [13] ? We 
consider this integrated approach and its suitable 
implementation to be an open question for future 
research on spoken language translation? 
 From the performance point of view the most im-
portant  experience obtained in the VERBMOBIL pro-
ject, in particular a large-scale end-to-end 
evaluation, showed that the statistical approach 
resulted in significantly lower error rates than three 
competing translation approaches: the sentence 
error rate was 29% in comparison with 52% to 
62% for the other translation approaches.  
 
Finally a key issue for S2ST systems is the end to 
end evaluation methodology. The goal is to de-
velop a methodology based on objective measure-
ment. Evaluation methodologies have been 
proposed and developed in VERBMOBIL, C-
STAR, and by many other groups.   
3 Major Challenges 
 
3.1 Improve significantly the end-to-end per-
formance 
This is the first challenge to be addressed in the 
near future. It seems that unified methodologies 
based on statistical modeling are very promising, 
provided that some key issues will be afforded and 
suitable solutions worked out. This methodology 
allows to include acoustics, phonetic context, 
speaking rate, speaker variations, language features 
such as syntax or semantics, etc. into one unified 
way. Then this approach jointly optimizes acous-
tics, language and speaker effects. From the mod-
eling point of you it represents quite a shift from 
the source model. Much more work is needed in 
proposing new computational tools and building 
up. This approach is also consistent with the 
speech synthesis perspective: corpus based and 
data driven 
 A challenge will  also be the exploitation of real 
applications in a limited domain, i.e. tourism, of 
systems based on interlingua approaches. Key is-
sues in this case are portability and robustness. 
3.2 Produce aligned multilingual corpora and 
lexica 
In order to afford the challenge of  developing new 
models with the hope to improve significantly per-
formance a key issue is given by corpora and 
lexica. In order to afford the problem of spontane-
ous speech recognition, there are proposals [14] of 
collecting and transcribing  5000 hours of  sponta-
neous speech. This issue is controversial; anyhow 
this is what we have learn from the past experience 
in speech recognition. The test data could be a 
mixture of current and new sources. For translation 
aligned multilingual  text corpora are also crucial. 
An effort is going on in a joint cooperation with 
ATR and IRST and with the other member of  C-
STAR III consortium in order to set up an aligned 
text corpora composed by the transcription and 
translation of  phrase book in the tourism domain. 
This phrase book cover a broad range of situations: 
emergency, time table, transport, sightseeing, di-
rections, attractions, hotels, shopping?Aligned 
multilingual lexical are also important language 
resources for future S2ST systems development. A 
current activity is under development in LC-STAR 
[15] a new funded project in the Vth framework by 
EU. 
 
3.3 Integrate speech to speech translation 
components in a real applications 
          Real services and application involving 
speech communication need to manage the ?inter-
face problem?, i.e. the physical impact of the user 
with a device which involves multimodal, multi-
media in a  ubiquitous environment. A wearable 
device, a PDA or 3G cellular  cannot be operated 
by keyboard, and requires sophisticated natural 
multimodal human interfaces. Speech, vision and 
handwriting seem natural candidates for human-
machine interaction. But how can a system provide 
seamless integration between human-machine ser-
vices and human-human services? How can the 
system blend the two, provide assistance and guid-
ance for a user to access and understand databases 
and information resources, but also to serve as a 
go-between to facilitate the interaction with other 
humans or with a user?s direct environment? 
4 A new action in Europe 
Given the challenges previously discussed and the 
experience carried on in the previous and ongoing 
projects  a new and innovative initiative is needed 
to tackle to problem. This initiative in order to be 
successful need first of all a critical mass of re-
searchers. Within Europe few research groups have 
the capability to build up complete SST systems. 
Most research groups are small and work only on 
some research themes, i.e prosody, acoustic model-
ing, language modeling, speech synthesis. Al-
though these small groups may have excellent 
researchers, their work has less impact on the de-
velopment of SST-components. This new initiative 
should provide an appropriate infrastructure to use 
in a effective way the intellectual potential of 
European researchers. Given the big shift needed 
in order to set up this new action, a group of Euro-
pean major players in the spoken language tech-
nology, both research institutions,  industrial 
entities, and ELDA proposed a preparatory action, 
which acronym is TC-STAR_P (Technology and 
Corpora for speech translation). 
 
4.1  Goals and activities. 
 
The preparatory action, under negotiation, fits with 
the action line IST2002-III.5.2 c) ?preparing for 
future research activities?. It is scheduled to begin  
in July 2002. The duration will be  one year with 
the purpose of preparing and getting ready an inte-
grated project for the VI Framework. An integrated 
project as is a large scale action  with the purpose 
to create the European Research Area, ERA.  The 
activity of the TC-STAR_P  will be carried on  by 
the cooperation of  the four groups: an industrial 
group, with proven experience in SST technology 
development, a research group, with proven ex-
perience in research in SST-technologies, an infra-
structure group, with proven experience in 
producing language resources for SST components 
and with proven experience of evaluation of SST 
components and systems. Then a dissemination 
group  will be in charge of using and spreading the 
project?s results 
Three are the main goals of this action: 
 
? developing research roadmaps and as-
sociated implementation models 
? identifying and bringing together all 
relevant actors in the Speech to Speech 
Translation (SST) area 
? investigating effective mechanisms for 
managing future activities 
 
4.1.1 Preparing RTD roadmaps and associated 
implementation models 
 
The consortium is composed of different RTD 
communities: industrial, academics, and infrastruc-
ture entities. All these organizations will contribute 
to develop common visions and analyze research 
requirements for SST systems. As a result of these 
tasks, industrial partners will prepare roadmaps for 
technical implementations and services; the scien-
tific and academic groups will prepare roadmaps 
for technology improvements; and the infrastruc-
ture group will provide roadmaps for LR-
production and evaluation campaigns.  
The work will include a case study where indus-
trial partners and research partners will provide 
application-oriented and research input respec-
tively. The infrastructure group will focus on pre-
paratory tasks for setting up production, evaluation 
and validation centers for the needed LR.  
 
4.1.2 Identifying and bringing together all rele-
vant actors 
The consortium includes some of the most relevant 
actors in the SST field. One of the objectives dur-
ing the lifetime of the project is to attract further 
key actors from the industrial, research and infra-
structure groups, as well as SMEs working with 
SST applications and related fields. 
Within the infrastructure group, a key action is to 
attract and prepare contacts with national agencies 
for funding language specific LR-production in the 
future FP6, and with entities working on evaluation 
and validation of language resources. The devel-
opment of language resources is a very expensive 
activity, which must be best tackled by coordinated 
funding actions at national and European levels. 
 
4.1.3 Investigating a new management model 
 
According to the IST 2002 Work programme, Ac-
tion Line 3.5.2 should focus on building and 
strengthening RTD communities by encouraging 
research, business and user organisations to de-
velop together common visions and analyse re-
search requirements in order to identify common 
challenges and objectives; and on investigating 
effective mechanisms for managing future activi-
ties.  
 
Moreover, a cornerstone of the future work to be 
developed under the Integrated Project is the man-
agement structure. In accordance with Action Line 
3.5.2., the work to be performed under TC-
STAR_P includes exploring a new organizational 
model in order to allow partners to smoothly col-
laborate in pursuing the final goal. This important 
task will be investigated during the project.  Issues 
such as distribution of work and resources, admis-
sion and withdrawal of participants, engagement of 
additional parties, scientific guidance and monitor-
ing, etc. will be examined. The model has to be 
effective to reach the envisaged goal, to react to 
external new trends, needs and demands coming 
from the market, society and scientific community 
Section 2 
 
References 
[1] W. Wahlster (Ed.): Verbmobil: Foundations of 
speech-to-speech translations. Springer-Verlag, Ber-
lin, Germany, 2000 
[2]  C-STAR Website:     http:// www.c-star.org/ 
[3]  NESPOLE! Website: http:// nespole!.itc.it 
[4] EU-TRANS Project; Instituto Tecnologico de In-
formatica (ITI, Spain), Fondazione Ugo Bordoni 
(FUB, Italy), RWTH Aachen, Lehrstuhl f. Informatik 
VI (Germany), Zeres GmbH Bochum (Germany): 
Example-Based Language Translation Systems. Fi-
nal report of the EuTrans project (EU project num-
ber 30268), July 2000. 
[5]  BABYLON Web site 
www.darpa.mil/ipto/research/babylon/approach.html 
[6]  R.V.Cox, Candace A. Kamm, Lawrence R. Rabiner, 
J. Schroeter,  J. G. Wilpon Speech and Language 
Processing for Next-Millennium Communications 
Services, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 88, No. 
8, August 2000 
[7] Sammy Lemmety Review of speech Synthesis 
Technology Master Thesis Helsinky University of 
Technology, 1999 
[8]  Ron Cole (Ed): Survey of the State of the Art in 
Human Language Technology, Spoken Output Tech-
nology, chapt. 5 Cambridge University Press 1996 
 [9] A. Lavie, L. Levin, A. Waibel, D. Gates, M. Ga-
valda, L. Mayfield: JANUS: Multi-lingual translation 
of spontaneous speech in a limited domain. 2nd Conf. 
Of the Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas pp. 252-255, Montreal, Quebec, Oct. 1995. 
[10] Takezawa et al A Japanese-to-English speech 
translation system: ATR-MATRIX. In Proceeding of 
ICSLP  1998 pp. 2779--2782 
[11] P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, 
R. L. Mercer: The mathematics of statistical machine 
translation: Parameter estimation. Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 19, No. 2, pp. 263?311, 1993 
[12] Yuqing Gao et alas. Speech to speech  translation. 
In proceeding of  C-STAR III Workshop Guillin 
China  march 13-14 2002 
[13] H. Ney: Speech Translation: Coupling of Recogni-
tion and Translation. IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing, pp. I-517-520, Phoe-
nix, AR, March 1999. 
[14] M.Padmanabham, M. Pichney, Large Vocabulary 
Speech Recognition Algorithms, IEEE Computer, 
pag 42-50 april 2002 
[15] LC_STAR Website    www.lc-star.com 
