Sharing Problems and Solutions for Machine Translation of
Spoken and Written Interaction
Sherri Condon             Keith Miller
The MITRE Corporation
7515 Colshire Drive
McLean, VA 22102-7508
{scondon, keith}@mitre.org
Abstract
Examples from chat interaction are
presented to demonstrate that machine
translation of written interaction
shares many problems with translation
of spoken interaction. The potential
for common solutions to the problems
is illustrated by describing operations
that normalize and tag input before
translation.  Segmenting utterances
into small translation units and
processing short turns separately  are
also motivated using data from chat.
1 Introduction
The informal, dialogic character of oral
interaction imposes demands on translation
systems that are not encountered in well-formed,
monologic texts.  These differences make it
appear that any similarities between the machine
translation of text and speech will be limited to
core translation components, as opposed to pre-
and post-processing operations that are linked to
the medium.
In this paper, we demonstrate that many
challenges of translating spoken interaction are
also encountered in translating written
interaction such as chat or instant messaging.
Consequently, it is proposed that solutions
developed for these common problems can be
shared by researchers engaged in applying
machine translation technologies to both types
of interaction.  Specifically, preprocessing
operations can address many of the problems
that make dialogic interaction difficult to
translate in both spoken and written media.
After surveying the challenges that are
shared in machine translation of spoken and
written interaction, we identify several areas in
which preprocessing solutions have been
proposed that could be fruitfully adopted for
either spoken or written input.  The speech
recognition problem of discriminating out of
vocabulary words from unrecognized
vocabulary words is equivalent to the problem
of discriminating novel forms that emerge in
chat environments from words that are
unrecognized due to nonstandard spellings.  We
suggest that a solution based on templates like
those used in example-based translation could
be a useful approach to the problem for both
spoken and written input.  Similarly, other
preprocessing operations that tag input for
special processing can be used to facilitate
translation of problematic phenomena such as
discourse markers and vocatives.  Finally, we
explore the possibility that the complexity of
translating interaction can be reduced by
translating smaller packages of input and
exploiting participants? strategies for packaging
certain discourse functions in smaller turn units.
2 Challenges for translation of
spoken and written interaction
In illustrating the problems for machine
translation that are shared by both spoken and
written interactions, we take for granted that
readers are aware of examples that occur in
spoken interaction because these are available in
the literature and from direct observation of
personal experience.  Therefore, we focus on
providing examples of written interaction to
demonstrate that the same kinds of challenges
arise in translation of chat and instant messages.
Most of the examples we present are taken from
logs of chat interactions collected from 10 chat
channels in 8 languages during July of 2001.
The examples are presented exactly as they
appeared in the logs.
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                          Algorithms and Systems, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 93-100.
                          Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation:
2.1 Ellipsis and fragments
The elliptical and fragmentary quality of
ordinary spoken dialogue is well-known and is
characteristic of chat interaction, too, as in (1).
(1) a. faut voir
b. voir koi?
The French expression il faut ?it is necessary? is
used without the pleonastic pronoun il, and the
verb voir ?to see? is used without a direct object
expressing what it is necessary to see.  The
writer may have intended to use voir
intransitively, as in the English expression we?ll
have to see, but the interlocutor who responded
with (1b) asks ?to see what?? and omits both the
pronoun and the verb faut.  (Creative spelling
such as the convention that replaces the qu in
quoi with k in koi is discussed in section 3.3.)
Though it is unlikely that preprocessing
operations will be able to add information that is
missing from fragments and elliptical
expressions, these problems interact with
preprocessing operations such as segmentation
of units for translation (see 2.9).
2.2 High function/low content terms
Spoken interaction is replete with formulaic
expressions that serve significant interactional
functions, but have little or no internal structure.
These include greetings, leave-takings,
affirmations, negations, and other interjections,
some of which are illustrated in (2).
(2) a. re esselamu aleyk?m
b. in like califonia
c. jose?lets make 1
The expression re is a conventional greeting in
chat interaction with the function re-greet, as in
hello again.  In (2a) it is used on a Turkish chat
channel preceding a greeting borrowed from
Arabic with the literal meaning ?peace to you.?
The example in (2b) demonstrates that chat
interaction includes expressions such as like that
are usually associated exclusively with speech.
Like and discourse markers such as well, now, so
and anyway occur frequently in chat interaction.
Wiebe et al (1995) identify discourse markers
as a major area of difficulty for translation of
spoken interaction.  Many discourse markers are
homophonous and/or homographic with lexical
items that have very different meanings, and the
need to disambiguate polysemous words has
received much attention in the language
processing and machine translation literature.
The use of vocative proper names illustrated
in (2c) is frequent in chat interaction, where
participants? nicknames are used to direct
messages to specific interlocutors.  In a small
sample of 76 messages from our chat logs, 31%
included vocative uses of participants?
nicknames.  In speech and in chat interaction
like (2), where punctuation is unpredictable (see
3.2), capitalization cannot be relied on to
identify proper names.  The complexity of
translating proper names has also received
considerable attention in the machine translation
research community, and translation of proper
names has been proposed as an evaluation
measure for machine translation (Papineni et al,
2002; Vanni and Miller, 2002).
2.3 Vagueness
Though vagueness is a problem in all language
use, Wiebe et al (1995) identify it as a major
problem for translation of spoken interaction,
citing metaphorical expressions such as de alli,
literally, ?from there,? translated as after that.
More pervasive are the deixis and vagueness
that result from the shared online context that
participants in real time interaction can rely on,
compared to communication environments in
which relevant context must be encoded in the
text itself.   Researchers have demonstrated the
increased explicitness and structural complexity
of asynchronous interaction, in which delays
between the transmission of messages preclude
immediate feedback, compared to synchronous
interaction, in which it is expected that messages
will be responded to immediately (Chafe, 1982;
Condon and Cech, forthcoming; Sotillo, 2000).
Similarly, Popowich et al (2000) report that a
high degree of semantic vagueness is a problem
for translating closed captions because the visual
context provided by the television screen
supplies missing details.
2.4 Anaphora
Another consequence of the synchronous
communication environments in written and
spoken interaction is the high frequency of
pronouns and deictic forms.  Wiebe et al (1995)
report that 64% of utterances in a corpus of
spoken Spanish contained pronominals
compared to 48% of sentences in a written
corpus.  Similarly, numerous studies have
demonstrated the high frequency of personal
pronouns, especially first person pronouns, in
chat interaction compared to other types of
written texts (Ferrara, Brunner and Whittemore,
1991; Flanagan 1996; Yates, 1996).  Pronouns
are particularly problematic for translation when
the target language makes distinctions such as
gender that are not present in the source
language.  To determine the appropriate
inflection, the antecedent of the pronoun must
be identified, and resolution of pronoun
antecedents is another thorny problem that has
attracted much attention from researchers in
machine translation.
2.5  Juncture
Along with the liberties that participants in chat
interaction take with spelling and punctuation
conventions (see 3.1,2), they also deliberately
(and undoubtedly sometimes accidentally) omit
spaces between words, as in (3).
(3) a. selamunaleykum  (= selamun aleykum)
b. aleykumselam   (= aleykum selam)
The Turkish ?peace to you? greeting in (3a) is a
variant of (2a) and is usually represented as two
words, though the merged forms in (3a) and in
the conventional reply (3b) occur several times
in a sample of our corpus.  Consequently, one of
the basic challenges for speech recognition,
identification of word boundaries, is also a
problem in chat interaction.
2.6 Colloquial terms, idioms and slang
Wiebe et al (1995) use the term conventional
constructions to refer to idiosyncratic
collocations and tense/aspect usage. Colloquial
or idiomatic usage complicates translation of
both spoken and chat interaction, though it is
less frequent in formal writing.  (4) provides
some examples from chat.
(4) a. have a ball, y?all
b. do u sleep there n stuff
Like discourse markers, expressions such as
have a ball in (4a) and [and] stuff in (4b), have
both compositional and idiomatic meanings,
which causes ambiguity that must be resolved.
2.7 Code-switching
Code-switching is common in multilingual
speech communities, and the participants in
communication environments like chat tend to
be multilingual.  The Turkish to English switch
in (5a) illustrates.
(5) a. anlamami istedigin seyi anlamadim sorry
b. salam mon frere
In (5b) from the #paris chat channel, Arabic
salam ?peace? is used as a greeting.  Not only
are these switches problematic for translation
engines designed to map a single source
language into a single target language, but also
translation into a single language eliminates the
sociolinguistic and pragmatic effects of code-
switching.
2.8  Language play
Another consequence of the informal contexts in
which speech and chat interaction occur is the
playful use of language for entertainment, and in
online environments like chat, where fun often
is the primary attraction,  humor and language
play are valued (Danet et al, 1995).  In addition
to play with identity and typographic symbols,
which have become conventional in chat
interaction, novel games like (6) emerge.
(6) a. wew
b. wiw
c. wow
(6) is part of a sequence on a Cebuano language
channel in which the game seems to be to
produce consonant frames with different vowels.
It ocurred after another game in which
participants inserted a vocative use of baby (as
in hey baby) into almost every message, often
accompanied by additional codeswitching into
English, and finally prompting the protest, ?you
guys have been on that baby thing for ages.?
2.9 Segmentation of translation units
Just as spoken interaction does not include clear
delimiters for word boundaries, it also lacks
conventional means of marking larger units of
discourse that would be analogous to sentence
punctuation in written texts.  Similarly, though
chat interaction is written, punctuation is often
inconsistent or absent.  For example, vocative
nicknames used to address messages to specific
participants may not be separated from the
remainder of the message by any punctuation or
they may be separated by commas, colons,
ellipses, parentheses, brackets, and emoticons.
The same range of possibilities occurs for
punctuation between sentences, which is
frequently absent.   Consequently, it is difficult
to segment input into consistent units that
translation components can anticipate.
3 Analogous Challenges in Spoken
and Written Interaction
Another set of problems that arise in translation
of written interaction are not found in spoken
interaction because they involve the typographic
symbols that render language in written form.
However, most of the problems have analogies
in spoken interaction, just as lack of punctuation
in writing causes the same juncture and
segmentation problems encountered in speech.
Most of the challenges in Section 2 represent
problems for translation from the source
language to the target language, whereas the
challenges in this section primarily complicate
the problem of recognizing the source message.
3.1 Unintentional misspellings and
typographical errors
Nonstandard spellings occur so frequently in
chat interaction that it is difficult to find
examples that do not contain them, as (2b)
illustrates above.  Online interaction also
contains many deliberate misspellings that are
discussed in the next section.  In addition to
misspellings like (2b) and (7a), we classify as
typographic errors the many instances like (7b)
in which participants fail to punctuate
contractions (though these may be deliberate).
(7) a. hi evenybody
b. bon jai mon vrai nick crisse
?good, I have my true nickname crisse?
Unlike the English contraction I?ve, the French
contraction j?ai ?I have? is not optional:  it is
always spelled j?ai and neither je ai nor jai exist
in the French language.  This kind of
misspelling is analogous to mispronunciations
and speech errors like slips of the tongue in
speech, though clearly these anomalous forms
are much more frequent in chat interaction than
in speech.
Another type of problem is the failure to use
diacritic symbols associated with letters in some
orthographic systems.  For example, in French
the letter ?a? without an accent represents the 3rd
person singular present tense form of the verb
?have,? while the form ? is the preposition ?to.?
Both of these forms are pronounced the same,
but in other cases the diacritic signifies a change
in both pronunciation and meaning.  For
example, marche is the 3rd person singular
present tense form of the French verb marcher
?to work, go? and is pronounced like English
marsh with one syllable, but march? ?market? is
a noun pronounced with a second syllable [e].
Consequently, the failure to follow orthographic
conventions, creates homographs that present
the same identification and ambiguity problems
as homophones do in speech.
3.2 Creative spelling, rebus, and
abbreviations
Online interaction is famous for the creative and
playful conventions that have emerged for
frequently used expressions, and though most of
these originated in English, it is now possible to
observe French mdr (mort de rire ?dying of
laughter?) with English lol (laughing out loud)
or amha (? mon humble avis ?in my humble
opinion?) like English imho (in my humble
opinion) and even Portuguese vc (voce ?you?).
Like the nonstandard spellings that are
unintentional, these deliberate departures from
convention are so frequent that we have already
seen several instances of rebus forms in (2c) and
(4b) and the replacement of Romance qu by k in
(1). Other examples include English pls "please"
and ur ?your,? Turkish slm (selam ?peace?) and
the French forms in (8).
(8) a. ah wi snooppy ?   "ah yes, snooppy?"
b. et c pa toi     "and it is not you"
In (8a) oui ?yes? is spelled wi, which reflects the
pronunciation, and in (8b) the rebus form c
represents c?est ?it is,? both pronounced [se],
while pas is also spelled as pronounced, without
the silent s.  In the creative and rebus spellings,
the nonstandard forms typically reflect the
pronunciation of the word and the pronunciation
is often a reduced one, as in hiya ?hi you? and
cyah ?see you.? Consequently, these forms can
be viewed as analogous to the variation in
speech that is caused by use of reduced forms.
Alternatively, these representations might be
viewed as analogous to the out of vocabulary
words that plague current speech recognizers.
3.3 Register and dialect differences
Chat interaction is subject to the same kinds of
register and dialect variation that occurs in
speech.  For example (2a) employs a form of the
standard Turkish greeting esselamu aleyk?m that
is closer to the original Arabic because it uses
the Arabic definite article es-, though the umlaut
is not Arabic.  In contrast the variant in (3a),
selamun aleykum, employs the Turkish suffix on
selam, but omits the umlaut.  (8) illustrates other
variants that occurred in a sample of chat from
the #ankara channel.
(9) a. selamun aleyk?m
b. selam?n aleykum
c. Selammmmmmmmm
d. selamlar
e. selam all
Another example is the variable use of ne in
French constructions with negative polarity.
Though formal French uses ne before the verb
and pas after the verb for sentence negation,
most varieties omit the ne in everyday contexts,
as observed in (8b), where the absence of both
ne and the s on pas creates serious problems for
any translation engine that expects negation to
appear as ne and pas in French.  This variation
combines with a creative spelling based on
reduction to produce examples like (10).
(10)  shuis pa interess?   ?I am not interested?
The standard form of (10) is je ne suis pas
interess?, but in casual speech, ne is dropped,
the vowel in je is omitted and the two adjacent
fricatives merge to produce the sound that is
typically spelled sh in English (though it is
usually spelled ch in French).
3.4 Emotives and repeated letters
Two challenges for speech recognition are non-
lexical sounds such as laughter or grunts and the
distortions of pronunciation that are caused by
emphasis, fatigue, or emotions such as anger
and boredom.  These complications have
analogies in written interaction when
participants attempt to render the same sounds
orthographically, producing forms like those in
(9c) and (10).
(10) a. merhabaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
 b. ewww
c. eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
 d. hehehe
In (10a) the final syllable of the Turkish greeting
merhaba is lengthened in the same way that it
would be in an enthusiastic and expansive
greeting, and (10b) effectively communicates a
typical expression of disgust.  Laughter is
rendered in a variety of ways including ha ha,
heh heh, and (10d).  The variability of spellings
in these cases resembles the variability of
nonverbal sounds in speech.
3.5 Emoticons
Another way that chat participants express
emotion is by using emoticons and messages
that consist entirely of punctuation, as in (11).
(11) a. hey Pipes` >:) how u doing?
b. o)))*******
c. !!!!
 d. ????
Like the emotives and repeated letters described
in 3.4, these can be viewed as analogous to the
non-lexical sounds that occur in speech.
However, they are probably more easily
identified because they are drawn from a very
limited set of symbols.
4 Sharing solutions to shared
problems
Because machine translations of spoken and
written interaction share so many challenges, it
is likely that solutions to the problems might
also be shared in ways that will allow research
on the newer phenomenon of written interaction
to benefit from the years of experience with
spoken interaction.  Conversely, approaches to
written interaction, not biased by previous
efforts, can provide fresh perspectives on
familiar problems.  We present some examples
in which there appears to be strong potential for
this kind of mutual benefit, drawing on our
efforts to improve the performance of TrIM,
MITRE?s Translingual Instant Messenger
prototype.  TrIM is an instant messaging
environment in which participants are able to
interact by reading and typing in their own
preferred languages.  The system translates each
user?s messages into the language of the other
participants and displays both the source
language and target language versions.
TrIM?s translation services are provided by
the CyberTrans system, which provides a
common interface for various commercial text
translation systems and several types of text
documents (e.g. e-mail, web, FrameMaker).  It
incorporates text normalization tools that can
improve the quality of the input text and thus the
resultant translation.  Specifically, preprocessing
systems provide special handling for
punctuation and normalize spelling, such as
adding diacritics that have been omitted.
4.1 Spelling and recognition problems
Closer consideration of the problems created by
nonstandard spellings  reveals the strong
similarities between the complexity of speech
recognition and recognition of written words in
?noisy? communication environments such as
chat.  In both cases, there is a need to
discriminate between words that are not
recognized because they are not in the system
and words that are in the system, but are not
recognized for other reasons, such as variation
in phonetic form or a problem in the recognition
process.  Two properties of chat interaction
make this problem as serious for identifying
written words as it is for spoken input.  First,
though a much larger vocabulary can be
maintained in digital memory than in the models
of speech recognition systems, the creativity and
innovation that is valued in chat environments
provides a constant source of new vocabulary:
it is guaranteed that there will always be out of
vocabulary (OOV) words.  Second,  the high
frequency of intentional and unintentional
departures from standard spelling matches the
variability of speech and makes it essential that
the system be able to normalize spellings so that
messages are not obscured by large numbers of
unidentified words.
A variety of methods have been proposed in
the speech recognition literature for detecting
OOV words. Fetter (1998) reviews four
approaches to the problem and observes that
they can be classified in two broad groups:
explicit acoustic and language models of OOV
words ?compete against models of in-
vocabulary words during a word-based
search?Implicit models use information
derived from other recognition parameters to
compute the likelihood of OOV-words? (Fetter,
1998: 104).  In the latter group, he classifies
approaches that use confidence measures, online
garbage modeling in keyword spotting, and the
use of an additional phoneme recognizer
running in parallel to a word recognizer. These
approaches might be adapted to the problem of
discriminating misspelled and OOV words in
chat interaction, just as approaches to spelling
correction might provide alternative solutions to
the analogous problem in speech recognition.
For example, models of OOV words might
compete with models of in-vocabulary
recognition errors using Brill and Moore?s
(2000) error model for noisy channel spelling
correction that takes into account the
probabilities of errors occurring in specific
positions in the word.  By modeling recognition
errors, the model captures the stochastic
properties of both the language and the
individual recognition system.
Because our goal is not only recognizing,
but also translating messages, we are especially
interested in solutions that will facilitate the
translation system and process.  Consequently,
solutions based on modeling the contexts of
OOV word use and the contexts of nonstandard
spellings seem most promising.  For example, it
would be worth exploring whether the templates
used in example-based translation could be used
to model these contexts.
4.2 Preprocessing for special cases
Seligman (2000) observes that current spoken
language translation systems use very different
methods for recognizing phones, words, and
syntactic structures, and he envisions systems in
which these processes are integrated, proposing
alternatives that range from architectures which
support a common central data structure to
grammars whose terminal symbols are phones.
The latter approach appears to be too narrow
because it precludes the possibility of
employing preprocessing operations that
structure input to facilitate translation.
The success of TrIm and CyberTrans
suggests that preprocessing operations offer
useful approaches to the challenges we have
identified.  For example, a preprocessing system
in CyberTrans identifies words which are likely
to be missing diacritic symbols and inserts them
before the input is sent to the translation
engines.  As a result, the chat message in (12a)
is correctly translated as (12b) rather than (12c)
or (12d), which are the results from two systems
that did not benefit from preprocessing.
(12) a. et la ca va mieux
 b. and there that is better
c. and Ca is better
 d. and the ca goes better
The French form la is the feminine definite
article, whereas the form l? is the demonstrative
deictic ?there.?  CyberTrans recognized that the
form should be l? and that ca should be ?a.
Another example concerns the problems of
forms such as discourse markers, vocatives, and
greetings.  (13) shows that when the discourse
marker well is separated by a comma, as in
(13a), it is correctly translated as a discourse
marker in (13b), whereas without the comma in
(13c), the translation uses puits, the word that
would be used if referring to a water well.
(13) a. Well, I'm feeling great!
b. Bien, je me sens grand!
c. well aren't we happy today?
d. puits ne sommes-nous pas heureux
aujourd'hui?
Therefore, the comma served as a signal to the
system to translate the discourse marker
differently, and clearly, a preprocessing
operation that identifies and tags items like
discourse markers can facilitate their translation.
4.3 Segmentation of translation units
Though clause or sentence units are not clearly
marked in speech, the grammars on which
analysis and translation rely typically operate
with the clause or sentence as the primary unit
of analysis.  Consequently, the issue of
segmenting speech into sentence-like units has
received considerable attention in the speech
translation community, especially the possibility
that prosodic information can be used to identify
appropriate boundaries (Kompe, 1997; Shriberg
et al, 2000).  Other efforts identify lexical items
with high probabilities of occurring at sentence
boundaries and incorporate probabilistic models,
taking into account acoustic features (Lavie et
al. 1996) or part of speech information
(Zechner, 2001).
In contrast, some researchers have proposed
that identifying sentence boundaries is less
important than finding appropriate packaging
sizes for translation.  For example, Seligman
(2000) reports that pause units divided a corpus
into units that were smaller than sentence units,
but could be parsed and yielded understandable
translations when translated by hand.  Popowich
et al (2000) deliberately segment closed caption
input into small packages for translation,
claiming that it provides a basis for handling the
vocatives, false starts, tag questions, and other
non-canonical structures encountered in
captions.  They also claim that the procedure
reduces the scope of translation failures and
constrains the generation problem.  Since much
interaction is already fragmented, processing
that relies on smaller units rather than sentences
seems worth investigating.
A related possibility is that much of the
problematic input is already packaged in small
units of short turns or messages.  Yu et al
(2000) report that 54% of turns with a duration
of 0.7 seconds or less in their data consisted of
either yeah or mmhmm and about 70% of the
turns contained the same 40 words or phrasal
expressions.  They took advantage of these facts
by building a language model tailored
specifically for short turns.
In a pilot study, we examined a small
sample of chat data in order to determine
whether short messages were more likely to
contain the problematic features described in
sections 2 and 3.  Of 76 chat messages, 46 or
61% were 3 units or less, where units were
delineated by space and punctuation (without
separation of contractions) and emoticons
counted as a unit.  The frequency of items such
as greetings, vocatives and acronyms was
counted for each message size.  Of 8 greetings
in the corpus, 7 occurred in messages of 3 or
fewer words, and all 9 greeting-plus-vocative
structures occurred in messages of 3 or fewer
words.  Messages with 3 or fewer words also
contained 11 of the 14 emotives in the corpus
(including emoticons), 8 of the 10 messages
with repeated letters, 3 of the 3 acronyms, 2 of
the 3 discourse markers, and both of the
interjections in the corpus.  These results
support the claim that much of the problematic
usage in chat interaction is limited to short turns
that can be identified and processed separately.
5 Conclusions
This paper demonstrates that many of the
problems which complicate translation of
spoken interaction are shared by written
interaction such as chat and instant messaging.
It is proposed that solutions developed to solve
similar problems in the two communication
environments can be profitably shared, and
several examples are presented where mutually
beneficial approaches might be developed.
Specifically, we noted that the problem of
discriminating unrecognized OOV words  from
in-vocabularly words in spoken interaction is
analogous to the problem of discriminating
unrecognized OOV words from misspelled
words in written interaction.  We suggested that
some of the same methods used in spelling
correction might be adapted to speech
recognition, especially language models that
incorporate probabilities of errors in specific
positions in the word.  We also observed the
potential of preprocessing operations that
structure input for translation systems to allow
special treatment of problematic language,
including the possibility that much complexity
can be avoided by processing and translating
smaller units separately.  We look forward to
exploring these possibilities in future work.
References
Brill, Eric and Moore, Robert C.  2000. An improved
error model for noisy channel spelling
correction.  Proceedings of the 38th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Chafe, Wallace. 1982. Integration and involvement in
speaking, writing, and oral literature.  In Spoken
and Written Language:  Exploring Orality and
Literacy, Deborah Tannen (Ed.), Norwoord, NJ:
Ablex, pp. 35-53.
Condon, Sherri and Cech, Claude.  (Forthcoming)
Discourse management in three modalities.  In
Computer-Mediated Conversation, Susan
Herring (Ed.), Hampton Press.
Danet, Brenda, Ruedenberg-Wright, Lucia, and
Rosenbaum-Tamari, Yehudit. 1995. Hmmm...
Where's that smoke coming from?" Writing,
Play and Performance on Internet Relay. Journal
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 1 (2).
Ferrara, Kathleen, Brunner, Hans, and Whittemore,
Greg.  1991.  Interactive written discourse as an
emergent register.  Written Communication, 8
(1), 8-34.
Fetter, Pablo. 1998.  Detection and transcription of
OOV words.  Verbmobil Technical Report 231.
Flanagan, Mary.  1996.  Two years online:
Experiences, challenges and trends.  Expanding
MT Horizons:  Proceedings of the Second
Conference of the Association for Machine
translation in the Americas, 2-5 October,  pp.
192-197.
Kompe, Ralf. 1997. Prosody in Speech
Understanding Systems.  Berlin:  Springer.
Lavie, Alon, Gates, Donna, Coccaro, Noah and
Levin, Lori.  1996. Input segmentation of
spontaneous speech in Janus: A speech-to-
speech translation system. Proceedings of the
ECAI 96, Budapest, Hungary.
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., Henderson, J.,
and Reeder, Florence. 2002. Corpus-Based
comprehensive and diagnostic MT evaluation :
Initial Arabic, Chinese, French, and Spanish
results. Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference.  San Diego, California.
Popowich, Fred, McFetridge, Paul, Turcato, Davide,
and Toole, Janine. 2000. Machine translation of
closed captions.  Machine Translation, 15, 311-
341.
Shriberg, Elizabeth, Stolcke, Andreas, Hakkani-Tur,
Dilek, and Tur, Gokhan. 2000.  Prosody-based
automatic segmentation of speech into sentences
and topics.  Speech Communication 32(1-2).
Seligman, Mark.  2000.  Nine issues in speech
translation.  Machine Translation, 15, 149-185.
Sotillo, Susana M. 2000. Discourse functions and
syntactic complexity in synchronous and
asynchronous communication. Language
Learning & Technology, 4 (1), pp. 82-119.
Vanni, Michelle. and Miller, Keith.  2002. Scaling
the ISLE framework: Use of existing corpus
resources for validation of MT evaluation
metrics across languages. In Proceedings of
LREC 2002.  Las Plamas, Canary Islands, Spain.
Wiebe, Janice, Farwell, David, Villa, Daniel, Chen,
J-L, Sinclaire, R., Sandgren, Thorsten, Stein, G.,
Zarazua, David, and Ohara, Tom. 1995.
ARTWORK:  Discourse Processing in Machine
Translation of Dialog.   Final Report Year 1.
New Mexico State University:  Computing
Research Lab.  http://crl.NMSU.Edu/Research/
Projects/artwork/index.html
Yates, Simeon. 1996.  Oral and written linguistic
aspects of computer conferencing:  A corpus
based study. In Computer-Mediated
Communication:  Linguistic, Social and Cross-
Cultural Perspectives., Susan Herring (Ed.),
Philadelphia:  John Benjamins, pp. 29-46.
Yu, Hua, Tomokiyo, Takashi, Wang, Zhirong, and
Waibel, Alex.  2000.  New developments in
automatic meeting transcription.  International
Conference on Speech and Language Processing,
Beijing, China.
Zechner, Klaus. 2001. Automatic Generation of
Concise Summaries of Spoken Dialogues in
Unrestricted Domains. Proceedings of the 24th
ACM-SIGIR International Conference on
Research and Development in Information
Retrieval, New Orleans, Louisiana.
