The PAPILLON project: cooperatively building a multilingual lexical
data-base to derive open source dictionaries & lexicons
Christian BOITET(1), Mathieu MANGEOT(2) & Gilles S?RASSET(1)
 (1) GETA, CLIPS, IMAG
385, av. de la biblioth?que, BP 53
F-38041 Grenoble cedex 9, France
Christian.Boitet@imag.fr
(2) National Institute of Informatics (NII)
2-1-2-1314, Hitotsubashi
Chiyoda-ku Tokyo 101-8430, Japan
Mathieu.Mangeot@imag.fr
Abstract
The PAPILLON project aims at creating a cooperative, free, permanent, web-oriented and personalizable environment for the
development and the consultation of a multilingual lexical database. The initial motivation is the lack of dictionaries, both for
humans and machines, between French and many Asian languages. In particular, although there are large F-J paper usage
dictionaries, they are usable only by Japanese literates, as they never contain both original (kanji/kana) and romaji writing.
This applies as well to Thai, Vietnamese, Lao, etc.
Introduction
The project was initiated in 2000 and launched
with the support of the French Embassy and NII
(Tokyo) in July 2000, and took really shape in
2001, with a technical seminar in July 2001 at
Grenoble, and concrete work (data gathering,
tool building, etc.).
The macrostructure of Papillon is a set of
monolingual dictionaries (one for each language)
of word senses, called "lexies", linked through a
central set of interlingual links, called "axies".
This pivot macrostructure has been defined by
S?rasset (1994) and experimented by Blanc
(1994) in the PARAX mockup.
The microstructure of the monolingual
dictionaries is the "DiCo" structure, which is a
simplification of Mel'tchuk's (1981;1987;1995)
DEC (Explanatory and Combinatory
Dictionary) designed by Polgu?re (2000) &
Mel'tchuk !"# make it possible to construct
large, detailed and principled dictionaries in
tractable time.
1. Languages included in the project
In 2000, the initial languages of the Papillon
project were English, French, Japanese and Thai.
Thai was included because there had been a
successful project, SAIKAM (Ampornaramveth
et al 1998; 2000), supported by NII and
NECTEC, of building a Japanese-Thai lexicon by
volunteers on the web. Lao, Vietnamese, and
Malay have been added in 2001 because of active
interest of labs and individuals.
The star-like macrostructure of Papillon makes
it easy to add a new language. Also, the DiCo
microstructure of each monolingual dictionary is
defined by an XML schema, containing a large
common core and a small specialization part
(morphosyntactic categories, language usage).
2. Interlingual links
Axies, also called "interlingual acceptions", are
not concepts, but simply interlingual links
between lexies, motivated by translations found
in existing dictionaries or proposed by the
contributors.
In case of discrepancies, 1 axie may be linked
with lexies of some languages only, e.g.
FR(mur#1), EN(wall#1), RU(stena#1), and t o
other axies by refinement links:
Example:
Axie#234 --lg--> FR(mur#1),
EN(wall#1), RU(stena#1)
--rf--> Axie#235, Axie#236
Axie#235 --lg--> DE(Wand#2),
IT(muro#1), ES(muro#1)
Axie#236 --lg--> DE(Mauer#2),
IT(parete#1), ES(pared#1)
It is also possible to have 2 axies for the same
"concept" at a certain stage in the life of the
database, because the monolingual information is
not yet detailed enough.
Suppose the level of language (usual, specialized,
vulgar, familiar?) is not yet given for
FR(maladie#1), FR(affection#2), EN(disease#1),
EN(affection#3).
Then we might have, for translational reasons:
Axie#456
--lg-->
FR(maladie#1),
EN(disease#1)
Axie#457
--lg-->
FR(affection#2),
EN(affection#3)
When this information will be put in each of the
above 4 monolingual entries, we may merge the
2 axies and get:
Axie#500
--lg-->
FR(maladie#1, affection#2),
EN(disease#1, affection#3)
Axies may also be linked to "external" systems
of semantic description. Each axie contains a
(possibly empty) list for each such system, and
the list of systems is open. The following are
included at this stage; UNL UWs (universal
words), ONTOS concepts, WordNet synsets,
NTT semantic categories.
3. Building the content
3.1. Recuperating existing resources
Building the content of the data base has several
aspects. To initiate it, the project starts from
open source computerized data, called "raw
dictionaries", which may be monolingual (4,000
French DiCo entries from UdM, 10,000 Thai
entries from Kasetsart Univ.), bilingual (70,000
Japanese-English entries and 10,000 Japanese-
French entries in J.Breen's JDICT XML format,
8000 Japanese-Thai entries in SAIKAM XML
format, 120,000 English-Japanese entries in
KDD-KATE LISP format), or multilingual
(50,000 French-English-Malay entries in FEM
XML format).
3.2. Integrating the data into Papillon
In the second phase, the "raw dictionaries" are
transformed into a "lexical soup" in
M.Mangeot's (2001) intermediary DML format
(an XML schema and namespace). The
transformation into almost empty DiCo entries
and the creation of axies for the translational
equivalences is semi-automatic. A tool has been
programmed at NII for that task.
3.3. Enriching the data with contributions
After that, it is hoped that many contributors
will "fill in" the missing information. The basis
for that third and continuous phase is a server
for cooperative building of the data base, where
each contributor has his/her own space, so that
contributions can be validated and integrated
into the DB by a group experts. Users can
establish user groups with specific read and write
access rights on their spaces.
4. Consultation of the resulting data
4.1. Online consultation
Consultation is meant to be free for anybody,
and open source. Requests produce personalizable
views of the data base, the most classical of
which are fragments of bilingual dictionaries.
However, it is also possible to produce
multitarget entries, on the fly and offline. Users
(consumers) are encouraged to become
contributors. To contribute, one may propose a
new word sense, a definition, an example of use,
a translation, the translation of an example, a
correction, etc., or an annotation on any
accessible information: Every user can
contribute with his own knowledge level.
4.2. Download of entire files
Users can also retrieve files, and can contribute
to define new output formats. The files retrieved
can contain structural, content-oriented tags.
This open source orientation contrasts with the
current usage of allowing users to retrieve files
containing only presentation-oriented tags.
4.3. Coverage of the dictionary
An interesting point is that the project wants t o
cover both general terms and terminological
terms.
Another one is that it contains a translation
subproject, because definitions, examples,
citations, etc. have to be translated into all
languages of the collection. For this, the notion
of complex lexie, already present to account for
lexical collocations such as compound predicates
(e.g. "to kick the bucket"), is extended to cover
full sentences. Axies relating them are special
because they can't in general relate them t o
external semantic systems such as WordNet. An
exception is UNL: the UNL list for an axie may
contain one UNL graph, produced automatically,
manually, or semi-automatically.  This graph
may be automatically sent to available UNL
"deconverters" to get draft translations.
5. Project organisation
In the current stage, the project has no legal
implementation as a fundation, association,
company, etc., although many participants have
already established official MOUs and other
types of agreements on which to base their
cooperative work.
There is a steering committee of about 10-12
members, who represent Papillon where they
are, and not the converse. There is a set of
tasks, and for each task a working group and an
advisory committee. One of the tasks is the
management of the project. In between, there is
a coordinating group containing the heads of the
tasks and chaired by the head of the
management task.
Sponsors may not donate money to the project,
which has no bank account. Rather, they are
encouraged to donate data, to assign personal
part time to the project, and to fund
participating organizations and persons as they
see fit.
Conclusion
The theoretical frameworks for the whole
database, the macrostructure and the
microstructure are very well defined. I t
constitutes a solid basis for the implementation.
A lot of open problems still have to be addressed
for the Papillon project to be a success. In this
respect, the Papillon project appears to be a
very interesting experimentation platform for a
lot of NLP research as data acquisition or human
access to lexical data, among others.
All these research will improve the attraction of
such a project to the Internet users. This
attraction is necessary for the project to go on,
as it is highly dependent on its users
motivations.
This way, we will be able to provide a very
interesting multilingual lexical database that we
hope useful for a lot of persons.
Rerefences
Ampornaramveth V., Aizawa A. & Oyama K. (2000)
An Internet-based Collaborative Dictionary
Development Project: SAIKAM. Proc. of 7th Intl.
Workshop on Academic Information Networks and
Systems (WAINS'7), Bangkok, 7-8 December 2000,
Kasetsart University.
Blanc ?., S?rasset G. & Tch?ou F. (1994) Designing
an Acception-Based Multilingual Lexical Data Base
under HyperCard: PARAX. Research Report, GETA,
IMAG (UJF & CNRS), Aug. 1994, 10 p.
Connolly, Dan (1997) XML Principles, Tools and
Techniques World Wide Web Journal, Volume 2,
Issue 4, Fall 1997, O'REILLY & Associates, 250 p.
Ide, N. & Veronis, J. (1995) Text Encoding Initiative,
background and context. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 242 p.
Mangeot-Lerebours M. (2000) Papillon Lexical
Database Project: Monolingual Dictionaries &
Interlingual Links. Proc. of 7th Workshop on
Advanced Information Network and System Pacific
Association for Computational Linguistics 1997
Conference (WAINS'7), Bangkok, Thailande, 7-8
d?cembre 2000, Kasetsart University, 6 p.
Mangeot-Lerebours M. (2001) Environnements
centralis?s et distribu?s pour lexicographes et
lexicologues en contexte multilingue. Nouvelle th?se,
Universit? Joseph Fourier (Grenoble I), 27 September
2001, 280 p.
Mel?tchuk I., Clas A. & Polgu?re A. (1995)
Introduction ? la lexicologie explicative et
combinatoire. AUPELF-UREF/Duculot, Louvain-la-
Neuve, 256 p.
Polgu?re, A. (2000) Towards a theoretically-motivated
general public dictionary of semantic derivations
and collocations for French. Proc. EURALEX'2000,
Stuttgart, pp 517-527.
S?rasset G. (1994a) Interlingual Lexical Organisation
for Multilingual Lexical Databases. Proc. of 15th
International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, COLING-94, 5-9 Aug. 1994, 6 p.
S?rasset G. (1994b) SUBLIM, un syst?me universel de
bases lexicales multilingues; et NADIA, sa
sp?cialisation aux bases lexicales interlingues par
acceptions. Nouvelle th?se, UJF (Grenoble 1), d?c.
1994.
S?rasset G. (1997) Le projet NADIA-DEC : vers un
dictionnaire explicatif et combinatoire informatis? ?
Proc. of La m?moire des mots, 5?me journ?es
scientifiques du r?seau LTT, Tunis, 25-27 septembre
1997, AUPELF?UREF, 7 p.
S?rasset G. & Mangeot-Lerebours M. (2001) Papillon
Lexical Database Project: Monolingual Dictionaries
& Interlingual Links. Proc. NLPRS'2001,
Hitotsubashi Memorial Hall, National Center of
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 27-30 November 2001, vol
1/1, pp. 119-125.
Tomokiyo M., Mangeot-Lerebours M. & Planas E.
(2000) Papillon : a Project of Lexical Database for
English, French and Japanese, using Interlingual
Links. Proc. of Journ?es des Sciences et Techniques
de l'Ambassade de France au Japon, Tokyo, Japon,
13-14 novembre 2000, Ambassade de France au
Japon, 3 p.
-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-
