 Topic Detection Based on Dialogue History 
 
Takayuki NAKATA, Takahiro IKEDA, Shinichi ANDO, Akitoshi OKUMURA 
Multimedia Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation 
4-1-1, Miyazaki, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, KANAGAWA, 216-8555, JAPAN 
t-nakata@bk.jp.nec.com, t-ikeda@di.jp.nec.co.jp, s-ando@cw.jp.nec.com, a-okumura@bx.jp.nec.com
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we propose a topic detection 
method using a dialogue history for 
selecting a scene in the automatic 
interpretation system (Ikeda et al, 2002).  
The method uses a k-nearest neighbor 
method for the algorithm, automatically 
clusters target topics into smaller topics 
grouped by similarity, and incorporates 
dialogue history weighted in terms of time 
to detect and track topics on spoken 
phrases.  From the evaluation of 
detection performance using test corpus 
comprised of realistic spoken dialogue, 
the method has shown to perform better 
with clustering incorporated, and 
combined with time-weighted dialogue 
history of three sentences, gives detection 
accuracy of 77.0%. 
1 Introduction 
In recent years, speech-to-speech translation 
systems have been developed that integrate three 
components: speech recognition, machine 
translation, and speech synthesis (Watanabe et 
al., 2000).  However, these systems cannot 
guarantee accurate translation because the 
individual components do not always provide 
correct results.  To overcome this restriction, 
we proposed a method to use parallel text based 
translation for supporting free-style sentence 
translation.  In addition, we built a prototype 
automatic interpretation system for Japanese 
overseas travelers (Ikeda et al, 2002).  With 
this system, the user searches for an appropriate 
sentence in source language from the registered 
parallel text by using the criteria of an utterance, 
a scene, and a situation, and then uses the target 
language sentence for a translation. 
Although parallel text based translation 
provides guaranteed translation results, it has 
two problems as the user searches for the 
sentence.  One is difficulty in searching an 
appropriate sentence from user?s short utterance, 
which is often heard in travel conversation.  
Short phrases provide only a few keywords and 
make the search result too broad.  Specifying 
the exact scene and action helps narrow down 
the result, but the task may cause user frustration 
in having to select the right option from the vast 
categories of scenes and actions. 
The other problem is existence of nonadaptive 
sentences that may be inappropriate in some of 
the scenes.  Users usually select sentences 
according to the scenes so they can exclude 
those inapplicable sentences, but some new 
users may accidentally select those nonadaptive 
sentences by failing to specify a scene. 
 Here, we propose a method to detect a topic 
for each utterance.  We define a topic as 
corresponding to a scene that is a place or a 
situation in which the user converses.  The 
proposed method is based on the k-nearest 
neighbor method, which is improved for 
dialogue utterances by clustering training data 
and using dialogue history.  We use the 
detected topic for specifying a scene condition in 
parallel text based translation, and thereby solve 
the two problems described above. 
Detecting topics also helps improve accuracy 
of the automatic interpretation system by 
disambiguating polysemy.  Some words should 
be translated into different words according to 
the scene and context selection.  Topic 
detection can enhance speech recognition 
accuracy by selecting the correct word 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                            Algorithms and Systems, Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 9-14.
                          Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-to-Speech Translation:
 dictionary and resources, which are organized 
according to the topic. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows.  Section 2 describes the constraints in 
detecting a topic from dialogue utterances.  
Section 3 describes our topic detection algorithm 
to overcome these constraints.  Section 4 
explains the evaluation of our method by using a 
travel conversation corpus and Section 5 
presents the evaluation result.  Section 6 
discusses the effect of our method from a 
comparison of the results on typical dialogue 
data and on real situation dialogue data.  We 
conclude in Section 7 with some final remarks 
and mention of future work. 
2 Topic detection 
Among conventional topic detection methods, 
one uses compound words that features certain 
topic as trigger information for detecting a topic 
(Hatori et al, 2000), and another uses 
domain-dependant dictionaries and thesauruses 
to construct knowledge applicable to a certain 
topic (Tsunoda et al, 1996).  In the former 
method, a scene-dependant dictionary provides 
the knowledge relevant to the scene and 
compound words in the dictionary are used for 
detecting a topic.  In the latter method, words 
appearing in a scene are defined as the 
knowledge relevant to the scene and 
superordinate/subordinate relation and 
synonyms provided by thesauruses are used to 
enhance the robustness. 
These conventional methods are suitable for 
written texts but not for dialogue utterances in a 
speech translation system.  The following two 
major constraints make the topic detection for 
dialogue utterances more difficult. 
 
(1) Constraint due to single sentence process 
- Sentences in a dialogue are usually 
short with few keywords. 
- In a dialogue, the frequency values of 
the word in a sentence are mostly one, 
making it difficult to apply a statistical 
method. 
 
(2) Constraint due to the nature of spoken 
dialogue 
- In a dialogue, one topic is sometimes 
expressed with two or more sentences. 
- The words appearing in a sentence are 
sometimes replaced by anaphora or 
omitted by ellipsis in the next sentence. 
- Topics frequently change in a dialogue. 
 
On the other hand, a speech translation system 
requires the following: 
- Topic detection for each utterance in a 
dialogue; 
- Prompt topic detection in real time 
processing; 
- Dynamic tracking of topic transition. 
 
To make topic detection adaptive to the 
speech translation system, we propose a method 
applicable to one utterance in a dialogue as an 
input, which can be used for tracking the topic 
transitions dynamically and outputting most 
appropriate topic for the latest utterance.  The 
k-nearest neighbor method (Yang, 1994) is used 
with the clustering method linked with the 
dialogue history as a topic detection algorithm 
for dialogue utterance.  The k-nearest neighbor 
method is known to have high precision 
performance with less restriction in the field of 
document categorization.  This method is 
frequently used as a baseline in the field and also 
applied to topic detection for story but not for a 
single sentence (Yang et al, 1999).  This paper 
incorporates two new methods to the k-nearest 
neighbor method to overcome two constraints 
mentioned above. 
To overcome the first constraint, we cluster a 
set of sentences in training data into subsets 
(called subtopics) based on similarity between 
the sentences.  A topic is detected by 
calculating the relevance between the input 
sentence and these subtopics.  Clustering 
sentences on the same subtopic increases 
number of characteristic words to be compared 
with input sentence in calculation. 
To overcome the second constraint, we group 
an input sentence with other sentences in the 
dialogue history.  A topic is detected by 
calculating the relevance between this group and 
each possible topic.  Grouping the input 
sentence with the preceding sentences increases 
number of characteristic words to be compared 
with topics in calculation.  We consider the 
 order of the sentences in the dialogue in 
calculating the relevance to avoid the influence 
of topic change in the dialogue. 
3 Topic detection algorithm 
This section explains three methods used in 
the proposed topic detection algorithm: 1) 
k-nearest neighbor method, 2) the clustering 
method using TF-IDF, and 3) the application of 
the dialogue history. 
3.1 k-nearest neighbor method 
We denote the character vector for a given 
sentence in the training data as Dj, and that for a 
given input sentence as X.  Each vector has a 
TF-IDF value of the word in the sentence as its 
element value (Salton 1989). 
The similarity between the input sentence X 
and the training data Dj is calculated by taking 
the inner product of the character vectors. 
 
 
 
The conditional probability of topic Cl being 
related to the training data Dj is calculated as: 
 
?
?
j
l
jl D
C
DCPr
  the torelated being 
  topicsofnumber  The
1)|( =  
 
The relevance score between the input sentence 
X and each topic Cl is calculated as the sum of 
similarity for k sentences taken from the training 
data in descending order of similarity. 
 
?
?
?=
}sentence  ranking  k  top{
)|(),()|(
jD
jljl DCPrDXSimXCRel  
3.2 Topics clustering method 
This method clusters topics into smaller 
subtopics.  The word ?topic? used in this 
method consists of several subtopics 
representing detailed situations.  The topic 
?Hotel? consists of subtopics such as ?Checking 
In? and ?Room Service?.  Sentences in training 
data categorized under the same topic are further 
grouped into subtopics based on their similarity.  
Calculating the relevance between the test data 
input and these subsets of training data provides 
more keywords in detecting topics.  Our 
method to create the subtopics identifies a 
keyword in a sentence set, and then recursively 
divides the set into two smaller subsets, one that 
includes the keyword and one that does not. 
 
TF-IDF Clustering Method 
(1) Find the word that has the highest TF-IDF 
value among the words in the sentence 
set; 
(2) Divide the sentence set into two subsets; 
one that contains the word obtained in 
step (1) and one that does not; 
(3) Repeat steps (1) and (2) recursively until 
TF-IDF value reaches the threshold. 
 
Subtopics created by this method consist of 
keywords featuring each subtopic and their 
related words. 
3.3 Application of the dialogue history 
The proposed method applies the dialog 
history in topic detection.  The method 
interprets a current input sentence and the 
sentences prior to the current input as a dialogue 
history subset, and detects topics by calculating 
the relevance score between the dialogue history 
subset and the each topic.  The method 
increases number of keywords in the input for 
calculation.  We assign a weight to each 
sentence in the dialogue history subset to control 
the effect of time-sequence in sentences. 
The relevance score combined with the dialog 
history is calculated as: 
 
)Xr|C(lRer...)Xr|C(lRer
)X|C(lRe)Xr,...,Xr,X|C(lRe
nlnl
lnl
??
?
+++
=
11
1  
 
Here the similarity is calculated with the input 
sentence X and the sentence in the dialog history 
subset Xri, taking ? and ?ri as the weights for the 
input sentences and the sentences in the dialogue 
history, respectively. 
4 Evaluation 
To evaluate the proposed method, we 
prepared training data and test data from a travel 
conversation corpus.  We also prepared three 
22 || || || || 
) , ( 
j 
i ij i 
j D X
d x 
D X Sim 
? 
? 
= 
? 
 types of clusters with different thresholds and 
two types of dialogue history with different 
weight values. 
4.1 Training data 
In the evaluation, we used approximately 
25,000 sentences from our original travel 
conversation corpus as our training data.  The 
sentences are manually classified into four 
topics: 1) Hotel, 2) Restaurant, 3) Shopping, and 
4) Others.  The topic ?Others? consists of 
sentences not categorized into the remaining 
three. Topics such as ?Transportation? or 
?Illnesses and injuries? are placed into this 
?Others? in this evaluation. 
4.2 Test data 
We prepared two sets of test data.  One set 
consists of 62 typical travel dialogues 
comprising 896 sentences (hereafter called 
?typical dialogue data?).  The other set consists 
of 45 dialogues comprising 498 sentences, 
which may include irregular expressions but 
closely representing daily spoken language 
(hereafter called ?real situation dialogue data?). 
Sentences in ?typical dialogue data? are often 
heard in travel planning and travelling situations, 
and form a variety of initiating dialogues as the 
travel conversation unfolds.  The data includes 
words and phrases often used in the topics listed 
above, and each sentence is short with little 
redundancy.  On the other hand, ?real situation 
dialogue data? consists of spoken dialogue 
phrases which are likely to appear in 
user-specific situations in the travel domain.  
Some phrases may be typically used, while 
others may consist of colloquial expressions and 
words and phrases that are redundant.  Some of 
the words may not appear in the training data. 
4.3 Clustering the topics 
We applied the clustering with the 
aforementioned method to 8,457 sentences from 
training data which are categorized into one or 
more of the three topics: 1) Hotel, 2) Restaurant, 
and 3) Shopping.  Clusters are created on three 
different thresholds: 8,409 clusters (small-sized 
cluster), 3,845 clusters (medium-sized cluster) 
and 2,203 clusters (large-sized cluster).  In 
carrying out clustering, we set one sentence as 
one cluster if the sentence does not contain a 
word whose TF-IDF value is not equal to or 
greater than the threshold.  We excluded data 
that falls only under the topic ?Others? and data 
that falls under all four topics, which are 
considered to be general conversation.  
Variations of these topics produce 13 probable 
combinations. 
The number of clusters is smallest (13) when 
we set one topic as one cluster and largest 
(8,457) when we set one sentence as one cluster. 
4.4 Use of the dialogue history 
To evaluate the effect of the dialogue history, 
we use an input sentence, the most preceding 
and the next preceding sentence (hereafter 
?sentence 0?, ?sentence -1?, and ?sentence -2?) 
as a dialogue history.  Two types of sentence 
weights are applied to these three sentences, one 
of equal weights and one of weights based on a 
time series.  These sets are: 
 
0.33) 0.33, (0.33,  
2)- sentence 1,- sentence 0, (sentence
=
0.2) 0.3, (0.5, 
 2)- sentence 1,- sentence 0, (sentence
=
 
 
5 Results 
We performed the detection test described in 
4.3 on 13 types of topic combinations using 
typical dialogue data and real situation dialogue 
data. 
5.1 Test results on typical dialogue data 
Figure 1 shows the results of topic detection 
on typical dialogue data for a varying number of 
clusters.  The figure shows that the accuracy is 
highest when one sentence is set as one cluster 
(one sentence per cluster) in each topic, and 
lowest when one whole topic is set as one 
cluster. 
  
5.2 Test result on real situation dialogue 
data 
Figure 2 shows the results of topic detection 
on real situation dialogue data for a varying 
number of clusters.  The figure shows that the 
accuracy of the medium cluster is slightly better 
than that for one sentence per cluster.  This 
indicates that sentences grouped in terms of 
similarity heighten the accuracy of similarity 
calculation between input sentences and the 
training data. 
 
5.3 Results of dialogue history 
application 
We evaluated the effect of the dialogue 
history for typical dialogue test data, and 
compared the case of one sentence per cluster 
with the case of medium cluster.  Using only 
the input sentence, the topic detection accuracy 
was 59.2% for the former and 56.0% for the 
latter.  Using three sentences from the dialogue 
history, the respective figures were 72.0% and 
70.0% with equal weights, 76.7% and 77.0% 
with time series weights.  
 
6 Discussion 
Looking at the results on the typical dialogue 
data, it can be argued that the 
one-sentence-per-cluster case shows the highest 
accuracy because the data is a typical dialogue 
and each sentence is short, so that feature words 
in the input sentences and those of the learning 
data are likely to match.  On the other hand, it 
can be argued that the one-topic-per-cluster case 
shows the lowest accuracy because feature 
words become less effective when so many 
subtopics are in one cluster. 
For example, let us look at the sentence in the 
learning data, ?Is it all right to pick it up with 
my hand??  This sentence can be used when 
deciding what to buy, and so is categorized 
under the topic ?Shopping?.  When a cluster is 
one sentence, the result will likely be 
satisfactory if you input the sentence, ?Is it all 
right to pick it up with my hand?? because the 
input sentence is similar to the cluster.  
However, when a cluster is one topic, this 
sentence might be categorized under the topic 
?Others?, along with sentences used to express 
physical conditions such as ?My hand hurts? or 
?I am all right?.  Therefore, it can be concluded 
that it is better to divide a large topic into 
smaller groups or even into single sentences. 
Looking at the results on real situation 
dialogue data, we find the ratio of correct 
answers is almost the same for the 
one-sentence-per-cluster and the medium-cluster 
cases, but the actual sentences correctly detected 
topics differed significantly between them.  In 
the former case, topics are identified correctly 
when there are strong feature words, while in the 
latter case, it works well when there is no strong 
feature word but the topics can be determined by 
sets of words.  From this fact, we can conclude 
that typical input sentences can be compared 
easily with the one-sentence-per-cluster case, 
and real situation input sentences can be 
Figure 2: The result on real situation test data 
Figure 1: The result on typical test data 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
one t
opic 
per c
luste
r
large
 clus
ter
medi
um c
luste
r
small
 clus
ter
one s
enten
ce pe
r clus
ter
number of cluster
ac
cu
ra
cy
 ra
te
42
44
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
one t
opic 
per c
luste
r
large
 clus
ter
medi
um c
luste
r
small
 clus
ter
one s
enten
ce pe
r clus
ter
number of cluster
ac
cu
ra
cy
 ra
te
 compared with the medium-cluster case even 
though the sentences are different from those in 
typical dialogue in terms of content and 
expressions.  We find that with typical dialogue 
data, the accuracy level is almost the same for 
the one-sentence-per-cluster and the 
medium-cluster cases, but with the real situation 
dialogue data, the accuracy level is slightly 
improved.  Therefore, it might be possible to 
improve the practicality of topic detection by 
collecting a large amount of data, dividing the 
data into typical and real situation dialogues, and 
setting the appropriate clusters to each type. 
7 Conclusions 
In this paper, we proposed a topic detection 
method using a dialogue history to select a scene 
for the automatic interpretation system.  We 
investigated its limitation in dialogue utterances 
and provided solutions by clustering training 
data and utilizing dialogue history.  Our 
method showed topic detection accuracy of at 
least 50% for both typical and real situation 
dialogues in 13 topic combinations.  For typical 
dialogues, we found that the best results were 
obtained when one sentence is used for one 
cluster, and for real situation dialogues, we 
found slightly better results were obtained when 
clustering was introduced.  Therefore, it can be 
argued that the topic detection accuracy is 
improved for both typical and real situation 
sentences if an appropriate size cluster is 
introduced. 
We plan to use our topic detection technique 
for specifying a scene condition of parallel text 
based translation in our automatic interpretation 
system.  Detecting topics also helps improve 
accuracy of the automatic interpretation system 
by disambiguating polysemy. Topic detection 
can enhance speech recognition accuracy by 
selecting the correct word dictionary and 
resources, which are organized according to the 
topic. 
Our method is also applicable in determining 
time series behavior such as topic transition.  
Our future studies will focus on linking the 
dialogue history and clustering more closely to 
improve the topic detection accuracy. 
References  
H. Hatori, Y. Kamiyama (2000) Web translation 
by feeding back information for judging 
category, Information Processing Society of 
Japan 63rd. Annual Meeting, Vol. 2, pp. 
253-254. 
 
T. Ikeda, S. Ando, K. Satoh, A. Okumura, T. 
Watanabe (2002) Automatic Interpretation 
System Integrating Free-style  Sentence 
Translation and Parallel Text Based Translation, 
ACL-02 Workshop on Speech-to-speech 
Translation (to appear). 
 
G. Salton (1989) The vector space model, 
automatic text processing ? the   
transformation, analysis, and retrieval of 
information by computer, Addison-Wesley 
Publishing Company Inc., pp.312-325. 
 
T. Tsunoda and H. Tanaka (1996) Evaluation of 
Scene Information as Context for English Noun 
Disambiguation, Natural Language Processing, 
Vol.3 No.1, pp. 3-27. 
 
T. Watanabe, A. Okumura, S. Sakai, K. 
Yamabana, S. Doi, K. Hanazawa (2000) An 
Automatic Interpretation System for Travel 
Conversation, The Proceeding of the 6th 
International Conference on Spoken Language 
Processing Vol. 4, pp. 444-447. 
 
Y. Yang (1994) Expert Network, Effective and 
Efficient Learning from Human Decisions in 
Text Categorization and Retrieval, Proceedings 
of the 17th Annual International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval (SIGIR?94) 1994:11-21. 
 
Y. Yang, J.G. Carbonell, R. Brown, T. Pierce, B. 
T. Archibald, and X. Liu (1999) Learning 
approaches for detecting and tracking news 
events, IEEE Intelligent Systems, 14(4), pp. 
32-43. 
