 Some Considerations on Guidelines for  
Bilingual Alignment and Terminology Extraction 
 
Lawrence Cheung, Tom Lai, Robert Luk?, Oi Yee Kwong, King Kui Sin, Benjamin K. Tsou 
 
Language Information Sciences Research Centre 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong  
{rlylc, cttomlai, rlolivia, ctsinkk, rlbtsou}@cityu.edu.hk  
?Department of Computing 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University  
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
csrluk@comp.polyu.edu.hk 
 
Abstract  
Despite progress in the development of 
computational means, human input is still 
critical in the production of consistent and 
useable aligned corpora and term banks. This 
is especially true for specialized corpora and 
term banks whose end-users are often 
professionals with very stringent 
requirements for accuracy, consistency and 
coverage. In the compilation of a high quality 
Chinese-English legal glossary for ELDoS 
project, we have identified a number of issues 
that make the role human input critical for 
term alignment and extraction. They include 
the identification of low frequency terms, 
paraphrastic expressions, discontinuous units, 
and maintaining consistent term granularity, 
etc. Although manual intervention can more 
satisfactorily address these issues, steps must 
also be taken to address intra- and 
inter-annotator inconsistency.  
 
Keyword: legal terminology, bilingual 
terminology, bilingual alignment, 
corpus-based linguistics 
1. Introduction 
Multilingual terminology is an important 
language resource for a range of natural language 
processing tasks such as machine translation and 
cross-lingual information retrieval. The 
compilation of multilingual terminology is often 
time-consuming and involves much manual 
labour to be of practical use. Aligning texts of 
typologically different languages such as Chinese 
and English is even more challenging because of 
the significant differences in lexicon, syntax, 
semantics and styles. The discussion in the paper 
is based on issues arising from the extraction of 
bilingual legal terms from aligned 
Chinese-English legal corpus in the 
implementation of a bilingual a text retrieval 
system for the Judiciary of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (HKSAR) Government.  
 Much attention in computational 
terminology has been directed to the development 
of algorithms for extraction from parallel texts. 
For example, Chinese-English (Wu and Xia 1995), 
Swedish-English-Polish (Borin 2000), and 
Chinese-Korean (Huang and Choi 2000). Despite 
considerable progress, bilingual terminology so 
generated is often not ready for immediate and 
practical use. Machine extraction is often the first 
step of terminology extraction and must be used in 
conjunction with rigorous and well-managed 
manual efforts which are critical for the 
production of consistent and useable multilingual 
terminology. However, there has been relatively 
little discussion on the significance of human 
intervention. The process is far from being 
straightforward because of the different purposes 
of alignment, the requirements of target users and 
the corpus type. Indeed, there remain many 
problematical issues that will not be easy to be 
resolved satisfactorily by computational means in 
the near future, especially when typologically 
different languages are involved, and must require 
considerable manual intervention. Unfortunately, 
such critical manual input has often been treated as 
an obscure process. As with other human cognitive 
process (T?sou et al 1998), manual terminology 
markup is not a straightforward task and many 
issues deserve closer investigation. 
 In this paper, we will present some 
significant issues for Chinese-English alignment 
 and term extraction for the construction of a 
bilingual legal glossary. Section 2 describes the 
background of the associated bilingual alignment 
project. Section 3 discusses the necessity of 
manual input in bilingual alignment, and some 
principles adopted in the project to address these 
issues. Section 4 provides an outline for further 
works to improve terminology management, 
followed by a conclusion in Section 5. 
2. High Quality Terminology Alignment 
and Extraction 
2.1 Bilingual Legal Terminology in Hong 
Kong 
The implementation of a bilingual legal system in 
Hong Kong as a result of the return of 
sovereignty to China in 1997 has given rise to a 
need for the creation and standardization of 
Chinese legal terminology of the Common Law 
on par with the English one. The standardization 
of legal terminology will not only facilitate the 
mandated wider use of Chinese among legal 
professionals in various legal practices such as 
trials and production of legal documentation 
involving bilingual laws and judgments, but also 
promote greater consistency of semantic 
reference of terminology to minimize ambiguity 
and to avoid confusion of interpretation in legal 
argumentation.  
 In the early 90?s, Hong Kong law drafters 
and legal translation experts undertook the 
unprecedented task of translating Hong Kong 
Laws, which are based on the Common Law 
system, from English into Chinese. In the 
process, many new Chinese legal terms for the 
Common Law were introduced. On this basis, an 
English-Chinese Glossary of legal terms and a 
Chinese-English Glossary were published in 1995 
and 1999 respectively. The legal terminology was 
vetted by the high level Bilingual Laws Advisory 
Committee (BLAC) of Hong Kong. The 
glossaries which contain about 30,000 basic 
entries have become an important reference for 
Chinese legal terms in Hong Kong. The Bilingual 
Legal Information System (BLIS) developed by 
the Department of Justice, HKSAR provides 
simple keyword search for the glossaries and 
laws that are available in both Chinese and 
English. Nevertheless, the glossaries are far from 
being adequate for many different types of legal 
documentation, e.g. contracts, court judgments, 
etc. One major limitation of the BLIS glossary is 
its restricted coverage of legal terminology in the 
Laws of Hong Kong, within a basically 
prescriptive context as when the laws were studied 
at the time of its promulgation. There are other 
important bilingual references (Li and Poon 1998, 
Yiu and Au-Yeung 1992, Yiu and Cheung 1996) 
which focus more on the translation of Common 
Law concepts. These are almost exclusively 
nominal expressions. 
 In 2000, the City University of Hong 
Kong, in cooperation with the Judiciary, HKSAR, 
initiated a research project to develop a bilingual 
text retrieval system, Electronic Legal 
Documentation/Corpus System (ELDoS), which is 
supported by a bilingually aligned corpus of 
judgments. The purpose of the on-going project is 
twofold. First, the aligned legal corpus enables the 
retrieval of legal terms used in authentic contexts 
where the essence and spirit of the laws are tested 
(and contested) in reality, explicated and 
elaborated on, as an integral part of the evolving 
and defining body of important precedent cases 
unique to the Common Law tradition. Second, the 
corpus covers judgment texts involving 
interpretation of different language styles and 
vocabulary from Hong Kong laws. The alignment 
markup also serves as the basis for the compilation 
of a high-quality bilingual legal term bank. To 
complete the task within the tight timeframe, a 
team of annotators highly trained in law and 
language are involved in alignment markup and 
related editing. 
2.2 Need for Human Input 
The legal professionals which are the target users 
of ELDoS have very stringent demands on 
terminology in terms of accuracy, coverage and 
consistency. Aligned texts and extracted terms 
must therefore be carefully and thoroughly 
verified manually to minimize errors. 
Furthermore, many studies on terminology 
alignment and extraction deal predominantly with 
nominal expressions. Since the project aims to 
provide comprehensive information on the 
manifestations of legal vocabulary in Chinese and 
English texts, the retrieval system should not 
restrict users to nominal expressions but should 
also provide reference to many other phenomena 
such as alternation of part-of-speech (POS) (e.g. 
noun-verb alternation) inherent in bilingual texts, 
as will be seen in Section 3.  
 The availability of bilingual corpora has 
made it possible to construct representative term 
 banks. Nonetheless, current alignment and term 
extraction technology are still considered 
insufficient to meet the requirements for high 
quality terminology extraction. In ELDoS project, 
many issues are difficult to be handled 
satisfactorily by the computer in the foreseeable 
future. Although human input is essential for high 
quality term bank construction, the practice of 
manual intervention is not straightforward. 
Indeed, the manual efforts to correct the errors 
can be substantial, and the associated cost should 
not be underestimated. The annotator must first 
go through the entire texts to spot the errors and 
terms left out by the machines. In this process, 
both the source and target materials have to be 
consulted. The annotator must also ensure the 
consistency of the output. As a result, guidelines 
should be set up to streamline the process. 
3. Aspects of Terminology Alignment 
The approach adopted for the manual annotation 
of alignment markup and the maintenance of term 
bank in the ELDoS project will be described. 
Additional caution has been taken in the 
coordination of a team of annotators.  
3.1 Term Frequency 
An important reason for manual intervention in 
bilingual term alignment is the relatively poor 
recall rate for low frequency terms. Many 
extraction algorithms make use of statistical 
techniques to identify multi-word strings that 
frequently co-occur (Wu and Xia 1995; Kwong 
and Tsou 2001). These methods are less effective 
for locating low frequency terms. Of the 16,000 
terms extracted from ELDoS bilingual corpora, 
about 62% occur only once in about 80 
judgments. For high quality alignment and 
extraction, failure to include these low frequency 
terms would be totally unacceptable.  
3.2 Correspondence of Aligned Units 
Because of the different grammatical requirement 
and language style, a term in the source language 
often differs in different ways from the 
corresponding manifestations in the target 
language. These differences could be alternation 
of POS and the use of paraphrastic expressions. 
Although many term banks avoid such variations 
and focus primarily on equivalent nominals or 
verbs, the correspondence of terms between two 
typologically different languages is often more 
complicated. For example, the English nominal 
(?fulfilment?) is more naturally translated into 
Chinese as a verb (?l??, ?????, ????). 
More examples can be found in Table 1. 
 
Alternation of POS  
English  Chinese POS alternation 
The accused 
o+ 
det + adj ~ noun 
hold 
*? 
verb ~ noun 
fulfillment  
?
 
noun ~ verb 
administration  
?D 
noun ~ verb 
repudiation  
l? 
noun ~ neg + verb 
Table 1. Alternation of POS  
 
In some cases, there are simply no equivalent 
words in the target language. Paraphrasing or 
circumlocution may be necessary. Such 
correspondence is far less consistent and obvious 
to be identified by the computer.  
 
Paraphrasing/Circumlocution 
English Chinese 
The judge entered judgment in 
favour of the respondents in 
respect of their claim for arrears 
of wages, and severance payment. 
t?o31
?2??KDI
??9? 
In our view,? z??a?
 
?evidenced by the Defendant's 
letter ? 
?7:+3?}
???1$Ym
??S??? 
Table 2.  Examples of paraphrasing 
 
Because of language differences, legal terms can 
be contextually realized as anaphors in the target 
language. Examples of such correspondence 
would be useful for legal drafting and translation. 
Again, such anaphoric relations are more 
accurately handled by humans. 
 
Anaphoric Relation 
English Chinese 
He was subsequently 
charged?  
9?3??s? 
Liu JA dealt with that 
application on 14 March 
1996 and dismissed it. 
B9?t?W?
?1996?3?14?A?
 ?-??9?? 
Enforcement of a 
Convention award may 
also be refused if the 
award is in respect of a 
matter which is not capable 
of settlement by arbitration.
???*????1
??"lh?X*
?????M???
N+??*?? 
Table 3.  Examples of anaphors 
 3.3 Discontinuous Units 
Most term extraction algorithms deal with 
contiguous units, e.g. n-gram. These algorithms 
would be problematical in handling discontinuous 
units. They include phrasal verbs (e.g. ?strike 
out?), collocation patterns (e.g. ?lodge three 
complaints?, ?o??|?E?). These have to 
be manually added or edited. Interestingly, our 
preliminary study shows that over 90% of the 
instances of discontinuous units are found in the 
Chinese manifestation of English terms. Some 
examples are listed in Table 4. 
 
English Chinese 
convict ? o??|?E 
The Court of Appeal 
allowed the tenant's appeal 
B9?X?:
?B9S4
The agreement kept the 
company alive 
0??h	
[
     
If the Defendant 
misrepresented to the 
Plaintiff that what he was 
signing was only?   
#?o+3Q?{
:+3dB?}?
1?"?
Table 4. Examples of discontinuous units 
3.4 Selective Markup 
To avoid producing ?uninteresting? term 
alignment, restricting markup to only terms of the 
interested domain would be an attractive 
alternative to full-text alignment. In the ELDoS 
project, it is possible to mark up only legal 
terminology. Other non-legal elements can be 
omitted in alignment annotation. This approach 
has been accepted by the ELDoS client. Some 
examples of legal and non-legal terms are shown 
in Table 5. 
 
Legal Terms Non-legal Terms 
1 alibi 
evidence 
l?-?
 
???? 
1 collar ? 
2 order nisi I1N? 2 finger ? 
3 prima facie d? 3 question 2 
Table 5.  Legal vs. Non-legal Terms 
 
However, many other terms are more ambiguous. 
There is often no hard and fast rule to set criteria 
for domain membership. Annotators would have 
to rely on their own individual judgement to 
decide whether an expression should be counted 
as a legal term. For example, the English words 
listed in Table 6 are not used exclusively in the 
legal domain. However, taking into account their 
frequency, legal context and the multiple 
renditions in Chinese, they are worthy of being 
considered as ?semi-legal.? What is interesting 
about ?I? is that though the pronoun is a common 
pronoun, the corresponding Chinese manifestation 
?
!?
? is used exclusively in the judgments and 
should be regarded as legal. These examples 
suggest that the decision to classify a phrase as a 
legal term involves a great deal of complications.   
 
Semi-Legal Terms 
impose 
+s, G@, ,  ?@, ?s 
terms 
{2, {?, ??, ?s, ? 
waive 
??, , W 
I 
!? 
Table 6.   Semi-legal Terms 
 
 Selective markup, however, could give 
rise to intra- and inter-annotator inconsistency. 
The vagueness of legal terms could lead to 
variation in the selection of the same term at 
different times and among different annotators. In 
ELDoS project, computer-aided markup tools that 
can instantly check candidate expressions against 
the term bank is an effective reference for 
annotators to maintain consistency. Those terms 
that are found in term bank should be included in 
the alignment. In this way, the term bank can serve 
as a working standard for annotators. As for new 
terms, our annotators have adopted the principle 
that whenever they have doubts as to domain 
membership of a new term, they should include 
the term in the alignment. In this way, all the 
candidate terms are guaranteed to be available for 
the term bank manager for final decision. 
Inter-annotator differences can also be reduced by 
fostering more communication among annotators 
such as regular review of peer work.  
3.5 Granularity 
Term granularity is another major issue not only 
for machines but also for humans. The 
terminology list should be as simple and compact 
as possible to avoid redundancy of entries. For 
example, instead of having ?allegations?, 
?corruption?, ?allegations of corruption?, 
?allegations of manslaughter? as separate entries, 
it is preferable to treat only ?allegations?, 
?corruption? and ?manslaughter? as glossary 
entries. The annotators have adopted the principle 
that a term should be a minimal semantic unit. 
 Here ?semantic unit? refers to single- or 
multi-word terms that have acquired specialized 
meaning or usage. For example, the phrase ?great 
and general importance? ?U???? has 
been used ???? as a frozen chunk, and should 
not be further divided into ?great?, ?and?,  
?general? and  ?importance?. Similarly, ?oral 
decision? 
Qp2
 refers to the verbal delivery 
of judgments in trial as opposed to written 
judgments. Such decisions involve the support of 
real-world knowledge and sophisticated 
semantic/pragmatic interpretation and are not 
easily modelled by the computer. 
4. Further Works 
Bilingual terminology extracted directly from the 
bilingual corpora bear the form as it is in the text 
corpora. English words with different 
morphological markers will give rise to multiple 
entries in the resulting glossary. However, from 
the user?s point of view, verbs with the same root 
but different inflectional markers (e.g. ?hold?, 
?held?, ?holding?) should be combined to form 
one single entry. Similarly, variants of Chinese 
expressions that differ simply by an optional 
markers 
1
 de (see Table 7) may better be treated 
as the same item to minimize redundancy.  
 
English Chinese 
lawful attorney 1. }9?3 2. }19?3 
order nisi 1. I?N? 2. I?1N? 
presumption in law 1. ?B?s 2. ?B1?s 
Table 7.  Chinese renditions differed by 
1
 de 
 
Term bank management tools will be developed 
to process the morphological markers and 
combine related pairs.  
5. Conclusion 
In this paper, we have studied the importance of 
human intervention in the preparation of aligned 
corpus and bilingual terminology, particularly 
when the specialized language resource and users 
are involved. Their demand for high quality 
alignment and terminology gives rise to a number 
of issues that are difficult, if not impossible, to be 
dealt with satisfactorily by the computer. These 
issues include the extraction of low frequency 
terms, the identification of equivalent units with 
different POS or paraphrases, discontinuous units, 
consistency of term granularity, etc. Though 
human intervention is far more effective in 
attaining accurate linguistic processing, if not 
properly planned, it could also suffer from intra- 
and inter-annotator inconsistency. Regular peer 
review and appropriate markup checking tools will 
be essential to minimize inconsistency. 
Acknowledgements 
This study is supported through the Hong Kong 
Judiciary contract (#RCL/0794) and the Research 
Grants Council of Hong Kong under Competitive 
Earmarked Research Grant (CERG) No. 9040570. 
We specially thank the Judiciary of HKSAR for 
providing authentic judgments for this study. Our 
thanks also go to the team of alignment annotators 
who provided interesting examples for this paper.  
References  
Borin, L. (2000) You ?ll Take the High Road and I?ll 
Take the Low Road: Using a Third Language to 
Improve Bilingual Word Alignment. Proceedings of 
COLING 2000, pp. 97?103. 
Huang, J.-X. and K.-S. Choi. (2000) Chinese-Korean 
Word Alignment Based on Linguistic Comparison. 
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
392?399.  
Kwong, O. Y. and B. K. Tsou. (2001) Automatic 
Corpus-Based Extraction of Chinese Legal Terms. 
Proceedings of the 6th Natural Language Processing 
Pacific Rim Symposium (NLPRS 2001), pp 669?676, 
Tokyo, Japan. 
Li, Z. E. and E. Poon. (1998) English-Chinese 
Dictionary of Law. Hong Kong: Commercial Press.  
T'sou, B. K., H. L. Lin, S. W. K. Chan and T. B. Y. 
(1998) "Cognitive Variation in Cross Straits 
Perception of Salient Information", in B. K. T'sou, T. 
B. Y. Lai, S. W. K. Chan and W. S-Y. Wang (Eds.), 
Quantitative and Computational Studies on the 
Chinese Language, Language Information Sciences 
Research Centre, City University of Hong Kong, 
pp.31-56. 
Wu, D. and X. Xia. (1995) Large-scale Automatic 
Extraction of an English-Chinese Translation 
Lexicon. Machine Translation 9 (3-4): 285?313. 
Yiu, T.-W. and Z.-Q. Zhang. (1996) English-Chinese 
Dictionary of Commercial Law. Hong Kong: 
Commercial Press. 
Yiu, T.-W. and P.-K. Au-Yeung. (1992) A Glossary of 
Law for Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Commercial Press. 
