Abstract
The rapid growth of Internet Technology,
especially user friendliness approach, helps
increase the number of Internet users and the
amount of information in the cyberspace.
There is a countless amount of information in
languages. This has spread developments of
MT systems. The focus of our approach is to
increase the reusability of those MT systems
by using Cross System machine translation.
Using natural language as an intermediate
language, such as English, will help us use the
information in Internet qualitatively. In this
paper, we point out some problems that may
cause the efficiency to decrease when a
sentence is translated from a second language
to a third language. A novel method is
proposed to solve this problem.
 
1. Introduction
Machine Translation (MT) is an automatic
system that provides an ability to convert a
message written in one language (source
language: SL) to another (target language:
TL)[1]. The interlingua approach [2,3], a
methodology of constructing an intermediate
language, is a dominant approach in
standalone system to support multi-language.
Many products such as, SYSTRAN [4],
BESTILAND [5], are implemented using this
approach. Interlingua approach is helpful for
a central server, but it is difficult to complete
concepts in Interlingua.
The rapid growth of Internet Technology,
especially user friendliness approach, helps
increase the population of users who access
the Internet and the amount of information in
the cyberspace. With the increasing amount of
online information and the rapid growth of
non-English speaking Internet hosts, it is
becoming increasingly important to offer
users universal access to valuable information
resources in different languages. The
European Multilingual Information Retrieval
(EMIR) project [6], the MULINEX project[7],
the TwentyOne project[8], and the
cross-language retrieval track in TREC[9]
conference all reflect people?s interest in
A Cross System Machine Translation
Thepchai Supnithi, Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Thatsanee Charoenporn
Information Research and Development Division
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center
112 Thailand Science Park, Paholyothin Rd.,
Klong 1, Klong Luang, Pathumthani 12120
THAILAND
{thepchai , virach ,thatsanee}@nectec.or.th
providing interoperability among different
language processing environments and
multilingual information retrieval.
Distributed system technology plays an
important role to enable us to manage
information from various places. This makes
it unnecessary to access only the central
server. It helps machine translation
developers to work individually. Yasuhara
[10] wrote that many machine translation
systems were developed, especially from local
language to English, and the language has an
important role as an intermediate language.
Our paper tries to apply a distributed
technique by using English language, which is
mostly used by non-English speakers as a
second language to be an intermediate
language. Our approach is not aimed to show
that it is better than the interlingua approach,
but it is another solution for us to use existing
resources in cyberspace. We hope that it is
possible to help developers build the
machine translation that will support
all languages taking into account of
cost, quantity, and time consumption.
In section 2, we show cross system
MT approach. In section 3, an
example of our approach is given. In
section 4 we illustrate drawbacks of
this technique and give an example
about how to examine these problems.
2. Cross System MT
The major significance of Asian
languages is the variation of languages
in the region; most of which use their
own unique set of characters. In terms of
grammar, some (Thai, Laotian, Japanese,
Chinese, etc.) do not indicate word boundary,
some (Thai, Laotian, etc.) do not inflect while
others(Japanese, Korean, etc.) provide
particles to indicate the word grammatical
function, some are not distinguishable
between sentences and phrases, etc. These are
the basic difficulties that interest the
researchers in the field of machine translation
and the application.
Due to these varieties, it is difficult to build
an MT system that supports all languages
taking into account of cost, quantity, and time
consumption. Cross system machine
translation approach is, therefore, an essential
concept that helps reduce these problems by
reusing the large amount of information
existing in Internet.
Figure 1 shows an idea of our cross system
machine translation approach. Since the
Text Processing Common Platform
VisualizationRepresentation Extraction Retrieval Summarization MT Mining
English
Language Processing
Chinese
Language Processing
Japanese
Language Processing
French
Language Processing
Korean
Language Processing
Myanmar
Language Processing
Vietnam
Language Processing
Indonesia
Language Processing
Thai
Language Processing
??
Language Processing
??
Language Processing
MT
MT MT MT MT
MT MT MT
MTMT
e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary
e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary
e-Content Dictionary
e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary e-Content Dictionary
Figure 1.Cross System Architecture 
???? ?? ??????? ?? ??
???? ?? ??????? ?? ???Computer Computer?


?EnglishEnglish???????
TE??ET System JE??EJ System
S
earching
Word transfer
Web transfer
1 2 3
4
567
TE??ET System: Thai-English MT System
JE??EJ System : Japanese-English MT System
?? ?? ?? ??
?? ?? ?? ??
S
earching
technology of building MT can be transferred
from us to other countries in this region and
we know that English is broadly used as a
bridge to communicate among different
languages. It is simpler for a local developer
to build an MT system from his/her local
language to English (L1??E). If all
countries have their own Ln??E MT system,
sharing English as an intermediate
representation language reduces problems
shown above. Moreover, there are many
different ways to develop a MT system. Our
approach is to encapsulate the type differences
among MT systems. Thus we can decrease the
gap among languages by connecting the MT
system of each local language.
Our cross system MT also offers a good
infrastructure for many future applications
such as e-commerce, digital archive,
e-publishing, and so on as shown in figure 1.
Next we show an example of the usage of a
cross system MT.
3. A Usage Sample of
Cross System MT
This chapter shows an
application of using our
cross system MT. Figure 2
shows an example of our
expected application tool
for information retrieval.
We have two MT systems
in our workgroup, a
bilingual Thai??English
MT system and Japanese
??English MT system.
When a user starts to search by input a
keyword in Thai, such as a word ??????????? ?
[kom pyu ter]?(step1). The word
?????????????will be sent to the Thai?English
MT system to translate into
?computer?(step2). The word ?computer?
will be sent to the English?Japanese MT
system to translate into ?     
?(step3). The word ?? will
be used as a keyword to search for Japanese
web pages by a Japanese search engine
(step4). The result of Japanese web pages
from the search engine will be sent to
Japanese ? English MT system to translate
into English web pages (step 5). The result of
English homepages will again be sent to
English ? Thai MT system to translate into
Thai pages (step 6). Finally, the output of the
workgroup is web pages that contain the
keyword????????????? (step 7). These web pages
are selected from Japanese web pages.
This approach helps us to develop a MT
system that supports all languages taking into
Figure 2.Cross System Information Retrieval 
account of cost, quantity, and time
consumption. If each pair of languages can be
translated perfectly, it should produce a
satisfactory result for cross system technique.
There is, however, a major problem that we
have to consider about the efficiency due to
the fact that the efficiency of each pair of
machine translation is not completed. The
more languages we include in our system, the
less efficient the system becomes. In order to
find out the solution for this problem, we
show the linguistic problems and an example
for solving those problems in the next section.
4. Problems and Solution to Improve
Efficiency from Cross System Approach
The cross system MT approach seems to
be another solution to develop an MT system
that is possible to connect to other languages.
However, it has a major problem of efficiency
decreasing. When we consider the efficiency
of translation from the SL to TL, we find that
the machine translation cannot be transferred
completely. Section 4.1 gives the problem that
is possible in linguistics and in section 4.2 our
approach to transfer information from the first
SL to TL in order to examine these problems
is described.
4.1 Linguistic Problems
Manisara Meechoonuk and Somporn
Rakchonlatee [11] evaluated the result of
machine translation developed in Thailand,
they define the linguistic problems as shown
in table 1. In the investigation, they show that
the result from MT that is perfect translation is
about 29%, comprehensible translation is
about 55%, and incomprehensible translation
for the remaining . They also state that
?Mismatch Concept? is about 34% found and
is the most common linguistic problems .
These linguistic problems cause the
Table 1. List of Linguistic Problems and Meaning
Linguistics Problems Meaning
Mismatch Concept Inappropriate concept is selected
Misplaced Modifiers Wrong position of words, phrases or modifiers in TL resulting in
distortion of meaning
Inappropriate Literal Translation An inappropriate translation that follows closely the form of SL.
It can be categorized into 1) part of speech, 2) order, 3) idiom.
Addition of words or phrases Some words in TL that are not stated in SL are added.
Omission of words The meaning of a word or words when translating from SL to TL
is/are leaved out.
Insufficient definitions of idioms, two
word verbs, and phrasal verbs
The scope or number of words in electronic storage is either
limited or inaccurate according to the meanings of words in SL
Translation which does not conform to
Target language grammar
A difference sentence structure in TL that may cause an
incomprehensible translation.
Implicit in both SL and TL The implied meaning of a word in the SL is not expressed clearly
or fully in TL
Active in SL but passive in TL The participles appear in SL as active forms but are translated
into passive forms in TL
Insufficient Dictionary Definitions The scope or number of words in the electronic data dictionary is
limited
Different Semantic Segmentation
between SL and TL
Using difference marker, such as punctuation or space in SL and
TL may cause the incomprehensible translation
Specific in SL but generic in TL A specific word in SL is referred as a general meaning in TL
incomplete translation. An MT system cannot
correctly translate from second language to
third language if the result of translation from
the MT system from first language to second
language is not perfect . We, however, find
that ?Insufficient definitions of idioms,
two-word verbs, and phrasal verbs? and
?Insufficient Dictionary Definitions?
problems cannot be fixed by the cross
language system because of the lack of
information before the translation in SL.
We examine this problem by adding the
information from the first language together
with the result of second language. When the
MT system translates from the second
language to the third one , it can request
additional information that is attached from
the first language as a reference. Next we
show some examples of using our method.
4.2 Examples of Information Transfer
In section 4.1, we give linguistic problems
that cause a decrease of efficiency of
translation. In order to increase the efficiency,
we illustrate how to give the additional
information in order to help the translation
when the second language functions as a
source language. Our approach is that the
information we receive from the first
language is the most appropriate information.
If we can add additional information from the
first language as much as we can, it will help
us increase the efficiency of translation. We
use an XML as a language to transfer from
first language to other languages.
For example, we have two MT systems, a
Thai??English MT system and
English??Japanese MT system.
(1) Looking at the first sentence,
??????????? (dek duum ya)?
means ?A child drinks a medicine?.
But it is translated into ?A child drinks a
drug? by the Thai?English MT system.
The problem of this sentence is classified as
a ?Mismatch Concept? problem. A word
????has several meanings, such as medicine,
drug, cure, tonic and so on. For this problem
we can add all concepts as a reference as
follows.
?A child <AGT> drinks<? > a drug
<OBJ:c#drug, c#medicine, c#pill,
c#tonic> ?
This will help the second MT system not to
translate ???? as ?drug?, but refer all concepts
of ???? before the translation. The result of
translation should be, ?? by
English?Japanese MT system.
(2) Looking at another sentence in
Japanese.
? 	
  
 !"#$%&'
()*+,-. means ? A private
standard and a wide range internet
security has been introduced in
InternetExplorer6.?
But it is translated into ?A private
standard has been introduced as the
Internet security whose it is wide range in
InternetExplorer6.?
The problem of this sentence is classified as
a ?Misplaced Modifiers? problem. ?Internet
security? which is defined as a private
standard causes the misunderstanding. In this
problem we can add a tag that refers to the
functions of Internet security (TAR) as a
reference as follows.
A private standard<TAR> has been
introduced<?> as the Internet security<
TAR> whose it is wide range<?> in
InternetExplorer6<?>.
This will help the second MT system use
the meaning of the CASE relation as TAR as a
reference. The result of translation should be,
???????????????????????????????????????????????????? 
??????????????????? Internet Explorer 6? by
English? Thai MT system.
 (3) Looking at another sentence in
Japanese.
?/0123456789:,-?
means ? There is grass that can eat in
hills and fields?.
But it is translated into ?There is grass
eaten in hills and fields? by the
Japanese?English MT system.
The problem of this sentence is classified as
an ?Active in SL but passive in TL? problem.
A word ?	
 ? which shows a
possible shape is translated as a passive form.
In this problem we can add a tag that refers to
a possible form as a reference as follows.
?There is <?> grass<?> eaten
<style:possible shape> in hills and
fields<?>. ?
This will help the second MT system to
translate ?eat? with a possible shape. The
result of translation should be,
?????????????????????????????????????????????? by
English?Thai MT system.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
Due to the growth of information in digital
world, the digital divide problem becomes
much more severe. We need a system that is
possible to be developed in a short period of
time. Our approach, cross system MT is a key
for developing such a system by considering
only a bilingual MT system.
The cross system MT is an alternative
solution to help the countries in the region to
create their own MT systems by using existing
resources when considering the cost, quantity,
and time consumption. This will help them
have a chance to strengthen their economic
competitiveness and keep their culture
preservations.
Since our method tries to give necessary
information from the first language, it is
appropriate to solve existent linguistics
problems, such as, ?mismatch conceptions?,
?inappropriate literal translation? and so on. It
cannot, however, solve some linguistic
problems because of the lack of information
in the first language, such as ?insufficient
dictionary definitions?.
In this paper, we give an outline of our
approach, cross system MT, some usages of
this system and define linguistics problems
that may cause the efficiency decrease. We
show an example of solving those problems.
The future work is to analyze essential
information for each of the linguistic
problems and subsequently implement our
system.
Reference
[1] Briem, S. (2001): Machine Translation.
http://www.simnet.is/stbr/vela/html
[2]Tucker, Allen B. (1987): Current Strategies in
Machine Translation Research Development in
Sergeri Nirenburg, Machine Translation
Cambridge University Press (pp24).
[3] Sornlertlamvanich, V. (1995): Paper on Natural
Language Process: Multi-lingual Machine
Translation and Related Topics (1987-1994),
Bangkok: National Electronics and Computer
Technology Center.
[4] SYSTRAN: http://www.systransoft.com/
[5] BESTILAND: http://www.bestiland.com/
[6] Fluhr, C. and Radwan, K. (1993): Ful Text
Databases as Lexical Semantic Knowledge for
Multilingual Interrogation and Machine
Translation. In EWAIC? 93.
[7] Erbach, G. Neumann, G. and Uszkoreit H.
(1997): MULINEX: Multilingual Indexing,
Navigation, and Editing Extensions for the World
Wide Web, in Working Notes of AAAI Spring
Symposium on Cross Language Text and Speech.
Standford California.
[8] Hiemstra, D.A (1998): Linguistically
Motivated Probabilistic Model of Information
Retrieval, In: C. Nicolaou and C. Stephanids(eds.)
Proc. Of the second European Conf. On Research
and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries,
pp 569-584.
[9] Hiemstra, D.A(1995): The 4th Text Retrieval
Conference(TREC-4), Gaitherburg, Md., Nov 1-3.
[10] Eiji Komatsu, Cui Jin, and Hiroshi Yasuhara.
(1993): A Mono-lingual Corpus-based Machine
Translation of the Interlingua Method.
In Proceedings of TMI 93.
[11] Meechoonuk M, and Rakchonlatee S. (2001):
An Analysis of Text Translation by Machine, A
master Thesis in Faculty of Arts, School of
Language and Communication, NIDA
