Grammar and Lexicon in the Robust Parsing of Italian 
Towards a Non-Na?ve Interplay 
 
Roberto  
BARTOLINI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale CNR 
Area della Ricerca 
Via Moruzzi 1 
56100 PISA (Italy) 
Alessandro  
LENCI 
Universit? di Pisa 
Via Santa Maria 36 
56100 PISA (Italy) 
Simonetta  
MONTEMAGNI 
Istituto di Linguistica Com-
putazionale CNR 
Area della Ricerca 
Via Moruzzi 1 
56100 PISA (Italy) 
Vito  
PIRRELLI 
Istituto di Linguistica 
Computazionale CNR 
Area della Ricerca 
Via Moruzzi 1 
56100 PISA (Italy) 
 
{roberto.bartolini, alessandro.lenci, simonetta.montemagni, vito.pirrelli}@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Abstract 
In the paper we report a qualitative evalua-
tion of the performance of a dependency 
analyser of Italian that runs in both a non-
lexicalised and a lexicalised mode. Results 
shed light on the contribution of types of 
lexical information to parsing.    
Introduction 
It is widely assumed that rich computational 
lexicons form a fundamental component of reli-
able parsing architectures and that lexical infor-
mation can only have beneficial effects on 
parsing. Since the beginning of work on broad-
coverage parsing  (Jensen 1988a, 1988b), the 
key issue has been how to make effective use of 
lexical information. In this paper we put these 
assumptions to the test by addressing the follow-
ing questions: to what extent should a lexicon be 
trusted for parsing? What is the neat contribution 
of lexical information to overall parse success? 
We present here the results of a preliminary 
evaluation of the interplay between lexical and 
grammatical information in parsing Italian using 
a robust parsing system based on an incremental 
approach to shallow syntactic analysis. The sys-
tem can run in both a non-lexicalised and a lexi-
calised mode. Careful analysis of the results 
shows that contribution of lexical information to 
parse success is more selective than commonly 
assumed,  thus raising the parallel issues of how 
to promote a more effective integration between 
parsers and lexicons and how to develop better 
lexicons for parsing.  
1 Syntactic parsing lexicons 
Syntactic lexical information generally feeds 
parsing systems distilled in subcategorization 
frames. Subcategorization is a formal specifica-
tion of a predicate phrasal context in terms of the 
type of arguments syntactically selected by the 
predicate entry (e.g. the verb hit selects for a 
subject NP and an object NP). Lexical frames 
commonly include: i.) number of selected argu-
ments, ii.) syntactic categories of their possible 
realization (NP, PP, etc.), iii.) lexical constraints 
on the argument realization (e.g. the preposition 
heading a PP complement), and iv.) the argu-
ment functional role. Other types of syntactic in-
formation that are also found in syntactic 
lexicons are: argument optionality, verb control, 
auxiliary selection, order constraints, etc. On the 
other hand, collocation-based lexical informa-
tion is only rarely provided by computational 
lexicons, a gap often lamented in robust parsing 
system development. 
A number of syntactic computational lexi-
cons are nowadays available to the NLP com-
munity. Important examples are LDOCE 
(Procter 1987), ComLex (Grishman et al 1994), 
PAROLE (Ruimy et al 1998). These lexicons 
are basically hand-crafted by expert lexicogra-
phers, and their natural purpose is to provide 
general purpose, domain-independent syntactic 
information, covering the most frequent entries 
and frames. On the other hand, parsing systems 
often complement general lexicons with corpus-
driven, automatically harvested syntactic infor-
mation (Federici et al 1998b, Briscoe 2001, 
Korhonen 2002). Automatic acquisition of sub-
categorization frames allows systems to access 
highly context dependent constructions, to fill in 
possible lexical gaps and eventually rely on fre-
quency information to tune the relative impact of 
specific frames (Carroll et al 1998). 
Lexicon coverage is usually regarded as the 
main parameter affecting use of lexical informa-
tion for parsing. However, the real comparative 
impact of the type (rather than the mere quan-
tity) of lexical information has been seldom dis-
cussed. Our results show that the contribution of 
various lexical information types to parse suc-
cess is not uniform. The experiment focuses on a 
particular subset of the information available in 
syntactic lexicons - the representation of PP 
complements in lexical frames - tested on the 
task of PP-attachment. The reason for this 
choice is that this piece of information occupies 
a central and dominant position in existing lexi-
cons. For instance in the Italian PAROLE lexi-
con, more than one third of verb frames contain 
positions realized by a PP, and this percentage 
raises up to the near totality noun-headed 
frames. 
2 Robust Parsing of Italian 
The general architecture of the Italian parsing 
system used for testing adheres to the following 
principles: 1) modular approach to parsing, 2) 
underspecified output (whenever required), 3) 
cautious use of lexical information, generally re-
sorted to in order to refine and/or further specify 
analyses already produced on the basis of 
grammatical information. These principles un-
derlie other typical robust parsing architectures 
(Chanod 2001, Briscoe and Carroll 2002). 
The system consists of i.) CHUNK-IT 
(Federici et al 1998a), a battery of finite state 
automata for non-recursive text segmentation 
(chunking), and ii.) IDEAL (Lenci et al 2001), a 
dependency-based analyser of the full range of 
intra-sentential functional relations (e.g. subject, 
object, modifier, complement, etc.). CHUNK-IT 
requires a minimum of lexical knowledge: 
lemma, part of speech and morpho-syntactic fea-
tures. IDEAL includes in turn two main compo-
nents: (i.) a Core Dependency Grammar of 
Italian; (ii.) a syntactic lexicon of ~26,400 sub-
categorization frames for nouns, verbs and ad-
jectives derived from the Italian PAROLE 
syntactic lexicon (Ruimy et al 1998). The 
IDEAL Core Grammar is formed by ~100 rules 
(implemented as finite state automata) covering 
major syntactic phenomena,1 and organized into 
structurally-based rules and lexically-based 
rules. IDEAL adopts a slightly simplified ver-
sion of the FAME annotation scheme (Lenci et 
al. 2000), where functional relations are head-
based and hierarchically organised to make pro-
vision for underspecified representations of 
highly ambiguous functional analyses. This fea-
ture allows IDEAL to tackle cases where lexical 
information is incomplete, or where functional 
relations cannot be disambiguated conclusively 
(e.g. in the case of the argument vs. adjunct dis-
tinction). A ?confidence score? is associated 
with some of the identified dependency relations 
to determine a plausibility ranking among dif-
ferent possible analyses. 
In IDEAL, lexico-syntactic information inter-
venes only after possibly underspecified de-
pendency relations have been identified on the 
basis of structural information only. At this sec-
ond stage, the lexicon is accessed to provide ex-
tra conditions on parsing, so that the first stage 
parse can be non-monotonically altered in vari-
ous ways (see section 3.3). This strategy mini-
mises the impact of lexical gaps (whether at the 
level of lemma or of the associated subcategori-
zation frames) on the system performance (in 
particular on its coverage). 
3 The Experiment 
3.1 The Test Corpus (TC) 
The test corpus contains a selection of sentences 
extracted from the balanced partition of the Ital-
ian Syntactic Semantic Treebank (ISST, Mon-
temagni et al 2000), including articles from 
 
1 Adjectival and adverbial modification; negation; (non-
extraposed) sentence arguments (subject, object, indirect 
object); causative and modal constructions; predicative 
constructions; PP complementation and modification; em-
bedded finite and non-finite clauses; control of infinitival 
subjects; relative clauses (main cases); participial construc-
tions; adjectival coordination; noun-noun coordination 
(main cases); PP-PP coordination (main cases); cliticiza-
tion. 
contemporary Italian newspapers and periodicals 
covering a high variety of topics (politics, econ-
omy, culture, science, health, sport, leisure, etc.). 
TC consists of 23,919 word tokens, correspond-
ing to 721 sentences (with a mean sentence 
length of 33.18 words, including punctuation to-
kens). The mean number of grammatical rela-
tions per sentence is 18. 
3.2 The Baseline Parser (BP) 
The baseline parser is a non-lexicalised version 
of IDEAL including structurally-based rules 
only. The mean number of grammatical relations 
per sentence detected by BP in TC is 15. 
The output of the baseline parser is shallow in 
different respects. First, it contains underspeci-
fied analyses, resorted to whenever available 
structural information does not allow for a more 
specific syntactic interpretation: e.g. at this level, 
no distinction is made between arguments and 
modifiers, which are all generically tagged as 
?complements?. Concerning attachment, the sys-
tem tries all structurally-compatible attachment 
hypotheses and ranks them according to a confi-
dence score. Strong preference is given to 
rightmost attachments: e.g. a prepositional com-
plement is attached with the highest confidence 
score (50) to the closest, or rightmost, available 
lexical head. In the evaluation reported in section 
4, we consider top-ranked dependents only, i.e. 
those enforcing rightmost attachment. Moreover, 
in matching the relations yielded by the parser 
with the ISST relations in TC we make allowance 
for one level of subsumption, i.e. a BP relation can 
be one level higher than its ISST counterpart in 
the hierarchy of dependency relations. Finally, the 
BP output is partial with respect to those depend-
encies (e.g. a that-clause or a direct object) that 
would be very difficult to identify with a suffi-
cient degree of confidence through structurally-
based rules only.  
3.3 The Lexically-Augmented Parser (LAP) 
The lexically-augmented version of IDEAL in-
cludes both structurally-based and lexically-
based rules (using the PAROLE lexicon). In this 
lexically-augmented configuration, IDEAL first 
tries to identify as many dependencies as possi-
ble with structural information. Lexically-based 
rules intervene later to refine and/or complete 
structurally-based analyses. Those structurally-
based hypotheses that find support in the lexicon 
are assigned the highest score (60). The contri-
bution of lexically-based rules is non-monotonic:
old relations can eventually be downgraded, as 
they happen to score, in the newly ranked list of 
possible relations, lower than their lexically-
based alternatives. Furthermore, specification of 
a former underspecified relation is always ac-
companied by a re-ranking of the relations iden-
tified for a given sentence; from this re-ranking, 
restructuring (e.g. reattachment of complements) 
of the final output may follow. 
LAP output thus includes: 
a) fully specified dependency relations: e.g. an 
underspecified dependency relation such as 
?complement? (COMP), identified by a struc-
turally-based rule, is rewritten, when lexi-
cally-supported, as ?indirect object? (OBJI) 
and assigned a higher confidence value; 
b) new dependency relations: this is the case, 
for instance, of that-clauses, direct objects 
and other relation types whose identification 
is taken to be too difficult and noisy without 
support of lexical evidence; 
c) underspecified dependency relations, for 
those cases that find no lexical support. 
The mean number of grammatical relations per 
sentence detected by LAP in TC is 16. In the 
evaluation of section 4, we consider top-ranked 
dependents only (confidence score  50), corre-
sponding to either lexically-supported dependency 
relations or ? in their absence ? to rightmost at-
tachments. Again, in matching the relations 
yielded by the parser with the ISST relations in 
TC we make allowance for one level of subsump-
tion. 
4 Analysis of Results 
The parsing outputs of BP and LAP were com-
pared and projected against ISST annotation to 
assess the contribution of lexical information to 
parse success. In this paper, we focus on the 
evaluation of how and to which extent lexico-
syntactic information contributes to identifica-
tion of the proper attachment of prepositional 
complements. For an assessment of the role and 
impact of lexical information in the analysis of 
dependency pairs headed by specific words, the 
interested reader is referred to Bartolini et al
(2002). 
4.1 Quantitative Evaluation 
Table 1 summarises the results obtained by the 
two different parsing configurations (BP and 
LAP) on the task of attaching prepositional 
complements (PC). Prepositional complements 
are classified with respect to the governing head: 
PC_VNA refers to all prepositional comple-
ments governed by V(erbal), N(ominal) or 
A(djectival) heads. PC_V is the subset with a 
V(erbal) head and PC_N the subset with a 
N(ominal) head. For each PC class, precision, 
recall and f score figures are given for the differ-
ent parsing configurations. Precision is defined 
as the ratio of correctly identified dependency 
relations over all relations found by the parser 
(prec = correctly identified relations / total num-
ber of identified relations); recall refers to the ra-
tio of correctly identified dependency relations 
over all relations in ISST (recall = correctly 
identified relations / ISST relations). Finally, the 
overall performance of the parsing systems is 
described in terms of the f score, computed as 
follows: 2 prec recall / prec + recall. 
 
BP LAP ISST 
Prec recall F score Prec recall f score 
PC_VNA 3458 75,53 57,40 65,23 74,82 61,02 67,22
PC_V 1532 75,43 45,50 56,76 74,23 49,50 61,22
PC_N 1835 73,53 80,82 77,00 72,76 81,36 76,82
Table 1. Prepositional complement attachment in BP and LAP 
 
Table 2. Lexicalised attachments 
 
To focus on the role of the lexicon in either con-
firming or revising structure-based dependen-
cies, lexically-supported attachments are singled 
out for evaluation in Table 2. Their cumulative 
frequency counts are reported in the first three 
columns of Table 2 (?Lexicalised attachments?), 
together with their distribution per head catego-
ries. Lexicalised attachments include both those 
structure-based attachments that happen to be 
confirmed lexically (?Confirmed attachments?), 
and restructured attachments, i.e. when a prepo-
sitional complement previously attached to the 
closest available head to its left is eventually re-
assigned as the dependent of a farther head, on 
the basis of lexicon look-up (?Restructured at-
tachments?). Table 2 thus shows the impact of 
lexical information on the task of PP attachment. 
In most cases, 89% of the total of lexicalised at-
tachments, LAP basically confirms dependency 
relations already assigned at the previous stage. 
Newly discovered attachments, which are de-
tected thanks to lexicon look-up and re-ranking,  
amount to only 11% of all lexicalised attach-
ments, less than 3% of all PP attachments 
yielded by LAP.  
4.3 Discussion 
4.3.1 Recall and precision on noun and verb 
heads 
Let us consider the output of BP first. The strik-
ing difference in the recall of noun-headed vs 
verb-headed prepositional attachments (on com-
parable levels of precision, rows 2 and 3 of Ta-
ble 1) prompts the suggestion that the typical 
context of use of a noun is more easily described 
in terms of local, order-contingent criteria (e.g. 
rightmost attachment) than a verb context is. We 
can give at least three reasons for that. First, 
frame bearing nouns tend to select fewer argu-
 Lexicalised atts Confirmed atts Restructured atts 
total OK prec Total OK prec total OK prec 
PP_VNA 919 819 89,12 816 771 94,49 103 65 63,11
PP_V 289 244 84,43 201 194 96,52 88 61 69,32
PP_N 629 575 91,41 614 577 93,97 15 4 26,67
ments than verbs do. In our lexicon, 1693 verb-
headed frames out of 6924 have more than one 
non subject argument (24.4%), while there being 
only 1950 noun-headed frames out of 15399 
with more than one argument (12.6%). In TC, of 
2300 head verb tokens, 328 exhibit more than 
one non subject argument (14%). Rightmost at-
tachment trivially penalises such argument 
chains, where some arguments happen to be 
overtly realised in context one or more steps re-
moved from their heads. The second reason is 
sensitive to language variation: verb arguments 
tend to be dislocated more easily than noun ar-
guments, as dislocation heavily depends on sen-
tence-level (hence main verb-level) phenomena 
such as shift of topic or emphasis. In Italian, 
topic-driven argument dislocation in preverbal 
position is comparatively frequent and repre-
sents a problem for the baseline parser, which 
works on a head-first assumption. Thirdly, verbs 
are typically modified by a wider set of syntactic 
satellites than nouns are, such as temporal and 
circumstantial modifiers (Dik 1989). For exam-
ple, deverbal nouns do not inherit the possible 
temporal modifiers of their verb base (I run the 
marathon in three hours, but *the run of the 
marathon in three hours). Modifiers of this sort 
tend to be distributed in the sentence much more 
freely than ordinary arguments.  
4.3.2 Impact of the lexicon on recall 
Of the three above mentioned factors, only the 
first one has an obvious lexical character. We 
can provide a rough estimate of the impact of 
lexical information on the performance of LAP. 
The lexicon filter contributes a 9% increase of 
recall on verb complements (4% over 45.5%), 
by correctly reattaching to the verbal head those 
arguments (61) that were wrongly attached to 
their immediately preceding constituent by BP. 
This leads to an overall 49.5% recall. All re-
maining false negatives (about 48%) are i) either 
verb modifiers or ii) proper verb arguments ly-
ing out of the reach of structure-based criteria, 
due to syntactic phenomena such as complement 
dislocation, complex coordination, parenthetic 
constructions and ellipsis. We shall return to a 
more detailed analysis of false negatives in sec-
tion 4.3.4. In the case of noun complements, use 
of lexical information produces a negligible in-
crease of recall: 0.6% ( 0.5% over 80.8%). This 
is not surprising, as our test corpus contains very 
few cases of noun-headed argument chains, 
fewer than we could expect if the probability of 
their occurrence reflected the (uniform) type dis-
tribution of noun frames in the lexicon. The vast 
majority of noun-headed false negatives, as we 
shall see in more detail in a moment, is repre-
sented by modifiers. 
4.3.3 Impact of the lexicon on precision 
Reattachment is enforced by LAP when the 
preposition introducing a candidate complement 
in context is found in the lexical frame of its 
head. Table 2 shows that ~37% of the 103 re-
structured attachments proposed by the lexicon 
are wrong. Even more interestingly, there is a 
strong asymmetry between nouns and verbs. 
With verb heads, precision of lexically-driven 
reattachments is fairly high (~70%), nonetheless 
lower than precision of rightmost attachment 
(~75%). In the case of noun heads, the number 
of lexically reattached dependencies is instead 
extremely low. The percentage of mistakes is  
high, with precision dropping to 26.6%. 
The difference in the total number of restruc-
tured attachment may be again due to the richer 
complementation patterns exhibited by verbs in 
the lexicon. However, while in the case of verbs 
lexical information produces a significant im-
provement on restructured attachment precision, 
this contribution drops considerably for nouns. 
The main reason for this situation is that nouns 
tend to select semantically vacuous prepositions 
such as of much more often than verbs do. In our 
lexicon, out of 4157 frames headed by a noun, 
4015 contain the preposition di as an argument 
introducer (96.6%). Di is in fact an extremely 
polysemous preposition, heading, among others, 
also possessive phrases and other kinds of modi-
fiers. This trivially increases the number of cases 
of attachment ambiguity and eventually the pos-
sibility of getting false positives. Conversely, as 
shown by the number of confirmed attachments 
in Table 2, the role of lexical information in fur-
ther specifying an attachment with no restructur-
ing is almost uniform across nouns and verbs. 
4.3.4 False negatives  
The vast majority of undetected verb comple-
ments (80.6%) are modifiers of various kind. 
The remaining set of false negatives consists of 
48 complements (7.7%), 30 indirect objects 
(4.8%) and 43 oblique arguments (6.9%). Most 
such complements are by-phrases in passive 
constructions which are not as such very diffi-
cult to detect but just happen to fall out of the 
current coverage of LAP. More interestingly, 2/3 
of the remaining false negatives elude LAP be-
cause they are overtly realised far away from 
their verb head, often to its left. Most of these 
constructions involve argument dislocation and 
ellipsis. We can thus preliminarily conclude that 
argument dislocation and ellipsis accounts for 
about 14% of false negatives (7% over 50%). 
Finally, the number of false negatives due to at-
tachment ambiguity is almost negligible in the 
case of verbal heads. 
On the other hand, the impact of undetected 
modifiers of a verbal head on attachment recall 
is considerable. The most striking feature of this 
large subset is the comparative sparseness of 
modifiers introduced by di (of): 31 out of 504 
(6.2%). At a closer scrutiny, the majority of 
these di-phrases are either phraseological adver-
bial modifiers (di recente ?of late?, del resto ?be-
sides? etc.) or quasi-arguments headed by 
participle forms. Notably, 227 undetected modi-
fiers (45% of the total) are selected by semanti-
cally heavy and complex (possibly 
discontinuous) prepositions (davanti a ?in front 
of?, in mezzo a ?amid?, verso ?towards?, intorno 
a ?around?, contro ?against?, da ... a ?from ... to? 
etc.). As to the remaining 241 undetected modi-
fiers (48%), they are introduced by ?light? 
prepositions such as a ?to?, in ?in? and da ?from?. 
Although this 48% contains a number of diffi-
cult attachments, one can identify subsets of 
fairly reliable modifiers by focusing on the noun 
head introduced by the preposition, which usu-
ally gives a strong indication of the nature of the 
modifier, especially in the case of measure, tem-
poral and locative expressions.  
4.3.5 False positives 
Table 2 shows a prominent asymmetry in the 
precision of confirmed and restructured attach-
ments. Wrong restructured attachments are 
mainly due to a misleading match between the 
preposition introducing a PC and that introduc-
ing a slot in the lexical frame of its candidate 
head (~85%). This typically occurs with ?light? 
prepositions (e.g. di, a, etc.). Most notably, in a 
relevant subset of these mistakes, the verb or 
noun head belongs to an idiomatic multi-word 
expression. In the case of confirmed attach-
ments, about one third of false positives (~5%) 
involve multi-word expressions, in particular 
compound terms such as presidente del consig-
lio ?prime minister?, where the rightmost ele-
ment of the compound is wrongly selected as the 
head of the immediately following PP. In both 
restructured and confirmed attachments, the re-
maining cases (on average ~4%) are due to 
complex syntactic structures (e.g. appositive 
constructions, complex coordination, ellipsis 
etc.) which are outside the coverage of the cur-
rent grammar.  
Conclusion 
Larger lexicons are not necessarily better for 
parsing. The issue of the interplay of lexicon and 
grammar, although fairly well understood at the 
level of linguistic theory, still remains to be fully 
investigated at the level of parsing. In this paper, 
we tried to scratch the surface of the problem 
through a careful analysis of the performance of 
an incremental dependency analyser of Italian, 
which can run in both a non-lexicalised and a 
lexicalised mode.  
The contribution of lexical information to 
parse success is unevenly distributed over both 
part of speech categories and frame types. For 
reasons abundantly illustrated in section 4, the 
frames of noun heads are not quite as useful as 
those of verb heads, especially when available 
information is only syntactic. Moreover, while 
information on verb transitivity or clause em-
bedding is crucial to filter out noisy attachments, 
information on the preposition introducing the 
oblique complement or the indirect object of a 
verb can be misleading, and should thus be used 
for parsing with greater care. The main reason is 
that failure to register in the lexicon all possible 
prepositions actually found in real texts may 
cause undesired over-filtering of genuine 
arguments (false negatives). In many cases, 
argument prepositions are actually selected by 
the lexical head of the subcategorised argument, 
rather than by its subcategorising verb. Simi-
larly, while information about argument option-
ality vs obligatoriness is seldom confirmed in 
real language use, statistical preferences on the 
order of argument realisation can be very useful. 
Most current lexicons say very little about 
temporal and circumstantial modifiers, but much 
more can be said about them that is useful to 
parsing. First, some prepositions only occur to 
introduce verb modifiers. These semantically 
heavy prepositions, often consisting of more 
than one lexical item, play a fundamental role in 
the organization of written texts, and certainly 
deserve a special place in a parsing-oriented 
lexicon. Availability of this type of lexical in-
formation could pave the way to the develop-
ment of specialised ?mini-parsers? of those 
satellite modifiers whose structural position in 
the sentence is subject to considerable variation. 
These mini-parsers could benefit from informa-
tion about semantically-based classes of nouns, 
such as locations, measure terms, or temporal 
expressions, which should also contain indica-
tion of the preposition they are typically intro-
duced by. Clearly, this move requires 
abandoning the prejudice that lexical informa-
tion should only flow from the head to its 
dependents. Finally, availability of large 
repertoires of multi word units (both complex 
prepositions and compound terms) appears to 
have a large impact on improving parse preci-
sion.  
There is no doubt that harvesting such a wide 
range of lexical information in the quantity 
needed for accurate parsing will require exten-
sive recourse to bootstrapping methods of lexi-
cal knowledge acquisition from real texts.     
References  
Bartolini R., Lenci A., Montemagni S, Pirrelli V. 
(2002) The Lexicon-Grammar Balance in Robust 
Parsing of Italian, in Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, Las Palmas, Gran Canaria. 
Briscoe, E.J. (2001) From dictionary to corpus to 
self-organizing dictionary: learning valency asso-
ciations in the face of variation and change, in 
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2001, Lancaster 
University, pp. 79-89. 
Briscoe T., Carroll J., (2002) Robust Accurate Statis-
tical Annotation of General Text, in Proceedings of 
the 3rd International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Las Palmas, Gran Canaria. 
Carroll, J., Minnen G., Briscoe E.J. (1998) Can sub-
categorisation probabilities help a statistical 
parser?, in Proceedings of the 6th ACL/SIGDAT 
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Montreal, Can-
ada. 118-126. 
Chanod J.P. (2001) Robust Parsing and Beyond, in 
J.C. Junqua and G. van Noord (eds.) Robustness in 
Language and Speech Technology, Dordrecht, 
Kluwer, pp. 187-204. 
Federici, S., Montemagni, S., Pirrelli, V. (1998a) 
Chunking Italian: Linguistic and Task-oriented 
Evaluation, in Proceedings of the LREC Workshop 
on ?Evaluation of Parsing Systems?, Granada, 
Spain. 
Federici, S., Montemagni, S., Pirrelli, V., Calzolari, 
N. (1998b) Analogy-based Extraction of Lexical 
Knowledge from Corpora: the SPARKLE Experi-
ence, in Proceedings of the 1st International Con-
ference on Language resources and Evaluation, 
Granada, Spain. 
Grishman, R., Macleod C., Meyers A. (1994) 
COMLEX Syntax: Building a Computational Lexi-
con, in Proceedings of Coling 1994, Kyoto. 
Jensen K. (1988a) Issues in Parsing, in A. Blaser 
(ed.), Natural Language at the Computer, Springer 
Verlag, Berlin, pp. 65-83. 
Jensen K. (1988b) Why computational grammarians 
can be skeptical about existing linguistic theories,
in Proceedings of COLING-88, pp. 448-449. 
Lenci, A., Bartolini, R., Calzolari, N., Cartier, E. 
(2001) Document Analysis, MLIS-5015 MUSI, De-
liverable D3.1,. 
Lenci, A., Montemagni, S., Pirrelli, V., Soria, C. 
(2000) Where opposites meet. A Syntactic Meta-
scheme for Corpus Annotation and Parsing 
Evaluation, in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, Athens, Greece. 
Montemagni S., Barsotti F., Battista M., Calzolari N., 
Corazzari O., Zampolli A., Fanciulli F., Massetani 
M., Raffaelli R., Basili R., Pazienza M.T., Saracino 
D., Zanzotto F., Mana N., Pianesi F., Delmonte R. 
(2000) The Italian Syntactic-Semantic Treebank: 
Architecture, Annotation, Tools and Evaluation, in 
Proceedings of the COLING Workshop on ?Lin-
guistically Interpreted Corpora (LINC-2000)?, 
Luxembourg, 6 August 2000, pp. 18-27. 
Procter, P. (1987) Longman Dictionary of Contempo-
rary English, Longman, London. 
Ruimy, N., Corazzari, O., Gola, E., Spanu, A., Cal-
zolari, N., Zampolli, A. (1998) The European LE-
PAROLE Project: The Italian Syntactic Lexicon, in 
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on 
Language resources and Evaluation, Granada, 
Spain, 1998. 
 
