Broadening the Scope of the EAGLES/ISLE Lexical 
Standardization Initiative 
 
Nicoletta CALZOLARI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Alessandro LENCI 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
alessandro.lenci@ilc.cnr.it 
 
Francesca BERTAGNA 
Dipartimento di Linguistica, Universit? di Pisa 
Via S. Maria 36 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
francesca.bertagna@ilc.cnr.it 
Antonio ZAMPOLLI 
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale, CNR  
Area della Ricerca, Via Moruzzi 1 
Pisa, Italy, 56100 
pisa@ilc.cnr.it 
Abstract  
ISLE is a continuation of the long standing EAGLES initiative and it is supported by EC and NSF under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) programme. Its objective is to develop widely agreed and urgently 
demanded standards and guidelines for infrastructural language resources, tools, and HLT products. 
EAGLES itself is a well-known trademark and point of reference for HLT projects and products and its 
previous results have already become de facto widely adopted standards. Multilingual computational 
lexicons, natural interaction and multimodality, and evaluation are the three areas targeted by ISLE. In the 
first section of the paper we describe the overall goals and methodology of EAGLES/ISLE, in the second 
section we focus on the work of the Computational Lexicon Working Group, introducing its work strategy 
and the preliminary guidelines of a standard framework for multilingual computational lexicons, based on a 
general schema for the ?Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry? (MILE). 
 
1 Introducing EAGLES/ISLE 
ISLE (International Standards for Language 
Engineering) is a continuation of the long 
standing European EAGLES (Expert Advisory 
Group for Language Engineering Standards) 
initiative (Calzolari et al, 1996), carried out 
through a number of subsequent projects 
funded by the European Commission (EC) 
since 1993. ISLE is an initiative under the 
Human Language Technology (HLT) 
programme within the EU-US International 
Research Co-operation with the aim to develop 
and promote widely agreed and urgently 
demanded HLT standards, common guidelines 
and best practice recommendations for 
infrastructural language resources (Zampolli, 
1998), (Calzolari, 1998), tools that exploit 
them, and language engineering products.  
Object of EAGLES/ISLE are large-scale 
language resources (such as text corpora, 
computational lexicons, speech corpora, 
multimodal resources), means of manipulating 
such knowledge via computational linguistic 
formalisms, mark-up languages and various 
software tools and means of assessing and 
evaluating  resources, tools and products 
(EAGLES EWG final report, 1996). 
EAGLES was set up to determine which 
aspects of our field are open to short-term de 
facto  standardisation and to encourage the 
development of such standards for the benefit 
of consumers and producers of language 
technology, through bringing together 
representatives of major collaborative 
European R&D projects, and of HLT industry, 
in relevant areas. In this respect, more than 150 
leading industrial and academic players in the 
HLT field have actively participated in the 
definition of this initiative and have lent 
invaluable support to its execution.  
Successful standards are those which respond 
to commonly perceived needs or aid in 
overcoming common problems. In terms of 
offering workable, compromise solutions, they 
must be based on some solid platform of 
accepted facts and acceptable practices.  
The current ISLE project1 targets the three 
areas of : 
-multilingual computational lexicons2, 
-natural interaction and multimodality 
(NIMM)3,  
-evaluation of HLT systems4.  
For multilingual computational lexicons, ISLE 
goals are: i) extending EAGLES work on 
lexical semantics, necessary to establish inter-
language links; ii) designing and proposing 
standards for multilingual lexicons; iii) 
developing a prototype tool to implement 
lexicon guidelines and standards; iv) creating 
exemplary EAGLES-conformant sample 
lexicons and tagging exemplary corpora for 
validation purposes; v) developing 
standardised evaluation procedures for 
lexicons.  
For NIMM, ISLE work is targeted to develop 
guidelines for: i) the creation of NIMM data 
resources; ii) interpretative annotation of 
NIMM data, including spoken dialogue in 
NIMM contexts; iii) metadata descriptions for 
large NIMM resources; iv) annotation of 
discourse phenomena.  
For evaluation, ISLE is working on: i) quality 
models for machine translation systems; ii) 
maintenance of previous guidelines - in an ISO 
based framework (ISO 9126, ISO 14598). 
Three Working Groups, and their sub-groups, 
carry out the work, according to the EAGLES 
                                                 
1 Coordinated by A. Zampolli for EU and M. Palmer for 
US, see 
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/isle/ISLE_Home_Pag
e.htm. 
2 EU chair: N. Calzolari; US chairs: M. Palmer and R. 
Grishman.  
3 EU chair: N. O. Bernsen; US chair: M. Liberman. 
4 EU chair: M. King; US chair: E. Hovy. 
methodology, with experts from both the EU 
and US, acting as a catalyst in order to pool 
concrete results coming from major 
international/national/industrial projects. 
Relevant common practices or upcoming 
standards are being used where appropriate as 
input to EAGLES/ISLE work. Numerous 
theories, approaches, and systems are being 
taken into account as any recommendation for 
harmonisation must take into account the needs 
and nature of the different major contemporary 
approaches.  
Results are widely disseminated, after due 
validation in collaboration with EU and US 
HLT R&D projects, National projects, and 
industry.  
In the following we concentrate on the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group 
(CLWG), trying to describe its specific 
methodology and its goal of establishing a 
general and consensual standardized 
environment for the development and 
integration of multilingual resources. The 
general vision adheres to the idea of enhancing 
the sharing and reusability of multilingual 
lexical resources, by promoting the definition 
of a common parlance for the community of 
multilingual HLT and computational lexicon 
developers. The CLWG pursues this goal by 
proposing a general schema for the encoding of 
multilingual lexical information, the MILE 
(Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry). This has to 
be intended as a meta-entry, acting as a 
common representational layer for multilingual 
lexical resources.  
We describe the preliminary proposals of 
guidelines for the MILE, highlighting some 
methodological principles applied in previous 
EAGLES. 
2 The Computational Lexicon 
Working Group 
Existing EAGLES results in the Lexicon and 
Corpus areas are currently adopted by an 
impressive number of European - and recently 
also National ? projects and has became the 
?de-facto standard? for LR in Europe. This is a 
very good measure of the impact ? and of the 
need ? of such a standardisation initiative in 
the HLT sector. To mention just a few key 
examples:  
- the LE PAROLE/SIMPLE resources 
(morphological/syntactic/semantic  lexicons 
and corpora for 12 EU languages (Zampolli, 
1997) (Ruimy et al, 1998) (Lenci et al, 
1999) (Bel et al, 2000) rely on EAGLES 
results (Sanfilippo et al, 1996) (Sanfilippo 
et al, 1999), and are now being enlarged to 
real-size lexicons through many National 
Projects, thus building a really large 
infrastructural platform of harmonised 
lexicons in Europe, sharing the same model;   
- the ELRA Validation Manuals for Lexicons 
(Underwood and Navarreta, 1997) and 
Corpora (Burnard et al, 1997) are based on 
EAGLES guidelines;  
- morpho-syntactic encoding of lexicons and 
tagging of corpora in a very large number of 
EU, international and national projects ? and 
for more than 20 languages ? is conformant 
to EAGLES recommendations (Monachini 
and Calzolari, 1996) (Monachini and 
Calzolari, 1999) (Leech and Wilson, 1996).  
Standards must emerge from state -of-the-art 
developments. The process of standardisation, 
although by its own nature not intrinsically 
innovative, must ? and actually does ? proceed 
shoulder to shoulder with the most advanced 
research. Since ISLE involves many bodies 
active in EU-US NLP and speech projects, 
close collaboration with these projects is 
assured and, significantly, free manpower has 
been contributed by the projects, as a sign of 
both their commitment and of the crucial 
importance they place on reusability issues. 
Lexical semantics has always represented a 
sort of wild frontier in the investigation of 
natural language. In fact, the number of open 
issues in lexical semantics both on the 
representational, architectural and content level 
might induce an actually unjustified negative 
attitude towards the possibility of designing 
standards in this difficult territory. Rather to 
the contrary, standardisation must be conceived 
as enucleating and singling out the areas in the 
open field of lexical semantics, that already 
present themselves with a clear and high 
degree of stability, although this is often 
hidden behind a number of formal differences 
or representational variants, that prevent the 
possibility of exploiting and enhancing the 
aspects of commonality and the already 
consolidated achievements.  
With no intent of imposing any constraints on 
investigation and experimentation, the ISLE 
CLWG rather aims at selecting mature areas 
and results in computational lexical semantics 
and in multilingual lexicons, which can also be 
regarded as stabilised achievements, thus to be 
used as the basis for future research. Therefore, 
consolidation of a standards proposal must be 
viewed, by necessity, as a slow process 
comprising, after the phase of putting forward 
proposals, a cyclical phase involving ISLE 
external groups and projects with: i) careful 
evaluation and testing of recommendations in 
concrete applications; ii) application, if 
appropriate, to a large number of European 
languages; iii) feedback on and readjustment of 
the proposals until a stable platform is reached; 
dissemination and promotion of consensual 
recommendations. 
The process of standard definition undertaken 
by CLWG represents an essential interface 
between advanced research in the field of 
multilingual lexical semantics, and the 
practical task of developing resources for HLT 
systems and applications. It is through this 
interface that the crucial trade-off between 
research practice and applicative needs will 
actually be achieved. 
In what follows we briefly describe the two-
step strategy adopted in the journey towards 
standards design: a first activity of survey of 
existing multilingual resources both in the 
European and American research and industrial 
scenarios. A second ongoing phase aiming at 
individuating hot areas on the domains of 
multilingual lexical resources, which call ? and 
de facto  can access to ? a process of 
standardisation. 
2.1 Preliminary Step: the Survey Phase 
Following the well established EAGLES 
methodology, the first priority was to do a 
wide-range survey of bilingual/multilingual (or 
semantic monolingual) lexicons, so as to reach 
a fair level of coverage of existing lexical 
resources. With respect to this target, one of 
the first objectives is to discover and list the 
(maximal) set of (granular) basic notions 
needed to describe the multilingual level. The 
Survey of existing lexicons (Calzolari, 
Grishman and Palmer, 2001) has been 
accompanied by the analysis of the 
requirements of a few multilingual 
applications, and by the parallel analysis of 
typical cross-lingually complex phenomena5. 
The main issue is how to state in the most 
proper way the translation correspondences 
among entries in the multilingual lexicon. The 
passage from source language (SL) to target 
language (TL) makes it necessary to express 
very complex and articulated transfer 
conditions , which have to take into account as 
difficult and pervasive phenomena as argument 
switching, multi-word expressions, 
collocational patterns, etc.  
The function of an entry in a multilingual 
lexicon is to supply enough information to 
allow the system to identify a distinct sense of 
a word or phrase in SL, in many different 
contexts, and reliably associate each context 
with the most appropriate translation. The first 
step is to determine, of all the information that 
can be associated with SL lexical entries, what 
is the most relevant to a particular task. We 
decided to focus the work of survey and 
subsequent recommendations around two 
major broad categories of application: Machine 
Translation and Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. They have partially 
different/complementary needs, and can be 
considered to represent the requirements of 
other application types. It is necessary in fact 
to ensure that any guidelines meet the 
requirements of industrial applications and that 
they are implementable. 
In the Survey, some Korean and Japanese 
examples were present in the case study 
dedicated to relevant cross-linguistic 
phenomena, (e. g. sense distinctions according 
to variation in syntactic frames/semantic type/ 
                                                 
5 Contributors are: Atkins, Bel, Bertagna, Bouillon, 
Calzolari, Dorr, Fellbaum, Grishman, Habash, Lange, 
Lehmann, Lenci, McCormick, McNaught, Ogonowski, 
Palmer, Pentheroudakis, Richardson, Thurmair, 
Vanderwende, Villegas, Vossen, Zampolli.   
domain information, differences in predicate 
argument structure, argument incorporation, 
conflation, head switching etc). 
2.2 Towards the Recommendation Phase: 
designing the MILE Architecture  
Since the architecture of the PAROLE-
SIMPLE lexicons has been selected to provide 
the necessary bootstrapping basis for the 
stepwise refinement cycle leading to MILE, we 
briefly provide here some information about 
these resources. The design of the SIMPLE 
lexicons (Bel et al, 2000) complies with the 
EAGLES Lexicon/Semantics Working Group 
guidelines (Sanfilippo et al, 1999), and the set 
of recommended semantic notions. 
The SIMPLE lexicons are built as a new layer 
connected to the PAROLE syntactic layer, and 
encode structured ?semantic types? and 
semantic (subcategorization) frames. They 
cover 12 languages (Catalan, Danish, Dutch, 
English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, 
Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Swedish). The 
common model is designed to facilitate future 
cross-language linking: they share the same 
core ontology and the same set of semantic 
templates.  
The ?conceptual core? of the lexicons consists 
of the basic structured set of ?semantic types? 
(the SIMPLE ontology) and the basic set of 
notions to be encoded for each Semantic Unit 
(SemU): domain information, lexicographic 
gloss, argument structure, selectional 
restrictions/preferences on the arguments, 
event type, links of the arguments to the 
syntactic subcategorization frames as 
represented in the PAROLE lexicons, ?qualia? 
structure, following the Generative Lexicon 
(Pustejovsky, 1995), semantic relations, etc.. 
SIMPLE and PAROLE lexicons are layered 
resources, with links between the 
morphological and syntactic layers expressed 
in PAROLE and the semantic information 
present in SIMPLE. 
In its general design, also MILE is envisaged 
as a highly modular and layered architecture as 
described in Calzolari et al (2001). Modularity 
concerns the ?horizontal? MILE organization, 
in which independent and yet linked modules 
target different dimensions of lexical entries. 
On the other hand, at the ?vertical? level, a 
layered organization is necessary to allow for 
different degrees of granularity of lexical 
descriptions, so that both ?shallow? and ?deep? 
representations of lexical items can be 
captured. This feature is particularly crucial in 
order to stay open to the different styles and 
approaches to the lexicon adopted by existing 
multilingual systems. 
At the top level, MILE includes two main 
modules, mono-MILE, providing monolingual 
lexical representations, and multi-MILE, where 
multilingual correspondences are defined. With 
this design choice the ISLE-CLWG intends 
also to address the particularly complex and 
yet crucial issue of multilingual resource 
development through the integration of 
monolingual computational lexicons. As in the 
reference model, PAROLE/SIMPLE, Mono-
MILE is organized into independent modules, 
respectively providing morphological, 
syntactic and semantic descriptions. The latter 
surely represents the core and the most 
challenging part of the ISLE-CLWG activities, 
together with the two other crucial topics of 
collocations and multi-word expressions, 
which have often remained outside 
astandardization initiatives, and nevertheless 
have a crucial role at the multilingual level. 
This bias is motivated by the necessity of 
providing an answer to the most urgent needs 
and desiderata of next generation HLT, as also 
expressed by the industrial partners 
participating to the project. With respect to the 
issue of the representation of multi-word 
expressions in computational lexicons, the 
ISLE-CLWG is actively cooperating with the 
NSF sponsored XMELLT project (Calzolari et 
al.,  2002). 
Multi-MILE specifies a formal environment 
for the characterization of multilingual 
correspondences between lexical items. In 
particular, source and target lexical entries can 
be linked by exploiting (possibly combined) 
aspects of their monolingual descriptions. 
Moreover, in multi-MILE both syntactic and 
semantic lexical representations can also be 
enriched, so as to achieve the granularity of 
lexical description required to establish proper 
multilingual correspondences, and which is 
possibly lacking in the original monolingual 
lexicons. 
According to the ISLE approach, monolingual 
lexicons can thus be regarded as pivot lexical 
repositories, on top of which various language-
to-language multilingual modules can be 
defined, where lexical correspondences are 
established by partly exploiting and partly 
enriching the monolingual descriptions. This 
architecture guarantees the independence of 
monolingual descriptions while allowing for  
the maximum degree of flexibility and 
consistency in reusing existing monolingual 
resources to build new bilingual lexicons.  
The MILE architecture is intended to provide 
the common representational environment 
needed to implement such an approach to 
multilingual resource development, with the 
goal of maximizing the reuse, integration and 
extension of existing monolingual 
computational lexicons. 
In the process of specifying the various 
components of MILE, the ISLE-CLWG has 
adopted a two-track strategy:  
1) identifying the lexical dimensions and 
the various types of information which 
are relevant to establish multilingual 
correspondences; 
2) idefining a suitable formal data model 
to encode this information as well as 
the operations required at the 
multilingual level. 
To tackle point 1) the survey of the available 
computational lexicons (see section 2.1) has 
been complemented with a more 
lexicographic-based effort, to identify the types 
of information used in bilingual dictionaries to 
establish translation equivalents. To this 
purpose, the CLWG has organized two ?task 
forces? with the responsibility respectively of 
creating a sample of lexical entries and 
investigating the use of the so-called sense 
indicators in traditional bilingual dictionaries. 
The work on sense indicators has been carried 
out mainly by S. Atkins and P. Bouillon: sense 
indicators are the  ?clues? given by the 
lexicographer to the bilingual dictionary users 
in order to guide them to the most appropriate 
choice of equivalence in the foreign language. 
The source word with its syntactic category, 
the target words and the sense indicators were 
automatically extracted from an English-
French dictionary and then the sense indicators 
have been classified on the basis of lexical 
relevant facts (cf. Atkins et al, 2002). 
The aim of these activities has been twofold: 
on one hand, we wanted to be able to highlight 
the various types of information useful to 
determine the transfer conditions; on the other, 
we had to explore and evaluate the full 
expressive potentialities provided by the 
reference computational model (i.e. the 
PAROLE-SIMPLE architecture). 
3.2 The MILE Data Structure and 
Lexicographic Environment 
 
The CLWG is setting up a lexicographic 
environment consisting of the following four 
main components: i) the MILE Entry Skeleton, 
ii)  the MILE Lexical Data Categories, iii) the 
MILE Shared Lexical Objects, iv) the ISLE 
Lexicographic Station. 
The MILE Entry Skeleton, formalized as an 
XML DTD, is an Entity Relationship model 
that will define the general constraints for the 
construction of multilingual entries, as well as 
the grammar to build the whole array of lexical 
elements needed for a given lexical 
description. 
The MILE Lexical Data Categories will 
provide the lexical objects (syntactic and 
semantic features, semantic relations, syntactic 
constructions, predicates and arguments etc..) 
that are the basic components of MILE-
conformant lexical entries. Lexical Data 
Categories will be organized in a hierarchy and 
will be defined using RDF schema (Brickley 
and Guha, 2000) to formalize their properties 
and make their ?semantics? explicit. 
The MILE Shared Lexical Objects will 
instantiate the MILE Lexical Data Categories, 
to be used to build in an easy and 
straightforward way lexical entries. These will 
include main syntactic constructions, basic 
operations and conditions to establish 
multilingual links, macro-semantic objects, 
such as lexical conceptual templates acting as 
general constraints for the encoding of 
semantic units. 
For instance, at the multilingual level it is 
possible to identify a first set of basic 
operations that are at the basis of multilingual 
transfer tests and actions. This would include: 
i) adding to a monolingual lexical entry a new 
syntactic position (required for a given 
translation correspondence); ii) adding to a 
monolingual semantic description a new 
semantic feature (required for a given 
transla tion correspondence); iii) constraining 
the source-target correspondence to apply only 
if an existing syntactic position is realized by a 
certain type of phrase, etc. 
Lexical  objects will be identified by an URI 
and will act as a common resources for lexical 
representation, to be in turn described by RDF 
metadata. The defined lexical objects will be 
used by the lexicon (or applications) 
developers  to build and target lexical data at a 
higher level of abstraction. Thus, they have to 
be seen as a step in the direction of simplifying 
and improving the usability of the MILE 
recommendations. 
The ISLE Lexicographic Station is a 
development platform used to automatically 
generate a prototype tool starting from the 
MILE DTD. The aim of this prototype tool is 
to i) exemplify the MILE entry ii)  make 
extensive use of already existing monolingual 
resources, and iii) eventually test the guidelines 
in a real scenario. This situation led us to 
define a lexicographic station development 
platform that guarantees the portability of the 
final prototype to the final specifications as 
well as to existing monolingual resources 
which will serve as the basic data for MILE  
(for a detailed description, cf. Villegas and Bel, 
2002). 
Both at monolingual and multilingual level 
(but with particular emphasis on the latter), 
ISLE intends to start up the incremental 
definition of a more Object-Oriented layer for 
lexical description and to foster the vision of 
open and distributed lexicons, with elements 
possibly residing in different sites of the web.  
3 Enlargement to Asian Languages  
An enlargement of the group to involve also 
Asian languages is going on and 
representatives of Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
and Thai languages have contributed to ISLE 
work and participated in some ISLE 
workshops.  
The cooperation between Asia and Europe has 
to be pursued also through new common 
initiatives, as the expression of interest for the 
creation of an Open Distributed Lexical 
Infrastructure that has been submitted to the 
European Commission for the 6th Framework 
Programme for Research.  
This expression of interest is supported by 
many non-EU participants, as the newly 
formed Asian Federation of Natural Language 
Processing Associations (AFNLPA), the 
Department of Computer Science of the 
University of Tokyo, the Korean KAIST and 
KORTERM, the Taiwanese Institute of 
Linguistics of the Academia Sinica. 
The Open Distributed Lexical Infrastructure, a 
natural development of the ISLE model, can be 
seen as a new paradigm of distributed lexicon 
creation and maintenance and it would be a 
step of great importance for the fulfilment of 
the vision of the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 
1998). The creation of such infrastructure has 
to be consensual and in this regard needs the 
collaboration of a group of languages as large 
as possible (for example the AFNLPA brings 
into the initiative many Asian languages, such 
as Chinese, Hindi, Indonesian, Japanese, 
Korean, Malay, Tamil, Thai and Urdu). A 
prerequisite in order to reach interoperability is 
the existence of best practices and standards 
that have been consensually agreed on or have 
been submitted to the international community 
as de-facto  standards. 
 
4 Conclusions 
In this paper we presented overall goals and 
methodological principles of the 
standardization activity of EAGLES/ISLE. In 
particular, we describe the work of the 
Computational Lexicon Working Group and its 
effort towards recommendations, focussing on 
the MILE, the multilingual lexical meta-entry 
proposed as the standard representational 
format for multilingual computational lexical 
resources. Lexical representation is articulated 
over different information layers, each 
factoring out different, but possibly inter-
related, linguistic facets of information, 
relevant in order to establish multilingual 
lexical links. We also pointed out the necessity 
to involve a broader group of languages in 
order to ensure the achievement of a real 
consensual standard. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank all the members of the ISLE CLWG 
for their active participation and contribution to 
this enterprise. 
References 
Atkins S., Bel N., Bertagna F., Bouillon P., 
Calzolari N., Fellbaum C., Grishman R., 
Lenci A., MacLeod C., Palmer M., Thurmair 
R., Villegas M., Zampolli A. (2002) From 
Resources to Applications. Designing The 
Multilingual ISLE Lexical Entry. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Bel N., Busa, F., Calzolari, N., Gola, E., Lenci, 
A., Monachini, M., Ogonowski, A., Peters, 
I., Peters, W., Ruimy, N., Villegas, M., 
Zampolli A. (2000) Simple: A General 
Framework for the Development of 
Multilingual Lexicons. In: LREC 
Proceedings. Athens. 
Berners-Lee T. (1998) Semantic Web road 
map. Personal note. Available at: 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/Semantic.ht
ml. 
Burnard L., Baker P., McEnery A., Wilson A. 
(1997) An analytic framework for the 
validation of language corpora. Report of 
the Elra Corpus Validation Group.  
Calzolari N (1998)  An Overview of Written 
Language Resources in Europe: a few 
Reflections, Facts, and a Vision. In: Rubio, 
A., Gallardo, N., Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.) 
Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation. Granada 217-224. 
Calzolari N., Grishman R., Palmer M. (eds.) 
(2001)  Survey of major approaches towards  
Bilingual/Multilingual Lexicons. ISLE 
Deliverable D2.1-D3.1. Pisa  
Calzolari N., Fillmore C.J., Grishman R., Ide 
N., Lenci A., MacLeod C., Zampolli A. 
(2002)  Towards Best Practice for Multiword 
Expressions in Computational Lexicons. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas, 
Canary Islands, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Lenci A., Zampolli A., Bel N., 
Villegas M., Thurmair G. (2001)  The ISLE 
in the Ocean. Transatlantic Standards for 
Multilingual Lexicons (with an eye to 
Machine Translation). In Proceedings of 
Machine Translation Summit VIII, Santiago 
de Compostela, Spain. 
Calzolari N., Mc Naught J., Zampolli A (1996)  
Eagles Final Report: Eagles Editors? 
Introduction. Pisa.  
Eagles (1996)  Evaluation of Natural Language 
Processing Systems. Final Report. CST, 
Copenhagen. Also at http://issco-
www.unige.ch/projects/ewg96/ewg96.html. 
Brickley D., Guha R. (2000) Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) Schema 
Specification 1.0, W3C Candidate 
Recommendation. Available online at 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema. 
Leech G., Wilson A. (1996) Recommendations 
for the morphosyntactic annotation of 
corpora.  Lancaster. 
Lenci A., Busa F., Ruimy N., Gola E., 
Monachini M., Calzolari N., Zampolli A. 
(1999)  Linguistic Specifications. Simple 
Deliverable D2.1. ILC and University of 
Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1996)  Synopsis 
and comparison of morphosyntactic 
phenomena encoded in lexicons and corpora. 
A common proposal and applications to 
European languages. ILC-CNR, Pisa. 
Monachini M., Calzolari N. (1999)  
Standardization in the Lexicon. In: H. van 
Halteren (ed.): Syntactic Wordclass Tagging. 
Kluwer, Dordrecht 149-173. 
Pustejovsky J. (1995)  The Generative Lexicon. 
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press. 
Ruimy N., Corazzari O., Gola E., Spanu A., 
Calzolari N., Zampolli A. (1998) The 
European LE-Parole Project: The Italian 
Syntactic Lexicon. In: Proceedings of the 
First International Conference on Language 
resources and Evaluation. Granada 241-248. 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1996) Eagles 
Subcategorization Standards. See 
http://www.icl.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/syntax/s
yntax.html 
Sanfilippo A. et al (1999) Eagles 
Recommendations on Semantic Encoding.. 
See http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/rep2  
Underwood N., Navarretta C. (1997) A Draft 
Manual for the Validation of Lexica. Final 
ELRA Report. Copenhagen. 
Villegas M., Bel N. (2002) From DTDs to 
relational dBs. An automatic generation of a 
lexicographical station out off ISLE 
guidelines. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, 
Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. 
Zampolli A. (1997) The PAROLE project in 
the general context of the European actions 
for Language Resources. In: 
Marcinkeviciene, R., Volz, N. (eds.): Telri 
Proceedings of the Second European 
Seminar: Language Applications for a 
Multilingual Europe. IDS/VDU, 
Manheim/Kaunas. 
Zampolli A. (1998) Introduction of the 
General Chairman. In: Rubio, A., Gallardo, 
N. Castro, R., Tejada A. (eds.): Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation. 
Granada, Spain. 
 
