Selecting Sentences for Multidocument Summaries using
Randomized Local Search
Michael White
CoGenTex, Inc.
840 Hanshaw Road
Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
mike@cogentex.com
Claire Cardie
Dept. of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14850, USA
cardie@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
We present and evaluate a randomized local
search procedure for selecting sentences to in-
clude in a multidocument summary. The search
favors the inclusion of adjacent sentences while
penalizing the selection of repetitive material,
in order to improve intelligibility without un-
duly affecting informativeness. Sentence simi-
larity is determined using both surface-oriented
measures and semantic groups obtained from
merging the output templates of an information
extraction subsystem. In a comparative evalu-
ation against two DUC-like baselines and three
simpler versions of our system, we found that
our randomized local search method provided
substantial improvements in both content and
intelligibility, while the use of the IE groups also
appeared to contribute a small further improve-
ment in content.
1 Introduction
Improving the intellibility of multidocument
summaries remains a significant challenge.
While most previous approaches to multidoc-
ument summarization have addressed the prob-
lem of reducing repetition, less attention has
been paid to problems of coherence and co-
hesion. In a typical extractive system (e.g.
Goldstein et al (2000)), sentences are selected
for inclusion in the summary one at a time,
with later choices sensitive to their similarity
to earlier ones; the selected sentences are then
ordered either chronologically or by relevance.
The resulting summaries often jump incoher-
ently from topic to topic, and contain broken
cohesive links, such as dangling anaphors or un-
met presuppositions.
Barzilay et al (2001) present an improved
method of ordering sentences in the context
of MultiGen, a multidocument summarizer
that identifies sets of similar sentences, termed
themes, and reformulates their common phrases
as new text. In their approach, topically related
themes are identified and kept together in the
resulting summary, in order to help improve co-
hesion and reduce topic switching.
In this paper, we pursue a related but simpler
idea in an extractive context, namely to favor
the selection of blocks of adjacent sentences in
constructing a multidocument summary. Here,
the challenge is to improve intelligibility with-
out unduly sacrificing informativeness; for ex-
ample, selecting the beginning of the most re-
cent article in a document set will usually pro-
duce a highly intelligible text, but one that is
not very representative of the document set as
a whole.
To manage this tradeoff, we have developed a
randomized local search procedure (cf. Selman
and Kautz (1994)) to select the highest ranking
set of sentences for the summary, where the in-
clusion of adjacent sentences is favored and the
selection of repetitive material is penalized. The
method involves greedily searching for the best
combination of sentences to swap in and out of
the current summary until no more improve-
ments are possible; noise strategies include oc-
casionally adding a sentence to the current sum-
mary, regardless of its score, and restarting the
local search from random starting points for a
fixed number of iterations. In determining sen-
tence similarity, we have used surface-oriented
similarity measures obtained from Columbia?s
SimFinder tool (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 2001),
as well as semantic groups obtained from merg-
ing the output templates of an information ex-
traction (IE) subsystem.
In related work, Marcu (2001) describes an
approach to balancing informativeness and in-
telligibility that also involves searching through
        Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 9-18.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
          Proceedings of the Workshop on Automatic Summarization (including DUC 2002),
sets of sentences to select. In contrast to
our approach, Marcu employs a beam search
through possible summaries of progressively
greater length, which seems less amenable to
an anytime formulation; this may be an im-
portant practical consideration, since Marcu re-
ports search times in hours, whereas we have
found that less than a minute of searching is
usually effective. In other related work, Lin
and Hovy (2002) suggest pairing extracted sen-
tences with their corresponding lead sentences;
we have not directly compared our search-based
approach to Lin and Hovy?s simpler method.
In order to evaluate our approach, we com-
pared 200-word summaries generated by our
system to those of two baselines that are similar
to those used in DUC 2001 (Harman, 2001), and
to three simpler versions of the system, where
a simple marginal relevance selection procedure
was used instead of the selection search, and/or
the IE groups were ignored. In general, we
found that our randomized local search method
provided substantial improvements in both con-
tent and intelligibility over the DUC-like base-
lines and the simplest variant of our system,
which used marginal relevance selection and no
IE groups (with the exception that the last arti-
cle baseline was always ranked first in intelligi-
bility). The use of the IE groups also appeared
to contribute a small further improvement in
content when used with our selection search.
We discuss these results in greater detail in the
final section of the paper.
2 System Description
We have implemented our randomized local
search method for sentence selection as part
of the RIPTIDES (White et al, 2001) sys-
tem. RIPTIDES combines information extrac-
tion (IE) in the domain of natural disasters and
multidocument summarization to produce hy-
pertext summaries. The hypertext summaries
include a high-level textual overview; tables of
all comparable numeric estimates, organized to
highlight discrepancies; and targeted access to
supporting information from the original arti-
cles. In White et al (2002), we showed that the
hypertext summaries can help to identify dis-
repancies in numeric estimates, and provide a
significantly more complete picture of the avail-
able information than the latest article. The
next subsection walks through a sample hyper-
text summary; it is followed by descriptions of
the IE and Summarizer system components.
2.1 Example
Figure 1 shows a textual overview of the first
dozen or so articles in a corpus of news arti-
cles gathered from the web during the first week
after the January 2001 earthquake in Central
America. Clicking on the magnifying glass icon
brings up the original article in the right frame,
with the extracted sentences highlighted.
The index to the hypertext summary appears
in the left frame of figure 1. Links to the
overview and to the lead sentences of the arti-
cles are followed by links to tables that display
the base level extraction slots for the main event
(here, an earthquake) including its description,
date, location, epicenter and magnitude. Access
to the overall damage estimates appears next,
with separate tables for types of human effects
(e.g. dead, missing) and for object types (e.g.
villages, bridges, houses) with physical effects.
Figure 2 shows the extracted estimates of the
overall death toll. In order to help identify dis-
crepancies, the high and low current estimates
are shown at the top, followed by other cur-
rent estimates and then all extracted estimates.
Heuristics are used to determine which esti-
mates to consider current, taking into account
the source (either news source or attributed
source), specificity (e.g. hundreds vs. at least
200) and confidence level, as indicated by the
presence of hedge words such as perhaps or as-
sumed. The tables also provide links to the orig-
inal articles, allowing the user to quickly and
directly determine the accuracy of any estimate
in the table.
2.2 IE System
The IE system combines existing language tech-
nology components (Bikel et al, 1997; Char-
niak, 1999; Day et al, 1997; Fellbaum, 1998) in
a traditional IE architecture (Cardie, 1997; Gr-
ishman, 1996). Unique features of the system
include a weakly supervised extraction pattern-
learning component, Autoslog-XML, which is
based on Autoslog-TS (Riloff, 1996), but op-
erates in an XML framework and acquires pat-
terns for extracting text elements beyond noun
phrases (e.g. verb groups, adjectives, adverbs,
and single-noun modifiers). In addition, a
Figure 1: Hypertext Summary Overview
Figure 2: Tables of Death Toll Estimates
heuristic-based clustering algorithm organizes
the extracted concepts into output templates
specifically designed to support multi-document
summarization: the IE system, for example, dis-
tinguishes different reports or views of the same
event from multiple sources (White et al, 2001).
Output templates from the IE system for each
text to be covered in the multi-document sum-
mary are provided as input to the summariza-
tion component along with all linguistic anno-
tations accrued in the IE phase.
2.3 Summarizer
The Summarizer operates in three main stages.
In the first stage, the IE output templates are
merged into an event-oriented structure where
comparable facts are semantically grouped. To-
wards the same objective, surface-oriented clus-
tering is used to group sentences from different
documents into clusters that are likely to report
similar content. In the second stage, importance
scores are assigned to the sentences based on the
following indicators: position in document, doc-
ument recency, presence of quotes, average sen-
tence overlap, headline overlap, size of cluster
(if any), size of semantic groups (if any), speci-
ficity of numeric estimates, and whether these
estimates are deemed current. In the third and
final stage, the hypertext summary is generated
from the resulting content pool. Further details
on each stage follow in the paragraphs below;
see White et al (2002) for a more complete de-
scription.
In the analysis stage, we use Columbia?s
SimFinder tool (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 2001) to
obtain surface-oriented similarity measures and
clusters for the sentences in the input articles.
To obtain potentially more accurate partitions
using the IE output, we semantically merge the
extracted slots into comparable groups, i.e. ones
whose members can be examined for discrepan-
cies. This requires distinguishing (i) different
types of damage; (ii) overall damage estimates
vs. those that pertain to a specific locale; and
(iii) damage due to related events, such as previ-
ous quakes in the same area. During this stage,
we also analyze the numeric estimates for speci-
ficity and confidence level, and determine which
estimates to consider current.
In the scoring stage, SimFinder?s similarity
measures and clusters are combined with the
semantic groupings obtained from merging the
IE templates in order to score the input sen-
tences. The scoring of the clusters and seman-
tic groups is based on their size, and the scores
are combined at the sentence level by includ-
ing the score of all semantic groups that con-
tain a phrase extracted from a given sentence.
More precisely, the scores are assigned in three
phases, according to a set of hand-tuned pa-
rameter weights. First, a base score is assigned
to each sentence according to a weighted sum
of the position in document, document recency,
presence of quotes, average sentence overlap,
and headline overlap. The average sentence
overlap is the average of all pairwise sentence
similarity measures; we have found this measure
to be a useful counterpart to sentence position
in reliably identifying salient sentences, with the
other factors playing a lesser role. In the second
scoring phase, the clusters and semantic groups
are assigned a score according to the sum of the
base sentence scores. After normalization in the
third scoring phase, the weighted cluster and
group scores are used to boost the base scores,
thereby favoring sentences from the more im-
portant clusters and semantic groups. Finally,
a small boost is applied for currenten and more
specific numeric estimates.
In the generation stage, the overview is con-
structed by selecting a set of sentences in a
context-sensitive fashion, and then ordering the
blocks of adjacent sentences according to their
importance scores. The summarization scoring
model begins with the sum of the scores for
the candidate sentences, which is then adjusted
to penalize the inclusion of multiple sentences
from the same cluster or semantic group, or sen-
tences whose similarity measure is above a cer-
tain threshold, and to favor the inclusion of ad-
jacent sentences from the same article, in order
to boost intelligibility. A larger bonus is applied
when including a sentence that begins with an
initial pronoun as well as the previous one, and
an even bigger bonus is added when including
a sentence that begins with a strong rhetorical
marker (e.g. however) as well as its predecessor;
corresponding penalties are also used when the
preceding sentence is missing, or when a short
sentence appears without an adjacent one.
To select the sentences for the overview ac-
cording to this scoring model, we use an itera-
tive randomized local search procedure inspired
by Selman and Kautz (1994). Two noise strate-
gies are employed to lessen the problem of lo-
cal maxima in the search space: (i) the local
search is restarted from random starting points,
for a fixed number of iterations, and (ii) during
each local search iteration, greedy steps are in-
terleaved with random steps, where a sentence
is added regardless of its score. In the first local
search iteration, the initial sentence collection
consists of the highest scoring sentences up to
the word limit. In subsequent iterations, the ini-
tial collection is composed of randomly selected
sentences, weighted according to their scores,
up to the word limit. During each local search
iteration, a random step or a greedy step (cho-
sen at random) is repeatedly performed until a
greedy step fails to improve upon the current
collection of sentences. In each greedy step, one
sentence is chosen to add to the collection, and
zero or more (typically one) sentences are cho-
sen to remove from the collection, such that the
word limit is still met, and this combination of
sentences represents the best swap available ac-
cording to the scoring model. After the prede-
termined number of iterations, the best combi-
nation of sentences found during the search is
output; note that the algorithm could easily be
formulated in an anytime fashion as well. From
a practical perspective, we have found that 10
iterations often suffices to find a reasonable col-
lection of sentences, taking well under a minute
on a desktop PC.
Once the overview sentences have been se-
lected, the hypertext summary is generated as a
collection of HTML files, using a series of XSLT
transformations.
2.4 Training and Tuning
For the evaluation below, the IE system was
trained on 12 of 25 texts from topic 89 of the
TDT2 corpus, a set of newswires that describe
the May 1998 earthquake in Afganistan. It
achieves 42% recall and 61% precision when
evaluated on the remaining 13 topic 89 texts.
The parameter settings of the Summarizer were
chosen by hand using the complete TDT2 topic
89 document set as input.
3 Evaluation Method and Results
To select the inputs for the evaluation, we took
five subsets of the articles from TDT2 topic
89 ? all the articles up to the end of days 1
through 5 after the quake. We chose to use
TDT2 topic 89 so that we could assess the im-
pact of the IE quality on the results, given that
we had previously created manual IE annota-
tions for these articles (White et al, 2001).1
1Although our decision to use subsets of TDT2 topic
89 as inputs meant that our training/tuning and test
data overlapped, we do not believe that this choice overly
compromises our results, since ? as will be discussed in
this section and the next ? the impact of the IE groups
For each input document set, we ran the RIP-
TIDES system to produce overview summaries
of 200 words or less. For comparison purposes,
we also ran two baselines, similar to those used
in DUC 2001 (Harman, 2001), and three sim-
pler versions of the system, for a total of six
summary types:
Last The first N sentences of the latest article
in the document set, up to the word limit.
Leads The lead sentences from the latest arti-
cles in the document set, up to the word
limit, listed in chronological order.
MR The top ranking sentences selected accord-
ing to their thresholded marginal relevance,
up to the word limit, listed in chronological
order, using RIPTIDES to score the sen-
tences, except with the IE groups zeroed
out.
MR+IE The MR summarization method, but
with the IE groups included for the RIP-
TIDES sentence scorer.
Search The RIPTIDES overview, except with
the IE groups zeroed out for sentence scor-
ing.
Search+IE The RIPTIDES overview.
The marginal relevance systems (MR and
MR+IE) used a simple selection mechanism
which does not involve search, inspired by the
maximal marginal relevance (MMR) approach
(Goldstein et al, 2000). This selection mech-
anism begins by selecting the top ranking sen-
tence for inclusion, then determines whether to
include the second ranking sentence depending
on whether it is sufficiently dissimilar from the
first one, based on comparing the SimFinder
similarity measure against a hard threshold
(0.85), and likewise for lower ranked sentences,
comparing them against all sentences included
so far, up to the word limit. The selected sen-
tences are then gathered into blocks of adjacent
sentences, and ordered chronologically.2
turned out to be small, while with our selection search,
we ran into a couple of problems on the test data that
did not show up in tuning the parameter settings.
2In trying out the MR systems on all the articles in
TDT2 topic 89, we found chronological ordering to usu-
ally be more coherent than importance ordering.
Content Rank, Simulated IE
Last Leads MR MR+IE Search Search+IE
Day 1 5, 6 5, 5 4, 4 3, 3 1, 1 1, 1
Day 2 5, 4 6, 6 1, 4 4, 3 2, 1 1, 2
Day 3 6, 6 3, 3 3, 3 5, 5 1, 1 1, 1
Day 4 6, 5 3, 6 3, 4 3, 2 2, 2 1, 1
Day 5 6, 6 2, 5 2, 4 2, 2 2, 2 1, 1
Average 5.5 ?0.7 4.4 ?1.5 3.2 ?1.0 3.1 ?1.2 1.6 ?0.7 1.1 ?0.3
Table 1: Content Rankings on TDT2 Topic 89, using Simulated IE. The scores for the two judges
at each time point are separated by commas.
Intelligibility Rank, Simulated IE
Last Leads MR MR+IE Search Search+IE
Day 1 1, 1 5, 2 6, 6 3, 2 2, 4 3, 5
Day 2 1, 1 5, 5 6, 5 4, 4 2, 2 2, 3
Day 3 1, 1 6, 5 5, 6 3, 4 3, 1 2, 1
Day 4 1, 1 6, 6 5, 5 3, 3 3, 4 2, 2
Day 5 1, 1 4, 6 4, 5 4, 3 2, 4 2, 2
Average 1 ?0 5 ?1.2 5.3 ?0.7 3.3 ?0.7 2.7 ?1.1 2.4 ?1.1
Table 2: Intelligibility Rankings on TDT2 Topic 89, using Simulated IE.
Content Rank, Actual IE
Last Leads MR MR+IE Search Search+IE
Day 1 5, 6 5, 5 4, 4 3, 3 2, 1 1, 1
Day 2 5, 4 6, 6 1, 4 3, 3 3, 2 1, 1
Day 3 6, 6 1, 2 1, 2 5, 5 3, 1 3, 2
Day 4 6, 5 4, 6 1, 2 5, 4 1, 1 1, 2
Day 5 6, 6 2, 5 4, 2 4, 4 2, 2 1, 1
Average 5.5 ?0.7 4.2 ?1.9 2.5 ?1.4 3.9 ?0.9 1.8 ?0.8 1.4 ?0.7
Table 3: Content Rankings on TDT2 Topic 89, using Actual IE.
Intelligibility Rank, Actual IE
Last Leads MR MR+IE Search Search+IE
Day 1 1, 1 5, 2 6, 6 3, 2 2, 4 3, 5
Day 2 1, 1 5, 5 6, 5 4, 4 2, 2 2, 2
Day 3 1, 1 6, 4 5, 6 2, 3 2, 2 2, 4
Day 4 1, 1 6, 6 4, 4 4, 3 3, 2 2, 4
Day 5 1, 1 4, 6 4, 5 4, 2 3, 4 2, 3
Average 1 ?0 4.9 ?1.3 5.1 ?0.9 3.1 ?0.9 2.6 ?0.8 2.9 ?1.1
Table 4: Intelligibility Rankings on TDT2 Topic 89, using Actual IE.
TDT2 Topic 89, Simulated IE
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
Las
t
Lea
ds MR
MR
+IE
Sea
rch
Sea
rch
+IE
System
Av
g 
Ra
nk Content
Intelligibility
Figure 3: Average System Rank for Content and Intelligibility on TDT2 Topic 89, using Simulated
IE. The ranks are averaged across two judges and five time points; manual IE annotations were
used with the MR+IE and Search+IE systems.
TDT2 Topic 89, Actual IE
11.522.533.544.555.56
Las
t
Lea
ds MR
MR
+IE
Sea
rch
Sea
rch
+IE
System
Av
g 
Ra
nk Content
Intelligibility
Figure 4: Average System Rank for Content and Intelligibility on TDT2 Topic 89, using Actual
IE. The ranks are averaged across two judges and five time points; actual IE annotations were used
with the MR+IE and Search+IE systems, making all systems fully automatic.
For each of the five time points, we ran the
six systems on two versions of the input docu-
ment sets, one with the manual IE annotations
(simulated IE) and one with the automatic IE
annotations (actual IE). Note that with each of
the first three systems, the output did not differ
from one version of the input to the other, since
these systems did not depend on the IE anno-
tations and did not involve randomized search.
Next, for each document set, we had two judges3
rank the summaries from best to worst, with
3The authors were the judges.
Significant Differences in System Versions
Last Leads MR MR+IE Search Search+IE
Last Int(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act)
Int(Sim,Act) Int(Sim,Act) Int(Sim,Act) Int(Sim,Act)
Leads - Int(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act) Con(Sim,Act)
Int(Sim,Act) Int(Sim,Act)
MR Int(Sim,Act) Con(Sim) Con(Sim)
Int(Sim,Act) Int(Sim,Act)
MR+IE Con(Act) Con(Sim,Act)
Search -
Table 5: Significant Differences in System Versions based on Pairwise t-Tests. Table entries indicate
statistically significant differences (at the 95% confidence level) in mean Content and Intelligibility
rank on TDT2 Topic 89 texts using Simulated or Actual output from the IE system.
ties allowed, in two categories, content and in-
telligibility. In the case of ties, the tied systems
shared the appropriate ranking; for example, if
two summaries tied for the best content, each
received a rank of 1, with the next best sum-
mary receiving a rank of 3 (cf. Olympic pairs
skating).
The charts in figures 3 and 4 show the sys-
tem rank for content and intelligibility for the
simulated IE and actual IE versions of the doc-
ument sets, respectively, averaged across the
two judges and five time points. Tables 1
through 4 list all the judgements together with
their means and standard deviations.
In general, we found that Search and
Search+IE provided substantial improvements
in both content and intelligibility over Last,
Leads and MR, with the exception that
Last was always ranked first in intelligibility.
Search+IE also appeared to show a small fur-
ther improvement in content.
Determining the significance of the improve-
ments is somewhat complex, due to the small
number of data points and the use of multiple
comparisons. To judge the significance levels,
we calculated pairwise t-tests for all the means
listed in tables 1 through 4, and applied the
Bonferroni adjustment, which is a conservative
way to perform multiple comparisons where the
total chance of error is spread across all com-
parisons.4
4With the total ? equal to 0.05, the Bonferroni ad-
justment provides a 95% confidence level that all the
pairwise judgements are correct. In our case, a total ?
of 0.05 corresponds to an individual ? of 0.0033, which
is difficult to exceed with a small number of data points.
Statisitically significant differences in system
performance at the 95% confidence level appear
in table 5. Turning first to the content rankings,
with the simulated IE output, we found that
both Search and Search+IE scored significantly
higher than Last, Leads and MR. While the dif-
ference between Search and Search+IE was not
significant, only Search+IE achieved a signifi-
cantly higher average rank than MR+IE. With
the actual IE output, Search and Search+IE
again scored significantly higher than Last and
Leads and, although these two systems did not
show a significant improvement over MR, both
systems did improve significantly over Leads
and MR+IE, in contrast to MR.
Turning now to the intelligibility rankings,
with both the simulated and actual IE and, we
found that Search and Search+IE improved sig-
nificantly over Leads and MR. The difference
between Search and Search+IE was not signifi-
cant. Surprisingly, MR+IE scored significantly
higher than MR, and not significantly worse
than Search and Search+IE.
4 Discussion
We were pleased with the substantial improve-
ments in both content and intelligibility that
our randomized local search method provided
over the DUC-like baselines and the simplest
variant of our system, the one using marginal
relevance selection and no IE groups (with the
exception that the last article baseline was al-
ways ranked first in intelligibility). We did not
expect to find that the selection search would
yield substantial improvements over marginal
relevance selection in the content rankings, since
the search method was designed to improve in-
telligibility without unduly affecting content.
At the same time though, we were somewhat
disappointed that the use of the IE groups ap-
peared to only contribute a small further im-
provement in content when used with our selec-
tion search.
It is not entirely clear why our selection
search method led to improvements in the con-
tent rankings when compared to the marginal
relevance variants. One possibility is that the
randomized local search was able to find sen-
tences with greater information density. An-
other possibility is that the use of a hard thresh-
old by the marginal relevance variants led to
some poor sentence selections fairly far down on
the list of ranked sentences; the marginal rele-
vance selection may have worked better had we
used a smaller threshold, or if we had re-ranked
the sentences following each selection according
to a redundancy penalty, rather than simply us-
ing a threshold.
It is also not clear why the IE groups did
not help more with content selection. It may
well be that a more elaborate evaluation, involv-
ing more systems and judgements, would indeed
show that the IE groups yielded significant im-
provements in content rankings. On the other
hand, our results may indicate that shallow ex-
tractive techniques can pick up much the same
information as IE techniques, at least for the
purpose of selecting sentences for generic extrac-
tive summaries. Note that for purposes of dis-
crepancy detection, the ability of IE techniques
to more completely extract relevant phrases is
clearly demonstrated in White et al (2002).
On the intelligibility side, we were surprised
to find that the IE groups led to improvements
in intelligibility when used with marginal rele-
vance selection. One likely explanation for this
improvement is that this system variant jumped
around less from topic to topic than its counter-
part that did not make use of the IE info.
Another question is why the selection search
did not yield further improvements in intelli-
bility. One reason is that the search method
always selected sentences up to the word limit,
even when this yielded highly repetitive sum-
maries ? as was the case with the first two test
sets, which only contained a handful of articles.
Another reason is that the search routine was
prone to selecting a couple of sentences from an
article that was largely off topic, only containing
a brief mention of the quake.
These deficiencies point to possible improve-
ments in the search method: informativeness
could perhaps be balanced with conciseness by
deselecting sentences that do not improve the
overall score; and off-topic sentences could per-
haps be avoided by taking into account the cen-
trality of the document in the sentence scores.
More speculatively, it would be interesting to
extend the approach to work with sub-sentential
units, and to make use of a greater variety of
inter-sentential cohesive links.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by DARPA
TIDES contract N66001-00-C-8009 and NSF
Grants 0081334 and 0074896. We thank
Tanya Korelsky, Daryl McCullough, Vincent
Ng, David Pierce and Kiri Wagstaff for their
help with earlier versions of the system.
References
Regina Barzilay, Noemie Elhadad, and Kath-
leen McKeown. 2001. Sentence Ordering in
Multidocument Summarization. In Proceed-
ings of the First International Conference on
Human Language Technology Research, San
Diego, CA.
D. Bikel, S. Miller, R. Schwartz, and
R. Weischedel. 1997. Nymble: A High-
Performance Learning Name-Finder. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied
Natural Language Processing, pages 194?201,
San Francisco, CA. Morgan Kaufmann.
C. Cardie. 1997. Empirical Methods in Infor-
mation Extraction. AI Magazine, 18(4):65?
79.
Eugene Charniak. 1999. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. Technical Report CS99-12,
Brown University.
D. Day, J. Aberdeen, L. Hirschman,
R. Kozierok, P. Robinson, and M. Vi-
lain. 1997. Mixed-Initiative Development
of Language Processing Systems. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth Conference on Applied
Natural Language Processing. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA.
J. Goldstein, V. Mittal, J. Carbonell, and
M. Kantrowitz. 2000. Multi-document sum-
marization by sentence extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the ANLP/NAACL Workshop on
Automatic Summarization, Seattle, WA.
R. Grishman. 1996. TIPSTER Archi-
tecture Design Document Version 2.2.
Technical report, DARPA. Available at
http://www.tipster.org/.
Donna Harman. 2001. Proceedings of the 2001
Document Understanding Conference (DUC-
2001). NIST.
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith L. Klavans,
Melissa L. Holcombe, Regina Barzilay, Min-
Yen Kan, and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2001.
Simfinder: A flexible clustering tool for sum-
marization. In Proceedings of the NAACL
2001 Workshop on Automatic Summariza-
tion, Pittsburgh, PA.
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Au-
tomated Multi-document Summarization in
NeATS. In Proceedings of the Second In-
ternational Conference on Human Language
Technology Research, San Diego, CA. To ap-
pear.
Daniel Marcu. 2001. Discourse-Based Sum-
marization in DUC-2001. In Proceedings of
the 2001 Document Understanding Confer-
ence (DUC-2001).
E. Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating Ex-
traction Patterns from Untagged Text. In
Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1044?
1049, Portland, OR. AAAI Press / MIT
Press.
Bart Selman and Henry Kautz. 1994. Noise
Strategies for Improving Local Search. In
Proceedings of AAAI-94.
Michael White, Tanya Korelsky, Claire Cardie,
Vincent Ng, David Pierce, and Kiri Wagstaff.
2001. Multidocument Summarization via In-
formation Extraction. In Proceedings of the
First International Conference on Human
Language Technology Research, San Diego,
CA.
Michael White, Claire Cardie, Vincent Ng, and
Daryl McCullough. 2002. Detecting Discrep-
ancies in Numeric Estimates Using Multidoc-
ument Hypertext Summaries. In Proceedings
of the Second International Conference on
Human Language Technology Research, San
Diego, CA. To appear.
