Annotating Semantic Consistency of Speech Recognition Hypotheses 
Iryna Gurevych, Robert Porzel and Michael Strube  
European Media Laboratory GmbH 
Schlo?-Wolfsbrunnenweg 33 
D-69118 Heidelberg, Germany 
e-mail: {gurevych,porzel,strube}@eml.villa-bosch.de 
 
Abstract 
Recent work on natural language processing 
systems is aimed at more conversational, 
context-adaptive systems in multiple do-
mains. An important requirement for such a 
system is the automatic detection of the do-
main and a domain consistency check of the 
given speech recognition hypotheses. We 
report a pilot study addressing these tasks, 
the underlying data collection and investi-
gate the feasibility of annotating the data re-
liably by human annotators.  
1 Introduction 
The complete understanding of naturally oc-
curring discourse is still an unsolved task in 
computational linguistics. Several large re-
search efforts are underway to build multi-
domain and multimodal information systems, 
e.g. the DARPA Communicator Program1, the 
SmartKom research framework2 (Wahlster et 
al., 2001), the AT&T interactive speech and 
multimodal user interface program3.  
Dialogue systems which deal with com-
plex dialogues require the interaction of multi-
ple knowledge sources, e.g. domain, discourse 
and user model (Flycht-Eriksson, 1999). Fur-
thermore NLP systems have to adapt to differ-
ent environments and applications. This can 
only be achieved if the system is able to de-
termine how well a given speech recognition 
hypothesis (SRH) fits within the respective 
domain model and what domain should be 
considered by the system currently in focus. 
The purpose of this paper is to develop 
an annotation scheme for annotating a corpus 
of SRH with information on semantic consis-
tency and domain specificity. We investigate 
                                                     
1http://fofoca.mitre.org 
2http://www.smartkom.com 
3http://www.research.att.com/news/2002/January/IS
MUI.html 
the feasibility of an automatic solution by first 
looking at how reliably human annotators can 
solve the task.   
The structure of the paper is as follows: 
Section 2 gives an overview of the domain 
modeling component in the SmartKom system. 
In Section 3 we report on the data collection 
underlying our study. A description of the 
suggested annotation scheme is given in 
Section 4. Section 5 presents the results of an 
experiment in which the reliability of human 
annotations is investigated.  
2 Domain Modeling in SmartKom 
The SmartKom research project (a consortium 
of twelve academic and industrial partners) 
aims at developing a multi-modal and multi-
domain information system. Domains include 
cinema information, home electronic device 
control, etc. A central goal is the development 
of new computational methods for 
disambiguating different modalities on 
semantic and pragmatic levels. 
 The information flow in SmartKom is 
organized as follows: On the input side the 
parser picks an N-best list of hypotheses out of 
the speech recognizer?s word lattice (Oerder 
and Ney, 1993). This list is sent to the media 
fusion component and then handed over to the 
intention recognition component.  
 The main task of intention recognition 
in SmartKom is to select the best hypothesis 
from the N-best list produced by the parser. 
This is then sent to the dialogue management 
component for computing an appropriate 
action. In order to find the best hypothesis, the 
intention recognition module consults a 
number of other components involved in 
language, discourse and domain analysis and 
requests confidence scores to make an 
appropriate decision (s. Fig. 1).  
 Tasks of the domain modeling 
component are:  
       Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 46-49.  Association for Computational Linguistics.
                  Proceedings of the Third SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
? to supply a confidence score on the 
consistency of SRH with respect to the 
domain model;  
? to detect the domain currently in focus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Figure 1. Information flow 
 
These tasks are inherently related to each 
other: It is possible to assign SRH to certain 
domains only if they are consistent with the 
domain model. On the other hand, a 
consistency score can only be useful when it is 
given with respect to certain domains. 
3 Data  
We consider semantic consistency scoring and 
domain detection a classification task. The 
question is whether it is feasible to solve this 
task automatically. As a first step towards an 
answer we reformulate the problem: automatic 
classification of SRH is possible only if 
humans are able to do that reliably. 
3.1 Data Collection 
In order to test the reliability of such 
annotations we collected a corpus of SRH. The 
data collection was conducted by means of a 
hidden operator test (Rapp and Strube, 2002). 
In the test the SmartKom system was 
simulated. We had 29 subjects prompted to say 
certain inputs in 8 dialogues. 1479 turns were 
recorded. Each user-turn in the dialogue 
corresponded to a single intention, e.g. route 
request or sights information request.  
 
3.2 Data Preprocessing 
The data obtained from the hidden operator 
tests had to be prepared for our study to com-
pose a corpus with N-best SRH. For this pur-
pose we sent the audio files to the speech rec-
ognizer. The input for the domain modeling 
component, i.e. N-best lists of SRH were re-
corded in log-files and then processed with a 
couple of Perl scripts. The final corpus con-
sisted of ca. 2300 SRH. This corresponds to ca. 
1.55 speech recognition hypotheses per user?s 
turn.  
The SRH corpus was then transformed 
into a set of annotation files which could be 
read into MMAX, the annotation tool adopted 
for this task (Mueller and Strube, 2001). 
4 Annotation Scheme 
For our study, a markable, i.e. an expression to 
be annotated, is a single SRH. The annotators 
as well as the domain modeling component in 
SmartKom currently do not take the dialogue 
context into account and do not perform 
context-dependent analysis. Hence, we 
presented the markables completely out of 
dialogue order  and thus prevented the 
annotators from interpreting SRH context-
dependently. 
4.1 Semantic Consistency 
In the first step, the annotators had to classify 
markables with respect to semantic consis-
tency. Semantic consistency is defined as well-
formedness of an SRH on an abstract semantic 
level. We differentiate three classes of seman-
tic consistency: consistent, semi-consistent, or 
inconsistent. First, all nouns and verbs con-
tained in the hypothesis are extracted and cor-
responding concepts are retrieved from a 
lemma-concept dictionary (lexicon) supplied 
for the annotators. The decision regarding con-
sistency, semi-consistency and inconsistency 
has to be done on the basis of evaluating the 
set of concepts corresponding to the individual 
hypothesis. 
? Consistent means that all concepts are 
semantically related to each other, e.g. 
"ich moechte die kuerzeste Route"4 is 
mapped to the concepts "self", "wish",  
"route" all of which are related to each 
other. Therefore the hypothesis is con-
sidered consistent.   
? The label semi-consistent is used if at 
least a fragment of the hypothesis is 
                                                     
4 I?d like the shortest route. 
Language 
parsing 
Discourse 
model 
Domain  
model 
Intention 
recognition 
Media Fusion 
Dialogue  
Management 
meaningful. For example, the hypothe-
sis "ich moechte das Video sind"5 is 
considered semi-consistent as the 
fragment "ich moechte das Video", i.e. 
a set of corresponding concepts "self", 
"want", "video" is semantically well-
formed. 
? Inconsistent hypotheses are those 
whose conceptual mappings are not 
semantically related within the domain 
model. E.g. "ich wuerde die Karte ja 
Wiedersehen"6 is conceptualized as 
"self", "map", "parting". This set of 
concepts does not semantically make 
sense and the hypothesis should be re-
jected.  
4.2 Domain Detection 
One of our considerations was that it is princi-
pally not always feasible to detect domains 
from an SRH. This is because the output of 
speech recognition is often corrupt, which 
may, in many cases, lead to false domain as-
signments. We argue that domain detection is 
dependent on the semantic consistency score. 
Therefore, according to our annotation scheme 
no domain analysis should be given to the se-
mantically inconsistent SRH.    
 If the hypothesis is considered either 
consistent or semi-consistent, certain domains 
will be assigned to it. The list of SmartKom 
domains for this study is finite and includes the 
following: route planning, sights information, 
cinema information, electronic program guide, 
home electronic device control, personal assis-
tance, interaction management, small-talk and 
off-talk. 
In some cases multiple domains can be 
assigned to a single markable. The reason is 
that some domains are inherently so close to 
each other, e.g. cinema information and elec-
tronic program guide, that the distinction can 
only be made when the context is taken into 
account. As this is not the case for our study 
we allow for the specification of multiple do-
mains per SRH.  
 
 
 
 
                                                     
5 I?d like the video are. 
6 I would the map yes good-bye. 
5 Reliability of Annotations 
5.1 The Kappa Statistic 
To measure the reliability of annotations we 
used the Kappa statistic (Carletta, 1996).  
The value of Kappa statistic (K) for  se-
mantic consistency in our experiment was 
0.58, which shows that there was not a high 
level of agreement between annotators7. In the 
field of content analysis, where the Kappa 
statistic originated,  K>0.8 is usually taken to 
indicate good reliability, 0.68<K<0.8 allows to 
draw tentative conclusions. 
The distribution of semantic consistency 
classes and domain assignments is given in 
Fig. 2.  
 
Domain % 
Route planning 33,1 
Sights info 13,3 
Cinema info 10,8 
Electr. Program guide 15,9 
Home device control 12,0 
Personal assistance 1,1 
Interaction Management 13,1 
Other 0,7 
                     Figure 2. Distribution of Classes 
5.2 Discussion of the results 
One reason for the relatively low coefficient of 
agreement between annotators could be a small 
number of annotators (two) as compared to 
rather fine distinction between the classes in-
consistent vs. semi-consistent and semi-
consistent vs. consistent respectively. 
Another reason arises from the analysis 
of disagreements among annotators. We find 
many annotation errors caused by the fact that 
the annotators were not able to interpret the 
conceptualized SRH correctly. In spite of the 
fact that we emphasized the necessity of care-
                                                     
7
 Results on the reliability of domain assignments 
are not the subject of the present paper and will be 
published elsewhere. 
 
Type % 
Consistent 51 
Semi-consistent 10,3 
Inconsistent 38,7 
ful examination for high-quality annotations, 
the annotators tended to take functional words 
like prepositions into account. According to 
our annotation scheme, however, they had to 
be ignored during the analysis. 
5.3 Revisions to the annotation scheme 
As already noted, one possible reason for dis-
agreements among annotators is a rather fine 
distinction between the classes inconsistent vs. 
semi-consistent and semi-consistent vs. consis-
tent. We had difficulties in defining strict crite-
ria for separating semi-consistent as a class on 
its own. The percentage of its use is rather low 
as compared to the other two and amounts to 
10.3% on average.   
A possible solution to this problem 
might be to merge the class semi-consistent 
with either consistent or inconsistent. We con-
ducted a corresponding experiment with the 
available annotations.  
In the first case we merged the classes 
inconsistent and semi-consistent.  We then ran 
the Kappa statistic over the data and obtained 
K=0.7. We found this to be a considerable 
improvement as compared to earlier K=0.58.  
In the second case we merged the 
classes consistent and semi-consistent. The 
Kappa statistic with this data amounted to 
0.59, which could not be considered an im-
provement. 
6 Concluding Remarks 
In this work we raised the question whether it 
is possible to reliably annotate speech recogni-
tion hypotheses with information about seman-
tic consistency and domain specificity. The 
motivation for that was to find out whether it is 
feasible to develop and evaluate a computer 
program addressing the same task and imple-
menting the algorithm reflected in the annota-
tion scheme. 
We found that humans principally had 
problems in looking solely at the conceptual-
ized speech recognition hypotheses. This, 
however, should not be a problem for a ma-
chine where the word-to-concept mapping is 
done automatically and all so-called function 
words are discarded. In the future it would be 
interesting to have humans annotate not speech 
recognition hypotheses per se, but only their 
automatically generated conceptual mappings. 
Another finding was that the originally 
proposed annotation scheme does not allow for 
a high level of agreement between human an-
notators with respect to semantic consistency. 
Eliminating the class semi-consistent led us, 
however, to a considerably better reliability of 
annotations.  
We consider this study as a first attempt 
to show the feasibility of determining semantic 
consistency of the output of the speech recog-
nizer. We plan to integrate the results into the 
domain modeling component and conduct 
further experiments on semantic consistency 
and domain detection. 
 
Acknowledgements 
The work presented in this paper was con-
ducted within the SmartKom project partly 
founded by the German Ministry of Research 
and Technology under grant 01IL95I7 and by 
the Klaus Tschira Foundation.  
  
References 
Carletta, J. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational 
Linguistics, 22 (2):249-254.  
Flycht-Eriksson, A. 1999. A Survey of Knowledge 
Sources in Dialogue Systems. In: Proc. of 
IJCAI'99 Workshop on Knowledge and Reason-
ing in Practical Dialogue Systems. Stockholm, 
Sweden, pp. 41-48. 
Mueller, C., Strube, M. 2001. Annotating anaphoric 
and bridging expressions with MMAX. In: 
Proc. of the 2nd SIGdial Workshop on Discourse 
and Dialogue. Aalborg, Denmark, 2001, pp. 90-
95. 
Oerder, M., Ney, H. 1993. Word Graphs: An Effi-
cient Interface between Continuous Speech 
Recognition and Language Understanding. 
In:Proc. of the International Conf. on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing. IEEE Signal 
Processing Society. 
Rapp, S., Strube, M. 2002. An iterative data collec-
tion approach for multimodal dialogue sys-
tems. In: Proc. of the 3rd International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion. Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain. To 
appear.  
Wahlster, W., Reithinger, N., Blocher, A. 2001. 
SmartKom: Multimodal Communication with a 
Life-Like Character. In: Proc. of Eurospeech 
2001. Aalborg, Danemark, pp. 1547-1550.  
 
