The Influence of Minimum Edit Distance on Reference Resolution
Michael Strube
European Media Laboratory GmbH
Villa Bosch
Schlo?-Wolfsbrunnenweg 33
69118 Heidelberg, Germany
strube@eml.villa-bosch.de
Stefan Rapp
Sony International (Europe) GmbH
Advanced Technology Center Stuttgart
Heinrich-Hertz-Stra?e 1
70327 Stuttgart, Germany
rapp@sony.de
Christoph Mu?ller
European Media Laboratory GmbH
Villa Bosch
Schlo?-Wolfsbrunnenweg 33
69118 Heidelberg, Germany
mueller@eml.villa-bosch.de
Abstract
We report on experiments in reference res-
olution using a decision tree approach. We
started with a standard feature set used in
previous work, which led to moderate re-
sults. A closer examination of the perfor-
mance of the features for different forms
of anaphoric expressions showed good re-
sults for pronouns, moderate results for
proper names, and poor results for definite
noun phrases. We then included a cheap,
language and domain independent feature
based on the minimum edit distance be-
tween strings. This feature yielded a sig-
nificant improvement for data sets consist-
ing of definite noun phrases and proper
names, respectively. When applied to
the whole data set the feature produced a
smaller but still significant improvement.
1 Introduction
For the automatic understanding of written or spo-
ken natural language it is crucial to be able to iden-
tify the entities referred to by referring expressions.
The most common and thus most important types
of referring expressions are pronouns and definite
noun phrases (NPs). Supervised machine learning
algorithms have been used for pronoun resolution
(Ge et al, 1998) and for the resolution of definite
NPs (Aone and Bennett, 1995; McCarthy and Lehn-
ert, 1995; Soon et al, 2001). An unsupervised ap-
proach to the resolution of definite NPs was applied
by Cardie and Wagstaff (1999). However, though
machine learning algorithms may deduce to make
best use of a given set of features for a given prob-
lem, it is a linguistic question and a non-trivial task
to identify a set of features which describe the data
sufficiently.
We report on experiments in the resolution of
anaphoric expressions in general, including definite
noun phrases, proper names, and personal, posses-
sive and demonstrative pronouns. Based on the
work mentioned above we started with a feature set
including NP-level and coreference-level features.
Applied to the whole data set these features led
only to moderate results. Since the NP form of the
anaphor (i.e., whether the anaphoric expression is
realized as pronoun, definite NP or proper name) ap-
peared to be the most important feature, we divided
the data set into several subsets based on the NP
form of the anaphor. This led to the insight that the
moderate performance of our system was caused by
the low performance for definite NPs. We adopted
a new feature based on the minimum edit distance
(Wagner and Fischer, 1974) between anaphor and
antecedent, which led to a significant improvement
on definite NPs and proper names. When applied to
the whole data set the feature yielded a smaller but
still significant improvement.
In this paper, we first discuss features that have
been found to be relevant for the task of reference
resolution (Section 2). Then we describe our cor-
pus, the corpus annotation, and the way we prepared
the data for use with a binary machine learning clas-
sifier (Section 3). In Section 4 we first describe the
feature set used initially and the results it produced.
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                    Language Processing (EMNLP), Philadelphia, July 2002, pp. 312-319.
                         Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
We then introduce the minimum edit distance fea-
ture and give the results it yielded on different data
sets.
2 Features for Reference Resolution in
Previous Work
Driven by the necessity to provide robust systems
for the MUC system evaluations, researchers began
to look for those features which were particular im-
portant for the task of reference resolution. While
most features for pronoun resolution have been de-
scribed in the literature for decades, researchers only
recently began to look for robust and cheap features,
i.e., features which perform well over several do-
mains and can be annotated (semi-) automatically.
In the following, we describe a few earlier contri-
butions to reference resolution with respect to the
features used.
Decision tree algorithms were used for ref-
erence resolution by Aone and Bennett (1995,
C4.5), McCarthy and Lehnert (1995, C4.5) and
Soon et al (2001, C5.0). This approach requires
the definition of a set of features describing
pairs of anaphors and their antecedents, and col-
lecting a training corpus annotated with them.
Aone and Bennett (1995), working on reference
resolution in Japanese newspaper articles, use
66 features. They do not mention all of these
explicitly but emphasize the features POS-tag,
grammatical role, semantic class and distance.
The set of semantic classes they use appears to be
rather elaborated and highly domain-dependent.
Aone and Bennett (1995) report that their best
classifier achieved an F-measure of about 77% after
training on 250 documents. They mention that
it was important for the training data to contain
transitive positives, i.e., all possible coreference
relations within an anaphoric chain.
McCarthy and Lehnert (1995) describe a refer-
ence resolution component which they evaluated on
the MUC-5 English Joint Venture corpus. They dis-
tinguish between features which focus on individ-
ual noun phrases (e.g. Does noun phrase contain a
name?) and features which focus on the anaphoric
relation (e.g. Do both share a common NP?). It
was criticized (Soon et al, 2001) that the features
used by McCarthy and Lehnert (1995) are highly id-
iosyncratic and applicable only to one particular do-
main. McCarthy and Lehnert (1995) achieved re-
sults of about 86% F-measure (evaluated accord-
ing to Vilain et al (1995)) on the MUC-5 data set.
However, only a defined subset of all possible ref-
erence resolution cases was considered relevant in
the MUC-5 task description, e.g., only entity refer-
ences. For this case, the domain-dependent features
may have been particularly important, making it dif-
ficult to compare the results of this approach to oth-
ers working on less restricted domains.
Soon et al (2001) use twelve features (see Table
1). Soon et al (2001) show a part of their decision
tree in which the weak string identity feature (i.e.
identity after determiners have been removed) ap-
pears to be the most important one. They also report
on the relative contribution of the features where
the three features weak string identity, alias (which
maps named entities in order to resolve dates, per-
son names, acronyms, etc.) and appositive seem to
cover most of the cases (the other nine features con-
tribute only 2.3% F-measure for MUC-6 texts and
1% F-measure for MUC-7 texts). Soon et al (2001)
include all noun phrases returned by their NP iden-
tifier and report an F-measure of 62.6% for MUC-6
data and 60.4% for MUC-7 data. They only used
pairs of anaphors and their closest antecedents as
positive examples in training, but evaluated accord-
ing to Vilain et al (1995).
Cardie and Wagstaff (1999) describe an unsuper-
vised clustering approach to noun phrase corefer-
ence resolution in which features are assigned to
single noun phrases only. They use the features
shown in Table 2, all of which are obtained auto-
matically without any manual tagging. The feature
semantic class used by Cardie and Wagstaff (1999)
seems to be a domain-dependent one which can
only be used for the MUC domain and similar
ones. Cardie and Wagstaff (1999) report a perfor-
mance of 53,6% F-measure (evaluated according to
Vilain et al (1995)).
3 Data
3.1 Text Corpus
Our corpus consists of 242 short German texts (to-
tal 36924 tokens) about sights, historic events and
persons in Heidelberg. The average length is 151 to-
? distance in sentences between anaphor and antecedent
? antecedent is a pronoun?
? anaphor is a pronoun?
? weak string identity between anaphor and antecedent
? anaphor is a definite noun phrase?
? anaphor is a demonstrative pronoun?
? number agreement between anaphor and antecedent
? semantic class agreement between anaphor and antecedent
? gender agreement between anaphor and antecedent
? anaphor and antecedent are both proper names?
? an alias feature (used for proper names and acronyms)
? an appositive feature
Table 1: Features used by Soon et al
? position (NPs are numbered sequentially)
? pronoun type (nom., acc., possessive, ambiguous)
? article (indefinite, definite, none)
? appositive (yes, no)
? number (singular, plural)
? proper name (yes, no)
? semantic class (based on WordNet: time, city, animal,
human, object; based on a separate algorithm: num-
ber, money, company)
? gender (masculine, feminine, either, neuter)
? animacy (anim, inanim)
Table 2: Features used by Cardie and Wagstaff
kens. The texts were POS-tagged using TnT (Brants,
2000). A basic identification of markables (refer-
ring expressions, i.e. NPs) was obtained by using the
NP-Chunker Chunkie (Skut and Brants, 1998). The
POS-tagger was also used for assigning attributes
like e.g. the NP form to markables. The automatic
annotation was followed by a manual correction and
annotation phase in which the markables were anno-
tated with further tags (e.g. semantic class). In this
phase manual coreference annotation was performed
as well. In our annotation coreference is represented
in terms of a member attribute on markables. Mark-
ables with the same value in this attribute are con-
sidered coreferring expressions. The annotation was
performed by two students. The reliability of the an-
notations was checked using the kappa statistic (Car-
letta, 1996).
3.2 Data Generation
The problem of coreference resolution can easily be
formulated as a binary classification: Given a pair
of potential anaphor and potential antecedent, clas-
sify as positive if the antecedent is in fact the closest
antecedent, and as negative otherwise. In anaphoric
chains only the immediately adjacent pairs are clas-
sified as positive. We generated data suitable as in-
put to a machine learning algorithm from our corpus
using a straightforward algorithm which combined
potential anaphors and their potential antecedents.
We then applied the following filters to the resulting
pairs: Discard an antecedent-anaphor pair
  if the anaphor is an indefinite NP,
  if one entity is embedded into the other, e.g. if
the potential anaphor is the head of the poten-
tial antecedent NP (or vice versa),
  if both entities have different values in their se-
mantic class attributes1 ,
  if either entity has a value other than 3rd person
singular or plural in its agreement feature,
  if both entities have different values in their
agreement features2.
For some texts, these heuristics (which were ap-
plied to the entire corpus) reduced to up to 50%
the potential anaphor-antecedent pairs all of which
would have been negative cases. We consider the
cases discarded as irrelevant because they do not
contribute any knowledge for the classifier. After ap-
plication of the filters, the remaining candidate pairs
were labeled as follows:
  Pairs of anaphors and their direct (i.e. clos-
est) antecedents were labeled P. This means
that each anaphoric expression produced ex-
actly one positive instance.
  Pairs of anaphors and those non-antecedents
which occurred closer to the anaphor than the
direct antecedent were labeled N. The number
of negative instances that each expression pro-
duced thus depended on the number of non-
antecedents occurring between the anaphor and
the direct antecedent (or, the beginning of the
text if there was none).
Pairs of anaphors and non-antecedents which oc-
cured further away than the direct antecedent as well
as pairs of anaphors and non-direct (transitive) an-
tecedents were not considered in the data sets. This
produced 242 data sets with a total of 72093 in-
stances of potential antecedent-anaphor pairs.
4 Results
4.1 Our Features
The features for our study were selected according
to three criteria:
1This filter applies only if none of the expressions is a pro-
noun. Otherwise, filtering on semantic class is not possible be-
cause in a real-world setting, information about a pronoun?s se-
mantic class obviously is not available prior to its resolution.
2This filter applies only if the anaphor is a pronoun. This
restriction of the filter is necessary because German allows for
cases where an antecedent is referred back to by a non-pronoun
anaphor which has a different grammatical gender.
  relevance according to previous research,
  low annotation cost and/or high reliability of
automatic tagging,
  domain-independence.
We distinguish between features assigned to noun
phrases and features assigned to the potential coref-
erence relation. All features are listed in Table 3 to-
gether with their respective possible values.
The grammatical function of referring expres-
sions has often been claimed to be an important fac-
tor for reference resolution and was therefore in-
cluded (features 2 and 6). The surface realization
of referring expressions seems to have an influence
on coreference relations as well (features 3 and 7).
Since we use a German corpus and in this language
the gender and the semantic class do not necessar-
ily coincide (i.e., objects are not necessarily neuter
as they are in English) we also provide a semantic
class feature (5 and 9) which captures the difference
between human, concrete objects, and abstract ob-
jects. This basically corresponds to the gender at-
tribute in English, for which we introduced an agree-
ment feature (4 and 8). The feature wdist (10) cap-
tures the distance in words between anaphor and an-
tecedent, while the feature ddist (11) does the same
in terms of sentences and mdist (12) in terms of
markables. The equivalence in grammatical func-
tion between anaphor and potential antecedent is
captured in the feature syn par (13), which is true if
both anaphor and antecedent are subjects or both are
objects, and false in the other cases. The string ident
feature (14) appears to be of major importance since
it provides for high precision in reference resolution
(it almost never fails) while the substring match fea-
ture (15) could potentially provide better recall.
4.2 Baseline Results
Using the features of Table 3, we trained decision
tree classifiers using C5.0, with standard settings for
pre and post pruning. As several features are dis-
crete, we allowed the algorithm to use subsets of
feature values in questions such as ?Is ana npform in

PPER, PPOS, PDS  ??. We also let C5.0 construct
rules from the decision trees, as we found them to
give superior results. In our experiments, the value
Document level features
1. doc id document number (1 . . . 250)
NP-level features
2. ante gram func grammatical function of antecedent (subject, object, other)
3. ante npform form of antecedent (definite NP, indefinite NP, personal pronoun,
demonstrative pronoun, possessive pronoun, proper name)
4. ante agree agreement in person, gender, number
5. ante semanticclass semantic class of antecedent (human, concrete object, abstract object)
6. ana gram func grammatical function of anaphor (subject, object, other)
7. ana npform form of anaphor (definite NP, indefinite NP, personal pronoun,
demonstrative pronoun, possessive pronoun, proper name)
8. ana agree agreement in person, gender, number
9. ana semanticclass semantic class of anaphor (human, concrete object, abstract object)
Coreference-level features
10. wdist distance between anaphor and antecedent in words (1 . . . n)
11. ddist distance between anaphor and antecedent in sentences (0, 1,  1)
12. mdist distance between anaphor and antecedent in markables (1 . . . n)
13. syn par anaphor and antecedent have the same grammatical function (yes, no)
14. string ident anaphor and antecedent consist of identical strings (yes, no)
15. substring match one string contains the other (yes, no)
Table 3: Our Features
of the ana semanticclass attribute was reset to miss-
ing for pronominal anaphors, because in a realistic
setting the semantic class of a pronoun obviously is
not available prior to its resolution.
Using 10-fold cross validation (with about 25
documents for each of the 10 bins), we achieved an
overall error rate of 1.74%. Always guessing the by
far more frequent negative class would give an er-
ror rate of 2.88% (70019 out of 72093 cases). The
precision for finding positive cases is 88.60%, the
recall is 45.32%. The equally weighted F-measure3
is 59.97%.
Since we were not satisfied with this result we
examined the performance of the features. Surpris-
ingly, against our linguistic intuition the ana npform
feature appeared to be the most important one. Thus,
we expected considerable differences in the perfor-
mance of our classifier with respect to the NP form
of the anaphor under consideration. We split the data
into subsets defined by the NP form of the anaphor
and trained the classifier on these data sets. The re-
sults confirmed that the classifier performed poorly
on definite NPs (defNP) and demonstrative pronouns
3computed as 
		
(PDS), moderately on proper names (NE) and quite
good on personal pronouns (PPER) and possessive
pronouns (PPOS) (the results are reported in Ta-
ble 4). As definite NPs account for 792 out of
2074 (38.19%) of the positive cases (and for 48125
(66.75%) of all cases), it is evident that the weak
performance for the resolution of definite NPs, es-
pecially the low recall of only 8.71% clearly impairs
the overall results. Demonstrative pronouns appear
only in 0.87% of the positive cases, so the inferior
performance is not that important. Proper names
(NE) however are more problematic, as they have to
be considered in 644 or 31.05% of the positive cases
(22.96% of all).
P R F
defNP 87.34% 8.71% 15.84%
NE 90.83% 50.78% 65.14%
PDS 25.00% 11.11% 15.38%
PPER 88.12% 78.07% 82.79%
PPOS 82.69% 87.31% 84.94%
all 88.60% 45.32% 59.97%
Table 4: Baseline results using features 2?15.
Antecedent Anaphor
?Philips? ?Kurfu?rst Philip?
?vier Schu?lern? ?die Schu?ler?
?die alte Universita?t? ?der alten Universita?t?
?im Studentenkarzer in der Augustinergasse? ?des Studentenkarzers?
?diese hervorragende Bibliothek? ?dieser Bibliothek?
Table 5: Anaphors and their direct antecedents
New coreference-level features
16. ante med minimum edit distance to anaphor
ff fiflffi "!#!%$'&)(*,+.-0/1-32
4
&
17. ana med minimum edit distance to antecedent
5 fi6fl7ffi "!#!8$'9(*1+:-0/-32;4
9
Table 6: Additional Features ( fi ,  , < , = , fl : see text)
4.3 Additional features
Since definite noun phrases constitute more than a
third of the anaphoric expressions in our corpus, we
investigated why the resolution performed so poorly
for these cases. The major reason may be that the
resolution algorithm relies on surface features and
does not have access to world or domain knowl-
edge, which we did not want to depend upon since
we were mainly interested in cheap features. How-
ever, the string ident and substring match features
did not perform very well either. The string ident
feature had a very high precision (it almost never
failed) but a poor recall. The substring match fea-
ture was not too helpful either as it does not trigger
in many cases. So, we investigated ways to raise the
recall of the string ident and substring match fea-
tures without losing too much precision.
A look at some relevant cases (Table 5) sug-
gested that a large number of anaphoric defi-
nite NPs shared some substring with their an-
tecedent, but they were not identical nor com-
pletely included. What is needed is a weakened
form of the string ident and substring match fea-
tures. Soon et al (2001) removed determiners be-
fore comparing the strings. Other researchers like
Vieira and Poesio (2000) used information about the
syntactic structure and compared only the syntactic
heads of the phrases. However, the feature used by
Soon et al (2001) is neither sufficient nor language
dependent, the one used by Vieira and Poesio (2000)
is not cheap since it relies on a syntactic analysis.
We were looking for a feature which gave us
the improvements of the features used by other re-
searchers without their associated costs. Hence we
considered the minimum edit distance (MED) (Wag-
ner and Fischer, 1974), which has been used for
spelling correction and in speech recognizer evalu-
ations (termed ?accuracy? there) in the past. The
MED computes the similarity of strings by taking
into account the minimum number of editing oper-
ations (substitutions, insertions, deletions) needed
to transform one string into the other (see also
Jurafsky and Martin (2000, p.153ff. and p.271)).
We included MED into our feature set by comput-
ing one value for each editing direction. Both val-
ues share the number of editing operations but they
differ when anaphor and antecedent have a differ-
ent length. The features ante med (16) and ana med
(17) are computed from the number of substitutions
< , insertions = , deletions fl and the length of the po-
tential antecedent fi or anaphor  as in Table 6.
4.4 Improved Results
The inclusion of the MED features 16 and 17 led to a
significant improvement (Table 7). The F-measure is
improved to 67.98%, an improvement of about 8%.
Considering the classifiers trained and tested on the
data partitions according to ana npform, we can see
that the improvements mainly stem from defNP and
NE. With respect to definite NPs we gained about
18% F-measure, with respect to proper names about
11% F-measure. For pronouns, the results did not
vary much.
4.5 MUC-style results
It is common practice to evaluate coreference reso-
lution systems according to a scheme originally de-
veloped for MUC evaluation by (Vilain et al, 1995).
In order to be able to apply it to our classifier, we
first implemented a simple reference resolution al-
gorithm. This algorithm incrementally processes a
real text by iterating over all referring expressions.
Upon encountering a possibly anaphoric expression,
it moves upwards (i.e. in the direction of the be-
ginning of the text) and submits each pair of po-
tential anaphor and potential antecedent to a clas-
sifier trained on the features described above. For
the reasons mentioned in Section 4.2, the value of
the ana semanticclass attribute is reset to missing
if the potential anaphor is a pronominal form. The
algorithm then selects the first (if any) pair which
the classifier labels as coreferential. Once a text
has been completely processed, the resulting coref-
erence classes are evaluated by comparing them to
the original annotation according to the scheme pro-
posed by (Vilain et al, 1995). This scheme takes
into account the particularities of coreference reso-
lution by abstracting from the question if individ-
ual pairs of anaphors and antecedents are found.
Instead, it focusses on whether sets of coreferring
expressions are correctly identified. In contrast to
the experiments reported in Section 4.2 and 4.4, our
algorithm did not use a C5.0, but a J484 decision
tree classifier, which is a Java re-implementation of
4Part of the Weka machine learning library, cf.
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka
P R F
defNP 69.26% 22.47% 33.94%
NE 90.77% 65.68% 76.22%
PDS 25.00% 11.11% 15.38%
PPER 85.81% 77.78% 81.60%
PPOS 82.11% 87.31% 84.63%
all 84.96% 56.65% 67.98%
Table 7: Improved results using features 2?17.
C4.5. This was done for technical reasons, J48 being
more easily integrated into our system. Accompany-
ing experimentation revealed that J48?s performance
is only slightly inferior to that of C5.0 for our data.
Again using 10-fold cross validation, we obtained
the results given in Table 8.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we described the influence of features
based on the minimum edit distance (MED) be-
tween anaphor and antecedent on reference resolu-
tion. Though previous research used several differ-
ent string similarity measures, to our knowledge, the
MED feature was not used in previous work on ref-
erence resolution. We showed that the feature led to
a significant improvement over the standard set of
features we started with. It improved the recall for
definite NPs and proper names considerably with-
out losing too much precision. Also, it did not have
any negative effect on pronouns. The MED feature
is easy to compute and language and domain inde-
pendent. In contrast, features used in previous work
were either language dependent (e.g. the weak string
identity feature as used by Soon et al (2001)), do-
main dependent (their alias feature or similar fea-
tures used by Cardie and Wagstaff (1999)), or relied
on information on the syntactic structure (Vieira and
Poesio, 2000). We consider the MED feature as a
generalization of these features. It is more abstract
than the features used by other researchers but deliv-
ers similar information.
We showed that our approach performs very well
for personal and possessive pronouns and for proper
names. For definite NPs, although they benefit from
the MED features as well, there is still much room
for improvement. We are curious to investigate fur-
ther ?cheap? features and compare them to what
could be obtained when taking domain or world
knowledge into account.
Features P R F
2 ? 15 81.31% 47.44% 59.92%
2 ? 17 80.17% 55.14% 65.34%
Table 8: MUC-style results with different features.
Acknowledgments. The work presented here has
been partially funded by the German Ministry of
Research and Technology as part of the EMBASSI
project (01 IL 904 D/2, 01 IL 904 S 8), by Sony
International (Europe) GmbH and by the Klaus
Tschira Foundation. We would like to thank our an-
notators Anna Bjo?rk Nikula?sdo?ttir, Berenike Loos
and Lutz Wind.
References
Chinatsu Aone and Scott W. Bennett. 1995. Evaluating
automated and manual acquisition of anaphora reso-
lution strategies. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, Cambridge, Mass., 26?30 June 1995, pages 122?
129.
Thorsten Brants. 2000. TnT ? A statistical Part-of-
Speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 6th Confer-
ence on Applied Natural Language Processing, Seat-
tle, Wash., 29 April ? 4 May 2000, pages 224?231.
Claire Cardie and Kiri Wagstaff. 1999. Noun phrase
coreference as clustering. In Proceedings of the 1999
SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and Very Large Corpora, Col-
lege Park, Md., 21?22 June 1999, pages 82?89.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):249?254.
Niyu Ge, John Hale, and Eugene Charniak. 1998. A sta-
tistical approach to anaphora resolution. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth Workshop on Very Large Corpora,
Montre?al, Canada, pages 161?170.
Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2000. Speech and
Language Processing. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle
River, N.J.
Joseph F. McCarthy and Wendy G. Lehnert. 1995. Us-
ing decision trees for coreference resolution. In Pro-
ceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Montre?al, Canada, 1995, pages
1050?1055.
Wojciech Skut and Thorsten Brants. 1998. A maximum-
entropy partial parser for unrestricted text. In 6th
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Montreal, Canada,
pages 143?151.
Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel Chung Yong
Lim. 2001. A machine learning approach to corefer-
ence resolution of noun phrases. Computational Lin-
guistics, 27(4):521?544.
Renata Vieira and Massimo Poesio. 2000. An
empirically-based system for processing definite de-
scriptions. Computational Linguistics, 26(4):539?
593.
Marc Vilain, John Burger, John Aberdeen, Dennis Con-
nolly, and Lynette Hirschman. 1995. A model-
theoretic coreference scoring scheme. In Proceedings
of the 6th Message Understanding Conference (MUC-
6), pages 45?52, San Mateo, Cal. Morgan Kaufmann.
Robert A. Wagner and Michael J. Fischer. 1974. The
string-to-string correction problem. Journal of the
ACM, 21(1):168?173.
