Lexicon-based Orthographic Disambiguation
in CJK Intelligent Information Retrieval
	

Jack Halpern??????jack@cjk.org
The CJK Dictionary Institute??????????
34-14, 2-chome, Tohoku, Niiza-shi, Saitama 352-0001, Japan
Abstract
The orthographical complexity of Chinese,
Japanese and Korean (CJK) poses a special
challenge to the developers of computational
linguistic tools, especially in the area of
intelligent information retrieval. These
difficulties are exacerbated by the lack of a
standardized orthography in these languages,
especially the highly irregular Japanese
orthography. This paper focuses on the typology
of CJK orthographic variation, provides a brief
analysis of the linguistic issues, and discusses why
lexical databases should play a central role in the
disambiguation process.
1 Introduction
Various factors contribute to the difficulties of
CJK information retrieval. To achieve truly
"intelligent" retrieval many challenges must be
overcome. Some of the major issues include:
1. The lack of a standard orthography. To
process the extremely large number of
orthographic variants (especially in Japanese)
and character forms requires support for
advanced IR technologies such as cross-
orthographic searching (Halpern 2000).
2. The accurate conversion between Simplified
Chinese (SC) and Traditional Chinese (TC), a
deceptively simple but in fact extremely
difficult computational task (Halpern and
Kerman 1999).
3. The morphological complexity of Japanese
and Korean poses a formidable challenge to
the development of an accurate
morphological analyzer. This performs such
operations as canonicalization, stemming
(removing inflectional endings) and
conflation (reducing morphological variants
to a single form) on the morphemic level.
4. The difficulty of performing accurate word
segmentation, especially in Chinese and
Japanese which are written without interword
spacing. This involves identifying word
boundaries by breaking a text stream into
meaningful semantic units for dictionary
lookup and indexing purposes. Good progress
in this area is reported in Emerson (2000) and
Yu et al (2000).
5. Miscellaneous retrieval technologies such as
lexeme-based retrieval (e.g. 'take off' +
'jacket' from 'took off his jacket'), identifying
syntactic phrases (such as ???? from ?
????), synonym expansion, and cross-
language information retrieval (CLIR) (Goto
et al 2001).
6. Miscellaneous technical requirements such as
transcoding between multiple character sets
and encodings, support for Unicode, and
input method editors (IME). Most of these
issues have been satisfactorily resolved, as
reported in Lunde (1999).
7. Proper nouns pose special difficulties for IR
tools, as they are extremely numerous,
difficult to detect without a lexicon, and have
an unstable orthography.
8. Automatic recognition of terms and their
variants, a complex topic beyond the scope
of this paper. It is described in detail for
European languages in Jacquemin (2001),
and we are currently investigating it for
Chinese and Japanese.
Each of the above is a major issue that deserves a
paper in its own right. Here, the focus is on
orthographic disambiguation, which refers to
the detection, normalization and conversion of
CJK orthographic variants. This paper summarizes
the typology of CJK orthographic variation,
briefly analyzes the linguistic issues, and
discusses why lexical databases should play a
central role in the disambiguation process.
2 Orthographic Variation in Chinese
2.1 One Language, Two Scripts
As a result of the postwar language reforms in the
PRC, thousands of character forms underwent
drastic simplifications (Zongbiao 1986). Chinese
written in these simplified forms is called
Simplified Chinese (SC). Taiwan, Hong Kong,
and most overseas Chinese continue to use the old,
complex forms, referred to as Traditional
Chinese (TC).
The complexity of the Chinese writing system is
well known. Some factors contributing to this are
the large number of characters in common use,
their complex forms, the major differences
between TC and SC along various dimensions, the
presence of numerous orthographic variants in TC,
and others. The numerous variants and the
difficulty of converting between SC and TC are of
special importance to Chinese IR applications.
2.2 Chinese-to-Chinese Conversion
The process of automatically converting SC
to/from TC, referred to as C2C conversion, is full
of complexities and pitfalls. A detailed description
of the linguistic issues can be found in Halpern
and Kerman (1999), while technical issues related
to encoding and character sets are described in
Lunde (1999). The conversion can be
implemented on three levels in increasing order of
sophistication, briefly described below.
2.2.1 Code Conversion The easiest, but most
unreliable, way to perform C2C conversion is on a
codepoint-to-codepoint basis by looking the
source up in a mapping table, such as the one
shown below. This is referred to as code
conversion or transcoding. Because of the
numerous one-to-many ambiguities (which occur
in both the SC-to-TC and the TC-to-SC
directions), the rate of conversion failure is
unacceptably high.
Table 1. Code Conversion
SC TC1 TC2 TC3 TC4 Remarks
  one-to-one
  one-to-one
   one-to-many
  	 one-to-many

   
  one-to-many
2.2.2 Orthographic Conversion The next
level of sophistication in C2C conversion is
referred to as orthographic conversion, because
the items being converted are orthographic units,
rather than codepoints in a character set. That is,
they are meaningful linguistic units, especially
multi-character lexemes. While code conversion is
ambiguous, orthographic conversion gives better
results because the orthographic mapping tables
enable conversion on the word level.
Table 2. Orthographic Conversion
English SC TC1 TC2 Incorrect Comments
telephone     unambiguous
we     unambiguous
start-off       one-to-many
dry 
   
   one-to-many

  
  depends on context
As can be seen, the ambiguities inherent in code
conversion are resolved by using an orthographic
mapping table, which avoids false conversions
such as shown in the Incorrect column. Because
of segmentation ambiguities, such conversion
must be done with the aid of a morphological
analyzer that can break the text stream into
meaningful units (Emerson 2000).
2.2.3 Lexemic Conversion A more
sophisticated, and far more challenging, approach
to C2C conversion is called lexemic conversion,
which maps SC and TC lexemes that are
semantically, not orthographically, equivalent.
For example, SC  (x?nx?) 'information' is
converted to the semantically equivalent TC 
(z?x?n). This is similar to the difference between
lorry in British English and truck in American
English.
There are numerous lexemic differences between
SC and TC, especially in technical terms and
proper nouns, as demonstrated by Tsou (2000).
For example, there are more than 10 variants for
'Osama bin Laden.' To complicate matters, the
correct TC is sometimes locale-dependent.
Lexemic conversion is the most difficult aspect of
C2C conversion and can only be done with the
help of mapping tables. Table 3 illustrates various
patterns of cross-locale lexemic variation.
Table 3. Lexemic Conversion
English SC Taiwan TC Hong Kong TC Other TC Incorrect TC(orthographic)
Software   !    
Taxi "#$ %&' () *) "#'
Osama bin Laden +,-./0 1234/0 1234/5 126./0
Oahu 789 :8; 78;
2.3 Traditional Chinese Variants
Traditional Chinese does not have a stable
orthography. There are numerous TC variant
forms, and much confusion prevails. To process
TC (and to some extent SC) it is necessary to
disambiguate these variants using mapping tables
(Halpern 2001).
2.3.1 TC Variants in Taiwan and Hong
Kong Traditional Chinese dictionaries often
disagree on the choice of the standard TC form.
TC variants can be classified into various types, as
illustrated in Table 4.
Table 4. TC Variants
Var. 1 Var. 2 English Comment
  inside 100% interchangeable
  teach 100% interchangeable
  particle variant 2 not in Big5
  for variant 2 not in Big5
	 

sink;
surname
partially
interchangeable
 
leak;
divulge
partially
interchangeable
There are various reasons for the existence of TC
variants, such as some TC forms are not being
available in the Big Five character set, the
occasional use of SC forms, and others.
2.3.2 Mainland vs. Taiwanese Variants To a
limited extent, the TC forms are used in the PRC
for some classical literature, newspapers for
overseas Chinese, etc., based on a standard that
maps the SC forms (GB 2312-80) to their
corresponding TC forms (GB/T 12345-90).
However, these mappings do not necessarily agree
with those widely used in Taiwan. We will refer to
the former as "Simplified Traditional Chinese"
(STC), and to the latter as "Traditional
Traditional Chinese" (TTC).
Table 5. STC vs. TTC Variants
Pinyin SC STC TTC
xi?n   
b?ng   
c?   
3 Orthographic Variation in
Japanese
3.1 One Language, Four Scripts
The Japanese orthography is highly irregular.
Because of the large number of orthographic
variants and easily confused homophones, the
Japanese writing system is significantly more
complex than any other major language, including
Chinese. A major factor is the complex interaction
of the four scripts used to write Japanese, resulting
in countless words that can be written in a variety
of often unpredictable ways (Halpern 1990, 2000).
Table 6 shows the orthographic variants of ???
? toriatsukai 'handling', illustrating a variety of
variation patterns.
Table 6. Variants of toriatsukai
Toriatsukai Type of variant
<=>? "standard" form
<>? okurigana variant
<> All kanji
@=>? replace kanji with hiragana
<=ABC? replace kanji with hiragana
@=ABC? All hiragana
An example of how difficult Japanese IR can be is
the proverbial "A hen that lays golden eggs." The
"standard" orthography would be ???????
(Kin no tamago wo umu niwatori). In reality, tamago
'egg' has four variants (?, ??, ???, ???),
niwatori 'chicken' three (?, ????, ????)
and umu 'to lay' two (??, ??), which expands
to 24 permutations like ??????????, ?
??????? etc. As can be easily verified by
searching the web, these variants frequently occur
in webpages. Clearly, the user has no hope of
finding them unless the application supports
orthographic disambiguation.
3.2 Okurigana Variants
One of the most common types of orthographic
variation in Japanese occurs in kana endings,
called ???? okurigana, that are attached to a
kanji base or stem. Although it is possible to
generate some okurigana variants algorithmically,
such as nouns (???) derived from verbs (??
?), on the whole hard-coded tables are required.
Because usage is often unpredictable and the
variants are numerous, okurigana must play a
major role in Japanese orthographic
disambiguation.
Table 7. Okurigana Variants
English Reading Standard Variants
publish kakiarawasu DEFG
DEFHG
DFHG
DFG
perform okonau IJ IKJ
handling toriatsukai <=>? <>?
<>
3.3 Cross-Script Orthographic Variants
Japanese is written in a mixture of four scripts
(Halpern 1990): kanji (Chinese characters), two
syllabic scripts called hiragana and katakana,
and romaji (the Latin alphabet). Orthographic
variation across scripts, which should play a major
role in Japanese IR, is extremely common and
mostly unpredictable, so that the same word can
be written in hiragana, katakana or kanji, or even
in a mixture of two scripts. Table 8 shows the
major cross-script variation patterns in Japanese.
Table 8. Cross-Script Variants
Kanji vs. Hiragana   
Kanji vs. Katakana  	
 
Kanji vs. hiragana vs. katakana   
Katakana vs. hybrid  Y 
Kanji vs. katakana vs. hybrid   
Kanji vs. hybrid   
Hiragana vs. katakana   
3.4 Kana Variants
Recent years have seen a sharp increase in the use
of katakana, a syllabary used mostly to write
loanwords. A major annoyance in Japanese IR is
that katakana orthography is often irregular; it is
quite common for the same word to be written in
multiple, unpredictable ways which cannot be
generated algorithmically. Hiragana is used
mostly to write grammatical elements and some
native Japanese words. Although hiragana
orthography is generally regular, a small number
of irregularities persist. Some of the major types
of kana variation are shown in Table 9.
Table 9. Katakana and Hiragana Variants
Type English Reading Standard Variants
Macron computer konpyuutakonpyuutaa
???
???
????
???
Long
vowels maid meedo ??? ???
Multiple
kana team
chiimu
tiimu ??? ????
Traditional big ookii ???? ????
 vs. continue tsuzuku ??? ???
The above is only a brief introduction to the most
important types of kana variation. There are
various others, including an optional middle dot
(nakaguro) and small katakana variants (?? vs.
??), and the use of traditional (? vs. ?) and
historical (? vs.?) kana.
3.5 Miscellaneous Variants
There are various other types of orthographic
variants in Japanese, which are beyond the scope
of this paper. Only a couple of the important ones
are mentioned below. A detailed treatment can be
found in Halpern (2000).
3.5.1 Kanji Variants Though the Japanese
writing system underwent major reforms in the
postwar period and the character forms have by
now been standardized, there is still a significant
number of variants in common use, such as
abbreviated forms in contemporary Japanese (?
for ? and ? for ? ) and traditional forms in
proper nouns and classical works (such as ? for
? and? for?).
3.5.2 Kun Homophones An important factor
that contributes to the complexity of the Japanese
writing system is the existence of a large number
of homophones (words pronounced the same but
written differently) and their variable orthography
(Halpern 2000). Not only can each kanji have
many kun readings, but many kun words can be
written in a bewildering variety of ways. The
majority of kun homophones are often close or
even identical in meaning and thus easily
confused, i.e., noboru means 'go up' when written
?? but 'climb' when written ?? , while
yawarakai ?soft? is written ???? or ????
with identical meanings.
4 Orthographic Variation in Korean
4.1 Irregular Orthography
The Korean orthography is not as regular as most
people tend to believe. Though hangul is often
described as "logical," the fact is that in modern
Korean there is a significant amount of
orthographic variation. This, combined with the
morphological complexity of the language, poses
a challenge to developers of IR tools. The major
types of orthographic variation in Korean are
described below.
4.2 Hangul Variants
The most important type of orthographic variation
in Korean is the use of variant hangul spellings in
the writing of loanwords. Another significant kind
of variation is in the writing of non-Korean
personal names, as shown in Table 10.
Table 10. Hangul Variants
cake
LMN (keikeu) LO (keik)
yellow
PQR (yelrou) PQ (yelro)
Mao
Zedong
STUV
(maojjeottung )
WXY
(motaekdong)
Clinton Z[\
(keulrinteon )
Z[]
(keulrinton)
4.3 Cross-Script Orthographic Variants
A factor that contributes to the complexity of the
Korean writing system is the use of multiple
scripts. Korean is written in a mixture of three
scripts: an alphabetic syllabary called hangul,
Chinese characters called hanja (their use is
declining) and the Latin alphabet called romaja.
Orthographic variation across scripts is not
uncommon. The major patterns of cross-script
variation are shown Table 11.
Table 11. Cross-Script Orthographic Variants
Type of
Variation English Var. 1 Var. 2 Var.3
Hanja vs.
hangul
many
people
^_
(daese)
`a
(daese)
Hangul vs.
hybrid shirt
bMcd
(wai-
syeacheu)
ecd
(wai-
syeacheu)
Hangul vs.
numeral
vs. hanja
one
o'clock
fg
(hansi)
hg
(hansi )
ij
(hansi)
English
vs. hangul sex sex
kl
(sekseu )
4.4 Miscellaneous Variants
4.4.1 North vs. South Korea Another factor
contributing to the irregularity of hangul
orthography is the differences in spelling between
South Korea (S.K.) and North Korea (N.K.). The
major differences are in the writing of loanwords,
a strong preference for native Korean words, and
in the writing of non-Korean proper nouns. The
major types are shown below.
1. Place names: N.K. Tmn (osakka) vs. S.K.
Tmo (osaka) for 'Osaka'
2. Personal names: N.K. pq (busyu) vs. S.K.
pg (busi) for 'Bush'
3. Loanwords: N.K.rst (missail) vs. S.K.r
mt (misail) for 'missile'
4. Russian vs. English: N.K. uvw (guruppa)
vs. S.K.ux (geurup)
5. Morphophonemic: N.K. yz (ramyong) vs.
S.K.{z (namyong)
4.4.2 New vs. Old Orthography The hangul
script went through several reforms during its
history, the latest one taking place as recently as
1988. Though the new orthography is now well
established, the old orthography is still important
because the affected words are of high frequency
and their number is not insignificant. For example,
the modern t| 'worker' (ilgun) was written t}
(ilkkun) before 1988, while~ 'color' (bitgal) was
written~? (bitkkal).
4.4.3 Hanja Variants Although language
reforms in Korea did not include the
simplification of the character forms, the Japanese
occupation of Korea resulted in many simplified
Japanese character forms coming into use, such as
the Japanese form? to replace? (bal).
4.4.4 Miscellaneous Variants There are
various other types of orthographic variation,
which are beyond the scope of this paper. This
includes the use of abbreviations and acronyms
and variation in interword spacing in multiword
compounds. For example, 'Caribbean Sea'
(karibeuhae) may be written solid (o???) or
open (o???).
5 The Role of Lexical Databases
Because of the irregular orthography of CJK
languages, lexeme-based procedures such as
orthographic disambiguation cannot be based on
probabilistic methods (e.g. bigramming) alone.
Many attempts have been made along these lines,
as for example Brill (2001) and Goto et al (2001),
with some claiming performance equivalent to
lexicon-based methods, while Kwok (1997)
reports good results with only a small lexicon and
simple segmentor.
These methods may be satisfactory for pure IR
(relevant document retrieval), but for orthographic
disambiguation and C2C conversion, Emerson
(2000) and others have shown that a robust
morphological analyzer capable of processing
lexemes, rather than bigrams or n-grams, must be
supported by a large-scale computational lexicon
(even 100,000 entries is much too small).
The CJK Dictionary Institute (CJKI), which
specializes in CJK computational lexicography, is
engaged in an ongoing research and development
effort to compile comprehensive CJK lexical
databases (currently about 5.5 million entries),
with special emphasis on orthographic
disambiguation and proper nouns. Listed below
are the principal components useful for intelligent
IR tools and orthographic disambiguation.
1. Chinese to Chinese conversion. In 1996,
CJKI launched a project to investigate C2C
conversion issues in-depth, and to build
comprehensive mapping tables (now at 1.3
million SC and 1.2 million TC items) whose
goal is to achieve near 100% conversion
accuracy. These include:
a. SC-to/from-TC code-level mapping tables
b. SC-to/from-TC orthographic and lexemic
mapping tables for general vocabulary
c. SC-to/from-TC orthographic mapping
tables for proper nouns
d. Comprehensive SC-to/from-TC
orthographic/lexemic mapping tables for
technical terminology, especially IT terms
2. TC orthographc normalization tables
a. TC normalization mapping tables
b. STC-to/from-TTC character mapping
tables
3. Japanese orthographic variant databases
a. A comprehensive database of Japanese
orthographic variants
b. A database of semantically classified
homophone groups
c. Semantically classified synonym groups
for synonym expansion (Japanese
thesaurus)
d. An English-Japanese lexicon for CLIR
e. Rules for identifying unlisted variants
Conclusions
CJK IR tools have become increasingly important
to information retrieval in particular and to
information technology in general. As we have
seen, because of the irregular orthography of the
CJK writing systems, intelligent information
retrieval requires not only sophisticated tools such
as morphological analyzers, but also lexical
databases fine-tuned to the needs of orthographic
disambiguation.
Few if any CJK IR tools perform orthographic
disambiguation. For truly "intelligent" IR to
become a reality, not only must lexicon-based
disambiguation be supported, but such emerging
technologies as CLIR, synonym expansion and
cross-homophone searching should also be
implemented.
We are currently engaged in further developing
the lexical resources required for building
intelligent CJK information retrieval tools and for
supporting accurate segmentation technology.
References
Brill, E. and Kacmarick, G. and Brocket, C. (2001)
Automatically Harvesting Katakana-English Term
Pairs from Search Engine Query Logs. Microsoft
Research, Proc. of the Sixth Natural Language
Processing Pacific Rim Symposium, Tokyo, Japan.
Emerson, T. (2000) Segmenting Chinese in Unicode.
Proc. of the 16th International Unicode Conference,
Amsterdam
Goto, I., Uratani, N. and Ehara T. (2001) Cross-
Language Information Retrieval of Proper Nouns
using Context Information. NHK Science and
Technical Research Laboratories. Proc. of the Sixth
Natural Language Processing Pacific Rim
Symposium, Tokyo, Japan
Jacquemin, C. (2001) Spotting and Discovering Terms
through Natural Language Processing. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA
Halpern, J. (1990) Outline Of Japanese Writing System.
In ?New Japanese-English Character Dictionary?,
6th printing, Kenkyusha Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
(www.kanji.org/kanji/japanese/writing/outline.htm)
Halpern, J. and Kerman J. (1999) The Pitfalls and
Complexities of Chinese to Chinese Conversion.
Proc. of the Fourteenth International Unicode
Conference in Cambridge, MA.
Halpern, J. (2000) The Challenges of Intelligent
Japanese Searching. Working paper (www.cjk.org/
cjk/joa/joapaper.htm), The CJK Dictionary Institute,
Saitama, Japan.
Halpern, J. (2001) Variation in Traditional Chinese
Orthography. Working paper (www.cjk.org/cjk/
cjk/reference/chinvar.htm), The CJK Dictionary
Institute, Saitama, Japan.
Kwok, K.L. (1997) Lexicon Effects on Chinese
Information Retrieval. Proc. of 2nd Conf. on
Empirical Methods in NLP. ACL. pp.141-8.
Lunde, Ken (1999) CJKV Information Processing.
O?Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA.
Yu, Shiwen, Zhu, Xue-feng and Wang, Hui (2000) New
Progress of the Grammatical Knowledge-base of
Contemporary Chinese. Journal of Chinese
Information Processing, Institute of Computational
Linguistics, Peking University, Vol.15 No.1.
Tsou, B.K., Tsoi, W.F., Lai, T.B.Y. Hu, J., and Chan
S.W.K. (2000) LIVAC, a Chinese synchronous
corpus, and some applications. In "2000
International Conference on Chinese Language
ComputingICCLC2000", Chicago .
Zongbiao (1986)????F (Jianhuazi zongbiao)
(Second Edition).???????????,??
??, China.
