A Sentence Reduction Using Syntax Control
Nguyen Minh Le
The Graduate School of
Information Science JAIST
Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan
nguyenml@jaist.ac.jp
Susumu Horiguchi
The Graduate School of
Information Science JAIST
Ishikawa, 923-1292, Japan
hori@jaist.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper present a method based on the
behavior of nonnative speaker for reduc-
tion sentence in foreign language. We
demonstrate an algorithm using seman-
tic information in order to produce two
reduced sentences in two difference lan-
guages and ensure both grammatical and
sentence meaning of the original sentence
in reduced sentences. In addition, the or-
ders of reduced sentences are able to be
different from original sentences.
1 Introduction
Most of the researches in automatic summarization
were focused on extraction or identifying the im-
portant clauses and sentences, paragraphs in texts
(Inderject Mani and Mark Maybury, 1999). How-
ever, when humans produce summaries of docu-
ments, they used to create new sentences that are
grammatical, that cohere with one another, and cap-
ture the most salient parts of information in the orig-
inal document. Sentence reduction is the problem to
remove some redundant words or some phrases from
the original sentence by creating a new sentence in
which the gist meaning of the original sentence was
unchanged.
Methods of sentence reduction have been used
in many applications. Grefenstette (G.Grefenstette,
1998) proposed removing phrases in sentences to
produce a telegraphic text that can be used to pro-
vide audio scanning services for the blind. Dolan
(S.H. Olivers and W.B.Dolan, 1999) proposed re-
moving clauses in sentences before indexing docu-
ment for information retrieval. Those methods re-
move phrases based on their syntactic categories but
not rely on the context of words, phrases and sen-
tences around. Without using that information can
be reduced the accuracy of sentence reduction prob-
lem. Mani and Maybury also present a process of
writing a reduced sentence by reversing the original
sentence with a set of revised rules to improve the
performance of summarization. (Inderject Mani and
Mark Maybury, 1999).
Jing and McKeown(H. Jing, 2000) studied a new
method to remove extraneous phrase from sentences
by using multiple source of knowledge to decide
which phrase in the sentences can be removed. The
multiple sources include syntactic knowledge, con-
text information and statistic computed from a cor-
pus that consists of examples written by human pro-
fessional. Their method prevented removing some
phrases that were relative to its context around and
produced a grammatical sentence.
Recently, Knight and Marcu(K.Knight and
D.Marcu, 2002) demonstrated two methods for sen-
tence compression problem, which are similar to
sentence reduction one. They devised both noisy-
channel and decision tree approach to the prob-
lem. The noisy-channel framework has been used
in many applications, including speech recognition,
machine translation, and information retrieval. The
decision tree approach has been used in parsing sen-
tence. (D. Magerman, 1995)(Ulf Hermijakob and
J.Mooney, 1997) to define the rhetorical of text doc-
uments (Daniel Marcu, 1999).
Most of the previous methods only produce a
short sentence whose word order is the same as that
of the original sentence, and in the same language,
e.g., English.
When nonnative speaker reduce a long sentence
in foreign language, they usually try to link the
meaning of words within the original sentence into
meanings in their language. In addition, in some
cases, the reduced sentence and the original sen-
tence had their word order are difference. Therefore,
two reduced sentences are performed by non-native
speaker, one is the reduced sentence in foreign lan-
guage and another is in their language.
Following the behavior of nonnative speaker, two
new requirements have been arisen for sentence re-
duction problem as follows:
1) The word order of the reduced sentence may dif-
ferent from the original sentence.
2) Two reduced sentences in two difference lan-
guages can be generated.
With the two new perspectives above, sentence re-
duction task are useful for many applications such
as: information retrieval, query text summarization
and especially cross-language information retrieval.
To satisfy these new requirements, we proposed a
new algorithm using semantic information to simu-
late the behavior of nonnative-speaker. The seman-
tic information obtained from the original sentence
will be integrated into the syntax tree through syntax
control. The remainder of this paper will be orga-
nized as follows: Section 2 demonstrated a method
using syntactic control to reduced sentences. Sec-
tion 3 shows implementation and experiments. Sec-
tion 4 gives some conclusions and remained prob-
lems to be solved in future.
2 Sentence reduction using syntax control
2.1 Formulation
Let E and V be two difference languages. Given a
long sentence e : e1, e2, ..., en in the language E.
The task of sentence reduction into two languages
E and V is to remove or replace some redundant
words in the sentence e to generate two new sen-
tences e?1, e?2, ..., e?m and v1, v2, ..., vk in language E
and V so that their gist meanings are unchanged.
In practice, we used English language as a source
language and the target language are in English and
Vietnamese. However, the reader should understand
that our method can apply for any pair of languages.
In the following part we present an algorithm of sen-
tence reduction using syntax control with rich se-
mantic information.
2.2 Sentence reduction algorithm
We present an algorithm based on a semantic parsing
in order to generate two short sentences into differ-
ence languages. There are three steps in a reduction
algorithm using syntax control. In the first step, the
input sentence e will be parsed into a syntax tree t
through a syntax parser.
In the second step, the syntax tree will be added
rich semantic information by using a semantic
parser, in which each node of the syntax tree is asso-
ciated with a specific syntax control. The final step is
a process of generating two deference sentences into
language E and V language from the syntax tree t
that has been annotated with rich semantic informa-
tion.
2.2.1 Syntax parsing
First, We parse a sentence into a syntax tree. Our
syntax parser locates the subject, object, and head
word within a sentence. It also recognizes phrase
verbs, cue phases or expressions in English sen-
tences. These are useful information to reduce sen-
tence. The Figure 2 explains the equivalent of our
grammar symbol with English grammar symbol.
Figure 1 shows an example of our syntax pars-
ing for the sentence ?Like FaceLift, much of ATM?s
screen performance depends on the underlying ap-
plication?.
To reduce the ambiguity, we design a syntactic pars-
ing base on grammar symbols, which classified in
detail. Part of speech of words was extended to cope
with the ambiguity problem. For example, in Figure
2, ?noun? was dived into ?private noun? and ?gen-
eral noun?.
The bilingual dictionary was built including about
200,000 words in English and its meaning in Viet-
namese. Each English word entry includes several
meanings in Vietnamese and each meaning was as-
sociated with a symbol meaning. The set of sym-
bol meanings in each word entry is defined by using
WordNet database.(C. Fellbaum, 1998) The dictio-
nary also contained several phrases, expressions in
Figure 1: An example of syntax tree of ?Like
FaceLift, much of ATM?s screen performance de-
pends on the underlying application?
English and its equivalent to Vietnamese.
2.2.2 Semantic parsing using syntax control
After producing a syntax tree with rich informa-
tion, we continue to apply a semantic parsing for that
syntax tree.
Let N be an internal node of the syntax tree t and N
has k children nodes: n1, n2, ...nk .
The node N based on semantic information from
its n children nodes to consider what the remained
part in the reducing sentence should be.
When parsing semantic for the syntax tree t, each
N must be used the information of children nodes
to define its information. We call that information is
semantic-information of the node N and define it as
N.sem . In addition, each semantic-information of
a given node N was mapped with a meaning in the
Figure 2: Example of symbol Equivalent
target language.
For convince, we define SI is a set of semantic-
information and assume that the jth semantic-
information of the node nj is nj [i].
To understand what the meaning of the node N
should be, we have to know the meaning of each
children node and know how to combine them into
meanings for the node N .
Figure 3: Syntax control
Figure 3 shows two choices for sequence mean-
ings of the node N in a reduction process .
It is easy for human to understand exactly which
meaning of ni should be and then decoding them as
objects to memorize. With this basic idea, we design
a control language to do this task.
The k children nodes n1, n2, ...nk are associated
with a set of a syntax control to conduct the reducing
sentence process. The node N and its children are
associated with a set of rules. To present the set of
rules we used a simple syntax of a control language
as follows:
1) Syntax to present the order of children nodes and
nodes to be removed.
2) Syntax to constraint each meaning of a children
node with meanings of other children nodes.
3) Syntax to combine sequence meanings into
one symbol meaning (this process called a inherit
process from the node N to its children).
A syntax rule control will be encoded as one-
generation rules and a set of condition rules so that
the generation rule has to satisfy. With a specifica-
tion condition rule, we can define its generation rule
directly.
Condition rule
A condition rule is formulated as follows: if
nj1 .sem = v1 ? nj2 .sem = v2... ? njm .sem = vm
then N.sem = v with v and vj ? SI
Generation rule
A generation rule is a sequence of symbols in order
to transfer the internal node N into the internal node
of a reduced sentence. We used two generation
rules, one for E and other one for V . Given a
sequence symbols g : g1g2...gm , in which gi is an
integer or a string. The equation gi = j means the
children node be remained at position j in the target
node. If gi = ?v1v2...vl?, we have that string will in
the children node ni of the target node.
Figure 1 shows a syntax tree of the input sentence:
?Much of ATM?s performance depends on the un-
derlying application.?. In this syntax tree, the syntax
rule:?S1=Bng-daucau Subj cdgt Bng-cuoicau? will
be used the syntax control bellow to reduce
< Con > default < /Con >
< Gen > 1 2 < /Gen >
The condition rule is ?default? mean the generation
rule is applied to any condition rule. The generation
rule be ?1 2? mean only the node (Subj) in the
index 1 and the node (cdgt) in the index 2 of the
rule ?S1=Bng-daucau Subj cdgt Bng-cuoicau? are
remained in the reduced sentence.
If the syntax control is changed to
< Con > Subj = HUMAN < /Con >
< Gen > 1 2 < /Gen >
This condition rule means that only the case the
semantic information in the children node ?Subj?
is ?HUMAN? the generation rule ?1 2? is applied
for reduction process. Using the default condition
rule the reduced sentences to be generated as
follows.
Original sentence: Like FaceLift, much of ATM?s
screen performance depends on the underlying
application.
Reduced sentence in English: Much of ATM?s per-
formance depends on the underlying application.
Reduced sentence in Vietnamese: Nhieu hieu suat
cua ATM phu thuoc vao nhung ung dung tiem an.
In order to generating reduced sentence in Viet-
namese language, the condition rule and generation
is also designed. This process is used the same way
as transfer translation method.
Because the gist meaning of a short sentence is un-
changed in comparing with the original sentence, the
gist meaning of a node after applying the syntax con-
trol will be unchanged. With this assumption, we
can reuse the syntax control for translating the origi-
nal sentence into other languages (English into Viet-
namese) for translating the reduced sentence. There-
fore, our sentence reduction program can produce
two reduced sentences in two difference languages.
Our semantic parsing used that set of rules to select
suitable rules for the current context. The problem
of selecting a set of suitable rules for the current con-
text of the current node N is to find the most likely
condition rule among the set of syntax control rules
that associated with it. Thus, semantic parsing using
syntax control problem can be described mathemat-
ically as follows:
Given a sequence of children nodes n1, n2, ..., nk
of a node N , each node ni consist of a list of mean-
ing, in which each meaning was associated with a
symbol meaning. The syntax rule for the node N
was associated with a set of condition rules. In ad-
dition, one condition rule is mapped with a specifi-
cation generation rule.
Find the most condition rules for that node se-
quences.
This problem can be solved by using a variant of the
Viterbi algorithm (A.J. Viterbi, 1967).
Firstly, we define each semantic-information of a
children node with all index condition rules. Sec-
ondly, we try to find all sequences that come from
the same condition rules.
Algorithm 1 A definition of condition rules algo-
rithm. FindRule(N )
Require: Input: N is a node
Ensure: A syntax control for a rule
{Initialization step:}
1: for i = 1 to k do
2: for j = 1 to Ki do
3: Set stack s[i]=all index rules in the set of
condition rules satisfy ni.sem = ni[j]
4: end for
5: for i = 1 to K1 do
6: Cost[0][i] = 1;
7: Back[0][i] = 0;
8: end for
9: end for
{Interaction step:}
10: for i = 1 to k do
11: for j=1 to Ki do
12: Cost[i][j] = maxCost[i ? 1][l] ?
V alue(s[i][j], s[i? 1][l]) with l = 1,Ki
Back[i][j]= all the index gave max
13: end for
14: end for
{Identification step:}
15: Set a list LS= all index rules gave max values
Cost[k][j] with j = 1,Kk.
16: Update all semantic-information of each condi-
tion rule in the list LS to node N .
17: Function Value (i, j)
Begin
If i==j return 2;
Else return 1;
End
After defining a set of semantic-information for
each internal node, we have a frame of semantic
parsing algorithm as shown in Algorithm 2. Our se-
mantic parsing using syntax control is fast because
of finding syntax control rule for each node tree is
applied dynamic programming.
Algorithm 2 Semantic parsing algorithm
Require: Given a syntax tree , a set of syntax con-
trol for each node of the syntax tree.
Ensure: a syntax tree with rich semantic informa-
tion
{SemanticParsingTree}
1: if N is leaf then
2: Update all symbol-meaning in word entry
3: else
4: FindRules(N);
5: end if{main procedure}
6: SemanticParsingNode(root);
2.2.3 Generation reduced sentences
The input of this process is a syntax tree which
associated with rich information after applying the
semantic parsing process. Browsing the syntax tree
following bottom-up process, in which, a node tree
can be generated a short sub-sentence by using the
corresponding generation rule. Because we have
two generation rules for each node tree, so we have
two reduced sentences in two difference languages.
3 Experiments and Discussion
3.1 Experiment Data
We used the same corpus(K.Knight and D.Marcu,
2002) with 1067 pair of sentence and its reduction.
We manually changed the order of some reduced
sentences in that corpus while keep their meaning.
We manually build a set of syntax control for that
corpus for our reduction algorithm using syntax con-
trol. The set of semantic symbols was described
such as, HUMAN, ANIMAL, THINGS, etc. We
make 100 pair of sentences with the order of a reduc-
tion sentence is different from its original sentence.
Afterward, those sentences are to be combined with
the corpus above in order to confirm that our method
can deal with the changeable word order problem.
3.2 Experiment Method
To evaluate our reduction algorithms, we randomly
selected 32 pair of sentences from our parallel
corpus, which will refer to as the Test corpus.
We used 1035 sentence pairs for training with
the reduction based decision tree algorithm. We
used test corpus to confirm that our methods us-
ing semantic-information will outperform than the
decision tree method without semantic-information
(K.Knight and D.Marcu, 2002). We presented each
original sentence in the test corpus to three judges
who are Vietnamese and specialize in English, to-
gether with three sentence reductions of it: The hu-
man generated reduction sentence, the outputs of the
sentence reduction based syntax control and the out-
put of the baseline algorithm. The judges were told
that all outputs were generated automatically. The
order of the outputs was scrambled randomly across
test cases. The judges participated in two experi-
ments. In the first experiment, they were asked to
determine on a scale from 1 to 10 how well the sys-
tems did with respect to selecting the most important
words in the original sentence. In the second exper-
iment, they were asked to determine on a scale from
1 to 10 how grammatical the outputs were. The out-
puts of our methods include both reduced sentences
in English and Vietnamese. In the third experiment,
we tested on the randomly of 32 sentences from 100
sentences whose had word order between input and
output are different.
3.3 Experiment Results
Using the first and the second experiment method,
we had two table results as follows.
Table 1: Experiment results with outputs in English
Method comp Grammatically Importance
Baseline 57.19 8.6? 2.8 7.18? 1.92
Syn.con 6.5 8.7? 1.2 7.3? 1.6
Human 53.33 9.05? 0.3 8.5? 0.8
Table 2: Experiment results with outputs in Viet-
namese
Method comp Grammatically Importance
Baseline x x x
Syn.con 67 6.5? 1.7 6? 1.3
Human 63 8.5? 0.3 8.7? 0.7
Using the third experiments method we achieved
a result to be shown in Table5.
Table 3: Experiment results with the changeable or-
der
Method comp Grammatically Importance
Baseline 56.2 7.4? 3.1 6.5? 1.3
Syn.con 66 8.4? 2.1 7.2? 1.7
Human 53.33 9.2? 0.3 8.5? 0.8
3.4 Discussion
Table 1 shows the compression of three reduc-
tion methods in comparing with human for English
language. The grammatically of semantic control
achieved a high results because we used the syntax
control from human expert. The sentence reduction
decision based is yielded a smallest result. We sus-
pect that the requirement of word order may affect
the grammatically. Table 1 and Table 3 also indi-
cates that our new method achieved the importance
of words are outperform than the baseline algorithm
due to semantic information. This was because our
method using semantic information to avoid deleting
important words. Following our point, the base line
method should integrate with semantic information
within the original sentence to enhance the accuracy.
Table 2 shows the outputs of our method into Viet-
namese language, the baseline method cannot gener-
ate the output into Vietnamese language. The syntax
control method achieved a good enough results in
both grammatically and importance aspects.
The comparison row in the Table 1 and the Table 2
also reported that the baseline yields a shorter output
than syntax control method.
Table 3 shows that when we selected randomly 32
sentence pairs from 100 pairs of sentences those had
words order between input and output are different,
we have the syntax method change a bit while the
baseline method achieved a low result. This is due
to the syntax control method using rule knowledge
based while the baseline was not able to learn with
that corpus that.
4 Conclusions
We have presented an algorithm that allows rewrit-
ing a long sentence into two reduced sentences in
two difference languages. We compared our meth-
ods with the other methods to show advantages as
well as limits of the method. We claim that the se-
mantic information of the original sentence through
using syntax control is very useful for sentence re-
duction problem.
We proposed a method for sentence reduction
using semantic information and syntactic parsing
so-called syntax control approach. Our method
achieved a higher accuracy and the outputted reduc-
tion sentences in two different languages e.g. En-
glish and Vietnamese. Thus, it is closed to the out-
puts of non-native speaker in reduction manner.
Investigate machine learning to generate syntax
control rules automatically from corpus available are
promising to enhance the accuracy of sentence re-
duction using syntax control .
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank to Dr. Daniel Marcus about
the data corpus for sentence reduction task. This re-
search was supported in part by the international re-
search project grant, JAIST.
References
Indeject Mani and Mark Maybury. 1999. Advances in
Automatic Text Summarization. The MIT press.
G.Grefenstette. 1998. Producing intelligent telegraphic
text reduction to provide an audio scanning service for
the blind. In Working notes of the AAAI Spring Sym-
posium on Intelligent Text summarization, pp.111-118.
S.H.Olivers and W.B.Dolan. 1999. Less is more; elimi-
nating index terms from subordinate clauses. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistic, pp.349-356.
H.Jing. 2000. Sentence reduction for automatic text
summarization. In Proceeding of the First Annual
Meeting of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics NAACL-2000.
Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2002. Summarization
beyond sentence extraction: A Probabilistic approach
to sentence compression. Artificial Intelligent, 139:
91?107.
D. Magerman. 1995. Statistical decision tree models for
parsing. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistic, pp.276-
283.
Ulf Hermijakob and Raymond J. Mooney. 1997. Learn-
ing parse and translation decision from examples with
rich context. In Proceeding of ACL/EACL?97, pp 482-
489.
Daniel Marcu. 1999. A decision- based approach to
Rhetorical parsing. In Proc. Of ACL?99, pp.365-372.
C.Fellbaum. 1998. WORDNET: An Electronic Lexical
Database. The Mit Press.
A.J.Viterbi. 1967. Error bounds for convolution codes
and an asymptotically optimal decoding algorithm.
IEEE Trans on Information Theory,13: 260?269.
