Exploring adjectival modification in biomedical discourse 
across two genres 
Olivier Bodenreider Serguei V. Pakhomov 
Lister Hill National Center 
for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 ? USA 
Division of Medical Informatics Research 
Department of Health Sciences Research 
Mayo Clinic 
Rochester, Minnesota, 55905 ? USA 
olivier@nlm.nih.gov Pakhomov.Serguei@mayo.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Objectives: To explore the phenomenon 
of adjectival modification in biomedical 
discourse across two genres: the biomedi-
cal literature and patient records. Meth-
ods: Adjectival modifiers are removed 
from phrases extracted from two corpora 
(three million noun phrases extracted 
from MEDLINE, on the one hand, and 
clinical notes from the Mayo Clinic, on 
the other). The original phrases, the adjec-
tives extracted, and the resulting demodi-
fied phrases are compared across the two 
corpora after normalization. Quantitative 
comparisons (frequency of occurrence) 
are performed on the whole domain. 
Qualitative comparisons are performed on 
the two subdomains (disorders and proce-
dures). Results: Although the average 
number of adjectives per phrase is equiva-
lent in the two corpora (1.4), there are 
more adjective types in MAYO than in 
MEDLINE for disorders and procedures. 
For disorder phrases, the 38% of adjective 
types common to the two corpora account 
for 85% of the occurrences. The predomi-
nance of adjectives in one corpus is ana-
lyzed. Discussion: Potential applications 
of this approach are discussed, namely 
terminology acquisition, information re-
trieval, and genre characterization. 
1 Introduction 
In previous studies, we demonstrated the feasi-
bility of using NLP techniques such as shallow 
parsing of adjectival modification for identifying 
hierarchical relations among biomedical terms 
(Bodenreider et al, 2001) and for extending an 
existing biomedical terminology (Bodenreider et 
al., 2002). In these studies, the corpus was bio-
medical terminology or phrases extracted from the 
biomedical literature. 
Other authors have explored adjectival modifi-
cation in a clinical corpus. Chute and Elkin (1997) 
note, based on empirical observation of clinical 
data, that many clinical terms are accompanied by 
modifiers, including adjectives. The authors make 
a distinction between clinical modifiers (such as 
chronic, severe, and acute) and operational or ad-
ministrative qualifiers (such as no evidence of, his-
tory of, and status post). It appears that the class of 
clinical modifiers consists primarily of adjectives 
that provide specific information regarding condi-
tion and are distributed on a scale. They suggest 
that operational modifiers be kept separate from 
the terms themselves in order to avoid combinato-
rial explosion. 
Taking this idea one step further, we believe 
that, besides operational modifiers, other adjectives 
encountered in clinical phrases could receive a 
special treatment in applications such as informa-
tion retrieval. For example, adjectives expressing 
nuances useful only in the context of clinical care 
could be removed from the phrase when searching 
the biomedical literature. This is the case of adjec-
tives expressing degree of certainty (e.g., prob-
able). In other cases, adjectives specific to clinical 
phrases can be mapped to synonyms or closely 
related modifiers (e.g., greenish sputum, green 
sputum). The ability to map stylistic variations of 
the same adjective becomes especially important to 
establishing links between clinical records and sci-
entific literature, which actually has significant 
implications for improving patient care in clinical 
practice as well as health science research. Finally, 
adjectives absent from the biomedical literature or 
terminologies may denote recent phenomena, not 
yet integrated in terminologies. 
Knowledge about these classes of adjectives 
may help map across genres. Conversely, studying 
adjectival modification across genres may help 
identify adjectives whose representation varies 
across genres, possibly denoting one of these phe-
nomena. 
In the present paper, we explore the phenome-
non of adjectival modification across two genres: 
the biomedical literature and patient records. The 
expected outcome of this study is to obtain a better 
characterization of adjectival modification in bio-
medical phrases of various origins, in order to fully 
take advantage of this phenomenon in applications 
such as the automatic construction of terminology 
and ontology resources and the retrieval of clinical 
documents. 
2 Background 
Adjectival modification as well as lexical seman-
tics of adjectives has been studied extensively in 
the linguistic and NLP literature. Most approaches 
have been directed at creating adjective taxono-
mies and other ways of classifying and represent-
ing adjectives according to their properties and 
function. Raskin and Niernburg (1995) provide a 
comprehensive overview of the various approaches 
that have been taken to description, classification 
and representation of adjectives. 
From the NLP standpoint, Fellbaum (1993) par-
titions adjectives in WordNet? 1 into two large 
classes: descriptive and relational. Descriptive ad-
jectives ?ascribe a value of an attribute to a noun? 
(p.27) (i.e., big child) while relational adjectives 
are usually derived from and are somehow associ-
ated with a noun (i.e., musical child). Another 
prominent distinction has to do with whether an 
adjective can express continuous (scalar) or dis-
crete (non-scalar) values. Raskin and Niernburg 
(1996) point out that for text meaning representa-
                                                          
1
 www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn/ 
tion for computational semantics, the most impor-
tant distinction to make is between scalar and non-
scalar. They also present a method for incorporat-
ing the semantics of the modifier adjective into the 
semantics of the modified noun by representing 
nouns as frames with elements such as 
ATTRIBUTE_SIZE than can be filled in by the 
semantic content of the modifying adjectives. 
The major contribution of this study is to ex-
plore adjectival modification across two genres in 
the biomedical domain. Our approach is essentially 
practical and oriented towards applied perspec-
tives. 
3 Resources 
The two genres compared in this study are the 
biomedical literature and patient records. More 
precisely, we use MEDLINE as our bibliographic 
corpus and clinical notes recorded at the Mayo 
Clinic as our clinical corpus. 
MEDLINE? 2, the U.S. National Library of 
Medicine?s (NLM) premier bibliographic database, 
contains over twelve million references to articles 
from more than 4,600 worldwide journals in life 
sciences with a concentration on biomedicine. 
Srinivasan et al (2002) performed a shallow syn-
tactic analysis on the entire MEDLINE collection, 
using only titles and abstracts in English. From the 
175 million noun phrase types identified in their 
study, we selected the subset of ?simple? phrases, 
i.e., noun phrases excluding prepositional modifi-
cation or any other complex feature. In this study, 
a randomly selected subset of three million of these 
simple noun phrases constitutes our bibliographic 
corpus. 
The Mayo Clinic is a group medical practice in 
the United States and spans all recognized medical 
care settings and specialties. Currently over 50,000 
patient visits occur each week that generate 40,000 
medical documentation entries in Mayo electronic 
record that principally consists of text narratives. 
The current size of the collection is approaching 
fifteen million notes and each note has on average 
200 to 250 words of text. For this study we consid-
ered only the most current sample of the clinical 
notes collection ? 1,783,377 documents recorded 
in 2002. Only simple noun phrases of the same 
type extracted from MEDLINE were extracted 
                                                          
2
 www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi 
from this corpus, resulting in a set of 9,665,942 
phrases. A randomly selected subset of three mil-
lion of these simple noun phrases constitutes our 
clinical corpus. 
In both cases, the noun phrases were first nor-
malized for case, so that the two subsets studied 
represent three million noun phrase types each. 
 
Another resource used in this study is the Uni-
fied Medical Language System? 3 (UMLS?) 
Metathesaurus?. The Metathesaurus, also devel-
oped by NLM, is organized by concept or mean-
ing. A concept is defined as a cluster of terms 
representing the same meaning (synonyms, lexical 
variants, acronyms, translations). The 14th edition 
(2003AA) of the UMLS Metathesaurus contains 
over 1.75 million unique English terms drawn from 
more than sixty families of medical vocabularies, 
and organized in some 875,000 concepts. 
In the UMLS, each concept is categorized by 
semantic types from the Semantic Network. 
McCray et al (2001) designed groupings of se-
mantic types that provide a partition the Metathe-
saurus and, therefore, can be used to extract 
consistent sets of concepts corresponding to a sub-
domain, such as disorders or procedures. 
4 Methods 
In order to compare the linguistic phenomenon of 
adjectival modification across two corpora of noun 
phrases, we first extracted the adjectives after 
submitting the phrases to a shallow syntactic 
analysis and normalizing the head noun of the 
phrase for inflectional variation. Then, we com-
pared across corpora the adjectives on the one hand 
and the ?demodified? noun phrases4 (i.e., noun 
phrases from which the adjectives have been re-
moved) on the other. In order to address the size of 
these corpora, we limited the focus of our study to 
a significant subdomain of clinical medicine: dis-
orders and procedures. 
4.1 Extracting adjectives 
Figure 1 illustrates the sequence of methods 
used for extracting adjectives from the original 
noun phrases. It also presents the number of 
phrases present before and after each of the four 
steps detailed below. 
                                                          
3
 umlsinfo.nlm.nih.gov 
4
 also referred to as ?nested terms? in the literature 
Step 1. Syntactic analysis 
The phrases in our bibliographic and clinical 
samples were then submitted to an underspecified 
syntactic analysis described by Rindflesch et al 
(2000) that draws on a stochastic tagger (see 
(Cutting et al, 1992) for details) as well as the 
SPECIALIST Lexicon5, a large syntactic lexicon 
of both general and medical English that is distrib-
uted with the UMLS. Although not perfect, this 
combination of resources effectively addresses the 
phenomenon of part-of-speech ambiguity in Eng-
lish.  
The resulting syntactic structure identifies the 
head and modifiers for the noun phrase analyzed. 
Each modifier is also labeled as being adjectival, 
adverbial, or nominal. Although all types of modi-
fication in the simple English noun phrase were 
labeled, only adjectives and nouns were selected 
for further analysis in this study. For example, the 
phrase abnormal esophageal motility study was 
analyzed as: 
 
[[mod([abnormal,adj]), 
  mod([esophageal,adj]), 
  mod([motility,noun]), 
  head([study,noun])]] 
 
The result of the syntactic analysis was used to 
select the noun phrases suitable for studying the 
adjectival modification phenomenon, i.e., phrases 
having the following structure: (adj+, noun*, 
head). The phrase is required to start with an ad-
jectival modifier, possibly followed by other adjec-
tives and end with a head noun, possibly preceded 
by other nouns. This specification excludes both 
simple phrases (e.g., one isolated noun) and com-
plex phrases, not suitable for our analysis. 
Step 2. Normalizing the head noun 
In order to compare phrases across corpora, we 
normalized the head noun for inflectional variation 
in each noun phrase. As a result, the two noun 
phrases cerebrovascular accident (in MAYO) and 
cerebrovascular accidents (in MEDLINE) are con-
sidered equivalent. When both the singular and the 
plural form of a phrase appear in the same corpus, 
only the singular form is considered for further 
processing. In practice, to normalize head nouns, 
we used the program lvg6, developed at NLM and 
distributed with the UMLS. 
                                                          
5
 umlslex.nlm.nih.gov 
6
 umlslex.nlm.nih.gov (lvg parameters used: -f:b -CR:oc) 



1,329,225
(adj+, noun*, head)
phrases
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? phrases
syntactic
analysis
1,322,403
normalized phrases
normalize
head noun
remove
adjectives
select sub-
domain

2,826,395
demodified
phrases
72,324
adjective
types
Disorders
18,370 adjectives
279,182 dem. terms
Procedures
16,098 adjectives
160,207 dem. terms
1,641,350
(adj+, noun*, head)
phrases
3,000,000
randomly selected
?simple? phrases
syntactic
analysis
1,575,478
normalized phrases
normalize
head noun
remove
adjectives
3,092,340
demodified
phrases
44,268
adjective
types
	
select sub-
domain
Disorders
16,486 adjectives
714,257 dem. terms
Procedures
11,630 adjectives
242,326 dem. terms
 
Figure 1. Summary of the methods. 
 
Step 3. Creating demodified phrases 
When adjectives are identified in a phrase O, a set 
of demodified phrases {T1, T2,?,Tn} is created by 
removing from phrase O any combinations of ad-
jectival modifiers found in it. While the structure 
of the demodified phrases remains syntactically 
correct, the semantics of some phrases may be 
anomalous, especially when adjectives other than 
the leftmost are removed. Since most of them are 
semantically valid, we found it convenient to keep 
all demodified phrases for further analysis. De-
modified phrases with incorrect semantics will be 
filtered out later in the experiment, since they will 
appear with a lower frequency. 
The number of demodified phrases derived 
from a given phrase is 2m ? 1, m being the number 
of adjectives in the phrase. For example, the phrase 
acute respiratory infection syndrome starts with 
the two adjectival modifiers acute and respiratory, 
so that the following three demodified phrases are 
generated respiratory infection syndrome, acute 
infection syndrome, and infection syndrome. 
Step 4. Restricting to disorders and procedures 
Because of the large size of the two corpora, we 
only performed a quantitative analysis of adjectival 
modification for the whole biomedical domain. We 
restricted the qualitative study to disorders and 
procedures. These represent a significant subdo-
main of clinical medicine, yet are small enough to 
be able to perform at least a somewhat detailed 
analysis. 
All phrases, original and demodified, were 
mapped to the UMLS Metathesaurus by first at-
tempting an exact match between phrases and 
Metathesaurus concepts. If an exact match failed, 
normalization was then attempted. This process 
makes the input and target terms potentially com-
patible by eliminating such inessential differences 
as inflection, case and hyphen variation, as well as 
word order variation. From the phrases mapping to 
some concept in the UMLS, we selected those for 
which the semantic category of the concept 
mapped to corresponded to the subdomains of in-
terest. In practice, for a phrase to be considered a 
procedure, it had to map to a UMLS concept and 
the semantic type of this concept had to belong to 
the semantic group Procedures. The same principle 
was used for selecting disorders, using the seman-
tic group Disorders. For example, the demodified 
phrase arthroscopic surgery (derived from decom-
pressive arthroscopic surgery) is considered a pro-
cedure because it maps, as a synonym, to the 
concept Surgical Procedures, Arthroscopic, whose 
semantic group is Procedures. Exceptionally (32 
UMLS concepts), a term may name both a disorder 
and a procedure. These terms are simply counted 
twice, once with Disorders and once with Proce-
dures. 
4.2 Comparing corpora 
In order to investigate the characteristics of each 
corpus (noun phrases extracted from the biomedi-
cal literature and from patient records), we used 
two kinds of comparisons: quantitative and qualita-
tive. The quantitative part consists of comparing 
frequencies of adjectives and demodified phrases 
across corpora, for the whole corpus as well as on 
specific subsets (Disorders and Procedures). In the 
qualitative part, we examined only phrases form 
the subdomains of Disorders and Procedures. 
Quantitative comparisons 
As mentioned earlier, the head noun of each phrase 
was normalized for inflectional variation (see Step 
2 above). The purpose of normalizing the head 
noun is two-fold. First, it contributes to identifying 
phrase variants within each corpus, resulting in 
accurate counts of phrase types after duplicates had 
been removed. Second, it provides a simple means 
(string match) for identifying equivalent phrases 
across corpora. 
We computed the number of original phrases, 
adjectives, and demodified phrases in each corpus, 
counting tokens and types in each category. Addi-
tionally, we explored similarities between the two 
genres by computing the number of phrases and 
adjectives common to the two corpora (intersec-
tion). Finally, we computed the number of phrase 
and adjective types for the two corpora taken to-
gether (union) in order to better characterize the 
whole domain. From these frequencies, we derived 
additional parameters such as the ratio of the num-
ber of adjectives to the number of original phrases. 
Qualitative comparisons 
We first extracted adjectives from the original 
phrases corresponding to Disorders and Procedures 
and computed their frequency of occurrence. Be-
cause phrases must map to a UMLS term in order 
to be identified as members of a subdomain, only 
the adjectives present in biomedical terms can be 
analyzed. For this reason, their rank will be studied 
rather than their frequency7. 
In order to better represent the whole spectrum 
of adjectives present in the two corpora, we then 
turned to the demodified phrases instead of the 
original phrases. In this second part, the condition 
                                                          
7
 rank n simply corresponds to the nth highest frequency 
for a phrase to be considered a member of a sub-
domain was that the demodified phrase (not the 
entire phrase) map to a UMLS term. However, 
some adjectives may be overrepresented when sev-
eral demodified phrases map to a UMLS term in 
the subdomains considered. For example, the 
phrase abdominal vascular reconstructive surgery, 
once demodified, maps to both vascular surgery 
(with modifiers abdominal and reconstructive) and 
reconstructive surgery (with modifiers abdominal 
and vascular). In this case, the adjective abdominal 
was counted twice. 
For each adjective, we determined the corpus in 
which it was predominantly used. If more than half 
of the occurrences appear in one corpus, the adjec-
tive is considered predominant in this corpus. 
When more than half of the occurrences appear in 
both corpora, the adjective is considered common 
to the two corpora. 
5 Results 
5.1 Extracting adjectives 
Out of the 3 million simple noun phrases randomly 
selected from MEDLINE, 1,322,403 phrase types 
were selected for further processing. Out of these, 
72,324 adjective types (1,916,530 tokens) were 
extracted and 2,826,395 demodified phrases were 
generated. 1,575,478 phrase types were selected 
from the 3 million noun phrases in the MAYO 
corpus. Out of these, 44,268 adjective types 
(2,209,778 tokens) were extracted and 3,092,340 
demodified phrases were generated. Details about 
the number of phrases selected at each step of the 
processing are given in Figure 1. 
5.2 Comparing corpora 
Quantitative results 
The number of original phrases (Table 1), adjec-
tives (Table 2), and demodified phrases (Table 3) 
are presented below in tabular format. Counts are 
broken down by corpus (MEDLINE and MAYO), on 
the one hand, and by subdomain (Disorders and 
Prodedures), on the other. Tables also include re-
sults obtained on the whole corpus (All), i.e., with-
out subsetting, and on the union of the two corpora 
(Together). Except for original phrases (Table 1), 
which, by design, are phrase types, Table 2 and 
Table 3 contain the numbers of types (upper left) 
and tokens (lower right). 
The number of adjectives per phrase ranges 
from 1 to 16 in MEDLINE and from 1 to 7 for 
MAYO when the whole corpus is considered. The 
maximum number of adjectives per phrase is 6 or 7 
for the various subsets. Phrases containing so many 
adjectives may look syntactically and semantically 
suspicious. While some of them denote extraction 
errors (often due to inappropriate part-of-speech 
tagging), most correspond to valid phrases and re-
flect the complexity of the biomedical domain 
(e.g., diastolic systolic mean middle cerebral ar-
tery blood flow velocity and combined enteral par-
enteral synthetic hypercaloric nutrition). The 
distribution of the number of adjectives per phrase 
is plotted in Figure 2. 
Although the number of phrases processed is 
slightly more important for MAYO (1,575,476) 
than for MEDLINE (1,322,403), and although the 
ratio of the number of adjective tokens extracted to 
the number of original phrases is roughly similar in 
the two corpora (1.45 for MEDLINE and 1.40 for 
MAYO), there are significantly more adjective 
types in MEDLINE (72,324) than in MAYO 
(44,268). A difference in the opposite direction is 
observed in the Disorders and Procedures subsets, 
where the number of adjective types is higher in 
MAYO than in MEDLINE, while the average number 
of adjectives per phrase is still slightly higher in 
MEDLINE (1.27 vs. 1.21 for Disorders and 1.21 vs. 
1.14 for Procedures). This finding requires further 
investigation. 
Despite reducing the variation by normalizing 
head nouns for inflection, less than 3% of the 
original phrases are common to the two corpora. 
This proportion is significantly higher for the sub-
set of disorder and procedure phrases where up to 
one third of MEDLINE phrases can be found in the 
MAYO corpus. Not surprisingly, the proportion of 
adjectives in common is higher. Overall, 44% of 
the adjectives in MAYO are also found in MEDLINE 
and up to 75% of the adjectives in MEDLINE are 
also found in MAYO (for disorders). Interestingly, 
the adjectives common to both corpora are also the 
most frequent. For example, as shown in Table 2, 
the 1,584 adjective types in common in the subset 
Disorders account for 38% of all adjectives for 
Disorders (4,148), but the corresponding 25,557 
adjective tokens account for 85% of all tokens 
(30,046). 
 
Table 1 ? Number of original phrases (types), for 
Disorders (Di) and Procedures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
Di 4,941 19,641 22,774 1,808 
Pr 1,534 4,959 6,028 465 
All 1,322,403 1,575,476 2,857,848 40,031 
 
Table 2 ? Number of adjectives (types [top] and 
tokens [bottom]), for Disorders (Di) and Proce-
dures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
  2,048   3,684   4,148   1,584 Di 6,299 23,747 30,046 25,557 
     902   1,499   1,790      611 Pr 1,852 5,667 7,519 5,683 
72,324 44,268 97,762 18,830 All 1,916,530 2,209,778 4,126,308 3,885,852 
 
Table 3 ? Number of demodified phrases (types 
[top] and tokens [bottom]), for Disorders (Di) and 
Procedures (Pr) 
 
 MEDLINE MAYO Together Common 
22,031 24,719 34,302 12,448 Di 174,548 463,097 637,645 571,041 
  9,850   8,595 13,691 4,754 Pr 101,323 166,180 267,503 241,790 
1,487,889 1,047,772 2,403,504 132,157 All 2,826,395 3,092,340 5,918,735 2,709,100 
 
 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
  
Number of adjectives per phrase MEDLINE MAYO
all disorders procedures
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of the number of adjectives 
per phrase 
 
Qualitative results 
The list of the most frequent adjectives found in 
the original phrases corresponding to Disorders 
and Procedures in the UMLS is given in Table 4, 
with their rank in each corpus. Interestingly, most 
high-ranking adjectives are found in both corpora. 
 
Table 4 ? Rank of the most frequent adjectives in 
MEDLINE (ME) and MAYO (Ma) 
 
Disorders ME Ma Procedures ME Ma 
chronic 2 2 total 1 2 
normal 3 1 surgical 2 3 
acute 4 3 partial 5 1 
congenital 1 8 serum 4 5 
increased 6 5 patient 13 4 
abnormal 8 4 percutaneous 3 15 
neonatal 17 >100 renal 12 7 
decreased 11 7 pulmonary 10 12 
pulmonary 10 9 ultrasound >100 22 
benign 7 13 general >100 23 
renal 9 11 cardiac 16 8 
recurrent 15 6 spinal 11 14 
multiple 12 10 radical 14 13 
increasing 14 12 evoked 29 >100 
malignant 5 27 coronary 8 24 
fetal 33 >100 femoral >100 33 
nasal >100 33 studied 33 >100 
joint 18 18 aortic >100 34 
intracranial 40 >100 fluid 7 27 
positive 24 17 abdominal 24 11 
 
Considering not the original phrases, but de-
modified phrases corresponding to disorders and 
procedures, most adjectives with a frequency 
greater than 10 are found in the two corpora (86% 
for disorder and 80% for procedures). However, 
their representation may differ largely across cor-
pora. Examining the contexts of adjectives for Dis-
orders (4978 adjectives with a frequency greater 
than 10), we found that 40% of the adjectives ap-
pear predominantly in MAYO (e.g., mild, possible, 
recent, probable, questionable, greenish), 20% 
predominantly in MEDLINE (e.g., experimental, 
human, neonatal, canine, intracellular), while 40% 
share most of their contexts across the two corpora 
(e.g., acute, chronic, recurrent). The repartition of 
the demodified phrases for Disorders (8263 
phrases with a frequency greater than 10) is some-
what different. 65% of the demodified phrases ap-
pear predominantly in MAYO (e.g., discomfort, 
tenderness, low back pain, chest pain, diarrhea), 
15% predominantly in MEDLINE (e.g., resistance, 
strain, vesicle, hyperthermia), while 20% share 
most of their contexts across the two corpora (e.g., 
disease, lesion, pain, symptom, abnormality). 
6 Applications 
In this section, we briefly examine some of the 
applications that may benefit from a better knowl-
edge of adjectival modification in biomedical dis-
course: genre characterization, terminology and 
ontology acquisition, and information retrieval. 
Genre characterization 
Knowledge about adjectives and demodified 
phrases predominantly associated with one corpus 
may be useful to characterize corpora, and in this 
experiment, genres. Although limited, this study 
suggests, for example, that a clinical corpus con-
tains markers for uncertainty (e.g., possible, prob-
able, questionable) and non-specific symptoms 
(e.g., discomfort, low back pain). On the other 
hand, in a broad bibliographic corpus, precisions 
about organism or age groups must be given (e.g., 
human, canine, neonatal). Interestingly, while the 
term fever is found with no predominance in either 
corpus, its more scientific synonyms hyperthermia 
and pyrexia are used predominantly in MEDLINE. If 
corroborated, this finding may suggest that, al-
though both scientific publications and medical 
records are geared toward peers, the language used 
in scientific publications tends to be more special-
ized. 
Terminology and ontology acquisition 
The method described in this paper constitutes a 
useful technique for adapting existing terminol-
ogies and ontologies with empirically derived 
terms from a new subdomain. First, demodified 
phrases are more likely to be mapped to another 
corpus. And second, because adjectival modifica-
tion often denotes a hyponymic relation between a 
phrase without modifier and a modified phrase, the 
modified phrase can be linked as a candidate hy-
ponym to the phrase without modifier 
(Bodenreider et al, 2002). 
This approach could be used, for example, for 
adapting biomedical terminologies to subtle clini-
cal nuances. When used with exactly the same 
subdomain the existing terminology comes from, 
this technique could enable regular updates of the 
terminology provided that current textual data is 
used for phrase extraction. 
The approach is currently limited to simple ad-
jectival modification; however, this is a self-
imposed limitation. Theoretically, the same meth-
odology can be adapted to work on nominal, 
prepositional phrase and other types of modifica-
tion. 
Information retrieval 
Terminologies as well as ontologies are frequently 
used for information or document retrieval in the 
domains for which such terminologies or ontolo-
gies are available. Medicine is one such domain 
where there are numerous terminological re-
sources. Integrated in a system such as the UMLS, 
these resources provide, for example, many syno-
nyms for each concept, increasing the chances of 
retrieving documents from a given term. However, 
most terms in these resources are pre-coordinated 
and may not include all the variants needed in 
various contexts. Moreover, most terms are noun 
phrases and, while synonyms are often given for 
nouns, it may not be the case for their modifiers. 
For example, while the various synonyms for fever 
(e.g., hyperthermia and pyrexia) are present in the 
UMLS, there is no greenish variant for green spu-
tum. Nor can there systematically be a variant de-
noting uncertainty. Therefore, identifying classes 
of adjectives that can be either ignored (e.g., uncer-
tainty markers) or mapped to other adjectives (e.g., 
greenish to green) would increase the performance 
of information retrieval systems operating on clini-
cal corpora. In light of these findings, existing ter-
minologies and ontologies can provide a core of 
medical concepts common to most subdomains; 
whereas the methodology described here can be 
used to tailor the general-purpose terminological 
resources to accommodate subdomain-specific 
terminology services. 
7 Conclusions 
In conclusion, adjectival modification plays an im-
portant role in biomedical texts, and knowledge 
about this phenomenon can be exploited in appli-
cations such as the retrieval of biomedical docu-
ments and for developing terminology services in 
the biomedical domain. 
In the future, we would like to identify patterns 
in biomedical terms and phrases based, in part, on 
classes of adjectival modifiers. Creating such a 
model for terms would constitute a generative ap-
proach to biomedical terminology, contrasting with 
the lists of precoordinated terms populating most 
terminology systems in the biomedical domain. 
References 
Bodenreider, O., Burgun, A., and Rindflesch, T. C. 
(2001). Lexically-suggested hyponymic relations 
among medical terms and their representation in the 
UMLS. Proceedings of TIA'2001 "Terminology and 
Artificial Intelligence", 11-21. 
Bodenreider, O., Rindflesch, T. C., and Burgun, A. 
(2002). Unsupervised, corpus-based method for ex-
tending a biomedical terminology. Proceedings of 
the ACL'2002 Workshop "Natural Language Proc-
essing in the Biomedical Domain", 53-60. 
Chute, C. G., and Elkin, P. L. (1997). A clinically de-
rived terminology: qualification to reduction. Proc 
AMIA Annu Fall Symp, 570-574. 
Cutting, D. R., Kupiec, J., Pedersen, J. O., and Sibun, P. 
(1992). A practical part-of-speech tagger. Proceed-
ings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing, 133-140. 
Fellbaum, C. (1993). Five Papers on WordNet: Adjec-
tives in Wordnet, D. Gross, ed. 
McCray, A. T., Burgun, A., and Bodenreider, O. (2001). 
Aggregating UMLS semantic types for reducing 
conceptual complexity. Medinfo 10, 216-220. 
Raskin, V., and Niernburg, S. (1995). Lexical Semantics 
of Adjectives: A Microtheory of Adjectival Meaning. 
Memoranda In Cognitive and Computer Science 
MCCS-95-288. 
Raskin, V., and Niernburg, S. (1996). Adjectival Modi-
fication in Text Meaning Representation. Proceed-
ings of COLING '96, 842-847. 
Rindflesch, T. C., Rajan, J. V., and Hunter, L. (2000). 
Extracting molecular binding relationships from 
biomedical text. In "Proceedings of the 6th Applied 
Natural Language Processing Conference" (San 
Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers), pp. 188-
195. 
Srinivasan, S., Rindflesch, T. C., Hole, W. T., Aronson, 
A. R., and Mork, J. G. (2002). Finding UMLS 
Metathesaurus concepts in MEDLINE. Proc AMIA 
Symp, 727-731. 
 
