Examining the consensus between human summaries: initial
experiments with factoid analysis
Hans van Halteren
Department of Language and Speech
University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University, UK
Abstract
We present a new approach to summary evaluation
which combines two novel aspects, namely (a) con-
tent comparison between gold standard summary
and system summary via factoids, a pseudo-semantic
representation based on atomic information units
which can be robustly marked in text, and (b) use
of a gold standard consensus summary, in our case
based on 50 individual summaries of one text. Even
though future work on more than one source text is
imperative, our experiments indicate that (1) rank-
ing with regard to a single gold standard summary is
insufficient as rankings based on any two randomly
chosen summaries are very dissimilar (correlations
average ? = 0.20), (2) a stable consensus summary
can only be expected if a larger number of sum-
maries are collected (in the range of at least 30-40
summaries), and (3) similarity measurement using
unigrams shows a similarly low ranking correlation
when compared with factoid-based ranking.
1 Introduction
It is an understatement to say that measuring the
quality of summaries is hard. In fact, there is unan-
imous consensus in the summarisation community
that evaluation of summaries is a monstrously diffi-
cult task. In the past years, there has been quite a
lot of summarisation work that has effectively aimed
at finding viable evaluation strategies (Spa?rck Jones,
1999; Jing et al, 1998; Donaway et al, 2000). Large-
scale conferences like SUMMAC (Mani et al, 1999)
and DUC (2002) have unfortunately shown weak re-
sults in that current evaluation measures could not
distinguish between automatic summaries ? though
they are effective enough to distinguish them from
human-written summaries.
In principle, the best way to evaluate a summary
is to try to perform the task for which the sum-
mary was meant in the first place, and measure the
quality of the summary on the basis of degree of
success in executing the task. However, such extrin-
sic evaluations are so time-consuming to set up that
they cannot be used for the day-to-day evaluation
needed during system development. So in practice,
a method for intrinsic evaluation is needed, where
the properties of the summary itself are examined,
independent of its application.
We think one of the reasons for the difficulty of an
intrinsic evaluation is that summarisation has to call
upon at least two hard subtasks: selection of infor-
mation and production of new text. Both tasks are
known from various NLP fields (e.g. information re-
trieval and information extraction for selection; gen-
eration and machine translation (MT) for produc-
tion) to be not only hard to execute, but also hard to
evaluate. This is caused for a large part by the fact
that in both cases there is no single ?best? result, but
rather various ?good? results. It is hence no won-
der that the evaluation of summarisation, combining
these two, is even harder. The general approach for
intrinsic evaluations, then (Mani, 2001), is to sepa-
rate the evaluation of the form of the text (quality)
and its information content (informativeness).
In this paper, we will focus on the latter, the in-
trinsic evaluation of informativeness, and we will ad-
dress two aspects: the (in)sufficiency of the single
human summary to measure against, and the infor-
mation unit on which similarity measures are based.
1.1 Gold standards
In various NLP fields, such as POS tagging, systems
are tested by way of comparison against a ?gold stan-
dard?, a manually produced result which is supposed
to be the ?correct?, ?true? or ?best? result. This
presupposes, however, that there is a single ?best?
result. In summarisation there appears to be no ?one
truth?, as is evidenced by a low agreement between
humans in producing gold standard summaries by
sentence selection (Rath et al, 1961; Jing et al,
1998; Zechner, 1996), and low overlap measures be-
tween humans when gold standards summaries are
created by reformulation in the summarisers? own
words (e.g. the average overlap for the 542 single
document summary pairs in DUC-02 was only about
47%).
But even though the non-existence of any one gold
standard is generally acknowledged in the summari-
sation community, actual practice nevertheless ig-
nores this. Comparisons against a single gold stan-
dard are widely used, due to the expense of compil-
ing summary gold standards and the lack of compos-
ite measures for comparison to more than one gold
standard.
In a related field, information retrieval (IR), the
problem of subjectivity of relevance judgements is
circumvented by extensive sampling: many differ-
ent queries are collected to level out the difference
humans have in suggesting queries and in select-
ing relevant documents. While relevance judgements
between humans remain different, Voorhees (2000)
shows that the relative rankings of systems are nev-
ertheless stable across annotators, which means that
meaningful IR measures have been found despite the
inherent subjectivity of relevance judgements.
Similarly, in MT, the recent Bleu measure also
uses the idea that one gold standard is not enough.
In an experiment, Papineni et al (2001) based an
evaluation on a collection of four reference trans-
lations of 40 general news stories and showed the
evaluation to be comparable to human judgement.
Lin and Hovy (2002) examine the use of a multi-
ple gold standard for summarisation evaluation, and
conclude ?we need more than one model summary
although we cannot estimate how many model sum-
maries are required to achieve reliable automated
summary evaluation?. We explore the differences
and similarities between various human summaries
in order to create a basis for such an estimate, and as
a side-effect, also re-examine the degree of difference
between the use of a single summary gold standard
and the use of a compound gold standard.
1.2 Similarity measures
The second aspect we examine is the similarity
measure to be used for gold standard comparison.
In principle, the comparison can be done via co-
selection of extracted sentences (Rath et al, 1961;
Jing et al, 1998; Zechner, 1996), by string-based sur-
face measures (Lin and Hovy, 2002; Saggion et al,
2002), or by subjective judgements of the amount
of information overlap (DUC, 2002). The rationale
for using information overlap judgement as the main
evaluation metric for DUC is the wish to measure
the meaning of sentences rather than use surface-
based similarity such as co-selection (which does not
even take identical information expressed in different
sentences into account) and string-based measures.
In the DUC competitions, assessors judge the infor-
mational overlap between ?model units? ( elemen-
tary discourse units (EDUs), i.e. clause-like units,
taken from the gold standard summary) and ?peer
units? (sentences taken from the participating sum-
maries) on the basis of the question: ?How much
of the information in a model unit is contained in a
peer unit: all of it, most, some, any, or none.? This
overlap judgement is done for each system-produced
summary, and weighted recall measures report how
much gold standard information is present in the
summaries.
However, Lin and Hovy (2002) report low agree-
ment for two tasks: producing the human summaries
(around 40%), and assigning information overlap be-
tween them. In those cases where annotators had
to judge a pair consisting of a gold standard sen-
tence and a system sentence more than once (be-
cause different systems returned the same sentence),
they agreed with their own prior judgement in only
82% of the cases. This relatively low intra-annotator
agreement points to the fact that the overlap judge-
ment remains a subjective task where judges will
disagree. Lin and Hovy show the instability of the
evaluation, expressed in system rankings.
We propose a gold standard comparison based
on factoids, a pseudo-semantic representation of the
text, which measures information rather than string
similarity, like DUC, but which is more objective
than DUC-style information overlap judgement.
2 Data and factoid annotation
Our goal is to compare the information content of
different summaries of the same text. In this ini-
tial investigation we decided to focus on a single
text. The text used for the experiment is a BBC
report on the killing of the Dutch politician Pim
Fortuyn. It is about 600 words long, and contains
a mix of factual information and personal reactions.
Our guidelines asked the human subjects to write
generic summaries of roughly 100 words. We asked
them to formulate the summary in their own words,
so that we can also see which different textual forms
are produced for the same information.
Knowledge about the variability of expression is
important both for evaluation and system building,
and particularly so in in multi-document summarisa-
tion, where redundant information is likely to occur
in different textual forms.
We used two types of human summarisers. The
largest group consisted of Dutch students of English
and of Business Communications (with English as
a chosen second language). Of the 60 summaries
we received, we had to remove 20. Summaries were
removed if it was obvious from the summary that
the student had insufficient skill in English or if the
word count was too high (above 130 words). A sec-
ond group consisted of 10 researchers, who are either
native or near-native English speakers. With this
group there were no problems with language, for-
mat or length, and we could use all 10 summaries.
Our total number of summaries was thus 50.
2.1 The factoid as atomic information units
We use atomic semantic units called factoids to rep-
resent the meaning of a sentence. For instance, we
represent the sentence
The police have arrested a white Dutch man.
by the union of the following factoids:
FP20 A suspect was arrested
FP21 The police did the arresting
FP24 The suspect is white
FP25 The suspect is Dutch
FP26 The suspect is male
Note that in this case, factoids correspond to ex-
pressions in a FOPL-style semantics, which are com-
positionally interpreted. However, we define atom-
icity as a concept which depends on the set of sum-
maries we work with. If a certain set of potential
factoids always occurs together, this set of factoids
is treated as one factoid, because differentiation of
this set would not help us in distinguishing the sum-
maries. If we had found, e.g., that there is no sum-
mary that mentions only one of FP25 and FP26,
those factoids would be combined into one new fac-
toid ?FP27 The suspect is a Dutch man?.
Our definition of atomicity means that the
?amount? of information associated with one factoid
can vary from a single word to an entire sentence.
An example for a large chunk of information that
occurred atomically in our texts was the fact that
the victim wanted to become PM (FV71), a factoid
which covers an entire sentence. On the other hand,
a single word may contain several factoids. The word
?gunman? leads to two factoids: ?FP24 The perpe-
trator is male? and ?FA20 A gun was used in the
attack?.
The advantage of our functional, summary-set-
dependent definition of atomicity is that the defi-
nition of what counts as a factoid is more objec-
tive than if factoids had to be invented by intuition,
which is hard. One possible disadvantage of our def-
inition of atomicity (which is dependent on a given
set of summaries) is that the set of factoids used
may have to be adjusted if further summaries are
added to the collection. In practice, for a fixed set
of summaries for experiments, this is less of an issue.
We decompose meanings into separate (composi-
tionally interpreted) factoids, if there are mentions
in our texts which imply information overlap. If
one summary contains ?was murdered? and another
?was shot dead?, we can identify the factoids
FA10 There was an attack
FA40 The victim died
FA20 A gun was used
The first summary contains only the first two fac-
toids, whereas the second contains all three. That
way, the semantic similarity between related words
can be expressed.
2.2 Compositionality, generalisation and
factuality
The guidelines for manual annotation of summaries
with factoids stated that only factoids which are
explicitly expressed in the text should be marked.
When we identified factoids in our actual summary
collection, most factoids turned out to be indepen-
dent of each other, i.e. the union of the factoids can
be compositionally interpreted. However, there are
relations between factoids which are not as straight-
forward. For instance, in the case of ?FA21 Mul-
tiple shots were fired? and ?FA22 Six shots were
fired?, FA22 implies FA21; any attempt to express
the relationship between the factoids in a composi-
tional way would result in awkward factoids. We
accept that there are factoids which are most natu-
rally expressed as generalisations of other factoids,
and record for each factoid a list of factoids that are
more general than it is, so that we can include these
related factoids as well. In one view of our data, if a
summary states FA22, FA21 is automatically added.
In addition to generality, there are two further
complicated phenomena we had to deal with. The
first one is real inference, rather than generalisation,
as in the following cases:
FL52 The scene of the murder had tight security
checks
FL51 The scene of the murder was difficult to
get into
FL50 It is unclear how the perpetrator got to
the victim
FL52 implies (in the sense of real inference) FL51,
which in turn implies FL50. We again record infer-
ence relations and automatically compute the transi-
tive closure of all inferences, but we do not currently
formally distinguish them from the simpler general-
isation relations.
The second phenomenon is the description of peo-
ple?s opinions. In our source document, quotations
of the reactions of several politicians were given. In
the summaries, our subjects often generalised these
reactions and produced statements such as
Dutch as well as international politicians have expressed
their grief and disbelief.
As more than one entity can be reported as saying
the same thing, straightforward factoid union is not
powerful enough to accurately represent the attri-
bution of opinions, as our notation does not contain
variables for discourse referents and quoted state-
ments. We therefore revert to a separate set of fac-
toids, which are multiplied-out factoids that com-
bine the statement (what is being said) together with
a description of who said it. Elements of the descrip-
tion can be interpreted in a compositional manner.
For instance, the above sentence is expressed in
our notation as
OG10 Grief was expressed
OG60 Dutch persons or organizations expressed
grief
OG62 International persons or organizations
expressed grief
OG40 Politicians expressed grief
OS10 Disbelief was expressed
OS60 Dutch persons or organizations expressed
disbelief
OS62 International persons or organizations
expressed disbelief
OS40 Politicians expressed disbelief
Another problem with attribution of opinions is
that there is not always a clear distinction between
fact and opinion. For instance, the following sen-
tence is presented as opinion in the original ?Geral-
dine Coughlan in the Hague says it would have been
difficult to gain access to the media park.? Never-
theless, our summarisers often decided to represent
such opinions as facts, ie. as ?The media park was
difficult to gain entry to.? ? in fact, in our data,
every summary containing this factoid presents it
as fact. For now, we have taken the pragmatic ap-
proach that the classification of factoids into factual
and opinion factoids is determined by the actual rep-
resentation of the information in the summaries (cf.
FL51 above, where the first letter ?F? stands for
factual, the first letter ?O? for opinion).
The factoid approach can capture much finer
shades of meaning differentiations than DUC-style
information overlap does ? in an example from Lin
and Hovy (2002), an assessor judged some content
overlap between ?Thousands of people are feared
dead? and ?3,000 and perhaps ... 5,000 people have
been killed.? In our factoid representation, a dis-
tinction between ?killed? and ?feared dead? would
be made, and different numbers of people mentioned
would have been differentiated.
2.3 Factoid annotation
The authors have independently marked the pres-
ence of factoids in all summaries in the collection.
Factoid annotation of a 100 word summary takes
roughly half an hour. Even with only short guide-
lines, the agreement on which factoids are present
in a summary appears to be high. The recall of an
individual annotator with regard to the consensus
annotation is about 96%, and precision about 97%.
This means that we can work with the current fac-
toid presence table with reasonable confidence.
Whereas single summaries contain between 32 and
55 factoids, the collection as a whole contains 256
different factoids. Figure 1 shows the growth of the
number of factoids with the size of the collection (1
to 40 summaries). We assume that the curve is Zip-
fian. This observation implies that larger numbers
of summaries are necessary if we are looking for a
definitive factoid list of a document.
Figure 1: Average number of factoids in collections
of size 1?40
The maximum number of possible factoids is not
bounded by the number of factoids occurring in the
document itself. As we explained above, factoids
come into existence because they are observed in the
collection of summaries, and summaries sometimes
contain factoids which are not actually present in the
document. Examples of such factoids are ?FP31 The
suspect has made no statement?, which is true but
not stated in the source text, and ?FP23 The suspect
was arrested on the scene?, which is not even true.
The reasons for such ?creative? factoids vary from
the expression of the summarisers? personal knowl-
edge or opinion to misinterpretation of the source
text. In total we find 87 such factoids, 51 factual
ones and 36 incorrect generalisations of attribution.
Of the remaining 169 ?correct? factoids, most
(125) are factual. Within these factoids, we find
74 generalisation links. The rest of the factoids con-
cern opinions and their attribution. There are 18
descriptions of opinion, with 11 generalisation links,
and 26 descriptions of attribution, with 16 general-
isation links. For all types, we see that most facts
are being represented at differing levels of generali-
sation. Some of the generalisation links are part of
3- or 4-link hierarchies, e.g. ?FV40 Victim outspo-
ken about/campaigning on immigration issues? (26
mentions) to ?FV41 Victim was anti- immigration?
(23) to ?FV42 Victim wanted to close borders to im-
migration? (9), or ?FV50 Victim outspoken about
race/religion issues? (17 mentions) to ?FV51 Vic-
tim outspoken about Islam/Muslims? (16) to ?FV52
Victim made negative remarks about Islam? (14) to
?FV53 Victim called Islam a backward religion? (9).
It is not surprising that more specific factoids are
less frequent than their generalisations, but we ex-
pect interesting correlations between a factoid?s im-
portance and the degree and shape of the decline
of its generalisation hierarchy, especially where fac-
toids about the attribution of opinion are concerned.
This is an issue for further research.
3 Human summaries as benchmark
for evaluation
If we plan to use human summaries as a refer-
ence point for the evaluation of machine-made sum-
maries, we are assuming that there is some consensus
between the human summarisers as to which infor-
mation is important enough to include in a summary.
Whether such consensus actually exists is uncertain.
In very broad terms, we can distinguish four possible
scenarios:
1. There is a good consensus between all human
summarisers. A large percentage of the factoids
present in the summaries is in fact present in a
large percentage of the summaries. We can de-
termine whether this is so by measuring factoid
overlap.
2. There is no such overall consensus between all
summarisers, but there are subsets of summaris-
ers between whom consensus exists. Each of
these subsets has summarised from a particular
point of view, even though a generic summary
was requested, and the point of view has led
to group consensus. We can determine whether
this is so by doing a cluster analysis on the fac-
toid presence vectors. We should find clusters
if and only if group consensus exists.
3. There is no such thing as overall consensus, but
there is a difference in perceived importance be-
tween the various factoids. We can determine
whether this is the case by examining how often
each factoid is used in the summaries. Factoids
that are more important ought to be included
more often. In that case, it is still possible to
create a consensus-like reference summary for
any desired summary size.
4. There is no difference in perceived importance
of the various factoids at all. Inclusion of fac-
toids in summaries appears to be random.
3.1 Factoid frequency and consensus
We will start by examining whether an importance
hierarchy exists, as this can help us decide between
scenario 1, 3 or 4. If still necessary, we can check for
group consensus later.
If we count how often each factoid is used, it
quickly becomes clear that we do not have to worry
about worst-case scenario 4. There are clear differ-
ences in the frequency of use of the factoids. On
the other hand, scenario 1 does not appear to be
very likely either. There is full consensus on the in-
clusion of only a meager 3 factoids, which can be
summarised in 3 words:
Fortuyn was murdered.
If we accept some disagreement, and take the fac-
toids which occur in at least 90% of the summaries,
this increases the consensus summary to 5 factoids
and 6 words:
Fortuyn, a politician, was shot dead.
Setting our aims ever lower, 75% of the summaries
include 6 further factoids and the summary goes up
to 20 words:
Pim Fortuyn, a Dutch right-wing politician, was shot
dead before the election. A suspect was arrested. Fortuyn
had received threats.
A 50% threshold yields 8 more factoids and the
47-word summary:
Pim Fortuyn, a Dutch right-wing politician, was shot
dead at a radio station in Hilversum. Fortuyn was cam-
paigning on immigration issues and was expected to do
well in the election. He had received threats. There were
shocked reactions. Political campaigning was halted. The
police arrested a man.
If we want to arrive at a 100-word summary (ac-
tually 104), we need to include 26 more factoids, and
we need to allow all factoids which occur in at least
30% of the summaries:
Pim Fortuyn was shot six times and died shortly after-
wards. He was attacked when leaving a radio station in
the (well-secured) media park in Hilversum. The Dutch
far-right politician was campaigning on an anti- immi-
gration ticket and was outspoken about Islam. He was
expected to do well in the upcoming election, getting at
least 15% of the votes. Fortuyn had received threats. He
expected an attack and used bodyguards. Dutch and in-
ternational politicians were shocked and condemned the
attack. The Dutch government called a halt to political
campaigning. The gunman was chased. The police later
arrested a white Dutch man. The motive is unknown.
We conclude that the extreme scenarios, full con-
sensus and full absence of consensus, can be rejected
for this text. This leaves the question whether the
partial consensus takes the form of clusters of con-
senting summarisers.
3.2 Summariser clusters
In order to determine whether the summarisers can
be assigned to groups within which a large amount of
consensus can be found, we turn to statistical tech-
niques. We first form 256-dimensional binary vectors
recording the presence of each of the factoids in each
?2 ?1 0 1 2
?
2
?
1
0
1
2
R001
R002
R003
R004
R005
R006
R007
R008
R009
R010
S001
S002S003
S004
S005
S007
S009
S010
S011S012
S013
S014
S015
S016
S017
S018
S019S023S027
S028S030
S031
S032
S033
S034
S036
S038
S041
S042
S045
S046
S048
S049
S051
S053
S054
S055
S056
S057 S061
Cons
Figure 2: Classical multi-dimensional scaling of dis-
tances between factoid vectors into two dimensions
summariser?s summary. We also added a vector for
the 104-word consensus summary above (?Cons?).
We then calculate the distances between the vari-
ous vectors and use these as input for classical multi-
dimensional scaling. The result of scaling into two
dimensions is shown in Figure 2.
Only a few small clusters appear to emerge. Al-
though we certainly cannot conclude that there are
no clusters, we would have expected more clearly de-
limited groups of summarisers, i.e. different points
of view, if scenario 2 described the actual situation.
For now we will assume that, for this document, sce-
nario 3 is the most likely.
3.3 The consensus summary as an
evaluation tool
Two of the main demands on a gold standard generic
summary for evaluation are: a) that it contains the
information deemed most important in the docu-
ment and b) that two gold standard summaries con-
structed along the same lines lead to the same, or
at least very similar, ranking of a set of summaries
which are evaluated.
If we decide to use a single human summary as
a gold standard, we in fact assume that this hu-
man?s choice of important material is acceptable for
all other summary users, which it the wrong assump-
tion, as the lack of consensus between the various
human summaries shows. We propose that the use
of a reference summary which is based on the factoid
importance hierarchy described above, as it uses a
less subjective indication of the relative importance
of the information units in the text across a popu-
lation of summary writers. The reference summary
would then take the form of a consensus summary,
in our case the 100-word compound summary on the
basis of factoids over the 30% threshold.
The construction of the consensus summary would
indicate that demand a) will be catered for, but we
still have to check demand b). We can do this by
computing rankings based on the F-measure for in-
cluded factoids, and measuring the correlation coef-
ficient ? between them.
As we do not have a large number of automatic
summaries of our text available, we use our 50 hu-
man summaries as data, pretending that they are
summaries we wish to rank (evaluate).
If we compare the rankings on the basis of sin-
gle human summaries as gold standard, it turns out
that the ranking correlation ? between two ?gold?
standards is indeed very low at an average of 0.20
(variation between -0.51 and 0.85). For the consen-
sus summary, we can compare rankings for various
numbers of base summaries. After all, the consensus
summary should improve with the number of con-
tributing base summaries and ought to approach an
ideal consensus summary, which would be demon-
strated by a stabilizing derived ranking.
We investigate if this assumption is correct by cre-
ating pairs of samples of N=5 to 200 base summaries,
drawn (in a way similar to bootstrapping) from our
original sample of 50. For each pair of samples, we
automatically create a pair of consensus summaries
and then determine how well these two agree in their
ranking. Figure 3 shows how ? increases with N
(based on 1000 trials per N). At N=5 and 10, ? has
a still clearly unacceptable average 0.40 or 0.53. The
average reaches 0.80 at 45, 0.90 at 95 and 0.95 at a
staggering 180 base summaries.
We must note, however, that we have to be care-
ful with these measurements, since 40 of our 50
starting summaries were made by less experienced
non-natives. In fact, if we bootstrap pairs of N=10
base summary samples (100 trials) on just the 10
higher-quality summaries (created by natives and
near-natives), we get an average ? of 0.74. The
same experiment on 10 different summaries from
the other 40 (100 trials for choosing the 10, and for
each 100 trials to estimate average ?) yields average
??s ranging from 0.55 to 0.63. So clearly the differ-
ence in experience has its effect. Even so, even the
?better? summaries lead to a ranking correlation of
?=0.74 at N=10, which still is much lower than we
would like to see. We estimate that with this type of
summaries an acceptably stable ranking (? around
0.90) would be reached somewhere between 30 and
40 summaries.
3.4 Using unigrams instead of factoids
Apart from the need for human summaries, the
factoid-based comparisons have another problem,
5 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 110 125 140 155 170 185 200
?0
.2
0.
0
0.
2
0.
4
0.
6
0.
8
1.
0
Figure 3: Correlation coefficient ? between rankings
for 50 summaries on the basis of two consensus sum-
maries, each based on a size N base summary collec-
tion, for N between 5 and 200
viz. the need for human interpretation when map-
ping summaries to factoid lists. The question is
whether simpler measures might not be equally in-
formative. We investigate this using unigram over-
lap, following Papineni et al (2001) in their sug-
gestion that unigrams best represent contents, while
longer n-grams best represent fluency.
Again, we reuse our 50 summaries as summaries to
be evaluated. For each of these summaries, we cal-
culate the F-measure for the included factoids with
regard to the consensus summary shown above. In
a similar fashion, we build a consensus unigram list,
containing the 103 unigrams that occur in at least
11 summaries, and calculate the F-measure for un-
igrams. The two measures are plotted against each
other in Figure 4.
Some correlation is present (r = 0.48 and Spear-
man?s ranking correlation ? = 0.45), but there are
clearly profound differences. If we look at the rank-
ings produced from these two F-measures, S054, on
position 16 on the basis of factoids, drops to posi-
tion 37 on the basis of unigrams. S046, on the other
hand, climbs from 42nd to 4th place when consid-
ered by unigrams instead of factoids. Apart from
these extreme cases, these are also clear differences
in the top-5 for the two measurements: S030, S028,
R001, S003 and S023 are the top-5 when measuring
with factoids, whereas S032, R002, S030, S046 and
S028 are the top-5 when measuring with unigrams.
It would seem that unigrams, though they are much
cheaper, are not a viable substitute for factoids.
0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
0.
40
0.
45
0.
50
0.
55
0.
60
F(factoids)
F(
un
ig
ra
m
s)
R001
R002
R003
R004
R005
R006
R007
R008
R009
R010 S001
S002
S003
S004
S005
S007 S009
S010
S011
S012
S013
S014
S015
S016
S017
S018
S019
S023
S027
S028
S030
S031
S032
S033
S034
S036
S038
S041 S042
S045
S046
S048
S049
S051
S053
S054
S055
S056
S057
S061
Figure 4: F-measures of summarisers with regard to
consensus data: factoid-based versus unigram-based
4 Discussion and future work
From our experiences so far, it seems that both our
innovations, viz. using multiple summaries and mea-
suring with factoids, appear to be worth pursuing
further. We summarise the results for our test text
in the following:
? We observe a very wide selection of factoids in
the summaries, only few of which are included
by all summarisers.
? The number of factoids found if new summaries
are considered does not tail off.
? There is a clear importance hierarchy of fac-
toids which allows us to compile a consensus
summary.
? If single summaries are used as gold standard,
the correlation between rankings based on two
such gold standard summaries is low.
? We could not find any large clusters of highly
correlated summarisers in our data.
? Stability with respect to the consensus sum-
mary can only be expected if a larger number
of summaries are collected (in the range of at
least 30-40 summaries).
? A unigram-based measurement shows only low
correlation with the factoid-based measure-
ment.
The information that is gained through multi-
ple summaries with factoid-similarity is insufficiently
approximated with the currently used substitutes,
as the observations above show. However, what we
have described here must clearly be seen as an initial
experiment, and there is yet much to be done.
First of all, the notation of the factoid (currently
flat atoms) needs to be made more expressive, e.g.
by the addition of variables for discourse referents
and events, which will make factoids more similar
to FOPL expressions, and/or by the use of a typing
mechanism to indicate the various forms of infer-
ence/implication.
We also need to identify a good weighting scheme
to be used in measuring similarity of factoid vec-
tors. The weighting should correct for the variation
between factoids in information content, for their
different position along an inference chain, and pos-
sibly for their position in the summary. It should
also be able to express some notion of importance
of the factoids, e.g. as measured by the number of
summaries containing the factoid.
Something else to investigate is the presence and
distribution of factoids, types of factoids and rela-
tions between factoids in summaries and summary
collections. We have the strong feeling that some
of our observations were tightly linked to the type
of text we used. We would like to build a balanced
corpus of texts, of various subject areas and lengths,
and their summaries, at several different lengths and
possibly even multi-document, so that we can study
this factor. An open question is how many sum-
maries we should try to get for each of the texts in
the corpus. It is unlikely we will be able to collect
50 summaries for each new text. Furthermore, the
texts of the corpus should also be summarised by as
many machine summarisers as possible, so that we
can test ranking these on the basis of factoids, in a
realistic framework.
A final line of investigation is searching for ways to
reduce the cost of factoid analysis. The first reason
why this analysis is currently expensive is the need
for large summary bases for consensus summaries.
There is yet hope that this can be circumvented by
using larger numbers of texts, as is the case in IR
and in MT, where discrepancies prove to average out
when large enough datasets are used. Papineni et al,
e.g., were able to show that the ranking with their
Bleu measure of the five evaluated translators (two
human and three machine) remained stable if only
a single reference translation was used, suggesting
that ?we may use a big corpus with a single reference
translation, provided that the translations are not all
from the same translator?. Possibly a similar aver-
aging effect will occur in the evaluation of summari-
sation so that smaller summary bases can be used.
The second reason is the need for human annotation
of factoids. Although simple unigram-based meth-
ods prove insufficient, we will hopefully be able to
come a long way in automating factoid identification
on the basis of existing NLP techniques, combined
with information gained about factoids in research
as described in the previous paragraph. All in all,
the use of consensus summaries and factoid analy-
sis, even though expensive to set up for the moment,
provides a promising alternative which could well
bring us closer to a solution to several problems in
summarisation evaluation.
References
Donaway, Robert L., Kevin W. Drummey, and Laura A.
Mather. 2000. A comparison of rankings produced by
summarization evaluation measures. In Proceedings
of the ANLP/NAACL 2000 Workshop on Automatic
Summarization.
DUC. 2002. Document Understanding Conference
(DUC). Electronic proceedings, http://www-nlpir.
nist.gov/projects/duc/pubs.html.
Jing, Hongyan, Regina Barzilay, Kathleen R. McKe-
own, and Michael Elhadad. 1998. Summarization
Evaluation Methods: Experiments and Analysis. In
Dragomir R. Radev and Eduard H. Hovy, eds., Work-
ing Notes of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelli-
gent Text Summarization, 60?68.
Lin, Chin-Yew, and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Manual and
automatic evaluation of summaries. In DUC 2002.
Mani, Inderjeet. 2001. Automatic Summarization. John
Benjamins.
Mani, Inderjeet, Therese Firmin, David House, Gary
Klein, Beth Sundheim, and Lynette Hirschman. 1999.
The TIPSTER Summac Text Summarization Evalu-
ation. In Proceedings of EACL-99 , 77?85.
Papineni, K, S. Roukos, T Ward, and W-J. Zhu. 2001.
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of ACL-02 , 311?318.
Rath, G.J, A. Resnick, and T. R. Savage. 1961. The
Formation of Abstracts by the Selection of Sentences.
American Documentation 12(2): 139?143.
Saggion, Horacio, Dragomir Radev, Simone Teufel, Wai
Lam, and Stephanie M. Strassel. 2002. Developing
Infrastructure for the Evaluation of Single and Multi-
document Summarization Systems in a Cross-lingual
Environment. In Proceedings of LREC 2002 , 747?754.
Spa?rck Jones, Karen. 1999. Automatic Summaris-
ing: Factors and Directions. In Inderjeet Mani and
Mark T. Maybury, eds., Advances in Automatic Text
Summarization, 1?12. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Voorhees, Ellen. 2000. Variations in relevance judge-
ments and the measurement of retrieval effectiveness.
Information Processing and Management 36: 697?
716.
Zechner, Klaus. 1996. Fast Generation of Abstracts from
General Domain Text Corpora by Extracting Relevant
Sentences. In Proceedings of COLING-96 , 986?989.
