Issues in Pre- and Post-translation Document Expansion:
Untranslatable Cognates and Missegmented Words
Gina-Anne Levow
University of Chicago
1100 E. 58th St., Chicago, IL 60637, USA
levow@cs.uchicago.edu
Abstract
Query expansion by pseudo-relevance
feedback is a well-established technique
in both mono- and cross- lingual informa-
tion retrieval, enriching and disambiguat-
ing the typically terse queries provided
by searchers. Comparable document-side
expansion is a relatively more recent de-
velopment motivated by error-prone tran-
scription and translation processes in spo-
ken document and cross-language re-
trieval. In the cross-language case, one
can perform expansion before translation,
after translation, and at both points. We
investigate the relative impact of pre- and
post- translation document expansion for
cross-language spoken document retrieval
in Mandarin Chinese. We find that post-
translation expansion yields a highly sig-
nificant improvement in retrieval effec-
tiveness, while improvements due to pre-
translation expansion alone or in combina-
tion do not reach significance. We identify
two key factors of segmentation and trans-
lation in Chinese orthography that limit
the effectiveness of pre-translation expan-
sion in the Chinese-English case, while
post-translation expansion yields its full
benefit.
1 Introduction
Information retrieval aims to match the informa-
tion need expressed by the searcher in the query
with concepts expressed in documents. This match-
ing process is complicated by the variety of dif-
ferent ways - different terms - available to express
these concepts and information needs. In addition,
this matching process is dramatically complicated
in cross-language and spoken document retrieval
by the need to match expressions across languages
and typically using error-prone processes such as
translation and automatic speech recognition tran-
scription. To compensate for this variation in ex-
pression of underlying concepts, researchers have
developed the technique of pseudo-relevance feed-
back whereby the information representation - query
or document - is enriched with highly selective,
topically related terms from a large collection of
comparable documents. Such expansion techniques
have proved useful across the range of information
retrieval applications from mono-lingual to multi-
lingual, from text to speech, and from queries to doc-
uments.
Expansion in the context of cross-language in-
formation retrieval (CLIR) is particularly interesting
as it presents multiple opportunities for improving
retrieval effectiveness. The pseudo-relevance feed-
back process can be applied, depending on the re-
trieval architecture, before translating the query, af-
ter translating the query, before translating the doc-
ument, after translating the document, or at some
subset of these points, though not all combinations
are reasonable. While pre- and post-translation ex-
pansion have been well-studied for a query transla-
tion architecture in European languages, as we de-
scribe in more detail below, these effects are less
well-understood on the document side, especially
for Asian languages.
In this paper, we compare the effects of pre-
translation, post-translation, and combined pre-
and post-translation document expansion for cross-
language retrieval using English queries to retrieve
spoken documents in Mandarin Chinese. We iden-
tify not only significant enhancements to retrieval
effectiveness for post-translation document expan-
sion, but also key contrasts with prior work on query
translation and expansion, caused by certain char-
acteristics of Mandarin Chinese, shared by many
Asian languages, including issues of segmentation
and orthography.
2 Related Work
This work draws on prior research in pseudo-
relevance feedback for both queries and documents.
2.1 Pre- and Post-translation Query Expansion
In pre-translation query expansion, the goal is both
that of monolingual query expansion - providing ad-
ditional terms to refine the query and to enhance
the probability of matching the terminology cho-
sen by the authors of the document - and to pro-
vide additional terms to limit the possibility of fail-
ing to translate a concept in the query simply be-
cause the particular term is not present in the trans-
lation lexicon. (Ballesteros and Croft, 1997) eval-
uated pre- and post-translation query expansion in
a Spanish-English cross-language information re-
trieval task and found that combining pre- and post-
translation query expansion improved both precision
and recall with pre-translation expansion improving
both precision and recall, and post-translation ex-
pansion enhancing precision. (McNamee and May-
field, 2002)?s dictionary ablation experiments on the
effect of translation resource size and pre- and post-
translation query expansion effectiveness demon-
strated the key and dominant role of pre-translation
expansion in providing translatable terms. If too few
terms are translated, post-translation expansion can
provide little improvement.
2.2 Document Expansion
The document expansion approach was first pro-
posed by (Singhal et al, 1999) in the context of
spoken document retrieval. Since spoken document
retrieval involves search of error-prone automatic
speech recognition transcriptions, Singhal et alin-
troduced document expansion as a way of recover-
ing those words that might have been in the original
broadcast but that had been misrecognized. They
speculated that correctly recognized terms would
yield a topically coherent transcript, while the spo-
radic errors would be from a random distribution.
Enriching the documents with highly selective terms
drawn from highly ranked documents retrieved by
using the document itself as a query yielded re-
trieval effectiveness that improved not only over the
original errorful transcription but also over a perfect
manual transcription. (Levow and Oard, 2000) ap-
plied post-translation document expansion to both
spoken documents and newswire text in Mandarin-
English multi-lingual retrieval and found some im-
provements in retrieval effectiveness. (Levow,
2003) evaluated multi-scale units (words and bi-
grams) for post-transcription expansion of Mandarin
spoken documents, finding the significant improve-
ments for expansion with word units using bigram
based indexing.
3 Experimental Configuration
Here we describe the basic experimental configu-
ration under which contrastive document expansion
experiments were carried out.
3.1 Experimental Collection
We used the Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT)
Collection for this work. TDT is an evaluation pro-
gram where participating sites tackle tasks as such
identifying the first time a story is reported on a
given topic or grouping similar topics from audio
and textual streams of newswire date. In recent
years, TDT has focused on performing such tasks
in both English and Mandarin Chinese.1 The task
that we have performed is not a strict part of TDT
because we are performing retrospective retrieval
which permits knowledge of the statistics for the
entire collection. Nevertheless, the TDT collection
serves as a valuable resource for our work. The
TDT multilingual collection includes English and
Mandarin newswire text as well as (audio) broad-
cast news. For most of the Mandarin audio data,
word-level transcriptions produced by the Dragon
1This year Arabic was added to the languages of interest.
automatic speech recognition system are provided.
All news stories are exhaustively tagged with event-
based topic labels, which serve as the relevance
judgments for performance evaluation of our cross-
language spoken document retrieval work. We used
a subset of the TDT-2 corpus for the experiments re-
ported here.
3.2 Query Formulation
TDT frames the retrieval task as query-by-example,
designating 4 exemplar documents to specify the in-
formation need. For query formulation, we con-
structed a vector of the 180 terms that best distin-
guish the query exemplars from other contempora-
neous (and hopefully not relevant) stories. We used
a   test in a manner similar to that used by Schu?tze
et al(Schu?tze et al, 1995) to select these terms.
The pure    statistic is symmetric, assigning equal
value to terms that help to recognize known rele-
vant stories and those that help to reject the other
contemporaneous stories. We limited our choice to
terms that were positively associated with the known
relevant training stories. For the    computation,
we constructed a set of 996 contemporaneous doc-
uments for each topic by removing the four query
examplars from a topic-dependent set of up to 1000
stories working backwards chronologically from the
last English query example. Additional details may
be found in (Levow and Oard, 2000).
3.3 Document Translation
Our translation strategy implemented a word-for-
word translation approach. For our original
spoken documents, we used the word bound-
aries provided in the baseline recognizer tran-
scripts. We next perform dictionary-based word-
for-word translation, using a bilingual term list
produced by merging the entries from the sec-
ond release of the LDC Chinese-English term list
(http://www.ldc.upenn.edu, (Huang, 1999)) and en-
tries from the CETA file, a large human-readable
Chinese-English dictionary. The resulting term list
contains 195,078 unique Mandarin terms, with an
average of 1.9 known English translations per Man-
darin term. We select the translation with the highest
target language unigram frequency, based on a side
collection in the target language.
3.4 Document Expansion
We implemented document expansion for the VOA
Mandarin broadcast news stories in an effort to par-
tially recover terms that may have been mistran-
scribed. Singhal et al used document expansion for
monolingual speech retrieval (Singhal and Pereira,
1999).
The automatic transcriptions of the VOA Man-
darin broadcast news stories and their word-for-
word translations are an often noisy representation
of the underlying stories. For expansion, the text
of these documents was treated as a query to a
comparable collection (in Mandarin before transla-
tion and English after translation), by simply com-
bining all the terms with uniform weighting. This
query was presented to the InQuery retrieval system
version 3.1pl developed at the University of Mas-
sachusetts (Callan et al, 1992).
Figure 1 depicts the document expansion process.
The use of pre- and post-translation document ex-
pansion components was varied as part of the ex-
perimental suite described below. We selected the
five highest ranked documents from the ranked re-
trieval list. From those five documents, we extracted
the most selective terms and used them to enrich the
original translations of the stories. For this expan-
sion process we first created a list of terms from the
documents where each document contributed one in-
stance of a term to the list. We then sorted the terms
by inverse document frequency (IDF). We next aug-
mented the original documents with these terms
until the document had approximately doubled in
length. Doubling was computed in terms of number
of whitespace delimited units. For Chinese audio
documents, words were identified by the Dragon au-
tomatic speech recognizer as part of the transcription
process. For the Chinese newswire text, segmenta-
tion was performed by the NMSU segmenter ( (Jin,
1998)). The expansion factor chosen here followed
Singhal et als original proposal. A proportional
expansion factor is more desirable than some con-
stant additive number of words or some selectivity
threshold, as it provides a more consistent effect on
documents of varying lengths; an IDF-based thresh-
old, for example, adds disproportionately more new
terms to short original documents than long ones,
outweighing the original content. Prior experiments
indicate little sensitivity to the exact expansion fac-
tor chosen, as long as it is proportional.
This process thus relatively increased the weight
of terms that occurred rarely in the document collec-
tion as a whole but frequently in related documents.
The resulting augmented documents were then in-
dexed by InQuery in the usual way.This expanded
document collection formed the basis for retrieval
using the translated exemplar queries.
The intuition behind document expansion is that
terms that are correctly transcribed will tend to be
topically coherent, while mistranscription will intro-
duce spurious terms that lack topical coherence. In
other words, although some ?noise? terms are ran-
domly introduced, some ?signal? terms will survive.
The introduction of spurious terms degrades ranked
retrieval somewhat, but the adverse effect is limited
by the design of ranking algorithms that give high
scores to documents that contain many query terms.
Because topically related terms are far more likely
to appear together in documents than are spurious
terms, the correctly transcribed terms will have a
disproportionately large impact on the ranking pro-
cess. The highest ranked documents are thus likely
to be related to the correctly transcribed terms, and
to contain additional related terms. For example, a
system might fail to accurately transcribe the name
?Yeltsin? in the context of the (former) ?Russian
Prime Minister?. However, in a large contemporane-
ous text corpus, the correct form of the name will ap-
pear in such document contexts, and relatively rarely
outside of such contexts. Thus, it will be a highly
correlated and highly selective term to be added in
the course of document expansion.
4 Document Expansion Experiments
Our goal is to evaluate the effectiveness of pseudo-
relevance feedback expansion applied at different
stages of document processing and determine what
factors contribute to the any differences in final re-
trieval effectiveness. We consider expansion before
translation, after translation, and at both points. The
expansion process aims to (re)introduce terminology
that could have been used by the author to express
the concepts in the documents. Expansion at differ-
ent stages of processing addresses different causes
of loss or absence of terms. At all points, it can ad-
!"#$%&?
()*+,
#$%&?+-%./)&
0%1$2/1
!"#$%&?
3)4*+356"%1%
7%8186&%+3)&*$1
9:";:&6"
<&):;.:1/
7%81
(%&4+=%2%./6)"
>=0
(&:"1.&6*/6)"
(&:"1.&6?%;
@).$4%"/1
()*+,
!"#$%&?
3)4*+A"B2615
7%8186&%+3)&*$1
(%&4+=%2%./6)"
(&:"12:/%;
@).$4%"/1
(&:"12:/6)"
C&%D/&:"12:/6)"
AE*:"16)"
C)1/D/&:"12:/6)"
AE*:"16)"
Figure 1: Document Expansion Process
dress terminological choice by the author.
Since we are working with automatic transcrip-
tions of spoken documents, pre-translation (post-
transcription) expansion directly addresses term loss
due to substitution or deletion errors in automatic
recognition. In addition, as emphasized by (Mc-
Namee and Mayfield, 2002), pre-translation expan-
sion can be crucial to providing translatable terms so
that there is some material for post-translation index-
ing and matching to operate on. In other words, by
including a wider range of expressions of the docu-
ment concepts, pre-translation expansion can avoid
translation gaps by enhancing the possibility that
some term representing a concept that appears in
the original document will have a translation in the
bilingual term list. Addition of terms can also serve
a disambiguating effect as identified by (Ballesteros
and Croft, 1997).
Post-translation expansion provides an opportu-
nity to address translation gaps even more strongly.
Pre-translation expansion requires that there be
some representation of the document language con-
cept in the term list, whereas post-translation expan-
sion can acquire related terms with no representation
in the translation resources from the query language
side collection. This capability is particularly desir-
able given both the important role of named entities
(e.g. person and organization names) in many re-
trieval activities, in conjunction with their poor cov-
erage in most translation resources. Finally, it pro-
vides the opportunity to introduce additional con-
ceptually related terminology in the query language,
even if the document language form of the term was
not introduced by the original author to enhance the
representation.
We evaluate four document processing configura-
tions:
1. No Expansion
Documents are translated directly as de-
scribed above, based on the provided automatic
speech recognition transcriptions.
2. Pre-translation Expansion
Documents are expanded as described
above, using a contemporaneous Mandarin
newswire text collection from Xinhua and Za-
obao news agencies. These collections are
segmented into words using the NMSU seg-
menter. The resulting documents are translated
as usual. Note that translation requires that the
expansion units be words.
3. Post-translation Expansion
The English document forms produced by
item 1 are expanded using a contemporaneous
collection of English newswire text from the
New York Times and Associated Press (also
part of the TDT-2 corpus).
4. Pre- and Post-translation Expansion
The document forms produced by item 2
are translated in the the usual word-for-word
process. The resulting English text is expanded
as in item 3.
After the above processing, the resulting English
documents are indexed.
4.1 Results
The results of these different expansion configura-
tions appear in Figure 2. We observe that both post-
translation expansion and combined pre- and post-
translation document expansion yield highly sig-
nificant improvements (Wilcoxon signed rank test,
two-tailed,  
	 ) in retrieval effectiveness
over the unexpanded case. In contrast, although
pre-translation expansion yields an 18% relative in-
crease in mean average precision, this improvement
does not reach significance. The combination of pre-
and post-translation expansion increases effective-
ness by only 3% relative over post-translation ex-
pansion, but 33% relative over pre-translation ex-
pansion alone. This combination of pre- and post-
translation expansion significantly improves over
pre-translation document expansion alone (  

 ).
5 Discussion
These results clearly demonstrate the significant
utility of post-translation document expansion for
English-Mandarin CLIR with Mandarin spoken doc-
uments, in contrast to pre-translation expansion. Not
only do these results extend our understanding of the
interactions of translation and expansion, but they
contrast dramatically with prior work on translation
Document Expansion
None Pre Post Pre+Post
0.39 0.46 0.59 0.61
Figure 2: Retrieval effectiveness of document ex-
pansion
and query expansion - in particular, with the (Mc-
Namee and Mayfield, 2002) work emphasizing the
primary importance of pre-translation expansion.
Two main factors contribute to this contrast: first,
differences between languages, and second, differ-
ences between documents and queries. The charac-
teristics of the document and query languages play a
crucial role in determining the effectiveness of pre-
and post-translation document expansion. In partic-
ular, the orthography of Mandarin Chinese and the
difference in writing systems between the English
queries and Mandarin documents affect the expan-
sion process. If one examines the terms contributed
by post-translation expansion, one can quickly ob-
serve the utility of the enriching terms. For in-
stance in a document about the Iraqi oil embargo,
one finds the names of Tariq Aziz and Saddam; in an
article about the former Soviet republic of Georgia,
one finds the name of former president Zviad Gam-
sakhurdia. These and many of the other useful ex-
pansion terms do not appear anywhere in the transla-
tion resource. Even if these terms were proposed by
pre-translation expansion or existed in the original
document, they would not be available in the trans-
lated result. These named entities are highly useful
in many information retrieval activities but are no-
toriously absent from translation resources. For lan-
guages with different orthographies, these terms can
not match as cognates but must be explicitly trans-
lated or transliterated. Thus, these terms are only
useful for enrichment when the translation barrier
has already been passed. In contrast, the major-
ity of the query translation experiments that demon-
strate the utility of pre-translation expansion have
been performed on European language pairs that
share a common alphabet, making names found at
any stage of expansion available for matching as
cognates in retrieval even when no explicit transla-
tion is available. Recent side experiments on pre-
and post-translation query expansion on the English-
Chinese pair show a similar pattern of effectiveness
for post-translation expansion over pre-translation
expansion (Levow et al, Under Review).
A further complication is caused by the fact that
Mandarin Chinese is written without white space
separating words. As a result, some segmentation
process must be performed to identify words for
translation, even though indexing and retrieval can
be performed effectively on   -gram units (Meng et
al., 2001). This segmentation process typically re-
lies on a list of terms that may appear in legal seg-
mentations. Just as in the case of translation, these
term lists often lack good coverage of proper names.
Thus, these terms may not be identified for trans-
lation, expansion, or even transcription by an auto-
matic speech recognition system that also depends
on word lists as models. These constraints limit
the effectiveness of pre-translation expansion. In
post-translation expansion, however, these problems
are much less significant. In English, white-space
delimited terms are available and largely sufficient
for retrieval (especially after stemming). Even with
multi-word concepts as in the name examples above,
the cooccurrence of these terms in expansion docu-
ments makes it likely that they will cooccur in the
list of enriching terms as well, though perhaps not in
the same order. In Chinese or other typically unseg-
mented languages, overlapping   -grams can be used
as indexing or expansion units, to bypass segmenta-
tion issues, once translation has been completed.
Finally, (McNamee and Mayfield, 2002) observe
that pre-translation query expansion plays a crucial
role in ensuring that some terms are translatable, and
post-translation expansion would having nothing to
operate on if no query terms translated. This is cer-
tainly true, but this problem is much more likely to
arise in the case of short queries, where only a single
term may represent a topic and there are few terms in
the query. As documents are typically much longer,
there is often more redundancy of representation.
This is analogous to the observation (Krovetz, 1993)
that stemming has less of an impact as documents
become longer because a wider variety of surface
forms are likely to appear. Thus it is more likely
that some translatable form of a concept is likely to
appear in a long document, even without expansion
and even with a poor translation resource. As a re-
sult, pre-translation expansion may be less crucial
for long documents.
6 Conclusion
These factors together explain both the significant
improvement for post-translation document expan-
sion that our experiments illustrate in contrast to the
much weaker effects of pre-translation expansion,
and also the difference observed between the exper-
imental results reported here and prior work on pre-
and post-translation query expansion that has em-
phasized European language pairs. We have iden-
tified a key role for post-translation expansion in
CLIR language pairs where trivial cognate matching
is not possible, but explicit translation or translitera-
tion is required. We have also identified limitations
on pre-translation expansion due to corresponding
gaps in segmentation, translation, and transcription
resources. We believe that these findings will extend
to other CLIR language combinations with com-
parable characteristics, including many other Asian
languages.
References
Lisa Ballesteros and W. Bruce Croft. 1997. Phrasal
translation and query expansion techniques for cross-
language information retrieval. In Proceedings of
the 20th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
July.
James P. Callan, W. Bruce Croft, and Stephen M. Hard-
ing. 1992. The INQUERY retrieval system. In
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages 78?
83. Springer-Verlag.
Shudong Huang. 1999. Evaluation of LDC?s bilingual
dictionaries. Unpublished manuscript.
Wanying Jin. 1998. NMSU Chinese segmenter. In First
Chinese Language Processing Workshop, Philadel-
phia.
Robert Krovetz. 1993. Viewing morphology as an infer-
ence process. In SIGIR-93, pages 191?202.
Gina-Anne Levow and Douglas W. Oard. 2000.
Translingual topic tracking with PRISE. In Working
Notes of the Third Topic Detection and Tracking Work-
shop, February.
Gina-Anne Levow, Douglas W. Oard, and Philip Resnik.
Under Review. Dictionary-based techniques for cross-
language information retrieval.
Gina-Anne Levow. 2003. Multi-scale document ex-
pansion for mandarin chinese. In Proceedings of the
ISCA Workshop on Multi-lingual Spoken Document
Retrieval.
Paul McNamee and James Mayfield. 2002. Comparing
cross-language query expansion techniques by degrad-
ing translation resources. In Proceedings of the 25th
Annual International Conference on Research and De-
velopment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR-2002).
Helen Meng, Berlin Chen, Erika Grams, Wai-Kit Lo,
Gina-Anne Levow, Douglas Oard, Patrick Schone,
Karen Tang, and Jian Qiang Wang. 2001. Mandarin-
English Information (MEI): Investigating translingual
speech retrieval. In Human Language Technology
Conference.
Hinrich Sch u?tze, David A. Hull, and Jan O. Peder-
sen. 1995. A comparison of classifiers and docu-
ment representations for the routing problem. In Ed-
ward A. Fox, Peter Ingwersen, and Raya Fidel, ed-
itors, Proceedings of the 18th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, pages 229?237, July.
ftp://parcftp.xerox.com/pub/qca/schuetze.html.
Amit Singhal and Fernando Pereira. 1999. Document
expansion for speech retrieval. In Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Research and De-
velopment in Information Retrieval, pages 34?41, Au-
gust.
Amit Singhal, John Choi, Donald Hindle, Julia
Hirschberg, Fernando Pereira, and Steve Whittaker.
1999. AT&T at TREC-7 SDR Track. In Proceedings
of the DARPA Broadcast News Workshop.
