HITIQA:  An Interactive Question Answering System  
A Preliminary Report 
 
Sharon Small, Ting Liu, Nobuyuki Shimizu, and Tomek Strzalkowski  
 
ILS Institute 
The State University of New York at Albany 
1400 Washington Avenue 
Albany, NY 12222 
{small,tl7612,ns3203,tomek}@albany.edu 
 
 
Abstract
HITIQA is an interactive question answering 
technology designed to allow intelligence analysts 
and other users of information systems to pose 
questions in natural language and obtain relevant 
answers, or the assistance they require in order to 
perform their tasks. Our objective in HITIQA is to 
allow the user to submit exploratory, analytical, 
non-factual questions, such as ?What has been 
Russia?s reaction to U.S. bombing of Kosovo?? 
The distinguishing property of such questions is 
that one cannot generally anticipate what might 
constitute the answer. While certain types of things 
may be expected (e.g., diplomatic statements), the 
answer is heavily conditioned by what information 
is in fact available on the topic. From a practical 
viewpoint, analytical questions are often under-
specified, thus casting a broad net on a space of 
possible answers. Therefore, clarification dialogue 
is often needed to negotiate with the user the exact 
scope and intent of the question. 
 
1   Introduction 
HITIQA project is part of the ARDA AQUAINT 
program that aims to make significant advances in 
the state of the art of automated question answer-
ing.  In this paper we focus on two aspects of our 
work: 
1. Question Semantics: how the system ?un-
derstands? user requests. 
2. Human-Computer Dialogue: how the user 
and the system negotiate this understand-
ing. 
     We will also discuss very preliminary evalua-
tion results from a series of pilot tests of the system 
conducted by intelligence analysts via a remote 
internet link.  
   
2   Factual vs. Analytical 
The objective in HITIQA is to allow the user to 
submit and obtain answers to exploratory, analyti-
cal, non-factual questions.  There are very signifi-
cant differences between factual, or fact-finding, 
and analytical question answering. A factual ques-
tion seeks pieces of information that would make a 
corresponding statement true (i.e., they become 
facts): ?How many states are in the U.S.?? / ?There 
are X states in the U.S.? In this sense, a factual 
question usually has just one correct answer that 
can generally, be judged for its truthfulness. By 
contrast, an analytical question is when the ?truth? 
of the answer is more a matter of opinion and may 
depend upon the context in which the question is 
asked. Answers to analytical questions are rarely 
unilateral, indeed, a mere ?correct? answer may 
have limited value, and in some cases may not 
even be determinate (?Which college is the best??, 
?How do I stop my baby?s crying??). Instead, an-
swers to analytical questions are often judged as 
helpful, or useful, or satisfactory, etc. ?Technically 
correct? answers (e.g., ?feed the baby milk?) may 
be considered as irrelevant or at best unresponsive.   
     The distinction between factual and analytical 
questions depends primarily on the intention of the 
person who is asking, however, the form of a ques-
tion is often indicative of which of the two classes 
it is more likely to belong to.  Factual questions 
can be classified into a number of syntactic formats 
(?question typology?) that aids in automatic proc-
essing. 
     Factual questions display a fairly distinctive 
?answer type?, which is the type of the information 
piece needed to fulfill the statement.  Recent auto-
mated systems for answering factual questions  
deduct  this expected answer type from the form of 
the question and a finite list of possible answer 
 types. For example, ?Who was the first man in 
space? expects a ?person? as the answer, while 
?How long was the Titanic?? expects some length 
measure as an answer, probably in yards and feet, 
or meters.  This is generally a very good strategy, 
that has been exploited successfully in a number of 
automated QA systems that appeared in recent 
years, especially in the context of TREC QA1 
evaluations (Harabagiu et al, 2000; Hovy et al, 
2000; Prager at al., 2001).     
     This process is not easily applied to analytical 
questions. This is because the type of an answer for 
analytical questions cannot always be anticipated 
due to their inherently exploratory character.  In 
contrast to a factual question, an analytical ques-
tion has an unlimited variety of syntactic forms 
with only a loose connection between their syntax 
and the expected answer.  Given the unlimited po-
tential of the formation of analytical questions, it 
would be counter-productive to restrict them to a 
limited number of question/answer types. Even 
finding a non-strictly factual answer to an other-
wise simple question about Titanic length (e.g., 
?two football fields?) would push the limits of the 
answer-typing approach. Therefore, the formation 
of an answer should instead be guided by the top-
ics the user is interested in, as recognized in the 
query and/or through the interactive dialogue, 
rather than by a single type as inferred from the 
query in a factual system.   
     This paper argues that the semantics of an ana-
lytical question is more likely to be deduced from 
the information that is considered relevant to the 
question than through a detailed analysis of their 
particular form. While this may sound circular, it 
needs not be. Determining ?relevant? information 
is not the same as finding an answer; indeed we 
can use relatively simple information retrieval 
methods (keyword matching, etc.) to obtain per-
haps 50 or 100 ?relevant? documents from a data-
base. This gives us an initial answer space to work 
on in order to determine the scope and complexity 
of the answer. In our project, we use structured 
templates, which we call frames to map out the 
content of pre-retrieved documents, and subse-
quently to delineate the possible meaning of the 
question (Section 6). 
                                                 
1 TREC QA is the annual Question Answering evalua-
tion sponsored by the U.S. National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology www.trec.nist.gov. 
 
3   Document Retrieval 
When the user poses a question to a system sitting 
atop a huge database of unstructured data (text 
files), the first order of business is to reduce that 
pile to perhaps a handful of documents where the 
answer is likely to be found. This means, most of-
ten, document retrieval, using fast but non-exact 
selection methods.  Questions are tokenized and 
sent to a document retrieval engine, such as Smart 
(Buckley, 1985) or InQuery (Callan et al, 1992).  
Noun phrases and verb phrases are extracted from 
the question to give us a list of potential topics that 
the user may be interested in.   
    In the experiments with the HITIQA prototype, 
see Figure 1, we are retrieving the top fifty docu-
ments from three gigabytes of newswire 
(AQUAINT corpus plus web-harvested docu-
ments).  
 
Document 
Retrieval
Document 
Retrieval
Build
Frames
Build
Frames
Process
Frames
Process
Frames
Dialogue
Manager
Dialogue
anager
Segment/
Filter
Segment/
Filter
Cluster
Paragraphs
Cluster
Paragraphs
Answer
Generator
Answer
Generator
answer
Tokenized 
question
top 50 
documents
distinct 
paragraphs
clusters
framed text 
segments
candidate 
answer topics
relevant text 
segments
system 
clarification 
question/
user response
DB
Gate
Wordnet
Figure 1: HITIQA preliminary architecture 
 
4   Data Driven Semantics of Questions 
The set of documents and text passages returned 
from the initial search is not just a random subset 
of the database. Depending upon the quality (recall 
and precision) of the text retrieval system avail-
 able, this set can be considered as a first stab at 
understanding the user?s question by the machine.  
Again, given the available resources, this is the 
best the system can do under the circumstances. 
Therefore, we may as well consider this collection 
of retrieved texts (the Retrieved Set) as the mean-
ing of the question as understood by the system. 
This is a fair assessment: the better our search ca-
pabilities, the closer this set would be to what the 
user may accept as an answer to the question.  
     We can do better, however. We can perform 
automatic analysis of the retrieved set, attempting 
to uncover if it is a fairly homogenous bunch (i.e., 
all texts have very similar content), or whether 
there are a number of diverse topics represented 
there, somehow tied together by a common thread. 
In the former case, we may be reasonably confi-
dent that we have the answer, modulo the retriev-
able information. In the latter case, we know that 
the question is more complex than the user may 
have intended, and a negotiation process is needed. 
     We can do better still. We can measure how 
well each of the topical groups within the retrieved 
set is ?matching up? against the question. This is 
accomplished through a framing process described 
later in this paper. The outcome of the framing 
process is twofold: firstly, the alternative interpre-
tations of the question are ranked within 3 broad 
categories: on-target, near-misses and outliers. 
Secondly, salient concepts and attributes for each 
topical group are extracted into topic frames. This 
enables the system to conduct a meaningful dia-
logue with the user, a dialogue which is wholly 
content oriented, and thus entirely data driven.  
ON-TARGET
OUTLIERS
NEAR-MISSES
 
Figure 2: Answer Space Topology.  The goal of interac-
tive QA it to optimize the ON-TARGET middle zone. 
 
5   Clustering 
We use n-gram-based clustering of text passages 
and concept extraction  to uncover the main topics, 
themes and entities in this set.  
     Retrieved documents are first broken into natu-
rally occurring paragraphs.  Duplicate paragraphs 
are filtered out and the remaining passages are 
clustered using a combination of hierarchical clus-
tering and n-bin classification (details of the clus-
tering algorithm can be found in Hardy et al, 
2002a).  Typically three to six clusters are gener-
ated out of the top 50 documents, which may yield 
as many as 1000 passages.  Each cluster represents 
a topic theme within the retrieved set: usually an 
alternative or complimentary interpretation of the 
user?s question. 
    A list of topic labels is assigned to each cluster. 
A topic label may come from one of two places:  
First, the texts in the cluster are compared against 
the list of key phrases extracted from the user?s 
query.  For each match found, the matching phrase 
is used as a topic label for the cluster. If a match 
with the key phrases from the question cannot be 
obtained, Wordnet is consulted to see if a common 
ancestor can be found. For example, ?rifle? and 
?machine gun? are kinds of ?weaponry? in Word-
net, which allows an indirect match between a 
question about weapon inspectors and a text re-
porting a discovery by the authorities of a cache of 
?rifles? and ?machine guns?.  
 
6   Framing 
In HITIQA we use a text framing technique to de-
lineate the gap between the meaning of the user?s 
question and the system ?understanding? of this 
question. The framing is an attempt to impose a 
partial structure on the text that would allow the 
system to systematically compare different text 
pieces against each other and against the question, 
and also to communicate with the user about this. 
In particular, the framing process may uncover 
topics and themes within the retrieved set which 
the user has not explicitly asked for, and thus may 
be unaware of their existence. Nonetheless these 
may carry important information ? the NEAR-
MISSES in Figure 2. 
     In the current version of the system, frames are 
fairly generic templates, consisting of a small 
number of attributes, such as LOCATION, PERSON, 
COUNTRY, ORGANIZATION, etc.  Future versions of 
HITIQA will add domain specialized frames, for 
example, we are currently constructing frames for 
the Weapons Non-proliferation Domain. Most of 
the frame attributes are defined in advance, how-
 ever, dynamic frame expansion is also possible. 
Each of the attributes in a frame is equipped with 
an extractor function which specializes in locating 
and extracting instances of this attribute in the run-
ning text. The extractors are implemented using 
information extraction utilities which form the ker-
nel of Sheffield?s GATE2 system.  We have modi-
fied GATE to separate organizations into compa-
nies and other organizations, and we have also ex-
panded by adding new concepts such as industries.  
Therefore, the framing process resembles strongly 
the template filling task in information extraction 
(cf. MUC3 evaluations), with one significant ex-
ception: while the MUC task was to fill in a tem-
plate using potentially any amount of source text 
(Humphreys et al, 1998), the framing is essentially 
an inverse process. In framing, potentially multiple 
frames can be associated with a small chunk of text 
(a passage or a short paragraph). Furthermore, this 
chunk of text is part of a cluster of very similar text 
chunks that further reinforce some of the most sali-
ent features of these texts. This makes the frame 
filling a significantly less error-prone task ? our 
experience has been far more positive than the 
MUC evaluation results may indicate. This is be-
cause, rather than trying to find the most appropri-
ate values for attributes from among many poten-
tial candidates, we in essence fit the frames over 
small passages4.  
Therefore, data frames are built from the re-
trieved data, after clustering it into several topical 
groups. Since clusters are built out of small text 
passages, we associate a frame with each passage 
that serves as a seed of a cluster. We subsequently 
merge passages, and their associated frames when-
ever anaphoric and other cohesive links are de-
tected.   
     A very similar process is applied to the user?s 
question, resulting in a Goal Frame which can be 
subsequently compared to the data frames obtained 
from retrieved data. For example, the Goal Frame 
generated from the question, ?How has pollution in 
the Black Sea affected the fishing industry, and 
                                                 
2 GATE is Generalized Architecture for Text Engineering, an 
information extraction system developed at the University of 
Sheffield (Cunningham, 2000). 
3 MUC, the Message Understanding Conference, funded by 
ARPA, involved the evaluation of information extraction sys-
tems applied to a common task. 
4 We should note that selecting the right frame type for a pas-
sage is an important pre-condition to ?understanding?. 
what are the sources of this pollution?? is shown 
in Figure 3 below. 
 
TOPIC:[pollution, industry, sources] 
LOCATION: [Black Sea] 
INDUSTRY:[fishing] 
Figure 3: HITIQA generated Goal Frame 
 
            
TOPIC: pollution 
SUB-TOPIC: [sources] 
LOCATION: [Black Sea] 
INDUSTRY :[fisheries, tourism] 
TEXT: [In a period of only three decades (1960's-1980's), 
the Black Sea has suffered the catastrophic degradation 
of a major part of its natural resources. Particularly acute 
problems have arisen as a result of pollution (notably 
from nutrients, fecal material, solid waste and oil), a 
catastrophic decline in commercial fish stocks, a severe 
decrease in tourism and an uncoordinated approach to-
wards coastal zone management. Increased loads of nutri-
ents from rivers and coastal sources caused an overpro-
duction of phytoplankton leading to extensive eutrophica-
tion and often extremely low dissolved oxygen concentra-
tions. The entire ecosystem began to collapse. This prob-
lem, coupled with pollution and irrational exploitation of 
fish stocks, started a sharp decline in fisheries resources.] 
RELEVANCE: Matches on all elements found in goalframe  
Figure 4: A HITIQA generated data frame.  Words in 
bold were used to fill the Frame. 
 
     The data frames are then compared to the Goal 
Frame. We pay particular attention to matching the 
topic attributes, before any other attributes are con-
sidered. If there is an exact match between a Goal 
Frame topic and the text being used to build the 
data frame, then this becomes the data frame?s 
topic as well.  If more than one match is found, the 
subsequent matches become the sub-topics of the 
data frame. On the other hand, if no match is pos-
sible against the Goal Frame topic, we choose the 
topic from the list of the Wordnet generated hy-
pernyms. An example data frame generated from 
the text retrieved in response to the query about the 
Black Sea is shown in Figure 4. After the initial 
framing is done, frames judged to be related to the 
same concept or event, are merged together and 
values of their attributes are combined. 
 
7   Judging Frame Relevance 
We judge a particular data frame as relevant, and 
subsequently the corresponding segment of text as 
relevant, by comparison to the Goal Frame. The 
 data frames are scored based on the number of 
conflicts found between them and the Goal Frame. 
The conflicts are mismatches on values of corre-
sponding attributes. If a data frame is found to 
have no conflicts, it is given the highest relevance 
rank, and a conflict score of zero.  All other data 
frames are scored with an incrementing conflict 
value, one for frames with one conflict with the 
Goal Frame, two for two conflicts etc.  Frames that 
conflict with all information found in the query are 
given a score of 99 indicating the lowest relevancy 
rank.  Currently, frames with a conflict score of 99  
are excluded from further processing. The frame in 
Figure 4 is scored as fully relevant to the question 
(0 conflicts). 
 
8   Enabling Dialogue with the User 
Framed information allows HITIQA to automati-
cally judge some text as relevant and to conduct a 
meaningful dialogue with the user as needed on 
other text. The purpose of the dialogue is to help 
the user to navigate the answer space and to solicit 
from the user more details as to what information 
he or she is seeking. The main principle here is that 
the dialogue is at the information semantic level, 
not at the information organization level. Thus, it is 
okay to ask the user whether information about the 
AIDS conference in Cape Town should be in-
cluded in the answer to a question about combating 
AIDS in Africa. However, the user should never be 
asked if a particular keyword is useful or not, or if 
a document is relevant or not. We have developed 
a 3-pronged strategy: 
1. Narrowing dialogue: ask questions that 
would allow the system to reduce the size 
of the answer set.  
2. Expanding dialogue: ask questions that 
would allow the system to decide if the an-
swer set needs to be expanded by informa-
tion just outside of it (near-misses). 
3. Fact seeking dialogue: allow the user to 
ask questions seeking additional facts and 
specific examples, or similar situations. 
Of the above, we have thus far implemented the 
first two options as part of the preliminary clarifi-
cation dialogue. The clarification dialogue is when 
the user and the system negotiate the task that 
needs to be performed. We can call this a ?triaging 
stage?, as opposed to the actual problem solving 
stage (point 3 above). In practice, these two stages 
are not necessarily separated and may be overlap-
ping throughout the entire interaction. Nonetheless, 
these two have decidedly distinct character and 
require different dialogue strategies on the part of 
the system. 
     Our approach to dialogue in HITIQA is mod-
eled to some degree upon the mixed-initiative dia-
logue management adopted in the AMITIES pro-
ject (Hardy et al, 2002b). The main advantage of 
the AMITIES model is its reliance on data-driven 
semantics which allows for spontaneous and mixed 
initiative dialogue to occur.  
     By contrast, the major approaches to implemen-
tation of dialogue systems to date rely on systems 
of functional transitions that make the resulting 
system much less flexible. In the grammar-based 
approach, which is prevalent in commercial sys-
tems, such as in various telephony products, as 
well as in practically oriented research prototypes5, 
(e.g., DARPA, 2002; Seneff and Polifoni, 2000; 
Ferguson and Allen, 1998) a complete dialogue 
transition graph is designed to guide the conversa-
tion and predict user responses, which is suitable 
for closed domains only. In the statistical variation 
of this approach, a transition graph is derived from 
a large body of annotated conversations (e.g., 
Walker, 2000; Litman and Pan, 2002). This latter 
approach is facilitated through a dialogue annota-
tion process, e.g., using Dialogue Act Markup in 
Several Layers (DAMSL) (Allen and Core, 1997), 
which is a system of functional dialogue acts.  
     Nonetheless, an efficient, spontaneous dialogue 
cannot be designed on a purely functional layer. 
Therefore, here we are primarily interested in the 
semantic layer, that is, the information exchange 
and information building effects of a conversation. 
In order to properly understand a dialogue, both 
semantic and functional layers need to be consid-
ered. In this paper we are concentrating exclusively 
on the semantic layer. 
 
9   Clarification Dialogue 
Data frames with a conflict score of zero form the 
initial kernel answer space. Depending upon the 
size of this set and the presence of other frames 
outside of it, the system either proceeds to generate 
the answer or initiates a dialogue with the user. For 
                                                 
5 A notable exception is CU Communicator developed 
at University of Colorado (Ward and Pellom, 1999) 
 example, if the answer space appears too large or 
varied, e.g. consists of many different topics, the 
system may ask the user how to narrow it. Alterna-
tively, the presence of large groups of texts frames 
with near-miss frames assigned to them (i.e., 
frames with 1 or 2 conflicts with the Goal Frame) 
may indicate that the answer space is actually lar-
ger, and the user will be consulted about a  possi-
ble broadening of the question. Currently, we only 
initiate a clarification dialogue for 1-conflict 
frames.  
     A 1-conflict frame has only a single attribute 
mismatch with the Goal Frame. This could be a 
mismatch on any attribute, for example, LOCA-
TION, or ORGANIZATION, or TIME, etc. A special 
case arises when the conflict occurs on the TOPIC 
attribute.  Since all other attributes match, we may 
be looking at potentially different events or situa-
tions involving the same entities, or occurring at 
the same location or time. The purpose of the clari-
fication dialogue in this case is to probe which of 
these topics may be of interest to the user.  This is 
illustrated in the exchange below recorded during 
an evaluation session with an intelligence analyst: 
 
User: ?Who is Elizardo Sanchez?? 
HITIQA: ?Are you interested in seeing information 
about civil rights as it is related to Elizardo Sanchez? 
 
ONE-CONFLICT FRAME 
TOPIC: civil_rights  
SUB-TOPIC: []  
LOCATION: [Cuba, Cuba, Cuba]  
COMPANIES: []  
PEOPLE: [Sanchez, Sanchez]  
DOCUMENT DATE: [2000, 1, 11]  
SOURCE: HAVANA (AP) ?  
TEXT: [``I consider that the situation for civil and political 
rights in Cuba has worsened over the past year... owing to 
that Cuba continues to be the only closed society in this hemi-
sphere,'' Sanchez said. ``There have been no significant re-
lease of prisoners, the number of people sanctioned or proc-
essed for political motives increased. Sanchez, who himself 
spent many years in Cuban prisons, is among the communist 
island's best known opposition activists. The commission he 
heads issues a report on civil rights every six months, along 
with a list of people it considers to be imprisoned for political 
motives. ] 
Figure 5: One of the Frames that were used in generat-
ing Sanchez  dialogue.  Words in bold were used to fill 
the Frame. 
 
    In order to understand what happened here, we 
need to note first that the Goal Frame for the user 
question does not have any specific value assigned 
to its TOPIC attribute. This of course is as we would 
expect it: the question does not give us a hint as to 
what information we need to look for or may be 
hoping to find about Sanchez. This also means that 
all the text frames obtained from the retrieved set 
for this question will have at least one conflict, 
near-misses. One such text frame is shown in Fig-
ure 5: its topic is ?civil rights? and it about San-
chez. HITIQA thus asks if ?civil rights? is a topic 
of interest to the user. If the user responds posi-
tively, this topic will be added to the answer space.    
     The above dialogue strategy is applicable to 
other attribute mismatch cases, and produces intel-
ligent-sounding responses from the system. During 
the dialogue, as new information is obtained from 
the user, the Goal Frame is updated and the scores 
of all the data frames are reevaluated. The system 
may interpret the new information as a positive or 
negative. Positives are added to the Goal Frame. 
Negatives are stored in a Negative-Goal Frame and 
will also be used in the re-scoring of the data 
frames, possibly causing conflict scores to in-
crease. The Negative-Goal Frame is created when 
HITIQA receives a negative response from the 
user. The Negative-Goal Frame includes informa-
tion that HITIQA has identified as being of no in-
terest to the user.  If the user responds the equiva-
lent of ?yes? to the system clarification question  in 
the Sanchez dialogue, civil_rights will be added to 
the topic list in the Goal Frame and all one-conflict 
frames with a civil_rights topic will be re-scored to 
Zero conflicts, two-conflict frames with 
civil_rights as a topic will be rescored to one, etc.  
If the user responds ?no?, the Negative-Goal 
Frame will be generated and all frames with 
civil_rights as a topic will be rescored to 99 in or-
der to remove them from further processing. 
     The clarification dialogue will continue on the 
topic level until all the significant sets of NEAR-
MISS frames are either included in the answer 
space (through user broadening the scope of the 
question that removes the initial conflicts) or dis-
missed as not relevant. When HITIQA reaches this 
point it will re-evaluate the data frames in its an-
swer space.  If there are too many answer frames 
now (more than a pre-determined upper threshold), 
the dialogue manager will offer to the user to nar-
row the question using another frame attribute. If 
the size of the new answer space is still too small 
(i.e., there are many unresolved near-miss  frames), 
 the dialogue manager will suggest to the user ways 
of further broadening the question, thus making 
more data frames relevant, or possibly retrieving 
new documents by adding terms acquired through  
the clarification dialogue.  When the number of 
frames is within the acceptable range, HITIQA will 
generate the answer using the text from the frames 
in the current answer space.  The user may end the 
dialogue at any point and have an answer gener-
ated given the current state of the frames. 
 
9.1   Narrowing Dialogue 
HITIQA attempts to reduce the number of frames 
judged to be relevant through a Narrowing Dia-
logue. This is done when the answer space con-
tains too many elements to form a succinct answer. 
This typically happens when the initial question 
turns out to be too vague or unspecific, with re-
spect to the available data. 
 
9.2   Broadening Dialogue 
As explained before, the system may attempt to 
increase the number of frames judged relevant 
through a Broadening Dialogue (BD), whenever 
the answer space appears too narrow, i.e., contains 
too few zero-conflict frames.  We are conducting 
further experiments to define this situation more 
precisely. Currently, the BD will only occur if 
there are one-conflict frames, or near misses. 
Broadening questions can be asked about any of 
the attributes which have values in the Goal Frame. 
 
10   Answer Generation 
Currently, the answer is simply composed of text 
passages from the zero conflict frames. The text of 
these frames are ordered by date and outputted to 
the user.  Typically the answer to these analytical 
type questions will require many pages of informa-
tion.  Example 1 below shows the first portion of 
the answer generated by HITIQA for the Black Sea 
query. Current work is focusing on answer genera-
tion. 
 
2002:  
The Black Sea is widely recognized as one of the re-
gional seas most damaged by human activity. Almost 
one third of the entire land area of continental Europe 
drains into this sea? major European rivers, the Da-
nube, Dnieper and Don, discharge into this sea while its 
only connection to the world's oceans is the narrow 
Bosphorus Strait. The Bosphorus is as little as 70 me-
ters deep and 700 meters wide but the depth of the 
Black Sea itself exceeds two kilometers in places. Con-
taminants and nutrients enter the Black Sea via river 
run-off mainly and by direct discharge from land-based 
sources. The management of the Black Sea itself is the 
shared responsibility of the six coastal countries: Bul-
garia, Georgia, Romania, Russian Federation, Turkey, 
and Ukraine? 
Example 1: Partial answer generated by HITIQA to the 
Black Sea query. 
 
11   Evaluations 
We have just completed the first round of a pilot 
evaluation for testing the interactive dialogue com-
ponent of HITIQA. The purpose of this first stage 
of evaluation is to determine what kind of dialogue 
is acceptable/tolerable to the user and whether an 
efficient navigation though the answer space is 
possible.  HITIQA was blindly tested by two dif-
ferent analysts on eleven different topics.  Five 
different groups participated, but no analyst tested 
more than one system, as system comparison was 
not a goal.  The analysts were given complete free-
dom in forming their queries and responses to 
HITIQA?s questions.  They were only provided 
with descriptions of the eleven topics the systems 
would be tested on.  The analysts were given 15 
minutes for each topic to arrive at what they be-
lieved to be an acceptable answer. During testing a 
Wizard (human) was allowed to intervene if 
HITIQA generated a dialogue question/response 
that was felt inappropriate. The Wizard was able to 
override the system and send a Wizard generated 
question/response to the analyst.  The HITIQA 
Wizard intervened an average of 13% of the time. 
     These results are for information purposes only 
as it was not a formal evaluation.  HITIQA earned 
an average score of 5.8 from both Analysts for dia-
logue, where 1 was ?extremely dissatisfied? and 7 
was ?completely satisfied?.  The highest score pos-
sible was a 7 for each dialogue.  The Analysts were 
asked to grade each scenario for success or failure.  
We divide the failures from both analysts into three 
categories: 
1) the user gives up on the system for the 
given scenario(9%) 
2) the 15 minute time limit was up(13%) 
3) the data was not in the database(9%) 
HITIQA had a 63% success rate for Analyst 1 and 
a 73% success rate for Analyst 2. It is unclear how 
 these results should be interpreted, if at all, as the 
evaluation was a mere pilot, mostly to test the me-
chanics of the setup. We know only that a human 
Wizard equipped with all necessary information 
can easily achieve 100% success in this test. What 
is still needed is a baseline performance, perhaps 
based on using an ordinary keyword-based search 
engine.  
12   Future Work 
This paper describes a work in progress. We ex-
pect that the initial specification of content frame 
will evolve as we subject the initial system to more 
demanding evaluations. Currently, the frames are 
not topically specialized, and this appears the most 
logical next refinement, i.e., develop several (10-
30) types of frames covering different classes of 
events, from politics to medicine to science to in-
ternational economics, etc. This is expected to in-
crease the accuracy of the dialogue as is the inter-
active visualization which is also under develop-
ment. Answer generation will involve fusion of 
information on the frame level, and is currently in 
an initial phase of implementation. 
Acknowledgements 
This paper is based on work supported by the Advanced 
Research and Development Activity (ARDA)?s Ad-
vanced Question Answering for Intelligence 
(AQUAINT) Program under contract number 2002-
H790400-000. 
References  
J. Allen.  and Core. 1997. Draft of DAMSL:  Dialog Act 
Markup in Several Layers. 
http://www.cs.rochester.edu/research/cisd/ resources/damsl/    
Bagga, A., T. Strzalkowski, and G.B. Wise. 2000. PartsID: A 
Dialog-Based System for Identifying Parts for Medical 
Systems. Proc. of the ANLP-NAACL-2.  
Chris Buckley. May 1985. Implementation of the Smart in-
formation retrieval system. Technical Report TR85-686, 
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, NY.  
James P. Callan, W. Bruce Croft, Stephen M. Harding 1992. 
The INQUERY Retrieval System.  Proc. of DEXA-92, 3rd 
International Conference on Database and Expert Systems 
Applications. 78-83.  
Cunningham, H., D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva, V. Tablan and 
Y. Wilks. 2000 Experience of using GATE for NLP R&D. 
In Coling 2000 Workshop on Using Toolsets and Architec-
tures To Build NLP Systems.  
DARPA Communicator Program. 2002. 
http://www.darpa.mil/iao/communicator   
 Grinstein, G.G., Levkowitz, H., Pickett, R.M., Smith, S. 1993. 
?Visualization alternatives: non-pixel based images,? 
Proc. of IS&T 46th Annual Conf. 132-133.  
George Ferguson and James Allen. 1998. "TRIPS: An Intelli-
gent Integrated Problem-Solving Assistant," in Proc. of 
the Fifteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence (AAAI-98), Madison, WI. 567-573.  
H. Hardy, N. Shimizu, T. Strzalkowski, L. Ting, B. Wise and 
X. Zhang 2002a. Cross-Document Summarization by 
Concept Classification. Proceedings of SIGIR-2002, Tam-
pere, Finland.  
H. Hardy, K. Baker, L. Devillers, L. Lamel, S. Rosset, T. 
Strzalkowski, C. Ursu and N. Webb.  2002b.  Multi-layer 
Dialogue Annotation for Automated Multilingual Cus-
tomer Service. ISLE Workshop, Edinburgh, Scotland.  
Harabagiu, S., M. Pasca and S. Maiorano. 2000. Experiments 
with Open-Domain Textual Question Answering. In Proc. 
of COLING-2000. 292-298.  
Humphreys, R. Gaizauskas, S. Azzam, C. Huyck, B. Mitchell, 
H. Cunningham, Y. Wilks. 1998. Description of the 
LaSIE-II System as Used for MUC-7. In Proceedings of 
the Seventh Message Understanding Conference (MUC-
7.)  
Judith Hochberg, Nanda Kambhatla and Salim Roukos. 2002. 
A Flexible Framework for Developing Mixed-Initiative 
Dialog Systems. Proc. of 3rd SIGDIAL Workshop on Dis-
course and Dialogue, Philadelphia.  
Hovy, E., L. Gerber, U. Hermjakob, M. Junk, C-Y. Lin. 2000. 
Question Answering in Webclopedia. Notebook Proceed-
ings of Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-9).  
Johnston, M., Ehlen, P., Bangalore, S., Walker., M., Stent, A., 
Maloor, P., and Whittaker, S. 2002. MATCH: An Archi-
tecture for Multimodal Dialogue Systems. In Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2002.  
Diane J. Litman and Shimei Pan. Designing and Evaluating an 
Adaptive Spoken Dialogue System. 2002. User Modeling 
and User-Adapted Interaction. 12(2/3):111-137.  
Miller, G.A. 1995. WordNet: A Lexical Database. Comm. of 
the ACM, 38(11):39-41. 
John Prager, Dragomir R. Radev, and Krzysztof Czuba. An-
swering what-is questions by virtual annotation. In Human 
Language Technology Conference, Demonstrations Sec-
tion, San Diego, CA, 2001.  
S. Seneff and J. Polifroni, ``Dialogue Management in the 
MERCURY Flight Reservation System,'' Proc. ANLP-
NAACL 2000, Satellite Workshop, 1-6, Seattle, WA, 2000.   
Marilyn A. Walker. An Application of Reinforcement Learn-
ing to Dialogue Strategy Selection in a Spoken Dialogue 
System for Email . Journal of Artificial Intelligence Re-
search.12:387-416.  
W. Ward and B. Pellom.  1999.  The CU Communicator Sys-
tem.  IEEE ASRU. 341-344.  
