Paraphrasing Rules for Automatic Evaluation of Translation into Japanese
KANAYAMA Hiroshi
Tokyo Research Laboratory, IBM Japan, Ltd.
1623-14 Shimo-tsuruma, Yamato-shi, Kanagawa 242-8502, Japan
kanayama@trl.ibm.com
Abstract
Automatic evaluation of translation qual-
ity has proved to be useful when the target
language is English. In this paper the eval-
uation of translation into Japanese is stud-
ied. An existing method based on n-gram
similarity between translations and refer-
ence sentences is difficult to apply to the
evaluation of Japanese because of the ag-
glutinativeness and variation of semanti-
cally similar expressions in Japanese. The
proposed method applies a set of para-
phrasing rules to the reference sentences
in order to increase the similarity score
for the expressions that differ only in their
writing styles. Experimental results show
the paraphrasing rules improved the cor-
relation between automatic evaluation and
human evaluation from 0.80 to 0.93.
1 Introduction
Evaluating natural language processing applica-
tions? output is important both for users and devel-
opers. Tasks such as sentential parsing, morpho-
logical analysis and named entity recognition are
easy to evaluate automatically because the ?right an-
swer? can be defined deterministically under a spe-
cific grammar or assumed criterion.
The evaluation of machine translation is not so
straightforward since there are infinite ways to out-
put similar meanings and one can not enumerate the
right answers exhaustively. In spite of that, auto-
matic translation evaluation is practically important
because the evaluation is laborious work for humans
and evaluation by humans tends to be arbitrary. Au-
tomatic evaluation is more reliable than human eval-
uation because of its consistency for the same trans-
lations.
BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002b) is one of the meth-
ods for automatic evaluation of translation quality.
It uses the ratio of co-occurring n-grams between
a translation and single or multiple reference sen-
tences. High correlation is reported between the
BLEU score and human evaluations for translations
from Arabic, Chinese, French, and Spanish to En-
glish (Papineni et al, 2002a).
This paper investigates how to apply BLEU to the
evaluation of English-to-Japanese translation. The
main goal of this paper is to design a reliable method
of evaluation for translations from another language
to Japanese (henceforth we call this Japanese trans-
lation evaluation). There are some difficulties in ad-
justing BLEU for Japanese: BLEU uses n-grams of
words, so words in a sentence are assumed to be sep-
arated by spaces, while Japanese does not use spaces
between words. Moreover, Japanese has more vari-
ation in writing styles than English. A major differ-
ence in these languages is that Japanese has polite
forms expressed by inflections or auxiliary verbs. If
the style of the translations is not the same as that
of the reference sentences, the evaluation score be-
comes low even though the translations are accurate
in their meanings and grammar. To solve these prob-
lems, we apply paraphrasing rules to the reference
sentences so that the differences in writing styles do
not affect the evaluation score.
Another goal is derived from this application
of paraphrasing: to define a ?good paraphrase?.
Here paraphrasing means rewriting sentences with-
out changing their semantics. Several methods of
paraphrasing have been studied. Some of them aim
at the preprocessing of machine translation (Mita-
mura and Nyberg, 2001; Takahashi et al, 2001).
They use paraphrasing to transform the input sen-
tences so that the language-transferring routines
can handle them easily. Another application of
paraphrasing is to canonicalize many expressions
that have the same semantics, supporting informa-
tion retrieval or question answering (Zukerman and
Raskutti, 2002; Torisawa, 2002). Paraphrasing tech-
niques in these studies are considered to be useful,
but they are difficult to evaluate.
Machine translation evaluation requires methods
to judge whether two sentences have the same
meaning even when they are syntactically different.
Therefore if a set of paraphrasing rules contributes
to more reliable translation evaluation, it can be said
to be ?good? paraphrasing. Thus the study in this
paper also presents a new paradigm for evaluating
paraphrases.
Section 2 overviews the BLEU metric. Section 3
presents the proposed method of Japanese transla-
tion evaluation, and its performance is evaluated in
Section 4. Based on the experimental results, Sec-
tion 5 discusses qualitative and quantitative features
of paraphrasing.
2 Background: Overview of BLEU
This section briefly describes the original BLEU
(Papineni et al, 2002b)1, which was designed for
English translation evaluation, so English sentences
are used as examples in this section.
2.1 N-gram precision
BLEU evaluation uses a parallel corpus which con-
sists of sentences in the source language and their
translations to the target language by professional
translators. We call the professional translations ref-
erence sentences. It is preferable if the corpus has
multiple reference sentences translated by multiple
translators for each source sentence.
Sentences in the source language are also trans-
lated by the translation systems to be evaluated. The
1See the cited paper for more detailed definitions.
translations are called candidate sentences. Below
is an example.
Example 1
Reference 1
I had my watch repaired by an office worker.
Reference 2
A person in the office repaired my watch.
Candidate 1
I had a man in the office repair a watch.
Candidate 2
I had the person of an office correct a clock.
The BLEU score is based on n-gram precision
shown in Equation (1). It is the ratio of n-grams
which appear both in the candidate sentence and in
at least one of the reference sentences, among all n-
grams in the candidate sentence.
pn =
?
s?cand
?
ngr?s
min(C(ngr), Cr(ngr))
?
s?cand
?
ngr?s
C(ngr)
cand : candidates s : sentence ngr : n-gram
C : count in the candidate sentence
Cr : count in a corresponding reference sentence
(1)
Candidate 1 in Example 1 contains 11 unigrams
including punctuation. 8 unigrams out of these also
appear in Reference 1 or Reference 2: ?I?, ?had?, ?a?,
?in?, ?the?, ?office?, ?watch? and ?.?, therefore, the un-
igram precision of Candidate 1 is 8/11. The bigram
precision is 4/10 since ?I had?, ?in the?, ?the office?
and ?watch .? are found. The only matched trigram
is ?in the office?, so the trigram precision is 1/9.
On the other hand, the unigram, bigram, and tri-
gram precisions of Candidate 2 are 8/11, 2/10, 0/9,
respectively, which are lower than those of Candi-
date 1. Indeed Candidate 1 is a better English trans-
lation than Candidate 2.
In practice the n-gram precision is calculated not
for each sentence but for all of the sentences in the
corpus.
2.2 Brevity Penalty
The n-gram precision is calculated by dividing the
number of matched n-grams by the number of n-
grams in the candidate sentence. Therefore, a short
candidate sentence which consists only of frequently
used words can score a high n-gram precision. For
example, if the candidate sentence is just ?The?, its
unigram precision is 1.0 if one of reference sen-
tences contains at least one ?the?, and that is usually
true.
To penalize such a meaningless translation, the
BLEU score is multiplied by the brevity penalty
shown in (2).
BP =
{
1 if c > r
e(1?r/c) if c ? r (2)
where c and r are the total numbers of words in
the candidate sentences and the reference sentences
which have the closest numbers of words in each
parallel sentence.
2.3 BLEU score
The BLEU score is calculated by Equation (3) be-
low. It is the geometric average of the n-gram pre-
cisions multiplied by the brevity penalty. The geo-
metric average is used because pn decreases expo-
nentially as n increases. The BLEU score ranges
between 0 and 1.
BLEU = BP ?
( N?
n=1
pn
) 1N
(3)
The evaluations use unigrams up to N -grams. If a
large n is used, the fluency of the sentences becomes
a more important factor than the correctness of the
words. Empirically the BLEU score has a high cor-
relation with human evaluation when N = 4 for En-
glish translation evaluations (Papineni et al, 2002b).
3 Japanese Version of BLEU and Its
Extension
This section describes how to adapt BLEU for
Japanese translation evaluation. The adaptation con-
sists of three steps.
3.1 Use of Morphological Analyzer
The first modification is mandatory for using the n-
gram metric as in the original BLEU implementa-
tion. Since Japanese has no spaces between words,
the words have to be separated by morphological
analysis as in Example 2.
Example 2
Kare ga hon wo yo mi mashi ta .
He SUBJ book ACC read INF POLITE PAST .
?He read a book.?
3.2 Distinguish between Different
Parts-of-speech
Many English words can be used as various parts-
of-speech (POSs), but BLEU doesn?t distinguish be-
tween the words with the same surface form in terms
of their POSs, since the sentences are not processed
by a tagger, so the system can?t handle POSs. This
doesn?t cause a problem because most of the multi-
POS words have conceptually similar meanings, as
exemplified by the adverb ?fast? and the adjective
?fast? which have the same basic concept, so match-
ing them between the candidate and references rea-
sonably reflects the quality of the translation.
On the other hand, Japanese homonyms tend to
be completely different if their POSs are different.
For example, the postpositional phrasal particle ?ga?
and the connective particle ?ga? should be distin-
guished from one another since the former acts as
a subject case marker, while the latter connects two
clauses that normally contradict each other. Fortu-
nately the morphological analyzer outputs POS in-
formation when the sentence is separated into words,
and therefore the words are also distinguished by
their POSs in the described method.
3.3 Paraphrasing Rules
Example 3 is another possible translation of the
source sentence of Example 2.
Example 3
Kare ga hon wo yo n da .
He SUBJ book ACC read INF-EUPH PAST .
?He read a book.?
The only difference here is the ending of the sen-
tence has a less polite form. However, when Ex-
ample 2 is the only reference sentence, the BLEU
evaluation of Example 3 does not score high: 6/8 for
unigrams, 4/7 for bigrams, 3/6 for trigrams, and 2/5
1 $1(verb-c) : n : da ? $1 : mi : masi : ta
2 nai(adj) : . ? ari : mase : n : .
3 $1(noun) : da ? $1 : dearu
4 ni : yo : t : te ? ni : yo : ri
Table 1: Examples of paraphrasing rules. $1 denotes
a wild card shared by both sides. ?:? is a boundary of
morphemes. ?(verb-c)? means a consonant verb such
as ?yomu?. Actually these rules have conditions not
described here so that they are not overused.
for 4-grams, while its meaning is same as that of the
reference sentence.
Basically BLEU copes with this problem of varia-
tion in writing styles by relying on the number of ref-
erence sentences available for each source sentence
and by reflecting the total size of corpus. That is,
if the corpus has multiple reference sentences trans-
lated by different translators, multiple writing styles
will tend to be included, and if the corpus is very
large, such inconsistencies of writing style are sta-
tistically not a problem.
In Japanese translation evaluation, however, this
problem can not be resolved using such a quantita-
tive solution because the influence of the differences
in writing styles are too large. For example, whether
or not the translation is given in the polite form de-
pends on the translation system2, so the evaluation
score is strongly affected by the degree of matching
of the writing styles between the translation system
and the reference sentences.
To cancel out the differences in writing styles,
we apply some paraphrasing rules to the reference
sentences to generate new sentences with different
writing styles. The generated sentences are added
to the reference sentences, and therefore, n-grams
in the candidate sentences can match the reference
sentences regardless of their writing styles. Table 1
shows examples of paraphrasing rules.
These rules are applied to the reference sentences.
If a reference sentence matches to a paraphrasing
rule, the sentence is replicated and the replica is
rewritten using the matched rule. For example, the
Japanese sentence in Example 2 matches Rule 1 in
Table 1 so the Japanese sentence in Example 3 is
2Some translation systems allow us to specify such writing
styles but some systems don?t.
produced. In this case, the evaluation is done as if
there are two reference sentences, therefore, a can-
didate sentence gets the same score regardless of its
politeness.
To avoid applying the same rules repeatably, the
rules are applied in a specific order. How to generate
the rules is described in Section 4.1.
4 Experiments
4.1 Environments
To see how much the three extensions above con-
tribute to the evaluation of translation, the correla-
tion between the automatic evaluation and the hu-
man evaluation is calculated. We used a bilingual
corpus which consists of 6,871 English sentences
on a technical domain and their translations into
Japanese.
100 sentences were randomly selected and trans-
lated by 5 machine translation systems S1-S5 and
a human H1 who is a native Japanese speaker but
does not have strong knowledge of the technical do-
main. These 6 translations were evaluated by five
methods: B1 to B4 are Japanese versions of BLEU
with the extension described in Section 3 and M1 is
a manual evaluation.
B1: Morphological analysis is applied to translated
Japanese sentences. Only the technique de-
scribed in Section 3.1 is used.
B2: Functional words are distinguished by their
POSs. This corresponds to the technique in
Section 3.1 and 3.2.
B3: Paraphrasing rules are applied to the reference
sentences as described in Section 3.3. Here
the applied rules are limited to 51 rules which
rewrite polite forms (e.g. 1 and 2 in Table 1).
B4: All 88 paraphrasing rules including other types
(e.g. 3 and 4 in Table 1) are applied.
M1: Average score of the manual evaluation of all
translations in the corpus. The sentences were
scored using a 5-level evaluation: 1 (poor) to
5 (good). The evaluator was different from the
translator of H1.
B1 B2 B3 B4 M1
S1 0.115 0.114 0.132 0.135 2.38
S2 0.130 0.129 0.149 0.151 2.74
S3 0.134 0.132 0.148 0.152 2.77
S4 0.137 0.135 0.148 0.158 3.16
S5 0.183 0.177 0.179 0.180 3.38
H1 0.170 0.166 0.179 0.187 4.40
correl 0.797 0.803 0.865 0.931 (1.0)
Table 2: BLEU scores evaluated by each method.
?correl? means the correlation of each method with
the manual evaluation (M1).
0
0.5
1
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 H1
?
? ?
?
?
?
?
? ? ?
? ?
?
? ?
?
?
?
?
? ?
?
?
?
? B2
? B3
? B4
? M1
Figure 1: BLEU scores normalized as S1 is 0 and
H1 is 1. B1 is omitted since it is close to B2.
The paraphrasing rules used in B3 and B4 were
prepared manually by comparing the candidate sen-
tences and the reference sentences in the reminder of
the corpus which are not used for the evaluation. The
application of the rules are unlikely to produce in-
correct sentences, because the rules are adjusted by
adding the applicable conditions, and the rules that
may have side effects are not adopted. This was con-
firmed by applying the rules to 200 sentences in an-
other corpus. A total of 189 out of the 200 sentences
were paraphrased in at least a part, and all of the
newly created sentences were grammatically correct
and had the same meaning as the original sentences.
4.2 Experimental Results
Table 2 shows the result of evaluation using the five
methods. Comparing the correlation with M1, B2
slightly outperformed B1, thus the POS information
improves the evaluation. B3 was better than B2 in
correlation by 0.06. This is because the scores by the
B3 evaluation were much higher than the B2 evalu-
ation except for S5, since only S5 tends to output
sentences in polite form while the most of reference
sentences are written in polite form. Further im-
provement was observed in B4, by applying other
types of paraphrasing rules.
Figure 1 graphically illustrates the correlation be-
tween the BLEU evaluations and the human evalua-
tions, by normalizing the results so that S1 is 0, H1
is 1, and the rest of scores are linearly interpolated.
We can see that only B4 ranks all six systems in the
same order as the manual evaluation.
5 Discussion
5.1 Lexical or Structural Paraphrasing Rules
The paraphrasing rules used here have no lexical
rules that rewrite content words into other expres-
sions as in Example 4.
Example 4
dokusho : suru ? hon : wo : yo : mu
?read? ?read a book?
The main reason why we don?t use such rules is
that this type of rules may produce incorrect sen-
tences. For instance, (a) in Example 5 is rewritten
into (b) by the rule in Example 4, but (b) is not cor-
rect.
Example 5
(a) Kare ha watashi no hon wo yo mu.
?He reads my book.?
(b)* Kare ha watashi no dokusho suru.
?He my reads.? (literally)
This error can be decreased if the paraphrasing
rules have more strict conditions about surrounding
words, however, using such lexical rules contradicts
the original BLEU?s strategy that the differences in
expressions should be covered by the number of ref-
erence sentences. This strategy is reasonable be-
cause complicated rules tend to make the evaluation
arbitrary, that is, the evaluation score strongly de-
pends on the lexical rules. To verify that the lex-
ical rules are unnecessary, we added 17,478 word-
replacing rules to B4. The rules mainly replace Chi-
nese characters or Kana characters with canonical
Paraphrasing rule ?correl
da(aux) ? de : a : ru 0.025
$1(verb-v) : ru ? $1(verb-v) : masu 0.022
$1(noun) : (dot) : $2(noun) ? $1 : $2 0.020
Table 3: The three best paraphrasing rules which
contributed to the translation evaluation. The col-
umn ??correl? means the decrease of the correla-
tion in the translation evaluation when the rule is re-
moved. ?(verb-v)? denotes a vowel verb.
ones. With the rules, the correlation with M1 was
0.886, which is much lower than B4.
This result implies the differences in content
words do not affect the evaluations. More specifi-
cally, BLEU?s misjudgments because of differences
in content words occur with almost equal probabil-
ity for each translation system. Thus it is enough
to use the structural (i.e. non-lexical) paraphrasing
rules which rewrite only functional words.
5.2 Evaluation of Each Paraphrasing Rule
The contribution of the paraphrasing was measured
by the increase of reliability of the translation eval-
uation, as described in Section 4.2. In the same
way, the effect of each single paraphrasing rule can
be also evaluated quantitatively. Table 3 shows the
three best paraphrasing rules which contributed to
the translation evaluation. Here the contribution of
a rule to the automatic evaluation is measured by
the increase of correlation with the human evalua-
tion when the rule is used.
6 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper has proposed an automatic translation
evaluation method applicable to Japanese translation
evaluation. The paraphrasing rules that cancel out
the differences in writing styles contributed to im-
prove the reliability of the automatic evaluation. The
proposed evaluation method with paraphrasing rules
achieved a high correlation of 0.93 with the human
evaluation, while the correlation was 0.80 without
the rules.
The experiments clarified how much the para-
phrasing rules improved the evaluation by compar-
ing the correlations. This means our system can
evaluate not only the translation quality but also
the paraphrasing rules under the assumption that the
more properly the semantically similar sentences are
judged as close sentences the more reliable the trans-
lation evaluation is. Therefore the translation evalu-
ation gives us an objective evaluation method of the
paraphrasing quality that has been difficult to evalu-
ate.
This paper focuses on non-lexical paraphrasing
since lexical paraphrasing rules make the translation
evaluation inconsistent, but if an exhaustive and pre-
cise set of paraphrasing rules can be generated, it
will be useful for translation evaluation, and its ap-
propriateness should be shown by the reliability of
the translation evaluation. In order to develop such
desirable paraphrasing rules, the automatic acquisi-
tion of paraphrasing rules will be our next research
direction.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Dr. Kishore Papineni for the instruc-
tion of BLEU. I would like to thank people in Yam-
ato Research Laboratory for helping the evaluation.
References
Teruko Mitamura and Eric Nyberg. 2001. Automatic
rewriting for controlled language translation. In Proc.
of NLPRS2001 Workshop on Automatic Paraphrasing,
pages 1?12.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, John Hen-
derson, and Florence Reeder. 2002a. Corpus-based
comprehensive and diagnostic MT evaluation: Initial
Arabic, Chinese, French, and Spanish results. In Proc.
of HLT2002, pages 124?127.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002b. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. of the 40th
ACL, pages 311?318.
Tetsuro Takahashi, Tomoya Iwakura, Ryu Iida, and
Kentaro Inui. 2001. Kura: A revision-based
lexico-structural paraphrasing engine. In Proc. of
NLPRS2001 Workshop on Automatic Paraphrasing,
pages 37?46.
Kentaro Torisawa. 2002. An unsupervised learn-
ing method for associative relationships between verb
phrases. In Proc. of COLING 2002, pages 1009?1015.
Ingrid Zukerman and Bhavani Raskutti. 2002. Lexical
query paraphrasing for document retrieval. In Proc. of
COLING 2002, pages 1177?1183.
