SYSTRAN?s Chinese Word Segmentation 
Jin Yang Jean Senellart Remi Zajac 
SYSTRAN Software, Inc. 
9333 Genesee Ave. 
San Diego, CA 92121, USA 
jyang@systransoft.com 
SYSTRAN S.A. 
1, rue du Cimeti?re 
95230 Soisy-sous-Montmorency, France 
senellart@systran.fr 
 
SYSTRAN Software, Inc. 
9333 Genesee Ave. 
San Diego, CA 92121, USA 
zajac@systransoft.com 
Abstract 
SYSTRAN?s Chinese word segmentation 
is one important component of its 
Chinese-English machine translation 
system. The Chinese word segmentation 
module uses a rule-based approach, based 
on a large dictionary and fine-grained 
linguistic rules. It works on general-
purpose texts from different Chinese-
speaking regions, with comparable 
performance. SYSTRAN participated in 
the four open tracks in the First 
International Chinese Word Segmentation 
Bakeoff. This paper gives a general 
description of the segmentation module, 
as well as the results and analysis of its 
performance in the Bakeoff. 
1 Introduction 
Chinese word segmentation is one of the pre-
processing steps of the SYSTRAN Chinese-
English Machine Translation (MT) system. The 
development of the Chinese-English MT system 
began in August 1994, and this is where the 
Chinese word segmentation issue was first 
addressed. The algorithm of the early version of 
the segmentation module was borrowed from 
SYSTRAN?s Japanese segmentation module. The 
program ran on a large word list, which contained 
600,000 entries at the time1. The basic strategy was 
to list all possible matches for an entire linguistic 
unit, then solve the overlapping matches via 
linguistic rules. The development was focused on 
technical domains, and high accuracy was 
achieved after only three months of development. 
Since then, development has shifted to other areas 
of Chinese-English MT, including the enrichment 
of the bi-lingual word lists with part-of-speech, 
syntactic and semantic features. In 2001, the 
development of a prototype Chinese-Japanese MT 
system began. Although the project only lasted for 
three months, some important changes were made 
in the segmentation convention, regarding the 
distinction between words and phrases 2 . Along 
with new developments of the SYSTRAN MT 
engine, the segmentation engine has recently been 
re-implemented. The dictionary and the general 
approach remain unchanged, but dictionary lookup 
and rule matching were re-implemented using 
finite-state technology, and linguistic rules for the 
segmentation module are now expressed using a 
context-free-based formalism, improving 
maintainability. The re-implementation generates 
multiple segmentation results with associated 
probabilities. This will allow for disambiguation at 
a later stage of the MT process, and will widen the 
possibility of word segmentation for other 
applications. 
2 System Description 
2.1 Segmentation Standard 
Our definition of words and our segmentation 
conventions are based on available standards, 
modified for MT purposes. The PRC standard (Liu 
et al, 1993) was initially used. Sample differences 
are listed as follows: 
 
Type PRC SYSTRAN 
NP ???? 
??????? 
??   ?? 
??  ??  ??? 
CD 31? 31  ? 
CD + M ?? ??? ?  ?   ?  ?  ? 
DI4 + CD ?? ?  ? 
Name ?  ? ?  ?? ??   ??? 
 
Table 1. Segmentation Divergences with the PRC Guidelines 
2.2 Methodology 
The SYSTRAN Chinese word segmentation 
module uses a rule-based approach and a large 
dictionary. The dictionary is derived from the 
Chinese-English MT dictionary. It currently 
includes about 400,000 words. The basic 
segmentation strategy is to list all possible matches 
for a translation unit (typically, a sentence), then to 
solve overlapping matches via linguistic rules. The 
same segmentation module and the same 
dictionary are used to segment different types of 
text with comparable performance. 
All dictionary lookup and rule matching are 
performed using a low level Finite State 
Automaton library. The segmentation speed is 
3,500 characters per second using a Pentium 4 
2.4GHZ processor. 
Dictionary 
The Chinese-English MT dictionary currently 
contains 400,000 words (e.g., ??), and 200,000 
multi-word expressions (e.g., ??  ??  ??? ). 
Only words are used for the segmentation. 
Specialized linguistic rules are associated with the 
dictionary. The dictionary is general purpose, with 
good coverage on several domains. Domain-
specific dictionaries are also available, but were 
not used in the Bakeoff. 
The dictionary contains words from different 
Chinese-speaking regions, but the representation is 
mostly in simplified Chinese. The traditional 
characters are considered as ?variants?, and they 
are not physically stored in the dictionary. For 
example, ???  and ???  are stored in the 
dictionary, and ??? can also be found via the 
character matching ?? ?. 
The dictionary is encoded in Unicode (UTF8), 
and all internal operations manipulate UTF8 
strings. Major encoding conversions are supported, 
including GB2312-80, GB13000, BIG-5, BIG5-
HKSCS, etc. 
Training 
The segmentation module has been tested and fine-
tuned on general texts, and on texts in the technical 
and military domains (because of specific customer 
requirements for the MT system). Due to the wide 
availability of news texts, the news domain has 
also recently been used for training and testing. 
The training process is merely reduced to the 
customization of a SYSTRAN MT system. In the 
current version of the MT system, customization is 
achieved by building a User Dictionary (UD). A 
UD supplements the main dictionary: any word 
that is not found in the main MT system dictionary 
is added in a User Dictionary.  
Name-Entity Recognition and Unknown Words 
Name entity recognition is still under development. 
Recognition of Chinese persons? names is done via 
linguistic rules. Foreign name recognition is not 
yet implemented due to the difficulty of obtaining 
translations. 
Due to the unavailability of translations, even 
when an unknown word has been successfully 
recognized, we consider the unknown word 
recognition as part of the terminology extraction 
process. This feature was not integrated for the 
Bakeoff. 
2.3 Evaluation 
Our internal evaluation has been focused on the 
accuracy of segmentation using our own 
segmentation standard. Our evaluation process 
includes large-scale bilingual regression testing for 
the Chinese-English system, as well as regression 
testing of the segmenter itself using a test database 
of over 5MB of test items. Two criteria are used: 
1. Overlapping Ambiguity Strings (OAS): the 
reference segmentation and the segmenter 
segmentation overlap for some string, e.g., 
AB-C and A-BC. As shown below, this 
typically indicates an error from our 
segmenter. 
2. Covering Ambiguity Strings (CAS): the test 
strings that cover the reference strings 
(CAS-T: ABC and AB-C), and the reference 
strings that cover the test strings (CAS-R: 
AB-C and ABC). These cases arise mostly 
from a difference between equally valid 
segmentation standards. 
No evaluation with other standards had been done 
before the Bakeoff. 
 
Test Reference Type 
???  ?? ??  ??? OAS 
???? ? ? ? ? CAS-T 
???? ?? ? ? CAS-T 
?? ? ? CAS-T 
?? ?? ???? CAS-R 
1994  ? 1994 ? CAS-R 
? ? ?? CAS-R 
Table 2. Types of Segmentation Differences 
3 Discussion of the Bakeoff 
3.1 Results 
SYSTRAN participated in the four open tracks in 
the First International Chinese Word Segmentation 
Bakeoff http://www.sighan.org/bakeoff2003/. Each 
track corresponds to one corpus with its own word 
segementation standard. Each corpus had its own 
segmentation standard that was significantly 
different from the others. The training process 
included building a User Dictionary that contains 
words found in the training corpora, but not in the 
SYSTRAN dictionary.  Although each of these 
corpora was segmented according to its own 
standard, we made a single UD containing all the 
words gathered in all corpora.  
Although the ranking of the SYSTRAN 
segmenter is different in the four open tracks, 
SYSTRAN?s segmentation performance is quite 
comparable across the four corpora. This is to be 
compared to the scores obtained by other 
participants, where good performance was 
typically obtained on one corpus only. SYSTRAN 
scores for the 4 tracks are shown in Table 3 (Sproat 
and Emerson, 2003). 
 
Track R P F Roov Riv 
ASo 0.915 0.894 0.904 0.426 0.926 
CTBo 0.891 0.877 0.884 0.733 0.925 
HKo 0.898 0.860 0.879 0.616 0.920 
PKo 0.905 0.869 0.886 0.503 0.934 
Table 3. SYSTRAN?s Scores in the Bakeoff 
3.2 Discussions 
The segmentation differences between the 
reference corpora and SYSTRAN?s results are 
further analyzed. Table 4 shows the  partition of 
divergences between OAS, CAS-T, and CAS-R 
strings:3 
 
 Total Same OAS CAS-T CAS-R 
ASo 11,985 10,970 76 448 491 
CTBo 39,922 35,561 231 2,419 1,711 
HKo 34,959 31,397 217 1,436 1,909 
PKo 17,194 15,554 82 615 943 
Table 4. Count of OAS and CAS Divergence 
The majority of OAS divergences show incorrect 
segmentation from SYSTRAN. However, 
differences in CAS do not necessarily indicate 
incorrect segmentation results. The reasons can be 
categorized as follows: a) different segmentation 
standards, b) unknown word problem, c) name 
entity recognition problem, and d) miscellaneous4. 
The distributions of the differences are further 
analyzed in Table 5 and 6 for the ASo and PKo 
corpora, respectively. 
 
CAS-R: Unique Strings=334 (total=491) 
Type Count Percent Examples 
Different 
Standards 
184 55% ???  
??  
????  
???? 
Unknown  
Words 
116 35% ??  
??  
??  
?? 
Name  
Entity 
30 9% ??  
???  
?? 
Misc. 4 1% ???? 
CAS-T: Unique Strings=137 (total=448) 
Type Count Percent Examples 
Different  
Standard 
134 98% ??  
??? 
???? 
True 
Covering 
3 2% ?? 
?? 
Table 5. Distribution of Divergences in the ASo Track  
 
 
CAS-R: Unique Strings=508 (total=943) 
Type Count Percent Examples 
Different 
Standards 
294 58% ???? 
?? 
?? 
?? 
?? 
2001 ? 
Unknown  
Words 
90 18% ?? 
?? 
?? 
Name  
Entity 
61 12% ??? 
??? 
Misc. 63 12% 20% 
3.9? 
CAS-T: Unique Strings=197 (total=615) 
Type Count Percent Examples 
Different  
Standards 
194 98% ??? 
?? 
??? 
??? 
True 
Covering 
3 2% ?? 
?? 
Table 6. Distribution of Divergences in the PKo Track  
 
This analysis shows that the segmentation results 
are greatly impacted by the difference in the 
segmentation standards. Other problems include 
for example the encoding of numbers using single 
bytes instead of the standard double-byte encoding 
in the PKo corpus, which account for about 12% of 
differences in the PKo track scores.  
4 Conclusion 
For an open track segmentation competition like 
the Bakeoff, we need to achieve a balance between 
the following aspects:  
? Segmentation standards: differences between 
one?s own standard and the reference standard. 
? Adaptation to the other standards: whether one 
should adapt to other standards. 
? Dictionary coverage: the coverage of one?s 
own dictionary and the dictionary obtained by 
training. 
? Algorithm: combination of segmentation, 
unknown word identification, and name entity 
recognition. 
? Speed: the time needed to segment the corpora. 
? Training: time and manpower used for training 
each corpus and track 
Few systems participated in all open tracks: 
only SYSTRAN and one university participated in 
all four. We devoted about 2 person/week for this 
evaluation. We rank in the top three of three open 
tracks, and only the PKo track scores are lower, 
probably because of encoding problems for 
numbers for this corpus (we did not adjust our 
segmenter to cope with this corpus-specific 
problem). Our results are very consistent for all 
open tracks, indicating a very robust approach to 
Chinese segmentation.  
Analysis of results shows that SYSTRAN?s 
Chinese word segmentation excels in the area of 
dictionary coverage, robustness, and speed. The 
vast majority of divergences with the test corpora 
originate from differences in segmentation 
standards (over 55% for CAS-R and about 98% for 
CAS-T). True errors range between 0% and 2% 
only, the rest being assigned to either the lack of 
unknown word processing or the lack of a name 
entity recognizer. Although not integrated, the 
unknown word identification and name entity 
recognition are under development as part of a 
terminology extraction tool. 
For future Chinese word segmentation 
evaluations, some of the issues that arose in this 
Bakeoff would need to be addressed to obtain even 
more significant results, including word 
segmentation standards and encoding problems for 
example. We would also welcome the introduction 
of a surprise track, similar to the surprise track of 
the DARPA MT evaluations that would require 
participants to submit results within 24 hours on an 
unknown corpus. 
References 
Liu, Y, Tan Q. & Shen, X. 1993. Segmentation 
Standard for Modern Chinese Information Processing 
and Automatic Segmentation Methodology. 
Sproat, R., & Emerson T. 2003.  The First International 
Chinese Word Segmentation Bakeoff.  In the 
Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN Workshop on 
Chinese Language Processing. ACL03. 
 
                                                          
1  The word list only contained Chinese-English 
bilingual dictionary without any syntactic or semantic 
features. It also contained many compound nouns, e.g. 
????. 
2 Compound nouns are no longer considered as words. 
They were moved to the expression dictionary. For 
example, ???? has become ?? ??. 
3 The number of words in the reference strings is used 
when counting OAS and CAS divergences. For 
example, ?????s CAS count is three because the 
number of words in the reference string ?? ? ? is 
three. 
4 Word segmentation in SYSTRAN MT systems occurs 
after sentence identification and normalization. During 
word segmentation, Chinese numbers are converted into 
Arabic numbers. 
