A Simple Named Entity Extractor using AdaBoost
Xavier Carreras and Llu??s Ma`rquez and Llu??s Padro?
TALP Research Center
Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informa`tics
Universitat Polite`cnica de Catalunya
{carreras,lluism,padro}@lsi.upc.es
1 Introduction
This paper presents a Named Entity Extraction (NEE)
system for the CoNLL-2003 shared task competition. As
in the past year edition (Carreras et al, 2002a), we have
approached the task by treating the two main sub?tasks of
the problem, recognition (NER) and classification (NEC),
sequentially and independently with separate modules.
Both modules are machine learning based systems, which
make use of binary and multiclass AdaBoost classifiers.
Named Entity recognition is performed as a greedy se-
quence tagging procedure under the well?known BIO la-
belling scheme. This tagging process makes use of three
binary classifiers trained to be experts on the recognition
of B, I, and O labels, respectively. Named Entity classifi-
cation is viewed as a 4?class classification problem (with
LOC, PER, ORG, and MISC class labels), which is straight-
forwardly addressed by the use of a multiclass learning
algorithm.
The system presented here consists of a replication,
with some minor changes, of the system that obtained the
best results in the CoNLL-2002 NEE task. Therefore, it
can be considered as a benchmark of the state?of?the?
art technology for the current edition, and will allow also
to make comparisons about the training corpora of both
editions.
2 Learning the Decisions
We use AdaBoost with confidence rated predictions as
learning algorithm for the classifiers involved in the sys-
tem. More particularly, the basic binary version has been
used to learn the I, O, and B classifiers for the NER
module, and the multiclass multilabel extension (namely
AdaBoost.MH) has been used to perform entity classifi-
cation.
The idea of these algorithms is to learn an accurate
strong classifier by linearly combining, in a weighted vot-
ing scheme, many simple and moderately?accurate base
classifiers or rules. Each base rule is learned sequen-
tially by presenting the base learning algorithm a weight-
ing over the examples, which is dynamically adjusted de-
pending on the behavior of the previously learned rules.
AdaBoost has been applied, with significant success, to
a number of problems in different areas, including NLP
tasks (Schapire, 2002). We refer the reader to (Schapire
and Singer, 1999) for details about the general algorithms
(for both the binary and multiclass variants), and (Car-
reras and Ma`rquez, 2001; Carreras et al, 2002b) for par-
ticular applications to NLP domains.
In our setting, the boosting algorithm combines sev-
eral small fixed?depth decision trees, as base rules. Each
branch of a tree is, in fact, a conjunction of binary fea-
tures, allowing the strong boosting classifier to work with
complex and expressive rules.
3 Feature Representation
A window W anchored in a word w represents the local
context of w used by a classifier to make a decision on
that word. In the window, each word around w is cod-
ified with a set of primitive features, together with its
relative position to w. Each primitive feature with each
relative position and each possible value forms a final bi-
nary feature for the classifier (e.g., ?the word form at
position(-2) is street?). The kind of information coded
in those features may be grouped in the following kinds:
? Lexical: Word forms and their position in the win-
dow (e.g., W (3)=?bank?). When available, word
lemmas and their position in the window.
? Syntactic: Part-of-Speech tags and Chunk tags.
? Orthographic: Word properties with regard to how
is it capitalized (initial-caps, all-caps), the kind
of characters that form the word (contains-digits,
all-digits, alphanumeric, roman-number), the pres-
ence of punctuation marks (contains-dots, contains-
hyphen, acronym), single character patterns (lonely-
initial, punctuation-mark, single-char), or the mem-
bership of the word to a predefined class (functional-
word1), or pattern (URL).
? Affixes: The prefixes and suffixes of the word (up to
4 characters).
? Word Type Patterns: Type pattern of consecutive
words in the context. The type of a word is ei-
ther functional (f), capitalized (C), lowercased (l),
punctuation mark (.), quote (?) or other (x). For
instance, the word type pattern for the phrase ?John
Smith payed 3 euros? would be CClxl.
? Left Predictions: The {B,I,O} tags being predicted
in the current classification (at recognition stage), or
the predicted category for entities in left context (at
classification stage).
? Bag-of-Words: Form of the words in the window,
without considering positions (e.g., ?bank?? W ).
? Trigger Words: Triggering properties of window
words. An external list is used to determine whether
a word may trigger a certain Named Entity (NE)
class (e.g., ?president? may trigger class PER).
? Gazetteer Features: Gazetteer information for win-
dow words. An external gazetteer is used to deter-
mine possible classes for each word.
4 The NER Module
The Named Entity recognition task is performed as a
combination of local classifiers which test simple deci-
sions on each word in the text.
According to a BIO labelling scheme, each word is
tagged as either the beginning of a NE (B tag), a word
inside a NE (I tag), or a word outside a NE (O tag).
We use three binary classifiers for the tagging, one cor-
responding to each tag. All the words in the train set are
used as training examples, applying a one-vs-all binariza-
tion. When tagging, the sentence is processed from left to
right, greedily selecting for each word the tag with maxi-
mum confidence that is coherent with the current solution
(e.g., O tags cannot be followed by I tags). Despite its
simplicity, the greedy BIO tagging performed very well
for the NER task. Other more sophisticated represen-
tations and tagging schemes, studied in the past edition
(Carreras et al, 2002a), did not improve the performance
at all.
The three classifiers use the same information to codify
examples. According to the information types introduced
in section 3, all the following features are considered for
each target word: lexical, syntactic, orthographic, and
affixes in a {-3,+3} window; left predictions in a {-3,-1}
1Functional words are determiners and prepositions which
typically appear inside NEs.
window; and all the word type patterns that cover the 0
position in a {-3,+3} window.
The semantic information represented by the rest
of features, namely bag-of-words, trigger words, and
gazetteer features, did not help the recognition of
Named Entities, and therefore was not used.
5 The NEC Module
NEC is regarded as a classification task, consisting of as-
signing the NE type to each already recognized NE. In
contrast to the last year system, the problem has not been
binarized and treated in an ECOC (error correcting out-
put codes) combination scheme. Instead, the multiclass
multilabel AdaBoost.MH algorithm has been used. The
reason is that although ECOC provides slightly better re-
sults, its computational cost is also much higher than the
required for AdaBoost.MH.
The algorithm has been employed with different pa-
rameterizations, by modeling NEC either as a three-class
classification problem (in which MISC is selected only
when the entity is negatively classified as PER, ORG and
LOC) or as a four-class problem, in which MISC is just
one more class. The latter turned out to be the best choice
(with very significant differences).
The window information described in section 3 is
used in the NEC module computing all features for a
{-3,+3} window around the NE being classified, ex-
cept for the bag-of-words group, for which a {-5,+5}
window is used. Information relative to orthographic,
left predictions, and bag-of-words features is straight-
forwardly coded as described above, but other requires
further detail:
? Lexical features: Apart from word form and lemma
for each window position, two additional binary fea-
tures are used: One is satisfied when the focus NE
form and lemma coincide exactly, and the other
when they coincide after turning both of them into
lowercase.
? Syntactic features: Part-of-Speech (PoS) and
Chunk tags of window words (e.g., W (3).PoS=NN).
PoS and Chunk pattern of the NE (e.g.,
NNPS POS JJ for the NE ?People ?s Daily?)
? Affix features: Prefixes and suffixes of all window
words. Prefixes and suffixes of the NE being classi-
fied and of its internal components (e.g., considering
the entity ?People ?s Daily?, ?ly? is taken as a suf-
fix of the NE, ?ple? is taken as a suffix of the first
internal word, etc.).
? Trigger Words: Triggering properties of window
words (e.g., W (3).trig=PER). Triggering properties
of components of the NE being classified (e.g., for
the entity ?Bank of England? we could have a fea-
ture NE(1).trig=ORG). Context patterns to the left
of the NE, where each word is marked with its trig-
gering properties, or with a functional?word tag if
appropriate (e.g., the phrase ?the president of United
States?, would produce the pattern f ORG f for the
NE ?United States?, assuming that the word ?presi-
dent? is listed as a possible trigger for ORG).
? Gazetteer Features: Gazetteer information for
the NE being classified and for its components
(e.g., for the entity ?Bank of England?, features
NE(3).gaz=LOC and NE.gaz=ORG would be acti-
vated if ?England? is found in the gazetteer as LOC
and ?Bank of England? as ORG, respectively.
? Additionally, binary features encoding the length in
words of the NE being classified are also used.
6 Experimental Setting
The list of functional words for the task has been automat-
ically constructed using the training set. The lowercased
words inside a NE that appeared more than 3 times were
selected as functional words for the language.
Similarly, a gazetteer was constructed with the NEs in
the training set. When training, only a random 40% of the
entries in the gazetteer were considered. Moreover, we
used external knowledge in the form of a list of trigger
words for NEs and an external gazetteer. These knowl-
edge sources are the same that we used in the last year
competition for Spanish NEE. The entries of the trigger?
word list were linked to the Spanish WordNet, so they
have been directly translated by picking the correspond-
ing synsets of the English WordNet. The gazetteer has
been left unchanged, assuming interlinguality of most of
the entries. The gazetteer provided by the CoNLL-2003
organization has not been used in the work reported in
this paper.
In all cases, a preprocess of attribute filtering was per-
formed in order to avoid overfitting and to speed?up
learning. All features that occur less than 3 times in the
training corpus were discarded.
For each classification problem we trained the corre-
sponding AdaBoost classifiers, learning up to 4,000 base
decision trees per classifier, with depths ranging from 1
(decision stumps) to 4. The depth of the base rules and
the number of rounds were directly optimized on the de-
velopment set. The set of unlabelled examples provided
by the organization was not used in this work.
7 Results
The described system has been applied to both languages
in the shared task, though German and English environ-
ments are not identical: The German corpus enables the
use of lemma features while English does not. Also, the
used trigger word list is available for English but not for
German.
The results of the BIO model for the NER task on
the development and test sets for English and German
are presented in table 1. As will be seen later for the
whole task, the results are systematically better for En-
glish than for German. As it can be observed, the be-
haviour on the development and test English sets is quite
different. While in the development set the NER mod-
ule achieves a very good balance between precision and
recall, in the test set the precision drops almost 4 points,
being the F1 results much worse. On the contrary, de-
velopment and test sets for German are much more sim-
ilar. In this case, recall levels obtained for the language
are much lower compared to precision ones. This fact is
indicating the difficulty for reliably detecting the begin-
nings of the Named Entities in German (all common and
proper nouns are capitalized). Probably, a non?greedy
tagging procedure would have the chance to improve the
recognition results.
Precision Recall F?=1
English devel. 95.65% 95.51% 95.58
English test 91.93% 94.02% 92.96
German devel. 88.15% 71.55% 78.99
German test 85.87% 72.61% 78.68
Table 1: Results of the BIO recognizer for the NER task
Regarding NEC task, optimal feature selection is dif-
ferent for each language: Chunk information is almost
useless in English (or even harmful, when combined with
PoS features), but useful in German. On the contrary, al-
though the use of left predictions for NEC is useful for
English, the lower accuracy of the German system ren-
ders those features harmful (they are very useful when
assuming perfect left predictions). Table 2 presents NEC
accuracy results assuming perfect recognition of entities.
English German
features accuracy features accuracy
basic 91.47% basic 79.02%
basic+P 92.14% basic+P 79.29%
basic+C 91.60% basic+C 79.04%
basic+PC 92.12% basic+PC 79.91%
basic+Pg 93.86% basic+PCg 81.54%
basic+PG 95.05% basic+PCG 85.12%
basic+PGT 95.14%
Table 2: NEC accuracy on the development set assuming
a perfect recognition of named entities
The basic feature set includes all lexical, orthographic,
affix and bag?of?words information. P stands for Part-of-
Speech features, C for chunking?related information, T
for trigger?words features and g/G for gazetteer?related
information2. In general, more complex features sets
yield better results, except for the C case in English, as
commented above.
Table 4 presents the results on the NEE task obtained
by pipelining the NER and NEC modules. The NEC
module used both knowledge extracted from the training
set as well as external sources such as the gazetteer or
trigger word lists.
Almost the same conclusions extracted from the NER
results apply to the complete task, although here the re-
sults are lower due to the cascade of errors introduced by
the two modules: 1) Results on English are definitely bet-
ter than on German; 2) Development and test sets present
a regular behaviour in German, while for English they are
significantly different. We find the latter particularly dis-
appointing because it is indicating that no reliable con-
clusions can be extracted about the generalization error
of the NEE system constructed, by testing it on a 3,000
sentence corpus. This may be caused by the fact that the
training set is no representative enough, or by a too biased
learning of the NEE system towards the development set.
Regarding particular categories, we can see that for En-
glish the results are not extremely dissimilar (F1 values
fall in a range of 10 points for each set), being LOC and
PER the most easy to identify and ORG and MISC the most
difficult. Comparatively, in the German case bigger dif-
ferences are observed (F1 ranges from 52.58 to 80.79 in
the test set), e.g., recognition of MISC entities is far worse
than all the rest. Another slight difference against English
is that the easiest category is PER instead of LOC.
In order to allow fair comparison with other systems,
table 3 presents the results achieved on the development
set without using external knowledge. The features used
correspond to the basic model plus Part-of-Speech infor-
mation (plus Chunks for German), plus a gazetteer build
with the entities appearing in the training corpus.
Precision Recall F?=1
English devel. 90.34% 90.21% 90.27
English test 83.19% 85.07% 84.12
German devel. 74.87% 60.77% 67.09
German test 74.69% 63.16% 68.45
Table 3: Overall results using no external knowledge
Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the European
Commission (Meaning, IST-2001-34460) and the Span-
ish Research Dept. (Hermes, TIC2000-0335-C03-02; Pe-
2g refers to a gazetteer containing only entities appearing in
the training set while G includes also external knowledge
English devel. Precision Recall F?=1
LOC 95.33% 94.39% 94.86
MISC 89.94% 83.41% 86.55
ORG 86.98% 88.14% 87.56
PER 91.79% 94.68% 93.21
Overall 91.51% 91.37% 91.44
English test Precision Recall F?=1
LOC 88.14% 90.41% 89.26
MISC 82.02% 75.36% 78.54
ORG 78.40% 80.43% 79.41
PER 86.36% 91.65% 88.93
Overall 84.05% 85.96% 85.00
German devel. Precision Recall F?=1
LOC 75.72% 73.67% 74.68
MISC 72.34% 42.48% 53.52
ORG 76.89% 63.82% 69.75
PER 83.84% 68.88% 75.63
Overall 77.90% 63.23% 69.80
German test Precision Recall F?=1
LOC 70.31% 70.92% 70.61
MISC 64.91% 44.18% 52.58
ORG 71.70% 54.08% 61.65
PER 87.59% 74.98% 80.79
Overall 75.47% 63.82% 69.15
Table 4: Final results for English and German
tra - TIC2000-1735-C02-02). Xavier Carreras holds a
grant by the Catalan Government Research Department.
References
X. Carreras and L. Ma`rquez. 2001. Boosting Trees for
Clause Splitting. In Proceedings of the 5th CoNLL,
Tolouse, France.
X. Carreras, L. Ma`rquez, and L. Padro?. 2002a. Named
Entity Extraction using AdaBoost. In Proceedings of
the 6th CoNLL, Taipei, Taiwan.
X. Carreras, L. Ma`rquez, V. Punyakanok, and D. Roth.
2002b. Learning and Inference for Clause Identifica-
tion. In Proceedings of the 14th European Conference
on Machine Learning, ECML, Helsinki, Finland.
R. E. Schapire and Y. Singer. 1999. Improved Boosting
Algorithms Using Confidence-rated Predictions. Ma-
chine Learning, 37(3).
R. E. Schapire. 2002. The Boosting Approach to Ma-
chine Learning. An Overview. In Proceedings of the
MSRI Workshop on Nonlinear Estimation and Classi-
fication, Berkeley, CA.
