Learning Extraction Patterns for Subjective Expressions?
Ellen Riloff
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
riloff@cs.utah.edu
Janyce Wiebe
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a bootstrapping process
that learns linguistically rich extraction pat-
terns for subjective (opinionated) expressions.
High-precision classifiers label unannotated
data to automatically create a large training set,
which is then given to an extraction pattern
learning algorithm. The learned patterns are
then used to identify more subjective sentences.
The bootstrapping process learns many subjec-
tive patterns and increases recall while main-
taining high precision.
1 Introduction
Many natural language processing applications could
benefit from being able to distinguish between factual
and subjective information. Subjective remarks come
in a variety of forms, including opinions, rants, allega-
tions, accusations, suspicions, and speculations. Ideally,
information extraction systems should be able to distin-
guish between factual information (which should be ex-
tracted) and non-factual information (which should be
discarded or labeled as uncertain). Question answering
systems should distinguish between factual and specula-
tive answers. Multi-perspective question answering aims
to present multiple answers to the user based upon specu-
lation or opinions derived from different sources. Multi-
document summarization systems need to summarize dif-
ferent opinions and perspectives. Spam filtering systems
?This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under grants IIS-0208798, IIS-0208985, and IRI-9704240.
The data preparation was performed in support of the North-
east Regional Research Center (NRRC) which is sponsored by
the Advanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA), a
U.S. Government entity which sponsors and promotes research
of import to the Intelligence Community which includes but is
not limited to the CIA, DIA, NSA, NIMA, and NRO.
must recognize rants and emotional tirades, among other
things. In general, nearly any system that seeks to iden-
tify information could benefit from being able to separate
factual and subjective information.
Some existing resources contain lists of subjective
words (e.g., Levin?s desire verbs (1993)), and some em-
pirical methods in NLP have automatically identified ad-
jectives, verbs, and N-grams that are statistically associ-
ated with subjective language (e.g., (Turney, 2002; Hatzi-
vassiloglou and McKeown, 1997; Wiebe, 2000; Wiebe
et al, 2001)). However, subjective language can be ex-
hibited by a staggering variety of words and phrases. In
addition, many subjective terms occur infrequently, such
as strongly subjective adjectives (e.g., preposterous, un-
seemly) and metaphorical or idiomatic phrases (e.g., dealt
a blow, swept off one?s feet). Consequently, we believe
that subjectivity learning systems must be trained on ex-
tremely large text collections before they will acquire a
subjective vocabulary that is truly broad and comprehen-
sive in scope.
To address this issue, we have been exploring the use
of bootstrapping methods to allow subjectivity classifiers
to learn from a collection of unannotated texts. Our re-
search uses high-precision subjectivity classifiers to au-
tomatically identify subjective and objective sentences in
unannotated texts. This process allows us to generate a
large set of labeled sentences automatically. The sec-
ond emphasis of our research is using extraction patterns
to represent subjective expressions. These patterns are
linguistically richer and more flexible than single words
or N-grams. Using the (automatically) labeled sentences
as training data, we apply an extraction pattern learning
algorithm to automatically generate patterns represent-
ing subjective expressions. The learned patterns can be
used to automatically identify more subjective sentences,
which grows the training set, and the entire process can
then be bootstrapped. Our experimental results show that
this bootstrapping process increases the recall of the high-
precision subjective sentence classifier with little loss in
precision. We also find that the learned extraction pat-
terns capture subtle connotations that are more expressive
than the individual words by themselves.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
previous work on subjectivity analysis and extraction pat-
tern learning. Section 3 overviews our general approach,
describes the high-precision subjectivity classifiers, and
explains the algorithm for learning extraction patterns as-
sociated with subjectivity. Section 4 describes the data
that we use, presents our experimental results, and shows
examples of patterns that are learned. Finally, Section 5
summarizes our findings and conclusions.
2 Background
2.1 Subjectivity Analysis
Much previous work on subjectivity recognition has fo-
cused on document-level classification. For example,
(Spertus, 1997) developed a system to identify inflamma-
tory texts and (Turney, 2002; Pang et al, 2002) developed
methods for classifying reviews as positive or negative.
Some research in genre classification has included the
recognition of subjective genres such as editorials (e.g.,
(Karlgren and Cutting, 1994; Kessler et al, 1997; Wiebe
et al, 2001)).
In contrast, the goal of our work is to classify individ-
ual sentences as subjective or objective. Document-level
classification can distinguish between ?subjective texts?,
such as editorials and reviews, and ?objective texts,? such
as newspaper articles. But in reality, most documents
contain a mix of both subjective and objective sentences.
Subjective texts often include some factual information.
For example, editorial articles frequently contain factual
information to back up the arguments being made, and
movie reviews often mention the actors and plot of a
movie as well as the theatres where it?s currently playing.
Even if one is willing to discard subjective texts in their
entirety, the objective texts usually contain a great deal of
subjective information in addition to facts. For example,
newspaper articles are generally considered to be rela-
tively objective documents, but in a recent study (Wiebe
et al, 2001) 44% of sentences in a news collection were
found to be subjective (after editorial and review articles
were removed).
One of the main obstacles to producing a sentence-
level subjectivity classifier is a lack of training data. To
train a document-level classifier, one can easily find col-
lections of subjective texts, such as editorials and reviews.
For example, (Pang et al, 2002) collected reviews from
a movie database and rated them as positive, negative, or
neutral based on the rating (e.g., number of stars) given
by the reviewer. It is much harder to obtain collections of
individual sentences that can be easily identified as sub-
jective or objective. Previous work on sentence-level sub-
jectivity classification (Wiebe et al, 1999) used training
corpora that had been manually annotated for subjectiv-
ity. Manually producing annotations is time consuming,
so the amount of available annotated sentence data is rel-
atively small.
The goal of our research is to use high-precision sub-
jectivity classifiers to automatically identify subjective
and objective sentences in unannotated text corpora. The
high-precision classifiers label a sentence as subjective or
objective when they are confident about the classification,
and they leave a sentence unlabeled otherwise. Unanno-
tated texts are easy to come by, so even if the classifiers
can label only 30% of the sentences as subjective or ob-
jective, they will still produce a large collection of labeled
sentences. Most importantly, the high-precision classi-
fiers can generate a much larger set of labeled sentences
than are currently available in manually created data sets.
2.2 Extraction Patterns
Information extraction (IE) systems typically use lexico-
syntactic patterns to identify relevant information. The
specific representation of these patterns varies across sys-
tems, but most patterns represent role relationships sur-
rounding noun and verb phrases. For example, an IE
system designed to extract information about hijackings
might use the pattern hijacking of <x>, which looks for
the noun hijacking and extracts the object of the prepo-
sition of as the hijacked vehicle. The pattern <x> was
hijacked would extract the hijacked vehicle when it finds
the verb hijacked in the passive voice, and the pattern
<x> hijacked would extract the hijacker when it finds
the verb hijacked in the active voice.
One of our hypotheses was that extraction patterns
would be able to represent subjective expressions that
have noncompositional meanings. For example, consider
the common expression drives (someone) up the wall,
which expresses the feeling of being annoyed with some-
thing. The meaning of this expression is quite different
from the meanings of its individual words (drives, up,
wall). Furthermore, this expression is not a fixed word
sequence that could easily be captured by N-grams. It is
a relatively flexible construction that may be more gener-
ally represented as <x> drives <y> up the wall, where x
and y may be arbitrary noun phrases. This pattern would
match many different sentences, such as ?George drives
me up the wall,? ?She drives the mayor up the wall,?
or ?The nosy old man drives his quiet neighbors up the
wall.?
We also wondered whether the extraction pattern rep-
resentation might reveal slight variations of the same verb
or noun phrase that have different connotations. For ex-
ample, you can say that a comedian bombed last night,
which is a subjective statement, but you can?t express
this sentiment with the passive voice of bombed. In Sec-
tion 3.2, we will show examples of extraction patterns
representing subjective expressions which do in fact ex-
hibit both of these phenomena.
A variety of algorithms have been developed to au-
tomatically learn extraction patterns. Most of these
algorithms require special training resources, such as
texts annotated with domain-specific tags (e.g., Au-
toSlog (Riloff, 1993), CRYSTAL (Soderland et al,
1995), RAPIER (Califf, 1998), SRV (Freitag, 1998),
WHISK (Soderland, 1999)) or manually defined key-
words, frames, or object recognizers (e.g., PALKA (Kim
and Moldovan, 1993) and LIEP (Huffman, 1996)).
AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996) takes a different approach,
requiring only a corpus of unannotated texts that have
been separated into those that are related to the target do-
main (the ?relevant? texts) and those that are not (the ?ir-
relevant? texts). Most recently, two bootstrapping algo-
rithms have been used to learn extraction patterns. Meta-
bootstrapping (Riloff and Jones, 1999) learns both extrac-
tion patterns and a semantic lexicon using unannotated
texts and seed words as input. ExDisco (Yangarber et al,
2000) uses a bootstrapping mechanism to find new ex-
traction patterns using unannotated texts and some seed
patterns as the initial input.
For our research, we adopted a learning process very
similar to that used by AutoSlog-TS, which requires only
relevant texts and irrelevant texts as its input. We describe
this learning process in more detail in the next section.
3 Learning and Bootstrapping Extraction
Patterns for Subjectivity
We have developed a bootstrapping process for subjec-
tivity classification that explores three ideas: (1) high-
precision classifiers can be used to automatically iden-
tify subjective and objective sentences from unannotated
texts, (2) this data can be used as a training set to auto-
matically learn extraction patterns associated with sub-
jectivity, and (3) the learned patterns can be used to grow
the training set, allowing this entire process to be boot-
strapped.
Figure 1 shows the components and layout of the boot-
strapping process. The process begins with a large collec-
tion of unannotated text and two high precision subjec-
tivity classifiers. One classifier searches the unannotated
corpus for sentences that can be labeled as subjective
with high confidence, and the other classifier searches
for sentences that can be labeled as objective with high
confidence. All other sentences in the corpus are left
unlabeled. The labeled sentences are then fed to an ex-
traction pattern learner, which produces a set of extrac-
tion patterns that are statistically correlated with the sub-
jective sentences (we will call these the subjective pat-
terns). These patterns are then used to identify more sen-
tences within the unannotated texts that can be classified
as subjective. The extraction pattern learner can then re-
train using the larger training set and the process repeats.
The subjective patterns can also be added to the high-
precision subjective sentence classifier as new features to
improve its performance. The dashed lines in Figure 1
represent the parts of the process that are bootstrapped.
In this section, we will describe the high-precision sen-
tence classifiers, the extraction pattern learning process,
and the details of the bootstrapping process.
3.1 High-Precision Subjectivity Classifiers
The high-precision classifiers (HP-Subj and HP-Obj) use
lists of lexical items that have been shown in previous
work to be good subjectivity clues. Most of the items are
single words, some are N-grams, but none involve syntac-
tic generalizations as in the extraction patterns. Any data
used to develop this vocabulary does not overlap with the
test sets or the unannotated data used in this paper.
Many of the subjective clues are from manually de-
veloped resources, including entries from (Levin, 1993;
Ballmer and Brennenstuhl, 1981), Framenet lemmas with
frame element experiencer (Baker et al, 1998), adjec-
tives manually annotated for polarity (Hatzivassiloglou
and McKeown, 1997), and subjectivity clues listed in
(Wiebe, 1990). Others were derived from corpora, in-
cluding subjective nouns learned from unannotated data
using bootstrapping (Riloff et al, 2003).
The subjectivity clues are divided into those that are
strongly subjective and those that are weakly subjective,
using a combination of manual review and empirical re-
sults on a small training set of manually annotated data.
As the terms are used here, a strongly subjective clue is
one that is seldom used without a subjective meaning,
whereas a weakly subjective clue is one that commonly
has both subjective and objective uses.
The high-precision subjective classifier classifies a sen-
tence as subjective if it contains two or more of the
strongly subjective clues. On a manually annotated test
set, this classifier achieves 91.5% precision and 31.9%
recall (that is, 91.5% of the sentences that it selected are
subjective, and it found 31.9% of the subjective sentences
in the test set). This test set consists of 2197 sentences,
59% of which are subjective.
The high-precision objective classifier takes a different
approach. Rather than looking for the presence of lexical
items, it looks for their absence. It classifies a sentence as
objective if there are no strongly subjective clues and at
most one weakly subjective clue in the current, previous,
and next sentence combined. Why doesn?t the objective
classifier mirror the subjective classifier, and consult its
own list of strongly objective clues? There are certainly
lexical items that are statistically correlated with the ob-
Known Subjective
Vocabulary
High?Precision Objective
Sentence Classifier (HP?Obj)
High?Precision Subjective
Sentence Classifier (HP?Subj)
Unannotated Text Collection
unlabeled sentences
unlabeled sentences
unlabeled sentences
Pattern?based Subjective
Sentence Classifier
Extraction Pattern
Learner
subjective
sentences
subjective sentences
objective sentences
subjective patterns
subjective patterns
Figure 1: Bootstrapping Process
jective class (examples are cardinal numbers (Wiebe et
al., 1999), and words such as per, case, market, and to-
tal), but the presence of such clues does not readily lead
to high precision objective classification. Add sarcasm
or a negative evaluation to a sentence about a dry topic
such as stock prices, and the sentence becomes subjec-
tive. Conversely, add objective topics to a sentence con-
taining two strongly subjective words such as odious and
scumbag, and the sentence remains subjective.
The performance of the high-precision objective classi-
fier is a bit lower than the subjective classifier: 82.6% pre-
cision and 16.4% recall on the test set mentioned above
(that is, 82.6% of the sentences selected by the objective
classifier are objective, and the objective classifier found
16.4% of the objective sentences in the test set). Al-
though there is room for improvement, the performance
proved to be good enough for our purposes.
3.2 Learning Subjective Extraction Patterns
To automatically learn extraction patterns that are associ-
ated with subjectivity, we use a learning algorithm similar
to AutoSlog-TS (Riloff, 1996). For training, AutoSlog-
TS uses a text corpus consisting of two distinct sets of
texts: ?relevant? texts (in our case, subjective sentences)
and ?irrelevant? texts (in our case, objective sentences).
A set of syntactic templates represents the space of pos-
sible extraction patterns.
The learning process has two steps. First, the syntac-
tic templates are applied to the training corpus in an ex-
haustive fashion, so that extraction patterns are generated
for (literally) every possible instantiation of the templates
that appears in the corpus. The left column of Figure 2
shows the syntactic templates used by AutoSlog-TS. The
right column shows a specific extraction pattern that was
learned during our subjectivity experiments as an instan-
tiation of the syntactic form on the left. For example, the
pattern <subj> was satisfied1 will match any sentence
where the verb satisfied appears in the passive voice. The
pattern <subj> dealt blow represents a more complex ex-
pression that will match any sentence that contains a verb
phrase with head=dealt followed by a direct object with
head=blow. This would match sentences such as ?The
experience dealt a stiff blow to his pride.? It is important
to recognize that these patterns look for specific syntactic
constructions produced by a (shallow) parser, rather than
exact word sequences.
SYNTACTIC FORM EXAMPLE PATTERN
<subj> passive-verb <subj> was satisfied
<subj> active-verb <subj> complained
<subj> active-verb dobj <subj> dealt blow
<subj> verb infinitive <subj> appear to be
<subj> aux noun <subj> has position
active-verb <dobj> endorsed <dobj>
infinitive <dobj> to condemn <dobj>
verb infinitive <dobj> get to know <dobj>
noun aux <dobj> fact is <dobj>
noun prep <np> opinion on <np>
active-verb prep <np> agrees with <np>
passive-verb prep <np> was worried about <np>
infinitive prep <np> to resort to <np>
Figure 2: Syntactic Templates and Examples of Patterns
that were Learned
1This is a shorthand notation for the internal representation.
PATTERN FREQ %SUBJ
<subj> was asked 11 100%
<subj> asked 128 63%
<subj> is talk 5 100%
talk of <np> 10 90%
<subj> will talk 28 71%
<subj> put an end 10 90%
<subj> put 187 67%
<subj> is going to be 11 82%
<subj> is going 182 67%
was expected from <np> 5 100%
<subj> was expected 45 42%
<subj> is fact 38 100%
fact is <dobj> 12 100%
Figure 3: Patterns with Interesting Behavior
The second step of AutoSlog-TS?s learning process ap-
plies all of the learned extraction patterns to the train-
ing corpus and gathers statistics for how often each
pattern occurs in subjective versus objective sentences.
AutoSlog-TS then ranks the extraction patterns using a
metric called RlogF (Riloff, 1996) and asks a human to
review the ranked list and make the final decision about
which patterns to keep.
In contrast, for this work we wanted a fully automatic
process that does not depend on a human reviewer, and
we were most interested in finding patterns that can iden-
tify subjective expressions with high precision. So we
ranked the extraction patterns using a conditional proba-
bility measure: the probability that a sentence is subjec-
tive given that a specific extraction pattern appears in it.
The exact formula is:
Pr(subjective | patterni) = subjfreq(patterni)freq(patterni)
where subjfreq(patterni) is the frequency of patterni
in subjective training sentences, and freq(patterni) is
the frequency of patterni in all training sentences. (This
may also be viewed as the precision of the pattern on the
training data.) Finally, we use two thresholds to select ex-
traction patterns that are strongly associated with subjec-
tivity in the training data. We choose extraction patterns
for which freq(patterni) ? ?1 and Pr(subjective |
patterni) ? ?2.
Figure 3 shows some patterns learned by our system,
the frequency with which they occur in the training data
(FREQ) and the percentage of times they occur in sub-
jective sentences (%SUBJ). For example, the first two
rows show the behavior of two similar expressions us-
ing the verb asked. 100% of the sentences that contain
asked in the passive voice are subjective, but only 63%
of the sentences that contain asked in the active voice are
subjective. A human would probably not expect the ac-
tive and passive voices to behave so differently. To un-
derstand why this is so, we looked in the training data
and found that the passive voice is often used to query
someone about a specific opinion. For example, here is
one such sentence from our training set: ?Ernest Bai Ko-
roma of RITCORP was asked to address his supporters on
his views relating to ?full blooded Temne to head APC?.?
In contrast, many of the sentences containing asked in
the active voice are more general in nature, such as ?The
mayor asked a newly formed JR about his petition.?
Figure 3 also shows that expressions using talk as a
noun (e.g., ?Fred is the talk of the town?) are highly cor-
related with subjective sentences, while talk as a verb
(e.g., ?The mayor will talk about...?) are found in a mix
of subjective and objective sentences. Not surprisingly,
longer expressions tend to be more idiomatic (and sub-
jective) than shorter expressions (e.g., put an end (to) vs.
put; is going to be vs. is going; was expected from vs. was
expected). Finally, the last two rows of Figure 3 show that
expressions involving the noun fact are highly correlated
with subjective expressions! These patterns match sen-
tences such as The fact is... and ... is a fact, which appar-
ently are often used in subjective contexts. This example
illustrates that the corpus-based learning method can find
phrases that might not seem subjective to a person intu-
itively, but that are reliable indicators of subjectivity.
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Subjectivity Data
The text collection that we used consists of English-
language versions of foreign news documents from FBIS,
the U.S. Foreign Broadcast Information Service. The
data is from a variety of countries. Our system takes
unannotated data as input, but we needed annotated data
to evaluate its performance. We briefly describe the man-
ual annotation scheme used to create the gold-standard,
and give interannotator agreement results.
In 2002, a detailed annotation scheme (Wilson and
Wiebe, 2003) was developed for a government-sponsored
project. We only mention aspects of the annotation
scheme relevant to this paper. The scheme was inspired
by work in linguistics and literary theory on subjectiv-
ity, which focuses on how opinions, emotions, etc. are
expressed linguistically in context (Banfield, 1982). The
goal is to identify and characterize expressions of private
states in a sentence. Private state is a general covering
term for opinions, evaluations, emotions, and specula-
tions (Quirk et al, 1985). For example, in sentence (1)
the writer is expressing a negative evaluation.
(1) ?The time has come, gentlemen, for Sharon, the as-
sassin, to realize that injustice cannot last long.?
Sentence (2) reflects the private state of Western coun-
tries. Mugabe?s use of overwhelmingly also reflects a pri-
vate state, his positive reaction to and characterization of
his victory.
(2) ?Western countries were left frustrated and impotent
after Robert Mugabe formally declared that he had over-
whelmingly won Zimbabwe?s presidential election.?
Annotators are also asked to judge the strength of each
private state. A private state may have low, medium, high
or extreme strength.
To allow us to measure interannotator agreement, three
annotators (who are not authors of this paper) indepen-
dently annotated the same 13 documents with a total of
210 sentences. We begin with a strict measure of agree-
ment at the sentence level by first considering whether
the annotator marked any private-state expression, of any
strength, anywhere in the sentence. If so, the sentence is
subjective. Otherwise, it is objective. The average pair-
wise percentage agreement is 90% and the average pair-
wise ? value is 0.77.
One would expect that there are clear cases of objec-
tive sentences, clear cases of subjective sentences, and
borderline sentences in between. The agreement study
supports this. In terms of our annotations, we define a
sentence as borderline if it has at least one private-state
expression identified by at least one annotator, and all
strength ratings of private-state expressions are low. On
average, 11% of the corpus is borderline under this def-
inition. When those sentences are removed, the average
pairwise percentage agreement increases to 95% and the
average pairwise ? value increases to 0.89.
As expected, the majority of disagreement cases in-
volve low-strength subjectivity. The annotators consis-
tently agree about which are the clear cases of subjective
sentences. This leads us to define the gold-standard that
we use when evaluating our results. A sentence is subjec-
tive if it contains at least one private-state expression of
medium or higher strength. The second class, which we
call objective, consists of everything else.
4.2 Evaluation of the Learned Patterns
Our pool of unannotated texts consists of 302,163 indi-
vidual sentences. The HP-Subj classifier initially labeled
roughly 44,300 of these sentences as subjective, and the
HP-Obj classifier initially labeled roughly 17,000 sen-
tences as objective. In order to keep the training set rel-
atively balanced, we used all 17,000 objective sentences
and 17,000 of the subjective sentences as training data for
the extraction pattern learner.
17,073 extraction patterns were learned that have
frequency ? 2 and Pr(subjective | patterni) ? .60 on
the training data. We then wanted to determine whether
the extraction patterns are, in fact, good indicators of sub-
jectivity. To evaluate the patterns, we applied different
subsets of them to a test set to see if they consistently oc-
cur in subjective sentences. This test set consists of 3947
Figure 4: Evaluating the Learned Patterns on Test Data
sentences, 54% of which are subjective.
Figure 4 shows sentence recall and pattern (instance-
level) precision for the learned extraction patterns on the
test set. In this figure, precision is the proportion of pat-
tern instances found in the test set that are in subjective
sentences, and recall is the proportion of subjective sen-
tences that contain at least one pattern instance.
We evaluated 18 different subsets of the patterns, by
selecting the patterns that pass certain thresholds in the
training data. We tried all combinations of ?1 = {2,10}
and ?2 = {.60,.65,.70,.75,.80,.85,.90,.95,1.0}. The data
points corresponding to ?1=2 are shown on the upper line
in Figure 4, and those corresponding to ?1=10 are shown
on the lower line. For example, the data point correspond-
ing to ?1=10 and ?2=.90 evaluates only the extraction pat-
terns that occur at least 10 times in the training data and
with a probability ? .90 (i.e., at least 90% of its occur-
rences are in subjective training sentences).
Overall, the extraction patterns perform quite well.
The precision ranges from 71% to 85%, with the expected
tradeoff between precision and recall. This experiment
confirms that the extraction patterns are effective at rec-
ognizing subjective expressions.
4.3 Evaluation of the Bootstrapping Process
In our second experiment, we used the learned extrac-
tion patterns to classify previously unlabeled sentences
from the unannotated text collection. The new subjec-
tive sentences were then fed back into the Extraction Pat-
tern Learner to complete the bootstrapping cycle depicted
by the rightmost dashed line in Figure 1. The Pattern-
based Subjective Sentence Classifier classifies a sentence
as subjective if it contains at least one extraction pattern
with ?1?5 and ?2?1.0 on the training data. This process
produced approximately 9,500 new subjective sentences
that were previously unlabeled.
Since our bootstrapping process does not learn new ob-
jective sentences, we did not want to simply add the new
subjective sentences to the training set, or it would be-
come increasingly skewed toward subjective sentences.
Since HP-Obj had produced roughly 17,000 objective
sentences used for training, we used the 9,500 new sub-
jective sentences along with 7,500 of the previously iden-
tified subjective sentences as our new training set. In
other words, the training set that we used during the sec-
ond bootstrapping cycle contained exactly the same ob-
jective sentences as the first cycle, half of the same sub-
jective sentences as the first cycle, and 9,500 brand new
subjective sentences.
On this second cycle of bootstrapping, the extraction
pattern learner generated many new patterns that were not
discovered during the first cycle. 4,248 new patterns were
found that have ?1?2 and ?2?.60. If we consider only the
strongest (most subjective) extraction patterns, 308 new
patterns were found that had ?1?10 and ?2?1.0. This is
a substantial set of new extraction patterns that seem to
be very highly correlated with subjectivity.
An open question was whether the new patterns pro-
vide additional coverage. To assess this, we did a sim-
ple test: we added the 4,248 new patterns to the origi-
nal set of patterns learned during the first bootstrapping
cycle. Then we repeated the same analysis that we de-
pict in Figure 4. In general, the recall numbers increased
by about 2-4% while the precision numbers decreased by
less, from 0.5-2%.
In our third experiment, we evaluated whether the
learned patterns can improve the coverage of the high-
precision subjectivity classifier (HP-Subj), to complete
the bootstrapping loop depicted in the top-most dashed
line of Figure 1. Our hope was that the patterns would al-
low more sentences from the unannotated text collection
to be labeled as subjective, without a substantial drop in
precision. For this experiment, we selected the learned
extraction patterns that had ?1? 10 and ?2? 1.0 on the
training set, since these seemed likely to be the most reli-
able (high precision) indicators of subjectivity.
We modified the HP-Subj classifier to use extraction
patterns as follows. All sentences labeled as subjective
by the original HP-Subj classifier are also labeled as sub-
jective by the new version. For previously unlabeled sen-
tences, the new version classifies a sentence as subjective
if (1) it contains two or more of the learned patterns, or
(2) it contains one of the clues used by the original HP-
Subj classifier and at least one learned pattern. Table 1
shows the performance results on the test set mentioned
in Section 3.1 (2197 sentences) for both the original HP-
Subj classifier and the new version that uses the learned
extraction patterns. The extraction patterns produce a 7.2
percentage point gain in coverage, and only a 1.1 percent-
age point drop in precision. This result shows that the
learned extraction patterns do improve the performance
of the high-precision subjective sentence classifier, allow-
ing it to classify more sentences as subjective with nearly
the same high reliability.
HP-Subj HP-Subj w/Patterns
Recall Precision Recall Precision
32.9 91.3 40.1 90.2
Table 1: Bootstrapping the Learned Patterns into the
High-Precision Sentence Classifier
Table 2 gives examples of patterns used to augment the
HP-Subj classifier which do not overlap in non-function
words with any of the clues already known by the original
system. For each pattern, we show an example sentence
from our corpus that matches the pattern.
5 Conclusions
This research explored several avenues for improving the
state-of-the-art in subjectivity analysis. First, we demon-
strated that high-precision subjectivity classification can
be used to generate a large amount of labeled training data
for subsequent learning algorithms to exploit. Second, we
showed that an extraction pattern learning technique can
learn subjective expressions that are linguistically richer
than individual words or fixed phrases. We found that
similar expressions may behave very differently, so that
one expression may be strongly indicative of subjectivity
but the other may not. Third, we augmented our origi-
nal high-precision subjective classifier with these newly
learned extraction patterns. This bootstrapping process
resulted in substantially higher recall with a minimal loss
in precision. In future work, we plan to experiment with
different configurations of these classifiers, add new sub-
jective language learners in the bootstrapping process,
and address the problem of how to identify new objec-
tive sentences during bootstrapping.
6 Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to Theresa Wilson for her invaluable
programming support and help with data preparation.
References
C. Baker, C. Fillmore, and J. Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley
FrameNet Project. In Proceedings of the COLING-ACL-98.
T. Ballmer and W. Brennenstuhl. 1981. Speech Act Classifi-
cation: A Study in the Lexical Analysis of English Speech
Activity Verbs. Springer-Verlag.
A. Banfield. 1982. Unspeakable Sentences. Routledge and
Kegan Paul, Boston.
seems to be <dobj> I am pleased that there now seems to be broad political consensus . . .
underlined <dobj> Jiang?s subdued tone . . . underlined his desire to avoid disputes . . .
pretext of <np> On the pretext of the US opposition . . .
atmosphere of <np> Terrorism thrives in an atmosphere of hate . . .
<subj> reflect These are fine words, but they do not reflect the reality . . .
to satisfy <dobj> The pictures resemble an attempt to satisfy a primitive thirst for revenge . . .
way with <np> . . . to ever let China use force to have its way with . . .
bring about <np> ?Everything must be done by everyone to bring about de-escalation,? Mr Chirac added.
expense of <np> at the expense of the world?s security and stability
voiced <dobj> Khatami . . . voiced Iran?s displeasure.
turn into <np> . . . the surging epidemic could turn into ?a national security threat,? he said.
Table 2: Examples of Learned Patterns Used by HP-Subj and Sample Matching Sentences
M. E. Califf. 1998. Relational Learning Techniques for Natural
Language Information Extraction. Ph.D. thesis, Tech. Rept.
AI98-276, Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Dayne Freitag. 1998. Toward General-Purpose Learning for
Information Extraction. In Proceedings of the ACL-98.
V. Hatzivassiloglou and K. McKeown. 1997. Predicting the
Semantic Orientation of Adjectives. In Proceedings of the
ACL-EACL-97.
S. Huffman. 1996. Learning information extraction pat-
terns from examples. In Stefan Wermter, Ellen Riloff,
and Gabriele Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Statistical, and
Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language
Processing, pages 246?260. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
J. Karlgren and D. Cutting. 1994. Recognizing Text Genres
with Simple Metrics Using Discriminant Analysis. In Pro-
ceedings of the COLING-94.
B. Kessler, G. Nunberg, and H. Schu?tze. 1997. Automatic De-
tection of Text Genre. In Proceedings of the ACL-EACL-97.
J. Kim and D. Moldovan. 1993. Acquisition of Semantic Pat-
terns for Information Extraction from Corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the Ninth IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence
for Applications.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations: A
Preliminary Investigation. University of Chicago Press.
B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs up? Sen-
timent Classification Using Machine Learning Techniques.
In Proceedings of the EMNLP-02.
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik. 1985. A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Long-
man, New York.
E. Riloff and R. Jones. 1999. Learning Dictionaries for In-
formation Extraction by Multi-Level Bootstrapping. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI-99.
E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2003. Learning Subjective
Nouns using Extraction Pattern Bootstrapping. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventh Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-03).
E. Riloff. 1993. Automatically Constructing a Dictionary for
Information Extraction Tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI-
93.
E. Riloff. 1996. Automatically Generating Extraction Patterns
from Untagged Text. In Proceedings of the AAAI-96.
S. Soderland, D. Fisher, J. Aseltine, and W. Lehnert. 1995.
CRYSTAL: Inducing a Conceptual Dictionary. In Proceed-
ings of the IJCAI-95.
S. Soderland. 1999. Learning Information Extraction Rules for
Semi-Structured and Free Text. Machine Learning, 34(1-
3):233?272.
E. Spertus. 1997. Smokey: Automatic Recognition of Hostile
Messages. In Proceedings of the IAAI-97.
P. Turney. 2002. Thumbs Up or Thumbs Down? Semantic Ori-
entation Applied to Unsupervised Classification of Reviews.
In Proceedings of the ACL-02.
J. Wiebe, R. Bruce, and T. O?Hara. 1999. Development and
Use of a Gold Standard Data Set for Subjectivity Classifica-
tions. In Proceedings of the ACL-99.
J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, and M. Bell. 2001. Identifying Collo-
cations for Recognizing Opinions. In Proceedings of the
ACL-01 Workshop on Collocation: Computational Extrac-
tion, Analysis, and Exploitation.
J. Wiebe. 1990. Recognizing Subjective Sentences: A Compu-
tational Investigation of Narrative Text. Ph.D. thesis, State
University of New York at Buffalo.
J. Wiebe. 2000. Learning Subjective Adjectives from Corpora.
In Proceedings of the AAAI-00.
T. Wilson and J. Wiebe. 2003. Annotating Opinions in the
World Press. In Proceedings of the ACL SIGDIAL-03.
R. Yangarber, R. Grishman, P. Tapanainen, and S. Huttunen.
2000. Automatic Acquisiton of Domain Knowledge for In-
formation Extraction. In Proceedings of COLING 2000.
