Bootstrapping toponym classifiers
David A. Smith and Gideon S. Mann
Center for Language and Speech Processing
Computer Science Department, Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{dasmith,gsm}@cs.jhu.edu
Abstract
We present minimally supervised methods for
training and testing geographic name disam-
biguation (GND) systems. We train data-driven
place name classifiers using toponyms already
disambiguated in the training text ? by such
existing cues as ?Nashville, Tenn.? or ?Spring-
field, MA? ? and test the system on texts
where these cues have been stripped out and
on hand-tagged historical texts. We experiment
on three English-language corpora of varying
provenance and complexity: newsfeed from the
1990s, personal narratives from the 19th cen-
tury American west, and memoirs and records
of the U.S. Civil War. Disambiguation accu-
racy ranges from 87% for news to 69% for
some historical collections.
1 Scope and Prior Work
We present minimally supervised methods for training
and testing geographic name disambiguation (GND) sys-
tems. We train data-driven place name classifiers using
toponyms already disambiguated in the training text ?
by such existing cues as ?Nashville, Tenn.? or ?Spring-
field, MA? ? and test the system on text where these
cues have been stripped out and on hand-tagged histori-
cal texts.
As in early work with such named-entity recognition
systems as Nominator (Wacholder et al, 1997), much
previous work in GND has relied on heuristic rules (Ol-
ligschlaeger and Hauptmann, 1999; Kanada, 1999) and
such culturally specific and knowledge intensive tech-
niques as postal codes, addresses, and telephone num-
bers (McCurley, 2001). In previous work, we used the
heuristic technique of calculating weighted centroids of
geographic focus in documents (Smith and Crane, 2001).
Sites closer to the centroid were weighted more heavily
than sites far away unless they had some countervailing
importance such as being a world capital.
News texts offer two principal advantages for boot-
strapping geocoding applications. Just as journalistic
style prefers identifying persons by full name and title on
first mention, place names, when not of major cities, are
often first mentioned followed by the name of their state,
province, or country. Even if a toponym is strictly unam-
biguous, it may still be labelled to provide the reader with
some ?backoff? recognition. Although there is only one
place in the world named ?Wye Mills?, an author would
still usually append ?Maryland? to it so that a reader who
doesn?t recognize the place name can still situate it within
a rough area. In any case, the goal is to generalize from
the kinds of contexts in which writers use a disambiguat-
ing label to one in which they do not.
Since news stories also tend to be relatively short and
focused on a single topic, we can also exploit the heuristic
of ?one sense per discourse?: unless otherwise indicated
? e.g., by a different state label ? subsequent mentions
of the toponym in the story can be identified with the first,
unambiguous reference. News stories often also have to-
ponyms in their datelines that are disambiguated. Our
news training corpus consists of two years (1989-90) of
AP wire and two months (October, November, 1998) of
Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) data. The test set
is the December, 1998, TDT data. See table 1 for the
numbers of toponyms in the corpora.
In contrast to news texts, historical documents exhibit
a higher density of geographical reference and level of
ambiguity. To test the performance of our minimally-
supervised classifiers in a particularly challenging do-
main, we test it on a corpus of historical documents where
all place names have been marked and disambiguated. As
with news texts, we initially train and test our classifiers
on raw text. The range of geographic reference in these
texts is somewhat similar to American news text: the cor-
pus comprises the Personal Memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant
and two nineteenth-century books of travel about Califor-
nia and Minnesota from the Library of Congress? Amer-
ican Memory project.1 In all, we thus have about 600
pages of tagged historical text.
2 Experimental Setup
Dividing the corpora in training and test data, we train
Naive Bayes classifiers on all examples of disambiguated
toponyms in the training set. Although it is not uncom-
mon for two places in the same state, for example, to
share a name, we define disambiguation for purposes of
these experiments as finding the correct U.S. state or for-
eign country. This asymmetry is reflected in U.S. news
and historical text of the training data, where toponyms
are specified by U.S. states or by foreign countries. We
then run the classifiers on the test text with disambiguat-
ing labels, such as state or country names that immedi-
ately follow the city name, removed.
Since not all toponyms in the test set will have been
seen in training, we also train backoff classifiers to guess
the states and countries related to a story. If, for exam-
ple, we cannot find a classifier for ?Oxford?, but can
tell that a story is about Mississippi, we will still be
able to disambiguate. We use a gazetteer to restrict the
set of candidate states and countries for a given place
name. In trying to disambiguate ?Portland?, we would
thus consider Oregon, Maine, and England, among other
options, but not Maryland. As in the word sense dis-
ambiguation task as usually defined, we are classifying
names and not clustering them. This approach is prac-
tical for geographic names, for which broad-coverage
gazetteers exist, though less so for personal names (Mann
and Yarowsky, 2003). System performance is measured
with reference to the naive baseline where each ambigu-
ous toponym is guessed to be the most commonly oc-
curring place. London, England, would thus always
be guessed rather than London, Ontario. Bootstrapping
methods similar to ours have been shown to be compet-
itive in word sense disambiguation (Yarowsky and Flo-
rian, 2003; Yarowsky, 1995).
3 Difficulty of the Task
Our ability to disambiguate place names should be
weighed against the ease or difficulty of the task. In a
world where most toponyms referred unambiguously to
one place, we would not be impressed by near-perfect
performance.
Before considering how toponyms are used in text, we
can examine the inherent ambiguity of place names in
1Our annotated data also includes disambiguated texts of
Herodotus? Histories and Caesar?s Gallic War, but toponyms in
the ancient (especially Greek) world do not show enough ambi-
guity with personal names or with each other to be interesting.
Corpus Train Test Tagged
News 80,366 1464 0
Am. Mem. 11,877 3782 342
Civ. War 59,994 787 4153
Table 1: Experimental corpora with toponym counts in
unsupervised training and test and hand-tagged test sec-
tions.
Continent % places % names
w/mult. names w/mult. places
N. & Cent. America 11.5 57.1
Oceania 6.9 29.2
South America 11.6 25.0
Asia 32.7 20.3
Africa 27.0 18.2
Europe 18.2 16.6
Table 2: Places with multiple names and names applied
to more than one place in the Getty Thesaurus of Geo-
graphic Names
isolation. The Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names,
with over a million toponyms, not only synthesizes many
contemporary gazetteers but also contains a wealth of his-
torical names. In table 2, we summarize for each conti-
nent the proportion of places that have multiple names
and of names that can refer to more than one place. Al-
though these proportions are dependent on the names
and places selected for inclusion in this gazetteer, the
relative rankings are suggestive. In areas with more
copious historical records?such as Asia, Africa, and
Europe?a place may be called by many names over
time, but individual names are often distinct. With the
increasing tempo of settlement in modern times, how-
ever, many places may be called by the same name, par-
ticularly by nostalgic colonists in the New World. Other
ambiguities arise when people and places share names.
Very few Greek and Latin place names are also personal
names.2 This is less true of Britain, where surnames
(and surnames used as given names) are often taken from
place names; in America, the confusion grows as numer-
ous towns are named after prominent or obscure peo-
ple. What may be called a lack of imagination in the
many 41 Oxfords, 73 Springfields, 91 Washingtons, and
97 Georgetowns seems to plague the very area ? North
America ? covered by our corpora.
If, however, one Washington or Portland predominates
in actual usage, things are not as bad as they seem. At the
2In Herodotus, for example, the only ambiguities between
people and places are for foreign names such as ?Ninus?, the
name used of Nineveh and of its mythical king.
Corpus H(class) H(class|name) % ambig.
News 6.453 0.241 12.71
Am. Mem. 4.519 0.525 18.81
Civ. War 4.323 0.489 18.49
Table 3: Entropy (H) of the state/country classification
task
very worst, for a baseline system, one can always guess
the most predominant referent. We quantify the level of
uncertainty in our corpora using entropy and average con-
ditional entropy. As stated above, we have simplified the
disambiguation problem to finding the state or country to
which a place belongs. For our training corpora, we can
thus measure the entropy of the classification and the av-
erage conditional entropy of the classification given the
specific place name (table 3). These entropies were cal-
culated using unsmoothed relative frequencies. The con-
ditional entropy, not surprisingly, is fairly low, given that
the percentage of toponyms that refer to more than one
place in the training data is quite low. Since training data
do not perfectly predict test data, however, we have to
smooth these probabilities and entropy goes up.
4 Evaluation
We evaluate our system?s performance on geographic
name disambiguation using two tasks. For the first task,
we use the same sort of untagged raw text used in train-
ing. We simply find the toponyms with disambiguating
labels ? e.g., ?Portland, Maine? ?, remove the labels,
and see if the system can restore them from context. For
the second task, we use texts all of whose toponyms have
been marked and disambiguated. The earlier heuristic
system described in (Smith and Crane, 2001) was run on
the texts and all disambiguation choices were reviewed
by a human editor.
Table 4 shows the results of these experiments. The
baseline accuracy was briefly mentioned above: if a to-
ponym has been seen in training, select the state or coun-
try with which it was most frequently associated. If a site
was not seen, select the most frequent state or country
from among the candidates in the gazetteer. The columns
for ?seen? and ?new? provide separate accuracy rates for
toponyms that were seen in training and for those that
were not. Finally, the overall accuracy of the trained sys-
tem is reported. For the American Memory and Civil War
corpora, we report results on the hand-tagged as well as
the raw text.
Not surprisingly, in light of its lower conditional en-
tropy, disambiguation in news text was the most accurate,
at 87.38%. Not only was the system accurate on news text
overall, but it degraded the least for unseen toponyms.
The relative accuracy on the American Memory and Civil
Corpus Baseline Seen New Overall
News 86.36 87.10 69.72 87.38
Am. Mem. 68.48 74.60 46.34 69.57
(tagged) 80.12 91.74 10.61 77.19
Civ. War 78.27 77.23 33.33 78.65
(tagged) 21.94 71.07 9.38 21.82
Table 4: Disambiguation accuracy (%) on test corpora.
Hand-tagged data were available for the American Mem-
ory and Civil War corpora.
War texts is also consistent with the entropies presented
above. The classifier shows a more marked degradation
when disambiguating toponyms not seen in training.
The accuracy of the classifier on restoring states and
countries in raw text is significantly, but not considerably,
higher than the baseline. It seems that many of toponyms
mentioned in text might be only loosely connected to the
surrounding discourse. An obituary, for example, might
mention that the deceased left a brother, John Doe, of Ar-
lington, Texas. Without tagging our test sets to mark such
tangential statements, it would be hard to weigh errors in
such cases appropriately.
Although accuracy on the hand-tagged data from the
American memory corpus was better than for the raw
text, performance on the Civil War tagged data (Grant?s
Memoirs) was abysmal. Most of this error seems came
from toponyms unseen in training, for with the accuracy
was 9.38%. In both sets of tagged text, moreover, the full
classifier performed below baseline accuracy due to prob-
lems with unseen toponyms. The back-off state models
are clearly inadequate for the minute topographical refer-
ences Grant makes in his descriptions of campaigns. In-
cluding proximity to other places mentioned is probably
the best way to overcome this difficulty. These problems
suggest that we need to more robustly generalize from the
kinds of environments with labelled toponyms to those
without.
5 Conclusions
Lack of labelled training or test data is the bane of many
word sense disambiguation efforts. For geographic name
disambiguation, we can extract training and test instances
from contexts where the toponyms are disambiguated by
the document?s author. Tagging accuracy is quite good,
especially for news texts, which have a lower entropy
in the disambiguation task. In real applications, how-
ever, we do not usually need to disambiguate toponyms
that already have state or country labels; we need to dis-
ambiguate unmarked place names. We investigated the
ability of our classifier to generalize by evaluating on
hand-corrected texts with all toponyms marked and dis-
ambiguated. The mixed results show that more gener-
alization power is needed in our models, particularly the
back-off models that handle toponyms unseen in training.
In future work, we hope to try further methods from
WSD such as decision lists and transformation-based
learning on the GND task. In any event, we hope that
this should improve the accuracy on toponyms seen in
training. As for disambiguating unseen toponyms, incor-
porating our prior work on heuristic proximity-base dis-
ambiguation into the probabilistic framework would be a
natural extension. A fully hand-corrected test corpus of
news text would also provide us with more robust evi-
dence for classifier generalization.
Evidence learned by classifiers to disambiguate to-
ponyms includes the names of prominent people and in-
dustries in a particular place, as well as the topics and
dates of current and historical events, and the titles of
newspapers (see figures 1 and 2). In our news training
corpus, for example, Hawaii was most strongly collo-
cated with ?lava? and Poland with ?solidarity? (case was
ignored). In addition to their use for GND, such associa-
tions should be useful in their own right for event detec-
tion (Smith, 2002), personal name disambiguation, and
augmenting the information in gazetteers.
References
[Kanada1999] Yasusi Kanada. 1999. A method of geo-
graphical name extraction from Japanese text for the-
matic geographical search. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management, pages 46?54, Kansas City,
Missouri, November.
[Mann and Yarowsky2003] Gideon S. Mann and David
Yarowsky. 2003. Unsupervised personal name disam-
biguation. In CoNLL, Edmonton, Alberta. (to appear).
[McCurley2001] Kevin S. McCurley. 2001. Geospatial
mapping and navigation of the web. In Proceedings of
the Tenth International WWW Conference, pages 221?
229, Hong Kong, 1?5 May.
[Olligschlaeger and Hauptmann1999] Andreas M. Ol-
ligschlaeger and Alexander G. Hauptmann. 1999.
Multimodal information systems and GIS: The In-
formedia digital video library. In Proceedings of the
ESRI User Conference, San Diego, California, July.
[Smith and Crane2001] David A. Smith and Gregory
Crane. 2001. Disambiguating geographic names in
a historical digital library. In Proceedings of ECDL,
pages 127?136, Darmstadt, 4-9 September.
[Smith2002] David A. Smith. 2002. Detecting and
browsing events in unstructured text. In Proceedings
of the 25th Annual ACM SIGIR Conference, pages 73?
80, Tampere, Finland, August.
[Wacholder et al1997] Nina Wacholder, Yael Ravin, and
Misook Choi. 1997. Disambiguation of proper names
in text. In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on
Applied Natural Language Processing, pages 202?
208, Washington, DC, April. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
[Yarowsky and Florian2003] David Yarowsky and Radu
Florian. 2003. Evaluating sense disambiguation per-
formance across diverse parameter spaces. Journal of
Natural Language Engineering, 9(1).
[Yarowsky1995] David Yarowsky. 1995. Unsuper-
vised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised
mehtods. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 189?196.
NASHVILLE , Tenn - Singer Marie Osmond will
receive the 1988 Roy Acuff Community Service
Award from the Country Music Foundation. She will
be honored for her work as national chairwoman of
the Osmond Foundation ... The honor is named for a
Grand Ole Opry star known as ?the king of country
music?.
NASHVILLE , Tenn - The home of country music
is singing the blues after the sale of its last locally
owned music publising company to CBS Records.
Tree International Publishing, ranked as Billboard
magazine ?s No. 1 country music publisher for
the last 16 years, is being sold to New York-based
CBS for a reported $45 million to $50 million, The
Tennessean reported today.
NASHVILLE , Tenn - Country music entertainer
Johnny Cash was scheduled to be released from Bap-
tist Hospital Tuesday, two weeks after undergoing
heart bypass surgery, a hospital spokeswoman said
Monday ...
Figure 1: Documents with Dateline of Nashville, having
strong collocation country music
PORTLAND, Ore - Federal court hearing on whether
to permit logging on timber tracts where northern
spotted owl nests.
GRANTS PASS, Ore - ... ?As more and more federal
lands are set aside for spotted owls and other types
of wildlife and recreation areas, the land available
for perpetual commercial timber management de-
creases?...
SEATTLE - Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan says
federal law should allow economic considerations to
be taken into account in deciding whether to protect
species like the northern spotted owl...
SAN FRANCISCO - Environmental groups can sue
the government to try to stop logging of old-growth fir
near spotted owl nests in western Oregon, a federal
appeals court ruled Tuesday...
PORTLAND, Ore - Environmentalists trying to
protect the northern spotted owl cheered a federal
judge?s decision halting logging on five timber tracts...
WASHINGTON - Are the spotted owls that live in the
ancient forest of the Northwest really endangered or
are they being victimized by the miniature radio trans-
mitters that scientists use to track their movements?
SEATTLE - A federal court extended a ban Thursday
on U.S Forest Servi ce plans to sell nearly 1 billion
board feet of ancient timber from nine nationa l forests
in two states where the northern spotted owl lives.
Figure 2: A sample of new stories with the keyword spot-
ted owl, most are Oregon/Washington
