Using LSA and Noun Coordination Information to Improve the Precision
and Recall of Automatic Hyponymy Extraction
Scott Cederberg Dominic Widdows
Center for the Study of Language and Information
210 Panama Street
Stanford University
Stanford CA 94305
{cederber,dwiddows}@csli.stanford.edu
Abstract
In this paper we demonstrate methods of im-
proving both the recall and the precision of au-
tomatic methods for extraction of hyponymy
(IS A) relations from free text. By applying la-
tent semantic analysis (LSA) to filter extracted
hyponymy relations we reduce the rate of er-
ror of our initial pattern-based hyponymy ex-
traction by 30%, achieving precision of 58%.
Applying a graph-based model of noun-noun
similarity learned automatically from coordi-
nation patterns to previously extracted correct
hyponymy relations, we achieve roughly a five-
fold increase in the number of correct hy-
ponymy relations extracted.
1 Introduction
This paper demonstrates that mathematical models for
measuring semantic similarity between concepts can be
used to improve the learning of hyponymy relationships
between concepts from free text. In particular, we show
that latent semantic analysis can be used to filter results,
giving an increase in precision, and that neighbors in a
graph built from coordination information can be used to
improve recall.
The goal of extracting semantic information from text
is well-established, and has encouraged work on lexical
acquisition (Roark and Charniak, 1998), information ex-
traction (Cardie, 1997), and ontology engineering (Hahn
and Schnattinger, 1998). The purpose of this kind of
work is to collect information about the meanings of lexi-
cal items or phrases, and the relationships between them,
so that the process of building semantic resources (such
as ontologies and dictionaries) by hand can be automated
or at least helped.
One of the standard ways of arranging concepts is in a
concept hierarchy or taxonomy such as the WordNet noun
taxonomy (Fellbaum, 1998). The fundamental relation-
ship between objects in a taxonomy is called hyponymy,
where y is a hyponym of x if every y is also an x. For
example, every trout is also a fish, so we say that trout
is a hyponym (?below name?) of fish and conversely, fish
is a hypernym (?above name?) of trout. Other names ex-
ist for variants of the hyponymy relationship, such as an
IS A relationship, a parent-node / child-node relationship,
and a broader term / narrower term relationship. It is also
noted that the genus of an object, in traditional lexico-
graphic terms, is often a hypernym of that object (Guthrie
et al, 1996). Throughout this paper we will write y < x
for the relationship ?y is a hyponym of x?. In this paper,
we use the hyponymy relationship to describe subset re-
lationships, so we regard y < x to be true if the set of y?s
can reasonably be said to be a subset of the set of x?s.1
Because hyponymy relationships are so central to
knowledge engineering, there have been numerous at-
tempts to learn them from text, beginning with those
of Hearst (1992). We review this work in Section 2,
where we reproduce similar experiments as a baseline
from which to expand. The rest of the paper demon-
strates ways in which other mathematical models built
from text corpora can be used to improve hyponymy ex-
traction. In Section 3, we show how latent semantic anal-
ysis can be used to filter potential relationships accord-
ing to their ?semantic plausibility?. In Section 4, we
show how correctly extracted relationships can be used
as ?seed-cases? to extract several more relationships, thus
improving recall; this work shares some similarities with
that of Caraballo (1999). In Section 5 we show that com-
bining the techniques of Section 3 and Section 4 improves
both precision and recall. Section 6 demonstrates that
1Another possible view is that ?hyponymy? should only re-
fer to core relationships, not contingent ones (so pheasant <
bird might be accepted but pheasant < food might not be, be-
cause it depends on context and culture). We use the broader
?subset? definition because contingent relationships are an im-
portant part of world-knowledge (and are therefore worth learn-
ing), and because in practice we found the distinction difficult to
enforce. Another definition is given by Caraballo (1999): ?. . . a
word A is said to be a hypernym of a word B if native speakers
of English accept the sentence ?B is a (kind of) A.? ?
linguistic tools such as lemmatization can be used to re-
liably put the extracted relationships into a normalized or
?canonical? form for addition to a semantic resource.
2 Pattern-Based Hyponymy Extraction
The first major attempt to extract hyponyms from text
was that of Hearst (1992), described in more detail in
(Hearst, 1998), who extracted relationships from the text
of Grolier?s Encyclopedia. The method is illustrated by
the following example. The sentence excerpt
Even then, we would trail behind other Euro-
pean Community members, such as Germany,
France and Italy. . . (BNC)2
indicates that Germany, France, and Italy are all Euro-
pean Community members. More generally, phrases of
the form
x such as y1 (y2, . . . , and/or yn)
frequently indicate that the yi are all hyponyms of
the hypernym x. Hearst identifies several other con-
structions that have a tendency to indicate hyponymy,
calling these constructions lexicosyntactic patterns, and
analyses the results. She reports that 52% of the re-
lations extracted by the ?or other? pattern (see Ta-
ble 1) were judged to be ?pretty good relations?. A
more recent variant of this technique was implemented
by Alfonseca and Manandhar (2001), who compare the
collocational patterns of words from The Lord of the
Rings with those of words in the WordNet taxonomy,
adding new nouns to WordNet with an accuracy of
28%. Using a much more knowledge-intensive approach,
Hahn and Schnattinger (1998) improve ?learning accu-
racy? from around 50% to over 80% by forming a number
of hypotheses and accepting only those which are most
consistent with their current ontology. Their methods are
like ours in that the ?concept learning? combines infor-
mation from several occurrences, but differ in that they
rely on a detailed existing ontology into which to fit the
new relationships between concepts.
Our initial experiment was to construct a hyponymy
extraction system based on the six lexicosyntactic pat-
terns identified in (Hearst, 1998), which are listed in Ta-
ble 1. We first used a chunker to mark noun groups, and
then recognized and extracted noun groups occurring as
part of one of the extraction patterns.3
We applied these extraction patterns to an approxi-
mately 430,000-word extract from the beginning of the
2This excerpt and others in this paper are from the British
National Corpus.
3The chunker used was LT CHUNK, from
the University of Edinburgh?s Language Tech-
nology Group. It can be downloaded from
http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/software/chunk/.
x such as y1 (, y2, . . . , and/or yn)
such x as y1 (, y2, . . . , and/or yn)
y1 (, y2, . . . , yn,) or other x
y1 (, y2, . . . , yn,) and other x
x, including y1 (, y2, . . . , and/or yn)
x, especially y1 (, y2, . . . , and/or yn)
Table 1: The lexicosyntactic patterns described by
Hearst (1998), which we used in the work described in
this paper. Each of these patterns is taken to indicate the
hyponymy relation(s) yi < x.
British National Corpus (BNC). The patterns extracted
513 relations. We selected 100 of the extracted relations
at random and each author evaluated them by hand, scor-
ing each relation on a scale from 4 (correct) to 0 (incor-
rect), defined as follows:
4. Extracted hypernym and hyponym exactly correct as
extracted.
3. Extracted hypernym and hyponym are correct after
a slight modification, such as depluralization or the
removal of an article (e.g. a, the) or other preceding
word.
2. Extracted hypernym and hyponym have something
correct, e.g. a correct noun without a necessary
prepositional phrase, a correct noun with a superflu-
ous prepositional phrase, or a noun + prepositional
phrase where the object of the preposition is correct
but the preposition itself and the noun to which it
attaches are superfluous. Thus these hyponymy re-
lations are potentially correct but will require poten-
tially difficult processing to extract an exactly cor-
rect relation. Some of the errors which would need
to be corrected were in preprocessing (e.g. on the
part of the noun-group chunker) and others were er-
rors caused by our hyponymy extractor (e.g. tacking
on too many or too few prepositional phrases).
1. The relation extracted is correct in some sense, but
is too general or too context specific to be useful.
This category includes relations that could be made
useful by anaphora resolution (e.g. replacing ?this?
with its referent).
0. The relation extracted is incorrect. This results when
the constructions we recognize are used for a pur-
pose other than indicating the hyponymy relation.
The results of each of the authors? evaluations of the
100-relation random sample are show in Table 2.4 For
4Table 2 suggests that although there is significant disagree-
ment about how to assign scores of 1 and 0, inter-annotator
score Author 1 Author 2
4 4 2
3 34 35
2 14 13
1 35 22
0 13 28
Table 2: Number of the 100 randomly selected hyponymy
relations (of 513 extracted) to which each of the authors
assigned the five available scores.
purposes of calculating precision, we consider those rela-
tions with a score of 4 or 3 to be correct and those with a
lower score to be incorrect. After discussion between the
authors on disputed annotations to create ?gold standard?
annotations, we found that 40 of the 100 relations in our
random sample were correct according to this criterion.
In other words, 40% of the relations extracted were ex-
actly correct or would be correct with the use of minor
post-processing consisting of lemmatization and removal
of common types of qualifying words. (We describe our
application of such post-processing in Section 6.)
Thus our initial implementation of Hearst-style hy-
ponymy extraction achieved 40% precision. This is less
than the 52% precision reported in (Hearst, 1998). We
believe this discrepancy to be mainly due to the dif-
ference between working with the BNC and Grolier?s
encyclopedia?as noted by Hearst, the encyclopedia is
designed to be especially rich in conceptual relationships
presented in an accessible format.
Various problems with the pattern-based extraction
method explain the 60% of extracted relations that were
incorrect and/or useless. One problem is that the con-
structions that we assume to indicate hyponymy are often
used for other purposes. For instance, the pattern
x including y1, y2, . . . , and yn
which indicates hyponymy in sentences such as
Illnesses, including chronic muscle debility,
herpes, tremors and eye infections, have come
and gone. (BNC)
and is a quite productive source of hyponymy relations,
can be used instead to indicate group membership:
agreement regarding the assignment of scores of 4, 3, and 2 is
quite high. Indeed, considering the rougher distinction we use
for reporting precision, in which scores of 4 and 3 are deemed
correct and scores of 2, 1, and 0 are deemed incorrect, we found
that inter-annotator agreement across all relations annotated (in-
cluding those from this random sample and those from the sam-
ple described in Section 3) was 86%. We discussed each of
the relations in the 14% of cases where we disagreed until we
reached agreement; this produced the ?gold standard? annota-
tions to which we refer.
Often entire families including young children
need practical home care . . . (BNC)
While all children are members of families, the hy-
ponymy relationship child < family does not hold, since
it is not true that all children are families.
Another source of errors in lexicosyntactic hyponymy
extraction is illustrated by the sentence
A kit such as Edme Best Bitter, Tom Caxton
Best Bitter, or John Bull Best Bitter will be a
good starting kit. (BNC)
which indicates the (potentially useful) relations Edme
Best Bitter < beer-brewing kit, Tom Caxton Best Bitter
< beer-brewing kit, and John Bull Best Bitter < beer-
brewing kit, but only when we use the context to infer
that the type of ?kit? referred to is a beer-brewing kit, a
process that is difficult by automatic means. Without this
inference, the extracted relations Edme Best Bitter < kit,
etc., while correct in a certain sense, are not helpful. One
frequent source of such problems is anaphora that require
resolution.
There are also problems related to prepositional phrase
attachment.
3 Improving Precision Using Latent
Semantic Analysis
Solving all of the problems with pattern-based hyponymy
extraction that we describe above would require near-
human-level language understanding, but we have ap-
plied a far simpler technique for filtering out many of the
incorrect and spurious extracted relations with good re-
sults, using a variant of latent semantic analysis (LSA)
(Deerwester et al, 1990; Baeza-Yates and Ribiero-Neto,
1999, p. 44). LSA is a method for representing words
as points in a vector space, whereby words which are re-
lated in meaning should be represented by points which
are near to one another. The LSA model we built is sim-
ilar to that described in (Schu?tze, 1998). First 1000 fre-
quent content words (i.e. not on the stoplist)5 were chosen
as ?content-bearing words?. Using these content-bearing
words as column labels, the other words in the corpus
were assigned row vectors by counting the number of
times they occured within a 15-word context window of
a content-bearing word. Singular-value decomposition
(Deerwester et al, 1990) was then used to reduce the
number of dimensions from 1000 to 100. Similarity be-
tween two vectors (points) was measured using the cosine
of the angle between them, in the same way as the simi-
larity between a query and a document is often measured
5A ?stoplist? is a list of frequent words which have little
semantic content in themselves, such as prepositions and pro-
nouns (Baeza-Yates and Ribiero-Neto, 1999, p. 167).
score Author 1 Author 2
4 4 5
3 57 52
2 18 14
1 12 19
0 9 10
Table 3: Number of the 100 top-ranked hyponymy re-
lations (of 513 extracted) to which each of the authors
assigned the five available scores.
in information retrieval (Baeza-Yates and Ribiero-Neto,
1999, p. 28). Effectively, we could use LSA to measure
the extent to which two words x and y usually occur in
similar contexts. This LSA similarity score will be called
sim(x, y).
Since we expect a hyponym and its hypernym to be
semantically similar, we can use the LSA similarity be-
tween two terms as a test of the plausibility of a putative
hyponymy relation between those terms. If their similar-
ity is low, it is likely that they do not have a true and use-
ful hyponymy relationship; the relation was probably ex-
tracted erroneously for one or more of the reasons listed
above. If the similarity between two terms is high, we
have increased confidence that a hyponymy relationship
exists between them, because we know that they are at
least in similar ?semantic regions?.
We ranked the 513 putative hyponym/hypernym pairs
that we extracted from our trial excerpt of the BNC ac-
cording to the similarity between the putative hypernym
and the putative hyponym in each pair; i.e. for each pair
x and y where the relationship y < x had been suggested,
we calculated the cosine similarity sim(x, y), then we
ranked the extracted relations from highest to lowest sim-
ilarity. We then manually evaluated the accuracy of the
top 100 extracted relations according to this ranking us-
ing the 5-point scale described in Section 2. We found
that 58 of these 100 top-ranked relations received scores
of 4 or 3 according to our ?gold standard? annotations.
Comparing this 58% precision with the 40% precision
obtained on a random sample in Section 2, we determine
that LSA achieved a 30% reduction in error (see Table 3
for a breakdown of annotation results by author).6
Thus LSA proved quite an effective filter. LSA pro-
vides broad-based semantic information learned statis-
tically over many occurences of words; lexicosyntactic
hyponymy extraction learns semantic information from
specific phrases within a corpus. Thus we have bene-
fitted from combining local patterns with statistical in-
6It should be noted that 24 of the top 100 hyponymy rela-
tions evaluated in this section were also in the randomly-chosen
sample of 100 relations described in Section 2. Thus there were
a total of 176 distinct hyponymy relations across both test sets.
formation. Considered in analogy with the process by
which humans learn from reading, we might think of
the semantic information learned by LSA as background
knowledge that is applied by the reader when determining
what can accurately be gleaned from a particular sentence
when it is read.
4 Improving Recall Using Coordination
Information
One of the main challenges facing hyponymy extraction
is that comparatively few of the correct relations that
might be found in text are expressed overtly by the simple
lexicosyntactic patterns used in Section 2, as was appar-
ent in the results presented in that section.
This problem has been addressed by Caraballo (1999),
who describes a system that first builds an unlabelled hi-
erarchy of noun clusters using agglomerative bottom-up
clustering of vectors of noun coordination information.
The leaves of this hierarchy (corresponding to nouns)
are assigned hypernyms using Hearst-style lexicosyntac-
tic patterns. Internal nodes in the hierarchy are then la-
belled with hypernyms of the leaves they subsume ac-
cording to a vote of these subsumed leaves.
We proceed along similar lines, using noun coordi-
nation information and an alternative graph-based clus-
tering method. We do not build a complete hierarchy,
but our method nonetheless obtains additional hypernym-
hyponym pairs not extracted by lexicosyntactic patterns.
Our method is based on the following sort of inference.
Consider the sentence
This is not the case with sugar, honey, grape
must, cloves and other spices which increase
its merit. (BNC)
which provides evidence that clove is a kind of spice.
Given this, the sentence
Ships laden with nutmeg or cinnamon, cloves
or coriander once battled the Seven Seas to
bring home their precious cargo. (BNC)
might suggest that nutmeg, cinnamon, and coriander are
also spices, because they appear to be similar to cloves.
Thus we can learn the hyponymy relations nutmeg <
spice, cinnamon < spice, and coriander < spice that
are not directly attested by lexicosyntactic patterns in our
training corpus.
This kind of information from coordination patterns
has been used for work in automatic lexical acquisition
(Riloff and Shepherd, 1997; Roark and Charniak, 1998;
Widdows and Dorow, 2002). The basic rationale behind
these methods is that words that occur together in lists
are usually semantically similar in some way: for exam-
ple, the phrase
y1, y2, and y3
suggests that there is some link between y1 and y2, etc.
Performing this analysis on a whole corpus results in a
data structure which holds a collection of nouns and ob-
served noun-noun relationships. If we think of the nouns
as nodes and the noun-noun relationships as edges, this
data structure is a graph (Bolloba?s, 1998), and combina-
toric methods can be used to analyze its structure.
Work using such techniques for lexical acquisition has
proceeded by building classes of related words from a
single ?seed-word? with some desired property (such as
being a representative of a paticular semantic class). For
example, in order to extract a class of words referring to
kinds of disease from a corpus, you start with a single
seed-word such as typhoid, and then find other nouns that
occur in lists with typhoid. Using the graph model de-
scribed above, Widdows and Dorow (2002) developed a
combinatoric algorithm for growing clusters from a sin-
gle seed-word, and used these methods to find correct
new members for chosen categories with an accuracy of
over 80%.
The idea that certain patterns can be identified using
finite-state techniques and used as evidence for seman-
tic relationships is the same as Hearst?s (1992), but ap-
pears to be more effective for finding just similar words
rather than hypernyms because there are many more in-
stances of simple coordination patterns than of hyper-
nymy patterns?in the lists we used to extract these re-
lationships, we see much more cooccurence of words on
the same ontological level than between words from dif-
ferent ontological levels. For example, in the BNC there
are 211 instances of the phrase ?fruit and vegetables? and
9 instances of ?carrots and potatoes?, but no instances of
?fruit and potatoes?, only 1 instance of ?apples and veg-
etables?, and so on.
This sort of approach should be ideal for improving
the recall of automatic hyponymy extraction, by using the
hyponym from each of the correct hypernym/hyponym
pairs as a seed-word for the category represented by the
hypernym?for example, from the relationship clove <
spice, the word clove could be taken as a seed-word, with
the assumption that words which frequently occur in co-
ordination with clove are also names of spices.
We used the algorithm of (Widdows and Dorow, 2002)
on the British National Corpus to see if many more hy-
ponymy relations would be extracted in this way. For
each correct pair y < x where y was a single-word hy-
ponym of x discovered by the lexicosyntactic patterns of
Section 2, we collected the 10 words most similar to y ac-
cording to this algorithm and tested to see if these neigh-
bors were also hyponyms of x.
Of the 176 extracted hyponyms that we evaluated by
hand in the overlapping test sets described in Section 2
and Section 3, 95 were rated 4 or 3 on our 5-point scor-
ing system (Section 2) by at least one of the authors. Con-
sidering these correct or nearly-correct relations in their
hand-corrected form, we found that 45 of these 95 rela-
tions involved single-word hyponyms. (We restricted our
attention to these 45 relations because the graph model
was built using only single words as nodes in the graph.)
This set of 45 correct hypernym ?seed-pairs? was ex-
tended by another potential 459 pairs (slightly more than
10 for each seed-pair because if there was a tie for 10th
place both neighbors were used). Of these, 211 (46%)
were judged to be correct hypernym pairs and 248 (54%)
were not.7 This accuracy compares favorably with the ac-
curacy of 40% obtained for the raw hyponymy extraction
experiments in Section 2, suggesting that inferring new
relations by using corpus-based similarities to previously
known relations is more reliable than trying to learn com-
pletely new relations even if they are directly attested in
the corpus. However, our accuracy falls way short of the
figure of 82% reported by Widdows and Dorow (2002).
We believe this is because the classes in (Widdows and
Dorow, 2002) are built from carefully selected seed-
examples: ours are built from an uncontrolled sample
of seed-examples extracted automatically from a corpus.
We outline three cases where this causes a critical differ-
ence.
The ambiguity of ?mass?
One of the correct hyponymy relations extracted in our
experiments in Section 2 was mass < religious service.
Using mass as a seed suggested the following candidates
as potential hyponyms of religious service:
Seed Semantically Similar Words
mass length weight angle shape depth
height range charge size momentum
All these neighbors are related to the ?measurement of
physical property? sense of the word mass rather than the
?religious service? sense. The inferred hyponymy rela-
tions are all incorrect because of this mismatch.
The specific properties of ?nitrogen?
Another true relation we extracted was nitrogen < nu-
trient. Using the same process as above gave the follow-
ing neighbors of nitrogen:
Seed Semantically Similar Words
nitrogen methane dioxide carbon hydrogen methanol
vapour ammonia oxide oxygen monoxide water
These neighboring terms are not in general nutrients,
and the attempt to infer new hyponymy relations is a fail-
7As before, we consider scores of 4 and 3 on our 5-point
scale to be correct and lower scores to be incorrect. The pre-
cision of graph-model results (reported in this section and in
Section 5), unlike those reported elsewhere, are based on the
annotations of a single author.
ure in this case. While the relationship nitrogen < nu-
trient is one of the many facts which go to make up the
vast store of world-knowledge that an educated adult uses
for reasoning, it is not a necessary property of nitrogen
itself, and one could arguably ?know? the meaning of
nitrogen without being aware of this fact. In traditional
lexicographic terms, the fact that nitrogen is a nutrient
might be regarded as part of the differentiae rather than
the genus of nitrogen. Had our seed-pair instead been
nitrogen < gas or nitrogen < chemical element, many
correct hyponymy relations would have been inferred by
our method, and both of these classifications are central
to the meaning of nitrogen.
Accurate levels of abstraction for ?dill?
Finally, even when the hyponymy relationship y < x
used as a seed-case was central to the meaning of y and
all of the neighbors of y were related to this meaning,
they were still not always hyponyms of x but sometimes
members of a more general category. For example, using
the correct seed-pair dill < herb we retrieved the follow-
ing suggested hyponyms for herb:
Seed Semantically Similar Words
dill rind fennel seasoning juice sauce
pepper parsley vinegar oil pur
All of these items are related to dill, but only some of
them are herbs. The other items should also be placed
in the same general area of a taxonomy as dill, but as
cooking ingredients rather than specifically herbs.
In spite of these problems, the algorithm for improv-
ing recall by adding neighbors of the correct hyponyms
worked reasonably well, obtaining 211 correct relation-
ships from 45 seeds, an almost fivefold increase in recall,
with an accuracy of 46%, which is better than that of our
baseline pattern-matching hyponymy extractor.
It is possible that using coordination (such as co-
occurence in lists) as a measure of noun-noun similarity
is well-adapted for this sort of work, because it mainly
extracts ?horizontal? relationships between items of sim-
ilar specificity or similar generality. Continuing the ge-
ometric analogy, these mainly ?horizontal? relationships
might be expected to combine particularly well with seed
examples of ?vertical? relationships, i.e. hyponymy rela-
tionships.
5 Combining LSA and Coordination to
Improve Precision and Recall
Having used two separate techniques to improve preci-
sion and recall in isolation, it made sense to combine
our methods to improve performance overall. This was
accomplished by applying LSA filtering as described in
Section 3 to the results obtained by extending our initial
hypernym pairs with coordination patterns in Section 4.
LSA filtering of extended results: phase I
The first application of filtering to the additional hy-
ponymy relations obtained using noun-cooccurrence was
straightforward. We took the 459 potential hyponymy
relationships obtained in Section 4. For each of the
prospective hyponyms y of a given hypernym x, we com-
puted the LSA similarity sim(x, y). We then considered
only those potential hyponyms whose LSA similarity to
the hypernym surpassed a certain threshhold. Using this
technique with an experimentally determined threshhold
of 0.15, we obtained a set of 260 hyponymy relations of
which 166 were correct (64%, as opposed to the 46%
correct in the unfiltered results). The LSA filtering had
removed 154 incorrect relationships and only 45 correct
ones, reducing the overall error rate by 33%.
In particular, this technique removed all but one of
the spurious religious service hyponyms which were ob-
tained through inappropriate similarities with mass in the
example in Section 4, though it was much less effective
in filtering the neighbors of nitrogen and dill, as might be
expected.
LSA filtering of extended results: phase II
For some of the hyponymy relations to which we ap-
plied our extension technique, the hypernym had multiple
words.8 In some of these cases, it was clear that one of
the words in the hypernym had a meaning more closely
related to the original (correct) hyponym. For instance, in
the mass < religious service relation, the word religious
tells us more about the appropriate meaning of mass than
does the word service. It thus seemed that, at least in cer-
tain cases, we might be able to get more traction in LSA
filtering of potential additional hyponyms by first select-
ing a particular word from the hypernym as the ?most
important? and using that word rather than the entire hy-
pernym for filtering.9
We thus applied a simple two-step algorithm to refine
the filtering technique presented above:
1. The LSA similarity between the original (correct)
hyponym and each word in the hypernym is com-
puted. The words of the hypernym are ranked ac-
cording to these similarities.
2. The word in the hypernym that has the highest LSA
similarity to the original (correct) hyponym is used
instead of the entire hypernym for phase-I-style fil-
tering.
8The graph model used to obtain new candidate hyponyms
was built using single words, which is why our extended results
include some multiword expressions among the hypernyms but
only single word hyponyms.
9When using an entire multiword hypernym for filtering, a
term-vector was produced for the multiword hypernym by aver-
aging the LSA vectors for the constituent words.
This filtering technique, with an LSA-similarity thresh-
hold of 0.15, resulted in the extraction of 35 correct and
25 incorrect relationships. In contrast, using LSA simi-
larity with the whole expression rather than the most im-
portant word resulted in the extraction of 32 correct and
30 incorrect relationships for those hypernyms with mul-
tiple words. On the face of it, selecting only the most
important part of the hypernym for comparison enabled
us to obtain more correct and fewer incorrect relations,
but it is also clear that by this stage in our experiments
our sample of seed-relationships had become too small
for these results to be statistically significant.
However, the examples we considered did demonstrate
another point?that LSA could help to determine which
parts of a multiword expression were semantically rel-
evant. For example, one of the seed-relationships was
France < European Community member. Finding that
sim(france, european) > sim(france, community),
we could infer that the adjective European was central to
the meaning of the hyponym, whereas for the example
wallflowers < hardy biennials the opposite conclusion,
that hardy is an adjectival modifier which isn?t central to
the relationship, could be drawn. However, these conclu-
sions could also be drawn by using established colloca-
tion extraction techniques (Manning and Schu?tze, 1999,
Ch. 5) to find semantically significant multiword expres-
sions.
6 Obtaining Canonical Forms for
Relations
An important part of extracting semantic relations like
those discussed in this paper is converting the terms in
the extracted relations to a canonical form. In the case
of our extracted hyponymy relations, such normalization
consists of two steps:
1. Removing extraneous articles and qualifiers. Our
extracted hyponyms and hypernyms were often in
the form ?another x?, ?some x?, and so forth, where
x is the hypernym or hyponym that we actually want
to consider.
2. Converting nouns to their singular form. This is el-
ementary morphological analysis, or a limited form
of lemmatization.
We performed the second of these steps using the
morph morphological analysis software (Minnen et al,
2001).10 To perform the first step of removing modifiers,
we implemented a Perl script to do the following:
10This software is freely available from
http://www.cogs.susx.ac.uk/lab/nlp/carroll/morph.html.
? Remove leading determiners from the beginning of
the hypernym and from the beginning of the hy-
ponym.
? Remove leading prepositions from the beginning of
the hypernym. Doing this after removing leading
determiners eliminates the common ?those of? con-
struction.
? Remove cardinal numbers from the hypernym and
the hyponym.
? Remove possessive prefixes from the hypernym and
the hyponym.
? Remove ?set of? and ?number of? from the hy-
pernym and the hyponym. This ad hoc but rea-
sonable procedure eliminates common troublesome
constructions not covered by the above rules.
? Remove leading adjectives from hypernyms, but not
from hyponyms. In addition to removing ?other?,
this amounts to playing it safe. By removing leading
adjectives we make potential hypernyms more gen-
eral, and thus more likely to be a superset of their
potential hyponym. While this removal sometimes
makes the learned relationship less useful, it sel-
dom makes it incorrect. We leave adjectives on hy-
ponyms to make them more specific, and thus more
likely to be a subset of their purported hypernym.
Using these simple rules, we were able to convert 73
of the 78 relations orginally scored as 3 (see Section 2)
to relations receiving a score of 4. This demonstrates as
a ?proof of concept? that comparatively simple language
processing techniques can be used to map relationships
from the surface forms in which they were observed in
text to a canonical form which could be included in a se-
mantic resource.
7 Conclusion and Further Work
The results presented in this paper demonstrate that the
application of linguistic information from automatically-
learned mathematical models can significantly enhance
both the precision and the recall of pattern-based hy-
ponymy extraction techniques. Using a graph model of
noun similarity we were able to obtain an almost five-
fold improvement in recall, though the precision of this
technique is clearly affected by the correctness of the
?seed-relationships? used. Using LSA filtering we elimi-
nated spurious relations extracted by the original pattern
method, reducing errors by 30%. Such filtering also elim-
inated spurious relations learned using the graph model
that were the result of lexical ambiguity and of seed hy-
ponymy relations inappropriate for the technique, reduc-
ing errors by 33%.
This paper suggests many possibilities for future work.
First of all, it would be interesting to apply LSA to a sys-
tem for building an entire hypernym-labelled ontology in
roughly the way described in (Caraballo, 1999), perhaps
by using an LSA-weighted voting method to determine
which hypernym would be used to label each node. We
are considering how to extend our techniques to such a
task.
Also, systematic comparison of the lexicosyntactic
patterns used for extraction to determine the relative pro-
ductiveness and accuracy of each pattern might prove
illuminating, as would comparison across different cor-
pora to determine the impact of the topic area and
medium/format of documents on the effectiveness of hy-
ponymy extraction. Ultimately, the ability to predict a
priori how well a knowledge-extraction system will work
on a previously unseen corpus will be crucial to its use-
fulness.
Applying the techniques of this paper to a system that
used mutual bootstrapping (Riloff and Jones, 1999) to
find additional extraction patterns would also be interest-
ing (such an approach is suggested in (Hearst, 1998)).
And of course, further refinement of the mathematical
models we use and our methods of learning them, includ-
ing more sophisticated use of available tools for linguistic
pre-processing, such as the identification and indexing of
multiword expressions, could further improve the preci-
sion and recall of hyponymy extraction techniques.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Research
Collaboration between the NTT Communication Science
Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corpora-
tion and CSLI, Stanford University, and by EC/NSF grant
IST-1999-11438 for the MUCHMORE project. Thanks
also to Stanley Peters for his helpful comments on an ear-
lier draft.
References
Enrique Alfonseca and Suresh Manandhar. 2001. Im-
proving an ontology refinement method with hy-
ponymy patterns. In Third International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 235?
239, Las Palmas, Spain.
Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribiero-Neto. 1999.
Modern Information Retrieval. Addison Wesley /
ACM Press.
Be?la Bolloba?s. 1998. Modern Graph Theory. Num-
ber 184 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-
Verlag.
Sharon Caraballo. 1999. Automatic construction of a
hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Proceedings of the Conference, pages
120?126.
Claire Cardie. 1997. Empirical methods in information
extraction. AI Magazine, 18:65?79.
Scott Deerwester, Susan Dumais, George Furnas,
Thomas Landauer, and Richard Harshman. 1990. In-
dexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 41(6):391?
407.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
L Guthrie, J Pustejovsky, Y Wilks, and B Slator. 1996.
The role of lexicons in natural language processing.
Communications of the ACM, 39(1):63?72.
Udo Hahn and Klemens Schnattinger. 1998. Towards
text knowledge engineering. In AAAI/IAAI, pages
524?531.
Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In COLING, Nantes,
France.
Marti A. Hearst, 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical
Database, chapter 5, Automated discovery of WordNet
relations, pages 131?152. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze. 1999.
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Process-
ing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2001.
Applied morphological processing of english. Natural
Language Engineering, 7(3):207?223.
Ellen Riloff and Rosie Jones. 1999. Learning dictionar-
ies for infomation extraction by multi-level bootstrap-
ping. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pages 472?479. AAAI.
Ellen Riloff and Jessica Shepherd. 1997. A corpus-based
approach for building semantic lexicons. In Claire
Cardie and Ralph Weischedel, editors, Proceedings of
the Second Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 117?124. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Somerset, New Jersey.
Brian Roark and Eugene Charniak. 1998. Noun-phrase
co-occurence statistics for semi-automatic semantic
lexicon construction. In COLING-ACL, pages 1110?
1116.
Hinrich Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimi-
nation. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?124.
Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow. 2002. A graph
model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In 19th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1093?1099, Taipei, Taiwan, August.
