Outline of the International Standard Linguistic Annotation
Framework
Nancy Ide
Dept. of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie,
New York 12604-0520
 USA
ide@cs.vassar.edu
Laurent Romary
Equipe Langue et Dialogue
LORIA/INRIA
Vandoeuvre-l?s-Nancy
FRANCE
romary@loria.fr
Abstract
This paper describes the outline of a lin-
guistic annotation framework under de-
velopment by ISO TC37 SC WG1-1. This
international standard provides an archi-
tecture for the creation, annotation, and
manipulation of linguistic resources and
processing software. The goal is to pro-
vide maximum flexibility for encoders
and annotators, while at the same time
enabling interchange and re-use of anno-
tated linguistic resources. We describe
here the outline of the standard for the
purposes of enabling annotators to begin
to explore how their schemes may map
into the framework.
1 Introduction
Over the past 15-20 years, increasingly large bod-
ies of language resources have been created and
annotated by the language engineering community.
Certain fundamental representation principles have
been widely adopted, such as the use of stand-off
annotation, use of XML, etc., and several attempts
to provide generalized annotation mechanisms and
formats have been developed (e.g., XCES, annota-
tion graphs). However, it remains the case that an-
notation formats often vary considerably from
resource to resource, often to satisfy constraints
imposed by particular processing software. The
language processing community has recognized
that commonality and interoperability are increas-
ingly imperative to enable sharing, merging, and
comparison of language resources.
To provide an infra-structure and framework for
language resource development and use, the Inter-
national Organization for Standardization (ISO)
has formed a sub-committee (SC4) under Techni-
cal Committee 37 (TC37, Terminology and Other
Language Resources) devoted to Language Re-
source Management. The objective of ISO/TC
37/SC 4 is to prepare international standards and
guidelines for effective language resource man-
agement in applications in the multilingual infor-
mation society. To this end, the committee is
developing principles and methods for creating,
coding, processing and managing language re-
sources, such as written corpora, lexical corpora,
speech corpora, and dictionary compiling and clas-
sification schemes. The focus of the work is on
data modeling, markup, data exchange and the
evaluation of language resources other than termi-
nologies (which have already been treated in
ISO/TC 37). The worldwide use of ISO/TC 37/SC
4 standards should improve information manage-
ment within industrial, technical and scientific en-
vironments, and increase efficiency in computer-
supported language communication.
Within ISO/TC 37/SC 4, a working group (WG1-
1) has been established to develop a Linguistic An-
notation Framework (LAF) that can serve as a ba-
sis for harmonizing existing language resources as
well as developing new ones. The overall design of
the architecture and the data model that it will in-
stantiate have been described in Ide et al, 2003. In
this paper we provide a description of the data
model and its instantiations in LAF, in order to
enable annotators to begin to explore how their
schemes will map into the framework.
2 Terms and definitions
The following terms and definitions are used in the
discussion that follows:
Annotation: The process of adding linguistic in-
formation to language data (?annotation of a cor-
pus?) or the linguistic information itself (?an
annotation?), independent of its representation. For
example, one may annotate a document for syntax
using a LISP-like representation, an XML repre-
sentation, etc.
Representation: The format in which the annota-
tion is rendered, e.g. XML, LISP, etc. independent
of its content. For example, a phrase structure syn-
tactic annotation and a dependency-based annota-
tion may both be represented using XML, even
though the annotation information itself is very
different.
Types of Annotation: We distinguish two funda-
mental types of annotation activity:
1. Segmentation: delimits linguistic elements that
appear in the primary data. Including
o  continuous segments (appear contiguously
in the primary data)
o  super- and sub-segments, where groups of
segments will comprise the parts of a
larger segment (e.g., a contiguous word
segments typically comprise a sentence
segment)
o  discontinuous segments (linked continuous
segments)
o  landmarks (e.g. time stamps) that note a
point in the primary data
In current practice, segmental information may
or may not appear in the document containing
the primary data itself. Documents considered
to be read-only, for example, might be seg-
mented by specifying byte offsets into the
primary document where a given segment be-
gins and ends.
2. Linguistic annotation: provides linguistic in-
formation about the segments in the primary
data, e.g., a morpho-syntactic annotation in
which a part of speech and lemma are associ-
ated with each segment in the data. Note that
the identification of a segment as a word, sen-
tence, noun phrase, etc. also constitutes lin-
guistic annotation. In current practice, when it
is possible to do so, segmentation and identifi-
cation of the linguistic role or properties of that
segment are often combined (e.g., syntactic
bracketing, or delimiting each word in the
document with an XML tag that identifies the
segment as a word, sentence, etc.).
Stand-off annotation: Annotations layered over a
given primary document and instantiated in a
document separate from that containing the pri-
mary data. Stand-off annotations refer to specific
locations in the primary data, by addressing byte
offsets, elements, etc. to which the annotation ap-
plies. Multiple stand-off annotation documents for
a given type of annotation can refer to the same
primary document (e.g., two different part of
speech annotations for a given text). There is no
requirement that a single XML-compliant docu-
ment may be created by merging stand-off annota-
tion documents with the primary data; that is, two
annotation documents may specify trees over the
primary data that contain overlapping hierarchies.
3 LAF overview
LAF development has proceeded by first identify-
ing an abstract data model that can formally de-
scribe linguistic annotations, distinct from any
particular representation (as defined in the previous
section). Development of this model has been dis-
cussed extensively within the language engineering
community and tested on a variety of annotation
types (see Ide and Romary, 2001a, 2001b, 2002).
The data model forms the core of the framework
by serving as the reference point for all annotation
representation schemes.
The overall design of LAF is illustrated in Figure
1. The fundamental principle is that the user con-
trols the representation format for linguistic anno-
tations, which is mappable to the data model. This
mapping is accomplished via a rigid ?dump? for-
mat, isomorphic to the data model and intended
primarily for machine rather than human use.
Figure 1. Overall LAF architecture
4 Dump format specification
The data model is built around a clear separation of
the structure of annotations and their content, that
is, the linguistic information the annotation pro-
vides. The model therefore combines a structural
meta-model, that is, an abstract structure shared by
all documents of a given type (e.g. syntactic anno-
tation), and a set of data categories associated with
the various components of the structural meta-
model.
The structural component of the data model is a
feature structure graph capable of referencing n-
dimensional regions of primary data as well as
other annotations. The choice of this model is indi-
cated by its almost universal use in defining gen-
eral-purpose annotation formats, including the
Generic Modeling Tool (GMT) (Ide and Romary,
2001, 2002) and Annotation Graphs (Bird and
Liberman, 2001). A small inventory of logical op-
erations over annotation structures is specified,
which define the model?s abstract semantics. These
operations allow for expressing the following rela-
tions among annotation fragments:
? Parallelism: two or more annotations refer to
the same data object;
? Alternatives: two or more annotations com-
prise a set of mutually exclusive alternatives
(e.g., two possible part-of-speech assignments,
before disambiguation);
? Aggregation: two or more annotations com-
prise a list (ordered) or set (unordered) that
should be taken as a unit.
The feature structure graph is a graph of elemen-
tary structural nodes to which one or more data
category/value pairs are attached, providing the
semantics of the annotation. LAF does not provide
definitions for data categories. Rather, to ensure
semantic coherence we specify a mechanism for
the formal definition of categories and relations,
and provide a Data Category Registry of pre-
defined categories that can be used directly in an-
notations. Alternatively, users may define their
own data categories or establish variants of catego-
ries in the registry; in such cases, the newly defined
data categories will be formalized using the same
format as definitions available in the registry.
5 Implementation
5.1 Dump format
The dump format is instantiated in XML. Struc-
tural nodes are represented as XML elements. The
XML-based GMT will serve as a starting point for
defining the dump format. Its applicability to di-
verse annotation types, including terminology, dic-
tionaries and other lexical data (Ide, et al, 2000),
morphological annotation (Ide and Romary, 2002)
and syntactic annotation (Ide and Romary, 2001b,
2003) demonstrates its generality.
As specified by the LAF architecture, the GMT
implements a feature structure graph. Structural
nodes in the graph are represented with the XML
element <struct>. <brack> and <alt> elements
User-defined
representation
format
User-defined
representation
format
User-definedrepresentationformat DUMPFORMAT DATAMODELMappingspecifica-
tion
are provided as grouping tags to handle aggrega-
tion (grouping) and alternatives (disjunction), as
described above. A <feat> element is used to ex-
press category/value pairs. All of these elements
are recursively nestable. Therefore, hierarchical
relations among annotations and annotation com-
ponents can be expressed via XML syntax via ele-
ment nesting. Other relations, including those
among discontiguous elements, rely on XML?s
powerful inter- and intra-document pointing and
linkage mechanisms. Because all annotations are
stand-off (i.e., in documents separate from the pri-
mary data and other annotations), the same mecha-
nisms are used to associate annotations with both
?raw? and XML-tagged primary data and with
other annotations.
The final XML implementation of the dump format
may differ slightly from the GMT, in particular
where processing concerns (e.g. ease of processing
elements vs. attributes vs. content) and conciseness
are applied. However, in its general form the above
are sufficient to express the information required in
LAF. For examples of morphological and syntactic
annotation in GMT format, see Ide and Romary,
2001a; 2003; and Ide and Romary, 2001b.
5.2 Data Categories
To make them maximally interoperable and con-
sistent with existing standards, RDF schemas can
be used to formalize the properties and relations
associated with data categories. Instances of the
categories themselves will be represented in RDF.
The RDF schema ensures that each instantiation of
the described objects is recognized as a sub-class
of more general classes and inherits the appropriate
properties. Annotations will reference the data
categories via a URL identifying their instantia-
tions in the Data Category Registry itself. The class
and sub-class mechanisms provided in RDFS and
its extensions in OWL will also enable creation of
an ontology of annotation classes and types.
For example, the syntactic feature defined in the
ISLE/MILE format for lexical entries (Calzolari, et
al. 2003) can be represented in RDF as follows
1
:
                                                       
1
 For brevity, this representation does not include the full i n-
formation necessary for the RDF representation.
<rdf:RDF>
<Phrase rdf:ID="Vauxhave">
   <hasSynFeature>
     <SynFeature>
        <hasSynFeatureName rdf:value="aux"/>
        <hasSynFeatureValue rdf:value="have"/>
   </SynFeature>
</hasSynFeature></Phrase>
</rdf:RDF>
Once declared in the Data Category registry, an-
notations or lexicons can reference this object di-
rectly, for example:
<Self rdf:ID="eat1Self">
  <headedBy
   rdf:resource="http://www.DCR /Vauxhave"/>
</Self>
For a full example of the use of RDF-instantiated
data categories, see Ide, et al, in this volume.
Note that RDF descriptions function much like
class definitions in an object-oriented program-
ming language: they provide, effectively, templates
that describe how objects may be instantiated, but
do not constitute the objects themselves. Thus, in a
document containing an actual annotation, several
objects with the same type may be instantiated,
each with a different value. The RDF schema en-
sures that each instantiation is recognized as a sub-
class of more general classes and inherits the ap-
propriate properties.
A formally defined set of categories will have sev-
eral functions: (1) it will provide a precise seman-
tics for annotation categories that can be either
used ?off the shelf? by annotators or modified to
serve specific needs; (2) it will provide a set of ref-
erence categories onto which scheme-specific
names can be mapped; and (3) it will provide a
point of departure for definition of variant or more
precise categories. Thus the overall goal of the
Data Category Registry is not to impose a specific
set of categories, but rather to ensure that the se-
mantics of data categories included in annotations
(whether they exist in the Registry or not) are well-
defined and understood.
6 Conclusion
In this paper we describe the Linguistic Annotation
Framework under development by ISO TC37/SC 4
WG1-1. Its design is intended to allow for, on the
one hand, maximum flexibility for annotators, and.
on the other, processing efficiency and reusability.
This is accomplished by separating user annotation
formats from the exchange/processing format. This
separation ensures that pre-existing annotations are
compatible with LAF, and that users have the free-
dom to design specific schemes to meet their
needs, while still conforming to LAF requirements.
LAF provides for the use of any annotation format
consistent with the feature structure-based data
model that will be used to define the pivot format.
This suggests a future scenario in which annotators
may create and edit annotations in a proprietary
format, transduce the annotations using available
tools to the pivot format for interchange and/or
processing, and if desired, transduce the pivot form
of the annotations (and/or additional annotation
introduced by processing) back into the proprietary
format. We anticipate the future development of
annotation tools that provide a user-oriented inter-
face for specifying annotation information, and
which then generate annotations in the pivot format
directly. Thus the pivot format is intended to func-
tion in the same way as, for example, Java byte
code functions for programmers, as a universal
?machine language? that is interpreted by process-
ing software into an internal representation suited
to its particular requirements. As with Java byte
code, users need never see or manipulate the pivot
format; it is solely for machine consumption.
Part of the work of SC4 WG1-1 is to provide de-
velopment resources, including schemas, design
patterns, and stylesheets, which will enable anno-
tators and software developers to immediately
adapt to LAF. Example mappings, e.g., for XCES-
encoded annotations, will also be provided. In this
way, we hope to realize the goal of harmonized and
reusable resources in the near future.
References
Bird, S. and Liberman, M. (2001). A formal
framework for linguistic annotation. Speech Com-
munication, 33:1-2, 23-60.
Bunt. H. and Romary, L. (2002). Towards Multi-
modal Content Representation.  Proceedings of the
Workshop on International Standards for Termi-
nology and Language Resource Management, Las
Palmas.
Calzolari, N., Bertagna, F., Lenci, A., Monachini,
M., 2003. Standards and best Practice for Multi-
lingual Computational Lexicons and MILE (Multi-
lingual ISLE Lexical Entry), ISLE Computational
Lexicon Working Group deliverables D2.2 ? D3.2,
Pisa.
Ide, N. and Romary, L. (2001a). Standards for
Language Resources, IRCS Workshop on Linguis-
tic Databases, Philadelphia, 141-49.
Ide, N. and Romary, L. (2001b). A Common
Framework for Syntactic Annotation. Proceedings
of ACL'2001, Toulouse, 298-305.
Ide, N. and Romary, L. (2002). Standards for Lan-
guage Resources. Proceedings of the Third Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, 839-
44.
Ide, N. and Romary, L. (2003). Encoding Syntactic
Annotation. In Abeill?, A. (ed.). Treebanks:
Building and Using Syntactically Annotated Cor-
pora. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers (in
press).
Ide, N., Kilgarriff, A., and Romary, L. (2000). A
Formal Model of Dictionary Structure and Content.
Proceedings of Euralex 2000, Stuttgart, 113-126.
Ide, N., Lenci, A., And Calzolari, N. (2003). RDF
Instantiation of ISLE/MILE Lexical Entries. This
volume.
Ide, N., Romary, L, and De la Clergerie, E. (2003).
International Standard for a Linguistic Annotation
Framework. Proceedings of NAACL?03 Workshop
on Software Engineering and Architecture of Lan-
guage Technology Systems (to appear).
