Parmenides: an opportunity for ISO TC37 SC4?
Fabio Rinaldi
1
, James Dowdall
1
, Michael Hess
1
, Kaarel Kaljurand
1
, Andreas Persidis
2
,
Babis Theodoulidis
3
, Bill Black
3
, John McNaught
3
, Haralampos Karanikas
3
, Argyris Vasilakopoulos
3
,
Kelly Zervanou
3
, Luc Bernard
3
, Gian Piero Zarri
4
, Hilbert Bruins Slot
5
, Chris van der Touw
5
,
Margaret Daniel-King
6
, Nancy Underwood
6
, Agnes Lisowska
6
, Lonneke van der Plas
6
,
Veronique Sauron
6
, Myra Spiliopoulou
7
, Marko Brunzel
7
, Jeremy Ellman
8
,
Giorgos Orphanos
9
, Thomas Mavroudakis
10
, Spiros Taraviras
10
.
Abstract
Despite the many initiatives in recent years
aimed at creating Language Engineering
standards, it is often the case that dierent
projects use dierent approaches and often
dene their own standards. Even within the
same project it often happens that dierent
tools will require dierent ways to represent
their linguistic data.
In a recently started EU project focusing
on the integration of Information Extrac-
tion and Data Mining techniques, we aim
at avoiding the problem of incompatibility
among dierent tools by dening a Com-
mon Annotation Scheme internal to the
project. However, when the project was
started (Sep 2002) we were unaware of the
standardization eort of ISO TC37/SC4,
and so we commenced once again trying to
dene our own schema. Fortunately, as this
work is still at an early stage (the project
will last till 2005) it is still possible to redi-
rect it in a way that it will be compati-
ble with the standardization work of ISO.
In this paper we describe the status of the
work in the project and explore possible
synergies with the work in ISO TC37 SC4.
1 1
Institute of Computational Linguistics, Uni-
versity of Zurich, Switzerland;
2
Biovista, Athens,
Greece;
3
Centre for Research in Information Manage-
ment, UMIST, Manchester, UK;
4
CNRS, Paris, France;
5
Unilever Research and Development, Vlaardingen,
The Netherlands;
6
TIM/ISSCO, University of Geneva,
Switzerland;
7
Uni Magdeburg, Germany;
8
Wordmap
Ltd., Bath, UK;
9
Neurosoft, Athens, Greece;
10
The
Greek Ministry of National Defense, Athens, Greece
1 Introduction
It is by now widely accepted that some W3C stan-
dards (such as XML and RDF) provide a con-
venient and practical framework for the creation
of eld-specic markup languages (e.g. MathML,
VoiceXML). However XML provides only a common
\alphabet" for interchange among tools, the steps
that need to be taken before there is any real shar-
ing are still many (just as many human languages
share the same alphabets, that does not mean that
they can be mutually intelligible). The necessary
step to achieve mutual understanding in Language
Resources is to create a common data model.
The existence of a standard brings many other
advantages, like the ability to automatically com-
pare the results of dierent tools which provide the
same functionality, from the very basic (e.g. tok-
enization) to the most complex (e.g. discourse rep-
resentation). Some of the NIST-supported competi-
tive evaluations (e.g. MUC) greatly beneted by the
existence of scoring tools, which could automatically
compare the results of each participant against a gold
standard. The creation of such tools (and their ef-
fectiveness) was possible only because the organizing
institute had pre-dened and \imposed" upon the
participants the annotation scheme. However, that
sort of \brute force" approach might not always pro-
duce the best results. It is important to involve the
community in the denition of such standards at an
early stage, so that all the possible concerns can be
met and a wider acceptance can be achieved.
Another clear benet of agreed standards is that
they will increase interoperability among dierent
tools. It is not enough to have publicly available
APIs to ensure that dierent tools can be integrated.
In fact, if their representation languages (their \data
vocabulary") are too divergent, no integration will
be possible (or at least it will require a considerable
mapping eort). For all the above reasons we enthu-
siastically support any concertation work, aimed at
establishing common foundations for the eld.
In a recently started EU project (\Parmenides")
focusing on the integration of Information Extrac-
tion and Data Mining techniques (for Text Mining)
we aim at avoiding the problem of incompatibility
among dierent tools by dening a Common Annota-
tion Scheme internal to the project. However, when
the project was started (Sep 2002) we were unaware
of the standardization eort of ISO TC37 SC4, and
so we commenced once again trying to dene our own
schema. Fortunately, as this work is still at an early
stage (the project will last till 2005) it is still possible
to redirect it in a way that it will be compatible with
the standardization work of ISO.
In this paper we will describe the approach fol-
lowed so far in the denition of the Parmenides Com-
mon Annotation Scheme, even if its relation with ISO
is still only supercial. In the forthcoming months
our intention is to explore possible synergies between
our work and the current initiatives in ISO TC37
SC4, with the aim to get at a Parmenides annota-
tion scheme which is conformant to the approach cur-
rently discussed in the standardization committee.
2 The Parmenides Lingua Franca
In this section we will describe the XML-based anno-
tation scheme proposed for the Parmenides project.
In general terms the project is concerned with or-
ganisational knowledge management, specically, by
developing an ontology driven systematic approach
to integrating the entire process of information gath-
ering, processing and analysis.
The annotation scheme is intended to work as the
projects' lingua franca: all the modules will be re-
quired to be able to accept as input and generate
as output documents conformant to the (agreed) an-
notation scheme. The specication will be used to
create data-level compatibility among all the tools
involved in the project.
Each tool might choose to use or ignore part of
the information dened by the markup: some infor-
mation might not yet be available at a given stage
of processing or might not be required by the next
module. Facilities will need to be provided for lter-
ing annotations according to a simple conguration
le. This is in fact one of the advantages of using
XML: many readily available o-the-shelf tools can
be used for parsing and ltering the XML annota-
tions, according to the needs of each module.
The annotation scheme will be formally dened by
a DTD and an equivalent XML schema denition.
Ideally the schema should remain exible enough to
allow later additional entities when and if they are
needed. However the present document has only an
illustrative purpose, in particular the set of anno-
tation elements introduced needs to be further ex-
panded and the attributes of all elements need to be
veried.
There are a number of simplications which have
been taken in this document with the purpose of
keeping the annotation scheme as simple as possible,
however they might be put into question and more
complex approaches might be required. For instance
we assume that we will be able to identify a unique
set of tags, suitable for all the applications. If this
proves to be incorrect, a possible way to deal with
the problem is the use of XML namespaces. Our
assumptions allow us (for the moment) to keep all
XML elements in the same namespace (and there-
fore ignore the issue altogether).
2.1 Corpus Development
The annotation scheme will be used to create a de-
velopment corpus - a representative sample of the
domain, provided by the users as typical of the doc-
uments they manually process daily. In this phase,
the documents are annotated by domain experts for
the information of interest. This provides the bench-
mark against which algorithms can be developed and
tested to automate extraction as far as possible.
Of primary importance to the annotation process
is the consolidation of the \information of interest",
the text determined as the target of the Information
Extraction modules. Given the projects' goals, this
target will be both diverse and complex necessitating
clarity and consensus.
2.2 Sources Used for this Document
Parmenides aims at using consolidated Information
Extraction techniques, such as Named Entity Ex-
traction, and therefore this work builds upon well-
known approaches, such as the Named Entity anno-
tation scheme from MUC7 (Chinchor, 1997). Cru-
cially, attention will be paid to temporal annota-
tions, with the aim of using extracted temporal in-
formation for detection of trends (using Data Min-
ing techniques). Therefore we have investigated all
the recently developed approaches to such a problem,
and have decided for the adoption of the TERQAS
tagset (Ingria and Pustejovsky, 2002; Pustejovsky et
al., 2002).
Other sources that have been considered include
the GENIA tagset (GENIA, 2003), TEI (TEI Con-
sortium, 2003) and the GDA
1
tagset. The list of
entities introduced so far is by no means complete
1
http://www.i-content.org/GDA/tagset.html
but serves as the starting point, upon which to build
a picture of the domains from information types they
contain. The domain of interests (e.g. Biotechnol-
ogy) are also expected to be terminology-rich and
therefore require proper treatment of terminology.
To supplement the examples presented, a com-
plete document has been annotated according to the
outlined specication.
2
There are currently three
methods of viewing the document which oer dif-
fering ways to visualize the annotations. These
are all based on transformation of the same XML
source document, using XSLT and CSS (and some
Javascript for visualization of attributes). For exam-
ple, the basic view can be seen in gure (1).
3 Levels of Annotation
The set of Parmenides annotations is organized into
three levels:
 Structural Annotations
Used to dene the physical structure of the doc-
ument, it's organization into head and body,
into sections, paragraphs and sentences.
3
 Lexical Annotations
Associated to a short span of text (smaller than
a sentence), and identify lexical units that have
some relevance for the Parmenides project.
 Semantic Annotations
Not associated with any specic piece of text
and as such could be free-oating within the
document, however for the sake of clarity, they
will be grouped into a special unit at the end
of the document. They refer to lexical anno-
tations via co-referential Ids. They (partially)
correspond to what in MUC7 was termed `Tem-
plate Elements' and `Template Relations'.
Structural annotations apply to large text spans,
lexical annotations to smaller text spans (sub-
sentence). Semantic annotations are not directly
linked to a specic text span, however, they are
linked to text units by co-referential identiers.
All annotations are required to have an unique ID
and thus will be individually addressable, this allows
semantic annotations to point to the lexical annota-
tions to which they correspond. Semantic Annota-
tions themselves are given a unique ID, and therefore
can be elements of more complex annotations (\Sce-
nario Template" in MUC parlance).
2
available at http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/Parmenides
3
Apparently the term 'structure' is used with a dif-
ferent meaning in the ISO documentation, referring
to morpho-syntactical structure rather than document
structure.
Structural Annotations The structure of the
documents will be marked using an intuitively appro-
priate scheme which may require further adaptations
to specic documents. For the moment, the root
node is <ParDoc> (Parmenides Document) which
can contain <docinfo>, <body>, <ParAnn>. The
<docinfo> might include a title, abstract or sum-
mary of the documents contents, author informa-
tion and creation/release time. The main body
of the documents (<body>) will be split into sec-
tions (<sec>) which can themselves contain sec-
tions as well as paragraphs (<para>). Within the
paragraphs all sentences will be identied by the
<sentence> tag. The Lexical Annotations will
(normally) be contained within sentences. The -
nal section of all documents will be <ParAnn> (Par-
menides Annotations) where all of the semantic an-
notations that subsume no text are placed. Figure
(2) demonstrates the annotation visualization tool
displaying the documents structure (using nested
boxes).
Lexical Annotations Lexical Annotations are
used to mark any text unit (smaller than a sentence),
which can be of interest in Parmenides. They include
(but are not limited to):
1. Named Entities in the classical MUC sense
2. New domain-specic Named Entities
3. Terms
4. Temporal Expressions
5. Events
6. Descriptive phrases (chunks)
The set of Lexical Annotations described in this
document will need to be further expanded to cover
all the requirements of the project, e.g. names of
products (Acme Arms International's KryoZap (TM)
tear gas riot control gun), including e.g. names of
drugs (Glycocortex's Siderocephalos).
When visualizating the set of Lexical Tags in a
given annotated document, clicking on specic tags
displays the attribute values (see gure (3)).
Semantic Annotations The relations that exist
between lexical entities are expressed through the
semantic annotations. So lexically identied peo-
ple can be linked to their organisation and job ti-
tle, if this information is contained in the document
(see gure (4)). In terms of temporal annotations, it
is the explicit time references and events which are
identied lexically, the temporal relations are then
captured through the range of semantic tags.
Figure 1: Basic Annotation Viewing
3.1 Example
While the structural annotations and lexical annota-
tions should be easy to grasp as they correspond to
accepted notions of document structure and of con-
ventional span-based annotations, an example might
help to illustrate the role of semantic annotations.
(1) The recent ATP award is
<ENAMEX id="e8" type="ORGANIZATION">
Dyax
</ENAMEX>
's second, and follows a
<NUMEX id="n5" type="MONEY">
$4.3 million
</NUMEX>
<ENAMEX id="e9" type="ORGANIZATION">
NIST
</ENAMEX>
grant to
<ENAMEX id="e10" type="ORGANIZATION">
Dyax
</ENAMEX>
and
<ENAMEX id="e11" type="ORGANIZATION">
CropTech Development Corporation
</ENAMEX>
in
<TIMEX3 tid="t4" type="DATE" value="1997">
1997
</TMEX3>
There are two occurrences of Dyax in this short
text: the two Lexical Entities e8 and e10, but clearly
they correspond to the same Semantic Entity. To
capture this equivalence, we could use the syntactic
notion of co-reference (i.e. Identify the two as co-
referent). Another possible approach is to make a
step towards the conceptual level, and create a se-
mantic entity, of which both e8 and e10 are lexical
expressions (which could be dierent, e.g. \Dyax",
\Dyax Corp.", \The Dyax Corporation"). The sec-
ond approach can be implemented using an empty
XML element, created whenever a new entity is men-
tioned in text. For instance, in (2) we can use the tag
Figure 2: Visualization of Structural Annotations
<PEntity> (which stands for Parmenides Entity).
(2) <PEntity peid="obj1" type="ORGANIZATION"
mnem="Dyax" refid="e1 e3 e6 e8 e10 e12"/>
The new element is assigned (as usual) a unique
identication number and a type. The attribute mnem
contains just one of the possible ways to refer to the
semantic entity (a mnemonic name, possibly chosen
randomly). However, it also takes as the value of
the refid attribute as many coreferent ids as are
warranted by the document. In this way all lexical
manifestations of a single entity are identied. All
the lexical entities which refer to this semantic entity,
are possible ways to `name' it (see also g. 4).
Notice that the value of the `type' attribute has
been represented here as a string for readability pur-
poses, in the actual specication it will be a pointer
to a concept in a domain-specic Ontology.
Other semantic entities from (1) are:
(3) <PEntity peid="obj2" type="ORGANIZATION"
mnem="NIST" refid="e2 e4 e7 e9"/>
<PEntity peid="obj3" type="ORGANIZATION"
mnem="CropTech" refid="e11"/>
The newly introduced semantic entities can then
be used to tie together people, titles and organiza-
tions on the semantic level. Consider for example
the text fragment (4), which contains only Lexical
Annotations.
(4) ... said
<ENAMEX id="e17" type="PERSON">
Charles R. Wescott
</ENAMEX>
, Ph.D.,
<ROLE type='x' id="x5">
Senior Scientist
</ROLE>
at
<ENAMEX id="e60" type="ORGANIZATION">
Dyax Corp
</ENAMEX>
The Lexical Entity e17 requires the introduction
of a new semantic entity, which is given the arbitrary
identier `obj5':
(5) <PEntity peid="obj5" type="PERSON"
mnem="Charles R. Wescott" refid="e17"/>
Figure 3: Visualization of Lexical Annotations and their attributes
In turn, this entity is linked to the entity obj1
from (1) by a relation of type `workFor' (PRelation
stands for Parmenides Relation):
(6) <PRelation prid="rel2" source="obj5"
target="obj1" type="worksFor" role="Senior
Scientist" evidence="x5"/>
4 Discussion
As the status of the Parmenides annotation scheme
is still preliminary, we aim in this section to pro-
vide some justication for the choices done so far
and some comparison with existing alternatives.
4.1 Named Entities
One of the purposes of Named Entities is to instanti-
ate frames or templates representing facts involving
these elements. A minor reason to preserve the clas-
sic named entities is so that we can test an IE system
against the MUC evaluation suites and know how
it is doing compared to the competition and where
there may be lacunae. As such, the MUC-7 speci-
cation (Chinchor, 1997) is adopted with the minor
extension of a non-optional identication attribute
on each tag.
4.2 Terminology
A term is a means of referring to a concept of a spe-
cial subject language; it can be a single wordform,
a multiword form or a phrase, this does not matter.
The only thing that matters is that it has special
reference: the term is restricted to refer to its con-
cept of the special domain. The act of (analytically)
dening xes the special reference of a term to a con-
cept. Thus, it makes no sense to talk of a term not
having a denition. A concept is described by den-
ing it (using other certain specialised linguistic forms
(terms) and ordinary words), by relating it to other
concepts, and by assigning a linguistic form (term)
to it.
If we are interested in fact extraction from densely
terminological texts with few named entities apart
from perhaps names of authors, names of laborato-
ries, and probably many instances of amounts and
measures, then we would need to rely much more on
prior identication of terms in the texts, especially
where these are made up of several word forms.
A term can have many variants: even standard-
ised terms have variants e.g. singular, plural forms
of a noun. Thus we should perhaps more correctly
refer to a termform, at least when dealing with text.
Among variants one can also include acronyms and
reduced forms. You therefore nd a set of variants,
typically, all referring to the same concept in a special
domain: they are all terms (or termforms). Again
this problem pinpoints the need for a separation of
the lexical annotations (the surface variants within
the document) and semantic annotations (pointing
abstractly to the underlying concept).
4.3 Approaches to Temporal Annotations
TIDES (Ferro et al, 2001) is a temporal annota-
tion scheme that was developed at the MITRE Cor-
poration and it can be considered as an extension
of the MUC7 Named Entity Recognition (Tempo-
ral Entity Recognition - TIMEX Recognition) (Chin-
chor, 1997). It aims at annotating and normalizing
explicit temporal references. STAG (Setzer, 2001)
is an annotation scheme developed at the University
of She?eld. It has a wider focus than TIDES in
the sense that it combines explicit time annotation,
event annotation and the ability to annotate tempo-
ral relations between events and times.
TimeML (Ingria and Pustejovsky, 2002) stands for
\Time Markup Language" and represents the inte-
gration and consolidation of both TIDES and STAG.
It was created at the TERQAS Workshop
4
and is
designed to combine the advantages of the previous
temporal annotations schemes. It contains a set of
tags which are used to annotate events, time expres-
sions and various types of event-event, event-time
and time-time relations. TimeML is specically tar-
geted at the temporal attributes of events (time of
occurrence, duration etc.).
As the most complete and recent, TimeML should
be adopted for the temporal annotations. Broadly,
its organization follows the Parmenides distinction
between lexical/semantic annotations. Explicit tem-
poral expressions and events receive an appropriate
(text subsuming) lexical tag. The temporal rela-
tions existing between these entities are then cap-
tured through a range of semantic (non-text subsum-
ing) tags.
For example, each event introduces a correspond-
ing semantic tag. There is a distinction be-
tween event \tokens" and event \instances" moti-
vated by predicates that represent more than one
event. Accordingly, each event creates a semantic
<MAKEINSTANCE> tag that subsumes no text. Ei-
ther, one tag for each realised event or a single tag
with the number of events expressed as the value of
the cardinality attribute. The tag is introduced and
the event or to which it refers is determined by the
attributes eventID.
5 Conclusion
We believe that ISO TC37/SC4 provides a very in-
teresting framework within which specic research
concerns can be addressed without the risk of rein-
venting the wheel or creating another totally new
4
http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/~jamesp/arda/time
and incompatible annotation format. The set of an-
notations that we have been targeting so far in Par-
menides is probably a small subset of what is tar-
geted by ISO TC37/SC4. Although we had only lim-
ited access to the documentation available, we think
our approach is compatible with the work being done
in ISO.
It is, we believe, extremely important for a project
like ours, to be involved directly in the ongoing dis-
cussion. Moreover we are at precisely the right stage
for a more direct `exposure' to the ISO TC37/SC4
discussion, as we have completed the exploratory
work but no irrevocable modeling commitment has
so far been taken. Therefore we would hope to be-
come more involved in order to make our proposal
t exactly into that framework. The end result of
this process might be that Parmenides could become
a sort of \Guinea Pig" for at least a subset of ISO
TC37 SC4.
Acknowledgments
The Parmenides project is funded by the European
Commission (contract No. IST-2001-39023) and
by the Swiss Federal O?ce for Education and Sci-
ence (BBW/OFES). All the authors listed have con-
tributed to the (ongoing) work described in this pa-
per. Any remaining errors are the sole responsibility
of the rst author.
References
Nancy Chinchor. 1997. MUC-7 Named Entity Task Denition, Version
3.5. http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/
related projects/muc/proceedings/ne task.html.
Lisa Ferro, Inderjeet Mani, Beth Sundheim, and George Wilson. 2001.
Tides temporal annotation guidelines, version 1.0.2. Technical re-
port, The MITRE Corporation.
GENIA. 2003. Genia project home page. http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-
tokyo.ac.jp/~genia.
Bob Ingria and James Pustejovsky. 2002. TimeML
Specication 1.0 (internal version 3.0.9), July.
http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/%7Ejamesp/arda
/time/documentation/TimeML-Draft3.0.9.html.
James Pustejovsky, Roser Sauri, Andrea Setzer, Rob Giazauskas, and
Bob Ingria. 2002. TimeML Annotation Guideline 1.00 (internal
version 0.4.0), July. http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/%7Ejamesp/arda
/time/documentation/TimeML-Draft3.0.9.html.
Andrea Setzer. 2001. Temporal Information in Newswire Articles: An
Annotation Scheme and Corpus Study. Ph.D. thesis, University of
She?eld.
TEI Consortium. 2003. The text encoding initiative. http://www.tei-
c.org/.
Figure 4: Visualization of Semantic Annotations
