Sentence Alignment for Monolingual Comparable Corpora
Regina Barzilay
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
regina@cs.cornell.edu
Noemie Elhadad
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
noemie@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
We address the problem of sentence align-
ment for monolingual corpora, a phe-
nomenon distinct from alignment in par-
allel corpora. Aligning large compara-
ble corpora automatically would provide
a valuable resource for learning of text-to-
text rewriting rules. We incorporate con-
text into the search for an optimal align-
ment in two complementary ways: learn-
ing rules for matching paragraphs using
topic structure and further refining the
matching through local alignment to find
good sentence pairs. Evaluation shows
that our alignment method outperforms
state-of-the-art systems developed for the
same task.
1 Introduction
Text-to-text generation is an emerging area of re-
search in NLP (Chandrasekar and Bangalore, 1997;
Caroll et al, 1999; Knight and Marcu, 2000; Jing
and McKeown, 2000). Unlike in traditional concept-
to-text generation, text-to-text generation applica-
tions take a text as input and transform it into a new
text satisfying specific constraints, such as length in
summarization or style in text simplification. One
exciting new research direction is the automatic in-
duction of such transformation rules. This is a par-
ticularly promising direction given that there are nat-
urally occurring examples of comparable texts that
convey the same information yet are written in dif-
ferent styles. Presented with two such texts, one
can pair sentences that convey the same information,
thereby building a training set of rewriting examples
for the domain to which the texts belong. We believe
that automating this process will provide researchers
in text-to-text generation with valuable training and
testing resources, just as techniques to align multi-
lingual parallel corpora boosted research in Machine
Translation (MT).
In this paper, we address the task of aligning sen-
tences in text pairs. We focus on monolingual com-
parable corpora, that is, texts in the same language
(e.g., English) that overlap in the information they
convey. Stories about the same events from different
press agencies and texts presenting the same infor-
mation to experts and lay people are two examples.
In MT, the task of sentence alignment was exten-
sively studied for parallel corpora.1 A typical sen-
tence alignment algorithm can be roughly described
as a two-step process: (1) for each sentence pair
compute a local similarity value, independently of
the other sentences; (2) find an overall sequence of
mapped sentences, using both the local similarity
values and additional features.
In the case of monolingual corpora, step (2) might
seem unnecessary. Since the texts share the same
language, it would be enough to choose for local
similarity a function based on lexical cues only and
select sentence pairs with high lexical similarity.
Even a simple lexical function (e.g., one that counts
word overlap) could produce an accurate alignment.
1Sentence alignment for comparable multilingual corpora
was not addressed in previous research. Comparable cor-
pora have primarily been used to build bilingual lexical re-
sources (Fung and Yee, 1998).
After all, two sentences which share most of their
words are likely to paraphrase each other. The prob-
lem is that there are many sentences that convey
the same information but have little surface resem-
blance. As a result, simple word counts cannot dis-
tinguish the matching pair (A) in Figure 1 from the
unrelated pair (B). An accurate local similarity mea-
sure would have to account for many complex para-
phrasing phenomena. A simple, weak lexical simi-
larity function alone is not sufficient.
(A)
? Petersburg served as the capital of Russia for 200
years.
? For two centuries Petersburg was the capital of the
Russian Empire.
(B)
? The city is also the country?s leading port and center
of commerce.
? And yet, as with so much of the city, the port facili-
ties are old and inefficient.
Figure 1: Sentence pairs from our corpus sharing
two content words. (A) is a matching pair, (B) is not.
In MT, a weak similarity function is compensated
for by searching for a globally optimal alignment,
using dynamic programming or taking advantage
of the geometric/positional or contextual properties
of the text pair (Gale and Church, 1991; Shemtov,
1993; Melamed, 1999). But these techniques oper-
ate on the assumptions that there are limited inser-
tions and deletions between the texts and that the
order of the information is roughly preserved from
one text to another.
Texts from comparable corpora, as opposed to
parallel corpora, contain a great deal of ?noise.? In
Figure 2 which plots the manually identified align-
ment for a text pair in our corpus, only a small frac-
tion of the sentences got aligned (35 out of 31 ?
270 sentence pairs), which illustrates that there is no
complete information overlap. Consider two texts
written by different press agencies: while both re-
port on the same events, one may contain additional
interviews and the other, background information.
Another distinguishing characteristic of comparable
corpora is that the order in which the information
is presented can differ greatly from one text to an-
other. Analysis of comparable texts in different do-
mains (Paris, 1993; Barzilay et al, 2002) showed
that there is wide variability in the order in which
the same information can be presented. This is also
illustrated in Figure 2.
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Se
nt
en
ce
s 
in
 T
ex
t 2
Sentences in Text 1
Manual Alignment
Figure 2: Manual alignment for a text pair in our
corpus. A point in (x,y) indicates that the sentences
x and y match.
We investigate a novel approach informed by text
structure for sentence alignment. Our method em-
phasizes the search for an overall alignment, while
relying on a simple local similarity function. We
incorporate context into the search process in two
complementary ways: (1) we map large text frag-
ments using hypotheses learned in a supervised fash-
ion and (2) we further refine the match through lo-
cal alignment within mapping fragments to find sen-
tence pairs. When the documents in the collection
belong to the same domain and genre, the fragment
mapping takes advantage of the topical structure of
the texts. This structure is derived in an unsuper-
vised fashion by analyzing commonalities among
texts on each side of the comparable corpora sep-
arately. Our experiments show that our overall ap-
proach identifies even pairs with low lexical sim-
ilarity. We also found that a fully unsupervised
method using a minimalist representation of contex-
tual information, viz., paragraph-level lexical simi-
larity, outperforms existing methods based on com-
plex local similarity functions.
In the next section, we provide an overview of
existing work on monolingual sentence alignment.
Section 3 describes our algorithm. In sections 4
and 5, we report on data collection and evaluation.
2 Related Work
Most of the work in monolingual corpus alignment
is in the context of summarization. In single docu-
ment summarization, alignment between full docu-
ments and summaries written by humans is used to
learn rules for text compression. Marcu (1999) com-
putes sentence similarity using a cosine-based met-
ric. Jing (2002) identifies phrases that were cut and
pasted together using a Hidden Markov Model with
features incorporating word identity and positioning
within sentences, thereby providing an alignment of
the document and its summary. However, both of
these methods construct an alignment by looking at
sentences one at a time, independently of the de-
cisions made about other sentences. Because sum-
maries often reuse original document text to a large
extent, these methods achieve good results.
In the context of multidocument summarization,
SimFinder (Hatzivassiloglou et al, 1999) identifies
sentences that convey similar information across in-
put documents to select the summary content. Even
though the input documents are about the same sub-
ject, they exhibit a great deal of lexical variability.
To address this issue, SimFinder employs a com-
plex similarity function, combining features that ex-
tend beyond a simple word count and include noun
phrase, proper noun, and WordNet sense overlap.
Since many documents are processed in parallel,
clustering is used to combine pairwise alignments.
In contrast to our approach, SimFinder does not take
the context around sentences into account.
3 Algorithm
Given a comparable corpus consisting of two collec-
tions and a training set of manually aligned text pairs
from the corpus, the algorithm follows four main
steps. Steps 1 and 2 take place at training time. Steps
3 and 4 are carried out when a new text pair (Text1,
Text2) is to be aligned.
1. Topical structure induction: by analyzing
multiple instances of paragraphs within the
texts of each collection, the topics characteris-
tic of the collections are identified through clus-
tering. Each paragraph in the training set gets
assigned the topic it verbalizes (Section 3.1.1.)
2. Learning of structural mapping rules: us-
ing the training set, rules for mapping para-
graphs are learned in a supervised fashion (Sec-
tion 3.1.2).
3. Macro alignment: given a new unseen pair
(Text1, Text2), each paragraph is automati-
cally assigned its topic. Paragraphs are mapped
following the learned rules (Section 3.2).
4. Micro alignment: for each mapped paragraph
pair, a local alignment is computed at the sen-
tence level. The final alignment for the text pair
is the union of all the aligned sentence pairs
(Section 3.3).
3.1 Off-Line Processing
Given two sentences with moderate lexical similar-
ity, we may not have enough evidence to decide ac-
curately whether they should be aligned. Looking at
the broader context they appear in can provide addi-
tional insight: if the types of information expressed
in the contexts are similar, then the specific infor-
mation expressed in the sentences is more likely to
be the same. On the other hand, if the types of in-
formation in the two contexts are unrelated, chances
are that the sentences should not be aligned. In our
implementation, context is represented by the para-
graphs to which the sentences belong.2 Our goal in
this phase is to learn rules for determining whether
two paragraphs are likely to contain sentences that
should be aligned, or whether, on the contrary, two
paragraphs are unrelated and, therefore, should not
be considered for further processing.
A potentially fruitful way to do so is to take ad-
vantage of the topical structure of texts. In a given
domain and genre, while the texts relate different
subjects, they all use a limited set of topics to con-
vey information; these topics are also known as the
Domain Communication Knowledge (Kittredge et
al., 1991). For instance, most texts describing dis-
eases will have topics such as ?symptoms? or ?treat-
ment.?3 If the task is to align a disease description
written for physicians and a text describing the same
disease for lay people, it is most likely that sentences
within the topic ?symptoms? in the expert version
will map to sentences describing the symptoms in
the lay version rather than those describing treat-
ment options. If we can automatically identify the
topic each paragraph conveys, we can decide more
accurately whether two paragraphs are related and
should be mapped for further processing.
2Texts without adequate paragraph marking could be seg-
mented using tools such as TextTiling (Hearst, 1994).
3We use the term topic differently than it is commonly used
in the topic detection task? there, a ?topic? would designate
which disease is described.
In the field of text generation, methods for
representing the semantic structure of texts have
been investigated through text schemata (McKeown,
1985) or rhetorical structures (Mann and Thompson,
1987). In our framework, we want to identify the
different topics of the text, but we are not concerned
with the relations holding between them or the order
in which they typically appear. We propose to iden-
tify the topics typical to each collection in the com-
parable corpus by using clustering, such that each
cluster represents a topic in the collection.
The process of learning paragraph mapping rules
is accomplished in two stages: first, we identify the
topics of each collection, Corpus1 and Corpus2,
and label each paragraph with its specific topic. Sec-
ond, using a training set of manually aligned text
pairs, we learn rules for mapping paragraphs from
Corpus1 to Corpus2. Two paragraphs are consid-
ered mapped if they are likely to contain sentences
that should be aligned.
3.1.1 Vertical Paragraph Clustering
We perform a clustering at the paragraph level for
each collection. We call this stage Vertical Clus-
tering because all the paragraphs of all the doc-
uments in Corpus1 get clustered, independently
of Corpus2; the same goes for the paragraphs in
Corpus2. At this stage, we are only interested in
identifying the topics of the texts in each collection,
each cluster representing a topic.
We apply a hierarchical complete link clustering.
Similarity is a simple cosine measure based on the
word overlap of the paragraphs, ignoring function
words. Since we want to group together paragraphs
that convey the same type of information across the
documents in the same collection, we replace all the
text-specific attributes, such as proper names, dates
and numbers, by generic tags.4 This way, we ensure
that two paragraphs are clustered not because they
relate the same specific information, but rather, be-
cause they convey the same type of information (an
example of two automatically clustered paragraphs
is shown in Figure 3). The number of clusters for
each collection is a parameter tuned on our training
set (see Section 4).
4We crudely consider any words with a capital letter a proper
name, except for each sentence?s first word.
Lisbon has a mild and equable climate, with a mean annual
temperature of 63 degree F (17 degree C). The proximity of
the Atlantic and the frequency of sea fogs keep the atmosphere
humid, and summers can be somewhat oppressive, although
the city has been esteemed as a winter health resort since the
18th century. Average annual rainfall is 26.6 inches (666 mil-
limetres).
Jakarta is a tropical, humid city, with annual temperatures
ranging between the extremes of 75 and 93 degree F (24 and
34 degree C) and a relative humidity between 75 and 85 per-
cent. The average mean temperatures are 79 degree F (26 de-
gree C) in January and 82 degree F (28 degree C) in October.
The annual rainfall is more than 67 inches (1,700 mm). Tem-
peratures are often modified by sea winds. Jakarta, like any
other large city, also has its share of air and noise pollution.
Figure 3: Two automatically clustered paragraphs in
the same collection (without date, number, and name
substitution).
Cluster1
Text Text
Par.2
Par.1
Par.3
Corpus1 Corpus2
Par.3
Par.1
Par.2
ClusterE
ClusterB
Text Textj1 j2
i1 i2
Figure 4: The training set for the paragraph mapping
step. An arrow between two paragraphs indicates
they contain at least one aligned sentence pair.
3.1.2 Horizontal Paragraph Mapping
Once the different topics, or clusters, are identi-
fied inside each collection, we can use this informa-
tion to learn rules for paragraph mapping (Horizon-
tal Mapping between texts from Corpus1 and texts
from Corpus2). Using a training set of text pairs,
manually aligned at the sentence level, we consider
two paragraphs to map each other if they contain at
least one aligned sentence pair (see Figure 4).
Our problem can be framed as a classification
task: given training instances of paragraph pairs (P ,
Q) from a text pair, classify them as mapping or not.
The features for the classification are the lexical sim-
ilarity of P and Q, the cluster number of P , and the
cluster number of Q. Here, similarity is again a sim-
ple cosine measure based on the word overlap of the
two paragraphs.5 These features are weak indicators
by themselves. Consequently, we use the publicly-
available classification tool BoosTexter (Singer and
Schapire, 1998) to combine them accurately.6
3.2 Macro Alignment: Find Candidate
Paragraph(s)
At this stage, the clustering and training are com-
pleted. Given a new unseen text pair (Text1,
Text2), the goal is to find a sentence alignment be-
tween them. Two sentences with very high lexical
similarity are likely to be aligned. We allow such
pairs in the alignment independently of their context.
This step allows us to catch the ?easy? paraphrases.
We focus next on how our algorithm identifies the
less obvious matching sentence pairs.
For each paragraph in each text, we identify the
cluster in its collection it is the closest to. Similarity
between the paragraph and each cluster is computed
the same way as in the Vertical Clustering step. We
then apply mapping classification to find the map-
ping paragraphs in the text pair (see Figure 5).
Text 2Text 1
Cluster G
Par. 13
Cluster E
Par. 7
Cluster B
Par. 2
Par. 2
Cluster 3
Figure 5: Macro Alignment: a paragraph in Text1
and its mapped candidate paragraphs in Text2.
3.3 Micro Alignment: Find Sentence Pair(s)
Once the paragraph pairs are identified in (Text1,
Text2), we want to find, for each paragraph pair,
the (possibly empty) subsets of sentence pairs which
constitute a good alignment. Context is used in the
following way: given two sentences with moder-
ate similarity, their proximity to sentence pairs with
high similarity can help us decide whether to align
them or not.
To combine the lexical similarity (again using co-
sine measure) and the proximity feature, we com-
5At this stage, we want to match on text-specific informa-
tion, unlike in the Vertical Clustering. We therefore use the
original text, without any substitution, to compute the similarity.
6Because BoosTexter cannot form conjunctive hypotheses,
we add a feature which encodes the combination of two cluster
numbers.
pute local alignments on each paragraph pair, us-
ing dynamic programming. The local alignment we
construct fits the characteristics of the data we are
considering. In particular, we adapt it to our frame-
work to allow many-to-many alignments and some
flips of order among aligned sentences. Given sen-
tences i and j, their local similarity sim(i, j) is:
sim(i, j) = cos(i, j) ? mismatch penalty
The weight s(i, j) of the optimal alignment between
the two sentences is computed as follows:
s(i, j) = max
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
s(i, j?1) ? skip penalty
s(i?1, j) ? skip penalty
s(i?1, j?1) + sim(i, j)
s(i?1, j?2) + sim(i, j) + sim(i, j?1)
s(i?2, j?1) + sim(i, j) + sim(i?1, j)
s(i?2, j?2) + sim(i, j?1) + sim(i?1, j)
The mismatch penalty penalizes sentence pairs with
very low similarity measure, while the skip penalty
prevents only sentence pairs with high similarity
from getting aligned.
4 Evaluation Setup
The Data. We compiled two collections from the
Encyclopedia Britannica and Britannica Elementary.
In contrast to the long (up to 15-page) detailed arti-
cles of the Encyclopedia Britannica, Britannica Ele-
mentary contains one- to two-page entries targeted
towards children. The elementary version gener-
ally contains a subset of the information presented in
the comprehensive version, but there are numerous
cases when the elementary entry contains additional
or more up-to-date pieces of information.7 The two
collections together exhibit many instances of com-
plex rewriting.
We collected 103 pairs of comprehensive/ele-
mentary city descriptions. We set aside a testing set
of 11 text pairs. The rest (92 pairs) was used for the
Vertical Clustering. Nine text pairs were used for
training (see Table 1 for statistics).
Human Annotation. Each text pair in the train-
ing and testing sets was annotated by two annota-
tors.8 In our guidelines to them, we defined two sen-
tences as aligned if they contain at least one clause
7Britannica Elementary is a new feature of the encyclopedia,
not all entries in the original Britannica have been fully updated.
8All the annotators were native speakers of English. The
authors did not take part in the annotation.
Sentences Paragraphs
Min Max Avg Min Max Avg
Comp. Train 87 313 180 19 59 37
Comp. Test 138 308 200 32 63 43
Elem. Train 34 64 47 8 12 10
Elem. Test 27 75 45 6 16 10
Table 1: Statistics for the training and testing sets for
the comprehensive and elementary versions.
Range Training Testing
0%?40% 149 (46.6%) 127 (45.2%)
40%?70% 103 (32.2%) 96 (34.2%)
70%?100% 68 (21.2%) 58 (20.6%)
Table 2: Distribution of manually aligned sentence
pairs among different similarity ranges.
that expresses the same information. We allowed
many-to-many alignments. On average, each anno-
tator spent 50 minutes per text pair. While the an-
notators agreed for most of the sentence pairs they
identified, there were some cases of disagreement.
Alignment is a tedious task, and sentence pairs can
easily be missed even by a careful human annotator.
For each text pair, a third annotator went through
contested sentence pairs, deciding on a case-by-case
basis whether to include it in the alignment. Over-
all, 320 sentence pairs were aligned in the training
set and 281 in the testing set. The other sentence
pairs which were not aligned served as negative ex-
amples, yielding a total of 4192 training instances
and 3884 testing instances.9
As a confirmation that there is no order preserva-
tion in comparable corpora, there were up to nine or-
der shifts in each of the annotated text pairs. Table 2
shows that a large fraction of manually aligned sen-
tence pairs have low lexical similarity. Similarity is
measured here by the number of words in common,
normalized by the number of types in the shorter
sentence.
Parameter Tuning. We tuned all the parameters
on our training set, obtaining the following values:
the skip penalty is 0.001, and the cosine threshold
for selecting pairs with high lexical similarity is 0.5.
BoosTexter was trained in 200 iterations. To find the
optimal number of clusters for each collection, Ver-
tical Clustering was performed with different num-
bers of clusters, ranging from 10 to 40; we selected
9Our corpus is available at http://www.cs.
columbia.edu/?noemie/alignment.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
Pr
ec
is
io
n
Recall
full
SimFinder
cosine
decomposition
Figure 6: Precision/Recall for SimFinder, Cosine,
Decomposition, and our full method.
the alternatives with the best performance on the
training set: 20 for both collections.
5 Results
We first present the comparison of our method with
other systems developed for the same task. Next we
focus on the impact of individual components on the
performance of our method.
5.1 Comparison with Other Systems
An obvious choice for a baseline in this task is the
following: any two sentences are considered aligned
if their cosine similarity exceeds a certain threshold.
We also compare our algorithm with two state-of-
the-art systems, SimFinder (Hatzivassiloglou et al,
1999) and Decomposition (Jing, 2002).10 Figure 6
shows Precision/Recall curves for the different sys-
tems. For our full system, we obtain different values
of Recall keeping constant the skip penalty and the
cosine threshold and varying the value of the mis-
match penalty from 0 to 0.45.11 This setup results
in recall values in a 25%?65% range. The curve for
SimFinder was obtained by running SimFinder with
different similarity thresholds, ranging from 0.1 to
0.95. In the case of Decomposition, there are sev-
eral hard-coded parameters which are not trainable.
As a result, we were able to obtain results for De-
composition only at a 55.8% Recall level. Table 3
reports Precision values at this level of Recall.
10Jing (2002) reports that Decomposition outperforms the al-
gorithm of Marcu (1999); we, therefore, did not compare our
method against his system.
11Varying the mismatch penalty is a natural choice: varying
the skip penalty produces a narrow range of Recall values, while
the cosine threshold controls only a small portion of the sen-
tence pairs that can be identified (the ones with high similarity).
System Precision
SimFinder 24%
Cosine 57.9%
Decomposition 64.3%
Without Topic Mapping 71.6%
Without Local Alignment 73.3%
Full Method 76.9%
Full Method (with ideal clusters) 80.9%
Table 3: Precision at 55.8% Recall.
(*) Gradually the German culture and language became more
widespread in the city.
Capping Prague?s rebirth, it was designated a European
City of Culture in 2000.
Prague is a centuries-old city with a wealth of historic
landmarks.
The physical attractions and landmarks of Prague are
many.
Figure 7: Aligned pairs, (*) denotes an incorrect
alignment.
Our full method outperforms both the base-
line (?Cosine?) and the more complex systems
(?SimFinder? and ?Decomposition?). Interestingly,
methods that use simple local similarity functions
significantly outperform SimFinder (SimFinder was
trained on newswire texts; we did not have access
to SimFinder?s training component for retraining on
our corpus). This confirms our hypothesis that while
it is an appealing idea, putting all one?s eggs in the
basket of a sophisticated local similarity measure to
achieve good performance may be too hard a task.
The simple cosine baseline is competitive with the
Hidden Markov Model of Decomposition (Decom-
position was specifically developed to identify sen-
tence pairs with cut-and-paste transformations, not
all possible paraphrase pairs). This suggests that
when looking for an alignment, Cosine is a good,
yet simple, starting local similarity measure. Adding
on top of it an explicit search mechanism relying
on the context surrounding the sentences, as in our
method, results in a performance improvement of
19% at 55.8% Recall. Figure 7 shows examples of
pairs identified by our method.
5.2 Analysis
Impact of Horizontal Paragraph Mapping. We
hypothesize that exploiting the regularity in map-
ping between semantic units, such as topics, im-
proves the alignment. We compared the perfor-
mance of our full method with a variation that does
not take any topical information into account. For
the paragraph mapping, we replaced the learned
rules by a single rule based on lexical similarity:
two paragraphs are mapped if their cosine measure
is above a pre-specified threshold.12 This new map-
ping is a good point of comparison because it does
not rely on any knowledge inferred from the other
texts in the corpus. The results confirm our hypoth-
esis: learning paragraph mapping based on topical
structures improves the performance (see ?Without
Topic Mapping? vs. ?Full Method?, Table 3).
This experiment also shows that representing con-
text, even simply using only the paragraphs and their
lexical similarity, achieves higher performance than
methods based on more complex local similarity
functions. It is an important finding, because this
simplified method can be used when topic struc-
ture cannot be derived (e.g., in heterogeneous col-
lections) or when no training data is available, since
it is unsupervised.
Impact of Cluster Quality. Our method uses
clustering to identify the different topics of each
collection. It is important to know how sensitive
our overall algorithm is to the quality of the iden-
tified clusters. Fortunately, in our corpus, some of
the texts contain section headings (e.g., ?Climate?
or ?Demography?). Even though our method ig-
nores this piece of information, we used it to derive
manually ?ideal? clusters.13 We obtained eight clus-
ters for the elementary version and 11 for the com-
prehensive one. When feeding these ideal clusters
instead of the automatically identified ones to the
learning module for paragraph mapping, we achieve
4% improvement in Precision (at 55.8% Recall). We
interpret this as a sign that the algorithm handles im-
perfect, automatically induced clusters fairly well.
Impact of Local Alignment. Our hypothesis
for computing local alignments between pairs of
mapped paragraphs is that our approach allows us to
identify additional matching sentence pairs: if two
sentences paraphrase each other but have a low co-
sine measure, looking at the sentence pairs around
12The threshold was tuned on our training data.
13The process was performed manually because the sections
are different from one text to another, both in names and levels
of detail, and because we needed to infer clusters for the para-
graphs that did not have section headings.
Full Dec. Cos.
Range Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec. Prec. Rec.
0%?40% 50% 25% 34% 28% 23% 15%
40%?70% 85% 73% 82% 74% 66% 86%
70%?100% 95% 95% 93% 88% 90% 95%
Table 4: Precision and Recall for different ranges
of lexical similarity for Decomposition, Cosine, and
our full method.
them may increase their chances of getting selected.
We compared our full method with a version of
our algorithm that does not perform local alignment
(?Without Local Alignment?). Instead, it simply se-
lects sentence pairs inside the mapped paragraphs
based on their cosine measure. This incomplete ver-
sion of the algorithm achieves 73.3% Precision (at
55.8% Recall), 3% lower than the full method, vali-
dating our hypothesis.
Impact of Lexical Similarity. We investigated
how the performance of our method depends on the
lexical similarity of the input sentences. Table 4
shows Precision and Recall for our method and oth-
ers at three sentence-similarity ranges based on word
overlap counts (at the overall Recall of 55.8%). Our
method outperforms the Cosine baseline and De-
composition on all similarity ranges.
6 Conclusions
The central finding of our work is that context plays
an important role in the task of sentence alignment
for monolingual comparable corpora. A weak sen-
tence similarity measure combined with contextual
information outperforms methods based on sophis-
ticated sentence similarity functions. Experiments
show that a simple representation of context is help-
ful. Relying on a more elaborate representation,
such as topical text structure, has an even stronger
impact on performance.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Michael Elhadad, Klara Kedem, Kathy
McKeown and Becky Passonneau for the useful discussions.
Thanks to Mirella Lapata, Lillian Lee, Vincent Ng and Bo Pang
for their helpful comments on previous drafts. We are grateful
to Hongyan Jing for giving us access to her code for Decompo-
sition. Finally we would like to thank all the annotators (they are
many). This paper is based upon work supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under ITR/IM grant IIS-0081334,
Digital Library Initiative Phase II Grant No. IIS-98-17434, and
a Sloan Research Fellowship to Lillian Lee. Any opinions, find-
ings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed above are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Science Foundation or the Sloan Foundation.
References
Regina Barzilay, Noemie Elhadad, and Kathleen McKeown.
2002. Inferring strategies for sentence ordering in multi-
document news summarization. Journal of Artificial Intel-
ligence Research, 17:35?55.
John Carroll, Guido Minnen, Darren Pearce, Yvonne Canning,
Siobhan Devlin, and John Tait. 1999. Simplifying text for
language-impaired readers. In Proceedings of EACL.
Raman Chandrasekar and Srinivas Bangalore. 1997.
Automatic Induction of Rules for Text Simplification.
Knowledge-Based Systems, 10(3):183?190.
Pascale Fung and Lo Yuen Yee. 1998. An IR approach for
translating new words from nonparallel, comparable texts.
In Proceedings of ACL.
William Gale and Kenneth Church. 1991. A program for align-
ing sentences in bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of ACL.
Vasileios Hatzivassiloglou, Judith Klavans, and Eleazar Eskin.
1999. Detecting text similarity over short passages: Explor-
ing linguistic feature combinations via machine learning. In
Proceedings of EMNLP.
Marti Hearst. 1994. Multi-paragraph segmentation of exposi-
tory text. In Proceedings of ACL.
Hongyan Jing and Kathleen McKeown. 2000. Cut and paste
based summarization. In Proceedings of NAACL.
Hongyan Jing. 2002. Using hidden Markov modeling to de-
compose human-written summaries. Computational Lin-
guistics, 28(4):527?543.
Richard Kittredge, Tanya Korelsky, and Owen Rambow. 1991.
On the need for domain communication knowledge. Com-
putational Intelligence, 7(4):305?314.
Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2000. Statistics-based sum-
marization - step one: Sentence compression. In Proceed-
ings of AAAI.
William Mann and Sandra Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical struc-
ture theory: description and construction of text structures.
In G. Kempen, editor, Natural Language Generation: Recent
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, Psychology, and Linguis-
tics. Kluwer Academic.
Daniel Marcu. 1999. The automatic construction of large-scale
corpora for summarization research. In Proceedings of SI-
GIR.
Kathleen McKeown. 1985. Text Generation. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Dan Melamed. 1999. Bitext maps and alignment via pattern
recognition. Computational Linguistics, 25(1):107?130.
Cecile Paris. 1993. User Modelling in Text Generation.
Frances Pinter Publishers.
Hadar Shemtov. 1993. Text alignment in a tool for translating
revised documents. In Proceedings of EACL.
Yoram Singer and Robert Schapire. 1998. Improved boosting
algorithms using confidence-rated predictions. In Proceed-
ings of COLT.
