Different Sense Granularities for Different Applications 
 
 
Martha Palmer, Olga Babko-Malaya, Hoa Trang Dang 
University of Pennsylvania 
{mpalmer/malayao/htd}@linc.cis.upenn.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes an hierarchical approach 
to WordNet sense distinctions that provides 
different types of automatic Word Sense Dis-
ambiguation (WSD) systems, which perform 
at varying levels of accuracy.  For tasks where 
fine-grained sense distinctions may not be es-
sential, an accurate coarse-grained WSD sys-
tem may be sufficient. The paper discusses the 
criteria behind the three different levels of 
sense granularity, as well as the machine learn-
ing approach used by the WSD system. 
1 Introduction 
The difficulty of finding consistent criteria for making 
sense distinctions has been thoroughly attested to in the 
literature (Kilgarriff, ?97, Hanks, ?00).  Difficulties have 
been found with truth-theoretical criteria, linguistic crite-
ria and definitional criteria (Sparck-Jones, ?86, Geer-
aerts, ?93).  In spite of the proliferation of dictionaries, 
there is no methodology by which two lexicographers 
working independently are guaranteed to derive the same 
set of distinctions for a given word, with objects and 
events vying for which is the most difficult to character-
ize (Cruse, ?86, Apresjan, ?74, Pustejovsky, ?91, ?95).   
 
On the other hand, accurate Word Sense Disambiguation 
(WSD) could significantly improve the precision of In-
formation Retrieval by ensuring that the senses of verbs 
in the retrieved documents match the sense of the verb in 
the query.  For example, the two queries What do you 
call a successful movie? and Whom do you call for a 
successful movie? submitted to AskJeeves both retrieve 
the same set of documents, even though they are asking 
quite different questions, referencing very different 
senses of call.  The documents retrieved are also not very 
relevant, again because they do not distinguish which 
matches contain relevant senses and which do not. 
 
Tips on Being a Successful Movie Vampire ... I shall 
call the police. 
 
Successful Casting Call & Shoot for ``Clash of Em-
pires'' ... thank everyone for their participation in the 
making of yesterday's movie. 
 
Demme's casting is also highly entertaining, although I 
wouldn't go so far as to call it successful. This  movie's 
resemblance to its predecessor is pretty vague... 
 
VHS Movies: Successful Cold Call Selling: Over 100 
New Ideas, Scripts, and Examples from the Nation's 
Foremost Sales Trainer. 
 
The two senses of call in the two queries can be easily 
distinguished by their differing predicate-argument 
structures.  They are also separate senses in WordNet, 
but WordNet has an additional 26 senses for call, and the 
current best performance of an automatic Word Sense 
Disambiguation system this type of polysemous verb is 
only 60.2% (Dang and Palmer, 2002).  Is it possible that 
sense distinctions that are less fine-grained than Word-
Net?s distinctions could be made more reliably, and 
could still benefit this type of NLP application?   
 
The idea of underspecification as a solution to WSD has 
been proposed in Buitelaar 2000 (among others), who 
pointed out that for some applications, such as document 
categorization, information retrieval, and information 
extraction it may be sufficient to know if a given word 
belongs to a certain class of WordNet senses or under-
specified sense. On the other hand, there is evidence that 
machine translation of languages as diverse as Chinese 
and English will require all of the fine-grained sense 
distinctions that WordNet is capable of providing, and 
even more (Ng, et al2003, Palmer, et. al., to appear).   
 
An hierarchical approach to verb senses, of the type dis-
cussed in this paper, presents obvious advantages for the 
problem of word sense disambiguation. The human an-
notation task is simplified, since there are fewer choices 
at each level and clearer distinctions between them.  The 
automated systems can combine training data from 
closely related senses to overcome the sparse data prob-
lem, and both humans and systems can back off to a 
more coarse-grained choice when fine-grained choices 
prove too difficult. 
 
The approach to verb senses presented in this paper as-
sumes three different levels of sense distinctions: Prop-
Bank Framesets, WordNet groupings, and WordNet 
senses.  In a project for the semantic annotation of predi-
cate-argument structure, PropBank, we have made 
coarse-grained sense distinctions for the 700 most 
polysemous verbs in the Penn TreeBank (Kingsbury and 
Palmer, ?02).  These distinctions are based primarily on 
different subcategorization frames that require different 
argument label annotations. In a separate project, as dis-
cussed in Palmer et al2004, we have grouped 
SENSEVAL-2 verb senses (which came from WordNet 
1.7). These manual groupings were shown to reconcile a 
substantial portion of the manual and automatic tagging 
disagreements, showing that many of these disagree-
ments are fairly subtle (Palmer, et.al., ?04).   
 
The tree levels of sense distinctions form a continuum of 
granularity. Our criterion for the Framesets, being pri-
marily syntactic, is also the most clear cut. These distinc-
tions are based primarily on usages of a verb that have 
different numbers of predicate-arguments, however they 
also separate verb senses on semantic grounds, if these 
senses are not closely related. Sense groupings provide 
an intermediate level of hierarchy, where groups are 
distinguished by more fine-grained criteria.  Both 
Frameset and grouping distinctions can be made consis-
tently by humans and systems (over 90% accuracy for 
Framesets and 82% for groupings) and are surprisingly 
compatible; 95% of our groups map directly onto a sin-
gle PropBank sense.   
 
2  Background 
2.1 Propbank 
PropBank [Kingsbury & Palmer, 2002] is an annotation 
of the Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank 
II [Marcus, 1994] with dependency structures (or `predi-
cate-argument' structures), using sense tags for highly 
polysemous words and semantic role labels for each de-
pendency. An important goal is to provide consistent 
semantic role labels across different syntactic realiza-
tions of the same verb, as in the window in [ARG0 John] 
broke [ARG1 the window] and [ARG1 The window] broke. 
PropBank can provide frequency counts for (statistical) 
analysis or generation components in a machine transla-
tion system, but provides only a shallow semantic analy-
sis in that the annotation is close to the syntactic 
structure and each verb is its own predicate. 
 
In addition to the annotated corpus, PropBank provides a 
lexicon that lists, for each broad meaning of each anno-
tated verb, its Frameset, i.e., the possible arguments in 
the predicate and their labels and all possible syntactic 
realizations.  The notion of ``meaning'' used is fairly 
coarse-grained, and it is typically motivated from differ-
ing syntactic behavior.  The Frameset alo includes a 
``descriptor'' field for each role which is intended for use 
during annotation and as documentation, but which does 
not have any theoretical standing. The collection of 
Frameset entries for a verb is referred to as the verb's 
frame.  As an example of a PropBank entry, we give the 
frame for the verb leave below.  Currently, there are 
frames for over 3,000 verbs, with a total of just over 
4,300 Framesets described.  Of these 3,000 verb frames, 
only a small percentage 21.8 % (700) have more than 
one Frameset, with less than 100 verbs with 4 or more.  
The process of sense-tagging the PropBank corpus with 
the Frameset tags has just been completed. 
 
The criteria used for the Framesets are primarily syntac-
tic and clear cut. The guiding principle is that two verb 
meanings are distinguished as different framesets if they 
have distinct subcategorization frames. For example, the 
verb ?leave? has 2 framesets with the following frames, 
illustrated by the examples in (1) and (2): 
 
Frameset 1:  move away from 
Arg0:entity leaving 
Arg1:place left 
 
Frameset 2:  give  
Arg0:giver / leaver 
Arg1:thing given 
Arg2:benefactive / given-to 
 
(1) John left the room. 
(2) Mary left her daughter-in-law her pearls in her will 
 
2.2 WordNet  Sense Groupings 
In a separate project, as part of Senseval tagging exer-
cises, we have developed a lexicon with another level of 
coarse-grained distinctions, as described below. 
 
The Senseval-1 workshop (Kilgarriff and Palmer, 2000) 
provided convincing evidence that supervised automatic 
systems can perform word sense disambiguation (WSD) 
satisfactorily, given clear, consistent sense distinctions 
and suitable training data.  However, the Hector lexicon 
that was used as the sense inventory was very small and 
under proprietary constraints, and the question remained 
whether it was possible to have a publicly available, 
broad-coverage lexical resource for English and other 
languages, with the requisite clear, consistent sense dis-
tinctions. 
 
Subsequently, the Senseval-2 (Edmonds and Cotton, 
2001) exercise was run, which included WSD tasks for 
10 languages.  A concerted effort was made to use exist-
ing WordNets as sense inventories because of their 
widespread popularity and availability. Each language 
had a choice between the lexical sample task and the all-
words task.  The most polysemous words in the English 
Lexical Sample task are the 29 verbs, with an average 
polysemy of 16.28 senses using the pre-release version 
of WordNet 1.7.  Double blind annotation by two lin-
guistically trained annotators was performed on corpus 
instances, with a third linguist adjudicating between in-
ter-annotator differences to create the ?Gold Standard.?  
The average inter-annotator agreement rate was only 
71%, which is comparable to the 73% agreement for all 
words in SemCor, with a much lower average polysemy. 
However, a comparison of system performance on words 
of similar polysemy in Senseval-1 and Senseval-2 
showed very little difference in accuracy (Palmer et al, 
submitted).  In spite of the lower inter-annotator agree-
ment figures for Senseval-2, the double blind annotation 
and adjudication provided a reliable enough filter to en-
sure consistently tagged data with WordNet senses.  
Even so, the high polysemy of the WordNet 1.7 entries 
on average poses a challenge for automatic word sense 
disambiguation.  In addition, WordNet only gives a flat 
listing of alternative senses, unlike most standard dic-
tionaries which are more structured and often provide 
hierarchical entries. To address this lack, the verbs were 
grouped by two or more people, with differences being 
reconciled, and the sense groups were used for coarse-
grained scoring of the systems. 
 
The criteria used for groupings included syntactic and 
semantic ones. Syntactic structure performed two dis-
tinct functions in our groupings. Recognizable alterna-
tions with similar corresponding predicate-argument 
structures were often a factor in choosing to group 
senses together, as in the Levin classes and PropBank, 
whereas distinct subcategorization frames were also of-
ten a factor in putting senses in separate groups.  Fur-
thermore, senses were grouped together if they were 
more specialized versions of a general sense.  The se-
mantic criteria for grouping senses separately included 
differences in semantic classes of arguments (abstract 
versus concrete, animal versus human, animacy versus 
inanimacy, different instrument types...), differences in 
the number and type of arguments (often reflected in the 
subcategorization frame as discussed above), differences 
in entailments (whether an argument refers to a created 
entity or a resultant state), differences in the type of 
event (abstract, concrete, mental, emotional...), whether 
there is a specialized subject domain, etc.   
 
Senseval-2 verb inter-annotator disagreements were re-
duced by more than a third when evaluated against the 
groups, from 29% to 18%, and by over half in a separate 
study, from 28% to 12%.    A similar number of random 
groups provided almost no benefit to the inter-annotator 
agreement figures (74% instead of 71%), confirming the 
greater coherence of the manual groupings. 
3 Mapping of Sense Groups to Framesets  
Groupings of senses for Senseval-2, as discussed above, 
use both syntactic and semantic criteria.  Propbank, on 
the other hand, uses mostly syntactic cues to divide verb 
senses into framesets. As a result, framesets are more 
general than sense-groups and usually incorporate sev-
eral sense groups. We have been investigating whether 
or not the groups developed for SENSEVAL-2 can provide 
an intermediate level of hierarchy in between the Prop-
Bank Framesets and the WN 1.7 senses, and our initial 
results are promising.  Based on our existing WN 1.7 
tags and frameset tags of the Senseval2 verbs in the Penn 
TreeBank, 95% of the verb instances map directly from 
sense groups to framesets, with each frameset typically 
corresponding to two or more sense groups, as illustrated 
by the tables 1-4 for the verbs ?serve?, ?leave?, ?pull?, and 
?see?1  below. 
 
As the tables 1-4 illustrate, the criteria used to split the 
Framesets into groups are as follows:  
  
 1) Syntactic Frames. Most verb senses which allow syn-
tactic alternations (such as transitive/inchoative, unspeci-
fied object deletion, etc) are analyzed as one sense 
group. However, in some cases, as illustrated by the verb 
leave, intransitive and transitive uses are distinguished as 
different sense groups: 
 
Group 1: DEPART (Ship leaves at midnight) 
Group 2: LEAVE BEHIND (She left a mess.) 
 
The DEPART sense of the verb can be used transitively if 
the object specifies the place of departure. The LEAVE 
BEHIND sense is more general and allows syntactic varia-
tion as well as different semantic types of NPs. In Prop-
Bank, these groups are unified as one frameset (Frameset 
1 MOVE AWAY FROM). 
                                                          
1 All these verbs have one or more additional framesets, which 
correspond to one group or sense, and therefore are not in-
cluded here 
 
Frameset  Senseval-2 Groupings Examples from WordNet 
GROUP 1:   
WN1 (function) 
WN3(contribute to) 
WN12 (answer) 
 
His freedom served him well 
The scandal served to increase his popularity 
Nothing else will serve 
GROUP 2:   
WN2 (do duty) 
WN13 (do military service) 
 
She served in Congress 
She served in Vietnam 
GROUP 5:    
WN7 (devote one?s efforts) 
WN10 (attend to) 
 
She served the art of music 
May I serve you? 
serve 01:  Act, work 
 
Roles: 
Arg0:worker 
Arg1:job,  project 
Arg2:employer 
 
GROUP 3:   
WN4 (be used by) 
WN8 (serve well)                
WN14 (service) 
 
 
The garage served to shelter horses 
Art serves commerce 
Male animals serve the females for breeding 
purposes 
 
Table 1. Frameset  serve 01.
            
 
Frameset  Senseval-2 Groupings Examples from WordNet 
GROUP 2:   
WN2 (leave behind)  
 WN12 (be survived by)  
 WN14  (forget) 
 
She left a mess 
He left six children I left my keys 
GROUP 1:   
WN1  (go away) 
 
WN5 (exit, go out) 
WN8 (depart) 
 
The ship leaves at midnight 
Leave the room 
The teenager left home 
GROUP 3:   
WN3 (to act)   
WN7 (result in) 
 
The inflation left them penniless 
Her blood left a stain on the napkin 
SINGLETON  
WN4 (leave behind) 
 
Leave it as is 
leave 02: Move away 
from  
 
Roles:  
Arg0:entity leaving 
Arg1:thing left 
Arg2 :attribute / sec-
ondary predication 
 
SINGLETON  
WN6 (allow for, provide) 
 
Leave lots of time for the trip 
 
Table 2. Frameset leave 02. 
 
 
 
2. Optional Arguments.  In PropBank verbs of manner 
of motion and verbs of directed motion are usually 
grouped into one frameset. For example, one of the 
framesets of the verb pull (TRY) TO CAUSE MOTION 
unifies the following two group senses: 
Group 1: MOVE ALONG (pull a sled) 
Group 2: MOVE INTO A CERTAIN DIRECTION (The van 
pulled up) 
    
Although the frame for the frameset 1 of the verb pull 
has a ?direction? argument, this argument does not 
have to be present (or implied), and verbs with this 
frame can also be understood as verbs of manner of 
motion in PropBank. 
 
3) Syntactic variation of arguments. Syntactic varia-
tion in objects can also be used to distinguish sense 
groups, but are not taken into consideration for distin-
guishing framesets.  Here both noun phrases and sen-
 
 
Frameset  Senseval-2 Groupings Examples from WordNet 
GROUP 1:  
WN1 (draw)  
WN4(apply force)  
WN9 (cause to move) 
WN10 (operate) 
WN13 (hit) 
 
Pull a sled 
Pull the rope 
A declining dollar pulled  down the export figures 
Pull the oars 
Pull the ball 
GROUP 2:   
WN2 (attract) 
WN12 (rip) 
 
The ad pulled in many potential customers 
 Pull the cooked chicken into strips 
GROUP 3:   
WN3 (move) 
WN7 (steer) 
 
The car pulls to the right 
 Pull the car over 
pull.01:  try to cause motion 
 
Roles:  
Arg0:puller 
Arg1:thing pulled 
Arg2: direction or predication 
Arg3:extent, distance moved 
  
 
GROUP 4:   
WN6 (pull out) 
WN15 (extract) 
WN17(take away) 
 
The mugger pulled a knife on his victim 
 Pull weeds 
 Pull the old soup cans from the shelf 
 
Table 3. Frameset pull 01. 
 
 
Frameset  Senseval-2 Groupings Examples from WordNet 
GROUP 1:  
WN1 (perceive by sight)  
WN7 (watch)  
WN19 (observe as if with an eye) 
 WN20 (examine)       
 
Can you the bird? 
See a movie 
The camera saw the burglary 
I must see your passport 
GROUP 3:   
WN3 (witness) 
 WN6 (learn) 
 
I want to see the results 
I see that you have been promoted 
GROUP 4:   
WN5 (consider) 
WN24 (interpret) 
 
I don?t see the situation quite as negatively 
What message do you see in this letter? 
GROUP 5:   
WN8 (determine) 
WN10 (check) 
WN14 (attend) 
 
See whether it works 
See that the curtains are closed 
Could you see about lunch? 
see.01: view  
 
Roles:  
Arg0:viewer 
Arg1:thing viewed 
Arg2:secondary attribute 
 
GROUP 6:   
WN11 (see a professional) 
WN15 (receive as a guest) 
 
You should see a lawyer 
The doctor will see you now 
 
Table 4. Frameset see 01. 
 
tential complements are contained in the same frame-
set.  These could also be distinguished by the type of 
event, a physical perception vs. an abstract or mental 
perception, but these would also not distinguished by 
PropBank. 
   
Group 1: PERCEIVE BY SIGHT (Can you see the bird?) 
Group 5: DETERMINE, CHECK (See whether it works) 
 
4) Semantic classes of arguments. Differences in se-
mantic classes of arguments, such as ANIMACY versus 
INANIMACY, are also not considered for distinguishing 
framesets. The verb serve, for example, has the follow-
ing group senses, the second of which requires an 
ANIMATE agent, which are unified as one frameset in 
PropBank: 
 
Group 1: FUNCTION (His freedom served him well) 
Group 2: WORK (He served in Congress)   
 
Most of the criteria which are used to split Framesets 
into groupings, as the tables above illustrate, are se-
mantic. These distinctions, although more fine-grained 
than Framesets, are still more easily distinguished than 
WordNet senses. 
 
Mismatches between Framesets and groupings usually 
occur for the following two reasons. First, some senses 
can be missing in the PropBank, if they do not occur in 
the corpus.  Second, given that PropBank is an annota-
tion of the Wall Street Journal, it often distinguishes 
obscure financial senses of the verb as separate senses.  
4 Experiments with Automatic WSD  
We have also been investigating the suitability of these 
distinctions for training automatic Word Sense 
Disambiguation systems.  The system that we used to 
tag verbs with their frameset is the same maximum 
entropy system as that of Dang and Palmer (2002), 
including both topical and local features. Topical 
features looked for the presence of keywords occurring 
anywhere in the sentence and any surrounding 
sentences provided as context (usually one or two 
sentences).  The set of keywords is specific to each 
lemma to be disambiguated, and is determined 
automatically from training data so as to minimize the 
entropy of the probability of the senses conditioned on 
the keyword.  
The local features for a verb w in a particular sentence 
tend to look only within the smallest clause containing 
w.  They include collocational features requiring no 
linguistic prepro essing beyond part-of-speech tagging 
(1), syntactic features that capture relations 
between the verb and its complements (2-4), and se-
mantic features that incorporate information about 
noun classes for objects (5-6): 
1) the word w, the part of speech of w, and 
words at positions -2, -1, +1, +2, relative to w 
2) whether or not the sentence is passive 
3) whether there is a subject, direct object, indi-
rect object, or clausal complement (a comple-
ment whose node label is S in the parse tree) 
4) the words (if any) in the positions of subject, 
direct object, indirect object, particle, preposi-
tional complement (and its object) 
5) a Named Entity tag (PERSON, 
ORGANIZATION, LOCATION) for proper 
nouns appearing in (4). 
6) all possible WordNet synsets and hypernyms 
for the nouns appearing in (4). 
The system performed well on the English verbs in 
Senseval-2, achieving an accuracy of 60.2% when tag-
ging verbs with their fine-grained WordNet senses, and 
70.2% when tagging with the more coarse-grained 
sense groups. 
 
 
Verb Framesets Instances Accuracy
call 11 522 0.835 
carry 4 195 0.933 
develop 2 240 0.938 
draw 3 94 0.926 
dress 3 15 0.800 
drive 2 99 0.808 
keep 5 136 0.919 
leave 3 147 0.762 
live 4 125 0.888 
play 5 98 0.806 
pull 6 88 0.784 
see 2 187 0.995 
serve 2 150 0.967 
strike 10 59 0.610 
train 2 17 0.941 
treat 2 51 0.863 
turn 14 141 0.638 
use 2 820 0.988 
wash 2 8 0.875 
work 7 398 0.955 
Table 5.  Frameset tagging results 
 
For frameset tagging, we collected a total of 3590 in-
stances of 20 verbs in the PropBank corpus that had 
been annotated with their framesets.  The verbs all had 
more than one possible frameset and were a subset of 
the ones used for the English lexical sample task of 
Senseval-2.  Local features for frameset taging were 
extracted using the gold-standard part-of-speech tags 
and bracketing of the Penn Treebank.  Table 5 shows 
the number of framesets, the number of instances, and 
the system accuracy for each verb using 10-fold cross-
validation. The overall accuracy of our automatic 
frameset tagging was 90.0%, compared to a baseline 
accuracy of 73.5% if verbs are tagged with their most 
frequent frameset. While the data is only a subset of 
that used in Senseval-2, it is clear that framesets can be 
much more reliably tagged than fine-grained WordNet 
senses and even sense groups. 
Conclusion 
This paper described an hierarchical approach to 
WordNet sense distinctions that provided different 
types of automatic Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) 
systems, which perform at varying levels of accuracy. 
We have described three different levels of sense 
granularity, with PropBank Framesets being the most 
syntactic, the most coarse-grained, and most easily 
reproduced.  A set of manual groupings devised for 
Senseval2 provides a middle level of granularity that 
mediates between Framesets and WordNet.   For tasks 
where fine-grained sense distinctions may not be essen-
tial such as an AskJeeves information retrieval task, an 
accurate coarse-grained WSD system such as our 
Frameset tagger may be sufficient. There is evidence, 
however, that machine translation of languages as di-
verse as Chinese and English might require all of the 
fine-grained sense distinctions of WordNet, and even 
more (Ng, et al2003, Palmer, et. al., to appear).   
References 
 
Apresjan, J. D. .(1974) Regular polysemy, Linguistics, 
142:5?32. 
 
Atkins, S. (1993) Tools for computer-aided corpus 
lexicography: The Hector Project.  Actu Linguis-
tica Hunguricu, 41:5-72. 
 
Buitelaar, P.P (2000). Reducing Lexical Semantic 
Complexity with Systematic Polysemous Classes 
and Underspecification. In Poceedings of the 
ANLP Workshop on Syntactic and Semantic Com-
plexity in NLP Systems. Seattle, WA. 
 
Cruse, D. A., (1986), Lexical Semantics, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1986. 
 
Dang, H. T. and Palmer, M., (2002). Combining Con-
textual Features for Word Sense Disambiguation. 
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Word Sense 
Disambiguation: Recent Successes and Future Di-
rections, Philadelphia, Pa. 
 
Edmonds, P. and Cotton, S. (2001). SENSEVAL-2: 
Overview. In Proceedings of SENSEVAL-2: Sec-
ond International Workshop on Evaluating Word 
Sense Disambiguation Systems, ACL-SIGLEX, 
Toulouse, France. 
 
Hanks, P., (2000), Do word meanings exist? Com-
puters and the Humanities, Special Issue on 
SENSEVAL, 34(1-2). 
 
Geeraerts, D., (1993), Vagueness's puzzles, polysemy's 
vagaries, Cognitive Linguistics, 4. 
 
Kilgarriff, A., (1997), I don't believe in word senses, 
Computers and the Humanities, 31(2). 
 
Kilgarriff, A. and Palmer, M., (2000), Introduction to 
the special issue on Senseval, Computers and the 
Humanities, 34(1-2):1-13. 
 
Kingsbury, P., and Palmer, M, (2002), From TreeBank 
to PropBank, Third International Conference on 
Language  Resources and Evaluation, LREC-02, 
Las Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain, May 28- June 
3. 
 
Marcus, M, (1994), The Penn TreeBank: A revised 
corpus design for extracting predicate argument 
structure, In Proceedings of the ARPA Human 
Language Technology Workshop, Princeton, NJ.   
 
Ng, H. T., & Wang, B., & Chan, Y. S. (2003). 
Exploiting Parallel Texts for Word Sense Disam-
biguation: An Empirical Study. In the Proceed-
ings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics (ACL-03). Sapporo, 
Japan, July. 
Palmer, M., Dang, H. T., and Fellbaum, C., (to appear, 
2004), Making fine-grained and coarse-grained 
sense distinctions, both manually and automati-
cally, under revision for Natural Language Engi-
neering. 
Pustejovsky, J. (1991) The Generative Lexicon,  in 
Computational Linguistics 17(4).   
Pustejovsky, J. (1995) The Generative Lexicon, Cam-
bridge, MIT Press, Mass. 
 
