Context Sensing using Speech and Common Sense 
 
 
Nathan Eagle 
20 Ames St., Cambridge, MA 02139 
nathan@media.mit.edu 
Push Singh 
20 Ames St., Cambridge, MA 02139 
push@media.mit.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We present a method of inferring aspects of a 
person?s context by capturing conversation 
topics and using prior knowledge of human 
behavior. This paper claims that topic-spotting 
performance can be improved by using a large 
database of common sense knowledge. We 
describe two systems we built to infer context 
from noisy transcriptions of spoken conversa-
tions using common sense, and detail some 
preliminary results. The GISTER system uses 
OMCSNet, a commonsense semantic net-
work, to infer the most likely topics under dis-
cussion in a conversation stream. The 
OVERHEAR system is built on top of 
GISTER, and distinguishes between aspects 
of the conversation that refer to past, present, 
and future events by using LifeNet, a prob-
abilistic graphical model of human behavior, 
to help infer the events that occurred in each 
of those three time periods. We conclude by 
discussing some of the future directions we 
may take this work. 
1 
2 
2.1 
Introduction 
Can we build computers that infer a speaker's context by 
summarizing the conversation's gist? Once computers 
are able to capture the gist of a conversation, an enor-
mous number of potential applications become possible. 
However, current topic-spotting methods have met with 
little success in characterizing spontaneous conversa-
tions involving hundreds of potential topics (Jebara et 
al., 2000). This paper claims that performance can be 
greatly improved by making use of not only the text of a 
speech transcription, but also perceptual and common-
sensical information from the dialogue.  
We have enabled a suite of wearable computers with 
the ability to provide the perceptual information neces-
sary for a human to infer a conversation's gist and pre-
dict subsequent events. To take the human fully out of 
the loop we have infused the system with two common-
sense knowledge bases that enable the computer to 
make educated inferences about the user's context.  
Implementation 
Our system incorporated a Zaurus Linux handheld com-
puter, with an 802.11b CF card and a wireless Bluetooth 
headset microphone. Applications were written to en-
able the Zaurus to stream high quality audio (22 kHz, 
16-bit) to an available 802.11b network, or to store the 
audio locally when no network is detected. Besides 
streaming audio, packets in this wireless network could 
be ?sniffed? by the PDAs interested in determining who 
else is in the local proximity. Information regarding 
access point signal strength information was correlated 
with location using a static table look-up procedure. The 
system is typically kept in a participant's pocket, or for 
those with Bluetooth headsets, stored in a briefcase, 
purse, or backpack. 
Audio Processing and Transcription 
ViaVoice, a commercial speech recognition engine, is 
used to transcribe the audio streams, however typically 
word recognition rates fall below 35% for spontaneous 
speech recognition (Eagle & Pentland, 2002). This inac-
curacy poses a serious problem for determining the gist 
of an interaction. However, a human can read through a 
noisy transcript and with adequate perceptual cues, still 
have an impression of the underlying conversation 
topic. 
 
Speaker 1: you do as good each key in and tell 
on that this this printers? rarely broken key fixed 
on and off-fixes and the new nine-month London 
deal on and then now take paper out and keep 
looking cartridges and then see if we confine 
something of saw someone to fix it but see Sad-
dam out of the system think even do about it had 
tools on is there a persona for the minister what 
will come paper response to use the paper is not 
really going to stay in the printer for very much 
longer high is Chinese college and shredded 
where inks that inks is really know where the 
sounds like a Swiss have to have played by ear 
than 
Speaker 2: a can what can do that now I think 
this this seems to work on which side is working 
are in 
Speaker 1: an hour riderless I E fix the current 
trend the Stratton practice page of the test cas-
ings to of printed nicely I think jacking years ago 
that is paid toes like a printed Neisse 
 
Additional context, such as information that the con-
versation is occurring in an office, or more precisely, by 
a printer, may help many people understand that the 
conversation is about fixing a printer jam. Prior knowl-
edge about the conversation participants and the time of 
day may also significantly augment a person?s ability to 
infer the gist of the interaction, for example, one of the 
speakers could be a printer repairman. Our work sug-
gests that the additional contextual and commonsensical 
information a human can employ for inference on the 
transcript above is equally helpful to a probabilistic 
model. 
As will be shown, this additional contextual and 
commonsense information can be used to form prob-
abilistic models relating observed keywords to conver-
sation topic. Thus by combining audio and information 
from a mobile device with a commonsense knowledge 
network, we can determine the gist of noisy, face-to-
face conversations. In the above example, for instance, 
our system correctly labeled the conversation as ?print-
ing on printer?. 
3 
3.1 
GISTER 
GISTER is a system that infers the most likely topics 
under discussion in a conversation stream by using a 
commonsense semantic network called OMCSNet. 
More details about the GISTER system are available in 
(Eagle et al, 2003) but we summarize its operation in 
this section. 
OMCSNet 
We built the OMCSNet commonsense semantic net-
work (Liu & Singh, 2004) by aggregating and normaliz-
ing the contributions from nearly 14,000 people from 
across the web (Singh et al, 2002). Its semantic net-
work structure resembles that of WordNet (Fellbaum, 
1998) but its content is motivated by the range of 
knowledge in commonsense knowledge bases such as 
Cyc (Lenat, 1995). As in WordNet, the nodes of 
OMCSNet are natural language terms and the links are 
drawn from a fixed ontology of semantic relationships. 
But as in Cyc, the nodes include not just single words, 
but also compound expressions such as ?at the zoo?, ?eat 
a sandwich? or ?fix a printer?, and the links are drawn 
from a broader range of semantic relationships than are 
available in WordNet; OMCSNet goes beyond simple 
?is-a? and ?part-of? relations to include spatial, temporal, 
causal, affect, and other types of relations. At present 
OMCSNet employs the 20 binary semantic relations 
shown below in Table 1. 
 
Relation Type Semantic Relation 
Things KindOf, HasProperty, PartOf, 
MadeOf 
Events SubEventOf, FirstSubeventOf, 
LastSubeventOf, HappensAfter 
Actions Requires, HasEffect, ResultsIn-
Want, HasAbility 
Spatial OftenNear, LocationOf  
Goals DoesWant, DoesNotWant, 
MotivatedBy 
Functions UsedInLocation, HasFunction 
Generic ConceptuallyRelatedTo 
 
Table 1. Semantic relations currently in OMCSNet 
 
Prior research in text summarization has recognized the 
need for general world knowledge?in SUMMARIST 
(1997), Hovy & Lin describe how the words ?gun?, 
?mask?, ?money?, ?caught?, and ?stole? together would 
indicate the topic of ?robbery?, but they note that that 
WordNet and other dictionary-like resources did not 
contain enough such knowledge. However, OMCSNet 
contains precisely this type of knowledge. It contains a 
wide variety of knowledge about many aspects of eve-
ryday life: typical objects and their properties, the ef-
fects of ordinary actions, the kinds of things people like 
and dislike, the structure of typical activities and events, 
and many other things. A small excerpt of OMCSNet is 
show in Figure 1 below. 
 
HAS USE
printer
print on printer
load in
paperprinter will jam
HAS LOCATION
HAS MOTIVATION HAS REQUIREMENT
HAS CONSEQUENCE
hard copy of 
document
configure printer
HAS FIRST STEP
putting ink on paper
HAS EFFECT
type of 
computer
hardware
IS A
paper
HAS WANT
office
 
 
Figure 1. A selection of OMCSNet?s 250,000 relations 
 
OMCSNet has been used in a variety of applications to 
date (Lieberman et al, 2004). 
3.2 GISTER infers fine-grained topics 
The purpose of the GISTER system is to infer the ?fine 
grained topic?, or gist, of a conversation. A gist is the 
class of event that most accurately summarizes the cur-
rent subject of the conversation. For example: 
? Buying a ticket to a baseball game 
? Looking for a restaurant 
? Scheduling a meeting 
? Canceling a meeting 
These gists are represented within OMCSNet as the 
nodes of the semantic network containing simple verb 
phrases. For our set of target gists, we use the 700 most 
richly defined verb phrase nodes within OMCSNet 
(those for which at least 10 facts are asserted.) 
GISTER infers gists using a two step process. First, 
the transcriptions are preprocessed to reduce the noise 
of the speech recognition engine. To do this the tran-
scriptions are lemmatized and filtered for stop words 
(such as ?like?, ?the?, ?a?, etc.), and a filtering process is 
performed using a clustering metric to reduce the num-
ber of weakly connected words. These outliers, words 
with very sparse links to the rest of the transcription, are 
removed from the data set. 
Second, the OMCSNet network is flattened into a 
bipartite network that incorporates all ties from words in 
the OMCSNet lexicon to gists. The probability of a spe-
cific gist can be modeled as proportional to the gist?s 
links to the selected words: 
1
( )
i
i G
i
i
i
k
P g k
k
GistScore k
=
=
=
?  
where  is the number of links between a gist, ik ig , and 
the observed transcript, and G is the number of potential 
gists (approximately 700). This simple method is often 
capable of identifying a small group of potential gists, 
frequently with one dominating the others. 
Once the probable topics of conversation have been 
identified and ranked, contextual information about the 
conversation is incorporated into the model. In many 
instances, information such as location or participant 
identity can identify the gist from the small subsection 
of topics. In our initial tests we incremented a gist?s 
score for each of its links to a keyword related to the 
given context. 
3.3 Experiments 
We ran a series of experiments on a testing set of 20 
speech segments ranging from 50 to 150 words and 
taken from a single individual on a wide range of topics. 
No prior knowledge about the participant was assumed, 
but the 802.11b networks were used to give general 
locations such as office and cafeteria when appropriate. 
In one test we captured conversations from the student 
center cafeteria ? streaming data to an access point 
mapped as ?restaurant?. Using this contextual informa-
tion to condition the model, our results significantly 
improved: 
 
Transcription: 
Store going to stop and listen to type of its cellu-
lar and fries he backed a bill in the one everyone 
get a guess but that some of the past like a salad 
bar and some offense militias cambers the site 
fast food them and the styrofoam large chicken 
nuggets son is a pretty pleased even guess I as 
long as can?t you don?t have to wait too long its 
complicity sunrise against NAFTA pact if for 
lunch  
 
Selected Keywords: 
wait type store stop salad past lunch long long 
listen large fry food fast chicken cellular bill big 
bar back 
 
Top Ten Scores: 
 
Without Location Context With Location Context 
5 talk with someone 
far away 
27 eat in fast food res-
taurant 
5 buy beer 21 eat in restaurant 
5 Eat in restaurant 18 wait on table 
5 eat in fast food 
restaurant 
16 you would go to 
restaurant because 
you 
5 buy hamburger 16 wait table 
4 go to hairdresser 16 go to restaurant 
4 wait in line 
 
15 know how much you 
owe restaurant 
4 howl with laughter 12 store food for people 
to purchase 
4 eat healthily 
 
11 sitting down while 
place order at bar 
4 play harp 11 cook food 
Table 2. Results of using Context for Gist Differentia-
tion 
 
Actual Situation: 
Deciding what to get for lunch while standing in 
line at the cafeteria. 
 
4 OVERHEAR 
The OVERHEAR system is a newer system, built on 
top of GISTER, and distinguishes between aspects of 
the conversation that refer to past, present, and future 
events. The system relies on LifeNet, a probabilistic 
graphical model of human behavior, to infer the events 
occurring in each of those three time periods. 
We have two reasons for trying to distinguish be-
tween past, present, and future events. First, using addi-
tional sensory context (such as addition information 
about the speakers? location) to bias the results of gist 
sensing only works when the conversation is referring to 
the present context. Often, people?s conversations re-
ferred to things that happened in the past, or things they 
were planning to do in the future, and in those cases 
sensory context only hurt GISTER?s performance. 
However, one could imagine making use of recorded, 
time-stamped sensory data to bias the gisting of conver-
sations that were talking about events that happened 
earlier. 
The structure of LifeNet is represented by a Markov 
network whose structure resembles a Dynamic Bayesian 
Network (DBN). Although lacking the 'explaining away' 
power of true Bayesian inference, the model is not con-
strained to directed acyclic graphs. LifeNet is designed 
to support the same kinds of temporal inferences as a 
DBN, including predicting future states and guessing 
prior states from the current state.  
LifeNet was built as a probabilistic graphical model 
because stochastic methods can be more tolerant than 
traditional logical reasoning methods to the uncertainty 
in our knowledge of the situation, as well as to the un-
certainty in the reliability of the rules themselves. Addi-
tionally these methods have efficient and well-known 
inference procedures for generating approximate solu-
tions. 
Second, our long term goal is to use context sensing 
from speech to build new types of context-aware appli-
cations for wearable computers and other mobile de-
vices. An application that knew that the speaker was 
referring to past events could perform tasks like retrieve 
documents and e-mails that referred to those past 
events. However, if the speaker was referring to the 
current situation, the application could know to make 
use of sensory information to improve its understanding 
of the current context. And if the speaker was referring 
to potential future events, like ?going to a movie this 
weekend?, the application could assist the user by mak-
ing plans to help make those events happen (or not hap-
pen, as the case may be), for instance by offering to 
purchase movie tickets on-line. 
Our early experiments reasoning with LifeNet treat 
it as Markov network, an undirected graphical model 
where the nodes represent random variables and the 
edges joint probability constraints relating those vari-
ables. We convert LifeNet into a series of joint prob-
abilities (the details of this process are described later 
this paper), and we reason with the resulting network 
using local belief updating techniques. We engage in 
?loopy? belief propagation as described by Pearl (Pearl, 
1988). Belief propagation in a Markov network is 
straightforward. We use the following belief updating 
rules, as described in (Yedidia et al, 2000): 
( )\
( ) ( , ) ( ) ( )ij i ij i j i i ki i
x k N ii
m x x x x m x? ? ?
?
? ? ?
j
 (1) 4.1 LifeNet 
LifeNet is a probabilistic graphical model that captures 
a first-person model of human experience. It relates 
80,000 ?egocentric? propositions with 415,000 temporal 
and atemporal links between these propositions, as 
shown in Figure 2. More details about how the LifeNet 
model is generated are given in (Singh & Williams, 
2003). 
  (2) 
( )
( ) ( ) ( )i i i i ki i
k N i
b x x m x??
?
? ?
In these rules ix represents the random variable at 
node i . The current belief in node i is denoted by ib , the 
local evidence for node i by i? and the joint probability 
of a pair of linked nodes andi j by ij? . The message 
sent from node i to j is denoted by m . ij ( )N i  is the set 
of all neighbors of node , and i ( ) \N i j represents the 
set of all neighbors of node i except for node j . is a 
normalization constant. 
?
 
I switch TV on
I watch television
I watch evening news
I put child to bed
I turn out the light
An armchair is here
A television is here
I flip a switch
A television stand is here
Before After
 
These simple updating rules run fairly quickly even 
on a knowledge base as large as LifeNet. In our opti-
mized Common Lisp implementation, on a 1.8 GHz 
Pentium 4 with 512 MB ram, a single iteration of belief 
updating runs in 15 seconds. Inference is further sped up 
by restricting the belief updating to run only on nodes 
within a fixed distance from the evidence nodes. Given 
a single evidence node and using only those nodes 
within a depth of three edges away, a single iteration of 
belief updating runs in as little as 0.5 seconds for some 
nodes; on average it takes about 3 seconds. 
4.2 Model Integration and Implementation  
Figure 2. A sample of LifeNet GISTER leverages the commonsense facts within 
OMCSNet to generate discrete conceptual topics from a  
given transcript segmented into twenty-word-long 
observations, with each twenty-word observation 
independent from the others. We extended GISTER to 
infer the average tense of the text within the observation 
by detecting verb tenses, auxiliary verbs like did and 
will, and also specific temporal expressions like 
yesterday and tomorrow. LifeNet then allows us to 
calculate the transition probabilites to a given specific 
propositional representation based on previous states. 
By using the independent output of GISTER as input 
into LifeNet, we are able to improve the inferences of a 
user's context which subsequently can be used to 
training data for improved models of human behavior. 
As shown in Figure 3, by using the output of GISTER 
for inference in LifeNet, additional insight can be 
gained about the user's situation. If the output from 
GISTER is 'eating sushi' and was assigned a past tense, 
while 'going to the doctor' was assigned a future tense, 
LifeNet can make educated inferences about what 
happened to the user. This inference can be fed back 
into the lower level of the model by weighting words 
like 'sick, full, tired', and rerunning the semantic 
filtering technique. By incorporating this feedback into 
the system, the filtering technique would be much less 
likely to exclude words related to being sick despite 
them being initally filtered from the transcript. If the 
gister's output changes, the process continues until the 
two systems converge on a solution. 
We propose a variation to the Markov network 
implementation of LifeNet described in section 4.1. 
Noisy transcript and signal data is still used as initial 
input into the system; GISTER then processes this data, 
semantically filters the speech, and calculates the likely 
subjects of conversation and their tenses. Highly ranked 
output from GISTER is then used as temporal 
observations for inference on the LifeNet model, as 
shown in Figure 3. These observations are linked to 
specific nodes within LifeNet that correspond to the 
given tense (past, present, future). We used multiple 
root nodes with weights proportional to the rank 
generated from the gister. This belief weighting system 
accounts for the uncertainty of the gister's output while 
starting with multiple roots enables much richer 
inference. 
4.3 Preliminary Results 
The system was initially tested on an office worker's 
conversation regarding how she had eaten too much the 
day before and that she will have to go to the doctor's 
office during the next day. The following transcripts 
were input into GISTER: 
 
PAST: had sushi for lunch could then have 
thought so he and then so yesterday's the sushi I 
its while I was at the Senate Committee lunch it 
tasted good sign yet was expenses over a cost me 
$7 to buy six roles and they lead to much of its in 
the rules were not a very good and I ate too 
many roles half so after words about six hours 
later I wasn't feeling very well of this so more 
Matsushita I never bought some sugar before 
usually advised chicken sandwich usual and 
normal food there I thought that this issue would 
be a good deal I also bought some seltzer water 
was so worked well and silence 
  
OMCSNet
Past Present Future
Gister
LifeNet
uggg.. ate a ton of sushi last night...
think i'm going to have to see a doctor tomorrow...
I eat sushi.
I go to the doctor's office.
I feel sick.
I
 
 
FUTURE: of debt reduction appointment tomor-
row they can see mental tomorrow to clock will 
meet Dr. Smith and he's going to put my stomach 
because of what I a yesterday bomb I'm hoping 
that when I'll feel better so looking forward to 
going 
 
In this experience an overall tense was assigned to each 
passage. GISTER correctly inferred that the first 
passage referred to past events and the second to future 
events, and output potential topics of the conversation 
for each of those time periods: 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 3. The OVERHEAR System  
 
Past Present Future 
eat lunch 
eat 
have lunch 
get in shape 
get job 
get fit 
eat breakfast 
cook dinner 
taste something 
sweet 
lose weight 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fall 
have examination  
eat cookie 
go for run  
have physical exam 
eat lunch 
go on vacation 
give assistance 
take walk 
walk 
 
 
Table 3. Potential Topics Separated by Tense 
 
The topics generated by GISTER in Table 3 were 
subsquently used as observational inputs to the next 
section of the model. These topics were mapped to the 
past and future nodes within LifeNet, marked as 'true', 
and then we ran the loopy belief propogation algorithm 
described earlier. The solution converged on nodes 
representing the present state, in-between the first tier 
(past) and the third tier (future). The nodes deemed most 
likely by the system are listed in Table 4 below. 
 
Inferences on Present Situation  
0.999 I stop being hungry 
0.999 I warm feeling 
0.982 I satisfy hunger 
0.964 I make appointment  
0.962 I have energy  
0.957 I schedule appointment with doctor 
0.956 I feel worry 
 
Table 4. Inferences about Present Situation given Past 
and Future 
4.4 
5 
Training Future Models of Human Behavior 
When this system is deployed on many users over an 
extended period of time, information about people's 
behavior can begin to influence the initial priors from 
LifeNet. Although it has not been determined how addi-
tional links could be made, this represents an alternative 
method for increasing the common sense knowledge 
stored within LifeNet. Additionally, extensive observa-
tions on the same people could augment the original 
commonsense model by better reflecting an individual?s 
behavior.  
Conclusions 
Combining common sense with speech and other types 
of sensory context presents abundant opportunities 
within a wide range of fields, from artificial intelligence 
and ubiquitous computing to traditional social science. 
By integrating two common sense knowledge bases, we 
have developed a method for inferring human behavior 
from noisy transcripts and sensor data. As mobile 
phones and PDAs become ever more embedded in soci-
ety, the additional contextual information they provide 
will become invaluable for a variety of applications. 
This paper has shown the potential for these devices to 
leverage this additional information to begin under-
standing informal face-to-face conversations and infer-
ring a user's context. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank to Hugo Liu for his 
work developing OMCSNet and Sandy Pentland. 
References 
Nathan Eagle and Alex Pentland. 2002. Information 
Explication from Computer-Transcribed Conversa-
tions. MIT Media Lab Vision and Modeling Techni-
cal Report. 
Nathan Eagle, Push Singh, and Alex Pentland. 2003. 
Common sense conversations: understanding casual 
conversation using a common sense database. Pro-
ceedings of the Artificial Intelligence, Information 
Access, and Mobile Computing Workshop (IJCAI 
2003). Acapulco, Mexico. 
Christiane Fellbaum (Ed.) 1998. WordNet: An elec-
tronic lexical database. MIT Press. 
Eduard Hovy and Chin-Yew Lin. 1997. Automated text 
summarization in SUMMARIST. In ACL/EACL-97 
Workshop on Intelligent Scalable Text Summariza-
tion. Madrid, Spain. 
Douglas Lenat. 1995. CYC: A large-scale investment in 
knowledge infrastructure. Communications of the 
ACM, 38(11). 
Henry Lieberman, Hugo Liu, Push Singh, and Barbara 
Barry. 2004. Beating Some Common Sense into In-
teractive Applications. In submission. Draft available 
at 
http://web.media.mit.edu/~lieber/Publications/Beatin
g-Common-Sense.pdf. 
Hugo Liu and Push Singh (2004). OMCSNet: A com-
monsense inference toolkit. MIT Media Lab Techni-
cal Report SOM03-01. Available at: http:// 
web.media.mit.edu/~push/OMCSNet.pdf 
Tony Jebara, Yuri Ivanov, Ali Rahimi, and Alex Pent-
land. 2000. Tracking Conversational Context for Ma-
chine Mediation of Human Discourse. Proceedings 
of AAAI Fall Symposium on Socially Intelligent 
Agents. North Falmouth, MA.  
Judea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent 
systems: networks of plausible inference. San Mateo, 
CA: Morgan Kaufman. 
Push Singh, Thomas Lin,  Erik T. Mueller, Grace 
Lim, Travell Perkins and Wan Li Zhu. 2002. Open 
Mind Common Sense: Knowledge acquisition from 
the general public. Proceedings of ODBASE?02. Ir-
vine, CA.  
Push Singh and William Williams. 2003. LifeNet: a 
propositional model of ordinary human activity. Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Distributed and Col-
laborative Knowledge Capture (DC-KCAP) at K-
CAP 2003. Sanibel Island, Florida. 
Jonathan Yedidia, William Freeman, and Yair Weiss. 
2000. Generalized belief propagation. Advances in 
Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 13, 
689-695. 
 
 
