Evaluating information content by factoid analysis: human
annotation and stability
Simone Teufel
Computer Laboratory
Cambridge University, UK
Hans van Halteren
Language and Speech
University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract
We present a new approach to intrinsic sum-
mary evaluation, based on initial experiments
in van Halteren and Teufel (2003), which com-
bines two novel aspects: comparison of infor-
mation content (rather than string similarity)
in gold standard and system summary, mea-
sured in shared atomic information units which
we call factoids, and comparison to more than
one gold standard summary (in our data: 20
and 50 summaries respectively). In this paper,
we show that factoid annotation is highly re-
producible, introduce a weighted factoid score,
estimate how many summaries are required for
stable system rankings, and show that the fac-
toid scores cannot be sufficiently approximated
by unigrams and the DUC information overlap
measure.
1 Introduction
Many researchers in summarisation believe that
the best way to evaluate a summary is extrin-
sic evaluation (Spa?rck Jones, 1999): to measure
the quality of the summary on the basis of de-
gree of success in executing a specific task with
that summary. The summary evaluation per-
formed in SUMMAC (Mani et al, 1999) fol-
lowed that strategy. However, extrinsic eval-
uations are time-consuming to set up and can
thus not be used for the day-to-day evaluation
needed during system development. So in prac-
tice, a method for intrinsic evaluation is needed,
where the properties of the summary itself are
examined, independently of its application.
Intrinsic evaluation of summary quality is un-
deniably hard, as there are two subtasks of sum-
marisation which need to be evaluated, infor-
mation selection and text production ? in fact
these two subtasks are often separated in evalu-
ation (Mani, 2001). If we restrict our attention
to information selection, systems are tested by
way of comparison against a ?gold standard?, a
manually produced result which is supposed to
be the ?correct?, ?true? or ?best? result.
In summarisation there appears to be no ?one
truth?, but rather various ?good? results. Hu-
man subjectivity in what counts as the most im-
portant information is high. This is evidenced
by low agreement on sentence selection tasks
(Rath et al, 1961; Jing et al, 1998), and low
word overlap measures in the task of creating
summaries by reformulation in the summaris-
ers? own words (e.g. word overlap of the 542
single document summary pairs in DUC-02 av-
eraged only 47%).
But even though the non-existence of any one
gold standard is generally acknowledged in the
summarisation community, actual practice nev-
ertheless ignores this, mostly due to the expense
of compiling summary gold standards and the
lack of composite measures for comparison to
more than one gold standard.
Other fields such as information retrieval (IR)
also have to deal with human variability con-
cerning the question of what ?relevant to a
query? means. This problem is circumvented
by extensive sampling: many different queries
are collected to level out the differences in
query formulation and relevance judgements.
Voorhees (2000) shows that the relative rank-
ings of IR systems are stable across annota-
tors even though relevance judgements differ
significantly between humans. Similarly, in MT,
the recent BLEU metric (Papineni et al, 2001)
also uses the idea that one gold standard is
not enough. Their ngram-based metric derived
from four reference translations of 40 general
news stories shows high correlation with human
judgement.
Lin and Hovy (2002) examine the use of
ngram-based multiple gold standards for sum-
marisation evaluation, and conclude ?we need
more than one model summary although we
cannot estimate how many model summaries
are required to achieve reliable automated sum-
mary evaluation?. In this paper, we explore the
differences and similarities between various hu-
man summaries in order to create a basis for
such an estimate and examine the degree of dif-
ference between the use of a single summary
gold standard and the use of a consensus gold
standard for two sample texts, based on 20 and
50 summaries respectively.
The second aspect we examine is the similar-
ity measure which compares system and gold
standard summaries. In principle, the com-
parison can be done via co-selection of ex-
tracted sentences (Rath et al, 1961; Jing et al,
1998), by string-based surface measures (Lin
and Hovy, 2002), or by subjective judgements
of the amount of information overlap (DUC,
2002). String-based metrics are superior to sen-
tence co-selection, as co-selection cannot take
similar or even identical information into ac-
count if it does not occur in the sentences which
were chosen. The choice of information overlap
judgements as the main metric in DUC reflects
the intuition that human judgements of shared
?meaning? of two texts should in principle be
superior to surface-based similarity.
DUC assessors judge the informational over-
lap between ?model units? (elementary dis-
course units (EDUs), i.e. clause-like units,
taken from the gold standard summary) and
?peer units? (sentences taken from the partici-
pating summaries) on the basis of the question:
?How much of the information in a model unit is
contained in a peer unit: 100%, 80%, 60%, 40%,
20%, 0%?? Weighted recall measures report
how much gold standard information is present
in the summaries.
However, information overlap judgement is
not something humans seem to be good at, ei-
ther. Lin and Hovy (2002) show the instabil-
ity of the evaluation, expressed in system rank-
ings. They also examined those cases where
annotators incidentially had to judge a given
model?peer pair more than once (because differ-
ent systems returned the same ?peer? sentence).
In those cases, assessors agreed with their own
prior judgement in only 82% of the cases.
We propose a novel gold standard comparison
based on factoids. Identifying factoids in text is
a more objective task than judging information
overlap a` la DUC. Our annotation experiments
show high human agreement on the factoid an-
notation task. We believe this is due to the way
how factoids are defined, and due to our pre-
cise guidelines. The factoid measure also allows
quantification of the specific elements of infor-
mation overlap, rather than just giving a quan-
titative judgement expressed in percentages.
In an example from Lin and Hovy (2002), a
DUC assessor judged some content overlap be-
tween ?Thousands of people are feared dead?
and ?3,000 and perhaps ... 5,000 people have
been killed.? In our factoid representation, a
distinction between ?killed? and ?feared dead?
would be made, and different numbers of peo-
ple mentioned would have been differentiated.
Thus, the factoid approach can capture much
finer shades of meaning differentiation than
DUC-style information overlap does. Futher-
more, it can provide feedback to system builders
on the exact information their systems fail to
include or include superfluously.
We describe factoid analysis in section 2, a
method for comparison of the information con-
tent of different summaries of the same texts,
and describe our method for measuring agree-
ment and present results in section 3. We then
investigate the distribution of factoids across
the summaries in our data sets in section 4,
and define a weighted factoid score in section
5. In that section, we also perform stability ex-
periments, to test whether rankings of system
summaries remain stable if fewer than all sum-
maries which we have available are used, and
compare weighted factoid scores to other sum-
mary evaluation metrics.
2 Data and factoid annotation
We use two texts: a 600-word BBC report on
the killing of the Dutch politician Pim Fortuyn
(as used in van Halteren and Teufel (2003)),
which contains a mix of factual information and
personal reactions, and a 573-word article on
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait (used in DUC-2002,
LA080290-0233).
For these two texts, we collected human writ-
ten generic summaries of roughly 100 words.
Our guidelines asked the human subjects to for-
mulate the summary in their own words, in or-
der to elicit different linguistic expressions for
the same information. Knowledge about the
variability of expression is important both for
evaluation and system building.
The Fortuyn text was summarised by 40
Dutch students1, and 10 NLP researchers (na-
tive or near-native English speakers), resulting
in a total of 50 summaries. For the Kuwait text,
1Another 20 summaries of the same source were re-
moved due to insufficient English or excessive length.
we used the 6 DUC-provided summaries, 17
ELSNET-02 student participants (7 summaries
removed), and summaries by 4 additional re-
searchers, resulting in a total of 20 summaries.
We use atomic semantic units called factoids
to represent the meaning of a sentence. For
instance, we represent the sentence ?The police
have arrested a white Dutch man? by the union of
the following factoids:
FP20 A suspect was arrested
FP21 The police did the arresting
FP24 The suspect is white
FP25 The suspect is Dutch
FP26 The suspect is male
Factoids are defined empirically based on the
data in the set of summaries we work with. Fac-
toid definition starts with the comparison of the
information contained in two summaries, and
gets refined (factoids get added or split) as in-
crementally other summaries are considered. If
two pieces of information occur together in all
summaries ? and within the same sentence ?
they are treated as one factoid, because dif-
ferentiation into more than one factoid would
not help us in distinguishing the summaries. In
our data, there must have been at least one
summary that contained either only FP25 or
only FP26 ? otherwise those factoids would have
been combined into a single factoid ?FP27 The
suspect is a Dutch man?. Factoids are labelled
with descriptions in natural language; initially,
these are close in wording to the factoid?s oc-
currence in the first summaries, though the an-
notator tries to identify and treat equally para-
phrases of the factoid information when they
occur in other summaries.
Our definition of atomicity implies that the
?amount? of information associated with one
factoid can vary from a single word to an en-
tire sentence. An example for a large chunk
of information that occurred atomically in our
texts was the fact that Fortuyn wanted to be-
come PM (FV71), a factoid which covers an en-
tire sentence. On the other hand, a single word
may break down into more than one factoids.
If (together with various statements in other
summaries) one summary contains ?was killed?
and another ?was shot dead?, we identify the
factoids
FA10 There was an attack
FA40 The victim died
FA20 A gun was used
The first summary contains only the first two
factoids, whereas the second contains all three.
That way, the semantic similarity between re-
lated sentences can be expressed.
When we identified factoids in our summary
collections, most factoids turned out to be in-
dependent of each other. But when dealing
with naturally occuring documents many dif-
ficult cases appear, e.g. ambiguous expressions,
slight differences in numbers and meaning, and
inference.
Another difficult phenomenon is attribution.
In both source texts, quotations of the reactions
of several politicians and officials are given, and
the subjects often generalised these reactions
and produced statements such as ?Dutch as well
as international politicians have expressed their grief
and disbelief.? Due to coordination of speak-
ers (in the subject) and coordination of reac-
tions (in the direct object), it is hard to ac-
curately represent the attribution of opinions.
We therefore introduce combinatorical factoids,
such as ? OG40 Politicians expressed grief? and
?OS62 International persons/organizations ex-
pressed disbelief? which can be combined with
similar factoids to express the above sentence.
We wrote guidelines (10 pages long) which
describe how to derive factoids from texts. The
guidelines cover questions such as: how to cre-
ate generalising factoids when numerical val-
ues vary (summaries might talk about ?200?,
?about 200? or ?almost 200 Kuwaitis were
killed?), how to create factoids dealing with at-
tribution of opinion, and how to deal with coor-
dination of NPs in subject position, cataphors
and other syntactic constructions. We believe
that written guidelines should contain all the
rules by which this process is done; this is the
only way that other annotators, who do not
have access to all the discussions the original an-
notators had, can replicate the annotation with
a high agreement. We therefore consider the
guidelines as one of the most valuable outcomes
of this exercise, and we will make them and our
annotated material generally available.
The advantage of our empirical, summary-
set-dependent definition of factoid atomicity is
that the annotation is more objective than if
factoids had to be invented by intuition of se-
mantic constructions from scratch. One possi-
ble disadvantage of our definition of atomicity
is that the set of factoids used may have to be
adjusted if new summaries are judged, as a re-
quired factoid might be missing, or an existing
one might require splitting. Using a large num-
ber of gold-standard summaries for the defini-
tion of factoids decreases the likelihood of this
happening.
3 Agreement
In our previous work, a ?definitive? list of fac-
toids was given (created by one author), and
we were interested in whether annotators could
consistently mark the text with the factoids con-
tained in this list. In the new annotation cycle
reported on here, we study the process of factoid
lists creation, which is more time-consuming.
We will discuss agreement in factoid annotation
first, as it is a more straightforward concept,
even though procedurally, factoids are first de-
fined (cf. section 3.2) and then annotated (cf.
section 3.1).
3.1 Agreement of factoid annotation
Assuming that we already have the right list of
factoids available, factoid annotation of a 100
word summary takes roughly 10 minutes, and
measuring agreement on the decision of assign-
ing factoids to sentences is relatively straight-
forward. We calculate agreement in terms of
Kappa, where the set of items to be classified are
all factoid?summary combinations (e.g. in the
case of Phase 1, N=153 factoids times 20 sen-
tences = 2920), and where there are two cate-
gories, either ?factoid is present in summary (1)?
or ?factoid is not present in summary (0)?. P(E),
probability of error, is calculated on the basis
of the distribution of the categories, whereas
P(A), probability of agreement, is calculated
as the average of observed to possible pairwise
agreements per item. Kappa is calculated as
k = P (A)?P (E)1?P (E) ; results for our two texts are
given in Figure 1.
We measure agreement at two stages in
the process: entirely independent annotation
(Phase 1), and corrected annotation (Phase 2).
In Phase 2, annotators see an automatically
generated list of discrepancies with the other
annotator, so that slips of attention can be cor-
rected. Crucially, Phase 2 was conducted with-
out any discussion. After Phase 2 measurement,
discussion on the open points took place and a
consensus was reached (which is used for the
experiments in the rest of the paper).
Figure 1 includes results for the Fortuyn text
as we have factoid?summary annotations by
both annotators for both texts. The Kappa fig-
ures indicate high agreement, even in Phase 1
(K=.87 and K=.86); in Phase 2, Kappas are as
high as .89 and .95. Note that there is a dif-
ference between the annotation of the Fortuyn
and the Kuwait text: in the Fortuyn case, there
was no discussion or disclosure of any kind in
Phase 1; one author created the factoids, and
both used this list to annotate. The agreement
of K=.86 was thus measured on entirely inde-
pendent annotations, with no prior communica-
tion whatsoever. In the case of the Kuwait text,
the prior step of finding a consensus factoid list
had already taken place, including some discus-
sion.
Fortuyn text
K N k n P(A) P(E)
Phase 1 .86 14178 2 2 .970 .787
Phase 2 .95 14178 2 2 .989 .779
Kuwait text
K N k n P(A) P(E)
Phase 1 .87 3060 2 2 .956 .670
Phase 2 .89 2940 2 2 .962 .663
Figure 1: Agreement of factoid annotation.
3.2 Agreement of factoid definition.
We realised during our previous work, where
only one author created the factoids, that the
task of defining factoids is a complicated pro-
cess and that we should measure agreement on
this task too (using the Kuwait text). Thus,
we do not have this information for the Fortuyn
text.
But how should the measurement of agree-
ment on factoid creation proceed? It is diffi-
cult to find a fair measure of agreement over set
operations like factoid splitting, particularly as
the sets can contain a different set of summaries
marked for each factoid. For instance, consider
the following two sentences: (1) M01-004 Sad-
dam Hussein said ... that they will leave the
country when the situation stabilizes. and (2)
M06-004 Iraq claims it ... would withdraw soon.
One annotator created a factoid ?(P30) Sad-
dam H/Iraq will leave the country soon/when
situation stabilises? whereas the other anno-
tator split this into two factoids (F9.21 and
F9.22). Note that the annotators use their own,
independently chosen factoid names.
Our procedure for annotation measurement is
as follows. We create a list of identity and sub-
sumption relations between factoids by the two
annotators. In the example above, P30 would
be listed as subsuming F9.21 and F9.22. It is
time-consuming but necessary to create such
a list, as we want to measure agreement only
amongst those factoids which are semantically
related. We use a program which maximises
shared factoids between two summary sentences
A1 A2 A1 A2
P30 ? F9.21 ? a 1 1 P30 ? F9.22 ? a 1 0
P30 ? F9.21 ? b 0 0 P30 ? F9.22 ? b 0 0
P30 ? F9.21 ? c 1 0 P30 ? F9.22 ? c 1 1
P30 ? F9.21 ? d 0 0 P30 ? F9.22 ? d 0 0
P30 ? F9.21 ? e 1 0 P30 ? F9.22 ? e 1 1
Figure 2: Items for kappa calculation.
to suggest such identities and subsumption re-
lations.
We then calculate Kappa at Phases 1 and 2.
It is not trivial to define what an ?item? in
the Kappa calculation should be. Possibly
the use of Krippendorff?s alpha will provide
a better approach (cf. Nenkova and Passon-
neau (2004)), but for now we measure using
the better-known kappa, in the following way:
For each equivalence between factoids A and
C, create items { A ? C ? s | s ? S } (where
S is the set of all summaries). For each fac-
toid A subsumed by a set B of factoids, create
items { A ? b ? s | b ? B, s ? S}. For exam-
ple, given 5 summaries a, b, c, d, e, Annotator
A1 assigns P30 to summaries a, c and e. An-
notator A2 (who has split P30 into F9.21 and
F9.22), assigns a to F9.21 and c and e to F9.22.
This creates the 10 items for Kappa calculation
given in Figure 2.
Results for our data set are given in Figure 3.
For Phase 1 of factoid definition, K=.7 indicates
relatively good agreement (but lower than for
the task of factoid annotation). Many of the
disagreements can be reduced to slips of atten-
tion, as the increased Kappa of .81 for Phase 2
shows.
Overall, we can observe that this high agree-
ment for both tasks points to the fact that the
task can be robustly performed in naturally oc-
curring text, without any copy-editing. Still,
from our observations, it seems that the task
of factoid annotation is easier than the task of
factoid definition.
Kuwait text
K N k n P(A) P(E)
Phase 1 .70 3560 2 2 .91 .69
Phase 2 .81 3240 2 2 .94 .67
Figure 3: Agreement of factoid definition.
One of us then used the Kuwait consensus
agreement to annotate the 16 machine sum-
maries for that text which were created by dif-
ferent participants in DUC-2002, an annotation
which could be done rather quickly. However, a
small number of missing factoids were detected,
for instance the (incorrect) factoid that Saudi
Arabia was invaded, that the invasion happened
on a Monday night, and that Kuwait City is
Kuwait?s only sizable town. Overall, the set of
factoids available was considered adequate for
the annotation of these new texts.
0 10 20 30 40 50
0
50
10
0
15
0
20
0
25
0
Number of summaries
Av
er
ag
e 
nu
m
be
r o
f f
ac
to
id
s
Figure 4: Average size of factoid inventory as a
function of number of underlying summaries.
4 Growth of the factoid inventory
The more summaries we include in the analy-
sis, the more factoids we identify. This growth
of the factoid set stems from two factors. Dif-
ferent summarisers select different information
and hence completely new factoids are intro-
duced to account for information not yet seen
in previous summaries. This factor also implies
that the factoid inventory can never be complete
as summarisers sometimes include information
which is not actually in the original text. The
second factor comes from splitting: when a new
summary is examined, it often becomes neces-
sary to split a single factoid into multiple fac-
toids because only a certain part of it is included
in the new summary. After the very first sum-
mary, each factoid is a full sentence, and these
are gradually subdivided.
In order to determine how many factoids exist
in a given set of N summaries, we simulate ear-
lier stages of the factoid set by automatically re?
merging those factoids which never occur apart
within the given set of summaries.
Figure 4 shows the average number of factoids
over 100 drawings of N different summaries from
the whole set, which grows from 1.0 to about 4.5
for the Kuwait text (long curve) and about 4.1
for the Fortuyn text (short curve). The Kuwait
curve shows a steeper incline, possibly due to
the fact that the sentences in the Kuwait text
are longer. Given the overall growth for the
total number of factoids and the number of fac-
toids per sentence, it would seem that the split-
ting factors and the new information factor are
equally productive.
Neither curve in Figure 4 shows signs that it
might be approaching an assymptote. This con-
firms our earlier conclusion (van Halteren and
Teufel, 2003) that many more summaries than
10 or 20 are needed for a full factoid inventory.2
5 Weighted factoid scores and
stability
The main reason to do factoid analysis is to
measure the quality of summaries, including
machine summaries. In our previous work, we
do this with a consensus summary. We are now
investigating different weighting factors for the
importance of factoids. Previously, the weight-
ing factors we suggested were information con-
tent, position in the summaries and frequency.
We investigated the latter two.
Each factoid we find in a summary to be eval-
uated contributes to the score of the summary,
by an amount which reflects the perceived value
of the factoid, what we will call the ?weighted
factoid score (WFS)?. The main component in
this value is frequency, i.e., the number of model
summaries in which the factoid is observed.
When frequency weighting is used by itself,
each factoid occurrence is worth one.3 We could
also assume that more important factoids are
placed earlier in a summary, and that the fre-
quency weight is adjusted on the basis of po-
sition. Experimentation is not complete, but
the adjustments appear to influence the rank-
ing only slightly. The results we present here
are those using pure frequency weights.
We noted in our earlier paper that a good
quality measure should demonstrate at least the
following properties: a) it should reward inclu-
sion in a summary of the information deemed
2It should be noted that the estimation in Figure 4
improves upon the original estimation in that paper, as
the determination of number of factoids for that figure
did not consider the splitting factor, but just counted
the number of factoids as taken from the inventory at its
highest granularity.
3This is similar to the relative utility measure intro-
duced by Radev and Tam (2003), which however oper-
ates on sentences rather than factoids. It also corre-
sponds to the pyramid measure proposed by Nenkova
and Passonneau (2004), which also considers an estima-
tion of the maximum value reachable. Here, we use no
such maximum estimation as our comparisons will all be
relative.
1 3 5 7 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48
?0
.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Number of summaries (N) that score is based on
Ra
nk
ing
 co
rre
lat
ion
 be
tw
ee
n t
wo
 sa
mp
lin
gs
 (a
llo
win
g r
ep
ea
ts)
 of
 N
 su
mm
ari
es
Figure 5: Correlation (Spearman?s ?) between
summary rankings on the basis of two different
sets of N summaries, for N between 1 and 50.
most important in the document and b) mea-
sures based on two factoid analyses constructed
along the same lines should lead to the same,
or at least very similar, ranking of a set of sum-
maries which are evaluated. Since our measure
rewards inclusion of factoids which are men-
tioned often and early, demand a) ought to be
satisfied by construction.
For demand b), some experimentation is in
order. For various numbers of summaries N,
we take two samples of N summaries from the
whole set (allowing repeats so that we can use N
larger than the number of available summaries;
a statistical method called ?bootstrap?). For
each sample in a pair, we use the weighted fac-
toid score with regard to that sample of N sum-
maries to rank the summaries, and then deter-
mine the ranking correlation (Spearman?s ?) be-
tween the two rankings. The summaries that we
rank here are the 20 human summaries of the
Kuwait text, plus 16 machine summaries sub-
mitted for DUC-2002.
Figure 5 shows how the ranking correlation
increases with N for the Kuwait text. Its mean
value surpasses 0.8 at N=11 and 0.9 at N=19.
At N=50, it is 0.98. What this means for the
scores of individual summaries is shown in Fig-
ure 6, which contains a box plot for the scores
for each summary as observed in the 200 draw-
ings for N=50. The high ranking correlation
and the reasonable stability of the scores shows
that our measure fulfills demand b), at least at
a high enough N. What could be worrying is
the fact that the machine summaries (right of
the dotted line) do not seem to be performing
significantly worse than the human ones (left
Submitted summaries (Human | Machine)
Sc
ore
 ba
se
d o
n 5
0 s
um
ma
rie
s, 
wit
h f
req
ue
nc
y w
eig
hti
ng
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 6: Variation in summary scores in eval-
uations based on 200 different sets of 50 model
summaries.
Submitted summaries (Human | Machine)
Sc
ore
 ba
se
d o
n 1
0 s
um
ma
rie
s, 
wit
h f
req
ue
nc
y w
eig
hti
ng
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 7: Variation in summary scores in eval-
uations based on 200 different sets of 10 model
summaries.
of the line). However, an examination of the
better scoring machine summaries show that in
this particular case, their information content
is indeed good. The very low human scores ap-
pear to be cases of especially short summaries
(including one DUC summariser) and/or sum-
maries with a deviating angle on the story.
It has been suggested in DUC circles that a
lower N should suffice. That even a value as
high as 10 is insufficient is already indicated by
the ranking correlation of only 0.76. It becomes
even clearer with Figure 7, which mirrors Figure
6 but uses N=10. The scores for the summaries
vary wildly, which means that ranking is almost
random.
Of course, the suggestion might be made that
the system ranking will most likely also be sta-
bilised by scoring summaries for more texts,
even with such a low (or even lower) N per text.
However, in that case, the measure only yields
information at the macro level: it merely gives
an ordering between systems. A factoid-based
measure with a high N also yields feedback on a
micro level: it can show system builders which
vital information they are missing and which
superfluous information they are including. We
expect this feedback only to be reliable at the
same order of N at which single-text-based scor-
ing starts to stabilise, i.e. around 20 to 30.
As the average ranking correlation between
two weighted factoid score rankings based on
20 summaries is 0.91, we could assume that
the ranking based on our full set of 20 differ-
ent summaries should be an accurate ranking.
If we compare it to the DUC information over-
lap rankings for this text, we find that the indi-
vidual rankings for D086, D108 and D110 have
correlations with our ranking of 0.50, 0.64 and
0.79. When we average over the three, this goes
up to 0.83.
In van Halteren and Teufel (2003), we com-
pared a consensus summary based on the top-
scoring factoids with unigram scores. For the 50
Fortuyn summaries, we calculate the F-measure
for the included factoids with regard to the con-
sensus summary. In a similar fashion, we build
a consensus unigram list, containing the 103
unigrams that occur in at least 11 summaries,
and calculate the F-measure for unigrams. The
correlation between those two scores was low
(Spearman?s ? = 0.45). We concluded from
this experiment that unigrams, though much
cheaper, are not a viable substitute for factoids.
6 Discussion and future work
We have presented a new information-based
summarization metric called weighted factoid
score, which uses multiple summaries as gold
standard and which measures information over-
lap, not string overlap. It can be reliably and
objectively annotated in arbitrary text, which is
shown by our high values for human agreement.
We summarise our results as follows: Factoids
can be defined with high agreement by indepen-
dently operating annotators in naturally occur-
ring text (K=.70) and independently annotated
with even higher agreement (K=.86 and .87).
Therefore, we consider the definition of factoids
intuitive and reproducible.
The number of factoids found if new sum-
maries are considered does not tail off, but
weighting of factoids by frequency and/or lo-
cation in the summary allows for a stable sum-
mary metric. We expect this can be improved
further by including an information content
weighting factor.
If single summaries are used as gold standard
(as many other summarization evaluations do),
the correlation between rankings based on two
such gold standard summaries can be expected
to be low; in our two experiments, the correla-
tions were ?=0.20 and 0.48 on average. Accord-
ing to our estimations, stability with respect
to the factoid scores can only be expected if
a larger number of summaries are collected (in
the range of 20?30 summaries).
System rankings based on the factoid score
shows only low correlation with rankings based
on a) DUC-based information overlap, and
b) unigrams, a measurement based on shared
words between gold standard summaries and
system summary. As far as b) is concerned,
this is expected, as factoid comparison abstracts
over wording and captures linguistic variation
of the same meaning. However, the ROUGE
measure currently in development is considering
various n-grams and Wordnet-based paraphras-
ing options (Lin, personal communication). We
expect that this measure has the potential for
better ranking correlation with factoid ranking,
and we are currently investigating this.
We also plan to expand our data sets to more
texts, in order to investigate the presence and
distribution of factoids, types of factoids and re-
lations between factoids in summaries and sum-
mary collections. Currently, we have two large
factoid-annotated data sets with 20 and 50 sum-
maries, and a workable procedure to annotate
factoids, including guidelines which were used
to achieve good agreement. We now plan to
elicit the help of new annotators to increase our
data pool.
Another pressing line of investigation is re-
ducing the cost of factoid analysis. The first rea-
son why this analysis is currently expensive is
the need for large summary bases for consensus
summaries. Possibly this can be circumvented
by using larger numbers of different texts, as is
the case in IR and in MT, where discrepancies
prove to average out when large enough datasets
are used. The second reason is the need for
human annotation of factoids. Although sim-
ple word-based methods prove insufficient, we
expect that existing and emerging NLP tech-
niques based on deeper processing might help
with automatic factoid identification.
All in all, the use of factoid analysis and
weighted factoid score, even though initially ex-
pensive to set up, provides a promising alterna-
tive which could well bring us closer to a solu-
tion to several problems in summarisation eval-
uation.
References
DUC. 2002. Document Understanding Con-
ference (DUC). Electronic proceedings,
http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projects/duc/
pubs.html.
Jing, H., R. Barzilay, K. R. McKeown, and M. El-
hadad. 1998. Summarization Evaluation Meth-
ods: Experiments and Analysis. In Working Notes
of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Intelligent
Text Summarization, 60?68.
Lin, C., and E. Hovy. 2002. Manual and automatic
evaluation of summaries. In DUC 2002.
Mani, I. 2001. Automatic Summarization. John Ben-
jamins.
Mani, I., T. Firmin, D. House, G. Klein, B. Sund-
heim, and L. Hirschman. 1999. The TIPSTER
Summac Text Summarization Evaluation. In Pro-
ceedings of EACL-99 , 77?85.
Nenkova, A., and R. Passonneau. 2004. Evaluating
Content Selection in Summarization: the Pyra-
mid Method. In Proceedings of NAACL/HLT-
2003 .
Papineni, K, S. Roukos, T Ward, and W-J. Zhu.
2001. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL-02 ,
311?318.
Radev, D., and D. Tam. 2003. Summarization eval-
uation using relative utility. In Proceedings of the
Twelfth International Conference on Information
and Knowledge Management , 508?511.
Rath, G.J, A. Resnick, and T. R. Savage. 1961. The
Formation of Abstracts by the Selection of Sen-
tences. American Documentation 12(2): 139?143.
Spa?rck Jones, K. 1999. Automatic Summarising:
Factors and Directions. In I. Mani and M. May-
bury, eds., Advances in Automatic Text Summa-
rization, 1?12. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
van Halteren, H., and S. Teufel. 2003. Examining
the consensus between human summaries: initial
experiments with factoid analysis. In Proceedings
of the HLT workshop on Automatic Summariza-
tion.
Voorhees, E. 2000. Variations in relevance judge-
ments and the measurement of retrieval effective-
ness. Information Processing and Management
36: 697?716.
