61
A Computational Model of Emergent Simple Syntax: Supporting the Natural 
Transition from the One-Word Stage to the Two-Word Stage.  
Kris Jack, Chris Reed, and Annalu Waller 
Division of Applied Computing,  
University of Dundee, 
Dundee, Scotland, DD1 4HN 
[kjack | creed | awaller]@computing.dundee.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
This paper introduces a system that simulates 
the transition from the one-word stage to the 
two-word stage in child language production.  
Two-word descriptions are syntactically 
generated and compete against one-word 
descriptions from the outset.  Two-word 
descriptions become dominant as word 
combinations are repeatedly recognised, 
forming syntactic categories; resulting in an 
emergent simple syntax.  The system 
demonstrates a similar maturation as children 
as evidenced by phenomena such as 
overextensions and mismatching, and the use 
of one-word descriptions being replaced by 
two-word descriptions over time. 
1 Introduction 
Studies of first language acquisition in children 
have documented general stages in linguistic 
development.  Neither the trigger nor the 
mechanism that takes a child from one stage to the 
next are known.  Stages arise gradually with no 
precise start  or end points, overlapping one 
another (Ingram, 1989). 
The aim of this research is to develop a system 
that autonomously acquires conceptual 
representations of individual words (the ?one-word 
stage?) and also, simultaneously, is capable of 
developing representations of valid multi-word 
structures i.e. simple syntax (the ?two-word 
stage?).  Two-word descriptions are expected to 
emerge as a result of the system state and not be 
artificially triggered. 
The system accepts sentences containing a 
maximum of two words.  It is designed to be 
scalable, allowing larger, more natural sentence 
sizes also.  System input is therefore a mixture of 
both one-word and two-word sentences.  The 
system is required to produce valid descriptions, 
particularly in the two-word stage.  Rules that 
enforce syntactic order, and allow for the 
production of semantically correct descriptions 
from novel concepts, are desirable. 
This paper is sectioned as follows;  pre-one-
word stage linguistic abilities in children are 
briefly discussed to explain why initial system 
functionality assumptions are made; the defining 
characteristics of both the one-word stage and two-
word stage in children are introduced as possible 
benchmarks for the system; a detailed description 
of system design and implementation with 
examples of the learning process and games played 
by the system are presented; a discussion of current 
results along with their possible implications 
follows; a brief review of related works that have 
influenced this research, citing major influences; 
the direction and aims of future research is 
described briefly; and finally, conclusions are 
drawn. 
2 Pre-One-Word Stage Children 
Linguistic abilities can be found in children prior 
to word production.  In terms of comprehension, 
children can distinguish between their mother?s 
voice and a stranger?s voice, male and female 
voices, and sentences spoken in their mother?s 
native language and sentences spoken in a different 
language.  They also show categorical perception 
to voice, can use formant transition information to 
mark articulation, and show intonation sensitivity 
(Pinker, 1994, Jusczyk, 1999). 
In terms of production, children produce noises, 
such as discomfort noises (0-2 months), comfort 
noises (2-4 months), and ?play? vocally with pitch 
and loudness variations (4-7 months) (Pinker, 
1994).  The babbling stage (6-8 months) is 
characterised with the production of recognisable 
syllables.  The syllables are often repeated, such as 
[mamama] and [papapa], with the easiest to 
produce sounds often being associated with 
members of the family (Jakobson, 1971). 
From this evidence it is reasonable to draw 
conclusions about linguistic abilities in the young 
child that can be used to frame assumptions for use 
in the system.  It is assumed that the system can 
receive and produce strings that can be broken 
down into their component words.  These words 
can be compared and equalities can be detected. 
62
3 One-Word Stage and Two-Word Stages 
The system is required to produce one-word 
descriptions in early stages that develop into two-
word descriptions, where appropriate, in latter 
stages..  The recognition of each stage is based on 
the number of words that the system uses at a 
particular point.  In children, the one and two-word 
stages have notable features. 
The one-word, or holophrastic, stage (9-18 
months), is characterised by one-word 
vocalisations that are consistently associated with 
concepts.  These concepts can be either concrete or 
abstract, such as ?mama?, referring to the concrete 
concept of the child?s mother, and ?more?, an 
abstract concept which can be applied in a variety 
of situations (Piaget, 1960). 
Two phenomena that occur during this stage are 
underextensions and overextensions.  An 
underextension is the formation of a word to 
concept association that is too narrow, such as 
?dog? referring to only the family dog.  
Overextension, similarly, is an association that is 
too broad, such as ?dog? referring to all four 
legged animals.  Mismatches, or idiosyncratic 
referencing also occur, resulting in a word being 
associated with an unrelated concept, such as 
?dog? referring to a table (Pinker, 1994).  These 
associations change over time. 
The two-word stage (18-24 months) introduces 
simple syntax into the child?s language faculty.  
Children appear to determine the most important 
words in a sentence and, almost all of the time, use 
them in the same order as an adult would 
(Gleitman and Newport, 1995).  Brown (1973) 
defines a typology to express semantic relations in 
the two-word stage.  It contains ten sets of 
relations, but only one will be considered in this 
paper; attribute  + entity (?red circle?).  During this 
stage, children already demonstrate a three word 
comprehension level (Tomasello and Kruger, 
1992).  The concepts relating to their sentences 
may therefore be more detailed than the phrases 
themselves. 
The system is expected to make the transition 
from the one-word stage to the two-word stage 
without changes to the functionality of the system.  
Once the system begins to run, input is restricted to 
that of sensory (concept based) and vocal (string 
representation) data. 
4 System Design and Implementation 
4.1 Introduction 
The system is designed to learn phrase-to-
concept associations and demonstrate it through 
playing games: a guessing game and a naming 
game.  Games are often used to test, and encourage 
system learning (Steels and Kaplan, 2001).  The 
learning process involves a user selecting an object 
in a scene and naming it.  The guessing game 
involves a user saying a phrase, and the system 
pointing to the object that the phrase refers to.  The 
naming game involves a user pointing to an object 
and the system naming it  The system is not 
physically grounded, so all games are simulated. 
The learning process allows the system to 
acquire associations between phrases and concepts 
while the games test system comprehension and 
system production respectively.  The learning 
process takes a string and concept as input, and 
produces no output.  Comprehension takes a string 
as input, and produces a concept as output, 
whereas production takes a concept as input, and 
produces a string as output. 
4.2 Strings and Concepts 
A string is a list of characters with a fixed order.  
A blank space is used to separate words within the 
string, of which there can be either one or two.  
The system can break strings down into their 
component words. 
A concept is a list of feature values.  The 
system recognises six feature values; red, blue, 
green, white, circle, and square.  There are no in-
built associations between any of the feature 
values.  This form of learning is supported by the 
imageability theory (Paiviom 1971).  No claims 
concerning concept acquisition and formation are 
made in this paper.  All concepts are hard coded 
from the outset. 
The full list of objects used in the games are 
derived from shape and colour combinations; red 
square, red circle, blue square, blue circle, green 
square, green circle, white square, and white 
circle.  Individual feature values can also act as 
concepts, therefore the full list is concepts is the 
list of object plus the list of feature values. 
4.3 Groups 
To associate a string with a concept, the system 
stores a list of groups.  Each group contains an ID, 
one or more description pairs, an observed 
frequency, and zero or more occurrence 
supporter links. 
The ID acts as a unique identifier, allowing the 
group to be found.  A description pair is a string 
and a concept.  Groups must have at least one 
description pair since their primary function is to 
relate a string to a concept.  The observed 
frequency represents the number of times that the 
description pair?s components have been 
associated through system input. 
The occurrence supporter links are a set of group 
IDs.  Each ID in the set refers to a group that 
63
contains a superset of either the description pair, or 
the same value for one component of the 
description pair and a superset of the other e.g. The 
description pair [?red?; red] 1 would be supported 
by the description pair [?red square?; red square].  
A worked example is provided in the next section.  
The links therefore record the number of 
occurrences of the group?s description pair.  The 
occurrence supporter link reinforces the 
description pair?s association and increases the 
total frequency of the group.  The total frequency 
is the group?s observed frequency plus the 
observed frequency of all of its supporters, never 
including a supporter more than once.   
Finally, group equality is defined by groups 
sharing the same description pair. 
4.4 The Learning Process 
At each stage in the learning process, a 
description pair is entered into the system.  The 
system does not attempt to parse the correctness of 
the description.  All data is considered to be 
positive.  The general learning process algorithm is 
detailed in the rest of this section.  Specific 
examples are also provided in Table 1, showing the 
groups? values; ID, description pair, occurrence 
frequency (OF), occurrence supporter links 
(OSLs), and total frequency (TF).  Five steps are 
followed to incorporate the new data: 
1. Identify the description pair. 
2. Find equal and unequal parts. 
3. Update system based on equal parts.. 
4. Update system based on unequal parts. 
5. Re-enter new groups into the system. 
4.4.1 Identify the description pair 
If the description pair exists in a group that is 
already in the system, then that group?s observed 
frequency is incremented.  Otherwise, the system 
creates a new group containing the new 
description.  It is given a unique ID and an 
observed frequency of one.  Assume that the 
system already contains a group based on the 
description pair [?red circle?; red circle].  This has 
an ID of one.  Assume also that the new 
description pair entered is [?red square?; red 
square].  Its group has an ID of two (group #2). 
All description pairs entered into the system are 
called concrete description pairs, this is, the 
system has encountered them directly as input.  
The new group is referred to as a concrete group, 
since it contains a concrete description pair. 
 
 
                                                   
1
 The convention of strings appearing in quotes 
(? red? ), and concepts appearing in italics (red) is 
adopted throughout this paper. 
 
ID Description Pair OF OSLs TF 
#1 [? red circle? ; red circle] 1 [] 1 
#2 [? red square? ; red 
square]
1 [] 1 
#3 [? red? ; red] 0 [#1,# 2] 2 
#4 [? #3 circle? ; #3 circle] 0 [#1] 1 
#5 [? #3 square? ; #3
square]
0 [#2] 1 
#6 [? circle? ; circle],
[? square? ; square]
0 [] 0 
#7 [? #3 #6? ; #3 #6] 0 [#2] 1 
Table 1: Sample data 
4.4.2 Find equal and unequal parts 
The new group is compared to all of the groups 
in the system.  Comparisons are based on the 
groups? description pairs alone.  Strings are 
compared separately from concepts.  A string 
match is found if one of the strings is a subset, or 
exact match, of the other.  Subsets of strings must 
contain complete words.  Words are regarded as 
atomic units.  Concepts are compared in the same 
fashion as strings, where feature values are the 
atomic units.  Successful comparisons create a set 
of equal parts and unequal parts.  Comparison 
results are only used when equal parts exist.  This 
approach is similar to alignment based learning, 
but with the additional component of concepts (van 
Zaanen, 2000). 
In comparing the new group, group #2, to the 
existing group, group #1, the equal part [?red?; 
red] and the unequal part [?circle?; circle], 
[?square?; square] are found.  The comparison 
algorithm is essential to the operation of the 
system.  It is used in the learning process and in the 
games.  Without it, no string or concept relations 
could be drawn2. 
4.4.3 Update system based on equal parts 
When an equal part is found, a new group is 
created.  In the example, an equal part is found 
between group #1 and group #2.  Group #3 is 
created as a result.  The new group is given an 
observed frequency of zero.  The IDs of the groups 
that were compared (group #1 and group #2) are 
added to the new group?s (group #3) occurrence 
supporter links.  If the group already exists, then as 
well as the existing group?s observed frequency 
being incremented, the IDs of the groups that were 
compared are added to the occurrence supporter 
links.  IDs can only appear once in the set of 
occurrence supporters links, so if an ID is already 
in it, then it is not added. 
                                                   
2
 The system assumes full compositionality.  Idioms 
and metaphors are not considered at this stage. 
64
Up until this point, all groups? description pairs 
have contained a string and concept.  Description 
pairs can also contain links to other groups? strings 
and groups? concepts.  These description pairs are 
referred to as abstract description pairs.  If all 
elements of the abstract description pair are links 
to other groups then it is fully abstract, else it is 
partially abstract.  A group that contains an 
abstract description pair is called an abstract 
group.  The group is fully abstract if its abstract 
description pair is fully abstract, else it is a 
partially abstract group.  Once a group has been 
created (as group #3 was), based on a description 
comparison, the system attempts to make two 
abstract groups. 
The new abstract groups (group #4 and group 
#5) are based on substitutions of the new group?s 
ID (group #3) into each of the groups that were  
originally compared.  Group #4 is therefore created 
by substituting group #3 into group #1.  Similarly, 
group #5 is created by substituting group #3 into 
group #2. 
The new abstract groups are given an observed 
frequency of zero (ID?s equal four and five).  Note 
that abstract groups always have an observed 
frequency of zero as they can never been directly 
observed.  The ID of the appropriate group used in 
comparison and later creation is added to the 
occurrence supporters links.  Each abstract group 
therefore has a total frequency equal to that of the 
group of which it is an abstract form. 
4.4.4 Update system based on unequal parts 
Unequal parts are only considered if equal parts 
are found in the comparison.  Otherwise, the 
unequal parts would be the complete set of data 
from both groups, which does not provide useful 
information for comparisson.  For every set of 
unequal parts that is found, a new group is created.  
If there is more than one unequal part then the 
group will contain more than one description pair.  
Such a group is referred to as a multi-group.  Two 
unequal parts were found earlier in comparing 
group #1 and group #2.  They are [?circle?; circle] 
and [?square?; square].  Group #6 is therefore 
created using these two description pairs. 
The creation of a multi-group allows for a fully 
abstract group to be created.  The system uses the 
data from the new multi-group (group #6) and the 
group created through equal parts (group #3).  
Both groups are substituted back into the group 
that was originally being compared (group #1).  
The resulting group (group #7) is fully abstract as 
both equal parts and unequal parts have been used 
to reconstruct the original group (group #1). 
4.4.5 Re-enter new groups into the system 
All groups that have been created through steps 
3 and 4 are compared to all other groups in the 
system.  Results of comparisons are dealt with by 
repeating steps 3-5 with the new results.  By use a 
recursive step like this, all groups are compared to 
one another in the system.  All group equalities are 
therefore created when the round is complete.  The 
amount of information available from every new 
group entered into the system is therefore 
maximised. 
4.5 The Significance of Groups Types 
Four different types of group have been 
identified in the previous section.  Although all 
groups share the same properties, they can be seen 
to represent difference aspects of language.  It is 
the combination and interaction of these groups 
that gives rise to emergent simple syntax.  This 
syntax is bi-gram collocations, but since the system 
is scalable, it is referred to as simple syntax. 
4.5.1 Concrete Groups 
Concrete groups acquire the meaning of 
individual lexemes (associate concepts with 
strings).  They are verifiable in the real world 
through the use of scene based games. 
4.5.2 Multi-Groups 
Multi-groups form syntactic categories based on 
similarities between description pair usage.  Under 
the current system, groups can only have a 
maximum of two description pairs.  If this were to 
be expanded, it is clear that large syntactic 
categories such as noun and verb equivalents 
would arise. 
4.5.3 Partially and Fully Abstract Groups 
Partially and fully abstract groups act as phrasal 
rules in the system.  Abstract values contained 
within the group?s description pairs can relate to 
both concrete groups and multi-groups.  Abstract 
groups that relate to multi-groups offer a choice of 
substitutions. 
For example, group #7 (Table 1) relates a single 
group to a multi-group.  By substitution of groups 
#3 and #6 into group #7, the concrete pairings of 
[?red circle?; red circle] and [?red square?; red 
square] are produced.  The string data are directly 
equivalent to: 
S -> Adj. N, 
where Adj. = {?red?} 
and N = {?circle?, ?square?} 
When a description pair is entered into the 
system, the process of semantic bootstrapping 
takes place.  Lexical items (strings) are associated 
with their meanings (concepts). When group 
65
comparisons are made, syntactic bootstrapping 
begins.  Associations are made between all 
combinations of lexical items throughout the 
system, and all combinations of meanings 
throughout the system. 
The system stores lexical item-meaning 
associations, lexical item-lexical item associations 
and meaning-meaning associations.  This basic 
framework allows for the production of complex 
phrasal rules. 
4.6 Comprehension and Production Through 
Games 
The guessing game tests comprehension while 
the naming game test production.  Comprehension 
takes a string as input, and produces a concept as 
output, whereas production takes a concept as 
input, and produces a string as output.  The 
comprehension and the production algorithms are 
the same, except the first is string based, and the 
second is concept based.  
The algorithm performs two tasks: finding 
concrete groups with exact matches to the input, 
and finding abstract groups with possible matches 
to the input.  Holophrastic matching uses only 
concrete groups.  Syntactic matching performs 
holophrastic matching, followed by further 
matches using abstract groups.  Note that the 
system only performs syntactic matching, which 
includes holophrastic matching.  Holophrastic 
matching is never performed alone, unless in 
testing stages. 
For holophrastic matches, the system searches 
through its list of groups.  Their description pairs 
are compared to the input being searched for.  
There is therefore re-use of the comparison 
algorithm introduced in the learning process.  
When a match is found, the group is added to a list 
of possible results. 
If holophrastic matching is being performed 
alone, then this list of possible results is sorted by 
total frequency.  The group with the highest total 
frequency is output by the system. 
Syntactic matching begins by performing 
holophrastic matching, but does not output a result 
until all abstract groups have been matched too.  It 
is therefore an extension of holophrastic matching.  
Once a first fun of holophrastic matching is 
performed, the input is converted into abstract 
form.  This is performed at the word/feature value 
level.  The most likely element is found by 
searching through the groups, comparing it to the 
description pair, and selecting the group with the 
highest total frequency from those found. 
The group IDs replace the appropriate element in 
the input (just as substitutions were made during 
the learning process).  All multi-groups that 
contain any of the abstract forms are found.  Each 
multi-group?s description pair becomes a 
replacement for the appropriate input?s abstract 
value. 
The new input, which is still in abstract form, is 
searched for, using holophrastic matching again.  
Since the groups found are not exact matches of 
the original input, their total frequency is 
multiplied by an abstract factor.  The abstract 
factor is a value between zero and one inclusive.  
The higher the factor, the greater the effect that 
abstract groups have on the results.  Syntactic 
matches can therefore  produce different results 
based on the value of abstract factor.  The abstract 
factor is not changed from the initiation to 
termination of the system. 
Groups found during the search are added to a 
new list of possible results.  The appropriate 
elements are substituted into the groups abstract 
values to make them concrete.  If an abstract value 
is acting as a substitute (by being found originally 
in a multi-group) then the original input value is 
used, not the replacement element.  This allows the 
abstract group to act as a syntactic rule, but it is 
penalised by the abstract factor so it does not have 
as much influence as concrete groups, that have 
been found to occur through direct input 
associations. 
The groups found throughout the entire syntactic 
search are now contained in a second list of 
possible results.  This list is reduced by removing 
duplicate groups.  For each group that is removed, 
its observed frequency and occurrence supporter 
links are added to the duplicate that is kept in the 
list. 
The two lists from each matching routine are 
merged and sorted by total frequency.  The 
string\concept of the group with the highest total 
frequency is outputted by the system. 
5 Testing and Results 
The system is tested within the following areas: 
1. Comprehension and production of all 
fourteen concepts.  The rate at which full 
comprehension and full production are 
achieved is compared. 
2. Correctness of production matches for 
compound concepts.  The correctness of 
production matches are studied over a 
number of rounds. 
3. Type of production matches for compound 
concepts.  The type of production matches 
favoured, holophrastic or syntactic, are 
compared over a number of rounds 
A match of concept to word or word to concept 
is considered correct if the string describes the 
concept fully.  For example, [?red?; red] and [?red 
66
square?;  red square] are correct, but [?red?; red 
square] and [?red square?; red] are incorrect.  One 
point is given for each correct match, zero for each 
incorrect match. 
Note that all test results are based on the average 
of ten different system trials.  Each result shows a 
broad tendency that will likely be smoothed if 
more trials are run.  All input is randomly 
generated.  The abstract factor is set to 0.4 for all 
tests. 
5.1 Comprehension Vs. Production 
Full comprehension occurs much sooner (see 
Figure 1), on average, than full production.  This 
result is found in children also.  Although 
production and comprehension compete quite 
steadily in early stages of the system, 
comprehension reaches its maximum, on average, 
in 20% of the time that production takes to reach 
its maximum. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1 4 7 10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49
Production
Comprehension
 
Figure 1: Shows number of correct 
comprehension and production matches 
Full comprehension (fourteen points) is 
achieved, on average, by round 50, while full 
production comes at round 250.  Both holophrastic 
data and syntactic data contribute to the successes.  
Underextensions are found during comprehension.  
For example,  in early rounds, ?green? is used to 
describe only green squares.  This phenomena is 
quickly eliminated in the trials but with a larger set 
of concepts and vocabulary, it is likely to persist 
for more than a few rounds. 
5.2 Correctness of Holophrastic Vs Syntactic 
Matches 
At the end of each round, production is tested 
using the eight compound concepts alone.  These 
are based on the eight observable objects in the 
simulated scene.  Only compound concepts can 
demonstrate simple syntax in this system, as 
singular concepts have associations to single word 
strings. 
 The system uses syntactic matching alone, but 
syntactic matching includes holophrastic matching, 
as discussed earlier.  To determine whether 
holophrastic data is being used, or syntactic data 
when a syntactic match is run, the matching 
algorithm has been split.  The number of correct 
strings produced using holophrastic data and the 
number of correct strings produced using syntactic 
data alone are compared (see Figure 2). 
The data demonstrate that the system uses 
mostly holophrastic matches in early rounds 
(comparable to the one-word stage).  This is 
eliminated in further rounds, in favour or syntactic 
matches alone (the two-word stage).  Note that 
although the holophrastic stage may appear to be 
producing two-words, these words are considered 
to be one-word.  For example, ?allgone? is 
considered to be one-word in early stages of 
linguistic development, as opposed to ?all gone? 
(Ingram, 1989). 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73
Holophrastic
Syntactic
 
Figure 2: Shows number of correct holophrastic 
and syntactic matches. 
The syntactic data continues to rise, until it 
achieves full production.  The holophrastic stage 
never achieves full production, but peaks, then 
reduces to zero.  This trend occurs as holophrastic 
underextensions such as ?red? representing red 
square become more likely than ?red square? 
representing red square. 
Early syntactic matches are based on novel 
string productions for novel string concepts.  
Holophrastic matching is incapable of producing 
novel strings from novel concepts, as it deals with 
concrete concepts.  Abstract concepts however, 
allow new string combinations to be produced, 
such as ?blue square?, from blue square even 
though neither then string nor concept have been 
encountered before.  Such an abstraction may 
come from a multi-group that associates ?blue? 
with ?red?, while containing a group that contains 
?red square? also.  The novel string ?blue square? 
is therefore abstracted. 
5.3 Use of Holophrastic Vs Syntactic Matches 
The system does not always produce the correct 
strings when a concept is entered.  The strings that 
are produced are a result of either holophrastic or 
syntactic matching.  Regardless of correctness, the 
amount of times that holophrastic matches are 
made over syntactic matches can be compared (see 
Figure 3). 
67
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1 5 9 13 17 21 25 29 33 37 41 45 49 53 57 61 65 69 73
Syntactic
Holophrastic
 
Figure 3: Shows distribution of holophrastic and 
syntactic matches. 
The system relies completely on one-word 
descriptions at the outset, but soon syntactically 
derived two-word descriptions become prevalent.  
It is likely that the one-word stage will last longer 
if larger concept and vocabulary sets are in use. 
The system shows the same form of transition as 
can be seen in children from the one-word stage to 
the two-word stage, without the use of an artificial 
trigger.  The shift is gradual although the use of 
larger concept and vocabulary sets, plus different 
abstract factor values will affect the transition.  
The greater the number of words in multi-groups 
(the greater the size of syntactic categories), the 
lower the abstract factor is required to encourage 
the emergence of simple syntax. 
6 Related Works 
Supporters of computational modelling in 
language acquisition, often promote the practical 
importance of running simulations, where 
evolutionary effects can be recreated in short time 
periods (Zuidema, 2001). 
Although this paper is focussed on an individual 
system, or agent, acquiring language, it is been 
influenced by research into social learning 
(Oliphant and Batali, 1997; Kirby, 1999; Steels 
and Kaplan, 2002).  Social learning demonstrates 
the convergence upon a common language, or set 
of languages, from an uncoordinated proto-
language, within a population of agents.  Social 
learning allows for the playing of games between 
agents, similar to those in this paper, with the 
results being used as further system input, to 
support, or deny associations.  This research can be 
viewed as a form of social learning with one agent 
(string and concept generator) performing the 
teacher role, and the other agent (the system) 
performing the learner role. 
Simulations of both the babbling stage and the 
one-word stage have been developed (Scheler, 
1997; Abidi, 1999).  ACCLAIM, a one-word stage 
simulator, demonstrates that systems can react 
appropriately to changes in situations.  For 
example, when a cessation event is triggered, it 
produces ?Stop?, and when an object is requested, 
it produces ?More?.  Both examples are typical of 
children during the one-word stage (Bloom, 1973). 
Several systems exist that use perceptions to 
encourage language acquisition (Howell, Becker, 
and Jankowicz,, 2001; Roy, 2001).  ELBA learns 
both nouns and verbs from video scenes, starting 
with a blank lexicon.  Such systems have helped in 
the selection of both appropriate input sources and 
feature values to use in this research.  This system 
will also be physically grounded in future. 
The research presented in this paper describes a 
system that drives linguistic development.  Other 
systems have used similar techniques, based on 
syntactic and semantic bootstrapping (Howell and 
Becker, 2001), but have not explained how 
multiple word acquisition is achieved from a single 
word basis. 
Steels (1998) introduces frames that group 
lexical elements together by the roles that they 
play, very similar to groups in this paper.  Frames 
are more dynamic than groups however, 
structurally adapting when words reoccur.  Groups 
do not adapt in this way.  New groups are created 
to describe similarities rather than adapting 
existing ones.  Steels also introduces multiple word 
sentences, but it is unclear as to why agents invent 
a multiple word description over creating a new 
single word description.  The invention is triggered 
and does not emerge.  This research is based on 
real multiple word inputs, so the reason for 
invention is not necessary, unlike the reason for 
adoption i.e. why the system adopts two-word 
descriptions. 
The comparison algorithm, as previously noted, 
is similar to alignment based learning (van Zaanen, 
2000).  The system in this research performs 
perfect alignment requiring exact word matches 
when finding equal parts and unequal parts.  This 
system also uses concepts, reducing the number of 
incorrect groupings, or constituents, when there is 
ambiguity in text.  Unsupervised grammar 
induction can also be found in EMILE (van Zaanen 
and Adriaans, 2001).  EMILE identifies 
substitution classes by means of clustering.  These 
classes are comparable to this system?s groups 
although no concepts are used. 
7 Future Research 
As the system stands, it uses a small input set.  
Further developments are focussed on expanding 
the system.  All ten of Brown?s relations should be 
implemented.  Larger concept and vocabulary sets 
are therefore required.  Extensions to these sets are 
likely to affect underextensions, mismatches, the 
length of pre-syntactic usage time, and the overall 
growth pattern of simple syntax. 
68
8 Conclusion 
This paper offers a potential explanation of the 
mechanism by which the two-word stage emerges 
from the one-word stage.  It suggests that syntactic 
data is sought out from the beginning of language 
acquisition.  This syntactic data is always 
competing with the associations of holophrastic 
data.  Syntax is strengthened when patterns are 
consistently found between strings and concepts, 
and is used in favour of holophrastic data when it 
is sufficiently frequent.  The simple syntax 
continues to grow in strength, ultimately being 
used in favour of holophrastic data in all 
production and comprehension tasks. 
This system provides the foundation for more 
complex, hierarchical, syntax to emerge.  The type 
and volume of input is the only constraint upon the 
system.  The entry into post two-word stages is 
predicted from the system?s robust architecture. 
9 Acknowledgements 
The first author is sponsored by a studentship 
from the EPSRC. 
Thanks to the workshop reviewers for their 
helpful and much appreciated advice. 
References  
S. Abidi, 1996.  A Neural Network Simulation of Child 
Language Development at the One-word Stage.  In
proceedings of IASTED Int. Conf. on Modelling,
Simulation and Optimization, Gold Coast, Australia. 
L. Bloom, 1973.  One Word at a Time.  The use of 
single-word utterances before syntax  The Hague, 
Mouton. 
R.W. Brown, 1986.  Language and categories. In ? A
Study of Thinking? , ed. J.S. Bruner, J.J. Goodnow, 
and G.A. Austin, pages 247-312. New York: John 
Wiley, 1956. Reprint, New Brunswick: Transaction. 
L.R.. Gleitman and Elissa L. Newport, 1995.  The 
Invention of Language by Children: Environmental 
and Biological Influences on the Acquisition 
Language.  In ? An Invitation to Cognitive Science? , 
L.R. Gleitman and M. Liberman, 2nd ed., Vol.1, 
Cambridge, Mass., London, MIT Press. 
S.R. Howell and S. Becker, 2001.  Modelling language 
acquisition: Grammar from the Lexicon?  In 
Proceedings of the Cognitive Science Society..
S.R. Howell, S. Becker, and D. Jankowicz, 2001.  
Modelling Language Acquisition: Lexical Grounding 
Through Perceptual Features.  In Proceedings of the 
2001 Workshop on Developmental Embodied 
Cognition 
J.R. Hurford, M. Studdert-Kennedey, and C. Knight, 
1998. The Emergence of Syntax.  In ? Approaches to 
the evolution of language: social and cognitive 
bases? , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
D. Ingram, 1989. First Language Acquisition.  Method, 
Description and Explanation.  Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
R. Jakobson, 1971.  Why ?mama? and ?papa?? In 
? Child Language: A Book of Readings? , by A. Bar-
Adon and W. F. Leopold, ed., pages 213-217. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice-Hall.
P.W. Jusczyk, 1999  How infants begin to extract words 
from speech.  Trends in Cognitive Science, 3 (9, 
September):323-328. 
S. Kirby, 1999.  Syntax out of learning: The cultural 
evolution of structured communication in a 
population of induction algorithms. In Proceedings of 
ECAL99 European Conference on Artificial Life, D. 
Floreano et al ed. pages 694-703, Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 
M. Oliphant and J. Batali 1997. Learning and the 
emergence of coordinated communication. Centre for 
Research in Language Newsletter, 11(1). 
A. Paivio, 1971, Imagery and Verbal Processes. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
J. Piaget, 1960.  The Language and Thought of the 
Child.  Routledge and K. Paul, 3rd ed.,.  Routledge 
Paperbacks.
S. Pinker, 1994. The Language Instinct.  The New 
Science of Language and Mind. Allen Lane, Penguin 
Press. 
D. Roy, 2001.  Grounded spoken language acquisition: 
Experiments in word learning.  IEEE Transactions on 
Multimedia. 
G. Scheler, 1997d. The transition from babbling to the 
one-word stage: A computational model. In 
Proceedings of GALA '97. 
L. Steels and F. Kaplan, 2001.  AIBO's first words: The 
social learning of language and meaning. Evolution of 
Communication, vol. 4(1):3-32.  John Benjamin?s 
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, Holland. 
L. Steels, 1998.  The Origins of Syntax in visually 
grounded robotic agents. AI 103, 1-24. 
M. Tomasello, and A.C. Kruger, 1992. Joint attention in 
action: Acquiring verbs in ostensive and non-
ostensive contexts. Journal of Child Language 
19:311-333. 
M. van Zaanen, 2000.  Learning structure using 
alignment based learning.  In Proceedings of the 
Third Annual Doctoral Research Colloquium 
(CLUK), pages 75-82. 
M. van Zaanen and P. Adriaans, 2001.  Alignment-
based learning versus EMILE: A comparison.  In 
Proceedings of the Belgian-Dutch Conference on AI 
(BNAIC).
W.H. Zuidema, 2001.  Emergent syntax: the unremitting 
value of computational modelling for understanding 
the origins of complex language. ECAL01, 641-644. 
Springer, Prague, Sept. 10-14, 2001. 
