What is at stake:
a case study of Russian expressions starting with a preposition
Serge Sharoff
Centre for Translation Studies
School of Modern Languages and Cultures
University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK
s.sharoff@leeds.ac.uk
Abstract
The paper describes an experiment in
detecting a specific type of multiword
expressions in Russian, namely expres-
sions starting with a preposition. This
covers not only prepositional phrases
proper, but also fixed syntactic construc-
tions like v techenie (?in the course of?).
First, we collect lists of such construc-
tions in a corpus of 50 mln words using
a simple mechanism that combines sta-
tistical methods with knowledge about
the structure of Russian prepositional
phrases. Then we analyse the results of
this data collection and estimate the ef-
ficiency of the collected list for the reso-
lution of morphosyntactic and semantic
ambiguity in a corpus.
1 Introduction
Computational research on multiword expressions
(MWEs) has mostly addressed the topic for En-
glish (Sag et al, 2001). Some research has dealt
with other languages, such as French (Michiels
and Dufour, 1998) or Chinese (Zhang et al, 2000),
but there has been no computationally tractable re-
search on the topic for Russian. What is more, the
study of MWEs in English has been mostly de-
voted to the description of nominal groups or light
verbs, e.g. (Calzolari et al, 2002), (Sag et al,
2001), while constructions starting with a prepo-
sition, such as in line, at large, have not been the
focus of attention.
Even though the tradition of studying Russian
idiomatic expressions resulted in many descrip-
tions of Russian idioms and phraseological dic-
tionaries, like (Dobrovol?skij, 2000) or (Fedorov,
1995), the studies and dictionaries often concen-
trate on non-decomposable colourful expressions
of the ?kick-the-bucket? type, such as byt? bez
carja v golove (?to have a screw loose?, lit. ?to
be without a tsar in one?s head?) and pay no atten-
tion to the very notion of their frequency. How-
ever, many expressions of this sort are relatively
rare in modern language. For example, there is no
single instance of bez carja v golove in the corpus
we used. At the same time, existing Russian dic-
tionaries of idioms often miss more frequent con-
structions, which are important both for transla-
tion studies and for the development of NLP ap-
plications. The task of the current study is defined
by the ongoing development of the Russian Ref-
erence Corpus (Sharoff, 2004), a general-purpose
corpus of Russian that is comparable to the British
National Corpus (BNC) in its size and coverage.
The goal of the study was to identify the list of
statistically important MWEs in the corpus and to
use them to reduce the ambiguity in corpus analy-
sis.
Existing research on the detection of MWEs
can be positioned between two extremes: linguis-
tic and statistical. The former approaches assume
syntactic parsing of source texts (sometimes shal-
low, sometimes deep to identify the semantic roles
of MWE components) and the ability to get in-
formation from a thesaurus. Detection results can
be further improved by deep semantic analysis of
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp. 17-23
source texts (Piao et al, 2003). When we apply
such techniques to a Russian corpus of the size of
the BNC, this means that we need accurate and ro-
bust parsing tools, which do not exist for Russian.
Also, no electronic thesaurus, such as WordNet
(Miller, 1990), is available for Russian. Purely sta-
tistical approaches treat multiword expressions as
a bag of words and pay no attention to the possibil-
ity of variation in the inventory and order of MWE
components. Given that the word order in Russian
(and other Slavonic languages) is relatively free
and a typical word (i.e. lemma) has many forms
(typically from 9 for nouns to 50 for verbs), the se-
quences of exact N-grams are much less frequent
than in English, thus rendering purely statistical
approaches useless.
This paper discusses a hybrid approach to the
identification of a specific type of MWEs in Rus-
sian, namely constructions starting with preposi-
tional phrases with the emphasis on those that are
frequent in the corpus. The study is also aimed at
a specific task, namely the disambiguation of their
morphological properties and syntactic functions
in a corpus. The approach assumes the develop-
ment of a list of MWEs supported by computa-
tional tools, including the calculation of standard
statistical measures and shallow parsing of prepo-
sitional phrases. In addition, the scope of the study
is further distinguished by the goal of extracting
MWEs from the core lexicon on the basis of a
general-purpose corpus, while many other MWE
detection studies concerned the extraction of tech-
nical terms specific to a particular domain.
2 The analysis of the structure of
Russian MWEs
First, a few words on the linguistic features of
MWEs in Russian in general and of prepositional
phrases in particular. Russian is an inflecting lan-
guage in which a word inflects for a set of morpho-
logical categories and shows a specific combina-
tion of these categories in its ending. For instance,
a noun in Russian has a fixed gender and inflects
for 6 to 9 cases and for the number (singular or
plural, with relics of the dual, which is relevant
for some words). Similarly, an adjective inflects
for six cases, two numbers and three genders and
agrees with the noun that is the head of the nom-
(1) beloj vorony genitive, singular
(2) beloj vorone dative, singular
(3) belye vorony nominative, plural
Table 1: Examples of the ambiguity of forms
inal group in the values of these three categories.
This means that an approach that treats MWEs as
?words with spaces inside? is not always suitable
for English, and cannot work for Russian. There
is a certain variation in the number of forms in
an MWE like rara avis in English, because rarae
aves and rara avises are both possible according to
(OED, 1989), even though they are extremely rare
(neither is used in the BNC and Internet searches
mostly point to entries in dictionaries), but at least
it is feasible to list the two extra forms separately.
At the same the Russian expression belaja vorona
(corresponding to rara avis, lit. ?white crow?) ex-
ists in 10 different forms (see examples in Table 1,
the endings are underlined) and the variability of
forms applies to any nominal group. The situation
is even more complicated in the case of MWEs
including verbs, given that in addition to several
proper verbal forms, a Russian verb can exist in
the form of up to four participles, each of which is
inflected as an adjective with its own set of forms.
At the same time the large number of forms
does not mean that each form can be mapped to a
lemma and a set of morphological categories with-
out any ambiguity, because the number of endings
is much smaller than the number of possible com-
binations of features. As lines (1) and (2) in Ta-
ble 1 suggest, the genitive and dative forms of sin-
gular feminine adjectives coincide, as well as the
genitive singular and nominative plural forms of
the noun vorona, see lines (1) and (3).1
If we consider prepositional phrases, the
amount of ambiguity is much smaller, because
prepositions govern the case of a nominal group
that follows them and do not themselves inflect.2
However, PPs still exhibit the general problem of
1See (Hajic? and Hladka?, 1998) for a general overview of
problems with the identification of a tagset and the resolution
of the ambiguity in Slavonic languages. Their description is
about Czech, but it can be applied to Russian as well.
2The terminology that distinguishes groups and phrases,
e.g. nominal groups vs. prepositional phrases, follows (Hall-
iday, 1985).
ambiguity in lemma selection. For instance, the
word form tem is ambiguous between the genitive
plural form of the noun tema (topic) and the instru-
mental singular masculine form of the demonstra-
tive pronoun tot (that). What is more, the preposi-
tional phrase s tem from the purely syntactic view-
point can be interpreted in both ways, because the
preposition s can govern either the genitive or the
instrumental case. At the same time the word tem
as the component of s tem chtoby (in order to,
lit. ?with that to?) shows no ambiguity in its part
of speech. More frequently ambiguity concerns
the selection of a lemma or morphological prop-
erties for the collocate. For instance, the second
word in the expression s bol?shim zapasom (with a
huge margin, lit. ?with large storage?) can be anal-
ysed as either of two adjectives bol?shoj (large) or
bo?l?shij (larger). Similarly, the last word in the
expression do six por (until now, lit. ?before this
time?) can be analysed as either of two nouns pora?
(time, season) or po?ra (pore). However, the ex-
pressions as a whole are not ambiguous and have
specific meanings.
The second problem with prepositional phrases
concerns their syntactic function, in particular the
notorious PP attachment problem. Even though
MWEs consisting of a preposition followed by a
nominal group are often identical in their syntac-
tic structure to fully compositional prepositional
phrases, they do not carry the same syntactic func-
tion as the latter. Such MWEs function in the syn-
tactic structure of the clause as a single unit with
a clearly defined meaning that cannot be decom-
posed into the meaning of their components. In
the end, it is better to treat them as adverbs, e.g. v
chastnosti (in particular), pod kljuch (turnkey, lit.
?under key?), or as prepositions in their own right,
e.g. v techenie (?in the course of?). Multiword
expressions starting with a preposition in English
have similar structure, but the difference with Rus-
sian is that there is no change in the structure of the
prepositional group, unlike some English MWEs,
e.g. in line, at large, which do not have a deter-
miner. Thus, we cannot use the difference in the
PP structure as an indicator of an MWE.
The fact that MWEs are not fully compositional
means that the meanings of their constituent words
change resulting a specific idiomatic meaning of
the whole contstruction. In this case we cannot
accept the general assumption of one sense per
discourse (Gale et al, 1992), because words such
as line, large in English or kljuch in Russian can
function in the same discourse in a totally differ-
ent sense. However, the assumption of one sense
per collocation can hold, because an MWE with
a prepositional phrase typically has one and the
same meaning: even though line, large or techenie
are ambiguous, in line, at large and pod kljuch, v
techenie have their specific meanings.
3 Methodology
The study starts with the selection of the list of
the most frequent prepositions to account for a
large number of potential collocations. Informa-
tion on the frequency of prepositions (Table 2) is
taken from the pilot version of the Russian Refer-
ence Corpus, which currently consists of about 55
million words (Table 2 lists the relative frequency
of prepositions in terms of the number of their in-
stances per million words, ipm).
Then for each preposition we extract its most
frequent collocations in the same corpus and
weight them according to the pointwise mutual in-
formation score (MI score) and Student?s t test (T
score). Two types of collocates are extracted: all
lexical items occurring immediately on the right
of a preposition and the longest possible nominal
groups defined as the sequence of adjectives and
nouns with the condition that nouns after the first
one are in the genitive case. This simple pattern
captures the majority of Russian nominal groups,
except those with elaborations of other clauses or
other prepositional phrases embedded inside them.
Anyway, because of their nature they do not be-
long to the class of fixed expressions under study.
The MI score foregrounds collocations in which
the second component rarely (almost never) oc-
curs outside of the expression in question, whereas
the T score foregrounds the most stable colloca-
tions on the basis of their frequency.
For every preposition and the list of its most
significant collocates we select MWEs on the ba-
sis of the lack of compositionality, namely that
there is a specific function performed by the ex-
pression and this function cannot be automatically
derived from the meaning of the words compris-
ing the candidate MWE. The criterion cannot be
defined precisely, but in many cases it is imme-
diately obvious that the candidate MWE is or is
not fully compositional. For instance, the expres-
sion bez vsjakoj svjazi (?for no apparent reason?,
lit. ?without any connection?) is sufficiently fre-
quent (38 instances) and the last element has a
lexical ambiguity svjaz?: connection (either physi-
cal or logical) or communication. When the MWE
is used in texts, it has a specific function, namely
someone?s discourse is evaluated as lacking a con-
tinuity. Thus, bez vsjakoj svjazi is treated as an
MWE. On the other hand, the expression v Rossii
(in Russia) is much more frequent and statistically
significant (14557 instances, its T score is 104.21),
but the set of locations constitutes an open list, in
which other members may be also frequent, e.g. v
SSHA (in the USA, 4739 instances), v Evrope (in
Europe, 2752), v Parizhe (in Paris, 2087), v Ki-
tae (in China, 1055), and the expressions are fully
compositional. None of them are considered to be
MWEs. At the same time, an expression with a
very similar structure: v storone ([to keep] aloof,
lit. ?in side?, 9690 instances, its T-score is 83.95) is
considered to be an MWE, because it is not com-
positional. The vast majority of uses of this ex-
pression do not refer to a physical location, but to
the fact that a person does not take part in a joint
activity.
Also, because of the idiomaticity of the mean-
ing of an MWE, it functions as a whole in the
syntactic structure of the clause, most typically as
an adjunct, and is translated to other languages in
a specific way not necessarily related to preposi-
tional phrases. The possibility of its translation
into English without the use of a prepositional
phrase is another reason for treating the expression
to be a potential MWE.
Finally, an easy test for detecting an MWE con-
cerns the ?penetrability? of the expression, i.e. the
possibility to insert another word, most typically
an adjective or a determiner, into the candidate
MWE. If any insertion is unlikely or the meaning
of components is redefined as the result of inser-
tion, then the expression in question is an MWE.
For instance, even though the MWE v storone can
be modified as v drugoj/levoj/protivopolozhnoj
storone (on the other/left/opposite side), the result-
Word Gloss Frq (ipm) Scored Selected
v/vo in 27966 703 198
na on 16513 198 117
s/so with 11131 734 64
po over 5816 124 56
k to 5468 157 20
u at 4956 203 6
iz out of 4816 194 6
za behind 4711 115 34
ot from 3540 118 13
o about 2956 357 5
dlja for 2302 164 13
do before 1978 477 40
pod under 1467 139 95
pri by 1163 140 2
bez without 1097 459 42
mezhdu between 502 102 9
Total 4384 720
Table 2: The list of prepositions and the number
of their patterns
ing expressions refer to physical locations and not
to the idiomatic meaning of the MWE v storone.
Thus, they are not considered as MWEs but the
possibility of insertion here does not violate the
penetrability of the MWE in question.
4 Results
The automatic procedure detected 4384 candidate
expressions, out of which we selected 720 MWEs.
The summary of prepositions and the number of
their patterns identified in the study is given in Ta-
ble 2. It was expected that more frequent prepo-
sitions participate in a larger number of MWEs.
However, the situation is more complex. Some
prepositions like u or iz occur almost exclusively
in fully compositional patterns, for example, ex-
pressing location: u okna, morja (by the window,
by the sea), or possession: u menja, u Ivana (I
have, Ivan has). Other prepositions that are less
frequent regularly produce non-compositional pat-
terns, e.g. pod rukami (?at hand?, which expresses
the specific meaning of availability, not literally
?under hands?), pod konec (?at the end?).
The results retained in the database include
well-formed prepositional phrases that function as
proper idioms, as well as syntactic constructions
that can take a noun or another nominal group
on their right, such as v techenie (?in the course
of?), which is a PP in its own, or an incom-
plete combination of a preposition and an adjec-
tive such as dlja puschij (?for greater?). The lat-
ter is a part of an open list of well-formed PPs,
as in dlja puschej vazhnosti, (?for greater impor-
tance?), soxrannosti (safety), ostrastki (frighten-
ing), but the word puschij in itself occurs only in
this construction. In other cases, the ?noun? from
the nominal group does not even exist in the con-
temporary language, like in bez umolku ([to talk]
without a pause), so the expression cannot be anal-
ysed correctly without knowing that it is an MWE.
The resulting list also includes multiword ex-
pressions with a slightly different structure, in
cases where an MWE naturally extends to the left
of the prepositionto form a larger pattern. One
example is sudja po vsemu (?to all appearances?,
lit. ?judging over all?), which is an extension of a
prepositional phrase po vsemu, as it gives the only
suitable pattern by far with 1626 instances in the
corpus, with the next most frequent left neighbour
razbrosat? po vsemu (?scatter all over? followed by
a spatial location) having only 34 instances. Also,
the sequence of words po vsemu is ambiguous, e.g.
it can be a part of larger PPs, such as po vsemu
gorodu, domu, zalu (over the whole city, house,
hall), so from the viewpoint of automatic detection
the MWE sudja po vsemu is more reliable.
Another example of an extended pattern is a
complex reflexive expression: drug druga (?each
other?, lit. ?friend friend-acc?), which is a mul-
tiword expression of its own, because no mean-
ing of friendship is explicitly communicated here,
as in nenavidet? drug druga (?to hate each other?,
lit. ?to hate friend friend-acc?). Even though the
original pattern did not cover this structure, the
expression has been detected for almost all prepo-
sitions in the form of PREP+drug-ending, because
the reflexive expression allows the insertion of any
preposition between the two elements, e.g. drug k
drugu (?to each other?, lit. friend to friend). Ex-
pressions of this sort resist the automatic identifi-
cation by means of a simple pattern such as those
used for other MWEs in the study.
It is well-known that ambiguity is abundant in
natural languages. As discussed above, many
word forms in Russian allow several morpholog-
ical analyses and this applies to forms used in
MWEs. Monolingual and bilingual dictionaries
can also give an estimation of the semantic ambi-
guity by counting the number of senses and trans-
lations available for a word, though this will be the
lower bound, because the number of senses and
translations offered in dictionaries does not typ-
ically cover the full variety of types of possible
uses: depending on a context, a word can be trans-
lated in many more ways than is suggested by a
dictionary.
It was relatively straightforward to measure the
reduction of morphological ambiguity. We can
compare the number of morphological analyses
before and after tagging of MWEs. The reduction
of semantic ambiguity can be measured only in-
directly by comparing the difference between the
number of senses detected in a monolingual dic-
tionary and the number of translations in a bilin-
gual dictionary against the same numbers after
tagging of MWEs, because we can assume that
each MWE has only one sense, given the ?one-
sense-per-collocation? hypothesis. Even in cases
when the hypothesis does not hold, as in the case
of the reflexive MWE drug druga, which can be
translated in many different ways depending on
the main predicate in a clause, the combination of
the two words in an MWE saves from the possi-
bility of their separate translation as companion,
friend, mate, pal, comrade, colleague, fellow, etc.
Table 3 shows the level of the ambiguity in the
original texts and the estimates for its reduction
using the list of MWEs. The morphological anal-
ysis was performed using Mystem (Segalovich,
2003), a high-performance analyser which is also
used in Yandex, a major Russian search engine.
The results show that 41% of Russian word forms
are ambiguous with respect to their morphologi-
cal features with an average number of 4.6 anal-
yses per ambiguous word (1.9 on average for all
words).
The estimation of semantic ambiguity is based
on electronic copies of the monolingual Ozhegov
dictionary (Ozhegov, 1988) and the Oxford Rus-
sian bilingual dictionary (ORD, 2000). The for-
mer has 37785 entries with 1.6 senses per entry
Morphology Monolingual Bilingual
Coverage 55022365 38508185 39056759
Average ambiguity 1.90 4.38 11.66
No of ambiguous words 22790728 19254090 19528375
Ambiguity per ambiguous word 4.59 8.76 23.32
Ambiguity after MWEs 4.06 8.39 21.72
Improvement 10.66% 4.27% 6.86%
Table 3: The analysis of the ambiguity resolution
on average, while the Russian-English part of the
latter has 40303 entries with 1.9 translations per
entry. The dictionaries were applied to simple tag-
ging of the running text in the corpus, whereby
every word listed in the dictionaries was tagged
with the respective number of its senses and trans-
lations. The experiment also showed that either of
the two dictionaries covers about 70% of the run-
ning text (noncovered words are typically proper
names). Since more frequent words typically ex-
hibit greater polysemy, the polysemy in the run-
ning text is larger. A word has about 4.4 senses
on average according to (Ozhegov, 1988) and 11.7
translations according to (ORD, 2000). How-
ever, these counts are slightly misleading, because
about half of the words in the corpus are not am-
biguous. But if a word is ambiguous, it exhibits
a much greater set of possible senses and transla-
tions: for instance, (ORD, 2000) lists the word big
as having 35 translations in various contexts, so if
the average ambiguity in the corpus is counted for
ambiguous words only, it reaches 8.8 for senses
and 23.3 for translations.
The results for morphological and semantic am-
biguity are summarised in Table 3. After the appli-
cation of the list of MWEs (they cover only about
2% of the total corpus size), the level of ambigu-
ity for ambiguous lexical items goes down to 4.1
for morphological analysis, 8.4 for senses and 21.7
for translations. This gives a drop of about 11%
for ambiguity in morphological analysis, 4% for
ambiguity of senses and 7% for translations.
5 Conclusions
The paper reports the first attempt to ap-
ply computational methods to the detection
and use of multiword expressions in Rus-
sian. The study resulted in a list of about
700 prepositional phrases which is available
from http://www.comp.leeds.ac.uk/
ssharoff/frqlist/mwes-en.html. The
list offers rough results of MWE selection: it
includes proper idioms, of the type one can find
in a phraseological dictionary, in particular items
missed or underdescribed in such dictionaries,
so that it can be used as a source for improving
them. However, it also includes items on the edge
between idioms and other types of lexicalised
phrases, for instance, grammatical constructions
or institutionalised phrases.
The study shows that a simple method with lit-
tle syntactic knowledge about the structure of PPs
in Russian and no semantic resources can pro-
duce a useful list of MWEs. The combination of
automatic detection of the most significant collo-
cations and manual filtering of the results is not
labour intensive and produces many expressions
that are not covered in existing Russian dictionar-
ies.
The next immediate step would be to use the
lists for the study of translation equivalence be-
tween English and Russian, because MWEs are
also not adequately represented in bilingual dic-
tionaries, whereas their translation causes signif-
icant problems for language learners as well as
for machine translation systems. For instance, the
Oxford Russian Dictionary lists 13 translations of
bez (without), including such idioms as bez uma
(?be crazy about something?, lit. ?without mind?),
but fails to list many other more frequent construc-
tions, such as bez ocheredi (to jostle to the front of
the queue, lit. ?without queue?), bez umolku ([to
talk] nonstop), bez sleda ([to vanish] without any
hint), etc.
The lists can also act as a useful resource for
morphological and semantic disambiguation. The
list covers about 2% of the running text in the cor-
pus, yet it reduces semantic ambiguity in the run-
ning text by 4?7%, and morphological ambiguity
by 11%. We did not experiment with the reduction
of syntactic ambiguity, because there is no Russian
syntactic parser that can give robust parsing of an
unrestricted corpus, such as that used in the study.
Also, there is no easy way to force existing parsers
to treat the identified MWEs as separate syntactic
units on the clause level. However, we expect that
accuracy will increase, because the set of identi-
fied MWEs reduces the number of PP attachment
problems, as each MWE acts as an adjunct unit of
its own within the clause.
The domain of prepositional phrases has been
chosen specifically because it is relatively easy to
guess the structure from the form by means of
shallow parsing. Further experiments may con-
sider detection of other types of MWEs, in par-
ticular, with light verbs, such as brat? primer (to
follow the example of someone, lit. ?take exam-
ple?), which are also very important for transla-
tion, but given the free word order in Russian this
extension requires syntactic parsing to detect the
dependency structure.
Acknowledgements
I?m grateful to Dmitrij Dobrovol?skij, Tony Hart-
ley, Viktor Pekar, and especially to Bogdan
Babych for useful discussions.
References
Nicoletta Calzolari, Charles J. Fillmore, Ralph Gr-
ishman, Nancy Ide, Alessandro Lenci, Catherine
MacLeod, and Antonio Zampolli. 2002. Towards
best practice for multiword expressions in compu-
tational lexicons. In Proc. of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2002), pages 1934?1940.
Dmitrij Dobrovol?skij. 2000. Contrastive idiom analy-
sis: Russian and German idioms in theory and in the
bilingual dictionary. International Journal of Lexi-
cography, 13(3):169?186.
A.I. Fedorov, editor. 1995. Frazeologicheskii slovar
russkogo literaturnogo iazyka. Nauka, Novosibirsk.
William Gale, Kenneth Church, and David Yarowsky.
1992. One sense per discourse. In Proc. of the 4th
DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop,
pages 233?237.
Jan Hajic? and Barbora Hladka?. 1998. Tagging inflec-
tive languages: Prediction of morphological cate-
gories for a rich, structured tagset. In Proceedings
of COLING-ACL, pages 483?490.
Michael A. K. Halliday. 1985. An Introduction to
Functional Grammar. Edward Arnold, London.
Archibald Michiels and Nicolas Dufour. 1998.
DEFI, a tool for automatic multi-word unit recog-
nition, meaning assignment and translation selec-
tion. In Proc. of First International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation Conference, pages 1179?
1186. Granada, Spain.
G. Miller. 1990. WordNet: an online lexical database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4).
OED. 1989. Oxford English Dictionary. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
ORD. 2000. The Oxford Russian Dictionary. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 3rd edition.
S. I. Ozhegov. 1988. Slovar? russkogo iazyka. Russkii
iazyk, Moskva, 20th edition.
Scott S. L. Piao, Paul Rayson, Dawn Archer, Andrew
Wilson, and Tony McEnery. 2003. Extracting mul-
tiword expressions with a semantic tagger. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2003 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions, pages 49?56.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann
Copestake, and Dan Flickinger. 2001. Multiword
expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP. Technical
Report No. 2001-03, LinGO Working Paper.
Ilya Segalovich. 2003. A fast morphological algorithm
with unknown word guessing induced by a dictio-
nary for a web search engine. In Proc. of MLMTA-
2003, Las Vegas.
Serge Sharoff. 2004. Methods and tools for de-
velopment of the Russian Reference Corpus. In
D. Archer, A. Wilson, and P. Rayson, editors, Cor-
pus Linguistics Around the World. Rodopi, Amster-
dam.
J. Zhang, J. Gao, and M. Zhou. 2000. Extraction of
Chinese compound words ? an experimental study
on a very large corpus. In Proc. of the 2nd Chinese
Language Processing Workshop, ACL 2000, pages
132?139.
