COOPML: Towards Annotating Cooperative Discourse
Farah Benamara, Ve?ronique Moriceau, Patrick Saint-Dizier
IRIT
118 route de Narbonne
31062 Toulouse cedex France
benamara, moriceau, stdizier@irit.fr
Abstract
In this paper, we present a preliminary version of
COOPML, a language designed for annotating co-
operative discourse. We investigate the different lin-
guistic marks that identify and characterize the dif-
ferent forms of cooperativity found in written texts
from FAQs, Forums and emails.
1 What are cooperative responses and
why annotate them ?
Grice (Grice, 1975) proposed a number of maxims
that describe various ways in which speakers are en-
gaged in a cooperative conversation. Human con-
versations are governed by implicit rules, used and
understood by all conversants. The contents of a re-
sponse can be just direct w.r.t. the question literal
contents, but it can also go beyond what is normally
expected, in a relevant way, in order to meet the
questioner?s expectations. Such a response is said
to be cooperative.
Following these maxims and related works, e.g.
(Searle, 1975), in the early 1990s, a number of
forms of cooperative responses were identified.
Most of the efforts in these studies and systems fo-
cussed on the foundations and on the implementa-
tion of reasoning procedures (Gal, 1988), (Minock
et al., 1996), while little attention was paid to
question analysis and NL response generation. An
overview of these systems can be found in (Gaster-
land et al, 1994) and in (Webber et al., 2002),
based on works by (Hendrix et al., 1978), (Kaplan,
1982), (Mays et al., 1982), among others. These
systems include e.g. the identification of false pre-
suppositions and various types of misunderstand-
ings found in questions. They also include rea-
soning schemas based e.g. on constant relaxation
to provide approximate or alternative, but relevant,
answers when the direct question has no response.
Intensional reasoning schemas can also be used to
generalize over lists of basic responses or to con-
struct summaries.
The framework of Advanced Reasoning for
Question Answering (QA) systems, as described in
a recent road map, raises new challenges since an-
swers can no longer be only directly extracted from
texts (as in TREC) or databases, but requires the use
of a domain knowledge base, including a concep-
tual ontology, and dedicated inference mechanisms.
Such a perspective, obviously, reinforces and gives
a whole new insight to cooperative answering. For
example, if one asks 1:
Q4: Where is the Borme les Mimosas cinema ?
if there are no cinema in Borme les Mimosas, it can
be responded:
R4: There is none in Borme, the closests are in
Londe (8kms) and in Hyeres (20kms),
where close-by alternatives are proposed, involving
relaxing Borme, identified as a village, into close-by
villages or towns that respond to the question, eval-
uating proximity, and finally sorting the responses,
e.g. by increasing distance from Borme. This sim-
ple example shows that, if a direct response can-
not be found, several forms of knowledge, reason-
ing schemas and strategies need to be used. This is
one of the major challenges of advanced QA. An-
other challenge, not yet addressed, is the generation
of the response in natural language.
Our first aim is to study, via corpus annotations,
how humans deploy cooperative behaviours and
procedures, by what means, and what is the form of
the responses provided. Our second aim is to con-
struct a linguistically and cognitively adequate for-
mal model that integrates language, knowledge and
inference aspects involved in cooperative responses.
Our assumption is then that an automatic coopera-
tive QA system, although much more stereotyped
than any natural system, could be induced from nat-
ural productions without loosing too much of the
cooperative contents produced by humans.
From that point of view, the results presented in
this paper establish a base for investigating coop-
erativity empirically and not only in an abstract and
1Our corpora are in French, but, whenever possible we only
give here English glosses for space reasons
introspective way. Our goal is to get a kind of empir-
ical testing and then model for cooperative answer-
ing, to get clearer ideas on the structure of coopera-
tive discourse, the reasoning processes involved, the
types of knowledge involved and the NL expression
modes.
2 Related work
Discourse annotation is probably one of the most
challenging domains that involves almost all aspects
of language, from morphology to pragmatics. It is
of much importance in a number of areas, besides
QA, such as MT or dialogue. A number of discourse
annotation projects (e.g. PALinkA (Orasan, 2003),
MULI (Baumann et al., 2004), DiET (Netter et
ali. 1998), MATE (Dybkjaer et al., 2000)) mainly
deal with reference annotations (be they pronom-
inal, temporal or spatial), which is clearly a ma-
jor problem in discourse. Discourse connectives
and their related anaphoric links and discourse units
are analyzed in-depth in PDTB (Miltasakaki et al.
2004), a system now widely used in a number of
NL applications. RST discourse structures are also
identified in the Treebank corpora.
All these projects show the difficulty to annotate
discourse, the subjectivity of the criteria for both the
bracketing and the annotations. Annotation tasks
are in general labor-intensive, but results in terms of
discourse understanding are rewarding. Customisa-
tion to specific domains or forms of discourse and
the definition of test-suites are still open problems,
as outlined in PDTB and MATE.
Our contribution is more on the pragmatic side of
discourse, where there is little work done, probably
because of the complexity of the notions involved
and the difficulty to interpret them. Let us note
(Strenston, 1994) that investigates complex prag-
matic functions such as performatives and illocu-
tionary force. Our contribution is obviously inspired
by abstract and generic categorizations in pragmat-
ics, but it is more concrete in the sense that it aims
at identifying precise cooperative functions used in
everyday life in large-public applications. In a first
stage, we restrict ourselves to written QA pairs such
as FAQ, Forums and email messages, which are
quite well representative of short cooperative dis-
courses (see 3.1).
3 A typology of cooperative functions
The typology below clearly needs further testing,
stabilization and confirmation by annotators. How-
ever, it settles the main lines of cooperative dis-
course structure.
3.1 Typology of corpora
To carry out our study and subsequent evaluations,
we considered three typical sources of coopera-
tive discourses: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ),
Forums and email question-answer pairs (EQAP),
these latter obtained by sending ourselves emails to
relevant services (e.g. for tourism: tourist offices,
airlines, hotels). The initial study was carried out on
350 question-answer pairs. Note that in the tourism
domain, FAQ are rather specific: they are not ready-
made, prototypical questions. They are rather un-
structured sets of questions produced e.g. via email
by standard users. From that point of view, they are
of much interest to us.
We have about 50% pairs coming from FAQ, 25%
from Forums and 25% from EQAP. The domains
considered are basically large-public applications:
tourism (60%, our implementations being based on
this application domain), health (22%), sport, shop-
ping and education. In all these corpora, no user
model is assumed, and there is no dialogue: QA
pairs are isolated, with no context. This is basi-
cally the type of communication encountered when
querying the Web. Our corpus is only composed of
written texts, but these are rather informal, and quite
close in style to spoken QA pairs.
FAQ, Forum and EQAP cooperative responses
share several similarities, but have also some dif-
ferences. Forums have in general longer responses
(up to half a page), whereas FAQ and EQAP are
rather short (from 2 to 12 lines, in general). FAQ
and Forums deal with quite general questions while
EQAP are more personal. EQAP provided us with
a very rich material since they allowed us to get re-
sponses to queries in which we have deliberately in-
troduced various well identified errors and miscon-
ceptions. In order to have a better analysis of how
humans react, we sent those questions to different,
closely related organizations (e.g. sending the same
ill-formed questions to several airlines). FAQ, Fo-
rums and EQAP also contain several forms of adver-
tising, and metalinguistic parameters outlining e.g.
their commercial dimensions.
From the analysis of 350 of QA pairs, taking into
account the formal pragmatics and artificial intelli-
gence perspectives, we have identified the typology
presented below, which defines the first version of
COOPML.
3.2 Cooperative discourse functions
We structure cooperative responses in terms of co-
operative functions, which are realized in responses
by means of meaningful units (MU). An MU is the
smallest unit we consider at this level; it conveys a
minimal, but comprehensive and coherent fragment
of information. In a response, MUs are connected
by means of transition units (TU), which are intro-
ductory or inserted between meaningful units. TUs
define the articulations of the cooperative discourse.
In a cooperative discourse, we distinguish three
types of MU: direct responses (DR), cooperative
know-how (CSF) and units with a marginal useful-
ness (B) such as commentaries (BC), paraphrases
(BP), advertising, useless explanations w.r.t. to the
question. These may have a metalinguistic force
(insistence, customer safety, etc) that we will not
examine in this paper. DR are not cooperative
by themselves, but they are studied here because
they introduce cooperative statements. Let us now
present a preliminary typology for DR and CSF, be-
tween parentheses are abbreviations used as XML
labels.
Direct responses (DR): are MUs corresponding
to statements whose contents can be directly elabo-
rated from texts, web pages, databases, etc., possi-
bly via deduction, but not involving any reformula-
tion of the original query. DR include the following
main categories:
? Simple responses (DS): consisting of yes/no
forms, modals, figures, propositions in either
affirmative or negative form, that directly re-
spond the question.
? Definitions, Descriptions (DD): usually text
fragments defining or describing a concept, in
response to questions e.g. of the form what is
?concept??.
? Procedures (DP): that describe how to realize
something.
? Causes, Consequences, Goals (DCC): that usu-
ally respond to questions in Why/ How?.
? Comparisons and Evaluations (DC): that re-
spond to questions asking for comparisons or
evaluations.
This classification is closely related to a typology of
questions defined in (Lehnert, 1978).
Responses involving Cooperative Know-how
(CSF) are responses that go beyond direct answers
in order to help the user when the question has no
direct solution or when the question contains a mis-
conception of some sort. These responses reflect
various forms of know-how deployed by humans.
We decompose them into two main classes: Re-
sponse Elaboration (ER) and Additional Infor-
mation (CR). The first class includes response units
that propose alternative responses to the question
whereas the latter contains a variety of complements
of information, which are useful but not absolutely
necessary. ER are in a large part inspired from spe-
cific research in Artificial Intelligence such as con-
straint relaxation and intensional calculus.
Response elaboration (ER) includes the follow-
ing MUs:
? Corrective responses (CC): that explain why a
question has no response when it contains a
misconception or a false presupposition (for-
mally, a domain integrity constraint or a factual
knowledge violation, respectively), For exam-
ple: Q5: a chalet in Corsica for 15 persons?
has no solution, a possible response is:
R5a: Chalets can accomodate a maximum of
10 persons in Corsica.
? Responses by extension (CSFR): propose al-
ternative solutions by relaxing a constraint in
the original question. There are several forms
of relaxations, reported in (Benamara et al
2004a), which are more subtle than those de-
veloped in artificial intelligence. For example,
we observed relaxation on cardinality, on sis-
ter concepts or on remote concepts with similar
prominent properties, not studied in AI, where
relaxation operates most of the time on the ba-
sis of ancestors.
Response R5a above can then be followed by
CSFRs of various forms such as: R5b: we can
offer (1) two-close-by chalets for a total of 15
persons, or
(2) another type of accomodation in Corsica:
hotel or pension for 15 persons.
Case (1) is a relaxation on cardinality (dupli-
cation of the resource) while (2) is a relaxation
that refers to sisters of the concept chalet.
? Intensional responses (CSFRI): tend to abstract
over possibly long enumerations of extensional
responses in order to provide a response at the
best level of abstraction, which is not necessar-
ily the highest. For example, Q6: How can I
get to Geneva airport ? has the following re-
sponse:
R6a: Taxis, most buses and all trains go
to Geneva airport. This level is prefered
to the more general but less informative re-
sponse R6b: Most public transportations go to
Geneva airport.
? Indirect responses (CSFI): provide responses
which are not direct w.r.t. the question (but
which may have a direct response), e.g.: is
your camping close to the highway?, can be
indirectly, but cooperatively answered:
yes, but that highway is quiet at night.. A di-
rect response would have said, e.g.: yes, we are
only 50 meters far from the highway, meaning
that the camping is of an easy access.
? Hypothetical responses (CSFH): include re-
sponses based on an hypothesis. Such re-
sponses are often related to incomplete ques-
tions, or questions which can only be partly
be answered for various reasons such as lack
of information, or vague information w.r.t the
question focus. In this case, we have a QA pair
of the form: Q7: Can I get discounts on train
tickets ? R7: You can get a discount if you are
less than 18 years old or more than 65, or if
you are travelling during week-ends.
? Clustered, case or comparative responses
(CSFC): which answer various forms of ques-
tions e.g. with vague terms (e.g. expensive, far
from the beach). For example, to Q8: is the ho-
tel Royal expensive? it is answered: R8: for its
category (3*) it is expensive, you can find 4*
hotels at the same rate.
The most frequent forms of responses are CSFR,
CSFI, CSFC, CSFRI; the two others (CC and
CSFH) are mainly found in email QA.
Additional Information units (CR) contain the
following cases:
? precisions of various forms, that deepen the re-
sponse (AF): this ?segment? or ?continuum? of
forms ranges from minor precisions and gen-
eralizations to elaborated comments, as in Q9:
Where can I buy a hiking trail map of Mount
Pilat ? which has the response R9 that starts
by an AF: R9: The parc published a 1:50 000
map with itineraries,... this map can be bought
at bookshops....
? restrictions (AR): restrict the scope of a re-
sponse, e.g. by means of conditions: Q10: Do
you refund tickets in case of a strike ? R10:
yes, a financial compensation is possible pro-
vided that the railway union agrees....
? warnings (AA): warn the questioner about
possible problems, annoyances, dangers, etc.
They may also underline the temporal versatil-
ity of the information, as it is often the case for
touristic resources (for example, hotel or flight
availability),
? justifications (AJ): justify a negative, unex-
pected or partial response: Q11: Can I be re-
funded if I loose my rail pass ?, R11: No, the
rail pass fare does not include any insurance
against loss or robbery.
? concessives (AC): introduce the possibility of
e.g. exceptions or specific treatments: Chil-
dren below 12 are not allowed to travel unac-
companied, however if a passenger is willing
to take care about him....
? suggestions - alternatives - counter-proposals
(AS): this continuum of possibilities includes
the proposition of alternatives, more or less
marked, when the query has no answer, in par-
ticular via the above ER. Q12: Can I pay the
hotel with a credit card?, R12: yes, but it is
preferable to have cash with you: you?ll get a
much better exchange rate and no commission.
The different MU have been designed with no
overlap, it is however clear that there may have
some forms of continuums between them. For ex-
ample, CSFR, although more restricted, may be
viewed as an AS, since an alternative, via relaxation,
is proposed. We then would give preference to the
CSF group over the CR, because they are more pre-
cise.
A response does not involve more, in general,
than 3 to 4 meaningful units. Most are linearly or-
ganized, but some are also embedded. At the form
level, response units of CSF (ER and CR) have
in general one or a combination of the following
forms: adverb or modal (RON), proposition (RP),
enumeration (RE), sorted response (via e.g. scalar
implicature) (RT), conditionals (RC) or case struc-
ture (RSC). These forms may have some overlap,
e.g. RE and RT.
3.3 Annotating Cooperative Discourse: a few
illustrations
Fig. 1 (next page) presents three examples anno-
tated with COOPML.
3.4 Identifying cooperative response units
The question that arises at this stage is the existence
of linguistic markers that allow for the identifica-
tion of these response units. Besides these mark-
ers, there are also constraints on the organization
of the cooperative discourse in meaningful units.
These are essentially co-occurrence, incompatibil-
ity and precedence constraints. Finally, it is possi-
ble to elaborate heuristics that give indications on
the most frequent combinations to improve MU au-
tomatic identification.
In the following subsections we first present a ty-
pology for MU delimitation, then we explain how
direct responses (DS) are identified, mainly, via the
Discourse level:
Q1: Can we buy drinking water on the Kilimandjaro ?
R1: < DS > yes < /DS >, < BP > drinking water can be bought < /BP >, < CSP >< AA > but fares
are higher than in town, up to 2USD < /AA > . < AR > It is however not allowed to bring much water from
the city with you < /AR >< /CSP >.
Q2: Is there a cinema in Borme ?
R2: < DS >No< /DS >, < CSFR > the closest cinema is at Londes (8 kms) or at Hyeres
(< AF >Cinema Olbia< /AF > at 20 kms).< /CSFR >
Q3: How can I get to the Borme castle ?
R3: < DS > You must take the GR90 from the old castle: < AF > walking distance: 30 minutes < /AF ><
/DS >. < AJ > There is no possibility to get there by car.< /AJ >
Form level:
R2: < RON > No, < /RON > < RE >< RT > The closest cinema is at Londes (8kms) or at Hyeres
(cinema Olbia at 20 kms) < /RT >< /RE >.
Figure 1: Discourse annotation
domain ontology whose structure and contents is
presented. We end the section by the linguistic
marks that identify a number of additional informa-
tion units (CR).
3.4.1 Typology of MU delimitators
Identifying meaningful response units consists in
two tasks: exploring linguistic criteria associated
with each form of cooperative response unit and
finding the boundaries of each unit. Cooperative
discourse being in general quite straightforward, it
turns out that most units are well delimited natu-
rally: about 70% of the units are single, complete
sentences, ending by a dot. The others are either
delimited by transition units TU such as connectors
(about 20%) or by specific signs (e.g. end of enu-
merations, punctuation marks). Delimiting units is
therefore in our perspective quite simple (it may not
be so in e.g. oral QA or dialogues).
3.4.2 Identification of direct responses (DS) via
the domain ontology
The identification (and the production) of a num-
ber of cooperative functions (e.g. relaxation, inten-
sional responses, direct responses) rely heavily on
ontological knowledge.
Let us present first the characteristics of the
ontology required in our approach. It is basically
a conceptual ontology where nodes are associated
with concept lexicalizations and essential proper-
ties. Each node is represented by the predicate :
onto-node(concept, lex, properties)
where concept has properties and lexicalisations
lex. Most lexicalisations are entries in the lexicon
(except for paraphrases), where morphological and
grammatical aspects are described. For example,
for hotel, we have (coded in Prolog):
onto-node(hotel,
[[hotel], [residence, hoteliere]],
[night-rate, nb-of-rooms,
facilities]) .
There are several well-designed public domain
ontologies on the net. Our ontology is a synthesis
of two existing French ontologies, that we cus-
tomized: TourinFrance (www.tourinfrance.net)
and the bilingual (French and English) the-
saurus of tourism and leisure activities
(www.iztzg.hr/indokibiblioteka/THESAUR.PDF)
which includes 2800 French terms. We manually
integrated these ontologies in WEBCOOP (Bena-
mara et al 2004a) by removing concepts that are
either too specific (i.e. too low level), like some
basic aspects of ecology or rarely considered, as e.g.
the economy of tourism. We also removed quite
surprising classifications such as sanatorium under
tourist accommodation. We finally reorganized
some concept hierarchies, so that they ?look? more
intuitive for a large public. Finally, we found that
some hierarchies are a little bit odd, for example,
we found at the same level accommodation capac-
ity and holiday accommodation whereas, in our
case, we consider that capacity is a property of the
concept tourist accommodation.
We have, at the moment, 1000 concepts in our
tourism ontology which describe accommodation
and transportation and a few other satellite elements
(geography, health, immigration). Besides the tra-
ditional ?isa? relation, we also coded the ?part-of?
relation. Synonymy is encoded via the list of lexi-
calizations.
Direct responses (DS) are essentially character-
ized by introductory markers like yes/no/this is pos-
sible and by the use of similar terms as those given
in the question (55% of the cases) or by various lex-
icalizations of the question terms, studied in depth
in (Benamara et al 2004b). An obvious situation is
when the response contains a subtype of the ques-
tion focus: opening hours of the hotel ? l?hotel
vous acceuille 24h sur 24 (approx. hotel welcomes
you round the clock). In terms of portability to other
domains than tourism, note that the various terms
used can be identified via the ontology: synonyms,
sisters, subtypes.
3.4.3 Linguistic marks
In this section, for space reasons, we explore only
three typical CR: justifications (AJ), restrictions
(AR) and warnings (AA). These MUs are charac-
terized by markers which are general terms, domain
independent for most of them. The study of these
marks for French reveals that there is little marker
overlap between units. Markers have been defined
in a first stage from corpus analysis and then gener-
alized to similar terms in order to have a larger basis
for evaluation. We also used, to a limited extend,
a bootstrapping technique to get more data (Ravin-
chandran and Hovy 2002), a method that starts by
an unambiguous set of anchors (often arguments of
a relational term) for a target sense. Searching text
fragments on the Web based on these anchors then
produces a number of ways of relating these an-
chors.
Let us now characterize linguistic markers for
each of these categories:
Restrictions (AR) are an important unit in coop-
erative discourse. There is a quite large literature in
linguistics about the expression of restrictions. In
cooperative discourse, the expression of restrictions
is realized quite straightforwardly by a small num-
ber of classes of terms:
(a) restrictive locutions: sous re?serve que, a`
l?exception de, il n?est pas autoris?e de, toutefois, etc.
(provided that),
(b) the negative form ne ... que that is typical of re-
strictions, is very frequently used
(c) restrictive modals: doit obligatoirement,
impe?rativement, ne?cessairement (must obligato-
rily),
(d) quantification with a restrictive interpretation:
seul, pas tous, au maximum (only, not all).
Justifications (AJ) is also an important mean-
ingful unit, it has however a little bit fuzzy scope.
Marks are not very clearcut. Among them, we have:
(a) marks expressing causality, mainly connectors
such as: car, parce que, en raison de,
(b) marks expressing, via other forms of negation
than in AR, the impossibility to give a positive re-
sponse, or marks ?justifying? the response: il n?y a
pas, il n?existe pas, en effet (because, there is no,
indeed).
Warnings (AA) can quite clearly be identified by
means of:
(a) verbal expressions: sachez que, veuillez a` ne
pas, mieux vaut e?viter, n?oubliez pas, attention a`,
etc. (note that, do not forget, etc.),
(b) expressions or temporal morphological marks
that indicate that data is sensitive to time and may
be true only at some point: mise a` jour, change-
ments fre?quents, etc. (frequent updates),
(c) a few other expressions such as: il n?existe pas,
mais (but) ... + comparative form.
Except for the identification of DS, which require
quite a lot of ontological resources, marks identi-
fied for the other MU studied here are quite general.
Portability of these marks to other domains and pos-
sibly to other languages should be a reasonably fea-
sible challenge.
The response elaboration part (ER) is more con-
strained in terms of marks, because of the logical
procedures that are related to. For example, the
CSFR, dealing with constraint relaxation, involves
the use of sister, daughter and sometimes parent
nodes of the focus, and often proposes at least 2
choices. It is in general associated with a negative
direct response, or an explanation why no response
can be found. It also also contains some fixed marks
that indicate a change of concept, such as another
type of. This is easily visible in the pair Q2-R2 (sec-
tion 3.3) with the mark: the closests.
3.4.4 Constraints between units
A few constraints or preferences can be formu-
lated on the organization of meaningful units, these
may be somewhat flexible, because cooperative dis-
course may have a wide range of forms:
(a) coocurrence: any DR can co-occur with an AS,
AF, AR, AA or AJ,
(b) precedence: any DR precedes any (unmarked)
AA, AR, AC, ACP, B, or any sequence DS-BP. Any
CC precedes any CSFR, CSFH or CSFRI,
(c) incompatibility: DS + DP, CSFR + CSFI,
CSFC + CSFH. Furthermore CR cannot appear
alone.
Frequent pairs are quite numerous, here are the
most typical ones: DS + P, DS + AR, CC + CSFR
or CSFH or CSFRI, DS + AJ, DS(negative) + AJ +
AS, DS + AF, DS(negative) + CSFR. These can be
considered in priority in case of ambiguities.
3.5 Evaluation by annotators
At this stage, it is necessary to have evaluated by hu-
man annotators how clear, well-delimited and easy
to use this classification is. We do not have yet pre-
cise results, but it is clear that judgments may vary
from one annotator to another. This is not only due
to the generic character of our definitions, but also
to the existence of continuums between categories,
and to the interpretation of responses that may vary
depending on context, profile and culture of annota-
tors.
An experiment carried out on three independent
subjects (annotation task followed by a discussion
of the results) reveals that there is a clear consen-
sus of 80% on the annotations we did ourselves.
The other 20% reflect interpretation variations, in
general highly contextual. These 20% are almost
the same cases for the three subjects. In particu-
lar, at the level of additional information (CR), we
observed some differences in judgement in partic-
ular between restrictions (AR) and warnings (AA),
and a few others between CSFH and CSFC whose
differences may sometimes be only superficial (pre-
sentation of the arguments of the response).
3.6 Evaluation of prototype: a first experiment
We can now evaluate the accuracy of the linguistic
marks given above. For that purpose, we designed
a programme in Prolog (for fast prototyping) that
uses: (1) the domain lexicon and ontology, to have
access e.g. to term lexicalizations and morphology,
and (2) a set of ?local? grammars that implement the
different marks. Since these marks involve lexical
and morphological variations, negation, and some
long-distance dependencies, grammars are a good
solution.
Tests were carried out on a new corpus, essen-
tially from airlines FAQ. 134 QA pairs have been
selected from this corpus containing some form of
cooperativity. The annotation of this corpus is auto-
matic, while the evaluation of the results is manual
and is carried out in parallel by both ourselves and
by an external professional evaluator. These 134
QA pairs contain a total of 237 MU, therefore an
average of 1.76 MU per response. Most responses
have 2 MU, the maximum observed being 4. Sur-
prisingly, out of the 134 pairs, only 108 contain di-
rect responses followed by various CSF, the other
16 only contain cooperative know-how responses
(CSF), without any direct response part.
Evaluation results, although carried out on a rel-
atively small set of QA pairs, give good indications
on the accuracy of the linguistic marks, and also on
the typology of the different MU. We consider here
the MU: DS, AJ, AR, AA, as characterized above:
Unit A B C Total correct annotation
DS 102 6 0 108 88%
AJ 27 6 3 36 75%
AR 36 4 2 42 86%
AA 24 0 0 24 100%
A: number of MU annotated correctly for that cate-
gory, B: MU not annotated (no decision made), C:
incorrect annotation.
MU boundaries have been correctly identified in
88% of the cases, they are mostly related to punctu-
ation marks.
There are obviously a few delicate cases where
annotation is difficult if not impossible. First, we
observed a few discontinuities: an MU can be frag-
mented. In that case, it is necessary to add an index
to the tag so that the different fragments can be un-
ambiguously related, as in:
Q: What is the deadline for an internet reservation?
R: < DR index = 1 > In the case of an electronic
ticket, you can reserve up to 24h prior to departure
< /DR > . < B > You just need to show up at the
registration desk < /B > . < DR index = 1 >
In the case of a traditional ticket ... < /DR >.
The index=1 allows to tie the two fragments of the
enumeration.
In a number of cases the direct response part
is rather indirect, making its identification via the
means presented above quite delicate:
Q: I forgot to note my reservation number, how can
I get it?
R: A confirmation email has been sent to you as
soon as the reservation has been finalized.... To
identify this portion of the response as a DR, it is
necessary to infer that the email is a potential con-
tainer for a reservation number.
4 Conclusion and Perspectives
We reported in this paper a preliminary version, for
testing, of COOPML, a language designed to an-
notate the different facets of cooperative discourse.
Our approach, still preliminary, can be viewed as a
base to investigate the different forms of coopera-
tivity on an empirical basis. This work is of much
interest to define the formal structure of a coopera-
tive discourse. It can be used in discourse parsing as
well as generation, where it needs to be paired with
other structures such as rhethorical structures. It is
so far limited to written forms. We believe the same
global structure, with minor adaptations and addi-
tional marks, is valid for dialogues and oral com-
munication, but this remains to be investigated. The
main application area where our work is of interest
is probably advanced Question-Answering systems.
Besides cooperative discourse annotation, we
have investigated the different forms lexicalization
takes between the question and the different parts
of the response, the direct response (DR), the re-
sponse elaboration (ER) and the additional infor-
mation (CR). These are subtle realizations of much
interest for natural language generation. These ele-
ments are reported in (Benamara and Saint-Dizier,
2004b).
COOPML will be extended and stabilized in the
near future along the following dimensions:
? analyze the linguistic marks associated with
the MU not investigated here, and possible cor-
relations or conflicts between MU,
? analyze its customisation to various applica-
tion domains: since quite a lot of ontological
and lexical knowledge is involved, in particu-
lar to identify DS, this needs some elaboration,
? investigate portability to other languages, in
particular investigate the cost related to lin-
guistic resources development,
? develop a robust annotator, for each of the lev-
els identified, and make it available on a stan-
dard platform,
? investigate knowledge annotation. This point
is quite innovative and of much interest be-
cause of the heavy knowledge load involved in
the production of cooperative responses.
Acknowledgements We thank all the partici-
pants of our TCAN programme project and the
CNRS for partly funding it. We also thank the 3
anonymous reviewers for their stimulating and help-
ful comments.
References
Baumann, S., Brinckmann, C., Hansen-Schirra, S.,
Kruijff, G., The MULI Project : Annotation and
Analysis of Information Structure in German and
English., LREC, 2004.
Benamara, F., Saint-Dizier, P., Dynamic Generation
of Cooperative NL responses in WEBCOOP, 9th
EWNLG, Budapest, 2003.
Benamara. F, and Saint Dizier. P, Advanced Relax-
ation for Cooperative Question Answering, in:
New Directions in Question Answering, To ap-
pear in Mark T. Maybury, (ed), AAAI/MIT Press,
2004 (a).
Benamara. F, and Saint Dizier. P, Lexicalisation
Strategies in Cooperative Question-Answering
Systems in Proc. Coling?04, Geneva, 2004 (b).
Dybkjaer, L., Bernsen, N.O., The MATE Work-
bench. A Tool in Support of Spoken Dialogue
Annotation and Information Extraction, In B.
Yuan, T. Huang, X. Tank (Eds.): Proceedings of
ICSLP?2000?, Beijing,?, 2000.
Gal, A., Cooperative Responses in Deductive
Databases, PhD Thesis, Univ. of Maryland,
1988.
Gaasterland, T., Godfrey, P., Minker, J., An
Overview of Cooperative Answering, Papers in
non-standard queries and non-standard answers,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1994.
Grice, H., Logic and Conversation, in Cole and
Morgan (eds), Syntax and Semantics, Academic
Press, 1975.
Hendrix, G., Sacerdoti, E., Sagalowicz, D., Slocum,
J., Developing a Natural Language Interface to
Complex Data, ACM transactions on database
systems, 3(2), 1978.
Kaplan, J., Cooperative Responses from a Portable
Natural Language Query System, in M. Brady
and R. Berwick (ed), Computational Models of
Discourse, 167-208, MIT Press, 1982.
Lehnert, W., The Process of Question Answering:
a Computer Simulation of Cognition, Lawrence
Erlbaum, 1978.
Mays, E., Joshi, A., Webber, B., Taking the Ini-
tiative in Natural Language Database Interac-
tions: Monitoring as Response, EACL?82, Orsay,
France, 1982.
Miltsakaki, E., Prasad, R., Joshi, A., Webber, B.,
The Penn Discourse Treebank, LREC, 2004.
Minock M, Chu W, Yang H, Chiang K, Chow, G
and Larson, C, CoBase: A Scalable and Exten-
sible Cooperative Information System. Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, volume 6, num-
ber 2/3,pp : 223-259, 1996.
Netter, K., Armstrong, S., Kiss, T., Klein, J., DiET -
Diagnostic and Evaluation Tools for Natural Lan-
guage Applications,, Proceedings of 1st LREC,
Granada.?, 1998.
Orasan, C., PALink: A Highly Customisable Tool
for Discourse Annotation, Paper from the SIGdial
Workshop, 2003.
Ravinchandran, D., Hovy, E., Learning Surface Text
Patterns for a Question Answering System, ACL
2002, Philadelphia.
Reiter, R., Dale, R., Building Applied Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems, Journal of Natural
Language Engineering, volume 3, number 1,
pp:57-87, 1997.
Searle, J., Indirect Speech Acts, in Cole and Morgan
(eds), Syntax and Semantics III, Academic Press,
1975.
Strenston, J., Introduction to Spoken Dialog, Long-
man, 1994.
Webber, B., Gardent, C., Bos, J., Position State-
ment: Inference in Question-Abswering, LREC
proceedings, 2002.
