A Large-Scale Semantic Structure for Chinese Sentences 
Tang Li 
Institutue for Infocomm Research  
21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace 
Singapore119613 
Tangli@I2R.a-star.edu.sg 
Ji Donghong, Yang Lingpeng 
Institutue for Infocomm Research  
21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace 
Singapore119613 
{dhji, lpyang}@I2R.a-star.edu.sg 
 
Abstract 
Motivated by a systematic analysis of 
Chinese semantic relationships, we 
constructed a Chinese semantic framework 
based on surface syntactic relationships, deep 
semantic relationships and feature structure to 
express dependencies between lexical 
meanings and conceptual structures, and 
relations that underlie those lexical meanings. 
Analyzing the semantic representations of 
10000 Chinese sentences, we provide a model 
of semantically and syntactically annotated 
sentences from which reliable information on 
combinatorial possibilities of each semantic 
item targeted for analysis can be displayed. 
We also propose a semantic argument ? head 
relation, ?basic conceptual structure? and the 
?Head-Driven Principle?. Our results show that 
we can successfully disambiguate some 
troublesome sentences, and minimize the 
redundancy in language knowledge 
descriptions for natural language processing.  
1 Introduction 
To enable computer-based analysis of Chinese 
sentences in natural language texts we have 
developed a semantic framework, taking into 
account concepts used in the Berkeley FrameNet 
Project (Baker, Fillmore, & Lowe 1998; Fillmore 
& Baker 2001) and the Penn Chinese Tree Bank 
(Nianwen Xue; Fei Xia et al 2000). The FrameNet 
Project, as a computational project, is creating a 
lexical resource for English, based on the principle 
of  semantic frames. It has tried to concentrate on 
frames which help to explain the meanings of 
groups of words, rather than frames that cover just 
one word. The representation of the valences of its 
target words and descriptions of the semantic 
frames underlying the meanings of the words 
described are the mainly part of the database. The 
Penn Chinese Tree Bank analyzed the syntactic 
structure of a phrase or sentence for  selected text, 
based on the current research in Chinese syntax 
and the linguistic expertise of those involved in 
this project. Different from Pan?s syntactic 
structures and FrameNet?s semantic frames, our 
object is to record exactly how the semantic 
features relates frames to those syntactic 
constituents. The key task is to determine the 
relationship between the two direct constituents in 
terms of the semantic relationship. The grammar 
functions are also considered for primarily 
identifying the relation. Here, we use methods 
developed for the analysis of semantic 
relationships to produce a framework based on the 
direct component link. Our framework is largely a 
semantic one, but it has adopted some crucial 
principles of syntactic analysis in the semantic 
structure analysis. 
In this paper, we present our model of 
semantically and synactically annotated 10000 
Chinese sentences. The focus is on the analysis of 
the semantic relationships between one word to 
another in a sentence. We also briefly discuss the 
annotation process. 
2 Theoretical Framework and Case Study 
The basic assumption of Frame Semantics 
(Fillmore 1976;1977; Fillmore & Atkins 1992; 
Petruck 1996) as it applies to the description of 
lexical meanings is that each word (in a given 
meaning) evokes a particular frame and possibly 
profiles some element or aspect of that frame. By 
being linked to frames, each word is directly 
connected with other words in its frame(s). where 
word dependence association are needed from 
surface syntactic structures which actually reflect 
the grammatical relationship to the deep semantics 
structure whereby semantic content are put into 
natural language. The meaning of a word, in most 
cases, is best demonstrated by reference to a 
semantic network. Referential meaning on its own 
is insufficient. Word meaning would include the 
other dimensions concerning the structure and 
function of words. Unlike English, in which there 
are two major types of evidence that help to 
determine the syntactic structure of a phrase or 
sentence: morphological information and 
distributional information (such as word order) ,  in 
Chinese the lack of conclusive morphological cues 
makes ambiguity analyses for one sentence more 
likely. Moreover, most Chinese sentences order are 
very flexible. Phrase omission, word  movement, 
ellipsis and binding also make it difficult to 
characterize their grammatical relation. So the 
semantic information provides important clues for 
Chinese sentence analyse. We have to rely on 
semantic knowledge to guide role assignment. 
Thus,  we propose a method allowing a syntactic 
and semantic-based analysis of sequences and 
relationship of semantic items to obtain the 
common distribution of the relationship order. 
3 Method 
The analysis method that will be presented here 
is logically equivalent to the parsing of syntax and 
semantic dependency  with feature constraints. 
The key idea in our method is to avoid the 
complexity hierarchical tree sturcture. We are 
concerned with building structures that reflect  
basic relationships between one word and other in 
a single sentence. We use methods developed for 
the analysis of semantic relationships to produce a 
framework based on the order link. We started 
from an initial analysis based on the surface 
syntactics, then we analyzed deep semantic 
relationships, and attempted to improve it by 
removing the semantic order from the syntactic 
structure and reconnecting them in different places. 
Since many word phrase patterns are difficult for 
computers to recognize, trying to compromise 
between linguistic correctness and engineering 
convenience, we link the difference semantic roles 
on the flat level, while employing a few template 
rules. All semantic words are linked on the same 
level. They are non-hierarchical constructs. This 
flatted representation allows access to various 
levels of syntactic description tree simultaneously. 
In fact, the purpose of generalization is to get a 
regular expression from the original sentence.  
We manually tagged two kind of relationship 
among our large-scale frameworks: 1. syntax-
semantic relationship; 2. semantic feature 
relationship. 
Our framework consists of a set of nodes and a 
set of arcs that join the nodes, with each word or 
concept corresponding to a node and links between 
any two nodes that are directly associated. The 
basic links in the framework are between one word 
item to another based on immediate semantic 
deperdency order. We summarized the immediate 
semantic relationship through a variety of semantic 
relation features such as agent, reason, result and 
so on. The feature of relationship between two 
nodes are labeled on the arc.  
We developed the first fully instantiated 
semantic structure by manually labeling semantic 
representations in a machine-readable format. To 
make sure that our model can deal with various 
kinds of texts in real life situations, we have 
analysed 10000 sentences from large Web site 
corpora based on our formal model. Our aim is not 
to describe in detail any specific, but to capture at 
an abstract level the semantic relations between the 
direct components in a sentence. Our model?s most 
important domain of application is to Chinese 
sentence analysis, but it may also be applicable to 
different languages. This semantic framwork 
constructs a model on the basis of a few rules. 
The present paper indicates how situation types 
are represented, how these representations are 
composed from semantic representations of 
linguistic constituents, and how these type 
differences affect the expression of sentences. 
3.1 Syntax-Semantics Relationship Labeling 
This work flow includes linking and labeling of 
each relation between direct semantic items in 
single sentences, which reflects different semantic 
representation, and descriptions of the relations of 
each frame?s basic conceptual structure in terms of 
semantic actions. A semantic representation is a 
feature that allows one word in the sentence to 
point at some other word to which it is related. A 
word in a sentence may have much direct 
representation, these are differentiated by the 
semantic action. By analyzing the direct se mantic 
representation, we can capture semantic 
relationships between words, reconstructing a  
framework for the order of Chinese sentences. 
In most cases syntactic relationships are 
consistent with semantic relationships. The 
following framework shows show some important 
similarities between the structure of syntactic and 
semantic structure. For example, in 
     ?????. ??I am watching TV.?? 
Syntactically,  ?? ?? I? is subject, directly 
relating to the verbal predicate ????watch?, ??
? ??TV? is object , also links to the verbal 
predicate directly. ????be doing?as a adverb is 
an adjoined predicate ????watch?, there is a 
direct relationship between the two nodes.  
Semantically,  ????I?is the agent and ????
?TV?is the recipients, both of them have a direct 
relationship with the activity ????watch?. So 
we link the different nodes as follows: 
 
In cases where the relationship between syntax 
and semantics is inconsistent, by syntactic analysis, 
if there are multiple syntactic analyses among a 
sentence, we always choose the analysis 
 3.2 ?Head? Determination relationship that is consistent with the semantic 
relationship. For example, the Chinese sentence The basic link is the direct link between two 
semantic units. In addition, a set of general rules 
for determining the directions has been identified. 
???????? 
?many people sit beside the street.? 
The above sentence can be analyzed either of the 
following two syntactic structures.  
1. That between  Head and Its Modifier as a 
Case of Direct Relationship 
type 1: The head (see below), and the modifiers that 
come before it, constitute a type of modification 
relationship, which is one of the typical cases of 
direct relationships, e.g,  
 A. Gao zige de ren 
type 2:      tall  body DE person 
 
     the person with tall body 
B.   (to be compared with the above sentence) 
      ren de gezi gao 
      person DE body tall The two syntactic structures are analyzed with 
difference in the first node and the second node. In 
type 1, ?????beside of the street?is analyzed 
as subject, for type2, the linguist also analyzed it as 
adverb modifier, adjuncting to the predicate ???
?seat?. But when this sentence is analyzed in 
terms of semantics, there is only one relationship 
structure similar as type 2. ?? ?? people? is 
analyzed as agent,  ?????beside of the street?
as localizer, attached to the activity ????seat?. 
This semantic structure is consistent with the 
syntactic structure type 2. Only one structure can 
display both syntax and semantic relationship 
simultaneously. So we choose the second analysis. 
      ?The person?s body is tall.? 
In the above sentence, ren ?person? and gezi 
?body? hold a modification relationship, but gao 
?tall? and ren?person? are related indirectly as the 
relationship between the two words is realized 
through that of gezi ?body?. Therefore, we say that 
the relationship that ren ?person? holds with gezi 
?body? is a direct one, but that with gao is a rather 
indirect one. 
2. That between An Action Verb and Its Patient 
as a Case of a Direct relationship 
In case a head noun is an AGENT of an action 
verb within a modifying phrase, then the 
relationship between the Head none and the action 
verb is a direct one. The following sentences 
illustrate the point. 
If the syntactic relationship is different from the 
semantic relationship, we take no account of the 
syntactic order. In the Chinese sentence  C. chi pingguo de nuhai. 
     Eat apples DE   girl ??????? 
    ?the girl who is eating apples.?     ?she cry so much that her eyes become red.? 
D. (to be compared with the above sentence) Within the surface syntactic structure, adjective 
??? ?red?will be analyzed as  complementation 
and directly associated with main verb  ?? ? 
? cry?  , which indicate  result of predicate. 
Underlying the syntactic structure, ??? ?red?
actually point to ??? ?? eyes? in semantic 
representation. There is no direct semantic 
relationship between   ?? ? ? cry? and ?? ? 
?red?. The semantic network can be analyzed as: 
she cry + her eyes become red, the immediate 
relationship between ?he? as a possessor and 
?belly? as a possession and that between ?belly? as 
entity and ?painful? as description. In this case we 
link the node ?? ? ? red? to ??? ??eyes?
directly based on semantic relationship. 
      nuhai chi pingguo 
      girl    eat apples 
     ?The girl is eating apples.? 
In the above sentence, nuhai ?girl? is an AGENT 
of the action verb chi ?eat?, the two words have a 
direct semantic relationship, therefore we link 
them directly and annotate ?girl? as a head. In 
contrary, the relationship between nuhai ?girl? and 
pingguo ?apples? is of an indirect type. 
3. Other Cases of Direct Relationships 
In case there is neither a modification nor an 
AGENT/PATIENT relationship, the whole phrase, 
which is still directly related to a following 
describing phrase, has to be embedded. E.g.,  
E. ban shiqing yinggai guquan daju. 
Handle problem should care-about overall  
 
situation 
 ?People should care about the overall situation  
when they handle problems.? 
F. chouyan hai shenti.  
    Smoke   harm health 
    ?Smoking harms health.? 
 
G. ta neng daying de shiqing wo ye neng daying. 
     He can accept DE event I also can accept 
The above three head semantic structures clearly 
show us the different relationships among sentence 
and noun phrases with different meaning. The head 
words are connected  to  their modifier through 
arrow arcs. The first SVO relationship is also 
represented by non-head tagging.  
  ?The event that he can accept are also 
acceptable to me.? 
3.3 ?Head? Determination 
Since Chinese lacks morphological cues, the  
grammatical markers (such as ?????) and 
word order are comparatively important cues for 
the relationship determination. We have to rely on 
grammatical and semantic knowledge to guide role 
assignment. 
3.4 Feature Abstracting and Labeling 
Based on the analysis of semantic relationships, 
we have been parsing feature structures to express 
dependencies between semantic features. In our 
analysis model, semantic feature means a variety 
of  detailed semantic relationships. Most of the 
time, semantic features are not so easy to define. 
Some feature typologies have been provided, but 
there is still much discussions about the nature of a 
re in a text. To avoid the confusion of feature 
ification, we p d a method bstract 
the semantic featur tly from se s that 
contain the natura
sentences without s
labeling the sema
categorys include in
the relationship ar
semantic framewo
dimension. For exam
In this study, we have proposed an approach that 
combines ?basic conceptual structure? and our 
?Head-Driven Principle?.  According to the ?Head-
Driven Principle?, most structures are analyzed as 
having a ?Head? which is connected to various 
types of modifiers, such as Head-NP (adjective-
noun, noun-adverbial pairs ???  ), Head-VP 
(adverbial-verb, verb-adverbial, adjective-verb?). 
In our framework, modification is represented by 
attaching tags with arrows to the core semantic 
item whereve the type of modification can be 
clearly identified. Since the SVO is the basic order 
in Chinese, there is no modifier relationship among 
the level of SVO. In our model, ?Subject-Predicate 
Structures? and ?Verb-Object Structures? are 
represented as non-head. In above example, the 
relation linking the ?core? noun and verb with their 
?adjunct? is tagged with an arrow to indicate that it 
is a ?head?. Both A and B label the ?head? as the 
core noun. E labels the ?head? as  the core verb. 
Employing the ?Head-Driven Principle? for the 
construction of semantic models. Some ambiguous 
sentences can be clearly represented. The different 
meaning among sentence or phrase  containing 
same words can also be described . Conside the 
following sentence and phrases: 
       Ta  gezi   bu g
       His stature isn
       He isn?t tall. 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
statu
he
In traditional anal
constituent in a sen
meaning of the sent
is semantic feature l
thus in our semantic
?tall? semantically, 
marking a semanti
immediate constitu
structure, after featu
to its English co
translation from one
??????? 
?The students like the teachers.? 
??????? 
(the students who like the teachers) 
??????? 
(the teachers who the students like) 
All of above examples containing same meaning 
words can have very different meaning, depending 
on the different word order and grammatical 
marker ?? ??DE? . We use head tagging to 
construct different frameworks for these structures:  In some sentence
features but also th
Similarly we abstrac
features. Thus we ca
to express this level 
    
 
Ta  liang   mi     
he   two   metersropose
e direc
l feature word.
emantic features i
ntic features re
 other sentences,
cs. Thus we co
rk based on 
ple: 
ao. 
?t tall. 
re 
not 
ysis, ?stature? is ju
tence. However, 
ence is ?he is not t
inking ?he? and ?t
 analysis we link o
?stature? is take
c relationship, ra
ent. This Chine
re abstraction, is 
unterpart. It fa
 language into ano
s , there are not o
eir particular valu
ted the values atta
n expand the featu
of detail. For exam
  gao. 
  tall   to a
ntencefeatu
class For those 
nsert , we?ll 
fer to the 
 attached on 
nstructed a 
multi-profile 
tall
st a syntactic 
the essential 
all?, ?stature? 
all? together, 
nly ?he? and 
n as feature 
ther than an 
se semantic 
very similar 
cilitates the 
ther. 
nly semantic 
es included. 
ched on  the 
re structures 
ple 
?He is two meters tall.?  
 Several different sentences which should be 
analyzed as having the same syntactic structure 
may have fundamentally different semantic 
structures. The following three sentences S1, 
S2and S3, for example, should be analyzed as 
having the syntactic structure, but their semantic 
structures are nevertheless represented as S1?, S2? 
and S3? respectively in our framework. 
 
 
 
 
he tall
two 
meters 
In the above framework, ?tall? is the semantic 
feature describing staturs of the agent ?he? , and 
?two meters? express the value of the feature. They 
provid different information at different level, 
constructing a feature sturcture.  NP + V + Adj + NP   
  S1?Ta xiao-tong le duzi 4 The Advantages of Our Semantic Model     
           he laugh-painful ASP belly 
In developing our semantic frameworks, we also 
have articulated a framework of ?Noun-Centrality? 
as a supplement to the widely assumed ?Verb-
Centrality? practice. We can successfully 
disambiguate some troublesome sentences, and 
minimize the redundancy in language knowledge 
description for natural language processing. We 
automatically learn a simpler, less redundant 
representation of the same information.  
          ?He laughed so much that his belly was 
painful.? 
  S2?Wo kan-tou le ni 
         I  see- through ASP you 
         ?I understand you thoroughly.? 
    S3?Ta da po-le beizi 
            She broke up the cup First, comparing syntactic order and semantic 
order, we used the reconstructed original order, 
giving some different order sentences similar 
results. Thus, variations of order in the same 
sentence can reveal the same relationships. 
            She broke up the cup. 
                                                    
S1?? NP         V        Adj     NP                  One semantic structure may correspond to more 
syntactic structures in Chinese, and this 
correspondence can be made specifically clear 
using our approach.  
 
1.Ta da-le 
wo 
 She beat me 
 ?She beat 
me.? 
2.Ta ba wo da-
le 
She BA me beat  
?She beat me.? 
      
3.Wo BEI Ta da-
le 
I BEI she beat 
?I have been 
beaten by her.? 
The above three sentences, their syntactic 
structures are clearly different from each other. 
That is, the direct object wo ?me? appears right 
after the main verb in (1) whereas the same logical 
object has moved to a pre-verbal position with the 
help of a special Chinese preposition BA in (2) and 
to a sentence-initial position with the help of BEI 
in (3). But underlying the difference syntactic 
structures, they share the same basic semantic 
structure, using semantic represented expression, 
the three sentences of above example can be 
described in below. 
AGENT Ta   ?she? 
PATIENT Wo?me? 
ACTION Da  ?beat? 
 
 
S2??NP            V       Adj     NP                  
 
                                                                                                  
 
S3??NP         V   Adj        NP 
                                        
 
On the other hand, many structural ambiguities 
in Chinese sentences are one of the major problems 
in Chinese syntactic analyses. One syntactic 
structure may correspond to two or more semantic 
structures, that is, various forms of structural 
ambiguity are widely observed in Chinese. 
Disregarding the semantic types will cause 
syntactic ambiguity. If this type of information is 
not available during parsing, important clues will 
be missing, and loss of accuracy will result. 
Consider the Chinese sentence 
Ta de yifu zuo de piaoliang. 
   Her cloth do DE beautiful 
 Reading 1:  ?She has made the cloth beautifully 
b) minimal redundancy in language knowledge 
description for natural language processing. 
Reading 2: (Somebody) has made her cloth 
beautifully.? 
We hope to use the minimum analysis method to 
find the semantic order with equal relationship 
among new sentence. We then used the partition 
relationship as a training database to recognize 
new order as similar as these order structures. 
Syntactically, the sentence, with either one of 
the above two semantic interpretations, should be 
analyzed as 
                          S 
We also have been creating feature sets parsing 
feature structures to expressing dependencies 
between semantic features. Furthermore, we 
abstracted the values attached to the features. Thus 
we can expand the feature structures to express this 
level of detail. 
                      /         \ 
               NP               VP 
            /        \            /      \ 
      NP           N      V         Adj (Complement) 
       |               |        |              | 
References  
      Ta de     yifu    zuo  de  piaoliang 
Baker C, Fillmore C, Lower J 1998 The 
Berkeley                Her    cloth      make DE beautiful 
   FrameNet Project, In Proc. of ACL/COLING 
1998.  
But the two semantic structures have to be 
properly represented in a semantics-oriented 
framework. We do so as in type A and type B 
respectively. 
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky 2002 Auto 
matic Labeling of Semantic Roles. In Proc. of 
ACL 2000. 
Type A:   Ta de yifu zuo de piaoliang.                Nianwen Xue, Fei Xia 2000 The Bracketing 
Guidelines for the Pann Chinese Treebank, IRCS 
Report 00-08 University of Pennsylvania, Oct 
2000 
                 Her cloth do DE beautiful         
            
Dominique Dutoit, Thierry Poibeau 2002 Inferring 
Knowledge from a Large Semantic Network, In 
Proc. of COLING 2000 
 Type B: Ta     de yifu zuo de piaoliang. James Henderson, Paola Merlo, Ivan Petroff  2002 
Using Syntactic Analysis to Increase Efficiency 
in Visualizing Text Collections, In Proc. of 
ACL/COLING 2002. 
               Her cloth do DE beautiful 
    
 
So under our proposal, the above two different 
types of semantic relations can be clearly 
represented.. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper we have demonstrated how our 
semantic model can be created to analyze and 
represent the semantic relationships of Chinese 
sentence structures. The semantic model project is 
producing a structured tree bank with a richer set 
of semantic and syntactic relationships of different 
words on the basis of the analysis of lexical 
meanings and conceptual structures that underlie 
those lexical meanings. We developed some 
methods for determining the relationship between 
direct semantic items based on the analysis of 
syntactic and semantic order. The key advantages 
of our semantic model are:  
a) many ambiguous sentences can be clearly 
represented. 
