An Algorithm for Open Text Semantic Parsing
Lei Shi and Rada Mihalcea
Department of Computer Science
University of North Texas
leishi@unt.edu, rada@cs.unt.edu
Abstract
This paper describes an algorithm for open text shal-
low semantic parsing. The algorithm relies on a
frame dataset (FrameNet) and a semantic network
(WordNet), to identify semantic relations between
words in open text, as well as shallow semantic fea-
tures associated with concepts in the text. Parsing
semantic structures allows semantic units and con-
stituents to be accessed and processed in a more
meaningful way than syntactic parsing, moving the
automation of understanding natural language text
to a higher level.
1 Introduction
The goal of the semantic parser is to analyze the
semantic structure of a natural language sentence.
Similar in spirit with the syntactic parser ? whose
goal is to parse a valid natural language sentence
into a parse tree indicating how the sentence can
be syntactically decomposed into smaller syntactic
constituents ? the purpose of the semantic parser is
to analyze the structure of sentence meaning. Sen-
tence meaning is composed by entities and interac-
tions between entities, where entities are assigned
semantic roles, and can be further modified by other
modifiers. The meaning of a sentence is decom-
posed into smaller semantic units connected by var-
ious semantic relations by the principle of compo-
sitionality, and the parser represents the semantic
structure ? including semantic units as well as se-
mantic relations, connecting them into a formal for-
mat.
In this paper, we describe the main components
of the semantic parser, and illustrate the basic pro-
cedures involved in parsing semantically open text.
We believe that such structures, reflecting various
levels of semantic interpretation of the text, can be
used to improve the quality of text processing appli-
cations, by taking into account the meaning of text.
The paper is organized as follows. We first de-
scribe the semantic structure of English sentences,
as the basis for semantic parsing. We then intro-
duce the knowledge bases utilized by the parser, and
show how we use this knowledge in the process of
semantic parsing. Next, we describe the parsing
algorithm and elaborate on each of the three main
steps involved in the process of semantic parsing:
(1) syntactic and shallow semantic analysis, (2) se-
mantic role assignment, and (3) application of de-
fault rules. Finally, we illustrate the parsing process
with several examples, and show how the semantic
parsing algorithm can be integrated into other lan-
guage processing systems.
2 Semantic Structure
Semantics is the denotation of a string of symbols,
either a sentence or a word. Similar to a syn-
tactic parser, which shows how a larger string is
formed by smaller strings from a formal point of
view, the semantic parser shows how the denotation
of a larger string ? sentence, is formed by deno-
tations of smaller strings ? words. Syntactic rela-
tions can be described using a set of rules about how
a sentence string is formally generated using word
strings. Instead, semantic relations between seman-
tic constituents depend on our understanding of the
world, which is across languages and syntax.
We can model the sentence semantics as describ-
ing entities and interactions between entities. Enti-
ties can represent physical objects, as well as time,
places, or ideas, and are usually formally realized
as nouns or noun phrases. Interactions, usually real-
ized as verbs, describe relationships or interactions
between participating entities. Note that a partic-
ipant can also be an interaction, which can be re-
garded as an entity nominalized from an interaction.
We assign semantic roles to participants, and their
semantic relations are identified by the case frame
introduced by their interaction. In a sentence, par-
ticipants and interactions can be further modified
by various modifiers, including descriptive modi-
fiers that describe attributes such as drive slowly,
restrictive modifiers that enforce a general denota-
tion to become more specific such as musical in-
strument, referential modifiers that indicate partic-
ular instances such as the pizza I ordered. Other
semantic relations can also be identified, such as
coreference, complement, and others. Based on the
principle of compositionality, the sentence semantic
structure is recursive, similar to a tree.
The semantic parser analyzes shallow-level se-
mantics, which is derived directly from linguis-
tic knowledge, such as rules about semantic
role assignment, lexical semantic knowledge, and
syntactic-semantic mappings, without taking into
account any context or common sense knowledge.
The parser can be used as an intermediate semantic
processing tool before higher levels of text under-
standing.
3 Knowledge Bases for Semantic Parsing
One major problem faced by many natural language
understanding applications that rely on syntactic
analysis of text, is the fact that similar syntactic pat-
terns may introduce different semantic interpreta-
tions. Likewise, similar meanings can be syntac-
tically realized in many different ways. The seman-
tic parser attempts to solve this problem, and pro-
duces a syntax-independent representation of sen-
tence meaning, so that semantic constituents can be
accessed and processed in a more meaningful and
flexible way, avoiding the sometimes rigid interpre-
tations produced by a syntactic analyzer. For in-
stance, the sentences I boil water and water boils
contain a similar relation between water and boil,
even though they have different syntactic structures.
To deal with the large number of cases where the
same syntactic relation introduces different seman-
tic relations, we need knowledge about how to map
syntax to semantics. To this end, we use two main
types of knowledge ? about words, and about rela-
tions between words. The first type of knowledge
is drawn from WordNet ? a large lexical database
with rich information about words and concepts.
We refer to this as word-level knowledge. The lat-
ter is derived from FrameNet ? a resource that con-
tains information about different situations, called
frames, in which semantic relations are syntacti-
cally realized in natural language sentences. We
call this sentence-level knowledge. In addition to
these two lexical knowledge bases, the parser also
utilizes a set of manually defined rules, which en-
code mappings from syntactic structures to seman-
tic relations, and which are also used to handle those
structures not explicitly addressed by FrameNet or
WordNet.
In this section, we describe the type of infor-
mation extracted from these knowledge bases, and
show how this information is encoded in a format
accessible to the semantic parser.
3.1 Frame Identification and Semantic Role
Assignment
FrameNet (Johnson et al, 2002) provides the
knowledge needed to identify case frames and se-
mantic roles. FrameNet is based on the theory of
frame semantics, and defines a sentence level on-
tology. In frame semantics, a frame corresponds to
an interaction and its participants, both of which
denote a scenario, in which participants play some
kind of roles. A frame has a name, and we use this
name to identify the semantic relation that groups
together the semantic roles. In FrameNet, nouns,
verbs and adjectives can be used to identify frames.
Each annotated sentence in FrameNet exempli-
fies a possible syntactic realization for the seman-
tic roles associated with a frame for a given target
word. By extracting the syntactic features and cor-
responding semantic roles from all annotated sen-
tences in the FrameNet corpus, we are able to auto-
matically build a large set of rules that encode the
possible syntactic realizations of semantic frames.
In our implementation, we use only verbs as
target words for frame identification. Currently,
FrameNet defines about 1700 verbs attached to 230
different frames. To extend the parser coverage to
a larger subset of English verbs, we are using Verb-
Net (Kipper et al, 2000), which allows us to handle
a significantly larger set of English verbs.
VerbNet is a verb lexicon compatible with Word-
Net, but with explicitly stated syntactic and se-
mantic information using Levin?s verb classification
(Levin, 1993). The fundamental assumption is that
the syntactic frames of a verb as an argument-taking
element are a direct reflection of the underlying se-
mantics. Therefore verbs in the same VerbNet class
usually share common FrameNet frames, and have
the same syntactic behavior. Hence, rules extracted
from FrameNet for a given verb can be easily ex-
tended to verbs in the same VerbNet class. To en-
sure a correct outcome, we have manually validated
the FrameNet-VerbNet mapping, and corrected the
few discrepancies that were observed between Verb-
Net classes and FrameNet frames.
3.1.1 Rules Learned from FrameNet
FrameNet data ?is meant to be lexicographically rel-
evant, not statistically representative? (Johnson et
al., 2002), and therefore we are using FrameNet as
a starting point to derive rules for a rule-based se-
mantic parser.
To build the rules, we are extracting several syn-
tactic features. Some are explicitly encoded in
FrameNet, such as the grammatical function (GF)
and phrase type (PT) features.
In addition, other syntactic features are extracted
from the sentence context. One such feature is the
relative position (RP) to the target word. Sometimes
the same syntactic constituent may play different se-
mantic roles according to its position with respect
to the target word. For instance the sentences: I pay
you. and You pay me. have different roles assigned
to the same lexical unit you based on the relative
position with respect to the target word pay.
Another feature is the voice of the sentence. Con-
sider these examples: I paid Mary 500 dollars. and
I was paid by Mary 500 dollars. In these two sen-
tences, I has the same values for the features GF, PT
and RP, but it plays completely different roles in the
same frame because of the difference of voice.
If the phrase type is prepositional phrase (PP), we
also record the actual preposition that precedes the
phrase. Consider these examples: I was paid for my
work. and I was paid by Mary. The prepositional
phrases in these examples have the same values for
the features GF, PT, and RP, but different preposi-
tions differentiate the roles they should play.
After we extract all these syntactic features, the
semantic role is appended to the rule, which creates
a mapping from syntactic features to semantic roles.
Feature sets are arranged in a list, the order of
which is identical to that in the sentence. The or-
der of sets within the list is important, as illustrated
by the following example: ?I give the boy a ball.?
Here, the boy and a ball have the same features
as described above, but since the boy occurs be-
fore a ball, then the boy plays the role of recipi-
ent. Altogether, the rule for a possible realization
of a frame exemplified by a tagged sentence is an
ordered sequence of syntactic features with their se-
mantic roles.
For instance, Table 1 lists the syntactic and se-
mantic features extracted from FrameNet for the
sentence I had chased Selden over the moor.
I had chased Selden over the moor
GF Ext obj comp
PT NP Target NP PP
Position before after after
Voice active
PP over
Role Theme Goal Path
Table 1: Example sentence with syntactic and se-
mantic features
The corresponding formalized rule for this sen-
tence is:
[active, [ext,np,before,theme], [obj,np,
after,goal], [comp,pp,after,over,path]]
In FrameNet, there are multiple annotated sen-
tences for each frame to demonstrate multiple pos-
sible syntactic realizations. All possible realizations
of a frame are collected and stored in a list for that
frame, which also includes the target word, its syn-
tactic category, and the name of the frame. All the
frames defined in FrameNet are transformed into
this format, so that they can be easily handled by
the rule-based semantic parser.
3.2 Word Level Knowledge
WordNet (Miller, 1995) is the resource used to iden-
tify shallow semantic features that can be attached
to lexical units. For instance, attribute relations,
adjective/adverb classifications, and others, are se-
mantic features extracted from WordNet and stored
together with the words, so that they can be directly
used in the parsing process.
All words are uniformly defined, regardless of
their class. Features are assigned to each word, in-
cluding syntactic and shallow semantic features, in-
dicating the functions played by the word. Syntactic
features are used by the feature-augmented syntac-
tic analyzer to identify grammatical errors and pro-
duce syntactic information for semantic role assign-
ment. Semantic features encode lexical semantic in-
formation extracted from WordNet that is used to
determine semantic relations between words in var-
ious situations.
Features can be arbitrarily defined, as long as
there are rules to handle them. The features we
define encode information about the syntactic
category of a word, number and countability for
nouns, transitivity and form for verbs, type, degree,
and attribute for adjectives and adverbs, and others.
Table 2 lists the main features used for content
words.
Feature Values
Nouns
Number singular/plural
Countability countable/uncountable
Verbs
Transitivity transitive/intransitive/double transitive
Form normal/infi nitive/present
participle/past participle
Adjectives
Type descriptive/restrictive/referential
Attribute arbitrary
Degree base/comparative/superlative
Adverbs
Type descriptive/restrictive/referential
Attribute arbitrary
Degree base/comparative/superlative
Table 2: Features for content words
For example, for the word dog, the entry in the
lexicon is defined as:
lex(dog,W):- W= [parse:dog, cat:noun,
num:singular, count:countable].
Here, the category (cat) is defined as noun, the
number (num) is singular, and we also record the
countability (count)1.
For adjectives, the value of the attribute feature
is also stored, which is provided by the attribute re-
lation in WordNet. This relation links a descriptive
adjective to the attribute (noun) it modifies, such as
slow ? speed. For example, for the adjective slow,
the entry in the lexicon is defined as:
lex(slow,W):- W= [parse:slow, cat:adj,
attr:speed, degree:base, type:descriptive].
Here, the category (cat) is defined as adjective,
the type is descriptive, degree is base form. We also
record the attr feature, which is derived from the at-
tribute relation in WordNet, and links a descriptive
adjective to the attribute (noun) it modifies, such as
slow? speed.
We are also exploiting the transitional relations
from adverbs to adjectives and to nouns. We noticed
that some descriptive adverbs have correspondence
to descriptive adjectives, which in turn are linked to
nouns by the attribute relation. Using these transi-
tional links, we derive relations like: slowly? slow
? speed. A typical descriptive adverb is defined as
follows:
lex(slowly,W):- W= [parse:slowly, cat:adv,
attr:speed, degree:base, type:descriptive].
In addition to incorporating semantic information
from WordNet into the lexicon, this word level on-
tology is also used to derive default rules, as dis-
cussed later.
3.3 Hand-coded Knowledge
The FrameNet database encodes various syntac-
tic realizations only for semantic roles within a
frame. Syntax-semantics mappings other than se-
mantic roles are manually encoded as rules inte-
grated in the syntactic-semantic analyzer. The an-
alyzer determines the syntactic structure of the sen-
tence, and once a particular syntactic constituent
is identified, its corresponding mapping rules are
immediately applied. The syntactic constituent is
1The value for the feature (countability) is obtained
from word properties stored in the Link parser dictionaries
(http://www.link.cs.cmu.edu/link/). The Link dictionaries are
also used to derive the lists of words to be stored in the lexi-
con. Note however that the Link parser itself is not used in the
parsing process.
then translated into its corresponding semantic con-
stituent, together with the relevant semantic infor-
mation.
Some semantic relations can be directly derived
from syntactic patterns. For example, a restrictive
relative clause such as ?the man that you see? serves
as a referential modifier. An adverbial clause be-
ginning with ?because? is a modifier describing the
?reason? of the interaction. The inflection from
?apple? to ?apples? adds an attributive modifier of
quantity to the entity ?apple?.
However, syntactic relations may often introduce
semantic ambiguity, with multiple possible interpre-
tations. To handle these cases, we encode rules that
describe all possible interpretations of any given
structure, and then use lexical semantic informa-
tion as selectional restrictions for ambiguity reso-
lution. For instance, in ?a book on Chinese his-
tory?, on Chinese history describes the topic of the
book and this interpretation can be uniquely deter-
mined by noting that history is not a physical object,
and thus the interpretation of on Chinese history as
describing location is semantically anomalous. In-
stead, in ?a book on the computer?, on the computer
may describe a location, but it could also describe
the book topic, and hence the correct interpretation
of this sentence cannot be determined without ad-
ditional context. In such cases, the semantic parser
produces all possible interpretations, allowing sys-
tems that use the semantic parser?s output to deter-
mine the right interpretation that best fits the appli-
cation at hand.
Selectional restrictions ? as part of the hand-
coded knowledge ? are used for both semantic
role identification and syntax-semantics translation.
These additional rules are needed to supplement the
information encoded in FrameNet, since FrameNet
only annotates syntactic features, which often times
do not provide enough information for identifying
correct semantic roles.
Consider for example ?I break the window? vs.
?The hammer breaks the window?. According to
our semantic parser, the participants in the interac-
tion ?break? have exactly the same syntactic fea-
tures in both sentences, but they play different se-
mantic roles (?I? plays the agent role while ?ham-
mer? plays the instrument role), since they belong
to different ontological categories: ?I? refers to a
person and ?hammer? refers to a tool. This interpre-
tation is not possible using only FrameNet informa-
tion, and thus we fill the gap by attaching selectional
restrictions to the rules extracted from FrameNet.
The definition of selectional restriction is based
on WordNet 2.0 noun hierarchy. We say that en-
tity E belongs to the ontological category C if the
noun E is a child node of C in the WordNet seman-
tic hierarchy of nouns. For example, if we define
the ontological category for the role ?instrument? as
instrumentality, then all hyponyms of instrumental-
ity can play this role, while other nouns like ?boy?,
which are not part of the instrumentality category
will be rejected. Selectional restrictions are defined
using a Disjunctive Normal Form (DNF) in the fol-
lowing format:
[Onto(ID,P),Onto(ID,P),...],[Onto(ID,P),...],...
Here, ?Onto? is a noun and ID is its Word-
Net sense, which uniquely identifies Onto as a
node in the semantic network. ?P? can be set
to p (positive) or n (negative), denoting if a noun
should belong to the given category or not. For
example, [person(1,n),object(1,p)],[substance(1,p)]
means that the noun should belong to object(sense
#1) but not person(sense #1)2, or it should belong
to substance(sense #1). This information is added
to the rules derived from FrameNet, and therefore
after this step, a complete FrameNet rule entry is:
[Voice,[GF,PT,SelectionalRestriction,Role],...].
4 Semantic Parsing
The general procedure of semantic parsing consists
of three main steps3: (1) The syntactic-semantic
analyzer analyzes the syntactic structure, and uses
hand-coded rules as well as lexical semantic knowl-
edge to identify some semantic relations between
constituents. It also prepares syntactic features for
semantic role assignment in the next step. (2) The
role assigner uses rules extracted from FrameNet,
and assigns semantic roles for identified partici-
pants, based on their syntactic features as produced
in the first step. (3) For those constituents not exem-
plified in FrameNet, we apply default rules to decide
their default meaning.
4.1 Feature Augmented Syntactic-Semantic
Analyzer
The analyzer is implemented as a bottom-up chart
parsing algorithm based on features. We include
rules of syntax-semantics mappings in the unifica-
tion based formalism. The parser analyzes syntac-
tic relations and immediately applies corresponding
mapping rules to obtain semantic relations when a
2person(sense #1) is a child node of object(sense #1) in
WordNet
3The parsing algorithm is implemented as a rule-based sys-
tem using a declarative programming language Prolog.
syntactic relation is identified. Most semantic rela-
tions (e.g. various modifiers) are identified in this
step, except semantic role annotation and applica-
tion of default rules, which are postponed for a later
stage. The analyzer generates an intermediate for-
mat, where target words and arguments are explic-
itly tagged with their syntactic and semantic fea-
tures, so that they can be matched against the rules
derived from FrameNet. We are using a feature-
based analyzer that accomplishes three main tasks:
4.1.1 Check if the sentence is grammatically
correct
The syntactic analyzer is based on a feature aug-
mented grammar, and therefore has the capability of
detecting if a sentence is grammatically correct (un-
like statistical parsers, which attempt to parse any
sentence, regardless of their well-formness). The
grammar consists of a set of rules defining how con-
stituents with different syntactic or semantic fea-
tures can unify with each other.
By defining a grammar in this way, using fea-
tures, once the right features are selected, the an-
alyzer can reject some grammatically incorrect sen-
tences such as: I have much apples., You has my
car., and some semantically anomalous sentences:
The technology is very military.4.
4.1.2 Provide features for semantic role
assignment
Through syntactic-semantic analysis in the first
step, sentences are transformed into a format
in which target words and syntactic constituents
are explicitly tagged with their features. Unlike
FrameNet ? which may also assign roles to adverbs,
we only use the subject, object(s) and prepositional
phrases as potential participants in the interaction
for semantic role labeling5. The analyzer marks
verbs as target words for frame identification, iden-
tifies constituents for semantic role assignment, and
produces features such as GF, PT, Voice, Preposi-
tion, as well as ontological categories for each con-
stituent, in a format identical to the rules extracted
from FrameNet, so that they can be matched with
the frame definitions.
The ontological categories of constituents are
used to match selectional restrictions, and are au-
tomatically derived from the head word of the noun
phrase, or the head word of the noun phrase of the
prepositional phrase. For other constituents that
act like nouns, such as pronouns, infinitive forms,
gerunds, or noun clauses, we have manually defined
4Since military is not a descriptive adjective, it cannot be
modifi ed by very and predicative use is forbidden.
5Adverbs are treated as modifi ers.
ontological categories. For example, ?book? is the
ontological category of the phrase ?the interesting
book? and ?on the book?. ?person? is the ontolog-
ical category we manually define for the pronoun
?he?. We have also defined several special onto-
logical categories that are not in WordNet such as
any, which can be matched to any selectional re-
striction, nonperson, which means everything ex-
cept person, and others. Note that this matching
procedure also plays the role of a word sense dis-
ambiguation tool, by selecting only those categories
that match the current frame constituents. After
this step, target words and syntactic constituents can
be assigned with the corresponding case frame and
semantic roles during the second step of semantic
parsing.
4.1.3 Identify some semantic relations
Some semantic relations can be identified in this
phase. These semantic relations include word level
semantic relations, and some semantic relations
that have direct syntactic correspondence by using
syntax-semantics mapping rules. This phase can
also identify the function of the sentence such as
assertion, query, yn-query, command etc, based on
syntactic patterns of the sentence.
The output of the analyzer is an intermediate for-
mat suitable for the semantic parser, which contains
syntactic features and identified semantic relations.
For example, the output for the sentence ?He kicked
the old dog.? is:
[assertion,
[[tag, ext, np, person,
[[entity, [he], reference(third)],
[modification(attribute), quantity(single)],
[modification(attribute), gender (male)]]],
[target, v, kick, active, [kick]],
[modification(attribute), time (past)],
[tag, obj, np, dog,
[[modification(reference), reference(the)],
[modification(attribute), age(old)],
[target, n, dog, [dog]]]]]
]
4.2 Semantic Role Assignment
In the process of semantic role assignment, we first
start by identifying all possible frames, according
to the target word. Next, a matching algorithm is
used to find the most likely match among all rules
of these frames, to identify the correct frame (or
frames if several are possible), and assign semantic
roles.
In a sentence describing an interaction, we select
the verb as the target word, which triggers the sen-
tence level frame and uses the FrameNet rules of
that target word for matching. If the verb is not
defined in FrameNet and VerbNet, we use Word-
Net synonymy relation to check if any of its syn-
onyms is defined in FrameNet or VerbNet. If such
synonyms exist, their rules are applied to the tar-
get word. This approach is based on the idea in-
troduced by Levin that ?what enables a speaker to
determine the behavior of a verb is its meaning?
(Levin, 1993). Synonymous verbs always intro-
duce the same semantic frame and usually have the
same syntactic behavior. To minimize information
in the verb lexicon, non-frequently used verbs usu-
ally inherit a subset of the syntactic behavior of
their frequently used synonyms. Since VerbNet has
defined a framework of syntactic-semantic behav-
ior for these frequently used verbs, the behavior of
other related verbs can be quite accurately predicted
by using WordNet synonymy relations. Using this
approach, we achieve a coverage of more than 3000
verbal lexical units.
The matching algorithm relies on a scoring
scheme to evaluate the similarity between two se-
quences of features. The matching starts from the
first constituent of the sentence. It looks through
the list of entries in the rule and when a match is
found, it moves to the next constituent looking for
a new match. A match involves match of syntactic
features, as well as match of selectional restrictions.
An exact match means that both syntactic features
and selectional restrictions are matched, which in-
crements the score of matching by 3. We apply
selectional restriction by looking up the WordNet
noun hierarchies. If the node of the ontological cat-
egory is within the areas that the selectional restric-
tion describes, this is regarded as a match. When
applying selectional restrictions, due to polysemy
of the ontological entries, we try all possible senses,
starting from the most frequently used sense accord-
ing to WordNet, until one sense meets the selec-
tional restriction. If the syntactic features match ex-
actly, but none of the possible word senses meet the
selectional restrictions, this is regarded as a partial
match, which increments the score by 2.
Partial matching is also possible, for a relaxed
application of selectional restriction. This enables
anaphora and metaphor resolution, in which the
constituents have either unknown ontological cate-
gory, or inherit features from other ontological cat-
egories (by applying high level knowledge such as
personification). The number of subjects and ob-
jects as well as their relative positions should be
strictly obeyed, since any variations may result in
significant differences for semantic role labeling.
Prepositional phrases are free in their location be-
cause the preposition is already a unique identi-
fier. Finally, after all constituents have found their
match, if there are still remaining entries in the
rule, the total score is decreased by 1. This is a
penalty paid by partial matches, since additional
constituents may indicate different semantic role la-
beling, which may change the interpretation of the
entire sentence.
A polysemous verb may belong to multiple
frames, and a frame pertaining to a given target
word may have multiple possible syntactic realiza-
tions, exemplified by different sentences in the cor-
pus. We try to match the syntactic features in the in-
termediate format with all the rules of all the frames
available for the target word, and compare their
matching scores. The rule with the highest score
is selected, and used for semantic role assignment.
Through this scoring scheme, the matching algo-
rithm tries to maximize the utilization of syntactic
and semantic information available in the sentence,
to correctly identify case frames and semantic roles.
4.2.1 Walk-Through Example
Assume the following two rules, triggered for the
target word break:
1: [active,[ext,np,[[person(1,p)]],agent],
[obj,np,[[object(1,p)]],theme],
[comp,pp,with,[[instrumentality(3,p)]],
instrument]]
2: [[ext,np,[[instrumentality(3,p)]],instrument],
[obj,np,[[person(1,n),object(1,p)]],theme]]
3: [[ext,np,[[person(1,n),object(1,p)]],theme]]
And the sentences:
A: I break the window with a hammer
B: The hammer breaks the window
C: The window breaks on the wall
The features identified by the analyzer are:
A?:[[ext,np,active,person],
[obj,np,active,window],
[comp,pp,active,with,hammer]]
B?:[[ext,np,active,hammer],
[obj,np,active,window]]
C?:[[ext,np,active,window],
[comp,pp,on,wall]]
Using the matching/scoring algorithm, the score
for matching A? to rule 1 is determined as 9 since
there are 3 exact matches, and to rule 2 as 5 since
there is an exact match for ?the window? but a par-
tial match for ?I?. Hence, the matching algorithm
selects rule 1, and the semantic role for ?I? is agent.
Similarly, when we match B? to rule 1, we obtain a
score of 4, since there is an exact match for ?the
window?, a partial match for ?the hammer?, and
rule 1 has an additional entry for a prepositional
phrase, which decrements the score by 1. It makes
a larger score of 6 for matching with rule 2. There-
fore, for the second case, the role assigned to ?the
hammer? is instrument. Rule 3 is not applied to the
first two sentences since they have additional ob-
jects; similarly, rule 1 and 2 cannot be applied to
sentence C for the same reason. The first constituent
in C finds an exact match in rule 3 with a total score
of 3, and hence ?the window? is assigned the correct
role theme. The prepositional phrase ?on the wall?,
for which no entry for labeling a role is found in rule
3, will be handled by default rules (see Section 4.3).
Based on the principle of compositionality, mod-
ifiers and constituents assigned semantic roles can
describe interactions, so the semantic role assign-
ment is performed recursively, until all roles within
frames triggered by all target words are assigned.
4.3 Applying Default Rules
We always assign semantic roles to subjects and ob-
jects6, but only some prepositional phrases can in-
troduce semantic roles, as defined in the FrameNet
case frames. Other prepositional phrases function
as modifiers; in order to handle these constituents,
and allow for a complete semantic interpretation of
the sentence, we have defined a set of default rules
that are applied as the last step of the semantic pars-
ing process. For example, FrameNet defines a role
for the prepositional phrase on him in ?I depend
on him? but not for on the street in ?I walk on the
street?, because it does not play a role, but it is a
modifier describing a location. Since the role for
the prepositional phrase beginning with on is not de-
fined for the target word walk in FrameNet, we ap-
ply the default rule that ?on something? modifies the
location attribute of the interaction walk. Note that
we include selectional restriction in the default rule
since constituents with the same syntactic features
such as ?on Tuesday? and ?on the table? may have
obviously different semantic interpretations. An ex-
ample of a default rule is shown below, indicating
that the interpretation of a prepositional phrase fol-
lowed by a time period (where time period is an
ontological category from WordNet) is that of time
modifier:
DefaultRule([_,pp,_,on,Onto,_],time):-
SelectionalRestriction
(Onto,1,
[[time_period(1,p)]])
We have defined around 100 such default rules,
which are applied during the last step of the seman-
6Where a subject and object are usually realized by noun
phrases, noun clauses, or infi nitive forms.
tic parsing process.
5 Parser Output and Evaluation
We illustrate here the output of the semantic parser
on a natural language sentence, and show the
corresponding semantic structure and tree7. For
example, for the sentence I like to eat Mexican food
because it is spicy, the semantic parser produces the
following encoding of sentence type, frames, se-
mantic constituents and roles, and various attributes
and modifiers:
T = assertion
P =
[[experiencer, [[entity, [i], reference(first)],
[modification(attribute), quantity(single)]]],
[interaction(experiencer_subj),[love]],
[modification(attribute), time(present)],
[content, [
[interaction(ingestion), [eat]],
[ingestibles, [entity, [food]]
[[modification(restriction), [mexican]],
]]]],
[reason, [[agent, [[entity, [it],
reference(third)],
[modification(attribute), quantity(single)]]],
[description,
[modification(attribute), time(present)]],
[modification(attribute),
taste_property(spicy)]]]
]
The corresponding parse tree is shown in Figure 1.
ingestion ), [eat]interaction(
I love to eat Mexican food, because it is spicy.
{[I], reference(first)}
S?[assertion]
interaction( experiencer_subj ), [love]
{[it], reference(third)}
time(present)
quantity(single) {food}
{mexican}
taste_property(spicy)
ingestibles
experiencer content reason
am am
sm
am
Figure 1: Semantic parse tree (am = attributive modifi er,
rm = referential modifi er, sm = restrictive modifi er)
We have conducted evaluations of the semantic
role assignment algorithm on 350 sentences ran-
domly selected from FrameNet. The test sentences
were removed from the FrameNet corpus, and the
rules-extraction procedure described earlier in the
paper was invoked on this reduced corpus. All test
sentences were then semantically parsed, and full
semantic annotations were produced for each sen-
tence. Notice that the evaluation is conducted only
7The semantic parser was demonstrated in a major Natural
Language Processing conference, and can be also demonstrated
during the workshop.
for semantic role assignment ? since this is the only
information available in FrameNet. The other se-
mantic annotations produced by the parser (e.g. at-
tribute, gender, countability) are not evaluated at
this point, since there are no hand-validated anno-
tations of this kind available in current resources.
Both frames and frame elements are automati-
cally identified by the parser. Out of all the elements
correctly identified, we found that 74.5% were as-
signed with the correct role (this is therefore the
accuracy of role assignment), which compares fa-
vorably with previous results reported in the liter-
ature for this task. Notice also that since this is a
rule-based approach, the parser does not need large
amounts of annotated data, and it works well the
same for words for which only one or two sentences
are annotated.
6 Interface and Integration to Other
Systems
The semantic algorithm uses linguistic knowledge,
such as syntactic realization of semantic roles in a
case frame, syntax-semantics mappings, and lexical
semantic knowledge, to parse the semantic structure
of open text. It can be regarded as a shallow se-
mantic analyzer, which provides partial results for
higher level understanding systems that can effec-
tively utilize context, commonsense, and other types
of knowledge, to achieve final accurate meaning in-
terpretations, or use custom defined rules for high
level processing in particular domains.
The matching/scoring scheme integrated in our
algorithm can effectively identify the right semantic
interpretation, but some semantic ambiguity cannot
be resolved without enough context and common-
sense knowledge. For example, although the fa-
mous meaningless sentence ?colorless green ideas
sleep furiously? can be correctly identified as se-
mantically anomalous by the semantic parser, by
analyzing the syntactic behavior of ?sleep? and the
selectional restrictions that we attach to this frame,
the sentence ?I saw the man in the park with the
telescope? has several semantic interpretations. Ac-
cording to the commonsense knowledge that we en-
code in the semantic parser (mostly drawn from
WordNet), telescope is defined as a tool to see some-
thing, and we may infer that ?with telescope? in this
sentence describes an instrument of ?see?. How-
ever, without enough context, not even humans can
rule out the possibility that the ?telescope? is the
man?s possession, rather than an instrument for the
interaction ?see?. The semantic parser maintains all
possible interpretations that cannot be rejected by
their syntactic and shallow semantic patterns, and
rank all of them by their scores as the likelihood of
being the correct interpretation. Other systems can
use high level knowledge such as common sense,
context or user defined rules to choose the right in-
terpretation.
As an integral part of the parsing system, we pro-
vide several interfaces that allow other systems or
additional modules to change the behavior of the
parser based on their rules and knowledge. One
such interface is the ontochg predicate, which is
called whenever the ontological category is identi-
fied for a constituent during the syntactic-semantic
analysis. By default, it outputs the same ontolog-
ical category as identified by the parser, but other
systems can change the content of this predicate to
replace the ontological category identified by the
parser with other categories, according to their rules
and knowledge. This is particularly useful for inte-
grating add-ons capable of anaphora and metaphor
resolution. The adjatt predicate is another interface
for add-ons that can resolve polysemy of descriptive
adjectives and adverbs. Due to polysemy, some de-
scriptive adjectives and adverbs may modify differ-
ent attributes in different situations and sometimes
the resolution requires high level understanding us-
ing commonsense knowledge and context. These
interfaces make the semantic parser more flexible,
robust, and easier to integrate into other systems that
achieve high level meaning processing and under-
standing.
7 Related Work
There are several statistical approaches for auto-
matic semantic role labeling based on PropBank
and FrameNet. (Gildea and Jurafsky, 2000) pro-
posed a statistical approach based on FrameNet I
data for annotation of semantic roles. Fleischman
(Fleischman et al, 2003) used FrameNet annota-
tions in a maximum entropy framework. A more
flexible generative model is proposed in (Thomp-
son et al, 2003), where null-instantiated roles can
be also identified, and frames are not assumed to be
known a-priori. These approaches exclusively focus
on semantic roles labeling based on statistical meth-
ods, rather than analysis of the full structure of sen-
tence semantics. However, a rule-based approach
is closer to the way humans interpret the semantic
structure of a sentence. Moreover, as mentioned
earlier, the FrameNet data is not meant to be ?sta-
tistically representative? (Johnson et al, 2002), but
rather illustrative for various language constructs,
and therefore a rule-based approach is more suitable
for this lexical resource.
8 Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed an algorithm for open
text shallow semantic parsing. The algorithm has
the capability to analyze the semantic structure of
a sentence, and show how the meaning of the en-
tire sentence is composed of smaller semantic units,
linked by various semantic relations. The parsing
process utilizes linguistic knowledge, consisting of
rules derived from a frame dataset (FrameNet), a se-
mantic network (WordNet), as well as hand-coded
rules of syntax-semantics mappings, which encode
natural selectional restrictions. Parsing semantic
structures allows semantic units and constituents to
be accessed and processed in a more meaningful
way than syntactic parsing, and enables higher-level
text understanding applications. We believe that the
semantic parser will prove useful for a range of lan-
guage processing applications that require knowl-
edge of text meaning, including word sense disam-
biguation, information retrieval, question answer-
ing, machine translation, and others.
References
M. Fleischman, N. Kwon, and E. Hovy. 2003.
Maximum entropy models for FrameNet classi-
fication. In Proceedings of 2003 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing EMNLP-2003, Sapporo, Japan.
D. Gildea and D. Jurafsky. 2000. Automatic label-
ing of semantic roles. In Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Conference of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL 2000), pages 512?
520, Hong Kong, October.
C. Johnson, C. Fillmore, M. Petruck, C. Baker,
M. Ellsworth, J. Ruppenhofer, and E. Wood.
2002. FrameNet: Theory and Practice.
http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/ framenet.
K. Kipper, H.T.Dang, and M. Palmer. 2000. Class-
based construction of a verb lexicon. In Proceed-
ings of Seventeenth National Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence AAAI 2000, Austin,TX, July.
B. Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tion: A Preliminary Investigation. The Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
G. Miller. 1995. Wordnet: A lexical database.
Communication of the ACM, 38(11):39?41.
C. Thompson, R. Levy, and C. Manning. 2003. A
generative model for FrameNet semantic role la-
beling. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning ECML-
2003, Croatia.
