Inflectional Syncretism and Corpora 
D.Brown, C. Tiberius, G.G. Corbett 
Surrey Morphology Group 
University of Surrey 
Guildford, Surrey, UK 
GU2 7XH 
{d.brown,c.tiberius,g.corbett}@surrey.ac.uk  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a novel undertaking: 
comparing the relationship between 
grammatical ambiguity (syncretism) in nouns, 
as represented in a default inheritance 
hierarchy, with textual frequency distributions. 
In order to do this we consider a language with 
a reasonable number of grammatical 
distinctions and where syncretism occurs in 
different morphological classes. We  
investigated this relationship for Russian 
nouns. Our results suggest that there is an 
intricate relationship between textual 
frequency and inflectional syncretism. 
 
1 Introduction 
The treatment of syncretism, where a single form 
has more than one function, poses a particular 
challenge for theories of morphology. There are 
different ways of analyzing syncretism. One way is 
underspecification, where the form in question is 
treated as not realizing the syncretized functions. 
Another way is referrals (Zwicky 1985; Stump 
2001: 212-41), where the form is associated with a 
basic function, and other cells in the paradigm 
refer to the cell with this basic function.  Referrals 
are therefore asymmetrical in their nature, whereas 
underspecification is not. There is evidence that 
both types of analysis are required (Stump 2001: 
212-41) and Evans, Brown & Corbett  (2001: 216) 
argue that a kind of underspecified referral is 
required for analyzing syncretisms in Slovene and 
Dalabon. Therefore we cannot dispense with one at 
the expense of the other. It is therefore worthwhile 
examining whether the theoretical asymmetry of 
referrals can be observed in language use. 
We consider the relationship between the 
frequency distributions of noun syncretism in texts 
and a formal implemented model of Russian 
inflection, created for other purposes. In particular 
we determine whether the asymmetry of referrals 
is reflected in the frequency distributions (i.e. does 
the referred-to cell in the paradigm typically occur 
more frequently than the cell which refers to it). 
Russian is an ideal candidate for testing this 
relationship, as it is a language with substantial 
paradigms and extensive syncretism of different 
types. 
We used a manually compiled dataset (Corbett, 
Hippisley, Brown and Marriott 2001) of the most 
frequent nouns derived from the Uppsala corpus 
(L?nngren 1993; Maier 1994) containing 5440 
noun lexemes, accounting for 243,000 word forms 
from the entire one million word corpus. On the 
basis of this dataset, we tested a set of hypotheses 
and established a model describing the relationship 
between paradigm structure and textual use in 
Russian nouns. 
We cross-validate our results by testing the 
model on a pilot version of the Russian Standard 
Corpus (Sharoff 2004) which has been fully 
lemmatized and tagged. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
outlines the problem. We describe what we mean 
by syncretism and frequency and define a set of 
hypotheses. In Section 3, we test our hypotheses on 
the two corpora. Section 4 concludes the paper. 
2 Morphological Theory and Frequency 
2.1 Syncretism 
Grammatical paradigms define the relationship 
between functions and forms. A reasonable 
assumption would be that functions and forms 
would match up one-to-one. Contrary to these 
expectations, however, languages often fail to meet 
this apparent ideal of one form for every function. 
In Russian nouns, for instance, there is a smaller 
number of forms. 
    
    
 
     
     
    
   
 
 
 
         Functions          Forms  
Figure 1: More functions than forms 
 
Russian nouns have two number values (singular 
and plural) and six cases (nominative, accusative, 
genitive, dative, instrumental, and locative) which 
can be combined yielding 12 combinations of case 
and number. Despite the 12 combinations of case 
and number, a typical noun does not have more 
than 10 forms (Figure 1) in Russian1, but the class 
in question will determine where the distinctions 
between functions are collapsed. For example, the 
form ??????? (komnate) ?room? is ambiguous 
between dative singular and locative singular, the 
form ????? (kosti) ?bone? is three-way ambiguous; 
it can function as a dative singular, a locative 
singular and a genitive singular. 
Similarly, in English we expect that a verb will 
have forms for the present tense, the past tense and 
the passive participle. Given an ambiguous form, 
such as hit (as in ?Mary hit the nail with a hammer? 
as opposed to ?Mary was hit by a meteorite?) we 
assume that there are two or more separate 
functions associated with it. This is because other 
verbs have different forms, such as the verb eat (as 
in ?John often ate chocolate? as opposed to ?The 
chocolate was eaten by John?). 
Formally syncretism can be treated as 
underspecification, where the multiple functions of 
the form have equal importance, or it can be seen 
in terms of referral (Zwicky 1985; Stump 2001: 
212-41), where the form is associated with a basic 
function, and other cells in the paradigm refer to 
the cell with this basic function. 
Underspecification implies equal status for the 
functions in question, whereas the referral-based 
approach attributes greater importance to one 
function. 
One measure of the relative importance of 
grammatical functions is textual frequency. We 
can make two different predictions about how the 
formal distinction between underspecification and 
referrals is reflected in textual frequency: 
Prediction 1) both functions are of equal 
importance (underspecification) and therefore the 
frequency of use is distributed equally between 
functions; or Prediction 2) one function is more 
important than another (referral) and therefore the 
frequency of use is not distributed equally between 
functions. 
In this paper we test these predictions for 
Russian nouns. As the basis for our predictions, we 
start from a formal theoretical model of Russian 
morphology developed within the Network 
Morphology framework. 
                                                     
1 We exclude from consideration here the question of 
the second locative and the second genitive. 
2.2 Inheritance Hierarchy 
In this model four noun classes are distinguished 
for Russian as is shown in Table 1.2 
 
 I IV II III 
 
 
Sing 
???o? 
zavod 
?factory' 
???? 
delo 
'thing' 
?o????? 
komnata 
'room' 
?????  
kost? 
'bone' 
Nom ???o?  
zavod 
???? 
delo 
?o????? 
komnata 
????? 
kost? 
Acc ???o? 
zavod 
???? 
delo 
?o????? 
komnatu 
????? 
kost? 
Gen ???o?? 
zavoda 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Dat ???o?? 
zavodu 
???? 
delu 
?o????e 
komnate 
?o??? 
kosti 
Instr ???o??? 
zavodom 
????? 
delom 
?o?????? 
komnatoj 
?o???? 
kost?ju 
Loc ???o?? 
zavode 
???? 
dele 
?o????e 
komnate 
?o??? 
kosti 
     
Plur     
Nom ???o?? 
zavody 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Acc ???o?? 
zavody 
???? 
dela 
?o????? 
komnaty 
?o??? 
kosti 
Gen ???o??? 
zavodov 
??? 
del 
?o???? 
komnat 
?????? 
kostej 
Dat ???o??? 
zavodam 
????? 
delam 
?o?????? 
komnatam 
?????? 
kostjam 
Instr ???o???? 
zavodami 
?????? 
delami 
?o??????? 
komnatami 
??????? 
kostjami 
Loc ???o??? 
zavodax 
????? 
delax 
?o?????? 
komnatax 
?????? 
kostjax 
Table 1: Forms for major noun classes in 
Russian 
We see that Class III nouns such as ????? 'bone' 
have the highest ambiguity, three forms are used 
for six functions, one for the nominative and 
accusative, one for the genitive, the dative and the 
locative, and one for the instrumental. Class II 
nouns such as ?o????? have syncretism in the 
dative and locative singular. Russian also has 
syncretism related to animacy. In the singular in 
Russian, masculine animate nouns, which belong 
to Class I, form their accusative on the basis of the 
genitive form. For classes IV and III, which are 
associated with neuter and feminine genders 
respectively, there is always nominative-accusative 
syncretism. Class II, of course, has a separate form 
for the accusative. In the plural, the situation is 
more straightforward: any animate noun forms its 
accusative on the basis of the genitive, and any 
inanimate noun forms its accusative on the basis of 
the nominative. In the above table only examples 
of inanimate nouns are given. 
Counts based on both corpora show that, about 
38%3 of token occurrences in the singular in 
                                                     
2 We use the following abbreviations: NOM ? 
nominative, ACC ? accusative, GEN ? genitive, DAT ? 
dative, INSTR ? instrumental, LOC ? locative. Forms 
are given in Cyrillic and in transliteration. 
3 This figure is obtained by summing the counts for 
Russian are morphologically ambiguous 
(syncretic). Hence, in an apparently 
morphologically well-equipped language such as 
Russian, a great deal still depends on syntactic 
context. 
Our default inheritance analysis of Russian treats 
syncretisms within paradigms as asymmetrical, in 
that a particular form is considered to have one 
function as basic. If this paradigmatic asymmetry 
is reflected in frequency distributions, then 
Prediction 2 would be the correct one. As the 
syncretisms within paradigms differ from class to 
class, we also have to take into account the 
hierarchical structure of morphological classes. 
Figure 2 represents the hierarchical structure of our 
model of Russian noun morphology using the 
Network Morphology framework (Corbett and 
Fraser 1993), with example lexemes at the bottom 
of the hierarchy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Inheritance structure for Russian 
nouns 
 Two points should be stressed. First, the 
original analysis was carried out with the goal of 
contributing to morphological theory, a goal which 
was achieved (see comments in Stump 2001:275-
6). Second, in order to demonstrate that the 
analysis was valid, a substantial fragment of 
Russian, sufficient to include all instances of 
                                                                                   
paradigm cells which share the same form and dividing 
this by the overall number of singular tokens. In other 
words we use the sum of the token occurrences of the 
following ambiguous forms: i) all dative and locative 
singular occurrences of Class II nouns; ii) all 
nominative and accusative singular occurrences of Class 
IV nouns, Class III nouns and Class I nouns which are 
inanimate; iii) all accusative and genitive singular 
occurrences of Class I nouns which are animate; iv) all 
genitive, dative and locative singular nouns from Class 
III. It is likely that one can disambiguate most 
morphological syncretisms in Russian readily from the 
syntactic context, but our purpose is to demonstrate how 
often a morphologically well endowed language such as 
Russian still leaves much work to syntax.  
irregularity was implemented in the lexical 
knowledge representation language DATR (Evans 
and Gazdar 1996) and is available at the DATR 
archive from the DATR webpages 
(http://www.datr.org). The morphological model is 
structured as a hierarchy in which information is 
pushed as far up the hierarchy as it can go 
capturing as many generalisations as possible. 
Thus at the top of the hierarchy in Figure 2  we 
find a information associated with all nouns (such 
as the inflections for the dative, instrumental and 
locative plural) and that information is propagated 
to others by inheritance, and at the bottom we find 
information which is unique to particular instances. 
Node N_I (representing Class I) and node N_IV 
(representing Class IV) both inherit from node N_0 
(representing Class O), sharing the inflections for 
the genitive, dative, instrumental and locative 
singular. DATR is a default inheritance formalism, 
which means that information specified under a 
particular class node takes precedence over that 
what is inherited, overriding the inherited 
information. This means that, for example, the 
value for locative singular which is stem+? in three 
of the four inflectional classes can be stated under 
the noun node and its value only needs to be 
overridden for Class III by stem+i. 
We will use this model and link frequency 
information to the different components of the 
noun hierarchy, i.e nouns at the top, the different 
noun classes and the lexemes belonging to these 
noun classes at the bottom.  
 
2.3 Research Questions 
To check our predictions, we defined a set of 
hypotheses which we tested on two sets of corpus 
data. 
 
The hierarchical organisation of paradigms. 
Our inheritance model of Russian morphology 
involves a hierarchical organisation above the level 
of traditional word classes. A major question is 
whether this hierarchical organisation of paradigms 
is reflected by differences in frequency of use. 
Thus we will investigate the frequency of use of 
grammatical functions for each point on the 
hierarchy in Figure 2, and in particular we shall 
look at the frequency of use of those functions 
which are syncretic (grammatically ambiguous) at 
various points on that hierarchy. This research 
question will be studied by testing the following 
null hypothesis:  
 
H0-1: Nodes at the same point in the 
hierarchy show no difference in frequency 
NOUN 
N_0 N_II N_III 
N_I N_IV ???????/komnata 
?????/zavod ????/delo 
?????/kost? 
distribution for any elements of their 
paradigms.  
 
However, related research by Corbett et al
(2001) who investigate the relationship between 
irregularity types and frequency suggests that we 
will find significant differences between nodes in 
the hierarchy. We therefore predict that the null 
hypothesis is false. There should be differences in 
frequency distributions for paradigms between 
nodes at the same point on the hierarchy.  For 
example, for nominals there should be differences 
between nouns and adjectives. Within nouns, there 
should be differences between N_O (class N_I and 
class N_IV combined), class N_II and class N_III. 
This leads us on to a more specific hypothesis that 
specifies the nature of these differences. 
 
H1-1: If two or more functions f1... fz 
share the same form in one class, but not in 
another, then the combined relative 
frequency of those functions is higher for 
the classes where they are differentiated. 
 
Syncretism and asymmetry of use 
Do syncretisms occur where one function is 
more important than the other(s), but not where 
equal in status (as defined in terms of frequency of 
use)? Here we formulate the following null 
hypothesis: 
 
H0-2: Where two or more functions 
share the same form, there is no difference 
in the relative frequency of those 
functions. 
 
Again, we expect the null hypothesis to be false. 
 
The context of syncretism 
Which category is the most important factor for 
syncretism? According to Haspelmath (2001: 241) 
the frequency of a category determines the 
prevalence of syncretism within that category. 
Frequent grammatical categories, such as singular 
number, are more differentiated and thus show less 
syncretism than less frequent categories. This 
research question will be tested by the following 
null hypothesis.  
 
H0-3: The frequency of a category has 
no influence on the prevalence of 
syncretism within that category.  
 
Following Haspelmath (2001), we predict that 
the null hypothesis is false. Based on our findings 
in Corbett et al(2001) we would predict that 
syncretism behaves in a similar way to various 
types of irregularity. That is, examples of 
syncretisms are found in the singular and plural in 
Russian, and the most important factor influencing 
syncretism will be the relative frequency 
distribution of the number subparadigm in which 
the syncretism is found, rather than the relative 
frequency distribution of the syncretic cells in 
question. Note that this hypothesis interacts with 
hypothesis H1-1. If there were no evidence for that 
hypothesis, but there were evidence that H0-3 is 
false, then this would suggest that the number 
subparadigm is the most important factor.  
 
3 Corpus Study and Results 
To test the above hypotheses we looked at two 
separate sets of corpus data so as to cross-validate 
our results.  
3.1 Corpus data 
The first dataset consists of nouns from the 
Uppsala corpus. The Uppsala corpus is a set of 
sub-corpora of various genres, containing 
approximately one million words (L?nngren 1993, 
Maier 1994).  The dataset was manually 
constructed  by Andrew Hippisley4 to investigate 
the relationship between number availability and 
number use. It is in the form of a spreadsheet and 
contains frequency information, case and  number 
features, as well as semantic information, i.e. 
animacy category for 5440 lexemes, accounting for 
around 243,000 word forms from the entire one 
million word Uppsala corpus. The lexemes 
recorded in the dataset are those represented by  
word forms occurring in total at least five times. 
Lexemes occurring less than five times were 
excluded to avoid large standard errors in the 
estimates which occur when observed numbers in 
each category are small (Corbett, Hippisley, Bown 
and Marriott 2001:208). 
The lexemes in the original dataset were 
transliterated. We have converted them into 
Unicode Cyrillic using the simplest encoding of 
unicode in data files, the ?ucs2? encoding. In 
addition, we have included class information 
according to the Network Morphology analysis 
(Figure 2). 
The second dataset consists of the nouns of a 
pilot version of the Russian Standard Corpus 
which is fully lemmatized and tagged. Based on 
this information a spreadsheet was created similar 
to the one we have for the Uppsala corpus. For 
consistency, we only took those nouns into account 
                                                     
4 The dataset is available at 
http://www.surrey.ac.uk/LIS/SMG, along 
with a readme file. 
which occur more than five times. This results in 
3350 lexemes, making up 126,598 word forms of 
the 500 000 word corpus. 
 
3.2 Results 
We tested the hypotheses given in Section 2.3. 
We repeat the hypotheses here with the cross-
validated results. 
 
Hierarchical organisation of paradigms 
H0-1: Nodes at the same point in the 
hierarchy show no difference in frequency 
distribution for any elements of their 
paradigms.  
 
As expected, hypothesis H0-1is false. There are 
differences in the frequency distributions, both in 
relative and absolute terms, of grammatical 
functions for classes represented as nodes at the 
same point in the hierarchy in Figure 2. For 
instance, there are differences in frequency of the 
singular and plural between noun classes at the 
same level in the hierarchy (See Table 2 in the 
Appendix). Class III has the lowest number of 
plurals in absolute terms (3421 in corpus 1 and 954 
in corpus 2), and also in relative5 terms (15.6% in 
corpus 1 and 14.5% in corpus 2). This contrasts 
with Class O which has the highest number of 
plurals in absolute terms (42677 in corpus 1 and 
12241 in corpus 2), and also in relative terms 
(30.3% in corpus 1 and 23.9% in corpus 2).  
We now turn to the dependent hypothesis H1-1 
 
Hierarchical organisation of paradigms(cont.) 
H1-1: If two or more functions f1... fz 
share the same form in one class, but not in 
another, then the combined relative 
frequency of those functions is higher for 
the classes where they are differentiated. 
 
In order to test this, we looked at the frequency 
distributions of the genitive singular, dative 
singular and locative singular for the different 
inflectional classes and calculated the proportion of 
the singular paradigm which they account for (See 
Appendix). As Class III has syncretism of all three 
of these functions, Class II has syncretism of two 
of them (dative singular and locative singular), and 
Class O differentiates all three, if the hypothesis 
were correct, then Class O should have the highest 
combined relative frequency for these functions, 
thereby accounting for a greater proportion of its 
singular paradigm. However, there is no evidence 
to support hypothesis H1-1, because the combined 
                                                     
5 Relative frequency with respect to the class. 
relative frequency differs for the classes across the 
two corpora. In corpus 1 Class O shows the highest 
relative frequency, Class II the next, and Class III 
the least high relative frequency (which would 
support the hypothesis). In contrast, in corpus 2 
Class III shows the highest relative frequency for 
the three functions. 
The next hypothesis concerns the relationship 
between syncretism and the importance of the 
functions involved. If the hypothesis is false, then 
this is support for prediction 2 that syncretisms  
occur where one function is more frequent than 
another. 
 
Assymmetry of use 
H0-2: Where two or more functions share the 
same form, there is no difference in the relative 
frequency of those functions. 
 
Again, we looked at the frequency distributions 
of the genitive, dative and locative singular. In 
Table 1, we saw that the lexemes belonging to 
Class N_I and Class N_IV (which are grouped 
together under a Class N_O in Figure 2) have the 
same forms, but they unambiguously distinguish 
all three cases. Class N_II has ambiguity between 
dative singular and locative singular, and Class 
N_III completely fails to differentiate the three 
combinations. In the default inheritance 
representation of Russian nominal morphology, the 
default specification of locative singular at NOUN 
is stem + e, as this is used across three inflectional 
classes. In classes II and III, where the dative 
singular has the same ending as the locative 
singular, the dative singular will take over its 
ending from the locative singular, and in Class III 
where the locative singular has the same ending as 
the genitive singular, the locative singular will take 
over its ending from the genitive singular. 
Hence, where there is syncretism, we can claim 
that a form is primarily associated with a particular 
function, but may be used by another function. In 
the case of Class III, composition of the referrals 
means that the dative singular takes over the 
locative singular, and this in turn takes over the 
genitive singular, giving the form stem + i for all 
three functions. According to prediction 2, we 
expect that this asymmetry, where one cell refers 
to another for its form, is reflected in the frequency 
of use of the particular functions in question. This 
is true for Class III, which has all three functions 
syncretic. But it is also true for nouns as a whole, 
including the Class O which has different forms for 
each function. In Figure 3 we see a decrease in 
frequency of use from genitive singular, through 
locative singular to dative singular. 
 
 0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
50000
GenSg LocSg DatSg  
Figure 3: Frequency related to the NOUN node 
 
Hence, if there is a relationship between 
syncretism and frequency, this asymmetry may be 
a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition. 
The final hypothesis we tested concerned the 
frequency of the category which provides a context 
for syncretism. 
 
H0-3: The frequency of a category has 
no influence on the prevalence of 
syncretism within that category.  
 
Class III which has the greatest amount of 
ambiguity in the singular has the lowest absolute 
frequency of singulars. This means that the 
hypothesis H0-3 is false. 
 
A note on animacy 
Animacy is a distinction which is orthogonal to the 
individual morphological classes in Figure 2. We 
were not in a position to cross-validate the results 
for nominative-accusative syncretism in inanimate 
nouns, as only corpus 2 has disambiguated the 
nominative and accusative for inanimates. The 
results for corpus 2 suggest (Table 4), however, 
that there is no directional effect for inanimates. 
We were in a position to check the animates, for 
which the genitive-accusative syncretism had been 
disambiguated in both corpora. 
In the DATR representation there is a 
referral of the accusative singular for masculines of 
Class I to the genitive singular, and there is a 
referral of the accusative plural to the genitive 
plural for all animate nouns. Our corpus study 
showed that the null hypothesis H0-2 is also false 
when we look at animates in the plural: for 
animates the accusative plural is less frequent than 
the genitive plural in both corpora (Table 5), 
which, given the referral of the accusative plural to 
genitive plural, is the same effect we have seen for 
genitive singular, locative singular and dative 
singular in Figure 3 (the referred-to element of the 
paradigm is more frequent). Recall that, in the 
singular, only masculine nouns have genitive-
accusative syncretism for animates. Our results 
proved to be very interesting for the singular. For 
animate nouns as a whole (i.e. across all the 
morphological classes), the two corpora did not 
match: while genitive singular was more frequent 
in corpus 1, there was little difference between 
genitive singular and accusative singular for all 
animates in corpus 2 (Table 5). However, if the 
comparison is restricted to precisely the class 
which may have the genitive-accusative 
syncretism, namely Class I, the two corpora match 
in that they both show genitive singular as more 
frequent (Table 6).  
4 Conclusion 
We wished to see whether there is a relationship 
between syncretism and its representation in a 
model based on a default inheritance hierarchy.  
We investigated this relationship for Russian 
nouns. Our results showed that there is a difference 
in the frequency distributions for particular 
functions at the different nodes in the hierarchy. It 
is also true that there is a relationship with 
syncretism when one compares classes at the same 
point in the hierarchy. Class III compared with 
classes II and O had the lowest absolute frequency 
for both singulars and plurals, and the most 
syncretism in the singular. This could suggest that 
low absolute frequency is a necessary condition for 
syncretism.  
We have also found evidence that the frequency 
of use of a particular function reflects 
directionality in the formal model, in that the 
function which is referred to for its form (the 
function with which a form is pimarily associated) 
has higher textual frequency. This may be a 
necessary condition, but it is not a sufficient one. 
Our results show that there is an intricate 
relationship between syncretism and frequency, 
one which should be investigated further. 
5 Acknowledgements 
The research reported here is supported by the 
Economic and Social Research Council (UK) 
under grant RES-000-23-0082 ?Paradigms in Use?. 
Their support is gratefully acknowledged. We 
would like to thank Anja Belz, Kees van Deemter, 
Roger Evans, Gerald Gazdar and Adam Kilgarriff 
for useful discussion on aspects of this paper, and 
the anonymous referees for helpful suggestions for 
its improvement. All errors are, of course, our 
responsibility. 
References  
Greville G. Corbett and Norman M. Fraser. 1993. 
Network morphology: A DATR account of 
Russian nominal inflection. Journal of 
Linguistics 29: 113-42. 
Greville G. Corbett, Andrew Hippisley, Dunstan 
Brown and Paul Marriott. 2001. Frequency, 
regularity and the paradigm: a perspective from 
Russian on a complex relation.  In J. Bybee and 
P. Hopper, editors, Frequency and the 
Emergence of Linguistic Structure, pages 201-
226.  John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Nicholas Evans, Dunstan Brown and Greville G. 
Corbett. 2001. Dalabon pronominal prefixes and 
the typology of syncretism: a Network 
Morphology analysis.  In G. Booij and J. van 
Marle, editors, Yearbook of Morphology 2000, 
pages 187-231. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
Roger Evans and Gerald Gazdar. 1996. DATR: A 
Language for Lexical Knowledge 
Representation. Computational Linguistics 22: 
167-216. 
Norman M. Fraser and Greville G. Corbett.  1995. 
Gender, animacy and declensional class 
assignment: a unified account for Russian. In G. 
Booij and J. van Marle, editors, Yearbook of 
Morphology 1994, pages 123-150. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht. 
Martin Haspelmath. 2001. Understanding 
Morphology. Edward Arnold, London. 
Lennart L?nngren. 1993. ?astotnyj slovar? 
sovremennogo russkogo jazyka. Uppsala 
University, Uppsala. 
Ingrid Maier. 1994. Review of L?nngren  
?astotnyj slovar? sovremennogo russkogo 
jazyka. Rusistika Segodnja 1: 130-136. 
Serge Sharoff. 2004. Methods and tools for 
development of the Russian Reference Corpus. 
In D. Archer, A. Wilson, P. Rayson, editors, 
Corpus Linguistics Around the World. 
Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Gregory T. Stump. 2001. Inflectional Morphology. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Arnold Zwicky. 1985. How to describe inflection. 
In M. Niepokuj, M. Van Clay, V. Nikiforidou 
and D. Feder, editors, Proceedings of the 
eleventh annual meeting of the Berkeley 
Linguistics Society, pages 372-386. Berkeley 
Linguistics Society, Berkeley. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  
 
Number of Tokens in 
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
 
SG PL SG PL 
Class O 98173 42677 38877 12241
Class II 48843 17688 21047 5700
Class III 18522 3421 5619 954
Table 2: Absolute and Relative Frequency 
 
 Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
Class O 48.1% 34.7% 
Class II 46.4% 32.9% 
Class III 42.0% 36.1% 
Table 3: Combined Relative Frequency for Gen-
Dat-Loc Animate/Inanimate Singular 
 Number of Tokens in Corpus 2 
 NomSg AccSg NomPl AccPl 
Class O 6873 7804 2050 1987
Class II 3695 5223 1006 1174
ClassIII 1231 1105 202 230
Table 4: Frequency distributions for Inanimate 
Nouns in Corpus 2 
Number of Tokens in  
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
GenSg 2966 1569
AccSg 1595 1606
GenPl 3484 1131
AccPl 1003 536
Table 5: Frequency distribtions for Animate 
Nouns 
Number of Tokens in  
Corpus 1 Corpus 2 
GenSg 2260 1033
AccSg 1107 981
Table 6: Frequency distributions for Class I 
Animate Nouns 
