Monolingual Machine Translation for Paraphrase Generation 
Chris QUIRK,  Chris BROCKETT  and  William DOLAN 
Natural Language Processing Group 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA  90852  USA 
{chrisq,chrisbkt,billdol}@microsoft.com 
 
 
Abstract 
We apply statistical machine translation 
(SMT) tools to generate novel paraphrases 
of input sentences in the same language. 
The system is trained on large volumes of 
sentence pairs automatically extracted from 
clustered news articles available on the 
World Wide Web. Alignment Error Rate 
(AER) is measured to gauge the quality of 
the resulting corpus. A monotone phrasal 
decoder generates contextual replacements. 
Human evaluation shows that this system 
outperforms baseline paraphrase generation 
techniques and, in a departure from previ-
ous work, offers better coverage and scal-
ability than the current best-of-breed 
paraphrasing approaches. 
1 Introduction 
The ability to categorize distinct word sequences 
as ?meaning the same thing? is vital to applications 
as diverse as search, summarization, dialog, and 
question answering. Recent research has treated 
paraphrase acquisition and generation as a machine 
learning problem (Barzilay & McKeown, 2001; 
Lin & Pantel, 2002; Shinyama et al 2002, Barzilay 
& Lee, 2003, Pang et al, 2003). We approach this 
problem as one of statistical machine translation 
(SMT), within the noisy channel model of Brown 
et al (1993). That is, we seek to identify the opti-
mal paraphrase T* of a sentence S by finding: 
 
( ){ }
{ })P()|P(maxarg
|Pmaxarg*
TTS
STT
T
T
=
=
 
 
T and S being sentences in the same language.  
We describe and evaluate an SMT-based para-
phrase generation system that utilizes a monotone 
phrasal decoder to generate meaning-preserving 
paraphrases across multiple domains. By adopting 
at the outset a paradigm geared toward generating 
sentences, this approach overcomes many prob-
lems encountered by task-specific approaches. In 
particular, we show that SMT techniques can be 
extended to paraphrase given sufficient monolin-
gual parallel data.1 We show that a huge corpus of 
comparable and alignable sentence pairs can be 
culled from ready-made topical/temporal clusters 
of news articles gathered on a daily basis from 
thousands of sources on the World Wide Web, 
thereby permitting the system to operate outside 
the narrow domains typical of existing systems. 
2 Related work 
Until recently, efforts in paraphrase were not 
strongly focused on generation and relied primarily 
on narrow data sources. One data source has been 
multiple translations of classic literary works (Bar-
zilay & McKeown 2001; Ibrahim 2002; Ibrahim et 
al. 2003). Pang et al (2003) obtain parallel mono-
lingual texts from a set of 100 multiply-translated 
news articles. While translation-based approaches 
to obtaining data do address the problem of how to 
identify two strings as meaning the same thing, 
they are limited in scalability owing to the diffi-
culty (and expense) of obtaining large quantities of 
multiply-translated source documents.  
Other researchers have sought to identify pat-
terns in large unannotated monolingual corpora. 
Lin & Pantel (2002) derive inference rules by pars-
ing text fragments and extracting semantically 
similar paths. Shinyama et al (2002) identify de-
pendency paths in two collections of newspaper 
articles. In each case, however, the information 
extracted is limited to a small set of patterns.  
Barzilay & Lee (2003) exploit the meta-
information implicit in dual collections of news-
                                                          
1
 Barzilay & McKeown (2001), for example, reject the 
idea owing to the noisy, comparable nature of their data. 
wire articles, but focus on learning sentence-level 
patterns that provide a basis for generation. Multi-
sequence alignment (MSA) is used to identify sen-
tences that share formal (and presumably semantic) 
properties. This yields a set of clusters, each char-
acterized by a word lattice that captures n-gram-
based structural similarities between sentences. 
Lattices are in turn mapped to templates that can 
be used to produce novel transforms of input sen-
tences. Their methodology provides striking results 
within a limited domain characterized by a high 
frequency of stereotypical sentence types. How-
ever, as we show below, the approach may be of 
limited generality, even within the training domain.   
3 Data collection 
Our training corpus, like those of Shinyama et 
al. and Barzilay & Lee, consists of different news 
stories reporting the same event. While previous 
work with comparable news corpora has been lim-
ited to just two news sources, we set out to harness 
the ongoing explosion in internet news coverage. 
Thousands of news sources worldwide are compet-
ing to cover the same stories, in real time. Despite 
different authorship, these stories cover the same 
events and therefore have significant content over-
lap, especially in reports of the basic facts. In other 
cases, news agencies introduce minor edits into a 
single original AP or Reuters story. We believe 
that our work constitutes the first to attempt to ex-
ploit these massively multiple data sources for 
paraphrase learning and generation.  
3.1 Gathering aligned sentence pairs 
We began by identifying sets of pre-clustered 
URLs that point to news articles on the Web, gath-
ered from publicly available sites such as 
http://news.yahoo.com/, http://news.google.com 
and http://uk.newsbot.msn.com. Their clustering 
algorithms appear to consider the full text of each 
news article, in addition to temporal cues, to pro-
duce sets of topically/temporally related articles. 
Story content is captured by downloading the 
HTML and isolating the textual content. A super-
vised HMM was trained to distinguish story con-
tent from surrounding advertisements, etc.2 
Over the course of about 8 months, we collected 
11,162 clusters, comprising 177,095 articles and 
averaging 15.8 articles per cluster. The quality of 
                                                          
2
 We hand-tagged 1,150 articles to indicate which por-
tions of the text were story content and which were ad-
vertisements, image captions, or other unwanted 
material.  We evaluated several classifiers on a 70/30 
test train split and found that an HMM trained on a 
handful of features was most effective in identifying 
content lines (95% F-measure). 
these clusters is generally good. Impressionisti-
cally, discrete events like sudden disasters, busi-
ness announcements, and deaths tend to yield 
tightly focused clusters, while ongoing stories like 
the SARS crisis tend to produce very large and 
unfocused clusters. 
To extract likely paraphrase sentence pairs from 
these clusters, we used edit distance (Levenshtein 
1966) over words, comparing all sentences pair-
wise within a cluster to find the minimal number of 
word insertions and deletions transforming the first 
sentence into the second. Each sentence was nor-
malized to lower case, and the pairs were filtered 
to reject:  
 
? Sentence pairs where the sentences were 
identical or differed only in punctuation;  
? Duplicate sentence pairs;  
? Sentence pairs with significantly different 
lengths (the shorter is less than two-thirds 
the length of the longer);  
? Sentence pairs where the Levenshtein dis-
tance was greater than 12.0.3  
 
A total of 139K non-identical sentence pairs were 
obtained. Mean Levenshtein distance was 5.17; 
mean sentence length was 18.6 words. 
3.2 Word alignment 
To this corpus we applied the word alignment 
algorithms available in Giza++ (Och & Ney, 
2000), a freely available implementation of IBM 
Models 1-5 (Brown, 1993) and the HMM align-
ment (Vogel et al 1996), along with various im-
provements and modifications motivated by 
experimentation by Och & Ney (2000). In order to 
capture the many-to-many alignments that identify 
correspondences between idioms and other phrasal 
chunks, we align in the forward direction and again 
in the backward direction, heuristically recombin-
ing each unidirectional word alignment into a sin-
gle bidirectional alignment (Och & Ney 2000). 
Figure 1 shows an example of a monolingual 
alignment produced by Giza++. Each line repre-
sents a uni-directional link; directionality is indi-
cated by a tick mark on the target side of the link. 
We held out a set of news clusters from our 
training data and extracted a set of 250 sentence 
pairs for blind evaluation. Randomly extracted on 
the basis of an edit distance of 5 ? n ? 20 (to allow 
a range of reasonably divergent candidate pairs 
while eliminating the most trivial substitutions), 
the gold-standard sentence pairs were checked by 
an independent human evaluator to ensure that 
                                                          
3
 Chosen on the basis of ablation experiments and opti-
mal AER (discussed in 3.2).  
they contained paraphrases before they were hand 
word-aligned. 
To evaluate the alignments, we adhered to the 
standards established in Melamed (2001) and Och 
& Ney (2000, 2003). Following Och & Ney?s 
methodology, two annotators each created an ini-
tial annotation for each dataset, subcategorizing 
alignments as either SURE (necessary) or POSSIBLE 
(allowed, but not required). Differences were high-
lighted and the annotators were asked to review 
their choices on these differences. Finally we com-
bined the two annotations into a single gold stan-
dard: if both annotators agreed that an alignment 
should be SURE, then the alignment was marked as 
SURE in the gold-standard; otherwise the alignment 
was marked as POSSIBLE. 
To compute Precision, Recall, and Alignment 
Error Rate (AER) for the twin datasets, we used 
exactly the formulae listed in Och & Ney (2003). 
Let A be the set of alignments in the comparison, S 
be the set of SURE alignments in the gold standard, 
and P be the union of the SURE and POSSIBLE 
alignments in the gold standard. Then we have:  
 
||
||precision
A
PA ?
=  ||
||
  recall
S
SA ?
=
 
 
||
||AER
SA
SAPA
+
?+?
=  
 
Measured in terms of AER4, final interrater agree-
ment between the two annotators on the 250 sen-
tences was 93.1%. 
                                                          
4
 The formula for AER given here and in Och  & Ney 
(2003) is intended to compare an automatic alignment 
against a gold standard alignment. However, when com-
paring one human against another, both comparison and 
reference distinguish between SURE and POSSIBLE links. 
Because the AER is asymmetric (though each direction 
Table 1 shows the results of evaluating align-
ment after trainng the Giza++ model. Although the 
overall AER of 11.58% is higher than the best bi-
lingual MT systems (Och & Ney, 2003), the train-
ing data is inherently noisy, having more in 
common with analogous corpora than conventional 
MT parallel corpora in that the paraphrases are not 
constrained by the source text structure. The iden-
tical word AER of 10.57% is unsurprising given 
that the domain is unrestricted and the alignment 
algorithm does not employ direct string matching 
to leverage word identity.5 The non-identical word 
AER of 20.88% may appear problematic in a sys-
tem that aims to generate paraphrases; as we shall 
see, however, this turns out not to be the case. Ab-
lation experiments, not described here, indicate 
that additional data will improve AER.  
3.3 Identifying phrasal replacements 
Recent work in SMT has shown that simple 
phrase-based MT systems can outperform more 
sophisticated word-based systems (e.g. Koehn et 
al. 2003). Therefore, we adopt a phrasal decoder 
patterned closely after that of Vogel et al (2003). 
We view the source and target sentences S and T 
as word sequences s1..sm and t1..tn. A word align-
ment A of S and T can be expressed as a function 
from each of the source and target tokens to a 
unique cept (Brown et al 1993); isomorphically, a 
cept represents an aligned subset of the source and 
target tokens. Then, for a given sentence pair and 
word alignment, we define a phrase pair as a sub-
set of the cepts in which both the source and target 
tokens are contiguous. 6  We gathered all phrase 
                                                                                           
differs by less than 5%), we have presented the average 
of the directional AERs. 
5
 However, following SMT practice of augmenting data 
with a bilingual lexicon, we did append an identity lexi-
con to the training data. 
6
 While this does preclude the usage of ?gapped? phrase 
pairs such as or ? either ? or, we found such map-
Training Data Type: L12 
Precision   87.46% 
Recall      89.52% 
AER         11.58% 
Identical word precision   89.36% 
Identical word recall      89.50% 
Identical word AER         10.57% 
Non-identical word preci-
sion   76.99% 
Non-identical word recall      90.22% 
Non-identical word AER     20.88% 
 
Table 1. AER on the Lev12 corpus 
 
Figure 1. An example Giza++ alignment 
pairs (limited to those containing no more than five 
cepts, for reasons of computational efficiency) oc-
curring in at least one aligned sentence somewhere 
in our training corpus into a single replacement 
database. This database of lexicalized phrase pairs, 
termed phrasal replacements, serves as the back-
bone of our channel model. 
As in (Vogel et al 2003), we assigned probabili-
ties to these phrasal replacements via IBM Model 
1. In more detail, we first gathered lexical transla-
tion probabilities of the form P(s | t) by running 
five iterations of Model 1 on the training corpus. 
This allows for computing the probability of a se-
quence of source words S given a sequence of tar-
get words T as the sum over all possible 
alignments of the Model 1 probabilities: 
 
( ) ( )
( )??
?
? ?
=
=
Tt Ss
A
tsP
TASPTSP
|
|,|
 
 
(Brown et al (1993) provides a more detailed deri-
vation of this identity.) Although simple, this ap-
proach has proven effective in SMT for several 
reasons. First and foremost, phrasal scoring by 
Model 1 avoids the sparsity problems associated 
with estimating each phrasal replacement probabil-
ity with MLE (Vogel et al 2003). Secondly, it ap-
pears to boost translation quality in more 
sophisticated translation systems by inducing lexi-
cal triggering (Och et al 2004). Collocations and 
other non-compositional phrases receive a higher 
probability as a whole than they would as inde-
pendent single word replacements. 
One further simplification was made. Given that 
our domain is restricted to the generation of mono-
lingual paraphrase, interesting output can be pro-
duced without tackling the difficult problem of 
inter-phrase reordering.7 Therefore, along the lines 
of Tillmann et al (1997), we rely on only mono-
tone phrasal alignments, although we do allow in-
tra-phrasal reordering. While this means certain 
common structural alternations (e.g., ac-
tive/passive) cannot be generated, we are still able 
to express a broad range of phenomena: 
 
                                                                                           
pings to be both unwieldy in practice and very often 
indicative of poor a word alignment. 
7
 Even in the realm of MT, such an assumption can pro-
duce competitive results (Vogel et al 2003).  In addi-
tion, we were hesitant to incur the exponential increase 
in running time associated with those movement models 
in the tradition of Brown el al (1993), especially since 
these offset models fail to capture important linguistic 
generalizations (e.g., phrasal coherence, headedness). 
? Synonymy: injured ? wounded 
? Phrasal replacements: Bush administration 
? White House 
? Intra-phrasal reorderings: margin of error 
? error margin 
 
Our channel model, then, is determined solely 
by the phrasal replacements involved. We first as-
sume a monotone decomposition of the sentence 
pair into phrase pairs (considering all phrasal de-
compositions equally likely), and the probability 
P(S | T) is then defined as the product of the each 
phrasal replacement probability. 
The target language model was a trigram model 
using interpolated Kneser-Ney smoothing (Kneser 
& Ney 1995), trained over all 1.4 million sentences 
(24 million words) in our news corpus. 
3.4 Generating paraphrases 
To generate paraphrases of a given input, a stan-
dard SMT decoding approach was used; this is de-
scribed in more detail below. Prior to decoding, 
however, the input sentence underwent preprocess-
ing: text was lowercased, tokenized, and a few 
classes of named-entities were identified using 
regular expressions. 
To begin the decoding process, we first con-
structed a lattice of all possible paraphrases of the 
source sentence based on our phrasal translation 
database. Figure 2 presents an example. The lattice 
was realized as a set of |S| + 1 vertices v0..v|S| and a 
set of edges between those vertices; each edge was 
labeled with a sequence of words and a real num-
ber. Thus a edge connecting vertex vi to vj labeled 
with the sequence of words w1..wk and the real 
number p indicates that the source words si+1 to sj 
can be replaced by words w1..wk with probability p. 
Our replacement database was stored as a trie with 
words as edges, hence populating the lattice takes 
worst case O(n2) time. Finally, since source and 
target languages are identical, we added an identity 
mapping for each source word si: an edge from vi-1 
to vi with label si and a uniform probability u. This 
allows for handling unseen words. A high u value 
permits more conservative paraphrases. 
We found the optimal path through the lattice as 
scored by the product of the replacement model 
and the trigram language model. This algorithm 
reduces easily to the Viterbi algorithm; such a dy-
namic programming approach guarantees an effi-
cient optimal search (worst case O(kn), where n is 
the maximal target length and k is the maximal 
number of replacements for any word). In addition, 
fast algorithms exist for computing the n-best lists 
over a lattice (Soong & Huang 1991). 
Finally the resultant paraphrases were cleaned 
up in a post-processing phase to ensure output was 
not trivially distinguishable from other systems 
during human evaluation. All generic named entity 
tokens were re-instantiated with their source val-
ues, and case was restored using a model like that 
used in Vita et al (2003). 
3.5 Alternate approaches 
Barzilay &  Lee (2003) have released a common 
dataset that provides a basis for comparing differ-
ent paraphrase generation systems. It consists of 59 
sentences regarding acts of violence in the Middle 
East. These are accompanied by paraphrases gen-
erated by their Multi-Sequence Alignment (MSA) 
system and a baseline employing WordNet (Fell-
baum 1998), along with human judgments for each 
output by 2-3 raters. 
The MSA WordNet baseline was created by se-
lecting a subset of the words in each test sen-
tence?proportional to the number of words 
replaced by MSA in the same sentence?and re-
placing each with an arbitrary word from its most 
frequent WordNet synset. 
Since our SMT approach depends quite heavily 
on a target language model, we presented an alter-
nate WordNet baseline using a target language 
model.8 In combination with the language model 
described in section 3.4, we used a very simple 
replacement model: each appropriately inflected 
member of the most frequent synset was proposed 
as a possible replacement with uniform probability. 
This was intended to isolate the contribution of the 
language model from the replacement model. 
Given that our alignments, while aggregated into 
phrases, are fundamentally word-aligned, one 
question that arises is whether the information we 
learn is different in character than that learned 
                                                          
8
 In contrast, Barzilay and Lee (2003) avoided using a 
language model for essentially the same reason: their 
MSA approach did not take advantage of such a re-
source. 
from much simpler techniques. To explore this 
hypothesis, we introduced an additional baseline 
that used statistical clustering to produce an auto-
mated, unsupervised synonym list, again with a 
trigram language model. We used standard bigram 
clustering techniques (Goodman 2002) to produce 
4,096 clusters of our 65,225 vocabulary items. 
4 Evaluation 
We have experimented with several methods for 
extracting a parallel sentence-aligned corpus from 
news clusters using word alignment error rate, or 
AER, (Och & Ney 2003) as an evaluation metric. 
A brief summary of these experiments is provided 
in Table 1. To evaluate the quality of generation, 
we followed the lead of Barzilay & Lee (2003). 
We started with the 59 sentences and correspond-
ing paraphrases from MSA and WordNet (desig-
nated as WN below). Since the size of this data set 
made it difficult to obtain statistically significant 
results, we also included 141 randomly selected 
sentences from held-out clusters. We then pro-
duced paraphrases with each of the following sys-
tems and compared them with MSA and WN: 
 
? WN+LM: WordNet with a trigram LM 
? CL: Statistical clusters with a trigram LM 
? PR: The top 5 sentence rewrites produced by 
Phrasal Replacement. 
 
For the sake of consistency, we did not use the 
judgments provided by Barzilay and Lee; instead 
we had two raters judge whether the output from 
each system was a paraphrase of the input sen-
tence. The raters were presented with an input sen-
tence and an output paraphrase from each system 
in random order to prevent bias toward any par-
ticular judgment. Since, on our first pass, we found 
inter-rater agreement to be somewhat low (84%), 
we asked the raters to make a second pass of judg-
ments on those where they disagreed; this signifi-
cantly improved agreement (96.9%). The results of 
this final evaluation are summarized in Table 2. 
 
Figure 2. A simplified generation lattice: 44 top ranked edges from a total 4,140 
5 Analysis 
Table 2 shows that PR can produce rewordings 
that are evaluated as plausible paraphrases more 
frequently than those generated by either baseline 
techniques or MSA. The WordNet baseline per-
forms quite poorly, even in combination with a 
trigram language model: the language model does 
not contribute significantly to resolving lexical 
selection. The performance of CL is likewise 
abysmal?again a language model does nothing to 
help. The poor performance of these synonym-
based techniques indicates that they have little 
value except as a baseline. 
The PR model generates plausible paraphrases 
for the overwhelming majority of test sentences, 
indicating that even the relatively high AER for 
non-identical words is not an obstacle to successful 
generation. Moreover, PR was able to generate a 
paraphrase for all 200 sentences (including the 59 
MSA examples). The correlation between accept-
ability and PR sentence rank validates both the 
ranking algorithm and the evaluation methodology.  
In Table 2, the PR model scores significantly 
better than MSA in terms of the percentage of 
paraphrase candidates accepted by raters. More-
over, PR generates at least five (and often hun-
dreds more) distinct paraphrases for each test 
sentence. Such perfect coverage on this dataset is 
perhaps fortuitous, but is nonetheless indicative of 
scalability. By contrast Barzilay & Lee (2003) re-
port being able to generate paraphrases for only 59 
out of 484 sentences in their training (test?) set, a 
total of 12%.  
One potential concern is that PR paraphrases 
usually involve simple substitutions of words and 
short phrases (a mean edit distance of 2.9 on the 
top ranked sentences), whereas MSA outputs more 
complex paraphrases (reflected in a mean edit dis-
tance of 25.8). This is reflected in Table 3, which 
provides a breakdown of four dimensions of inter-
est, as provided by one of our independent evalua-
tors. Some 47% of MSA paraphrases involve 
significant reordering, such as an active-passive 
alternation, whereas the monotone PR decoder 
precludes anything other than minor transpositions 
within phrasal replacements. 
Should these facts be interpreted to mean that 
MSA, with its more dramatic rewrites, is ulti-
mately more ambitious than PR? We believe that 
the opposite is true. A close look at MSA suggests 
that it is similar in spirit to example-based machine 
translation techniques that rely on pairing entire 
sentences in source and target languages, with the 
translation step limited to local adjustments of the 
target sentence (e.g. Sumita 2001). When an input 
sentence closely matches a template, results can be 
stunning. However, MSA achieves its richness of 
substitution at the cost of generality. Inspection 
reveals that 15 of the 59 MSA paraphrases, or 
25.4%, are based on a single high-frequency, do-
main-specific template (essentially a running tally 
of deaths in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict). Unless 
one is prepared to assume that similar templates 
can be found for most sentence types, scalability 
and domain extensibility appear beyond the reach 
of MSA. 
In addition, since MSA templates pair entire 
sentences, the technique can produce semantically 
different output when there is a mismatch in in-
formation content among template training sen-
tences. Consider the third and fourth rows of Table 
3, which indicate the extent of embellishment and 
lossiness found in MSA paraphrases and the top-
ranked PR paraphrases. Particularly noteworthy is 
the lossiness of MSA seen in row 4. Figure 3 illus-
trates a case where the MSA paraphrase yields a 
significant reduction in information, while PR is 
more conservative in its replacements.  
While the substitutions obtained by the PR 
model remain for the present relatively modest, 
they are not trivial. Changing a single content word 
is a legitimate form of paraphrase, and the ability 
to paraphrase across an arbitrarily large sentence 
set and arbitrary domains is a desideratum of para-
phrase research. We have demonstrated that the 
SMT-motivated PR method is capable of generat-
ing acceptable paraphrases for the overwhelming 
majority of sentences in a broad domain.  
Method B&L59 B&L59 + 141 
PR #1 54 / 59 = 91.5% 177 / 200 = 89.5% 
PR #2 53 / 59 = 89.8% 168 / 200 = 84.0% 
PR #3 46 / 59 = 78.0% 164 / 200 = 82.0% 
PR #4 49 / 59 = 83.1% 163 / 200 = 81.5% 
MSA 46 / 59 = 78.0% 46 /   59 = 78.0% 
PR #5 44 / 59 = 74.6% 155 / 200 = 77.5% 
WN 23 / 59 = 39.0% 25 /   59 = 37.9% 
WN+LM 30 / 59 = 50.9% 53 / 200 = 27.5% 
CL  14 / 59 = 23.7% 26 / 200 = 13.0% 
 
Table 2. Human acceptability judgments 
 
MSA PR#1 
Rearrangement 28 / 59 = 47% 0 / 100 =   0% 
Phrasal alternation 11 / 59 = 19% 3 / 100 =   3% 
Info added 19 / 59 = 32% 6 / 100 =   6% 
Info lost 43 / 59 = 73% 31 / 100 = 31% 
 
Table 3. Qualitative analysis of paraphrases 
6 Future work 
Much work obviously remains to be done. Our 
results remain constrained by data sparsity, despite 
the large initial training sets. One major agenda 
item therefore will be acquisition of larger (and 
more diverse) data sets. In addition to obtaining 
greater absolute quantities of data in the form of 
clustered articles, we also seek to extract aligned 
sentence pairs that instantiate a richer set of phe-
nomena. Relying on edit distance to identify likely 
paraphrases has the unfortunate result of excluding 
interesting sentence pairs that are similar in mean-
ing though different in form. For example: 
 
The Cassini spacecraft, which is en route to Saturn, 
is about to make a close pass of the ringed 
planet's mysterious moon Phoebe 
 
On its way to an extended mission at Saturn, the 
Cassini probe on Friday makes its closest ren-
dezvous with Saturn's dark moon Phoebe. 
 
We are currently experimenting with data extracted 
from the first two sentences in each article, which 
by journalistic convention tend to summarize con-
tent (Dolan et al 2004). While noisier than the edit 
distance data, initial results suggest that these can 
be a rich source of information about larger phrasal 
substitutions and syntactic reordering.  
Although we have not attempted to address the 
issue of paraphrase identification here, we are cur-
rently exploring machine learning techniques, 
based in part on features of document structure and 
other linguistic features that should allow us to 
bootstrap initial alignments to develop more data. 
This will we hope, eventually allow us to address 
such issues as paraphrase identification for IR.  
To exploit richer data sets, we will also seek to 
address the monotone limitation of our decoder 
that further limits the complexity of our paraphrase 
output. We will be experimenting with more so-
phisticated decoder models designed to handle re-
ordering and mappings to discontinuous elements. 
We also plan to pursue better (automated) metrics 
for paraphrase evaluation.  
7 Conclusions 
We presented a novel approach to the problem 
of generating sentence-level paraphrases in a broad 
semantic domain. We accomplished this by using 
methods from the field of SMT, which is oriented 
toward learning and generating exactly the sorts of 
alternations encountered in monolingual para-
phrase. We showed that this approach can be used 
to generate paraphrases that are preferred by hu-
mans to sentence-level paraphrases produced by 
other techniques. While the alternations our system 
produces are currently limited in character, the 
field of SMT offers a host of possible enhance-
ments?including reordering models?affording a 
natural path for future improvements.  
A second important contribution of this work is 
a method for building and tracking the quality of 
large, alignable monolingual corpora from struc-
tured news data on the Web. In the past, the lack of 
such a data source has hampered paraphrase re-
search; our approach removes this obstacle. 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful to Mo Corston-Oliver, Jeff Ste-
venson, Amy Muia, and Orin Hargraves of the 
Butler Hill Group for their work in annotating the 
data used in the experiments. This paper has also 
benefited from discussions with Ken Church, Mark 
Johnson, and Steve Richardson. We greatly appre-
ciate the careful comments of three anonymous 
reviewers. We remain, however, solely responsible 
for this content. 
References 
R. Barzilay and K. R. McKeown. 2001. Extracting Para-
phrases from a parallel corpus. In Proceedings of the 
ACL/EACL. 
R. Barzilay and L. Lee. 2003. Learning to Paraphrase; 
an unsupervised approach using multiple-sequence 
alignment. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL. 
P. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra and R. L. 
Mercer. 1993. The Mathematics of Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Computational Linguistics 19(2): 
263-311. 
W. Dolan, C. Quirk and C. Brockett. 2004. Unsuper-
vised Construction of Large Paraphrase Corpora: Ex-
ploiting Massively Parallel News Sources.  To appear 
in Proceedings of COLING-2004. 
C. Fellbaum, ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical 
Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
J. Goodman. 2002. JCLUSTER. Software available at 
http://research.microsoft.com/~joshuago/ 
A. Ibrahim. 2002. Extracting Paraphrases from Aligned 
Corpora. Master of Engineering Thesis, MIT. 
A. Ibrahim, B. Katz, and J. Lin. 2003. Extracting Struc-
tural Paraphrases from Aligned Monolingual Cor-
pora. In Proceedings of the Second International 
Workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP 2003). Sapporo, 
Japan. 
R. Kneser and H. Ney. 1995. Improved backing-off for 
N-gram language modeling. In Proc. Int. Conf. on 
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing: 181-184. 
Detroit, MI. 
P. Koehn, F. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical 
Phrase-Based Translation. In Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL. 
V. Levenshtein. 1966. Binary codes capable of correct-
ing deletions, insertions, and reversals. Soviet 
Physice-Doklady 10: 707-710. 
D. Lin and P. Pantel. 2001. DIRT - Discovery of Infer-
ence Rules from Text. In Proceedings of ACM 
SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining: 323-328. 
I. D. Melamed. 2001. Empirical Methods for Exploiting 
Parallel Texts. The MIT Press. 
R. Mihalcea and T. Pedersen. 2003. An Evaluation Ex-
ercise for Word Alignment. In HLT/NAACL Work-
shop: Building and Using Parallel Texts: 1-10. 
F. Och and H. Ney. 2000. Improved Statistical Align-
ment Models. In Proceedings of the ACL: 440-447. 
Hong Kong, China. 
F. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of 
Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computa-
tional Linguistics 29(1): 19-52. 
B. Pang, K. Knight, and D. Marcu. 2003. Syntax-based 
Alignment of Multiple Translations: Extracting Para-
phrases and Generating New Sentences. Proceedings 
of HLT/NAACL.  
Y. Shinyama, S. Sekine and K. Sudo. 2002. Automatic 
Paraphrase Acquisition from News Articles. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL-HLT. 
F. K. Soong and E. F. Huang. 1991. A tree-trellis based 
fast search for finding the n-best sentence hypotheses 
in continuous speech recognition. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, 
Speech and Signal Processing 1: 705-708. Toronto, 
Canada. 
E. Sumita. 2001. Example-based machine translation 
using DP-matching between work sequences. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2001 Workshop on Data-Driven 
Methods in Machine Translation: 1?8. 
C. Tillmann, S. Vogel, H. Ney, and A. Zubaiga. 1997. A 
DP Based Search Using Monotone Alignments in 
Statistical Translation. In Proceedings of the ACL. 
L. Vita, A. Ittycheriah, S. Roukos, and N. Kambhatla. 
2003. tRuEcasing. In Proceedings of the ACL: 152-
159. Sapporo, Japan. 
S. Vogel, H. Ney and C. Tillmann. 1996. HMM-Based 
Word Alignment in Statistical Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL: 836-841. Copenhagen Den-
mark. 
S. Vogel, Y. Zhang, F. Huang, A. Venugopal, B. Zhao, 
A. Tribble, M. Eck, and A. Waibel. 2003. The CMU 
Statistical Machine Translation System. In Proceed-
ings of MT Summit IX, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
USA. 
