Interpreting Communicative Goals in Constrained Domains
using Generation and Interactive Negotiation
Aure?lien Max
Groupe d?Etude pour la Traduction Automatique
GETA-CLIPS
Grenoble, France
aurelien.max@imag.fr
Abstract
This article presents an approach to in-
terpret the content of documents in con-
strained domains at the level of com-
municative goals. The kind of knowl-
edge used contains descriptions of well-
formed document contents and texts
that can be produced from them. The
automatic analysis of text content is
followed by an interactive negotiation
phase involving an expert of the class
of documents. Motivating reasons are
given for an application of this ap-
proach, document normalization, and
an implemented system is briefly intro-
duced.1
1 Introduction
A classical view on text interpretation is to have
a syntactic parsing process followed by seman-
tic interpretation derived from syntactic structures
(Allen, 1995). In practice, however, building
broad-coverage syntactically-driven parsing gram-
mars that are robust to the variation in the input
is a very difficult task. Sometimes, it may not be
relevant to perform a fine-grained analysis of the
semantic content of text. Indeed, there are cases
where what should be recognized is the high-level
communicative intentions of the author. Depend-
ing on the kind of interpretation that is targeted
1The author was affiliated to Xerox Research Centre Eu-
rope (XRCE) and GETA when this work was carried out un-
der a PhD grant.
from a text, some semantic distinctions need not
be recognized. For example, the two following
sentences found in a drug leaflet may not carry sig-
nificantly different communicative goals in spite
of their clear semantic differences:
? Consult your doctor in case of pregnancy be-
fore taking this product.
? Consult a health professional in case of preg-
nancy before taking this product.
We have identified a domain of application,
document normalization, where text interpretation
can be limited in many cases to the interpretation
of a text in terms of the communicative goals it
conveys (Max, 2003a). We have defined document
normalization as the process that first derives the
normalized communicative content of a text in a
constrained domain (e.g. drug leaflets), and then
generates the normalized version of the text in the
language of the original document. We consid-
ered three levels in a normalization model for doc-
uments in constrained domain:
1. Communicative goals: the communicative
goals that can appear in a document in con-
strained domain belong to a predefined reper-
toire.
2. Communicative structure: the communica-
tive structure describes the content of a docu-
ment in terms of compatible communicative
goals, as well as how these communicative
goals are organized in a document.
3. Natural language: the language used should
be as comprehensible as possible. To this
end, every communicative goal should be as-
sociated with an expression that could be
considered as ?gold standard?.
Figure 1 shows a warning section found in the
drug leaflet for a pain reducer. Manually deriv-
ing a normalized version of this document ex-
tract using a normalization model requires identi-
fying the communicative goals present in the doc-
ument, which may be deduced from textual evi-
dence found at different places in the document.
Once identified, these communicative goals must
be compared with the normalized ones in the pre-
defined repertoire. We consider the four following
cases:
1. A communicative goal in the document is
clearly identified as belonging to the prede-
fined repertoire.
2. A communicative goal in the document be-
longs to the predefined repertoire, but several
normalized communicative goals are in com-
petition due to some evidence found in the
document.
3. A communicative goal in the document does
not belong to the predefined repertoire, but it
is deemed close to a normalized communica-
tive goal.
4. A communicative goal in the document can-
not be matched with any normalized commu-
nicative goal.
Once the normalized communicative goals have
been identified, the communicative structure can
be built (provided there are no incompatibilities)
and the corresponding normalized textual version
produced. A possible normalized text correspond-
ing to the input document of figure 1 is given on
figure 2.
The very general Warnings section has been
split into several subsections. Communicative
goals that were expressed in the same sentence
have been isolated and reformulated in separate
sentences, as is the case for the communicative
goal indicating that the product should not be
taken in case of allergy to aspirin. This commu-
nicative goal was found in a complex sentence,
Do not take this product if you have asthma, an
allergy to aspirin, stomach problems. . . , and was
reformulated as DO NOT TAKE THIS DRUG IF
YOU ARE ALLERGIC TO ASPIRIN in the section
about product warnings.
The communicative goal warning about the
risk of Reye?s syndrome in children is expressed
in a long and complex sentence: Children and
teenagers should not use this medicine for chicken
pox or flu symptoms before a doctor is consulted
about Reye syndrome, a rare but serious illness
reported to be associated with aspirin. Consid-
ering the fact that no other communicative goals
should be in competition with this one in this
class of documents when Reye?s syndrome is
involved, its identification can be quite simple.2
In fact, it illustrates the fact that the interpretation
of communicative goals within documents in
constrained domains may not always require a
very fine-grained semantic analysis, and that some
indicators can already be quite informative.
However, it is unquestionable that in general
identifying communicative goals and comparing
them to predefined communicative goals clearly
requires high-level interpretation capabilities,
which would normally be those of an expert of
the domain. With our application to normalize
documents as target, we have proposed an ap-
proach to extract the communicative content of
documents in constrained domains automatically.
Considering that we wanted to obtain a practical
normalization system, we further defined an
approach to allow a human expert identifying the
correct communicative content of a document
from the set of hypotheses produced automati-
cally.
This task should not be confused with text
paraphrasing, for example for rewriting into a
2We do not claim that this is necessarily true in expert
medical terms. Nonetheless, the normalization model that
we used only considered this communicative goal involving
Reye?s Syndrome.
Drug Interaction Precautions:
Do not take this product if you are taking a prescription drug for anticoagulation (thinning the blood),
diabetes or gout unless directed by a doctor.
Warnings: Children and teenagers should not use this medicine for chicken pox or flu symptoms
before a doctor is consulted about Reye syndrome, a rare but serious illness reported to be associated
with aspirin. Do not take this product if you have asthma, an allergy to aspirin, stomach problems (such
as heartburn, upset stomach, or stomach pain) that persist or recur, ulcers or bleeding problems, or if
ringing in the ears or a loss of hearing occurs, unless directed by a doctor. Do not take this product for
pain for more than 10 days unless directed by a doctor. If pain persists or gets worse, if new symptoms
occur, or if redness or swelling is present , consult a doctor because these could be signs of a serious
condition. As with any drug. If you are pregnant or nursing a baby, seek the advice of a health profes-
sional before using this product. It is especially important not to use aspirin during the last 3 months
of pregnancy unless specifically directed to do so by a doctor because it may cause problems in the
unborn child or complications during delivery. Keep this and all drugs out of the reach of children. In
case of accidental overdose, seek professional assistance or contact a poison control center immediately.
Alcohol Warning: If you consume 3 or more alcoholic drinks every day, ask you doctor whether you
should take aspirin or other pain relievers or fever reducers. Aspirin may cause stomach bleeding.
Figure 1: Example of a warning sections in a drug leaflet for a pain reducer
WARNINGS
Product warnings. DO NOT TAKE THIS DRUG IF YOU ARE ALLERGIC TO ASPIRIN. Do not
take this product for more than 10 days unless directed by a health professional. Consult your doctor if
pain persists or gets worse.
Alcohol. Do not take alcohol when you take this drug or ask your doctor for an alternative pain reducer.
Particular conditions. A doctor should be consulted before taking this drug if you have any of the
following conditions:
- asthma
- stomach problems
- ulcers
- bleeding problems
Children and teenagers. CONSULT A DOCTOR BEFORE ADMINISTERING THIS PRODUCT
TO A CHILD OR A TEENAGER, AS IT CAN INCREASE THE RISKS OF A SERIOUS ILLNESS
CALLED REYE?S SYNDROME.
Pregnancy. Consult a doctor before taking this drug if you are pregnant. Using aspirin during the last
3 months of pregnancy may cause problems to the unborn child or complications during delivery.
Overdose. Stop taking this drug immediately and call a poison control control center or a health
professional if you have taken too much of this drug.
Figure 2: Normalized text corresponding to the warning section of figure 1
controlled language (see e.g. (Nasr, 1996)). The
main objective of our task is to identify which
communicative goals from a given repertoire
occur in a document, and to build a well-formed
communicative structure that contains them.3
Because the speech acts conveying a com-
municative goal (such as one that says that a
doctor should be consulted before taking a given
drug in case of pregnancy) can be performed
under a wide range of surface forms, text para-
phrasing would have to transform very different
surface forms into the same target normalized text.
Through document normalization, we want to
enforce 4 properties of document well-formedness
that should be encodable into the normalization
model used:
? Well-formedness of the communicative
structure of documents: sentences should be
well articulated to form a coherent discourse.
? Consistency of the communicative content:
incompatible communicative goals should
not coexist in the same document.
? Completeness of the communicative content:
communicative content imposed by some
communicative goal must be present.
? Comprehensibility and coherence of the lan-
guage used: readers should be able to identify
easily the communicative intentions across
documents of the same class.
Text paraphrasing into a controlled language
at the level of the sentence would only enforce
the last property, because if controlled language
rules can enforce some level of semantic well-
formedness, they cannot guarantee the three other
properties.
3It is true, however, that document normalization of a
given document with very particular properties relative to a
normalization model could be achieved by text paraphrasing
at the level of the sentence, but this is too specific to us.
2 Automatic analysis of the
communicative content of a document
in constrained domain
Several approaches have already been experi-
mented to analyze the content of documents in
constrained domains, which can vary depending
on the amount of surface analysis of the text.
One type of approach uses information extraction
techniques such as pattern matching that use
strong predictions on the content and attempt to
fill templates derived from a model of the domain
(e.g. (Blanchon, 2002)), thus not giving too much
importance to syntactic structure. Another type
of approach first performs a syntactic analysis
of the text, from which semantic dependencies
can be extracted. The system presented in (Brun
and Hage`ge, 2003) derives normalized predicates
encoding the meaning of documents from seman-
tic dependencies found by a robust parser. This
allows obtaining identical semantic interpretations
for paraphrases such as ProductX is a colorless,
non flammable liquid and ProductX is a liquid
that has no colour and that does not burn easily.
These approaches require an encoding of tem-
plates and extraction or normalization rules that
may be difficult to build and to maintain. Fur-
thermore, if they seem appropriate for extracting
surface semantic information, interpreting com-
municative goals using these techniques may be
more difficult. Indeed, communicative goals can
be expressed with different surface texts carrying
semantic differences that may not bear any signifi-
cance for our purpose and may not always be con-
sidered as paraphrases. In the following examples
from pain reducer leaflets, it may be acceptable
that a particular normalization model consider the
three following sentences as carrying one and only
communicative goal:
1. This product should not be taken for more
than 14 days without first consulting a health
professional.
2. If pain persist after 14 days, consult your doc-
tor before taking any more of this product.
3. If symptoms persist for 2 weeks, stop using
this product and see a physician.
In order to be able to identify communicative
goals, we believe that it is important to consider
them within a well-formed communicative struc-
ture. Therefore, we think that the central objects
for analysis should be well-formed descriptions
of document communicative content4, as it may
be counterproductive to spend too much effort
on the fine-grained analysis of surface text. If
semantic dependencies can be expressed in these
descriptions, then the space of possible contents
will filter out incompatible communicative goals
and thus disambiguate without always requiring a
more fine-grained semantic analysis.
We have proposed an approach for the deep
content analysis of documents in contrained
domain, fuzzy inverted generation (Max and
Dymetman, 2002). Well-formed document con-
tent representations are produced for the class of
the input document. From these representations,
normalized texts are generated, and a score of
semantic similarity taking into account common
descriptors is computed between the normalized
texts and the text of the input document. The un-
derlying hypotheses are, as we said earlier on, that
considering well-formed content representations
can restrict the space of the communicative goals
to consider, and that the presence of informative
textual indicators can help identifying commu-
nicative goals.
However, the space of content representations
being potentially huge, a heuristic search can be
performed to find the candidate representations
with the best global scores. Moreover, in order to
better cover the space of possible texts, the gener-
ation of the text can be done non-deterministically,
so that several texts will compete over the input
document from the same content representation.
Figure 3 shows how several texts produced from a
content representation can span several documents
from the space of possible texts. The content
representation that corresponds to the text with the
4This is under the assumption that the input documents
are semantically well-formed and complete, but if they are
not then the model used can indicate for what reasons they
are ill-formed, and document normalization can be used to
correct those documents so that they become valid relative to
the normalization model.
Figure 3: Fuzzy inverted generation
highest similarity score with the input document
is then considered to be the most likely candidate.
3 Interactive validation of the correct
communicative content
Relying solely on information retrieval techniques
to associate a normalized content representation
to an input document is unfortunately unlikely to
yield good results, even if linguistically-oriented
techniques can improve accuracy (Arampatzis
et al, 2000). We have advocated an interactive
approach to text understanding (Dymetman et al,
2003) where the input text is used as a source of
information to assist the user in re-authoring its
content. Following fuzzy inverted generation, an
interactive negotiation can take place between the
system and its hypotheses (the candidate content
representations) on the one hand, and a human
expert on the second. A naive way would be to
let the expert choose which hypothesis is correct
based on the normalized text associated with each
one of them. But this would be a tedious and
error-prone process. Rather, underspecifications
from analysis can be found by building a compact
representation of the candidates, and then used to
engage in negotiations over local interpretation
issues.
Using interactive validation with generated
texts has already been used in several domains:
for example, (Blanchon, 1994) proposed disam-
biguation dialogues involving reformulations for
dialogue-based machine translation; (Overmyer
et al, 2001) proposed a text that can be used
to inspect the domain object model automa-
tically built from a text describing a software
engineering domain model. In the following
section, we introduce our implementation of a
prototype system for interactive document nor-
malization based on the two presented approaches.
4 Interactive document normalization
system
Systems implementing controlled document
authoring (Hartley and Paris, 1997) are based on
an interaction with an author who makes semantic
choices that define the content of a document,
from which multilingual textual versions can be
produced. Therefore, these systems integrate
resources that can be used to represent document
content and to generate textual versions of the
documents. The MDA system developed at
XRCE (Dymetman et al, 2000; Brun et al,
2000) uses a formalism inspired from Definite
Clause Grammars (Pereira and Warren, 1980)
that encodes both the abstract semantic syntax of
well-formed documents and the concrete syntax
for the documents in several languages.5 MDA
grammars contain the definition of semantic
objects of a given semantic type, which are used
to build typed abstract semantic trees. Impor-
tantly, the formalism can encode the three levels
for a normalization model that we described in
our introduction: semantic objects can be of
any granularity and can thus be communicative
goals; the communicative structure is described
by the abstract semantic syntax, which can be
used to express semantic dependencies across
subtrees; and the text generated is entirely under
control, so normalized texts can be associated
with communicative goals.
5This is achieved by developing parallel grammars that
share the same abstract semantic syntax, but specify concrete
syntax for a particular language.
Figure 4: Architecture of our document normal-
ization system
For the reasons given above, we used the
formalism of MDA for our implementation. The
architecture of our normalization system is shown
on figure 4. Textual descriptors (WordNet synsets
in our current implementation) are first extracted
from the text of the input document to build the
profile of the input document. The MDA grammar
used was previously compiled offline in order to
associate profiles to each semantic objects and
types described in the grammar. Fuzzy inverted
generation is then performed from the profile of
the document and the profiled grammar. Details
on the implementation using MDA grammars have
been described elsewhere (Max, 2003a; Max,
2003b).
The set of abstract semantic trees extracted by
fuzzy inverted generation is then used to build
Figure 5: Factorized abstract semantic tree
a compact representation (a factorized abstract
semantic tree) for interactive negotiation with an
expert. The output of this phase is a single abstract
semantic tree, such as the one shown on figure
5 that is used for interactive validation. The
icon represents a semantic object that dominates
a semantic subtree containing no underspecifica-
tions; the icon represents a semantic object that
does not take part in any underspecification, but
which dominates a subtree that contains at least
one; the icon represents a semantic type that
is underspecified, that is for which at least two
semantic objects are in competition; finally, the
icon denotes semantic objects in competition,
which are ordered for a given type by decreasing
score of plausibility.
The MDA grammar used for analysis can then
be used to produce the text associated with this
tree, which corresponds to the normalized version
of the input document that was validated by the
expert.
The interface of our system displays an enumer-
Figure 6: Example of a negotiation dialogue
ation of all the underspecifications found in the
compact representation. They are ordered by de-
creasing score, where the score can indicate the
average score of the objects in competition, or
the inverse of the average number of candidates
per object in competition. Therefore, the expert
can choose to resolve first underspecifications that
contain likely objects, or underspecifications that
involve few candidates so that the validation of an
object will prune more candidates from the com-
pact representations. Clicking on an underspeci-
fication in the list triggers a negotiation dialogue
similar to that on figure 6. The semantic type on
that dialogue, specifies how links are shown, is
not supported by any evidence in the input docu-
ment. The expert can however choose a value for
it.
5 Perspectives
We have presented a practical approach to content
analysis at the level of communicative goals,
in which a strong emphasis is put on document
content well-formedness. Providing the expert is
willing to spend enough time, the communicative
content of a document can be interactively built.
The better the system performance, the less
time is needed to identify the correct candidate
content representation. The fact that the expert
can read the corresponding normalized text
(on the MDA view) can help guarantee that the
whole validation process was carried out correctly.
We now need to grow our grammars for Unix
commands and drug leaflets, and to enrich our
test corpus of annotated documents (raw text and
abstract semantic structure)6 for these classes in
6Documents for the test corpus can be obtained by using
order to be able to carry out evaluation. Evaluation
should be performed on two aspects. First, the
performance of fuzzy inverted generation could be
measured, for a given normalization model and on
a given source of documents, by the position and
relative score of the candidate content representa-
tion corresponding to the normalized document.
Second, we want to evaluate the usability of our
user interface supporting interactive negotiation.
An evaluation corresponding to the number of
steps and the time needed to obtain the normalized
version of a document would be a good indicator.
Moreover, we plan to implement the possibility
for the expert to add new formulations found in
documents to better match communicative goals
in subsequent normalizations. It will then be
interesting to evaluate the impact of this kind of
supervised learning on system performance and
user acceptance. Our next challenge will be to
investigate how our approach can be applied to
documents in less-constrained domains for which
normalization models cannot be entirely built a
priori.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Marc Dymetman and Christian
Boitet for their supervision of this work.
References
James Allen. 1995. Natural Language Understanding.
Benjamin/Cummings Publishing, 2nd edition.
Avi Arampatzis, Th. P. ven der Weide, P. van Bommel,
and C.H.A Koster. 2000. Linguistically Motivated
Information Retrieval. Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Science, 69.
Herve? Blanchon. 1994. LIDIA-1: une premire ma-
quette vers la TA interactive pour tous. Phd thesis,
Universite? Joseph Fourier, Grenoble.
Herve? Blanchon. 2002. A Pattern-based Analyzer for
French in the Context of Spoken Language Transla-
tion: First Prototype and Evaluation. In Proceedings
of COLING-02, Taipei.
our system on each document, or by re-creating the content
with the MDA system. Building a significant corpus is a time-
consuming task that we have not finished yet.
Caroline Brun and Caroline Hage`ge. 2003. Normal-
ization and Paraphrasing using Symbolic Methods.
In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Paraphrasing (IWP2003) at ACL-03, Sapporo,
Japan.
Caroline Brun, Marc Dymetman, and Veronika Lux.
2000. Document Structure and Multilingual Author-
ing. In Proceedings of INLG 2000, Mitzpe Ramon,
Israel.
Marc Dymetman, Veronika Lux, and Aarne Ranta.
2000. XML and Multilingual Document Author-
ing: Convergent Trends. In Proceedings of COLING
2000, Saarbrucken, Germany.
Marc Dymetman, Aure?lien Max, and Kenji Yamada.
2003. Towards Interactive Text Understanding. In
Proceeding of ACL-03, interactive posters session,
Sapporo, Japan.
Anthony F. Hartley and Ce?cile L. Paris. 1997. Mul-
tilingual Document Production - From Support for
Translating to Support for Authoring. Machine
Translation, 12:109?128.
Aure?lien Max and Marc Dymetman. 2002. Document
Content Analysis through Inverted Generation. In
Actes de l?atelier Using (and Acquiring) Linguis-
tic (and World) Knowledge for Information Access
du AAAI Spring Symposium Series, Universite? Stan-
ford, Etats-Unis.
Aure?lien Max. 2003a. De la cre?ation de docu-
ments normalise?s a` la normalisation de documents
en domaine contraint. Phd thesis, Universite? Joseph
Fourier, Grenoble.
Aure?lien Max. 2003b. Reversing Controlled Docu-
ment Authoring to Normalize Documents. In Pro-
ceedings of the EACL-03 Student Research Work-
shop, Budapest, Hungary.
Alexis Nasr. 1996. Un mode`le de reformulation de
phrases fonde? sur la the?orie Sens-Texte. Application
aux langues contro?le?es. Phd thesis, Universite? Paris
7.
Scott P. Overmyer, Benoit Lavoie, and Owen Ram-
bow. 2001. Conceptual Modeling through Linguis-
tic Analysis using LIDA. In Proceedings of the 23rd
international conference on Software Engineering,
ICSE, Toronto, Canada.
Fernando Pereira and David Warren. 1980. Definite
Clauses for Language Analysis. Artificial Intelli-
gence, 13.
