Using Natural Language Processing, Locus Link, and the  
Gene Ontology to Compare OMIM to MEDLINE 
 
 
Bisharah 
Libbus 
Halil 
Kilicoglu 
Thomas C. 
Rindflesch 
James G. 
Mork 
Alan R. 
Aronson 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 
{libbus|halil|tcr|mork|alan}@nlm.nih.gov 
 
 
Abstract 
Researchers in the biomedical and molecular 
biology fields are faced with a wide variety of 
information sources. These are presented in 
the form of images, free text, and structured 
data files that include medical records, gene 
and protein sequence data, and whole genome 
microarray data, all gathered from a variety of 
experimental organisms and clinical subjects. 
The need to organize and relate this informa-
tion, particularly concerning genes,  has moti-
vated the development of resources, such as 
the Unified Medical Language System, Gene 
Ontology, LocusLink, and the Online Inheri-
tance In Man (OMIM) database. We describe 
a natural language processing application to 
extract information on genes from unstruc-
tured text and discuss ways to integrate this 
information with some of the available online 
resources.  
1 Introduction 
The current knowledge explosion in genetics and ge-
nomics poses a challenge to both researchers and medi-
cal practitioners. Traditionally, scientific reviews, which 
summarize and evaluate the literature, have been indis-
pensable in addressing this challenge. OMIM (Online 
Mendelian Inheritance in Man) (OMIM 2000), for ex-
ample, is a clinical and biomedical information resource 
on human genes and genetic disorders. It has close to 
15,000 entries detailing clinical phenotypes and disor-
ders as well as information on nearly 9,000 genes. The 
database can be searched by gene symbol, chromosomal 
location, or disorder. 
More recently, automated techniques for information 
and knowledge extraction from the literature are being 
developed to complement scientific reviews. These 
methods address the need to condense and efficiently 
present large amounts of data to the user.  The feasibil-
ity of applying natural language processing techniques 
to the biomedical literature (Friedman and Hripcsak 
1999; de Bruijn and Martin 2002) and to the wealth of 
genomics data now available (Jenssen et al 2001; Yan-
dell and Majoros 2002) is increasingly being recog-
nized. Efforts to develop systems that work toward this 
goal focus on the identification of such items as gene 
and protein names (Tanabe and Wilbur 2002) or groups 
of genes with similar function (Jenssen et al 2001; 
Masys et al 2001). Other groups are interested in identi-
fying protein-protein (Blaschke et al 1999; Temkin and 
Gilder 2003) or gene-gene interactions (Stephens et al 
2001; Tao et al 2002), inhibit relations (Pustejovsky et 
al. 2002), protein structure (Gaizauskas et al 2003), and 
pathways (Ng and Wong 1999; Friedman et al 2001). 
We discuss the modification of an existing natural 
language processing system, SemGen (Rindflesch et al 
2003), that has broad applicability to biomedical text 
and that takes advantage of online resources such as 
LocusLink and the Gene Ontology. We are pursuing 
research that identifies gene-gene interactions in text on 
genetic diseases. For example the system extracts (2) 
from (1).  
1) Here, we report that TSLC1 directly associates 
with MPP3, one of the human homologues of a 
Drosophila tumor suppressor gene, Discs large 
(Dlg). 
2) TSLC1|INTERACT_WITH|MPP3 
                                            Association for Computational Linguistics.
                   Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases, pp. 69-76.
                                                HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Biolink 2004,
Due to the complexity of the language involved, the 
extraction of such predications is currently not accurate 
enough to support practical application. However, we 
suggest its potential in the context of an application that 
combines traditional, human-curated resources such as 
OMIM and emerging information extraction applica-
tions. 
2 
3 SemGen 
Molecular Biology Resources 
To support and supplement the information extracted by 
SemGen from biomedical text, we draw on two re-
sources, LocusLink and the Gene Ontology. LocusLink 
(Wheeler et al 2004) provides a single query interface 
to curated genomic sequences and genetic loci. It pre-
sents information on official nomenclature, aliases, se-
quence accessions, phenotypes, OMIM numbers, 
homology, map locations, and related Web sites, among 
others. Of particular interest is the Reference Sequence 
(RefSeq) collection, which provides a comprehensive, 
curated, integrated, non-redundant set of sequences, 
including genomic DNA, transcript (RNA), and protein 
products for major research organisms. Currently, 
SemGen uses LocusLink to obtain normalized gene 
names and Gene Ontology annotations.  
The Gene Ontology (GO) (The Gene Ontology Con-
sortium 2000, 2001, 2004) aims to provide a dynamic 
controlled vocabulary that can be applied to all organ-
isms, even while knowledge of gene and protein func-
tion is incomplete or unfolding. The GO consists of 
three separate ontologies: molecular function, biological 
process, and cellular component. These three branches 
are used to characterize gene function and products and 
provide a comprehensive structure that permits the an-
notation of molecular attributes of genes in various or-
ganisms. We use GO annotations to examine whether 
there are identifiable patterns, or concordance, in the 
function of gene pairs identified by SemGen.  
SemGen identifies gene interaction predications based  
on semantic interpretation adapted from SemRep (Srini-
vasan and Rindflesch 2002; Rindflesch and Fiszman 
2003), a general natural language processing system 
being developed for the biomedical domain. After the 
application of  a statistically-based labeled categorizer 
(Humphrey 1999) that limits input text to the molecular 
biology domain, SemGen processing proceeds in  three 
major phases: categorial analysis, identification of con-
cepts, and identification of relations.  
The initial phase relies on a parser that draws on the 
SPECIALIST Lexicon (McCray et al 1994) and the 
Xerox Part-of-Speech Tagger (Cutting et al 1992) to 
produce an underspecified categorial analysis.  
In the phase for identifying concepts, disorders as 
well as genes and proteins are isolated by mapping sim-
ple noun phrases from the previous phase to concepts in 
the Unified Medical Language System? (UMLS)? 
Metathesaurus? (Humphreys et al 1998), using 
MetaMap (Aronson 2001). ABGene, a program that 
identifies genes and proteins using several statistical and 
empirical methods (Tanabe and Wilbur 2002) is also 
consulted during this phase. In addition, a small list of 
signal words (such as gene, codon, and exon) helps 
identify genetic phenomena. For example, the genetic 
phenomena in (4) are identified from the sentence in (3). 
Concepts isolated in this phase serve as potential argu-
ments in the next phase.  
3) WIF1 was down-regulated in 64% of primary 
prostate cancers, while SFRP4 was up-regulated 
in 81% of the patients. 
4) genphenom|WIF1  
genphenom|SFRP4 
 
During the final phase, in which relations are identi-
fied, the predicates of semantic propositions are based 
on indicator rules. These stipulate verbs, nominaliza-
tions, and prepositions that ?indicate? semantic predi-
cates. During this phase, argument identification is 
constrained by an underspecified dependency grammar, 
which also attempts to accommodate coordinated argu-
ments as well as predicates.  
SemGen originally had twenty rules indicating one 
of three etiology relations between genetic phenomena 
and diseases, namely CAUSE, PREDISPOSE, and 
ASSOCIATED_WITH. In this project, we extended Sem-
Gen to cover gene-gene interaction relations: INHIBIT, 
STIMULATE, AND INTERACT_WITH. About 20 indicator 
rules were taken from MedMiner (Tanabe et al 1999). 
We supplemented this list by taking advantage of the 
verbs identified in syntactic predications by GeneScene 
(Leroy et al 2003). SemGen has 46 gene-gene interac-
tion indicator rules (mostly verbs), including 16 for 
INHIBIT (such as block, deplete, down-regulate); 12 for 
INTERACT_WITH (bind, implicate, influence, mediate); 
and 18 for STIMULATE (amplify, activate, induce, up-
regulate).  
An overview of the SemGen system is given in Fig-
ure 1, and an example is provided below. SemGen proc-
essing on input text (5) produces the underspecified 
syntactic structure (represented schematically) in (6). 
(7) illustrates genetic phenomena identified, and (8) 
shows the final semantic interpretation. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. SemGen system  
 
5) We show here that EGR1 binds to the AR in 
prostate carcinoma cells, and an EGR1-AR 
complex can be detected by chromatin im-
munoprecipitation at the enhancer of an en-
dogenous AR target gene. 
6) [We] [show] [here] [that] [EGR1] [binds] [to 
the AR] [in prostate carcinoma cells,] [and] [an 
EGR1-AR complex] [can] [be] [detected] [by 
chromatin immunoprecipitation] [at the enhan-
cer] [of an endogenous AR target gene] 
7) genphenom|egr1 
genphenom|ar 
genphenom|enhancer endogenous ar target gene 
8) egr1|INTERACT_WITH|ar 
During processing, SemGen normalizes gene sym-
bols using the preferred symbol from LocusLink. The 
final interpretation with LocusLink gene symbol is 
shown in (9).  
9) EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
As we retrieve the LocusLink symbol for a gene, we 
also get the GO terms associated with that gene. We are 
interested in extending the application of our textual 
analysis and knowledge extraction methodology and 
relating it to other biomedical and genomic resources. 
Gene Ontology is one such important resource, and be-
low we discuss the possibility that GO might shed addi-
tional light on the biological relationship between genes 
that are paired functionally based on textual analysis. 
The GO terms for the genes in (9) are given in (10) and 
(11). 
 
10) EGR1|[transcription factor activity; regulation 
of transcription, DNA-dependent; nucleus] 
11) AR|[androgen receptor activity; steroid binding; 
receptor activity; transcription factor activity; 
transport; sex differentiation; regulation of tran-
scription, DNA-dependent; signal transduction; 
cell-cell signaling; nucleus] 
4 SemGen Evaluation and Error Analysis 
Before suggesting an application using SemGen output, 
we discuss the results of error analysis performed on 
344 sentences from MEDLINE citations related to six 
genetic diseases: Alzheimer's disease, Crohn?s disease, 
lung cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and sickle 
cell anemia. Out of 442 predications identified by Sem-
Gen, 181 were correct, for 41% precision. This is not 
yet accurate enough to support a production system; 
however, the majority of the errors are focused in two 
syntactic areas, and we believe that with further devel-
opment it is possible to provide output effective for 
supporting practical applications. 
The majority of the errors fall into one of two major 
syntactic classes, relativization and coordination. A fur-
ther source of error is the fact that we have not yet ad-
dressed interaction relations that involve a process in 
addition to a gene.  
Reduced relative clauses, such as mediated by Tip60 
in (12), are a rich source of argument identification er-
rors.  
12) LRPICD dramatically inhibits APP-derived in-
tracellular domain/Fe65 transactivation medi-
ated by Tip60.  
SemGen wrongly interpreted this sentence as asserting 
that LRPICD inhibits Tip60. The rules of the under-
specified dependency grammar that identify arguments 
essentially look to the left and right of a verb for a noun 
phrase that has been marked as referring to a genetic 
phenomenon. Arguments are not allowed to be used in 
more than one predication (unless licensed by coordina-
tion or as the head of a relative clause).  
A number of phenomena conspire in (12) to wrongly 
allow TIP60  to be analyzed as the object of inhibits. 
The actual object, transactivation, was not recognized 
because we have not yet addressed processes as argu-
ments of gene interaction predications. Further, the 
predication on transactivation, with argument TIP60, 
was not interpreted, and hence TIP60 was available (in-
correctly) for the object of inhibits.  If we had recog-
nized the relative clause in (12), TIP60 would not have 
been reused as an argument of inhibits, since only heads 
of relative clauses can be reused. 
The underspecified analysis on which SemGen is 
based is not always effective in identifying verb phrase 
coordination, as in (13), leading to the incorrect inter-
pretation that WIF1 interacts with SFRP4. 
13) WIF1 was down-regulated in 64% of primary 
prostate cancers, while SFRP4 was up-regulated 
in 81% of the patients.  
A further source of error in this sentence is that 
down-regulated was analyzed by the tagger as a past 
tense rather than past participle, thus causing the argu-
ment identification phase to look for an object to the 
right of this verb form. A further issue here is that we 
have not yet addressed truncated passives.  
5 Using SemGen to Compare OMIM and 
MEDLINE  
SemGen errors notwithstanding, we are investigating 
possibilities for exploiting automatically extracted gene 
interaction predications. We discuss an application 
which compares MEDLINE text to OMIM documents, 
for specified diseases. LocusLink preferred gene sym-
bols and GO terms are an integral part of this process-
ing. We feel it is instructive to investigate the 
consequences of this comparison, anticipating results 
that are effective enough for practical application. 
We selected five diseases with a genetic component 
(Alzheimer?s disease, Crohn?s disease, lung cancer, 
prostate cancer, and sickle cell anemia), and retrieved 
the corresponding OMIM report for each disease, auto-
matically discarding sections such as references, head-
ings, and edit history. We also queried PubMed for each 
disease and retrieved all MEDLINE citations that were 
more recent than the corresponding OMIM report. Both 
OMIM and MEDLINE files were then submitted to 
SemGen.  
For each disease, the MEDLINE file was larger than 
the corresponding OMIM file, and the categorizer 
eliminated some parts of each file as not being in the 
molecular biology domain. Table 1 shows the number 
of sentences in the original input files and the number 
processed after the categorizer eliminated sentences not 
in the molecular biology domain.  
 
 
 OMIM 
Orig. 
OMIM 
Proc. 
MEDLINE 
Orig. 
MEDLINE 
Proc. 
Alz 408 264 1639 862 
Crohn 188 124 4871 1236 
LungCa 55 34 9058 2966 
ProstCa 121 69 6989 2964 
SCA 184 79 4383 1057 
 
    Table 1. Input sentences processed by SemGen 
A paragraph in the OMIM file for Alzheimer?s dis-
ease beginning with the sentence Alzheimer disease is 
by far the most common cause of dementia, for example, 
was eliminated, while a MEDLINE citation with the 
title Semantic decision making in early probable AD: A 
PET activation study was removed.   
An overview of predication types retrieved by Sem-
Gen is given in Table 2 for the files on Alzheimer?s 
disease. Of the gene-disease predications, the majority 
had predicate ASSOCIATED_WITH (15 from OMIM and 
25 from MEDLINE). For gene-gene relations, 
INTERACT_WITH predominated (3 from OMIM and 12 
from MEDLINE). 
 
Alzheimer disease OMIM MEDLINE 
Gene-Disease 16 31 
Gene-Gene  3 22 
Total 19 53 
 
Table 2. Gene interaction predication types 
 
We developed a program that compares semantic 
predications found in MEDLINE abstracts to those 
found in an OMIM report associated with a particular 
disease and classifies the comparison between two 
predications as either an exact match, partial match, or 
no match. The category of a comparison is determined 
by examining the argument and predicate fields of the 
predications. If all three fields match, the comparison is 
an exact match; if any two fields match it is a partial 
match. All other cases are considered as no match.  
Although fewer than half of the predications ex-
tracted by SemGen are likely to be correct, we provide 
some examples from the files on Alzheimer?s disease.  
(The system retains the document ID?s, which are sup-
pressed here for clarity.) Examples of partial matches 
between gene-disease predications extracted from 
OMIM and MEDLINE are shown in (14) and (15).  
14) OM: APP | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alz-
heimer?s Disease 
ML:  CD14 | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alz-
heimer?s Disease 
15) OM: amyloid beta peptide | 
ASSOCIATED_WITH | Alzheimer?s Disease 
ML: amyloid beta peptide | 
ASSOCIATED_WITH | Senile Plaques 
Some of the gene-disease predications that only oc-
curred in OMIM are given in (16), and a few of those 
occurring exclusively in MEDLINE are given in (17). 
 
16) TGFB1 | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Amyloid 
deposition  
        PRNP | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Amyloid 
deposition 
        Mutation 4 gene | CAUSE | Alzheimer?s Dis-
ease 
 
17) MOG | ASSOCIATED_WITH | Nervous Sys-
tem Diseases 
Acetylcholinesterase | PREDISPOSE | Alz-
heimer?s Disease  
 
In (18) are listed some of the gene-gene interaction 
predications found in MEDLINE but not in OMIM. 
18) LAMR1 | STIMULATE | HTATIP 
MAPT|INTERACT_WITH | HSPA8  
CD14 | STIMULATE | amyloid peptide 
 
6 Using the GO Terms  
As noted above, for each gene argument in the predica-
tions identified by SemGen, we retrieved from Locus-
Link the GO terms associated with that gene. We have 
begun to investigate ways in which these terms might be 
used to compare genes by looking at the gene-gene in-
teraction predications extracted from MEDLINE that 
did not occur in OMIM.  
To support this work, we developed a program that 
sorts gene-gene interaction predications by the GO 
terms of their arguments. For each gene function, the 
predications in which both arguments share the same 
function are listed first. These are followed by the 
predications in which only the first argument has that 
gene function, and then the predications in which only 
the second argument has the relevant gene function. A 
typical output file of this process is shown in (19): 
 
19) RECEPTOR ACTIVITY 
        ----------------- 
        Both Arguments: 
        DTR|STIMULATE|EGFR 
        First Argument: 
        AR|STIMULATE|TRXR3 
        EPHB2|STIMULATE|ENO2 
        Second Argument: 
        EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
        PSMC6|STIMULATE|AR 
 
The three branches of the Gene Ontology provide a 
uniform system for relating genes by function. The 
terms in the molecular function and biological process 
branches are perhaps most useful for this purpose; how-
ever, we have begun by considering all three branches 
(including the cellular component branch). The most 
effective method of exploiting GO annotations remains 
a matter of research.  
It is important to recognize that GO mapping is not 
precise; different annotators may make different GO 
assignments for the same gene. Nevertheless, GO anno-
tations provide considerable potential for relating the 
molecular functions and biological processes of genes. 
We consider one of the predications extracted from the 
MEDLINE file for prostate cancer that did not occur in 
OMIM: 
19) EGR1|INTERACT_WITH|AR 
Both genes EGR1 and AR in LocusLink elicit the 
same human gene set (367 Hs AR; 1026 Hs CDKN1A; 
1958 Hs EGR1; 3949 Hs LDLR; 4664 Hs NAB1; 4665 
Hs NAB2; 5734 Hs PTGER4; 114034 Hs TOE1). This 
suggests a high degree of sequence homology and func-
tional similarity. In addition, LocusLink provides the 
following GO terms for the two genes: 
20) EGR1: early growth response 1; LocusID: 1958 
Gene Ontology: transcription factor activity; 
regulation of transcription, DNA-dependent; 
nucleus  
21)  AR: androgen receptor (dihydrotestosterone re-
ceptor; testicular feminization; spinal and bulb 
ar muscular atrophy; Kennedy disease) ; Lo-
cusID: 367 Gene Ontology:  androgen receptor 
activity; steroid binding; receptor activity; tran-
scription factor activity; transport; sex differen-
tiation; regulation of transcription, DNA-
dependent; signal transduction; cell-cell signal-
ing; nucleus 
(The GO provides additional, hierarchical information 
for terms, which we have not yet exploited.) 
Thirty percent of the predications examined had 
some degree of overlap in their GO terms. For example, 
the terms for EGR1 (transcription factor activity; regu-
lation of transcription, DNA- dependent; and nucleus) 
are identical to three of the GO terms for the AR gene. 
This concordance may not be typical of the majority of 
paired genes in our sample. However, in the case of 
genes that do not exhibit such complete overlap, con-
cordance might be obtained at higher nodes in the clas-
sification scheme. 
An alternate approach for assessing distance be-
tween GO annotations has been suggested by Lord et al 
(2003a, 2003b). They propose a ?semantic similarity 
measure? using ontologies to explore the relationships 
between genes that may have associated interaction or 
function. The authors consider the information content 
of each GO term, defined as the number of times each 
term, or any child term, occurs. 
The fact that any one gene has a number of GO an-
notations indicates that a particular gene may perform 
more than one function or its function may be classified 
under a number of molecular activities. Some of these 
activities may be part of, i.e. extending to a variable 
degree down, the same GO structure. For example, for 
gene AR, ?receptor activity? (GO 4872) partially over-
laps with ?androgen receptor activity? (GO 4882), as 
does ?steroid binding? (GO 5496) with ?transcription 
factor activity? (GO 3700), and ?signal transduction 
(GO 7165) and ?cell-cell signaling (GO 7267). This 
indicates that in assessing similarity one needs to exam-
ine the ontology structure and not rely solely on the GO 
terms.  
While we have no experimental evidence, we would 
like to speculate about the functional or biological sig-
nificance indicated by similarity in GO annotation. 
There are three orthogonal aspects to GO: molecular 
function, biological process, and cellular component. If 
two genes map more closely in one of the taxonomies, 
then their function is necessarily more closely related. 
The majority of GO terms are in the molecular function 
taxonomy. It is conceivable that genes that map more 
closely could be involved in the same cascade or par-
ticipate in the same genetic regulatory network. There is 
increasing interest in genetic networks (e.g. 
www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ kegg2.html; http://ecocyc.org; 
http://us.expasy.org/tools/pathways; www.biocarta.com) 
and combining the ability to search and extract informa-
tion from the literature with GO mapping could prove 
effective in elucidating the functional interactions of 
genes. 
 
7 
8 Conclusion 
Potential Knowledge Discovery 
To determine whether our automatic comparison of 
MEDLINE to OMIM based on SemGen predications 
might throw new light on  gene-gene interactions, we 
examined predications found in the MEDLINE file that 
had no match in the OMIM file. We searched the 
OMIM reports for information on the genes found in 
such predications to confirm that they were absent from 
the OMIM reports. For example, while the OMIM re-
port on colon cancer did not mention BARD1, the 
SemGen output for MEDLINE had   
22) BARD1|INTERACT_WITH|hmsh2 
The abstract containing this predication (PMID 
11498787) asserts that the BARD1 gene (LocusID 580) 
interacts with the breast cancer gene BRCA1 as well as 
with hMSH2, a mismatch repair gene associated with 
colon cancer.  BARD1 shares homology with the two 
conserved regions of BRCA1 and also interacts with the 
N-terminal region of BRCA1. Interaction of BARD1 
with BRCA1 could be essential for the function of 
BRCA1 in tumor suppression.  
Conversely, disruption of this interaction may possi-
bly contribute to the process of oncogenesis. It has been 
reported that the BRCA1/BARD1 complex is responsi-
ble for many of the tumor suppression activities of 
BRCA1 (Baer and Ludwig 2002). The gene hMSH2 
(LocusID 4436) is one of a number of genes that, when 
mutated, predisposes to colon cancer type 1. It is the 
human homolog of the bacterial mismatch repair gene 
mutS. We hypothesize that the interaction of BARD1 
with hMSH2, in a similar fashion to BRCA1, may be 
necessary for tumor suppression. Disruption of this in-
teraction may increase the likelihood of developing co-
lon cancer. Furthermore, this observation serves to point 
toward a possible link between BRCA1 and colon can-
cer. 
 
We have extended earlier work with SemGen (Rind-
flesch et al 2003) and are now able to extract from text, 
in addition to names of gene and disorders, gene-
disorder and gene-gene relations. Although SemGen is 
not at a stage where it can be used indiscriminately and 
without selective review and evaluation, it may never-
theless prove useful for reviewers by providing an effi-
cient means of scanning a large number of references 
and extracting relations involving genes and diseases. 
The process of curation and review is time consum-
ing. Given the rate at which new publications are added 
to the scientific literature, the availability of tools for 
accelerating the review process would meet a real need. 
As demonstrated by our pilot study on six disorders, 
SemGen could prove useful, even at this prototype 
stage, in extracting relevant information from the litera-
ture concerning genes and diseases. Additionally, the 
ability to scan and extract information from diverse sci-
entific domains could play an important role in identify-
ing new relationships between genes and diseases that 
would promote hypothesis-generation and advance sci-
entific research. Even with the present limitations, 
SemGen could assist in making the scientific literature 
more accessible and reduce the time it takes for re-
searchers to update their knowledge and expertise. 
References 
Aronson, A.R. (2001). ?Effective mapping of biomedi-
cal text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap 
program.? In Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Sym-
posium, 17-21. 
Baer, R., and Ludwig, T. (2002). ?The BRCA1/BARD1 
heterodimer: a tumor suppressor complex with ubiq-
uitin E3 ligase activity.? Current Opinion in Genetics 
& Development, 12, 86-91 
Blaschke, C.; Andrade, M.A.; Ouzounis, C.; and Valen-
cia, A. (1999). ?Automatic extraction of biological 
information from scientific text: protein-protein in-
teractions.? In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Systems for 
Molecular Biology, 60-70. 
de Bruijn, B., and Martin, J. (2002). ?Getting to the 
(c)ore of knowledge: mining biomedical literature.? 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 67, 7-
18. 
Cutting, D.; Kupiec, J.; Pedersen, J.; and Sibun, P. 
(1992). ?A practical part-of-speech tagger.? In Pro-
ceedings of the Third Conference on Applied Natural 
Language Processing. 
Friedman, C., and Hripcsak, G. (1999). ?Natural lan-
guage processing and its future in medicine.? Aca-
demic Medicine, 74 (8),890-5. 
Friedman, C.; Kra, P.; Yu, H.; Krauthammer, M.; and 
Rzhetsky, A. (2001). ?GENIES: a natural-language 
processing system for the extraction of molecular 
pathways from journal articles.? Bioinformatics, 17 
Suppl 1, S74-82. 
Gaizauskas, R; Demetriou, G.; Artymiuk, P.J.; and  
Willett, P. (2003). ?Protein Structures and Informa-
tion Extraction from Biological Texts: The PASTA 
System.? Bioinformatics, 19, 135-43. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2000). ?Gene ontol-
ogy: tool for the unificaiton of biology.? Nature, 25, 
25-29. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2001). ?Creating the 
Gene Ontology Resource: Design and implementa-
tion.? Genome Research, 11,1425-1433. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium. (2004). ?The Gene 
Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.? 
Nucleic Acids Research, 32,D258-D261. 
Humphrey, S. (1999). ?Automatic indexing of docu-
ments from journal descriptors: A preliminary inves-
tigation.? Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 50(8), 661-74. 
Humphreys, B.L.; Lindberg, D.A.; Schoolman, H.M.; 
and Barnett, G.O. (1998). ?The Unified Medical lan-
guage System: An informatics research collabora-
tion.? Journal of American Medical Informatics 
Association, 5(1), 1-13. 
Jenssen, T.K.; Laegreid, A.; Komoroswski, J.; and 
Hovig, E. (2001). ?A literature network of human 
genes for high-throughput analysis of gene expres-
sion.? Nature Genetics, 28,21-28.  
Leroy, G.; Chen, H.; Martinez, J.D. (2003) ?A shallow 
parser based on closed-class words to capture rela-
tions in biomedical text.? Journal of Biomedical In-
formatics, 36, 145-58 . 
Lord, P.W.; Stevens, R.D.; Brass, A.; and Goble, C.A. 
(2003a). ?Investigating semantic similarity measures 
across the Gene Ontology: the relationship between 
sequence and annotation.? Bioinformatics 19:1275-
1283. 
Lord, P.W.; Stevens, R.D.; Brass, A.; and Goble, C.A. 
(2003b). ?Semantic similarity measures as tools for 
exploring the Gene Ontology.? Pacific Symposium 
on. Biocomputing,  601-612. 
Masys, D.R.; Welsh, J.B.; Fink, J.L.; Gribskov, M.; 
Klacansky, I.; and Vorbeil, J. (2001). ?Use of key-
word hierarchies to interpret gene expression pat-
terns.? Bioinformatics, 17(4), 319-26. 
McCray, A.T.; Srinivasan, S.; and Browne, A.C. (1994). 
?Lexical methods for managing variation in biomedi-
cal terminologies.? In Proceedings of the Annual 
Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical 
Care, 235-9. 
Ng, S.K., and Wong, M. (1999). ?Toward routine auto-
matic pathway discovery from on-line scientific text 
abstracts.? Genome Informatics, 10,104-112. 
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, OMIM (2000). 
McKusick-Nathans Institute for Genetic Medicine, 
Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, MD) and Na-
tional Center for Biotechnology Information, Na-
tional Library of Medicine (Bethesda, MD). WWW 
URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.  
Pustejovsky, J.; Castano, J.; Zhang, J.; Kotecki, M.; and 
Cochran, B. (2002). ?Robust relational parsing over 
biomedical literature: extracting inhibit relations.? 
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, 362-73. 
Rindflesch, T. C., and Fiszman, M. (2003). ?The inter-
action of domain knowledge and linguistic structure 
in natural language processing: Interpreting hy-
pernymic propositions in biomedical text.? Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 36(6):462-77. 
Rindflesch, T. C.; Libbus, B.; Hristovski, D.; Aronson, 
A.R.; and Kilicoglu, H. (2003). ?Semantic relations 
asserting the etiology of genetic diseases.? In Pro-
ceedings of the AMIA Annual Symposium, 554-8. 
Srinivasan, P., Rindflesch, T.C. (2002). ?Exploring Text 
Mining from MEDLINE.? In Proceedings of the 
AMIA Annual Symposium, 722-6. 
Stephens, M.; Palakal, M.; Mukhopadhyay, S.; and 
Raje, R. (2001). ?Detecting gene relations form Med-
line abstracts.? In Proceedings of the Sixth Pacific 
Symposium on Biocomputing, 6, 483-96. 
Tanabe, L.; Scherf, U.; Smith, L.H.; Lee, J.K.; Hunter, 
L.; Weinstein, J.N. (1999). ?MedMiner: An Internet 
text- mining tool for biomedical information, with 
application to gene expression profiling.? BioTech-
niques, 27(6),1210-17. 
Tanabe, L., Wilbur, W.J. (2002). ?Tagging gene and 
protein names in biomedical text.? Bioinformatics, 
18(8), 1124-32. 
Tao, Y-C., and Leibel, R.L. (2002). ?Identifying rela-
tionships among human genes by systematic analysis 
of biological literature.? BMC Bioinformatics, 3,16-
25. 
Temkin, J. M., and Gilder, M. R. (2003). ?Extraction of 
protein interaction information from unstructured text 
using a context-free grammar.? Bioinformatics, 
19(16), 2046-53. 
Wheeler, D.L.; Church, D.M.; Edgar, R.; Federhen, S.; 
Helmberg, W.; Madden, T.L.; Pontius, J.U.; Schuler, 
G.D.; Schriml, L.M.; Sequeira, E.; Suzek, T.O.; 
Tatusova, T.A.; Wagner, L. (2004). ?Database re-
sources of the National Center for Biotechnology In-
formation: update.? Nucleic Acids Research, 32(1), 
D35-40.  
Yandell, M.D., and Majoros, W.H. (2002) ?Genomics 
and natural language processing.? Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 3, 601-610. 
 
