Using Soundex Codes for Indexing Names in ASR documents
Hema Raghavan
hema@cs.umass.edu
James Allan
allan@cs.umass.edu
Abstract
In this paper we highlight the problems that
arise due to variations of spellings of names
that occur in text, as a result of which links be-
tween two pieces of text where the same name
is spelt differently may be missed. The problem
is particularly pronounced in the case of ASR
text. We propose the use of approximate string
matching techniques to normalize names in or-
der to overcome the problem. We show how we
could achieve an improvement if we could tag
names with reasonable accuracy in ASR.
1 Introduction
Proper names are often key to our understanding of the
information conveyed by a document. This is particu-
larly the case when the domain is news. For example, a
document with several mentions of George W. Bush, Dick
Cheney, Baghdad and Saddam Hussein, gives us a good
sense of what the contents of the document may be. In
comparison, other regular English words like death, scud
and missiles, may be good indicators of more general top-
ics like war, but may not give us any indication of the
exact event being discussed. Linking stories that discuss
the same event, like the Attack on Iraq is very useful for
a news filtering systems. When topics are primarily de-
termined by specific events, it is easy to see why names
of entities- people places and organizations, play such a
critical role in discriminating between events that discuss
a topic.
However, when one considers a real life scenario
where news is from different media (print and broad-
cast) and in many different languages, proper names
pose many different problems. The problem with proper
names is that they often have different spelling variations.
For example, the names Arafat, Araafat, and Arafaat may
all refer to the same entity. Human beings can also vary
in their spellings of a named entity. Besides that, the out-
put of ASR and Machine Translation systems can also re-
sult in different spelling variations of a name. Such slight
spelling variations may be acceptable and discernible by
humans, but for a machine they are harder to match. A
user who issues a query with the term Arafat in it may
never find a document that discusses Araafat, using cur-
rent TF-IDF matching techniques, even though the docu-
ment may be pertinent to his or her query. Although this
loss may not be critical to some applications, one cannot
assume that the problem does not exist. The problem has
been addressed by the data-base community in the past by
the use of approximate string matching techniques, but in
pure-text, we have the added problem of detecting names.
In this paper, we demonstrate with examples how
sometimes we may not be able to draw connections be-
tween two pieces of text without the use of approximate
string matching techniques. We indicate the problems we
encounter while detecting names, and propose ways to
address those issues. In the discussion of previous work
in the next section we describe some tasks that use ASR
output, and which may have been benefited by the use
of approximate string matching techniques. We describe
some preliminary experiments and their results. We then
discuss the bottlenecks, in the proposed methodology,
and how they may be overcome.
2 Past Work
2.1 Stemming
Stemming (Porter, 1980; Krovetz, 1993) is a method in
which the corpus is processed so that semantically and
morphologically related words are reduced to a common
stem. Thus, race, racing, and racer are all reduced to a
single root ? race. Stemming has been found to be ef-
fective for Information Retrieval, TDT and other related
tasks. Current stemming algorithms work only for regu-
lar English words and not names. In this paper we look
at addressing the problem of grouping together and nor-
malizing proper names in the same way that stemming
groups together regular English words.
2.2 Approximate String Matching
There has been some past work (French et al, 1997; Zo-
bel and Dart, 1996) that has addressed the problem that
proper names can have different spellings. Each of those
works, however, only addresses the question of how ef-
fectively one can match a name to its spelling variants.
They measure their performance in terms of the preci-
sion and recall with which they are able to retrieve other
names which are variants of a given query name. Essen-
tially, the primary motivation of those works was in find-
ing good approximate string matching techniques. Those
techniques are directly applicable only in applications
that retrieve tuples from a database record.
However, there is no work that evaluates the effec-
tiveness of approximate string matching techniques for
names in an information retrieval or related task. We
know of no work that attempts to detect names automati-
cally, and then index names that should go together, in the
same way that words of the same stem class are indexed
by one common term.
2.3 The TREC SDR and the TDT Link Detection
tasks
A single news-source may spell all mentions of a given
name identically. However, this consistency is lost when
there are multiple sources of news, where sources span
languages and modes (broadcast and print). The TDT3
corpus (ldc, 2003) is representative of such real-life data.
The corpus consists of English, Arabic and Mandarin
print and broadcast news. ASR output is used in the case
of the broadcast sources and in the case of non-English
stories machine translated output is used for comparing
stories. For both ASR systems and Machine Transla-
tion systems, proper names are often out-of-vocabulary
(OOV). A typical speech recognizer has a lexicon of
about 60K, and for a lexicon of this size about 10% of
the person names are OOV. The OOV problem is usually
solved by the use of transliteration and other such tech-
niques. A breakdown of the OOV rates for names for
different lexicon sizes is given in (Miller et al, 2000).
We believe the problem of spelling errors is of impor-
tance when one wants to index and retrieve ASR docu-
ments. For example, Monica Lewinsky is commonly re-
ferred to in the TDT3 corpus. The corpus has closed- cap-
tion transcripts for TV broadcasts. Closed caption suf-
fers from typing errors. The name Lewinsky is also often
misspelt as Lewinskey in the closed caption text. In the
ASR text some of the variants that appear are Lewenskey,
Linski, Lansky and Lewinsky. This example is typical,
with the errors in the closed caption text highlighting how
humans themselves can vary in their spelling of a name
and the errors in ASR demonstrating how a single ASR
system can output different spellings for the same name.
The ASR errors are largely because ASR systems rely
on phonemes for OOV words, and each of the different
variations in the spellings of the same name is probably
a result of different pronounciations and other such fac-
tors. The result of an ASR system then, is several dif-
ferent spelling variations of each name. It is easy to see
why it would help considerably to group names that refer
to the same entity together, and index them as one en-
tity. We can exploit the fact that these different spelling
variations of a given name exhibit strong similarity us-
ing approximate string matching techniques. We propose
that in certain domains, where the issue that proper names
exist with many different variations is dominant, the use
of approximate string matching techniques to determine
which names refer to the same entity will help improve
the accuracy with which we can detect links between sto-
ries. Figure 1 shows a snippet of closed caption text and
its ASR counterpart. The names Lewinskey and Tripp
are misspelt in the ASR text. The two documents how-
ever have high similarity, because of the other words that
the ASR system gets right. Allan (Allan, 2002) showed
how ASR errors can cause misses in TDT tasks, and can
sometimes be beneficial, resulting in a minimal average
impact on performance in TDT. In the case of Spoken
Document Retrieval (Garofolo et al, 2000) also it was
found that a few ASR errors per document did not re-
sult in a big difference to performance as long as we get
a reasonable percentage of the words right. Of course,
factors such as the length of the two pieces of text being
compared make a difference. Barnett et al(Barnett et al,
1997), showed how short queries were affected consid-
erably by Word Error rate. ASR errors may not cause a
significant drop in performance for any of the Topic De-
tection and Tracking tasks. But, consider a system where
retrieving all documents mentioning Lewinskey and Tripp
is critical, and it is not unrealistic to assume there exist
systems with such needs, the ASR document in the above
mentioned example would be left out. We therefore, be-
lieve that the problem we are addressing in this paper is
an important one. The preliminary experiments in this
paper, which are on the TDT corpus, only highlight how
our approach can help.
3 Story Link Detection
3.1 Task Definition
The Story Link Detection Task is key to all the other tasks
in TDT. The system is handed a set of story pairs, and
for each pair it is asked to judge whether both the stories
discuss the same topic or different topics. In addition to
a YES/NO decision the system is also expected to output
a confidence score, where a low confidence score implies
that the system is more in favor of the NO decision.
3.2 Our Approach
Simply stated our approach to the SLD task, is to use ap-
proximate string matching techniques to compare entities
between two pieces of text. The two pieces of text may be
a query and a document, or two documents, depending on
the task. We first need to identify entities in the two doc-
uments. There exist several techniques to automatically
identify names. For properly punctuated text, heuristics
like capitalization work sufficiently well. However, for
ASR text we often do not have sentence boundaries or
even punctuation. Hence we rely on a Hidden Markov
Model based named entity recognizer (Bikel et al, 1999)
for our task.
A simple strategy that incorporates an approximate
string matching technique is to first preprocess the cor-
pus, and then normalize all mentions of a named entity
to a given canonical form, where the canonical form is
independent of mentions of other entities in the two doc-
uments being compared. Soundex, Phonix, and other
such codes offer us a means of normalizing a word to
its phonetic form. The Soundex code is a combination of
the first letter of the word and a three digit code which
is representative of its phonetic sound. Hence, similar
sounding names like ?Lewinskey? and ?Lewinsky? are
both reduced to the same soundex code ?l520?. We can
pre-process the corpus so that all the named entities are
replaced by their Soundex codes. We then compute the
similarity between documents in the new corpus as op-
posed to the old one, using conventional similarity met-
rics like Cosine or TF-IDF.
4 Experimental Set up
4.1 Data
The corpus (ldc, 2003) has 67111 documents from mul-
tiple sources of news in multiple languages (English
Chinese and Arabic) and media (broadcast news and
newswire). The English sources are Associated Press and
New York Times, PRI, Voice of America etc. For the
broadcast news sources we have ASR output and for TV
we have both ASR output as well as closed caption data.
Additionally we have the following Mandarin news-wire,
web and broadcast sources - Xinhua news, Zaobao, and
Voice of America (Mandarin). For all the Mandarin doc-
uments we have the original documents in the native lan-
guage as well the English output of Systran- a machine
translation system. The data has been collected by LDC
by sampling from the above mentioned sources in the pe-
riod from October to December 1998.
The LDC has annotated 60 topics in the TDT3 corpus.
A topic is determined by an event. For example topic
30001 is the Cambodian Government Coalition. Each
topic has key entities associated with it and a description
of the topic. A subset of the documents are annotated as
being on-topic or not according to a well formed strategy
as defined by the LDC.
4.2 Story Link Detection
To compute the similarity of two documents, that is, the
YES/NO decision threshold, we used the the traditional
cosine similarity metric. To give some leverage to doc-
uments that were very similar even before named entity
normalization, we average the similarity scores between
documents before and after the named entities have been
normalized by their Soundex codes as follows:
Sim(D
1
; D
2
) =
1
2
(Cos(D
1
; D
2
) + Cos(D
0
1
; D
0
2
)) (1)
Where D
1
and D
2
are the original documents and D0
1
and D0
2
are the documents after the names have been nor-
malized.
4.3 Evaluation
An ROC curve is plotted by making a parameter sweep of
the YES/NO decision thresholds, and plotting the Misses
and False Alarms at each point. At each point the cost
is computed using the following empirically determined
formula (Fiscus et al, 1998).
C
det
= 0:02P (miss) + 0:098P (fa) (2)
This cost function is standard across all tasks. The point
of minimum cost serves as the comparison between vari-
ous systems.
5 Results
We tested our idea on the TDT3 corpus for the Story Link
Detection Task, using the Cosine similarity metric, and
found that performance actually degraded. On investiga-
tion we found that the named entity recognizer performs
poorly on Machine Translated and ASR source data. Our
named entity recognizer relies considerably on sentence
structure, to make its predictions. Machine translated out-
put often lacks grammatical structure, and ASR output
does not have punctuation, which results in a lot of named
entity tagging errors.
We therefore decided to test our idea for newswire text.
We created our own test set of 4752 pairs of stories from
newswire sources. This test set was created by randomly
picking on and off-topic stories for each topic using the
same policy as employed by the LDC (Fiscus, 2003). On
these pairs, we obtained about 10% improvement (Fig-
ure 2), suggesting that there is merit in Soundex normal-
ization of names. However, the problem of poor named
entity recognition is a bottle-neck for ASR. We discuss
1
2
5
10
20
40
60
80
90
.01 .02 .05 .1 .2 .5 1 2 5 10 20 40 60 80 90
M
is
s 
pr
ob
ab
ilit
y 
(in
 %
)
False Alarms probability (in %)
SLD using soundex codes on Newswire-Newswire pairs
Random Performance
Using Soundex
TW Min DET Norm(Cost) = 0.1588
Baseline
TW Min DET Norm(Cost) = 0.1709
Figure 1: Story Link Detection performance
alternative strategies of how to deal with this, and other
ways of using approximate string matching in the next
section.
6 Alternative strategies
6.1 To not use an entity recognizer
We were not able to benefit from our approach on the
ASR documents because of the poor performance of the
named entity recognizer on those types of document.
An example of a randomly picked named entity tagged
ASR document is given below. The tagging errors are
underlined.
< DOC >
< DOCNO > CNN19981001:0130:0000 < /DOCNO >
< TEXT >
< ENAMEX TYPE=?ORGANIZATION? >
BUDGET SURPLUS < /ENAMEX> AND FIGHTING
OVER WHETHER IT?S GOING DOOR POCKETS WILL
TELL YOU THE < ENAMEX TYPE=?ORGANIZATION?
> VEHICLES CLIMBED DATES THEREAFTER <
/ENAMEX > AND IF YOU?RE REQUIRED TO PAY
CHILD SUPPORT INFORMATION THAT YOUR
JOB AND COME AND ADDRESS NOW PART
HAVE < ENAMEX TYPE=?ORGANIZATION? >
A NATIONAL REGISTRY THE HEADLINE < /ENAMEX
> NEWS I?M < ENAMEX TYPE=?PERSON?>KIMBERLY
KENNEDY </ENAMEX> THOSE STORIES IN A MO-
MENT BUT FIRST </TEXT></DOC >
We need a better performing recognizer, but that may
be hard. Instead we might be able to use other informa-
tion from the speech recognizer to overcome this prob-
lem. We did not have confidence scores for the words in
the ASR output. If we had had that information, or if we
were able to obtain information about which words were
OOV, we could possibly index all words with low confi-
dence scores or all OOV words by their Soundex codes.
Or else, one could normalize all words in the ASR out-
put, that are not part of the regular English vocabulary by
their Soundex codes.
6.2 Other ways of grouping entities
Another direction of research to pursue is the way in
which approximate string matching is used to compare
documents. The way we used approximate string match-
ing in this paper was fairly simple. However, it loses
out on some names that ought to go together particularly
when two names differ in their first alphabet - for example
Katherine and Catherine. The Soundex codes are k365
and c365 respectively. This is by virtue of the nature of
the Soundex code of word.
There are other ways to compute the similarity be-
tween two documents like the Levenshtein distance or
edit distance which is a measure of the number of string
edit operations required to convert one string to the other.
The words Katherine and Catherine have an edit distance
of 1. Given two documents D
1
and D
2
, we can compute
the distance between them by computing the distance be-
tween all pairs of names that occur in the two documents,
and using the distances to group entities and finally to find
the similarity of the two documents. However this means
that each entity in D
1
has to be compared to all entities in
D
1
and D
2
. Besides, this method brings with it the ques-
tion of how to use the distances between the names so as
to group together similar names. This method is probably
a good direction for future research, because the Leven-
shtein distance could possibly be a better string matching
technique. Another plausible strategy would be to use the
edit-distance of the Soundex codes of the names, when
comparing documents. Katherine and Catherine would
have a distance of 1 in this case too.
Using cross document coreference resolution tech-
niques to find equivalence classes of entities would be yet
another alternative approach. In Cross document corefer-
ence, two mentions of the same name, may or may not be
included in the same group depending on whether or not
the context of the two mentions is the same or is different.
7 Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper we highlighted an important problem that
occurs with names in ASR text. We showed how a name
may be spelt differently by humans. In ASR the same
name had many more different spellings.
We proposed a simple indexing strategy for names,
wherein a name was indexed by its Soundex code. We
found that our strategy did not work for ASR, but the
problem was not with the approach, but because we could
not do a good job of identifying names in ASR text.If
we could detect names with reasonable accuracy in ASR
text we should be able to achieve reasonable improve-
ment. We did not have a named entity recognizer that
performed well on ASR text. We therefore verified our
idea on news-wire text, which is grammatical, well punc-
tuated text. In the news-wire domain, in spite of there be-
ing reasonable consistency in spellings of names, we get
about 10% improvement in minimum cost, and a consis-
tent improvement at all points in the ROC curve. Hence,
a simple technique like Soundex served as a useful nor-
malization technique for names. We proposed alternative
mechanisms that could be applied to ASR text, wherein
all OOV words could be normalized by their Soundex
codes. We also outlined further directions for research in
the way that approximate string matching may be used.
We think the general results of past works that has con-
sidered the problems due to ASR errors to be insignificant
cannot be assumed to transfer across to other problems.
There will arise situations when this problem is material
and research needs to be done in this direction.
8 Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Cen-
ter for Intelligent Information Retrieval, in part by
SPAWARSYSCEN-SD grant number N66001-02-1-
8903. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recom-
mendations expressed in this material are the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsor.
References
James Allan. 2002. Detecting and tracking topics in
broadcast news,att speechdays 2002.
James Barnett, Steve Anderson, John Broglio, Mona
Singh, R. Hudson, and S. W. Kuo. 1997. Experiments
in spoken queries for document retrieval. In Proc. Eu-
rospeech ?97, pages 1323?1326, Rhodes, Greece.
Daniel M. Bikel, Richard L. Schwartz, and Ralph M.
Weischedel. 1999. An algorithm that learns what?s
in a name. Machine Learning, 34(1-3):211?231.
J. Fiscus, G. Doddington, J. Garofolo, and A. Martin.
1998. Nist?s 1998 topic detection and tracking eval-
uation.
John Fiscus. 2003. Personal communication.
J. C. French, A. L. Powell, and E. Schulman. 1997. Ap-
plications of approximate word matching in informa-
tion retrieval. In Proceedings of the Sixth International
Conference on Knowledge and Information Manage-
ment, pages 9?15, New York, NY. ACM Press.
J. Garofolo, G. Auzanne, and E. Voorhees. 2000. The
trec spoken document retrieval track: A success story.
R. Krovetz. 1993. Viewing Morphology as an Inference
Process,. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual In-
ternational ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval, pages 191?203.
2003. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/tdt/.
David Miller, Richard Schwartz, Ralph Weischedel, and
Rebecca Stone. 2000. Named entity extraction from
broadcast news.
M.F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
Program.
J. Zobel and P. W. Dart. 1996. Phonetic string match-
ing: Lessons from information retrieval. In H.-P. Frei,
D. Harman, P. Scha?ble, and R. Wilkinson, editors,
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 166?172, Zurich, Switzerland. ACM Press.
