The Swarthmore College SENSEVAL3 System
Richard Wicentowski, Emily Thomforde and Adrian Packel
Computer Science Department
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, Pennsylvania, 19081, USA
{richardw,ethomfo1,packel}@cs.swarthmore.edu
Abstract
This paper presents the Swarthmore College word-
sense disambiguation system which was designed
for the 2004 SENSEVAL3 competition. Our system
participated in five tasks: the lexical sample tasks in
Basque, Catalan, Italian, Romanian, and Spanish.
For each task, a suite of supervised algorithms were
combined using voting to form the final system.
1 Introduction
The Swarthmore College system consisted of three
supervised classifiers which were used to perform
lexical ambiguity resolution in five languages. A
nearest-neighbor clustering classifier, a na??ve Bayes
classifier, and a decision list classifier were each
trained on several permutations of the extracted fea-
ture set, then the answers were joined using voting.
The training data was limited to the labeled data
provided by the organizers; no outside or unlabeled
data was used.
The systems presented in this paper were devel-
oped by undergraduates as part of a class project at
Swarthmore College.
2 Features
Each of the supervised algorithms made use of the
same set of features, extracted from only the labeled
data provided to us by the task organizers. We used
no unlabeled data. We used the tagged and lemma-
tized data to extract the following features, which
were the only features used in our system:
? Bag-of-words and bag-of-lemmas
? Bigrams and trigrams of words, lemmas, part-
of-speech, and case (Basque-only) around the
target word
? Topic or code (Basque, Catalan and Spanish)
In order to prevent individual features from dom-
inating any individual system, we used up to eight
permutations of the above mentioned features (de-
pending on the language) for each of our classifiers.
Catalan and Spanish provided fine-grained part-
of-speech tags which we felt would lead to sparse
data problems. To reduce this problem, for some
feature sets we made the part-of-speech tags more
coarse by simplifying the tags to include only the
first or first two letters of the tag.
3 Systems
The following systems were used to complete the
Basque, Catalan, Italian and Romanian lexical sam-
ple tasks. The Spanish lexical sample task was com-
pleted before the other four tasks were begun and
used only a subset of the systems presented below.
Full details on the systems and methods used for the
Spanish lexical sample task can be found in Sec-
tion 7.3.
See Section 4 for details on the classifier com-
bination, and Section 5.2 for information about our
use of bagging.
3.1 Cosine-based Clustering
The first system developed was a nearest-neighbor
clustering method which used the cosine similarity
of feature vectors as the distance metric. A centroid
was created for each attested sense in the training
data, and each test sample was assigned to a cluster
based on its similarity to the existing centroid. Cen-
troids were not recalculated after each added test in-
stance.
3.2 Na??ve Bayes
The second system used was a na??ve Bayes classifier
where the similarity between an instance, I , and a
sense class, Sj , is defined as:
Sim(I, Sj) = P (I, Sj) = P (Sj)P (I|Sj)
We then choose the sense class, Sj , which max-
imized the similarity function above, making stan-
dard independence assumptions.
3.3 Decision List
The final system was a decision list classifier that
found the log-likelihoods of the correspondence be-
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
tween features and senses, using plus-one smooth-
ing (Yarowsky, 1994). The features were ordered
from most to least indicative to form the decision
list. A separate decision list was constructed for
each set of lexical samples in the training data. For
each test instance, the first matching feature found
in the associated decision list was used to determine
the classification of the instance. Instances which
failed to match any rule in the decision list were
labeled with the most frequent sense, as calculated
from the training data.
4 Classifier Combination
Due to time constraints, we were unable to get
cross-validation results for all of the systems we cre-
ated, and therefore all of the final classifier combi-
nation was done using simple majority vote, break-
ing ties arbitrarily. To reach a consensus vote, we
combined the multiple decision list systems, which
had been run on each of the different subsets of ex-
tracted features, into a single system. We then did
the same for the clustering system and the na??ve
Bayes system, yielding a total of three new sys-
tems. These three systems were then voted together
to form the final system. The two-tiered voting was
performed to ensure equal voting in the case of our
joint work (Wicentowski et al, 2004) where the five
systems that needed to be combined were run on
different numbers of feature subsets.
4.1 Combination Errors
There were two mistakes we made when voting our
systems together. We caught one mistake after the
submission deadline but before notification of re-
sults; the other we realized only while evaluating
our systems after receiving our results. For this rea-
son, there are three sets of results that we will report
here:
? Official results: The results from our submis-
sion to SENSEVAL3.
? Unofficial results: Includes a bug-fix found be-
fore notification of competition results.
? Tie-breaking results: Includes a bug-fix found
after notification of results.
In doing the evaluation of our system for this pa-
per, we will use the unofficial results1. Because
of the nature of the bug-fix, evaluating our system
based on the official results will yield less informa-
tive results than an evaluation of results after fixing
1As mentioned previously, Spanish is a special case and we
will report only our official results.
the error. Since these unofficial results were ob-
tained before notification of results from the com-
petition organizers, we believe this to be a fair com-
parison.
4.1.1 Over-weighting part-of-speech n-grams
The bug which yielded our unofficial results oc-
curred when we combined the multiple decision list
systems into a single decision list system (and sim-
ilarly for the multiple clustering and na??ve Bayes
systems). As discussed in Section 2, we experi-
mented with forming partial labels for the part-of-
speech tags to reduce the sparse-data issues: using
the full part-of-speech tag, using only the first let-
ter of the tag, and using the first two letters of the
tag. However, in the final combination, we ended
up including all three methods in the voting, in-
stead of including only one. Obviously, these three
classifiers, based solely on part-of-speech n-grams
around the target word, had a high rate of agree-
ment and were therefore over-weighted in the final
voting. Our systems underperformed where they
should have, with the surprising exception of Cata-
lan, which performed better with the mistake than
without it. Table 1 compares our official results with
our unofficial results.
Language official unofficial change
Basque 64.6% 66.6% 2.0%
Catalan 79.7% 79.5% (-0.2%)
Italian 46.5% 49.6% 3.1%
Romanian 70.1% 71.3% 1.2%
Spanish 79.5% ? ?
Table 1: Final results, officially and unofficially,
from making a bug-fix before notification of results,
but after the submission deadline.
4.1.2 Voting without weighting
Our classifier combination used a non-informed
method for breaking ties: whichever sense had
the first hash code (as determined by Perl?s hash
function) was chosen. Our inability to complete
cross-validation experiments led us to not favor any
one classifier over another. Performance would
have been improved by using an ad-hoc weighting
scheme which took into account the following intu-
itions:
? Initial experiments indicated that the instances
of the classifiers with access to the full set of
features would outperform the instances run-
ning on limited subsets of the features.
? Empirical evidence suggested that the deci-
sion list classifier was the best, the clustering
method a strong second, and the na??ve Bayes
method a distant third.
In fairness, we did not discover this mistake un-
til we were preparing this paper, only after receiv-
ing notification of our results. While we report our
revised results, we make no further comparisons
based on these results. In addition, we ran no ex-
tra experiments to determine the weighting scheme
listed below, we simply used our intuition based on
our earlier experimentation as noted above. These
intuitions were not always correct, as indicated in
Table 5 and Table 6.
Using very simple ad-hoc weights which back up
these intuitions, we changed our classifier combina-
tion system to break ties according to the following
scheme: In the first tier of voting, we fractionally
increased the weight given to the classifiers run on
the full-feature set: instead of each system receiv-
ing exactly one vote, we gave those systems an extra
1
10 th of a vote. In the second tier of voting, we made
the same fractional increase to the weight given to
the decision list classifier. Use of this tie breaking
scheme increases our results impressively, as shown
below in Table 2.
Language official tie-breaking net gain
Basque 64.6% 68.2% 3.6%
Catalan 79.7% 81.0% 1.3%
Italian 46.5% 52.4% 5.9%
Romanian 70.1% 73.2% 3.1%
Table 2: Using simple tie-breakers in voting. The
second column also includes the bug fix described
in ?4.1.1. Note that the tie-breaking error was found
after notification of our final results.
5 Additional features
5.1 Collocational Senses
In the Basque and Romanian tasks, senses could
be labeled either as numbered alternatives or as
a collocational sense. For example, the Basque
word astun could be labeled with the collocational
sense pisu astun.
From the SENSEVAL2 English lexical-sample
task, we found there were 175 words labeled with a
collocational sense. A lemmatized form of the col-
location was found in 96.6% of these when consid-
ering a ?2-word window around the target. To take
advantage of this expected behavior in Basque and
Romanian, we labeled a target word with a colloca-
tional sense if we found the lemmatized collocation
in a ?2-word window. In Romanian, many collo-
cations contained prepositions or other stop-words;
therefore, we labeled a target word with the colloca-
tional sense only if a non-stop-word from the collo-
cation was found in the ?2-word window. Overall,
as shown in Table 3, this decision proved to be rea-
sonably effective.
Language Correct Answered Precision
Romanian 161 190 84.7%
Basque 70 79 88.6%
Table 3: Precision on likely collocational senses.
Complementary to this issue, a sampling of the
same English data indicated that if a target word was
part of a previously seen collocation, it was highly
unlikely that this word would not be tagged with
the collocational sense. Therefore, we expected
it would be advantageous if we could remove the
collocational senses from the training data to pre-
vent target words which were not part of colloca-
tions from being tagged as such. Based on cross-
validated results, we found that this was worthwhile
for Basque, but not for Romanian, where there were
many examples of a target word being tagged as
collocational sense without the collocation being
present.
5.2 Bagging
For the decision list and clustering systems, we used
bagging (Breiman, 1996) to train on five randomly
sampled instances of the training data which were
combined using a simple majority vote. We limited
ourselves to five samples due to time limitations im-
posed by the competition. We found a consistent,
but minimal, improvement for each of the four tasks
due to our use of bagging, as shown below in Ta-
ble 4.
Language no bagging bagging net gain
Basque 66.0% 66.6% 0.6%
Catalan 79.4% 79.5% 0.1%
Italian 48.6% 49.6% 1.0%
Romanian 70.9% 71.3% 0.4%
Table 4: Overall impact of using bagging.
6 Evaluation
As previously discussed, we used a combination of
three supervised classifiers, each run on a different
subset of the features. Here we report the perfor-
mance of each of the individual classifiers, as well
as the features we found to be most indicative of the
correct sense.
6.1 Indicative features
As discussed in Section 2, we did not use any exter-
nal data for the lexical sample tasks, but we did try
to use all of the features that were available in the
training and test sets. In order to show the effective-
ness of each of the features we used, we present the
following sample taken from running our decision
list system in Basque, Catalan, Italian and Roma-
nian using only one feature at a time.
Basque Feature Catalan
55.8% mfs baseline 55.0%
64.6% all features 80.6%
52.9% case n-grams -
54.2% simplified pos n-grams 74.9%
59.2% topic/code tag 70.5%
54.1% part-of-speech n-grams 77.5%
61.7% docsrc tag 69.7%
61.4% bag of words 78.7%
61.3% bag of ?forms? 79.7%
62.6% bag of lemmas 78.7%
65.0% word n-grams 81.7%
66.1% lemma n-grams 81.7%
Italian Feature Romanian
27.7% mfs baseline 58.4%
50.3% all features 70.9%
38.4% simplified pos n-grams 63.7%
38.6% part-of-speech n-grams 64.2%
41.0% bag of words 64.7%
41.1% bag of ?forms? -
41.1% bag of lemmas 64.8%
44.4% word n-grams 70.0%
46.5% lemma n-grams 69.4%
Table 5: Accuracy of the decision list system using
each of the available features individually. All of
the above features, except ?docsrc? were used in the
final system. The features are ordered from least to
most informative across the four languages.
With the exception of Romanian, the bigrams and
trigrams comprised of the lemmas were the most in-
formative single feature for the decision list system.
Surprisingly, in both Catalan and Basque, the de-
cision list system trained only on lemma n-grams
outperformed decision list system which used all of
the features.
Because the lemmas were so important, we sus-
pect that omitting them in future data sets will favor
those systems which can incorporate accurate lem-
matizers. Since real world applications will require
such lemmatizers, we are in favor of omitting these
in future competitions.
6.2 Classifiers
As shown in Table 6, the decision list system
was the best single system; however, the nearest-
neighbor clustering system outperformed decision
lists in Basque. Each of the supervised systems is
compared against the baseline most-frequent-sense
classifier (as computed from the training data).
Language MFS NB NNC DL
Basque 55.8% 60.4% 66.0% 64.6%
Catalan 55.0% 71.3% 77.5% 80.6%
Italian 27.7% 42.1% 44.9% 50.3%
Romanian 58.4% 62.8% 67.9% 70.9%
Table 6: Accuracies for each of the classifiers: Most
Frequent Sense, Na??ve Bayes, Nearest-Neighbor
Clustering, and Decision Lists.
7 Task-specific Details
7.1 Basque
The Basque data contained the largest number of
available features, but in places, the features were
incomplete (case markers) or required additional
steps to extract. Most notably, though lemmas were
provided, the target word was not indicated in ei-
ther the training or test data; therefore, we per-
formed some simple pre-processing of the Basque
data to isolate the target lemma in the training and
test data As is shown in Table 5, these lemma n-
grams around the target word were the most indica-
tive features for our decision list system.
7.2 Romanian
The Romanian data also provided a large number
of available features, however some pre-processing
was necessary to change the format of the supplied
part-of-speech tagged data into the format supplied
by the other tasks.
7.3 Spanish
We were required to submit our results for the Span-
ish lexical sample task before we had completed
writing our system, so the submission includes only
two classifiers, a na??ve Bayes classifier and a deci-
sion list classifier. We ran our decision list on seven
permutations of the feature set, and the na??ve Bayes
on two permutations, for a total of nine systems.
These nine systems were joined using a majority-
voting scheme. Relative performance on this task is
expected to be below that of other tasks.
8 Collaborative Work
This paper refers only to the entries completed
exclusively by the Swarthmore College team and
discusses the entries submitted under the label
?Swat?. The ?Swat-HK? and ?Swat HK-Bo? en-
tries were submitted by Swarthmore College in col-
laboration with a joint team from Hong Kong Poly-
technic University and Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology. For these entries, Swarth-
more College provided the data, with all of the fea-
tures described, to the Hong Kong team. Their team
then sent us back two sets of results: the output of
their maximum entropy system and their boosting
system. These two results were then combined with
the three systems written by Swarthmore College.
Details on this joint effort can be found in (Wicen-
towski et al, 2004).
In addition, the decision list system described
here was used in the Semantic Role Labeling task
submitted by (Ngai et al, 2004).
9 Acknowledgments
The authors thank the following Swarthmore Col-
lege students for their assistance and guidance: Ben
Mitchell ?05, Charles Bell ?06, Lisa Spitalewitz ?06,
and Michael Stone ?07. Their efforts as part of the
Fall 2003 ?Information Retrieval and Natural Lan-
guage Processing? class laid the foundation for our
successful entry into the SENSEVAL3 competition.
In addition, the authors express their gratitude to
Grace Ngai, Dekai Wu, and all the members of their
joint team, for asking us to participate in their Se-
mantic Role Labeling system.
Finally, the authors thank the organizers, espe-
cially Rada Mihalcea, for their support of our par-
ticipation.
References
L. Breiman. 1996. Bagging predictors. Machine
Learning, 24:123?140.
G. Ngai, D. Wu, M. Carpuat, C.S. Wang, and
C.Y. Wang. 2004. Semantic Role Label-
ing with Boosting, SVMs, Maximum Entropy,
SNOW, and Decision Lists. In Proceedings of
SENSEVAL-3, Barcelona.
R. Wicentowski, G. Ngai, E. Thomforde, A. Packel,
D. Wu, and M. Carpuat. 2004. Joining forces
to resolve lexical ambiguity: East meets West
in Barcelona. In Proceedings of SENSEVAL-3,
Barcelona.
D. Yarowsky. 1994. Decision lists for lexical am-
biguity resolution: Application to accent restora-
tion in spanish and french. In Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 88?95.
