 A Rule Based Approach to Discourse Parsing 
Livia Polanyi, Chris Culy, Martin van den Berg, Gian Lorenzo Thione, David Ahn1 
FX Palo Alto Laboratory 
3400 Hillview Avenue, Bldg 4 
Palo Alto CA 94304 
{polanyi|culy|vdberg|thione}@fxpal.com ; ahn@science.uva.nl 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present an overview of 
recent developments in discourse the-
ory and parsing under the Linguistic 
Discourse Model (LDM) framework, a 
semantic theory of discourse structure. 
We give a novel approach to the prob-
lem of discourse segmentation based 
on discourse semantics and sketch a 
limited but robust approach to sym-
bolic discourse parsing based on syn-
tactic, semantic and lexical rules. To 
demonstrate the utility of the system in 
a real application, we briefly describe 
the architecture of the PALSUMM sys-
tem, a symbolic summarization system 
being developed at FX Palo Alto Labo-
ratory that uses discourse structures 
constructed using the theory outlined 
to summarize written English prose 
texts. 1 
1 Introduction 
In this paper we present an overview of recent 
theoretical and computational developments in 
discourse theory and parsing under the Linguistic 
Discourse Model (LDM) framework, a semantic 
account of discourse structure. In Section 2, we 
                                                          
1 Current address:  
Language and Inference Technology Group,  
ILLC, University of Amsterdam,  
Nieuwe Achtergracht 166,  
1018 WV Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
present an overview of what we will term the 
Classical LDM (C-LDM) and identify critical 
problems encountered in implementing the 
model: the difficulty in segmenting complex 
sentences within a text and calculating the at-
tachment site and relationship of an incoming 
unit to an appropriate node in a developing Dis-
course Tree. In Sections 3 and 4 we introduce the 
Unified Linguistic Discourse Model (U-LDM) 
that incorporates solutions to these problems. 
Specifically, in Section 3 we describe a novel 
approach to discourse segmentation based on the 
relationship of sentential syntax to discourse 
semantics. In Section 4, a limited but robust ap-
proach to symbolic discourse processing based 
on syntactic, semantic and lexical rules is given. 
In Section 5, we sketch the architecture of the 
PALSUMM system, a summarization system 
being developed at FX Palo Alto Laboratory that 
uses algorithms operating on discourse represen-
tations generated by a U-LDM parser to summa-
rize written English prose texts. In Section 6 we 
present our conclusions and suggest directions 
for future research. 
2 The Classical Linguistic Dis-
course Model (C-LDM) 
Unlike the Discourse Structures Model (DSM) of 
Grosz and Sidner (1986), a pragmatic and psy-
chological theory that aims to clarify the rela-
tionship between speakers? intentions and their 
focus of attention in discourse, or the rhetorical 
model of Rhetorical Structures Theory (Mann 
and Thompson, 1988) that is designed to identify 
the coherence relations between segments of 
text, the Linguistic Discourse Model (LDM) 
(Polanyi and Scha, 1984; Polanyi, 1988; Polanyi 
 and van den Berg, 1996) is a syntactically in-
formed, semantically driven model developed to 
provide proper semantic interpretation for every 
utterance in a discourse despite the apparent dis-
continuities that are present even in well struc-
tured written texts. In its focus on understanding 
discourse meaning, the LDM is close in spirit to 
Structured Discourse Representation Theory (S-
DRT) (Asher, 1993). While S-DRT attempts to 
account for discourse structure purely semanti-
cally, the LDM framework is concerned to main-
tain a separation between discourse ?syntactic? 
structure, on the one hand, and discourse inter-
pretation on the other. Therefore, like DSM and 
RST, the LDM incorporates an explicit tree 
structured model of relationships between dis-
course segments as its model of discourse ?syn-
tax?. In discourse parsing under the LDM, any 
attachment to the developing discourse tree of a 
textual unit is treated as an instruction to update 
an appropriate semantic representation. We con-
struct dynamic semantic representations (DSRs), 
similar to the Discourse Representation Struc-
tures (Kamp, 1981; Kamp and Reyle, 1993) used 
in S-DRT as its model of discourse semantics. 
The DSRs correspond to the contexts relative to 
which subsequent segments can be interpreted.  
The analysis of intra-sentential structure is 
done by sentential syntax which identifies the 
syntactic and semantic structures within the sen-
tence and makes the resulting analysis available 
for discourse processing. 
2.1 Overview of the Classic LDM 
In the Linguistic Discourse Model (LDM) dis-
course is formed through the recursive combina-
tion of discourse constituent units (DCUs). The 
structure of a discourse is represented by an open 
right tree of DCUs. Basic discourse units 
(BDUs), resulting from a segmentation of the 
discourse according to rules of discourse seg-
mentation, form the content of the leaves of the 
tree. Once a text has been segmented into BDUs, 
an open right tree representing the structure of 
the discourse is built up. The completed tree 
shows, for any given point in the discourse, 
which discourse units (DCUs) remain available 
for continuation and which DCUs are no longer 
available. Because discourse anaphora resolution 
is critically constrained by discourse structure, 
the tree representation makes clear the domain in 
which the antecedent for a given anaphoric refer-
ential expression is to be found. Antecedents 
must be available at a node along the right edge 
of the discourse tree. (Polanyi, 1985; Grosz and 
Sidner 1986; Webber, 1991) 
The LDM posits three structural relations be-
tween discourse units: 
 
1. discourse coordination  
a. Units related by bearing a similar rela-
tionship to an existing or newly formed 
common parent in the tree (lists, narra-
tives).  
b. Available at the C-node is information 
common to all child nodes. 
2. discourse subordination  
a. Units related by an elaboration relation-
ship in which the subordinated unit pro-
vides more information about an entity 
or situation described in the subordinat-
ing unit. 
b. Units unrelated to existing units avail-
able on the right edge of the tree, 
viewed as intrusions or interruptions.  
c. Available at the S-node is information 
specific only to the subordinating or 
dominant constituent (usually the left 
child). 
3. n-ary constructions 
a. Units related by logical or rhetorical, 
genre or interactional conventions spe-
cific to a given language. 
b. Preposed modifier, sentence initial ad-
verbial, ?cue word?, (reported speech) 
attribution phrase. 
c. Available at N-nodes is information 
about each constituent and the relation-
ship connecting them. 
 
Although we believe that the general approach to 
discourse structure captured by the Classical 
LDM is essentially sound, there are three critical 
problems with the existing framework:  
 
1. Segmenting the incoming text into BDUs 
2. Determining the existing or new node at 
which to attach an incoming BDU  
3. Determining the relationship between the 
incoming BDU and the attachment node 
 
Although very difficult challenges associated 
with each of these discourse parsing tasks re-
main, in developing the Unified Linguistic Dis-
course Model (U-LDM) we have made 
significant progress recently on solving them. 
These are discussed in Sections 3 and 4 below. 
3 Discourse Segmentation  
The problem of segmenting discourse into the 
elementary units appropriate for building up the 
 structure of the discourse is an extremely diffi-
cult one. Each discourse theory must specify 
how ?segments? should be identified in light of 
the questions the theory is set up to answer. 
Models based on Grosz and Sidner?s 1986 work, 
especially those which form the basis of spoken 
language systems, define segments in terms of 
the intentions of the speaker: when the speaker?s 
intention shifts, the segment associated with that 
intention ends and immediately following talk is 
included in new (or resumed) segments. While 
very useful in dealing with task oriented talk 
where speakers move between asking questions, 
informing others and giving commands, this 
model is less applicable to determining discourse 
segments within a sentence. The problem is an 
acute one for the analysis of written texts be-
cause often a subsequent, not necessarily adja-
cent, segment will continue the development of 
material introduced in a sub-sentential, often 
subordinate, constituent. Construction of the 
appropriate representation of the rhetorical or 
semantic structure of discourse must therefore 
keep sub-sentential units available for attach-
ment at independent nodes on the tree along. The 
entire sentence or sentential main constituent 
must also be available to be continued after any 
continuation on sub-sentential units has been 
completed. As reported by Carlson et al (2003), 
under RST2, lexical and syntactic information 
used to segment discourse into Elementary Dis-
course Units (EDUs) is based on verbal constitu-
ents including clauses and infinitives.3  
As we show below, the approach taken to 
segmentation under the U-LDM, while it in-
cludes as segments (and non-segments) many of 
the constructions currently used in RST, pro-
vides a rationalization for the choice of units. 
Rather than posit which syntactic objects func-
tion as discourse segments, we started by estab-
lishing the semantic basis for functioning as a 
segment and then identified which syntactic con-
structions carry the semantic information needed 
for discourse segment status. We then identified 
as Basic Discourse Units (BDUs) segments that 
have the potential to independently establish an 
anchor point for future continuation. We then 
drew a further distinction between BDUs as a 
class of syntactic structures with the potential to 
                                                          
2  Under S-DRT, no explicit structural tree is 
constructed and no explicit segmentation criteria 
have been proposed in the literature. 
3 Although some clauses are not treated as ele-
mentary units and ?a small number of phrasal EDUs 
are allowed, provided that the phrase begins with a 
strong discourse marker.? 
establish anchor points and the actual BDUs in a 
given sentence which can function as indexical 
anchor points in a specific discourse. We believe 
these distinctions, while cumbersome, are neces-
sary for both theoretical and practical text analy-
sis. 
3.1 Discourse Segments under the U-LDM 
As a semantic theory, the U-LDM must account 
for the interpretation of utterances. Specifically, 
we must account for the availability for update of 
appropriate discourse contexts or sub-contexts 
introduced in earlier text. In order to do so, we 
must be able to match incoming discourse utter-
ances with their target contexts, some of which 
may have been introduced in syntactically sub-
ordinated positions within a sentence. Therefore, 
in designing U-LDM discourse segmentation, we 
have identified the syntactic reflexes of the se-
mantic content of the linguistic or paralinguistic 
phenomena making up discourse. 
 Since elementary discourse units are needed 
to build up discourse structure recursively, we 
have identified as discourse segments the syntac-
tic constructions that encode a minimum unit of 
meaning and/or discourse function interpretable 
relative to a set of contexts. We understand a 
minimum unit of meaning to communicate in-
formation about not more than one ?event?, 
?event-type? or state of affairs in a ?possible 
world? of some type4. Clauses, and many other 
verb based structures, carry indexical informa-
tion that ties the content to the context in which 
it is to be interpreted. Minimal functional units, 
on the other hand encode information about how 
previously occurring (or possibly subsequent) 
linguistic gestures relate structurally, semanti-
cally, interactionally or rhetorically to other units 
in the discourse or to information in the context 
in which the discourse takes place5. 
 Examples of discourse segments are given in 
Table 1. Note that while discourse segments un-
der the U-LDM are the syntactic reflex of a lin-
guistically realized semantic ?gesture? 
interpreted relative to context, they need not be 
contiguous, but may completely surround an-
other segment (e.g. an appositive, or non-
restrictive relative clause.) Discontinuous seg-
                                                          
4  Roughly speaking an ?elementary proposi-
tion?, ?event-type predicate? etc. In a Davidsonian 
style semantics, quantification over an event vari-
able signals a separate unit of meaning. 
5 Greetings, discourse PUSH/POP markers and 
other ?cue phrases?, connectives etc. are all func-
tional segments. 
 ments occur when there is overt material on both 
sides of the intervening segment. With fragmen-
tary segments, the full interpretation remains 
unrecoverable from surrounding context. For 
example: a single word answer to a question is a 
complete segment, whereas the same word ut-
tered but ?left hanging? would be an un-
interpretable fragment. (See Appendix for exten-
sive example of a segmented text.) 
3.2 Basic Discourse Units 
An important contrast between the U-LDM and 
other approaches to segmentation concerns the 
distinction made in the U-LDM between dis-
course segments such as those we have identified 
above and Basic Discourse Units (BDUs). While 
all BDUs under the U-LDM are segments, not 
all segments are BDUs. BDUs, under this model, 
are discourse segments of a type that can be in-
dependently continued: operator segments are 
one example of non-BDU segments. Other verb 
bases constituents that might be expected to be 
segments are not because they do not establish 
an interpretation context independent of other 
segments that can be updated by subsequent 
units. In general, these ?notable non-segments?, 
summarized in Table 2, are heavily integrated 
into other nominal or verbal constructions and 
cannot be accessed for independent continuation. 
 
Non-segments Examples 
Gerunds [Singing is fun.] 
Nominalizations [Rationalization is useless.] 
Auxiliary and 
modal verbs 
[I might have succeeded.] 
Clefts [It was the tiger that we liked best.] 
Table 2. Notable non-segments (underlined). 6 
                                                          
6 In answer to a reviewer who asked if in "Sing-
ing is fun", singing should not be an independent 
In order to account for continuation in specific 
sentences, we further identify one class of in-
stances of BDU: Active BDUs (A-BDUs) are 
BDUs on the right edge of a discourse tree. The 
main clause of any sentence will be an A-BDU 
and, depending on the deployment of BDU seg-
ments within a given sentence, other BDUs may 
also be accessible for continuation. (See Section 
4 below.)  
4 Discourse Parsing with the 
U-LDM 
Ascertaining the relationship of a BDU to the 
discourse is a complex parsing process involving 
lexical, semantic, structural and syntactic infor-
mation7. For the case of written prose we are 
concentrating on here, the unit of analysis is the 
sentence (or sentence fragment). Sentences are 
attached to the DPT of the text as a unit8. Dis-
course attachment of the sentence involves two 
decisions: where along the right edge to attach, 
and what is the relationship to the attachment 
point. The process, which includes constructing a 
BDU tree of the sentence, can be summarized as 
follows: 
                                                                                
segment, we would answer that this sentences con-
cerns one eventuality (something being fun), not two. 
Since any noun can be referred to by a pronoun in 
the next sentence simply referring to the noun is not 
equivalent to referring to the eventuality in which 
the referent of the noun is a participant. 
7 Although the linguistic (and lexical) informa-
tion we discuss could be augmented with processes 
relying upon high level world knowledge and infer-
ence, we believe that it is extremely significant to 
see how far one can get with discourse parsing with-
out invoking non-linguistic information. 
8 See discussion of MBDU below. 
 
Segments Common realizations Examples 
Content segments 
Clauses: main, subordinate [I heard the dog] [that was barking.] 
Predication [California elected Schwarzenegger] [governor] 
Participial modifiers [The donkey [braying next door] was annoying.] 
Eventualities (activities or 
states) and their participants. 
Infinitival modifiers [We persuaded them] [to leave.] 
[They left] [to get the tickets.] 
Parentheticals [The show [(and what a show it was)] lasted 4 hours.] 
Appositives [The building, [an example of the Mozarabic style,] was 
recently restored.] 
Interpolations 
Interruptions [They were [? Stop that! ?] leaving at 8:00.] 
Fragments Section headings [4. Discussion] 
List items [e.g., [hydrogen,] [helium]]  
?Restarted? material [My dog,] [no,] [my cat ran away.] 
Operator Segments 
Conjunction Conjunctions [We arrived] [and] [got seats.] 
Discourse operators ?scene-setting? preposed modifi-
ers  
[On Tuesday,] [we will see the sites.] 
 ?cue? words  [Anyway,] [we did get there on time.] 
Table 1. Examples of Discourse Segments, Unlabelled bracketing is used to indicate segments. 
  
? Identify potential BDUs within sentence 
using sentential syntax  
? Construct a BDU-tree from the segments of 
the sentence, using sentential syntactic in-
formation and discourse rules to map seg-
ments and relationships among them. This 
BDU-tree is itself an Open Right Tree domi-
nated by the node corresponding to the Main 
clause of sentence9. (This is the Main BDU 
or MBDU). 
? Attach the BDU-tree as a unit to the Dis-
course Parse Tree by computing the rela-
tionship of MBDU and preposed modifiers, 
if any, to accessible DCUs aligned along the 
right edge of the tree using rules of dis-
course relations (See Section 4.1 below). 
Lexical information used for attachment de-
cisions can come from anywhere in the 
BDU tree. 
? Once the BDU-tree is attached, its terminal 
leaves are terminal nodes of the Discourse 
Parse Tree (DPT) and any terminal or inter-
mediary nodes on the right edge of the BDU 
tree are DCUs on the DPT accessible for at-
tachment in the next iteration of the process. 
 
In order to determine which accessible DCUs are 
candidates for M-BDU attachment and what re-
lationship obtains between the incoming unit and 
the selected DCU, a number of distinct types of 
evidence are used, including: 
 
1) lexical information 
reuse somewhere in the BDU tree of the 
same lexeme, synonym/antonym, hypernym, 
or participation in the same lexical frame or 
?semantic field? as item in target node. 
2) syntactic information 
parallel syntactic structure; topic/focus and 
centering information, syntactic status of re-
used lexemes, pre-posed adverbial constitu-
ents, etc. 
3) semantic information 
realis status, genericity, tense, aspect, point 
of view etc. in the MBDU 
                                                          
9 This process is too complex to describe in de-
tail here but it involves looking at both the F-
structure of the sentential parsing information re-
turned by the XLE and applying discourse rules to 
the BDUs identified. Soricut and Marcu (2003) also 
build up RST sentential trees to use in discourse 
parsing. Both the information and methods used to 
construct RST trees as well as the trees themselves 
differ from ours.  
4) constituents of incomplete n-ary construc-
tions on the right edge 
Questions, initial greetings, genre-internal 
units like sections and sub-sections, etc. 
5) structure of both the local attachment 
point and the BDU-tree 
 
While we are still experimenting with under-
standing the complexities involved in attach-
ment, we believe that different types of evidence 
have different weights10 and that the combined 
weight of evidence determines the attachment 
point. We have noted, however even at this stage 
of our investigations, that the weight given to 
each type of information differs for attachment 
site selection and relationship determination. 
Lexical information, for example, is often very 
important in determining site, while semantic 
and syntactic information is most relevant in 
determining relationship. In the remainder of this 
section we will give a small set of robust rules 
for determining the attachment site and relation-
ship of an incoming BDU-tree to the existing 
parse tree of the discourse.  
4.1 Rules for Determining Discourse 
Attachment Site Candidates and 
Attachment Relations 
Both the attachment site choice and the actual 
attachment process rely on partially ordered sets 
of hybrid rules, each of which are conditioned on 
a set of constraints. Constraints for rules used in 
attachment site selection are primarily lexical 
constraints, although other information is also 
relevant.  
All types of evidence play a role in choosing 
the attachment relation. A rule is a pair: Rule 
<C, O> where C is the set of constraints that 
enable the rule and O is the associated operation. 
The operation associated with a rule can there-
fore be either the markup of a DCU as a possible 
attachment site, or an actual discourse relation, 
such as Subordination, Coordination or N-ary. A 
rule is enabled when all sub-conditions in C are 
satisfied and no other rules having priority are 
enabled. Rules may combine different sources of 
evidential information (semantic, syntactic, 
structural and lexical). If more than one rule is 
enabled at the same time, ambiguous parses are 
produced11. Some rules are listed in Table 3. 
                                                          
10 We assign weights heuristically at this point. 
11 At this stage in our research, we rely only on a 
partial order among the rules. In future work, we 
will investigate (1) how evidence is weighed and 
combined in order to make better attachment deci-
 The parsing process at the Discourse Parse 
Tree (DPT) level works as follows. When a 
BDU-Tree has been constructed and is ready to 
be attached to the right edge of the DPT, each 
DCU along the right edge is examined and the 
lexical information in the right-edge DPT nodes 
are compared with the lexical evidence retrieved 
                                                                                
sions and (2) the extent to which discourse ambigu-
ity generated in this fashion is legitimate and how to 
reduce grammar overgeneration by more efficient 
handling of interactions among rules and the weigh-
ing of the linguistic evidence. 
from the incoming BDU-Tree. This process, 
guided by the set of discourse rules, produces an 
ordered set of active DCUs, representing the 
possible attachment points in order of likelihood. 
The set can then be pruned of its n lowest scor-
ing constituents, according to an appropriate 
policy such as a threshold. 
In a second stage, each attachment rule is 
checked against possible attachment sites. Rules 
that fire successfully attach the BDU-Tree to the 
DPT at the chosen site with the relationship 
specified by the rule. Local semantic, lexical and 
syntactic information is then percolated up to the 
Attachment Relation Sub Conditions 
Nary-Attachment 
Frame(AP,MBDU) matches genre-specific construction 
Greetings, Argument, Question/Answer, Speech Event,  
Genre Meta Structure(Story, Technical Paper, Lecture, etc..) 
Reported speech/reporting clause 
Subordination M-BDU Realis status differs from Status of AP (MBDU is Irrealis; AP is Realis OR MBDU is Realis; AP is Irrealis) 
Nary-Attachment 
(intrasentential) 
Tense(AP) = past  
Tense(MBDU) = pluperfect  
AP is time-reference for MBDU 
Nary-Attachment 
(intrasentential) 
VerbClass(AP)=?SpeechAct? 
Type(MBDU) = ADJUNCT  
Nary-Attachment 
(intrasentential) 
Tense(AP) = present  
Tense(MBDU) = past  
AP is time-reference for MBDU 
Coordinate 
Parent(AP) is Coordination 
Parent(AP) would coordinate with MBDU  
AP would coordinate with MBDU 
Subordination 
Tense(AP) = past 
Genericty(AP) = specific 
Tense(MBDU) = present 
Genericty(MBDU) = generic 
Subordination M-BDU genericity status differs from Status of AP (MBDU is specific; AP is generic OR MBDU is generic; AP is specific) 
Subordination SUBJ(MBDU) = OBJ(AP) 
Subordination SUBJ(MBDU) = XCOMP(AP) 
Subordination MBDU/Lexeme is a subcase of AP/Lexeme Role(AP/Lexeme) = Role(MBDU/Lexeme) 
Right Headed Subordination 
(intrasentential) 
Type(AP) = ADJUNCT 
Type(MBDU) = S 
Nary-Attach 
(intrasentential) 
PRED(ADJUNCT(AP)) = ?if? 
AP is Irrealis 
MBDU is Realis 
Nary-Attachment 
(intrasentential) AP and MBDU related by logical connective (cf Webber& Joshi, 1998; Forbes (2003) 
Subordination  Tense(AP) = past Tense(MBDU) = pluperfect 
Subordination Tense(AP) = present Tense(MBDU) = past 
Subordinate AP is Bottom of DPT M-BDU is Footnote or Parenthetical 
Coordinate AP is Narrative( = Specific, punctual ,event) MBDU is Narrative 
Coordinate Tense(AP) = Tense(MBDU) Aspect(AP) = Aspect(MBDU) 
Coordinate MBDU/Lexeme is synonym or antonym of AP/Lexeme Role(AP/Lexeme) = Role(MBDU/Lexeme) 
Subordinate AP is Bottom of DPT 
Table 3. Discourse Attachment Rules ordered to express priority of the rules. AP denotes (potential) 
attachment point.  
 
 DCU consisting of the parent of both attachment 
point and incoming MBDU according to con-
straints of the discourse relation selected. If mul-
tiple attachments at different sites are possible, 
ambiguous parses are generated; less preferred 
attachments are discarded and the remaining 
attachment choices generate valid parse trees. 
5 PALSUMM Text Summarization  
So far, we have described the U-LDM only as a 
theoretical approach to discourse parsing. We 
now turn briefly to describe a computational 
implementation of these methods. The 
PALSUMM Text Summarization System is a 
domain independent symbolic sentence extrac-
tion system that produces high level readable 
summaries that preserve the language and style 
of the original text and eliminate problems with 
unresolved or incorrect reference. Our system is 
currently used to summarize a corpus of 300 
technical reports produced by our laboratory. 12 
The PALSUMM System relies on the Xerox 
Linguistic Environment (XLE) to parse the sen-
tences of our source texts. The f-structure output 
of the XLE parser is segmented into units ac-
cording to the criteria identified above. The seg-
ments are then combined into a BDU-tree. Using 
syntactic information about syntactic coordina-
tion and subordination relations, lexical onto-
logical information taken from WordNet and a 
customized lexical domain ontology as well as 
discourse rules, the M-BDU of the sentence 
along with any other BDUs that must be accessi-
ble along the right edge of the discourse tree to 
accommodate possible continuations are identi-
fied, Both the site of attachment and the attach-
ment relation are then computed using discourse 
attachment rules of the type presented above. 
Text summarization algorithms are then applied 
to the resulting tree.  
Running in purely symbolic mode, the tree is 
pruned at a given level of embeddedness to pro-
duce a summary of a desired length or degree of 
summarization.13 Because the resulting summa-
                                                          
12 For illustration purposes, we present in Ap-
pendix A a summary of a document that was hand 
coded using the rules given and then summarized 
automatically using the PALSUMM tree pruning al-
gorithm. The PALSUMM Summaries were judged 
to be significantly more readable than summaries 
produced by MEAD in a small comparative study. 
In Appendix B, we present a diagram of the 
PALSUMM system. 
13 Although closely related to methods reported 
by Marcu (1999, 2000) for summarization using 
ries may be longer than desired, alternatively we 
also use statistical methods to identify salient 
information (see discussion and references in 
Marcu 2003) and then construct a partial dis-
course tree that includes only information identi-
fied as most salient and the text at all nodes 
dominating that salient information.  
 
6 Conclusions and Directions for 
future work 
The U-LDM discussed in this paper represents a 
significant advance in the theoretical understand-
ing of the nature of discourse structure. The ex-
plicit rules for discourse segmentation based on 
the syntactic reflexes of semantic structures al-
low analysts for the first time to relate the se-
mantics underlying the syntactic structure of 
sentences to the discourse segments needed to 
account for continuity. In order to adapt the rules 
to other languages which may have different 
syntactic reflexes of semantic information, un-
derstanding the semantic justification for the 
choice of segments is important. In addition, the 
rules for discourse attachment for the first time 
make clear the principles of discourse continuity 
for ?coherent? discourse. In the future, we plan 
to deepen our understanding of the rules for dis-
course attachment and, in particular, begin to 
apply machine learning techniques to increase 
our understanding of the complex interrelation-
ship that obtain among them.  
While full implementation of the principles 
of discourse organization outlined here are be-
yond the state of the art in some respects (i.e. 
determining that a sentence is generic in English 
is non-trivial in many instances although ma-
chine learning techniques might be useful in this 
regard), we believe that the PALSUMM System 
demonstrates the practicality of symbolic dis-
course parsing using the U-LDM Model. The 
infrastructure for this system has been success-
fully applied to the task of summarizing docu-
ments without a complex semantic component, 
extensive world knowledge and inference or a 
subjectively annotated corpus. We believe that 
the U-LDM parsing methods discussed here can 
be used for all other complex NLP tasks in 
which symbolic parsing is appropriate, especially 
                                                                                
RST trees, our basic algorithm is essentially simpler 
because RST trees are dependency trees over a large 
set of different link types, whereas LDM trees are 
constituent trees over effectively two basic node 
types: subordinations and non-subordinations. 
 those involving high value document collections 
where precision is critical. In addition, the struc-
tures generated through symbolic parsing by the 
system will be invaluable for training statistical 
and probabilistic systems.  
References 
 
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract 
Objects in English: A Philosophical Seman-
tics for Natural Language Metaphysics. Klu-
wer Academic Publishers. 
Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and Mary Ellen 
Okurowski. To appear. Building a Discourse-
Tagged Corpus in the Framework of Rhetori-
cal Structure Theory. In Current Directions in 
Discourse and Dialogue, Jan van Kuppevelt 
and Ronnie Smith eds. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.  
Katherine M. Forbes, Eleni Miltsakaki, Rashmi 
Prasad, Anoop Sarkar, Aravind Joshi and 
Bonnie Webber. 2003. D-LTAG System - 
Discourse Parsing with a Lexicalized Tree-
Adjoining Grammar, Journal of Language, 
Logic and Information, 12(3). 
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986. Atten-
tion, Intention and the Structure of Discourse. 
Computational Linguistics 12:175-204.. 
Hans Kamp. 1981. A theory of truth and seman-
tic representation.? In Formal Methods in the 
Study of Language. Jeroen A. G. Groenendijk, 
Theo Janssen, and Martin Stokhof (eds.). Am-
sterdam: Mathematisch Centrum, 277-322.  
Hans Kamp and Uwe Reyle. 1993. From Dis-
course to Logic: Introduction to Model-
theoretic Semantics of Natural Language, 
Formal Logic and Discourse Representation 
Theory. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 
1988. Rhetorical Structure Theory: Towards a 
Functional Theory of Text Organization. Text 
8(3)243-281. 
Daniel Marcu. 1999. Discourse trees are good 
indicators of importance in text. In Advances 
in Automatic Text Summarization. I. Mani and 
Mark Maybury (Eds.), 123-136, The MIT 
Press. 
Daniel Marcu. 2000. The Theory and Practice of 
Discourse Parsing and Summarization. The 
MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Daniel Marcu. 2003. Automatic Abstracting, 
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sci-
ence, 245-256, 2003. 
Livia Polanyi. 1988. A Formal Model of Dis-
course Structure. Journal of Pragmatics 12: 
601-639. 
Livia Polanyi and Martin van den Berg. 1996. 
Discourse Structure and Discourse Interpreta-
tion. In Proceedings of the 10th Amsterdam 
Colloquium on Formal Semantics. University 
of Amsterdam. 
Livia Polanyi and Remko Scha. 1984. A syntac-
tic approach to discourse semantics. In Pro-
ceedings of COLING 6. Stanford, CA. 413-
419. 
Dragomir Radev, Timothy Allison, Sasha Blair-
Goldensohn, and John Blitzer, Arda ?elebi, 
Elliott Drabek, Wai Lam, Danyu Liu, Hong 
Qi, Horacio Saggion, Simone Teufel, Michael 
Topper, Adam Winkel. 2003. ?The MEAD 
Multidocument Summarizer?. 
http://www.summarization.com/mead/ 
Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Sentence 
Level Discourse Parsing using Syntactic and 
Lexical Information. In Proceedings of 
HLT/NAACL?03, May 27-June 1, Edmonton, 
Canada 
Bonnie Webber.1991. Structure and Ostension in 
the Interpretation of discourse Deixis. In Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes, 6(2):107-135. 
Bonnie Webber and Aravind Joshi. 1998. An-
choring a Lexicalized Tree-Adjoining Gram-
mar for Discourse. ACL/COLING Workshop 
on Discourse Relations and Discourse Mark-
ers, Montreal, Canada.  
Alec Wilkinson. 2003. Talk of the Town, Sep-
tember 26, 2003, New Yorker 
 APPENDIX A. PALSUMM Example 
The text below, taken from a recent issue of The 
New Yorker magazine (Alec Wilkinson, 2003)14, 
has been analyzed by hand using the segmenta-
tion and discourse structure construction rules 
given in Sections 3 and 4 above, resulting in the 
Discourse Parse Tree given in Figure 1. The 
summary of the text was automatically generated 
using the automatic summarization algorithm 
mentioned in Section 5 and a Genre Specific rule 
for stories in which stories are treated as consist-
ing of an Orientation, Narrative and Coda. The 
first specific, non-habitual eventive clause closes 
the Orientation and begins the Narrative Section. 
The function of a Coda is to make the point of a 
story explicit. This is often done, as in the pre-
sent case, by using an anaphor that refers to an 
entire section of text (Webber, 1991)15. 
 
(1) In the spring of 1947, (2)William Katavolos 
is the solitary occupant of the Ram?s Head Inn, 
(3) on Ram Island,(4) off eastern Long Island. 
(5) Katavolos is twenty-three. (6) His father has 
leased the inn. (7) Katavolos has returned from 
the war (8) and (9) wants a place (10) where he 
can paint (11) and (12) be left alone. (13) The 
hotel is reached by a causeway from Shelter Is-
land, (14) and the causeway sometimes floods, 
(15) leaving Katavolos as isolated as a light-
house keeper. (16) To amuse himself one evening, 
(17) he puts some water in a glass, (18) covers 
the rim of the glass with waxed paper, (19) then 
presses the paper into the water (20) to create a 
vacuum. (21) He secures the paper to the glass 
with a rubber band, (22) then turns the glass 
upside down. (23) The water fills the vacuum, 
(24) preserving the dome (25) ? it looks like the 
bottom of a wine bottle. (26) Then he begins to 
wonder (27) what would happen (28) if he re-
peated the experiment on a larger scale.(29) A 
few days later, (30) he throws a tarpaulin over a 
section of Gardiners Bay (31) He weights down 
the edges (32) so that no air can get beneath the 
tarpaulin, (33) then he swims underneath it. (34) 
Using two oars, (35) he raises the center of the 
tarpaulin. (36) The water fills the cavity (37) and 
                                                          
14 Alec Wilkinson. 2003. Talk of the Town, Sep-
tember 26, 2003, New Yorker 
15 Bonnie Webber.1991. Structure and Ostension 
in the Interpretation of discourse Deixis. In Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes, 6(2):107-135. 
 
he swims into it, (38) floating above sea level, 
(39) which, (40) he says later, (41) ?fascinated 
the hell out of me.? (42) This is the beginning of 
(43) what Katavolos will call hydronics, (44) the 
practice of making buildings from soft plastic 
forms (45) filled with water. (46) In 1949, (47) 
Katavolos gives up painting (48) to design furni-
ture (49) ? his chairs are in the collections of 
the Museum of Modern Art, the Metropolitan 
Museum, and the Louvre? (50) and, (51) in 
1960, (52) he begins teaching architecture at the 
Pratt Institute, (54) in Brooklyn, (55) where he 
will become the co-director of the Center for 
Experimental Structures. (56) In 1970, (57) in a 
courtyard at Pratt, (58) he builds the first hy-
dronic structure (59) ? a plastic dome filled 
with water (60) and supported by a plastic cylin-
der, (61) also filled with water. (62) The plastic 
is like Saran Wrap, (63) only thicker. (64) Each 
year after that, (65) he builds a new structure 
(66) He calls the structures (67) liquid villas. 
(68) They consist of columns, arches, and vaults. 
(69) The elements, (70) that is (71) of classical 
architecture. 
Summary 152/363 = 42% 
In the spring of 1947, William Katavolos is the 
solitary occupant of the Ram?s Head Inn, 
Katavolos is twenty-three. To amuse himself one 
evening, he puts some water in a glass, covers 
the rim of the glass with waxed paper, then 
presses the paper into the water. He secures the 
paper to the glass with a rubber band, then turns 
the glass upside down. A few days later, he 
throws a tarpaulin over a section of Gardiners 
Bay. 
He weights down the edges then he swims 
underneath it. Using two oars, he raises the cen-
ter of the tarpaulin. The water fills the cavity, 
This is the beginning of what Katavolos will call 
hydronics. In 1949, Katavolos gives up painting 
and in 1960 he begins teaching architecture at 
the Pratt Institute. In 1970, in a courtyard at 
Pratt, he builds the first hydronic structure. Each 
year after that, he builds a new structure. 
 
   
 
Figure 1. Discourse Parse Tree of the New Yorker text. 
 
 
APPENDIX B. System Diagram 
 
WordNet
Lookup
Flat
Ontology
Files
DAML
Encoded
Ontology
HTML
document
XLE Server
XLE
Parser
Segmentation
Webservice
Lexical Ontology Server
Ontology
Webservice
Lexical
Ontology
Lookup
English
Grammar
LiveTree
Sentence
Breaker
Sentence
Level
Discourse
Parser
Text
Level
Discourse
Parser
Discourse
tree
XML
XML
document
Hybrid
Summarizer
MEAD Statistical Summarizer
WebserviceSentence
Level
Discourse
Segmenter
Sentence
Level
Discourse
Grammar
Text
Level
Discourse
Grammar
LDM
Engine
TEXT XMLXML
SOAP
 
Figure 2. Diagram of the PALSUMM system, a symbolic summarization system currently being devel-
oped at FX Palo Alto Laboratory. 
 
