Urdu Localization Project: Lexicon, MT and TTS (ULP) 
Sarmad HUSSAIN 
Center for Research in Urdu Language Processing,  
National University of Computer and Emerging Sciences  
B Block, Faisal Town 
Lahore, Pakistan 
sarmad.hussain@nu.edu.pk 
 
Abstract 
Pakistan has a population of 140 million 
speaking more than 56 different languages.  
Urdu is the lingua franca of these people, as 
many speak Urdu as a second language, also 
the national language of Pakistan.  Being a 
developing population, Pakistani people need 
access to information.  Most of the 
information over the ICT infrastructure is only 
available in English and only 5-10% of these 
people are familiar with English.  Therefore, 
Government of Pakistan has embarked on a 
project which will generate software to 
automatically translate the information 
available in English to Urdu.  The project will 
also be able to convert Urdu text to speech to 
extend this information to the illiterate 
population as well.  This paper overviews the 
overall architecture of the project and provides 
briefs on the three components of this project, 
namely Urdu Lexicon, English to Urdu 
Machine Translation System and Urdu Text to 
Speech System. 
1 Introduction 
In today?s information age it is critical to provide 
access to information to people for their 
development.  One precursor to this access is 
availability of information in the native languages.  
Due to limitations in technology, it has not been 
possible to generate information in many 
languages of the world.  However, with recent 
advances in internationalization and localization 
technology, many languages are not enabled.  
However, as this is recent development, the 
published content in these languages is still 
limited, and far lags behind the content available 
for English, Spanish and some other languages 
spoken in developed countries.  Realizing this gap 
in content and the need to provide access to 
information to its citizens, Government of Pakistan 
has recently launched Urdu Localization Project1.  
                                                     
1 Urdu Localization Project is a three-year initiative 
being undertaken by Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing (www.crulp.org) and is funded 
This project will enable translation and access of 
English content to literate and illiterate Urdu 
speakers.   
Urdu Localization Project aims to provide access 
to existing English language content to Urdu 
language speakers.  The project has three 
components: Urdu Computational Lexicon, 
English-to-Urdu Machine Translation System, 
Urdu Text-to-Speech system.  This paper briefly 
describes the architecture and work achieved to-
date for different systems within ULP. 
2 ULP Architecture 
As indicated, ULP comprises of three largely 
independent systems: Lexicon, MT and TTS, 
though these components may also be integrated to 
develop a written and oral interface to information.  
The project has three architectural layers.  At the 
base are the core data and engines for Lexicon, MT 
and TTS.  The middle layer provides public 
programming interfaces to these engines (APIs) so 
that they may be integrated with end-user 
applications at the top layer or used by third-party 
applications.  Both the engine and API layer 
components are being developed in standard 
C/C++ to enable them to compile on all platforms 
(e.g. Microsoft, Linux, Unix).  The user-end/top 
layer has to be technology centric and is currently 
being enabled in Microsoft platform.  The lexicon 
will be given a web interface for user access.  In 
addition, plug-ins for internet and email clients will 
be developed for MT and TTS to enable end-users 
to translate and re-display English websites in 
Urdu and also enable them to convert the translated 
Urdu text to speech.  This is shown in Figure 1 
below.  In the figure the layers and systems are 
demarcated (horizontally and vertically 
respectively).  The figure also shows that MT and 
TTS may be using the Lexicon through the APIs 
for getting appropriate data.   
 
                                                                                   
through a grant by E-Government Directorate of 
Ministry of IT&Telecom., Government of Pakistan. 
Figure 1: Architecture Diagram for ULP 
 
These three systems are discussed briefly below.   
 
2.1 Urdu Lexicon 
Urdu Computational Lexicon being designed 
would be holding more than 25 dimensions of a 
single headword.  The first task to date has been to 
determine this hierarchical storage structure.  The 
structure required for end-user has been finalized.  
However, requirements for computational 
applications, e.g. MT, are still being finalized.  
This was perhaps one of the most challenging tasks 
as there are currently no standards which exist, 
although some guidelines are available.  In 
addition, Urdu also had some additional 
requirements (e.g. multiple plural forms, 
depending on whether the word is derived from 
Arabic or Sanskrit).  Entries of more than thirty 
thousand headwords and complete entry of about a 
thousand headwords along with specification of at 
least 15 entries has already been done.  Currently 
more content is being generated.  In addition, work 
is under progress to define the physical structure of 
the lexicon (e.g. storage and retrieval models).  
The prototype showing this application is also 
available in Microsoft platform. 
2.2 English-Urdu Machine Translation 
Work is under progress to develop English to 
Urdu MT engine.  The translation is based on LFG 
formalism and is developing grammars, lexica and 
the parsing/mapping/generation engine for LFG.  
Mapping and Generation prototypes have already 
been developed and are integrated with a freely 
available LFG parser for internal testing.  In 
addition sample grammars for English, Urdu and 
English-Urdu mapping have also been written.  
The prototype covers about 10 percent of 
grammatical rules and already translates within the 
limited vocabulary of the engine.  The work is 
being extended to write the parser and rewrite 
mapper and generator and to develop English, 
Urdu and English Urdu grammars and lexica. 
2.3 Urdu Text to Speech System 
The Urdu TTS is divided into two main part, the 
Urdu Natural Language Processor and Urdu 
Speech Synthesizer.  The work on NLP is 
completed (except the intonational module, on 
which preliminary work has been completed).  The 
NLP processor inputs Urdu Unicode text and 
output narrow phonetic transcription with syllable 
and stress markers.  The NLP processor is 
integrated with Festival speech synthesis system 
(though by-passes its NLP module).  A vocabulary 
of about 500 words is already defined at the 
diphones have been created.  Prototype application 
is already developed which synthesized these 
single words.  Work is currently in progress to 
define Urdu intonational and durational model.  In 
addition, work is also under progress to extend the 
vocabulary and functionality to synthesize 
complete sentences.  The functional prototype 
works on both Linux an Microsoft platforms. 
3 Conclusion 
Most of the work being done in the project is 
novel.  Urdu language is not very well defined for 
use with computers.  Script, speech and language 
aspects of Urdu are being studied, documented and 
implemented in this project.  The project is also 
testing the work which has been matured on 
western languages but only being recently exposed 
to other languages, e.g. the lexical 
recommendations by ISLE, LFG framework, use 
of LFG for MT, speech modeling of Urdu (both 
spectral and temporal) and more.  Non-functional 
issues including performance are also being 
negotiated.  Pre-compiled lexica, user-centric pre-
stored performance-enhancing profiles and 
frequency lists, etc. are part of the architectural 
tasks being addressed.  Though only initial work 
has been done, this work in itself is substantial, and 
has raised many questions which will be answered 
as the project progresses.   
MT 
Engine 
Lexicon 
Engine 
TTS 
Engine 
MT API Lexicon 
API
TTS API
Website/ 
Email 
Translator 
Online 
Urdu 
Dictionary 
Website/ 
Email 
Reader 
End User Third Party 
Applications
