Word Sense Disambiguation based on
Term to Term Similarity in a Context Space
Javier Artiles
Dpto. Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
UNED, Spain
javart@bec.uned.es
Anselmo Pen?as
Dpto. Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
UNED, Spain
anselmo@lsi.uned.es
Felisa Verdejo
Dpto. Lenguajes y
Sistemas Informa?ticos
UNED, Spain
felisa@lsi.uned.es
Abstract
This paper describes the exemplar based ap-
proach presented by UNED at Senseval-3. In-
stead of representing contexts as bags of terms
and defining a similarity measure between con-
texts, we propose to represent terms as bags
of contexts and define a similarity measure be-
tween terms. Thus, words, lemmas and senses
are represented in the same space (the context
space), and similarity measures can be defined
between them. New contexts are transformed
into this representation in order to calculate
their similarity to the candidate senses. We
show how standard similarity measures obtain
better results in this framework. A new similar-
ity measure in the context space is proposed for
selecting the senses and performing disambigua-
tion. Results of this approach at Senseval-3 are
here reported.
1 Introduction
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is the task
of deciding the appropriate sense for a partic-
ular use of a polysemous word, given its tex-
tual or discursive context. A previous non triv-
ial step is to determine the inventory of mean-
ings potentially attributable to that word. For
this reason, WSD in Senseval is reformulated as
a classification problem where a dictionary be-
comes the class inventory. The disambiguation
process, then, consists in assigning one or more
of these classes to the ambiguous word in the
given context. The Senseval evaluation forum
provides a controlled framework where different
WSD systems can be tested and compared.
Corpus-based methods have offered encour-
aging results in the last years. This kind of
methods profits from statistics on a training
corpus, and Machine Learning (ML) algorithms
to produce a classifier. Learning algorithms
can be divided in two main categories: Super-
vised (where the correct answer for each piece of
training is provided) and Unsupervised (where
the training data is given without any answer
indication). Tests at Senseval-3 are made in
various languages for which two main tasks are
proposed: an all-words task and a lexical sam-
ple task. Participants have available a training
corpus, a set of test examples and a sense inven-
tory in each language. The training corpora are
available in a labelled and a unlabelled format;
the former is mainly for supervised systems and
the latter mainly for the unsupervised ones.
Several supervised ML algorithms have been
applied to WSD (Ide and Ve?ronis, 1998), (Es-
cudero et al, 2000): Decision Lists, Neural Net-
works, Bayesian classifiers, Boosting, Exemplar-
based learning, etc. We report here the
exemplar-based approach developed by UNED
and tested at the Senseval-3 competition in the
lexical sample tasks for English, Spanish, Cata-
lan and Italian.
After this brief introduction, Sections 2 and
3 are devoted, respectively, to the training data
and the processing performed over these data.
Section 4 characterizes the UNED WSD system.
First, we describe the general approach based on
the representation of words, lemmas and senses
in a Context Space. Then, we show how results
are improved by applying standard similarity
measures as cosine in this Context Space. Once
the representation framework is established, we
define the criteria underlying the final similar-
ity measure used at Senseval-3, and we com-
pare it with the previous similarity measures.
Section 5 reports the official results obtained at
the Senseval-3 Lexical Sample tasks for English,
Spanish, Italian and Catalan. Finally, we con-
clude and point out some future work.
2 Data
Each Lexical Sample Task has a relatively large
training set with disambiguated examples. The
test examples set has approximately a half of
the number of the examples in the training data.
Each example offers an ambiguous word and its
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
surrounding context, where the average context
window varies from language to language. Each
training example gives one or more semantic la-
bels for the ambiguous word corresponding to
the correct sense in that context.
Senseval-3 provided the training data and the
test data in XML format. The XML tagging
conventions provides an excellent ground for the
corpora processing, allowing a simple way for
the data browsing and transformation. How-
ever, some of the XML well-formedness con-
straints are not completely satisfied. For exam-
ple, there is no XML declaration and no root
element in the English Lexical Sample docu-
ments. Once these shortcomings are fixed any
XML parser can normally read and process the
data.
Despite the similarity in the structure of the
different corpora at the lexical sample task
in different languages, we had found a het-
erogeneous vocabulary both in the XML tags
and the attributes, forcing to develop ?ad hoc?
parsers for each language. We missed a common
and public document type definition for all the
tasks.
Sense codification is another field where dif-
ferent solutions had been taken. In the English
corpus nouns and adjectives are annotated using
the WordNet 1.7.1. classification1 (Fellbaum,
1998), while the verbs are based on Wordsmyth2
(Scott, 1997). In the Catalan and Spanish tasks
the sense inventory gives a more coarse-grained
classification than WordNet. Both tasks have
provided a dictionary with additional informa-
tion as examples, typical collocations and the
equivalent synsets at WordNet 1.5. Finally, the
Italian sense inventory is based on the Multi-
Wordnet dictionary3 (Pianta et al, 2002). Un-
like the other mentioned languages , the Italian
task doesn?t provide a separate file with the dic-
tionary.
Besides the training data provided by Sen-
seval, we have used the SemCor (Miller et al,
1993) collection in which every word is already
tagged in its part of speech, sense and synset of
WordNet.
3 Preprocessing
A tokenized version of the Catalan, Spanish and
Italian corpora has been provided. In this ver-
sion every word is tagged with its lemma and
1http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/ wn/
2http://www.wordsmyth.net
3http://multiwordnet.itc.it/
part of speech tag. This information has been
manually annotated by human assessors both in
the Catalan and the Spanish corpora. The Ital-
ian corpus has been processed automatically by
the TnT POStagger4 (Brants, 2000) including
similar tags.
The English data lacked of this information,
leading us to apply the TreeTagger5 (Schmid,
1994) tool to the training and test data as a
previous step to the disambiguation process.
Since the SemCor collection is already tagged,
the preprocessing consisted in the segmentation
of texts by the paragraph tag, obtaining 5382
different fragments. Each paragraph of Semcor
has been used as a separate training example
for the English lexical sample task. We applied
the mapping provided by Senseval to represent
verbs according to the verb inventory used in
Senseval-3.
4 Approach
The supervised UNED WSD system is an ex-
emplar based classifier that performs the disam-
biguation task measuring the similarity between
a new instance and the representation of some
labelled examples. However, instead of repre-
senting contexts as bags of terms and defining
a similarity measure between the new context
and the training contexts, we propose a rep-
resentation of terms as bags of contexts and
the definition of a similarity measure between
terms. Thus, words, lemmas and senses are
represented in the same space, where similar-
ity measures can be defined between them. We
call this space the Context Space. A new disam-
biguation context (bag of words) is transformed
into the Context Space by the inner product,
becoming a kind of abstract term suitable to be
compared with singular senses that are repre-
sented in the same Context Space.
4.1 Representation
The training corpus is represented in the usual
two-dimension matrix A as shown in Figure 1,
where
? c1, ..., cN is the set of examples or con-
texts in the training corpus. Contexts are
treated as bags of words or lemmas.
? lem1, ..., lemT is the set of different words
or lemmas in all the training contexts.
4http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/ thorsten/tnt/
5http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/
TreeTagger/
? wi,j is the weight for lemi in the training
context cj .
A new instance q, represented with the vec-
tor of weights (w1q, ..., wiq, ..., wTq), is trans-
formed into a vector in the context space ~q =
(q1, ..., qj , ..., qN ), where ~q is given by the usual
inner product ~q = q ? A (Figure 1):
qj =
T?
i=1
wiqwij
Figure 1: Representation of terms in the Con-
text Space, and transformation of new in-
stances.
If vectors cj (columns of matrix A) and vector
q (original test context) are normalized to have
a length equal to 1, then qj become the cosine
between vectors q and cj . More formally,
~q = q.A = (cos(q, c1), ..., cos(q, cj), ..., cos(q, cN ))
where
cos(q, cj) =
T?
i=1
wiq
?q?
wij
?cj?
and
?x? =
?
?
i
x2i
At this point, both senses and the representa-
tion of the new instance ~q are represented in the
same context space (Figure 2) and a similarity
measure can be defined between them:
sim( ~senik, ~q)
where senik is the k candidate sense for the
ambiguous lemma lemi. Each component j of
~senik is set to 1 if lemma lemi is used with sense
senik in the training context j, and 0 otherwise.
Figure 2: Similarity in the Context Space.
For a new context of the ambiguous lemma
lemi, the candidate sense with higher similarity
is selected:
argmaxk sim( ~senik, ~q)
4.2 Bag of words versus bag of contexts
Table 1 shows experimental results over the En-
glish Lexical Sample test of Senseval-3. Sys-
tem has been trained with the Senseval-3 data
and the SemCor collection. The Senseval train-
ing data has been lemmatized and tagged with
TreeTagger. Only nouns and adjectives have
been considered in their canonical form.
Three different weights wij have been tested:
? Co-occurrence: wij and wiq are set to {0,1}
depending on whether lemi is present or
not in context cj and in the new instance q
respectively. After the inner product q ? A,
the components qj of ~q get the number of
co-occurrences of different lemmas in both
q and the training context cj .
? Term Frequency: wij is set to tfij , the num-
ber of occurrences of lemi in the context cj .
? tf.idf : wij = (1 + log(tfij)) ? (log( Ndfi )),
a standard tf.idf weight where dfi is the
number of contexts that contain lemi.
These weights have been normalized ( wij||cj ||)
and so, the inner product q?A generates a vector
~q of cosines as described above, where qj is the
cosine between q and context cj .
Two similarity measures have been compared.
The first one (maximum) is a similarity of q as
bag of words with the training contexts of sense
sen. The second one (cosine) is the similarity
of sense sen with ~q in the context space:
? Maximum: sim( ~sen, ~q) =
= MaxNj=1 (senj ? qj) =
= Max{j/sen?cj}qj =
= Max{j/sen?cj}cos(q, cj)
Weight Similarity Nouns Adjectives Verbs Total
Co-occurrences Maximum 60.76% 35.85% 60.75% 59.75%
(normalized) Cosine 59.99% 55.97% 63.88% 61.78%
Term frequency Maximum 56.83% 50.31% 56.85% 56.58%
(normalized) Cosine 60.76% 53.46% 63.83% 62.01%
tf.idf Maximum 59.82% 48.43% 59.94% 59.42%
(normalized) Cosine 60.27% 53.46% 64.29% 62.01%
Most frequent
(baseline) 54.01% 54.08% 56.45% 55.23%
Table 1: Bag of words versus bag of contexts, precision-recall
Similarity with sense sen is the high-
est similarity (cosine) between q (as bag of
words) and each of the training contexts
(as bag of words) for sense sen.
? Cosine: sim( ~sen, ~q) = cos( ~sen, ~q) =
=
?
{j/sen?cj}
senj
|| ~sen|| ?
cos(q,cj)
||~q||
Similarity with sense sen is the co-
sine in the Context Space between ~q and
~sen
Table 1 shows that almost all the results are
improved when the similarity measure (cosine)
is applied in the Context Space. The exception
is the consideration of co-ocurrences to disam-
biguate nouns. This exception led us to explore
an alternative similarity measure aimed to im-
prove results over nouns. The following sections
describe this new similarity measure and the cri-
teria underlying it.
4.3 Criteria for the similarity measure
Co-occurrences behave quite good to disam-
biguate nouns as it has been shown in the exper-
iment above. However, the consideration of co-
occurrences in the Context Space permits acu-
mulative measures: Instead of selecting the can-
didate sense associated to the training context
with the maximum number of co-occurrences,
we can consider the co-occurences of q with all
the contexts. The weights and the similarity
function has been set out satisfying the follow-
ing criteria:
1. Select the sense senk assigned to more
training contexts ci that have the maxi-
mum number of co-occurrences with the
test context q. For example, if sense sen1
has two training contexts with the highest
number of co-occurrences and sense sen2
has only one with the same number of co-
occurrences, sen1 must receive a higher
value than sen2.
2. Try to avoid label inconsistencies in the
training corpus. There are some training
examples where the same ambiguous word
is used with the same meaning but tagged
with different sense by human assessors.
Table 2 shows an example of this kind of
inconsistencies.
4.4 Similarity measure
We assign the weights wij and wiq to have ~q a
vector of co-occurrences, where qj is the number
of different nouns and adjectives that co-occurr
in q and the training context cj . In this way, wij
is set to 1 if lemi is present in the context cj .
Otherwise wij is set to 0. Analogously for the
new instance q, wiq is set to 1 if lemi is present
in q and it is set to 0 otherwise.
According to the second criterium, if there
is only one context c1 with the higher num-
ber of co-occurrences with q, then we reduce
the value of this context by reducing artifi-
cially its number of co-occurrences: Being c2
a context with the second higher number of co-
occurrences with q, then we assign to the first
context c1 the number of co-occurrences of con-
text c2.
After this slight modification of ~q we imple-
ment the similarity measure between ~q and a
sense senk according to the first criterium:
sim( ~sen, ~q) =
N?
j=1
senj ? N
qj
Finally, for a new context of lemi we select
the candidate sense that gives more value to the
similarity measure:
argmaxk sim( ~senk, ~q)
<answer instance=?grano.n.1? senseid=?grano.4?/>
<previous> La Federacin Nacional de Cafeteros de Colombia explic que el nuevo valor fue estable-
cido con base en el menor de los precios de reintegro mnimo de grano del pas de los ltimos tres das,
y que fue de 1,3220 dlares la libra, que fue el que alcanz hoy en Nueva York, y tambin en la tasa rep-
resentativa del mercado para esta misma fecha (1.873,77 pesos por dlar). </previous> <target>
El precio interno del caf colombiano permaneci sin modificacin hasta el 10 de noviembre de 1999,
cuando las autoridades cafetaleras retomaron el denominado ?sistema de ajuste automtico?, que
tiene como referencia la cotizacin del <head>grano</head> nacional en los mercados interna-
cionales. </target>
<answer instance=?grano.n.9? senseid=?grano.3?/>
<previous> La carga qued para maana en 376.875 pesos (193,41 dlares) frente a los 375.000 pesos
(192,44 dlares) que rigi hasta hoy. </previous> <target> El reajuste al alza fue adoptado por
el Comit de Precios de la Federacin que fijar el precio interno diariamente a partir de este lunes
tomando en cuenta la cotizacin del <head>grano</head> en el mercado de Nueva York y la tasa
de cambio del da, que para hoy fueron de 1,2613 dlares libra y1.948,60 pesos por dlar </target>
Table 2: Example of inconsistencies in human annotation
Weight Similarity Nouns Adjectives Verbs Total
Co-occurrences Without criterium 2 65.6% 45.9% 62.5% 63.3%
(not normalized) With criterium 2 66.5% 45.9% 63.4% 64.1%
Table 3: Precision-recall for the new similarity measure
Table 3 shows experimental results over the
English Lexical Sample test under the same con-
ditions than experiments in Table 1.
Comparing results in both tables we observe
that the new similarity measure only behaves
better for the disambiguation of nouns. How-
ever, the difference is big enough to improve
overall results. The application of the second
criterium (try to avoid label inconsistencies)
also improves the results as shown in Tables 3
and 4. Table 4 shows the effect of applying this
second criterium to all the languages we have
participated in. With the exception of Cata-
lan, all results are improved slightly (about 1%)
after the filtering of singular labelled contexts.
Although it is a regular behavior, this improve-
ment is not statistically significative.
With Without
Criterium 2 Criterium 2
Spanish 81.8% 80.9%
Catalan 81.8% 82.0%
English 64.1% 63.3%
Italian 49.8% 49.3%
Table 4: Incidence of Criterium 2, precision-
recall
5 Results at Senseval-3
The results submited to Senseval-3 were gener-
ated with the system described in Section 4.4.
Since one sense is assigned to every test con-
text, precison and recall have equal values. Ta-
ble 4 shows official results for the Lexical Sam-
ple Task at Senseval-3 in the four languages we
have participated in: Spanish, Catalan, English
and Italian.
Fine Coarse Baseline
grained grained (most frequent)
Spanish 81.8% - 67%
Catalan 81.8% - 66%
English 64.1% 72% 55%
Italian 49.8% - -
Table 5: Official results at Senseval-3, precision-
recall
Differences between languages are quite re-
markable and show the system dependence on
the training corpora and the sense inventory.
In the English task, 16 test instances have
a correct sense not present in the training cor-
pus. Since we don?t use the dictionary informa-
tion our system was unable to deal with none of
them. In the same way, 68 test instances have
been tagged as ?Unasignable? sense and again
the system was unable to detect none of them.
6 Conclusion and work in progress
We have shown the exemplar-based WSD sys-
tem developed by UNED for the Senseval-3 lexi-
cal sample tasks. The general approach is based
on the definition of a context space that be-
comes a flexible tool to prove quite different
similarity measures between training contexts
and new instances. We have shown that stan-
dard similarity measures improve their results
applied inside this context space. We have es-
tablished some criteria to instantiate this gen-
eral approach and the resulting system has been
evaluated at Senseval-3. The new similarity
measure improves the disambiguation of nouns
and obtains better overall results. The work in
progress includes:
? the study of new criteria to lead us to al-
ternative measures,
? the development of particular disambigua-
tion strategies for verbs, nouns and adjec-
tives,
? the inclusion of the dictionary information,
and
? the consideration of WordNet semantic re-
lationships to extend the training corpus.
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Julio Gonzalo for the lending
of linguistic resources, and to V??ctor Peinado for
his demonstrated sensibility.
This work has been supported by the Spanish
Ministry of Science and Technology through the
following projects:
? Hermes (TIC-2000-0335-C03-01)
? Syembra (TIC-2003-07158-C04-02)
? R2D2 (TIC 2003-07158-104-01)
References
Thorsten Brants. 2000. Tnt - a statistical part-
of-speech tagger. In In Proceedings of the
Sixth Applied Natural Language Processing
Conference ANLP-2000.
G. Escudero, L. Ma`rquez, and G. Rigau. 2000.
A comparison between supervised learning al-
gorithms for word sense disambiguation. In
In Proceedings of the 4th Computational Nat-
ural Language Learning Workshop, CoNLL.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet
An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT
Press.
N. Ide and J. Ve?ronis. 1998. Introduction to the
special issue on word sense disambiguation:
The state of the art. Computational Linguis-
tics.
G. Miller, C. Leacock, T. Randee, and
R. Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance.
In In Procedings of the 3rd DARPA Work-
shop on Human Language Technology.
E. Pianta, L. Bentivogli, and C. Girardi. 2002.
Multiwordnet: developing an aligned mul-
tilingual database. In In Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Global
WordNet.
Helmut Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-
speech tagging using decision trees. In Inter-
national Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing.
M. Scott. 1997. Wordsmith tools lexical analy-
sis software for data driven learning and re-
search. Technical report, The University of
Liverpool.
