Do We Need Chinese Word Segmentation
for Statistical Machine Translation?
Jia Xu and Richard Zens and Hermann Ney
Chair of Computer Science VI
Computer Science Department
RWTH Aachen University, Germany
{xujia,zens,ney}@cs.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract
In Chinese texts, words are not separated by
white spaces. This is problematic for many nat-
ural language processing tasks. The standard
approach is to segment the Chinese character
sequence into words. Here, we investigate Chi-
nese word segmentation for statistical machine
translation. We pursue two goals: the first one
is the maximization of the final translation qual-
ity; the second is the minimization of the man-
ual effort for building a translation system.
The commonly used method for getting the
word boundaries is based on a word segmenta-
tion tool and a predefined monolingual dictio-
nary. To avoid the dependence of the trans-
lation system on an external dictionary, we
have developed a system that learns a domain-
specific dictionary from the parallel training
corpus. This method produces results that are
comparable with the predefined dictionary.
Further more, our translation system is able
to work without word segmentation with only a
minor loss in translation quality.
1 Introduction
In Chinese texts, words composed of single or
multiple characters, are not separated by white
spaces, which is different from most of the west-
ern languages. This is problematic for many
natural language processing tasks. Therefore,
the usual method is to segment a Chinese char-
acter sequence into Chinese ?words?.
Many investigations have been performed
concerning Chinese word segmentation. For
example, (Palmer, 1997) developed a Chinese
word segmenter using a manually segmented
corpus. The segmentation rules were learned
automatically from this corpus. (Sproat and
Shih, 1990) and (Sun et al, 1998) used a
method that does not rely on a dictionary or a
manually segmented corpus. The characters of
the unsegmented Chinese text are grouped into
pairs with the highest value of mutual informa-
tion. This mutual information can be learned
from an unsegmented Chinese corpus.
We will present a new method for segment-
ing the Chinese text without using a manually
segmented corpus or a predefined dictionary. In
statistical machine translation, we have a bilin-
gual corpus available, which is used to obtain
a segmentation of the Chinese text in the fol-
lowing way. First, we train the statistical trans-
lation models with the unsegmented bilingual
corpus. As a result, we obtain a mapping of
Chinese characters to the corresponding English
words for each sentence pair. By using this map-
ping, we can extract a dictionary automatically.
With this self-learned dictionary, we use a seg-
mentation tool to obtain a segmented Chinese
text. Finally, we retrain our translation system
with the segmented corpus.
Additionally, we have performed experiments
without explicit word segmentation. In this
case, each Chinese character is interpreted as
one ?word?. Based on word groups, our ma-
chine translation system is able to work without
a word segmentation, while having only a minor
translation quality relative loss of less than 5%.
2 Review of the Baseline System for
Statistical Machine Translation
2.1 Principle
In statistical machine translation, we are given
a source language (?French?) sentence fJ1 =
f1 . . . fj . . . fJ , which is to be translated into
a target language (?English?) sentence eI1 =
e1 . . . ei . . . eI . Among all possible target lan-
guage sentences, we will choose the sentence
with the highest probability:
e?I1 = argmax
eI1
{Pr(eI1|fJ1 )
} (1)
= argmax
eI1
{Pr(eI1) ? Pr(fJ1 |eI1)
} (2)
The decomposition into two knowledge sources
in Equation 2 is known as the source-channel
approach to statistical machine translation
(Brown et al, 1990). It allows an independent
modeling of target language model Pr(eI1) and
translation model Pr(fJ1 |eI1)1. The target lan-
guage model describes the well-formedness of
the target language sentence. The translation
model links the source language sentence to the
target language sentence. The argmax opera-
tion denotes the search problem, i.e. the gener-
ation of the output sentence in the target lan-
guage. We have to maximize over all possible
target language sentences.
The resulting architecture for the statistical
machine translation approach is shown in Fig-
ure 1 with the translation model further decom-
posed into lexicon and alignment model.
Source Language Text
Transformation
 Lexicon Model
Language Model
Global Search:
 
 
Target Language Text
 
over
 
 Pr(f1  J  |e1I )
 
 
 Pr(   e1I )
 
 
 Pr(f1  J  |e1I )   Pr(   e1I )
  
e1I
f1 J
maximize  Alignment Model
Transformation
Figure 1: Architecture of the translation ap-
proach based on Bayes decision rule.
2.2 Alignment Models
The alignment model Pr(fJ1 , aJ1 |eI1) introduces
a ?hidden? alignment a = aJ1 , which describes
1The notational convention will be as follows: we use
the symbol Pr(?) to denote general probability distri-
butions with (nearly) no specific assumptions. In con-
trast, for model-based probability distributions, we use
the generic symbol p(?).
a mapping from a source position j to a target
position aj . The relationship between the trans-
lation model and the alignment model is given
by:
Pr(fJ1 |eI1) =
?
aJ1
Pr(fJ1 , aJ1 |eI1) (3)
In this paper, we use the models IBM-1, IBM-
4 from (Brown et al, 1993) and the Hidden-
Markov alignment model (HMM) from (Vogel et
al., 1996). All these models provide different de-
compositions of the probability Pr(fJ1 , aJ1 |eI1).
A detailed description of these models can be
found in (Och and Ney, 2003).
A Viterbi alignment a?J1 of a specific model is
an alignment for which the following equation
holds:
a?J1 = argmax
aJ1
Pr(fJ1 , aJ1 |eI1). (4)
The alignment models are trained on a bilin-
gual corpus using GIZA++(Och et al, 1999;
Och and Ney, 2003). The training is done it-
eratively in succession on the same data, where
the final parameter estimates of a simpler model
serve as starting point for a more complex
model. The result of the training procedure is
the Viterbi alignment of the final training iter-
ation for the whole training corpus.
2.3 Alignment Template Approach
In the translation approach from Section 2.1,
one disadvantage is that the contextual informa-
tion is only taken into account by the language
model. The single-word based lexicon model
does not consider the surrounding words. One
way to incorporate the context into the trans-
lation model is to learn translations for whole
word groups instead of single words. The key
elements of this translation approach (Och et
al., 1999) are the alignment templates. These
are pairs of source and target language phrases
with an alignment within the phrases.
The alignment templates are extracted from
the bilingual training corpus. The extraction al-
gorithm (Och et al, 1999) uses the word align-
ment information obtained from the models in
Section 2.2. Figure 2 shows an example of a
word aligned sentence pair. The word align-
ment is represented with the black boxes. The
figure also includes some of the possible align-
ment templates, represented as the larger, un-
filled rectangles. Note that the extraction algo-
rithm would extract many more alignment tem-
plates from this sentence pair. In this example,
the system input was the sequence of Chinese
characters without any word segmentation. As
can be seen, a translation approach that is based
on phrases circumvents the problem of word seg-
mentation to a certain degree. This method will
be referred to as ?translation with no segmen-
tation? (see Section 5.2).
they
will
also
go
to
hangzhou
for
a
visit
Figure 2: Example of a word aligned sentence
pair and some possible alignment templates.
In the Chinese?English DARPA TIDES eval-
uations in June 2002 and May 2003, carried out
by NIST (NIST, 2003), the alignment template
approach performed very well and was ranked
among the best translation systems.
Further details on the alignment template ap-
proach are described in (Och et al, 1999; Och
and Ney, 2002).
3 Task and Corpus Statistics
In Section 5.3, we will present results for a
Chinese?English translation task. The domain
of this task is news articles. As bilingual train-
ing data, we use a corpus composed of the En-
glish translations of a Chinese Treebank. This
corpus is provided by the Linguistic Data Con-
sortium (LDC), catalog number LDC2002E17.
In addition, we use a bilingual dictionary with
10K Chinese word entries provided by Stephan
Vogel (LDC, 2003b).
Table 1 shows the corpus statistics of this
task. We have calculated both the number of
words and the number of characters in the cor-
pus. In average, a Chinese word is composed
of 1.49 characters. For each of the two lan-
guages, there is a set of 20 special characters,
such as digits, punctuation marks and symbols
like ?()%$...?
The training corpus will be used to train a
word alignment and then extract the alignment
templates and the word-based lexicon. The re-
sulting translation system will be evaluated on
the test corpus.
Table 1: Statistics of training and test corpus.
For each of the two languages, there is a set of 20
special characters, such as digits, punctuation
marks and symbols like ?()%$...?
Chinese English
Train Sentences 4 172
Characters 172 874 832 760
Words 116 090 145 422
Char. Vocab. 3 419 + 20 26 + 20
Word Vocab. 9 391 9 505
Test Sentences 993
Characters 42 100 167 101
Words 28 247 26 225
4 Segmentation Methods
4.1 Conventional Method
The commonly used segmentation method is
based on a segmentation tool and a monolingual
Chinese dictionary. Typically, this dictionary
has been produced beforehand and is indepen-
dent of the Chinese text to be segmented. The
dictionary contains Chinese words and their fre-
quencies. This information is used by the seg-
mentation tool to find the word boundaries. In
the LDC method (see Section 5.2) we have used
the dictionary and segmenter provided by the
LDC. More details can be found on the LDC
web pages (LDC, 2003a). This segmenter is
based on two ideas: it prefers long words over
short words and it prefers high frequency words
over low frequency words.
4.2 Dictionary Learning from Alignments
In this section, we will describe our method of
learning a dictionary from a bilingual corpus.
As mentioned before, the bilingual training
corpus listed in Section 3 is the only input to the
system. We firstly divide every Chinese charac-
ters in the corpus by white spaces, then train
the statistical translation models with this un-
segmented Chinese text and its English trans-
lation, details of the training method are de-
scribed in Section 2.2.
To extract Chinese words instead of phrases
as in Figure 2, we configure the training pa-
rameters in GIZA++, the alignment is then re-
stricted to a multi-source-single-target relation-
ship, i.e. one or more Chinese characters are
translated to one English word.
The result of this training procedure is an
alignment for each sentence pair. Such an align-
ment is represented as a binary matrix with J ?I
elements.
An example is shown in Figure 3. The un-
segmented Chinese training sentence is plotted
along the horizontal axes and the corresponding
English sentence along the vertical axes. The
black boxes show the Viterbi alignment for this
sentence pair. Here, for example the first two
Chinese characters are aligned to ?industry?,
the next four characters are aligned to ?restruc-
turing?.
industry
restructuring
made
vigorous
progress
Figure 3: Example of an alignment without
word segmentation.
The central idea of our dictionary learning
method is: a contiguous sequence of Chinese
characters constitute a Chinese word, if they
are aligned to the same English word. Using
this idea and the bilingual corpus, we can au-
tomatically generate a Chinese word dictionary.
Table 2 shows the Chinese words that are ex-
tracted from the alignment in Figure 3.
Table 2: Word entries in Chinese dictionary
learned from the alignment in Figure 3.
We extract Chinese words from all sentence
pairs in the training corpus. Therefore, it is
straightforward to collect word frequency statis-
tics that are needed for the segmentation tool.
Once, we have generated the dictionary, we can
produce a segmented Chinese corpus using the
method described in Section 4.1. Then, we
retrain the translation system using the seg-
mented Chinese text.
4.3 Word Length Statistics
In this section, we present statistics of the word
lengths in the LDC dictionary as well as in the
self-learned dictionary extracted from the align-
ment.
Table 3 shows the statistics of the word
lengths in the LDC dictionary as well as in
the learned dictionary. For example, there are
2 368 words consisting of a single character in
learned dictionary and 2 511 words in the LDC
dictionary. These single character words rep-
resent 16.9% of the total number of entries in
the learned dictionary and 18.6% in the LDC
dictionary.
We see that in the LDC dictionary more than
65% of the words consist of two characters and
about 30% of the words consist of a single char-
acter or three or four characters. Longer words
with more than four characters constitute less
than 1% of the dictionary. In the learned dic-
tionary, there are many more long words, about
15%. A subjective analysis showed that many
of these entries are either named entities or
idiomatic expressions. Often, these idiomatic
expressions should be segmented into shorter
words. Therefore, we will investigate methods
to overcome this problem in the future. Some
suggestions will be discussed in Section 6.
Table 3: Statistics of word lengths in the LDC
dictionary and in the learned dictionary.
word LDC dictionary learned dictionary
length frequency [%] frequency [%]
1 2 334 18.6 2 368 16.9
2 8 149 65.1 5 486 39.2
3 1 188 9.5 1 899 13.6
4 759 6.1 2 084 14.9
5 70 0.6 791 5.7
6 20 0.2 617 4.4
7 6 0.0 327 2.3
?8 11 0.0 424 3.0
total 12 527 100 13 996 100
5 Translation Experiments
5.1 Evaluation Criteria
So far, in machine translation research, a sin-
gle generally accepted criterion for the evalu-
ation of the experimental results does not ex-
ist. We have used three automatic criteria. For
the test corpus, we have four references avail-
able. Hence, we compute all the following cri-
teria with respect to multiple references.
? WER (word error rate):
The WER is computed as the minimum
number of substitution, insertion and dele-
tion operations that have to be performed
to convert the generated sentence into the
reference sentence.
? PER (position-independent word error
rate):
A shortcoming of the WER is that it re-
quires a perfect word order. The word or-
der of an acceptable sentence can be dif-
ferent from that of the target sentence, so
that the WER measure alone could be mis-
leading. The PER compares the words in
the two sentences ignoring the word order.
? BLEU score:
This score measures the precision of un-
igrams, bigrams, trigrams and fourgrams
with respect to a reference translation with
a penalty for too short sentences (Papineni
et al, 2001). The BLEU score measures
accuracy, i.e. large BLEU scores are bet-
ter.
5.2 Summary: Three Translation
Methods
In the experiments, we compare the following
three translation methods:
? Translation with no segmentation: Each
Chinese character is interpreted as a single
word.
? Translation with learned segmentation:
It uses the self-learned dictionary.
? Translation with LDC segmentation:
The predefined LDC dictionary is used.
The core contribution of this paper is the
method we called ?translation with learned seg-
mentation?, which consists of three steps:
? The input is a sequence of Chinese charac-
ters without segmentation. After the train-
ing using GIZA++, we extract a mono-
lingual Chinese dictionary from the align-
ment. This is discussed in Section 4.2, and
an example is given in Figure 3 and Table 2.
? Using this learned dictionary, we segment
the sequence of Chinese characters into
words. In other words, the LDC method
is used, but the LDC dictionary is replaced
by the learned dictionary (see Section 4.1).
? Based on this word segmentation, we
perform another training using GIZA++.
Then, after training the models IBM1,
HMM and IBM4, we extract bilingual word
groups, which are referred as alignment
templates.
5.3 Evaluation Results
The evaluation is performed on the LDC corpus
described in Section 3. The translation perfor-
mance of the three systems is summarized in
Table 4 for the three evaluation criteria WER,
PER and BLEU. We observe that the trans-
lation quality with the learned segmentation is
similar to that with the LDC segmentation. The
WER of the system with the learned segmenta-
tion is somewhat better, but PER and BLEU
are slightly worse. We conclude that it is possi-
ble to learn a domain-specific dictionary for Chi-
nese word segmentation from a bilingual corpus.
Therefore the translation system is independent
of a predefined dictionary, which may be unsuit-
able for a certain task.
The translation system using no segmenta-
tion performs slightly worse. For example, for
the WER there is a loss of about 2% relative
compared to the system with the LDC segmen-
tation.
Table 4: Translation performance of different
segmentation methods (all numbers in percent).
method error rates accuracy
WER PER BLEU
no segment. 73.3 56.5 27.6
learned segment. 70.4 54.6 29.1
LDC segment. 71.9 54.4 29.2
5.4 Effect of Segmentation on
Translation Results
In this section, we present three examples of the
effect that segmentation may have on transla-
tion quality. For each of the three examples in
Figure 4, we show the segmented Chinese source
sentence using either the LDC dictionary or the
self-learned dictionary, the corresponding trans-
lation and the human reference translation.
In the first example, the LDC dictionary
leads to a correct segmentation, whereas with
the learned dictionary the segmentation is erro-
neous. The second and third token should be
combined (?Hong Kong?), whereas the fifth to-
ken should be separated (?stabilize in the long
term?). In this case, the wrong segmentation of
the Chinese source sentence does not result in a
wrong translation. A possible reason is that the
translation system is based on word groups and
can recover from these segmentation errors.
In the second example, the segmentation with
the LDC dictionary produces at least one error.
The second and third token should be combined
(?this?). It is possible to combine the seventh
and eighth token to a single word because the
eighth token shows only the tense. The segmen-
tation with the learned dictionary is correct.
Here, the two segmentations result in different
translations.
In the third example, both segmentations are
incorrect and these segmentation errors affect
the translation results. In the segmentation
with the LDC dictionary, the first Chinese char-
acters should be segmented as a separate word.
The second and third character and maybe even
the fourth character should be combined to one
word.2 The fifth and sixth character should be
combined to a single word. In the segmentation
with the learned dictionary, the fifth and sixth
token (seventh and eighth character) should be
combined (?isolated?). We see that this term is
missing in the translation. Here, the segmenta-
tion errors result in translation errors.
6 Discussion and Future Work
We have presented a new method for Chinese
word segmentation. It avoids the use of a pre-
defined dictionary and instead learns a corpus-
specific dictionary from the bilingual training
corpus.
The idea is extracting a self-learned dictio-
nary from the trained alignment models. This
method has the advantage that the word entries
in the dictionary all occur in the training data,
and its content is much closer to the training
text as a predefined dictionary, which can never
cover all possible word occurrences. Here, if the
content of the test corpus is closer to that of the
2This is an example of an ambiguous segmentation.
Example 1
LDC dictionary:
                              
It will benefit Hong Kong's economy to prosper
and stabilize in the long term.
Learned dictionary:
                          
It will benefit Hong Kong's economy to prosper
and stabilize in the long term.
Reference:
It will be benificial for the stability and
prosperity of Hong Kong in the long run.
Example 2
LDC dictionary:
                               
         
but this meeting down or achieved certain
progress.
Learned dictionary:
                             
    
however, this meeting straight down still
achieved certain progress.
Reference:
Neverless, this meeting has achieved some
progress.
Example 3
LDC dictionary:
...                                 
 ...
... the unification of the world carried adjacent
isolate of proof, ...
Learned dictionary:
...                                
 ...
... in the world faced with a became another
proof, ...
Reference:
... another proof that ... is facing isolation in the
world ...
Figure 4: Translation examples using the
learned dictionary and the LDC dictionary.
training corpus, the quality of the dictionary is
higher and the translation performance would
be better.
The experiments showed that the transla-
tion quality with the learned segmentation is
competitive with the LDC segmentation. Ad-
ditionally, we have shown the feasibility of a
Chinese?English statistical machine translation
system that works without any word segmenta-
tion. There is only a minor loss in translation
performance. Further improvements could be
possible by tuning the system toward this spe-
cific task.
We expect that our method could be im-
proved by considering the word length as dis-
cussed in Section 4.3. As shown in the word
length statistics, long words with more than
four characters occur only occasionally. Most of
them are named entity words, which are writ-
ten in English in upper case. Therefore, we can
apply a simple rule: we accept a long Chinese
word only if the corresponding English word is
in upper case. This should result in an improved
dictionary. An alternative way is to use the
word length statistics in Table 3 as a prior dis-
tribution. In this case, long words would get a
penalty, because their prior probability is low.
Because the extraction of our dictionary is
based on bilingual information, it might be in-
teresting to combine it with methods that use
monolingual information only.
For Chinese?English, there is a large num-
ber of bilingual corpora available at the LDC.
Therefore using additional corpora, we can ex-
pect to get an improved dictionary.
References
P. F. Brown, J. Cocke, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J.
Della Pietra, F. Jelinek, J. D. Lafferty, R. L.
Mercer, and P. S. Roossin. 1990. A statisti-
cal approach to machine translation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 16(2):79?85, June.
P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della
Pietra, and R. L. Mercer. 1993. The mathe-
matics of statistical machine translation: Pa-
rameter estimation. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(2):263?311, June.
LDC. 2003a. LDC Chinese resources home
page. http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/
Chinese/LDC ch.htm.
LDC. 2003b. LDC resources home page.
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/TIDES/
mt2004cn.htm.
NIST. 2003. Machine translation home page.
http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/mt/
index.htm.
F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2002. Discriminative
training and maximum entropy models for
statistical machine translation. In Proc. of
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages
295?302, Philadelphia, PA, July.
F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic com-
parison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51,
March.
F. J. Och, C. Tillmann, and H. Ney. 1999. Im-
proved alignment models for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of the Joint SIG-
DAT Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and Very Large Cor-
pora, pages 20?28, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, June.
D. D. Palmer. 1997. A trainable rule-based
algorithm for word segmentation. In Proc.
of the 35th Annual Meeting of ACL and 8th
Conference of the European Chapter of ACL,
pages 321?328, Madrid, Spain, August.
K. A. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. J.
Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. Techni-
cal Report RC22176 (W0109-022), IBM Re-
search Division, Thomas J. Watson Research
Center, September.
R. W. Sproat and C. Shih. 1990. A statistical
method for finding word boundaries in Chi-
nese text. Computer Processing of Chinese
and Oriental Languages, 4:336?351.
M. Sun, D. Shen, and B. K. Tsou. 1998. Chi-
nese word segmentation without using lexi-
con and hand-crafted training data. In Proc.
of the 36th Annual Meeting of ACL and
17th Int. Conf. on Computational Linguistics
(COLING-ACL 98), pages 1265?1271, Mon-
treal, Quebec, Canada, August.
S. Vogel, H. Ney, and C. Tillmann. 1996.
HMM-based word alignment in statistical
translation. In COLING ?96: The 16th Int.
Conf. on Computational Linguistics, pages
836?841, Copenhagen, Denmark, August.
