Character-Sense Association and Compounding Template Similarity: 
Automatic Semantic Classification of Chinese Compounds 
Chao-Jan Chen 
LATTICE, University Paris VII, Paris, France 
chen_chaojan@yahoo.com.tw 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a character-based model of 
automatic sense determination for Chinese 
compounds. The model adopts a sense 
approximation approach using synonymous 
compounds retrieved by measuring similarity 
of semantic template in compounding. The 
similarity measure is derived from an 
association network among characters and 
senses, which is built from a formatted MRD. 
Adopting the taxonomy of CILIN, a system of 
deep semantic classification (at least to the 
small classes) for V-V compounds is 
implemented and evaluated to test the model. 
The experiment reports a high precision rate 
(about 38% in outside test and 61% in inside 
test) against the baseline one (about 18%). 
 
1. Introduction 
Sense tagging is an important task in NLP. It is 
supposed to provide semantic information useful to 
the application tasks like IR and MT.  As generally 
acknowledged, sense tagging is to assign a certain 
sense to a word in a certain context by using a 
semantic lexicon (Yarowsky, 1992, Wilks and 
Stevenson, 1997). In addition to word sense 
disambiguation (WSD) for known words, sense 
determination for words unknown to the lexicon 
poses another challenge in sense tagging. This is 
especially the case in NLP of Chinese, a language 
rich in compound words. According to the data in 
(Chen and Lin, 2000), about 5.51% of unknown 
words is encountered in their sense-tagging task of 
Chinese corpus. Instead of proper names, the 
cross-linguistically most common type of unknown 
words, compound words constitute the majority of 
unknown words in Chinese text. According to Chen 
and Chen (2000), the three most dominant types of 
Chinese unknown words are: compound nouns 
(about 51%), compound verbs (about 34%), and 
proper names (about 15%). While the identification 
and classification of proper names is an issue already 
well discussed in Chinese NLP researches, the sense 
determination of unknown compounds remains a 
subject relatively less tackled. 
 
1.1 Shallow vs. Deep Classification 
While word sense might be conceptually vague and 
controversial in linguistics and difficult to define 
(Manning and Sch?tze, 1999), sense tag is more 
concrete and can be defined according to the specific 
need of the NLP tasks in question. For example, in a 
task of semantic tagging or classification, sense tag 
can be the semantic class from a thesaurus. Or 
otherwise, in a task of machine translation, the 
equivalent foreign word from a bilingual dictionary 
can be chosen as sense tag. In this paper, it is the 
sense tag so defined that is meant by the term sense. 
The notion sense determination then refers to the 
assignment of sense tag to a word without using 
contextual information. It is so called to be 
distinguished from sense tagging, which requires 
contextual information. Under such a definition, 
semantic classification can be regarded as a case of 
sense determination using the taxonomy of a certain 
thesaurus, in which a semantic class is a sense tag. 
According to Wilks and Stevenson (1997), a 
task assigning broad sense tags like HUMAN, 
ANIMATE in WordNet is referred to as semantic 
tagging, different from sense tagging, which assigns 
more particular sense tags. In fact, a similar 
distinction can also be made for semantic 
classification according to the target level of the 
semantic classes in the taxonomy tree: a task aiming 
at the top-level classes can be called shallow 
semantic classification (like Lua, 1997), while a task 
aiming at the bottom-level classes can be called a 
deep semantic classification1 (like Chen and Chen, 
2000). Since many top-level semantic classes, like 
TIME, SPACE, QUALITY, ACTION, etc., are often 
already reflected in the syntactic information, a 
shallow semantic classification does not actually 
provide much semantic information independent of 
syntactic tagging. It is therefore the deep semantic 
classification that the paper is concerned about. 
                                                 
1
 Take the word ?(?attack?) for example. According to 
CILIN (a thesaurus widely used in Chinese semantic 
classification, see 3.1), it can be classified to shallow-levels as 
major class H (ACTIVITY) or as medium class Hb (MILITARY 
ACTIVITY). It can also be classified to deep-levels as small 
class Hb03 (specific military operations: ATTACK, RESIST, 
and COUNTERATTACK) or as subclass Hb031 (ATTACK). 
1.2 Previous Researches 
In the previous researches of automatic semantic 
classification of Chinese compounds, compounds 
are generally presupposed to be endocentric, 
composed of a head and a modifier. Determining the 
class of the head is therefore determining the class of 
the target compound (Lua, 1997, Chen and Chen, 
2000). This head-determination approach has two 
advantages: (1) it is simple and easy to implement (2) 
it works effectively for compound nouns, the 
dominant type of compounds, since most of them are 
head-final endocentric words.2 However, there exist 
considerable exocentric compounds, for which such 
a simple algorithm does not work successfully. It is 
especially the case for compound verbs like V-Vs3. 
For example, q is a V-V compound meaning ?to 
kill by beating?. Obviously, neither the sense of q
(?beat?) nor that of (?die?) is appropriate to be 
assigned to the compound q as the sense of B
(?car?) can be assigned to ?B (?tram?, literally 
?electricity-car?) as a general meaning. 
A second problem encountered in compound 
semantic classification is that there are considerable 
out-of-coverage morphemes, which are not listed in 
the lexicon, as remarked in (Chen and Chen, 2000). 
Moreover, even a morpheme is listed, the given 
senses are not necessarily appropriate to the task. 
For example, in the search of compound 
morphological rules in (Chen and Chen, 1998), some 
appropriate senses of morphemes have to be added 
manually to facilitate the task. Obviously this causes 
a great difficulty to an automatic task, especially to 
the example-based models which rely on the 
similarity measurement of the modifier morphemes 
to disambiguate the head senses (Chen and Chen, 
1998, 2000). An alternative approach is thus needed 
to solve the problems of exocentric compounds and 
lexicon incompleteness. 
Therefore in this paper I will present a non 
head-oriented model of Chinese compound sense 
determination, in which lexicon incompleteness will 
be overcome by exploring the association between 
                                                 
2
 Though a compound noun and its head are strictly speaking in 
a hyponym relation, they are usually categorized as members of 
the same class. For example, in CILIN,B(?car?, ?vehicle?) and 
most of the compounds X-B are put under the same class Bo21 
(VEHICLES), where X can be a morpheme designating the 
energy source (like horse, cow, electricity) or the load content 
(like passenger, merchandise). 
3
 An introspection on the two-character verbs in CILIN shows 
that about 48% of them are semantically exocentric, which 
means the semantic class of a compound X-Y in CILIN is equal 
neither to that of X nor to that of Y. As to the endocentric V1-V2, 
V1 and V2 are about equally likely to be the head of a compound 
verb according to the introspection. 
characters and senses in a MRD. The sense of an 
unknown compound can be approximated by 
retrieved synonyms. Its sense tag can be assigned 
according to a certain MRD. This model facilitates 
an automatic system of deep semantic classification 
for unknown compounds. In this paper, a system for 
V-V compounds is implemented and evaluated. The 
model can however be extended to handle general 
Chinese compounds, like V-N and N-N, as well. 
 
2. Compound Sense Determination 
2.1 Compounding Semantic Templates 
Most of the Chinese compounds are composed of 
two constituents, which can be bound morphemes of 
one character or free words of one or more 
characters. The two-character compound is a most 
representative type because its components can be 
bound morphemes as well as free words. The 
handling of two-character compounds becomes 
therefore the focus in this paper. 
As in general Chinese compounding, a 
two-character compound is usually semantically 
compositional, with each character conveying a 
certain sense. The principle of semantic composition 
implies that under each compound lies a semantic 
pattern, which can be represented as the combination 
of the sense tags of the two component characters. 
The combination pattern is referred to as 
compounding semantic template (denoted by 
S-template) in this paper; compounds of the same 
S-template are then referred to as template-similar 
(denoted by T-similar). Since T-similar compounds 
are alike in their semantic compositions, they are 
supposed to possess roughly the same meaning and 
to be put under a considerably fine-grained semantic 
class. Take the compound verbq~ for example. 
This compound suggests the existence of a 
S-template of HIT-BROKEN, as the senses of the 
two component characters q and ~  are 
respectively ?hit? and ?broken?. The S-template 
HIT-BROKEN refers to a complex event schema [to 
make something BROKEN by HITting]. This 
S-template can also be found in many other 
compounds with a similar meaning:q?,?,~,
??etc. Obviously such T-similar words can 
make a good set of examples for the example-based 
approach to the sense determination, if an effective 
measure of word similarity is available for their 
retrieval. 
 
2.2 Compound Similarity 
As a critical technique, word similarity is generally 
used in the example-based models of semantic 
classification. The measure of word similarity can be 
divided into two major approaches: taxonomy-based 
lexical approach (Resnik 1995, Lin 1998a, Chen and 
Chen 1998) and context-based syntactic approach 
(Lin 1998b,Chen and You 2002), which is not the 
concern in this context-free model. However, two 
problems arise here for the taxonomy-based lexical 
approach. First, such similarity measures risk the 
failure to capture the similarity among some 
semantically highly related words, if they happen to 
be put under classes distant from each other 
according to a specific ontology 4 . Second, as 
mentioned, the appropriate senses of some 
characters just cannot be found in the thesaurus. One 
major reason why dictionaries do not include certain 
character senses is that many of such characters are 
used in contemporary Chinese only as bound 
morphemes not as free words, when the senses in 
question are involved. However, such senses could 
be kept in the compounds in the lexicon, so they 
might be covert but not inextricable. 
To remedy the effects of such lexicon 
incompleteness, I propose an approach to retrieve 
the latent senses 5  of characters and the latent 
synonymy among characters by exploring 
association among characters and senses. The idea is 
that if a character C appears in a compound W, then 
according to semantic composition, the sense of C 
must somehow contributes to S, the sense of W. 
Therefore the association strength between character 
C and sense S in a MRD is supposed to reflect the 
potentiality of S to be a sense of C. By transitivity, 
such association between characters and senses 
allows to capture association among characters. A 
new way to measure word similarity of two 
compounds can be thus derived based on the 
association strength of the corresponding component 
characters. This measure actually reflects the 
S-template similarity between two compounds and 
can be used to retrieve for a compound its T-similar 
words, which are potentially synonymous. 
                                                 
4
 Take an example in CILIN (a Chinese thesaurus, see 3.1). 
KILL(), BUTCHER(??), and EXCUTE(?) are three 
concepts all meaning ?cause to die?. However, the words 
expressing these three ideas are respectively put under small 
classes Hn05, Hd28, and Hm10, respectively under medium 
class Hn: Criminal Activities(u@ ), class Hd: Economical 
Production Activities(?Y), and class Hm: Security and Justice 
Activities(??-P[). We wonder if any measurement based on 
that hierarchy can capture the similarity among the words 
situated in these three small classes in CILIN, for those words 
share only a common major class H, denoting vaguely Activities, 
which includes 296 small classes and 836 subclasses. 
5
 Here the term latent is used only to mean ?hidden, potential, 
and waiting to be discovered?. It has nothing to do with the LSI 
techniques, though they both evoke the same meaning of latent. 
 
2.3 Synonyms and Sense Approximation 
The acquisition of synonyms plays an important role 
in the sense determination of a word. When a 
native-speaker is capable of giving synonyms to a 
word, he is considered to understand the meaning of 
that word. In fact, such a way of sense capturing is 
also reflected in how the senses of words can be 
explained in many dictionaries6. Moreover, as some 
researches propose, synonyms can be used to 
construct the semantic space for a given word (Ploux 
and Victorri, 1998, Ploux and Ji, 2003). In such a 
semantic space, each synonym with different nuance 
occupies a certain area. As visually reflected in this 
approach, retrieving a proper set of its synonyms 
means the ability to well capture the senses of a 
word. In fact, my model of automatic sense 
determination for a compound is exactly built upon 
the retrieval of its near synonyms, the T-similar 
compounds as previously described. 
 
2.4 Model Representation  
With a S-template similarity measure, one can 
retrieve, for a given compound, its potential 
synonymous T-similar compounds. Then the sense 
tags of the retrieved compounds can be used to 
determine the sense tag of the target compound. The 
model of compound sense determination can be thus 
composed of two modules, as illustrated in Fig.1. 
 
W(X-Y) 
 
{dico1,dico2,?} 
 
Module-A       < T-similar Word Retriever > 
 
 
   { SW-set(X-Y) }       
       Filter-C  
        dicox 
 
Module-B       < S-tag Determiner > 
 
 
 
Fig.1 Model of Compound 
Sense Determination 
{S-tag(X-Y)} 
 
Module-A (<T-similar Word Retriever>) is to find 
the potential synonyms ({SW-set(X-Y)}) of a given 
compound (X-Y) by using association information 
provided from dicos {dico1, dico2,?}. Module-B 
(<S-tag Determiner>) is to obtain the most likely 
                                                 
6
 Especially in Chinese dictionaries, it is often the case that 
several synonymous words are given as explanation to the 
meaning of a word, especially when it is a compound verb. 
sense tags ({S-tag(X-Y)}) according to dicox for the 
target word by using the output of Module-A. The 
component filter-C is optional, which passes only 
the T-similar words with the same syntactic category 
as the target compound, if it is already known. In 
fact, a system of semantic classification can be so 
created by choosing dico2 as dicox and the S-tag is 
then the semantic class in CILIN (as in section 4). 
 
3 Character-Sense Association Network 
Before exploring the critical measurement of 
association among characters and senses needed in 
the model, I have to briefly present the lexical 
sources in use and to define the idealized dictionary 
format adopted in this task. 
 
3.1 Lexical Sources 
The lexical sources used to implement my system 
include: 
(1) Sinica Corpus: a balanced Chinese corpus     
with 5 million words segmented and tagged with 
syntactic categories. (Huang et al, 1995) 
(2) HowNet: an on-line Chinese-English bilingual 
lexical resource created by Dong. It is used in 
this paper as a Chinese-English dictionary 
registering about 51,600 Chinese words, each 
assigned with its equivalent English words and 
its POS. (http://www.keenage.com/) 
(3) CILIN: a Chinese thesaurus collecting about 
53,200 words. CILIN classifies its lexicon in a 
four-level hierarchy according to different 
semantic granularities: 12 major classes (level-1), 
95 medium classes (level-2), 1428 small classes 
(level-3), and 3924 subclasses (level-4). The 
words in the same small class can be regarded as 
semantically similar, but only the words in the 
same subclasses can be surely regarded as 
synonyms7.(Mei et al, 1984) 
 
3.2 Idealized Dictionary Format (dico) 
The idealized dictionary, denoted as dico, is actually 
a formatted MRD defined as follows:  
 
A dico is a set of <W-S> correspondence pairs, 
where W is a word, and S is a sense tag.   (1) 
 
                                                 
7
 Take two verbs?(?to buy?) and [(?to sell?) as examples to 
demonstrate the taxonomy of CILIN. Both of the two verbs are 
grouped in the small class He03 (commercial trade), which is 
under the major class H (activities) and the medium class He 
(economic activities). However, the two antonyms are put under 
two different subclasses, respectively He031 (buying) and 
He032 (selling). 
In the system implementation in this paper, two 
dicos are converted respectively from HowNet and 
CILIN for the calculation of the association 
measures among characters and sense tags with 
different types of sense tags adopted. For HowNet, 
the English equivalent words are used as sense tags 
to form dico1. For CILIN, the subclasses are used as 
sense tags to form dico2. 
 
3.3 Character-Sense Association 
All the semantic information provided by a dico, as 
defined in (1), can be in fact represented as a 
network with links between two domains: W domain 
(words) and S domain (sense tags). In such a 
viewpoint, polysemy is then a one-to-many mapping 
from W to S, while synonymy a one-to-many 
mapping from S to W. If we further link a 
component character C of a word W to one of the S 
linked to W, such a C-S link might intuitively reflect 
a potential sense S for the character C, probably a 
latent sense of C, as previously described in section 
2.2. We can use a statistical association measure, 
like MI or ?2, to extract such C-S links. The 
statistically extracted C-S association can then lead 
to the finding of latent senses for a character. The 
revelation of a latent character-sense association will 
further lead to the retrieval of new synonymy 
relation between characters. Symmetrically, the 
revelation of a latent character-sense association will 
also lead to the retrieval of the potential polysemy of 
a character. As illustrated in the Z-diagram below, 
supposed that C1 is already associated to S1 and C2 
to S2, the retrieval of latent sense S1 to C2 will, 
meanwhile, lead to the finding of an association 
between C1 and C2 (latent synonymy), and an 
association between S1 and S2 (latent polysemy). 
 
C1          S1 
                                      
latent synonymy      latent sense       latent polysemy 
                                
           C2           S2 
                    
 
Fig. 2  Z-diagram of C-S links 
 
The directed association measure from a character to 
a sense, denoted as CS-asso(Ci,Sj), can be defined as 
follows: 
 
?(Ci, Sj) = [ freq(Ci,Sj)E/ ( freq(Ci)+freq(Sj) ) ] ^ 0.5   
CS-asso (Ci, Sj) =  ? (Ci,Sj) / Max k { ? (Ci,Sk) }      (2) 
 
where freq(Ci,Sj) is the number of the words in the 
MRD that contain character Ci and is tagged with 
sense Sj, while freq(Ci) is the number of words 
containing character Ci, and freq(Sj) the number of 
words tagged with sense Sj.8Likewise, the directed 
association measure from a sense to a character, 
denoted as SC-asso(Si,Cj), can be defined as 
follows9: 
 
? (Si,Cj)= [ freq(Si,Cj)E/( freq(Si)+freq(Cj) ) ] ^0.5    
SC-asso (Si,Cj) =  ? (Si,Cj) / Max k { ? (Si , Ck) },     (3) 
 
Consequently, by link of a Ci-Sj-Ck chain (a latent 
synonymy), the directed association measure for a 
character Ci to another character Ck is defined as a 
combination of two types of directed association 
measures, the maximal association measure 
CC-asso1(Ci ,Ck) and the over-all association 
measure CC-asso2(Ci ,Ck), with respective weights 
of 1-? and ? (the value ? is by default set at 0.5). 
 
asso-chain(Ci,Sj,Ck) = ?asso (Ci,Sj) * asso (Sj,Ck) ) ^ 0.5  
f1 (Ci,Ck) = Max j {asso-chain (Ci,Sj,Ck) } 
CC-asso1(Ci,Ck) = f1 (Ci,Ck) / Max m { f1 (Ci,Cm) }  
f2 (Ci,Ck) = ?j asso-chain(Ci,Sj,Ck) 
CC-asso2(Ci,Ck) = f2 (Ci,Ck) / Max m { f2 (Ci,Cm) }   
CC-asso = (1-?) * CC-asso1 + ? * CC-asso2           (4) 
 
3.4 S-Template Similarity Measure 
Supposed that Wi(Ci1-Ci2) and Wj(Cj1-Cj2) are both 
two-character compounds, a measure of word-word 
directed association (denoted as WW-asso) from Wi 
to Wj can be defined based on the CC-asso between 
their corresponding component characters: 
 
? (Wi,Wj) = { CC-asso(Ci1,Cj1) * CC-asso(Ci2,Cj2) } ^ 0.5 
WW-asso(Wi,Wj) = ? (Wi,Wj) / Max k { ? (Wi,Wk) }       (5) 
 
Since the corresponding characters of two T-similar 
compounds must share the same sense tags and thus 
have strong CC-asso, the measure WW-asso(Wi,Wj) 
indicates, in fact, how T-similar for a compound Wj 
to a target Wi, compared with other compounds. 
WW-asso(Wi,Wj) is therefore taken as the measure 
of S-template similarity (denoted as T-similarity). 
Applying the S-template similarity measure in 
(5), now the T-similar Word Retriever (<TWR>) can 
                                                 
8
 The formula ? in (2) is actually a simplified approximation to 
the ?2 -test measure by supposing that freq(C,S) is much smaller 
than freq(C) and freq(S). In fact, MI (mutual information) is 
another association measure frequently used in Chinese NLP. 
For example, it is successfully used for the character-POS 
association measure in the task of syntactical classification for 
Chinese unknown words (Chen et al, 1997). However, a 
heuristic evaluation on some randomly picked examples shows 
that it seems to be outperformed by the ?2 measure in this task. 
9
 It must be noted that the measures of directed association (2) 
and (3) are asymmetric in that they give different values for the 
association from Ci to Sj and for the one from Sj to Ci because 
their normalization factors are not the same. That is why the 
notion directed is added here to point out the asymmetry. 
give for a compound X-Y the list of its most 
T-similar compounds from the corpus and their 
T-similarity scores. As to the <S-tag Determiner>, it 
receives as input the output T-similar words from 
<TWR>. Among the input T-similar words, the ones 
known to dicox, are picked out and their sense tags 
(S-tag) with the T-similarity scores (WW-asso) are 
used, as in the formula (6), to calculate the 
likelihood score ? for a compound V-Vi to possess a 
certain S-tagj. Therefore a set of ranked possible 
semantic classes for the compound X-Y can be given 
({S-tag(X-Y)}). 
 
?(V-Vi, S-tagj) = ? j WW-asso (V-Vi, SWk)            (6) 
,where SWk is a known word in dicox                   
and S-tagj is one of the S-tages to SWk 
?(V-Vi,S-tagj)=?(V-Vi,S-tagj)/Max n { ?(V-Vi, S-tagn) } 
 
4. System Implementation  
4.1 Classification for V-V Compounds 
Based on the model proposed, a system of semantic 
classification can be implemented for two-character 
V-V compound verbs by using dico2 as the dicox in 
the Module-B (the S-tag now is the semantic class in 
CILIN). The V-V compounds are chosen as subjects 
in this system because the choice can best 
distinguish the present model from the previous 
head-orientated approaches. As the involvement of 
only V characters make training data homogeneous, 
it simplifies the association network and reduces 
largely the computational complexity. However, the 
partial system for V-V compounds can be easily 
extended to handle V-N compounds and N-N 
compounds as well when the character-sense 
association network for N characters is established. 
Since only the V characters are involved, a 
subset of <W-S> pairs of dico1 (HowNet) and dico2 
(CILIN) is extracted to calculate the association 
measures and then the T-similarity measure. The 
subset contains only the <W-S> pairs whose W are 
one-character or two-character verbs. In CILIN the 
verbs are put under the major classes from E to J, 
designating the concepts of attributes (E), actions (F), 
mental activities (G), activities (H), physical states 
(I), and relations (J). By choosing only the words in 
the above 6 major classes, the nominal senses of 
characters (A: human, B: concrete object, C: time 
and space, D: abstract object) are supposed to be 
excluded. Besides, the occurrence frequency of a 
character in a mono-character word will be double 
weighted, since in this case the word sense is surely 
contributed by that character alone. 
Let us take the V-V compound ?> (?to catch 
by hunting?, literally ?hunt-catch?) for example to 
see how the model operates. Based on the 
association network created from HowNet, the 
characters associated to ?  and > are listed in 
List 1 and List 2 (only the 10 top ranked are listed 
here), the 20 top ranked T-similar compounds of ?
> are listed in List 3 with their similarity scores, 
syntactic categories and semantic classes, if they are 
known in CILIN. Among the 20 T-similar 
compounds retrieved, 10 of them (the grayed ones) 
can be found in CILIN; 9 of them (the framed ones) 
can be considered as good synonyms of ?>, while 
other 7 (the starred ones) considered semantically 
really close. In this particular example, 80% (16/20) 
of the T-similar compounds can be considered as at 
least near synonymous, while 50%(8/16) of them 
can be actually found in CILIN to serve the 
automatic semantic classification. 
 
???????? ? ???????? ? ?? ????????? ?  Z???????  
???????? ? ???????? ? ?? S???????    ???????? ?
???????? ? ???????? ? ?? ???????? ?   ???????? ?
Z??????? ? ???????? ? ?? ?? ???????   ???????? ?
???????? ? ???????? ? ?? ????????    ???????? ?
???????? List 1                  List 2                  
?
??????????????  ??? ??????????????? ????
??????????????  ???? ?S?????????? ?
?S?????????? ? ? ?S??????????????????
Z??????????? ? ? ???????????? ?
???????? ?????? ???? ??????????????
??????????????? ???? ??????????????????  
???????????? ? ? ????????????  
?????????????? ? Z?????????????? ????
?)?????????? ? ? ?S???????????????? ?
??????????????? ???? ?S 0.7790 VC 
List 3 
Applying the formula for the likelihood score of 
semantic class determination in (6), we have the 4 
top ranked semantic classes for ?> predicted by 
the system as follows: 
(1) Hm051 (Z? ?arrest? )  
(2) Je121 (7S ?acquire? ) 
(3) Hb121  (?? ?attack and occupy? ) 
(4) Hb141 (?? ?capture as war prisoner?)  
In this case, the standard answer of class Hm051 for 
the compound ?> is ranked as the first candidate, 
while the second ranked candidate class Je121 
(?acquire?) is also reasonable, which can be 
considered rather correct in a certain way by human 
judgment. In fact, according to the native speaker?s 
instinct, the 4th ranked candidate class Hb141 
(?capture?) is also quite suitable to the meaning of 
the verb ?>, though that is not what it is classified 
in CILIN. However, to avoid the subjective 
interference of human judgment and particularly to 
make the evaluation task automatic, the evaluation in 
the following sections will be made by machine only 
according to the standard classification in CILIN. 
 
4.2 Experiment Results 
For evaluating the performance of the system, 500 
V-V compounds are randomly picked out from 
CILIN to form the test set. Two modes of evaluation 
experiments are carried out: both modes adopt dico2 
(CILIN) in Module-B (dicox=dioc2) to determine 
semantic classes, while the inside-test mode uses 
dico2 (CILIN) in Module-A and the outside-test 
mode uses dico1 (HowNet) in Module-A, to obtain 
association network and retrieve the T-similar words. 
To make the test compounds unknown to the model, 
the semantic classes of the test compounds have to 
be invisible to CILIN, while the invisibility should 
not undermine the training of the association 
network in Module-A. The effect is done by 
dynamically withdrawing a word from dico2 in 
Module-B each time when it is in test. Two ways of 
evaluation can be made: by verifying the answer to 
the level of small class (level-3) and to the level of 
subclasses (level-4). The accuracy is calculated by 
verifying if the correct answer or one of the correct 
answers (if V-V is polysemous) according to CILIN 
can be found in the first n ranked semantic classes 
predicted by the system. The performance of a 
random head-picking model is offered as the 
baseline. In this baseline model, one of the semantic 
classes of X and Y is randomly chosen as the 
semantic class of the compound X-Y. 
 
Level-3(Small Class)     Level-4(Subclass )  
n outside inside Baseline outside inside Baseline 
1 39.80% 61.60% 18.83% 36.60% 60.40% 17.34% 
2 56.80% 76.00% 31.40% 52.80% 74.40% 29.12% 
3 64.40% 83.80% 40.21% 59.80% 80.80% 37.54% 
Table 1. Performance for 500 V-V compounds 
 
The results in Table 1 show that the system achieves 
a precision rate of 60.40% for inside test and 36.60% 
for outside test in level-4 classification against the 
baseline one of 17.34%. Not to our surprise, the 
performance of classification to level-3, a slightly 
shallower level, is slightly better: 61.60% for inside 
test and 39.80% for outside test. Table 1 also shows 
that the system can achieve a correction rate of 
59.8% (outside) and 80.80% (inside) for including 
the correct answer in the first 3 ranked candidate 
classes in level-4, 64.40% (outside) and 83.80% 
(inside) in level-3, all much better than the baseline 
ones, 37.54% and 40.21%. 
 
4.3 A Pseudo-WSD Problem 
If the correct semantic class can be found in a 
limited number of candidates, context information 
can be used to help determine which candidate is 
more likely to be the proper one, just as a WSD task 
does. Take again the example of the compound ?
> in section 4.1, which the system classifies most 
likely as: ?arrest?, ?acquire? and ?attack-occupy?. 
Obviously the verbs in the three classes should take 
different stereotypes of objects: respectively person, 
thing, and place. Therefore it is not difficult to 
determine the correct semantic class of the verb in 
question by using context information, in this case 
the type of the object. Through this example, we can 
see that the high inclusion rate of the correct answer 
in the top ranked classes has in fact a great 
significance: the ranking of the top candidates can be 
further adjusted and eventually ameliorated by 
context information, and thus the task of class 
determination can become a pseudo-WSD problem, 
in which domain various techniques are well 
available (Manning and Schutze, 1999). The 
performance of the present non-contextual system of 
automatic semantic classification is then expected to 
be improvable with the eventual help of a good 
context-sensitive WSD system, though it is out of 
the scope in this paper. Therefore the correct 
inclusion rate of top n ranked classes is also the 
concern of this paper. 
 
4.4 Endocentric vs. Exocentric Compounds  
Table 2 shows the performance of the system on the 
endocentric compounds (with heads) and on the 
exocentric ones (without heads) in level-3. Among 
the 500 V-V compounds, the endocentric V-V 
compounds have much higher precision rates than 
the exocentric ones. But even for the exocentric 
compounds, the precision rate of the system is 
49.28% in inside test and 27.05% in outside test, 
while the correct inclusion rate of top 3 ranked 
classes achieves 74.64% in inside test and 51.69% in 
outside test. Such a performance is in fact rather 
encouraging since it shows that this model has 
overcome the inherent difficulty met by a 
head-oriented approach. 
 
    Outside inside  
n +Head -Head +Head -Head 
1 48.81% 27.05% 70.69% 49.28% 
2 68.26% 40.58% 84.83% 64.11% 
3 73.38% 51.69% 90.69% 74.64% 
Table 2. Level-3 performance for [+/- Head] V-V 
 
4.5 Syntactic Category Filter 
To test the function of the Filter-C in the model, two 
sets of 500 V-V compounds are randomly picked out 
from verbs of category VC corpus, and from verbs 
of category VA in Sinica Corpus.10. Table 3 and 4 
show the performance of the system on the two 
kinds of verbs when evaluated to level-3. The results 
show that the system using the syntactic category 
filter (+SCF) performs slightly better than that 
without using the filter (-SCF) only in the precision 
of first ranked class in the outside test. Beside that, 
the use of the syntactic category filter generally 
undermines the performance of the system. Such a 
result might be explained by the fact that 
synonymous words in CILIN are not necessarily of 
the same syntactic category; it also suggests that for 
the entire model recall is perhaps more important 
than precision in Module-A. 
 
outside Inside  
n +SCF -SCF +SCF -SCF 
Baseline 
1 49.60% 47.60% 64.40% 67.20% 22.90% 
2 63.20% 64.00% 76.40% 78.40% 39.74% 
3 70.00% 73.60% 84.40% 84.80% 50.27% 
Table 3. Level-3 performance for V-V of category VC 
 
outside inside  
n +SCF -SCF +SCF -SCF 
Baseline 
1 41.00% 38.60% 52.00% 58.60% 15.90% 
2 52.20% 49.60% 67.40% 73.80% 26.84% 
3 55.80% 55.00% 73.00% 80.20% 34.61% 
Table 4. Level-3 performance for V-V of category VA 
 
4.6 Classification Errors 
An examination of the bad performing cases 
suggests that there are three major sources of 
erroneous classification in the experiments. (1) 
Some test compounds are just idiomatic or non 
semantic compositional. Naturally, it is highly 
difficult, if not impossible, to correctly predict their 
semantic classes. (2) Some compounds are from 
unproductive S-templates, which causes the example 
sparseness of the T-similar compounds. The scarcity 
of examples will easily lead to a poor determination 
result caused by a low noise tolerance of occasional 
bad examples. (3) Some classifications predicted by 
the system are reasonable to native speakers, but 
happen not to be the case in CILIN as the standard 
answers. 
 
5. Conclusions and Further Remarks 
In this paper I have proposed a character-based 
model of sense determination for Chinese 
                                                 
10
 VC (transitive action/activity) and VA (intransitive 
action/activity) are the two most dominant types of 
two-character verbs in the corpus, occupying respectively 44% 
and 27% around. Here the statistics does not include the VH 
(intransitive state) verbs, because they generally correspond to 
the adjectives in English, and in deed they are categorized as 
adjective in HowNet. 
compounds using compounding template similarity. 
Based on this model, a system of deep semantic 
classification for V-V compounds is implemented, 
which classifies compounds according to the 
taxonomy of CILIN to its deep-level (level-3 and 
level-4) classes. The evaluation experiment reports a 
fairly satisfactory precision rate of the first ranked 
predicted semantic class (about 38% in outside test 
and 61% in inside test) against the baseline one 
(about 18%). The results also show a high inclusion 
rate of correct answer in the top3 ranked classes, 
which suggests that in the future the present 
non-contextual system can cooperate with a WSD 
module using context information. Though the 
model is only tested on a partial system for V-V 
compounds, it can be extended to work for general 
compounds, like V-N and N-N, with the association 
network further established for N characters. 
The model proposed in this paper has the 
following advantages: (1) It proposes a similarity 
measure of compounding template to retrieve 
potential synonyms for sense approximation, which 
avoids the inherent difficulty of head determination 
in a head-oriented approach and is thus capable of 
handling exocentric compounds. (2) It establishes a 
network of character-sense association, which allows 
the discovery of latent senses of characters, latent 
synonymy, and latent polysemy, thus remedying the 
incompleteness effect of the MRD in use. (3) It can 
carry out deep semantic classification, not just 
shallow classification assigning general and vague 
categories. (4) It requires only a simple format of 
idealized dictionary, which facilitates the conversion 
from a general MRD and allows an easy 
enhancement of the system by adding a new MRD. 
However, as can be remarked in the discussion 
of classification errors, the performance of the model 
relies much on the productivity of compounding 
semantic templates of the target compounds. To 
correctly predict the semantic class of a compound 
with an unproductive semantic template is no doubt 
very difficult due to a sparse existence of the 
T-similar compounds. How to remedy such an effect 
is thus a challenging task in the future. In addition, 
how to generalize the present character-based model 
to make it applicable to compounds with 
multi-character component morphemes will be 
another essential task to undertake. Besides, a task of 
automatic lexical translation for Chinese unknown 
compounds will also be carried out in the future. The 
task can be executed under the very same structure 
of the present model, since the only difference will 
be the change of working dicox (from dico2 to dico1) 
in the Module-B. A pilot experiment has already 
shown encouraging results. 
References 
Chao-Jan Chen, Ming-hong Bai, and Keh-Jiann Chen. 
1997. Category Guessing for Chinese Unknown Words. 
In Proceedings of the Natural Language Processing 
Pacific Rim Symposium 1997, pages 35-40. 
Hsin-Hsi Chen and Chi-Ching Lin. 2000. Sense-tagging 
Chinese corpus. In Proceedings of ACL-2000 workshop 
on Chinese Language Processing, pages 7-14. 
Keh-Jiann Chen and Chao-Jan Chen. 1998. A Corpus 
Based Study on Computational Morphology for 
Mandarin Chinese. In Quantitative and Computational 
Studies on the Chinese Language, pages 283-306. 
Keh-Jiann Chen and Chao-Jan Chen. 2000. Automatic 
Semantic Classification for Chinese Unknown 
Compound Nouns, In Proceedings of Coling-2000, 
pages 173-179. 
Keh-Jiann Chen and Jia-Ming You. 2002. A Study on 
Word Similarity Using Context Vector Models, 
Computational Linguistics & Chinese Language  
Processing, 8(2):37-58. 
Chu-Ren Huang et al 1995. The Introduction of Sinica 
Corpus. In Proceedings of ROCLING VIII, pages 
81-99. 
Dekang Lin. 1998a. An Information-Theoretic Definition 
of Similarity, In Proceedings of International 
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 296-304 
Dekang Lin. 1998b. Automatic retrieval and clustering of 
similar words. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL-98, 
pages 768?774. 
Kim-Teng Lua. 1997. Prediction of Meaning of 
Bi-syllabic Chinese Compound Words Using Back 
Propagation Neural Network. In Computer Processing 
of Oriental Languages, 11(2):133-144. 
Christopher Manning and Hinrich Sch?tze. 1999. 
Fondations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, 
MIT Press. 
Jia-Ju Mei et al 1984. TonYiCi CiLin ? thesaurus of 
Chinese words (????<), Shangwu Yinshuguan 
(OD??`???), Hong Kong.  
Sabine Ploux and Bernard Victorri. 1998. Construction 
d?espace s?mantique ? l?aide de dictionnaires de 
synonymes. Traitement Automatique des Langues, 
39(1):161-182. 
Sabine Ploux and Hyungsuk Ji. 2003. A Model for 
Matching Semantic Maps Between Languages 
(French/English, English/French). Computational 
Linguistics, 29(2):155-178. 
Philip Resnik. 1995. Using Information Content to 
Evaluate Semantic Similarity in a Taxonomy. In 
Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pages 448-453. 
Yorick Wilks and Mark Stevenson. 1997. Sense Tagging: 
Semantic Tagging with a Lexicon. In Proceedings of 
the SIGLEX Workshop on Tagging Text with Lexical 
Semantics, pages 47-51. 
David Yarowsky. 1992. Word-Sense Disambiguation 
Using Statistical Models of Rogets Categories Trained 
on Large Corpora?, In Proceedings of COLING-92, 
pages 454-460. 
