OntoSem Methods for Processing Semantic Ellipsis  
Marjorie McShane, Stephen Beale and Sergei Nirenburg 
 
Institute for Language and Information Technologies 
University of Maryland Baltimore County 
{marge,sbeale,sergei}@umbc.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes various types of semantic 
ellipsis and underspecification in natural lan-
guage, and the ways in which the meaning of 
semantically elided elements is reconstructed 
in the Ontological Semantics (OntoSem) text 
processing environment. The description cov-
ers phenomena whose treatment in OntoSem 
has reached various levels of advancement: 
fully implemented, partially implemented, and 
described algorithmically outside of imple-
mentation. We present these research results 
at this point ? prior to full implementation and 
extensive evaluation ? for two reasons: first, 
new descriptive material is being reported; 
second, some subclasses of the phenomena in 
question will require a truly long-term effort 
whose results are best reported in installments.  
1 
                                                          
Introduction 
Syntactic ellipsis ? the non-expression of syntactically 
obligatory elements ? has been widely studied in com-
putational (not to mention other branches of) linguistics, 
largely because accounting for missing syntactic ele-
ments is a crucial aspect of achieving a full parse, and 
parsing is required for many approaches to NLP.1 Much 
less attention has been devoted to what we will call se-
mantic ellipsis, or the non-expression of elements that, 
while not syntactically obligatory, are required for a full 
semantic interpretation of a text.2 Naturally, semantic 
ellipsis is important only in truly knowledge-rich ap-
1 Examples of NLP efforts to resolve syntactic ellipsis in-
clude Hobbs and Kehler 1997; Kehler and Shieber 1997; 
and Lappin 1992, among many others. 
2 Some of the types of semantic underspecification treated 
here are described in the literature (e.g., Pustejovsky 1995) 
in theoretical terms, not as heuristic algorithms. This is due, 
in large part, to a lack of knowledge sources for semantic 
reasoning in those contributions. 
proaches to NLP, which few current non-toy systems 
pursue. 
 All definitions of ellipsis derive from a stated or 
implied notion of completeness. Taking, again, the ex-
ample of syntactic ellipsis, this means that obligatory 
verbal arguments must be overt, auxiliary verbs must 
have complements, etc. ? all of which is defined in 
lexico-grammatical terms. But even if a text is devoid of 
syntactic gaps, much remains below the surface, easily 
interpretable by people but not directly observable.  
 Typical examples of semantically underspecified 
elements are pronouns and indexicals (e.g., here, now, 
yesterday), whose real-world anchors must be clarified 
in a fully developed semantic representation (i.e., yes-
terday has a concrete meaning only if one knows when 
today is). Pronouns and indexicals, though often diffi-
cult to resolve, have one advantage over the cases to be 
discussed here: the trigger that further semantic specifi-
cation need be carried out is the word itself, and the 
inventory of such words is well known.  
 By contrast, the semantically underspecified cases in 
the following examples are more subtle:  
 
(1) After boosting employment the past few years, 
Aluminum Co. of America won't be doing any 
hiring this fall beyond replacing those who leave. 
 
(2) Mitchell said he planned to work late tonight to 
complete the legislation. 
 
(3) Civilians invited into the prison by the admini-
stration to help keep the peace were unable to 
stanch the bloodshed. 
 
The categories of semantic ellipsis illustrated by these 
examples can be described as follows. (1) shows refer-
ence resolution that relies on the reconstruction of a 
semantically elided category: i.e., to understand who 
those refers to, one must understand that the implicit 
object of hire is ?employees?, and that the elided head of 
the NP with those as its determiner also refers to em-
ployees (albeit a different real-world set of employees). 
(2) illustrates semantic event ellipsis in configurations 
containing modal/aspectual + OBJECT: i.e., the meaning 
of complete the legislation is actually complete writing 
the legislation. (3) illustrates lexical patterns with pre-
dictable event ellipsis: e.g., invite <person> to  <loca-
tion> means ?invite someone to come/go to the 
location.? These examples, which illustrate the types of 
semantic ellipsis to be discussed below, require special 
treatment in our ontological semantic (OntoSem) text 
processing system, since its goal is to automatically 
produce fully specified semantic representations of un-
restricted text that can then be used in a wide variety of 
applications. 
2 
3 
A Snapshot of the OntoSem Environ-
ment 
OntoSem is a text-processing environment that takes  as 
input unrestricted raw text and carries out preprocess-
ing, morphological analysis, syntactic analysis, and se-
mantic analysis, with the results of semantic analysis 
represented as formal text-meaning representations 
(TMRs) that can then be used as the basis for many ap-
plications. Text analysis relies on:  
 
? The OntoSem language-independent ontology, which 
is written using a metalanguage of description and 
currently contains around 5,500 concepts, each of 
which is described by an average of 16 properties.  
? An OntoSem lexicon for each language processed, 
which contains syntactic and semantic zones (linked 
using variables) as well as calls to ?meaning proce-
dures? (i.e., programs that carry out procedural se-
mantics, see McShane et al forthcoming) when 
applicable. The semantic zone most frequently refers 
to ontological concepts, either directly or with prop-
erty-based modifications, but can also describe word 
meaning extra-ontologically, for example, in terms of 
modality, aspect, time, etc. The current English lexi-
con contains approximately 12K senses, including all 
closed-class items and the most frequent verbs, as in-
dicated by corpus analysis. 
? An onomasticon, or lexicon of proper names, which 
contains approximately 350,000 entries and is grow-
ing daily using automated extraction techniques.  
? A fact repository, which contains real-world facts 
represented as numbered ?remembered instances? of 
ontological concepts (e.g., SPEECH-ACT-3366 is the 
3366th instantiation of the concept SPEECH-ACT in the 
world model constructed during the processing of 
some given text(s)). 
? The OntoSem text analyzers, which cover preprocess-
ing, syntactic analysis, semantic analysis, and creation 
of TMRs. 
? The TMR language, which is the metalanguage for 
representing text meaning.  
 
 A very simple example of a TMR, reflecting the 
meaning of the sentence The US won the war, is as fol-
lows: 
WIN-3 
 AGENT  NATION-213 
 THEME  WAR-ACTIVITY-7 
  
This TMR is headed by a WIN event ? in fact, it is the 3rd 
instantiation of the concept WIN (WIN-3) in the world 
?snapshot? being built during the processing of the 
given text(s). Its agent is NATION-213, which refers to 
the United States of America in our fact repository. The 
theme of the event is the 7th instantiation of WAR-
ACTIVITY in this text. Details of this approach to text 
processing can be found, e.g., in Nirenburg and Raskin 
2004, Beale et al2003, Nirenburg et al2003a,b. The 
ontology itself, a brief ontology tutorial, and an exten-
sive lexicon tutorial can be viewed at 
http://ilit.umbc.edu. 
 Since OntoSem text processing attempts to do it all 
? meaning that any phenomenon in any language we are 
processing is within the purview of our approach ? work 
on any given problem is carried out in spiral fashion: 
first at a rough grain size, then at a finer grain size with 
each iterative improvement of the system. In order both 
to drive and to organize work, we develop a ?microthe-
ory? for each aspect of text processing we treat: e.g., we 
have microtheories of mood, time, reference resolution, 
and many more. One of the benefits of conceiving work 
on a given topic in terms of a microtheory is that con-
ceptual, algorithmic progress can occur separately from 
its realization in a specific application. This does not 
imply a disconnect between algorithms and implementa-
tions ? quite the opposite: all algorithms are devised for 
the OntoSem environment, relying on the types of 
knowledge and processing it can currently provide or 
realistically promises to provide. Within this frame-
work, a ?big picture? of long-term work on a given 
topic is often clarified before all details of implementa-
tion, or complete knowledge support, become available.  
 In this paper we present initial results of our work on 
the microtheory of semantic ellipsis and underspecifica-
tion, some of whose contributing phenomena can cur-
rently be well-handled in OntoSem and others of which 
will require long-term research and development efforts.  
Reference Resolution that Relies on the 
Reconstruction of a Semantically Elided 
Antecedent  
The reference resolution task in NLP has widely come 
to be understood in very narrow terms ? as linking pro-
nouns to their overt textual antecedents (a focus fueled 
by MUC and other similar competitions; see Sundheim 
1995). However, the scope of reference-related prob-
lems is actually much broader (see, e.g., McShane and 
Nirenburg 2002 and McShane forthcoming). In this sec-
tion we describe a number of cases in which reference 
resolution requires knowledge of semantically elided 
categories. That is, we are not talking simply about re-
covering a semantically elided category in its own right, 
we are talking about recovering it in order to support the 
correct analysis of another category in the text.  
 Consider the challenge of resolving the reference of 
those in example (1): After boosting employment the 
past few years, Aluminum Co. of America won't be do-
ing any hiring this fall beyond replacing those who 
leave. ?Those? refers to an unspecified set of employees. 
The ellipsis of the head noun employees (or any syno-
nym of it) is licensed by the fact that the notion of ?em-
ployees? is implicitly introduced into the discourse by 
the use of the word hire in the preceding clause (in the 
way described below). The real-world set of employees 
instantiated by the verb hire is not the same as the real-
world set of employees referred to by the ?those? NP. 
However, as this corpus-derived example shows, 
coreference at the level of concepts rather than instances 
can, in fact, license ellipsis.3 
 Most reference resolution programs  rely on shallow, 
stochastic methods and limit potential antecedents to 
overt textual elements; such programs would fail to re-
solve this case of reference. The OntoSem reference 
resolution programs, by contrast, include ontological 
knowledge in the search space of antecedents and, ac-
cordingly, can resolve such references. To make clear 
how this is done, a few more words about ontological 
specification and TMRs are necessary.  
 Fillers of properties in the OntoSem ontology can be 
concepts, literals, numbers or ranges of numbers. A 
small excerpt from the ontological specification of HIRE 
is as follows. 
 
HIRE 
     AGENT    sem    SOCIAL-ROLE  
      default   BUSINESS-ROLE 
        relaxable-to   CORPORATION 
     THEME  sem   SOCIAL-ROLE  
     LOCATION   sem   PLACE 
    default   BUILDING 
   
The fillers for ontological properties can be specified on 
various facets, including: sem, which indicates typical 
selectional restrictions; default, which indicates the de-
                                                          
3 It is noteworthy that many elliptical phenomena permit 
matching at the conceptual rather than instance-based level. 
For example, in Russian one can say the equivalent of They 
were selling stocks at a good rate so I bought, in which case 
the direct object of ?bought? is elided and understood to rep-
resent some subset of the original set of stocks being sold 
(see McShane forthcoming for details). 
fault filler(s), if any (i.e., this is more tightly constrained 
than sem); and relaxable-to, which shows acceptable 
relaxation of typical selectional restrictions. So, whereas 
the most typical AGENT of hiring is somebody in a busi-
ness role (children of BUSINESS-ROLE include MANAGER, 
CHAIRMAN, VP-CORPORATION and others) it is perfectly 
normal for any person in a social role to hire someone 
(e.g., I, as a homeowner, can hire a gardener), and even 
corporations can be metonymically said to hire people. 
As concerns the THEME of hiring, it is always a person 
in a social role, and no defaults or extensions to that 
specification are required. (Note that SOCIAL-ROLE is a 
child of HUMAN in the ontology.) 
 When a concept is instantiated in a TMR, its entire 
description becomes part of the TMR, and any property 
fillers actually provided by the text are indicated using 
the value facet. Fillers on the value facet are appended 
with an instance number, just like the main concept be-
ing instantiated. So an excerpt from the instantiation of 
HIRE (minus over a dozen properties that are not as-
signed specific values from the text) in the TMR for 
sentence (1) is as follows, with information explicit in 
the text shown in boldface: 
 
HIRE-47 
     AGENT sem    SOCIAL-ROLE  
    default   BUSINESS-ROLE 
       relaxable-to   CORPORATION 
   value   CORPORATION-4165 
     THEME sem   SOCIAL-ROLE  
  
In other words, the fact that certain properties of a con-
cept are not overtly mentioned in a text does not mean 
that the properties themselves or information about their 
typical fillers is stricken from the TMR: this information 
is available in the TMR, just as it is available to a per-
son when he is interpreting a text.  
 The OntoSem algorithm for resolving the reference 
of those can be briefly outlined as follows: 
 
1.  From the list of candidate antecedents that is gener-
ated during the processing of each sentence, ex-
clude those with incompatible grammatical features 
(in this case, those in the singular). 
2 Compare potential antecedents using (a) weighted 
heuristics of the same type as are used in most sto-
chastic reference resolution programs, based on fea-
tures such as text distance, grammatical function, 
etc, and (b) comparison of the semantic similarity 
between those (as suggested by the selectional re-
strictions imposed by its selecting verb) and each 
antecedent.  
 
The two key differences between our approach and sto-
chastic ones are that, for us, semantic comparison is a 
heavily weighted heuristic, and implicit properties of 
TMR-instantiated concepts are accessible in the search 
space. In example (1), this means that the THEME of 
HIRE, which is semantically specified as SOCIAL-ROLE, is 
a potential source of the semantics of those. Since there 
are no other viable candidates to supply the elided se-
mantic content, SOCIAL-ROLE will be understood as the 
conceptual head of the NP whose determiner is those. 
 Continuing with the example of HIRE, consider ex-
ample (4) which, like all examples cited in this paper, 
was drawn from a news corpus. 
 
(4) Although early placement statistics show that hiring 
by Wall Street has declined dramatically, students 
are not exactly flocking to the factory floor. For ex-
ample, preliminary statistics show that hiring by in-
vestment banks has been cut in half, from 22% of 
graduates in 1987 to 11% this year.  
 
The practical need for resolving the semantic ellipsis of 
the theme of hire in this passage becomes clear when 
one seeks to interpret the phrase from 22% of graduates 
in 1987 to 11% this year. Syntactically speaking, this 
phrase is difficult to parse, as it is appended to the main 
clause in a rather ?telegraphic? way: i.e., it is doubtful 
that most parsers have a rule to specifically target this 
sentence structure (ours does not). Interpreting this 
phrase relies primarily on semantics, i.e., an understand-
ing that the graduates are coreferential with the semanti-
cally elided object of hire.  
 In OntoSem, difficult cases of parsing are handled 
using what we call ?recovery? procedures. If a perfect 
parse cannot be arrived at in the initial run of the parser 
? where the most typical syntactic dependency struc-
tures are sought ? the parser can invoke several levels of 
recovery rules, as needed (see Beale et al 2003 for de-
tails). Among these recovery rules is the option to apply 
the semantics of a constituent to the nascent TMR with-
out recourse to its syntactic function. This type of re-
covery reflects our general desire to leverage semantic 
knowledge more and rely on syntax less.  
 An excerpt from the core of the TMR for the second 
sentence in (4) will look as follows (with COMMERCIAL-
BANK-8 representing the string investment banks):  
 
HIRE-50 
     AGENT  sem    SOCIAL-ROLE  
    default   BUSINESS-ROLE 
       relaxable-to   CORPORATION 
   value   COMMERCIAL-BANK-8 
     THEME sem   SOCIAL-ROLE  
 
And the TMR for the syntactically unattached compo-
nent, from 22% of graduates in 1987 to 11% this year, 
will look as follows (from and to have lexical senses 
that indicate the start-value and end-value of a range 
when their complement is a number): 
 
START-VALUE     
 DOMAIN  SOCIAL-ROLE-977 
      AGENT-OF  GRADUATE-COLLEGE 
 RANGE   .22 
 YEAR   1987 
 
END-VALUE 
 DOMAIN  SOCIAL-ROLE-978 
      AGENT-OF GRADUATE-COLLEGE 
 RANGE   .11 
 YEAR   find-anchor-year ; a call to a proce- 
        dural semantics program 
 
In short, the head of the core TMR expects a  SOCIAL-
ROLE as the THEME of HIRE, and the domain of the syn-
tactically unattached segment of the sentence is namely 
a SOCIAL-ROLE. The direct, and correct, hypothesis is to 
link the unattached TMR fragment namely to the filler 
of the THEME of HIRE, which is exactly what our seman-
tic analyzer does.  
 Cases in which semantically elided elements are 
crucial to the interpretation of other sentence elements 
are not rare. Another example taken from the same do-
main of hiring (we remain in this domain only for sim-
plicity of exposition) is shown in (5). 
 
(5) For one thing, in 20 states and the District of Co-
lumbia, it's illegal to discriminate in hiring or pro-
motions on the basis of marital status.  
 
In order to interpret the connection of marital status to 
the rest of the proposition, one must corefer the HUMAN 
in the DOMAIN of the concept MARITAL-STATUS to the 
implicit THEME of HIRE and PROMOTE.  
 
LEGALITY-ATTRIBUTE-4 
 DOMAIN sem   SOCIAL-EVENT 
    value  DISCRIMINATE-23 
 RANGE sem  YES, NO 
    value  NO 
 
DISCRIMINATE-23 
 AGENT  sem    HUMAN 
    relaxable-to  CORPORATION 
         ORGANIZATION 
 THEME sem    MENTAL-OBJECT 
    value    HIRE-65 
         PROMOTE-53 
 BENEFICIARY sem   HUMAN 
    relaxable-to  CORPORATION 
         ORGANIZATION 
 CAUSED-BY sem   EVENT 
     VALUE  MARITAL-STATUS-1 
 
 
MARITAL-STATUS-1 
 DOMAIN HUMAN 
 RANGE  SINGLE, MARRIED, WIDOWED, DIVORCED 
 
 As these examples show, there is a concrete, corpus-
attested need to resolve many instances of semantic 
ellipsis, namely, the need to use implicit information as 
the antecedent for coreferring categories. 
4 
                                                          
Semantic Event Ellipsis in Configura-
tions Containing a Modal/Aspectual + 
OBJECT  
In English and many other languages, modals and as-
pectuals can take nominal complements. Those com-
plements can, semantically, be of two types: OBJECTs 
and EVENTs. If the syntactic object semantically repre-
sents an EVENT, then there is no semantic ellipsis, as in 
The delegates began the conversation at noon, whose 
simplified TMR is as follows:  
 
SPEECH-ACT-35333 
 PHASE  begin 
 AGENT  DELEGATE-2223 
 TIME  12.00 
 
In other words, since conversation is mapped to the 
event SPEECH-ACT, it naturally has a PHASE and an 
AGENT and a TIME and there is no semantic ellipsis. Ex-
amples of this type are frequent in texts, as shown by 
examples (5)-(7): 
 
(5) Dataproducts has since started a restructuring that 
started the still-raging bidding wars  
 
(6) Nomura started a credit-card venture with Ameri-
can Express Co. 
 
(7) The spokesman said Maxicare hopes to complete 
the reorganization by early 1990 
 
 If the syntactic object semantically represents an 
OBJECT, then the semantics of the implied verb must be 
recovered. For OntoSem text processing, two subtypes 
of such cases are important: those in which the object 
refers to an institution, program, etc., and the elided 
verb predictably means ?initiate, found?, and those in 
which the object refers to something else and the verbal 
semantics must be inferred based on the meaning of the 
overt categories. Examples of the first subtype include 
the following:   
 
(8) She'll be the first one to leave it and start a fourth 
party. 
 
(9) Brazil started an ethanol program about 15 years 
ago. 
 
(10) Quebecor started the Philadelphia Journal. 
 
The OntoSem lexicon contains a number of lexical 
senses of start, finish, etc. that cover such cases: e.g., 
one sense specifies the THEME to be an ORGANIZATION, 
and heads the semantic description with the concept 
FOUND-ORGANIZATION; another specifies the THEME to 
be a MENTAL-OBJECT and heads the semantic description 
with INVENT (as in ?He started a new semantic theory?). 
This type of semantic ellipsis is discussed more fully in 
Section 5. 
 The second subtype requires procedural semantic 
analysis to recover the meaning of the implied event. 
Examples of such contexts include the following: 
 
(11) Mitchell said he planned to work late tonight to 
complete the legislation [elided WRITE]. 
  
(12) He conscripted 700,000 slaves to finish the Great 
Wall [elided BUILD]. 
 
(13) Most service businesses can complete their books 
within three weeks after a period has ended 
[elided BOOKKEEPING]. 
  
(14) Next Inc.... has finished the first version of its 
operating-system software [elided DESIGN-
SOFTWARE].  
 
(15) Manufacturers Hanover this week started a new 
series of ads that push "Power Savings" [elided 
BROADCAST].  
 
The OntoSem lexical sense that covers these contexts  
includes a procedural attachment called seek-event-
specification, which attempts to dynamically recover the 
meaning of the semantically elided events. That is, it 
seeks concepts for which the meaning of the subject and 
direct object provided in the text are most specifically 
constrained. For example, in (11), the program will seek 
an EVENT for which the default AGENT is SENATOR 
(Mitchell was a senator at the time4) and the default 
THEME is BILL-LEGISLATIVE; and in (12), the program 
4 We can expect that earlier in the text he was referred to us-
ing a more complete appellation which either overtly de-
scribed him as a senator or provided sufficient information 
for our reference-resolution program to link him to his fact-
repository entry, where his SOCIAL-ROLE of SENATOR is 
listed. Reference resolution using fact-repository informa-
tion has been implemented but not widely tested yet. The 
problem of identifying him as the same person that has just 
been elected Chairman of Disney is outside of the purview 
of this paper.  
will seek an EVENT for which AGENT is SLAVE and the 
default THEME is WALL (the basic ontological mapping 
of Great Wall, though a number of properties are de-
fined in its fact repository entry, like LOCATION: China, 
LENGTH: 5000 km). If more than one match is found, all 
options are retained in the TMR for possible later dis-
ambiguation based on further context. If no matches are 
found using the default facet, matches using the sem 
facet are sought. In the worst case (the maximal level of 
semantic relaxation), the only thing the semantic ana-
lyzer can say about the elided EVENT is that there is, 
indeed, an unspecified EVENT that has the text-specified 
AGENT and THEME. 
 Two points must be emphasized: a) the OntoSem 
lexicon records our expectations that dynamic semantic-
ellipsis resolution will be necessary in certain types of 
contexts, which can be specified based on reference to 
ontological types of OBJECTS; and b) the resolution of 
semantic event ellipsis is supported by the property-
defined relationships between ontological OBJECTs and 
EVENTs.  
5 Lexical Patterns with Predictable Event 
Ellipsis 
Ontological semantics has practical aims, which means, 
among other things, that extending the lexicon to in-
clude complex entities and thus bypass the need for 
their runtime compositional semantic treatment is a 
valid methodological option. A good case in point is the 
lexicalization of common cases of semantic ellipsis. 
Like any lexicalization, this does not offer full cover-
age; however, like all lexicalization, it does provide 
concrete information about concrete phenomena that 
can be immediately exploited. Here we present just a 
few examples of the lexicalized treatment of semantic 
ellipsis as an illustration of our omnivorous approach to 
improving the overall quality of text processing.  
 The verb invite, when followed by a prepositional 
phrase or adverb indicating location (or destination) 
directly or metonymically, actually means ?invite to 
come/go to that place?; the verb of motion is semanti-
cally elided. Examples include (16)-(19): 
  
(16) Civilians invited into the prison by the admini-
stration to help keep the peace were unable to 
stanch the bloodshed. 
 
(17) ?If they invited us back tomorrow to govern the 
mainland, frankly we would hesitate," Vice For-
eign Minister John H. Chang told a U.S. gover-
nor's delegation. 
 
(18) All 13 OPEC oil ministers were invited to the 
meeting. 
 
(19) He often is one of a handful of top aides invited 
into the Oval Office for the informal sessions at 
which President Bush likes to make sensitive for-
eign-policy decisions.  
 
The lexicon sense that covers this use of invite in (16) 
and (18) is as follows, in presentation format (the lexi-
con sense that covers (17) has an adverb of loca-
tion/destination instead of a PP): 
 
invite-v2 
  def  ?+ pp of destination, implies ?invite to come?? 
  ex ?She invited him to Paris? 
   
  syn-struc 
    subject      root $var1  cat n 
    v               root $var0 
    directobject   root $var2    cat n 
    pp-adjunct    root $var3    cat prep    
     root (or to onto into on) 
     obj     root $var4   cat n 
 
  sem-struc 
      INVITE  
   AGENT    value ^$var1 
  THEME    MOTION-EVENT 
      DESTINATION   value ^$var4 
      AGENT   value ^$var2 
 ^$var3  null-sem + 
 
The syntactic structure (syn-struc) says that this sense of 
like requires a subject, direct object and PP, and that the 
PP must be headed by the word to, onto, into or on. The 
semantic structure (sem-struc) is headed by an INVITE 
event, whose AGENT is the subject of the clause (note 
the linked variables) and whose theme is a MOTION-
EVENT. The AGENT and DESTINATION of the MOTION-
EVENT are the meanings of the direct object and preposi-
tional object, respectively, of the input clause. (We 
gloss over formal aspects of the entry that are tangential 
to the current discussion.) Note that there is no verb of 
motion in the input text: MOTION-EVENT is lexically 
specified since it is a predictable semantically elided 
aspect of meaning in the given configuration.  
 Another lexical item for which we can predict a par-
ticular type of semantic ellipsis is forget. When the di-
rect object of forget semantically represents a 
PHYSICAL-OBJECT, there is an elided TAKE event, as 
shown in (20). 
 
(20) ?This is the slowest day I've seen this year,? said 
Peter Canelo, a market strategist at Bear Stearns 
Cos. ?I've only had one call all day from a real 
investor and he just forgot his umbrella.? 
 
Thus, the OntoSem lexicon has a special sense for for-
get + PHYSICAL-OBJECT  that is selected by the semantic 
analyzer in contexts like (20). 
 Obviously, a lexicon that anticipates instances of 
semantic ellipsis must be quite detailed and, as a result, 
relatively expensive to build. The OntoSem lexicon falls 
into both of these categories. However, expensive does 
not mean prohibitive, and we believe that the ultimate 
utility of such a knowledge resource will fully justify its 
compilation. The rate of acquisition for open-class 
words and phrases in OntoSem depends primarily on the 
type of entity being acquired, be it argument-taking or 
not. A conservative estimate for lexical acquisition for 
OntoSem, based on a recent acquisition drive, is as fol-
lows: 
 
? acquisition of argument-taking word and phrase 
senses: 6 words/hr * 6 hrs./day * 5 days/week * 
50 weeks/yr = 9,000 senses/year 
? acquisition of non-argument-taking word and 
phrase senses (about 5 times as fast): 9000 * 5 = 
45,000 senses/year 
 
According to these estimates, and considering that many 
more words are non-argument-taking than are argu-
ment-taking, we might realistically expect to increase 
the size of the lexicon by around 100,000 senses per 
year if given 3 full-time acquirers supported by one full-
time ontology developer. In short, large volumes of 
high-quality knowledge can be achieved in real time.    
6 
7 
Evaluation 
In response to the current evaluation standards in NLP 
(which are more suited to and informative for stochas-
tic-based systems than knowledge-based ones), we have 
recently developed a novel evaluation methodology that 
assigns scores as well as blame for errors to various 
aspects of the TMRs generated during OntoSem text 
processing. While percentage scores for correct vs. in-
correct results can provide a general evaluation of sys-
tem function, it is blame assignment that drives 
development. Blame assignment is determined by proc-
essing each sentence multiple times: first without man-
ual intervention, then with the correction of 
preprocessor errors, then with the correction of syntax 
errors. The rationale behind these loops of correction 
and reevaluation is that ?low level? mistakes like pre-
processor errors or lack of coverage of some syntactic 
construction require different development action than 
more weighty (from our point of view) errors in seman-
tic interpretation that might result from gaps in knowl-
edge, insufficient reasoning engines, etc.  
 The first experiment with our new evaluation regime 
produced the following results (reported on in detail in 
Nirenburg et al 2004): the analyzer was shown to carry 
out word sense disambiguation at over 90% and seman-
tic dependency determination at 87% on the basis of 
correct syntactic analysis and on sentences of an aver-
age length of over 25 words with 1.33 unknown words 
on average per input sentence. Outstanding errors in 
semantic analysis were due, in most cases, to non-literal 
use of language (which is one of our topics of ongoing 
investigation). Although this first formal experiment 
was limited to WSD and semantic dependencies, testing 
of other modules ? like those for reference resolution 
and ellipsis ? will soon be added to the formal evalua-
tion regime. At this stage, evaluation work is slow, but 
we are well into the development of an evaluation and 
correction environment that promises to significantly 
speed up both evaluation and system enhancement. 
Closing Thoughts 
The type of work presented in this paper might be 
termed a practical, progressive long-term effort.  
 The work is practical because it is being carried out 
within a working system that: (a) uses non-toy, real text-
oriented knowledge resources ? lexical and ontological 
? that are being built not in the hope that someday some 
system might be able to use them, but because they are 
useful right now in the system under construction; (b) 
has processors that cover all levels of text analysis, from 
preprocessing raw input text to creating semantic text-
meaning representations of it; (c) has been and contin-
ues to be used in applications as diverse as machine 
translation, information extraction, summarization and 
question answering. In short, the work that we carry out 
on any given aspect of text processing answers a need 
encountered in real applications, and does so in a con-
crete, implemented and further implementable way.  
 The work is progressive in the sense that the loop of 
algorithm development and integration in each new ver-
sion of the working system is continuous. We find it 
important, tactically, to view issues in natural language 
from a broad perspective first, with development of 
practical ?microtheories? for their treatment progressing 
as need demands and resources permit. What we try not 
to do is artificially exclude from our purview those as-
pects of phenomena that are not easily treated at the 
present state of the art. Instead, we include such aspects 
in our algorithms to the degree possible and make sure 
that they are modified as soon as an advance is made in 
resource acquisition or algorithm fusion (e.g., incorpo-
rating stochastic methods if and when knowledge-based 
ones fail to produce a single, unambiguous semantic 
representation, as in the case of weighted heuristics for 
reference resolution). 
 The work is long term because we know that high-
quality text processing cannot be achieved in the short 
term. If a phenomenon exists in a language we are proc-
essing, it is, by definition, within our purview. Our ul-
timate aim: an intelligent agent able to communicate no 
less fluently than you or I and in possession of human-
level background knowledge about the world and lan-
guage. Of course, this goal will not be realized in our 
lifetimes, unless adequate resources are allocated to this 
task and its subtasks. However, a solid foundation that 
in principle can accommodate any and all later needs of 
language processing is what we are attempting to de-
velop while at the same time developing working appli-
cations. 
References 
 
Stephen Beale, Sergei Nirenburg and Marjorie 
McShane. 2003. Just-in-time grammar. Proceedings 
of the 2003 International Multiconference in Com-
puter Science and Computer Engineering, Las Ve-
gas, Nevada.  
Jerry R. Hobbs and Andrew Kehler. 1997. A theory of 
parallelism and the case of VP ellipsis. Proceedings 
of the 35th  Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Madrid, Spain. 
Andrew Kehler and Stuart Shieber. 1997. Anaphoric 
dependencies in ellipsis. Computational Linguistics, 
23(3): 457-466. 
Shalom Lappin. 1992. The syntactic basis of ellipsis 
resolution. Proceedings of the Stuttgart Ellipsis 
Workshop, 1-47. 
Marjorie McShane. Forthcoming. A Theory of Ellipsis. 
Oxford University Press. 
Marjorie McShane, Stephen Beale and Sergei Niren-
burg.  Forthcoming.  Some meaning procedures of 
Ontological Semantics.  Proceedings of LREC 2004, 
Lisbon, Portugal.   
Marjorie McShane and Sergei Nirenburg. 2002. Refer-
ence and ellipsis in Ontological Semantics. Memo-
randa in Computer and Cognitive Science, MCCS-
02-329. The Computing Research Laboratory, New 
Mexico State University.   
Sergei Nirenburg, Marjorie McShane and Stephen 
Beale. 2003a. Enhancing recall in information ex-
traction through Ontological Semantics. Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Ontologies and Information Ex-
traction, Bucharest, Romania, August 2003. 
Sergei Nirenburg, Marjorie McShane and Stephen 
Beale. 2003b. Operative strategies in Ontological 
Semantics. Proceedings of HLT-NAACL-03 Work-
shop on Text Meaning, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, 
June 2003. 
Sergei Nirenburg and Victor Raskin. 2004 (forthcom-
ing). Ontological Semantics, the MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.  
Sergei Nirenburg, Stephen Beale and Marjorie 
McShane. 2004. Evaluating the Performance of the 
OntoSem Semantic Analyzer. Submitted to ACL-
04. 
James Pustejovsky. The Generative Lexicon. The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
Roger Schank and Robert Abelson. 1977. Scripts, 
Plans, Goals, and Understanding: An Inquiry into 
Human Knowledge Structures. L. Erlbaum Associ-
ates, New York. 
Beth Sundheim. 1995. The MUC coreference task defi-
nition v. 3.0. Proceedings of the 6th Message Under-
standing Conference. 
