Abstraction Summarization for Managing the Biomedical  
Research Literature 
 
 
Marcelo Fiszman Thomas C. Rindflesch Halil Kilicoglu 
Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications 
National Library of Medicine 
Bethesda, MD 20894 
{fiszman|tcr|halil}@nlm.nih.gov 
 
 
Abstract 
We explore a semantic abstraction approach 
to automatic summarization in the biomedical 
domain. The approach relies on a semantic 
processor that functions as the source inter-
preter and produces a list of predications. A 
transformation stage then generalizes and 
condenses this list, ultimately generating a 
conceptual condensate for a disorder input 
topic. The final condensate is displayed in 
graphical form. We provide a set of principles 
for the transformation stage and describe the 
application of this approach to multidocument 
input. Finally, we examine the characteristics 
and quality of the condensates produced. 
1 Introduction 
Several approaches to text-based information manage-
ment applications are being pursued, including word-
based statistical processing and those depending on 
string matching, syntax, or semantics. Statistical sys-
tems have enjoyed considerable success for information 
retrieval, especially using the vector space model (Sal-
ton et al, 1975). Since the SIR system (Raphael, 1968), 
some have felt that automatic information management 
could best be addressed using semantic information. 
Subsequent research (Schank, 1975; Wilks, 1976) ex-
panded this paradigm. More recently, a number of ex-
amples of knowledge-based applications show 
considerable promise. These include systems for ma-
chine translation (Viegas et al, 1998), question answer-
ing, (Harabagiu et al, 2001; Clark et al, 2003), and 
information retrieval (Mihalcea and Moldovan, 2000).  
In the biomedical domain, the MEDLINE? biblio-
graphic database provides opportunities for keeping 
abreast of the research literature. However, the large 
size of this online resource presents potential challenges 
to the user. Query results often include hundreds or 
thousands of citations (including title and abstract). 
Automatic summarization offers potential help in man-
aging such results; however, the most popular approach, 
extraction, faces challenges when applied to multi-
document summarization (McKeown et al, 2001). 
Abstraction summarization offers an attractive alter-
native for managing citations resulting from MEDLINE 
searches. We present a knowledge-rich abstraction ap-
proach that depends on underspecified semantic inter-
pretation of biomedical text. As an example, a graphical 
representation (Batagelj, 2003) of the semantic predica-
tions serving as a summary (or conceptual condensate) 
from our system is shown in Figure 1. The input text 
was a MEDLINE citation with title ?Gastrointestinal 
tolerability and effectiveness of rofecoxib versus 
naproxen in the treatment of osteoarthritis: a random-
ized, controlled trial.? 
 
Figure 1. Semantic abstraction summarization 
Our semantic interpreter and the abstraction sum-
marizer based on it both draw on semantic information 
from the Unified Medical Language System? (UMLS),? 
a resource for structured knowledge in the biomedical 
domain. After introducing the semantic interpreter, we 
describe the transformation phase of our paradigm, dis-
cussing principles that depend on semantic notions in 
order to condense the semantic predications represent-
ing the content of text. Initially, this process was applied 
to summarizing single documents. We discuss its adap-
tation to multidocument input, specifically to the set of 
citations resulting from a query to the MEDLINE data-
base. Although we have not yet formally evaluated the 
effectiveness of the resulting condensate, we discuss its 
characteristics and possibilities as both an indicative and 
informative summary. 
2 
2.1 
2.2 
Background 
Lexical Semantics  
Research in lexical semantics (Cruse, 1986) provides 
insight into the interaction of reference and linguistic 
structure. In addition to paradigmatic lexical phenomena 
such as synonymy, hypernymy, and meronymy, diathe-
sis alternation (Levin and Rappaport Hovav, 1996), 
deep case (Fillmore, 1968), and the interaction of predi-
cational structure and events (Tenny and Pustejovsky, 
2000) are being investigated. Some of the consequences 
of research in lexical semantics, with particular attention 
to natural language processing, are discussed by Puste-
jovsky et al (1993) and Nirenburg and Raskin (1996). 
Implemented systems often draw on the information 
contained in WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). 
In the biomedical domain, UMLS knowledge pro-
vides considerable support for text-based systems. 
(Burgun and Bodenreider (2001) compare the UMLS to 
WordNet.) The UMLS (Humphreys et al, 1998) con-
sists of three components: the Metathesaurus,? Seman-
tic Network (McCray, 1993), and SPECIALIST 
Lexicon (McCray et al, 1994). The Metathesaurus is at 
the core and contains more than 900,000 concepts com-
piled from more than sixty controlled vocabularies. 
Many of these have hierarchical structure, and some 
contain meronymic information in addition to hy-
pernymy. Editors combine terms in the constituent vo-
cabularies into a set of synonyms (cf. WordNet?s 
synsets), which constitutes a concept. One term in this 
set is called the ?preferred name? and is used as the 
concept name, as shown in (1). 
(1) Concept: Dyspnea  Synonyms: Breath-
lessness, Shortness of breath, Breathless, Diffi-
culty breathing, Respiration difficulty, etc. 
In addition, each concept in the Metathesaurus is as-
signed at least one semantic type (such as ?Sign or 
Symptom? for (1)), which categorizes the concept in the 
biomedical domain. The semantic types available are 
drawn from the Semantic Network, in which they are 
organized hierarchically in two single-inheritance trees, 
one under the root ?Entity? and another under ?Event?.  
The Semantic Network also contains semantic 
predications with semantic types as arguments. The 
predicates are semantic relations relevant to the bio-
medical domain and are organized as subtypes of five 
classes, such as TEMPORALLY_RELATED_TO and  
FUNCTIONALLY_RELATED_TO.  Examples are shown in 
(2). 
(2)  ?Pharmacologic Substance? TREATS ?Disease 
or Syndrome?, ?Virus? CAUSES ?Disease or 
Syndrome? 
Lexical semantic information in the UMLS is dis-
tributed between the Metathesaurus and the Semantic 
Network. The Semantic Network stipulates permissible 
argument categories for classes of semantic predica-
tions, although it does not refer to deep case relations. 
The Metathesaurus encodes synonymy, hypernymy, and 
meronymy (especially for human anatomy). Synonymy 
is represented by including synonymous terms under a 
single concept. Word sense ambiguity is represented to 
some extent in the Metathesaurus. For example dis-
charge is represented by the two concepts in (3), with 
different semantic types. 
(3) Discharge, Body Substance: ?Body Substance? 
Patient Discharge: ?Health Care Activity? 
The SPECIALIST Lexicon contains orthographic in-
formation (such as spelling variants) and syntactic in-
formation, including inflections for nouns and verbs and 
sub-categorization for verbs. A suite of lexical access 
tools accommodate other phenomena, including deriva-
tional variation.  
 SemRep 
Our summarization system relies on semantic predica-
tions provided by SemRep (Rindflesch and Fiszman, 
2003), a program that draws on UMLS information to 
provide underspecified semantic interpretation in the 
biomedical domain (Srinivasan and Rindflesch, 2002; 
Rindflesch et al, 2000). Semantic interpretation is based 
on a categorical analysis that is underspecified in that it 
is a partial parse (cf. McDonald, 1992). This analysis 
depends on the SPECIALIST Lexicon and the Xerox 
part-of-speech tagger  (Cutting et al, 1992) and pro-
vides simple noun phrases that are mapped to concepts 
in the UMLS Metathesaurus using MetaMap (Aronson, 
2001).  
The categorial analysis enhanced with Metathesau-
rus concepts and associated semantic types provides the 
basis for semantic interpretation, which relies on two 
components: a set of ?indicator? rules and an (under-
specified) dependency grammar. Indicator rules map 
between syntactic phenomena (such as verbs, nominali-
zations, and prepositions) and predicates in the Seman-
tic Network. For example, such rules stipulate that the 
preposition for indicates the semantic predicate TREATS 
in sumatriptan for migraine. The application of an indi-
cator rule satisfies the first of several necessary condi-
tions for the interpretation of a semantic predication.  
Argument identification is controlled by a partial 
dependency grammar. As is common in such grammars, 
a general principle disallows intercalated dependencies 
(crossing lines). Further, a noun phrase may not be used 
as an argument in the interpretation of more than one 
semantic predication, without license. (Coordination 
and relativization license noun phrase reuse.) A final 
principle states that if a rule can apply it must apply. 
Semantic interpretation in SemRep is not based on 
the ?real? syntactic structure of the sentence; however  
linear order of the components of the partial parse is 
crucial. Argument identification rules are articulated for 
each indicator in terms of surface subject and object.  
For example, subjects of verbs are to the left and objects 
are to the right. (Passivization is accommodated before 
final interpretation.) There are also rules for preposi-
tions and several rules for arguments of nominaliza-
tions.  
The final condition on the interpretation of an asso-
ciative semantic predication is that it must conform to 
the appropriate relationship in the Semantic Network. 
For example, if a predication is being constructed on the 
basis of an indicator rule for TREATS, the syntactic ar-
guments identified by the dependency grammar must 
have been mapped to Metathesaurus concepts with se-
mantic types that conform to the semantic arguments of 
TREATS in the Semantic Network, such as ?Pharma-
cologic Substance? and ?Disease or Syndrome?. Hy-
pernymic propositions are further controlled by 
hierarchical information in the Metathesaurus (Rind-
flesch and Fiszman, 2003). 
In processing the sentence in (4), SemRep first con-
structs the partial categorical representation given 
schematically in (5).  This is enhanced with semantic 
information from the Metathesaurus as shown in (6), 
where the corresponding concept for each relevant noun 
phrase is shown, along with its semantic type. The final 
semantic interpretation for  (4) is given in (7). 
 
(4) Mycoplasma pneumonia is an infection of the 
lung caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
(5) [[Mycoplasma pneumonia] [is] [an infection] 
[of the lung] [caused] [by Mycoplasma pneumo-
niae]] 
(6) ?Mycoplasma pneumonia???Disease or Syn-
drome? 
?Infection???Disease or Syndrome? 
?Lung???Body Part, Organ, or Organ Compo-
nent? 
?Mycoplasma pneumoniae???Bacterium? 
(7) Mycoplasma Pneumonia ISA Infection  
Lung LOCATION_OF Infection 
Lung LOCATION_OF Mycoplasma Pneumonia 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae CAUSES Infection  
Mycoplasma pneumoniae CAUSES My-
coplasma Pneumonia 
3 
3.1 
Automatic Summarization 
Automatic summarization is ?a reductive transformation 
of source text to summary text through content reduc-
tion, selection, and/or generalization on what is impor-
tant in the source? (Sparck Jones, 1999). Two 
paradigms are being pursued: extraction and abstraction 
(Hahn and Mani, 2000). Extraction concentrates on cre-
ating a summary from the actual text occurring in the 
source document, relying on notions such as frequency 
of occurrence and cue phrases to identify important in-
formation. 
Abstraction, on the other hand, relies either on lin-
guistic processing followed by structural compaction 
(Mani et al, 1999) or on interpretation of the source text 
into a semantic representation, which is then condensed 
to retain only the most important information asserted in 
the source. The semantic abstraction paradigm is attrac-
tive due to its ability to manipulate information that may 
not have been explicitly articulated in the source docu-
ment. However, due to the challenges in providing se-
mantic representation, semantic abstraction has not been 
widely pursued, although the TOPIC system (Hahn and 
Reimer, 1999) is a notable exception.  
Semantic Abstraction Summarization 
We are devising an approach to automatic summariza-
tion in the semantic abstraction paradigm, relying on 
SemRep for semantic interpretation of source text. The 
transformation stage that condenses these predications is 
guided by principles articulated in terms of frequency of 
occurrence as well as lexical semantic phenomena.  
We do not produce a textual summary; instead, we 
present the disorder condensates in graphical format. 
We first discuss the application of this approach to 
summarizing single documents (full text research arti-
cles on treatment of disease) and then consider its ex-
tension to multidocument input in the form of biomedi-
cal scientific abstracts directed at clinical researchers.  
The transformation stage takes as input a list of 
Sem
3.2 Transformation 
In the semantic abstraction paradigm the transformation 
b. Connectivity: Also include ?useful? additional 
c. Novelty: Do not include predications that the 
d. Saliency: Only include the most frequently oc-
Alth urrence (saliency) plays a 
rol
(relevance), a condensation process, identi-
fies
ders} 
 {Disorders} 
isorders} 
ders} 
s of 
sem
a generalization process 
and
ovelty) provides further condensation by 
elim
tion phase 
and
n these principles are applied to the semantic 
pre
 
Rep predications and a seed disorder concept. The 
output is a conceptual condensate for the input concept. 
Before transformation begins, predications are subjected 
to a focused word sense disambiguation filter. Branded 
drug names such as Advantage (Advantage brand of 
Imidacloprid) and Direct (Direct type of resin cement), 
which are ambiguous with the more common meaning 
of their names, are resolved to their non-pharmaceutical 
sense.  
stage condenses and generalizes, and in our approach 
these processes are based on four general principles: 
a. Relevance: Include predications on the topic of 
the summary 
predications 
user already knows 
curring predications 
ough frequency of occ
e in determining predications to be included in the 
summary, the other three principles depend crucially on 
lexical semantic information from the UMLS. These 
four principles guide the phases involved in creating a 
summary. 
Phase 1 
 predications on a given topic (in this study, disor-
ders) and is controlled by a semantic schema 
(Jacquelinet et al, 2003) for that topic. The schema is 
represented as a set of predications in which the predi-
cate is drawn from a relation in the UMLS Semantic 
Network and the arguments are represented as a ?do-
main? covering a class of concepts in the Metathesaurus 
(Disorders, for example).  
{Disorders} ISA {Disor
{Etiological process} CAUSES
{Treatment} TREATS  {Disorders} 
{Body location} LOCATION_OF {D
{Disorders} OCCURS_IN {Disorders} 
{Disorders} CO-OCCURS_WITH {Disor
Each domain for the schema is defined in term
antic categorization in the Semantic Network. For 
example {Disorders} is a subset of the semantic group 
Disorders (McCray et al, 2001) and contains the fol-
lowing semantic types: ?Disease or Syndrome?, ?Neo-
plastic Process?, ?Mental or Behavioral Dysfunction?, 
and ?Sign or Symptom?. Although the schema is not 
complete, it represents a substantial amount of what can 
be said about disorders. Predications produced by Sem-
Rep must conform to this schema in order to be in-
cluded in the conceptual condensate; such predications 
are called ?core predications.? 
Phase 2 (connectivity) is 
 identifies predications occurring in neighboring 
semantic space of the core. This is accomplished by 
retrieving all the predications that share an argument 
with one of the core predications. For example, from 
Naproxen TREATS Osteoarthritis, non-core predica-
tions such as Naproxen ISA NSAID are included in the 
condensate. 
Phase 3 (n
inating predications that have a generic argument, 
as determined by hierarchical depth in the Metathesau-
rus. Arguments occurring less than an empirically de-
termined distance from the root are considered too 
general to be useful, and predications containing them 
are eliminated. For example Pharmaceutical Prepara-
tions TREATS Migraine is not included in the conden-
sate for migraine because ?Pharmaceutical 
Preparations? was determined to be generic.  
Phase 4 (saliency) is the final transforma
 its operations are adapted from TOPIC?s (Hahn and 
Reimer, 1999) saliency operators. Frequency of occur-
rence for arguments, predicates, and predications are 
calculated, and those occurring more frequently than the 
average are kept in the condensate; others are elimi-
nated.  
Whe
dications produced by SemRep for a full-text article 
with 214 sentences (Lisse et al, 2003) concerned with 
comparing naproxen and rofecoxib for treating os-
teoarthritis, with respect to effectiveness and gastroin-
testinal tolerability, the resulting condensate is given in 
Figure 2. (The abstract for this article was summarized 
in Figure 1.) 
 
Figure 2. Semantic abstraction summarization 
of a journal article on osteoarthritis 
4 Multidocument Summarization  
The MEDLINE database, developed and maintained by 
the N  than 12 
million citations (dating from the 1960?s to the present) 
d at the same time retaining differences 
that
ramework for de-
term
Th
results 
for  
Eval ation, especially for 
mult ev et al, 2003). 
It is usually classified as intrinsic (measures the quality 
nd marked the predica-
tion
h 
set
ational Library of Medicine, contains more
drawn from nearly 4,600 journals in the biomedical do-
main. Access is provided by a statistical information 
retrieval system. Due to the size of the database, 
searches often retrieve large numbers of items. For ex-
ample, the query ?diabetes? returns 207,997 citations. 
Although users can restrict searches by language, date 
and publication type (as well as specific journals), re-
sults can still be large. For example, a query for treat-
ment (only) for diabetes, limited to articles published in 
2003 and having an abstract in English finds 3,621 
items; limiting this further to articles describing clinical 
trials still returns 390 citations. We describe the adapta-
tion of our abstraction summarization process to multi-
document input for managing the results of searches in 
MEDLINE.  
Extending summarization to multidocument input 
presents challenges in removing redundancies across 
documents an
 might be important. One issue is devising a frame-
work on which to compute similarities and differences 
across documents. Radev (2000) defines twenty-four 
relationships (such as equivalence, subsumption, and 
contradiction) that might apply at various structural lev-
els across documents. Sub-events (Daniel et al, 2003) 
and sub-topics (Saggion and Lapalme, 2002) also con-
tribute to the framework used for comparing documents 
in multidocument summarization.  
A particular challenge to multidocument summariza-
tion in the extraction paradigm is determining what 
parts of documents conform to the f
ining similarities and differences. A recent study 
(Kan et al, 2001) uses topic composition from text 
headers, but other studies in the extraction paradigm 
(Goldstein et al, 1999), extraction coupled with rhetori-
cal structural identification (Teufel and Moens, 2002), 
and syntactic abstraction paradigms use  different meth-
odologies (Barzilay et al, 1999; McKeown et al, 1999). 
Our semantic abstraction summarization system 
naturally extends to multidocument input with no modi-
fication from the system designed for single documents. 
e disorder schema serves as the framework for identi-
fying sub-topics, and predications retrieved across sev-
eral documents must conform to its structure. 
Informational equivalence (and redundancy) is com-
puted on this basis. For example, all predications that 
conform to the schema line {Treatment} TREATS  
{Disorders} constitute a representation of a subtopic in 
the disorder domain. Exact matches in this set constitute 
redundant information, and other types of relationships 
can be computed on the basis of partial matches. Al-
though we concentrate on similarities across documents, 
differences could be computed by examining predica-
tions that are not shared among citations.  
We have begun testing our system applied to the re-
sults of MEDLINE searches on disorders, concentrating 
on the most recent 300 citations retrieved. The 
 migraine are represented graphically in Figure 3. 
Traversing the predicates (arcs) in this condensate pro-
vides an informative summary of these citations. 
5 Evaluation and Results 
uation in automatic summariz
idocument input, is  daunting (Rad
of the summary as related to the source documents) or 
extrinsic (how the summary affects some other task). 
Since we do not have a gold standard to compare the 
final condensates against, we performed a linguistic 
evaluation on the quality of the condensates generated 
for four diseases: migraine, angina pectoris, Crohn?s 
disease, and pneumonia. The input for each summary 
was 300 MEDLINE citations. 
Table 1 presents evaluation results. The first author 
(MF) examined the source sentence that SemRep used 
to generate each predication a
s as either correct or incorrect. Precision was calcu-
lated as the total number of correct predications divided 
by the total number of predications in the condensate. 
We also measured the reduction (compression) for 
each of the four disorder concepts. In Table 1, ?Base? is 
the number of predications SemRep produced from eac
 of 300 citations. ?Final? is the number of predica-
tions left after the final transformation. Therefore, this is 
a compression ratio on the semantic space of predica-
tions, and is different from text compression in the tradi-
tional sense. 
 
Concept Base Final C I Precision 
Migraine 2485 102 72 30 71% 
A 3 8
ia 
   
ngina 2989 41 3  80% 
Crohn?s 3077 135 71 64 53% 
Pneumon 2694 28 27 1 96% 
Total 11245 306 203 103 66% 
Table 1. ts the f di se 
r  = r
In Crohn?s disease (with lowest precision) a single 
Sem
for 52% of th ocessing the 
sen
 Resul  for our sea concepts  
C = Co rect, I Incor ect 
Rep error type in  argument identification accounts 
e mistakes. For example in pr
tence 36 patients with inflammatory bowel disease 
(11 with ulcerative colitis and 25 with Crohn?s disease), 
the parenthesized material caused SemRep to incor-
rectly  returned ?Inflammatory Bowel Diseases CO- 
OCCURS_WITH Ulcerative Colitis? and ?Ulcerative 
Colitis predicate CO-OCCURS_WITH Crohn?s Dis-
ease.? Word sense ambiguity also contributed to a large 
number of errors.  
6 Content Characterization 
We sformation stage 
has and predications 
during the summarization process. SemRep produced 
S_IN; 
and
pes in the final 
con
he 
fin
nitially parsed, only 63 are represented in 
the
o far do not accommodate. Some of 
the
lusion and Future Directions 
We raction 
summarization that produces conceptual condensates for 
condensate to the text that produced them. We 
als
ional Library of Medicine 
Re
01. Effective mapping of biomedical 
LS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap pro-
Ba
edi-
Ba
e context of multi-document summa-
Bu
and semantic classes in WordNet and the 
Cl
 to text meaning processing. Pro-
Cr
ge.  
examined the effect that  the tran
on the distribution of predicates 
2,485 predications from 300 citations retrieved for mi-
graine. Of these, 1,638 are distributed over four predi-
cates in the disorder schema (327?TREATS; 148?ISA; 
180?LOCATION_OF; 54?CAUSES; 720?
OCCURS_IN; and 209?CO-OCCURS_WITH).  
After phases 1, 2, and 3 of the transformation proc-
ess, 311 predications remain (134?TREATS; 41?ISA; 
12?LOCATION_OF; 5?CAUSES; 68?OCCUR
 51?CO-OCCURS_WITH). This reduction is largely 
due to hierarchical pruning in phase 3. 
Phase 4 operations, based on frequency of occur-
rence pruning (saliency), further condensed the list, and 
the top three TREATS predication ty
densate are (13?Sumatriptan TREATS Migraine; 6?
Botulinum Toxins TREATS Migraine; and 6?feverfew 
extract TREATS Migraine). This list represents the fact 
that Sumatriptan is a popular treatment for migraine.  
Besides frequency, another way of looking at the 
predications is typicality (Kan et al, 2001), or distribu-
tion of predications across citations.  Looking at t
al condensate for migraine and focusing on TREATS, 
the most widely distributed predications are  ?Sumatrip-
tan TREATS Migraine,? which occurs in  ten citations; 
?Botulinum Toxins TREATS Migraine? (three cita-
tions); and  ?feverfew extract TREATS Migraine? (two 
citations). 
One can also view the final condensate from the per-
spective of citations, rather than predications. Of the 
300 citations i
 final condensate, one with six predications, one with 
five predications, three with four predications, and so 
on. It is tempting to hypothesize that more highly rele-
vant citations will have produced more predications, but 
this must be formally tested in the context of the user?s 
retrieval objective.  
An informal examination of the citations that con-
tributed to the final condensate for migraine revealed 
differences that we s
se, such as publication and study type, could be ad-
dressed outside of natural language processing with 
MEDLINE metadata. Others, including medication de-
livery system and target population of the disorder 
topic, are amenable to current processing either through 
extension of the disease schema or enhancements to 
SemRep.  
7 Conc
propose a framework based on semantic abst
disorder topics that are both indicative and informative. 
The approach uses a biomedical semantic processor as 
the source interpreter. After semantic interpretation, a 
series of transformations condense the predications pro-
duced, and a final condensate is displayed in graphical 
form. 
In the future, we would like to link the predications 
in the 
o plan to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach 
in retrieving useful articles for clinical researchers. Fi-
nally, we would like to investigate additional ways of 
visualizing the condensates.  
Acknowledgements The first author was supported 
by an appointment to the Nat
search Participation Program administered by the 
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education through 
an inter-agency agreement between the U.S. Department 
of Energy and the National Library of Medicine. 
References 
Aronson AR. 20
text to the UM
gram. Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 17-21. 
tagelj AM. 2003. Pajek - Analysis and Visualization 
of Large Networks. In M. J?nger and P. Mutzel, 
tors, Graph Drawing Software. Springer Verlag, Ber-
lin, pp 77-103. 
rzilay R, McKeown KR, Elhadad M. 1999. Informa-
tion fusion in th
rization. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of 
the Association of Computational Linguistics, pp 
550-557. 
rgun A, Bodenreider O. 2001. Comparing terms, 
concepts, 
Unified Medical Language System. Proceedings of 
the NAACL Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical 
Resources: Applications, Extensions and Customiza-
tions, pp 77-82. 
ark P, Harrison P, Thompson J. 2003. A knowledge-
driven approach
ceedings of the HLT-NAACL Workshop on Text 
Meaning, pp 1-6.  
use DA. 1986. Lexical semantics. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambrid
Cutting D, Kupiec J, Pedersen J, Sibun P. 1992. A prac-
tical part-of-speech tagger. Proceedings of the Third 
Da
marization. Proceedings of HLT-
Fi
. 
Fe
trac-
Ha
6.  
erators for 
Ha
 
Hu
 System: 
Ja
eux P. 2003. Developing the 
Ka
on for 
Le
ment realization. unpublished ms.  
B, 
M
M
d Intelligent Systems. Law-
M
ts. 
M
hniruk A, Pate V, 
M
tion Man-
M
. Proceedings of the Annual Symp Comput 
M
t 1):216-20. 
w Mexico State Univer-
Pu
 Linguistics, 19:331-58. 
e, pp 33-145. 
st ACL 
Ra
Celebi A, Liu D, Drabek E. 2003. Evaluation chal-
Conference on Applied Natural Language Process-
ing, pp 133-40. 
niel N, Radev D, Allison T. 2003. Sub-event based 
multi-document sum
NAACL Workshop on Text Summarization, pp 9-16. 
llmore CJ. 1968. The case for case. In E. Bach and 
RT. Harms, editors, Universals in Linguistic Theory
Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York, pp 1-88. 
llbaum C. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Da-
tabase. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA 
Goldstein J, Mittal V, Carbonell J, Kantrowitz M. 2000. 
Multi-document summarization by sentence ex
tion. Proceedings of the ANLP/NAACL Workshop on 
Automatic Summarization, pp 40-48.  
hn U, Mani I. 2000. The challenges of automatic 
summarization. Computer, 33(11):29-3
Hahn U, Reimer U. 1999. Knowledge-based text sum-
marization: salience and generalization op
knowledge base abstraction. In I. Mani and MT. 
Maybury, editors, Advances in Automatic Text Sum-
marization. MIT Press, Cambridge, pp 215-32.  
rabagiu S, Moldovan D, Pasca M, Mihalcea R, 
Surdeanu M, Bunescu R; Girju R, Rus V, Morarescu
P. 2001. The role of lexico-semantic feedback in 
open-domain textual question-answering. Proceed-
ings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, pp 274-81.  
mphreys BL, Lindberg DA, Schoolman HM, Barnett 
GO. 1998. The Unified Medical Language
An informatics research collaboration. J Am Med In-
form Assoc, 5(1):1-11. 
cquelinet C, Burgun A, Delamarre D, Strang N, Djab-
bour S, Boutin B, Le B
ontological foundations of a terminological system 
for end-stage diseases, organ failure, dialysis and 
transplantation. Int J Med Inf, 70(2-3):317-28. 
n M, McKeown KR, Klavans JL. 2001. Domain-
specific informative and indicative summarizati
information retrieval. Workshop on Text Summariza-
tion (DUC3).  
vin B, Rappaport Hovav M. 1996. From lexical se-
mantics to argu
Lisse JR, Perlman M, Johansson G, Shoemaker JR, 
Schechtman J, Skalky CS, Dixon ME, Polis A
Mollen AJ, Geba GP. 2003. Gastrointestinal toler-
ability and effectiveness of rofecoxib versus 
naproxen in the treatment of osteoarthritis: a random-
ized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med, 139(7):539-46. 
ani I, Gates B, Bloedorn E. 1999. Improving summa-
ries by revising them. Proceedings of the 37th An-
nual Meeting of the Association of Computational 
Linguistics, pp 558-65. 
cDonald DD. 1992. Robust partial parsing through 
incremental, multi-algorithm processing. In PS Ja-
cobs, editor, Text-base
rence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey, pp 83-99. 
cKeown KR, Klavans JL, Hazivassiloglou V, Barzi-
lay R., Eskin E. 1999. Towards multidocument sum-
marization by reformulation: progress and prospec
Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pp 453-60. 
cKeown HR, Chang, SF, Cimino J, Feiner SK, 
Friedman C, Gravano L, Hatzivassiloglou V, Johnson 
S,  Jordan DA, Klavans JL, Kus
Teufel S. 2001. PERSIVAL, a system for personal-
ized search and summarization over multimedia 
healthcare information. JCDL, pp 331-40. 
cCray AT. 1993. Representing biomedical knowledge 
in the UMLS Semantic Network. High-Performance 
Medical Libraries: Advances in Informa
agement for the Virtual Era. Meckler Publishing, pp 
45-55. 
cCray AT, Srinivasan S, Browne AC. 1994. Lexical 
methods for managing variation in biomedical termi-
nologies
Appl Med Care, pp:235-9. 
cCray AT, Burgun A, Bodenreider O. 2001. Aggre-
gating UMLS semantic types for reducing conceptual 
complexity.  Medinfo, 10(P
Mihalcea R, Moldovan D. 2000. Semantic indexing 
using WordNet senses. Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on IR and NLP. 
Nirenburg S, Raskin V. 1996. Ten choices for lexical 
semantics. Memoranda in Computer and Cognitive 
Science. MCCS-96-304. Ne
sity. 
stejovsky J., Bergler S, Anick P. 1993. Lexical se-
mantic techniques for corpus analysis. Computa-
tional
Raphael B. 1968. SIR: Semantic information retrieval. 
In Minsky, M. (ed.) Semantic Information Process-
ing. The MIT Press, Cambridg
Radev D. 2000. A Common theory of information fu-
sion from multiple text sources, step one: cross-
document structure. Proceedings of 1
SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue. 
dev D, Teufel S, Saggion H, Lam W, Blitzer J, Qi H, 
lenges in large-scale multi-document summarization: 
the MEAD project. Proceedings of ACL. 
Rindflesch TC, Bean CA, Sneiderman CA. 2000. Ar-
gument identification for arterial branching predica-
tions asserted in cardiac catheterization reports. 
Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 704-8. 
:462-77.  
Sal
Sri ring text mining 
Sp tomatic summarizing: factors 
Sc
Publishing Co, Amster-
Te
 Experiments with relevance and rhetorical 
Te
di-
Vi
icative Forms in 
W
cs: An in-
Advances in Automatic Text Summarization. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, pp 1-13. 
hank RC. 1975. Conceptual information processing. 
Amsterdam. North-Holland 
dam, 
ufel S, Moens M. 2002. Summarizing scientific arti-
cles -Rindflesch TC, Fiszman M. 2003. The interaction of 
domain knowledge and linguistic structure in natural 
language processing: interpreting hypernymic propo-
sitions in biomedical text. J Biomed Infor, 36
status. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):409-445. 
nny C, Pustejovsk J. 2000. A history of events in lin-
guistic theory. In C. Tenny and J. Pustejovsky, e
tors, Events as Grammatical Objects, CSLI 
Publications, Stanford, pp 3-37. 
egas E, Mahesh K, Nirenburg  S. 1998. Semantics in 
action. In P. St. Dizier, editor, Pred
Saggion H, Lapalme G. Generating indicative-
informative summaries with SumUM. 2002. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 28(4):497-526. 
ton G, Wong A, Yang CS. 1975. A vector space 
Natural Language and in Lexical Knowledge Bases. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.  
ilks YA. 1976. Parsing English II. In E. Charniak and 
Y. Wilks, editors, Computational semanti
model for automatic indexing. Communications of 
the ACM, (18):613-20. 
nivasan P, Rindflesch T. 2002. Explo
from MEDLINE. Proceedings of the AMIA Symp, pp 
722-6. 
arck Jones K. 1999. Au
troduction to artificial intelligence and natural lan-
guage comprehension. North Holland Publishing 
Company, Amsterdam, pp 155-84. .and directions In I. Mani and MT. Maybury, editors, 
 
Figure 3. Semantic abstraction summarization on citations retrieved for migraine. Arrow thickness re-
flects redundant information (i.e. informational equivalence of sentences across multiple documents)  
