Using a probabilistic model of discourse relations
to investigate word order variation
Cassandre Creswell
Cymfony, Inc.
600 Essjay Rd
Williamsville NY 14221
USA
ccreswell@cymfony.com
Department of Linguistics
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia PA 19104
USA
creswell@ling.upenn.edu
Abstract
Like speakers of any natural language, speakers of
English potentially have many different word orders
in which to encode a single meaning. One key fac-
tor in speakers? use of certain non-canonical word
orders in English is their ability to contribute infor-
mation about syntactic and semantic discourse rela-
tions. Explicit annotation of discourse relations is a
difficult and subjective task. In order to measure the
correlations between different word orders and vari-
ous discourse relations, this project utilizes a model
in which discourse relations are approximated us-
ing a set of lower-level linguistic features, which are
more easily and reliably annotated than discourse
relations themselves. The featural model provides
statistical evidence for the claim that speakers use
non-canonicals to communicate information about
discourse structure.
1 Introduction: Non-canonical main
clause word order in English
Users of natural languages have many ways to en-
code the same propositional content within a sin-
gle clause. In English, besides the ?canonical?
word order, (1), options for realizing a proposi-
tion like GROW(MYRA,EGGPLANTS), include top-
icalization, left-dislocation, it-clefts, and wh-clefts,
shown in (2?5), respectively.
(1) Myra grows eggplants.
(2) Eggplants, Myra grows.
(3) Eggplants, Myra grows them.
(4) It?s eggplants that Myra grows.
(5) What Myra grows are eggplants.
Corpus-based research has shown that these
forms are appropriate only under certain discourse
conditions (Prince, 1978; Birner and Ward, 1998);
among others. These include the membership of
referents in a salient set of entities (left-dislocations
and topicalizations) or the salience of particular
propositions (topicalizations and clefts). For exam-
ple, in (6), the topicalization is felicitous because
there is a salient set KINDS OF VEGETABLES and a
salient open proposition, that Myra stands in some
relation X with an element of that set.
(6) Myra likes most vegetables, but eggplants
she adores.
V = {KINDS OF VEGETABLES};
P = X(m1 , v2 ), SUCH THAT v2 ? V
The discourse conditions licensing the use of
these non-canonical syntactic forms are necessary
conditions. When they do not hold, native speak-
ers judge the use of the form infelicitous. They are
not, however, sufficient conditions for use because
salient sets and open propositions are ubiquitous
in any discourse context, but these non-canonical
forms are rare. Each type alone makes up < 1%
of utterances, across a variety of genres (Creswell,
2003).
In addition to their information structure func-
tions, one additional communicative goal these
word orders fulfill is providing information about
how an utterance is related to other discourse seg-
ments (Creswell, 2003). Native speaker intuitions
about the appropriateness of non-canonicals in par-
ticular contexts provide anecdotal evidence (i.e.
based on listing individual examples) for this dis-
course function. To provide broader support for this
claim, however, we need to be able to generalize
across many tokens.
Ideally, a corpus annotated with discourse rela-
tions would be used to measure the correlations be-
tween the presence of non-canonical word order and
particular discourse relations. However, explicit an-
notation of discourse relations is a difficult task, and
one heavily dependent on the specific theory from
which the set of discourse relations is chosen. In-
stead, this paper describes how a set of more easily-
annotated features can be used to create a simpli-
fied approximation of the discourse context sur-
rounding non-canonical (or canonical control) utter-
ances. These features are then used as the indepen-
dent variables in a statistical model which provides
evidence for claims about how speakers use non-
canonical word order to communicate information
about discourse relations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes how some non-canonical
word orders in English contribute to the establish-
ment of certain discourse relations. Section 3 de-
scribes how these relations can be approximated
with a probabilistic model composed of more eas-
ily annotated features of the discourse context. Sec-
tion 4 presents results and discussion of using such
a model to measure the correlations between dis-
course relations and word order. Section 5 con-
cludes and suggests improvements and applications
of the model.
2 Additional meaning of non-canonical
syntax: discourse relations
The meaning of a multi-utterance text is composed
not only of the meaning of each individual utterance
but also of the relations holding between the utter-
ances. These relations have syntactic aspects, such
that single utterances can be grouped together and
combined into segments recursively and are often
modeled as a hierarchical tree structure (Grosz and
Sidner, 1986; Webber et al, 1999). Discourse re-
lations may also have a semantic or meaning com-
ponent; this property, when treated in the literature,
is often referred to as coherence, subject matter, or
rhetorical relations (Kehler, 2002; Halliday, 1985;
Mann and Thompson, 1988).
The use of an utterance with non-canonical word
order helps hearers make inferences about both the
syntactic and semantic properties of discourse rela-
tions between the utterance and the rest of the dis-
course. For both aspects of discourse relations, it is
the fact that the non-canonical order marks part of
the utterance?s information as salient or discourse-
old that assists these inferences.
2.1 Syntax of discourse relations
One substructure of a coherent discourse struc-
ture is its attentional structure, which can be mod-
eled as a stack of focus spaces (Grosz and Sidner,
1986). Each segment in the discourse tree has a
corresponding focus space containing the currently
salient discourse entities. When a segment begins,
its focus space is pushed onto the stack on top of any
other incomplete segments? spaces. When the seg-
ment ends, the focus space is popped off the stack.
When an utterance continues in the same segment,
the focus stack is unchanged.
Non-canonical utterances instruct hearers about
where to attach segments to the discourse tree. Be-
cause of the necessary conditions that license the
use of a non-canonical, in most cases the open
proposition or set is part of a focus space pushed
onto the stack previously. So, the non-canonical
form evokes the old proposition or set and thus re-
activates the salience of that focus space. Reactivat-
ing the salience of the focus space in turn activates
the salience of the discourse segment. As a result,
the hearer infers that the new segment associated
with the non-canonical utterance should be attached
at the same level as this reactivated discourse seg-
ment, i.e. at a non-terminal node on the tree?s right
frontier. Any intervening segments should be closed
off, and their focus spaces should be popped off the
stack.
To illustrate, in (7) the use of the it-cleft occurs
after an intervening discussion of a separate topic.
It-clefts are used to indicate that an existential clo-
sure of an open proposition is presupposed, here
?t.YOU GOT TO MICHIGAN STATE AT TIME t. This
presupposed material allows speaker B to mark the
question as related to the prior discussion. In a tree
structure of this discourse, the cleft corresponds to
an instruction to ?pop? back to a higher level in
the tree when attaching the utterance, where speaker
G?s career at Michigan State was under discussion.
The canonical version in (8) is an abrupt and infe-
licitous continuation of the discourse, as if B is un-
aware of the previous discussion of G?s arrival at
Michigan State.1
(7) G: So for two years, I served as a project offi-
cer for grants and contracts in health economics
that that agency was funding. I decided to go to
academia after that and taught at Michigan State
in economics and community medicine. One thing
I should mention is that for my last three months
in government, I had been detailed to work on the
Price Commission which was a component of the
Economic Stabilization program. [Description of
work on Price Commission...]
B: In what year was it that you got to Michigan
State? (SSA, ginsberg)
(8) In what year did you get to Michigan State?
2.2 Semantics of discourse relations
The contribution of non-canonical utterances to the
inference of semantic aspects of discourse relations
is also related to the fact that these word orders
mark (part of) an utterance?s content as discourse-
old or presupposed. Non-canonical word order is
1Varying the placement of the primary prosodic stress may
improve the version in (8); see Delin (1995) and Creswell
(2003) for comparison of the discourse function of prosody and
syntax.
used to indicate relations of RESEMBLANCE rather
than CONTIGUITY.
A CONTIGUITY relation is the basic relation
found in narratives. According to Labov (1997), ut-
terances in a prototypical narrative describe in the
order they took place a sequence of causally-related
events which lead up to a MOST REPORTABLE
EVENT. Kehler (2002), following Hobbs (1990),
says the events should be centered around a system
of entities, and each event should correspond to a
change of state for that system. To infer a CONTI-
GUITY relation between two utterances, the hearer
must infer that their eventualities correspond to a
change of state for that system.
Inferring a RESEMBLANCE relation between two
utterances depends on a very different type of in-
formation. To establish RESEMBLANCE, the hearer
must identify a common relation R that relates the
propositional content of two utterances and also the
number and identity of their arguments (Kehler,
2002). Resemblance relations include PARAL-
LEL, CONTRAST, EXEMPLIFICATION, GENERAL-
IZATION, EXCEPTION, and ELABORATION.
Non-canonicals are useful in resemblance rela-
tions because 1) the presence of ?old? material in a
non-canonical helps overrule the default coherence
relation of CONTIGUITY by making that interpreta-
tion less likely, and 2) the use of old material and
a structured proposition assists the hearer in iden-
tifying a common relation and corresponding argu-
ments needed to establish RESEMBLANCE.
This is illustrated in (9). The use of a left-
dislocation tells the hearer that the referent of a lot
of the doctors is in a salient set. By identifying that
set as {PROFESSIONAL PEOPLE}, the hearer can re-
alize that the information being added about a lot of
the doctors is going to be in an EXEMPLIFICATION
relation with the earlier statement that professional
people in general began to think of themselves as
disabled.
(9) During the Depression an awful lot of people
began to think of themselves as disabled, es-
pecially professional people, who depended on
clients whose business was on a cash basis?there
was no credit, this was a universe without credit
cards. A lot of the doctors, they were doing an
awful lot of charity work. They couldn?t sup-
port themselves. They?d have a little heart attack.
They?d have disability insurance. They went on
the insurance company rolls. A lot of doctors had
disability insurance and a lot of others too. A
lot of the insurance companies stopped underwrit-
ing disability insurance. They couldn?t afford it.
(SSA, hboral)
Ui-1 Ui?? Ui+1??
e1?? e3??
e4??e5?? e6?? e9??
e7??e8??e2??
Mi?? Mi+1??Mi-1?? ?? R??? R???
Figure 1: Approximating discourse relations (R)
between utterances (U ) by examining lexical dis-
course cues (M ) and relations between entities (e)
(10) A lot of the doctors were doing an awful lot of
charity work.
Without the left-dislocation, identifying the in-
clusion relationship between the set of professional
people and doctors is quite difficult. The preferred
interpretation of the canonical version in (10) is only
that the doctors were doing charity work for pro-
fessional people who had no credit cards. The left-
dislocation supports the additional inference that the
exemplification described above holds too.
3 Probabilistic model of discourse
relations and non-canonical syntax
To provide evidence beyond individual examples
for the phenomena in Section 2, we need to mea-
sure the correlation between discourse relations and
syntactic form, but annotating discourse relations
directly is problematic. Annotation of hierarchi-
cal discourse structure is difficult and subjective
although efforts have been made (Creswell et al,
2002; Marcu et al, 1999). Even annotating lin-
ear segmentation is challenging, particularly in the
vicinity of segment boundaries (Passonneau and
Litman, 1997). Annotation of the semantics of dis-
course relations requires a predetermined set of re-
lation types, on which theories vary widely, making
theory-neutral generalizations about the role of non-
canonical syntax impossible.
This project attempts to overcome these difficul-
ties by indirectly deriving discourse relations by
mapping from their known correlates to the use
of certain non-canonical forms. The correlates
used here are referential relations across utterance
boundaries and the presence and type of lexical dis-
course markers or cue words. These features are
annotated with respect to a three-utterance window
centered on a target utterance Ui, shown schemati-
cally in Figure 1.
These referential and lexical features build on the
work of Passonneau and Litman (1997), who use
them in discourse segmentation. Their use here is
extended to also derive information about the se-
Discourse Relations
Discourse Markers Sentence Types Referential Patterns
R2 R1
T x yL
W
I
Cmn
p ?
Figure 2: Influence of relations on independent and
dependent variables
mantic and syntactic properties of the relations be-
tween utterances.
As illustrated in Figure 2, discourse relations (e.g.
R1 ) influence observable patterns of referential re-
lations (e.g. x) and discourse markers (e.g. m). We
want to test whether discourse relations also influ-
ence the use of certain sentence types. However, the
discourse relations themselves are not observable
directly. To measure their correlation with sentence-
level syntax, we will only look at correlations of
referential patterns and discourse markers with syn-
tactic form. In the logistic regression analysis per-
formed here, syntactic form is the dependent vari-
able; referential relations and lexical cues are the
independent variables.
This analysis only measures the direct influence
of the independent variables on the dependent vari-
able, and does not model the existence of a mediat-
ing set of (unobserved) discourse relations, the re-
sult being that it is unable to capture correlations
among the independent variables. This inherent in-
adequacy of the model will be discussed further be-
low. Despite this inadequacy, a logistic regression
analysis is used because it is a mathematically con-
venient and well-understood way to model which
features of the independent variables are significant
in predicting the occurrence of each syntactic form,
while taking into account the rare prior probabilities
of the non-canonical syntactic forms.
In order to decide whether the featural models
provide evidence to support the claims about dis-
course relations and syntactic forms, we first need
to make clear our assumptions about how refer-
ential relations and lexical markers correlate with
discourse relations. Based on those assumptions,
testable predictions can then be made about how ref-
erential relations and lexical markers should corre-
late with syntactic forms.
Ref Utterances share center of attention; Cp of
3 first utterance is Cb of second utterance.
Mary?s a vegetarian. She never eats meat.
Ref Utterances have coreferential NPs.
2 Mary likes Fred. He?s very friendly.
Ref Utterances have inferentially-related NPs.
1 I bought an old bike. The tire was flat.
Ostriches are huge. Finches are little.
Ref Utterances have no NPs that share
0 reference.
Table 1: Values of referential relations feature
The lexical discourse marker feature is annotated
for the target Ui and its preceding (Ui?1) and fol-
lowing (Ui+1) utterances and has five values: and,
but, so, other or none. The predictions about the
correlations between these lexical features and syn-
tactic forms are based on the assumed correlations
between these lexical markers and discourse rela-
tions. First, if non-canonicals are indicators of at-
tentional stack pops, they should be more likely at
segment boundaries; hence, we expect an increased
presence of cue words (Passonneau and Litman,
1997) on non-canonicals compared to canonicals.
Predictions about the type of cue words are
based on the survey of lexical cue meanings from
Hirschberg and Litman (1994). Because and is an
indicator of segment-continuation and the relation
CONTIGUITY, we expect decreased incidence on
non-canonicals. However, we expect greater inci-
dence on Ui+1 when Ui is non-canonical because
Ui should be used to start a new segment. The pres-
ence of but indicates a CONTRAST relation. Non-
canonicals should have a greater likelihood of being
in contrast with either of the utterances surround-
ing them,2 so we expect a greater incidence of but
on both Ui and Ui+1 for non-canonicals than for
canonicals. The presence of so can indicate RE-
STATEMENT or RESULT, so so should appear more
often on Ui for wh-clefts, which are often used in
ELABORATION relations.
The referential features are four-valued and an-
notated with respect to pairs of utterances, (Ui?1,
Ui) and (Ui, Ui+1). The values here, described in
Table 1, form an implicational scale from strongest
to weakest connections, and the utterance pair is la-
beled with the strongest relation that holds.
In general, the more semantic content two utter-
ances share, the more likely they are to be related.
Referential connections are the measure of shared
content used here. Discourse relations vary in their
likelihood to be associated with certain values of
2See Creswell (2003) for examples and discussion.
Ref, shown in Table 2. For example, an utterance
immediately following a discourse pop, should be
unlikely to share a center with its immediately pre-
ceding utterance and be highly likely to share no ref-
erences at all. Two utterances in a RESEMBLANCE
relation (other than ELABORATION) are likely to
have inferential connections without coreferential
connections. Note that for nearly all of these pat-
terns, the correlation between a referential feature
value and the syntax or semantics of a discourse re-
lation is not absolute but only more or less likely.
Using a probabilistic model, however, allows for
patterns of relative likelihood in the data.
Based on the assumptions in Table 2, we can
now make predictions about expected correlations
between the referential features and utterances with
non-canonical word orders. These predictions are
based primarily on how we expect non-canonical
utterances to compare with canonical utterances.
However, when we test them on our data, we will
also compare each type of non-canonical utterance
with the others.
? Non-canonicals should be more likely than
canonicals to follow a POP and begin a new seg-
ment. They should have weaker referential ties
to the preceding utterance. They should have a
higher incidence of having no referential ties to
Ui?1, and a lower incidence of having no referen-
tial ties to Ui+1.
? Non-canonicals should be less likely than canon-
icals to have a NARRATIVE relation with either
Ui?1 or Ui+1. This situation predicts that with re-
spect to both of the utterances surrounding a non-
canonical utterance, these utterances will be less
likely to share the same center of attention than
when Ui is canonical.
? Non-canonicals should be more likely than
canonicals to be in RESEMBLANCE relations with
Ui?1 and/or Ui+1. So, a greater likelihood of ref-
erence to inferentially-related entities and smaller
likelihood of reference to coreferential entities or
shared centers in both the preceding and follow-
ing utterance is expected.
4 Results and discussion
To test the predictions about non-canonicals and
discourse relations, a corpus of 799 utterances with
non-canonical word order were extracted from 58
transcribed interviews from the Social Security Ad-
ministration Oral History Archives (SSA), a cor-
pus with ?750,000 words and 44,000 sentences. In
addition to the four types of non-canonicals, 200
randomly-selected controls with canonical word or-
der were also included. Table 4 lists the breakdown
Syntactic Type No. of Tokens
It-cleft 150
Left-dislocation 258
Topicalization 111
Wh-cleft 280
Control 200
Total 999
Table 3: Corpus of utterances by syntactic type
by syntactic type. The two lexical and three referen-
tial features described in the previous section were
annotated for each of the 999 utterances.
Logistic regression models for binary compar-
isons between each of the five sentence types were
then created. For 9 of 10 comparisons, at least one
of the five features were found to be significant.3
Table 4 lists all features found to be significant
for each of the ten comparisons, i.e. features that in-
dividually have a significant effect in improving the
likelihood of a model when compared to a model
that uses no features to predict the distribution of the
two classes.4 For comparisons with multiple fea-
tures significant at the five-percent level, the p-value
of the model fit in comparison with a fully saturated
model is listed in the fourth column of Table 4.
In order to understand the most likely context in
which a form to appears, we need to examine the
weights assigned to each feature value by the re-
gression analysis. The detailed feature weights in
the best model are listed in Table 5.
Table 6 summarizes the general conclusions we
can draw from these weights about the most favor-
able discourse contexts for each of the four types
of non-canonicals. For considerations of space, we
discuss in detail only one of the four types here, wh-
clefts. Wh-clefts are particularly relevant with re-
spect to the insights they provide into the inherent
limitations of our model of discourse relations.
Overall, wh-clefts are favored in contexts where
they start a new segment, one with weak connec-
tions with the preceding utterance and strong con-
nections with the following utterance. In particu-
lar, feature 4, REF(Ui?1,Ui), is significant in the
3The comparison of it-clefts and left-dislocations is the ex-
ception here. From the lack of significant features in this com-
parison we can surmise that the it-clefts and left-dislocations
are more similar to each other than any of the other forms com-
pared here.
4In particular, the measure whose significance is tested is
the -2?(difference in log-likelihoods of the models), which is
?2 distributed, where the number of degrees of freedom is the
difference in the total number of feature values between the two
models.
Relation between 3. Shared 2. Coreferring 1. Inferentially-related 0. No shared
Uj and Uk center entities entities only reference
SY
N
TA
C
T
IC POP unlikely less likely possible likely
PUSH, BEGIN possible likely possible unlikely
EMBEDDED SEG
CONTINUE IN highly possible possible highly
SAME SEG likely unlikely
SE
M
A
N
T
IC RESEMBLANCE unlikely possible likely impossible(not ELABORATION)
ELABORATION possible likely impossible impossible
NARRATIVE highly possible unlikely highly
likely unlikely
Table 2: Predictions from ref. features to discourse relations
CLASS VS. CLASS Feat. (p < .05) Feat. (p < .2) Overall Model Fit ?2 p-value
CONTROL, IT-CLEFT 2 5 (0.097) n.a.
CONTROL, LEFT-DIS. 4,5 3 (0.161) p=0.9289
CONTROL, TOPIC. 3 2 (0.178) n.a.
CONTROL, WH-CLEFT 2,4 3 (0.151) p=0.8696
IT-CLEFT, LEFT-DIS. ? 1 (0.106), 4 (0.086) ?
IT-CLEFT, TOPIC. 3 2 (0.092) , 4 (0.099) n.a.
IT-CLEFT, WH-CLEFT 4 1 (0.184) n.a.
LEFT-DIS, TOPIC. 3,4 5 (0.129) p =0.8561
LEFT-DIS, WH-CLEFT 1,4 5 (0.147) p=0.7615
TOPIC, WH-CLEFT 2,3,4 ? p=.6935 (with 3,4)
Table 4: Features significant at p < 0.05 and p < 0.2. Features significant at p < 0.01 are in bold. Features
1, 2, and 3 are discourse marker features on Ui?1, Ui, and Ui+1, respectively. Features 4 and 5 are referential
features for the pairs (Ui?1,Ui) and (Ui,Ui+1), respectively.
Sentence type Most Favorable Contexts
Topicalizations CONTINUE with Ui?1; CON-
TRAST with Ui?1 or Ui+1
Wh-clefts POP after Ui?1; CONTRAST
or CONTINUE with Ui+1
Left-dislocations POP after Ui?1 or RESEM-
BLANCE with Ui?1; CON-
TINUE with Ui+1
It-clefts No strong tendencies for be-
gin/end of segments; pos-
sible CONTRAST relations
with Ui?1, Ui+1
Table 6: Summary: favorable discourse contexts
comparison of wh-clefts with all other classes. Wh-
clefts are much more likely to share no connec-
tions at all with Ui?1 and less likely to share only
inferential connections when compared with any
other class. In comparison with everything but left-
dislocations, wh-clefts are also less likely to share
their center of attention with Ui?1.
In terms of discourse markers, feature 2 and 3
are significant when comparing topicalizations and
controls with wh-clefts (although feature 3 is only
weakly significant in comparing wh-clefts and con-
trols.) For feature 2, MARKER(Ui), wh-clefts are
less likely than either of the other two to appear with
and and more likely to appear with so. For feature
3, however, the presence of and on Ui+1 favors wh-
clefts over topicalizations and controls.
The most likely context in which to find wh-clefts
then is one with no referential connections to the
previous utterance and marked with the discourse
adverbial, so. When the Ui+1 begins with and, as-
sumed to be a marker of continuation of the previ-
ous content, wh-clefts are also favored. This pattern
resembles most closely the descriptions of a preced-
ing discourse POP and a subsequent discourse CON-
TINUE or NARRATIVE.
One use of wh-clefts that is not borne out conclu-
sively in the data is its use in ELABORATION rela-
tions, as in (11). Kehler (2002) describes elabora-
tions as a case of RESEMBLANCE where the predi-
cate and its arguments are the same, but described
from a different perspective or level of detail. The
hearer must infer the identity of the event and en-
CONTROL CONTROL CONTROL CONTROL IT-CLEFT IT-CL EFT IT-CLEFT LEFT-DIS. LEFT-DIS. TOPIC.
IT-CLEFT LEFT-DIS. TOPIC. WH-CLEFT LEFT-DIS. TOPI C. WH-CLEFT TOPIC. WH-CL EFT WH-CLEFT
1. MARK a 0.655
(Ui?1) b 0.326
s 0.500
o 0.542
n 0.481
2. MARK a 0.548 0.600 0.665
(Ui) b 0.399 0.444 0.604
s 0.249 0.246 0.172
o 0.689 0.628 0.483
n 0.628 0.602 0.630
3. MARK a 0.514 0.595 0.603 0.343
(Ui+1) b 0.266 0.232 0.268 0.804
s 0.408 0.406 0.470 0.579
o 0.738 0.685 0.641 0.311
n 0.574 0.602 0.533 0.429
4. REF 0 0.418 0.352 0.334 0.662 0.420 0.279
(Ui?1, Ui) 1 0.443 0.575 0.639 0.566 0.634 0. 574
2 0.511 0.493 0.458 0.501 0.493 0.467
3 0.627 0.583 0.571 0.280 0.450 0.686
5. REF 0 0.785
(Ui,Ui+1) 1 0.401
2 0.370
3 0.409
Table 5: Individual feature weights in best model. Feature weights >0.5 favor the application value (class
category) listed first; weights <0.5 favor the second application value. The farther away from 0.5, the
stronger the feature value?s effect on the distinction between the two classes.
tities being described in the two segments. If wh-
clefts are associated with ELABORATIONS, then we
should see an increased incidence of close referen-
tial connections with Ui?1 and an increased inci-
dence of so, a marker of restatement. In the results,
however, we only see evidence for the latter.
(11) S: How did you develop this Resource-Based
Relative Value Scale at this point?
H: We basically treated this as a research
project because most of us involved realized
we had some past failures and we should
not over-promise. We should be prepared to
face up to the world and say, ?We cannot
make the theory operational.? So what we did
was we continued to accept the theoretical
premise, that is the rational and objective
price should be based on the cost of the
service. Then we asked, ?What constitutes
the cost of physicians? services and what are
the components of physicians? work?? (SSA,
hsiao)
A possible factor in the absence of evidence here
is that wh-clefts are also associated with discourse
pops, which increase the likelihood of having no
referential connections with the previous utterance.
The logistic regression model used here aggregates
over all possible discourse relations. So, when two
discourse relations that give rise to different lexi-
cal and referential patterns are both associated with
a single sentence type, the patterns of one may ob-
scure the patterns of the other. A more sophisticated
statistical model might take into account dependen-
cies between discourse markers and referential pat-
terns and from them posit hidden states which cor-
respond to different discourse relations. Then based
upon these hidden states, the model would predict
which sentence type would best fit the context. Such
a model would be more true to Figure 2.
Another limitation of the model shown here is
that the only indicators in this model of starting a
new segment are weak or absent referential rela-
tions, presence of a connective like so, and absence
of and. These measures will not necessarily distin-
guish between continuing in the same segment or
beginning a new segment which includes recently-
mentioned discourse-old entities.
5 Conclusions and potential applications
The statistical model here uses a combination of ref-
erential and lexical features annotated for a small
window surrounding the target utterance to repre-
sent the local discourse context surrounding utter-
ances with non-canonical and canonical word or-
ders. The primary goal was to model the correla-
tions between discourse relations and non-canonical
syntax. Due to the difficulties inherent in annotating
discourse relations directly, the featural approxima-
tion was devised as a practical alternative.
Overall, the method used here yielded some in-
teresting new insights into the contexts that favor
the use of four types of non-canonical word order.
The complexity of this approach does make it diffi-
cult to draw simple conclusions about the relation-
ship between discourse relations and non-canonical
syntactic forms. However, the strength of some of
the correlations found here merits further investiga-
tion. The data also lend support for the idea that
some aspects of discourse relations, both syntactic
and semantic, can be inferred from combinations of
lower-level linguistic features.
An important factor in improving upon the cur-
rent project is the need for larger amounts of data.
The significance of any particular feature is greatly
affected by the quantity of data. This was a par-
ticular issue for the lexical feature values, where it
prevented inclusion of several of the less frequent
connectives with better understood discourse struc-
turing properties, like well and now. In addition,
more data may also be required in order to support
the use of more complex statistical models. Auto-
matic methods of annotating the referential features
or the availability of larger corpora marked up with
coreferential and inferential relations and with a rich
variety of syntactic forms could be used to test more
accurately the predictions in Section 3.
The technique used here for approximating dis-
course relations through more easily annotated fea-
tures has at least two interesting potential applica-
tions. One, given the significant correlation of these
features with non-canonical word order variation,
the discriminative models trained here could be used
as classifiers which could label discourse contexts
(feature vectors) with the form best suited to the
context for the surface realization stage in a natu-
ral language generation system.
Secondly, the feature set used here could be ap-
plied to the problem of automatic classification of
discourse relations. In conjunction with a rela-
tively small set of pairs of sentences for which
there is high inter-annotator agreement when hand-
annotated for type of discourse relation, the lexical
and referential features here could serve as an initial
feature set for bootstrapping the development of a
statistical discourse relation classifier. This applica-
tion would require stipulation of a predetermined set
of discourse relations?a requirement the present
study wished to avoid. However, given the practical
need for a statistical relation classifier, a set of rela-
tions could be constructed suitable to the domain of
use.
References
Birner, B., and G. Ward. 1998. Information status and non-
canonical word order in English. John Benjamins.
Creswell, C. 2003. Syntactic form and discourse function in
natural language generation. Doctoral Dissertation, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania.
Creswell, C., K. Forbes, E. Miltsakaki, R. Prasad, A. Joshi, and
B. Webber. 2002. The discourse anaphoric properties of
connectives. In Proceedings of DAARC 4, 45?50. Lisbon,
Portugal: Edicoes Colibri.
Delin, J. 1995. Presupposition and shared knowledge in it-
clefts. Language and Cognitive Processes 10:97?120.
Grosz, B. J., and C. L. Sidner. 1986. Attention, intentions,
and the structure of discourse. Computational Linguistics
12:175?204.
Halliday, M. A. K. 1985. An introduction to functional gram-
mar. Baltimore: Edward Arnold Press.
Hirschberg, J., and D. J. Litman. 1994. Empirical studies on the
disambiguation of cue phrases. Computational Linguistics
19:501?530.
Hobbs, J. R. 1990. Literature and cognition. Stanford: CSLI.
Kehler, A. 2002. Coherence, reference, and the theory of gram-
mar. CSLI Publishers.
Labov, W. 1997. Some further steps in narrative analysis. Jour-
nal of Narrative and Life History .
Mann, W. C., and S. A. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical Structure
Theory: towards a functional theory of text organization.
Text 8:243?281.
Marcu, D., E. Amorrortu, and M. Romera. 1999. Experiments
in constructing a corpus of discourse trees. In Proceedings
of the ACL workshop: Towards standards and tools for
discourse tagging, ed. M. Walker, 48?57.
Passonneau, R., and D. Litman. 1997. Discourse segmentation
by human and automated means. Computational Linguis-
tics 23:103?139.
Prince, E. F. 1978. A comparison of wh-clefts and it-clefts in
discourse. Language 54:883?906.
Webber, B., A. Knott, M. Stone, and A. Joshi. 1999. Discourse
relations: a structural and presuppositional account using
lexicalised TAG. In ACL 37, 41?48. College Park, MD.
