Topic Identification in Chinese Based on Centering Model 
Ching-Long Yeh and Yi-Chun Chen 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Tatung University 
40 Chungshan N. Rd. 3rd. Section 
Taipei 104 Taiwan 
R.O.C. 
chingyeh@cse.ttu.edu.tw, d8806005@mail.ttu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we are concerned with 
identifying the topics of sentences in Chinese 
texts. The key elements of the centering model 
of local discourse coherence are employed to 
identify the topic which is the most salient 
element in a Chinese sentence. Due to the 
phenomenon of zero anaphora occurring in 
Chinese texts frequently, in addition to the 
centering model, we further employ the 
constraint rules to identify the antecedents of 
zero anaphors. Unlike most traditional 
approaches to parsing sentences based on the 
integration of complex linguistic information 
and domain knowledge, we work on the 
output of a part-of-speech tagger and use 
shallow parsing instead of complex parsing to 
identify the topics from sentences. 
1 Introduction 
One of the most striking characteristics in a 
topic-prominent language like Chinese is the 
important element, ?topic,? in a sentence which 
can represent what the sentence is about (Li and 
Thompson, 1981). That is, if we can identify topics 
from Chinese sentences, we can obtain the most 
information embedded in the text. In this paper, we 
tend to identify the topic of each utterance within a 
discourse based on the centering model. However, 
in many natural languages, elements that can be 
easily deduced by the reader are frequently omitted 
from expressions in texts. The elimination of 
anaphoric expressions is termed zero anaphor (ZA) 
which often occurs in topic position in a Chinese 
sentence, due to their prominence in discourse. 
Accordingly, to accomplish the task of topic 
identification, we have to solve the problem of 
zero anaphora resolution. 
There are several methods of anaphora 
resolution. One method is to integrate different 
knowledge sources or factors (e.g. gender and 
number agreement, c-command constraints, 
semantic information) that discount unlikely 
candidates until a minimal set of plausible 
candidates is obtained (Grosz et al, 1995; Lappin 
and Leass, 1994; Okumura and Tamura, 1996; 
Walker et al, 1998; Yeh and Chen, 2001). 
Anaphoric relations between anaphors and their 
antecedents are identified based on the integration 
of linguistic and domain knowledge. However, it is 
very labor-intensive and time-consuming to 
construct a domain knowledge base. Another 
method employs statistical models or AI 
techniques, such as machine learning, to compute 
the most likely candidate (Aone and Bennett, 1995; 
Connoly et al, 1994; Ge et al, 1998; Seki et al, 
2002). This method can sort out the above 
problems. However, it heavily relies upon the 
availability of sufficiently large text corpora that 
are tagged, in particular, with referential 
information (Stuckardt, 2002). 
Our method is an inexpensive, fast and reliable 
procedure for anaphora resolution, which relies on 
cheaper and more reliable NLP tools such as part-
of-speech (POS) tagger and shallow parsers 
(Baldwin, 1997; Ferr?ndez et al, 1998; Kennedy 
and Boguraev, 1996; Mitkov, 1998; Yeh and Chen, 
2003). The resolution process works from the 
output of a POS tagger enriched with annotations 
of grammatical function of lexical items in the 
input text stream. The shallow parsing technique is 
used to detect zero anaphors and identifies the 
noun phrases preceding the anaphors as 
antecedents. 
In the following sections we first describe the 
centering model which including the key elements 
of the centering model of local discourse 
coherence. In Section 3 we describe the details of 
shallow parsing we employed. In Section 4 we 
explain our ZA resolution method based on the 
centering model and the constraint rules. The 
method of topic identification in Chinese sentences 
is illustrated in Section 5. In the last section the 
conclusions are made. 
2 Centering Model 
In the centering theory (Grosz and Sidner, 1986; 
Grosz et al 1995; Walker et al, 1994; Strube and 
Hahn, 1996), the 'attentional state' was identified as 
a basic component of discourse structure that 
consisted of two levels of focusing: global and 
local. For Grosz and Sidner, the centering theory 
provided a model for monitoring local focus and 
yielded the centering model which was designed to 
account for the difference in the perceived 
coherence of discourses. In the centering model, 
each utterance U in a discourse segment has two 
structures associated with it, called forward-
looking centers, Cf(U), and backward-looking 
center, Cb(U). The forward-looking centers of Un, 
Cf(Un), depend only on the expressions that 
constitute that utterance. They are not constrained 
by features of any previous utterance in the 
discourse segment (DS), and the elements of Cf(Un) 
are partially ordered to reflect relative prominence 
in Un. Grosz et al, in their paper (Grosz et al 
1995), assume that grammatical roles are the major 
determinant for ranking the forward-looking 
centers, with the order ?Subject > Object(s) > 
Others?. The superlative element of Cf(Un) may 
become the Cb of the following utterance, Cb(Un+1). 
In addition to the structures for centers, Cb, and 
Cf, the centering model specifies a set of 
constraints and rules (Grosz et al 1995; Walker et 
al. 1994). 
Constraints 
For each utterance Ui in a discourse segment 
consisting of utterances U1, ?, Um: 
1. Ui has exactly one Cb. 
2. Every element of Cf(Ui) must be realized in Ui. 
3. Ranking of elements in Cf(Ui) guides 
determination of Cb(Ui+1). 
4. The choice of Cb(Ui) is from Cf(Ui-1), and can 
not be from Cf(Ui-2) or other prior sets of Cf. 
Backward-looking centers, Cbs, are often 
omitted or pronominalized and discourses that 
continue centering the same entity are more 
coherent than those that shift from one center to 
another. This means that some transitions are 
preferred over others. These observations are 
encapsulated in two rules: 
Rules 
For each utterance Ui in a discourse segment 
consisting of utterances U1, ?, Um: 
I. If any element of Cf(Ui) is realized by a 
pronoun in Ui+1 then the Cb(Ui+1) must be 
realized by a pronoun also. 
II. Sequences of continuation are preferred over 
sequence of retaining; and sequences of 
retaining are to be preferred over sequences of 
shifting. 
Rule I represents one function of pronominal 
reference: the use of a pronoun to realize the Cb 
signals the hearer that the speaker is continuing to 
talk about the same thing. Psychological research 
and cross-linguistic research have validated that 
the Cb is preferentially realized by a pronoun in 
English and by equivalent forms (i.e. zero 
anaphora) in other languages (Grosz et al 1995). 
Rule II reflect the intuition that continuation of 
the center and the use of retentions when possible 
to produce smooth transitions to a new center 
provide a basis for local coherence. 
For example in (1), the subjects of the utterance 
(1b) and (1d)  are eliminated, and their antecedents 
are identified as the subjects of the preceding 
utterances (1a) and (1c) respectively1 according to 
the centering model. 
(1) a.  i  	 
  
Electronics stocki receive USA high-tech 
stock heavy-fall affect 
Electronics stocksi were affected by high-
tech stocks fallen heavily in America. 
b. i   
(Electronics stocks)i continue fall 
(Electronics stocks)i continued falling down. 
c.  j     
Securities stocksj also have relative 
respondence 
Securities stocksj also had respondence.  
d. j     
(Securities stocks) j continue fall by close. 
(Securities stocks) j fell by close one after 
another. 
3 Shallow Parsing 
Shallow (or partial) parsing which is an 
inexpensive, fast and reliable method does not 
deliver full syntactic analysis but is limited to 
parsing smaller constituents such as noun phrases 
or verb phrases (Abney, 1996; Li and Roth, 2001; 
Mitkov, 1999). For example, the sentence (2) can 
be divided as follows: 
(2) ! "# $% & '( )* 
Hualien became the popular tourist attraction. 
 ? [NP ! ] [VP "# ] [NP $% & '( )*] 
                                                     
1
 We use a b
a?  to denote a zero anaphor, where the 
subscript a is the index of the zero anaphor itself and the 
superscript b is the index of the referent. A single  
without any script represents an intrasentential zero 
anaphor. Also note that a superscript attached to an NP 
is used to represent the index of the referent. 
[NP Hualien] [VP became] [NP the popular 
tourist attraction] 
Given a Chinese sentence, our method of 
shallow parsing is divided into the following steps: 
First the sentence is divided into a sequence of 
POS-tagged words by employing a segmentation 
program, AUTOTAG, which is a POS tagger 
developed by CKIP, Academia Sinica (CKIP, 
1999). Second the sequence of words is parsed into 
smaller constituents such as noun phrases and verb 
phrases with phrase-level parsing. Each phrase is 
represented as a word list. Then the sequence of 
word lists is transformed into triples, [S,P,O]. For 
example in (3), (3b) is the output of sentence (3a) 
produced by AUTOTAG, and (3c) is the triple 
representation.  
 (3) a. [ !(Nc) "#(VG) $%(VH) &(DE) '
((VA) )*(Na)] 
b. [NP,[ !]], [VP,["#]], [NP,[$%,&,'
(,)*]] 
c. [[ !], ["#], [$%,&,'(,)*]] 
The definition of triple representation is 
illustrated in Definition 1.The triple here is a 
simple representation which consists of three 
elements: S, P and O which correspond to the 
Subject (noun phrase), Predicate (verb phrase) and 
Object (noun phrase) respectively in a clause. 
Definition 1: 
A Triple T is characterized by a 3-tuple:  
T = [S, P, O] where 
z S is a list of nouns whose grammatical 
role is the subject of a clause. 
z P is a list of verbs or a preposition whose 
grammatical role is the predicate of a 
clause. 
z O is a list of nouns whose grammatical 
role is the object of a clause. 
In the step of triple transformation, the sequence 
of word lists as shown in (3b) is transformed into 
triples by employing the Triple Rules. The Triple 
Rules is built by referring to the Chinese syntax. 
There are four kinds of Triples in the Triple Rules, 
which corresponds to five basic clauses: subject + 
transitive verb + object, subject + intransitive verb, 
subject + preposition + object, and a noun phrase 
only. The rules listed below are employed in order: 
Triple Rules: 
Triple1(S,P,O) ? np(S), vtp(P), np(O). 
Triple2(S,P,none) ? np(S), vip(P). 
Triple3(S,P,O) ? np(S), prep(P), np(O). 
Triple4(S,none,none) ? np(S). 
The vtp(P) denotes the predicate is a transitive 
verb phrase, which contains a transitive verb in the 
rightmost position in the phrase; likewise the vip(P) 
denotes the predicate is an intransitive verb phrase, 
which contains an intransitive verb in the rightmost 
position in the phrase. In the rule Triple3, the 
prep(P) denotes the predicate is a preposition. The 
Triple4 is employed if only a sentence contains 
only one noun phrase and no other constituent. If 
all the rules in the Triple Rules failed, the ZA 
Triple Rules are employed to detect zero anaphor 
(ZA) candidates. 
ZA Triple Rules: 
Triple1z1(zero,P,O)? vtp(P), np(O). 
Triple1z2(S,P,zero)? np(S), vtp(P). 
Triple1z3(zero,P,zero)? vtp(P). 
Triple2z1 (zero,P,none)? vip(P). 
Triple3z1(zero,P,O) ? prep(P), np(O). 
Triple4z1(zero,P,O) ? co-conj(P), np(O). 
The zero anaphora in Chinese generally occurs 
in the topic, subject or object position. The rules 
Triple1z1, Triple2z1, and Triple3z1 detect the zero 
anaphora occurring in the topic or subject position. 
The rule Triple1z2 detects the zero anaphora in the 
object position and Triple1z3 detect the zero 
anaphora occurring in both subject and object 
positions. In the Triple4, the co-conj(P) denotes a 
coordinating conjunction appearing in the initial 
position of a clause. For example in (4), there are 
two triples generated. In the second triple, zero 
denotes a zero anaphor according to Triple1z1. 
(4) +, -. /0 12 34 
Zhangsan entered a competition and won the 
champion. 
? [[[+,], [-.], [/0]], [[zero], [12], [3
4]]] 
[[[Zhangsan], [enter], [competition]], [[zero], 
[win], [champion]]] 
4 Zero Anaphora Resolution 
4.1 ZA Resolution Method 
The process of analyzing Chinese zero anaphora 
is different from general pronoun resolution in 
English because zero anaphors are not expressed in 
discourse. Therefore, the ZA resolution method we 
develop is divided into three phases. First each 
sentence of an input document is translated into 
triples as described in Section 3. Second is ZA 
identification that verifies each ZA candidates 
annotated in triples by employing ZA 
identification constraints. Third is antecedent 
identification that identifies the antecedent of each 
detected ZA using rules based on the centering 
model. 
In the ZA detection phase, we use the ZA Triple 
Rules described in the Section 3 to detect omitted 
cases as ZA candidates denoted by zero in triples. 
Table 1 shows some examples corresponding to 
the ZA Triple Rules. 
ZA Triple Rule Example 
Triple1z1 
(zero,P,O) 
56 7 8 9 (1b) 
   zhuangdao yi ge ren 
(he) bump-to a person 
(He) bumped into a person. 
Triple1z2 
(S,P,zero) 
+, :; < 
Zhangsan xihuan ma 
Zhangsan like (somebody 
or something) Q2 
Does Zhangsan like 
(somebody or something)? 
Triple1z3 
(zero,P,zero) 
:;
xihuan 
(he) like (somebody or 
something) 
(He) likes (somebody or 
something). 
Triple2z1 
(zero,P,none) 
= >? @ 
qu gouwu le 
(he) go shopping ASPECT 
(He) has gone shopping.  
Triple3z1 
(zero,P,O) 
A BC 
zai nabian 
(he) in there 
(He) is there. 
Triple4z1 
(zero,P,O) 
D EFG H 
gen xiaopengyou wan 
(he) with child play 
(He) is playing with little 
children. 
Table 1: Examples of zero anaphora 
After ZA candidates are detected by employing 
the ZA Triple Rules, the ZA identification 
constraints are utilized to filter out non-anaphoric 
cases. In the ZA identification constraints, the 
constraint 1 is employed to exclude the exophora3 
or cataphora4 which is different from anaphora in 
                                                     
2
 We use a Q to denote a question (ma); a 
ASPECT to denote aspect marker.  
3
 Exophora is reference of an expression directly to 
an extralinguistic referent and the referent does not 
require another expression for its interpretation. 
4
 Cataphora arises when a reference is made to an 
entity mentioned subsequently. 
texts. The constraint 2 includes some cases might 
be incorrectly detected as zero anaphors, such as 
passive sentences or inverted sentences (Hu, 1995).   
ZA identification constraints 
For each ZA candidate c in a discourse: 
1. c can not be in the first utterance in a 
discourse segment 
2. ZA does not occur in the following case: 
  NP + bei + NP + VP + c 
  NP (topic) + NP (subject) + VP + c  
In the antecedent identification phase, we 
employ the concept, ?backward-looking center? of 
centering model to identify the antecedent of each 
ZA. First we use noun phrase rules to obtain noun 
phrases in each utterance, and then the antecedent 
is identified as the most prominent noun phrase of 
the preceding utterance (Yeh and Chen, 2001): 
Antecedent identification rule: 
For each zero anaphor z in a discourse segment 
consisting of utterances U1, ? , Um:  
If z occurs in Ui, and no zero anaphor occurs in 
Ui-1 
then choose the noun phrase with the 
corresponding grammatical role in Ui-1 as 
the antecedent 
Else if only one zero anaphor occurs in Ui-1  
then choose the antecedent of the zero 
anaphor in Ui-1 as the antecedent of z 
Else if more than one zero anaphor occurs in 
Ui-1 
then choose the antecedent of the zero 
anaphor in Ui-1 as the antecedent of z 
according to grammatical role criteria: Topic 
> Subject > Object > Others 
End if 
Due to topic-prominence in Chinese (Li and 
Thompson, 1981), topic is the most salient 
grammatical role. In general, if the topic is omitted, 
the subject will be in the initial position of an 
utterance. If the topic and subject are omitted 
concurrently, the ZA occurs. Since the antecedent 
identification rule is corresponding to the concept 
of centering model. 
4.2 ZA Resolution Experiment 
In the experiment of ZA resolution, we use a test 
corpus which is a collection of 150 news articles 
contained 998 paragraphs, 4631 utterances, and 
40884 Chinese words. By employing the ZA Triple 
Rules and ZA identification constraints mentioned 
previously, zero anaphors occur in topic or subject, 
and object positions can be detected. Because the 
ZA Triple Rules cover each possible topic or 
subject, and object omission cases, the result 
shows that the zero anaphors are over detected and 
the precision rate (PR) is 84% calculated using 
equation 1. 
candidates ZA of No.
detectedcorrectly  ZA of No.detection ZA of PR = ....(1) 
The main errors of ZA detection occur in the 
experiment when parsing inverted sentences and 
non-anaphoric cases (e.g. exophora or cataphora) 
(Hu, 1995; Mitkov, 2002). Cataphora is similar to 
anaphora, the difference being the direction of the 
reference. In this paper, we do not deal with the 
case that the referent of a zero anaphor is in the 
following utterances, but we can detect about 60% 
cataphora in the test corpus by employing ZA 
identification constraint 1. 
In the phase of antecedent identification, we 
take the output of employing the ZA Triple Rules 
and ZA identification constraints, and further to 
identify the antecedents of zero anaphors by using 
antecedent identification rule based on the 
centering model. For example, in the discourse 
segment (5), the zero anaphors are detected in the 
utterances (5b) and (5c). According to the 
antecedent identification rule, the noun phrase, 
    ?Kee-lung General Hospital,? whose 
grammatical role is corresponding to the zero 
anaphor i1?  in (5b) is identified as the antecedent. 
Subsequently, the antecedent of the zero anaphor 
i
2?  in (5c) is identified as the antecedent of i1?  in 
(5b), . 
(5) a. IJKL i # MN OP QR 
Jilong yiyuan wei kuoda fuwu fanwei 
Kee-lung hospital for expand service 
coverage 
Kee-lungi General Hospital aims to increase 
service coverage. 
b. i1?  ST UV KW OP XY Z [\]  
jiji tisheng yiliao fuwu pinzhi ji biaozhunhua 
(Kee-lung General Hospital)i active improve 
medical-treatment service quality and 
standardization 
(Kee-lung General Hospital)i actively 
improves the service quality of medical 
treatment and standardization. 
c. 
i
2?    	
   
 
huo weishengshu renke wei banli wailao 
tijian yiyuan 
(Kee-lung General Hospital)i obtain 
Department-of-Health certify to-be handle 
foreign-laborer physical-examination 
hospital 
(Kee-lung General Hospital)i is certified by 
Department of Health as a hospital which 
can handle physical examinations of foreign 
laborers. 
The recall rates (RR) and precision rates (PR) of 
ZA resolution is 70% and 60.3% respectively 
calculated using equation 2 and equation 3. Errors 
occur in the phase when a zero anaphor refers to an 
entity other than the corresponding grammatical 
role or the antecedent of the zero anaphor in the 
preceding utterance. 
candidates ZA of No.
identifiedcorrectly  ant. of No.
resolution ZA of RR = .. (2) 
in text occurred ZA of No.
identifiedcorrectly  ant. of No.
resolution ZA of PR = ... (3) 
 
5 Topic Identification 
Topic identification is similar to theme 
identification in (Rambow, 1993). The theme 
clearly corresponds to the Cb: the theme, under a 
general definition, is what the current utterance is 
about; what utterances are about provides a link to 
previous discourse, since otherwise the text would 
be incoherent. The role of the Cb is precisely to 
provide such a link.  
In our approach, in addition to the centering 
model, we further employ the antecedent 
identification rule to identify the topic. When a ZA 
occurs in the utterance Ui, the antecedent of the ZA 
is identified as the topic of Ui. Otherwise, if the 
transition relation, center shifting, occurs, topic 
will not be identified as any of the element in the 
preceding utterance but the element in the current 
utterance according to grammatical role criteria. 
The topic identification rule is described below: 
Topic identification rule: 
For identifying each topic t in a discourse 
segment consisting of utterances U1, ? , Um:  
If at least one ZA occurs in Ui 
then refer to grammatical role criteria to 
choose the antecedent of the ZA as the t  
Else if no ZA occurs in Ui 
then refer to grammatical role criteria to 
choose one element of Ui as the t 
End if 
We now take the discourse segment (1) as an 
example to identify each topic of the utterances (1a) 
to (1d) by employing the topic identification rule. 
As illustrated in Table2, the topic of (1a) is  
?Electronics stocks,? and the topic of (1b) is 
identified as the antecedent of  i,    
?Electronics stocks.? Similarly, the topic of (1d) is 
 ?Securities stocks,? which is the same as 
the topic of (1c). 
 
Utterance Topic 
(1a)  i  	 

  
Electronics stocksi were 
affected by high-tech 
stocks fallen heavily in 
America 

Electronics 
stocks 
(1b) i   
(Electronics stocks)i 
continued falling down. 

Electronics 
stocks 
(1c)  j    
Securities stocksj also had 
respondence 
 
Securities 
stocks 

j
     
(Securities stocks)j fell by 
close one after another 
 
Securities 
stocks 
Table 2: Examples of zero anaphora 
 
6 Conclusion 
In this paper, we propose a method of topic 
identification in Chinese based on the centering 
model. Based on observations on real texts, we 
found that to identify the topics in Chinese context 
is much related to the issue of zero anaphora 
resolution. We use a zero anaphora resolution 
method to resolve the problem of ellipsis in 
Chinese text. The zero anaphora resolution method 
works on the output of a part-of-speech tagger and 
employs a shallow parsing instead of a complex 
parsing to resolve zero anaphors in Chinese text. 
Due to time limit, we have not applied the result of 
topic identification to applications for evaluation. 
We will further continue improving the accuracy 
of zero anaphora resolution and develop the 
applications based on topic identification, such as 
information extraction/retrieval and text 
categorization. 
7 Acknowledgements 
We give our special thanks to CKIP, Academia 
Sinica for making great efforts in computational 
linguistics and sharing the Autotag program to 
academic research. 
References  
Abney, Steven. 1996. Tagging and Partial Parsing. 
In: Ken Church, Steve Young, and Gerrit 
Bloothooft (eds.), Corpus-Based Methods in 
Language and Speech. An ELSNET volume. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Aone, Chinatsu and Bennett, Scott William. 1995. 
Evaluating automated and manual acquisition of 
anaphora resolution strategies. In Proceedings of 
the 33rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, Santa Cruz, 
CA, pages 122?129. 
Baldwin B. 1997. CogNIAC: high precision 
coreference with limited knowledge and 
linguistic resources. ACL/EACL workshop on 
Operational factors in practical, robust anaphor 
resolution. 
CKIP. 1999. ^_`abcde  Version 1.0 
(Autotag), http://godel.iis.sinica.edu.tw/CKIP/, 
Academia Sinica. 
Connoly, Dennis, John D. Burger & David S. Day. 
1994. A Machine learning approach to 
anaphoric reference. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on New Methods in 
Language Processing, 255-261, Manchester, 
United Kingdom. 
Eleni Miltsakaki. 1999. Locating Topics in Text 
Processing. In Proceedings of CLIN '99. 
Ferr?ndez, A., Palomar, Manuel and Moreno, Lidia. 
1998. Anaphor Resolution in Unrestricted Texts 
with Partial Parsing. Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING'98)/ACL'98 Conference, 
pages 385-391. Montreal, Canada. 
Ge, Niyu, Hale, John and Charniak, Eugene. 1998. 
A statistical approach to anaphora resolution. In 
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, pages 161 ?170. 
Grosz, B. J. and Sidner, C. L.. 1986. Attention, 
intentions, and the structure of discourse. 
Computational Linguistics, No 3 Vol 12, pp. 
175-204. 
Grosz, B. J., Joshi, A. K. and Weinstein, S. 1995. 
Centering: A Framework for Modeling the 
Local Coherence of Discourse. Computational 
Linguistics, 21(2), pp. 203-225. 
Hu, Wenze. 1995. Functional Perspectives and 
Chinese Word Order. Ph. D. dissertation, The 
Ohio State University. 
Kennedy, Christopher and Branimir Boguraev. 
1996. Anaphora for everyone: pronominal 
anaphora resolution without a parser. 
Proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING'96), 113-118. Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Lappin, S. and Leass, H. 1994. An algorithm for 
pronominal anaphor resolution. Computational 
Linguistics, 20(4). 
Li, Charles N. and Thompson, Sandra A. 1981. 
Mandarin Chinese ? A Functional Reference 
Grammar, University of California Press. 
Li, X.; Roth D. 2001. Exploring Evidence for 
Shallow Parsing. Proceedings of Workshop on 
Computational Natural Language Learning, 
Toulouse, France. 
Okumura, Manabu and Kouji Tamura. 1996. Zero 
pronoun resolution in Japanese discourse based 
on centering theory. In Proceedings of the 16th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING-96), 871-876. 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1998. Robust pronoun resolution 
with limited knowledge. Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING'98)/ACL'98 Conference. 
Montreal, Canada. 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 1999. Anaphora resolution: the 
state of the art. Working paper (Based on the 
COLING'98/ACL'98 tutorial on anaphora 
resolution). University of Wolverhampton, 
Wolverhampton. 
Mitkov, Ruslan. 2002. Anaphora Resolution, 
Longman. 
Rambow, O. (1993). Pragmatic aspects of 
scrambling and topicalization in German: A 
Centering Approach. In IRCS Workshop on 
Centering in Discourse. Univ. of Pennsylvania, 
1993. 
Seki, Kazuhiro, Fujii, Atsushi, and Ishikawa, 
Tetsuya. 2002. A Probabilistic Method for 
Analyzing Japanese Anaphora Integrating Zero 
Pronoun Detection and Resolution. Proceedings 
of the 19th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002), 
pp.911-917. 
Strube, M. and U. Hahn. 1996. Functional 
Centering. Proc. Of ACL ?96, Santa Cruz, Ca., 
pp.270-277. 
Stuckardt, Roland. 2002. Machine-Learning-Based 
vs. Manually Designed Approaches to Anaphor 
Resolution: the Best of Two Worlds. In 
Proceedings of the 4th Discourse Anaphora and 
Anaphor Resolution Colloquium (DAARC2002), 
University of Lisbon, Portugal, pages 211-216. 
Giv?n, T. 1983. Topic continuity in discourse: An 
introduction. Topic continuity in discourse. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]: John 
Benjamins. 
Walker, M. A., M. Iida and S. Cote. 1994. Japan 
Discourse and the Process of Centering. 
Computational Linguistics, 20(2): 193-233. 
Walker, M. A. 1998. Centering, anaphora 
resolution, and discourse structure. In Marilyn A. 
Walker, Aravind K. Joshi, and Ellen F. Prince, 
editors, Centering in Discourse. Oxford 
University Press. 
Yeh, Ching-Long and Chen, Yi-Chun. 2001. An 
empirical study of zero anaphora resolution in 
Chinese based on centering theory. In 
Proceedings of ROCLING XIV, Tainan, Taiwan. 
Yeh, Ching-Long and Chen, Yi-Chun. 2003. Zero 
anaphora resolution in Chinese with partial 
parsing based on centering theory. In 
Proceedings of IEEE NLP-KE03, Beijing, China. 
