Revising the WORDNET DOMAINS Hierarchy: semantics, coverage and 
balancing 
Luisa Bentivogli, Pamela Forner, Bernardo Magnini, Emanuele Pianta 
ITC-irst ? Istituto per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica 
Via Sommarive 18, Povo ? Trento, Italy, 38050 
email:{bentivo, forner, magnini, pianta}@itc.it 
 
Abstract 
The continuous expansion of the multilingual 
information society has led in recent years to a pressing 
demand for multilingual linguistic resources suitable to 
be used for different applications.  
In this paper we present the WordNet Domains 
Hierarchy (WDH), a language-independent resource 
composed of 164, hierarchically organized, domain 
labels (e.g. Architecture, Sport, Medicine). Although 
WDH has been successfully applied to various Natural 
Language Processing tasks, the first available version 
presented some problems, mostly related to the lack of a 
clear semantics of the domain labels. Other correlated 
issues were the coverage and the balancing of the 
domains. We illustrate a new version of WDH 
addressing these problems by an explicit and systematic 
reference to the Dewey Decimal Classification. The new 
version of WDH has a better defined semantics and is 
applicable to a wider range of tasks. 
1 Introduction 
The continuous expansion of the multilingual 
information society with a growing number of new 
languages present on the Web has led in recent 
years to a pressing demand for multilingual 
applications. To support such applications, 
multilingual language resources are needed, which 
however require a lot of human effort to be built. 
For this reason, the development of language-
independent resources which factorize what is 
common to many languages, and are possibly 
linked to the language-specific resources, could 
bring great advantages to the development of the 
multilingual information society. 
A language-independent resource, usable in 
many automatic and human applications, is 
represented by domain hierarchies. The notion of 
domain is related to similar notions such as 
semantic field, subject matter, broad topic, subject 
code, subject domain, category. These notions are 
used, sometimes interchangeably, sometimes with 
significant distinctions, in various fields such as 
linguistics, lexicography, cataloguing, text 
categorization. As far as this work is concerned, 
we define a domain as an area of knowledge which 
is somehow recognized as unitary. A domain can 
be characterized by the name of a discipline where 
a certain knowledge area is developed (e.g. 
chemistry) or by the specific object of the 
knowledge area (e.g. food). Although objects of 
knowledge and disciplines that study them are 
clearly related, the relation between these two 
points of view on domains is sometimes blurred 
and may be a source of uncertainty on their exact 
definition. 
Another interesting duality when speaking about 
domains is related to the fact that knowledge 
manifests itself in both words and texts. So the 
notion of domain can be applied both to the study 
of words, where a domain is the area of knowledge 
to which a certain lexical concept belongs, or to the 
study of texts, where the domain of a text is its 
broad topic. In this work we will assume that also 
these two points of view on domains are strictly 
intertwined.  
By their nature, domains can be organized in 
hierarchies based on a relation of specificity. For 
instance we can say that TENNIS is a more specific 
domain than SPORT, or that ARCHITECTURE is more 
general than TOWN PLANNING. 
Domain hierarchies can be usefully integrated 
into other linguistic resources and are also 
profitably used in many Natural Language 
Processing (NLP) tasks such as Word Sense 
Disambiguation (Magnini et al 2002), Text 
Categorization (Schutze, 1998), Information 
Retrieval (Walker and Amsler, 1986).  
As regards the usage of Domain hierarchies in 
the field of multilingual lexicography, an example 
is given by the EuroWordNet Domain-ontology, a 
language independent domain hierarchy to which 
interlingual concepts (ILI-records) can be assigned 
(Vossen, 1998). In the same line, see also the 
SIMPLE domain hierarchy (SIMPLE, 2000).  
Large domain hierarchies are also available on 
the Internet, mainly meant for classifying web 
documents. See for instance the Google and Yahoo 
directories. 
A large-scale application of a domain hierarchy 
to a lexicon is represented by WORDNET DOMAINS 
(Magnini and Cavagli?, 2000). WORDNET 
DOMAINS is a lexical resource developed at ITC-
irst where each WordNet synset (Fellbaum, 1998) 
is annotated with one or more domain labels 
selected from a domain hierarchy which was 
specifically created to this purpose. As the 
WORDNET DOMAINS Hierarchy (WDH) is 
language-independent, it has been possible to 
exploit it in the framework of MultiWordNet 
(Pianta et al, 2002), a multilingual lexical database 
developed at ITC-irst in which the Italian 
component is strictly aligned with the English 
WordNet. In MultiWordNet, the domain 
information has been automatically transferred 
from English to Italian, resulting in a Italian 
version of WORDNET DOMAINS. For instance, as 
the English synset {court, tribunal, judicature} was 
annotated with the domain LAW, also the Italian 
synset {corte, tribunale}, which is aligned with the 
corresponding English synset, results automatically 
annotated with the LAW domain. This procedure 
can be applied to any other WordNet (or part of it) 
aligned with Princeton WordNet (see for instance 
the Spanish WordNet). 
It is worth noticing that two of the main on-
going projects addressing the construction of 
multilingual resources, that is MEANING (Rigau 
et al 2002) and BALKANET (see web site), make 
use of WORDNET DOMAINS. Finally, WORDNET 
DOMAINS is being profitably used by the NLP 
community mainly for Word Sense 
Disambiguation tasks in various languages. 
Another application of domain hierarchies can 
be found in the field of corpus creation. In many 
existing corpora (see for instance the BNC, the 
ANC, the Brown and LOB Corpora) domain is one 
of the most used criteria for text selection and/or 
classification. Given that a domain hierarchy is 
language independent, if the same domain 
hierarchy is used to build reference corpora for 
different languages, then it would be easy to create 
(a first approximation of) comparable corpora by 
putting in correspondence corpora sections 
belonging to the same domain. 
An example of a corpus in which the complete 
representation of domains is pursued in a 
systematic way is represented by the MEANING 
Italian corpus, a large size corpus of written 
contemporary Italian in which a subset of the 
WDH labels has been chosen as the fundamental 
criterion for the selection of the texts to be 
included in the corpus (Bentivogli et al, 2003). 
Given the relevance of language-independent 
domain hierarchies for multilingual applications, it 
is of primary importance that these resources have 
a well-defined semantics and structure in order to 
be useful in various application fields. This paper 
reports the work done to improve the WDH so that 
it complies with such requirements. In particular, 
the WDH revision has been carried out with 
reference to the Dewey Decimal Classification. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
briefly introduces the WORDNET DOMAINS 
Hierarchy and its main characteristics, with a short 
overview of the Dewey Decimal Classification 
system. Section 3 describes features and properties 
of the revision. Finally, in section 4, conclusions 
are reported. 
2 The WordNet Domains Hierarchy 
The first version of the WDH was composed of 
164 domain labels selected starting from the 
subject field codes used in current dictionaries, and 
the subject codes contained in the Dewey Decimal 
Classification (DDC), a general knowledge 
organization tool which is the most widely used 
taxonomy for library organization purposes. 
Domain labels were organized in five main trees, 
reaching a maximum depth of four. Figure 1 shows 
a fragment of one of the five main trees in the 
WORDNET DOMAINS original hierarchy. 
Doctrines
Psychology
Art
Religion
Psychoanalysis
Dance
Drawing
Music
Photography
Plastic Arts
Sculpture
Numismatics
Jewellery
Painting
Philately
Philosophy
Theatre
Mythology
Occultism
Roman Catholic
Theology
Figure 1: Fragment of the original WDH 
Domain labels were initially conceived to be 
application-oriented, that is, they have been 
integrated in WordNet with the main purpose of 
allowing the categorization of word senses and to 
provide useful information during the 
disambiguation process. 
The second level of WDH, where the so-called 
Basic Domains are represented, includes labels 
such as ART, SPORT, RELIGION and HISTORY, 
while in the third level a degree of major 
specialization is reproduced, and domains, like for 
example, DRAWING, PAINTING, TENNIS, 
VOLLEYBALL, and ARCHAEOLOGY can be found. For 
NLP tasks, the set of Basic Domains has proved to 
possess a suitable level of abstraction and 
granularity. 
Although the first version of WDH found many 
applications in different scenarios, it presented 
some problems. First, the domain labels did not 
have a defined semantics. The content of the labels 
could be suggested by the lexical meaning of their 
name, but there was no explicit indication about 
their intended interpretation. 
Second, it was not clear whether the Basic 
Domains met certain requirements such as 
knowledge coverage and balancing. In fact, the 
Basic Domains are supposed to possess a 
comparable degree of granularity and, at the same 
time, to cover all human knowledge. However, 
they did not always posses such characteristics. For 
instance VETERINARY was put at the same level as 
ECONOMY, although these two domains obviously 
do not posses the same level of granularity. 
Moreover not all branches of human knowledge 
were represented (see for instance the HOME 
domain). 
The purpose of the work presented here was, 
therefore, to find a solution for such problems, in 
order to improve the applicability of WDH in a 
wider range of fields. The solution we propose is 
crucially based on the Dewey Decimal 
Classification (edition 21), which has been used as 
a reference point for defining a clear semantics, 
preventing overlapping among domains, and 
assessing the Basic Domains coverage and 
granularity issues.  
2.1 The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC)  
The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) system 
(Mitchell et al 1996) is the most widely used 
taxonomy for library classification purposes 
providing a logical system for the organization of 
every item of knowledge through well-defined 
subject codes hierarchically organized. The 
semantics of each subject code is determined by a 
numeric code, a short lexical description associated 
to it, and by the hierarchical relations with the 
other subject codes. Another characteristic of the 
DDC is that a handbook is available explaining 
how texts should be classified under subject codes. 
The DDC is not just for organizing book 
collections; it has also been licensed for 
cataloguing internet resources (see for example 
BUBL http://bubl.ac.uk/link/) and it was conceived 
to accommodate the expansion and evolution of 
the body of human knowledge.  
The DDC hierarchy is arranged by disciplines 
(or fields of study), and this entails that a subject 
may appear in more than one discipline, depending 
on the aspect of the topic discussed.  
The DDC hierarchical structure allows a topic to 
be defined as part of the broader topic above it, and 
that determines the meaning of the class and its 
relation to other classes. At the broadest level, 
called Main Classes (or First summary), the DDC 
is composed of ten mutually exclusive main 
classes, which together cover the entire world of 
knowledge. Each main class is sub-divided into ten 
divisions, (the Hundred Divisions, or Second 
Summary) and each division is split into ten 
sections (the Thousand Section, also called Third 
Summary). 
Each category in the DDC is represented by a 
numeric code as the example below shows.  
 
700  Art 
 730  Plastic Arts 
  736 Carving 
   736.2 Precious Stones 
    736.23 Diamonds 
    736.25 Sapphires 
   736.4 Wood 
  738 Ceramic Arts 
  739 Art Metalwork 
 740  Drawing 
 750  Painting 
 
The first digit of the numbers indicates the main 
class, (700 is used for all Arts) the second digit 
indicates the hundred division, (730 corresponds to 
Plastic arts, 740 to Drawing, 750 to Painting) and 
the third digit indicates the section (736 represents 
Carving, 738 Ceramic arts, 739 Art metalwork). 
Moreover, almost all sub-classes are further 
subdivided. A decimal point follows the third digit 
until the degree of specification needed (736.23 
Diamonds, 736.25 Sapphires).  
3 The Revision of the WDH 
The revision of the first version of the WDH aimed 
at satisfying the following properties and 
characteristics:  
 
o semantics: each WDH label should have an 
explicit semantics and should be 
unambiguously identified; 
o disjunction: the interpretation of all WDH 
labels should not overlap; 
o basic coverage: all human knowledge should 
be covered  by the Basic Domains; 
o basic balancing: most Basic Domains should 
have a comparable degree of granularity. 
 
In the following sections we are going to show 
how a systematic mapping between WDH and 
DDC can be used to enforce each of the above 
characteristics.  
3.1 Semantics 
To give the domain labels a clear semantics so that 
they can be unambiguously identified and 
interpreted, we decided to associate each domain 
label to one or more DDC codes as shown below in 
Table 1.  
WDH Domains 
 
DDC Codes 
 
 Art 
 
[700-(790-(791.43,792,793.3), 
          710,720,745.5)] 
       Plastic arts 730 
                   Sculpture [731:735] 
                   Numismatics 737 
       Jewellery 739.27 
       Drawing [740-745.5] 
       Painting 750 
       Graphic arts 760 
                   Philately 769.56 
       Photography 770 
       Music 780 
       Cinema 791.43 
       Theatre [792-792.8] 
       Dance [792.8,793.3] 
Table 1: Fragment of the new WDH with the 
respective DDC codes 
In many cases we found a one-to-one mapping 
between a WDH label and a DDC code (e.g. 
PAINTING mapped onto 750 or CINEMA onto 
791.43). When one-to-one mappings were not 
found, artificial DDC codes were created. An 
artificial code, represented within square brackets, 
is created with reference to various DDC codes or 
parts of them. To describe artificial nodes, certain 
conventions have been adopted.  
(i) A series of non-consecutive codes is listed 
separated by a comma (see DANCE). 
(ii) A series of consecutive codes is indicated by a 
range. For instance, the series [731, 732, 733, 734, 
735] is abbreviated as [731:735] (see SCULPTURE). 
(iii) A part of a tree is represented as the difference 
between a tree and one or more of its subtrees, 
where the tree and the subtrees are identified by 
their roots (see DRAWING). 
(iv) The square brackets should be interpreted as 
meaning ?the generalities? of the composition of 
codes contained in the brackets. So, for instance, 
[731:735] should be interpreted as the generalities 
of the codes going from 731 to 735. In the original 
DDC, generalities are identified by the 0 decimal. 
For instance, the code 700 refers to the generalities 
of the codes from 710 to 790. 
To establish a mapping between labels and codes 
we exploited the names of the DDC categories and 
their description in the DDC manual. This worked 
pretty well in most cases, but there are some 
exceptions. Take for instance the TOURISM domain. 
Apparently tourism does not occur as a category in 
the DDC. On a closer inspection it came out that 
the categories which are most clearly related to 
tourism are 910.202:World travel guides and 
910.4:Accounts of travel. 
Note that a WDH domain can be mapped onto 
codes included in different DDC main classes, i.e. 
disciplines. For example ARTISANSHIP 
(745.5:Handicrafts, 338.642:Small business) maps 
onto categories located partly under 700:Art and 
partly under 300:Social Sciences. The same 
happens with SEXUALITY, a domain that following 
the DDC is studied by many different disciplines, 
e.g. philosophy, medicine, psychology, body care. 
As a consequence of the systematic specification 
of the semantics of the WDH domains, some of 
them have been re-labeled with regard to the 
previous version of the hierarchy. For instance, the 
domain BOTANY has been changed to PLANTS, 
ZOOLOGY to ANIMALS, and ALIMENTATION to FOOD. 
This change of focus from the name of the 
discipline to the name of the object of the 
discipline is not only in compliance with the new 
edition of the DDC, but it also reflects current and 
international usage (see, for example, Google 
categories). In some cases the change of the 
domain name comes along with a change of its 
intended interpretation. For instance, we have 
decided to enlarge the semantics of the domain 
ZOOTECHNICS and to call it ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, a 
more generic domain which was missing in the 
previous hierarchy.  
In most cases the hierarchical relations between 
the WDH domains are the same as the relations 
holding between the corresponding DDC codes: 
MUSIC is more specific than ART in the same way 
as 780:Music is more specific than 700:The Arts. 
To reinforce the hierarchical parallelism between 
the WDH and the DCC, we re-located some 
domains with regard to the previous WDH 
hierarchy. For example, OCCULTISM, which was 
placed under RELIGION in the old hierarchy, has 
been moved under the newly created domain 
PARANORMAL. Also, TOPOGRAPHY, previously placed 
under ASTRONOMY, has now been moved under 
GEOGRAPHY.  
In a few cases however we did not respect the 
hierarchical relations specified by the DDC, as in 
the case of the ARCHITECTURE domain shown in 
Table 2. ARCHITECTURE has been mapped onto 
720:Architecture and TOWN PLANNING onto 
710:Civic & landscape art.  
WDH Domains DDC Codes 
 Architecture  [645,690,710,720] 
 
Town Planning 710 
 
Buildings 690 
 
Furniture 645 
Table 2: A fragment of WDH for ARCHITECTURE 
However, whereas the 710 code is sibling of 720 
in the DDC, TOWN PLANNING is child of 
ARCHITECTURE in WDH. Also, ARCHITECTURE and 
TOWN PLANNING should be under ART according to 
the DDC, but they have been placed under 
APPLIED SCIENCE in WDH. 
3.2 Disjunction 
This property requires that no DDC code is 
associated to more than one WDH label. In only 
one case this requirement has not been met. 
Apparently, the DDC does not distinguish between 
the disciplines of Sociology and Anthropology, 
and reserves the codes that go from 301 to 307 to 
both of them. Although these two disciplines are 
strictly connected, it seems to us that in the current 
practice they are considered as distinct. So the 
WDH contains two distinct domains for 
SOCIOLOGY and ANTHROPOLOGY, which partially 
overlap because they both map onto the same DDC 
codes 301:307. 
3.3 Basic Coverage 
The term basic coverage refers to the ideal 
requirement that all human knowledge be covered 
by the totality of the Basic Domains (i.e. the 
domains composing the second level of WDH). 
Also in this case, we used the DDC as a gold 
standard to measure the coverage of WDH. Given 
the fact that the DDC has been used for more than 
a century to classify books and written documents 
all over the world, we can assume that the DDC 
guarantees a complete representation of all 
branches of knowledge. So the basic coverage has 
been manually checked by verifying that all (or 
almost all) the DDC categories can be assigned to 
at least one Basic Domain.  
From a practical point of view, it would be very 
complicated to check all the thousands of codes 
contained in the DDC. Thus, our check relied on 
two assumptions. First, when the Basic Domains 
are taken as a stand alone set, the semantics of a 
Basic Domain is given by its specific code together 
with the codes of its subdomains. Second, once a 
DDC code is covered by a Basic Domain, 
inductively, all the more specific categories are 
covered as well. These assumptions allowed us to 
actually check only the topmost DDC codes. For 
example, let?s take the 300 main class of the DDC. 
Table 3 below shows that all the sub-codes of the 
300 class are covered by one or more domains.  
In order to improve the overall WDH coverage, 
5 completely new domains have been introduced 
(the first three are Basic): PARANORMAL, HOME, 
HEALTH, FINANCE and GRAPHIC ARTS. 
Codes DDC Categories WDH Domains 
300 ? Social sciences 
? SOCIAL SCIENCE 
? SOCIOLOGY 
? ANTHROPOLOGY 
310 ? General statistics ? SOCIOLOGY 
320 ? Political science ? POLITICS 
330 ? Economics ? ECONOMY 
340 ? Law ? LAW 
350 ? Public administration & military service 
? ADMINISTRATION  
? MILITARY 
360 ? Social problems & 
services 
? SOCIOLOGY 
? ECONOMY 
? SEXUALITY 
370 ? Education ? PEDAGOGY 
380 
? Commerce, 
communication, 
transport 
? COMMERCE  
? TELECOMMUNICATION  
? TRANSPORT 
390 ? Customs, etiquette, folklore 
? FASHION  
? ANTHROPOLOGY 
? SEXUALITY  
Table 3: Coverage of the 300 DDC class 
We can now assume that the domain-coverage of 
the new version of WDH is almost equivalent to 
that of the DDC, thus ensuring the complete 
representation of all branches of knowledge. 
The new WDH allowed us to fix a number of 
synset classifications that were unsatisfactory in 
the previous version of WORDNET DOMAINS. For 
instance, in the first version of WORDNET 
DOMAINS the English/Italian synset {microwave 
oven, microwave}/{forno a microonde, 
microonde} was annotated with the FURNITURE 
domain, while the synset {detergent}/{detersivo} 
was annotated with FACTOTUM (i.e. no specific 
domain) as no better solution was available. The 
new WDH hierarchy allows for a more appropriate 
classification of both synsets within the new HOME 
domain. 
A few DDC codes are not covered by the new 
list of domains either. These are the codes under 
the 000:Generalities class which includes 
disciplines such as 010:Bibliography, 020:Library 
& information sciences, 030:Encyclopedic works, 
080:General collections. This section has been 
specifically created for cataloguing general and 
encyclopedic works and collections. So it is a 
idiosyncratic category which is not based on 
subject but on the genre of texts. 
Another set of codes which remains not covered 
by WDH are those going from 420 to 490 and from 
810 to 890. These DDC codes are devoted to 
specific languages and literatures of different 
countries, for example, 430:Germanic Languages, 
440:Romance Languages, 810:American Literature 
in English, etc. These codes are undoubtedly 
relevant for the classification of books, but are not 
compatible with the rationale of WDH, which is 
meant to be a language-independent resource. 
3.4 Basic Balancing 
The requirement about basic balancing is meant to 
assure that all Basic Domains have a comparable 
degree of granularity. 
Defining a granularity metrics for domains is a 
complex issue, for which only a tentative solution 
is provided here. At a first glance, three aspects 
could be taken into consideration: the number of 
publications about a domain, the number of sub-
codes in the DDC, and the relevance of a domain 
in the social life.  
As a first attempt, balancing could be evaluated 
referring to the number of publications classified 
under each Basic Domain. In fact, data are 
available about the number of texts classified 
under each of the DDC codes. Unfortunately, the 
number of books published under a certain 
category may not be indicative of its social 
relevance: very specialized domains may include a 
high number of publications, which however 
circulate in a restricted circle, with low social 
impact. For example, the number of texts classified 
in the History domain turns out to be more then ten 
times the number of texts catalogued under the 
Computer Science domain. However, if one looks 
at the number of HTML pages available on the 
Internet, or the number of magazines sold in a 
newspaper stand, or the number of terms used in 
everyday life, one cannot maintain that History is 
ten times more relevant than Computer Science. 
Another approach for evaluating the granularity 
of domains could be to take into account the 
number of DDC sub-codes corresponding to each 
Basic Domain. Unfortunately, also this approach 
gives results which are far from being satisfactory. 
The fact that a discipline has many subdivisions 
seems not to be clearly correlated with its 
relevance. For instance in the DDC manual 
(version 21) 105 pages can be put in 
correspondence with the ENGINEERING domain, 
whereas only 26 correspond to SPORT. It should 
also be said that there is no correlation between the 
number of publications and the number of sub-
categories in the DDC. For instance, 
ARCHITECTURE has a great number of publications 
classified under it, but on the contrary, the number 
of sub-categories in the DDC is very limited. 
The third criterion to evaluate the granularity of 
domains is their social relevance, which seems not 
to be captured adequately by the previous two 
criteria. Of course, social relevance is very difficult 
to evaluate. We tentatively took into consideration 
the organization of Internet hierarchies such as the 
Google and Yahoo directories, which seem to be 
closer than the DDC to represent the current social 
relevance of certain domains. See for instance the 
huge number of HTML pages classified in Google 
under the topic Television Programs. Of course 
Internet is only a partial view of the organization 
of human knowledge, so we cannot simply rely on 
the Internet to evaluate the granularity of the 
domains. 
None of the approaches analyzed so far seems to 
fit our needs. Thus we took into consideration a 
fourth criterion, which is based on the DDC as 
well. Instead of counting the number of 
subdivisions under a certain DDC code, we 
measured the depth of the code from the top of the 
hierarchy. For instance we can say that 700:Art has 
depth 1, 780:Music has depth 2, 782:Vocal Music 
has depth 3, and so on. We make the assumption 
that two DDC codes with the same depth have the 
same granularity. For instance we assume that 
782:Vocal Music and 382:Foreign Trade have the 
same granularity (both have depth 3).  
In order to evaluate the granularity of the Basic 
Domains against the DDC, we can compare WDH 
labels and DDC codes with the same depth. Given 
that the Basic Domains have depth 2, we should 
compare them to the so called Hundred Divisions 
(000, 010, 020, 030, ?, 100, 110, 120, etc.). 
Summing up, we will say that the Basic Domains 
are balanced if they can all be mapped onto the 
Hundred Divisions. Also, in the comparison we 
should take into account that the Basic Domains 
are 45, whereas the Hundred Divisions are 100. So, 
we expect that in the average, one Basic Domain 
maps onto two Hundred Divisions with a small 
degree of variance with respect to the average.  
What we have obtained from the analysis of the 
new WDH is the following: out of 45 Basic 
Domains 
 
o 4 domains map onto a Main Class (depth 1) 
o 18 domains are mapped at the Hundred 
Divisions level (depth 2) 
o 6 domains are mapped at different DDC levels, 
with the majority of DDC codes at depth 2 
o 17 domains map onto subdivisions of depth 3 
and 4. 
 
As for the average number of DDC codes 
covered by each Basic Domain, the variance is 
quite high. Certain Basic Domains cover a big 
number of codes from the Hundred Divisions. For 
instance HISTORY, and ART cover 6 codes each. 
Instead, in  most cases, one Basic Domain covers 
only one DDC code (e.g. LAW and 340:Law). 
The evaluation of the granularity of the Basic 
Domains according to the proposed criterion can 
be considered satisfactory even if the results 
diverge somewhat from what expected in principle.  
To explain this partial divergence in the 
granularity of domains, one should take into 
consideration that the DDC has been created 
relying heavily on the academic organization of 
knowledge disciplines. On the other side, in the 
practical WDH reorganization process we tried to 
balance somehow this discipline-oriented 
approach, by taking into account also the social 
relevance of domains. This has been done by 
relying on the organization of Internet directories 
and on our personal intuitions. 
Such an approach led us to put at the Basic level 
WDH labels corresponding to DDC codes with 
depth higher than 2 (more specific than the 
Hundreds Divisions). See for instance the 
positioning of RADIO+TV, FOOD, HEALTH, and 
ENVIRONMENT at the Basic level, even if they 
correspond to DDC codes of level 3 and 4.  
Instead, ANIMALS and PLANTS were not Basic in 
the previous version of WDH, but have been 
promoted to the Basic level in accordance with the 
granularity level they have in the DDC.  
Other domain labels have been placed at a lower 
level then expected with reference to the DDC. For 
instance PHILOSOPHY, ART, RELIGION, and 
LITERATURE have been put at the Basic Level, 
even if they correspond to DDC codes belonging to 
the Main Classes (depth 1). On the other side 
ASTROLOGY, ARCHAEOLOGY,  BODY CARE, and  
VETERINARY which were Basic in the previous 
version of the WDH, have been demoted at a lower 
level in accordance with the granularity they have 
in the DDC. Only in one case this process of 
demotion has led to the elimination of a sub-
domain, that is TEXTILE.  
4 Conclusions 
In this paper we described the revision of the 
WORDNET DOMAINS Hierarchy (WDH), with the 
aim of providing it with a clear semantics, and 
evaluating the coverage and balancing of a subset 
of the WDH, called Basic Domains. This has been 
done mostly by relying on the information 
available in the Dewy Decimal Classification 
(DDC). A semantics has been provided to the 
WDH labels by defining one or more pointers to 
DDC codes. The coverage of the Basic Domains 
has been evaluated by checking that each DDC 
code is covered by at least one Basic Domain. 
Finally, balancing has been evaluated mostly by 
comparing the granularity of the Basic Domains 
with the granularity of a subset of the DDC called 
the Hundred Divisions. Balancing is the aspect of 
the Basic Domains which diverges more clearly 
from the DDC. This is explained by the fact that 
we took in higher consideration the social 
relevance of domains. 
We think that the new version of the WDH is 
better suited to act as a useful language-
independent resource in the fields of computational 
lexicography, corpus building, and various NLP 
applications.  
5 Acknowledgements 
Thanks to Alfio Gliozzo for his useful comments 
and suggestions about how to improve the 
WORDNET DOMAINS Hierarchy. 
References  
BALKANET http://www.ceid.upatras.gr/Balkanet/ 
L. Bentivogli, C. Girardi and E. Pianta. 2003. The 
MEANING Italian Corpus. In Proceedings of the 
Corpus Linguistics 2003 Conference. Lancaster, 
United Kingdom. 
C. Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet. An Electronic 
Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Boston. 
B. Magnini and G. Cavagli?. 2000. Integrating 
Subject Field Codes into WordNet. In 
Proceedings of LREC-2000. Athens, Greece. 
B. Magnini, C. Strapparava, G. Pezzulo and A. 
Gliozzo. 2002. The Role of Domain Information 
in Word Sense Disambiguation. Journal of 
Natural Language Engineering (Special Issue on 
evaluating Word Sense Disambiguation 
Systems), 9(1):359:373. 
J.S. Mitchell, J. Beall, W.E. Matthews and G.R. 
New (eds). 1996. Dewey Decimal Classification  
Edition 21 (DDC 21). Forest Press, Albany, New 
York. 
E. Pianta, L. Bentivogli and C. Girardi. 2002. 
MultiWordNet: developing an aligned 
multilingual database. In Proceedings of the 
First Global WordNet Conference. Mysore, 
India. 
G. Rigau, B. Magnini, E. Agirre, P. Vossen and J. 
Carrol. 2002. MEANING: a Roadmap to 
Knowledge Technologies. In Proceedings of the 
COLING-2002 workshop "A Roadmap for 
Computational Linguistics". Taipei, Taiwan. 
H. Schutze. 1998. Automatic Word Sense 
Discrimination. Computational Linguistics, 
24(1):97-123. 
SIMPLE. 2000. Linguistic Specifications. 
Deliverable D2.1, March 2000.  
P. Vossen (ed). 1998. Computers and the 
Humanities (Special Issue on EuroWordNet), 
32(2-3). 
D.E. Walker and R.A. Amsler. 1986. Analyzing 
Language in Restricted Domain. Sublanguage 
description and Processing. Lawrence Earlbaum, 
Hillsdale NJ.  
Appendix : The first two levels of the WDH new version with the corresponding DDC codes 
 
TOP-LEVEL BASIC DOMAINS DDC 
Humanities   
 History [920:990] 
 Linguistics 410 
 Literature [800, 400] 
 Philosophy [100-(130, 150, 176)] 
 Psychology 150 
 Art [700-(710, 720, 745.5, 790-(791.43, 792, 793.3))] 
 Paranormal 130 
 Religion 200 
   
Free_Time  [790-(791.43, 792, 793.3)] 
 Radio-Tv [791.44, 791.45] 
 Play [793.4:795-794.6] 
 Sport [794.6, 796:799] 
   
Applied_Science  600 
 Agriculture [338.1, 630] 
 Food [613.2, 613.3, 641, 642] 
 Home [640-(641, 642, 645)] 
 Architecture [645, 690, 710, 720] 
 Computer_Science [004:006] 
 Engineering 620 
 Telecommunication [383, 384] 
 Medicine [610-(611, 612, 613)] 
   
Pure_Science  500 
 Astronomy  520 
 Biology [570-577, 611, 612-612.6] 
 Animals  590 
 Plants 580 
 Environment  577 
 Chemistry  540 
 Earth  [550, 560, 910-(910.4, 910.202)] 
 Mathematics 510 
 Physics  530 
   
Social_Science  [300.1:300.9] 
 Anthropology [301:307, 395, 398] 
 Health [613-(613.2, 613.3, 613.8, 613.9)] 
 Military [355:359] 
 Pedagogy 370 
 Publishing 070 
 Sociology [301:319-(305.8, 306.7), 360-(363.4, 368)] 
 Artisanship [338.642, 745.5] 
 Commerce [381, 382] 
 Industry [338-(338.1, 338.642), 660, 670, 680] 
 Transport [385:389] 
 Economy [330-(334, 338), 368, 650] 
 Administration [351:354] 
 Law 340 
 Politics 320 
 Tourism [910.202, 910.4] 
 Fashion [390-(392.6, 395, 398), 687] 
 Sexuality [155.3, 176, 306.7, 363.4, 392.6, 612.6, 613.96] 
   
 Factotum  
 
 
