Discourse Annotation and Semantic Annotation in the GNOME Corpus
Massimo Poesio
University of Essex,
Department of Computer Science and Centre for Cognitive Science,
United Kingdom
Abstract
The GNOME corpus was created to study the dis-
course and semantic properties of discourse entities
that affect their realization and interpretation, and
particularly salience. We discuss what information
was annotated and the methods we followed.
1 Introduction
The GNOME corpus was created to study the as-
pects of discourse that appear to affect generation,
especially salience (Pearson et al, 2000; Poesio and
Di Eugenio, 2001; Poesio and Nissim, 2001; Poesio
et al, 2004b). Particular attention was paid to the
factors affecting the generation of pronouns (Pear-
son et al, 2000; Henschel et al, 2000), demon-
stratives (Poesio and Nygren-Modjeska, To appear)
possessives (Poesio and Nissim, 2001) and definites
in general (Poesio, 2004a). These results, and the
annotated corpus, were used in the development of
both symbolic and statistical natural language gen-
eration algorithms for sentence planning (Poesio,
2000a; Henschel et al, 2000; Cheng et al, 2001),
aggregation (Cheng, 2001) and text planning (Kara-
manis, 2003). The empirical side of the project in-
volved both psychological experiments and corpus
annotation, based on a scheme based on the MATE
proposals, as well as on a detailed annotation man-
ual (Poesio, 2000b), the reliability of whose instruc-
tions was tested by extensive experiments (Poe-
sio, 2000a). More recently, the corpus has also
been used to develop and evaluate anaphora resolu-
tion systems, with a special focus on the resolution
of bridging references (Poesio, 2003; Poesio and
Alexandrov-Kabadjov, 2004; Poesio et al, 2004a)
Although the results of the studies using the
GNOME corpus mentioned above have been pub-
lished in a number of papers, and although a de-
tailed annotation manual was written and has been
available on the Web for a few years (Poesio,
2000b), none of the previously published papers dis-
cusses in detail the goals of the annotation and the
methodology that was followed, especially for the
non-anaphoric aspects. In this paper we discuss the
methods used to identify possible ?utterances,? the
properties of NPs and discourse entities that were
annotated, and (very briefly) anaphoric information.
.
2 The Data
Texts from three domains were (partially) anno-
tated. The museum subcorpus consists of descrip-
tions of museum objects and brief texts about the
artists that produced them.1 The pharmaceutical
subcorpus is a selection of leaflets providing the
patients with legally mandatory information about
their medicine.2 The GNOME corpus also includes
tutorial dialogues from the Sherlock corpus col-
lected at the University of Pittsburgh. Each sub-
corpus contains about 6,000 NPs, but not all types
of annotation have been completed for all domains.
All sentences, units and NPs have been identified,
and all ?syntactic? properties of NPs (agreement fea-
ture and grammatical function). Anaphoric rela-
tions have been annotated in about half of the texts
in each domain; and the more complex semantic
properties (taxonomic properties, genericity, etc.) in
about 25% of these texts. The total size of the anno-
tated corpus is about 60K.
3 Identifying Utterances
In order to use a corpus to study salience, it is es-
sential to find a way to annotate what in Center-
1The museum subcorpus extends the corpus collected to
support the ILEX and SOLE projects at the University of Ed-
inburgh (Oberlander et al, 1998).
2The leaflets in the pharmaceutical subcorpus are a subset
of the collection of all patient leaflets in the UK which was
digitized to support the ICONOCLAST project at the University
of Brighton (Scott et al, 1998).
ing theory (Grosz et al, 1995) are called UTTER-
ANCES, i.e., the units of text after which the local
focus is updated. In most annotations concerned
with salience, a predefined notion of utterance was
adopted, typically sentences (Miltsakaki, 2002) or
(finite) clauses (Kameyama, 1998). This approach,
however, precludes using the corpus to compare
possible definitions of utterance, one of the goals
of the GNOME annotation (Poesio et al, 2004b).
In order to do this, we marked all spans of text
that might be claimed to update the local focus, in-
cluding sentences (defined as all units of text ending
with a full stop, a question mark, or an exclama-
tion point) as well as what we called (DISCOURSE)
UNITS. Units include clauses (defined as sequences
of text containing a verbal complex, all its oblig-
atory arguments, and all postverbal adjuncts) as
well as other sentence subconstituents that might
be viewed as independently updating the local fo-
cus, such as parentheticals, preposed PPs, and (the
second element of) coordinated VPs. Examples of
clauses, verbal and non-verbal parentheticals, and
preposed PPs marked as units follow; the parenthe-
ses indicate unit boundaries. (Sentence boundaries
are not indicated.)
(1) a. clausal unit with non-verbal parentheti-
cal: (It?s made in the shape of a real object
(? a violin))
b. clausal unit with preposed PP and em-
bedded relative clauses: ((With the de-
velopment of heraldry in the later Middle
Ages in Europe as a means of identifica-
tion), all (who were entitled (to bear arms))
wore signet-rings (engraved with their ar-
morial bearings))
As example (1b) above illustrates, subordinate units
such as clausal complements and relative clauses
were enclosed within the superordinate unit. Sub-
ordinate units also include adjunct clauses headed
by connectives such as before, after, because and
clauses in subject position. In total, the texts used
for the main study contain 505 sentences and more
than 1,000 units, including 900 finite clauses.3
Sentence and Unit Attributes Sentences have
one attribute, STYPE, specifying whether the sen-
tence is declarative, interrogative, imperative, or ex-
clamative. The attributes of units include:
? UTYPE: whether the unit is a main clause,
a relative clause, appositive, a parenthet-
3Our instructions for marking up such elements benefited
from the discussion of clauses in (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1973)
and Marcu?s proposals for discourse units annotation (1999).
ical, etc. The possible values for this
attribute are main, relative, such-as,
appositive, parenthetical,
paren-rel, paren-app, paren-
main, subject, complement, adjunct,
coord-vp,preposed-pp, listitem,
cleft, title, disc-marker.
? VERBED: whether the unit contains a verb.
? FINITE: for verbed units, whether the verb is
finite or not.
? SUBJECT: for verbed units, whether they have
a full subject, an empty subject (expletive, as in
there sentences), or no subject (e.g., for infini-
tival clauses).
Annotation Issues Marking up sentences proved
to be quite easy; marking up units, on the other
hand, required extensive annotator training. The
agreement on identifying the boundaries of units,
using the ? statistic discussed in (Carletta, 1996),
was ? = .9 (for two annotators and 500 units); the
agreement on features (2 annotators and at least 200
units) was as follows: UTYPE: ?=.76; VERBED:
?=.9; FINITE: ?=.81. The main problems
when marking units were to identify complements,
to distinguish clausal adjuncts from prepositional
phrases, and how to mark up coordinated units. The
main problem with complements was to distinguish
non-finite complements of verbs such as want from
the non-finite part of verbal complexes containing
modal auxiliaries such as get, let, make, and have:
(2) a. (I would like (to be able to travel))
b. (I let him do his homework)
One problem that proved fairly difficult to han-
dle (and which, in fact, we didn?t entirely solve)
was clausal coordination. The problem was to pre-
serve enough structure to be able to compute the
previous utterance, while preserving some basic in-
tuitions about what constitutes a clause (roughly,
that by and large clauses were text spans marked
either by the presence of a semantically isolated
verb or by punctuation / layout) which are essen-
tial for annotators and are needed to specify the val-
ues of attributes. This was relatively easy to do
when two main clauses were coordinated; coordi-
nated main clauses were marked as in (3a). How-
ever, it wasn?t completely obvious what to do in the
case of coordination within a subordinate clause, as
in (3b). Because there weren?t many such cases,
rather than using the ?unit? element with a spe-
cial value for UTYPE as we did for coordinated NPs
(which meant specifying all sorts of special val-
ues for attributes) we used a markup element called
?unit-coordination? to maintain the struc-
ture, and then marked up each clause separately,
as shown in (3c) (the ?unit-coordination? is
marked with square brackets).
(3) a. (The Getty museum?s microscope still
works,) (and the case is fitted with a
drawer filled with the necessary attach-
ments).
b. (If you have any questions or are not sure
about anything, ask your doctor or your
pharmacist)
c. ((If [(you have any questions) or (you are
not sure about anything)]), ask your doctor
or your pharmacist)
The elements of text not marked up as units in-
clude: NPs, post-verbal and post-nominal PPs, non-
verbal NP modifiers, coordinated VPs in case the
second conjunct did not have arguments (4a), and
quoted parts of text, when not reported speech (4b).
(4) a. (The oestradiol and norethisterone acetate
are plant derived and synthetically pro-
duced)
b. (The inscription ?CHNETOC
BASHLHKOC CPATHARHC?)
Layout Our genres raised a few issues that, as far
as we know, have not been previously discussed in
the Centering literature. One such problem is what
to do with layout elements such as titles and list ele-
ments, which can clearly serve as the first introduc-
tion of a CF and to move the CB. One example of
title unit is unit (u1) in (5).
(5) (u1) Side effects
Side effects may occur when PRODUCT-
Y is applied to large parts of the body,
We marked these layout elements as units, as in (6),
but using the special value title of the attribute
UTYPE (see above) so that we could test whether it
was better to treat them as utterances or not.
(6) <unit id="u1" utype="title">Side
effects</unit>
<p><s stype="decl"><unit> Side
effects may occur <unit>when PRODUCT-
Y is applied to large parts of the body, ...
</unit> ... </unit> ... </s> ... </p>
Problems with Attributes The most difficult at-
tribute to mark was UTYPE, and our main problem
was to distinguish between relative clauses and par-
entheticals, since it?s not always easy to tell whether
a relative clause is restrictive or non-restrictive (see
also (Cheng et al, 2001)). In the end, we adopted
rules purely based on surface form (the presence or
absence of a comma or other bracketing device).
(See also (Quirk and Greenbaum, 1973).)
Utterances and Propositions The annotation of
units has been shown useful to identify many of the
atomic propositions expressed by a text, and was
therefore used as a basis for studying text planning
(Karamanis, 2003) and aggregation (Cheng, 2001).
4 Properties of Discourse Entities and
their Realization
The main goal of the GNOME annotation was to
study the factors that affect the realization of dis-
course entities, focusing on those entities realized as
NPs. Hence, our main concern was to identify and
to annotate the relevant properties both of discourse
entities themselves and their realizations in a partic-
ular utterance (which we will call FORWARD LOOK-
ING CENTERS, or CFs, following Centering?s termi-
nology). Both types of properties were annotated as
properties of the ?ne? element, used to mark up NPs
in the corpus. Overall, we annotated 14 attributes of
?ne? elements, specifying the syntactic and seman-
tic properties of NPs and the semantic properties of
the discourse entities they realize. We discuss these
attributes in this section. We also annotated seman-
tic relations between discourse entities, particularly
when they express anaphoric relations. Anaphoric
annotation is discussed in the next section.
4.1 Marking up NEs
The ?ne? element is used to mark NPs, as in the
following example (the attributes will be discussed
below):
(7) <unit finite=?finite-yes? id=?u3? utype=?main?
verbed=?verbed-yes?>
<ne id="ne2" cat="poss-np" per="per3" num="sing"
gen="neut" gf="subj" lftype="term"
onto="concrete" ani="inanimate"
deix="deix-no" count="undersp-count"
structure="undersp-structure"
generic="generic-no" loeb="sem-function">
<ne id="ne3" cat="this-np" per="per3" num="sing"
gen="neut" gf="gen" lftype="term"
onto="concrete" ani="inanimate"
deix="deix-yes" count="count-yes"
structure="atom"
generic="generic-no" loeb="pragm-function">
This table?s
</ne>
</ne>
allow
<ne id="ne4" cat="bare-np" per="per3" num="plur"
gen="neut" gf="obj" lftype="term" onto="person"
ani="animate" deix="deix-no" count="count-yes"
structure="set" generic="generic-yes" loeb="sort">
scholars </ne>
<unit finite=?finite-no? id=?u4? utype=?complement?
verbed=?verbed-yes?>
to link
<ne id="ne5" cat="pers-pro" per="per3" num="sing"
gen="neut" gf="obj" lftype="term" onto="concrete"
ani="inanimate" deix="deix-yes" count="count-yes"
structure="atom" generic="generic-no"
loeb="disc-function"> it </ne>
...
The GNOME instructions for identifying NPs derive
from those proposed in MATE (Poesio et al, 1999),
in turn derived from DRAMA (Passonneau, 1997)
and MUC-7 (Hirschman, 1998). An important dif-
ference between the instructions used for GNOME
and those developed for MATE is that instead of at-
tempting to get the annotators to recognize the NP
that realize discourse entities and only mark those,
in GNOME all NPs were marked with ?ne? elements;
the separate LF TYPE attribute was used to distin-
guish between NPs with different types of denota-
tions (see below). This change made the process of
identifying nominal entities easier and potentially
automatic (even though the identification of mark-
ables was still done by hand).
As in the case of units, the main problem with
marking up NPs was coordination. Our approach
was to use a separate ?ne? element to mark up the
coordinated NP, with type (CAT) value coord-np.
We only used a coord-np element if two deter-
miners were present, as in ((your doctor) and (your
pharmacist)). This approach was chosen because it
limited the number of spurious coordinations intro-
duced (in cases such as this is an interesting and
well-known example of early Byzantine jewellery),
but has the limitation that only one ?ne? is marked
in cases such as Your doctor or pharmacist.
4.2 Properties of all NPs
Some of the attributes of ?ne? elements specify
properties of all NPs, whether or not they realize a
discourse entity. We discuss these first.
CAT The CAT attribute is used to mark NP type:
whether the NP is a pronoun, a definite description,
etc.. This attribute is only meant to provide a
very surface-y classification, without attempting to
group NPs in larger classes such as ?definite NP? and
?indefinite NP?. The one attempt to go beyond pure
surface was the introduction of a distinction be-
tween definite descriptions that are really disguised
proper names such as the Beatles, classified as
CAT=the-pn, and all other definite descriptions,
classified as the-np. The complete list of
values for CAT is: a-np, another-np, q-np,
num-np, meas-np, that-np, this-np,
such-np, wh-np, poss-np, bare-np, pn,
the-pn, the-np, pers-pro, poss-pro,
refl-pro, rec-pro, q-pro, wh-pro,
this-pro, that-pro, num-ana (for ?nu-
merical anaphors? such as one in I want one),
null-ana, gerund (for nominalized present
participles such as veneering furniture in the
practice of veneering furniture), coord-np, and
free-rel (for ?free relatives? such as what you
need most in what you need most is a good rest)).
The agreement on this attribute was pretty high,
? = .9; the one problem was the distinction be-
tween the-pn and the-np.
Agreement features: NUM, PER, and GEN These
atributes are used to annotate features that are im-
portant to study pronoun interpretation: gender,
number and person of NPs. Person and number were
generally easy to annotate, but gender was very dif-
ficult because of the presence of many references to
individual of unspecified gender, such as the maker
in the inventory gives neither the name of the maker
nor the location. This problem was solved by intro-
ducing a special undersp-gen value; indeed, un-
derspecified values were provided for all attributes.
The agreement values for these features were: GEN:
? = .89; NUM: ? = .84; PER: ? = .9.
GF This attribute was used to annotate the gram-
matical function of the NP, a property generally
taken to play an important role in determining
the salience of the discourse entity it realizes
(Grosz et al, 1995). Our instructions for this
attribute are derived from those used in the
FRAMENET project ((Baker et al, 1998); see also
http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/?framenet/).
The values are subj, obj, predicate (used
for post-verbal objects in copular sentences, such
as This is (a production watch)), there-obj
(for post-verbal objects in there-sentences), comp
(for indirect objects), adjunct (for the argument
of PPs modifying VPs), gen (for NPs in deter-
miner position in possessive NPs), np-compl,
np-part, np-mod, adj-mod, and no-gf (for
NPs occurring by themselves - eg., in titles). The
agreement values for GF is ? = .85.
LF TYPE Not all NPs realize discourse entities:
some of them realize quantifiers (e.g., each coffer
in Each coffer has a lid) or predicates (e.g., NPs in
appositive position, such as the oldest son of Louis
XIV in The 1689 inventory of the Grand Dauphin,
the oldest son of Louis XIV, lists a jewel coffer of
similar form and decoration. As said above, in the
GNOME annotation all NPs are treated as markables,
but the LF TYPE attribute is used to indicate the
type of semantic object denoted by an NP: term,
quant or pred. Quantifiers were identified purely
on the basis of the value of the CAT value: all NPs
with CAT=q-np or q-pro should get a value of
quant. A more complex test was used to identify
predicative NPs: three linguistic contexts in which
NP are typically predicative were considered (appo-
sitions, postcopular position in there-sentences, and
become-style sentences) but the annotators were ex-
plicitly asked to check whether the NP was used to
express a property. Agreement was more tentative:
? = .73 (for two annotators, 200 NPs).
Taxonomic information Two semantic attributes
capture information about the type of objects re-
ferred to (or quantifier over) by an NP. The first
attribute, ONTO, was originally introduced to distin-
guish between gerunds (event nominalizations such
as letter-writing) and bare plurals referring to con-
crete objects like scholars, both of which semanti-
cally denote collective objects (Link, 1983; Portner,
1992). Further distinctions were introduced to deal
with ?difficult? objects, such as diseases; particular
types of concrete objects such as medicines and per-
sons were also singled out. Distinctions captured
by the current set of values of ONTO include per-
sons, medicines, other substances, other concrete
objects; events, time intervals, or other abstract enti-
ties; spatial locations; and diseases. The agreement
value for the latest version of ONTO was ? = .8
between two annotators, 200 NPs.
The second ?taxonomic? attribute, ANI, is used
to annotate whether the objects referred to or quan-
tifier over by an NP are animate or inanimate. This
annotation was motivated by a number of studies
suggesting that animacy plays an important role in
salience (Prat-Sala and Branigan, 2000) and our
own experiments suggesting that animacy is much
more important than grammatical function, the-
matic roles, or order of mention in determining
which entities are most likely to be pronominal-
ized (Pearson et al, 2001). We also found that
the discrepancy between the results of Gordon et
al. (1999) and the findings of (Walker and Prince,
1996) can be explained in terms of animacy (Poesio
and Nissim, 2001). Animacy was by far the easiest
semantic attribute for our annotators: ? = .92.
4.3 Semantic properties of Discourse Entities
Semantic properties that may play a role in realiza-
tion but only apply to discourse entities include:4
Structure Two attributes are used to indicate
whether the discourse entity realized by an NP refers
to a mass of certain substance or to countable ob-
jects (attribute COUNT) and, in case of countable
objects, to an atom or a set (attribute STRUCTURE).
These attributes were marked in order to study the
4These attributes were only marked for about 25% of the
corpus.
factors leading to the realization of a discourse en-
tity as a bare NP, in combination with the annotation
of genericity discussed below: the reasoning being
that it should only be possible to use bare singu-
lars to realize a discourse entity described with mass
nouns (as in the ebeniste and his wife lived modestly
in a five-room apartment . . . with simple furniture).5
The main reason for keeping the two at-
tributes separate was that reaching agreement on
STRUCTURE was fairly easy (? = .82 at the second
attempt) whereas COUNT was one of the most dif-
ficult attributes to mark?it took several iterations of
changes to the instructions to achieve a ? = .78, and
substantial revisions would probably still be useful.
Nevertheless, given currently accepted views deriv-
ing from Link?s work (1983), it would make more
sense to merge the two attributes.
GENERIC This attribute is used to indicate
whether the NP should be interpreted generically or
not, which was thought to affect at least two types
of discourse entity realizations: gerunds, that we
took to be event types, and bare NPs, both singular
and referring to substances (e.g., ivory) and plural.
Annotating this information proved to be very diffi-
cult, which was not surprising because genericity is
not yet a completely understood phenomenon. One
complication is that there are two types of ?generic
NPs?: NPs referring to kinds, such as The dodo in
The dodo is extinct (being extinct is not a property
that can be predicated of individual dodos), and NPs
used in generic statements, such as Italians are good
skiers (a property of individual Italians) (Carlson
and Pelletier, 1995). Although some NPs can only
be used to express one or the other interpretation
(e.g., * A dodo is extinct), many can be used in both
ways (Dodos are extinct).
We started trying to make the very basic distinc-
tion between tokens and types one finds, e.g., in
(Lyons, 1977), but even after numerous refinements
we still encountered many problems. One of the
problems our annotators had was whether to treat
references to substances such as ivory and horn in
examples like This table?s marquetry of ivory and
horn ?existentially,? i.e., as referring to the partic-
ular amounts of those substances used in the ta-
ble, or ?generically?, to refer to the kinds. In the
end we decided to follow Carlson (1977) and to
mark all of these examples as references to kinds,
i.e., as generic. A second problem were quantifiers.
Our annotators found it very hard to distinguish
5Apart from the cases in which bare singulars are used to re-
fer to substances, such as the interiors of this pair of coffers are
lined with tortoiseshell and brass, the few discussed exceptions
to this rule are expressions like home in I went home.
between quantified NPs used (non-generically) to
quantify over a specific set of individuals at a partic-
ular spatio-temporal location, as in Many lecturers
went on strike (on March 16th, 2004), and quanti-
fiers used in generic sentences, as in Many lectur-
ers went (habitually) on strike (during those years).
The last version of the instructions (not yet added to
the overall annotation manual) asked annotators to
try to identify generic sentences before attempting
to determine the value of the GENERIC attribute.
With these instructions, we finally reached a reason-
able agreement (? = .82).
LOEB Poesio and Vieira (1998) found that of the
1,400 definite descriptions in their corpus, only
about 50% were subsequent mention or bridging
references, whereas 50% were first mentions. Of
the first mentions, about half (i.e., 25% of the to-
tal) were what Hawkins (1978) would call ?larger
situation? definites, i.e., definite descriptions like
the pope whose referent is supposed to be part of
shared knowledge; whereas the other half includes
what Loebner (1987) calls SEMANTICALLY FUNC-
TIONAL definites, like the first man on the Moon.
Loebner claimed that the paradigmatic case of def-
initeness are not anaphoric NPs, as suggested by
familiarity theories such as Heim?s (1982), but se-
mantically functional ones such as the first person
ever to row across the Pacific on his own. In or-
der to test Loebner?s theory and compare it with one
based on familiarity, we annotated the NPs referring
to discourse entities according to whether they were
functional, relational, or sortal (Poesio, 2004a). We
achieved good reliability on this attribute (? = .82),
and the results do suggest a much greater correlation
between functionality and definiteness than between
familiarity and definiteness (Poesio, 2004a).
5 Anaphora
The one aspect of the GNOME annotation that has
been extensively discussed in previous papers is
anaphoric annotation (Poesio, 2004b; Poesio et al,
2004b); we only discuss this aspect briefly here.
5.1 Annotating Discourse Models
Anaphoric annotation raises a number of difficult
and, sometimes, unresolved semantic issues (Poe-
sio, 2004b). As part of the MATE and GNOME
projects, an extensive analysis of previously exist-
ing schemes for so-called ?coreference annotation,?
such as the MUC-7 scheme, was carried out, high-
lighting a number of problems with such schemes,
ranging from issues with the annotation method-
ology to semantic issues. Proposals for annotat-
ing ?coreference? such as (Hirschman, 1998) have
been motivated by work on Information Extraction,
hence the notion of ?coreference? used is very diffi-
cult to relate to traditional ideas about anaphora (van
Deemter and Kibble, 2000). A distinctive feature
of the GNOME annotation (and the MATE propos-
als from which they derive (Poesio, 2004b)) are ex-
plicitly based on the DISCOURSE MODEL assump-
tion adopted almost universally by linguists (com-
putational and not) working on anaphora resolution
and generation (Webber, 1979; Heim, 1982; Kamp
and Reyle, 1993; Gundel et al, 1993). This is
the hypothesis that interpreting a discourse involves
building a shared discourse model containing DIS-
COURSE ENTITIES that may or may not ?refer? to
specific objects in the world, as well as the relations
between these entities. The annotation for which the
MATE scheme was developed?that we?ll call here
?anaphoric annotation,? is meant as a partial repre-
sentation of the discourse model evoked by a text.
5.2 Anaphoric Annotation in GNOME
For the GNOME corpus, we adopted a simplified ver-
sion of the MATE scheme, as for our purposes it?s
not essential to mark all semantic relations between
entities introduced by a text, but only those that may
establish a ?link? between two utterances. So, for
example, it was not necessary for us to mark a rela-
tion between the subject of a copular sentence and
its predicate - e.g., between the price of aluminum
siding and $3.85 or $4.02 in the example above.
In the GNOME corpus, anaphoric information is
marked by means of a special ?ante? element; the
?ante? element itself specifies the index of the
anaphoric expression (a ?ne? element) and the type
of semantic relation (e.g., identity), whereas one or
more embedded ?anchor? elements indicate pos-
sible antecedents.6 (See (8).)
(8) <unit finite=?finite-yes? id=?u227?>
<ne id=?ne546? gf=?subj?> The drawing of
<ne id=?ne547? gf=?np-compl?>the corner cupboard
</ne></ne>
<unit finite=?no-finite? id=?u228?>,or more probably
<ne id=?ne548? gf=?no-gf?> an engraving of
<ne id=?ne549? gf=?np-compl?>it </ne></ne>
</unit>,
...
</unit>
<ante current="ne549" rel="ident"> <anchor ID="ne547">
</ante>
Work such as (Sidner, 1979; Strube and Hahn,
1999), as well as our own preliminary analysis,
suggested that indirect realization can play a cru-
cial role in maintaining the CB. However, previ-
ous attempts at marking anaphoric information, par-
ticularly in the context of the MUC initiative, sug-
gested that while agreement on identity relations is
6The presence of more than one ?anchor? element indi-
cates that the anaphoric expression is ambiguous.
fairly easy to achieve, marking bridging references
is hard; this was confirmed by Poesio and Vieira
(1998). For these reasons, and to reduce the an-
notators? work, we did not mark all relations. Be-
sides identity (IDENT) we only marked up three
associative relations (Hawkins, 1978): set mem-
bership (ELEMENT), subset (SUBSET), and ?gen-
eralized possession? (POSS), which includes part-
of relations as well as ownership relations. We
only marked relations between objects realized by
noun phrases, excluding anaphoric references to ac-
tions, events or propositions implicitly introduced
by clauses or sentences. We also gave strict in-
structions to our annotators limiting how much to
mark.
As expected, we found a reasonable (if not
perfect) agreement on identity relations. In our
most recent analysis (two annotators looking at the
anaphoric relations between 200 NPs) we observed
no real disagreements; 79.4% of the relations were
marked up by both annotators; 12.8% by only one
of them; and in 7.7% of the cases, one of the an-
notators marked up a closer antecedent than the
other. With associative references, limiting the rela-
tions did limit the disagreements among annotators
(only 4.8% of the relations are actually marked dif-
ferently) but only 22% of bridging references were
marked in the same way by both annotators; 73.17%
of relations are marked by only one or the other
annotator. So reaching agreement on this informa-
tion involved several discussions between annota-
tors and more than one pass over the corpus.
6 Automatically computing the Local
Focus
The reader will have noticed that no attempt was
done to directly mark up properties of the local fo-
cus - e.g., which discourse entity is the CB of a par-
ticular utterance. We found that it is much easier
to annotate the ?building blocks? of a theory of the
local focus, and then use scripts to automatically
compute the CB. There are two advantages to this
approach: first of all, agreement on the ?building
blocks? is much easier to reach than agreement on
the CB?in our preliminary experiments we didn?t go
beyond ? = .6 when trying to directly identify the
CB using the definitions from (Brennan et al, 1987).
And secondly, this approach makes it possible to
compute the CB according to different ways of in-
stantiating what we call the ?parameters of Center-
ing? ?e.g., ranking.
We developed such scripts for the work dis-
cussed in (Poesio et al, 2004b); they can be
tested on the web site associated with that paper,
http://cswww.essex.ac.uk/staff/poesio/
cbc/. These scripts have been subsequently used
to compute the CB in, e.g., (Poesio and Nissim,
2001; Poesio and Nygren-Modjeska, To appear).
7 Discussions and Conclusion
Corpus consistency The main lesson learned
from this effort is that actually using a corpus is the
best way both to ensure its correctness and to learn
which types of information are most useful.
Thematic Roles One attribute on which we
weren?t able to reach acceptable agreement was the
thematic role of an NP, which has been argued to
be a better indicator of salience than grammatical
function (Sidner, 1979; Stevenson et al, 1994); the
agreement value in this case was ? = .35. Other
groups however have shown that this can be done,
e.g., in Framenet (Baker et al, 1998) and more re-
cently in PropBank (Kingsbury and Palmer, 2002).
Planned Revisions of the Scheme A number of
aspects of the annotation scheme used for the cor-
pus could be improved. An obvious improvement
would be to directly annotate predicates with their
WordNet senses instead of annotating ONTO and an-
imacy. We started doing this for the annotation of
modifiers (Cheng et al, 2001), and developed an in-
terface to WordNet, but too late to redo the whole
corpus. Of the attributes, COUNT and GENERIC
were the most difficult to annotate; further tests with
these attributes could be useful.
Automatic annotation A substantial part of the
annotation work required for GNOME now could
(and should) be done automatically, or semi-
automatically. This includes, most obviously, the
identification of sentences and NPs, already done
automatically in the VENEX corpus (Poesio, 2004b);
and at least grammatical function, animacy, and
countability could be automatically annotated in
preliminary form with existing techniques, and then
corrected by hand. We also plan to use the corpus
to bootstrap techniques for automatic identification
of uniqueness and gender.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Janet Hitzeman, who collected the
first subset of the museum domain for SOLE; to Re-
nate Henschel, who completed the collection of the
museum subset and wrote the first version of the an-
notation manual; to all our annotators; and to Mi-
jail Alexandrov-Kabadjov and Nikiforos Karama-
nis, who identified a number of annotation prob-
lems. Most of this work was supported by the
EPSRC project GNOME, GR/L51126/01.
References
C. F. Baker, C. J. Fillmore, and J. B Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley
FrameNet project. In Proc. 36th ACL.
S.E. Brennan, M.W. Friedman, and C.J. Pollard. 1987. A cen-
tering approach to pronouns. In Proc. of the 25th ACL.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classification tasks:
the kappa statistic. Comp. Linguistics, 22(2):249?254.
G. N. Carlson and F. J. Pelletier, editors. 1995. The Generic
Book. University of Chicago Press.
G. N. Carlson. 1977. Reference to Kinds in English. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
H. Cheng, M. Poesio, R. Henschel, and C. Mellish. 2001.
Corpus-based NP modifier generation. In Proc. of the Sec-
ond NAACL, Pittsburgh.
H. Cheng. 2001. Modelling Aggregation Motivated Interac-
tions in Descr. Text Generation. Ph.D. thesis, Edinburgh.
P. C. Gordon, R. Hendrick, K. Ledoux, and C. L. Yang. 1999.
Processing of reference and the structure of language: an
analysis of complex noun phrases. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 14(4):353?379.
B. J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. Centering:
A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 21(2):202?225.
J. K. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993. Cognitive
status and the form of referring expressions in discourse.
Language, 69(2):274?307.
J. A. Hawkins. 1978. Definiteness and Indefiniteness. Croom
Helm, London.
I. Heim. 1982. The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun
Phrases. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Massachusetts at Amherst.
R. Henschel, H. Cheng, and M. Poesio. 2000. Pronominaliza-
tion revisited. In Proc. of 18th COLING.
L. Hirschman. 1998. MUC-7 coreference task definition, ver-
sion 3.0. In N. Chinchor, editor, In Proc. of the 7th Message
Understanding Conference.
M. Kameyama. 1998. Intra-sentential centering. In M. A.
Walker, A. K. Joshi, and E. F. Prince, editors, Centering
Theory in Discourse, chapter 6, pages 89?112. Oxford.
H. Kamp and U. Reyle. 1993. From Discourse to Logic. D.
Reidel, Dordrecht.
N. Karamanis. 2003. Entity coherence for descriptive text
structuring. Ph.D. thesis, Edinburgh.
P. Kingsbury and M. Palmer. 2002. From Treebank to Prop-
Bank . In Proc. of LREC.
G. Link. 1983. The logical analysis of plurals and mass terms:
A lattice- theoretical approach. In R. Ba?uerle, C. Schwarze,
and A. von Stechow, editors, Meaning, Use and Interpreta-
tion of Language, pages 302?323. Walter de Gruyter.
S. Loebner. 1987. Definites. Journal of Semantics, 4:279?326.
J. Lyons. 1977. Semantics. Cambridge.
D. Marcu. 1999. Instructions for manually annotating the dis-
course structures of texts. Unpublished manuscript.
E. Miltsakaki. 2002. Towards an aposynthesis of topic conti-
nuity and intrasentential anaphora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):319?355.
J. Oberlander, M. O?Donnell, A. Knott, and C. Mellish. 1998.
Conversation in the museum. New Review of Hypermedia
and Multimedia, 4:11?32.
R. J. Passonneau. 1997. Instructions for applying discourse
reference annotation for multiple applications (DRAMA).
Unpublished manuscript., December.
J. Pearson, R. Stevenson, and M. Poesio. 2000. Pronoun reso-
lution in complex sentences. In Proc. of AMLAP, Leiden.
J. Pearson, R. Stevenson, and M Poesio. 2001. The effects of
animacy, thematic role, and surface position on the focus-
ing of entities in discourse. In M. Poesio, editor, Proc. of
SEMPRO-2001. University of Edinburgh.
M. Poesio and M. Alexandrov-Kabadjov. 2004. A general-
purpose, off the shelf anaphoric resolver. In Proc. of LREC.
M. Poesio and B. Di Eugenio. 2001. Discourse structure
and anaphoric accessibility. In Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova? and
Mark Steedman, editors, Proc. of the ESSLLI 2001 Work-
shop on Inf. Structure, Disc. Structure and Disc. Semantics.
M. Poesio and M. Nissim. 2001. Salience and possessive NPs:
the effect of animacy and pronominalization. In Proc. of
AMLAP (Poster Session).
M. Poesio and N. Nygren-Modjeska. To appear. Focus, activa-
tion, and this-noun phrases. In A. Branco, R. McEnery, and
R. Mitkov, editors, Anaphora Processing. John Benjamins.
M. Poesio and R. Vieira. 1998. A corpus-based investiga-
tion of definite description use. Computational Linguistics,
24(2):183?216, June.
M. Poesio, F. Bruneseaux, and L. Romary. 1999. The MATE
meta-scheme for coreference in dialogues in multiple lan-
guages. In M. Walker, editor, Proc. of the ACL Workshop on
Standards and Tools for Discourse Tagging, pages 65?74.
M. Poesio, R. Mehta, A. Maroudas, and J. Hitzeman. 2004a.
Learning to solve bridging references. In Proc. of the ACL.
M. Poesio, R. Stevenson, B. Di Eugenio, and J. M. Hitzeman.
2004b. Centering: A parametric theory and its instantia-
tions. Computational Linguistics, 30(3).
M. Poesio. 2000a. Annotating a corpus to develop and evaluate
discourse entity realization algorithms. In Proc. of the 2nd
LREC, pages 211?218, Athens, May.
M. Poesio, 2000b. The GNOME Annotation
Manual, Fourth Edition. Available from
http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/ ? gnome.
M. Poesio. 2003. Associative descriptions and salience. In
Proc. of the EACL Workshop on Computational Treatments
of Anaphora, Budapest.
M. Poesio. 2004a. An empirical investigation of definiteness.
In S. Kepser, editor, Proc. of the International Conference
on Linguistic Evidence, Tu?bingen, January.
M. Poesio. 2004b. The MATE/GNOME scheme for anaphoric
annotation, revisited. In Proc. of SIGDIAL, Boston, May.
P. H. Portner. 1992. Situation Theory and the Semantics of
Propositional Expressions. Ph.D. thesis, University of Mas-
sachusetts at Amherst.
M. Prat-Sala and H. Branigan. 2000. Discourse constraints
on syntactic processing in language production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 42(168?182).
R. Quirk and S. Greenbaum. 1973. A University Grammar of
English. Longman.
D. Scott, R. Power, and R. Evans. 1998. Generation as a solu-
tion to its own problem. In Proc. of the 9th INLG.
C. L. Sidner. 1979. Towards a computational theory of defi-
nite anaphora comprehension in English discourse. Ph.D.
thesis, MIT.
R. J. Stevenson, R. A. Crawley, and D. Kleinman. 1994. The-
matic roles, focus, and the representation of events. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes, 9:519?548.
M. Strube and U. Hahn. 1999. Functional centering?
grounding referential coherence in information structure.
Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309?344.
K. van Deemter and R. Kibble. 2000. On coreferring: Coref-
erence in MUC and related annotation schemes. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 26(4):629?637. Squib.
M. A. Walker and E. Prince. 1996. A bilateral approach to
givenness. In J. Gundel and T. Fretheim, editors, Reference
Accessibility, pages 291?306. John Benjamins.
B. L. Webber. 1979. A Formal Approach to Discourse
Anaphora. Garland, New York.
