Using prepositions to extend a verb lexicon
Karin Kipper, Benjamin Snyder, Martha Palmer
University of Pennsylvania
200 South 33rd Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
fkipper,bsnyder3,mpalmerg@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Abstract
This paper presents a detailed account of
prepositional mismatch between our hand-
crafted verb lexicon and a semantically an-
notated corpus. The analysis of these mis-
matches allows us to rene the lexicon and
to create a more robust resource capable
of better semantic predictions based on the
verb-preposition relations.
1 Introduction
There is currently much interest in training super-
vised systems to perform shallow semantic annota-
tion tasks such as word sense tagging and semantic
role labeling. These systems are typically trained on
annotated corpora such as the Penn Treebank [Mar-
cus1994], and perform best when they are tested on
data from the same genre. A more long-term goal
is to develop systems that will perform equally well
on diverse genres, and that will also be able to per-
form additional, more complex, semantic annotation
tasks. With this end in mind, we have been man-
ually developing a large-scale, general purpose hi-
erarchical verb lexicon that, in addition to links to
WordNet senses [Miller1985, Fellbaum1998], has ex-
plicit and detailed syntactic and semantic informa-
tion associated with each entry. Much of the syn-
tactic information is derived from the Levin verb
classes, although the classication has been extended
and modied. Sets of syntactic frames are associated
with each verb class, and specic prepositions are
often listed as well. We are interested in evaluating
how well our lexicon predicts syntactic frames in nat-
urally occurring data. This will give us an estimate
of its likely usefulness in extending the coverage of
systems trained on one genre to other genres.
This paper presents a comparison between our hi-
erarchical verb lexicon, VerbNet [Kipper et al2000,
Dang et al2000], and a corpus annotated seman-
tically with predicate-argument structure, Prop-
Bank [Kingsbury and Palmer2002]. We briey de-
scribe an experiment which established a baseline for
the syntactic coverage of the verb lexicon and more
extensively we compare and discuss the preposition
mismatches found while doing this evaluation. We
used this experiment, which used almost 50,000 verb
instances, to measure how well the linguistic intu-
itions motivating our verb lexicon are attested to in
the actual data. It allowed us to determine which
of the expected syntactic frames and specic prepo-
sitions occur and which do not, and also look for
unexpected occurrences. Although prepositions are
generally described as restrictions on syntax, their
signicance goes far beyond that of a syntactic re-
striction. Verb-preposition relations can also allow
us to make predictions about the semantic contents
of a verb-frame.
The mapping between the two resources was done
by assigning verb classes to the dierent senses in
PropBank and by assigning the thematic roles used
to describe VerbNet classes to argument roles of
PropBank. The criteria used for matches includes
both a notion of exact frame match where the en-
countered preposition was explicitly listed in the
frame, as well as a more relaxed notion of frame
match that allows alternative prepositions. We found
that under the former, our lexicon correctly predicts
over 78% of all the syntactic frames found in Prop-
Bank, while under the latter criterion, the results go
up to 81%. This dierential hints at the di?culty of
accounting for semantically signicant prepositions
in sentences. We believe that it is precisely because
the preposition-semantics relationship is so complex
that properly accounting for it will lead to a more
robust natural language resource.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Sections 2 and 3 present the lexical resources used for
the experiment. Section 4 discusses the evaluation
of VerbNet against PropBank and Section 5 shows
examples of preposition mismatches between the two
resources.
2 VerbNet's components
VerbNet is an on-line broad-coverage domain-
independent lexical resource with syntactic descrip-
tions for over 4,100 verbs organized into classes ac-
cording to the Levin classication [Levin1993]. It is
a general purpose verb lexicon created initially with
the task of instructing a virtual character in a simu-
lated environment in mind [Badler et al1999,Bindi-
ganavale et al2000].
VerbNet extends Levin's classication by pro-
viding explicit syntactic and semantic information
about the verbs it describes. In addition, the lex-
icon is organized hierarchically so that all verbs in
a class (or subclass) share these syntactic descrip-
tions and have common semantics. Each verb class is
completely described by the set of its members (each
verb has links to the appropriate senses in WordNet,
thematic roles for the predicate-argument structure
of the members, selectional restrictions on these ar-
guments to express preferred argument types, and
frames. Each frame consists of a brief description,
an example, a syntactic description corresponding to
one of Levin's alternations, and a set of semantic
predicates. In addition, each predicate has a time
function to show at what stage of the event the pred-
icate holds true, in a manner similar to the event
decomposition of Moens and Steedman (1988) . In
order for the members of each class to be coherent
with respect to the thematic roles, selectional restric-
tions, syntactic frames, and semantics they allow, we
rened the original Levin classes and added 74 new
subclasses.
VerbNet's broad-coverage, with explicit syntax
and semantics, attempts to address several gaps
present in other resources. WordNet was designed
mainly as a semantic network, and contains little
syntactic information. VerbNet, in contrast, includes
explicit predicate argument structures for verbs in
their classes, as well as a way to systematically ex-
tend those senses based on the semantics of each
class. FrameNet [Baker et al1998] and VerbNet both
contain the notion of verb groupings. The group-
ings in FrameNet however are based solely on the
semantic roles shared by the members of a class.
These members do not need to have the same set of
syntactic frames, and lack explicit semantics other
than what is provided by the semantic labels. Un-
like VerbNet, which uses a small set of thematic roles
for all classes, FrameNet uses frame elements which
are particular to a lexical item or to small groups of
frames. Besides, one of the benets of constructing
a general lexicon like VerbNet is that it allows one
to extend the coverage of resources tied to specic
corpora.
The syntactic frames in VerbNet describe the sur-
face realization for constructions such as transitive,
intransitive, prepositional phrases, resultatives, and
a large set of Levin's alternations. A syntactic frame
consists of the thematic roles, the verb, and other
lexical items which may be required for a particu-
lar construction or alternation. Additional restric-
tions may be further imposed on the thematic roles
(quotation, plural, innitival, etc.). Illustrations of
syntactic frames are shown in examples 1, 2, and 3.
(1) Agent V Patient
(John hit the ball)
(2) Agent V at Patient
(John hit at the window)
(3) Agent V Patient[+plural] together
(John hit the sticks together)
VerbNet alo includes a hierarchy of prepositions,
with 57 entries, derived from an extended version
of work described in Sparck-Jones and Boguraev
(1987). This restriction is necessary in order to spec-
ify which prepositions are possible in a particular
frame since many of Levin's alternations require spe-
cic prepositions such as `as' or `with/against'. A
partial and somewhat simplied hierarchy is shown
in Figure 1. This gure shows the spatial preposi-
tions hierarchy divided into path and locative prepo-
sitions. Path prepositions are further subdivided into
source, direction, and destination prepositions. A
syntactic frame with Prep[+src] as a constraint will
allow only those specic prepositions (from, out, out
of, etc) that are part of the spatial, path, source hi-
erarchy.
The semantic information for the verbs in Verb-
Net is expressed as a conjunction of semantic pred-
icates, any of which may be negated. These seman-
tic predicates fall into four categories: general pred-
icates such as motion and cause which are widely
used across classes; variable predicates whose mean-
ing is assumed to be in a one-to-one relation with a
set of words in the language; predicates that are spe-
cic to certain classes; and predicates for multiple
events which are used to express relations between
events. The semantic predicates can take arguments
over the verb complements, as well as over implicit
existentially quantied event variables.
Relations between verbs (or between verb classes)
such as antonymy and entailment present in Word-
spatial
path
src
from
out
out of
. . .
dir
across
along
around
down
. . .
dest
dest-conf
into
onto
dest-dir
for
at
to
towards
loc
about
above
against
. . .
Figure 1: Partial hierarchy of prepositions of the verb lexicon
Net can be predicted upon verication of the pred-
icates used. Relations between verbs (and verb
classes) such as the ones predicted in FrameNet, can
also be veried by the semantic predicates, for in-
stance all of the Communication classes have the
same predicates of cause and transfer info. Aspect in
VerbNet is captured by the time function argument
present in the predicates.
3 PropBank
The PropBank project [Kingsbury and Palmer2002]
is annotating the Penn Treebank with predicate-
argument structures. Semantic roles are dened for
each verb in PropBank. These roles are meant to be
theory neutral and are simply numbered. Verb senses
are distinguished by dierent Framesets, with a sep-
arate set of numbered roles, called a roleset, dened
for each Frameset. An example of the Framesets for
the verb leave can be seen in Figure 2. Arg0 is usually
associated with Agent and Arg1 is usually similar to
Theme or Patient. However, argument labels are not
necessarily signicant across dierent verb meanings
or across dierent verbs.
Roleset leave.01 \move away from":
Arg0: entity leaving
Arg1: place left
Arg3: attribute
Ex: [
ARG0
The move] [
rel
left] [
ARG1
the
companies] [
ARG3 as
as outside bidders.]
Roleset leave.02 \give":
Arg0: giver
Arg1: thing given
Arg2: beneciary
Ex: [
ARG0
John] [
rel
left] [
ARG1
cookies]
[
ARG2 for
for Mary]
Figure 2: Framesets for the verb leave in PropBank
4 Matching syntactic coverage
between the two resources
In order to test the syntactic coverage of VerbNet, we
performed an experiment to identify which syntactic
frames found in the PropBank corpus are represented
in our verb lexicon. As expected, we uncovered syn-
tactic frames and prepositions not initially predicted
in our resource which may now be added.
For this evaluation 49,073 PropBank annotated in-
stances were used, which translated into 1,678 verb
entries in VerbNet. Since the notion of a Prop-
Bank Frameset and a VerbNet class are not perfectly
equivalent, an individual Frameset may be mapped
to multiple classes. In order to put the two re-
sources in correspondence we created mappings be-
tween the Framesets and our verb classes, as well as
mappings between the argument labels in the roleset
of a Frameset to the thematic roles in our classes.
The process of assigning a verb class to a Frameset
was performed manually during the creation of new
PropBank frames. The thematic role assignment, on
the other hand, is a semi-automatic process which
nds the best match for the argument labels, based
on their descriptors, to the set of thematic roles of
VerbNet.
To verify whether a particular syntactic frame
found in PropBank was present in our lexicon, we
translated the PropBank annotated sentence into
VerbNet-style frames. An example of this transla-
tion for the verb leave is given below. Example sen-
tence (4) is taken from the corpus, its PropBank an-
notation can be seen in (5), and the VerbNet-style
frame is shown in (6). In this example, the verb
leave is mapped to two VerbNet classes 51.2 (Leave
class), and 13.3 (Future-having class), with dierent
roles mapped to the argument labels in each of these
classes.
(4) wsj/05/wsj 0568.mrg 12 4:
The tax payments will leave Unisys with $ 225
million *U* in loss carry-forwards that *T*-1 will
cut tax payments in future quarters .
(5) [
ARG0
The tax payments] [
rel
leave] [
ARG2
Unisys]
[
ARG1 with
with $ 225 million]
(6) (a) leave-51.2: Theme V NP Prep(with) Source
(b) future having-13.3: Agent V Recipient
Prep(with) Theme
In this instance, only the latter of the two con-
structed frames matches a frame in VerbNet. In ef-
fect, this serves as a sort of sense disambiguation, as
the leave entry in class 51.2 has the sense \to exit,"
while the entry in class 13.3 has a sense similar to
the verb \to give." In fact the sense of \leave" in the
sentence is the latter, and the single matched frame
conrms this.
In general, we used several criteria when attempt-
ing to match a constructed frame to a frame in Verb-
Net. Two of these criteria are of primary interest for
this paper:
1. the exact frame description was present in Verb-
Net (henceforth called \exact match", or a
match under the strict criterion);
2. the frame description is present in VerbNet but
there is a preposition mismatch (henceforth re-
ferred as a \relaxed match").
For instance, if the translated corpus sentence
is Agent V Prep(as) Theme, but VerbNet predicts
Agent V Prep(for) Theme for verbs in the class, this
annotation would be considered a relaxed match,
but not an exact match. VerbNet predicts 78% of
frames found in PropBank under the strict criterion
and 81% of those frames under the relaxed criterion.
More details of this experiment are described in Kip-
per et al (2004) .
5 Using prepositions from the
corpus to rene verb classes
By comparing our theoretically motivated sets of
syntactic frames for an individual verb with the ac-
tual data, we can evaluate both the coverage of our
lexicon and its theoretical underpinnings. There are
many questions to be addressed with respect to cov-
erage: Do the predicted syntactic frames occur? Do
the predicted prepositions occur? Do other, unpre-
dicted prepositions occur as well? Depending on the
answers to these questions, prepositions (or syntactic
frames) may be inserted into or deleted from specic
classes and entire classes may be restructured.
Our verb lexicon matches over 78% of all the syn-
tactic frames found in PropBank. However, when
restricting the frames found in PropBank to those
without prepositions, the resulting match rate is al-
most 81%. This dierence hints at the di?culty
of accounting for semantically signicant preposi-
tions in sentences, and a proper account of this
preposition-semantic relationship seems essential to
us in order to build a more robust lexical resource.
5.1 Prepositions in the Corpus
Verb occurrences are partitioned according to
whether a preposition occurs or not in the instance
frame, and according to how well the constructed
frame matches a VerbNet frame. Almost 4/5 of the
verb instances studied do not contain a signicant
preposition in their PropBank annotation (and con-
sequently their constructed frames do not include
any prepositions).
1
On these instances, we obtained
a 81% match rate under the strict criterion.
1
We consider a preposition \signicant" if the prepo-
sition object is a PropBank argument with a mapping to
a thematic role, excluding preposition \by".
Of the 49,073 verb instances we are looking at,
9,304 instances had a signicant preposition, with
constructed frames including one or more preposi-
tional items. For those we obtain match rates of
65% and 76% (depending on whether preposition
mismatches were allowed or not).
The dierence between the 81% match rate of the
frames without prepositions and the 65%-76% match
rate in the frames with prepositions is substantial
enough to lead us to believe that a close examina-
tion of the sentences containing a preposition and
their comparison to VerbNet frames would allow us
to improve the coherence of our verb classes.
5.2 Prepositional Mismatch
For the instances with signicant prepositional
items, 65% (6,033 instances) have constructed frames
with an exact match to VerbNet. Of the remaining
3,271 instances, 1,015 are relaxed matches, and 2,256
do not bear any matches to VerbNet frames.
We focused on those verb instances which would
have matched a VerbNet frame if only a dierent
preposition had been used in the sentence or if the
VerbNet frame had included a wider range of prepo-
sitions. In addition to the 1,015 instances, we looked
at 652 verb instances, all of which share the follow-
ing two properties: (i) that the verb in question is
contained in multiple VerbNet classes, and (ii) that
although the constructed frame matches one of those
VerbNet classes exactly, there is at least one other
class where it matches only under the relaxed crite-
rion (when the value of the preposition is ignored).
These instances are important because the value of
the preposition in these cases can help decide which
is the most appropriate VerbNet class for that in-
stance. This information could then be used for
coarse-grained automatic sense tagging { either to
establish a PropBank Frameset or a set of WordNet
senses for those instances, since verbs instances in
our verb lexicon are mapped to that resource.
These 1,667 verb instances (1,015 preposition mis-
matches + 652 exact matches) comprise 285 unique
verbs and are mapped to a total of 97 verb classes.
5.3 Explanation of Mismatch
After a close examination of these 1,667 instances,
we veried that the mismatches can be explained and
divided into the following cases:
1. cases where a preposition should be added to a
VerbNet class (in some of these cases, a rene-
ment of the class into more specic subclasses is
needed, since not all members take the included
preposition);
2. cases where the particular usage of the verb is
not captured by any VerbNet entry (this is the
case with metaphorical uses of certain verbs);
3. incorrect mappings between PropBank and
VerbNet;
2
4. cases where the PropBank annotation is incon-
sistent;
5. cases where the particular instance belongs to
another VerbNet class (which are expected since
the PropBank data used does not yet provide
sense tags).
As an example, in the PropBank annotated corpus
we nd the sentence:
\Lotus Development Corp. feeds its evaluations
into a computer...",
The verb to feed is present in four VerbNet classes.
The frame resulting from translating the PropBank
annotation to a VerbNet-style frame Agent V Theme
Prep(into) Recipient bears a resemblance to a frame
present in one of the classes (Give-13.1, syntactic
frame Agent V Theme Prep(to) Recipient). This is
a case where a VerbNet class requires renements
(with addition of new subclasses) to account for
prepositions unique to a subset of the verbs in the
class. It is an open question whether such rene-
ments, taken to completion, would result in sub-
classes that are so ne-grained they have a mem-
bership of one. If so, it may be more appropriate to
add verb-specic preposition preferences to existing
classes.
Another example is the following use of \build" in
the PropBank corpus:
\...to build their resumes through good grades and
leadership roles ..."
This sentence yields the frame Agent V Product
Prep(through) Material after translating the Prop-
Bank annotation to a VerbNet-style frame. This
frame bears a relaxed match to the Agent V Product
Prep(from, out of) Material syntactic frame found
in the Build-26.1 class. In VerbNet, the phrase
\..through good grades ..." is considered an adjunct
and therefore not relevant for the syntactic frame.
In PropBank, however, this phrase is annotated as
an argument (Arg2), which maps to the \Material"
thematic role in VerbNet. This example shows, as ex-
pected, mismatches between argument and adjuncts
in the two resources.
As a nal example, consider the following use of
the verb lease:
2
We asserted an error of 6.7% for the automatic map-
pings in a random sample of the data.
\The company said it was leasing the site of the
renery from Aruba."
Two frames are constructed for this verb instance,
one for each of the VerbNet classes to which the
PropBank lease Frameset is mapped. Its member-
ship in class Get-13.5.1, and class Give-13.1 respec-
tively yield the following two VerbNet-style frames:
(a) 13.1: Agent V Theme Prep(from) Recipient
(b) 13.5.1: Agent V Theme Prep(from) Source.
The rst frame bears a relaxed match to a frame
in its class (Agent V Theme Prep(to) Recipient)
whereas the second is an exact match to a frame
in the second class. In this instance, the preposition
`selects' the appropriate VerbNet class.
3
In fact, we
expect this to happen in all the 652 instances with ex-
act matches, since in those instances, the constructed
frame bears an exact match to one VerbNet class, but
a relaxed match to another. The dierent Framesets
of a verb are typically mapped to distinct sets of
VerbNet classes. If the preposition present in the
sentence matches frames in only a subset of those
VerbNet classes, then we are able to rule out cer-
tain Framesets as putative senses of the instance in
a sense tagging task.
6 Conclusion
We presented a detailed account of how prepositions
taken from a semantically annotated corpus can be
used to extend and rene a hand-crafted resource
with syntactic and semantic information for English
verbs. That the role of prepositions should not be
neglected can be clearly seen from the dierential in
match rates between those sentences with preposi-
tions and those without. The signicance of prepo-
sitions and their relation with verbs is of the utmost
importance for a robust verb lexicon, not only as
a syntactic restrictor, but also as a predictor of se-
mantic content. On the basis of these experiments
we are adding 132 new subclasses to VerbNet's ini-
tial 191 classes and 74 subclasses, going far beyond
basic Levin Classes.
One of the payos of constructing a general lexicon
like VerbNet is that it allows one to extend the cov-
erage of resources tied to specic corpora (e.g. Prop-
Bank, FrameNet). Currently we are in the process of
adding mappings between our verbs and FrameNet
verbs and mappings between our syntactic frames
and Xtag [XTAG Research Group2001] trees. These
3
It was pointed out that a possible interpretation is
that \from Aruba" is linked to the \renery" argument,
in which case this instance would be translated as Agent
V Theme and therefore have a perfect match to the Give-
13.1 class.
mappings will allow us to more deeply investigate
verb behavior.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by NSF Grant
9900297, DARPA Tides Grant N66001-00-1-891 and
ACE Grant MDA904-00-C-2136.
References
Norman I. Badler, Martha Palmer, and Rama Bindi-
ganavale. 1999. Animation control for real-time
virtual humans. Communications of the ACM,
42(7):65{73.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING/ACL-
98), pages 86{90, Montreal. ACL.
Rama Bindiganavale, William Schuler, Jan M. All-
beck, Norman I. Badler, Aravind K. Joshi, and
Martha Palmer. 2000. Dynamically Altering
Agent Behaviors Using Natural Language Instruc-
tions. Fourth International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents, June.
Hoa Trang Dang, Karin Kipper, and Martha Palmer.
2000. Integrating compositional semantics into
a verb lexicon. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics (COLING-2000), Saarbrucken, Germany,
July-August.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An
Eletronic Lexical Database. Language, Speech and
Communications. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts.
Karen Sparck Jones and Branimir Boguraev. 1987.
A note on a study of cases. American Journal of
Computational Linguistics, 13((1-2)):65{68.
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2002. From
treebank to propbank. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2002), Las Palmas, Ca-
nary Islands, Spain.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer.
2000. Class-based construction of a verb lexicon.
In Proceedings of the Seventh National Conference
on Articial Intelligence (AAAI-2000), Austin,
TX, July-August.
Karin Kipper, Benjamin Snyder, and Martha
Palmer. 2004. Extending a verb-lexicon using a
semantically annotated corpus. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-04), Lisbon, Por-
tugal.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterna-
tion, A Preliminary Investigation. The University
of Chicago Press.
Mitch Marcus. 1994. The penn treebank: A revised
corpus design for extracting predicate-argument
structure. In Proceedings of the ARPA Human
Language Technology Workshop, Princeton, NJ,
March.
George Miller. 1985. Wordnet: A dictionary
browser. In Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Information in Data, Waterloo,
Ontario.
M. Moens and M. Steedman. 1988. Temporal On-
tology and Temporal Reference. Computational
Linguistics, 14:15{38.
XTAG Research Group. 2001. A lexicalized tree
adjoining grammar for english. Technical Report
IRCS-01-03, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.
