Multi-level Dialogue Act Tags
Alexander Clark and Andrei Popescu-Belis
ISSCO / TIM / ETI
University of Geneva
UNI-MAIL, Boulevard du Pont-d?Arve 40
CH-1211 Geneva 4
Switzerland
asc@aclark.demon.co.uk andrei.popescu-belis@issco.unige.ch
Abstract
In this paper we discuss the use of multi-
layered tagsets for dialogue acts, in the con-
text of dialogue understanding for multi-
party meeting recording and retrieval ap-
plications. We discuss some desiderata for
such tagsets and critically examine some
previous proposals. We then define MAL-
TUS, a new tagset based on the ICSI-MR
and Switchboard tagsets, which satisfies
these requirements. We present some ex-
periments using MALTUS which attempt
to compare the merits of integrated versus
multi-level classifiers for the detection of di-
alogue acts.
1 Introduction
The processing of dialogues by computers serves
two main applicative goals: understanding of hu-
man dialogues, for information extraction or sum-
marization, and human-computer dialogue manage-
ment, for language-based or multimodal interfaces.
Whether the computer takes part in a dialogue or
only attempts to monitor a recorded one, it is im-
portant to detect the functions of each of the human
utterances that constitute the dialogue. In addition,
when the computer must generate an utterance as
a reply, this must also bear some of the functions
expected by the hearer in return.
In this article, we focus on dialogue understand-
ing for a dialogue storage and retrieval application,
developed in the (IM)2 project1. The goal of the
application is the multimodal recording of meetings
(such as staff or business meetings), the processing
and storage of the recordings into a database, and the
1(IM)2 stands for Interactive Multimodal Information
Management, a project sponsored by the Swiss Govern-
ment (see http://www.im2.ch).
possibility of querying the dialogue database (Arm-
strong et al, 2003). The query interface and the
processing of the dialogue must therefore meet the
needs of the potential users of the system, who will
attempt to retrieve various types of information from
the meeting recordings. While the result of the query
is in general a chunk of recorded dialogue (prefer-
ably with multimedia rendering), the criteria used to
query the database can vary from trivial (?who at-
tended the meeting??) to very abstract (?what were
the main decisions??). Some form of understanding
of the dialogue structure is thus required for a sig-
nificant proportion of potential queries (more about
requirements in subsection 2.3).
The utterance functions with which we deal in this
paper are dialogue acts. Although dialogue acts (DA)
tags are commonly used as a simple representation
of the function of an utterance in dialogue, there is
little consensus amongst researchers about what set
of DA tags is appropriate in a particular situation.
Our own application domain, meeting recording, is
comparatively open-ended and we do not yet have
a clear understanding of precisely what features will
be most useful. In section 2, we will try to under-
stand the multiplicity of DA tagsets, then we will an-
alyze (section 3) the dialogue data and annotations
on which we work. These considerations prompted
us to abstract a new DA tagset, of which we explain
the merits in section 4. Experiments on the auto-
matic annotation of DAs using the MALTUS tagset
are described in section 5; the results (subsection 5.2)
are followed by a brief discussion.
2 Understanding Dialogue Structure:
Dialogue Acts
2.1 The Concepts behind Dialogue Acts
Dialogues are series of speaker turns. Utterances can
be defined as the atomic subparts of a turn that ac-
complish one or more ?functions? with respect to
speaker interaction. Utterances are in general sig-
nalled by syntactic and/or prosodic means, but the
specificity of their ?function? belongs to pragmat-
ics (Levinson, 1983, ch. 4). Linguists have identified
several dimensions for the role of sentences uttered
in a dialogue. These dimensions are not mutually ex-
clusive, and there are certainly correlations between
some of them (e.g. ?question? as a speech act and
as a member of an adjacency pair).
? Speech acts (Searle, 1969; Vanderveken, 1990):
(1) representatives, such as assertions or con-
clusions; (2) directives, such as requests, ques-
tions, suggestions; (3) commissives, such as
promises, threatenings, offers; (4) expressives
such as thanks, apologies, congratulations; (5)
declarations, such as excommunications, decla-
rations of war, christening, firing from employ-
ment, etc.
? Turn management: backchannel, floor holder,
floor grabber, hold;
? Adjacency pairs: utterances can be the first part
or the second part of exchange pairs such as re-
quest / accept (or refuse); offer / accept; assess
/ (dis)agree; question / answer; etc.
? Overall organization and topics: openings, clos-
ings, topic-changers, topic-continuers, etc.
? Politeness management: face-threatening, face-
saving, neutral;
? Rhetorical role: elaboration, purpose, restate-
ment, etc.
2.2 Dialogue Acts in Computational
Linguistics
There is not much agreement, within the CL/NLP
community, on the definition of a dialogue act. The
term denotes some function of an utterance in a dia-
logue, not reducible to its syntactic or semantic con-
tent. The function is selected, in general, among
a set of possible dialogue acts (a DA tagset) that
depends on the goals of its creator (Traum, 2000).
One of the main inspiration sources for DA tagsets
are speech acts, but the original repertoire (Searle,
1969; Vanderveken, 1990) has been gradually en-
riched with other possible functions. From the nu-
merous DA tagsets (Klein and Soria, 1998), the fol-
lowing are particularly relevant to a general-domain
meeting recording application.
The DA tags in DAMSL (Allen and Core, 1997)
are nearly all independent: the DAMSL guidelines
state that all tags (i.e. all ?functions?) that charac-
terize an utterance should be associated with it. The
DAMSL tags are grouped in four dimensions: com-
municative status, information level, forward-looking
function and backward-looking function. In fact,
several theories are conflated in DAMSL, which was
initially designed as a shared resource with a focus
primarily on task-oriented dialogs (Core and Allen,
1997). There are about 4 million possible combi-
nations of DAMSL tags, which make a huge search
space for automatic annotation.
The application of DAMSL to the Switchboard
data (two-party telephone conversations) lead to
SWBD-DAMSL (Jurafsky et al, 1997), a smaller
tagset than DAMSL. About 200,000 SWBD utter-
ances were first annotated with DAMSL tags: it was
observed that only 220 combinations of tags occurred
(Jurafsky et al, 1998). These 220 labels were then
clustered into 42 tags, such as: statement (36%),
opinion (13%), agree/accept (5%), yes-no-question
(2%). The resulting search space (42 mutually ex-
clusive tags) was well adapted to the initial goals,
viz., the automatic annotation of dialogue acts and
the use of dialogue act specific language models in
speech recognition (Stolcke et al, 2000).
2.3 Requirements for the Definition of a
DA Tagset
In this paper, our goal is to design a new DA tagset
for our application, with the following constraints in
mind (see also the analysis by D. Traum (2000)):
? Relation to one or more existing theories (de-
scriptive, explanatory, etc.).
? Compatibility with the observed functions of ac-
tual utterances in context, in a given domain.
? Empirical validation: reliability of human appli-
cation of the tagset to typical data (high inter-
annotator agreement, at least potentially).
? Possibility of automatic annotation (this re-
quirement is specific to NLP).
? Relevance to the targeted NLP application:
there are numerous possible functions of utter-
ances, but only some of them are really use-
ful to the application. Within our IM2.MDM
project, a study has been conducted on the rel-
evance of dialogue acts (in particular) to typical
user queries on meeting recordings (Lisowska,
2003)2.
? Mapping (at least partially) to existing tagsets,
so that useful insights are preserved, and data
can be reused.
2Many other potential uses of dialogue act informa-
tion have been hypothesized, such as their use to increase
ASR accuracy (Stolcke et al, 2000), or to locate ?hot
spots? in meetings (Wrede and Shriberg, 2003).
3 Available Data and Annotations:
ICSI Meeting Recorder
The volume of available annotated data suffers from
the diversity of DA tagsets (Klein and Soria, 1998).
One of the most significant resources is the Switch-
board corpus mentioned above, but telephone con-
versations have many differences with multi-party
meetings. Apart from the data recently available in
the IM2 project, results reported in this paper make
use of the ICSI Meeting Recording (MR) corpus of
transcribed and annotated dialogues (Morgan et al,
2003; Shriberg et al, 2004)3.
3.1 Overview of ICSI MR Corpus
The ICSI-MR corpus consists of 75 one-hour record-
ings of staff meetings, each involving up to eight
speakers on separate mike channels. Each channel
was manually transcribed and timed, then annotated
with dialogue act and adjacency pair information
(Shriberg et al, 2004). Following a preliminary re-
lease in November 2003 (sound files, transcriptions,
and annotations), the full corpus was released in
February 2004 to IM2 partners.
The dialogue act annotation makes use of the pre-
existing segmentation of each channel into (prosodic)
utterances, sometimes segmented further into func-
tional utterances, each of them bearing a separate di-
alogue act. There are about 112,000 prosodic utter-
ances, and about 7,200 are segmented into two func-
tional utterances (only one is segmented in three).
3.2 Discussion of the ICSI-MR DA Tagset
Each functional utterance from the ICSI-MR corpus
is marked with a dialogue label, composed of one
or more tags from the ICSI-MR tagset (Dhillon et
al., 2004). The tagset, which is well documented,
is based on SWBD-DAMSL, but unlike SWBD-
DAMSL, it allows one utterance to be marked with
multiple tags. Also, the SWBD-DAMSL tagset was
extended, for instance with disruption tags such as
?interrupted?, ?abandoned?, etc. Utterances can also
be marked as ?unintelligible? or ?non-speech?. An
ICSI-MR label is made of a general tag, followed
by zero or more specific tags, followed or not by a
disruption tag:
gen_tag [^spec_tag_1 ... ^spec_tag_n] [.d]
Our formalization of the guidelines using rewriting
rules (Popescu-Belis, 2003) shows that few tags are
mutually exclusive. The number of possible combi-
nations (DA labels) reaches several millions. For in-
stance, even when not considering disruption marks,
3See http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/Speech/mr/
the labels are a combination of one general tag out
of 11, and one or more specific tags out of 39. If up
to five specific tags are allowed (as observed empir-
ically in the annotated data), there are more than
7,000,000 possible labels; if specific tags are limited
to four, there are about 1,000,000 possible labels.
Some studies acknowledge the difficulties of an-
notating precisely with ICSI-MR, but also the
fine-grained distinctions it allows for, e.g. be-
tween the possible functions of four related dis-
course particles (?yeah?, ?right?, ?okay?, and ?uhhuh?):
agreement/acceptance, acknowledgment, backchan-
nel, floor grabber (Bhagat et al, 2003). Conversely,
inter-annotator agreement on such fine-grained dis-
tinctions (specific tags) is lower than agreement on
major classes, though the kappa-statistic normally
used to measure agreement adjusts to a certain ex-
tent for this. In fact, ICSI-MR also provided a set
of five ?classmaps? that indicate how to group tags
into categories which reduce the number of possible
labels. For instance, the simplest one reduces all
DA labels to only five classes: statement, question,
backchannel, floor holder/grabber, disruption. Our
MALTUS proposal (see 4.1 below) could be viewed
as a classmap too: it preserves however more ICSI-
MR tags than the existing classmaps, and assigns in
addition conditions of mutual exclusiveness.
We also note that, while SWBD-DAMSL was an
attempt to reduce the dimensionality of the DAMSL
tagset (which had a clear theoretical base), the ICSI-
MR tagset alows SWBD tags to be combined again
instead of going back to DAMSL tags. Although
our proposal that we proceed to describe (MALTUS)
remains close to ICSI-MR for reusability reasons, we
are also working on a more principled DA tagset that
departs from ICSI-MR (Popescu-Belis, 2003).
3.3 Some Figures for the ICSI-MR Data
In the process of conversion to MALTUS (see 4.2
below), we validated the ICSI-MR data and made
several observations. Detected incoherent combina-
tions of tags (e.g., two general tags in a label) and
other remarks have also been sent back to ICSI.
We first separate prosodic utterances into func-
tional utterances, so that each utterance has one DA
label (and not two, separated by ?|?), thus obtaining
120,205 utterances. Also at this stage, we split ut-
terances that correspond to reported speech (marked
with ?:?). We then discard the disruption marks to fo-
cus on the DA labels only ? about 12,000 labels out of
ca. 120,000 are disruption marks, or contain one. We
are left with 113,560 utterances with DA labels, with
776 observed types of labels. An important param-
eter is the number of occurring vs. possible labels,
Nb. of Nb. of Nb. of Nb. of
tags in theoretical occurring tokens
label comb. comb.
1 11 11 68,213
2 429 129 37,889
3 8,151 402 5,054
4 100,529 176 2,064
5 904,761 49 326
6 6,333,327 9 14
7 . . . 0 0
Total: 7,347,208 776 113,560
Table 1: Number of possible labels (combinations of
tags): theoretical vs. actual.
Maximal nb. Maximal theoretical
of tags accuracy on ICSI-MR
1 0.601
2 0.934
3 0.979
4 0.997
5 0.999
6 1
Table 2: Maximal accuracy of DA tagging of the
ICSI-MR data that could be reached using a limited
number of tags per label.
which depends a lot on the number of specific tags
in a label, as summarized in table 1. The maximum
observed in the available data is five specific tags in
a label (hence six tags in all).
There is no guarantee that meaningful labels can-
not have more than six tags. However, such labels
are probably very infrequent, and a reasonable op-
tion for automatic tagging is to limit the number
of tag combinations, which is the main goal of the
MALTUS tagset. The maximal accuracies that could
be obtained on the available ICSI-MR data if the
number of tags in a label was limited to 1, 2, etc.
are shown in Table 2. In computing the accuracy we
consider here only perfect matches, but scores could
be higher if partial matches count too. Two or three
tags per label already allow very high accuracy, while
considerable reducing the search space.
4 The MALTUS DA Tagset
4.1 Definition
We defined MALTUS (Multidimensional Abstract
Layered Tagset for Utterances) in order to reduce
the number of possible combinations by assigning
exclusiveness constraints among tags, while remain-
ing compatible with ICSI-MR (Popescu-Belis, 2003).
MALTUS is more abstract than ICSI-MR, but can
be refined if needed. An utterance is either marked
U (undecipherable) or it has a general tag and zero
or more specific tags. It can also bear a disruption
mark. More formally (? means optional):
DA -> (U | (gen_tag (spec_tags)?)) (.D)?
gen_tag -> S | Q | B | H
spec_tags -> (RP | RN | RU)? AT? DO? PO?
The glosses of the tags, generally inspired from
ICSI-MR, are:
? U = undecipherable (unclear, noisy)
? S = statement
? Q = question
? B = backchannel
? H = hold (floor holder, floor grabber, hold)
? RP = positive answer (or positive response)
? RN = negative answer (or negative response)
? RU = other answer (or undecided answer or re-
sponse)
? RI = restated information
? DO = command or other performative (can be
refined into: command, commitment, sugges-
tion, open-option, explicit performative)
? AT = the utterance is related to attention man-
agement (can be refined into: acknowledgement,
rhetorical question backchannel, understanding
check, follow me, tag question)
? PO = the utterance is related to politeness (can
be refined into sympathy, apology, downplayer,
?thanks?, ?you?re welcome?)
? D = the utterance has been interrupted or aban-
doned
4.2 Conversion of ICSI-MR to MALTUS
There are only about 500 possible MALTUS labels,
but observations of the converted ICSI-MR data
show again that the probability distribution is very
skewed. An explicit correspondence table and con-
version procedure were designed to convert ICSI-MR
to MALTUS, so that the considerable ICSI-MR re-
source can be reused.
Correspondences between MALTUS and other
tagsets (Klein and Soria, 1998) were also provided
(Popescu-Belis, 2003). Such ?mappings? are imper-
fect for two reasons: first, they work only in one
direction, from the more specific tagset (ICSI-MR /
SWBD / DAMSL) to the more abstract one (MAL-
TUS). Second, a mapping is incomplete if one does
not state which tags must be mutually exclusive.
For MALTUS too, the idea to use at most three
tags per label in an automatic annotation program
might reduce the search space without decreasing the
accuracy too much. Another idea is to use only the
labels that appear in the data that is, only 50 labels.
An even smaller search space is provided by the 26
MALTUS labels that occur more than 10 times each.
If only these are used for tagging, then only 70 occur-
rences (only 0.061% of the total) would be incorrectly
tagged, on the ICSI-MR reference data. Occurring
labels ordered alphabetically and their frequencies
(when greater than 10) are listed below.
B (15180)
H (12288)
Q (5320)
Q^AT (3137)
Q^AT^RI (69)
Q^DO (239)
Q^RI (60)
Q^RN (19)
S (51304)
S^AT (8280)
S^AT^RI (273)
S^DO (3935)
S^DO^RI (32)
S^DO^RN (38)
S^DO^RP (41)
S^DO^RU (16)
S^PO (791)
S^PO^RI (13)
S^PO^RU (61)
S^RI (765)
S^RI^RN (46)
S^RI^RP (436)
S^RI^RU (18)
S^RN (2219)
S^RP (7612)
S^RU (1298)
Further analysis will tell whether this list should
be enriched with useful labels that are absent from
it. Also, a comparison of MALTUS to the SWBD
set (26 labels vs. 42) should determine whether the
loss in informativeness in MALTUS is compensated
by the gain in search space size and in theoretical
grounding.
5 Automatic Classification
As discussed above, one of the desiderata for a tagset
in this application domain is that the tags can be ap-
plied automatically. A requirement for annotations
that can only be applied manually is clearly unre-
alistic except for meetings of very high importance.
The ICSI-MR corpus on the other hand is concerned
with producing a body of annotated data that can
be used by researchers for a wide range of different
purposes: linguists who are interested in particular
forms of interaction, researchers in acoustics and so
on. It is by no means a criticism of their work that
some of the distinctions that they annotate or at-
tempt to annotate cannot be reliably automated.
Here we report some preliminary experiments on
the automatic annotation of meeting transcripts with
these tagsets. Our focus here is not so much on eval-
uating a classifier for this task but rather evaluating
the tagsets: we are interest in the extent to which
they can be predicted reliably from easily extracted
features of the utterance and its context. Addition-
ally we are interested in the multi-level nature of the
tagsets and exploring the extent to which the internal
structure of the tags allows other options for classi-
fiers. Therefore, our goal in these experiments is not
to build a high performance classifier; rather, it is to
explore the extent to which multi level tagsets can
be predicted by classifying each level separately ?
i.e. by having a set of ?orthogonal? classifiers ? as
opposed to classifying the entire structured object
in a single step using a single multi-class classifier
on a flattened representation. Accordingly there are
a number of areas in which our experimental setup
differs from that which would be appropriate when
performing experiments to evaluate a classifier.
Since in this paper we are not using prosodic or
acoustic information, but just the manual transcrip-
tions, there are two sources of information that can
be used to classify utterances. First, the sequence of
words that constitutes the utterance, and secondly
the surrounding utterances and their classification.
generally in prior research in this field, some form
of sequential inference algorithm has been used to
combine the local decisions about the DA of each ut-
terance into a classification of the whole utterance.
The common way of doing this has been to use a
hidden Markov model to model the sequence and to
use a standard decoding algorithm to find either the
sequence with maximum a posteriori (MAP) likeli-
hood or to select for each utterance the DA with
MAP likelihood. In the work here, we will ignore
this complexity and allow our classifier access to the
gold standard classification of the surrounding utter-
ances. This will make the task substantially easier,
since in a real application, there will be some noise
in the labels.
5.1 Feature selection
There are two sorts of features that we shall use here
? internal lexical features derived from the words in
the utterance, and contextual features derived from
the surrounding utterances. At our current state of
knowledge we have a very good idea about what the
lexically derived features should be, and how they
should be computed ? namely n-grams or gappy n-
grams including positional information. Addition-
ally, there are ways of computing these efficiently.
However, with regard to the contextually derived fea-
tures, our knowledge is much less complete. (Stolcke
et al, 2000) showed that in the Switchboard corpus
there was little dependence beyond the immediately
adjacent utterance, but whether this also applies in
this multi-party domain is unknown. Thus we find
ourselves in a rather asymmetric position with re-
gard to these two information sources. As we are
not here primarily interested in constructing a high
performance classifier, but rather identifying the pre-
dictable elements of the tag, we have resolved this
problem by deliberately selecting a rather limited set
of lexical features, together with a limited set of con-
textual features. Otherwise, we feel that our experi-
ments would be overly biased towards those elements
of the tag that are predictable from the internal lex-
ical evidence.
We used as lexical features the 1000 most frequent
words, together with additional features for these
words occurring at the beggining or end of the ut-
terance. This gives an upper bound of 3000 lexical
features. We experimented with a variety of simple
contextual features.
Preceding same label (SL) the immediately pre-
ceding utterance on the same channel has a par-
ticular DA tag.
Preceding label (PL) a preceding utterance on a
different channel has a particular DA tag. We
consider an utterance to be preceding if it starts
before the start of the current utterance.
Overlapping label (OL) an utterance on another
channel with a particular DA tag overlaps the
current utterance. We anticipate this being use-
ful for identifying backchannels.
Containing label (CL) an utterance on another
channel with a particular DA tag contains the
current channel ? i.e. the start is before the start
of the current utterance and the end is after the
end of the current utterance.
Figure 1 shows an artificial example in a multi-
party dialog with four channels. This illustrates the
features that will be defined for the classification of
the utterance that is shaded. In this example we
will have the following features SL:C1, PL:B1, PL:D1,
CL:D1, OL:A1, OL:B1, OL:B2, OL:D1. We have found
A
B
C
D
A1
B1 B2
C1
D1
Figure 1: Artificial example illustrating contextual
features defined for a particular utterance (shaded).
There are four channels labelled A to D; each box
represents an utterance, and the DA tag is repre-
sented by the characters inside each box.
that the overlapping label feature set does not help
the classifiers here, so we have used the remaining
three contextual feature sets. Note the absence of
contextual features corresponding to labels of utter-
ances that strictly follow the target utterance. We
felt that given the fact that we use the gold standard
tags this would be too powerful.
The data made available to us was preprocessed
in a number of ways. The most significant change
was to split utterances that had been labelled with a
sequence of DA labels (joined with pipes). We sep-
arated the utterances and the labels at the appro-
priate points and realigned. The data was provided
with individual time stamps for each word using a
speech recognizer in forced recognition mode: where
there were errors or mismatches we discarded the
words.
5.2 Results
We use a Maximum Entropy (ME) classifier (Man-
ning and Klein, 2003) which allows an efficient com-
bination of many overlapping features. We selected
5 meetings (6771 utterances after splitting) to use as
our test set and 40 as our training set leaving a fur-
ther five for possible later experiments. As a simple
baseline we use the classifier which just guesses the
most likely class. We first performed some experi-
ments on the original tag sets to see how predictable
they are.
We started by defining a simple six-way classifica-
tion task which classifies disruption forms, and unde-
cipherable forms as well as the four general tags de-
fined above. This is an empirically very well-founded
distinction: the ICSI-MR group have provided some
inter-annotator agreement figures(Carletta et al,
1997) for a very similar task and report a kappa
of 0.79. Our ME classifier scored 77.9% (baseline
54.0%).
We also tested a few simple binary classifications
to see how predictable they are. Utterances are anno-
tated for example with a tag J if they are a joke. As
would be expected, the Joke/Non-Joke classification
produced results not distinguishable from chance.
The performance of the classifiers on separating dis-
rupted utterances from non disrupted forms scored
slightly above chance at 89.9% (against baseline of
87.0%). We suspect that more sophisticated contex-
tual features could allow better performance here.
A more relevant performance criterion for our appli-
cation is the accuracy of classification into the four
general tags. In this case we removed disrupted and
undecipherable utterances, slightly reducing the size
of the test set, and achieved a score of 84.9% (base-
line 64.1%).
With regard to the larger sets of tags, since they
have some internal structure it should accordingly
be possible to identify the different parts separately,
and then combine the results. We have therefore per-
formed some preliminary experiments with classifiers
that classify each level separately. We again removed
the disruption tags since with out current framework
we are unable to predict them accurately. The base-
line for this task is again a classifier that chooses the
most likely tag (S) which gives 41.9% accuracy. Us-
ing a single classifier on this complex task gave an
accuracy of 73.2%.
We then constructed six classifiers as follows
Primary classifier S, H, Q or B
Politeness classifier PO or not PO
Attention classifier AT or not AT
Order classifier DO or not DO
Restatement classifier RI or not RI
Response classifier RP, RN, RU or no response
These were trained separately in the obvious way and
the results combined. This complex classifier gave an
accuracy 70.5%. This mild decrease in performance
is rather surprising ? one would expect the perfor-
mance to increase as the data sets for each distinction
get larger. This can be explained by dependences be-
tween the classifications. There are a number of ways
this could be treated ? for example, one could use a
sequence of classifiers, where each classifier can use
the output of the previous classifier as a feature in
the next. It is also possible that these dependencies
reflect idiosyncracies of the tagging process: tenden-
cies of the annotators for whatever reasons to favour
or avoid certain combinations of tags.
6 Conclusion
We have discussed some issues concerning the design
and use of dialogue act tagsets. It is too early to
draw firm conclusions from this preliminary study.
We can note the obvious point that simplified smaller
tagsets are easier to predict accurately than larger
ones. There appear to be non-trivial dependencies
between the tags for reasons that are not yet clear.
We expect the performance of a final, fully automatic
classifier to be substantially higher than the results
presented here, owing to the use of more powerful
classifiers and, more importantly, larger and richer
feature sets. Finally we note that an important point
of tagset design has not been addressed empirically
here: the question of whether particular distinctions
in the tagset are actually useful in our application.
Future studies will address this point by studying
the queries formulated by potential users of meeting
processing and retrieval systems.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the ICSI MR group for shar-
ing with us the data as part of the IM2/ICSI
agreement ? in particular to Barbara Peskin
and Liz Shriberg. This research is part of the
Multimodal Dialogue Management module (see
http://www.issco.unige.ch/projects/im2/mdm)
of the IM2 project.
References
James F. Allen and Mark G. Core. 1997. DAMSL:
Dialog act markup in several layers (draft 2.1).
Technical report, Multiparty Discourse Group,
Discourse Research Initiative, September/October
1997.
Susan Armstrong, Alexander Clark, Giovanni Coray,
Maria Georgescul, Vincenzo Pallotta, Andrei
Popescu-Belis, David Portabella, Martin Rajman,
and Marianne Starlander. 2003. Natural language
queries on natural language data: a database of
meeting dialogues. In NLDB?2003 (8th Inter-
national Conference on Applications of Natural
Language to Information Systems), Burg/Cottbus,
Germany.
Sonali Bhagat, Hannah Carvey, and Elizabeth
Shriberg. 2003. Automatically generated prosodic
cues to lexically ambiguous dialog acts in multi-
party meetings. In ICPhS 2003, Barcelona.
Jean Carletta, Amy Isard, Stephen Isard, Jacque-
line C. Kowtko, Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon, and
Anne H. Anderson. 1997. The reliability of a di-
alogue structure coding scheme. Computational
Linguistics, 23:13?31.
Mark G. Core and James F. Allen. 1997. Coding
dialogues with the DAMSL annotation scheme. In
David Traum, editor, Working Notes: AAAI Fall
Symposium on Communicative Action in Humans
and Machines, pages 28?35, Menlo Park, CA.
American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Rajdip Dhillon, Sonali Bhagat, Hannah Carvey,
and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2004. Meeting recorder
project: Dialog act labeling guide. Technical
Report TR-04-002, ICSI (International Computer
Science Institute), Berkeley, CA.
Daniel Jurafsky, Elizabeth Shriberg, and Debra Bi-
asca. 1997. Switchboard SWBD-DAMSL shallow-
discourse-function annotation (coders manual,
draft 13). Technical Report 97-02, University of
Colorado, Institute of Cognitive Science.
Daniel Jurafsky, Elizabeth Shriberg, Barbara Fox,
and Traci Curl. 1998. Lexical, prosodic, and syn-
tactic cues for dialog acts. In ACL/COLING-98
Workshop on Discourse Relations and Discourse
Markers, pages 114?120.
Marion Klein and Claudia Soria. 1998. Dialogue
acts. In Marion Klein, Niels Ole Bernsen, Sarah
Davies, Laila Dybkjaer, Juanma Garrido, Hen-
rik Kasch, Andreas Mengel, Vito Pirrelli, Mas-
simo Poesio, Silvia Quazza, and Claudia Soria,
editors, MATE Deliverable 1.1: Supported Coding
Schemes, MATE (Multilevel Annotation, Tools
Engineering) European Project LE4-8370.
Stephen C. Levinson. 1983. Pragmatics. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Agnes Lisowska. 2003. Multimodal interface design
for the multimodal meeting domain: Preliminary
indications from a query analysis study. Technical
report, IM2.MDM, 11/2003.
Christopher Manning and Dan Klein. 2003. Opti-
mization, maxent models, and conditional estima-
tion without magic. In Tutorial at HLT-NAACL
2003 and ACL 2003. ACL, Edmonton, Canada.
Nelson Morgan, Don Baron, Sonali Bhagat, Hannah
Carvey, Rajdip Dhillon, Jane A. Edwards, David
Gelbart, Adam Janin, Ashley Krupski, Barbara
Peskin, Thilo Pfau, Elizabeth Shriberg, Andreas
Stolcke, and Chuck Wooters. 2003. Meetings
about meetings: research at ICSI on speech in
multiparty conversations. In ICASSP 2003 (In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing), Hong Kong, China.
Andrei Popescu-Belis. 2003. Dialogue act tagsets for
meeting understanding: an abstraction based on
the DAMSL, Switchboard and ICSI-MR tagsets.
Technical report, IM2.MDM, v1.1, 09/2003.
John R. Searle. 1969. Speech Acts. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, UK.
Elizabeth Shriberg, Raj Dhillon, Sonali Bhagat,
Jeremy Ang, and Hannah Carvey. 2004. The ICSI
meeting recorder dialog act (MRDA) corpus. In
Proceedings of SIGDIAL ?04 (5th SIGdial Work-
shop on Discourse and Dialog), Cambridge, MA.
Andreas Stolcke, Klaus Ries, Noah Coccaro, Eliz-
abeth Shriberg, Rebecca Bates, Daniel Jurafsky,
Paul Taylor, Rachel Martin, Marie Meteer, and
Carol Van Ess-Dykema. 2000. Dialogue act mod-
eling for automatic tagging and recognition of
conversational speech. Computational Linguistics,
26(3):339?371.
David R. Traum. 2000. 20 questions for dialogue act
taxonomies. Journal of Semantics, 17(1):7?30.
Daniel Vanderveken. 1990. Meaning and speech acts.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Britta Wrede and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2003. The
relationship between dialogue acts and hot spots
in meetings. In IEEE Speech Recognition and Un-
derstanding Workshop, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin
Islands.
