Discourse-Level Annotation
for Investigating Information Structure
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova? and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff
Computational Linguistics, Saarland University, Saarbru?cken, Germany
{korbay,gj}@coli.uni-sb.de
Abstract
We present discourse-level annotation of newspa-
per texts in German and English, as part of an
ongoing project aimed at investigating information
structure from a cross-linguistic perspective. Rather
than annotating some specific notion of information
structure, we propose a theory-neutral annotation
of basic features at the levels of syntax, prosody
and discourse, using treebank data as a starting
point. Our discourse-level annotation scheme cov-
ers properties of discourse referents (e.g., semantic
sort, delimitation, quantification, familiarity status)
and anaphoric links (coreference and bridging). We
illustrate what investigations this data serves and
discuss some integration issues involved in combin-
ing different levels of stand-off annotations, created
by using different tools.
1 Introduction
The goal of this paper is to present a discourse-
level annotation scheme developed for the pur-
pose of investigating information distribution in
text from a cross-linguistic perspective, with a
particular focus on the interplay of various fac-
tors pertaining to the realization of information
structure. Information Structure (IS) concerns
utterance-internal structural and semantic proper-
ties reflecting the speaker?s/writer?s communica-
tive intentions and the relation of the utterance
to the discourse context, in terms of the dis-
course status of the content, the actual and at-
tributed attentional states of the discourse partici-
pants, and the participants? prior and changing atti-
tudes (knowledge, beliefs, intentions, expectations,
etc.) (Kruijff-Korbayova? and Steedman, 2003). In
many (if not all) languages, differences in IS moti-
vate variations in surface realization of utterances,
such as syntactic structure, word order and intona-
tion. But languages differ in the extent to which
they employ various combinations of IS-realization
means (Vallduv?? and Engdahl, 1996; Kruijff, 2001).
Modeling these phenomena and their interaction re-
quires understanding IS and its role in discourse.
IS is therefore an important aspect of meaning at
the interface between utterance and discourse, which
computational models of discourse processing should
take into account. Unfortunately, there exists no
theory that provides a comprehensive picture of IS,
explaining its realization cross-linguistically, its rep-
resentation at the level of linguistic meaning, and its
interpretation in context. Employing corpora can
help to deepen our intuitive understanding of IS, in
order to construct explanatorily more adequate the-
ories.
While the phenomena involved in discourse and
IS are themselves complex and not yet fully un-
derstood, studying and modeling their interaction
is made difficult by proliferating and often under-
formalized terminologies, especially for IS (cf. the
diverging dichotomies, e.g., Theme-Rheme, Topic-
Comment, Topic-Focus, Background-Focus, Given-
New, Contextually Bound-Nonbound). What is
needed is further systematization of terminologies,
formalization and computational modeling, and em-
pirical and corpus-based studies.
The goal of the MULI (MUltilingual Informa-
tion structure) project is to contribute to this effort
by empirically analyzing IS in German and English
newspaper texts. For this, we designed annotation
schemes for enriching existing linguistically inter-
preted language resources with information at the
levels of syntax, discourse semantics and prosody.
The MULI corpus consists of extracts
from the Tiger treebank for German
(Brants et al, to appear)1 and the Penn treebank
for English (Marcus et al, 1994)2. It comprises
250 sentences in German (app. 3,500 tokens) and
320 sentences in English (app. 7,000 tokens). The
MULI corpus has been created by extracting a
continuous stretch of 21 relatively short texts from
the Tiger treebank, and a set of 10 texts from the
Penn Treebank. The selection was made so that
the texts would be comparable in genre (financial
news/announcements).
The morphological, part-of-speech and syntactic
information encoded in the treebanks can be re-
used for our purposes. We add annotations of
syntactically marked constructions, prosodic fea-
tures and discourse semantics. Our approach
to annotation at the levels of syntax, prosody
and discourse is outlined in (Bauman et al, 2004a;
Bauman et al, 2004b). In this paper, we provide
1http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/cl/projects/tiger/
2http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~treebank/home.html
more details about the discourse-level annotation.
In ?2 we overview the methodological concerns
and desiderata we adhere to in designing our anno-
tation schemes. In ?3 we present the discourse-level
annotation scheme in detail. In ?4 we illustrate the
multi-level investigation perspective. ?5 we briefly
describe the annotation tools we use. In ?6 we con-
clude and sketch future work.
2 Methodology
Text samples of varying origin, genre, language and
size have been previously annotated with theory-
specific notions of IS by various authors. Such data
are typically not publicly available, and even if they
can be obtained, it is very hard if not impossible
to compare and reuse different annotations. More
promising in this respect are annotations that in-
clude or add some aspect(s) of IS to an existing
corpus or treebank. The most systematic effort of
this kind that we are familiar with is the Topic-
Focus annotation in the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (Bura?n?ova? et al, 2000).
In contrast to other projects in which IS is
annotated and investigated, we do not annotate
theory-biased abstract categories like Topic-Focus
or Theme-Rheme. Since we are particularly inter-
ested in the correlations and co-occurrences of fea-
tures on different linguistic levels that can be inter-
preted as indicators of the abstract IS categories,
we needed an annotation scheme to be as theory-
neutral as possible: It should allow for a descrip-
tion of the phenomena, from which ?any? theory-
specific explanatory mechanisms can subsequently
be derived (Skut et al, 1997). We therefore con-
centrate instead on features pertaining, on the one
hand, to the surface realization of linguistic expres-
sions (the levels of syntax and prosody), and, on
the other hand, to the semantic character of the dis-
course referents (the discourse level).
In designing our annotation schemes, we fol-
lowed the guidelines of the Text Encoding Ini-
tiative3 and the Discourse Resource Initiative
(Carletta et al, 1997). In line with these standards,
we define for each annotation level (i) the markable
expressions, (ii) the attributes of markables, and (iii)
the links between markables (if any).
Syntax The Tiger treebank and the Penn tree-
bank we use as the starting point already con-
tain syntactic information. The additional syntac-
tic features annotated in the MULI project per-
tain to clauses as markable units, and encode the
presence of structures with noncanonical word order
that typically serve to put the focus on certain syn-
tactic elements. We include cleft, pseudo-cleft, re-
versed pseudo-cleft, extraposition, fronting and ex-
pletives, as well as voice distinctions (active, medio-
passive and passive). We annotate these features
explicitly (when not already present in the tree-
3http://www.tei-c.org/
bank annotation), to be able to correlate them di-
rectly with features at other levels. The annotation
scheme draws on accounts of the analysed features in
(Eisenberg, 1994) and (Weinrich, 1993) for German
and in (Quirk et al, 1985) and (Biber et al, 1999)
for English.
Prosody For the prosodic annotation, we
recorded one German and one English native
speaker reading aloud the texts of the MULI
corpus.4,5 The recordings were digitised and
annotated using the EMU Speech Database
System ((Cassidy and Harrington, 2001b);
http://emu.sourceforge.net/).
The markables at the prosody level are into-
nation phrases, intermediate phrases and words.
Their attributes encode the position and strength
of phrase breaks, and the position and type of
pitch accents and boundary tones, following the
conventions of ToBI (Tones and Break Indices
(Beckmann and Hirschberg, 1994)) for English and
GToBI6 (Grice et al, in press) for German, which
are regarded as standards for describing the into-
nation of these languages within the framework of
autosegmental-metrical phonology.
Discourse At the discourse level, we define as
markable those linguistic expressions that introduce
or access discourse entities (i.e., discourse referents
in the sense used in DRT and alike) (Webber, 1983;
Kamp and Reyle, 1993). Currently we consider
primarily the discourse entities introduced by
?nominal-like? expressions (Passoneau, 1996). We
include other kinds of expressions as markable only
when they participate in an anaphoric relation
with a ?nominal-like? expression. For example, a
sentence is a markable when it serves as an an-
tecedent of a discourse-deictic anaphoric expres-
sion (Webber, 1991); the main verb of a sentence
is a markable when the subject of the sentence
is a ?zero-anaphor?, etc. Our annotation instruc-
tions for identifying markables are an amalgamation
and extension of those of the MUC-7 Coreference
Task Definition7, the DRAMA annotation manual
(Passoneau, 1996), and (Wind, 2002).
The attributes of markables in our discourse-
level annotation scheme are designed to capture
a range of properties that semantically character-
ize the discourse entities evoked by linguistic ex-
4We are aware that using recorded speech is not ideal. We
nevertheless decided for this approach, as we wanted to work
on top of existing treebanks. As far as we are aware, there
does not exist a treebank for any of the publicly available
speech corpora.
5Since prosodic annotation is very time-consuming, we had
to concentrate mainly on one language. Thus, we analysed
all German texts and restricted ourselves to some English
examples. Since individual speaking preferences may vary
from speaker to speaker, we will have to record additional
speakers in order to be able to come up with generalizable
results.
6http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/phonetik/projects/Tobi/gtobi.html
7http://www.itl.nist.gov/iaui/894.02/related_projects/
muc/proceedings/co_task.html
pressions. Thereby we differ from most existing
discourse-level annotation efforts, which concentrate
on the linguistic expressions and on identifying
anaphoric relations between them (i.e., identifying
anaphors and their antecedents). A notable ex-
ception is the GNOME project annotation scheme
(Poesio et al, 1999): In GNOME, the aim was to
annotate a corpus with information relevant for noun
phrase generation. This included syntactic, seman-
tic and discourse attributes of nominal expressions.
The semantic attributes include, among others, an-
imacy, ontological status, countability, quantifica-
tion and generic vs. specific reference, which reflect
similar distinctions as we make in our annotation
scheme.
Besides the semantic properties that characterize
discourse entities individually, our annotation
scheme of course also covers referential rela-
tions between discourse entities, including both
identity and bridging. We build on and ex-
tend the MUC-7 coreference specification and
the coreference/bridging classifications described
in (Passoneau, 1996), (Carletta et al, 1997),
(Poesio, 2000) and (Mu?ller and Strube, 2001). We
represent anaphoric relations between linguistic ex-
pressions through links between the corresponding
markables. The type of relation is annotated as
an attribute of the markable corresponding to the
anaphor.
3 Discourse-Level Annotation
Information structure theories describe the phenom-
ena at hand at a surface level, at a semantic level,
or at both levels simultaneously, i.e., an expres-
sion belongs to some IS partition, in virtue of some
information-status of the corresponding discourse
entity. For the investigation of IS at the (discourse)
semantic level, we thus need more information about
the character of the discourse entities introduced by
linguistic expressions. We therefore annotated ex-
pressions with their discourse referents and their fol-
lowing properties:
Semantic type/sort reflects ontological charac-
ter of a discourse entity: object, property, even-
tuality or textual entity. Since the primary fo-
cus of our current annotation are discourse enti-
ties evoked by nominal-like expressions, most of
them denote objects. Objects are further classi-
fied according to semantic sorts: human/person, of-
fice/profession, organization, animal, plant, physical
object, quantity/amount, date/time, location/place,
group/collection, abstract entity, other. Proper-
ties are classified into either temporal or perma-
nent. Eventuality has sub-classes phase (habit
or state) and process (activity, accomplishment,
achievement). Textual entities are for now not fur-
ther classified.
Denotation characteristics of a discourse en-
tity are captured by a combination of attributes,
inspired by (Hlavsa, 1975). First, we distinguish
between denotational (extensional, referential) and
non-denotational (intensional, attributive) uses of
linguistic expressions. Denotationally used expres-
sions pick out (specify) some instance(s) of the des-
ignated concept(s). The instance(s) can be uniquely
specified (=identifiable to the hearer), or specific
but not identifiable, or even unspecific (arbitrary,
generic ? so any instance will do). Generic refer-
ences are seen as denoting types. An expression is
used non-denotationally when it attribute or qual-
ifies, i.e., evokes the characteristic properties of a
concept, without actually instantiating it. A typical
example of a non-denotationally used expression is
a predicative NP, as in ?He was a painter?.
The annotation of a group of denotation proper-
ties is motivated by the need to have a language-
independent characterization of the referents as
such, rather then the properties of the referring ex-
pression, such as (in)definiteness. The latter is a
surface reflex of a combination of denotation char-
acteristics, and sometimes may not even be overtly
indicated by articles or other determiners.
For the denotationally used expressions, we then
analyze what part of the domain designated by
the expression is actualy included in the extension.
These aspects are annotated in the determination,
delimitation and quantification attributes.
Determination characterizes the specificity of
the denoted concept instance. Unique determina-
tion means that the entity is uniquely specified, i.e.,
the hearer can (or is assumed to be able to) iden-
tify the entity/instance intended by the speaker.
There may be just one such entity, e.g., as with
proper names, or there are possibly more entities
that satisfy the description, but the speaker means
a particular one and assumes that the hearer can
identify it. Anaphoric pronouns are also typically
used as unique denotators. Finally, an entity can
be uniquely specified through a relation to another
entity, or through a relation between expressions in
the text. In (Hlavsa, 1975) this is called relational
uniqueness ; it seems to correspond to Loebner?s no-
tion of NPs as functions, used in the GNOME an-
notation scheme.
Existential determination is assigned to entities
that are not uniquely specified, that is, the speaker
does not assume the hearer to be able to identify a
particular entity, but in principle the speaker would
be able to identify one. Maybe such unique identifi-
cation by the hearer is not important for the inter-
action, it is enough to take ?some instance?.
Variable determination is assigned when an ex-
pression not only does not uniquely specify an en-
tity, but a particular entity cannot in principle be
identified, rather, the speaker means an arbitrary
(?any?) instance. Typical examples are generics, or
references to type.
Delimitation characterizes the extent of the de-
noted concept instance with respect to the domain
designated by the expression. The posible values are
total and partial, indicating the entire domain desig-
nated by the expression is included in the extension,
or only a part.
Quantification captures the countability of the
denotated concept instance, and if countable, the
quantity of the individual objects included in the
extension:
 uncountable is assigned when it is impossible
to decompose the extension into countable dis-
tinguishable individual objects, e.g., with mass
nouns;
 specific-single means quantity of one, e.g., ?one
x?, ?the other x?;
 specific-multiple means a concrete quantity
larger than one, e.g., ?two x?, ?both x?, ?a
dozen?;
 unspecific-multiple means an unspecified num-
ber larger than one, e.g., ?some x?, ?many x?,
?most x?.
Familiarity Status is a notion that most ap-
proaches to IS use as one dimension or level
of the IS-partitioning, for example Given/New
in (Halliday, 1985), Background/Focus in
(Steedman, 2000), or as the basis for deriving
a higher level of partitioning (Sgall et al, 1986).
It is therefore important to capture it in our anno-
tation as an independent feature, so that we can cor-
relate it with other features at the discourse level and
at other levels. We apply the familiarity status tax-
onomy from (Prince, 1981), distinguishing between
new, unused, inferrable, textually and situationally
evoked entities. We are aware that operationalizing
Prince?s taxonomy is a tough issue. For the time be-
ing, our annotation guidelines give intuitive descrip-
tions of the different statuses, roughly as follows:
 brand new : create a new discourse referent for
a previously unknown object;
 unused : create a new discourse referent for a
known object;
 inferable: create a new discourse referent for an
inferable object;
 evoked (textually or situationally): access an
available discourse referent.
Annotators? uncertainty or discrepancies between
annotators help us to identify problematic cases, and
to revise the guidelines where necessary.8
Linguistic form encodes the syntactic category
of the markable expression. This is not an attribute
encoding a semantic property of a discourse entity.
We have found it useful to distinguish the following
categories:
8Our reason for applying the familiarity taxonomy from
(Prince, 1981) is that it addresses the status of discourse en-
tities as such, not other referential properties. For example,
the givenness hierarchy in (Gundel et al, 1993) interleaves in-
formation status with uniqueness and specificity.
 nominal group is a ?normal? NP with a head
noun;
 pronominal subsumes expressions headed by a
personal, demonstrative, interrogative or rela-
tive pronoun;
 possessive covers possessive premodifiers (typ-
ically a possessive pronoun, e.g., ?our view?,
or possessive adjective, e.g., ?the Treasury?s
threat? or in German ?newyorker Burse?;
 pronominal adverb in German, e.g. ?daraus?
(from that);
 apposition and coordination;
 clitic is used for clitics and in those cases when
an expression contains a clitic affix (though
not frequent in English and German newspaper
text);
 ellipsis is used for elliptical (reduced) expres-
sions, which function as nominal-like groups,
but contain no nominal head (e.g., ?the first?);
in case a discourse entity is evoked by a zero ar-
gument, e.g., in case of subject- or object pro-
drop, a markable is created on a surrogate non-
nominal expression, labeled as zero-arg; finally,
clause or text are used for markables which are
clause and simple sentences, or text segments,
respectively (note that these are only mark-
able, when they serve as antecedents to nominal
anaphors).
These categories classify the linguistic forms of ex-
pressions independently of the categories employed
in the syntactic-level annotation. There are also
technical reasons for introducing a form-feature, e.g.,
when some other expression serves as a markable to
annotate the attributes of the discourse entity cor-
responding to a ?zero-anaphor? or to a clitic affix.
Referential link encodes the type of relation
between the discourse entity corresponding to an
anaphoric expression, and the one corresponding to
the (most likely) antecedent. The referential links we
distinguish are identity (representing coreference)
and bridging, further classified into set-membership,
set-containment, part-whole composition, property-
attribution, generalized possession, causal link and
lexical-argument-filling.
The attributes of information status and referen-
tial link are related, but we include them both, be-
cause the former is a property of a discourse entity,
while the latter directly reflects anaphoricity as a
property of an expression (the size of it ranging, ul-
timately, from a word to a segment of a discourse).
The relation between anaphoricity and IS is not a
straightforward one, and needs further investigation,
enabled by an annotation like ours.
4 Multi-level Investigation of IS
We illustrate the different levels of annotation and
analysis with an example sequence taken from our
English corpus (Figure 1). We considered the syn-
tactic annotation as a suitable starting point for the
analysis. Where relevant features are detected, we
compare the annotation at other levels.
(1) In the 1987 crash, remember, the market
was shaken by a Danny Rostenkowski pro-
posal to tax takeovers out of existence. (2)
Even more important, in our view, was the
Treasury?s threat to thrash the dollar. (3) The
Treasury is doing the same thing today; (4)
thankfully, the dollar is not under 1987-style
pressure.
Figure 1: Example from the English corpus
Of the four clauses in the example sequence, three
show noncanonical word orders. In (1), the temporal
adjunct is fronted, followed by the main predicate
remember (in imperative mood). Additionally, (1)
contains a passive construction bringing the patient
in subject position. In (2), subject complement and
adjunct (marking stance) are fronted. In (4), an
adjunct (againmarking stance) is fronted.
The discourse entity (DE) introduced in the
fronted temporal phrase the 1987 crash in (1) is ex-
tensional, abstract, unique, specific singular, and has
the information status of unused (also indicated by
remember). The DE introduced in the unmarked
subject position is extensional, abstract, unique,
specific singular, but has the status of inferrable:
the market can be seen as a bridging anaphor to the
crash, by means of an argument filling (crash of the
market). The DEs introduced by the sentence-final
expressions in (1) and (2) are also extensional, ab-
stract, unique, specific singular, and both have the
information status of new.9 What appears sentence-
final in (1) and (2) are thus two negative things that
happened during the 1987 crash. The fronted ex-
pression(s) in (2) are not annotated as a DE. The
DEs in the unmarked subject positions in (3) and (4)
both have the information status of textually evoked,
as both expressions are coreferential anaphors to
parts of the Treasury?s threat to thrash the dollar.
While the DE referred to by the Treasury is an ex-
tensional, office, unique, specific singular, that of the
dollar is intensional, abstract, unique, uncountable.
The expression the same thing in (3) is anaphoric to
the Treasury?s threat . . . in (2), but it introduces
a new DE of the same type; its information status
is that of inferrable. Finally, the DE introduced in
the sentence-final expression 1987-style pressure in
(4) is intensional, abstract, existential, uncountable,
and also has the information status of inferable; it
is however hard to code it as a bridging anaphor,
because it is not clear what relation it would have
to what antecedent: if anything, then a Danny Ros-
tenkowski proposal . . . in (1).
The prosodic analysis shows that the fronted
phrase in (2) is not only syntactically but also
9We assume a layman reader. For an economy expert,
these entities may have the status of unused.
prosodically prominent (cf. Figure 2): Two peak ac-
cents on even and more highlight these words (with
the more pronounced accent on more expressing a
contrast), whereas the word important is deaccented,
since the concept of ?importance? is inferable from
the context. Furthermore, the adjective construc-
tion forms a phrase of its own, delimited by an in-
tonation phrase boundary, which is in turn signalled
by a falling-rising contour plus a short pause. The
following parenthesis in our view also constitutes a
single intonation phrase. Here again, our is assigned
a contrastive accent, while view is unaccented.
All remaining content words of the clause re-
ceive accents. However, the most ?newsworthy?
word, threat, is the only one marked by a ris-
ing pitch accent (L+H*), indicating its higher de-
gree of importance for the speaker. This interpre-
tation is further supported by the insertion of a
phrase break directly after this word. Finally, the
high-downstepped nuclear accent (H+!H*) on dollar
marks this item as being accessible by speaker and
hearer (Pierrehumbert and Hirschberg, 1990).
5 Technical Realization
Above we presented a multi-level view on IS anno-
tation, where each layer is to be annotated indepen-
dently, to enable us to investigate interactions across
the different levels. Such investigations involve ei-
ther exploration of the integrated data (i.e., simul-
taneous viewing of the different levels and searching
across levels) or integrated processing, e.g., in order
to discover or test correlations across levels. There
are two crucial technical requirements that must be
satisfied to make this possible: (i) stand-off anno-
tation at each level and (ii) alignment of base data
across the levels. Without the first, we would not be
able to keep the levels separate and perform annota-
tion at each level independently, without the latter
we would not be able to align the separate levels.
We have chosen XML for the representation and
maintenance of annotations. Each level of anno-
tation is represented as a separate XML file, re-
ferring to (sequences of) tokens in a common base
file containing the actual text data. We keep inde-
pendent levels of annotation separate, even if they
can in principle be merged into a single hierarchy.
Parallel aligned texts (e.g., the written and spo-
ken versions of our corpus) are also represented via
shared token IDs. A related issue is that of annota-
tion tools. We are not using one generic tool for
all levels for the simple reason that we have not
found a tool that would support the needs of all
levels and still be efficient (Bauman et al, 2004b;
Mu?ller and Strube, 2001). Therefore, we prefer to
use tools specifically designed for the task at hand.
We describe the tools of our choice below.
Prosodic Level The speech data was anno-
tated with the EMU Speech Database System10
(Cassidy and Harrington, 2001a), which produces
10http://emu.sourceforge.net/
Figure 2: Prosodic annotation of example sentence (2) in EMU
several files in which time stamps are associated with
the respective annotated labels.
Syntactic Level For the syntactic annotation, we
used the XML editor XML-Spy11. The annotation
scheme is defined in a DTD, which is used to check
the well-formedness and the validity of the annota-
tion.
Discourse Level The discourse-level annotation
is done with the MMAX annotation tool developed
at EML, Heidelberg (Mu?ller and Strube, 2003).
MMAX is a light-weight tool written in Java that
runs under both Windows and Unix/Linux. It sup-
ports multilevel annotation of XML-encoded data
using annotation schemes defined as DTDs. MMAX
implements the above-mentioned general concepts of
markables with attributes and standing in link rela-
tions to one another. To exploit and reuse annotated
data in the MMAX format, there is the MMAX
XML Discourse API.
Integration The tools inevitably employ differ-
ent data formats: on the prosodic level data is stored
in the EMU data format, on the syntactic level in
Tiger XML and on the discourse level in MMAX
XML format.
The EMU files have to be converted into stand-off
XML format. To be able to align the prosodic an-
notation with the syntax and the discourse level, we
chose the word as common basic unit. This poses
several problems. First, punctuation marks count
as separate words, but are not realised in spoken
language. To be able to correlate prosodic phras-
ing and punctuation marks, we store the punctua-
tion marks as attributes of the respective preceding
word. Second, pauses occur very often in speech, but
as they are not part of the written texts, they do not
count as words. Because they are an important fea-
ture for phrasing and rhythm, we also code them
as attributes of the preceding word. Third, in some
cases a single word carries more than one accent, e.g.
11http://www.xmlspy.com/
long compounds (Getra?nkedosenhersteller), or num-
bers. In these cases, it would be interesting to know
which part(s) of the word get accented, which re-
quires some way of annotating parts of words (e.g.,
syllables). Finally, for some multi-word units, e.g.
18,50 Mark, the spoken realisation (achtzehn Mark
fu?nfzig) cannot be aligned with the orthographic
form, because spoken and orthographic form differ
in number and order of words.
6 Conclusions and Perspectives
We presented the details of the discourse-level anno-
tation scheme that we developed within the MULI
project. This project is a pilot project: As such, the
annotation has so far been restricted to a relatively
small amount of data, since the experimental design
of the study required testing of tools as well as man-
ual annotation. We plan to extend the size of the
corpus by manual and semi-automatic annotation in
a follow-up project.
The challenge in the MULI project has been to
define theory-neutral and language-independent an-
notation schemes for annotating linguistic data with
information that pertains to the realisation and in-
terpretation of information structure. An important
characteristic of the MULI corpus, arising from its
theory-neutrality, is that it is descriptive. The cor-
pus annotation is not based on explanatory mecha-
nisms: We have to derive such explanations from the
data. (See (Skut et al, 1997) for related methodol-
ogy pertaining to syntactic treebanks.)
The MULI corpus facilitates linguistic investiga-
tion of how phenomena at different annotation levels
interact. For example, how do syntactic structure
and intonation interact to realize information struc-
ture? Or, how does information structure interact
with anaphoric relationships? Such linguistic inves-
tigations can help to extend existing accounts of in-
formation structure, and can also be used to verify
(or falsify) predictions made by such accounts. The
corpus also makes it possible to construct computa-
tional models from the corpus data.
Theory-neutrality enhances reusability of linguis-
tic resources, because it facilitates the integration
with other, theory-neutral resources. To some ex-
tent we have already explored this in MULI, com-
bining e.g. Tiger annotation with discourse-level
annotation. Another possibility to explore is the to
integrate MULI annotation with, e.g., the SALSA
corpus (Erk et al, 2003), which provides more de-
tailed semantico-pragmatic information in the style
of FrameNet.
Our initial investigation also reveals where addi-
tional annotation would be needed. For instance,
the text example discussed above constitutes a con-
cession scheme, which we cannot identify without
annotating discourse/rhetorical relations. This in
turn requires extending the annotation scheme to
non-nominal markables.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Saarland University for fund-
ing the MULI pilot project. Thanks also to Stella
Neumann, Erich Steiner, Elke Teich, Stefan Bau-
mann, Caren Brinckmann, Silvia Hansen-Schirra
and Hans Uszkoreit for discussions.
References
S. Bauman, C. Brinckmann, S. Hansen-Schirra, G.-J.
Kruijff, I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, S. Neumann, and E. Te-
ich. 2004a. Multi-dimensional annotation of linguis-
tic corpora for investigating information structure. In
Proc. of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Anno-
tation, held at the NAACL-HLT 2004 Conference.
S. Bauman, C. Brinckmann, S. Hansen-Schirra, G.-J.
Kruijff, I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, S. Neumann, E. Te-
ich, E. Steiner, and H. Uszkoreit. 2004b. The muli
project: Annotation and analysis of information struc-
ture in German and English. In Proc. of the LREC
2004 Conference.
M. E. Beckmann and J. Hirschberg. 1994. The ToBI an-
notation conventions. Ms. and accompanying speech
materials, Ohio State University.
D. Biber, S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad, and E.
Finegan. 1999. The Longman Grammar of Spoken
and Written English. Longman, Harlow.
S. Bird and M. Liberman. 2001. A formal framework for
linguistic annotation. Speech Communication, 33(1-
2):23?60.
S. Brants, S. Dipper, P. Eisenberg, S. Hansen, E. Ko?nig,
W. Lezius, C. Rohrer, G. Smith, and H. Uszkoreit. to
appear. TIGER: Linguistic interpretation of a Ger-
man corpus. Journal of Language and Computation
(JLAC), Special Issue.
E. Bura?n?ova?, E. Hajic?ova?, and P. Sgall. 2000. Tagging of
very large corpora: Topic-focus articulation. In Proc.
of the 18th Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING?2000), July 31 - August 4 2000, pages 139?
144. Universita?t des Saarlandes, Saarbru?cken, Ger-
many.
J. Carletta, N. Dahlba?ck, N. Reithinger, and M. A.
Walker. 1997. Standards for dialogue coding in natu-
ral language processing. Report on the dagstuhl sem-
inar, Discourse Resource Initiative, February 3?7.
S. Cassidy and J. Harrington. 2001a. Multi-level anno-
tation in the emu speech database management sys-
tem. Speech Communication, 33(1-2):61?78.
S. Cassidy and J. Harrington. 2001b. Multi-level an-
notation in the EMU speech database management
system. Speech Communication, 33(1-2):61?78.
P. Eisenberg. 1994. Grundriss der deutschen Gram-
matik, 3. Aufl. Metzler, Stuttgart, Weimar.
K. Erk, A. Kowalski, S. Pado?, and M. Pinkal. 2003. To-
wards a resource for lexical semantics: A large german
corpus with extensive semantic annotation. In Proc.
of ACL 2003, Sapporo, Japan.
M. Grice, S. Baumann, and R. Benzmu?ller. in press.
German intonation in autosegmental-metrical phonol-
ogy. In Sun-Ah Jun, editor, Prosodic Typology:
Through Intonational Phonology and Transcription.
OUP.
J. Gundel, N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski. 1993. Cog-
nitive status and the form of referring expressions in
discourse. Language, (69):274?307.
M. A.K. Halliday. 1985. Introduction to Functional
Grammar. Edward Arnold, London, U.K.
Z. Hlavsa. 1975. Denotace objektu a jej?? prostr?edky v
souc?asne? c?es?tine? [Denotating of objects and its means
in contemporary Czech], volume 10 of Studie a pra?ce
lingvisticke? [Linguistic studies and works]. Academia.
N. Ide, P. Bonhomme, and L. Romary. 2000. Xces: An
xml-based standard for linguistic corpora. pages 825?
830, Athens, Greece.
H. Kamp and U. Reyle. 1993. From discourse to logic.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, the Nether-
lands.
Geert-Jan M. Kruijff 2001. A Categorial-Modal Logical
Architecture of Informativity: Dependency Grammar
Logic & Information Structure, Faculty of Mathemat-
ics and Physics, Charles University. Prague, Czech Re-
public.
I. Kruijff-Korbayova? and M. Steedman. 2003. Discourse
and information structure. Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information: Special Issue on Discourse
and Information Structure, 12(3):249?259.
M. Marcus, G. Kim, M. Ann Marcinkiewicz, R. MacIn-
tyre, A. Bies, M. Ferguson, K. Katz, and B. Schas-
berger? 1994. The Penn treebank: Annotating predi-
cate argument structure. In Proc. of the Human Lan-
guage Technology Workshop, San Francisco, Morgan
Kaufmann.
D. McKelvie, A. Isard, A. Mengel, M.B. Moller,
M. Grosse, and M. Klein. 2001. The MATE work-
bench ? an annotation tool for XML coded speech
corpora. Speech Communication, 33(1-2):97?112.
C. Mu?ller and M. Strube. 2001. Annotating anaphoric
and bridging relations with MMAX. In Proc. of the
2nd SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue,
pages 90?95, Aalborg, Denmark, 1?2 September.
http://www.eml.villa-bosch.de/english/Research/NLP/sigdial
C. Mu?ller and M. Strube. 2003. Multi-level an-
notation in mmax. In Proc. of the 4th SIG-
dial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, Sap-
poro, Japan, 4-5 July. http://www.eml.villa-
bosch.de/english/Research/NLP/Publications.
R. Passoneau. 1996. Instructions for applying dis-
course reference annotation for multiple applications
(DRAMA). draft, December 20.
J. Pierrehumbert and J. Hirschberg. 1990. The meaning
of intonational contours in the interpretation of dis-
course. In P.R. Cohen, J. Morgan, and M.E. Pollack,
editors, Intentions in Communication, pages 271?311.
MIT press.
Massimo Poesio, Renate Henschel, Janet Hitzeman,
Rodger Kibble, Shane Montague, and Kees van
Deemter 1999. Towards An Annotation Scheme For
Noun Phrase Generation In Proc. of the EACL Work-
shop on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora. Bergen,
Norway.
Massimo Poesio 2000. The GNOME An-
notation Scheme Manual Available online
http://www.hcrc.ed.ac.uk/~gnome/anno manual.html
E. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-new infor-
mation. In P. Cole, editor, Radical Pragmatics, pages
223?256. Academic Press.
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartik. 1985.
A comprehensive grammar of the English language.
Longman, London.
P. Sgall, E. Hajic?ova?, and J. Panevova?. 1986. The mean-
ing of the sentence in its semantic and pragmatic as-
pects. Reidel, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
W. Skut, B. Krenn, T. Brants, and H. Uszkoreit. 1997.
An annotation scheme for free word order languages.
In Applied Natural Language Processing 1997, pages
88?95.
M. Steedman. 2000. Information structure and
the syntax-phonology interface. Linguistic Inquiry,
31(4):649?689.
E. Teich, S. Hansen, and P. Fankhauser. 2001. Repre-
senting and querying multi-layer annotated corpora.
pages 228?237, Philadelphia.
E. Vallduv?? and E. Engdahl. 1996. The linguistic reali-
sation of information packaging. Linguistics, 34:459?
519.
B. L. Webber. 1983. So what can we talk about now?
M.I.T. Press.
B. L. Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension in the in-
terpretation of discourse deixis. Language and Cogni-
tive Processes, 6(2):107?135.
H. Weinrich. 1993. Textgrammatik der deutschen
Sprache. Dudenverlag, Mannheim u.a.
L. Wind. 2002. Manual zur Annotation von anapho-
rischen und Bridging-relationen. European Media
Laboratory GmbH, August 9.
