Answering Questions Using Advanced Semantics and  
Probabilistic Inference 
 
Srini Narayanan  
International Computer Science Institute 
1947 Center St., Suite 600,  
Berkeley, CA 94704 
snarayan@icsi.berkeley.edu 
Sanda Harabagiu 
Human Language Technology Research 
Institute - University of Texas at Dallas 
2601 N. Floyd Rd. EC 31, ECSS 3.908A 
Richardson, TX 75083 
sanda@hlt.utdallas.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 In this paper we argue that access to rich se-
mantic structures  derived from questions and 
answers will enable both the retrieval of more 
accurate answers to simple questions and en-
able inference processes that explain the va-
lidity and contextual coverage of answers to 
complex questions. Processing complex ques-
tions involves the identifications of several 
forms of complex semantic structures. Answer 
Extraction is performed by recognizing event 
inter-relationships and by inferring over mul-
tiple sentences and texts, using background 
knowledge. 
1 Introduction 
 
Current Question Answering systems extract an-
swers from large text collections by (1) classifying 
questions by the answer type they expect; (2) using 
question keywords or patterns associated with questions 
to identify candidate answer passages and (3) ranking 
the candidate answers to decide which passage contains 
the exact answer. A few systems also justify the answer, 
by performing abduction in first-order predicate logic 
[Moldovan et al, 2003]. This paradigm is limited by the 
assumption that the answer can be found because it uses 
the question words. Although this may happen some-
times, this assumption does not cover the many cases 
where an informative answer is missed because its iden-
tification requires more sophisticated semantic process-
ing than named entity recognition and the identification 
of an answer type. Therefore access to rich semantic 
structures derived from questions and answers will en-
able the retrieval of more accurate answers as well as 
inference processes that explain the validity and contex-
tual coverage of answers.  
Several stages of deeper semantic processing may be 
considered for processing complex questions. A first 
step in this direction is the incorporation of ?semantic 
parsers? or identifiers of predicate argument structures 
in the processing of both questions and documents. 
Processing complex questions consists of: (1) a syntac-
tic parse of the question and of the document collection; 
(2) Named Entity recognition that along with the syntac-
tic parse enable (3) the identification of predicate-
argument structures; and (4) identification of the answer 
types, which no longer consist of simple concepts, but 
rather complex conceptual structures, and (5) keywords 
extraction that allows candidate answers to be identi-
fied. Document processing is performed by indexing 
and retrieval that uses three forms of semantic informa-
tion: (1) Classes of named entities; (2) Predicate-
argument structures and (3) Ontologies of possible an-
swer types. Additionally, as more complex semantic 
structures are evoked by the question and recognized in 
documents, indexing and retrieval models are enhanced 
by taking into account conceptual schemas and topic 
models. Answer processing is concerned with the rec-
ognition of the answer structure, which is a natural ex-
tension of recognizing exact answers when they are 
represented as single concepts. Since many times the 
answer is merged from several sources, enhanced an-
swer processing also requires a set of special operators 
for answer fusion. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 
2 presents question processing that uses deeper semantic 
resources. Section 3 details the methods for answer ex-
traction whereas Section 4 describes methods for repre-
senting and reasoning with rich semantic structures. 
Section 5 summarizes the conclusions. 
2 Question Processing that uses a variety 
of semantic resources 
Given the size of today?s very large document re-
positories, one can expect that any complex topic will 
be covered from multiple points of view. This feature is 
exploited by the question decomposition techniques, 
which generate a set of multiple questions in order to 
cover all of the possible interpretations of a complex 
topic.  However, a set of decomposed questions may 
end up producing a disparate (and potentially contradic-
tory) set of answers.  In order for Q/A systems to use 
these collections of answers to their advantage, answer 
fusion must be performed in order to identify a single, 
unique, and coherent answer. 
We view answer fusion as a three-step process. First, 
an open-domain, template-based answer formalization is 
constructed based on predicate-argument frames.  Sec-
ond, a probabilistic model is trained to detect relations 
between the extracted templates.  Finally, a set of tem-
plate merging operators are introduced to construct the 
merged answer.   The block architecture for answer fu-
sion is illustrated in Figure 2. The system functionality 
is demonstrated with the example illustrated in Figure 3. 
Our method first converts the extracted answers into 
a series of open-domain templates, which are based on 
predicate-argument frames (Surdeanu et al 2003). The 
next component detects generic inter-template relations. 
Typical ?greedy? approaches in Information Extraction 
(Hobbs et al 1997; Surdeanu and Harabagiu, 2002) use 
heuristics that favor proximity for template merging. 
The example in Figure 3 proves that this is not always 
the best decision, even for templates that share the same 
predicate and have compatible slots. 
Processing complex questions involves the identifi-
cation of several forms of complex semantic structures. 
Namely we need to first recognize the answer type that 
is expected, which is a rich semantic structure, in the 
case of complex question or a mere concept in the case 
of a factual question. At least three forms of information 
are needed for detecting the answer type: (1) question 
classes and named entity classes; (2) syntactic depend-
ency information, enabling the recognition of (3) predi-
cate-argument structures. Each of the following three 
questions illustrates the significance of the three forms 
of semantic information in question processing: 
For question Q-Ex1, the question stem ?when? indi-
cates that the answer type is a temporal unit, eventually 
expressed as a date. To find candidate answers, the rec-
ognition of India and other related named entities, e.g. 
Indian, as well as the name of the Prithvi missile or of 
its related program are important. Named entity recogni-
tion is also important for processing question Q-Ex2, 
because not only ?North Korea? needs to be recognized 
as a country, but names of other countries need to be 
identified in the candidate answer paragraph. Processing 
question Q-Ex2 involves syntactic information as well, 
e.g. the identification of the complex nominal ?missile 
launch pad metals?. To better process question Q-Ex2, 
additional semantic information in the form of predi-
cate- arguments structures enables the recognition of the 
answer type more precisely. Instead of looking only for 
country names when processing the documents, a search 
for countries that export missile launch pad metals or of 
counties from which North Korea imports such com-
modities refines the search space. This is made possible 
by the transformation of question Q-Ex2 in the structure 
illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The role set for the arguments of predicate ?import? 
was used as it is currently defined in the PropBank pro-
ject. Predicate-argument structures are also essential to 
the processing of question Q-Ex3, because the question 
is too ambiguous. The stem ?what? and the named en-
tity ?India? may relate to a large range of events and 
entities. 
 
Q-Ex1: When was India?s Prithvi missile launched for the first  
            time? 
Q-Ex2: From which country did North Korea import its missile  
           launch pad metals? 
Q-Ex3: What stimulated India?s missile programs? 
Figure 2: Predicate-argument structure of question Q-Ex2 
Predicate : import 
Arg 0 : (role = importer) : North Korea 
Arg 1 : (role = commodity) : missile launch pad metals 
Arg 2 : (role = exporter) : ANSWER 
 
Figure 1: FrameNet structuring of question Q-Ex3 
 
 
 
 
 
Frame: Subject_stimulus 
Frame element CIRCUMSTANCES: ANSWER (part 3) 
Frame element COMPARISON SET: ANSWER (part 4) 
Frame element EXPERIENCER: India?s missile pro-
gram 
    Frame element Parameter: nuclear proliferation 
Frame: Stimulate 
    Frame element CIRCUMSTANCES: ANSWER (part 1) 
    Frame element (EXPERIENCER):  India?s missile pro-
gram 
    Frame element (STIMULUS):  ANSWER (part 2) 
Figure 3: Predicate-argument structure for question Q-Ex3 
Predicate: Stimulate 
   Arg0 (role = agent):  ANSWER (part 1) 
   Arg1 (role = thing increasing):  India?s missile program 
   Arg2 (role = instrument):  ANSWER (part 2) 
The predicate-argument structure illustrated in Fig-
ure 3 indicates that the answer may have the role of the 
agent or even the role of the instrument. When semantic 
information from FrameNet is also used, Figure 4 shows 
that the answer may have in fact four other semantic 
roles. 
 
 To illustrate the semantic knowledge that needs to 
be recognized and the inference process that they en-
able, we shall use one of the questions employed in the 
AQUAINT Pilot 2 for Dialog Processing of CNS Sce-
narios, illustrated in Figure 5.  
Processing Q-Sem cannot be done by simply using 
the question stem ?how? to identify manners of detec-
tion or even by employing the predicate-argument struc-
ture illustrated in Figure 6. The answer contains a single 
troponym of the verb ?detect?, namely ?look at?, and 
the agent is ?Milton Leitenberg, an expert on biological 
weapons?. However returning the name of Milton Le-
itenberg as the answer is not informative enough.  
Instead of relying only on the question stem and the 
predicate-argument structure, question processing takes 
advantage of a more complex semantic structure made 
available by the enhanced architecture: the topic model.  
The topic model contributes to the interpretation of the 
only argument fully specified in the predicate-argument 
structure illustrated in Figure 6, namely Arg1 represent-
ing the ?detected? role, expressed as ?the biological 
weapons program?. The interpretation of this complex 
nominal is made possible by two semantic representa-
tions: (1) the typical connections in the topic model; and 
(2) the possible paths of action characterizing the topical 
model as represented in Figure 6. 
Figure 6 lists only two of the semantic representa-
tion typical of the scenario defined in Figure 8, namely 
typical connections between events and entities or be-
tween events. A special kind of relations between events 
is represented by the possible paths of action. The two 
paths of actions that are listed in Figure 6 enable the two 
interpretations of the detected object. It is to be noted 
that such semantic knowledge as the one represented in 
the topic model is not available from WordNet or Fra-
meNet at present, and thus need to be encoded and 
made accessible to the Q/A system. For structuring the 
complex answer type expected by question Q-Sem, a set 
Q-Sem: How can a biological weapons program be detected? 
Answer (Q-Sem) 
In recent months, Milton Leitenberg, an expert on biological weapons, has been looking at this murkiest and most dangerous cor-
ner of Saddam Hussein's armory. He says a series of reports add up to indications that Iraq may be trying to develop a new viral 
agent, possibly in underground laboratories at a military complex near Baghdad where Iraqis first chased away inspectors six 
years ago. A new assessment by the United Nations suggests Iraq still has chemical and biological weapons - as well as the rock-
ets to deliver them to targets in other countries. The UN document says Iraq may have hidden a number of Scud missiles, as well 
as launchers and stocks of fuel. US intelligence believes Iraq still has stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons and guided 
missiles, which it hid from the UN inspectors. 
 
Figure 5: Complex question and its answer derived from the CNS collection 
Q-Sem: How can a biological weapon program be detected? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question PATTERN: How can X be detected? 
Topic Model 
 
 
Program ? develop 
 
 
1) development ? production ? stockpiling ? delivery 
2) development ? acquisition ? stockpiling ? delivery 
Typical connec-
Possible paths of action 
Predicate-argument structure 
Predicate = detect 
Arg0 = detector: Answer(1) 
Arg1 = detected: biological  weapons program 
Arg2 = instrument: Answer(2)
Detect-object: complex nominal = biological weapons pro-
gram 
 
 
1) program for developing biological weapons 
Possible interpreta-
ti
 
Figure 4: Question processing based on topic semantics 
Q-Sem: How can a biological weapons program be detected? 
Question pattern: How can X be detected?        X = Biological Weapons Program 
 
1 Conceptual Schemas 
1.1 INSPECTION Schema 1.2 POSSESSION Schema 
1.3 Structure of Complex Answer Type: EVIDENCE 
of conceptual schemas need also to be recognized. Fig-
ure 7 shows some of the schemas instantiated by the 
question processing. The inspection schema is evoked 
by the question verb ?detect?; the possession schema is 
evoked by the complex nominal ?biological weapons 
program?. 
 
Along with the answer structure, the enhanced ques-
tion processing module generates the structure of the 
intentions uncovered by question Q-Sem. The general 
intention of finding evidence that there is a biological 
weapons program in Iraq is structured in four differ rep-
resentations illustrated in Figure 8. Intention structures 
are also dependent on the topic model. 
 
3 Answer Extraction based on semantic 
processing 
In the baseline architecture, the answer type as well as 
the predicate-argument structure determine the answer 
extraction. Complex questions like Q-Sem are provided 
with an answer by filling the semantic information of 
their complex answer types. 
 
Figure 9 illustrates the answer extracted for question Q-
Sem in the form of: (1) the text where the answer is 
found (2) the semantic structure of the answer with in-
formation derived from the text; and (3) pointers linking 
the fillers of the semantic structure of the answer with 
the text source. Such pointers may be supplemented 
with traces of the inferential processes. The answer 
type, labeled ?evidence-combined? has several semantic 
classes that are in turn filled with semantic representa-
tions for (1) the content of evidence; (2) the source of 
the evidence; (3) the quality of evidence and (4) the 
judgment of evidence.  The content structure lists both 
predicate-argument-like structures as well as such at-
tributes as: (a) the justification, accounting for the con-
ceptual schema that identified the content; (b) the status 
of the event/state recognized by the schema; (c) the like-
lihood of the eventuality of the event/state and (d) inten-
tions and abilities from the past, present or future. The 
source representation is also structured as (a) author, (b) 
type and (c) reliability. The quality of the inferred an-
swer is measured by (a) the judges; (b) the judge types; 
(c) judgment manner and (d) judgment stage. Finally, a 
qualitative assessment of the reliability of the answer is 
given, to complement the reliability score computed 
through probabilistic inference. 
4 Representing and Reasoning with Rich 
Semantic Structures for Advanced QA 
The ICSI work on embodied cognition is based on cog-
nitive linguistics. Research in this field has shown that 
many concepts and inferences are based on a relatively 
small number of /image schemas/, which are deeply 
embodied and are apparently universal across lan-
guages. For example, the ideas of container, goal and 
oppositional force occur prominently in language and 
thought. 
4.1 Cross-Linguistic Conceptual Schemas and 
Inference 
Much of narrative text relies on a relatively con-
strained set of conceptual schemas. For instance, the 
example above uses some of the most potent general 
schemas: POSSESSION, EVASION, SPATIAL 
RELATION, EVENT STRUCTURE, and SOURCE-
PATH-GOAL which involves an agent trying to obtain 
a particular goal (finding WMD) by moving along a 
path of actions. These are all basic embodied schemas 
whose inferential structure is common cross-
linguistically. Furthermore, these schemas are often 
sources of metaphor (PHYSICAL POSSESSION maps 
to INFORMATION POSSESION, SPATIAL 
LOCATIONS MAP TO INFORMATION STATES 
(murky and dangerous corner), PHYSICAL ACTIONS 
(look) MAP to ABSTRACT ACTIONS (scrutinize in-
formation) [35]). It appears that only a few dozen such 
general schemas suffice to describe a very wide range of 
scenarios. These have been extensively studied for 
many languages by linguists, but only recently formal-
ized (as part of our AQUAINT Phase 1 effort). Now 
that we have the formalism in hand, we believe and 
hope to demonstrate in Phase II that the combination of 
embodied schemas with metaphorical mappings to other 
domains can yield a significant improvement in inferen-
tial power over traditional approaches. 
4.2 Reasoning about Event Structure 
Q-Sem: How can a biological weapons program be detected? 
 INTENTION STRUCTURE: Evidence/information about biological weapons program in Iraq 
? CONTEXT/enabler ? for finding evidence of biological weapons program 
? MEANS: how can one develop/acquire biological weapons 
? PURPOSE/MOTIVATION: why biological weapons are used 
? RESULTS: consequences of using biological weapons 
 
Figure 6: Intentional Structure 
Performing QA with complex scenarios requires so-
phisticated reasoning about actions and events. For in-
stance, in the example above knowing the stage of a 
process (interrupted inspection due to a chase away 
event), gives valuable predictive information (Iraq may 
have hidden the WMD) as well as pre-suppositional 
information (Iraq had WMD before the inspections 
(signaled by the use of still has in the example sce-
nario)). Of course, this information is probabilistic (Iraq 
is only likely to have WMD (note the use of indica-
tions, may be, suggests, believes, and other linguistic 
markers of evidentials) and often 3) abductive (Iraq?s 
goal of chasing away the inspectors was probably to be 
able to hide the WMD). In all complex scenarios event 
descriptions are 1) dynamic (has been looking, still has, 
trying to develop, etc.), 2) resource specific (WMD de-
ployment needs launchers, inspections need inspectors), 
3) context sensitive (all inferences are conditioned on 
the scenario context which suggests among other things 
that a) Iraq intends and is probably trying to develop 
WMD and b) it is likely that Iraq will try to hide these 
WMD from the Inspectors), often 4) figurative (as in 
ANSWER: Evidence-Combined: 
                      Pointer to Text Source: 
A1 In recent months, Milton Leitenberg, an expert on biological weapons, has been looking at this murkiest and most dangerous corner of Saddam Hussein's armory. A1 
A2 
He says a series of reports add up to indications that Iraq may be trying to develop a new viral 
agent, possibly in underground laboratories at a military complex near Baghdad where Iraqis first 
chased away inspectors six years ago. 
A2 
A3 A new assessment by the United Nations suggests Iraq still has chemical and biological weapons - as well as the rockets to deliver them to targets in other countries.  A3 
A4 The UN document says Iraq may have hidden a number of Scud missiles, as well as launchers and stocks of fuel. A4 
A5 
US intelligence believes Iraq still has stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons and guided 
missiles, which it hid from the UN inspectors. A5 
 
  Content: Biological Weapons Program:   
   develop(Iraq, Viral_Agent(instance_of:new)) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability): Prevent(ability, Inspection);  
Inspection terminated; Possible resumption of ability 
Status: Attempt ongoing Likelihood: Medium Confirmability: difficult, obtuse, hidden 
   possess(Iraq, Chemical and Biological Weapons) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability): 
Hidden from Inspectors 
Likelihood: 
Medium 
   possess(Iraq, delivery Systems (type: rockets, target: Other countries)) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability):  
Hidden from Inspectors 
Status:  
Ongoing 
Likelihood: 
Medium 
   possess(Iraq, delivery Systems (type: scud missiles, target: Other countries)) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability):  
Hidden from Inspectors 
Status:  
Ongoing 
Likelihood:  
Medium 
   possess(Iraq, delivery Systems (type: launchers, target: Other countries)) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability):  
Hidden from Inspectors 
Status:  
Ongoing 
Likelihood:  
Medium 
   possess(Iraq, fuel stocks (purpose: power(launchers))) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Previous (Intent and Ability):  
Hidden from Inspectors 
Status:  
Ongoing 
Likelihood:  
Medium 
   hide(Iraq, Seeker: UN Inspectors, Hidden: CBW stockpiles) 
Justification:  
POSSESSION Schema 
Detection Process:  
Inspection 
Status:  
Past 
Likelihood:  
Medium 
Source: UN document, US Intelligence 
Source.Type: assessment reports Source.Reliability: med_high 
Reliability: medium  
Judge: UN, US Intelligence, Milton Leitenberg (Biological Weapons Expert) 
Judge_type: Mixed Judge_manner: Judge_stage: Ongoing 
Quality: low_medium  
 
Figure 7: Answer to complex question 
murky and dangerous corner, reports add up to indica-
tions, UN document says etc.), may incorporate the 
specific 7) perspectives of the various participants (Mil-
ton Leitenberg, US intelligence, UN inspectors etc.) 
 
Over the last decade and in Phase I of AQUAINT, 
we have developed a rich model of event structure that 
has been shown to be capable to capturing the event 
structure distinctions in complex text in a variety of 
languages (Narayanan99a, Narayanan99b, Chang et al 
2002, 2003). The model forms the basis and provides 
the underlying operational semantics for the DARPA 
funded DAML-S process model (NM 2003, ISWC 
2001) for the semantic web. This model is also being 
used in the ongoing ARDA video event recognition 
ontology effort (Hobbs and Nevatia 2003). 
 
4.3 Building Deep Semantic Structure From Text 
We now have a set of wide-coverage lexical re-
sources such as FrameNet (FN) and WordNet (WN) that 
can potentially aid knowledge formation in the rapid 
development of scenario models for inference in QA. 
An explicit representation of such semantic information 
is needed to fully realize use in text interpretation and 
inference. Previously we have worked out a formalism 
that unpacks the shorthand of frames into structured 
event representations. These dynamic representations 
allow annotated FrameNet data to parameterize event 
simulations based on the PIN model (Section II.B.7) 
(Chang et al2002) in a manner capable of producing the 
fine-grained, context-sensitive inferences required for 
language processing.. We anticipate that wide-coverage 
resources will be useful for the focused data AQUAINT 
Phase II task and we propose to enable developers to 
access these resources like FrameNet through a Java 
API.  We propose to undertake the following related 
tasks. 1)  Build a common API to WN and FN so we 
can combine the resources. 2) Produce an OWL-S 
(http://www.daml.org/services) port of FrameNet so that 
FrameNet information can be combined with other on-
tologies and in particular with specialized domain on-
tologies of use to the DoD and intelligence 
communities. 3) Build PIN (Section II.B.7)  models of 
FrameNet frames that are of use to the CNS scenarios. 
4) Evaluate the ease of using FrameNet based models 
and the amount of human intervention required to in-
stantiate them as Probabilistic Inference Networks. 5) 
Explore further automation of the mapping from Fra-
meNet frame descriptions to Probabilistic Inference 
Networks. 
4.4 A Construction Grammar based deep seman-
tic analyzer 
The ICSI group has developed a powerful semantic 
grammar formalism ? Embodied Construction Grammar 
(ECG), partially with Phase 1 AQUAINT support. It 
will not be possible to develop robust, full coverage 
ECG grammars from this base during phase 2 and ef-
forts in this task will focus on the detailed analysis of 
complex questions in context. An ECG grammar ex-
ploits constructions, starting from individual words and 
extending through complex linguistic forms, in a similar 
manner to other unification grammars such as HPSG. 
Central novel ideas are use of conceptual links, the 
evokes mechanism for activating other concepts, use of 
roles for describing schemas, and a meaning section 
that specifies introduced semantic relations. 
Given that an ECG grammar can map linguistic 
form to deep semantic relations, it remains to build sys-
tems that exploit this capability. John Bryant has built 
such an analyzer as part of the ICSI Phase 1 effort and 
his Master?s thesis. It is basically a unification based 
chart parser using chunking methods for efficiency and 
robustness. One major innovation is the use of deep 
semantic unification in the basic matching step ? this 
improves both efficiency and robustness. The ECG se-
mantic analysis system has been coupled to the ICSI 
inference engine of task 7 to produce a pilot complete 
QA system for news stories. For Phase 2, ICSI will ex-
tend the existing system in several ways. The semantic 
unification methodology will be extended to handle 
linguistic and situational context. This is a natural ex-
tension and has the promise of providing much more 
robust integration over extended discourse. In addition, 
there will be specific effort aimed at the analysis of que-
ries and the supporting declarations. This is intended to 
address the fact that analysts ask much more complex 
questions than Phase 1 systems can understand. 
4.5 Probabilistic Inference Networks for combin-
ing ontological, statistical and linguistic 
knowledge for advanced QA 
Modern inference systems deal with the ambiguity 
and uncertainty inherent in any large, real-word domain 
using probabilistic reasoning. Such models have many 
advantages, including the ability to deal with missing 
and uncertain data. Bayesian networks have worked 
extremely well in moderate sized cases, but do not scale 
to situations of the size and complexity needed here to 
model QA with complex scenarios as in the CNS data. 
To handle such data, we need techniques that combine 
reasoning about uncertainty with relational knowledge 
bases and dynamic linguistic knowledge and context. In 
general, reasoning with linguistic structure, ambiguity, 
and dynamics requires modeling coordinated temporal 
processes and complex, structured states. A significant 
amount of work has gone into different aspects of over-
all problem. 
  
5 Conclusions 
In this paper we show that, while there has been 
much progress in natural language analysis there is still 
a large gap in representing knowledge and reasoning 
with it for advanced QA. We have developed a method 
for processing complex questions which involves the 
identification of several forms of complex semantic 
structures. This involves the development of a powerful 
semantic grammar formalism - Embodied Construction 
Grammar (ECG) and applying it to the analysis of com-
plex questions. Answer Extraction will be performed by 
recognizing event inter-relationships, recognized by 
novel relation extraction techniques. Question extraction 
at the level the AQUAINT program seeks requires a 
mechanism for performing inference over multiple sen-
tences and texts, using background knowledge. We pro-
pose to build a software package which we refer to as 
Probabilistic Inference Networks (PIN) to provide a 
mechanism for performing context-sensitive inference 
over multiple sentences and discourse fragments, using 
encoded knowledge. 
References 
A. L. Berger, S. A. Della Pietra and V. J. Della Pietra. A 
maximum entropy approach to natural language 
processing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39-72, 
March 1996. 
Jennifer Chu-Carroll and Sandra Carberry. Generating 
Information-Sharing Subdialogues in Expert-User 
Consultation. In Proceedings of the 14th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-
95), pages 1243-1250, Montreal, Canada, 1995. 
Michael Collins. A New Statistical Parser Based on 
Bigram Lexical Dependencies. In Proceedings of the 
34th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL-96, pages 184-191, 1996. 
Abdessamad Echihabi and Daniel Marcu. A Noisy-
Channel Approach to Question Answering. In Pro-
ceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2003), 
Sapporo, Japan, 2003. 
Christiane Fellbaum (Editor). WordNet ? An Electronic 
Lexical Database. MIT Press, 1998. 
C.J. Fillmore and C.F. Baker and H. Sato. The  Frame-
Net Database  and  Software Tools. In M. Gonz?lez-
Rodr?guez and C.P. Su?rez-Araujo, Eds. In Proceed-
ings of the Third International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation. Las Palmas, Spain, 
2002. 
Michael Fleischman, Eduard Hovy and Abdessamad 
Echihabi. Offline Strategies for Online Question An-
swering: Answering Questions Before They Are 
Asked. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
2003), pages 1-7, Sapporo, Japan, 2003. 
Sanda Harabagiu, Marius Pa ca and Steven Maiorano. 
Experiments with Open-Domain Textual Question 
Answering. In Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-
2000), pages 292-298, Saarbrucken, Germany, 2000. 
Sanda Harabagiu, Dan Moldovan, Christine Clark, 
Mitchell Bowden, John Williams and Jeremy 
Bensley. Answer Mining by Combining Extraction 
Techniques with Abductive Reasoning. In Proceed-
ings of the 12th Text Retrieval Conference (TREC 
2003). 
Jerry R. Hobbs, Doug E. Appelt, John Bear, David Is-
rael, Megumi Kameyama, Mark Stickel and Mabry 
Tyson. FASTUS: A Cascaded Finite-State Trans-
ducer for Extracting Information Natural-Language 
Text. In Finite State Language Processing, Edited by 
Emmanuel Roche and Yves Schabes, MIT Press, 
1997. 
E.H. Hovy, U. Hermjakob, C.-Y. Lin, ?The Use of Ex-
ternal Knowledge in Factoid QA?, TREC-10 confer-
ence, November 2001. 
Dan I. Moldovan, Sanda M. Harabagiu, Marius Pa ca, 
Rada Mihalcea, Roxana G?rju, Richard Goodrum and 
Vasile Rus. The Structure and Performance of an 
Open-Domain Question Answering System. In Pro-
ceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2000), 
2000. 
John Prager, Eric Brown, Anni Coden and Dragomir 
Radev. Question-answering by predictive annotation. 
In Proceedings of the 23rd annual international ACM 
SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval, pages: 184-191, Athens, 
Greece, 2000. 
Dragomir R. Radev and Kathleen McKeown. Generat-
ing natural languages summaries from multiple on-
line sources. Computational Linguistics, 24(3):469-
500, 1998. 
