Contextual Semantics for WSD
ERIC CRESTAN(1,2) 
 
(1) Sinequa SAS 
51-54, rue Ledru-Rollin 
92400 Ivry-sur-Seine, France 
Crestan@sinequa.com 
(2) Laboratoire Informatique d?Avignon 
B.P. 1228 Agroparc 
339 Chemin des Meinajaries 
84911 Avignon Cedex 9, France 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
For Sinequa?s second participation to the 
Senseval evaluation, two systems using 
contextual semantic have been proposed. 
Based on different approaches, they both 
share the same data preprocessing and 
enrichment. The first system is a 
combined approach using semantic 
classification trees and information 
retrieval techniques. For the second 
system, the words from the context are 
considered as clues. The final sense is 
determined by summing the weight 
assigned to each clue for a given 
example. 
1 Introduction 
In the framework of the Senseval-3 evaluation 
campaign on Word Sense Disambiguation 
(WSD), we presented two systems relying on 
different strategy. The system SynLexEn is an 
evolution from the system used during the 
Senseval-2 campaign. It is based on two steps. 
The first step uses semantic classification trees 
on a short context size. A decision system based 
on document similarity is used as second step. 
The novelty of this system resides in a new 
vision level on the context. The semantic 
dictionary of Sinequa is extensively used in this 
process. 
The second system, SynLexEn2, is based on 
weighted clues summation over a short context 
size. From the training data, a score is computed 
for each word in a short context size, for each 
sense. 
In Section 2, the combined approach system 
for WSD is presented. We first give an overview 
of the data pre-processing that was applied 
(Section 2.1). Then, a brief description of 
Semantic Classification Trees is given (Section 
2.2) along with a description of additional data 
used for semantic view of short and long context 
(Section 2.3 and Section 2.4). Next, a semantic 
information retrieval system used in order to 
select the appropriate sense is proposed (Section 
2.5). 
Finally, the SynLexEn2 system is presented in 
Section 3. We then conclude with the evaluation 
results for both systems in Section 4. 
2 Combined approach 
The SinLexEn system is quite similar to the 
system used during the last Senseval-2 evaluation 
campaign (Crestan et al, 2001). It is based on 
two stages: the first stage uses three Semantic 
Classification Trees in parallel, trained on 
different size of context. Then, the second stage 
brings in a decision system based on information 
retrieval techniques. The novelty of this approach 
dwells in the use of semantic resource as 
conceptual view on extended context in both 
stages. 
2.1 Data pre-processing 
The first step in order to get the most from the 
data is to lemmatize and clean sentences. Each 
paragraph from the training and the test data are 
first passed though an internal tagger/lemmatizer. 
Then, some grammatical words are removed such 
as articles and possessive pronouns. Only one 
word is not handled in this process, it is the word 
to be disambiguated. Indeed, previous works 
(Loupy et al, 1998) have shown that the form of 
this word could bring interesting clues about its 
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
possible sense. Other pronouns, such as subject 
pronouns, are replaced by a generic PRP tag. 
2.2 Semantic Classification Trees for WSD 
The Semantic Classification Trees (SCT) were 
first introduced by Kuhn and De Mori (1995). It 
can be defined as simple binary decision trees. 
Training data are used in order to build one or 
more trees for each word to be disambiguate. An 
SCT is made up of questions distributed along 
the tree nodes. Then, each test sequence is 
presented to the corresponding trees and follows 
a path along the SCT according to the way the 
questions are answers. When no more question is 
available (arrived at a leaf), the major sense is 
assigned to the test. 
In order to build the trees, the Gini impurity 
(Breiman et al, 1984) was used. It is defined as: 
( )2/1)( 
?
?=
Ss
XsPXG
 
where P(s/X) is the likelihood of sense s given 
the population X. 
At the first step of the tree building process, 
the Gini impurity is computed for each possible 
questions. Then, the best question is selected and 
the population made up of all the examples is 
divided between the ones which answer the 
question (yes branch) and the others (no branch). 
The same process is recursively applied on each 
branch until the maximum tree depth is reached. 
 
In the framework of the SinLexEn system, 
three different trees have been built for each 
word to be disambiguated. They use different 
context size, varying from one to three words on 
each side of the target word. Following is an 
example of three training sequences using 
respectively 1, 2 and 3 words on each side of the 
target (0#sense): 
 
  
-1#make 0#sense 1#of   
 
-2#make -1#more 0#sense 1#to 2#annex  
-3#ceiling -2#add -1#to 0#sense 1#of 2#space 3#and 
 
The number preceding the # character gives the 
position of the word according to the target. The 
set of possible questions for the SCT building 
process is composed of all the words present in 
considered window width. The tree shown in 
Figure 1 was built for the word ?sense? on a 
window width of 3 words. Each node 
corresponds to a question, while leafs contain the 
sense to be assigned to the target. The test 
sequence?1#make 0#sense 1#of will be assigned 
to sense%1:10:00:: sense (?the meaning of a 
word or expression?) from WordNet (Miller et 
al., 1990). For a more detail description of SCT, 
see (Crestan et al, 2003). 
2.3 Semantic in short context 
WSD is much more easy to do for a human 
than for a machine. By simply reading a 
sentence, we can determine at a glance the 
meaning of a word in this particular context. 
However, we are not relying solely on what the 
words look like. The human brain is able to see 
the correlation between ?open a box? and ?open a 
jar?. We have the ability to generalize over 
similar ?concepts?. In order to follow this 
scheme, we used the WordNet?s semantic classes 
(SC). It enables a generalization over words 
sharing the same high-level hyperonym. Because 
the correct SC is not known for each word in 
context, all the possible SC were included in the 
set of questions for a given word and position. 
The WordNet top ontology is separated in 26 SC 
for the nouns and 15 for the verbs. An extended 
description of SC can be found in (Ciaramita and 
Johnson. 2003). In the following example, the 
two first sequences share the same sense (?cause 
to open or to become open?) whereas the last 
Figure 1. SCT example for the target word 'sense' 
-1#in ? 
1#of ? 
-1#of ? 
-1#senses ? -1#make ? 
sense%1:10:00:: 
sense%1:10:00:: sense%1:09:04:: sense%1:09:02:: 
sense%1:09:05:: sense%1:00:00:: 
y n 
y n y n 
y n 
y n 
sequence corresponds to another sense (?start to 
operate or function or cause to start operating or 
functioning?): 
 
0#open 1#box 1#06 1#20 1#23 1#25 1#35 
0#open 1#jar 1#06 1#11 1#23 1#38 1#42 
0#open 1#business 1#04  1#09 1#14   
 
Two of the five SC are common to both words 
box and jar: 
? 06: nouns denoting man-made objects, 
? 23: nouns denoting quantities and units of 
measure. 
However, they have nothing in common with 
the word business.  
Although many wrong SC are proposed for 
each word according to its context, we noticed a 
2% improvement on Senseval-2 data while using 
these ?high level information?. 
2.4 Semantic in full context 
The main improvement for this evaluation is 
the use of semantic clues at a paragraph level. 
Sinequa has developed along the last 5 years a 
large scale semantic dictionary of about 100.000 
entries. All the word of the language are 
organized across a semantic space composed of 
800 dimensions. For example, a word such as 
?diary? is present in the dimensions: calendar, 
story, book and newspaper. It has been wildly 
used in the information retrieval system Intuition 
(Manigot and Pelletier, 1997), (Loupy et al, 
2003).  
For each training sample, we summed the 
semantic vectors of each word. This step results 
on a global semantic vector from which only the 
3 most representative dimensions (with highest 
score) where kept. That additional information 
has been used as possible question in the tree 
building process. Then, the same semantic 
analysis has been done on each test sentence. For 
example, the major dimension represented in the 
next sentence for the word material is 
?newspaper?: 
?furthermore , nothing have yet be say about all the 
research that do not depend on the collection of datum 
by the sociologist ( primary datum ) but instead make 
use of secondary datum - the wealth of material 
already available from other source , such as 
government statistics , personal diary , newspaper , 
and other kind of information .? 
This enables a new vision of the context on a 
wider scale than the one we used with only short 
context SCT. Preliminary experiments carried on 
the Sensenval-2 nouns have shown a 1% 
improvement. Some nouns such as dyke, sense 
and spade have been dramatically improved 
(more than 5%). Although, words such as 
authority and post have had about 5% decrease in 
precision. A first hypothesis can be proposed to 
explain the gain of some words while others have 
lost in precision:  the use of a wide context 
semantic is mostly benefic in the case of 
homonymy, while it is not when dealing with 
polysemy. 
2.5 Semantic similarity for decision system 
In order to select the appropriate sense among 
the three senses proposed by the SCT, a decision 
system was used. It is based on the Intuition 
search engine used on the Default mode: the 
words and the semantic vectors of documents are 
used. The final score is a combination between 
the words score and the semantic score. 
Moreover, all the sentences linked to a given 
sense in the training data were concatenated in 
order to form a unique document (pseudo-
document). Then, for a given test instance, the 
whole paragraph was used to query the engine. 
The pseudo-document?s scores were then used in 
order to select among the three senses proposed 
by the SCT. A 2% improvement have been 
observed during the Senseval-2 evaluation 
campaign while using this strategy. 
3 Maximum clues approach 
Starting from the same preprocessing used for 
the combined approach, we implemented a 
simple approach based on Gini impurity. 
Considering a short context, the Gini impurity is 
computed for all the possible questions in the 
training data (including the questions about 
semantic level). For instance, if the question ?
1#of appears 3 times with the sense S1, 1 time 
with S2 and does not appear in 1 example of 
sense S1 and 2 examples for sense S2, the final 
score for this question is: 
 
G(-1#of) = [1-(3/4)?-(1/4)?] + [1-(1/3)?-(2/3)?] = 0.82 
 
Which corresponds to the Gini impurity of the 
examples where ?1#of is present, plus the Gini 
impurity for the examples where it is not. Then, a 
score is given for each sense according to each 
question. For the previous example, the score S1 
for the question ?1#of is: 
 
Score(S1, ?1#of) = P(S1/-1#of) * [G - G(?1#of)] 
 
Where G is the initial Gini impurity, minus the 
Gini impurity of G(-1#of) and weighted by the 
probability of S1 when ?1#of was observed. 
When disambiguating a test phrase, the score 
for each sense is computed by summing the 
individual score for each question. The highest 
score gives the sense. 
This simple approach has shown similar results 
as those obtained with the combined approach on 
nouns. Unlike the trees, this system is able to 
benefit from all the clues in the training corpus. 
At the opposite, for the SCT, if two questions get 
rather good scores at first stage, only on question 
will be selected in order to build the node. This 
prevents from using clues from the other question 
because its population is (or might be) divided 
between the two branches. 
4 Results and conclusion 
For the third edition of the Senseval campaign, 
the sense repository for the verbs was different, 
using WordsMyth instead of WordNet. The 
proportion of nouns, verbs and adjectives was 
also different. Because of these changes, it is 
difficult to compare this evaluation results with 
the previous ones. 
 Fine Coarse 
SinLexEn 67.2% 74.3% 
SinLexEn2 66.8% 73.6% 
 Table 1:  Precision for both systems 
The precisions of both systems are presented in 
Table 1. The column named Fine corresponds to 
fine grain scores, while the column named 
Coarse is for the coarse grained senses. 
 
Although we are using different strategies, 
both systems give approximately the same results 
for fine grained precision. According to the 
previous evaluation, we can observe almost 5% 
increase in precision. However, this increase 
cannot be taken as significant because of the 
differences between the evaluations. 
A comparative evaluation have to be carried 
now in order to establish if a combination of both 
system could improve the final score. 
References 
L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone 
1984. Classification and Regression Trees, 
Wadsworth. 
M. Ciaramita and M. Johnson. 2003. Supersense 
Tagging of Unknown Nouns in WordNet. In 
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing. 
E. Crestan, M. El-B?ze and C. de Loupy 2001. 
Improving WSD with Multi-Level View of Context 
Monitored by Similarity Measure, Proceedings of 
Senseval-2, 39th ACL. 
E. Crestan, M. El-B?ze, C. de Loupy. 2003. Peut-on 
trouver la taille de contexte optimale en 
d?sambigu?sation s?mantique ?, In Proceedings of 
TALN 2003. 
C. de Loupy, V. Combet and E. Crestan 2003. 
Linguistic resources for Information Retrieval, 
Proceedings ENABLER/ELSNET, International 
Roadmap for Language Resources, Paris. 
R. Kuhn and R. De Mori. 1995. The Application of 
Semantic Classification Trees to Natural Language 
Understanding, IEEE Transactions on Pattern 
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 17(5), 
p 449-460.  
C. de Loupy, M. El-B?ze and P.-F. Marteau. 1998. 
WSD based on three short context methods, 
SENSEVAL Workshop, Herstmontceux. 
L. Manigot, B. Pelletier. 1997. Intuition, une approche 
math?matique et s?mantique du traitement 
d'informations textuelles. Proceedings of 
Fractal'1997. pp. 287-291. Besan?on. 
G. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, and 
K. Miller. 1990. Introduction to WordNet: An on-
line lexical database, International Journal of 
Lexicography, vol. 3(4), p 235-244. 
 
