Robust Models of Human Parsing
Frank Keller
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
keller@inf.ed.ac.uk
1 Robustness and Human Parsing
A striking property of the human parser is its effi-
ciency and robustness. For the vast majority of sen-
tences, the parser will effortlessly and rapidly de-
liver the correct analysis. In doing so, it is robust to
noise, i.e., it can provide an analysis even if the input
is distorted, e.g., by ungrammaticalities. Further-
more, the human parser achieves broad coverage:
it deals with a wide variety of syntactic construc-
tions, and is not restricted by the domain, genre, or
modality of the input.
Current research on human parsing rarely investi-
gates the issues of efficiency, robustness, and broad
coverage, as pointed out by Crocker and Brants
(2000). Instead, most researchers have focussed on
the difficulties that the human parser has with cer-
tain types of sentences. Based on the study of gar-
den path sentences (which involve a local ambiguity
that makes the sentence hard to process), theories
have been developed that successfully explain how
the human parser deals with ambiguities in the in-
put. However, garden path sentences are arguably
a pathological case for the parser; garden paths are
not representative of naturally occurring text. This
means that the corresponding processing theories
face a scaling problem: it is not clear how they can
explain the normal behavior of the human parser,
where sentence processing is highly efficient and
very robust (see Crocker and Brants 2000 for details
on this scalability argument).
This criticism applies to most existing theories
of human parsing, including the classical garden
path model advanced by Frazier and Rayner (1982)
and Frazier (1989), and more recent lexicalist pars-
ing frameworks, of which MacDonald et al (1994)
and MacDonald (1994) are representative examples.
Both the garden path model and the lexicalist model
are designed to deal with idealized input, i.e., with
input that is (locally) ambiguous, but fully well-
formed. A real life parser, however, has to cope
with a large amount of noise, which often renders
the input ungrammatical or fragmentary, due to er-
rors such as typographical mistakes in the case of
text, or slips of the tongue, disfluencies, or repairs
in the case of speech. A quick search in the Penn
Treebank (Marcus et al, 1993) shows that about
17% of all sentences contain parentheticals or other
sentence fragments, interjections, or unbracketable
constituents. Note that this figure holds for carefully
edited newspaper text; the figure is likely to be much
higher for speech. The human parser is robust to
such noise, i.e., it is able to assign an (approximate)
analysis to a sentence even if it is ungrammatical or
fragmentary.
2 Probabilistic Parsing Models
In computational linguistics, probabilistic ap-
proaches to language processing play a central
role. Significant advances toward robust, broad-
coverage parsing models have been made based on
probabilistic techniques such as maximum likeli-
hood estimation or expectation maximization (for
an overview, see Manning and Schu?tze, 1999).
An example of a simple probabilistic pars-
ing model are probabilistic context-free grammars
(PCFGs), which extend the formalism of context-
free grammars (CFGs) by annotating each rule with
a probability. PCFGs constitute an efficient, well-
understood technique for assigning probabilities to
the analyses produced by a context-free grammar.
They are commonly used for broad-coverage gram-
mars, as CFGs large enough to parse unrestricted
text are typically highly ambiguous, i.e., a single
sentence will receive a large number of parses. The
probabilistic component of the grammar can then be
used to rank the analyses a sentence might receive,
and improbable ones can be eliminated.
In the computational linguistics literature, a num-
ber of highly successful extensions to the basic
PCFG model have been proposed. Of particular in-
terest are lexicalized parsing models such as the
ones developed by Collins (1996, 1997) and Carroll
and Rooth (1998).
In the human parsing literature, a PCFG-based
model has been proposed by Jurafsky (1996) and
Narayanan and Jurafsky (1998). This model shows
how different sources of probabilistic information
(such as subcategorization information and rule fre-
quencies) can be combined using Bayesian infer-
ence. The model accounts for a range of disam-
biguation phenomena in linguistic processing. How-
ever, the model is only small scale, and it is not clear
if it can be extended to provide robustness and cov-
erage of unrestricted text.
This problem is addressed by Brants and Crocker
(2000) and Crocker and Brants (2000), who pro-
pose a broad-coverage model of human parsing
based on PCFGs. This model is incremental, i.e.,
it makes word-by-word predictions, thus mimick-
ing the behavior of the human parser. Also, Brants
and Crocker?s (2000) model imposes memory re-
strictions on the parser that are inspired by findings
from the human sentence processing literature.
3 Robust Models of Human Parsing
The main weakness of both the Narayanan/Jurafsky
and the Crocker/Brants model (discussed in the pre-
vious section) is that they have not been evaluated
systematically. The authors only describe the per-
formance of their models on a small set of hand-
picked example sentences. No attempts are made
to test the models against a full set of experimental
materials and the corresponding reading times, even
though a large amount of suitable data are available
in the literature. This makes it very hard to obtain a
realistic estimate of how well these models achieve
the aim of providing robust, broad coverage mod-
els of human parsing. This can only be assessed by
testing the models against realistic samples of unre-
stricted text or speech obtained from corpora.
In this talk, we will present work that aims
to perform such an evaluation. We train a se-
ries of increasingly sophisticated probabilistic pars-
ing models on an identical training set (the Penn
Treebank). These models include a standard un-
lexicalized PCFG parser, a head-lexicalized parser
(Collins, 1997), and a maximum-entropy inspired
parser (Charniak, 2000). We test all three models
on the Embra corpus, a corpus of newspaper texts
annotated with eye-tracking data from 23 subjects
(McDonald and Shillcock, 2003). A series of re-
gression analyses are conducted to determine if per-
sentence reading time measures correlate with sen-
tence probabilities predicted by the parsing models.
Three baseline models are also included in the eval-
uation: word frequency, bigram and trigram prob-
ability (as predicted by a language model), and
part of speech (POS) probability (as predicted by
a POS tagger). Models based on n-grams have al-
ready been used successfully to model eye-tracking
data, both on a word-by-word basis (McDonald and
Shillcock, 2003) and for whole sentences (Keller,
2004).
Our results show that for all three parsing models,
sentence probability is significantly correlated with
reading times measures. However, the models differ
as to whether they predict early or late measures:
the PCFG and the Collins model significantly pre-
dict late reading time measures (total time and gaze
duration), but not early measures (first fixation time
and skipping rate). The Charniak model is able to
significantly predict both early and late measures.
An analysis of the baseline models shows that
word frequency and POS probability only predict
early measures, while bigram and trigram probabil-
ity only predict late measures. This indicates that
the Charniak model is able to predict both early and
late measures because it successfully combines lex-
ical information (word frequencies and POS proba-
bilities) with phrasal information (as modeled by a
PCFG). This finding is in line with Charniak?s own
analysis, which shows that the high performance of
his model is due to the fact that it combines a third-
order Markov grammar with sophisticated phrasal
and lexical features (Charniak, 2000).
4 Implications
The results reported in the previous section have in-
teresting theoretical implications. Firstly, there is a
methodological lesson here: simple baseline mod-
els based on n-gram or POS probabilities perform
surprisingly well as robust, broad coverage models
of human language processing. This is an important
point that has not been recognized in the literature,
as previous models have not been tested on realis-
tic corpus samples, and have not been compared to
plausible baselines.
A second point concerns the role of lexical in-
formation in human parsing. We found that the
best performing model was Charniak?s maximum
entropy-inspired parser, which combines lexical and
phrasal information, and manages to predict both
early and late eye-tracking measures. A number of
existing theories of human parsing incorporate lexi-
cal information (MacDonald et al, 1994; MacDon-
ald, 1994), but have so far failed to demonstrate
how the use of such information can be scaled up
to yield robust, broad coverage parsing models that
can be tested on realistic data such as the Embra
eye-tracking corpus.
Finally, a major challenge that remains is the
crosslinguistic aspect of human parsing. Virtually
all existing computational models have only been
implemented and tested for English data. However,
a wide range of interesting problems arise for other
languages. An examples are head-final languages, in
which the probabilistic information associated with
the head becomes available only at the end of the
phrase, which poses a potential problem for incre-
mental parsing models. Some initial results on a
limited dataset have been obtained by Baldewein
and Keller (2004) for head-final constructions in
German.
References
Baldewein, Ulrike and Frank Keller. 2004. Mod-
eling attachment decisions with a probabilistic
parser: The case of head final structures. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Chicago.
Brants, Thorsten and Matthew W. Crocker. 2000.
Probabilistic parsing and psychological plausi-
bility. In Proceedings of the 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics.
Saarbru?cken/Luxembourg/Nancy.
Carroll, Glenn and Mats Rooth. 1998. Valence in-
duction with a head-lexicalized PCFG. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing. Granada,
pages 36?45.
Charniak, Eugene. 2000. A maximum-entropy-
inspired parser. In Proceedings of the 1st Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. Seattle,
WA, pages 132?139.
Collins, Michael. 1996. A new statistical parser
based on bigram lexical dependencies. In Pro-
ceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. Santa
Cruz, CA, pages 184?191.
Collins, Michael. 1997. Three generative, lexi-
calised models for statistical parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 8th Conference of the European Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Madrid, pages 16?23.
Crocker, Matthew W. and Thorsten Brants. 2000.
Wide-coverage probabilistic sentence processing.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 29(6):647?
669.
Frazier, Lynn. 1989. Against lexical generation of
syntax. In William D. Marslen-Wilson, editor,
Lexical Representation and Process, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Mass., pages 505?528.
Frazier, Lynn and Keith Rayner. 1982. Making
and correcting errors during sentence comprehen-
sion: Eye movements in the analysis of struc-
turally ambiguous sentences. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy 14:178?210.
Jurafsky, Daniel. 1996. A probabilistic model of
lexical and syntactic access and disambiguation.
Cognitive Science 20(2):137?194.
Keller, Frank. 2004. The entropy rate principle as
a predictor of processing effort: An evaluation
against eye-tracking data. In Dekang Lin and
Dekai Wu, editors, Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing. Barcelona.
MacDonald, Maryellen C. 1994. Probabilistic con-
straints and syntactic ambiguity resolution. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes 9:157?201.
MacDonald, Maryellen C., Neal J. Pearlmutter, and
Mark S. Seidenberg. 1994. Lexical nature of syn-
tactic ambiguity resolution. Psychological Re-
view 101:676?703.
Manning, Christopher D. and Hinrich Schu?tze.
1999. Foundations of Statistical Natural Lan-
guage Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini, and
Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large
annotated corpus of English: The Penn Treebank.
Computational Linguistics 19(2):313?330.
McDonald, Scott A. and Richard C. Shillcock.
2003. Low-level predictive inference in reading:
The influence of transitional probabilities on eye
movements. Vision Research 43:1735?1751.
Narayanan, Srini and Daniel Jurafsky. 1998.
Bayesian models of human sentence processing.
In Morton A. Gernsbacher and Sharon J. Derry,
editors, Proceedings of the 20th Annual Confer-
ence of the Cognitive Science Society. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
