Multiple Indexing in an Electronic Kanji Dictionary 
James BREEN 
Monash University 
Clayton 3800, Australia 
jwb@csse.monash.edu.au 
 
Abstract  
Kanji dictionaries, which need to present a 
large number of complex characters in an 
order that makes them accessible by users, 
traditionally use several indexing techniques 
that are particularly suited to the printed 
medium. Electronic dictionary technology 
provides the opportunity of both introducing 
new indexing techniques that are not 
feasible with printed dictionaries, and also 
allowing a wide range of index methods 
with each dictionary. It also allows 
dictionaries to be interfaced at the character 
level with documents and applications, thus 
removing much of the requirement for 
complex index methods. This paper surveys 
the traditional indexing methods, introduces 
some of the new indexing techniques that 
have become available with electronic kanji 
dictionaries, and reports on an analysis of 
the index usage patterns in a major WWW-
based electronic kanji dictionary. This is 
believed to be the first such analysis 
conducted and reported.  
1 Introduction  
Unlike languages written in alphabetic, 
syllabic or similar scripts, languages such as 
Japanese and Chinese, which are written 
using a large number of characters: hanzi in 
Chinese, kanji in Japanese, require two 
distinct sets of dictionaries. These are:  
a. the traditional "word" dictionaries, 
as used in most recorded languages. Such 
dictionaries are usually ordered in some 
recognized phonetic sequence, and typically 
include the pronunciation or reading of the 
word as well as the usual dictionary 
components: part-of-speech, explanation. 
etc.  
b. character dictionaries, which 
typically have an entry for each character, 
and contain such information as the 
classification of the character according to 
shape, usage, components, etc., the 
pronunciation or reading of the character, 
variants of the character, the meaning or 
semantic application of the character, and 
often a selection of words demonstrating the 
use of the character in the language's 
orthography. These dictionaries are usually 
ordered on some visual characteristic of the 
characters.  
A typical learner of Japanese needs to have 
both forms of dictionary, and the process of 
"looking up" an unknown word often 
involves initially using the character 
dictionary to determine the pronunciation of 
one or more of the characters, then using 
that pronunciation as an index to a word 
dictionary, in a process that can be time-
consuming and error-prone.  
The advent of electronic dictionaries has had 
a considerable impact on Japanese 
dictionary usage:  
a. it has facilitated the integration or 
association of character and word 
dictionaries such that a user can index 
between them in a relatively straightforward 
manner. This integration was pioneered by 
the author in the early 1990s (Breen, 1995), 
and is now a common feature of almost all 
hand-held electronic Japanese dictionaries 
and PC-based dictionary packages;  
b. it has allowed the direct transfer of 
words between text documents and 
dictionary software, thus removing the 
often-laborious character identification;  
c. for kanji dictionaries, it has greatly 
increased the number of character indexing 
methods that can effectively be used, and 
has also provided the opportunity for new 
indexing methods that are not available to 
traditional paper dictionaries.  
This paper will concentrate on the issues 
associated with Japanese kanji dictionaries. 
Many of these also apply to Chinese.  
2 Indexing a Kanji Dictionary  
The general problem confronting the 
publication of kanji dictionaries is the large 
number of kanji in use and the absence of an 
intrinsic and recognized lexical order for 
kanji. In the post-war educational reforms in 
Japan, the number of kanji taught in schools 
was restricted to a basic 1,850, which has 
now been increased to 1,945. This set of 
kanji, along with a small set designated for 
use in personal names, accounts for all but a 
small proportion of kanji usage in modern 
Japanese. Many dictionaries and similar 
reference books compiled for students are 
based on this set (Sakade, 1961; Henshall, 
1988; Halpern, 1999; etc.). The main 
computer character-set standard used in 
Japan, JIS X 0208 (JIS, 1997), which 
extends to less-common kanji including 
those used in places-names, has 6,355 kanji. 
This set is the basis for several kanji 
dictionaries (Nelson, 1997; Spahn & 
Hadamitzky, 1996), while larger sets of 
kanji are covered in many dictionaries, e.g. 
the Kodansha Daijiten (Ueda, 1963) has 
14,900 kanji and the 13-volume Morohashi 
Daikanwajiten (Morohashi, 1989) has over 
45,000 kanji.  
In this paper, the term "primary index" has 
been used for the method of ordering the 
kanji entries, and "secondary index" has 
been used for cross-reference lists of kanji 
based on alternative ordering systems.  
The major traditional indexing technique for 
kanji and hanzi dictionaries has been the 
radical system (bushu in Japanese), based on 
214 elements plus about 150 variants. These 
elements are graphic components of the 
character that occur frequently enough to be 
used for indexing purposes. For example, 
the kanji ? (mura: village) is identified by 
the ? radical, and in a dictionary would be 
grouped with other kanji identified by that 
radical (?, ?, ?, ?, etc.), with the 
grouped kanji ordered by the number of 
strokes in the remainder of the kanji. Radical 
systems have been used in Chinese character 
dictionaries for nearly 2,000 years, and the 
dominant 214-radical system was first used 
in the ???? (kangxi zidian) published in 
1716.  
Virtually all major kanji dictionaries 
published in Japan use the radical indexing 
method as the primary index, as do a 
number of dictionaries published elsewhere. 
Some dictionaries use modified or reduced 
sets of radicals. The technique is not simple 
to use, and some skill and practice is 
required in correctly identifying the radical 
and counting the residual strokes. The 
difficulty has been compounded by recent 
simplifications of the glyphs of the kanji, 
which in some cases have modified or 
eliminated the radical.  
There are a number of other techniques used 
for indexing kanji in a dictionary:  
a. reading. The reading or 
pronunciation of a kanji is a common and 
useful method of identification, and virtually 
all kanji dictionaries have a separate 
reading/kanji index. The reading cannot be 
used effectively as the primary index, as in 
Japanese each kanji usually has two sets of 
readings, and some kanji have as many as 
fifteen distinct readings.  
b. shape/stroke. A number of 
techniques have been used to decompose the 
shape of a kanji according to coded patterns. 
One, which was popular in China, is the 
Four-Corner code, which allocates a number 
(0-9) to the pattern of strokes at each corner 
of the character, leading to a four-digit 
index. Another method, which is quite 
popular, is the SKIP (System of Kanji 
Indexing by Patterns) used by Jack Halpern 
in his kanji dictionaries (Halpern, 1990, 
1999). In this, a kanji is typically divided 
into two portions, and a code constructed 
from the division type and the stroke-counts 
in the portions. Thus ? has a SKIP code of 
1-4-3, indicating a vertical division into four 
and three-stroke portions.  
c. school grade. In Japan the kanji to 
be taught in each grade of elementary school 
are prescribed, and some references either 
organize kanji in those groupings or provide 
a secondary index of grades.  
d. stroke count. The number of pen or 
brush strokes making up a kanji, ranging 
from one to over forty, can be an effective 
indexing technique, particularly for the 
simpler kanji. Some dictionaries employ a 
secondary index using the total number of 
strokes in a kanji.  
e. frequency. The ranking of kanji 
according to frequency-of-use can be a 
useful secondary index, especially for the 
commonly used kanji.  
f. code-point. The standardization of 
character set code-points for kanji has led to 
the emergence of dictionaries with these as 
the primary index. The Sanseido Unicode 
Kanji Information Dictionary (Tanaka, 
2000) uses the Unicode code-point as the 
primary index, and the first edition of the 
JIS Kanji Dictionary (Shibano, 1997) used 
the JIS X 0208 code-point. It is interesting 
to note that the second edition (Shibano, 
2002) changed to the traditional radical 
system, with the codepoints being relegated 
to a secondary index.  
A summary of the indices available in a 
selection of dictionaries and references is in 
Table 1. The "P" indicates the primary index 
and an "S" indicates a secondary index. (The 
original Nelson uses a slightly modified 
version of the traditional radical index, and 
the Spahn & Hadamitzky Kanji Dictionary 
uses a simplified 79-radical system. 
  Index Type 
Dictionary Radical Shape Code-point Grade Reading Frequency Stroke Order 
Morohashi (1989) P       S     
Ueda (1963) P       S     
Nelson (1974) P*     S S   S 
Nelson (1997) P     S S     
S&H (1996) P*       S     
S&H (1997) S       S P S 
Halpern (1990) S P   S S S   
Halpern (1999) S P     S S   
Sakade (1961)       P S     
Henshall (1988)       P S   S 
Shibano (1997)     P   S     
Shibano (2002) P   S   S     
Tanaka (2000) S   P         
Table 1: Index Types in Printed Kanji Dictionaries. 
3 Electronic Kanji Dictionaries  
As mentioned above, electronic kanji 
dictionaries have an increased number of 
indexing methods available, and in 
particular have navigational advantages over 
traditional paper dictionaries:  
a. the concept of a "secondary" index 
no longer applies, as every index is capable 
of linking directly to the kanji entries;  
b. dictionary users can choose flexibly 
between index methods according to 
preference, and can select a method 
appropriate to the characteristics of an 
individual kanji;  
c. the above-mentioned capability to 
index directly to a kanji entry from a kanji 
selected from a text or application;  
d. suitable GUIs can enhance the kanji 
lookup process by providing visual cues and 
a degree of interactivity.  
Figures 1 and 2 show the GUIs for the bushu 
and SKIP methods in the kanji dictionary 
module of the JWPce word-processor 
(Rosenthal, 2002).  
Fig. 1: Bushu Lookup GUI 
 
Fig. 2: SKIP Lookup GUI 
Among the new indexing methods 
introduced with electronic kanji dictionaries 
are:  
a. indexing using the meaning of a 
kanji. The compilation of the KANJIDIC 
database (Breen 2004), which contains the 
English meanings for over 12,000 kanji, has 
enabled this technique to be employed. 
Searching for kanji meaning "castle" 
immediately gives ?, "fox" gives ?, etc.  
b. multi-radical searching. Most kanji 
are made up of several basic shapes drawn 
from a set of about 300 patterns. For 
example, the kanji ? (atarashii: new) 
consists of the ?, ? and ? patterns. 
Clearly, a traditional dictionary can only use 
one of these as an index (the index radical of 
? is ?) but an electronic dictionary can use 
all the patterns to identify a kanji. A file of 
the visual components of the 6,355 kanji in 
the JIS X 0208 standard was prepared by a 
team of volunteers and is currently 
maintained by the author. The patterns used 
are similar to the traditional 214 radicals, but 
include common shapes such as ? and ? 
that are not among the 214, and 
distinguishes between shapes such as ? and 
? that are regarded as variants of the same 
radical. The following is an extract from the 
file of kanji with the radical components 
identified.  
? : ? ?  
? : ? ? ?  
? : ? ? ?  
? : ? ? ? ? ?  
This file is inverted, enabling dictionary 
software to identify the kanji containing a 
particular selection of radicals. Figure 3 
shows the multi-radical lookup GUI in 
JWPce, having identified the ? kanji from 
its components.  
 
Fig. 3: Multi-radical Lookup GUI 
New indexing techniques, such as those 
described above, have to date been largely 
confined to non-commercial packages based 
on the author's KANJIDIC project files 
(Breen, 2004). The commercial electronic 
kanji dictionaries in Japan, which are 
typically based on published kanji 
dictionaries, usually only provide radical, 
reading and occasionally stroke-count 
indices.  
4 Usage Patterns in an Electronic Kanji 
Dictionary  
The availability of a large range of indexing 
techniques in an electronic kanji dictionary 
raises the question of how useful they 
actually are to users of such dictionaries, and 
which methods are preferred by users. With 
dictionaries provided as software packages, 
measurement of the usage of the differing 
indexing techniques would be limited to 
such things as surveys of users. To date no 
analysis appears to have been carried out on 
user preferences in indexing methods.  
One form of electronic kanji dictionary 
which is amenable to the direct 
measurement of usage patterns is the kanji 
dictionary component of WWW-based 
Japanese dictionary, such as the WWWJDIC 
server (Breen, 2003) developed by the 
author. The WWWJDIC server provides 
over twenty indices to its database of over 
13,000 kanji, including all the techniques 
mentioned earlier in this paper. The users 
are primarily students of Japanese and non-
native speakers of Japanese.  
The server code at the Monash University 
site was extended to provide detailed 
statistics of the accesses to the kanji 
dictionary module. Information was 
collected over a two-week period, during 
which time over 70,000 accesses to the kanji 
dictionary were made. Table 2 contains a 
breakdown of the accesses by index type. In 
the case of accesses using the multi-radical 
method, it is clear that users frequently have 
to make several selections of radicals to 
reach the correct kanji. From inspection of 
the raw statistics, it appeared that on average 
three accesses were made by each user of 
this method for each target kanji. 
Accordingly, the reported accesses for this 
method have been reduced to make a more 
meaningful comparison with the other 
methods. The "Direct" method involves 
access to the kanji in a word encountered in 
another dictionary function, whereas the 
"Cut-Paste" method refers to kanji 
transferred from another WWW page or 
application.  
Access Method Access % 
Multi-radical 24.8 
Reading (ja) 24.1 
Direct 17.6 
Cut-Paste 9.7 
English Meaning 9.2 
Code-Point 6.4 
Stroke Count 2.8 
Reading (cn,ko) 1.5 
Radical/Bushu 1.4 
SKIP, 4-Corner 1.3 
Dictionary Index 0.6 
Other 0.6 
Table 2: Kanji Access Statistics 
(In 20.3% of the accesses recorded in Table 
2, the user opted to make a follow-on search 
of one of the "word" dictionaries on the 
server using a kanji as a search key.)  
These results are interesting for a number of 
reasons:  
a. the index methods which dominate 
are either those which have only become 
available with electronic dictionaries: multi-
radical, direct access, English meaning, etc., 
or those which can only be used via a 
secondary index in traditional dictionaries.  
b. the high levels of access based on 
the code-points of the kanji, which includes 
the Direct, Cut-Paste and Code-Point 
methods is an indication of the usefulness of 
operating an electronic dictionary in 
association with other software. The 
relatively high result for the Code-Point 
method, which involves supplying the server 
with the hexadecimal representation of the 
kanji's code, was investigated further. Over 
60% of these accesses used the Unicode 
code-point, and on inspection of the server 
logs it transpired that most arrived as 
linkages from other WWW servers and 
database collections dealing with kanji and 
hanzi.  
c. the relatively low usage of the 
traditional radical index and the SKIP 
method is an indication that while they may 
be suitable and accepted in paper 
dictionaries as the primary indices, they play 
only a minor role in electronic dictionaries, 
where users clearly find other methods more 
useful.  
It is recognized that this survey of usage 
patterns reflects both the preferences of the 
particular set of users who have chosen to 
use it, and the biases introduced by the 
interface, which in the case of HTML forms 
is often not as easily used as, for example, a 
tailored GUI. It is, however, a strong 
indication of the sorts of indexing methods 
which are found to be useful by such a 
group. It is also worth noting that despite the 
clumsiness of the Multi-radical selection 
form, which has over 200 check-boxes, it is 
clearly among the most popular kanji index 
methods.  
5 Conclusion  
Kanji dictionaries have traditionally been 
published using indexing techniques 
developed for use in the printed medium. 
Electronic dictionary techniques provide the 
opportunity both to interface such 
dictionaries directly with text, and also to 
introduce new techniques more suited to the 
computer-human interface. Implementation 
of such techniques and the subsequent 
measurement of their usage in an 
environment where users can choose from a 
variety of indexing methods indicates a high 
level of acceptance of and preference for the 
new indexing techniques.  
References  
Breen, J.W. 1995. Building an Electronic 
Japanese-English Dictionary, JSAA 
Conference, Brisbane.  
Breen, J.W. 2003. A WWW Japanese 
Dictionary, in "Language Teaching at the 
Crossroads", Monash Asia Institute, 
Monash University Press  
Breen, J.W. 2004. KANJIDIC - Kanji 
Database Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/ka
njidic.html  
Rosenthal, G. 2002. JWPce: Japanese Word 
Processor 
http://www.physics.ucla.edu/~grosenth/j
wpce.html  
Halpern, J. 1990. New Japanese-English 
Character Dictionary, Kenkyusha/NTC.  
Halpern, J. 1999. Kanji Learner's 
Dictionary, Kodansha  
Henshall, K.G. 1988. A Guide to 
Remembering Japanese Characters, 
Tuttle.  
Japanese Industrial Standards Committee. 
1997. JIS X 0208-1997 7-bit and 8-bit 
Coded Kanji Sets for Information 
Interchange, Japanese Standards 
Association.  
Morohashi, T. et al (1989) Daikanwa Jiten, 
(Large Character Dictionary), Taishukan.  
Nelson, A.N. 1974. The Modern Reader's 
Japanese-English Character Dictionary, 
(second revised edition), Tuttle.  
Nelson, A.N. revised Haig, J.H. 1997. The 
New Nelson Japanese-English Character 
Dictionary, Tuttle.  
Sakade, F. et al 1961. A Guide to Reading 
& Writing Japanese, (second edition), 
Tuttle.  
Shibano, K. et al 1997, 2002. JIS Kanji 
Dictionary, (first and second editions), 
Japan Standards Association.  
Spahn, M. & Hadamitzky, W. 1996. The 
Kanji Dictionary, Tuttle.  
Spahn, M. & Hadamitzky, W. 1997. Kanji & 
Kana: A Handbook of the Japanese 
Writing System Tuttle.  
Tanaka, Y. et al 2000. Unicode Kanji 
Information Dictionary, Sanseido.  
Ueda, K. et al 1963. Daijiten, (Large 
Character Dictionary), Kodansha.  
