Stemming the Qur?an 
 
Naglaa Thabet 
School of English Literature, Language and Linguistics 
University of Newcastle  
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, NE1 7RU 
n.a.thabet@ncl.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
  In natural language, a stem is the 
morphological base of a word to which affixes can 
be attached to form derivatives. Stemming is a 
process of assigning morphological variants of 
words to equivalence classes such that each class 
corresponds to a single stem. Different stemmers 
have been developed for a wide range of languages 
and for a variety of purposes. Arabic, a highly 
inflected language with complex orthography, 
requires good stemming for effective text analysis. 
Preliminary investigation indicates that existing 
approaches to Arabic stemming fail to provide 
effective and accurate equivalence classes when 
applied to a text like the Qur?an written in 
Classical Arabic. Therefore, I propose a new 
stemming approach based on a light stemming 
technique that uses a transliterated version of the 
Qur?an in western script. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
  Stemming has been widely used in several 
fields of natural language processing such as data 
mining, information retrieval, and multivariate 
analysis. Some applications of multivariate 
analysis of text involve the identification of lexical 
occurrences of word stems in a text. Such lexical 
analysis, in which the frequency of word 
occurrences is significant, cannot be done without 
some form of stemming. 
  In morphology, variants of words which have 
similar semantic interpretations are considered to 
belong to the same stem and to be equivalent for 
purposes of text analysis and information retrieval. 
For this reason, a number of stemming algorithms 
have been developed in an attempt to reduce such 
morphological variants of words to their common 
stem. 
  Various stemming algorithms for a number of 
languages have been proposed. The structure of 
these stemmers range from the simplest technique, 
such as removing suffixes, to a more complicated 
design which uses the morphological structure of 
words to derive a stem.  
  In case of Arabic, several stemming algorithms 
have been developed. The major inadequacy of 
existing systems to stem the Qur?an results from 
the fact that most of them deal with Modern 
Standard Arabic as their input text; the language of 
the Qur?an is Classical Arabic. Orthographic 
variations and the use of diacritics and glyphs in 
the representation of the language of Classical 
Arabic increase the difficulty of stemming. In 
many respects, the Qur?an, with its unique lexicon 
and orthography requires dedicated attention.  
  Therefore, I have developed a new light 
stemmer that uses the Qur?an in western 
transliteration to improve the effectiveness of the 
stemming of the text.  
 
2 Stemming in Arabic 
  Arabic belongs to the Semitic family of 
languages, and as such differs from European 
languages morphologically, syntactically and 
semantically. The Arabic language is somewhat 
difficult to deal with due to its orthographic 
variations and its complex morphological structure. 
Xu et al provide an overview of the challenges the 
Arabic language creates for information retrieval 
[10, 11].  
2.1 Arabic Morphology 
  The grammatical system of the Arabic 
language is based on a root-and-affix structure and 
is considered as a root-based language. Most 
Arabic words are morphologically derived from a 
list of roots, to which many affixes can be attached 
to form surface words. Most of these roots are 
made up of three consonants which convey 
semantics. In addition to the different forms of the 
Arabic word that results from the derivational and 
inflectional process, most prepositions, 
conjunctions, pronouns, and possession forms are 
attached to the Arabic surface form. 
2.2 Arabic Orthography 
  Orthographic variations are prevalent in Arabic. 
Vocalized texts make use of diacritics to represent 
short vowels. The omission of such diacritics in 
non-vocalized text gives rise to ambiguity, 
specifically if words are read out of context. Other 
spelling variations include changing the letter ? to 
? at the end of a word and replacing ? ,?, and ? with 
plain ?. A sense of discrimination and a good 
knowledge of grammar and usage are required if 
one is to avoid misreading a word. 
  In terms of multivariate analysis of text as well 
as information retrieval, the combination of a rich 
morphology and a pervasively ambiguous writing 
system results in a degree of complexity such that 
some sort of pre-processing and classification is 
required. Therefore, stemming is very important 
for Arabic text analysis.   
 
2.3 Approaches to Arabic Stemming 
 
  Several stemming algorithms for Arabic have 
been proposed based on different principles; each 
produces rather different sets of stem 
classifications. It is possible to evaluate these 
stemming algorithms by the accuracy of the results 
they produce. Larkey et al gives a good summary 
of stemming approaches for the Arabic language 
[9]. The most common approaches used in Arabic 
stemming are the light and the root-based 
stemmers. 
  Root-based Stemming is based on removing all 
attached prefixes and suffixes in an attempt to 
extract the root of a given Arabic surface word. 
Several morphological analyzers have been 
developed, e.g. Buckwalter [3], Khoja and Garside 
[7] and Darwish [5].  
  Light Stemming is used not to produce the 
linguistic root of a given Arabic surface form, but 
to remove the most frequent suffixes and prefixes. 
The most common suffixation includes duals and 
plurals for masculine and feminine, possessive 
forms, definite articles, and pronouns. Several light 
stemmers have been developed, all based on suffix 
and prefix removal and normalization. Examples 
of light stemmers include: Aljlayl & Frieder?s 
Stemmer [2], Darwish?s Al-Stem [6], Chen & 
Gey?s TREC 2002 Stemmer [4], and Larkey et 
al.?s U Mass Stemmer [8, 9]. 
  All light stemmers adhere to the same steps of 
normalization and stemming. The main difference 
among them is the number of prefixes and suffixes 
removed from each one. During the normalization 
process, all diacritics, punctuation, and glyphs are 
removed. The light stemmers had different 
stopword lists consisting of Arabic pronouns, 
particles and the like removed after minimal 
normalization. Test results of previous researchers 
as in [2, 8], proved that the light stemmer achieved 
superior performance over the root-based approach 
since it reduces sense ambiguity by grouping 
semantically related words into the same class. 
  Although light stemming can correctly classify 
many variants of words into large stem classes, it 
can fail to classify other forms that should go 
together. For example, broken plurals for nouns 
and adjectives do not get conflated with their 
singular forms, and past tense verbs do not get 
conflated with their present tense forms, because 
they retain some affixes and internal differences.  
 
3 Stemming the Qur?an 
 
  My main objective for stemming the Qur?an is 
to prepare the text as data for multivariate analysis 
of the lexical semantics of the Qur?an using self-
organizing maps in which words with similar 
meanings are placed at the same or neighbouring 
points so that the topological relations among them 
represent degrees of semantic similarity. This work 
requires the construction of vector space models of 
the suras (chapters) of the Qur?an such that each 
sura is represented by a vector indicating the 
occurrence frequency of variables. This involves 
counting the occurrences of lexical items in the 
Qur?an. Such a task cannot be done accurately 
without some sort of stemming of words in the text. 
  The Qur?an has two significant textual features. 
The first is that the Classical Arabic language in 
which the Qur?an is written has created difficulty 
in reading and understanding it, even for the Arabs 
themselves. Its lexicon, morphology and grammar 
are more complicated than Modern Standard 
Arabic. It, therefore, requires specific attention. 
  The second significant point is the wide use of 
vocalization. Diacritics (,? ,?  ? , ,? ,?  ? , ,?  ? ) representing 
short vowels are prevalent in the Qur?an. Every 
word, even every letter is marked with a diacritic. 
The meanings of the words in the Qur?an require 
the use of such diacritical marks; otherwise it 
becomes very difficult to comprehend their 
meanings especially when out of context.  
  Vocalized text, in Arabic includes diacritics for 
short vowels and other details. Thus, a word could 
have several meanings when marked with different 
diacritics. (see Table 1). 
 
Word Transliteration Meaning 
?????  mulk reign 
?????  malik king 
?????  malak angel 
?????  khuluq morals 
?????  khalq creation 
?????  amah female slave 
??????  ummah nation 
Table 1. Orthographic variations of words 
 
  For those reasons stemming the Qur?an is not 
an easy task. In principal, the way existing Arabic 
stemmers are structured indicates that they will not 
work reliably on the stemming of the Qur?an. Most 
of the existing stemmers rely on Modern Standard 
Arabic as their input script. This modern form of 
Arabic is a simplified form of Classical Arabic. 
The main differences between both forms are that 
Modern Standard Arabic has less orthographic 
variation, a less complicated lexicon and a more 
modern vocabulary. The following two points are 
also significant regarding the use of existing 
stemmers to stem the Qur?an. 
  First, the root-based algorithm increases word 
ambiguity. The root algorithm stems the surface 
form to a base form from which the word variants 
are derived. A major problem with this type of 
stemmer is that many word variants are different in 
meaning, though they originate from one identical 
root. For example words like hasib (he thought), 
hasaba (he counted), and hasab (of noble origin) 
are all derived from the same root hsb. Therefore, 
the over-stemming of the root algorithm results in 
the deterioration of the retrieval performance as 
compared to the light stemming algorithm.  As 
noted by Khoja [7], another problem that the 
stemmer faces is that some of the letters that 
appear to be affixes are in fact part of the word.  
  Second, the light stemmers perform better than 
the root-based algorithms, though not entirely 
efficiently. All initial steps of the light-based 
algorithms require normalization which involves 
the removal of diacritics. Thus, if diacritics were 
removed from the words listed in Table 1 above, 
there would be no other way to indicate the 
difference in meaning of all word variants. The 
normalization technique, though it appears simple, 
increases ambiguity. If normalization was applied 
to the Qur?an, it would leave the text highly 
ambiguous. As the case with root-based algorithms, 
some of the suffixes and prefixes to be removed 
using light stemmers are originally part of the word.  
  Therefore, I propose a new light stemming 
approach that gives better results, particularly 
when applied to a rich vocalized text as the Qur?an. 
The stemmer is basically a light stemmer to 
remove prefixes and suffixes and is applied to a 
version of the Qur?an transliterated into western 
script. 
  The use of the transliteration is highly 
significant for resolving the problem of diacritics 
in the Qur?an. Given that the transliteration of the 
Qur?an is available in western script, the problem 
of diacritics is resolved, since in the transliterated 
version of the Qur?an, each diacritic is translated 
into a letter in Roman script. Thus, the ambiguity 
that arises when removing the diacritics from the 
Arabic text is avoided. So, while the word ???  
could have three different meanings when it 
appears without diacritics in Arabic, in 
transliteration each meaningful word has a single 
representation. (see Table 1). 
  Another advantage of using transliteration is 
avoiding the removal of suffixes and prefixes that 
sometimes could be part of the word. The prefix ? 
(pronounced as ?bi?) is very common in Arabic. 
This preposition resembles the letter ? of the 
Arabic alphabet. Thus, removing this letter 
indistinguishably would cause ambiguity if the 
letter is part of a word. For example, in words as 
????  (sea), ??????  (proof), the letter ? is part of the 
word, whereas, in ?????  (with a pen) the ? is a 
preposition. If the diacritics that are marking the 
letter ? were removed, the first letter in each word 
would be exactly the same, though different in 
pronunciation. Therfore, stemming the words from 
the prefix ?, in general, would be incorrect. When 
transliterating the same three words ( ???? , ?????? , 
????? ) the prefix ? would be represented as ba (bahr), 
bu (burhan), and bi (biqalam) respectively. The 
proposed light stemmer would only include ?bi? as 
a prefix thus, avoiding removing the other 
representations of that letter. A few stems in 
Arabic begin with ?bi?; those are added to a 
stopword list to be removed before stemming. The 
same process would be applied to the other 
prefixes to be removed such as ( ?? ,? ,? ,? ,? ), (la/li, 
ka, fa, sa, al).    
 
3.1 Implementation 
 
  The stemmer has been developed for the 
windows environment in Delphi, an object-
oriented programming language which creates a 
graphical user interface to facilitate the 
presentation of its applications. 
 
a. Preprocessing 
  Rather than the use of Arabic script, the system 
uses a Roman transliteration of the Qur?an which is 
formatted on the Web as HTML. This presents a 
particular problem that need to be remedied before 
the text can be stemmed. The problem is that some 
phonemically important distinctions, i.e., 
distinctions that are represented by different graphs 
in Arabic, are shown using HTML tags; when the 
HTML files are saved as text, these tags disappear, 
and the distinctions are lost. The Arabic phonemes 
(? ,? ,? ,? ,? ,? ,?) are represented in the HTML 
transliteration files as underlined (a, t, h, s, d, th, th) 
respectively. 
   Preprocessing involves (1) stripping out the 
entire HTML markup, and (2) before doing so, 
replacing all the above phonemes with the 
following characters: a^, t^, h^, s^, d^, z^, z*. The 
result is a pure text file in ASCII codes. 
 
 
 
 
b. Construction of stopword list 
 
  A stopword list of all the words to be excluded 
from the stemming process was compiled. The list 
was manually constructed using a concordance of 
the Qur?anic lexicon compiled by Abd Al-Baqi [1]. 
It consists of words which begin with the same 
letters which compose Arabic prefixes. Arabic 
pronouns, prepositions and names of people and 
places were also included in the stopword list. 
 
c.   Construction of stemmer 
 
  The algorithm for the stemmer is as follows: 
 
Step 1. Prefix Stemming 
  The program reads individual suras from text 
files, replaces all uppercase letters with lower case 
letters and constructs a list of word lists, where 
each word list contains all the words in a single 
sura. It then reads single words from each word list 
and compares the current word supplied as a 
parameter to each successive word in the stopword 
list. If the word is found in the stopword list, it is 
excluded from prefix stemming; otherwise it 
adheres to following procedures: 
? Remove prefixes (wa, fa, la, li, lil, bi, ka, 
sa, s^a, al) 
? After stemming, the word is inserted 
back into the word list. 
 
Step 2. Suffix Stemming 
  Six groups of suffixes are identified ranging 
from one-letter suffixes to six-letter suffixes. The 
system starts stemming the words in the word lists 
from the longest prefixes (six-letter prefixes) to the 
three-letter prefixes. Stemming the one and two-
letter suffixes causes some ambiguity, since some 
of the suffixes could sometimes be part of the word 
stem. To resolve this problem, the stemmer sorts 
the words alphabetically. In the sorted list of words, 
if a given sequence displays a variety of suffixes 
including one and two-letter suffixes, the suffixes 
are removed and the stem is retained, otherwise the 
word is left intact. 
 
3.2 Results 
 
  Preliminary results for seven long suras 
selected randomly and representing 6% of the 
Qur?an show that the stemmer achieves an 
accuracy of 99.6% for prefix stemming and 97% 
for suffix stemming. As the stemmer is being used, 
some inaccuracies were detected, but investigation 
shows that they are mainly to do with erroneous 
lexical items in the transliterated Qur?an. An 
evaluation of the system with accuracy figures 
should be available shortly for the entire Qur?anic 
text. 
4   Conclusion 
 
  Stemming is important for a highly inflected 
language as Arabic. Existing Arabic stemmers, 
though produced effective results in some 
applications, failed to provide good stemming for 
the Qur?an. Therefore, I have proposed this new 
method of using transliterated script, which gave 
good preliminary results. Ongoing work on the 
system is focused on improving the accuracy of the 
results either by modifying the algorithms or 
editing the transliteration of the Qur?an. 
 
References 
 
[1] M.F. Abd Al-Baqi. 1987. Al-Ma&jam Al-
Mufahras li-alfaz Al-Qur?an Al-Karim. Dar 
Al-hadith, Cairo. 
[2] M. Aljlayl and O. Frieder. 2002. On Arabic 
Search: Improving the retrieval effectiveness 
via a light stemming approach. In 
Proceedings of CIKM?02, VA, USA. 
[3] T. Buckwalter. 2002. Buckwalter Arabic 
Morphological Analyzer Version 1.0. 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatologE
ntry.jsp?catologId=LDC2002L49. 
[4] A. Chen and F. Gey. 2002. Building an 
Arabic stemmer for information retrieval. In 
Proceedings of TREC 2002, Gaithersburg, 
Maryland. 
[5] K. Darwish. An Arabic  Morphological 
analyzer. 
http://www.glue.umd.edu/~Kareem/research/  
[6] K. Darwish and D. Oard. 2002. CLIR 
Experiments at Maryland for TREC-2002: 
Evidence combination for Arabic-English 
Retrieval. In Proceedings of TREC 2002, 
Gaithersburg, Maryland. 
[7] S. Khoja and R. Garside. 1999. Stemming 
Arabic text. Computing Department, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster. 
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/computing/use
rs/khoja/stemmer.ps
[8] L. S. Larkey and M. E. Connell. 2001. 
Arabic information retrieval at UMass. In 
Proceedings of  TREC 2001, Gaithersburg: 
NIST, 2001. 
[9] L. S. Larkey, L. Ballesteros and M.E.Connell. 
2002. Improving stemming for Arabic 
information retrieval: Light Stemming and 
co-occurrence analysis. In SIGIR 2002, 
Tampere, Finland: ACM, 2002. 
[10] J. Xu, A. Fraser and R. Weischedel. 2001. 
TREC 2001 cross-lingual retrieval at BBN. 
In TREC 2001, Gaithersburg: NIST, 2001. 
[11] J. Xu, A. Fraser and R. Weischedel. 2002. 
Empirical studies in strategies for Arabic 
information retrieval. In  SIGIR 2002, 
Tampere, Finland: ACM, 2002. 
