Evaluation Measures Considering Sentence Concatenation for
Automatic Summarization by Sentence or Word Extraction
Chiori Hori, Tsutomu Hirao and Hideki Isozaki
NTT Communication Science Laboratories
{chiori, hirao, isozaki}@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp
Abstract
Automatic summaries of text generated through
sentence or word extraction has been evaluated by
comparing them with manual summaries generated
by humans by using numerical evaluation measures
based on precision or accuracy. Although sentence
extraction has previously been evaluated based only
on precision of a single sentence, sentence concate-
nations in the summaries should be evaluated as
well. We have evaluated the appropriateness of sen-
tence concatenations in summaries by using eval-
uation measures used for evaluating word concate-
nations in summaries through word extraction. We
determined that measures considering sentence con-
catenation much better reflect the human judgment
rather than those based only on the precision of a
single sentence.
1 Introduction
Summarization Target and Approach
The amount of text is explosively increasing day by
day, and it is becoming very difficult to manage in-
formation by reading all the text. To manage infor-
mation easily and find target information quickly,
we need technologies for summarizing text. Al-
though research into text summarization started in
the 1950?s, it is still largely in the research phase
(Mani and Maybury, 1999). Several projects on
text summarization have been carried out. 1 In
these project, text summarization has so far focused
on summarizing single documents through sentence
extraction. Recently, summarizing multiple docu-
ments with the same topic has been made a tar-
get. The major approach to extracting sentences that
have significant information is statistical, i.e., su-
pervised learning from parallel corpora consisting
of original texts and their summarization (Kupiec et
1SUMMAC in the Tipster project by DARPA (http://www-
nlpir.nist.gov/related projects/tipster summac) and DUC in
the TIDES project (http://duc.nist.gov/) in the U.S. TSC
(http://research.nii.ac.jp/ntcir/) in the NTCIR by NII (The Na-
tional Institute of Informatica) in Japan.
al., 1995) (Aone et al, 1998) (Mani and Bloedorn,
1998).
Several summarization techniques for multime-
dia including image, speech, and text have been re-
searched. Manually transcribed newswire speech
(TDT data) and meeting speech (Zechner, 2003)
have been set as summarization targets. The need
to automatically generate summaries from speech
has led to research on summarizing transcription re-
sults obtained by automatic speech recognition in-
stead of manually transcribed speech (Hori and Fu-
rui, 2000a). This summarization approach is word
extraction (sentence compaction) that attempts to
extract significant information, exclude acoustically
and linguistically unreliable words, and maintain
the meanings of the original speech.
The summarization approaches that have been
mainly researched so far are extracting sentences
or words from original text or transcribed speech.
There has also been research on generating an ?ab-
stract? like the much higher level summarization
composed freely by human experts (Jing, 2002).
This approach includes not only extracting sen-
tences but also combining sentences to generate new
sentences, replacing words, reconstructing syntactic
structure, and so on.
Evaluation Measures for Summarization
Metrics that can be used to accurately evaluate
the various appropriateness to summarization are
needed.The simplest and probably the ideal way of
evaluating automatic summarization is to have hu-
man subjects read the summaries and evaluate them
in terms of the appropriateness of summarization.
However, this type of evaluation is too expensive
for comparing the efficiencies of many different ap-
proaches precisely and repeatedly. We thus need au-
tomatic evaluation metrics to numerically validate
the efficiency of various approaches repeatedly and
consistently.
Automatic summaries can be evaluated by com-
paring them with manual summaries generated by
humans. The similarities between the targets and
the automatically processed results provide metrics
indicating the extent to which the task was accom-
plished. The similarity that can better reflect sub-
jective judgments is a better metric.
To create correct answers for automatic sum-
marization, humans generate manual summaries
through sentence or word extraction. However,
references consisting of manual summaries vary
among humans. The problems in validating auto-
matic summaries by comparing them with various
references are as follows:
? correct answers for automatic results cannot be
unified because of subjective variation,
? the coverage of correct answers in the collected
manual summaries is unknown, and
? the reliability of references in the collected
manual summaries is not always guaranteed.
When the similarity between automatic results
and references is used for the evaluation metrics,
the similarity determination function counts over-
lapping of each component or sequence of com-
ponents in the automatic results. If concatenations
between components in a summary had no mean-
ing, the overlap of a single component between the
automatic results and the references can represent
the extent of summarization. However, concatena-
tions between sentences or words have meanings,
so some concatenations of sentences or words in the
automatic summaries sometimes generate meanings
different from the original. The evaluation metrics
for summarization should thus consider each con-
catenation between components in the automatic re-
sults.
To evaluate sentence automatically generated
with taking consideration word concatenation into
by using references varied among humans, vari-
ous metrics using n-gram precision and word ac-
curacy have been proposed: word string preci-
sion (Hori and Furui, 2000b) for summarization
through word extraction, ROUGE (Lin and Hovy,
2003) for abstracts, and BLEU (Papineni et al,
2002) for machine translation. Evaluation metrics
based on word accuracy, summarization accuracy
(SumACCY), using a word network made by merg-
ing manual summaries has been proposed (Hori and
Furui, 2001). In addition, to solve the problems for
the coverage of correct answers and the reliability
of manual summaries as correct answers, weighted
summarization accuracy (WSumACCY) in which
SumACCY is weighted by the majority of the hu-
mans? selections, has been proposed (Hori and Fu-
rui, 2003a).
In contrast, summarization through sentence ex-
traction has been evaluated using only single sen-
tence precision. Sentence extraction should also be
evaluated using measures that take into account sen-
tence concatenations, the coverage of correct an-
swers, and the reliability of manual summaries.
This paper presents evaluation results of auto-
matic summarization through sentence or word ex-
traction using the above mentioned metrics based on
n-gram precision and sentence/word accuracy and
examines how well these measures reflect the judg-
ments of humans as well.
2 Evaluation Metrics for Extraction
In summarization through sentence or word extrac-
tion under a specific summarization ratio, the order
of the sentences or words and the length of the sum-
maries are restricted by the original documents or
sentences. Metrics based on the accuracy of the
components in the summary is a straight-forward
approach to measuring similarities between the tar-
get and automatic summaries.
2.1 Accuracy
In the field of speech recognition, automatic recog-
nition results are compared with manual transcrip-
tion results. The conventional metric for speech
recognition is recognition accuracy calculated based
on word accuracy:
ACCY
= Len ? (Sub + Ins + Del)Len ? 100[%], (1)
where Sub, Ins, Del, and Len are the numbers
of substitutions, insertions, deletions, and words in
the manual transcription, respectively. Although
word accuracy cannot be used to directly evaluate
the meanings of sentences, higher accuracy indi-
cates that more of the original information has been
preserved. Since the meaning of the original doc-
uments is generated by combining sentences, this
metric can be applied to the evaluation for sentence
extraction. Sentence accuracy defined by eq. (1)
with words replaced by sentences represents how
much the automatic result is similar to the answer
and how well it preserves the original meaning.
Accuracy is the simplest and most efficient metric
when the target for the automatic summaries can be
set as only one answer. However, there are usually
multiple targets for each automatic summary due to
the variation in manual summarization among hu-
mans. Therefore, it is not easy to use accuracy to
evaluate automatic summaries. Subjective variation
results into two problems:
? how to consider all possible correct answers in
the manual summaries, and
? how to measure the similarity between the
evaluation sentence and multiple manual sum-
maries.
If we could collect all possible manual sum-
maries, the one most similar to the automatic re-
sult could be chosen as the correct answer and used
for the evaluation. The sentence or word accuracy
compared with the most similar manual summary is
denoted as NrstACCY. However, in real situations,
the number of manual summaries that could be col-
lected is limited. The coverage of correct answers in
the collected manual summaries is unknown. When
the coverage is low, the summaries are compared
with inappropriate targets, and the NrstACCY ob-
tained by such comparison does not provide an effi-
cient measure.
2.2 N-gram Precision
One way to cope with the coverage problem is to
use local matching of components or component
strings with all the manual summaries instead of
using a measure comparing a word sequence as a
whole sentence, such as NrstACCY. The similar-
ity can be measured by counting the precision, i.e.,
the number of sentence or word n-gram overlapping
between the automatic result and all the references.
Even if there are multiple targets for an automatic
summary, the precision of components in each orig-
inal can be used to evaluate the similarity between
the automatic result and the multiple references.
Precision is an efficient way of evaluating the sim-
ilarity of component occurrence between automatic
results and targets with a different order of compo-
nents and different lengths.
In the evaluation of summarization through ex-
traction, a component occurring in a different loca-
tion in the original is considered to be a different
component even if it is the same component as one
in the result. When an answer for the automatic re-
sult can be unified and the lengths of the automatic
result and its answer are the same, accuracy counts
insertion errors and deletion errors and thus has both
the precision and recall characteristics.
Since meanings are basically conveyed by word
strings rather than single words, word string preci-
sion (Hori and Furui, 2000b) can be used to evalu-
ate linguistic precision and the maintenance of the
original meanings of an utterance. In this method,
word strings of various lengths, that is n-grams, are
used as components for measuring precision. The
extraction ratio, pn, of each word string consist-
ing of n words in a summarized sentence, V =
v1, v2, . . . , vM , is given by
pn =
M
?
m=n
?(vm?n+1, . . . , vm?1, vm)
M ? n + 1 , (2)
where
?(un) =
{ 1 if un ? Un
0 if un /? Un , (3)
un: each word string consisting of n words
Un: a set of word strings consisting of n words
in all manual summarizations.
When n is 1, pn corresponds to the precision of
each word, and when n is the same length as a
summarized sentence (n = M ), pn indicates the
precision of the summarized sentence itself.
2.3 Summarization Accuracy: SumACCY
Summarization accuracy (SumACCY) was pro-
posed to cope with the problem of correct answer
coverage and various references among humans
(Hori and Furui, 2001). To cover all possible correct
answers for summarization using a limited number
of manual summaries, all the manual summaries
are merged into a word network. In this evaluation
method, the word sequence in the network closest to
the evaluation word sequence is considered to be the
target answer. The word accuracy of the automatic
result is calculated in comparison with the target an-
swer extracted from the network.
Since summarization is processed by extracting
words from an original; the words cannot be re-
placed by other words, and the order of words can-
not be changed. Multiple manual summaries can
be combined into a network that represents the vari-
ations. Each set of words that could be extracted
from the network consists of words and word strings
occurring at least once in all the manual summaries.
The network made by the manual summaries can
be considered to represent all possible variations of
correct summaries.
SUB The beautiful cherry blossoms in Japan bloom in spring
A The cherry blossoms in Japan
B cherry blossoms in Japan bloom
C beautiful cherry bloom in spring
D beautiful cherry blossoms in spring
E The beautiful cherry blossoms bloom
Table 1: Example of manual summarization by sen-
tence compaction
<s> </s> The beautiful cherry blossoms inJapan bloomin spring
Figure 1: Word network made by merging manual
summaries
The sentence ?The beautiful cherry blossoms in
Japan bloom in spring.? is assumed to be manually
summarized as shown in Table 1. In this example,
five words are extracted from the nine words. There-
fore, the summarization ratio is 56%. The variations
of manual summaries are merged into a word net-
work, as shown in Fig. 1. We use <s> and </s>
as the beginning and ending symbols of a sentence.
Although ?Cherry blossoms bloom in spring? is not
among the manual answers in Table 1, this sentence,
which could be extracted from the network, is con-
sidered a correct answer.
When references consisting of manual sum-
maries cannot cover all possible answers and lack
the appropriate answer for an automatic summary,
SumACCY calculated using such a network is bet-
ter than NrstACCY for evaluating the automatic re-
sult. This evaluation method gives a penalty for
each word concatenation in the automatic results
that is excluded in the network, so it can be used
to evaluate the sentence-level appropriateness more
precisely than matching each word in all the refer-
ences.
2.4 Weighted SumACCY: WSumACCY
In SumACCY, all possible sets of words extracted
from the network of manually summarized sen-
tences are equally used as target answers. How-
ever, the set of words containing word strings se-
lected by many humans would presumably be better
and give more reliable answers. To obtain reliability
that reflects the majority of selections by humans,
the summarization accuracy is weighted by a pos-
terior probability based on the manual summariza-
tion network. The reliability of a sentence extracted
from the network is defined as the product of the
ratios of the number of subjects who selected each
word to the total number of subjects. The weighted
summarization accuracy is given by
WSumACCY
= P? (v1 . . . vM |R) ? SumACCY
P? (v?1 . . . v?M? |R)
, (4)
where P? (v1 . . . vM |R) is the reliability score of a
set of words v1 . . . vM in the manual summariza-
tion network, R, and M represents the total num-
ber of words in the target answer. The set of words
v?1 . . . v?M? represents the word sequence that maxi-
mizes the reliability score, P? (?|R), given by
P? (v1 . . . vM |R)
=
( M
?
m=2
C(vm?1, vm|R)
HR
)
1
M?1
, (5)
where vm is the m-th word in the sentence ex-
tracted from the network as the target answer, and
C(x, y|R) indicates the number of subjects who se-
lected the word connection of x and y. Here, ?word
connection? means an arc in the manual summariza-
tion network. HR is the number of subjects.
2.5 Evaluation Experiments
Newspaper articles and broadcast news speech were
automatically summarized through sentence extrac-
tion and word extraction respectively under the
given summarization ratio, which is the ratio of the
numbers of sentences or words in the summary to
that in the original.
The automatic summarization results were sub-
jectively evaluated by ten human subjects. The sub-
jects read these summaries and rated each one from
1 (incorrect) to 5 (perfect). The automatic sum-
maries were also evaluated by using the numerical
metrics SumACCY, WSumACCY, NrstACCY,
and n-gram precision (1 ? n ? 5) in compari-
son with reference summaries generated by humans.
The precisions of 1-gram, . . ., 5-gram are denoted
PREC1, . . ., PREC5. The numerical evaluation re-
sults were averaged over the number of automatic
summaries.
Note that the subjects who judged the automatic
summaries did not include anyone who generated
the references. To examine the similarity of the hu-
man judgments and that of the manual summaries,
the kappa statistics, ?, was calculated using eq. (A-
1) in the Appendix.
Finally, to examine how much the evaluation
measures reflected the human judgment, the correla-
tion coefficients between the human judgments and
the numerical evaluation results were calculated.
Sentence extraction
Sixty articles in Japanese newspaper published in
94, 95, and 98 were automatically summarized with
a 30% summarization ratio. Half the articles were
general news report (NEWS), and other half were
columns (EDIT).
The automatic summarization was performed us-
ing a Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Hirao et al,
2003), random extraction (RDM), the lead method
(LEAD) extracting sentences from the head of ar-
ticles. In comparison with these automatic sum-
maries, manual summaries (TSC) was also evalu-
ated.
These 4 types of summaries, SVM, RDM, LEAD,
and TSC were read and rated 1 to 5 by 10 humans.
The summaries were evaluated in terms of extrac-
tion of significance information (SIG), coherence
of sentences (COH), maintenance of original mean-
ings (SEM), and appropriateness of summary as a
whole (WHOLE).
To numerically evaluate the results using the ob-
jective metrics, 20 other human subjects gener-
ated manual summaries through sentence extrac-
tion. These manual summaries were set as the target
set for the automatic summaries.
Word extraction
Japanese TV news broadcasts aired in 1996 were
automatically recognized and summarized sentence
by sentence (Hori and Furui, 2003b). They con-
sisted of 50 utterances by a female announcer. The
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) rate for the 20k word vo-
cabulary was 2.5%, and the test-set perplexity was
54.5. Fifty utterances with word recognition accu-
racy above 90%, which was the average rate over the
50 utterances, were selected and used for the evalu-
ation. The summarization ratio was set to 40%.
Nine automatic summaries with various summa-
rization accuracies from 40% to 70% and a manual
summary (SUB) were selected as a test set. These
ten summaries for each utterance were judged in
terms of the appropriateness of the summary as a
whole (WHOLE).
To numerically evaluate the results using the ob-
jective metrics, 25 humans generated manual sum-
maries through word extraction. These manual
summaries were set as a target set for the automatic
summaries, and merged into a network. Note that a
set of 24 manual summaries made by other subjects
was used as the target for SUB.
2.6 Evaluation Results
Figures 2 and 3 show the correlation coefficients
between the judgments of the subjects and the nu-
merical evaluation results for EDIT and NEWS.
They show that the measures based on accuracy
much better reflected human judgments than those
of the n-gram precisions for evaluating SIG and
WHOLE for both EDIT and NEWS. On the other
hand, PREC2 better reflected the human judgments
for evaluating COH and SEM. These results show
that measures taking into account sentence concate-
nations better reflected human judgments than sin-
gle component precision. The precisions of longer
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SIG COH SEM WHOLE
C
or
re
la
tio
n 
co
ef
fic
ie
nt
Evaluation point
SumACCY
WSumACCY
  NrstACCY
PREC1
PREC2
PREC3
PREC4
PREC5
Figure 2: Correlation coefficients between human
judgment and numerical evaluation results for EDIT
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SIG COH SEM WHOLE
C
or
re
la
tio
n 
co
ef
fic
ie
nt
Evaluation point
SumACCY
WSumACCY
  NrstACCY
PREC1
PREC2
PREC3
PREC4
PREC5
Figure 3: Correlation coefficients between hu-
man judgment and numerical evaluation results for
NEWS
sentence strings (PREC3 to PREC5) didn?t reflect
the human judgments for all the conditions. These
results show that meanings of the original article can
maintain by the concatenations of only a few sen-
tences in summarization through sentence extrac-
tion.
Table 2 lists the kappa statistics for the manual
summaries and the human judgments for EDIT and
NEWS. The manual results varied among humans
DATA SUMMARIES ?
EDIT manual summaries 0.35
NEWS manual summaries 0.39
Table 2: Kappa statistics for manual summaries and
human judgments for sentence extraction.
and the similarity among humans was low. The
kappa statistics for NEWS is slightly higher than
that for EDIT. The difference of similarities among
manual summaries is due to the difference in struc-
tures of information in each article. Although the
articles in EDIT had a discourse structure, NEWS
had isolated and stereotyped information scattered
throughout the articles.
While the human judgments for NEWS were sim-
ilar, those for EDIT varied.The difficulty in evaluat-
ing COH and SEM in EDIT is due to the variation
in both manual summaries and human judgment.
Figure 4 shows the correlation coefficients be-
tween the judgments of the subjects and the numer-
ical evaluation results for summaries of broadcast
news speech through word extraction. Table 3 lists
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
WHOLE
C
or
re
la
tio
n 
co
ef
fic
ie
nt
s
Evaluation point
PREC1
PREC2
PREC3
PREC4
PREC5
SumACCY
WSumACC
NrstACCY  
Figure 4: Correlation coefficients between human
judgment and numerical evaluation results for sum-
maries through word extraction
the kappa statistics for the manual summaries and
the human judgments for summaries through word
extraction. In word extraction, the human judg-
DATA SUMMARIES ?
Broadcast news manual summaries 0.47
Table 3: Kappa statistics for manual summaries and
human judgments for word extraction
ments and the manual summaries were very similar
among the subjects.
As shown in figure 4, WSumACCY yielded the
best correlation to the human judgments. This
means that the correctness as a sentence and the
weight (that is how many subjects support the ex-
tracted phrases in summarized sentences) are im-
portant in summarization through word extraction.
In comparison with the results of sentence extrac-
tion in Figures 2 and 3, PREC1 effectively reflected
the human judgments for word extraction. Since in
the manual summarized sentences through word ex-
traction under the low summarization ratio, the sen-
tences were summarized based on significance word
extraction rather than syntactic structure mainte-
nance to generate grammatically correct sentences.
3 Conclusion
We have presented the results of evaluating
the appropriateness of the sentence concatena-
tions in summaries generated using SumACCY,
WSumACCY, NrstACCY and n-gram precision.
We found that the measures taking into account sen-
tence concatenation much better reflected the judg-
ments of humans than did the single sentence pre-
cision, so the concatenation of sentences in sum-
maries should be evaluated.
Although the human judgments and the man-
ual summaries for word extraction did not vary
much among the subjects, those for sentence extrac-
tion for single article summarization greatly varied
among the subjects. As a result, it is very difficult to
set correct answers for single article summarization
through sentence extraction.
Future works involves experiments to examine
the efficiency of each numerical measures in re-
sponse to the coverage of correct answers.
4 Acknowledgments
We thank NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation)
for providing the broadcast news database. We
also thank Prof. Sadaoki Furui at Tokyo Institute
of Technology for providing the summaries of the
broadcast news speech.
References
C. Aone, M. Okurowski, and J. Gorlinsky. 1998.
Trainable scalable summarization using robust
NLP and machine learning. In Proceedings ACL,
pages 62?66.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational
Linguistics, 22(2):249?254.
T. Hirao, K. Takeuchi, H. Isozaki, Y. Sasaki, and
E. Maeda. 2003. SVM-based multi-document
summarization integrating sentence extraction
with bunsetsu elimination. IEICE Trans. Inf. &
Syst., E86-D(9):1702?1709.
C. Hori and S. Furui. 2000a. Automatic speech
summarization based on word significance and
linguistic likelihood. In Proceedings ICASSP,
volume 3, pages 1579?1582.
C. Hori and S. Furui. 2000b. Improvements in
automatic speech summarization and evaluation
methods. In Proceedings ICSLP, volume 4,
pages 326?329.
C. Hori and S. Furui. 2001. Advances in auto-
matic speech summarization. In Proceedings Eu-
rospeech, volume 3, pages 1771?1774.
C. Hori and S. Furui. 2003a. Evaluation methods
for automatic speech summarization. In Proceed-
ings Eurospeech, pages 2825?2828.
C. Hori and S. Furui. 2003b. A new approach to
automatic speech summarization. IEEE Transac-
tions on Multimedia, 3:368?378.
H. Jing. 2002. Using hidden markov modeling to
decompose human-written summaries. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 28(4):527?543.
J. Kupiec, J. Pedersen, and F. Chen. 1995. A train-
able document summarizer. In Proceedings of
the 18th ACM-SIGIR, pages 68?73.
Chin-Yew Lin and E. H. Hovy. 2003. Auto-
matic evaluation of summaries using n-gram
co-occurrence statistics. In Proceedings HLT-
NAACL.
I. Mani and E. Bloedorn. 1998. Machine learning
of general and user-focused summarization. In
Proceedings of the 15th National Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 821?826.
I. Mani and M. Maybury. 1999. Advances in Auto-
matic Text Summarization. The MIT Press.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu. 2002.
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings ACL.
K. Takeuchi and Y. Matsumoto. 2001. Relation be-
tween text structure and linguistic clues: An in-
vestigation on text structure of newspaper arti-
cles. Mathematical Linguistics, 22(8).
K. Zechner. 2003. Automatic summarization of
open-domain multiparty dialogues in diverse
genres. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):447?
485.
Appendix
? is given by
? = P (A) ? P (E)1 ? P (E) , (A-1)
where P (A) and P (E) are the probabilities of hu-
man agreement and chance agreement, respectively,
so ? is adjusted by the possibility of chance agree-
ment. This measure was used to assess agreement of
human selections for discourse segmentation (Car-
letta, 1996).
In this study, kappa was calculated using a table
of objects and categories (Takeuchi and Matsumoto,
2001). P (A) was calculated using
P (A) = 1N
N
?
i=1
Si, (A-2)
where N is the number of trials to select one class
among all classes, and Si is the probability that two
humans at least agree at the i-th selection:
Si =
m
?
j=1
nij C2
kC2
, (A-3)
where k and m are the number of subjects and
classes, respectively. When the task is sentence or
word extraction, the number of classes is two, i.e.,
extract/not extract. The numerator of eq. (A-3)
shows the sum of the combinations that two humans
at least agree for each class; nij is the number of hu-
mans who select the j-th class at the i-th selection.
P (E) is the probability of chance agreement by
at least two humans:
P (E) =
m
?
j=1
pj2, (A-4)
where pj is the probability of selecting the j-th class
given by
Pj =
N
?
i=1
nij
Nk , (A-5)
where the total number of humans who select the j-
th class for each trial is divided by the total number
of trials performed by all humans.
