The Duluth Lexical Sample Systems in SENSEVAL-3
Ted Pedersen
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota
Duluth, MN 55812
tpederse@d.umn.edu
http://www.d.umn.edu/?tpederse
Abstract
Two systems from the University of Minnesota,
Duluth participated in various SENSEVAL-3 lexi-
cal sample tasks. The supervised learning system
is based on lexical features and bagged decision
trees. It participated in lexical sample tasks for
the English, Spanish, Catalan, Basque, Romanian
and MultiLingual English-Hindi data. The unsuper-
vised system uses measures of semantic relatedness
to find the sense of the target word that is most re-
lated to the senses of its neighbors. It participated
in the English lexical sample task.
1 Introduction
The Duluth systems participated in various lexical
sample tasks in SENSEVAL-3, using both super-
vised and unsupervised methodologies.
The supervised lexical sample system that partic-
ipated in SENSEVAL-3 is the Duluth3 (English) or
Duluth8 (Spanish) system as used in SENSEVAL-
2 (Pedersen, 2001b). It has been renamed for
SENSEVAL-3 as Duluth-xLSS, where x is a one let-
ter abbreviation of the language to which it is be-
ing applied, and LSS stands for Lexical Sample Su-
pervised. The idea behind this system is to learn
three bagged decision trees, one using unigram fea-
tures, another using bigram features, and a third
using co?occurrences with the target word as fea-
tures. This system only uses surface lexical fea-
tures, so it can be easily applied to a wide range
of languages. For SENSEVAL-3 this system partici-
pated in the English, Spanish, Basque, Catalan, Ro-
manian, and MultiLingual (English-Hindi) tasks.
The unsupervised lexical sample system is based
on the SenseRelate algorithm (Patwardhan et al,
2003) for word sense disambiguation. It is known
as Duluth-ELSU, for English Lexical Sample Un-
supervised. This system relies on measures of
semantic relatedness in order to determine which
sense of a word is most related to the possible
senses of nearby content words. This system de-
termines relatedness based on information extracted
from the lexical database WordNet using the Word-
Net::Similarity package. In SENSEVAL-3 this sys-
tem was restricted to English text, although in fu-
ture it and the WordNet::Similarity package could
be ported to WordNets in other languages.
This paper continues by describing our super-
vised learning technique which is based on the use
of bagged decision trees, and then introduces the
dictionary based unsupervised algorithm. We dis-
cuss our results from SENSEVAL-3, and conclude
with some ideas for future work.
2 Lexical Sample Supervised
The Duluth-xLSS system creates an ensemble of
three bagged decision trees, where each is based
on a different set of features. A separate ensemble
is learned for each word in the lexical sample, and
only the training data that is associated with a par-
ticular target word is used in creating the ensemble
for that word.
This approach is based on the premise that these
different views of the training examples for a given
target word will result in classifiers that make com-
plementary errors, and that their combined perfor-
mance will be better than any of the individual clas-
sifiers that make up the ensemble. A decision tree
is learned from each of the three representations of
the training examples. Each resulting classifier as-
signs probabilities to every possible sense of a test
instance. The ensemble is created by summing these
probabilities and assigning the sense with the largest
associated probability.
The objective of the Duluth-xLSS system?s par-
ticipating in multiple lexical sample tasks is to test
the hypothesis that simple lexical features identified
using standard statistical techniques can provide
reasonably good performance at word sense disam-
biguation. While we doubt that the Duluth-xLSS
approach will result in the top ranked accuracy in
SENSEVAL-3, we believe that it should always im-
prove upon a simple baseline like the most frequent
sense (i.e., majority classifier), and may be compet-
itive with other more feature?rich approaches.
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
2.1 Feature Sets
The first feature set is made up of bigrams, which
are consecutive two word sequences that can occur
anywhere in the context with the ambiguous word.
To be selected as a feature, a bigram must occur two
or more times in the training examples associated
with the target word, and have a log-likelihood ratio
(G2) value ? 6.635, which is associated with a p-
value of .01.
The second feature set is based on unigrams, i.e.,
one word sequences, that occur five or more times in
the training data for the given target word. Since the
number of training examples for most words is rel-
atively small (100-200 instances in many cases) the
number of unigram features that are actually identi-
fied by this criteria are rather small.
The third feature set is made up of co?occurrence
features that represent words that occur on the im-
mediate left or right of the target word. In effect,
these are bigrams that include the target word. To
be selected as features these must occur two or more
times in the training data and have a log?likelihood
ratio (G2) value ? 2.706, which is associated with a
p-value of .10. Note that we are using a more lenient
level of significance for the co?occurrences than the
bigrams (.10 versus .01), which is meant to increase
the number of features that include the target word.
The Duluth-xLSS system is identical for each of
the languages to which it is applied, except that
in the English lexical sample we used a stoplist of
function words, while in the other tasks we did not.
The use of a stoplist would likely be helpful, but
we lacked the time to locate and evaluate candi-
date stoplists for other languages. For English, un-
igrams in the stop list are not included as features,
and bigrams or co?occurrences made up of two stop
words are excluded. The stop list seems particularly
relevant for the unigram features, since the bigram
and co?occurrence feature selection process tends
to eliminate some features made up of stop words
via the log?likelihood ratio score cutoff.
In all of the tasks tokenization was based on
defining a word as a white space separated string.
There was no stemming or lemmatizing performed
for any of the languages.
2.2 Decision Trees
Decision trees are among the most widely used ma-
chine learning algorithms.
They perform a general to specific search of a fea-
ture space, adding the most informative features to a
tree structure as the search proceeds. The objective
is to select a minimal set of features that efficiently
partitions the feature space into classes of observa-
tions and assemble them into a tree. In our case, the
observations are manually sense?tagged examples
of an ambiguous word in context and the partitions
correspond to the different possible senses.
Each feature selected during the search process is
represented by a node in the learned decision tree.
Each node represents a choice point between a num-
ber of different possible values for a feature. Learn-
ing continues until all the training examples are ac-
counted for by the decision tree. In general, such
a tree will be overly specific to the training data
and not generalize well to new examples. Therefore
learning is followed by a pruning step where some
nodes are eliminated or reorganized to produce a
tree that can generalize to new circumstances.
When a decision tree is bagged (Breiman, 1996),
all of the above is still true. However, what is differ-
ent is that the training data is sampled with replace-
ment during learning. This is instead of having the
training data as a static or fixed set of data. This
tends to result in a learned decision tree where out-
liers or anomalous training instances are smoothed
out or eliminated (since it is more likely that the
resampling operation will find more typical train-
ing examples). The standard approach in bagging
it to learn multiple decision trees from the same
training data (each based on a different sampling of
the data), and then create an averaged decision tree
from these trees.
In our experiments we learn ten bagged decision
trees for each feature set, and then take the resulting
averaged decision tree as a member in our ensemble.
Thus, to create each ensemble, we learn 30 decision
trees, ten for each feature set. The decision trees
associated with each feature set are averaged into
a single tree, leaving us with three decision trees
in the ensemble, one which represents the bigram
features, another the unigrams, and the third the co?
occurrence features.
Our experience has been that variations in learn-
ing algorithms are far less significant contributors
to disambiguation accuracy than are variations in
the feature set. In other words, an informative fea-
ture set will result in accurate disambiguation when
used with a wide range of learning algorithms, but
there is no learning algorithm that can perform well
given an uninformative or misleading set of fea-
tures. Therefore, our interest in these experiments
is more in the effect of the different features sets
than in the variations that would be possible if we
used learning algorithms other than decision trees.
We are satisfied that decision trees are a reason-
able choice of learning algorithm. They have a long
history of use in word sense disambiguation, dat-
ing back to early work by (Black, 1988), and have
fared well in comparative studies such as (Mooney,
1996) and (Pedersen and Bruce, 1997). In the for-
mer they were used with unigram features and in the
latter they were used with a small set of features that
included the part-of-speech of neighboring words,
three collocations, and the morphology of the am-
biguous word. In (Pedersen, 2001a) we introduced
the use of decision trees based strictly on bigram
features.
While we might squeeze out a few extra points
of performance by using more complicated meth-
ods, we believe that this would obscure our abil-
ity to study and understand the effects of different
kinds of features. Decision trees have the further
advantage that a wide range of implementations are
available, and they are known to be robust and ac-
curate across a range of domains. Most important,
their structure is easy to interpret and may provide
insights into the relationships that exist among fea-
tures and more general rules of disambiguation.
2.3 Software Resources
The Duluth-xLSS system is based completely on
software that is freely available. All of the software
mentioned below has been developed at the Univer-
sity of Minnesota, Duluth, with the exception of the
Weka machine learning system.
The Ngram Statistics Package (NSP) (Banerjee
and Pedersen, 2003a) version 0.69 was used to iden-
tify the lexical features for all of the different lan-
guages. NSP is written in Perl and is freely available
for download from the Comprehensive Perl Archive
(CPAN) (http://search.cpan.org/dist/Text-NSP) or
SourceForge (http://ngram.sourceforge.net).
The SenseTools package converts unigram, bi-
gram, and co?occurrence features as discov-
ered by NSP into the ARFF format required
by the Weka Machine Learning system (Witten
and Frank, 2000). It also takes the output of
Weka and builds our ensembles. We used ver-
sion 0.03 of SenseTools, which is available from
http://www.d.umn.edu/?tpederse/sensetools.html.
Weka is a freely available Java based suite of
machine learning methods. We used their J48
implementation of the C4.5 decision tree learn-
ing algorithm (Quinlan, 1986), which includes
support for bagging. Weka is available from
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/
A set of driver scripts known as the DuluthShell
integrates NSP, Weka, and SenseTools, and is avail-
able from the same page as SenseTools. Version 0.3
of the DuluthShell was used to create the Duluth-
xLSS system.
3 Lexical Sample Unsupervised
The unsupervised Duluth-ELSU system is a dictio-
nary based approach. It uses the content of WordNet
to measure the similarity or relatedness between the
senses of a target word and its surrounding words.
The general idea behind the SenseRelate algo-
rithm is that a target word will tend to have the sense
that is most related to the senses of its neighbors.
Here we define neighbor as a content word that oc-
curs in close proximity to the target word, but this
could be extended to include words that may be syn-
tactically related without being physically nearby.
The objective of the Duluth-ELSU system?s par-
ticipation in the English lexical sample task is to test
the hypothesis that disambiguation based on mea-
sures of semantic relatedness can perform effec-
tively even in very diverse text and possibly noisy
data such as is used for SENSEVAL-3.
3.1 Algorithm Description
In the SenseRelate algorithm, a window of context
around the target word is selected, and a set of can-
didate senses from WordNet is identified for each
content word in the window. Assume that the win-
dow of context consists of 2n + 1 words denoted
by wi, ?n ? i ? +n, where the target word is
w0. Further let |wi| denote the number of candidate
senses of word wi, and let these senses be denoted
by si,j , 1 ? j ? |wi|. In these experiments we used
a window size of 3, which means we considered a
content word to the right and left of the target word.
Next the algorithm assigns to each possible sense
k of the target word a Scorek computed by adding
together the relatedness scores obtained by compar-
ing the sense of the target word in question with ev-
ery sense of every non?target word in the window of
context using a measure of relatedness. The Score
for sense s0,k is computed as follows:
Scorek =
n
?
i=?n
|wi|
?
j=1
relatedness(s0,k, si,j), i 6= 0
That sense with the highest Score is judged to be
the most appropriate sense for the target word. If
there are on average a senses per word and the win-
dow of context is N words long, there are a2?(N?
1) pairs of sets of senses to be compared, which in-
creases linearly with N .
Since the part of speech of the target word is
given in the lexical sample tasks, this information is
used to limit the possible senses of the target word.
However, the part of speech of the other words in
the window of context was unknown. In previous
experiments we have found that the use of a part of
speech tagger has the potential to considerably re-
duce the search space for the algorithm, but does not
actually affect the quality of the results to a signifi-
cant degree. This suggests that the measure of relat-
edness tends to eventually identify the correct part
of speech for the context words, however, it would
certainly be more efficient to allow a part of speech
tagger to do that apriori.
In principle any measure of relatedness can be
employed, but here we use the Extended Gloss
Overlap measure (Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003b).
This assigns a score to a pair of concepts based
on the number of words they share in their Word-
Net glosses, as well as the number of words shared
among the glosses of concepts to which they are di-
rectly related according to WordNet. This particular
measure (known as lesk in WordNet::Similarity) has
the virtue that it is able to measure relatedness be-
tween mixed parts of speech, that is between nouns
and verbs, adjectives and nouns, etc. Measures of
similarity are generally limited to noun?noun and
possibly verb?verb comparisons, thus reducing their
generality in a disambiguation system.
3.2 Software Resources
The unsupervised Duluth-ELSU system is freely
available, and is based on version 0.05 of
the SenseRelate algorithm which was devel-
oped at the University of Minnesota, Duluth.
SenseRelate is distributed via SourceForge at
http://sourceforge.net/projects/senserelate. This
package uses WordNet::Similarity (version 0.07)
to measure the similarity and relatedness among
concepts. WordNet::Similarity is available from
the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network at
http://search.cpan.org/dist/WordNet-Similarity.
4 Experimental Results
Table 1 shows the results as reported for the various
SENSEVAL-3 lexical sample tasks. In this table we
refer to the language and indicate whether the learn-
ing was supervised (S) or unsupervised (U). Thus,
Spanish-S refers to the system Duluth-SLSS. Also,
the English and Romanian lexical sample tasks pro-
vided both fine and coarse grained scoring, which is
indicated by (f) and (c) respectively. The other tasks
only used fine grained scoring. We also report the
results from a majority classifier which simply as-
signs each instance of a word to its most frequent
sense as found in the training data (x-MFS). The
majority baseline values were either provided by a
task organizer, or were computed using an answer
key as provided by a task organizer.
Table 1: Duluth-xLSy Results
System (x-y) Prec. Recall F
English-S (f) 61.80 61.80 61.80
English-MFS (f) 55.20 55.20 55.20
English-U (f) 40.30 38.50 39.38
English-S (c) 70.10 70.10 70.10
English-MFS (c) 64.50 64.50 64.50
English-U (c) 51.00 48.70 49.82
Romanian-S (f) 71.40 71.40 71.40
Romanian-MFS (f) 55.80 55.80 55.80
Romanian-S (c) 75.20 75.20 75.20
Romanian-MFS (c) 59.60 59.60 59.60
Catalan-S 75.37 76.48 75.92
Catalan-MFS 66.36 66.36 66.36
Basque-S 60.80 60.80 60.80
Basque-MFS 55.80 55.80 55.80
Spanish-S 74.29 75.02 74.65
Spanish-MFS 67.72 67.72 67.72
MultLing-S 58.20 58.20 58.20
MultLing-MFS 51.80 51.80 51.80
4.1 Supervised
The results of the supervised Duluth-xLSS system
are fairly consistent across languages. Generally
speaking it is more accurate than the majority clas-
sifier by approximately 5 to 9 percentage points de-
pending on the language. The Romanian results are
even better than this, with Duluth-RLSS attaining
accuracies more than 15 percentage points better
than the majority sense.
We are particularly pleased with our results for
Basque, since it is an agglutinating language and
yet we did nothing to account for this. We tok-
enized all the languages in the same way, by sim-
ply defining a word to be any string separated by
white spaces. While this glosses over many dis-
tinctions between the languages, in general it still
seemed to result in sufficiently informative features
to create reliable classifiers. Thus, our unigrams,
bigrams, and co?occurrences are composed of these
words, and we find it interesting that such simple
and easy to obtain features fare reasonably well.
This suggests to use that these techniques might
form a somewhat language independent foundation
upon which more language dependent disambigua-
tion techniques might be built.
4.2 Unsupervised
The unsupervised system Duluth-ELSU in the En-
glish lexical sample task did not perform as well as
the supervised majority classifier method, but this
is not entirely surprising. The unsupervised method
made no use of the training data available for the
task, nor did it use any of the first sense information
available in WordNet. We decided not to use the
information that WordNet provides about the most
frequent sense of a word, since that is based on the
sense?tagged corpus SemCor, and we wanted this
system to remain purely unsupervised.
Also, the window of context used was quite nar-
row, and only consisted of one content word to the
left and right of the target word. It may well be that
expanding the window, or choosing the words in
the window on criteria other than immediate prox-
imity to the target word would result in improved
performance. However, larger windows of context
are computationally more complex and we did not
have sufficient time during the evaluation period to
run more extensive experiments with different sized
windows of context.
As a final factor in our evaluation, Duluth-ELSU
is a WordNet based system. However, the verb
senses in the English lexical sample task came
from WordSmyth. Despite this our system re-
lied on WordNet verb senses and glosses to make
relatedness judgments, and then used a mapping
from WordNet senses to WordSmyth to produce re-
portable answers. There were 178 instances where
the WordNet sense found by our system was not
mapped to WordSmyth. Rather than attempt to cre-
ate our own mapping of WordNet to WordSmyth,
we simply threw these instances out of the evalua-
tion set, which does lead to somewhat less coverage
for the unsupervised system for the verbs.
5 Future Work
The Duluth-xLSS system was originally inspired
by (Pedersen, 2000), which presents an ensemble
of eighty-one Naive Bayesian classifiers based on
varying sized windows of context to the left and
right of the target word that define co-occurrence
features. However, the Duluth-ELSS system only
uses a three member ensemble to explore the ef-
ficacy of combinations of different lexical features
via simple ensembles. We plan to carry out a more
detailed analysis of the degree to which unigram, bi-
gram, and co?occurrence features are useful sources
of information for disambiguation.
We will also conduct an analysis of the comple-
mentary and redundant nature of lexical and syn-
tactic features, as we have done in (Mohammad and
Pedersen, 2004a) for the SENSEVAL-1, SENSEVAL-
2, and line, hard, serve, and interest data. The Syn-
taLex system (Mohammad and Pedersen, 2004b)
also participated in the English lexical sample task
of SENSEVAL?3 and is a sister system to Duluth-
ELSS. It uses lexical and syntactic features with
bagged decision trees and serves as a convenient
point of comparison. We are particularly inter-
ested to see if there are words that are better dis-
ambiguated using syntactic versus lexical features,
and in determining how to best combine classifiers
based on different feature sets in order to attain im-
proved accuracy.
The Duluth-ELSU system is an unsupervised ap-
proach that is based on WordNet content, in partic-
ular relatedness scores that are computed by mea-
suring gloss overlaps of the candidate senses of a
target word with the possible senses of neighbor-
ing words. There are several variations to this ap-
proach that can easily be taken, including increas-
ing the size of the window of context, and the use
of measures of relatedness other than the Extended
Gloss Overlap method. We are also interested in
choosing words that are included in the window of
context more cleverly. For example, we are study-
ing the possibility of letting the window of context
be defined by words that make up a lexical chain
with the target word.
The Duluth-ELSU system could be adapted for
use in the all-words task as well, where all content
words in a text are assigned a sense. One important
issue that must be resolved is whether we would at-
tempt to disambiguate a sentence globally, that is by
assinging the senses that maximize the relatedness
of all the words in the sentence at the same time.
The alternative would be to simply proceed left to
right, fixing the senses that are assigned as we move
through a sentence. We are also considering the use
of more general discourse level topic restrictions on
the range of possible senses in an all-words task.
We also plan to extend our study of comple-
mentary and related behavior between systems to
include an analysis of our supervised and unsu-
pervised results, to see if a combination of super-
vised and unsupervised systems might prove advan-
tageous. While the level of redundancy between
supervised systems can be rather high (Moham-
mad and Pedersen, 2004a), we are optimistic that a
corpus based supervised approach and a dictionary
based unsupervised approach might be highly com-
plementary.
6 Conclusions
This paper has described two lexical sample sys-
tems from the University of Minnesota, Duluth that
participated in the SENSEVAL-3 exercise. We found
that our supervised approach, Duluth-xLSS, fared
reasonably well in a wide range of lexical sample
tasks, thus suggesting that simple lexical features
can serve as a firm foundation upon which to build a
disambiguation system in a range of languages. The
unsupervised approach of Duluth-ELSU to the En-
glish lexical sample task did not fare as well as the
supervised approach, but performed at levels com-
parable to that attained by unsupervised systems in
SENSEVAL-1 and SENSEVAL-2.
7 Acknowledgments
This research has been partially supported by a
National Science Foundation Faculty Early CA-
REER Development award (#0092784), and by two
Grants?in?Aid of Research, Artistry and Scholar-
ship from the Office of the Vice President for Re-
search and the Dean of the Graduate School of the
University of Minnesota.
Satanjeev Banerjee, Jason Michelizzi, Saif Mo-
hammad, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Amruta Pu-
randare have all made significant contributions to
the development of the various tools that were used
in these experiments. This includes the Ngram
Statistics Package, SenseRelate, SenseTools, the
DuluthShell, and WordNet::Similarity. All of this
software is freely available at the web sites men-
tioned in this paper, and make it possible to easily
reproduce and extend the results described in this
paper.
References
S. Banerjee and T. Pedersen. 2003a. The design,
implementation, and use of the Ngram Statistics
Package. In Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Text Processing
and Computational Linguistics, pages 370?381,
Mexico City, February.
S. Banerjee and T. Pedersen. 2003b. Extended
gloss overlaps as a measure of semantic related-
ness. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
pages 805?810, Acapulco, August.
E. Black. 1988. An experiment in computa-
tional discrimination of English word senses.
IBM Journal of Research and Development,
32(2):185?194.
L. Breiman. 1996. The heuristics of instability in
model selection. Annals of Statistics, 24:2350?
2383.
S. Mohammad and T. Pedersen. 2004a. Combin-
ing lexical and syntactic features for supervised
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 25?32, Boston, MA.
S. Mohammad and T. Pedersen. 2004b. Comple-
mentarity of lexical and simple syntactic features:
The Syntalex approach to SENSEVAL-3. In Pro-
ceedings of the Third International Workshop on
the Evaluation of Systems for the Semantic Anal-
ysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain.
R. Mooney. 1996. Comparative experiments on
disambiguating word senses: An illustration of
the role of bias in machine learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, pages 82?
91, May.
S. Patwardhan, S. Banerjee, and T. Pedersen. 2003.
Using measures of semantic relatedness for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the
Fourth International Conference on Intelligent
Text Processing and Computational Linguistics,
pages 241?257, Mexico City, February.
T. Pedersen and R. Bruce. 1997. A new supervised
learning algorithm for word sense disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 604?
609, Providence, RI, July.
T. Pedersen. 2000. A simple approach to building
ensembles of Naive Bayesian classifiers for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the First
Annual Meeting of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 63?69, Seattle, WA, May.
T. Pedersen. 2001a. A decision tree of bigrams is
an accurate predictor of word sense. In Proceed-
ings of the Second Annual Meeting of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 79?86, Pittsburgh,
July.
T. Pedersen. 2001b. Machine learning with lexical
features: The Duluth approach to senseval-2. In
Proceedings of the Senseval-2 Workshop, pages
139?142, Toulouse, July.
J. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees. Ma-
chine Learning, 1:81?106.
I. Witten and E. Frank. 2000. Data Mining - Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with
Java Implementations. Morgan?Kaufmann, San
Francisco, CA.
