EVALUATING GETARUNS PARSER WITH
GREVAL TEST SUITE
Rodolfo Delmonte
Ca' Garzoni-Moro, San Marco 3417
Universit? "Ca Foscari"
30124 - VENEZIA
Tel. 39-041-2349464/52/19 - Fax. 39-041-5287683
E-mail: delmont@unive.it - website: project.cgm.unive.it
Abstract
GREVAL, the test suite of 500 English sentences
taken from SUSANNE Corpus and made
available by John Carroll and Ted Briscoe at their
website, has been used to test the performance of
a symbolic linguistically-based parser called
GETARUNS presented in (Delmonte, 2002).
GETARUNS is a symbolic linguistically-based
parser written in Prolog Horn clauses which uses
a strong deterministic policy by means of a
lookahead mechanism and a WFST. The grammar
allows the specification of linguistic rules in a
highly declarative mode: it works topdown and by
making a heavy use of linguistic knowledge may
achieve an almost complete deterministic policy:
in this sense it is equivalent to an LR parser. The
results obtained fare higher that the ones reported
in (Preis, 2003) and this we argue is due basically
to the symbolic rule-based approach: we reach
96% precision (coverage) and 84% recall
(accuracy). We assume that from a
psycholinguistic point of view, parsing requires
setting up a number of disambiguating strategies,
to tell arguments apart from adjuncts and reduce
the effects of backtracking. To do that the system
is based on LFG theoretical framework and uses
Grammatical Functions information to help the
parser cope with syntactic ambiguity. In the paper
we shall comment on some shortcomings of the
Greval corpus annotation and more in general we
shall criticize some aspects of the Dependency
Structure representation.
1. Introduction
In this paper we will present the parser used by the
system GETARUN and discuss its performance with
the test suite called GREVAL set up by Carroll &
Briscoe. We will also discuss the mapping algorithm
from LFG to Dependency Grammatical Relations
(DGRs), which we have been obliged to develop in
order to be able to evaluate our parser. Greval is a
benchmark for parser evaluation based on
Grammatical Relations in a Head Dependency
Structure style output, i.e. a word based Head-
Dependent flat representation enriched with
Grammatical Relation information, where each
relation is represented as follows,
Relation(introducer,head,dependent)
Relation(introducer,head,dependent,deep-relation)
where a deep relation is introduced basically for
passive constructions, dative shift, and potentially
other structures, according to the ?Movement?
approach invoked by chomskians. The annotation
adopted by the authors is a surface level GRs
approach where for instance, in cases of Locative
Inversion as in sentence 284,
(1) Here, in the old days - when they had come
to see the moon or displays of fireworks - sat
the king and his court while priests, soldiers,
and other members of the party lounged in
the smaller alcoves between.
the SUBJect NP ?the king and his court? is assigned
to DOBJ and then receives an additional deep-
relation label as NCSUBJ to indicate its original
deep structure position. However the same relation is
?wrongly? marked as NCSUBJ in a subsequent case
of Locative Inversion (the only other one, sentence
445), which we report below,
(2) In his stead is a milquetoast version known
as the corporation.
where the inverted subject NP ?a milquetoast
version? is annotated straightforwardly as NCSUBJ.
The inconsistency denounced by this case of double
annotation lingers on other types of ambiguous GRs
that we will comment below.
In our experiment, for reasons already explained in
(Crouch et al, 2002) and further commented below,
we restricted our mapping algorithm to all ?pred-
only? f-structures, i.e. only to semantic heads with
primary GRs. This is because we assume that the
most difficult task a parser is faced with when
parsing a sentence is to operate the argument-adjunct
distinction: thus the subset of GRs we will take into
account is the following:
NCSUBJ, DOBJ, IOBJ, ARG_MOD, XCOMP,
CCOMP
Difficulties in building up a comparable version of
our output, include the inconsistencies present in the
non typographical text distributed for the test. We
also had to give up using the internally provided tool
for evaluation because our system builds multiword
expressions which are almost totally absent in the
annotated Gold version. So even though the authors
admit to the need of improving this aspect, its lack
makes it impossible for real systems to use automatic
evaluation tools.
1.1 Multiwords
Multiwords go from obvious cases such as United
States, which is wrongly treated in the annotated
corpus as two separate words ? ?state? modified by
?united? ? to prepositional and adverbial locutions
some of which have been individuated but have been
left with an SGML markup, as shown here,
accord<blank>to
in<blank>favour<blank>of
even<blank>if
no<blank>one
a<blank>few
out<blank>of
in<blank>order<blank>to
at<blank>least
so<blank>that
for<blank>example
along<blank>with
in<blank>front<blank>of
because<blank>of
as<blank>to
e.<blank>g.
In addition to these 15 multiwords, we produced
over 220 nouns, adverbials and adjectives which
contributed in an important manner to disambiguate
both syntactic and semantic processing, as well as to
facilitate tagging.
1.2 Mapping from LFG to DGRs
However the most difficult part of the work was the
mapping itself. The mapping from LFG to DGRs
requires the setting up of a principled distinction
between GRs.
The main difficulties were due to the treatment of
OBLiques vs. PP adjuncts: LFG erases the
preposition of oblique arguments which is no longer
available for comparison, on the contrary, the
preposition is preserved in case it is semantically
needed to identify the semantic role associated to PP
adjuncts. In DGRs instead we have two options
reported below and taken from the online Readme
document,
ncmod(type, head, dependent) is the most common
relation type and is used to encode PP,
adjectival/adverbial modification, nominal modifiers,
and so on. ncmod is also used to indicate a particle
`modifier' in a verb particle combination, e.g. Bill
looked the word up is encoded as ncmod(prt, look,
up); of in consist of is treated as a particle.
iobj(type, head, dependent) is the relation between
a predicate and a non-clausal complement introduced
by a preposition;
iobj(in, arrive, Spain) arrive in Spain
iobj(into, put, box) put the tools into the box
iobj(to, give, poor) give to the poor
The definitions do not respect the actual decisions
taken in the annotation process because only
adjective and verb predicates are assigned
complement labels like nsubj, dobj and iobj. Nouns
are only assigned generic modifiers, apart from 9
cases of ?wrongly? labeled IOBJ complements
which we comment in more detail below. On the
contrary, in our representation, possessor relations
and other agent-like relations in noun modification
are computed as SUBJ. The remaining ?of? headed
PPs are all computed as OBJ in case the noun is a
deverbal predicate and is transitive; other
prepositions introduce OBLiques and ADJuncts
again according to the governing noun.
As to verb and adjective predicates, in order to be
able to sort out NCMODs from IOBJs, all
subcategorization relations must be suitably
encoded, be it obligatory or optional ones, as can be
understood from the examples of IOBJs listed above
and taken from the online accompanying document.
In particular, ARRIVE would be computed as taking
a Locative PP complement at the same level of PUT,
whereas only the latter requires the complement
obligatorily. As to the third example, GIVE, a
ditransitive verb allowing Dative Shift, its indirect
object would be computed as a case of IOBJ thus
collapsing an important linguistic distinction existing
between OBLiques and Indirect Objects.
However, given the generic criteria followed by the
annotators, we still wanted to verify the consistency
of annotation of IOBJs, so we checked with
COMLEX subcategorization frames whether the
relation would be predicted or not. When collecting
the IOBJs of the corpus we soon discovered that 9
IOBJS constitute cases of non verbal
complementation which we report below,
(iobj to akin future) ;;; non-verbal complementation
(iobj to adherence principle)
(iobj to applicability people)
(iobj of independent pressure)
(iobj of independent volume)
(iobj notorious for disregard)
(iobj to atune Whig)
(iobj to key acceptance)
(iobj on ruin country)
then, there is one dubious case of IOBJ: in sentence
316 the ellipsed governing adjective predicate
?atune? is done away with and the IOBJ relation is
assigned to the verb BE,
(3) Indeed, the old Jeffersonians were far more
atune to the Hamilton oriented Whigs than
they were to the Jacksonian Democrats.
(ncsubj be Jeffersonian _)
(xcomp _ be atune)
(iobj to atune Whig)
(ncsubj be they _)
**(iobj to be democrat)
From the search in COMLEX of the remaining 127
predicates governing IOBJ relations, we derived 20
predicates missing the preposition required for the
complement discriminative choice. In more than one
case the choice of complement (iobj) vs. adjunct
(ncmod) is highly disputable. This situation makes
the comparison and evaluation of IOBJs very
uncertain and bound to low scoring as happened with
the parsers included in the test reported under (Preis,
2003). As an additional remark, from the definition it
would appear that OBLiques are treated as DOBJ of
a preposition particle which is in turn treated itself as
ncmod. To better clarify the issue we partially report
the annotation of example 244 from the corpus,
where we italicize the relevant relations,
(4) Meanwhile, the experts speak of wars
triggered by false pre-emption, escalation,
unauthorized behavior and other terms that
will be discussed in this report.
ncsubj(speak, expert, _)
dobj(speak, war, _)
ncsubj(trigger, war, obj)
arg_mod(by, trigger, pre-emption, subj)
arg_mod(by, trigger, escalation, subj)
arg_mod(by, trigger, behaviour, subj)
arg_mod(by, trigger, term, subj)
ncsubj(discuss, term, obj)
ncmod(prt, speak, of)
So we decided that in our evaluation we treat as
IOBJs both those actually produced by our parser
and matched directly with the Gold corpus, as well
as those which appear in the Gold corpus as DOBJ
governed by a preposition NCMOD and also those
that have been computed as NCMODs directly, as
long as the head and the dependent are identical.
We then individuated a number of mismatches in the
Gold annotation which would not receive a suitable
mapping in our output, which were then interpreted
as mistakes by Ted Briscoe (p.c.) in particular cases
of secondary predication for the class of ECM verbs
(consider, believe, term, etc) which were treated as
OBJ2, as well as the relation of DOBJ associated to
complements of verb HAVE, which we compute as
copulative verb.
(5) Sunday he had added, We can love
Eisenhower the man, even if we considered
him a mediocre president... but there is
nothing left of the Republican Party without
his leadership.
ncsubj(add, he, _)
ncsubj(love, we, _)
dobj(love, Eisenhower, _)
ncsubj(consider, we, _)
dobj(consider, he, _)
obj2(consider, president, _)
For this reason we didn?t include data for OBJ2 in
our comparison which required too many changes in
our parser architecture in order to have the
appropriate mapping. As to clause level GRs, we
computed both open and closed sentential (CCOMP)
and small clause (XCOMP) complements, but we
did not compute open adjuncts ? XMODS ? which
again did not seem to be easily comparable in our
mapping. As a matter of fact, these clausal
complements have not been separated in the
published test and only figure as CLAUSAL. For
comparison reasons we had to erase all subject
relations made available by our LFG-based
representation for all open predicative complements
which were however not represented in the Gold
manually annotated GREVAL corpus.
2. Parsing and Robust Techniques
As far as parsing is concerned, we purport the view
that the implementation of sound parsing algorithm
must go hand in hand with sound grammar
construction. Extragrammaticalities can be better
coped with within a solid linguistic framework rather
than without it. Our parser is a rule-based
deterministic parser in the sense that it uses a
lookahead and a Well-Formed Substring Table to
reduce backtracking. It also implements Finite State
Automata in the task of tag disambiguation, and
produces multiwords whenever lexical information
allows it. In our parser we use a number of parsing
strategies and graceful recovery procedures which
follow a strictly parameterized approach to their
definition and implementation. Recovery procedures
are also used to cope with elliptical structures and
uncommon orthographic and punctuation patterns. A
shallow or partial parser, in the sense of (Abney,
1996) is also implemented and always activated
before the complete parse takes place, in order to
produce the default baseline output to be used by
further computation in case of total failure.
The grammar is equipped with a lexicon containing a
list of fully specified inflected word forms where
each entry is followed by its lemma and a list of
morphological features, organized in the form of
attribute-value pairs. However, morphological
analysis for English has also been implemented and
used for OOV words. The system uses a core fully
specified lexicon, which contains approximately
10,000 most frequent entries of English. In addition
to that, there are all lexical forms provided by a fully
revised version of COMLEX. In order to take into
account phrasal and adverbial verbal compound
forms, we also use lexical entries made available by
UPenn and TAG encoding. Their grammatical verbal
syntactic codes have then been adapted to our
formalism and is used to generate an approximate
subcategorization scheme with an approximate
aspectual and semantic class associated to it.
Semantic inherent features for Out of Vocabulary
words , be they nouns, verbs, adjectives or adverbs,
are provided by a fully revised version of WordNet ?
270,000 lexical entries - in which we used 75
semantic classes similar to those provided by
CoreLex.
All parser rules from lexicon to c-structure to f-
structure amount to 7532 rules, thus subdivided:
1. Calls to lexical entries - morphology and lexical
forms: 3865 rules
2. Syntactic and semantic rules in the parser proper:
2617 rules
All syntactic/semantic rules: 6482 rules
4. Semantic Rules for F-Structure
Lexical Rules for Consistency and Control:- 439
rules
F-structure building, F-command:- 170 rules
Quantifier Raising and Anaphoric Control:- 441
rules
All semantic f-structure building rules: 1050 rules
The parser itself is made up of 51,000 lines of code.
This does not take into account the code for the
lexicon ? with fully specified subcategorization
frames - and the dictionary for morphological
decomposition: 6600 entries for the lexicon and
76,000 entries for the dictionary. These are all
consulted at runtime. Eventually the semantics from
the WordNet and other sources derived from the web
make up three hash-tables for 5 Mb overall sitting on
the hard disk and accessed when needed.
Our training corpus for the complete system is made
up 200,000 words and is organized by a number of
texts taken from different genres, portions of the
UPenn WSJ corpus, test-suits for grammatical
relations, narrative texts, and sentences taken from
COMLEX manual.
Fig.1 GETARUNS? LFG-Based Parser
2.1 Lookahead and FSA
One of the important differences we would like to
highlight is the use of topdown lookahead based
parsing strategies. The following list of preterminal
14 symbols is used:
1. v=verb-auxiliary-modal-clitic-cliticized verb
2. n=noun ? common, proper; 
3. c=complementizer
4. s=subordinator; 
5. e=conjunction
6. p=preposition-particle
7. a=adjective; 
8. q=participle/gerund
9. i=interjection
10. g=negation
11.d=article-quantifier-number-intensifier-focalizer
12. r=pronoun
13. av=adverb
14. x=punctuation
Tab. 1: Preterminal symbols used for lookahead
As has been reported in the literature (see
Tapanainen and Voutilainen 1994; Brants and
Samuelsson 1995), English is a language with a high
level of homography: readings per word are around 2
(i.e. each word can be assigned in average two
different tags depending on the tagset). Lookahead in
our system copes with most cases of ambiguity:
however, we also had to introduce a disambiguating
tool before the input string could be safely passed to
the parser. Disambiguation is applied to the
lookahead stack and is operated by means of Finite
State Automata. The reason why we use FSA is
simply due to the fact that for some important
categories, English has unambiguous tags which can
be used as anchoring in the input string, to reduce
ambiguity. I am now referring to the class of
determiners which is used to tell apart words
belonging to the ambiguity class [verb,noun], the
most frequent in occurrence in English. Besides, all
FSA may be augmented by tests related to linguistic
properties needed for disambiguation; some such
tests are,
 check subcategorization frame for current
word
This is used for [n,v], [a,n,v] ambiguity classes
followed by a preposition, or followed by ?that?
 check for gerundive verb form
This is used to check for ?ing endings of words
 check for auxiliary and modals
This is used to disambiguate [n,v], [a,n,v]
ambiguity classes when preceded by an auxiliary
or a modal
 check for noun belonging to factive class
This is used to disambiguate ?that? [a,c,r]
ambiguity class when preceded by a governing
noun
 check for verbs of saying
This is used to disambiguate verbs preceded or
followed by punctuation marks
3. GETARUNS: a Linguistically and
Psychologically Based Parser
The parser is divided up into a pipeline of sequential
but independent modules which realize the
subdivision of a parsing scheme as proposed in LFG
theory where a c-structure is built before the f-
structure can be projected by unification into a DAG.
In this sense we try to apply phrase-structure rules in
a given sequence as they are ordered in the grammar:
whenever a syntactic constituent is successfully
built, it is checked for semantic consistency, both
internally for head-spec agreement, and externally,
in case of a non-substantial head like a preposition
dominates the lower NP constituent; other important
local semantic consistency checks are performed
with modifiers like attributive and predicative
adjuncts. In case the governing predicate expects
obligatory arguments to be lexically realized they
will be searched and checked for uniqueness and
coherence as LFG grammaticality principles require.
We assume that from a psycholinguistic point of
view, parsing requires setting up a number of
disambiguating strategies, basically to tell arguments
apart from adjuncts and reduce the effects of
backtracking. The use of strategies calls for
psychologically related disambiguation processes
which are strictly bound to linguistic parameters. For
instance, English is a language that freely allows
compless (complementizer-less) complement and
relative clauses. Being the sentence the highest
recursive structural level, it is plausible that English
speakers will adopt some strategy in order to avoid
falling in a garden path - thus freezing the parser.
Another peculiar feature of English regards the
inherent ambiguity of Past Tense/Past Participle verb
forms, exception made for irregular verbs which
however only constitute a small subset in the verb
lexicon of English amounting in our case to some
20,000 entries. Seen that Reduced Relative Clauses
are headed by the past participle verb form, and that
Participial Adjuncts may be attached to any NP head
nouns quite consistently; and seen also that is very
hard to apply strict subcategorization tests for
participial SUBJect - or deep OBJect in case of
passives - with good enough confidence we assume
that such tests will only be performed in case the
parser is at the complement level of the SUBJect NP.
The reason for this being that we need to prevent as
much as possible failures at the I_bar level. For this
reason we pass grammatical function information
down into the NP complement level in order to be
used for that purpose.
Whenever a given predicate has expectancies for a
given argument to be realized either optionally or
obligatorily this information will be passed below to
the recursive portion of the parsing: this operation
allows us to implement parsing strategies like
Minimal Attachment, Functional Preference and
other ones (see Delmonte, 2000a; Delmonte, 2000b).
As said above, English allows an empty
Complementizer for finite complement and relative
clauses, two structures which contribute a lot of
indeterminacy to the parsing process. However, in
our system, this can be nicely accomodated by using
linguistic information to prevent the rule to be
entered by the parser. Syntactic and semantic
information is accessed and used as soon as possible:
in particular, both categorial and subcategorization
information attached to predicates in the lexicon is
extracted as soon as the main predicate is processed,
be it adjective, noun or verb, and is used in
association with local lookahead to restrict the
number of possible structures to be built. Adjuncts
are computed by semantic compatibility tests on the
basis of selectional restrictions of main predicates
and adjuncts heads.
The grammar formalism implemented in our system
is not fully compliant with the one suggested by LFG
theory (Bresnan, 2001), in the sense that we do not
use a specific Feature-Based Unification algorithm
but a Prolog-based parsing scheme. On the other
hand, Prolog language gives full control of a
declarative rule-based system, where information is
clearly spelled out and passed on and out to
higher/lower levels of computation. In addition, we
find that topdown parsing policies are better suited to
implement parsing strategies that are essential in
order to cope with attachment ambiguities (but see
below).
We will need here to make clear what we intend for
"LFG-related grammar organization": as said above,
we are not following LFG theory strictly in that the
parser is not organized as would all constraint
unification-based parsers, with a context-free or
context-augmented grammar that produces
constituents which are then passed to a unification
mechanism to check for consistency, uniqueness and
coherence in LFG terms, or simply to check for
feature agreement and subcategorization constraints
satisfaction. In our parser the grammar is organized
by Grammatical Functions which call syntactic
constituents. Each Grammatical Function call passes
functional information to the constituent level which
is paramount to the lookahead mechanism and makes
available syntactic constraints of a higher level than
the constituent itself.
3.1 The Organization of Grammar Rules
The grammar is divided up into five main levels:
- the complex utterance level, where choices are
made for subordinate/coordinate, direct/indirect
discourse markers, or as simple assertion;
- the utterance level, where choices are made for
detecting a question vs. assertion;
- the simple assertion level, where we may have
assertions with a sentential subject; a verbal structure
as a gerundive as subject; a fronted OBJect NP as
focalized constituent or a Locative Inversion
sentence structure.
In case none of the previous structures are detected
the parser enters the CP level of canonical sentences
where Aux-to-Comp may take place.
All sentential fronted constituents are taken at the CP
level. Adjuncts at this level may be of many different
kinds, some of them conflicting with the same role
the constituent may have at a lower level. For
instance, a vocative NP may be present, fronted PP
complements, as well as various types of
parenthetical structures: here again, the parser must
be told at which level of computation it is actually
situated in the grammar. This is done again by
passing down the corresponding grammatical
function. When the parser leaves this level of
computation it will enter the canonical IP level
where the SUBJect NP must be computed, either as a
lexically present nominal head or as a string passed
in the Extraposition variable. Then again a number
of ADJuncts may be present between SUBJect and
verb, and they can be adverbials and parentheticals.
When this level is left the parser enters the I_bar
level where it is expecting a verb in the input string.
This can be a verb complex with a number of
internal constituents, but the first item must be
definitely a verb. In case there is none, a number of
fail-soft and recovery strategies are tried to check
whether the parser has taken a participial as ADJunct
or as reduced relative clause in a previous parse
which is passed down to perusal. Also in case there
was no nominal element available at IP level a
number of recovery strategy are tried to check
whether the parser has taken an Appositive or a
Vocative in a previous parse. So all the previously
parser material is either passed down or is recorded
in a WFST to be used in an upper level in case of
failure at a lower level.
The parser is strictly top-down, depth-first, one-stage
parser with backtracking: differently from most
principle-based parsers presented in (Berwick,
Abney, and Tenny, 1991) which are two-stage
parsers, our parser computes its representations in
one pass. This makes it psychologically more
realistic. The final output of the parsing process is an
f-structure which serves as input to the binding
module and logical form: in other words, it
constitutes the input to the semantic component to
compute logical relations. In turn the binding
module may add information as to pronominal
elements present in the structure by assigning a
controller/binder in case it is available, or else the
pronominal expression will be available for
discourse level anaphora resolution.
What are the main advantages of performing a
topdown lookahead driven parse as compared to
unification procedures applied to a LR parse table as
commented in (Carroll, 2000)? First of all, our
grammar is not a CF grammar seen that CF rules are
multiplied by all different sentence positions at
which they may occur: in order to do that, a NP may
be called by a SUBJect, an OBJect, a
NCOMPlement, an APPosition, a VOCative etc. so
that different properties and constraints may be
associated with each NP realization.
Consider now the wellknown case of
COMPlementizerLess complement clauses in
English as represented by the following example (all
examples are taken from Greval):
(6) A Yale historian, writing a few years ago in
The Yale Review, said We in New England
have long since segregated our children.
And now consider the case in which a sentential
complement is used in subject position, as in
(7) That any sort of duty was owed by his nation
to other nations would have astonished a
nineteenth century statesman.
No rule accessing sentential complement would be
used to look for subject complement clauses which
are only accessed at sentence level as a special case
of sentence structure. In order to take care of
compless complement clauses the parser checks
subcategorization frames, then in case the
complementizer is missing, it activates a check for
the semantic typology of verb predicates which
allow the complementizer to be omitted, which
coincides with bridge verbs or non-factive verbs.
Now consider the case in which the complement
clause follows the object (direct,indirect) NP, as in
(8) He told the committee the measure would
merely provide means of enforcing the
escheat law which has been on the books
since Texas was a republic.
This strategy is organized in a similar way to
checking for the attachment of a PP complement
following a NP. The complementation information is
turned into a ?that? word in case of sentential
complement, and into the whole set of prepositions
subcategorized by the verb with PP complements.
These words are used as Cues-set to prevent the NP
from entering relative clause rules, or any PP headed
with one of the prepositions listed in the Cues-set,
after the head has been taken and the parser is in the
complement block of rules. The Cues-set is passed as
a list from the I_bar level down to the vp level and
into the object NP if any.
Now consider cases in which the parser has to
choose between an OBJect NP/Sentence complement
SUBJect in case the verb is compless as shown in:
(9) Mitchell decried the high rate of
unemployment in the state and said the
Meyner administration and the Republican
controlled State Senate Must share the blame
for this.
Or this sentence where the complement is started by
a comma, and a vocative,
(10) A man must be able to say, Father, I
have sinned, or there is no hope for him.
As said above, we ascertain the verb belongs to the
semantic class of non-factive verbs and then look for
a finite verb ahead before allowing the Sentence
complement rule to be fired. Other similarly difficult
cases that can be adequately treated in our parser are
shown below,
(11) I told him what Liston had said and
he said Liston was a double crosser and said
anything he (Liston) got was through a
keyhole.
where both the complement clause and the following
relative clause are compless. Getting the final results
reported in Table 2. with Greval took us one
month/man work to account for rules and lexical
entries missing in the parser. Some such coverage
problems were caused by sentences like 12 and 13
below,
(12) Wagner replied, Can't you just see
the headline City Hooked for $172,000 ?
(13) Yet, I responded, could not similar
things be said about the art of the past ?
Or an imperative/exhortative followed by a question
as in,
(14) Take Augustine's doctrine of grace
given and grace withheld : have you
pondered the dramatic qualities in this
theology ?
or a subordinate clause followed by a question as in,
(15) If he attaches little importance to
personal liberty, why not make this known
to the world ?
Hard sentences to parse were the following ones,
(16) Battalion Chief Stanton M. Gladden,
42, the central figure in a representation
dispute between the fire fighters association
and the teamsters union, suffered multiple
fractures of both ankles.
(17) He bent down, a black cranelike
figure, and put his mouth to the ground.
where in 16 there are two long parentheticals fairly
hard to process before the main verb comes; in 17
the appositive comes after the verb and not after
head noun, the pronoun ?he?.
New lexical entries had to be added to account for
special multiwords basically in the area of
grammatical function words. We also added some
new lexical multiwords which caused the FSA
disambiguation problems.
4. Evaluation and Discussion
The parser parses 89% of all text top down: then it
parses 9.3% of the remaining linguistic material
bottom up and adds it up to the parsed portion of the
current sentence. That may produce wrong results in
case a list has been partially parsed by the top down
parser. But it produces right results whenever any
additional complete subordinate or coordinate
sentence structure has been left over ? which
constitutes the majority of cases. Overall almost the
whole text ? 98.3% - is turned into semantically
consistent structures which have already undergone
Pronominal Binding at sentence level in their DAG
structural representation.
We find it very important to remark the fact that the
performance of our parser is mainly to be appreciate
for the high coverage. None of the statistically and
stochastically based parser reported under (Preis,
2003)  reached such a high score.
ALL-RELS GOLD VENICE CORRECT %PRECIS
RECALL/
GOLD
RECALL/
GUESS
xcomp 361 344 274 95.29 75.90 79.65
ncsubj 1038 1038 883 100.00 85.06 85.06
iobj 158 126 99 79.74 62.65 78.57
dobj 409 394 331 96.33 80.92 84.01
argmod 38 30 26 78.94 68.42 86.66
ccomp 81 80 62 98.76 76.54 77.5
TOTAL 2085 2012 1675 96.49 80.33 83.25
Table 2: Grammatical Relations produced by GETARUNS with Precision and Recall
For the sake of comparison we also report the main
data taken from the table presented under (Preis,
2003) to allow the reader to appreciate the results of
our parser. In particular, the number of main
Grammatical Relations treated in the previous test is
half the number in comparison with ours. If we look
at the easiest GR to parse, i.e. the NCSUBJ GR, we
see that the number of cases found by the best parser
in the previous test is by far lower that our result.
The highest case of precision is for DOBJ in the BU
parser which reaches 88.42% which is 8 points lower
that our result. In absolute terms, limiting the
comparison to the two most frequent GRs, the best
parser ? BU - has found 361 DOBJs against our 394;
891 NCSUBJs against our 1038.
GF oec
BC -
PRECIS
BC -
RECALL
BU -
PRECIS
BU -
RECALL
CH -
PRECIS
CH -
RECALL
C1 -
PRECIS
C1 -
RECALL
C2 -
PRECIS
C2 -
RECALL
dobj 409 85.83 78.48 88.42 76.53 84.43 75.55 86.16 74.57 84.85 75.31
iobj 158 31.93 67.09 57.75 51.9 27.53 67.09 27.09 69.62 27.01 70.25
ncsubj 1038 81.99 82.47 85.83 72.93 81.8 70.13 79.19 65.99 81.29 69.46
obj2 19 27.45 73.68 46.15 31.58 61.54 42.11 81.82 47.37 61.54 42.11
arg_mod 41 - - 75.68 68.29 78.12 60.98 82.86 70.73 82.86 70.73
clausal 403 43.27 52.61 75.79 71.46 62.19 43.67 50.57 32.75 49.11 27.30
Table 3: GR Precisions and Recalls as derived from (Preis, 2003)
The recall is also accordingly lower in absolute
terms: there are 277 cases of correct DOBJs in BU
against our 331, and 702 cases of correct NCSUBJs
? in this case it is the BC parser that gets best recall ?
against our 883. And 277 and 702 are slightly better
than chance - 67.72  and 67.63 respectively.
The impression one gets from the performance of
statistically and stochastically based parsers is that
they are inherently unable to cope with deep
linguistic information. They are certainly impossible
to undergo substantial improvements. On the
contrary, rule based parsers would benefit from
additional subcategorization frames as in our case:
and for all those constructions which require setting
up of new additional peripheral rules in the grammar,
they would typically increase their coverage, as did
our parser.
As a last comment, we started evaluating subsets of
GREVAL corpus with the online version of
?Connexor? dependency parser, on the assumption
that that version would be identical or even better
than the one commercially available. We did that
because this parser is regarded the best dependency
parser on the market. We tried out a subset of 50
sentences, and on a first perusal of the output we
discovered that only 40 sentences contained correct,
and fully connected representations. The remaining
10 sentences either presented unconnected heads, or
misconnected ones due to wrong attachments. Some
remarks on the possible reasons for that:
 bottom up local parsing techniques are good
at coping with typically hard to parse
structures for a top down parser like
coordinate structures but they are bad at
computing long distance dependencies;
 they are good at computing attachment
whenever it is local, but they make mistakes
when there are extraposed elements;
 dependency parsing does not seem to obey
to generally accepted grammaticality
principles like the obligatoriness of SUBJect
constituents, nor the need to provide some
landing site for extracted wh- elements in
relative and interrogative clauses;
 control structures like small clauses for
predicative complements and adjuncts are all
attached locally, which is not always the
case.
So, even though word-level parsing may be more
effective as to the number of connections
(constituents) safely produced, without leaving off
any fragment or skimmed fragment, it is nonetheless
faced with the hard task of recomposing clause level
control mechanisms which in a top down
constituency-based parser are given for granted.
The F-measure derived from our P and R according
to the usual formula:
2rp
 F1(r,p) =       ---------
r+p
is 89.38%, which is by far higher than the 75%
reported in (Crouch et al, 2002) as being the best
result obtained by linguistic parsers today.
We are currently experimenting with a ?mildly?
topdown/bottomup version of the parser in which
rather than starting from Clause level we search
recursively for Arguments and Adjuncts. In other
words, we look for fully semantically interpreted
constituents in which choice for argumenthood has
already been partially performed. In addition to
collecting Arguments/Adjuncts, the new parser
scatters in the output list punctuation marks and
coordinate/subordinate words which are deemed
responsible to determine clause boundaries. To that
aim, we devised a procedure for clause creation
under the restriction that a main tensed Verb
constituent complex has been found. This can be
iterated on the input list and the procedure may
decide to fuse portion of the output list which have
been left stranded without independent clause status,
and append it to the preceding prospective clause.
Interpretation procedures follows by recovering
subcategorization frames for the main tensed verb
and assignment of grammatical function and
semantic roles takes place. The Clause level
procedure is then followed by an Utterance level
procedure that produces simple utterance or complex
ones ? coordinated or subordinated ? according to
the Clause input list.
We experimented the new version of the parser with
the Greval Corpus and discovered that in some cases
it was much slower than the fully topdown version.
However, we also recovered parsing time in highly
ambiguous and complex sentences, where the
?mildly? bottomup parser actually followed a totally
linear behaviour: no increase in computation time
resulted and the performance is only conditioned by
the number of words/number of arguments-
adjuncts/number of clauses to build. We haven?t
been able to compute this proportion systematically
but will do so in the future.
5. References
Abney, S. 1996. Part-of-Speech Tagging and Partial
Parsing, in Ken Church, Steve Young, and Gerrit
Bloothooft, eds. Corpus-Based Methods in
Language and Speech, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht.
Berwick, R.C., S. Abney, and C. Tenny. 1991.
Principle-Based Parsing: Computation and
Psycholinguistics. New York: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Brants T. & C.Samuelsson 1995. Tagging the
Teleman Corpus, in Proc.10th Nordic Conference
of Computational Linguistics, Helsinki, 1-12.
Bresnan, Joan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwells.
Carroll, John A. 2000. Statistical Parsing, in R.Dale,
H.Moisl, H.Somers 2000. Handbook of Natural
Language Processing, Marcel Dekker, New
York, Chapt.22, 525-43.
Delmonte R. 2002. GETARUN PARSER - A parser
equipped with Quantifier Raising and Anaphoric
Binding based on LFG, Proc. LFG2002
Conference, Athens, pp.130-153, at
http://cslipublications.stanford.edu/hand/miscpub
sonline.html.
Delmonte R. 2000a. Parsing Preferences and
Linguistic Strategies, in LDV-Forum - Zeitschrift
fuer Computerlinguistik und Sprachtechnologie -
"Communicating Agents", Band 17, 1,2, (ISSN
0175-1336), pp. 56-73.
Delmonte R. 2000b. Parsing with GETARUN,
Proc.TALN2000, 7? conf?rence annuel sur le
TALN,Lausanne, pp.133-146.
Preis J., 2003. Using Grammatical Relations to
Compare Parsers, in Proc., EACL, Budapest,
pp.291-298.
Richard Crouch, Ronald M. Kaplan, Tracy H. King,
Stefan Riezler 2002. A Comparison of
Evaluation Metrics for a Broad Coverage
Stochastic Parser. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on "Parseval and Beyond", LREC'02,
Las Palmas, Spain, 67-74.
Tapanainen P. and Voutilainen A. 1994. Tagging
accurately - don't guess if you know, Proc. of
ANLP '94,  pp.47-52, Stuttgart, Germany.
