Combining Lexical and Syntactic Features for
Supervised Word Sense Disambiguation
Saif Mohammad
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M4M2X6 Canada
smm@cs.toronto.edu
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/?smm
Ted Pedersen
University of Minnesota
Duluth, MN 55812 USA
tpederse@d.umn.edu
http://www.d.umn.edu/?tpederse
Abstract
The success of supervised learning approaches
to word sense disambiguation is largely de-
pendent on the features used to represent the
context in which an ambiguous word occurs.
Previous work has reached mixed conclusions;
some suggest that combinations of syntactic
and lexical features will perform most effec-
tively. However, others have shown that sim-
ple lexical features perform well on their own.
This paper evaluates the effect of using differ-
ent lexical and syntactic features both individu-
ally and in combination. We show that it is pos-
sible for a very simple ensemble that utilizes a
single lexical feature and a sequence of part of
speech features to result in disambiguation ac-
curacy that is near state of the art.
1 Introduction
Most words in natural language exhibit polysemy, that
is, they have multiple possible meanings. Each of these
meanings is referred to as a sense, and word sense disam-
biguation is the process of identifying the intended sense
of a target word based on the context in which it is used.
The context of the target word consists of the sentence
in which it occurs, and possibly one or two surrounding
sentences. Consider the following sentence:
Harry cast a bewitching spell (1)
The target word spell has many possible senses, such as,
a charm or incantation, to read out letter by letter, and
a period of time. The intended sense, a charm or incan-
tation, can be identified based on the context, which in
this case includes bewitching and a reference to a famous
young wizard.
Word sense disambiguation is often approached by su-
pervised learning techniques. The training data consists
of sentences which have potential target words tagged
by a human expert with their intended sense. Numerous
learning algorithms, such as, Naive Bayesian classifiers,
Decision Trees and Neural Networks have been used to
learn models of disambiguation. However, both (Peder-
sen, 2001a) and (Lee and Ng, 2002) suggest that different
learning algorithms result in little change in overall dis-
ambiguation results, and that the real determiner of accu-
racy is the set of features that are employed.
Previous work has shown that using different combi-
nations of features is advantageous for word sense dis-
ambiguation (e.g., (McRoy, 1992), (Ng and Lee, 1996),
(Stevenson and Wilks, 2001), (Yarowsky and Florian,
2002)). However, less attention is paid to determining
what the minimal set of features necessary to attain high
accuracy disambiguation are. In this paper we present
experiments that measure the redundancy in disambigua-
tion accuracy achieved by classifiers using two different
sets of features, and we also determine an upper bound on
the accuracy that could be attained via the combination of
such classifiers into an ensemble.
We find that simple combinations of lexical and syn-
tactic features can result in very high disambiguation
accuracy, via an extensive set of experiments using the
SENSEVAL-1, SENSEVAL-2, line, hard, serve and inter-
est data. Together, this consists of more than 50,000
sense-tagged instances. This paper also introduces a tech-
nique to quantify the optimum gain that is theoretically
possible when two feature sets are combined in an ensem-
ble. In the process, we identify some of the most useful
part of speech and parse features.
2 Feature Space
We employ lexical and syntactic features in our word
sense disambiguation experiments. The lexical features
are unigrams, bigrams, and the surface form of the target
word, while the syntactic features are part of speech tags
and various components from a parse tree.
2.1 Lexical Features
The surface form of a target word may restrict its possible
senses. Consider the noun case which has the surface
forms: case, cases and casing. These have the following
senses: object of investigation, frame or covering and a
weird person. Given an occurrence of the surface form
casing, we can immediately conclude that it was used in
the sense of a frame or covering and not the other two.
Each possible surface form as observed in the training
data is represented as a binary feature, and indicates if
that particular surface form occurs (or not).
Unigrams are individual words that appear in the text.
Consider the following sentence:
the judge dismissed the case (2)
Here the, judge, dismissed, the and case are unigrams.
Both judge and dismissed suggest that case has been used
in the judicial sense and not the others. Every unigram
that occurs above a certain frequency threshold in the
training corpus is represented as a binary feature. For
example, there is a feature that represents whether or not
judge occurs in the context of a target word.
Bigrams are pairs of words that occur in close proxim-
ity to each other, and in a particular order. For example,
in the following sentence:
the interest rate is lower in state banks (3)
the interest, interest rate, rate is, is lower, lower in, in
state and state banks are bigrams, where interest rate
suggests that bank has been used in the financial insti-
tution sense and not the river bank sense. Every bigram
that reaches a given frequency and measure of association
score threshold is represented as a binary feature. For ex-
ample, the bigram feature interest rate has value of 1 if it
occurs in the context of the target word, and 0 if it does
not.
We use the Ngram Statistics Package1 to identify fre-
quent unigrams and statistically significant bigrams in the
training corpus for a particular word. However, unigrams
or bigrams that occur commonly in text are ignored by
specifying a stop list composed mainly of prepositions,
articles and conjunctions.
2.2 Part of Speech Features
The parts of speech of words around the target word
are also useful clues for disambiguation. It is likely
that when used in different senses, the target word
will have markedly different configuration of parts of
speech around it. The following sentences have the
word turn in changing sides/parties sense and changing
course/direction senses, respectively:
1http://ngram.sourceforge.net
Did/VBD Jack/NNP turn/VB against/IN
his/PRP$ team/NN ?/. (4)
Did/VBD Jack/NNP turn/VB left/NN
at/IN the/DT crossing/NN ?/. (5)
Observe that the parts of speech following each occur-
rence of turn are significantly different, and that this dis-
tinction can be captured both by individual and combina-
tions of part of speech features.
The parts of speech of individual words at particular
positions relative to the target word serve as features. The
part of speech of the target word is P
0
. The POS of words
following the target are denoted by P
1
, P
2
and so on. The
POS of words to the left of the target word are P
?1
, P
?2
,
etc. There is a binary feature for each part of speech tag
observed in the training corpus at the given position or
positions of interest.
Suppose we would like to use part of speech features
for the target word and one word to the right of the target.
If the target word has 3 different parts of speech observed
in the training data, and the word to the right (without
regard to what that word is) has 32 different part of speech
tags, then there will be 35 binary features that represent
the occurrence of those tags at those positions.
We also consider combinations of part of speech tags
as features. These indicate when a particular sequence
of part of speech tags occurs at a given set of positions.
These features are boolean, and indicate if a particular se-
quence of tags has occurred or not. In the scenario above,
there would be 96 different binary features represented,
each of which indicates if a particular combination of val-
ues for the two positions of interest, occurs.
2.3 Parse Features
A sentence is made up of multiple phrases and each
phrase, in turn, is made of phrases or words. Each phrase
has a head word which may have strong syntactic re-
lations with other words in the sentence. Consider the
phrases, her hard work and the hard surface. The head
words work and surface are indicative of the calling for
stamina/endurance and not easily penetrable senses of
hard.
Thus, the head word of the phrase housing the target
word is used as a feature. The head word of its parent
phrase is also suggestive of the intended sense of the tar-
get word. Consider the sentence fragments fasten the line
and cross the line. The noun phrases (the line) have the
verbs fasten and cross as the head of parent phrases. Verb
fasten is indicative of the cord sense of line while cross
suggests the division sense.
The phrase housing the target word and the parent
phrase are also used as features. For example, phrase
housing the target word is a noun phrase, parent phrase
is a verb phrase and so on. Similar to the part of speech
features, all parse features are boolean.
3 Experimental Data
We conducted experiments using part of speech tagged
and parsed versions of the SENSEVAL-2, SENSEVAL-
1, line, hard, serve and interest data. The packages
posSenseval and parseSenseval part of speech
tagged and parsed the data, respectively. posSenseval
uses the Brill Tagger while parseSenseval employs
the Collins Parser. We used the training and test data
divisions that already exist in the SENSEVAL-2 and
SENSEVAL-1 data. However, the line, hard, serve and
interest data do not have a standard division, so we ran-
domly split the instances into test (20%) and training
(80%) portions.
The SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1 data were cre-
ated for comparative word sense disambiguation exer-
cises held in the summers of 2001 and 1998, respectively.
The SENSEVAL-2 data consists of 4,328 test instances
and 8,611 training instances and include a total of 73
nouns, verbs and adjectives. The training data has the
target words annotated with senses from WordNet. The
target words have a varied number of senses ranging from
two for collaborate, graceful and solemn to 43 for turn.
The SENSEVAL-1 data has 8,512 test and 13,276 training
instances, respectively. The number of possible senses
for these words range from 2 to 15, and are tagged with
senses from the dictionary Hector.
The line data (Leacock, 1993) consists of 4,149 in-
stances where the noun line is used in one of six possible
WordNet senses. This data was extracted from the 1987-
1989 Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus, and the American
Printing House for the Blind (APHB) corpus. The distri-
bution of senses is somewhat skewed with more than 50%
of the instances used in the product sense while all the
other instances more or less equally distributed among
the other five senses.
The hard data (Leacock, 1998) consists of 4,337 in-
stances taken from the San Jose Mercury News Corpus
(SJM) and are annotated with one of three senses of the
adjective hard, from WordNet. The distribution of in-
stances is skewed with almost 80% of the instances used
in the not easy - difficult sense.
The serve data (Leacock, 1998) consists of 5,131 in-
stances with the verb serve as the target word. They are
annotated with one of four senses from WordNet. Like
line it was created from the WSJ and APHB corpora.
The interest data (Bruce, 1994) consists of 2,368 in-
stances where the noun interest is used in one of six
senses taken from the Longman Dictionary of Contempo-
rary English (LDOCE). The instances are extracted from
the part of speech tagged subset of the Penn Treebank
Wall Street Journal Corpus (ACL/DCI version).
4 Experiments and Discussion
The SyntaLexword sense disambiguation package was
used to carry out our experiments. It uses the C4.5 algo-
rithm, as implemented by the J48 program in the Waikato
Environment for Knowledge Analysis (Witten and Frank,
2000) to learn a decision tree for each word to be disam-
biguated.
We use the majority classifier as a baseline point of
comparison. This is a classifier that assigns all instances
to the most frequent sense in the training data. Our sys-
tem defaults to the majority classifier if it lacks any other
recourse, and therefore it disambiguates all instances. We
thus, report our results in terms of accuracy. Table 1
shows our overall experimental results, which will be dis-
cussed in the sections that follow. Note that the results of
the majority classifier appear at the bottom of that table,
and that the most accurate result for each set of of data is
shown in bold face.
4.1 Lexical Features
We utilized the following lexical features in our experi-
ments: the surface form of the target word, unigrams and
bigrams. The entries under Lexical in Table 1 show dis-
ambiguation accuracy when using those features individ-
ually.
It should be noted that the experiments for the
SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1 data using unigrams and
bigrams are re-implementations of (Pedersen, 2001a),
and that our results are comparable. However, the exper-
iments on line, hard, serve and interest have been carried
out for the first time.
We observe that in general, surface form does not
improve significantly on the baseline results provided
by the majority classifier. While in most of the data
(SENSEVAL-2, line, hard and serve data) there is hardly
any improvement, we do see noticeable improvements in
SENSEVAL-1 and interest data. We believe that this is
due to the nature of the feature. Certain words have many
surface forms and senses. In many such cases, certain
senses can be represented by a restricted subset of possi-
ble surface forms. Such words are disambiguated better
than others using this feature.
4.2 Part of Speech Features
Word sense disambiguation using individual part of
speech features is done in order to compare the effect of
single POS features versus possibly more powerful com-
bination part of speech features. They are not expected
to be powerful enough to do very good classification but
may still capture certain intuitive notions. For example,
it is very likely that if the noun line is preceded by a wh
Table 1: Supervised WSD Accuracy by Feature Type
Features SENSEVAL-2 SENSEVAL-1 line hard serve interest
Lexical
Surface Form 49.3% 62.9% 54.3% 81.5% 44.2% 64.0%
Unigrams 55.3% 66.9% 74.5% 83.4% 73.3% 75.7%
Bigrams 55.1% 66.9% 72.9% 89.5% 72.1% 79.9%
POS
P
?2
47.1% 57.5% 54.9% 81.6% 52.1% 56.0%
P
?1
49.6% 59.2% 56.2% 82.1% 54.8% 62.7%
P
0
49.9% 60.3% 54.3% 81.6% 47.4% 64.0%
P
1
53.1% 63.9% 54.2% 81.6% 55.6% 65.3%
P
2
48.9% 59.9% 54.3% 81.7% 48.9% 62.3%
POS Combos
P
?1
, P
0
50.8% 62.2% 56.5% 82.3% 60.3% 67.7%
P
0
, P
1
54.3% 66.7% 54.1% 81.9% 60.2% 70.5%
P
1
, P
2
53.2% 64.0% 55.9% 82.2% 58.0% 68.6%
P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
54.6% 68.0% 60.4% 84.8% 73.0% 78.8%
P
?2
, P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
, P
2
54.6% 67.8% 62.3% 86.2% 75.7% 80.6%
Parse
Head (H) 51.7% 64.3% 54.7% 87.8% 47.4% 69.1%
Head of Parent (HP) 50.0% 60.6% 59.8% 84.5% 57.2% 67.8%
Phrase POS (P) 52.9% 58.5% 54.3% 81.5% 41.4% 54.9%
Parent Phrase POS (PP) 52.7% 57.9% 54.3% 81.7% 41.6% 54.9%
Parse Combos
H + HP 52.6% 65.1% 60.4% 87.7% 58.1% 73.2%
H + P 51.9% 65.1% 54.7% 87.8% 45.9% 69.1%
H + HP + P 52.9% 65.5% 60.4% 87.7% 57.6% 73.2%
H + P + HP + PP 52.7% 65.6% 60.5% 87.7% 56.7% 73.5%
Majority Classifier 47.7% 56.3% 54.3% 81.5% 42.2% 54.9%
word such as whose or which, it is used in the phone line
sense. If the noun line is preceded by a preposition, say in
or of, then there is a good chance that line has been used
in the formation sense. The accuracies achieved by part
of speech features on SENSEVAL-2, SENSEVAL-1, line,
hard, serve and interest data are shown in Table 1. The
individual part of speech feature results are under POS,
and the combinations under POS Combos.
We observe that the individual part of speech features
result in accuracies that are significantly better than the
majority classifier for all the data except for the line and
hard. Like the surface form, we believe that the part
of speech features are more useful to disambiguate cer-
tain words than others. We show averaged results for the
SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1, and even there the part
of speech features fare well. In addition, when looking
at a more detailed breakdown of the 73 and 36 words in-
cluded in these samples respectively, a considerable num-
ber of those words experience improved accuracy using
part of speech features.
In particular, we observed that while verbs and adjec-
tives are disambiguated best by part of speech of words
one or two positions on their right (P
1
, P
2
), nouns in gen-
eral are aided by the part of speech of immediately adja-
cent words on either side (P
?1
, P
1
). In the case of tran-
sitive verbs (which are more frequent in this data than
intransitive verbs), the words at positions P
1
and P
2
are
usually the objects of the verb (for example, drink water).
Similarly, an adjective is usually immediately followed
by the noun which it qualifies (for example, short discus-
sion). Thus, in case of both verbs and adjectives, the word
immediately following (P
1
) is likely to be a noun having
strong syntactic relation to it. This explains the higher
accuracies for verbs and adjectives using P
1
and would
imply high accuracies for nouns using P
?1
, which too we
observe. However, we also observe high accuracies for
nouns using P
1
. This can be explained by the fact that
nouns are often the subjects in a sentence and the words
at positions P
1
and P
2
may be the syntactically related
verbs, which aid in disambiguation.
To summarize, verbs are aided by P
1
and P
2
, adjectives
by P
1
and nouns by P
?1
and P
1
. Thus, P
1
is the the most
potent individual part of speech feature to disambiguate a
set of noun, verb and adjective target words.
4.2.1 Combining Part of Speech features
A combination of parts of speech of words surround-
ing (and possibly including) the target word may better
capture the overall context than single part of speech fea-
tures. Following is an example of how a combination
of part of speech features may help identify the intended
sense of the noun line. If the target word line is used in
the plural form, is preceded by a personal pronoun and
the word following it is not a preposition, then it is likely
that the intended sense is line of text as in the actor forgot
his lines or they read their lines slowly. However, if the
word preceding line is a personal pronoun and the word
following it is a preposition, then it is probably used in
the product sense, as in, their line of clothes. POS Com-
bos in Table 1 shows the accuracies achieved using such
combinations with the SENSEVAL-2, SENSEVAL-1, line,
hard, serve and interest data. Again due to space con-
straints we do not give a break down of the accuracies for
the SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1 data for noun, verb
and adjective target words.
We note that decision trees based on binary features
representing the possible values of a given sequence of
part of speech tags outperforms one based on individ-
ual features. The combinations which include P
1
obtain
higher accuracies. In the the case of the verbs and ad-
jectives in SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1 data, the best
results are obtained using the parts of speech of words
following the target word. The nouns are helped by parts
of speech of words on both sides. This is in accordance
with the hypothesis that verbs and adjectives have strong
syntactic relations to words immediately following while
nouns may have strong syntactic relations on either side.
However, the hard and serve data are found to be helped
by features from both sides. We believe this is because
of the much larger number of instances per task in case
of hard and serve data as compared to the adjectives and
verbs in SENSEVAL-1 and SENSEVAL-2 data. Due to the
smaller amount of training data available for SENSEVAL-
2 and SENSEVAL-1 words, only the most potent features
help. The power of combining features is highlighted by
the significant improvement of accuracies above the base-
line for the line and hard data, which was not the case
using individual features (Table 1).
4.3 Parse Features
We employed the following parse features in these exper-
iments: the head word of the phrase housing the target
word, the type of phrase housing the target word (Noun
phrase, Verb Phrase, etc), the head of the parent phrase,
and the type of parent phrase. These results are shown
under Parse in Table 1.
The head word feature yielded the best results in all the
data except line, where the head of parent phrase is most
potent. Further, the nouns and adjectives benefit most by
the head word feature. We believe this the case because
the head word is usually a content word and thus likely
to be related to other nouns in the vicinity. Nouns are
usually found in noun phrases or prepositional phrases.
When part of a noun phrase, the noun is likely to be the
head and thus does not benefit much from the head word
feature. In such cases, the head of the parent phrase may
prove to be more useful as is the case in the line data.
In case of adjectives, the relation of the head word to the
target word is expected to be even stronger as it is likely to
be the noun modified by the adjective (target word). The
verb is most often found in a verb phrase and is usually
the head word. Hence, verb target words are not expected
to be benefited by the head word feature, which is what
we find here. The phrase housing the target word and the
parent phrase were not found to be beneficial when used
individually.
4.3.1 Combining Parse Features
Certain parse features, such as, the phrase of the target
word, take very few distinct values. For example, the tar-
get word shirt may occur in at most just two distinct kinds
of phrases: noun phrase and prepositional phrase. Such
features are not expected to perform much better than the
majority classifier. However, when used in combination
with other features, they may be useful. Thus, like part
of speech features, experiments were conducted using a
combination of parse features in an effort to better capture
the context and to identify sets of features which work
well together. Consider the parse features head word and
parent word. Head words such as magazine, situation and
story are indicative of the quality of causing attention to
be given sense of interest while parent words such as ac-
crue and equity are indicative of the interest rate sense.
A classifier based on both features can confidently clas-
sify both kinds of instances. Table 1 has the results under
Parse Combos. The Head and Head of Parent combina-
tions have in general yielded significantly higher accura-
cies than simply the head word or any other parse feature
used individually. The improvement is especially note-
worthy in case of line, serve and interest data. The in-
clusion of other features along with these two does not
help much more. We therefore find the Head and Head
of Parent combination to be the most potent parse feature
combination. It may be noted that a break down of ac-
curacies (not shown here for sake of brevity) for noun,
verb and adjective target words, of the SENSEVAL-1 and
SENSEVAL-2 data revealed that the adjectives were dis-
ambiguated best using the Head word and Phrase combi-
nation. This is observed in the hard data results as well,
albeit marginally.
Table 2: The Best Combinations of Syntactic and Lexical Features
Feature-Set Pair Baseline Maj. Simple Optimal Best
Data Set 1 Acc. Set2 Acc. Ens. Class. Ens. Ens.
SVAL-2 Unigram 55.3% P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
54.6% 43.6% 47.7% 57.0% 67.9% 66.7%
SVAL-1 Unigram 66.9% P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
68.0% 57.6% 56.3% 71.1% 78.0% 81.1%
line Unigram 74.5% P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
60.4% 55.1% 54.3% 74.2% 82.0% 88.0%
hard Bigram 89.5% Head, Parent 87.7% 86.1% 81.5% 88.9% 91.3% 83.0%
serve Unigram 73.3% P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
73.0% 58.4% 42.2% 81.6% 89.9% 83.0%
interest Bigram 79.9% P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
78.8% 67.6% 54.9% 83.2% 90.1% 89.0%
5 Complementary/Redundant Features
As can be observed in the previous results, many different
kinds of features can lead to roughly comparable word
sense disambiguation results.
Different types of features are expected to be redun-
dant to a certain extent. In other words, the features
will individually classify an identical subset of the in-
stances correctly. Likewise, the features are expected to
be complementary to some degree, that is, while one set
of features correctly disambiguates a certain subset of in-
stances, use of another set of features results in the cor-
rect disambiguation of an entirely distinct subset of the
instances.
The extent to which the feature sets are complementary
and redundant justify or obviate the combining of the fea-
ture sets. In order to accurately capture the amount of re-
dundancy and complementarity among two feature sets,
we introduce two measures: the Baseline Ensemble and
the Optimal Ensemble. Consider the scenario where the
outputs of two classifiers based on different feature sets
are to be combined using a simple voting or ensemble
technique for word sense disambiguation.
The Baseline Ensemble is the accuracy attained by a
hypothetical ensemble technique which correctly disam-
biguates an instance only when both the classifiers iden-
tify the intended sense correctly. In effect, the Baseline
Ensemble quantifies the redundancy among the two fea-
ture sets. The Optimal Ensemble is the accuracy of a
hypothetical ensemble technique which accurately dis-
ambiguates an instance when any of the two classifiers
correctly disambiguates the intended sense. We say that
these are hypothetical in that they can not be imple-
mented, but rather serve as a post disambiguation anal-
ysis technique.
Thus, the Optimal Ensemble is the upper bound to the
accuracy achievable by combining the two feature sets
using an ensemble technique. If the accuracies of indi-
vidual classifiers is X and Y, the Optimal Ensemble can
be defined as follows:
OptimalEnsemble = (X ?BaselineEnsemble) +
(Y ?BaselineEnsemble) + BaselineEnsemble
We use a simple ensemble technique to combine some
of the best lexical and syntactic features identified in the
previous sections. The probability of a sense to be the
intended sense as identified by lexical and syntactic fea-
tures is summed. The sense which attains the highest
score is chosen as the intended sense. Table 2 shows
the best results achieved using this technique along with
the baseline and optimal ensembles for the SENSEVAL-
2, SENSEVAL-1, line, hard, serve and interest data. The
table also presents the feature sets that achieved these re-
sults. In addition, the last column of this table shows rep-
resentative values for some of the best results attained in
the published literature for these data sets. Note that these
are only approximate points of comparison, in that there
are differences in how individual experiments are con-
ducted for all of the non?SENSEVAL data.
From the Baseline Ensemble we observe that there is a
large amount of redundancy across the feature sets. That
said, there is still a significant amount of complementar-
ity as may be noted by the difference between the Optimal
Ensemble and the greater of the individual accuracies.
For example, in the SENSEVAL-2 data, unigrams alone
achieve 55.3% accuracy and part of speech features attain
an accuracy of 54.6%. The Baseline Ensemble attains ac-
curacy of 43.6%, which means that this percentage of the
test instances are correctly tagged, independently, by both
unigrams and part of speech features. The unigrams get
an additional 11.7% of the instances correct which the
part of speech features tag incorrectly.
Similarly, the part of speech features are able to cor-
rectly tag an additional 11% of the instances which are
tagged erroneously when using only bigrams. The above
values suggest a high amount of redundancy among the
unigrams and part of speech features but not high enough
to suggest that there is no significant benefit in combin-
ing the two kinds of features. The difference between the
Optimal Ensemble and the accuracy attained by unigrams
is 12.6% (67.9% - 55.3%). This is a significant improve-
ment in accuracy which may be achieved by a suitable
ensemble technique. The difference is a quantification of
the complementarity between unigram and part of speech
features based on the data. Further, we may conclude that
given these unigram and part of speech features, the best
ensemble techniques will not achieve accuracies higher
than 67.9%.
It may be noted that a single unified classifier based
on multiple features may achieve accuracies higher than
the Optimal Ensemble. However, we show that an ac-
curate ensemble method (Optimal Ensemble), based on
simple lexical and syntactic features, achieves accuracies
comparable or better than some of the best previous re-
sults. The point here is that using information from two
distinct feature sets (lexical features and part of speech)
could lead to state of the art results. However, it is as
yet unclear how to most effectively combine such simple
classifiers to achieve these optimal results.
Observation of the pairs of lexical and syntactic fea-
tures which provide highest accuracies for the various
data suggest that the part of speech combination feature -
P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
, is likely to be most complementary with the
lexical features (bigrams or unigrams).
The hard data did particularly well with combinations
of parse features, the Head and Parent words. The Op-
timal Ensemble attains accuracy of over 91%, while the
best previous results were approximately 83%. This indi-
cates that not only are the Head and Parent word features
very useful in disambiguating adjectives but are also a
source of complementary information to lexical features.
6 Related Work
(McRoy, 1992) was one of the first to use multiple kinds
of features for word sense disambiguation in the semantic
interpretation system, TRUMP. The system aims at dis-
ambiguating all words in the text and relies extensively
on dictionaries and is not corpus based. Scores are as-
signed based on morphology, part of speech, collocations
and syntactic cues. The sense with the highest score is
chosen as the intended sense. TRUMP was used to tag a
subset of the Wall Street Journal (around 2500 words) but
was not evaluated due to lack of gold standard.
The LEXAS system of (Ng and Lee, 1996) uses part
of speech, morphology, co-occurrences, collocations and
verb object relation in nearest neighbor implementation.
The system was evaluated using the interest data on
which it achieved an accuracy of 87.3%. They studied
the utility of individual features and found collocations
to be most useful, followed by part of speech and mor-
phological form.
(Lin, 1997) takes a supervised approach that is unique
as it did not create a classifier for every target word. The
system compares the context of the target word with that
of training instances which are similar to it. The sense of
the target word most similar to these contexts is chosen
as the intended sense. Similar to McRoy, the system at-
tempts to disambiguate all words in the text. Lin relies on
syntactic relations, such as, subject-verb agreement and
verb object relations to capture the context. The system
achieved accuracies between 59% and 67% on the Sem-
Cor corpus.
(Pedersen, 2001b) compares decision trees, decision
stumps and a Naive Bayesian classifier to show that bi-
grams are very useful in identifying the intended sense
of a word. The accuracies of 19 out of the total 36 tasks
in SENSEVAL-1 data were greater than the best reported
results in that event. Bigrams are easily captured from
raw text and the encouraging results mean that they can
act as a powerful baseline to build more complex systems
by incorporating other sources of information. Pedersen
points out that decision trees can effectively depict the re-
lations among the various features used. With the use of
multiple sources of information this quality of decision
trees gains further significance.
(Lee and Ng, 2002) compare the performances of Sup-
port Vector Machines, Naive Bayes, AdaBoost and De-
cision Trees using unigrams, parts of speech, colloca-
tions and syntactic relations. The experiments were con-
ducted on SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-1 data. They
found the combination of features achieved highest ac-
curacy (around 73%) in SENSEVAL-1 data, irrespective
of the learning algorithm. Collocations(57.2%), part of
speech tags(55.3%) and syntactic relations(54.2%) per-
formed better than decision trees using all features in the
SENSEVAL-2 data.
(Yarowsky and Florian, 2002) performed experiments
with different learning algorithms and multiple features.
Three kinds of Bayes Classifier, Decision lists and Trans-
formation Based Learning Model (TBL) were used with
collocations, bag of words and syntactic relations as fea-
tures. Experiments on SENSEVAL-2 data revealed that
the exclusion of any of the three kinds of features resulted
in a significant drop in accuracy. Lee and Ng as well as
Yarowsky and Florian conclude that the combination of
features is beneficial.
(Pedersen, 2002) does a pairwise study of the systems
that participated in SENSEVAL-2 English and Spanish
disambiguation exercises. The study approaches the sys-
tems as black boxes, looking only at the assigned tags
whatever the classifier and sources of information may
be. He introduces measures to determine the similarity
of the classifications and optimum results obtainable by
combining the systems. He points out that pairs of sys-
tems having low similarity and high optimal accuracies
are of interest as they are markedly complementary and
the combination of such systems is beneficial.
There still remain questions regarding the use of mul-
tiple sources of information, in particular which features
should be combined and what is the upper bound on the
accuracies achievable by such combinations. (Pedersen,
2002) describes how to determine the upper bound when
combining two systems. This paper extends that idea to
provide measures which determine the upper bound when
combining two sets of features in a single disambiguation
system. We provide a measure to determine the redun-
dancy in classification done using two different feature
sets. We identify particular part of speech and parse fea-
tures which were found to be very useful and the com-
binations of lexical and syntactic features which worked
best on SENSEVAL-2, SENSEVAL-1, line, hard, serve and
interest data.
7 Conclusions
We conducted an extensive array of word sense disam-
biguation experiments using a rich set of lexical and syn-
tactic features. We use the SENSEVAL-2, SENSEVAL-1,
line, hard, serve and interest data which together have
more than 50,000 sense tagged instances. We show that
both lexical and syntactic features achieve reasonably
good accuracies when used individually, and that the part
of speech of the word immediately following the target
word is particularly useful in disambiguation as com-
pared to other individual part of speech features. A com-
bination of part of speech features attains even better ac-
curacies and we identify (P
0
, P
1
) and (P
?1
, P
0
, P
1
) as the
most potent combinations. We show that the head word
of a phrase is particularly useful in disambiguating adjec-
tives and nouns. We identify the head and parent as the
most potent parse feature combination.
We introduce the measures Baseline Ensemble and Op-
timal Ensemble which quantify the redundancy among
two feature sets and the maximum accuracy attainable by
an ensemble technique using the two feature sets. We
show that even though lexical and syntactic features are
redundant to a certain extent, there is a significant amount
of complementarity. In particular, we showed that sim-
ple lexical features (unigrams and bigrams) used in con-
junction with part of speech features have the potential to
achieve state of the art results.
8 Acknowledgments
This work has been partially supported by a National Sci-
ence Foundation Faculty Early CAREER Development
award (#0092784).
References
R. Bruce and L. Wiebe. 1994 Word-Sense Disambigua-
tion using Decomposable Models In Proceedings of
the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
C. Leacock and M. Chodorow and G. Miller. 1998 Us-
ing Corpus Statistics and WordNet Relations for Sense
Identification Computational Linguistics, 24(1):147?
165.
C. Leacock and E. Voorhees. 1993 Corpus-Based Sta-
tistical Sense Resolution In Proceedings of the ARPA
Workshop on Human Language Technology.
K.L. Lee and H.T. Ng. 2002. An empirical evaluation of
knowledge sources and learning algorithms for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, pages 41?48.
D. Lin. 1997. Using syntactic dependency as a local
context to resolve word sense ambiguity. In Proceed-
ings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 64?71, Madrid, July.
S. McRoy. 1992. Using multiple knowledge sources for
word sense discrimination. Computational Linguis-
tics, 18(1):1?30.
H.T. Ng and H.B. Lee. 1996. Integrating multiple
knowledge sources to disambiguate word sense: An
exemplar-based approach. In Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 40?47.
T. Pedersen. 2001a. A decision tree of bigrams is an ac-
curate predictor of word sense. In Proceedings of the
Second Annual Meeting of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 79?86, Pittsburgh, July.
T. Pedersen. 2001b. Machine learning with lexical fea-
tures: The duluth approach to senseval-2. In Pro-
ceedings of the Senseval-2 Workshop, pages 139?142,
Toulouse, July.
T. Pedersen. 2002. Assessing system agreement and
instance difficulty in the lexical samples tasks of
senseval-2. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent Successes and
Future Directions, pages 40?46, Philadelphia.
M. Stevenson and Y. Wilks. 2001. The interaction
of knowledge sources in word sense disambiguation.
Computational Linguistics, 27(3):321?349, Septem-
ber.
I. Witten and E. Frank. 2000. Data Mining - Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java
Implementations. Morgan?Kaufmann, San Francisco,
CA.
D. Yarowsky and R. Florian. 2002. Evaluating sense
disambiguation performance across diverse parameter
spaces. Journal of Natural Language Engineering,
8(2).
D. Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word sense disam-
biguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceed-
ings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, pages 189?196, Cam-
bridge, MA.
