Using word similarity lists for resolving indirect anaphora
Caroline Gasperin and Renata Vieira
PIPCA - Unisinos
S?o Leopoldo, Brazil
{caroline,renata}@exatas.unisinos.br
Abstract
In this work we test the use of word similarity lists
for anaphora resolution in Portuguese corpora. We
applied an automatic lexical acquisition technique
over parsed texts to identify semantically similar
words. After that, we made use of this lexical
knowledge to resolve coreferent definite descrip-
tions where the head-noun of the anaphor is differ-
ent from the head-noun of its antecedent, which we
call indirect anaphora.
1 Introduction
In this work we investigate the use of word similar-
ity list for treating coreference, especially the cases
where the coreferent expressions have semantically
related head nouns (instead of same head nouns),
which we call indirect anaphora.
We applied a lexical acquisition technique
(Gasperin, 2001) over Portuguese parsed corpora to
automatically identify semantically similar words.
After that, we made use of this lexical knowledge
to resolve the coreferent definite descriptions where
the head-noun of the anaphor is different from the
head-noun of its antecedent.
Previous work on anaphoric resolution of English
texts has used acquired lexical knowledge in differ-
ent ways, examples are (Poesio et al, 2002; Schulte
im Walde, 1997; Bunescu, 2003).
This paper is organised as follows. The next sec-
tion explain our notion of indirect anaphora. Section
3 details the tools and techniques used to the con-
struction of our lexical resource. Section 4 presents
our heuristic for solving the indirect anaphors on the
basis of such resource. Section 5 details the corpus
we are using for evaluating the proposed heuristics.
Section 6 reports the implementation of the heuris-
tic and in Section 7 we present our experiments
over Portuguese annotated corpora. In Section 8 we
discuss our results and compare them to previous
works. Finally, Section 9 presents our concluding
comments.
2 Indirect anaphora
Coreference has been defined by (van Deemter and
Kibble, 2000) as the relation holding between lin-
guistic expressions that refer to the same extralin-
guistic entity. A slightly different discourse rela-
tion is anaphora. In an anaphoric relation the in-
terpretation of an expression is dependent on previ-
ous expressions within the same discourse (in vari-
ous ways). Therefore, an anaphoric relation may be
coreferent or not. An expression may be anaphoric
in the strict sense that its interpretation is only possi-
ble on the basis of the antecedent, as it is in general
the case of pronouns in written discourse. On the
other hand, it might be just coreferent, in the sense
that the entity has been mentioned before in the text.
In this work, we focus on the expressions that are
anaphoric and coreferent, and restricting even more,
just the indirect cases, when the antecedent head-
noun and the anaphor head-noun are not same but
semantically related.
To clarify what we mean by indirect anaphora,
we detail the classification we adopted in our pre-
vious work (Vieira et al, 2002; Vieira et al, 2003).
Our classes of analyses were based on the analy-
ses of English texts presented in (Poesio and Vieira,
1998), with the difference that we divided the Bridg-
ing class of their analyses into two different classes,
separating coreferent (Indirect Anaphora) and non-
coreferent (Other Anaphora) cases. Each definite
description (d) is classified into one of the follow-
ing four classes:
1. Direct anaphora: d corefers with a previous
expression a; d and a have the same nominal
head:
a. A Comiss?o tem conhecimento do livro... (the
Commission knows the book)
d. a Comiss?o constata ainda que o livro n?o se
debru?a sobre a actividade das v?rias... (the Com-
mission remarks that the book ignores the activity
of various)
2. Indirect anaphora: d corefers with a previous
expression a; d and a have different nominal
heads:
a. a circula??o dos cidad?es que dirigem-se... (the
flow of the citizens heading to...)
d. do controle das pessoas nas fronteiras (the con-
trol of the people in the borders)
3. Other Anaphora: d does not corefer with a pre-
vious expression a, but depends for its interpre-
tation on a:
a. o recrutamento de pessoal cient?fico e t?cnico...
(the recruitment of scientific and technical em-
ployees)
d. as condi??es de acesso ? carreira cient?fica (the
conditions of employment for scientific jobs)
4. Discourse New: the interpretation of d does not
depend on any previous expression:
d. o livro n?o se debru?a sobre a actividade das
v?rias organiza??es internacionais... (the book ig-
nores the activity of various international organ-
isation...)
In (Schulte im Walde, 1997) acquired lexical
knowledge is used for solving bridging descrip-
tions, a broader class of anaphoric relations that
includes our class, indirect anaphora. (Poesio et
al., 2002) presents alternative techniques, based
on syntactic patterns, focusing on meronymy rela-
tions. Finally, (Bunescu, 2003) deals with another
class of anaphoric descriptions, which is also in-
cluded in the bridging class, called as associative
anaphora, following (Hawkins, 1978), where asso-
ciative anaphora is an anaphoric relation between
non-coreferent entities.
3 Lexical resource
Our lexical resource consists on lists of semantically
related words. These lists are constructed automati-
cally by a syntax-based knowledge-poor technique.
The technique used is described in (Gasperin et al,
2001; Gasperin, 2001), and it is an extension of the
technique presented in (Grefenstette, 1994).
Briefly, this technique consists on extracting spe-
cific syntactic contexts for every noun in the parsed
whole corpus and then applying a similarity mea-
sure (the weighted Jaccard measure) to compare the
nouns by the contexts they have in common (more
contexts they share, more similar they are). As syn-
tactic context, we understand any word that estab-
lishes a syntactic relation with a given noun in the
corpus. An example of one kind of syntactic context
considered is subject/verb, meaning that two nouns
that occur as subject of the same verb share this
context. Other examples of syntactic contexts are
verb/object, modifier/noun, etc. To each context it
is assigned a global and a local weight: the first re-
lated to the context frequency in the corpus, and the
second related to its frequency as a context of the
noun in focus. As output, we have a list of the most
similar nouns to each noun in the corpus, ordered
by the similarity value. We present the similarity
list for the noun acusa??o (accusation) in Table 1
as an example.
Table 1: Similarity list for the noun acusa??o
den?ncia (denunciation)
esc?ndalo (scandal)
crime (crime)
pedido (demand)
declara??o (declaration)
proposta (proposal)
not?cia (news)
acusa??o carta (letter)
(accusation) lista (list)
cargo (post)
ataque (attack)
arma (gun)
caso (case)
impress?o (impression)
reclama??o (complain)
The similarity lists can contain any kind of se-
mantic relation (e.g. synonymy, hyponymy, etc.)
between the words, but they are not classified. In
general, the similarity lists for the less frequent
words in the corpus contain some non-semantically
related words (noise), since the relations were based
on few syntactic contexts they shared along the cor-
pus.
The main advantage of this technique is the pos-
sibility of having a corpus-tunned lexical resource
built completely automatically. This resource re-
flects closely the semantic relations present in the
corpus used to create the lists. So, we believe the
similarity lists are more suitable for being used as
lexical knowledge for resolving the anaphoras than
a generic lexical base (e.g. Wordnet), since it focus
on the semantic relations between the terms that ap-
pear in the corpus, without considering extra mean-
ings that some words could have. New lists could be
generated from each corpus that one aims to resolve
the anaphoras.
To generate the similarity lists for Portuguese we
utilised a 1,400,000-words corpus from the Brazil-
ian newspaper ?Folha de S?o Paulo?, containing
news about different subjects (sports, economics,
computers, culture, etc.). This corpus includes the
set of texts that was hand-annotated with corefer-
ence information in previous work (Vieira et al,
2002; Salmon-Alt and Vieira, 2002). The corpus
was parsed by the Portuguese parser PALAVRAS
(Bick, 2000), provided by VISL project1.
We created two different sets of similarity lists:
one considering just nouns and the other consider-
ing nouns and proper names. So, the first set of lists
includes one list for each noun in the corpus and
each list is composed by other common nouns. The
second set of lists has one list for each noun and
proper name in the corpus, and each list is com-
posed by other nouns and proper names. The first
set contains 8019 lists and the second 12275, corre-
sponding to the different nouns (and proper names)
appearing in the corpus. Each similarity list con-
tains the 15 words that are more similar to the word
in focus, according to the calculated similarity val-
ues.
Having lexical information about the proper
names in the corpus is important, since we have
many coreference cases whose anaphor or an-
tecedent is a proper name. But when generating the
similarity lists, proper names bring noise (in gen-
eral they are less frequent then common nouns) and
the lists became more heterogeneous (includes more
non semantically related words).
4 Using similar words lists to solve
indirect anaphora
From the manual annotation and classification of
680 definite descriptions we selected those cases
classified as indirect anaphora (95). For each of
them there is a list of candidate antecedents. This
list is formed by all NPs that occur in the text. We
consider as candidates all the NPs that occur in the
text before the anaphor being mentioned.
Our heuristic for solving indirect anaphoras using
lists of similar words is the following. Consider:
? Hana is the head-noun of the anaphor
? Hcani is the head-noun of the antecedent can-
didate i
? Lana is the anaphor?s list of similar nouns
? Lcani is the list of similar nouns for the candi-
date i
? So,Hcani is considered the antecedent ofHana
if
(1)Hcani ? Lana
or
(2)Hana ? Lcani
1See http://visl.hum.sdu.dk/visl/pt/
or
(3)Lana 3 Hj ? Lcani
We call (1) ?right direction?, (2) ?opposite direc-
tion?, and (3) ?indirect way?.
We consider (1) > (2) > (3) when regarding the
reliability of the semantic relatedness betweenHana
and Hcani .
If the application of the heuristic resulted in more
than one possible antecedent, we adopted a weight-
ing scheme to choose only one among them. The
candidate with the lowest weight wins. For ranking
the possible antecedents, we considered two param-
eters:
? reliability: how the possible antecedent was se-
lect, according to (1), (2) or (3). A penalis-
ing value is added to its weight: 0, 40, 200,
respectively. The higher penalty for the ?indi-
rect way? is because we expected it could cause
many false positives;
? recency: we consider the distance in words be-
tween the anaphor and the possible antecedent.
The penalty values for the reliability parameter
were chosen in such a way they could be in the same
magnitude as the recency parameter values, that are
measured in words. For example, if candidate A is
250 words far from the anaphor and was selected
by (1) (getting weight=250) and a candidate B is 10
words far from the anaphor and was selected by (3)
(getting weight=210), candidate B will be selected
as the correct antecedent.
5 Our evaluation corpus
As result of previous work (Vieira et al, 2002;
Vieira et al, 2003), we have a Portuguese corpus
manually annotated with coreference information.
This corpus is considered our gold-standard to eval-
uate the performance of the heuristic presented in
the previous section. The study aimed to verify if
we could get a similar distribution of types of defi-
nite descriptions for Portuguese and English, which
would serve as an indication that the same heuristics
tested for English (Vieira et al, 2000) could apply
for Portuguese. The main annotation task in this
experiment was identifying antecedents and classi-
fying each definite description according to the four
classes presented in section 2.
For the annotation task, we adopted the MMAX
annotation tool (M?ller and Strube, 2001), that re-
quires all data to be encoded in XML format. The
corpus is encoded by <word> elements with sequen-
tial identifiers, and the output - the anaphors and
its antecedents - are enconded as <markable> ele-
ments, with the anaphor markable pointing to the
antecedent markable by a ?pointer? attribute.
The annotation process was split in 4 steps: se-
lecting coreferent terms; identifying the antecedent
of coreferent terms; classifying coreferent terms (di-
rect or indirect); classifying non-coreferent terms
(discourse new or other anaphora). About half of
the anaphoras were classified as discourse new de-
scriptions, which account for about 70% of non-
coreferent cases. Among the coreferent cases the
number of direct coreference is twice the number of
indirect coreference. This confirms previous work
done for English.
For the present work, we took then the 95 cases
classified as indirect coreference to serve as our
evaluation set. In 14 of this cases, the relation be-
tween anaphor and antecedent is synonymy, in 43
of the cases the relation is hyponymy, and in 38, the
antecedent or the anaphor are a proper name.
6 Implementing heuristics for indirect
anaphora in ART
Our heuristics were implemented as an XSL
stylesheet on the basis of the Anaphora Resolution
Tool (ART) (Vieira et al, 2003).
The tool integrates a set of heuristics correspond-
ing to one or more stylesheets to resolve different
sorts of anaphora. The heuristics may be applied in
a sequence defined by the user. As resolving direct
anaphoric descriptions (the ones where anaphor and
antecedent have the same head noun) is a much sim-
pler problem with high performance rates as shown
in previous results (Vieira et al, 2000; Bean and
Riloff, 1999), these heuristics should be applied
first in a system that resolves definite descriptions.
In this work, however, we decided to consider for
the experiments just the anaphoras that were pre-
viously annotated as indirect and check if the pro-
posed heuristic is able to find the correct antecedent.
ART allows the user to define the set of anaphors
to be resolved, in our case they are selected from
previously classified definite descriptions. The
stylesheet for indirect anaphora takes as input this
list of indirect anaphors, a list of the candidates and
the similarity lists. We consider all NPs in the text
as candidates, and for each anaphor we consider just
the candidates that appear before it in the text (we
are ignoring cataphora at moment).
All the input and output data is in XML for-
mat, based on the data format used by MMAX.
Our stylesheet for solving indirect anaphora takes
the <markable> elements with empty ?pointer? at-
tribute (coming unsolved from passing by the previ-
Table 2: Results considering just nouns
Description Numbers
Total indirect anaphors 57
Correctly
resolved
anaphors
Right direction 8
Opposite direction 5
Indirect way 6
TOTAL 19 (33.3%)
Unsolved anaphors 21
ously applied stylesheets/heuristics) and create and
intermediate file with <anaphor> elements to be re-
solved. The resolved <anaphor>s are again encoded
as <markable>s, with the ?pointer? filled. A de-
tailed description of our data encoding is presented
in (Gasperin et al, 2003).
7 Experiments
We run two experiments: one using the similarity
lists with proper names and another with the lists
containing just common nouns.
With these experiments we verify the values for
precision, recall and false positives on the task
of choosing an semantically similar antecedent for
each indirect anaphor. Our annotated corpus has 95
indirect anaphors with nominal antecedents, where
57 of them do not include proper names (as anaphor
or as antecedent). We use a non annotated version of
this corpus for the experiments. It contains around
6000 words, from 24 news texts of 6 different news-
paper sections.
Firstly, we reduced both sets of similarity lists to
contain just the list for the words present in this por-
tion of the corpus (660 lists without proper names
and 742 including proper names).
7.1 Experiment 1
Considering the 57 indirect anaphoras to be solved
(the ones that do not include any proper name), we
could solve 19 of them. It leads to a precision of
52.7% and a a recall of 33.3%. Table 2 shows the
result of our study considering the set of common
noun lists.
Most of the cases could be resolved by ?right di-
rection?, that represents the more intuitive way. 21
of the cases didn?t get any antecedent. We got 17
false positives, with different causes:
1. the right antecedent was not in the lists, there-
fore it could not be found but other wrong an-
tecedents were retrieved. For example, in meu
amigo Ives Gandra da Silva Martins escreveu
para esse jornal ... o conselheiro Ives (my
friend Ives_Gandra_da_Silva_Martins wrote
to this newspaper ... the councillor Ives), two
more candidates head-nouns are similar words
to ?conselheiro? (councillor): ?arquiteto? (ar-
chitect) and ?consultor? (consultant), but not
?amigo? (friend);
2. the right antecedent was in the lists but another
wrong antecedent was given higher weights,
because of proximity to the anaphora, as in the
example a rodovia Comandante Jo?o Ribeiro
de Barros ... pr?ximo a ponte ... ao ten-
tar atravessar a estrada (the highway Coman-
dante Joao Ribeiro de Barros ... near to the
bridge ... while trying to cross the road). Here,
the correct antecedent to ?a estrada? (the road)
is ?rodovia? (the highway) and it is present in
?estrada??s similarity list (right direction), but
also is ?ponte? (the bridge) and it is closer to
the anaphor in the text.
As expected, most of the false positives (11 cases)
were ?resolved? by ?indirect way?.
Considering all similar words found among the
candidates, not just the one with highest weight, we
could find the correct antecedent in 24 cases (42%).
The average number of similar words among the
candidates was 2.8, taking into account again the
positive and false positive cases. These numbers
report how much the similarity lists encode the se-
mantic relations present in the corpus. 64% of the
synonymy cases and 28% of the hyponymy cases
could be resolved. 35% of the hyponymy cases re-
sulted in false positives, the same happened with
just 14% of the synonymy cases.
7.2 Experiment 2
We replicated the previous experiment now using
the similarity lists that include proper names. Table
3 shows the results considering the set of lists for
nouns and proper names. Considering the 95 indi-
rect anaphoras to be solved, we could solve 21 of
them. It leads to a precision of 36.8% and a a recall
of 22.1%. There was no antecedent found for 38
anaphors, and 36 anaphors got wrong antecedents
(half of them by ?inderect way?). We observed the
same causes for false positives as the two presented
for experiment 1.
Considering all cases resolved (correct and false
ones), we could find the correct antecedent among
the similar words of the anaphor in 31 cases
(32.6%). The average number of similar words
among the candidates was 2.75. The numbers for
synonymy and hyponymy cases were the same as
in experiment 1 - 64% and 28% respectively. The
numbers for proper names were 50% of false posi-
tives and 50% of unresolved cases. It means none
Table 3: Results considering nouns and proper
names
Description Numbers
Total indirect anaphors 95
Correctly
resolved
anaphors
Right direction 13
Opposite direction 3
Indirect way 5
TOTAL 21 (22.1%)
Unsolved anaphors 38
of the cases that include proper names could be
resolved, but do not means they hadn?t any influ-
ence in other nouns similarity lists. In 26% of the
false positive cases, the correct antecedent (a proper
name) was in the anaphor similarity list (but was not
selected due to the weighting strategy).
The experiment with the similarity lists that in-
clude proper names was able to solve more cases,
but experiment 1 got better precision and recall val-
ues.
8 Related work
An evaluation of the use of WordNet for treating
bridging descriptions is presented in (Poesio et al,
1997). This evaluation considers 204 bridging de-
scriptions, distributed as follows, where NPj is the
anaphora and NPi is antecedent.
? synonymy relation between NPj and NPi: 12
cases;
? hypernymy relation between NPj and NPi: 14
cases;
? meronymy between NPj and NPi: 12;
? NPj related with NPi being a proper name: 49;
? NPj sharing a same noun in NPi other than
head (compound nouns): 25;
? NPj with antecedent being an event 40;
? NPj with antecedents being an implicit dis-
course topic: 15;
? other types of inferences holding between NPj
and antecedent: 37.
Due to the nature of the relations, only some of
them were expected to be found in WordNet. For
Synonymy, hypernymy and meronymy, 39% of the
38 cases could be solved on the basis of WordNet.
From this related work we can see the large variety
of cases one can found in a class such as bridging. In
our work we concentrated on coreference relations,
these can be related to synonymy, hypernymy, and
proper name sub-classes evaluated in (Poesio et al,
1997).
The technique presented in (Schulte im Walde,
1997) based on lexical acquisition from the British
National Corpus was evaluated against the same
cases in (Poesio et al, 1997). For synonymy, hy-
pernymy and meronymy, it was reported that 22%
of the 38 cases were resolved. In (Poesio et al,
2002) the inclusion of syntactic patterns improved
the resolution of meronymy in particular, result-
ing in 66% of the meronymy cases being resolved.
Bunescu (Bunescu, 2003) reports for his method on
resolving associative anaphora (anaphoric relation
between non-coreferent entities) a precision of 53%
when his recall is 22.7%.
9 Concluding remarks
We tested the use of word similarity lists on re-
solving indirect anaphoras on Portuguese newspa-
per texts. We presented our heuristic for searching
word similarity lists to be able to find the relation
between an anaphor and its antecedent. We con-
sidered similarity lists containing proper names and
lists containing just common nouns. Our heuris-
tic was able to resolve 33.3% of the cases, with
precision of 52.7% when considering just common
nouns, and we got 22.1%recall with precision of
36.8% when including proper names. Even though
considering proper names give us the possibility of
treating more anaphora cases, we got lower preci-
sion than using the lists with only nouns, since such
lists are more homogeneous. These results are com-
parable to previous work dealing with such complex
anaphora.
As future work, we intend to integrate our heuris-
tic for indirect anaphora with other heuristics for
anaphora resolution into ART and investigate the
best combination of application of these. Concern-
ing refining the proposed heuristic, we intend to
run more experiments aiming to tune the penalis-
ing weights when choosing an antecedent among
the candidates already selected by the search on the
similarity lists.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank CNPq (Brazil) / INRIA
(France) for their financial support, and Susanne
Salmon-Alt, for her collaboration in this work.
References
D. Bean and E. Riloff. 1999. Corpus-based identi-
fication of non-anaphoric noun phrases. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL-99).
Eckhard Bick. 2000. The Parsing System
PALAVRAS: Automatic Grammatical Analysis of
Portuguese in a Constraint Grammar Frame-
work. Ph.D. thesis, ?rhus University, ?rhus.
Razvan Bunescu. 2003. Associative anaphora res-
olution: A web-based approach. In Proceedings
of EACL 2003 - orkshop on The Computational
Treatment of Anaphora, Budapest.
Caroline Gasperin, Pablo Gamallo, Alexandre
Agustini, Gabriel Lopes, and Vera Lima. 2001.
Using syntactic contexts for measuring word sim-
ilarity. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Se-
mantic Knowledge Acquisition and Categorisa-
tion, Helsink, Finland.
Caroline Gasperin, Renata Vieira, Rodrigo Goulart,
and Paulo Quaresma. 2003. Extracting xml
syntactic chunks from portuguese corpora. In
Traitement automatique des langues minoritaires
- TALN 2003, Btaz-sur-mer, France.
Caroline Varaschin Gasperin. 2001. Extra??o au-
tom?tica de rela??es sem?nticas a partir de re-
la??es sint?ticas. Master?s thesis, PUCRS, Porto
Alegre.
Gregory Grefenstette. 1994. Explorations in Auto-
matic Thesaurus Discovery. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, USA.
John A. Hawkins. 1978. Definiteness and Indef-
initeness. Humanities Press, Atlantic Highland,
NJ.
Christoph M?ller and Michael Strube. 2001.
MMAX: A tool for the annotation of multi-modal
corpora. In Proceedings of the IJCAI 2001, pages
45?50, Seattle.
Massimo Poesio and Renata Vieira. 1998. A
corpus-based investigation of definite description
use. Computational Linguistics, 24(2):183?216.
Massimo Poesio, Renata Vieira, and Simone Teufel.
1997. Resolving bridging descriptions in unre-
stricted texts. In Proceedings of the Practical,
Robust, Anaphora Resolution for Unrestricted
Texts, Workshop on Operational Factors, Madrid.
Massimo Poesio, Tomonori Ishikawa, Sabine
Schulte Im Walde, and Renata Vieira. 2002. Ac-
quiring lexical knowledge for anaphora resolu-
tion. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las Palmas
De Gran Canaria.
Susanne Salmon-Alt and Renata Vieira. 2002.
Nominal expressions in multilingual corpora:
Definites and demonstratives. In Proceedings of
the LREC 2002, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
Sabine Schulte im Walde. 1997. Resolving
Bridging Descriptions in High-Dimensional
Space. Master?s thesis, Institut f?r Maschinelle
Sprachverarbeitung, University of Stuttgart, and
Center for Cognitive Science, University of
Edinburgh.
K. van Deemter and R. Kibble. 2000. On corefer-
ring: Coreference in muc and related annotation
schemes. Computational Linguistics, 26(4).
Renata Vieira, Susanne Salmon-Alt, and Emmanuel
Schang. 2002. Multilingual corpora annotation
for processing definite descriptions. In Proceed-
ings of the PorTAL 2002, Faro.
Renata Vieira, Caroline Gasperin, and Rodrigo
Goulart. 2003. From manual to automatic anno-
tation of coreference. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Symposium on Reference Resolution
and Its Applications to Question Answering and
Summarization, Venice.
Vieira et al 2000. Extra??o de sintagmas nominais
para o processamento de co-refer?ncia. In Anais
do V Encontro para o processamento computa-
cional da L?ngua Portuguesa escrita e falada -
PROPOR, Atibaia.
