Language Resources for the Semantic Web ? perspectives for Machine 
Translation ? 
Cristina VERTAN 
Natural Language Systems Division, University of Hamburg 
Vogt-K?lln Strasse 30 
22527 Hamburg, Germany 
cri@nats.informatik.uni-hamburg.de 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present a possible solution for 
improving the quality of on-line translation 
systems, using mechanisms and standards from 
Semantic Web. We focus on Example based 
machine translation and the automatization of the 
translation examples extraction by means of RDF-
repositories. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Machine Translation  (MT) was nominated on the 
first place among the 10 emerging technologies 
who will change the world (Technical Review 
2004). It is expected that with the increased 
number of official language in Europe, and the 
continuous growth of non-English Internet 
resources, machine translation systems will 
become an indispensable tool in everyday work. 
For the moment high-quality MT-systems are on 
one hand expensive and on the other hand domain 
oriented. The on-line existent tools produce poor-
quality translation, and very often offer a false 
image of current translation engines capabilities. 
The main reason why on-line machine translation 
tools offer so poor results is that they rely either 
on corpus-based methods trained on a limited 
number of examples or they infer rules from a 
limited linguistic knowledge base (Gaspari 2002). 
Following the statistics published in 
(McLaughlin and Schwall 1998) already in 1998 
there were at least 25 countries with more than 
500 000 Internet users, and in at least half of these 
countries English is neither the first nor the 
second spoken language. This statistic shows 
clearly that access to on-line information can be 
guaranteed only through high-quality on-line 
machine translation tools. However, an on-line 
translation system has a number of specific 
requirements (i.e. different from the ?traditional? 
ones): 
- It has to be fast but not always perfect. 
The translation of web-documents is more 
a kind of ?translation for assimilation? in 
the Carbonell?s classification  (Carbonell 
1994). However it has to go beyond the 
word-to-word quality offered by the 
actual on-line systems 
- A large number of languages / pair of 
languages have to be covered 
- The system has to be a ?fully integrated 
black box?. Most part of the users do not 
have the expertise to tune different 
parameters. 
 
There are different approaches to automatic 
translation, however not all of them are suited to 
be used for on-line translation. 
 
1. Rule-based MT systems are based on 
complex linguistic modules both in the 
analysis and generation phase 
(morphology, syntax, semantics, 
pragmatics). Such modules are developed 
for only few languages and they are not 
commercially ?free available. The 
implementation of such modules requires 
deep linguistic knowledge in both 
languages (especially for the transfer 
rules) 
2. Knowledge-based MT systems are  
strongly domain dependent and rely on 
domain-specific ontologies. Most part of 
the ontologies were developed previously 
only for commercial products, and 
therefore are not free available 
3. Corpus-based MT systems (example ?
based and statistical-based) are younger 
on the market, and provide good 
translation quality, especially for 
assimilation purposes. They are based on 
large parallel aligned corpora, or on 
translation databases. In the first case 
considerable amount of text is aligned 
usually at the paragraph level; in the latter 
translation chunks are collected (usually 
the chunks are sentences or even smaller 
units.) 
 
Most part of the currently existent on-line 
translation systems adopt a very simplistic rule-
based approach, i.e. the translation is reduced to 
dictionary look-up followed by a morphological 
processing, and very simple syntactic transfer 
rules.  
Within the Semantic Web activities it is 
assumed that a big amount of internet resources 
will be semantically annotated.  This opens new 
perspectives for the corpus-based MT Systems, 
and makes them a serious candidate for on-line 
translation. 
This paper is organised as follows: in section 
2 we present the main principles of semantic web. 
In section 3 we describe a type of MT-System 
who can benefit from the Semantic Web activities. 
and show how Semantic Web technologies can be 
used to improve the quality of on-line Machine 
Translation systems. In section 4 we present 
directions of future work. 
2. The Semantic Web 
Following the definition of Tim-Berners-Lee, 
?The Semantic Web will bring structure to the 
meaningful content of the web pages, creating an 
environment where software agents roaming from 
page to page can readily carry out sophisticated 
tasks for users?(Berners-Lee and Hendler and 
Lasilla 1999) 
The WWW, was developed for humans; 
the documents on the web are machine readable 
but not machine understandable.  The main aim of 
Semantic Web is to  enrich documents with 
semantic information about the content and to 
develop powerful mechanisms capable of 
interpreting this information. These goals are 
achieved through implementation of models, 
standards as well as annotation of resources at the 
following layers (Berners-Lee 2003) presented in 
Figure 1:  
 
 
 
Figure 1 . Layer ?cake architecture of  Semantic 
Web (from Tim-Berners-Lee) 
 
Unicode and URI?s are the basic ?bricks? in this 
schema, the first ensuring internationalization, the 
latter unique identification of any resource on the 
Web. XML together with its syntactic validation 
language XMLschema and the Name Spaces 
mechanism are the standard way of encoding 
resources. However XML tags cannot describe 
contents of documents. Therefore RDF (Resource 
Description Framework) model has to be used, 
and the concepts used for semantic description 
have to be organised in ontologies. Inference on 
these concepts are made at the Logic  and Proof  
levels. 
For the purposes of this article we will 
concentrate on the Data-levels, i.e. annotations of 
documents (RDF)  and  structure of the semantic 
information (Ontologies) 
 
2.1.  Document annotation with RDF 
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) [is 
an entity relationship model used for representing 
information about resources in the World Wide 
Web. The main principle is that everything on the 
web can be unique identified with URI?s 
(Uniforme Resource Identifier) and then described 
in terms of triples representing the resources, their 
properties and values.  For the purposes of 
Semantic Web the serialization was done in XML; 
in this way the model benefits also from the 
Namespace property of XML and the RDF 
properties can be unique identified, independent 
of the users 
2.2. Ontologies for Semantic Web 
Ontology, a well-known Knowledge-
Representation mechanism  was rediscovered 
for the purposes of Semantic Web. The RDF 
properties can be organised in classes and 
subclasses, with attributes and values. 
Languages as RDFS, DAML+OIL, or 
recently OWL, permit complete description of 
complicated ontological relations between 
RDF properties, in an RDF/XML format. For 
the moment there are  already hundreds of 
Semantic Web ontolgies for different 
domains, most part of them free available. 
3. On-line Machine Translation and the 
Semantic Web 
In this section we will explain first the main 
principles of example-based machine translation. 
Then we will have a closer look on how it can 
benefit from the Semantic Web activities. 
3.1. Example-based Machine Translation 
(EBMT) 
The basic idea in EBMT is quite simple: for the 
translation of a sentence previous translation 
examples are used. The main assumption behind 
this idea is that many translations are simple 
modifications of previous translations 
[CarlWay03]. In contrast with the translation 
memories, the selection between more possible 
translations is completely automatic. 
  
A typical EBMT System is based on the following 
components (Trujillo 1999) 
 
1. A database of aligned sentences in the 
source and target languages. The contents 
of the database, as well as its dimension 
are essential for the quality of the 
selection. The examples have to be 
domain-relevant, long enough to capture 
specific particularities of a construction 
and short enough to be retrieved in 
common texts  
2. A matching algorithm that identifies the 
examples that most closely resemble all or 
part of the input sentence 
3. A combination algorithm which rebuilds 
the input sentence, through a combination 
of retrieved fragments  
4. A transfer and composition algorithm that 
extracts corresponding target fragments 
and combines them into  a sentence in the 
target language. 
 
It turned out that information about the syntactic 
structure of the fragments in both languages as 
well as pattern transfer rules, can improve 
significantly the performance of the example-
based MT system.[Carlway03]. Therefore it is 
quite usual that the example database contains, 
together with parallel aligned strings, also 
syntactic structures and their correspondences. 
3.2. Language Resources for Semantic Web 
and their role in Machine Translation 
Between the main activities in the Semantic Web 
at the moment we encounter:  
- the description and annotation of a large 
number of web resources following the 
RDF model  
- the creation of repositories of RDF 
properties, organised in  ontologies. 
 
Every resource (document piece of document or 
even sentence) is described via a triple (Subject, 
Predicate, Object). All three elements of the triple 
refer to the logical structure of the resource and 
not the syntactic one. It is expected that in the 
near future, a big part of the documents in Internet 
will be annotated following the RDF model. 
Machine Translation, and in particular 
Example-based Machine Translation can make 
use of these additional annotations for three 
purposes: 
1. For the achievement of parallel aligned 
corpora. Small languages still suffer from 
lack of linguistic resources, and especially 
multilingual resources. On-line 
documents are main source for machine-
readable corpora, however, with few 
exceptions (explicitly translations of the 
same Web page) it is difficult to 
determine automatically which part of a 
document is a translation of another 
document. RDF annotations can be used 
for such purposes 
2. For Example based rough translation: As 
mentioned in section 1 on-line translation 
is made for assimilation purposes, 
therefore, meaning preservation is much 
more important as an exact translation. 
RDF model aims to enrich documents 
with information about their content. This 
can help in the process of ?example based 
rough translation?. Until now, the trials in 
this field were done only on the basis of 
retrieval and translation of content-words 
[ShimhataSumitaMatsumoto03].  
3.  For disambiguation: the current example 
based translation systems make use only 
of syntactic annotation. These can be 
insufficient in disambiguation cases like 
the following: 
Let us assume that we have in the database of  
translation examples: 
Gro?e Besonderheiten ? important 
peculiarities 
Gro?e St?dte ? big cities 
The translation choice for gro?e  Schl??er 
as important castles or big castles is context 
depending. For the moment the disambiguation is 
done only statistical. Semantic annotation of the 
examples , as well as the input text would increase 
the translation accuracy. This makes sense 
especially for translation of on-line resources 
which are supposed to be  correspondingly 
annotated 
Although the advantages of Semantic 
Web annotations (in particular RDF-model) are 
transparent from the points mentioned above, the 
main question which arises is 
Who will decide which semantic information 
has to be included, at what level (sentence 
/paragraph/document), and in which 
language? 
Following information is needed for increasing 
the translation quality : 
- translation equivalents of words 
/expressions 
- transfer rules for syntactic structures 
- semantic classes for the candidate 
solutions. 
The main problem to be solved is the consistency 
between different RDF annotations corresponding 
to different users. Let us assume that in the 
German text the annotation for Gro?e St?dte  is . 
<rdf.description rdf. about:?http?..> 
  <user1: Messung > Gro?e  </user1: 
Messung > 
 
and in the English one  
<rdf.description rdf. about:?http?..> 
  <user2: size >big</user2: size > 
A relationship between ?size? and ?Messung? has 
to be established showing that they refer to the 
same concept. This has to be done via mapping on 
an ontology. The main challenge in the design of 
ontologies with multilingual instances is that, very 
often words in one language overlap concepts in 
the ontology, and there is no one-to-one mapping 
to the meaning in the other language 
The architecture in figure 2 proposes a 
framework for extracting translation 
correspondences, taking into account their RDF 
annotations. We propose the organisation of the  
RDF annotation scheme in two parts: syntactic 
annotation and semantic annotation. The concepts 
to be instantiated for this annotations will be 
organised in two correspondent ontologies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Extraction of Translation Equivalents 
from RDF annotated texts. 
 
Assuming that input is a text A in language L1, a 
search process will identify fragments from A in 
the translation database and obtain  one or more 
translations, namely Texts B1, B2,?Bn. During 
the next step the RDF descriptions of the input 
text and the translation candidates are compared 
by mapping the RDF annotations on the syntactic 
and semantic ontology, and the most similar one 
is chosen as output.  
At the University of Hamburg we are 
currently implementing this schema within a 
Demo-System for German and English texts, in 
tourist domain. Approximately 30 documents in 
both languages are currently annotated with 
linguistic properties in RDF format, mapped on a 
syntactic respectively semantic ontology.  
4. Conclusions and Further Work 
In this article we presented the main principles of 
semantic Web as well as its possible contributions 
to the improvement of on-line translation systems. 
A solution for automatic extraction of translation 
examples from RDF-annotated texts is also 
presented. However the architecture supposes the 
existence of the repositories for syntactic and 
semantic annotations as well as the both 
ontologies.  In order to ensure the viability of the 
principle for on-line translation systems, such 
repositories have to be created for different 
languages, texts have to be annotated and the 
ontologies have to cover a broad spectrum  of 
linguistic phenomena. 
After the complete implementation of the 
demo system we intend to perform an evaluation 
of the translation quality, and to analyse also the 
accuracy of the extraction mechanism,  
 
References 
T. Berners-Lee 2003, Foreword to ?Spinning the 
Semantic Web-Bringing the World wide Web t 
Its Full Potential?, in  D. Fensel, D., J. Hendler,, 
H.Lieberman, and W. Wahlster, (eds.), MIT 
Press, 2003 
T. Berners-Lee, and J. Hendler, and O. Lasilla, 
1999, ?The Semantic Web?, Scientific 
American, 1999 
J. Carbonell 1994,  Slides of a tutorial on MT 
Saarbr?cken 1994. unpublished  
A-Way,  and M. Carl 2003, ?Introduction to 
Example-based machine Translation?, Kluwer 
Academic Press, 2003  
F. Gaspari 2002 ?Using free on-line services in 
MT teaching,? in  Proceedings of the 6th EAMT 
Workshop on Teaching Machine Translation, 
November 14-15, 2002, Manchester, pp.145-
153 
Text 
A  
Search of 
translation 
equivalents 
RDF 
Description  
Text  A 
RDF Descr 
Text  B1, 
B2,..in  
Semantic 
Ontology 
Syntactic 
Ontology 
Translatio
n DB 
Text 
B1 B2
Translation 
from A in 
Language l2 
S. McLaughli, and U. Schwall 1998, ?Machine 
Translation and the Information Soup:?, in 
Third Conference of the Association for 
Machine Translation in the Americas, 
Proceedings of the AMTA'98, LNAI 1529, D. 
Farwell et. Al. (Eds.) Langhorne, PA, USA, 
October 1998, pp. 384-397 
M. Shimohata, and E Sumita, and Y. Matsumoto 
2003, ?Retrieving Meaning-equivalent 
Sentences for Example-based Rough 
Translation?, HLT-NAACL Workshop: 
Building and using Parallel Texts. Data Driven 
Machine Translation and Beyond, Edmonton, 
May-June 2003, pp. 50-56 
Technology Review 2003, ?10 emerging 
Technologies who will change the World?, 
retrieved at http://www.technologyreview.com/
A Trujillo 1999, Translation Engines: Techniques 
for Machine Translation, Springer Verlag, 1999  
