Semantic Parsing Based on FrameNet
Cosmin Adrian Bejan, Alessandro Moschitti, Paul Mora?rescu,
Gabriel Nicolae and Sanda Harabagiu
University of Texas at Dallas
Human Language Technology Research Institute
Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA
Abstract
This paper describes our method based on Support
Vector Machines for automatically assigning seman-
tic roles to constituents of English sentences. This
method employs four different feature sets, one of
which being first reported herein. The combination
of features as well as the extended training data we
considered have produced in the Senseval-3 experi-
ments an F1-score of 92.5% for the unrestricted case
and of 76.3% for the restricted case.
1 Introduction
The evaluation of the Senseval-3 task for Automatic
Labeling of Semantic Roles is based on the annota-
tions made available by the FrameNet Project (Baker
et al, 1998). The idea of automatically identifying
and labeling frame-specific roles, as defined by the
semantic frames, was first introduced by (Gildea and
Jurasfky, 2002). Each semantic frame is character-
ized by a set of target words which can be nouns,
verbs or adjectives. This helps abstracting the the-
matic roles and adding semantics to the given frame,
highlighting the characteristic semantic features.
Frames are characterized by (1) target words or
lexical predicates whose meaning includes aspects of
the frame; (2) frame elements (FEs) which represent
the semantic roles of the frame and (3) examples of
annotations performed on the British National Cor-
pus (BNC) for instances of each target word. Thus
FrameNet frames are schematic representations of
situations lexicalized by the target words (predicates)
in which various participants and conceptual roles
are related (the frame elements), exemplified by sen-
tences from the BNC in which the target words and
the frame elements are annotated.
In Senseval-3 two different cases of automatic la-
beling of the semantic roles were considered. The
Unrestricted Case requires systems to assign FE la-
bels to the test sentences for which (a) the bound-
aries of each frame element were given and the tar-
get words identified. The Restricted Case requires
systems to (i) recognize the boundaries of the FEs
for each evaluated frame as well as to (ii) assign a
label to it. Both cases can be cast as two different
classifications: (1) a classification of the role when
its boundaries are known and (2) a classification of
the sentence words as either belonging to a role or
not1.
A similar approach was used for automati-
cally identifying predicate-argument structures in
English sentences. The PropBank annotations
(www.cis.upenn.edu/?ace) enable training for two
distinct learning techniques: (1) decision trees (Sur-
deanu et al, 2003) and (2) Support Vector Machines
(SVMs) (Pradhan et al, 2004). The SVMs produced
the best results, therefore we decided to use the same
learning framework for the Senseval-3 task for Auto-
matic Labeling of Semantic Roles. Additionally, we
have performed the following enhancements:
? we created a multi-class classifier for each frame,
thus achieving improved accuracy and efficiency;
? we combined some new features with features from
(Gildea and Jurasfky, 2002; Surdeanu et al, 2003;
Pradhan et al, 2004);
? we resolved the data sparsity problem generated
by limited training data for each frame, when using
the examples associated with any other frame from
FrameNet that had at least one FE shared with each
frame that was evaluated;
? we crafted heuristics that improved mappings from
the syntactic constituents to the semantic roles.
We believe that the combination of these four exten-
sions are responsible for our results in Senseval-3.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 describes our methods of classify-
ing semantic roles whereas Section 3 describes our
method of identifying role boundaries. Section 4 de-
tails our heuristics and Section 5 details the exper-
imental results. Section 6 summarizes the conclu-
sions.
1The second classification represents the detection of role
boundaries. The semantic parsing defined as two different clas-
sification tasks was introduced in (Gildea and Jurasfky, 2002).
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
2 Semantic role classification
The result of the role classifier on a sentence, as il-
lustrated in Figure 1, is the identification of semantic
roles of the FEs when the boundaries of each FE are
known. To be able to assign the labels of each FE, we
used three sets of features. Feature Set 1, illustrated
in Figure 2 was used in the work reported in (Gildea
and Jurasfky, 2002).
VP
S
VP
NP
People were fastening
TARGETAgent
NP
a rope
PP
to the ring
NP
GoalItem
Figure 1: Sentence with annotated frame elements.
? POSITION (pos) ? Indicates if the constituent appears  
before or after the the predicate in the sentence.
? VOICE (voice) ? This feature distinguishes between
active or passive voice for the predicate phrase.
are preserved.
of the evaluated phrase. Case and morphological information
? HEAD WORD (hw) ? This feature contains the head word
? PARSE TREE PATH (path): This feature contains the path
in the parse tree between the predicate phrase and the 
labels linked by direction symbols (up or down), e.g.
? PHRASE TYPE (pt): This feature indicates the syntactic
noun phrases only, and it indicates if the NP is dominated
by a sentence phrase (typical for subject arguments with
active?voice predicates), or by a verb phrase (typical 
for object arguments).
? GOVERNING CATEGORY (gov) ? This feature applies to
type of the phrase labeled as a frame element, e.g.
target word, expressed as a sequence of nonterminal
? TARGET WORD ? In our implementation this feature
(2) LEMMA which represents the target normalized to lower 
the case and morphological information preserved; and 
consists of two components: (1) WORD: the word itself with
case and infinitive form for the verbs or singular for nouns. 
NP for Agent in Figure 1.
NP    S    VP    VP for Agent in Figure 1.
Figure 2: Feature Set 1 (FS1)
Feature Set 2 was introduced in (Surdeanu et al,
2003) and it is illustrated in Figure 3. The CON-
TENT WORD (cw) feature illustrated in Figure 3
applies to PPs, SBARs and VPs, as it was reported
in (Surdeanu et al, 2003). For example, if the PP is
?in the past month?, instead of using ?in?, the head
of the PP, as a feature, ?month?, the head of the NP
is selected since it is more informative. Similarly, if
the SBAR is ?that occurred yesterday?, instead of us-
ing the head ?that? we select ?occurred?, the head of
the VP. When the VP ?to be declared? is considered,
?declared? is selected over ?to?.
Feature set 3 is a novel set of features introduced
in this paper and illustrated in Figure 4. Some
of the new features characterize the frame, e.g.
the frame name (FRAME-NAME); the frame FEs,
(NUMBER-FEs); or the target word associated with
the frame (TAGET-TYPE). Additional characteriza-
tion of the FEs are provided by by the GRAMMATI-
CAL FUNCTION feature and by the list of grammat-
ical functions of all FEs recognized in each sentence(
LIST Grammatical Function feature).
BOOLEAN NAMED ENTITY FLAGS ? A feature set comprising: 
? neOrganization: set to 1 if an organization is recognized in the phrase
? neLocation: set to 1 a location is recognized in the phrase
? nePerson: set to 1 if a person name is recognized in the phrase
? neMoney: set to 1 if a currency expression is recognized in the phrase
? nePercent: set to 1 if a percentage expression is recognized in the phrase
? neTime: set to 1 if a time of day expression is recognized in the phrase
? neDate: set to 1 if a date temporal expression is recognized in the phrase 
word from the constituent, different from the head word.
? CONTENT WORD (cw) ? Lexicalized feature that selects an informative 
PART OF SPEECH OF HEAD WORD (hPos) ? The part of speech tag of
the head word.
PART OF SPEECH OF CONTENT WORD (cPos) ?The part of speech 
tag of the content word.
NAMED ENTITY CLASS OF CONTENT WORD (cNE) ? The class of 
the named entity that includes the content word
Figure 3: Feature Set 2 (FS2)
In FrameNet, sentences are annotated with the
name of the sub-corpus. There are 12,456 possi-
ble names of sub-corpus. For the 40 frames eval-
uated in Senseval-3, there were 1442 names asso-
ciated with the example sentences in the training
data and 2723 names in the test data. Three of
the most frequent sub-corpus names are: ?V-trans-
other? (frequency=613), ?N-all? (frequency=562)
and ?V-trans-simple?(frequency=560). The name
of the sub-corpus indicates the relations between
the target word and some of its FEs. For ex-
ample, the ?V-trans-other? name indicated that the
target word is a transitive verb, and thus its FEs
are likely to have other roles than object or indi-
rect object. A sentence annotated with this sub-
corpus name is: ?Night?s coming, you can see
the black shadow on [Self?mover the stones] that
[TARGET rush] [Pathpast] and [Pathbetween your
feet.?]. For this sentence both FEs with the role of
Path are neither objects or indirect objects of the
transitive verb.
Feature SUPPORT VERBS considers the usage of
support expressions in FrameNet. We have found
that whenever adjectives are target words, their se-
mantic interpretation depends on their co-occurrence
with verbs like ?take?, ?become? or ?is?. Support
verbs are defined as those verbs that combine with a
state-noun, event-noun or state-adjective to create a
verbal predicate, allowing arguments of the verb to
serve as FEs of the frame evoked by the noun or the
adjective.
The CORENESS feature takes advantage of a
more recent implementation concept of core FEs
(vs. non-core FEs) in FrameNet. More specifi-
cally, the FrameNet developers classify frame ele-
ments in terms of how central they are to a particular
frame, distinguishing three levels: core, peripheral
and extra-thematic.
The features were used to produce two types of
examples: positive and negative examples. For each
FE of a frame, aside from the positive examples ren-
dered by the annotations, we considered as negative
examples all the annotations of the other FEs for the
same frame. The positive and the negative examples
were used for training the multi-class classifiers.
SUPPORT_VERBS that are recognized for adjective or noun target words
target word. The values of this feature are either (1) The POS of the head
of the VP containing the target word or (2) NULL if the target word does
not belong to a VP
or ADJECTIVE
LIST_CONSTITUENT (FEs): This feature represents a list of the syntactic
Grammatical Function: This feature indicates whether the FE is:
? an External Argument (Ext)
? an Object (Obj)
? a Complement (Comp)
? a Modifier (Mod)
? Head noun modified by attributive adjective (Head)
? Genitive determiner (Gen)
? Appositive (Appos)
LIST_Grammatical_Function: This feature represents a list of the 
grammatical functions of the FEs recognized in the sentence.
in each sentence.
FRAME_NAME: This feature indicates the name of the semantic frame 
for which FEs are labeled
COVERAGE: This feature indicates whether there is a syntactic structure
in the parse tree that perfectly covers the FE
a conceptually necessary participant of a frame. For example, in the 
are: (1) core; (2) peripheral and (3) extrathemathic. FEs that mark notions
such as Time, Place, Manner and Degree are peripheral. Extrathematic
FEs situate an event against a backdrop of another event, by evoking 
a larger frame for which the target event fills a role.
SUB_CORPUS: In FrameNet, sentences are annotated with the name
of the subcorpus they belong to. For example, for a verb target word,
to a FE included in a relative clause headed by a wh?word.
(2) a hyponym of sense 1 of PERSON in WordNet
(1) a personal pronoun or
HUMAN: This feature indicates whether the syntactic phrase is either
TARGET?TYPE: the lexical class of the target word, e.g. VERB, NOUN
consituents covering each FE of the frame recognized in a sentence. 
For the example illustrated in Figure 1, the list is: [NP, NP, PP]
NUMBER_FEs: This feature indicates how many FEs were recognized 
have the role of predicate for the FEs. For example, if the target word is
"clever" in the sentence "Smith is very clever, but he?s no Einstein", the 
the FE "Smith" is an argument of the support verb "is"? rather than of the
CORENESS: This feature indicates whether the FE instantiates
REVENGE frame, Punishment is a core element. The values 
V?swh represents a subcorpus in which the target word is a predicate
Figure 4: Feature Set 3 (FS3)
Our multi-class classification allows each FE to be
initially labeled with more than one role when sev-
eral classifiers decide so. For example, for the AT-
TACHING frame, an FE may be labeled both as Goal
and as Item if the classifiers for the Goal and Item
select it as a possible role. To choose the final label,
we select the classification which was assigned the
largest score by the SVMs.
PARSE TREE PATH WITH UNIQUE DELIMITER ?  This feature removes
the direction in the path, e.g. VBN?VP?ADVP
PARTIAL PATH ? This feature uses only the path from the constituent to
the lowest common ancestor of the predicate and the constituent
FIRST WORD ? First word covered by constituent
FIRST POS ? POS of first word covered by constituent
LEFT CONSTITUENT ? Left sibling constituent label
RIGHT HEAD ? Right sibling head word
RIGHT POS HEAD ? Right sibling POS of head word
LAST POS ? POS of last word covered by the constituent
LEFT HEAD ? Left sibling head word
LEFT POS HEAD ? Left sibling POS of head word
RIGHT CONSTITUENT ? Right sibling constituent label
PP PREP ? If constituent is labeled PP get first word in PP
DISTANCE ? Distance in the tree from constituent to the target word
LAST WORD ? Last word covered by the constituent
Figure 5: Feature Set 4 (FS4)
3 Boundary Detection
The boundary detection of each FE was required
in the Restricted Case of the Senseval-3 evalua-
tion. To classify a word as belonging to an FE
or not, we used all the entire Feature Set 1 and
2. From the Feature Set 3 we have used only
four features: the Support- Verbs feature; the
Target-Type feature, the Frame-Name feature
and the Sub Corpus feature. For this task we have
also used Feature Set 4, which were first introduced
in (Pradhan et al, 2004). The Feature Set 4 is il-
lustrated in Figure 5. After the boundary detec-
tion was performed, the semantic roles of each FE
were assigned using the role classifier trained for the
Restricted Case
4 Heuristics
Frequently, syntactic constituents do not cover ex-
actly FEs. For the Unrestricted Case we imple-
mented a very simple heuristic: when there is no
parse-tree node that exactly covers the target role r
but a subset of adjacent nodes perfectly match r,
we merge them in a new NPmerge node. For the
Restricted Case, a heuristic for adjectival and nomi-
nal target words w adjoins consecutive nouns that are
in the same noun phrase as w.
5 Experimental Results
In the Senseval-3 task for Automatic Labeling of
Semantic Roles 24,558 sentences from FrameNet
were assigned for training while 8,002 for testing.
We used 30% of the training set (7367 sentences)
as a validation-set for selecting SVM parameters
that optimize accuracy. The number of FEs for
which labels had to be assigned were: 51,010 for
the training set; 15,924 for the validation set and
16,279 for the test set. We used an additional set
of 66,687 sentences (hereafter extended data) as ex-
tended data produced when using the examples as-
sociated with any other frame from FrameNet that
had at least one FE shared with any of the 40
frames evaluated in Senseval-3. These sentences
were parsed with the Collins? parser (Collins, 1997).
The classifier experiments were carried out using the
SVM-light software (Joachims, 1999) available at
http://svmlight.joachims.org/with a poly-
nomial kernel2 (degree=3).
5.1 Unrestricted Task Experiments
For this task we devised four different experiments
that used four different combination of features: (1)
FS1 indicates using only Feature Set 1; (2) +H in-
dicates that we added the heuristics; (3) +FS2+FS3
indicates that we add the feature Set 2 and 3; and
(4) +E indicates that the extended data has also been
used. For each of the four experiments we trained 40
multi-class classifiers, (one for each frame) for a total
of 385 binary role classifiers. The following Table il-
lustrates the overall performance over the validation-
set. To evaluate the results we measure the F1-score
by combining the precision P with the recall R in the
formula F1 = 2?P?RP+R .
FS1 +H +H+FS2+FS3 +H+FS2+FS3+E
84.4 84.9 91.7 93.1
5.2 Restricted Task Experiments
In order to find the best feature combination for this
task we carried out some preliminary experiments
over five frames. In Table 1, the row labeled B lists
the F1-score of boundary detection over 4 different
feature sets: FS1, +H, +FS4 and +E, the extended
data. The row labeled R lists the same results for the
whole Restricted Case.
Table 1: Restrictive experiments on validation-set.
+FS1 +H +H+FS2+FS3 +H+FS4+E
B 80.29 80.48 84.76 84.88
R 74.9 75.4 78 78.9
Table 1 illustrates the overall performance (bound-
ary detection and role classification) of automatic se-
mantic role labeling. The results listed in Tables 1
and 2 were obtained by comparing the FE bound-
aries identified by our parser with those annotated in
FrameNet. We believe that these results are more
2In all experiments and for any classifier, we used the default
SVM-light regularization parameter (e.g., C = 1 for normalized
kernels) and a cost-factor j = 100 to adjust the rate between
Precision and Recall.
indicative of the performance of our systems than
those obtained when using the scorer provided by
Senseval-3. When using this scorer, our results have
a precision of 89.9%, recall of 77.2% and an F1-
score of 83.07% for the Restricted Case.
Table 2: Results on the test-set.
Precision Recall F1
Unrestricted Case 94.5 90.6 92.5
Boundary Detection 87.3 75.1 80.7
Restricted Case 82.4 71.1 76.3
To generate the final Senseval-3 submissions we
selected the most accurate models (for unrestricted
and restricted tasks) of the validation experiments.
Then we re-trained such models with all training data
(i.e. our training plus validation data) and the set-
ting (parameters, heuristics and extended data) de-
rived over the validation-set. Finally, we run all clas-
sifiers on the test-set of the task. Table 2 illustrates
the final results for both sub-tasks.
6 Conclusions
In this paper we describe a method for automatically
labeling semantic roles based on support vector ma-
chines (SVMs). The training benefits from an ex-
tended data set on which multi-class classifiers were
derived. The polynomial kernel of the SVMs en-
able the combination of four feature sets that pro-
duced very good results both for the Restricted Case
and the Unrestricted Case. The paper also describes
some heuristics for mapping syntactic constituents
onto FEs.
References
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceedings
of the COLING-ACL, Montreal, Canada.
Michael Collins. 1997. Three generative, lexicalized
models for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of the
ACL-97, pages 16?23.,
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurasfky. 2002. Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistic,
28(3):496?530.
T. Joachims. 1999. Making Large-Scale SVM Learning
Practical. In B. Schlkopf, C. Burges, and MIT-Press.
A. Smola (ed.), editors, Advances in Kernel Methods -
Support Vector Learning.
Sameer Pradhan, Kadri Hacioglu, Valeri Krugler, Wayne
Ward, James H. Martin, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004.
Support vector learning for semantic argument classifi-
cation. Journal of Machine Learning Research.
Mihai Surdeanu, Sanda M. Harabagiu, John Williams,
and John Aarseth. 2003. Using predicate-argument
structures for information extraction. In Proceedings
of (ACL-03).
