The SENSEVAL?3 Multilingual English?Hindi Lexical Sample Task
Timothy Chklovski
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
timc@isi.edu
Rada Mihalcea
Department of Computer Science
University of North Texas
Dallas, TX 76203
rada@cs.unt.edu
Ted Pedersen
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota
Duluth, MN 55812
tpederse@d.umn.edu
Amruta Purandare
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota
Duluth, MN 55812
pura0010@d.umn.edu
Abstract
This paper describes the English?Hindi Multilingual
lexical sample task in SENSEVAL?3. Rather than
tagging an English word with a sense from an En-
glish dictionary, this task seeks to assign the most
appropriate Hindi translation to an ambiguous tar-
get word. Training data was solicited via the Open
Mind Word Expert (OMWE) from Web users who
are fluent in English and Hindi.
1 Introduction
The goal of the MultiLingual lexical sample task
is to create a framework for the evaluation of sys-
tems that perform Machine Translation, with a fo-
cus on the translation of ambiguous words. The
task is very similar to the lexical sample task, ex-
cept that rather than using the sense inventory from
a dictionary we follow the suggestion of (Resnik and
Yarowsky, 1999) and use the translations of the tar-
get words into a second language. In this task for
SENSEVAL-3, the contexts are in English, and the
?sense tags? for the English target words are their
translations in Hindi.
This paper outlines some of the major issues that
arose in the creation of this task, and then describes
the participating systems and summarizes their re-
sults.
2 Open Mind Word Expert
The annotated corpus required for this task was
built using the Open Mind Word Expert system
(Chklovski and Mihalcea, 2002), adapted for mul-
tilingual annotations 1.
To overcome the current lack of tagged data and
the limitations imposed by the creation of such data
using trained lexicographers, the Open Mind Word
1Multilingual Open Mind Word Expert can be accessed at
http://teach-computers.org/word-expert/english-hindi
Expert system enables the collection of semantically
annotated corpora over the Web. Tagged examples
are collected using a Web-based application that al-
lows contributors to annotate words with their mean-
ings.
The tagging exercise proceeds as follows. For
each target word the system extracts a set of sen-
tences from a large textual corpus. These examples
are presented to the contributors, together with all
possible translations for the given target word. Users
are asked to select the most appropriate translation
for the target word in each sentence. The selection
is made using check-boxes, which list all possible
translations, plus two additional choices, ?unclear?
and ?none of the above.? Although users are encour-
aged to select only one translation per word, the se-
lection of two or more translations is also possible.
The results of the classification submitted by other
users are not presented to avoid artificial biases.
3 Sense Inventory Representation
The sense inventory used in this task is the set of
Hindi translations associated with the English words
in our lexical sample. Selecting an appropriate
English-Hindi dictionary was a major decision early
in the task, and it raised a number of interesting is-
sues.
We were unable to locate any machine readable
or electronic versions of English-Hindi dictionaries,
so it became apparent that we would need to manu-
ally enter the Hindi translations from printed mate-
rials. We briefly considered the use of Optical Char-
acter Recognition (OCR), but found that our avail-
able tools did not support Hindi. Even after deciding
to enter the Hindi translations manually, it wasn?t
clear how those words should be encoded. Hindi is
usually represented in Devanagari script, which has
a large number of possible encodings and no clear
standard has emerged as yet.
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
We decided that Romanized or transliterated
Hindi text would be the the most portable encoding,
since it can be represented in standard ASCII text.
However, it turned out that the number of English?
Hindi bilingual dictionaries is much less than the
number of Hindi?English, and the number that use
transliterated text is smaller still.
Still, we located one promising candidate, the
English?Hindi Hippocrene Dictionary (Raker and
Shukla, 1996), which represents Hindi in a translit-
erated form. However, we found that many English
words only had two or three translations, making it
too coarse grained for our purposes2 .
In the end we selected the Chambers English?
Hindi dictionary (Awasthi, 1997), which is a high
quality bilingual dictionary that uses Devanagari
script. We identified 41 English words from the
Chambers dictionary to make up our lexical sam-
ple. Then one of the task organizers, who is
fluent in English and Hindi, manually transliter-
ated the approximately 500 Hindi translations of
the 41 English words in our lexical sample from
the Chambers dictionary into the ITRANS format
(http://www.aczone.com/itrans/). ITRANS software
was used to generate Unicode for display in the
OMWE interfaces, although the sense tags used in
the task data are the Hindi translations in transliter-
ated form.
4 Training and Test Data
The MultiLingual lexical sample is made up of 41
words: 18 nouns, 15 verbs, and 8 adjectives. This
sample includes English words that have varying de-
grees of polysemy as reflected in the number of pos-
sible Hindi translations, which range from a low of
3 to a high of 39.
Text samples made up of several hundred in-
stances for each of 31 of the 41 words were drawn
from the British National Corpus, while samples for
the other 10 words came from the SENSEVAL-2 En-
glish lexical sample data. The BNC data is in a
?raw? text form, where the part of speech tags have
been removed. However, the SENSEVAL-2 data in-
cludes the English sense?tags as determined by hu-
man taggers.
After gathering the instances for each word in
the lexical sample, we tokenized each instance and
removed those that contain collocations of the tar-
get word. For example, the training/test instances
for arm.n do not include examples for contact arm,
2We have made available transcriptions of the entries for
approximately 70 Hippocrene nouns, verbs, and adjectives
at http://www.d.umn.edu/?pura0010/hindi.html, although these
were not used in this task.
pickup arm, etc., but only examples that refer to arm
as a single lexical unit (not part of a collocation). In
our experience, disambiguation accuracy on collo-
cations of this sort is close to perfect, and we aimed
to concentrate the annotation effort on the more dif-
ficult cases.
The data was then annotated with Hindi transla-
tions by web volunteers using the Open Mind Word
Expert (bilingual edition). At various points in time
we offered gift certificates as a prize for the most
productive tagger in a given day, in order to spur
participation. A total of 40 volunteers contributed to
this task.
To create the test data we collected two indepen-
dent tags per instance, and then discarded any in-
stances where the taggers disagreed. Thus, each
instance that remains in the test data has complete
agreement between two taggers. For the training
data, we only collected one tag per instance, and
therefore this data may be noisy. Participating sys-
tems could choose to apply their own filtering meth-
ods to identify and remove the less reliably anno-
tated examples.
After tagging by the Web volunteers, there were
two data sets provided to task participants: one
where the English sense of the target word is un-
known, and another where it is known in both the
training and test data. These are referred to as the
translation only (t) data and the translation and sense
(ts) data, respectively. The t data is made up of in-
stances drawn from the BNC as described above,
while the ts data is made up of the instances from
SENSEVAL-2. Evaluations were run separately for
each of these two data sets, which we refer to as the
t and ts subtasks.
The t data contains 31 ambiguous words: 15
nouns, 10 verbs, and 6 adjectives. The ts data con-
tains 10 ambiguous words: 3 nouns, 5 verbs, and 2
adjectives, all of which have been used in the En-
glish lexical sample task of SENSEVAL-2. These
words, the number of possible translations, and the
number of training and test instances are shown in
Table 1. The total number of training instances in
the two sub-tasks is 10,449, and the total number of
test instances is 1,535.
5 Participating Systems
Five teams participated in the t subtask, submitting
a total of eight systems. Three teams (a subset of
those five) participated in the ts subtask, submitting
a total of five systems. All submitted systems em-
ployed supervised learning, using the training ex-
amples provided. Some teams used additional re-
sources as noted in the more detailed descriptions
Table 1: Target words in the SENSEVAL-3 English-Hindi task
Lexical Unit Translations Train Test Lexical Unit Translations Train Test Lexical Unit Translations Train Test
TRANSLATION ONLY (T?DATA)
band.n 8 224 91 bank.n 21 332 52 case.n 13 348 42
different.a 4 320 25 eat.v 3 271 48 field.n 14 300 100
glass.n 8 379 13 hot.a 18 348 32 line.n 39 360 11
note.v 11 220 12 operate.v 9 280 50 paper.n 8 264 73
plan.n 8 210 35 produce.v 7 265 67 rest.v 14 172 10
rule.v 8 160 18 shape.n 8 320 32 sharp.a 16 248 48
smell.v 5 210 17 solid.a 16 327 37 substantial.a 15 250 100
suspend.v 4 370 28 table.n 21 378 16 talk.v 6 341 35
taste.n 6 350 40 terrible.a 4 200 99 tour.n 5 240 9
vision.n 14 318 20 volume.n 9 309 54 watch.v 10 300 100
way.n 16 331 22 TOTAL 348 8945 1336
TRANSLATION AND SENSE ONLY (TS?DATA)
bar.n 19 278 39 begin.v 6 360 15 channel.n 6 92 16
green.a 9 175 26 nature.n 15 71 14 play.v 14 152 10
simple.a 9 166 19 treat.v 7 100 32 wash.v 16 10 11
work.v 24 100 17 TOTAL 125 1504 199
below.
5.1 NUS
The NUS team from the National University of Sin-
gapore participated in both the t and ts subtasks. The
t system (nusmlst) uses a combination of knowledge
sources as features, and the Support Vector Machine
(SVM) learning algorithm. The knowledge sources
used include part of speech of neighboring words,
single words in the surrounding context, local col-
locations, and syntactic relations. The ts system
(nusmlsts) does the same, but adds the English sense
of the target word as a knowledge source.
5.2 LIA-LIDILEM
The LIA-LIDILEM team from the Universite? d?
Avignon and the Universite? Stendahl Grenoble had
two systems which participated in both the t and ts
subtasks. In the ts subtask, only the English sense
tags were used, not the Hindi translations.
The FL-MIX system uses a combination of three
probabilistic models, which compute the most prob-
able sense given a six word window of context. The
three models are a Poisson model, a Semantic Clas-
sification Tree model, and a K nearest neighbors
search model. This system also used a part of speech
tagger and a lemmatizer.
The FC-MIX system is the same as the FL-MIX
system, but replaces context words by more gen-
eral synonym?like classes computed from a word
aligned English?French corpus which number ap-
proximately 850,000 words in each language.
5.3 HKUST
The HKUST team from the Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology had three systems that
participated in both the t and ts subtasks
The HKUST me t and HKUST me ts sys-
tems are maximum entropy classifiers. The
HKUST comb t and HKUST comb ts systems
are voted classifiers that combine a new Kernel
PCA model with a maximum entropy model and
a boosting?based model. The HKUST comb2 t
and HKUST comb2 ts are voted classifiers that
combine a new Kernel PCA model with a maximum
entropy model, a boosting?based model, and a
Naive Bayesian model.
5.4 UMD
The UMD team from the University of Maryland en-
tered (UMD?SST) in the t task. UMD?SST is a su-
pervised sense tagger based on the Support Vector
Machine learning algorithm, and is described more
fully in (Cabezas et al, 2001).
5.5 Duluth
The Duluth team from the University of Minnesota,
Duluth had one system (Duluth-ELSS) that partici-
pated in the t task. This system is an ensemble of
three bagged decision trees, each based on a differ-
ent type of lexical feature. This system was known
as Duluth3 in SENSEVAL-2, and it is described more
fully in (Pedersen, 2001).
6 Results
All systems attempted all of the test instances, so
precision and recall are identical, hence we report
Table 2: t Subtask Results
System Accuracy
nusmlst 63.4
HKUST comb t 62.0
HKUST comb2 t 61.4
HKUST me t 60.6
FL-MIX 60.3
FC-MIX 60.3
UMD-SST 59.4
Duluth-ELSS 58.2
Baseline (majority) 51.9
Table 3: ts Subtask Results
System Accuracy
nusmlsts 67.3
FL-MIX 64.1
FC-MIX 64.1
HKUST comb ts 63.8
HKUST comb2 ts 63.8
HKUST me ts 60.8
Baseline (majority) 55.8
the single Accuracy figure. Tables 2 and 3 show re-
sults for the t and ts subtasks, respectively.
We note that the participating systems all ex-
ceeded the baseline (majority) classifier by some
margin, suggesting that the sense distinctions made
by the translations are clear and provide sufficient
information for supervised methods to learn effec-
tive classifiers.
Interestingly, the average results on the ts data are
higher than the average results on the t data, which
suggests that sense information is likely to be helpful
for the task of targeted word translation. Additional
investigations are however required to draw some fi-
nal conclusions.
7 Conclusion
The Multilingual Lexical Sample task in
SENSEVAL-3 featured English ambiguous words
that were to be tagged with their most appropriate
Hindi translation. The objective of this task is to
determine feasibility of translating words of various
degrees of polysemy, focusing on translation of
specific lexical items. The results of five teams
that participated in this event tentatively suggest
that machine learning techniques can significantly
improve over the most frequent sense baseline.
Additionally, this task has highlighted creation
of testing and training data by leveraging the
knowledge of bilingual Web volunteers. The
training and test data sets used in this exercise are
available online from http://www.senseval.org and
http://teach-computers.org.
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to all those who contributed to the Mul-
tilingual Open Mind Word Expert project, making
this task possible. We are also grateful to all the par-
ticipants in this task, for their hard work and involve-
ment in this evaluation exercise. Without them, all
these comparative analyses would not be possible.
We are particularly grateful to a research grant
from the University of North Texas that provided the
funding for contributor prizes, and to the National
Science Foundation for their support of Amruta Pu-
randare under a Faculty Early CAREER Develop-
ment Award (#0092784).
References
S. Awasthi, editor. 1997. Chambers English?Hindi
Dictionary. South Asia Books, Columbia, MO.
C. Cabezas, P. Resnik, and J. Stevens. 2001. Su-
pervised sense tagging using Support Vector Ma-
chines. In Proceedings of the Senseval-2 Work-
shop, Toulouse, July.
T. Chklovski and R. Mihalcea. 2002. Building a
sense tagged corpus with the Open Mind Word
Expert. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on
Word Sense Disambiguation: Recent Successes
and Future Directions, Philadelphia.
T. Pedersen. 2001. Machine learning with lexical
features: The Duluth approach to Senseval-2. In
Proceedings of the Senseval-2 Workshop, pages
139?142, Toulouse, July.
J. Raker and R. Shukla, editors. 1996. Hip-
pocrene Standard Dictionary English-Hindi
Hindi-English (With Romanized Pronunciation).
Hippocrene Books, New York, NY.
P. Resnik and D. Yarowsky. 1999. Distinguish-
ing systems and distinguishing senses: New eval-
uation methods for word sense disambiguation.
Natural Language Engineering, 5(2):113?133.
