Evaluation of Restricted Domain Question-Answering Systems 
Anne R. Diekema, Ozgur Yilmazel, and Elizabeth D. Liddy 
Center for Natural Language Processing 
School of Information Studies 
Syracuse University 
4-206 Center for Science and Technology 
Syracuse, NY 13244 
{diekemar,liddy,oyilmaz}@syr.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Question-Answering (QA) evaluation efforts 
have largely been tailored to open-domain 
systems. The TREC QA test collections contain 
newswire articles and the accompanying queries 
cover a wide variety of topics. While some 
apprehension about the limitations of restricted-
domain systems is no doubt justified, the strict 
promotion of unlimited domain QA evaluations 
may have some unintended consequences. 
Simply applying the open domain QA evaluation 
paradigm to a restricted-domain system poses 
problems in the areas of test question 
development, answer key creation, and test 
collection construction. This paper examines the 
evaluation requirements of restricted domain 
systems. It incorporates evaluation criteria 
identified by users of an operational QA system 
in the aerospace engineering domain. While the 
paper demonstrates that user-centered task-based 
evaluations are required for restricted domain 
systems, these evaluations are found to be 
equally applicable to open domain systems. 
1 Introduction 
The Text REtrieval Conference (TREC) 
organized the first QA evaluation (QA track) in 
1999 (Voorhees, 2000) and annual evaluations of 
this nature are ongoing (Voorhees, to appear). 
While the tasks and answer requirements have 
varied slightly from year to year, the purpose 
behind QA evaluations remains the same: to 
move from the traditional document retrieval to 
actual information retrieval by providing an 
answer to a question rather than a ranked list of 
relevant documents. The track was originally 
intended to bring together the fields of 
Information Extraction (IE) and Information 
Retrieval (IR). This legacy still continues in the 
factoid questions that require an IE type answer 
snippet in response, e.g.: ?What country is the 
Aswan High Dam located in?? This style of QA 
evaluation is spreading with very similar 
evaluations in Asia (Fukumoto, Kato, Masui, 
2003) and Europe (Magnini et al, 2003). 
Although these evaluations have a multilingual 
slant, they are strongly modeled after the TREC 
QA track. 
Typical QA systems that participate in these 
evaluations classify the questions into types 
which determine what kind of answer is required. 
After an initial retrieval of documents pertaining 
to the question, some form of text processing is 
then applied to identify possible answer 
sentences in the documents. Sentences that are 
near or contain keywords from the original 
question and contain the desired answer pattern 
are selected for answer extraction. Since it is 
difficult for systems to determine which part of 
the sentence is the correct answer, especially if it 
contains multiple extractions of the desired type, 
many systems have resorted to redundancy 
tactics (Banko et al, 2002; Buchholz, 2002). 
These systems use the Web as an answer 
verification tool by choosing the answer that 
appears most often together with the question 
keywords. While this technique is very 
successful in open domain evaluations, 
restricted-domain systems do not have the luxury 
of using redundancy, making these evaluations 
inappropriate for systems such as these. 
Our QA system participated in the three 
earlier TREC evaluations, e.g. (Diekema et al, 
2002). However, after starting work in the 
restricted-domain of re-usable launch vehicles, 
we found that the TREC evaluation no longer 
suited our system development needs and 
maintaining two different QA systems was too 
costly. 
 
 
2 Restricted-domain system 
characteristics  
The restricted-domain systems of today are 
different from the toy systems from the early 
years of QA (Voorhees and Tice, 2000), which 
might be what first comes to mind when reading 
the term ?restricted-domain?. Early systems like 
LUNAR (with a domain somewhat tangentially 
related to ours, namely lunar archeology) were 
developed by researchers in the field of natural 
language understanding. These early systems 
encoded large amounts of domain knowledge in 
databases. The restricted-domain systems of 
today are far less dependent on large knowledge 
bases and do not aim for language understanding 
per se. Rather, they use specialized extraction 
rules on a domain specific collection. The one 
thing that both types of restricted-domain 
systems have in common is that they are often 
developed with a certain goal or task in mind.  
As we will see later, this task orientation 
becomes equally important in the evaluation of 
these QA systems.  
An example of a modern-day restricted-
domain system is our Knowledge Acquisition 
and Access System (KAAS) QA system. The 
KAAS was developed for use in a collaborative 
learning environment (Advanced Interactive 
Discovery Environment for Engineering 
Education or AIDE) for undergraduate students 
from two universities majoring in aeronautical 
engineering. While students are working within 
the AIDE they can ask questions and quickly get 
answers. The collection against which the 
questions are searched consists of textbooks, 
technical papers, and websites that have been 
pre-selected for relevance and pedagogical value. 
The KAAS system uses a two-stage retrieval 
model to find answers in relevant passages. 
Relevant passages are processed by the Center 
for Natural Language Processing?s eQuery 
information extraction system using additional 
rules in the domain of reusable launch vehicles. 
Users are aided in their question formulations 
through domain specific query expansions. 
 
3 Initiating a restricted domain 
evaluation 
When it came time to evaluate the KAAS 
system, we initially defaulted to the TREC style 
QA evaluation with short, fact-based questions, 
adjudicated answers to these questions, and a test 
collection in which to find those answers. This 
choice of evaluation was not surprising since 
early versions of our system grew out of that 
environment. However, it quickly became 
apparent that this evaluation style posed 
problems for our restricted-domain, specific 
purpose system. 
Developing a set of test questions was easier 
said than done. Unlike the open domain 
evaluations, where test questions can be mined 
from question logs (Encarta, Excite, AskJeeves), 
no question sets are at the disposal of restricted-
domain evaluators. To build a set of test 
questions, we hired two sophomore aerospace 
engineering students. Based on class project 
papers of the previous semester and examples of 
TREC questions, the students were asked to 
create as many short factoid questions as they 
could, i.e ?What is APAS?? However, the real 
user questions that we collected later did not look 
anything like the short test questions in this 
initial evaluation set. The user questions were 
much more complex, e.g. ?How difficult is it to 
mold and shape graphite-epoxies compared with 
alloys or ceramics that may be used for thermal 
protective applications?? A more in depth 
analysis of KAAS question types can be found in 
Diekema et al (to appear). 
Establishing answers for the initial test 
questions proved difficult as well. The students 
did fine at collecting the questions that they had 
while reading the papers, but lacked sufficient 
domain expertise to establish answer correctness. 
Another issue was determining recall because it 
wasn?t always clear whether the (small) corpus 
simply did not contain the answer or whether the 
system was not able to find it. A third student, a 
doctoral student in aerospace engineering, was 
hired to help with these issues. To facilitate 
automatic evaluation we wanted to represent the 
answers in simple patterns but found that 
complex answers are not necessarily suitable for 
such a representation, even though patterns have 
proven feasible for TREC systems.  
While a newswire document collection for 
general domain evaluation is easy to find, a 
collection in our specialized domain needed to be 
created from scratch. Not only did the collection 
of documents take time, the conversion of most 
of these documents to text proved to be quite an 
unexpected hurdle as well. 
As is evident, the TREC style QA evaluation 
did not suit our restricted domain system. It also 
leaves out the user entirely. While information-
based evaluations are necessary to establish the 
ability of the system to answer questions 
correctly, we felt that they were not sufficient for 
evaluating a system with real users. 
4 User-based evaluation dimensions 
Restricted domain systems tend to be situated 
not only within a specific domain, but also within 
a certain user community and within a specific 
task domain. A generic evaluation is neither 
sufficient nor suitable for a restricted domain 
system. The environment in which KAAS is 
situated should drive the evaluation. Unlike 
many of the systems that participate in a TREC 
QA evaluation, the KAAS system has to function 
in real time with real users, not in batch mode 
with surrogate relevance assessors. This brings 
with it additional evaluation criteria such as 
utility and system speed (Nyberg and Mitamura, 
2003). 
KAAS users were asked in two separate 
surveys about their use and experiences with the 
system. The surveys were part of larger scale, 
cross-university course evaluations which looked 
at the students? perceptions of distance learning, 
collaboration at a distance, the collaborative 
software package, the KAAS, and each 
participating faculty member. While there was 
some structure and guidance in the user survey of 
the QA system, it was minimal and the survey is 
mainly characterized by the open nature of the 
responses. There were 25 to 30 students 
participating in each full course survey, but since 
we do not have the actual surveys that were 
turned in, we are not certain as to exactly how 
many students completed the survey section on 
the KAAS. However, it appears that most, if not 
all of the students provided feedback. 
Given the free text nature of the responses, it 
was decided that the three researchers would do a 
content analysis of the responses and 
independently derive a set of evaluation 
dimensions that they detected in the students? 
responses. Through content analysis of the user 
responses and follow-up discussion, we 
identified 5 main areas of importance to KAAS 
users when using the system: system 
performance, answers, database content, display, 
and expectations (see Figure 1). Each of the 
categories will be described in more detail 
below. 
4.1 System Performance 
System Performance is the category that deals 
with system speed and system availability. Users 
indicated that the speed with which answers were 
returned to them mattered. While they did not 
necessarily expect an immediate answer, they 
also did not want to wait, e.g. ?took so long, so I 
gave up?. Whenever users have a question, they 
want to find an answer immediately. If the 
system is down or not available to them at that 
moment, they will not come back later and try 
again. 
Possible system performance metrics are the 
?answer return rate?, and ?up time?. The answer 
return rate measures how long it takes (on 
average) to return an answer after the user has 
submitted a question.  ?Up-time? measures for a 
certain time period how often the system is 
available (system available time divided by the 
length of up-time time period). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1: User-based evaluation dimensions. 
 
 
1 System Performance 
1.1 Speed 
1.2 Availability / reliability / upness 
2 Answers  
2.1 Completeness 
2.2 Accuracy 
2.3 Relevance 
2.4 Applicability to task / utility / usefulness 
3 Database Content 
3.1 Authority / provenance / Source quality 
3.2 Scope /extensiveness / coverage 
3.3 Size 
3.4 Updatedness 
4 Display (UI) 
4.1 Input 
4.1.1 Question understanding / info need 
understanding 
4.1.2 Querying style 
4.1.2.1 Question 
4.1.2.1.1 NL query 
4.1.2.2 Keywords 
4.1.2.3 Browsing 
4.1.3 Question formulation assistance 
4.1.3.1 Spell Checker 
4.1.3.2 Abbreviation recognition 
4.2 Output 
4.2.1 Organization 
4.2.2 Feedback Solicitation 
5 Expectations 
5.1 Googleness 
 
4.2 Answers  
What users find important in an answer is 
captured in the Answers category. The users not 
only wanted answers to be accurate, they also 
wanted them to be complete and, something that 
is not tested at all in a regular evaluation, 
applicable to their task. e.g. ?in general what I 
received was helpful and accurate?, ?it [the 
system] was useful for the Columbia incident 
exercise??. 
Possible metrics concerning answers are 
?accuracy or correctness?, ?completeness?, 
?relevance?, or ?task suitability?. While the first 
three metrics are used in some shape or form in 
the TREC evaluations, ?task suitability? is not.  
Perhaps this measure requires a certain task 
description with a question to test whether the 
answer provided by the system allowed the user 
to complete the task. 
4.3 Database Content  
Users also shared thoughts about the Database 
Content or source documents that are searched 
for answers. They find it important that these 
documents are reputable. They also shared 
concerns about the size of the database, fearing 
that a limit in size would restrict the number of 
answerable questions, e.g. ?it needs more 
documents?. The same is true for the scope of the 
collection. Users desired extended coverage to 
ensure that a wide range of questions could be 
fielded by the collection, e.g. ?I found the data 
too limited in scope?. 
Possible database content metrics are 
?authority?, ?coverage?, ?size?, and ?up-to-
dateness?. To measure ?authority? one would 
first have to identify the core authors for a 
domain through citation analysis. Once that is 
established, one could measure the percentage of 
database content created by these core 
researchers. ?Coverage? could be measured in a 
similar way after the main research areas within 
a domain are identified.  ?Size? could simply be 
measured in megabytes or gigabytes. ?Up-to-
dateness? could be measured by calculating the 
number of articles per year or simply noting the 
date of the most recent article. 
 
4.4 User Interface 
The User Interface of a system was also found 
of importance. Users were critical about the way 
they were asked to input their questions. They 
did not always want to phrase their question as a 
question but sometimes preferred to use 
keywords, e.g. ?a keyword search would be more 
useful?. They also expected the system to prompt 
them with assistance in case they misspelled 
terms, or when the system did not understand the 
question, e.g ?sometimes very good at correcting 
you to what you need, other times not very 
good?. Users also care about the way in which 
the results are presented to them and whether the 
system desires any additional responses from 
them. They did not like being prompted for 
feedback on a document?s relevance for example, 
e.g. ??the ?was this useful? window was 
disruptive?. 
Measuring UI related aspects can be done 
through observation, questionnaires and 
interviews and does not typically result in actual 
metrics but rather a set of recommendations that 
can be implemented in the next version of the 
system. 
4.5 Expectations 
Another interesting aspect of user criteria is 
Expectations , e.g. ?the documents in the e-Query 
database were useful, but Google is much 
faster?. All users are familiar with Google and 
tend to have little patience with systems that 
have a different look and feel. 
Expectations can be captured by survey so 
that it can be established whether these 
expectations are reasonable and whether they can 
be met.   
5 Restricted domain QA Evaluation  
If we consider a restricted domain QA system 
as a system developed for a certain application, it 
is clear that these systems require a situated 
evaluation. The evaluation has to be situated in 
the task, domain, and user community for which 
the system is developed.  
How then can a restricted domain system best 
be evaluated? We believe that the evaluation 
should be driven by the dimensions identified by 
the users as important: system performance, 
answers, database content, display, and 
expectations. 
The system should be evaluated on its 
performance. How many seconds does it take to 
answer a question? Once the speed is known, one 
can determine how long users are willing to wait 
for an answer. It may very well be that the 
answer-finding capability of a system will need 
to be simplified in order to speed up the system 
and satisfy its users. Similarly, tests to determine 
robustness need to be part of the system 
performance evaluation. Users tend to shy away 
from systems that are periodically unavailable or 
slow to a crawl during peak usage hours.  
Systems should also be evaluated on their 
answer providing ability. This evaluation should 
include measures for answer completeness, 
accuracy, and relevancy. Test questions should 
be within the domain of the QA system in order 
to test the answer quality for that domain. 
Answers to certain questions require a more fine-
grained scoring procedure: answers that are 
explanations or summaries or biographies or 
comparative evaluations cannot be meaningfully 
rated as simply right or wrong. The answer 
providing capability should be evaluated in light 
of the task or purpose of the system. For 
example, users of the KAAS are learners in the 
field and are not well served with exact answer 
snippets. For their task, they need answer context 
information to be able to learn from the answer 
text.  
The evaluation should also include measures 
of the Database Content. Rather than assuming 
relevancy of a collection, it should be evaluated 
whether the content is regularly updated, whether 
the contents are of acceptable quality to the 
users, and whether the coverage of the restricted 
domain is extensive enough. 
Another system component that should be 
evaluated is the User Interface. Is the system 
easy to use? Does the interface provide clear 
guidance and/or assistance to the user? Does it 
allow users to search in multiple ways? 
Finally, it may be pertinent to evaluate how 
far the system goes in living up to user 
expectations. Although it is impossible to satisfy 
everybody, the system developers need to know 
whether there is a large discrepancy between user 
expectations and the actual system, since this 
may influence the use of the system. 
6 Cross-fertilization between evaluations 
How different are restricted-domain 
evaluations from open-domain evaluations? Are 
they so diametrically opposed that restricted-
domain systems require separate evaluations 
from open-domain systems and vice versa? As 
pointed out in Section 1, we stopped 
participating in the TREC QA evaluations 
because that evaluation was not well suited to 
our restricted-domain system. However, we 
regretted this as we believe we could, 
nevertheless, have gained valuable insights. 
Clearly, open-domain systems would benefit 
from the evaluation dimensions discussed in 
Section 4. The difference would be that the test 
questions used for evaluation would be general 
rather than tailored to a specific domain. 
Additionally, it may be harder to evaluate the 
database content (i.e. the collection) for a general 
domain system than would be the case for 
restricted-domain systems.  
To make open-domain evaluations more 
applicable to restricted-domain systems, they 
could be extended to include metrics about 
answer speed, and the ability of answering within 
a certain task. For example, the evaluation could 
include system performance to get an indication 
as to how much processing time, given certain 
hardware, is required in getting the answers. As 
for answer correctness itself, it may be 
interesting to require extensive use of task 
scenarios that would determine aspects such as 
answer length and level of detail. It may also be 
desirable to evaluate runs without redundancy 
techniques separately. Ideally, users would be 
incorporated into the evaluation to assess the user 
interface and the ability of the system to assist 
them in completion of a certain task. 
 
7 Summary 
Restricted-domain systems require a more 
situated evaluation than is generally provided in 
open-domain evaluations. A restricted-domain 
evaluation extends beyond domain specific test 
questions and collections to include the user and 
their task. Users of the restricted-domain KAAS 
system identified five areas that should be 
included in an evaluation: System Performance, 
Answers, Database Content, Display, and 
Expectations. Most of these evaluation 
dimensions could be applied to open-domain 
evaluations as well. Adding system performance 
metrics (such as answer speed) and specific task 
requirements may allow a convergence between 
open domain and restricted domain QA 
evaluations. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Funding for this research has been jointly provided by 
NASA,  NY State, and AT&T. 
 
References  
 
Banko, M., Brill, E., Dumais, S. and Lin, J. 2002.  
AskMSR: Question answering using the worldwide 
Web.  In Proceedings of the 2002 AAAI Spring 
Symposium on Mining Answers from Texts and 
Knowledge Bases, March 2002, Palo Alto, 
California.  
Buchholz, S. 2002. Using Grammatical Relations, 
Answer Frequencies and the World Wide Web for 
TREC Question Answering. In: E. M. Voorhees 
and D. K. Harman (Eds.), The Tenth Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC 2001), volume 500-250 of 
NIST Special Publication, Gaithersburg, MD. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
2002, pp. 502-509. 
Diekema, A.R., Chen, J., McCracken, N, Ozgencil, 
N.E., Taffet, M.D., Yilmazel, O. and Liddy, E.D. 
2002. Question Answering: CNLP at the TREC-
2002 Question Answering Track. In: Proceedings 
of the Eleventh Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-
2002). E.M. Voorhees and D.K. Harman (Eds.). 
Gaithersburg, MD: Department of Commerce, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
2002. 
Fukumoto, J., Kato, T., and Masui, F. 2003. Question 
Answering Challenge (QAC-1): An Evaluation of 
Question Answering Tasks at the NTCIR 
Workshop 3. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring 
Symposium: New Directions in Question 
Answering, p.122-133, 2003. 
Diekema, A.R., Yilmazel, O., Chen, J., Harwell, S., 
He, L., and Liddy, E.D. Finding Answers to 
Complex Questions. To appaer. In Maybury, M. 
(Ed.) New Directions in Question Answering. 
AAAI-MIT Press. 
Magnini, B., Romagnoli, S., Vallin, A., Herrera, J. 
Pe?as, A., Peinado, V., Verdejo, F., M. de Rijke, 
The Multiple Language Question Answering Track 
at CLEF 2003. In Carol Peters (Ed.), Working 
Notes for the CLEF 2003 Workshop, 21-22 August, 
Trondheim, Norway, 2003. 
Nyberg E. and T. Mitamura. 2002. Evaluating QA 
Systems on Multiple Dimensions. In Proceedings 
of LREC 2002 Workshop on QA Strategy and 
Resources, May 28th, Las Palmas, Gran Canaria. 
Voorhees, E.M. 2003. DRAFT Overview of the 
TREC 2003 Question Answering Track. To appear 
in Proceedings of TREC 2003. Gaithersburg, MD, 
NIST, to appear. 
Voorhees, E.M. Overview of the TREC-8 Question 
Answering Track Report. In Proceedings of TREC-
8, 77-82. Gaithersburg, MD, NIST, 2000. 
Voorhees, E.M. & Tice, D.M.  Implementing a 
Question Answering Evaluation. In Proceedings of 
LREC?2000 Workshop on Using Evaluation within 
HLT Programs: Results and Trends. 2000. 
