Identifying correspondences between words: an approach based on a bilingual 
syntactic analysis of French/English parallel corpora 
Sylwia OZDOWSKA 
Equipe de Recherche en Syntaxe et S?mantique  
Universit? Toulouse le Mirail 
5 all?es Antonio Machado 
31058 Toulouse Cedex 1 France 
ozdowska@univ-tlse2.fr 
 
Abstract 
We present a word alignment procedure based 
on a syntactic dependency analysis of 
French/English parallel corpora called 
?alignment by syntactic propagation?. Both 
corpora are analysed with a deep and robust 
parser. Starting with an anchor pair consisting 
of two words which are potential translations 
of one another within aligned sentences, the 
alignment link is propagated to the 
syntactically connected words. The method 
was tested on two corpora and achieved a 
precision of 94.3 and 93.1% as well as a recall 
of 58 and 56%, respectively for each corpus. 
1 Introduction 
It is now an aknowledged fact that parallel 
corpora, i.e. corpora made of texts in one language 
and their translation in another language, are well 
suited in particular to cope with the problem of the 
construction of bilingual resources such as 
bilingual lexicons or terminologies. Several works 
have focused on the alignment of units which are 
smaller than a sentence, for instance words or 
phrases, as to produce bilingual word, phrase or 
term associations. A common assumption is that 
the alignment of words or phrases raises a real 
challenge, since it is ?neither one-to-one, nor 
sequential, nor compact?, and thus ?the 
correspondences are fuzzy and contextual? (Debili, 
1997). Indeed, it is even often diffult for a human 
to determine which source unit correspond to 
which target unit within aligned sentences (Och 
and Ney, 2003). 
Most alignment systems working on parallel 
corpora rely on statistical models, in particular the 
EM ones (Brown, Della Pietra and Mercer, 1993). 
Quite recently attempts have been made in order to 
incorporate different types of linguistic 
information sources into word and phrase 
alignment systems. The idea is to take into account 
the specific problems arising from the alignment at 
the word or phrase level mentioned in particular by 
Debili (1997). Different types of linguistic 
knowledge are exploited: morphological, lexical 
and syntactic ones. In the method described in this 
article, the syntactic information is the kernel of 
the alignment process. Indeed, syntactic relations 
identified on both sides of the French/English 
parallel corpus with a deep and robust parser are 
used to find out new correspondences between 
words or to confirm existing ones in order to 
achieve a high accuracy alignment. We call this 
procedure ?alignment by syntactic propagation?. 
2 State of the art 
2.1 Term alignment 
Two kinds of methods have been basically 
proposed in order to address the problem of 
bilingual lexicon extraction. On the one hand, 
terms are recognized in both source and target 
language and then they are mapped to each other 
(Daille, Gaussier and Lang?, 1994). On the other 
hand, only source terms are extracted and the 
target ones are discovered through the alignment 
process (Gaussier, 1998; Hull, 2001). The 
alignment between terms is obtained either by 
computing association probabilities (Gaussier, 
1998 ; Daille, Gaussier and Lang?, 1994) or by 
identifying, for a given source term, a sequence of 
words in the target language which is likely to 
contain or to correspond to its translation (Hull, 
2001). In so far as the precision rate may be 
affected by the number of alignments obtained 
(Daille, Gaussier and Lang?, 1994; Gaussier, 
1998), the results achieved basically range between 
80% and 90%, for the first 500 alignments. As for 
the method described in (Hull, 2001), the precison 
reported is 56%. 
It should be noticed that the use of linguistic 
knowledge is most of the time restricted to the 
term recognition stage. This kind of knowledge is 
quite rarely taken into account within the very 
alignment process, except for the approach 
implemented by Daille, Gaussier and Lang? 
(1994), which try to take advantage of 
correspondences between the syntactic patterns 
defined for each language. 
2.2 Word alignment 
Quite recently attempts have been made in order 
to incorporate different types of linguistic 
information sources into word alignment systems 
and to combine them with statistical knowledge. 
Various and more or less complex sources of 
linguistic knowledge are exploited: morphological, 
lexical (Arhenberg, Andersson and Merkel, 2000) 
and syntactic knowledge (Wu, 2000; Lin and 
Cherry, 2003). The contribution of these 
information sources to the alignment process with 
respect to the statistical data varies according to the 
considered system. However, as pointed out by 
Arhenberg, Andersson and Merkel (2000) as well 
as Lin and Cherry (2003), the introduction of 
linguistic knowledge leads to a significant 
improvement in alignment quality. In the first case, 
the accuracy goes from 91% for a baseline 
configuration up to 96.7% for a linguistic 
knowledge based one. In the second, the precision 
rate is increased from 82.7% up to 89.2% and the 
improvement noticed have been confirmed within 
the framework of an evaluation task (Mihalcea and 
Pedersen, 20003). 
For our part, we propose a method in which the 
syntactic information plays a major role in the 
alignment process, since syntactic relations are 
used to find out new correspondences between 
words or to confirm the existent ones. We chose 
this approach in order to achieve a high accuracy 
alignment both at word and phrase level. Indeed, 
we aim at capturing frequent alignments between 
words and phrases as well as those involving 
sparse or corpus specific ones. Moreover, as 
stressed in previous works, using syntactic 
dependencies seems to be particularly well suited 
to solve n-to-1 or n-to-m alignments (Fluhr, Bisson 
and Elkateb, 2000) and to cope with the problem of 
linguistic variation and non correspondence across 
languages, for instance when aligning terms 
(Gaussier, 2001).  
3 Starting hypothesis 
We take as a starting point the hypothesis 
formulated by Debili and Zribi (1996) according to 
which ?paradigmatic connections can help to 
determine syntagmatic relations, and conversely?1. 
More precisely, the idea is that one can make use 
of syntactic relations to validate or invalidate the 
existence of alignment links, on the one hand, and 
to create new ones, on the other hand. The 
reasoning is as follows : if there is a pair of anchor 
words, i.e. if two words w1i (community in the 
example) and w2m (communaut?) are aligned at the 
sentence level, and if there is a syntactic relation 
standing between w1i (community) and w1j (ban) 
on the one hand, and between w2m (communaut?) 
and w2n (interdire) on the other hand, then the 
alignment link is propagated from the anchor pair 
(community, communaut?) to the words (ban, 
interdire). We call this procedure ?alignment by 
syntactic propagation?. 
 
 
                                                     
                                                     1Our translation of the French version ? les liaisons 
paradigmatiques peuvent aider ? d?terminer les 
relations syntagmatiques, et inversement ?. 
 
 
The Community banned imports of ivory. 
SUBJECT 
 
La Communaut? a interdit l?importation d?ivoire. 
 
SUBJECT  
 
 
In the rest of this article, we describe the overall 
design and implementation of the syntactic 
propagation process and the results of applying it 
to two parsed French/English parallel corpora: 
INRA and JOC. 
4 Corpus processing 
The alignment by syntactic propagation was 
tested on two different parallel corpora aligned at 
the sentence level: INRA and JOC. The first 
corpus was constituted at the National Institute for 
Agricultural Research (INRA)2 to enrich a 
bilingual terminology database exploited by 
translators. It comprises about 300,000 words and 
mainly consists of research and popular-science 
papers, press releases. 
The JOC corpus was provided by the ARCADE 
project, a campaign devoted to the evaluation of 
parallel text alignment systems (Veronis and 
Langlais, 2000). It contains written questions on a 
wide variety of topics addressed by members of the 
European Parliament to the European Commission 
and corresponding answers published by the 
Official Journal of the European Community in 
nine official languages. A portion of about 400,000 
words of the French and English parts were used in 
the framework of the ARCADE evaluation task. 
The corpus processing was carried out by a 
French/English parser: SYNTEX (Bourigault and 
Fabre, 2000; Fr?rot, Fabre and Bourigault, 2003). 
SYNTEX is a dependency parser whose input is a 
2 We are grateful to A. Lacombe who allowed us to use 
this corpus for research purposes. 
POS tagged3 corpus?meaning each word in the 
corpus is assigned a lemma and grammatical tag. 
The parser identifies syntactic dependencies in the 
sentences of a given corpus, for instance subjects, 
direct and indirect objects of verbs. Once all 
syntactic dependencies have been identified, a set 
of words and phrases is extracted out of the corpus. 
The association score is computed provided the 
number of overall occurrences of u1 and u2 is 
higher than 4 since statistical techniques have 
proved to be particularly efficient when aligning 
frequent units. Moreover, the alignments are 
filtered according to the j(u1, u2) value, provided 
the latter is higher than 0.2. Then, two tests, based 
on cognate recognition and mutual correspondence 
condition (Altenberg, 1999), are applied as to filter 
spurious associations out of the initial lexicon. 
Both versions of the parser?the French one and 
the English one?are being developed according to 
the same procedures and architecture. The parsing 
is performed independently in each language, yet 
the outputs are quite homogeneous since the 
syntactic dependencies are identified and 
represented in the same way in both languages. In 
this respect, the alignment method proposed is 
different from the ones developed by Wu (2000) as 
well as Lin and Cherry (2003): the former is based 
on synchronous parsing while the letter uses a 
dependency tree generated only in the source 
language. 
The identification of anchor pairs, consisting of 
words which are translation equivalents within 
aligned sentences, combines both the projection of 
the initial lexicon and the recognition of cognates 
for words which have not been taken into account 
in the lexicon. These pairs are used as the starting 
point of the propagation process. 
Table 1
Table 1: The identification of anchor pairs 
 gives some characteristics of the two 
corpora as for the number of aligned sentences, the 
overall number of anchor pairs identified, the 
average number of anchor pairs per sentence pair 
as well as the precision rate4 of the anchor pairs. It 
can be seen that a high number of anchor pairs has 
been identified per sentence for both corpora with 
a high accuracy. 
In addition to parsed French/English corpus 
aligned at the sentence level, the syntactic 
alignment requires pairs of anchor words be 
identified prior to propagation as to start the 
process. In this study, we chose to extract a lexicon 
out of the corpus, the anchor pairs being located 
both by projecting the lexicon at the level of 
aligned sentences and processing the identical and 
fuzzy cognates. 
 
 INRA JOC 
aligned sentences 7056 8774 
anchor pairs 42570 58771 
words/source sentence 21 25 
words/target sentence 24 30 
anchor pairs/sentence 6.38 6.77 
precision (%) 98 99.3 
5 Identification of anchor pairs 
To derive a list of words which are likely to be 
used to initiate the syntactic propagation process 
out of the corpus, we implemented a widely used 
method described notably in (Gale and Church, 
1991; Ahrenberg, Andersson and Merkel, 2000) 
which is based on the assumption that the words 
which appear frequently in aligned text segments 
are potential translation equivalents. For each 
source (English) and target (French) unit, 
respectively u1 and u2, extracted by SYNTEX, the 
translation equivalents are searched for by 
counting co-occurrences of (u1, u2) in aligned 
sentences in comparison with their overall 
occurrences in the corpus and then an association 
score is computed. In this study, we chose the 
Jaccard association score which is calculated as 
follows: 
6 Syntactic propagation 
6.1 Two types of propagation 
The syntactic propagation may be performed 
according to two different directions. Indeed, a 
given word is likely to be both governor and 
dependent with respect to other words. The first 
direction consists in starting with dependent anchor 
words and propagating the alignment link to the 
governors (DepGov propagation). The DepGov 
propagation is a priori not ambiguous since one 
dependent is governed at most by one word. Thus, 
there is just one syntactic relation on which the 
propagation can be based. The syntactic structures 
are said to be parallel in English and French 
provided the two following conditions are met: i) 
the relation under consideration is identical in both 
languages and ii) the words involved in the 
 
f(u1, u2) 
j(u1, u2) =  
f(u1) + f(u2) ? f(u1, u2) 
 
 
                                                     
                                                     3 We use both the French and English versions of the 
Treetagger. (http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de) 4 The precision was evaluated manually 
6.2 Alignment of verbs syntactic propagation have the same POS. The 
second direction goes the opposite way: starting 
with governor anchor words, the alignment link is 
propagated to the dependents (GovDep 
propagation). In this case, several relations which 
may be used to achieve the propagation are 
available, as it is possible for a governor to have 
more than one dependent, and so the propagation is 
potentially ambiguous. The ambiguity is 
particularly widespread when performing the 
GovDep propagation from head nouns to their 
nominal and adjectival dependents. Let us consider 
the example (1). There is one occurrence of the 
relation PREP in English and two in French. Thus, 
it is not possible to determine a priori whether to 
propagate using the relations NN/PREP2, on the one 
hand, and PREP1/PREP2?, on the other hand, or 
NN/PREP2? and PREP1/PREP2. Moreover, even if 
there is just one occurrence of the same relation in 
each language, it does not mean that the 
propagation is of necessity performed through the 
same relation, as shown in example (2). 
Verbs are aligned according to eight propagation 
patterns, that is to say five for the DepGov 
propagation and three for the GovDep one. 
DEPGOV PROPAGATION TO ALIGN GOVERNOR 
VERBS. Five propagation patterns are used to align 
verbs: Adv-MOD-V (1), N-SUJ-V (2), N-OBJ-V 
(3), N-PREP-V (4) and V-PREP-V (5). 
 
(1) The net is then hauled to the shore. 
Le filet est ensuite hal? ? terre. 
(2) The fish are generally caught when they 
migrate from their feeding areas. 
G?n?ralement les poissons sont captur?s quand ils 
migrent de leur zone d?engraissement. 
(3) Most of the young shad reach the sea. 
La plupart des alosons gagne la mer. 
(4) The eggs are very small and fall to the bottom. 
Les oeufs de tr?s petite taille tombent sur le fond. 
(5) X is a model which was designated to 
stimulate? 
X est un mod?le qui a ?t? con?u pour stimuler?    GOVDEP PROPAGATION TO ALIGN DEPENDENT 
VERBS. The alignment links are propagated from 
the dependents to the verbs using three propagation 
patterns: V-PREP-V (1), V-PREP-N (2) and V-
PREP-Adj (3). 
 NN       PREP1 
(1)  
 outdoor use  of water 
utilisation  en ext?rieur de l?eau 
PREP2 
 
   (1) Ploughing tends to destroy the soil 
microaggregated structure.  PREP2?  Le labour tend ? rompre leur structure 
microagr?g?e.  (2)  (2) The capacity to colonize the digestive 
mucosa? 
NN             PREP1 
 
 L?aptitude ? coloniser le tube digestif? 
ADJ 
reference product on the market 
produit commercial de r?f?rence 
 (3) An established infection is impossible to 
control.   Toute infection en cours est impossible ? ma?triser.    PREP2  DepGov 
propagation 
GovDep 
propagation
INRA 
precision (%) 94.1 96.7 
JOC 
precision (%) 92.7 97.5 
 
 
In the following sections, we describe precisely 
the implementation of the two types of propagation 
defined above in order to align verbs (section  6.2), 
on the one hand, and nouns and adjectives, on the 
other hand (section  6.3). To this, we rely on 
different propagation patterns. Propagation 
patterns are given in the form CDep-REL-CGov, 
where CDep is the POS of the dependent, REL is 
the syntactic relation and CGov, the POS of the 
governor. The anchor element is underlined and 
the one aligned by propagation is bolded. For 
instance, the pattern N-SUJ-V corresponds to the 
propagation going from a noun anchor pair to the 
verbs through the subject relation. 
Table 2: Alignment of verbs by means of the 
DepGov and GovDep propagation 
6.3 Alignment of adjectives and nouns 
As for verbs, the two types of propagation 
described in section  6.1 are used to align adjectives 
and nouns. However, as far as these categories of 
words are concerned, they can?t be treated in a 
fully independent way when propagating from 
head noun anchor words in order to align the 
dependents. Indeed, the syntactic structure of noun 
phrases may be different in English and French, 
since they rely on a different type of composition 
to produce compounds and on the same one to 
produce free noun phrases (Chuquet and Paillard, 
1989). Then the potential ambiguity arising from 
the GovDep propagation from head nouns evoked 
in section  6.1 may be accompanied by variation 
phenomena affecting the category of the 
dependents, called transposition (Vinay and 
Darbelnet, 1958; Chuquet and Paillard, 1989). For 
instance, a noun may be rendered by an adjective, 
or vice versa: tax treatment profits is translated by 
traitement fiscal des b?n?fices, so the noun tax is in 
correspondence with the adjective fiscal. The 
syntactic relations used to propagate the alignment 
links are thus different. 
In order to cope with the variation problem, the 
propagation is performed whether the syntactic 
relations are identical in both languages or not, and 
if they are not, whether the categories of the words 
to be aligned are the same or not. To sum up, 
adjectives and nouns are aligned separately of each 
other by means of DepGov propagation or GovDep 
propagation provided that the governor is not a 
noun. They are not treated separately when 
aligning by means of GovDep propagation from 
head noun anchor pairs. 
 
DEPGOV PROPAGATION TO ALIGN ADJECTIVES. 
The propagation patterns involved are: Adv-MOD-
Adj (1), N-PREP-Adj (2) and V-PREP-Adj (3). 
 
(1) The white cedar exhibits a very common 
physical defect. 
Le Poirier-pays pr?sente un d?faut de forme tr?s 
fr?quent. 
(2) The area presently devoted to agriculture 
represents? 
La surface actuellement consacr?e ? l?agriculture 
repr?senterait? 
(3) Only fours plots were liable to receive this 
input. 
Seulement quatre parcelles sont susceptibles de 
recevoir ces apports. 
 
DEPGOV PROPAGATION TO ALIGN NOUNS. Nouns 
are aligned according to the following propagation 
patterns: Adj-ADJ-N (1), N-NN-N/N-PREP-N (2), 
N-PREP-N (3) and V-PREP-N (4). 
 
(1) Allis shad remain on the continental shelf. 
La grande alose reste sur le plateau continental. 
(2) Nature of micropolluant carriers. 
La nature des transporteurs des micropolluants. 
(3) The bodies of shad are generally fusiform. 
Le corps des aloses est g?n?ralement fusiforme. 
(4) Ability to react to light. 
Capacit? ? r?agir ? la lumi?re. 
 
DepGov propagation  
Adjectives Nouns 
INRA 
precision (%) 98.7 94.2 
JOC 
precision (%) 97.2 93.7 
Table 3: Alignment of adjectives and nouns by 
means of the DepGov propagation 
 
UNAMBIUOUS GOVDEP PROPAGATION TO ALIGN 
NOUNS. The propagation is not ambiguous when 
dependent nouns are not governed by a noun. This 
is the case when considering the following three 
propagation patterns: N-SUJ|OBJ-V (1), N-PREP-V 
(2) and N-PREP-Adj (3). 
 
(1) The caterpillars can inoculate the fungus. 
Les chenilles peuvent inoculer le champignon. 
(2) The roots are placed in tanks. 
Les racines sont plac?es en bacs. 
(3) Botrysis, a fungus responsible for grey rot. 
Botrysis, champignon responsable de la pourriture 
grise. 
 
POTENTIALLY AMBIGUOUS GOVDEP 
PROPAGATION TO ALIGN NOUNS AND ADJECTIVES. 
As we already explained in section  6.1, the 
propagation is potentially ambiguous when starting 
with head noun anchor words and trying to align 
the noun(s) and/or adjective(s) they govern. 
Considering this potential ambiguity, the algorithm 
which supports GovDep propagation form head 
noun anchor words (n1, n2) takes into account 
three situations which are likely to occur : 
 
1. if each of n1 and n2 have only one 
dependent, respectively reg1 and reg2, 
involving one of the following relations 
NN, ADJ or PREP; reg1 and reg2 are 
aligned; 
the drained whey 
le lactos?rum d??gouttage 
? (drained, ?gouttage) 
 
2. n1 has one dependent reg1 and n2 several 
ones {reg21, reg22, ?, reg2n}, or vice 
versa. For each reg2i, check if one of the 
possible alignments has already been 
performed, either by propagation or anchor 
word spotting. If such an alignment exists, 
remove the others (reg1, reg2k) such as k ? 
i, or vice versa. Otherwise, retain all the 
alignments (reg1, reg2i), or vice versa, 
without solving the ambiguity; 
stimulant substances which are absent 
from? 
substances solubles stimulantes absentes 
de? 
(stimulant, {soluble, stimulant, absent}) 
already_aligned(stimulant, stimulant) = 1 
? stimulant, stimulant) 
 
3. both n1 and n2 have several dependents, 
{reg11, reg12, ?, reg1m} and {reg21, 
reg22, ?, reg2n} respectively. For each 
reg1i and each reg2j, check if one/several 
alignments have already been performed. 
If such alignments exist, remove all the 
alignments (reg1k, reg2l) such as k ? i or 
l ? j. Otherwise, retain all the alignments 
(reg1i, reg2j) without solving the 
ambiguity. 
unfair trading practices 
pratiques commerciales d?loyales 
(unfair, {commercial, d?loyal}) 
(trading, {commercial, d?loyal}) 
already_aligned(unfair, d?loyal) = 1 
? (unfair, d?loyal) 
? (trading, commercial) 
a big rectangular net, which is lowered? 
un vaste filet rectangulaire immerg?? 
(big, {vaste, rectangulaire, immerg?}) 
(rectangular, {vaste, rectangulaire, immerg?}) 
already_aligned(rectangular, rectangulaire) = 1 
? (rectangular, rectangulaire) 
? (big, {vaste, immerg?}) 
 
The implemented propagation algorithm has two 
major advantages: it allows to solve some 
alignment ambiguities taking advantage of 
alignments which have been performed previously. 
This algorithm allows also to cope with the 
problem of non correspondence between English 
and French syntactic structures and makes it 
possible to align words using different syntactic 
relations in both languages, even though the 
category of the words under consideration is 
different. 
 
 
GovDep propagation  
Gov?Noun Gov=Noun 
INRA 
precision (%) 95.4 97.7 
JOC 
precision (%) 95 95.4 
Table 4: Alignment of adjectives and nouns by 
means of the GovDep propagation 
6.4 Overall results 
Table 5 gives a summary of the results obtained 
by applying all propagation patterns according to 
each corpus. It can be seen that the highest 
accuracy is achieved for the alignments 
corresponding to anchor pairs validated by the 
syntactic propagation (AP and PP): 99.7 and 
99.8% precision, respectively for INRA and JOC. 
The rates tend to decrease ? respectively 88.5 and 
86.1% ? as regards alignments established only by 
means of propagation, referred to as propagated 
pairs (PP), and is even lower ? 76.3% ? for the 
anchor pairs which have not been confirmed by the 
propagation (AP). Furthermore, the new 
alignments produced account for less than 20% of 
overall alignments to approximately 50% for the 
confirmed ones. Finally, since the method aims at 
aligning content words, the recall is assessed in 
relation to their overall occurrences in the corpora. 
 
 Total AP AP and PP PP 
INRA 
alignments 
50438 
(100%) 
23646 
(47%) 
18923 
(37%)
7868 
(16%)
precision (%) 94.3 76.3 99.7 88.5 
recall (%) 58 
JOC 
alignments 
71814 
(100%) 
37118 
(52%) 
21625 
(30%)
13073 
(18%)
precision (%) 93.1 94 99.8 86.1 
recall (%) 56 
Table 5: overall results of word alignment 
7 Discussion 
The results achieved by the syntactic 
propagation method are quite encouraging. They 
show a high global precision rate ? 94.3% for the 
INRA corpus and 93.1% for the JOC ? assessed 
respectively against a reference list of 
approximately 8000 and 4600 alignments. 
Various reasons make it difficult to compare the 
results of this experiment with those reported in the 
literature and presented in section 2. Indeed, each 
approach has been tested on a different corpus and 
the results achieved could depend on the type of 
texts used for evaluation purposes. Moreover, the 
reference alignment lists, i.e. the gold standards, 
have probably been established according to 
different annotation criteria, which could also 
influence the quality of the results. Finally, each 
system has been designed, or at least used, to 
perform a specific task and evaluated in this 
respect. Daille, Gaussier and Lang? (1994), as well 
as Gaussier (1998) and Hull (2001), were 
interested in bilingual terminology extraction so 
that word alignment could not be considered as an 
end in itself but rather as a basis for term 
alignment. The system proposed by Wu (2000) 
aims at bilingual language modelling, word and 
phrase alignment is incorporated as a subtask. 
Finally, Arhenberg, Andersson and Merkel (2000) 
as well as Lin and Cherry (2003) addressed the 
problem of full word alignment without restricting 
themselves to content words. Both noticed that the 
integration of linguistic knowledge, morphological 
and lexical for the former, syntactic for the latter, 
improves the alignment quality. However, 
concerning the approach proposed by Lin and 
Cherry (2003), it should be pointed out that 
linguistic knowledge is considered secondary to 
statistical information. As regards the alignment by 
syntactic propagation, linguistic knowledge is the 
kernel of the approach rather than an additional 
information. 
The propagation of alignments links using 
syntactic relations has proved very efficient when 
the same propagation pattern is used in both 
languages, i.e. when the syntactic structures are 
identical. A high level of precision is also achieved 
in the case of noun/adjective transpositions, even if 
the category of the words to be aligned varies. We 
are actually pursuing the study of non-
correspondence between syntactic structures in 
English and French outlined in (Ozdowska and 
Bourigault, 2004). The aim is to determine whether 
there are some regularities in rendering certain 
English structures into certain French ones or not. 
If variation across languages is subjected to such 
regularities, the syntactic propagation could then 
be extended to the cases of non correspondence. 
References  
Ahrenberg L., Andersson M. and Merkel M. 2000. 
A knowledge-lite approach to word alignment, 
V?ronis J. (Ed.), Parallel Text Processing : 
Alignment and Use of Translation Corpora, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 97-
138. 
Altenberg B. 1999. Adverbial connectors in 
English and Swedish: Semantic and lexical 
correspondences, Hasselgard and Oksefjell (eds), 
pp. 249-268. 
Bourigault D. and Fabre C. 2000. Approche 
linguistique pour l?analyse syntaxique de corpus, 
Cahiers de Grammaire, 25, pp. 131-151, 
Universit? Toulouse le Mirail. 
Brown P., Della Pietra S. and Mercer R. 1993. The 
mathematics of statistical machine translation : 
parameter estimation, Computational 
Linguistics, 19(2), pp. 263-311.  
Chuquet H. and Paillard M. 1989. Approche 
linguistique des probl?mes de traduction 
anglais/fran?ais, Ophrys.  
Daille B., Gaussier E. and Lang? J.-M. 1994. 
Towards Automatic Extraction of Monolingual 
and Bilingual Terminology, Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING?94) , pp. 515-521.  
Debili F. 1997. L?appariement :quels probl?mes ?, 
Actes des 1?res JST 1997 FRANCIL de 
l?AUPELF-UREF, pp. 199-206. 
Debili F. and Zribi A. 1996. Les d?pendances 
syntaxiques au service de l?appariement des 
mots, Actes du 10?me Congr?s Reconnaissance 
des Formes et Intelligence Artificielle 
(RFIA?96). 
Fluhr C., Bisson B. and Elkateb F. 2000. Parallel 
Text Alignment Using Crosslingual Information 
Retrieval Techniques, V?ronis, J. (Ed.), Parallel 
Text Processing : Alignment and Use of 
Translation Corpora, Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Fox H. J. 2002. Phrasal Cohesion and Statistical 
Machine Translation, Proceedings of EMNLP-
02, pp. 304-311. 
Fr?rot C., Bourigault D. and Fabre C. 2003. Marier 
apprentissage endog?ne et ressources exog?nes 
dans un analyseur syntaxique de corpus. Le cas 
du rattachement verbal ? distance de la 
pr?position ? de ?,  in Traitement Automatique 
des Langues, 44-3. 
Fr?rot C., Rigou G. and Lacombe A. 2001. 
Approche phras?ologique d?une extraction 
automatique de terminologie dans un corpus 
scientifique bilingue align?, Actes des 4?mes 
rencontres Terminologie et Intelligence 
Artificielle, Nancy, pp 180-188. 
Gale W. A. and Church K. W. 1991. Identifying 
Word Correspondences in Parallel Text, 
Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on Speech 
and Natural Language.  
Gaussier E. 1998. Flow Network Models for Word 
Alignment and Terminology Extraction from 
Bilingual Corpora, Proceedings of the joint 17th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics and 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
(COLING/ACL?98) , pp. 444-450.  
Gaussier E. 2001. General considerations on 
bilingual terminology extraction, D. Bourigault, 
Ch. Jacquemin, M.?C. L?Homme (Eds.), Recent 
Advances in Computational Terminology, John 
Benjamins, pp. 167-183.  
Harris B. 1988. Bi-text, A New Concept in 
Translation Theory, Language Monthly, 54, 
pp.8-10.  
Hull D. 2001. Software tools to support the 
construction of bilingual terminology lexicons, 
Bourigault, D., Jacquemin, Ch. and L?Homme, 
M.-C. (Eds.), Recent Advances in Computational 
Terminology, John Benjamins, pp. 225-244.  
Lin D. and Cherry C. 2003a. Linguistic Heuristics 
in Word Alignment, Proceedings of PACLing 
2003. 
Lin D. and Cherry C. 2003b. ProAlign: Shared 
Task System Description, Workshop 
Proceedings on Building and Using Parallel 
Texts: Data Driven Machine Translation and 
Beyond (HLT-NAACL 2003). 
Mihalcea R. and Pedersen T. 2003. An Evaluation 
Exercise for Word Alignment, Workshop 
Proceedings on Building and Using Parallel 
Texts: Data Driven Machine Translation and 
Beyond (HLT-NAACL 2003), pp. 1-10 
Och F. Z. and Ney H., 2003. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment 
Models, Computational Linguistics, 29(1), pp. 
19-51. 
Ozdowska S. and Bourigault D. 2004. D?tection de 
relations d?appariement bilingue entre termes ? 
partir d?une analyse syntaxique de corpus, Actes 
du 14?me Congr?s Francophone AFRIF-AFIA de 
Reconnaissance des Formes et Intelligence 
artificielle 
V?ronis J. (Ed). 2000. Parallel Text Processing : 
Alignment and Use of Parallel Corpora, 
Dordrecht : Kluwer Academic Publishers.  
V?ronis J. and Langlais P. 2000. Evaluation of 
parallel text alignment systems. The ARCADE 
project, V?ronis J. (ed.), Parallel Text 
Processing : Alignment and Use of Translation 
Corpora, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, pp. 371-388 
Vinay J-P. and Darbelnet J. 1958. Stylistique 
compar?e du fran?ais et de l?anglais , Paris, 
Didier.  
Wu D. 2000. Bracketing and aligning words and 
constituents in parallel text using Stochastic 
Inversion Transduction Grammars, V?ronis, J. 
(Ed.), Parallel Text Processing : Alignment and 
Use of Translation Corpora, Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, pp. 139-167. 
 
