Generic Sentence Fusion is an Ill-Defined Summarization Task
Hal Daume? III and Daniel Marcu
Information Sciences Institute
University of Southern California
4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
{hdaume,marcu}@isi.edu
Abstract
We report on a series of human evaluations of the
task of sentence fusion. In this task, a human is
given two sentences and asked to produce a single
coherent sentence that contains only the important
information from the original two. Thus, this is a
highly constrained summarization task. Our inves-
tigations show that even at this restricted level, there
is no measurable agreement between humans re-
garding what information should be considered im-
portant. We further investigate the ability of sepa-
rate evaluators to assess summaries, and find simi-
larly disturbing lack of agreement.
1 Introduction and Motivation
The practices of automatic summarization vary
widely across many dimensions, including source
length, summary length, style, source, topic, lan-
guage, and structure. Most typical are summaries
of a single news document down to a headline or
short summary, or of a collection of news docu-
ments down to a headline or short summary (Hahn
and Harman, 2002). A few researchers have focused
on other aspects of summarization, including sin-
gle sentence (Knight and Marcu, 2002), paragraph
or short document (Daume? III and Marcu, 2002),
query-focused (Berger and Mittal, 2000), or speech
(Hori et al, 2003).
The techniques relevant to, and the challenges
faced in each of these tasks can be quite different.
Nevertheless, they all rely on one critical assump-
tion: there exists a notion of (relative) importance
between pieces of information in a document (or ut-
terance), regardless of whether we can detect this
or not. Indeed, recent research has looked at this
question in detail, and can be rather cleanly divided
into two partitions. The first partition aims to de-
velop manual evaluation criteria for determining the
quality of a summary, and is typified by the exten-
sive research done in single-document summariza-
tion by Halteren and Teufel (2003) and by the evalu-
ation strategy proposed by Nenkova and Passonneau
(2004). The other half aims to develop automatic
evaluation criteria to imitate the manual evaluation
methods (or at least to complement them). Work in
this area includes that of Lin and Hovy (2003) and
Pastra and Saggion (2003), both of whom inspect
the use of Bleu-like metrics (Papineni et al, 2002)
in summarization.
The results of these investigations have been
mixed. In the DUC competitions (Hahn and Har-
man, 2002), when manual evaluation has been em-
ployed, it has been commonly observed that human-
written summaries grossly outscore any machine-
produced summary. All machine-produced sum-
maries tend to show little (statistically significant)
difference from one another. Moreover, a baseline
system that simply takes the first sentences of a doc-
ument performs just as well or better than intelli-
gently crafted systems when summarizing news sto-
ries. Additionally, studies of vast numbers of sum-
maries of the same document (Halteren and Teufel,
2003) have shown that there is little agreement
among different humans as to what information be-
longs in a single document summary. This has been
leveraged by Nenkova and Passonneau (2004) to
produce a manual scoring method for summaries,
though the fact that humans show so little agree-
ment in this task is somewhat disheartening. All of
these evaluations rely strongly on the issue of mul-
tiple references, in order to achieve consensus.
Opinions voiced at DUC meetings indicate that
different researchers attribute this apparent lack of
agreement to one (or more) of many factors (in ad-
dition, see (Mani and Maybury, 1999)). Many be-
lieve that the fact that we are typically working in a
news genre is to blame, though this complaint tends
to be directed more at the excellent performance of
the baseline than at the issue of human agreement.
Others believe that in order to observe more agree-
ment, one needs to move to query-focused sum-
maries; it seems reasonable that if the person writ-
ing the summary knew how it would be used, he
would be more guided in what information to re-
tain. Yet others attribute the lack of agreement sim-
Connecting Point has become the single largest Mac retailer after tripling it ?s Macintosh sales since January 1989 .
Connecting Point Systems tripled it ?s sales of Apple Macintosh systems since last January .  It is now the single largest seller of Macintosh .
Figure 1: Example ?document, abstract? alignment.
ply to the vast space of possible choices a summa-
rizer could make, and see the disagreement simply
as par for the course.
2 Our Study
In this paper, we report on a study of the perfor-
mance of humans producing summaries. We con-
cern ourselves with the task of sentence fusion. In
this task, we assume that two sentences are provided
and that the summarizer must produce as output a
single sentence that contains the important informa-
tion contained in the input sentences (we will de-
scribe later how we obtain such data). We would
like to show that this task is well-defined: if we
show many humans the same two sentences, they
will produce similar summaries. Of course we do
not penalize one human for using different words
than another.
The sentence fusion task is interesting after per-
forming sentence extraction, the extracted sen-
tences often contain superfluous information. It
has been further observed that simply compress-
ing sentences individually and concatenating the re-
sults leads to suboptimal summaries (Daume? III and
Marcu, 2002). The use of sentence fusion in multi-
document summarization has been extensively ex-
plored by Barzilay in her thesis (Barzilay, 2003;
Barzilay et al, 1999), though in the multi-document
setting, one has redundancy to fall back on. Addi-
tionally, the sentence fusion task is sufficiently con-
strained that it makes possible more complex and
linguistically motivated manipulations than are rea-
sonable for full document or multi-document sum-
maries (and for which simple extraction techniques
are unlikely to suffice).
3 Data Collection
Our data comes from a collection of computer prod-
uct reviews from the Ziff-Davis corporation. This
corpus consists of roughly seven thousand docu-
ments paired with human written abstracts. The av-
erage document was 1080 words in length, with an
abstract of length 136 words, a compression rate of
roughly 87.5%.
3.1 Examples Based on Alignments
For 50 of these ?document, abstract? pairs, we
have human-created word-for-word and phrase-for-
phrase alignments. An example alignment is shown
in Figure 1. Moreover, using a generalization of a
hidden Markov model, we are able to create (in an
unsupervised fashion) similar alignments for all of
the documents (Daume? III and Marcu, 2004). This
system achieves a precision, recall and f-score of
0.528, 0.668 and 0.590, respectively (which is a sig-
nificant increase in performance (f = 0.407) over
the IBM models or the Cut & Paste method (Jing,
2002)).
Based on these alignments (be they manually cre-
ated or automatically created), we are able to look
for examples of sentence fusions within the data.
In particular, we search for sentences in the ab-
stracts which are aligned to exactly two document
sentences, for which at least 80% of the summary
sentence is aligned and for which at least 20% of
the words in the summary sentence come from each
of the two document sentences.
This leaves us with pairs that consist of two doc-
ument sentences and one abstract sentence, exactly
the sort of data we are looking to use. We randomly
select 25 such pairs from the data collected from the
human-aligned portion of the corpus and 25 pairs
from the automatically aligned portion, giving us 50
pairs in all.
3.2 Examples Based on Elicitation
In addition to collecting data from the Ziff-Davis
corpus, we also elicited data from human subjects
with a variety of different backgrounds (though
all were familiar with computers and technology).
These people were presented with the pairs of docu-
ment sentences and, independently of the rest of the
document, asked to produce a single summary sen-
tence that contained the ?important? information.
Their summary was to be about half the length of
the original (this is what was observed in the pairs
extracted from the corpus) They were given no ad-
ditional specific instructions.
The summaries thus elicited ranged rather dra-
matically from highly cut and paste summaries to
highly abstractive summaries. An example is shown
in Table 1. In this table, we show the original pair of
ORIG: After years of pursuing separate and conflicting paths, AT&T and Digital Equipment Corp. agreed
in June to settle their computer-to-PBX differences.
The two will jointly develop an applications interface that can be shared by computers and PBXs of
any stripe.
REF: AT&T and DEC have a joint agreement from June to develop an applications interface to be shared
by various models of computers and PBXs.
HUM 1: AT&T and Digital Equipment Corp. agreed in June to settle their computer-to-PBX differences and
develop an applications interface that can be shared by any computer or PBX.
HUM 2: After years of pursuing different paths, AT&T and Digital agreed to jointly develop an applications
interface that can be shared by computers and PBXs of any stripe.
HUM 3: After working separately for years, AT&T will jointly develop an interface between computers and
PBXs.
Table 1: Example of elicited data.
document sentences, the ?reference? summary (i.e.,
the one that came from the original abstract), and
the responses of three of the eight human subjects
are shown (the first is the most ?cut and paste,? the
second is typical of the ?middle set? and the last is
unusually abstractive).
3.3 Baseline Summaries
In addition to the human elicited data, we gener-
ate three baseline summaries. The first baseline,
LONGER, simply selects the longer of the two sen-
tences as the summary (typically the sentences are
roughly the same length; thus this is nearly random).
The second baseline, DROPSTOP first catenates the
sentences (in random order), then removes punctu-
ation and stop words, finally cutting off at the 50%
mark. The third baseline, COMP is the document
compression system developed by Daume? III and
Marcu (2002), which compresses documents by cut-
ting out constituents in a combined syntax and dis-
course tree.
4 Evaluation of Summaries
We perform three types of manual evaluation on the
summaries from the previous section. In the first,
the ranked evaluation, we present evaluators with
original two document sentences; they also see a
list of hypothesis summaries and are asked to rank
them relative to one another. In the second evalu-
ation, the absolute evaluation, evaluators are pre-
sented with the reference summary and a hypothe-
sis and are asked to produce an absolute score for
the hypothesis. In the third, the factoid evaluation,
we manually inspect the information content of each
hypothesis.
4.1 Ranked Evaluation
In the ranked evaluation, human evaluators are pre-
sented with the original two document sentences.
They also see a list of 12 hypothesis summaries:
the reference summary, the eight summaries elicited
from human subjects, and the three baseline sum-
maries. They are asked to produce a ranking of the
12 summaries based both on their faithfulness to the
original document sentences and on their grammat-
icality. They were allowed to assign the same score
to two systems if they felt neither was any better (or
worse) than the other. They ranked the systems from
1 (best) to 12 (worst), though typically enough sys-
tems performed ?equally well? that a rank of 12 was
not assigned. Three humans performed this evalua-
tion.
4.2 Absolute Evaluation
In the absolute evaluation, human evaluators are
shown the reference summary and a single hypoth-
esis summary. In order to partially assuage the is-
sue of humans doing little more than string match-
ing (Coughlin, 2001), the reference and hypothe-
sis were shown on separate pages and humans were
asked not to go ?back? during the evaluation. Due to
time constraints, only three systems were evaluated
in this manner, one of the humans (the human out-
put was selected so that it was neither too cut-and-
paste nor too generative), the LONGER and COMP
systems. Three humans performed this task (each
shown a single different system output for each ref-
erence summary) and scored outputs on a scale from
1 (best) to 5 (worst). They were told to deduct points
for any information contained in the reference not
contained in the hypothesis, any information con-
tained in the hypothesis not contained in the refer-
ence, and ungrammaticality.
4.3 Factoid Evaluation
The third evaluation we perform ourselves, due to
its difficulty. This follows the general rubric de-
scribed by Nenkova and Passonneau?s (2004) pyra-
mid scoring scheme, though it differs in the sense
that we base our evaluation not on a reference sum-
mary, but on the original two document sentences.
Our methodology is described below.
REF LONGER COMP HUM 1 HUM 2 HUM 3 Factoid
F F F F F CP has taken leadership
F F leadership by volume
doug kass is analysis at dataquest inc
dq is a market research co
dq is in san jose
kass said CP has taken leadership
F F F F F analysts say
F F F F F F CP has a wide variety of stores
F F F F F F CP endorsed apple?s earned investment program
F F F F CP has become the low-price leader
F F F F CP hasn?t sacrificed technical support
Table 2: Factoid-based evaluation scheme for the sentence pair ?Connecting Point has taken leadership by volume,
volume, volume,? said Doug Kass, an analyst at Dataquest Inc., a market research company in San Jose. Analysts and
observers say Connecting Point?s wide variety of stores and endorsement of Apple?s earned investment program have
helped it become the low-price leader without sacrificing technical support.?
We assume that we are given the original pair
of sentences from the document and the hypothesis
summaries for many systems (in our experiments,
we used the original reference summary, the outputs
of three representative humans, and the LONGER
and COMP baselines). Given this data, we first seg-
ment the original pair of sentences into ?factoids?
in the style of Halteren and Teufel (2003). Then, for
each hypothesis summary and each factoid, we in-
dicate whether the summary contained that factoid.
Grammaticality of summary hypotheses enters
into the calculation of the factoid agreement num-
bers. A system only gets credit for a factoid if
its summary contains that factoid in a sufficiently
grammatical form that the following test could be
passed: given any reasonable question one could
pose about this factoid, and given the hypothesis
summary, could one answer the question correctly.
An example is shown in Table 2.
Based on this information, it is possible to se-
lect one or more of the outputs as the ?gold stan-
dard? and compare the rest in the pyramid scor-
ing scheme described by Nenkova and Passonneau
(2004). If only one output is used as the gold stan-
dard, then it is sufficient to compute precision and
recall against that gold standard, and then use these
numbers to compute an F-score, which essentially
measures agreement between the chosen gold stan-
dard and another hypothesis. In the remainder of
this analysis, when we report an F-score over the
factoid, this is calculated when the REF summary is
taken as the standard.
5 Evaluation Results
The fundamental question we would like to answer
is whether humans agree in terms of what informa-
tion should be preserved in a summary. Given our
data, there are two ways of looking at this. First:
HUM 1 HUM 2 HUM 3
REF 0.182 0.188 0.251
HUM 1 - 0.201 0.347
HUM 2 - - 0.470
Table 3: Agreement (kappa) scores for different
combinations of systems and humans
do the humans from whom we elicited data select
the same information as the reference? Second: do
these humans agree with each other. Both of these
questions can be answered by looking at the results
of the factoid evaluation.
For any set of columns in the factoid evaluation,
we can compute the agreement based on the kappa
statistic (Krippendorff, 1980). Researchers have ob-
served that kappa scores over 0.8 indicate strong
agreement, while scores between 0.6 and 0.8 indi-
cate reasonable agreement. Kappa values below 0.6
indicate little to no agreement. The kappa values
for various combinations of columns are shown in
Table 3.
As we can see from this table, there is essen-
tially no agreement found anywhere. The maximum
agreement is between HUMAN 2 and HUMAN 3, but
even a kappa value of 0.470 is regarded as virtually
no agreement. Furthermore, the kappa values com-
paring the human outputs to the reference outputs is
even lower, attaining a maximum of 0.251; again,
no agreement. One is forced to conclude that in the
task of generic sentence fusion, people will not pro-
duce a summary containing the same information
as the original reference sentence, and will not pro-
duce summaries that contain the same information
as another person in the same situation.
Despite the fact that humans do not agree on
what information should go into a summary, there is
still the chance that when presented with two sum-
System F-Score Absolute Relative
HUM 4 0.652 2.605 2.066
HUM 3 0.608 - 2.276
HUM 5 0.574 - 2.434
LONGER 0.419 3.000 3.368
REF 1.000 - 3.500
COMP 0.475 3.842 4.184
Table 4: Factoid F-score, absolute score and relative
ranking for 6 outputs
maries, they will be able to distinguish one as some-
how better than another. Answering this question is
the aim of the other two evaluations.
First, we consider the absolute rankings. Recall
that in this evaluation, humans are presented with
the reference summary as the gold standard sum-
mary. Since, in addition to grammaticality, this is
supposed to measure the correctness of information
preservation, it is reasonable to compare these num-
bers to the F-scores that can be computed based on
the factoid evaluation. These results are shown in
Table 4. For the first column (F-Score), higher num-
bers are better; for the second and third columns,
lower scores are better. We can see that the evalua-
tion prefers the human output to the outputs of either
of the systems. However, the factoid scoring prefers
the COMP model to the LONGER model, though the
Absolute scoring rates them in the opposite direc-
tion.
As we can see from the Relative column in Ta-
ble 4, human elicited summaries are consistently
preferred to any of the others. This is good news:
even if people cannot agree on what information
should go into a summary, they at least prefer hu-
man written summaries to others. After the hu-
man elicited summaries, there is a relatively large
jump to the LONGER baseline, which is unfortu-
nately preferred to the REFERENCE summary. After
the reference summary, there are two large jumps,
first to the document compression model and then
to the DROPSTOP baseline. However, when com-
paring the relative scores to the F-Score, we see that,
again, the factoid metric prefers the COMP model to
the LONGER model, but this is not reflected in the
relative scoring metric.
6 Analysis of Results
There are two conclusions that can be drawn from
these data. The first, related specifically to the
kappa statistic over the factoids as depicted in Ta-
ble 3, is that even in this modest task of compress-
ing two sentences into one, the task is ill-defined.
The second, related to the two other evaluations, is
that while humans seem able to agree on the rela-
tive quality of sentence fusions, judgments elicited
by direct comparison do not reflect whether systems
are correctly able to select content.
6.1 Disagreement of Importance
As indicated in Section 5, when humans are given
the task of compressing two sentences into one,
there is no measurable agreement between any two
as to what information should be retained.
The first thing worth noting is that there is mod-
erately more agreement between two elicited, non-
expert data points than between the elicited data and
the original reference. This can be attributed either
to the lack of context available to the non-experts,
or to their respective lack of expertise. Regardless,
the level of agreement between such non-expert hu-
mans is so low that this matters little. Furthermore,
from an automatic sentence fusion perspective, a
computer program is much more like a non-expert
human with no context than an expert with an entire
document to borrow from.
It might be argued that looking at only two sen-
tences does not provide sufficient context for hu-
mans to be able to judge relative importance. This
argument is supported by the fact that, upon mov-
ing to multi-document summarization, there is (rel-
atively) more agreement between humans regarding
what pieces of information should be kept. In or-
der to make the transition from two-sentence fusion
to multi-document summarization, one essentially
needs to make two inductive steps: the first from
two sentences, to three and so on up to a full sin-
gle document; the second from a single document
to multiple documents.
The analysis we have performed does not com-
ment on either of these inductive steps. However,
it is much more likely that it is the second, not
the first, that breaks down and enables humans to
agree more when creating summaries of collections
of documents. On the one hand, it seems unrea-
sonable to posit that there is some ?magic? num-
ber of sentences needed, such that once two humans
read that many sentences, they are able to agree on
what information is relevant. On the other hand, in
all evaluations that have considered multi-document
summarization, the collection of documents to be
summarized has been selected by a human with a
particular interest in mind. While this interest is not
(necessarily) communicated to the summarizers di-
rectly, it is indirectly suggested by the selection of
documents. This is why the use of redundancy in
multi-document summarization is so important. If,
on the other hand, humans were given a set of mod-
erately related or unrelated documents, we believe
that there would be even less agreement on what
makes a good summary1.
6.2 Human Perception of Quality
We have presented two sets of results regarding hu-
man perception of the quality of summaries. In the
first (see Table 4), humans are presented with the
REF summary and then with either a human-elicited
summary, a summary that is simply the longer of the
two sentences (recall that they do not see the origi-
nal two sentences, so they have no way of knowing
how this summary was created) and the output of
the COMP system. If one accepts that the F-Score
over factoids is a high-quality measure of summary
quality, then there should be strong correlation be-
tween this F-Score and the absolute scoring of the
system outputs. This is not observed. In fact, the
F-Score strongly prefers the COMP system over the
LONGER system, while human scoring prefers the
LONGER system.
Since the humans performing this evaluation
were told explicitly to count off for missing infor-
mation, extraneous information or lack of grammat-
icality, the only reasonable explanation for this dis-
crepancy is that the evaluators were sufficiently put
off by the grammatical errors made by the COMP
system that they penalized it heavily. Grammatical-
ity does enter into the factoids evaluation, though
perhaps not as strongly.
In the relative ranking evaluation (see Table 4),
there are two disturbing observations we can make.
First, as in the absolute scoring, the factoid evalua-
tion prefers the COMP system to the LONGER sys-
tem, but the relative ranking puts them in the other
order. Second, the LONGER baseline outperforms
the reference summary.
As before, we can explain this first discrepancy
by the issue of grammaticality. This is especially
important in this case: since the evaluators are not
given a reference summary that explicitly tells them
what information is important and what information
is not, they are required to make this decision on
their own. As we have observed, this act is very
imprecise, and it is likely the people performing
the evaluation have recognized this. Since there is
no longer a clear cut distinction between important
and unimportant information, and since they are re-
quired to make a decision, they have no choice but
to fall back on grammaticality as the primary moti-
vating factor for their decisions.
1Summarizing a set of unrelated documents may be an un-
realistic and unimportant task; nevertheless, it is interesting to
consider such a task in order to better understand why humans
agree more readily in multi-document summarization than in
single document summarization or in sentence fusion.
The second discrepancy is particularly disturb-
ing. Before discussing its possible causes, we
briefly consider the implications of this finding. In
order to build an automatic sentence fusion sys-
tem, one would like to be able to automatically col-
lect training data. Our method for doing so is by
constructing word-for-word and phrase-for-phrase
alignments between documents and abstracts and
leveraging these alignments to select such pairs.
In theory, one could extract many thousands of
such examples from the plethora of existing docu-
ment/summary pairs available. Unfortunately, this
result tells us that even if we are able to build a
system that perfectly mimics these collected data,
a simple baseline will be preferred by humans in an
evaluation.
One might wish to attribute this discrepancy to er-
rors made by the largely imperfect automatic align-
ments. However, we have calculated the results sep-
arately for pairs derived from human alignments and
from automatic alignments, and observe no differ-
ences.
This leaves two remaining factors to explain this
difference. First, the original summary is created
by a trained human professional, who is very famil-
iar with the domain (while our elicited data comes
from technologically proficient adults, the topics
discussed in the data are typically about technical
systems from the late eighties, topics our summa-
rizers know very little about). Second, the original
summarizers had the rest of the document available
when creating these fusions. Though without per-
forming relevant experiments, it is impossible to say
what the results would be.
However, from a system-building perspective,
one can view fusion in many applications and it
is highly desirable to be able to perform such fu-
sions without knowing the rest of the document.
From a document summarization perspective, one
might wish to perform sentence extraction to re-
duce the document to a few sentences and then use
sentence fusion to compress these further. In this
case, the primary motivation for performing this in
a pipelined fashion would be to remove the com-
plexity of dealing with the entire document when
the more complex fusion models are applied. In
another possible application of question answering,
one can imagine answering a question by fusion to-
gether several sentences returned as the result of an
information retrieval engine. In this case, it is nearly
impossible to include the remainder of the docu-
ments in such an analysis.
7 Summary and Conclusions
We have performed an analysis of agreement be-
tween humans in the highly constrained task of fus-
ing two sentences together. This task has appli-
cations in summarization, question answering and
pure natural language generation. We have shown
that this task is not well defined, when viewed in
isolation. Furthermore, we have shown that us-
ing automatically extracted data for training cannot
lead to systems that outperform a simple baseline of
choosing the longer of the two sentences..
These results are disheartening, though by per-
forming such experiments a priori, we are able to
better judge which courses of research are and are
not worth pursuing. Questions regarding the agree-
ment between people in the area of single docu-
ment summarization and multi-document summa-
rization have already been raised and are currently
only partially answered (Halteren and Teufel, 2003;
Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004; Marcu and Ger-
ber, 2001). We have shown that even in this con-
strained domain, it is very unlikely that any signif-
icant agreement will be found, without specifically
guiding the summarizers, either by a query, a user
model, or some other external knowledge. We have
argued that it is likely that this lack of agreement
will not be subverted by adding more sentences,
though this should be confirmed experimentally.
The issues of multiple references and of adding
context (essentially by allowing the summarizers to
see the document from which these two sentences
were extracted) has not been addressed in this work;
either might serve to increase agreement. However,
one of the goals of this methodology for automat-
ically extracting pairs of sentences from automat-
ically aligned corpora is to be able to get data on
which to train and test a system without having hu-
mans write it. To require one to elicit multiple ref-
erences to obtain any agreement obviates this goal
(moreover, that agreement between humans and the
original summary sentence is even lower than be-
tween a pair of humans makes this practice ques-
tionable). Regarding context, it is reasonable to hy-
pothesize (though this would need to be verified)
that the addition of context would result in higher
kappa scores. Unfortunately, if a human is given
access to this information, it would only be fair to
give a system access to the same information. This
means that we would no longer be able to view
generic sentence fusion as an isolated task, making
fusion-specific research advances very difficult.
8 Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Kevin Knight, Eduard Hovy, Jerry
Hobbs and the anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful and insightful comments. This work was par-
tially supported by DARPA-ITO grant N66001-00-
1-9814, NSF grant IIS-0097846, and a USC Dean
Fellowship to Hal Daume? III.
References
R. Barzilay, K. McKeown, and M. Elhadad. 1999.
Information fusion in the context of multi-
document summarization. In Proceedings of
ACL.
R. Barzilay. 2003. Information Fusion for Mut-
lidocument Summarization: Paraphrasing and
Generation. Ph.D. thesis, Columbia University.
A. Berger and V. Mittal. 2000. Query-relevant sum-
marization using FAQs. In Proceedings of ACL.
D. Coughlin. 2001. Correlating automated and hu-
man assessments of machine translation quality.
In Proceedings of MT Summit IX.
H. Daume? III and D. Marcu. 2002. A noisy-channel
model for document compression. In Proceed-
ings of ACL.
H. Daume? III and D. Marcu. 2004. A phrase-based
HMM approach to document/abstract alignment.
In preparation.
U. Hahn and D. Harman, editors. 2002. Second
Document Understanding Conference (DUC-
2002).
H. Halteren and S. Teufel. 2003. Examining the
consensus between human summaries: Initial ex-
periments with factoid analysis. In HLT-NAACL
DUC Workshop.
C. Hori, S. Furui, R. Malkin, H. Yu, and A. Waibel.
2003. A statistical approach to automatic speech
summarization. Journal on Applied Signal Pro-
cessing, 3:128?139.
H. Jing. 2002. Using hidden Markov modeling to
decompose human-written summaries. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 28(4):527 ? 544, December.
K. Knight and D. Marcu. 2002. Summarization
beyond sentence extraction: A probabilistic ap-
proach to sentence compression. Artificial Intel-
ligence.
K. Krippendorff. 1980. Content analysis: An Intro-
duction to its Methodology. Sage Publications,
CA.
C.Y. Lin and E. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation
of summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statis-
tics. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.
C.Y. Lin. 2003. Improving summarization perfor-
mance by sentence compression - a pilot study.
In Proceedings of IRAL Workshop.
I. Mani and M. Maybury, editors. 1999. Ad-
vances in Automatic Text Summarization. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
D. Marcu and L. Gerber. 2001. An inquiry into
the nature of multidocument abstracts, extracts,
and their evaluation. In NAACL Summarization
Workshop.
A. Nenkova and R. Passonneau. 2004. Evaluating
content selection in summarization: The pyramid
method. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.J. Zhu.
2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation
of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL.
K. Pastra and H. Saggion. 2003. Colouring sum-
maries BLEU. In EACL.
