BioGrapher: Biography Questions as a
Restricted Domain Question Answering Task
Oren Tsur
Text and Data Mining Group
Bar Ilan University
tsuror@cs.biu.ac.il
Maarten de Rijke
Informatics Institute
University of Amsterdam
mdr@science.uva.nl
Khalil Sima?an
Institute for Logic, Language
and Computation
University of Amsterdam
simaan@science.uva.nl
Abstract
We address Question Answering (QA) for biograph-
ical questions, i.e., questions asking for biographi-
cal facts about persons. The domain of biographical
documents differs from other restricted domains in
that the available collections of biographies are in-
herently incomplete: a major challenge is to answer
questions about persons for whom biographical in-
formation is not present in biography collections.
We present BioGrapher, a biographical QA system
that addresses this problem by machine learning al-
gorithms for biography classification. BioGrapher
first attempts to answer a question by searching in
a given collection of biographies, using techniques
tailored for the restricted nature of the domain. If
a biography is not found, BioGrapher attempts to
find an answer on the web: it retrieves documents
using a web search engine, filters these using the bi-
ography classifier, and then extracts answers from
documents classified as biographies. Our empirical
results show that biographical classification, prior to
answer extraction, improves the results.
1 Introduction
Although most current research in question answer-
ing (QA) is oriented towards open domains, as
witnessed by evaluation exercises such as TREC,
CLEF, and NTCIR, various significant applications
concern restricted domains, e.g., software manuals.
In restricted domains, a QA system faces questions
and documents that exhibit less variation in lan-
guage use (e.g., words and fixed phrases, more spe-
cific terminology) than in an open domain, and it
could access high-quality knowledge sources that
cover the entire domain. Open domain QA as it
is assessed at TREC, CLEF, and NTCIR concerns
a broad variety of fairly restricted question types,
such as location questions, monetary questions, bi-
ography questions, questions that ask for concept
definitions, etc. How useful or effective is it to
adopt a restricted domain approach to some of these
question types? In this paper we explore so-called
biographical questions, e.g., Who was Algar Hiss?
or Who is Sir John Hale?, i.e., questions that de-
mand answers consisting of biograpical key facts
that are typically found in biographies and that typ-
ically involve fixed phrases about, e.g., birthdates,
education, societal roles. This type of questions was
found to be quite frequent in search engine logs. We
believe that biographical questions can be usefully
viewed as defining a restricted domain for QA: the
domain of biographical information as represented
by biographies.
Ideally, biographical questions are answered by
retrieving a biography from some existing collec-
tion of biographies (such as biography.com)
and extracting snippets from it. Such resources,
however, have a limited coverage. There will al-
ways be people whose biographical information is
not contained in any of the existing collections.
This necessitates retrieval of ?biography-like? doc-
uments, i.e., documents with biographical informa-
tion. The problem of identifying biography-like
documents by machine learning algorithms turns
out to be a challenging but rewarding task as we will
see below.
In this paper we address the problem of question
answering within the biographical domain. We de-
scribe BioGrapher, a restricted domain QA system
for answering bibliographical questions in which a
baseline approach, that exploits biography collec-
tions, is extended with a trainable biography classi-
fier operating on the web in order to enhance cov-
erage. The baseline system helps us understand the
usefulness of existing high quality biography col-
lections within a QA system. The extension of our
baseline approach concerns the problem of identi-
fying biography-like documents, and the extraction
from such documents of answers for questions that
could not be answered using biography collections.
A main challenge lies in constructing an algorithm
for identifying documents containing usefull bio-
graphical information that may provide an answer
for a given question. To addresss this challenge, we
explore two machine learning algorithms: Ripper
(Cohen and Singer, 1996) and Support-Vector Ma-
chines (Joachims, 1998).
Section 2 provides some background, and in Sec-
tion 3 we briefly describe our baseline QA sys-
tem, based on external knowledge sources comple-
mented with a naive approach to retrieving biogra-
phy snippets using a web search engine. In Sec-
tion 4 we prepare the ground for our text classifica-
tion experiments. In Section 5 we present two clas-
sifiers: one loosely based on the Ripper algorithm
and the other based on an SVM classifier. In Sec-
tion 6 we compare the performanc of the baseline
against versions of the system integrated with the
two classifiers. Section 7 discusses the results and
considers the possibility of applying our approach
to other restricted domains. We conclude in Sec-
tion 8.
2 Related Work
Two kinds of related work are relevant to this pa-
per: question answering against external knowledge
sources, and genre detection (using classifiers). We
briefly discuss both.
Many QA research groups employed External
Knowledge Sources in order to improve perfor-
mance. For instance, (Chu-Carroll and Prager,
2002) used WordNet to answer what is questions,
using the isa hierarchy supported by WordNet.
(Hovy et al, 2002; Lin, 2002) used dictionaries
such as WordNet and web search results to re-rank
answers. (Yang et al, 2003) preformed structure
analysis of the knowledge obtained from WordNet
and the Web in order to further improve perfor-
mance.
We refer to (Sebastiani, 2002) for extensive re-
view about machine learning in automated text clas-
sification. (Lewis, 1992) were among the first to
use machine learning for genre detection trying to
categorize Reuters articles to predefined categories.
Probabilistic classifiers were used by many groups
(Lewis, 1998). Much current text classification re-
search is focused on Support Vector Machines, first
used for genre detection by (Joachims, 1998).
3 A Na??ve Baseline
In this section we describe our baseline QA system.
This system was used at TREC 2003, to produce an-
swers to so-called person definition questions (Jij-
koun et al, 2004; Voorhees, 2004). We present the
results and give a short analysis of the system?s per-
formance; as we will see, this provides further mo-
tivation for the use of text classification for identi-
fying biography-like documents.
Definition questions at TREC 2003
The QA track at TREC 2003 featured a subtask
devoted to definition questions. The latter came
in three flavors: person definitions (e.g., Who is
Colin Powell?), organization definitions (e.g., What
is the U.N.?), and concept definitions (e.g., What is
goth?). Here, we are only interested person defini-
tions.
In response to a definition question, systems had
to return an unordered set of snippets; each snippet
was supposed to be a facet in the definition of the
target. There were no limits placed on either the
length of an individual answer string or on the num-
ber of snippets in the list, although systems were
penalized for retrieving extraneous information.
As our primary strategy for handling person def-
inition questions, we consulted external resources.
The main resource used is biography.com.
While such resources contain biographies of many
historical and well-known people, they often lack
biographies of contemporary people that are not too
well-known. To be able to deal with such cases we
backed-off to using a web search engine (Google),
and applied a na??ve heuristic approach. We hand-
crafted a set of features (such as ?born?, ?gradu-
ated?, ?suffered?, etc.) that we felt would trigger
for biography-like snippets. Various subsets of the
large feature set, together with the target of the def-
inition question, were combined to form queries for
the web search engine.
Given a set of candidate answer snippets, we per-
formed two filtering steps before presenting the final
answer: we separated non-relevant snippets from
valuable snippets and we identified semantically-
close snippets. We addressed the first step by ana-
lyzing the distances between query terms submitted
to the search engine and the sets of features, and by
means of shallow syntactic aspects of the different
features such as sentence boundaries. To address
the second step we developed a snippet similarity
metric based on stemming, stopword removal and
keyword overlap by sorting and calculating the Lev-
enshtein distance measure of similarity.1. An ex-
ample of the snippets filtering can be found in Ta-
ble 1. The table presents 3 of the returned snippets
for the question Who is Sir John Hale?. The first
and third snippet are filtered out, the first one for
non-relevancy and the third for its semantic similar-
ity with the second, shorter, snippet.
1The Levenshtein measure is a measure of the similarity be-
tween two strings, which are refered to as the source string s
and the target string t. The distance is the number of deletions,
insertions, or substitutions required to transform s into t
1 Sir Malcolm Bradbury (writer/teacher) Dead.
Heart trouble. . . . Heywood Hale Broun (com-
mentator, writer ) ? Dead. John Brunner (au-
thor) Dead. Stroke. . . . Description: Debunks
the rumor of his death. . .
2 . . . Professor Sir John Hale woke up, had . . . For
her birthday in 1996, he wrote on the . . . John
Hale died in his sleep - possibly following an-
other stroke . . .
3 Observer On 29 July 1992, Professor Sir John
Hale woke up . . . her birthday in 1996, he wrote
on the . . . John Hale died in his sleep - possibly
following another stroke.
Table 1: Snippets filtering for Who is Sir John Hale?
Evaluation
Evaluation of individual person definition questions
was done using the F-measure: F = (?2 + 1)P ?
R)/(?2P + R), where P is precision (to be de-
fined shortly), R is recall (to be defined shortly),
and ? was set to 5, indicating that precision was
more important than recall. Length was used as a
crude approximation to precision; it gives a system
an allowance of 100 (non-white-space) characters
for each correct snippet it retrieved. The precision
score is set to one if the response is no longer than
this allowance, otherwise it is downgraded using the
function P = 1? ((length ? allowance)/length).
As to recall, for each question, the TREC asses-
sors marked some snippets as vital and the remain-
der as non-vital. The non-vital snippets act as ?don?t
care? condition. That is, systems should be penal-
ized for not retrieving vital nuggets, and for retriev-
ing snippets that are not in the assessors? snippet
lists at all, but should be neither penalized nor re-
warded for returning a non-vital snippet. To im-
plement the ?don?t care? condition, snippet recall is
computed only over vital snippets (Voorhees, 2004).
In total, 30 person definition questions were eval-
uated at the TREC 2003 QA track. The overall F
score of a run was obtained by averaging over all
the individual questions.
Results and Analysis
The F score obtained by the naive system described
in this section, on the TREC 2003 person definition
questions, was 0.392. An analysis of the results
shows that, for questions that could be answered
from external biography resources, the baseline sys-
tem obtains an F score of 0.586.
In post-submission experiments we changed the
subsets of features we use in the queries sent to
Google as well as the number of queries/subsets we
use. The snippet similarity threshold was also tuned
in order to filter out more snippets. This resulted in
fewer unanswered questions, while the average an-
swer length was decreased as well, by close to 50%.
All in all, an informal evaluation showed increase in
recall, precision and in the overall F score.
From our experience with our baseline system
we learned the following important lesson: having
a (relatively) small number of high quality biogra-
phy sources as a basis for each question?s answer
is far better than using a broad and large variety of
snippets returned by a web search engine. While
extending available biography resources so as to se-
riously boost their coverage is not a feasible option,
we want to do the next best thing: make sure we
identify good biography-like documents online, so
that we can use these to mine snippets from; to this
end we will use text classification.
4 Preparing for Text Classification
In the previous section we suggested that using a
text classifier might improve the performance of bi-
ography QA. Using text classifiers, we aim to iden-
tify biography-like documents from which we can
extract answers. In this section we detail the docu-
ment representations on which we will operate.
Document and Text Representation
Text classifiers represent a document as a set of fea-
tures d = {f1, f2,. . . , fn} where n is the number of
active features, that is, features that occur in the doc-
ument. A feature f can be a word, a set of words, a
stem or any phrasal structure, depending on its text
representation. Each feature has a weight, usually
representing the number of occurrences of this fea-
ture in the document.
What is a suitable abstract representation of doc-
uments for our biography domain? We have defined
7 clusters, groups of words (terms/tokens) with a
high degree of pair-wise semantic relatedness. Each
cluster has a meta-tag symbol (as can be seen in Ta-
ble 2) and all occurrences of members of a cluster
were substituted by the cluster?s meta-tag. An ex-
ample of a document abstraction can be found in Ta-
ble 3. This abstraction captures typical similarities
between biographical strings; e.g., for the two sen-
tences John Kennedy was born in 1917 and William
Shakespeare was born in 1564 we get the same ab-
straction <NAME> <NAME> was born in <YEAR>.
It is worth noting that some of the clusters,
such as <CAP> and <PLACE>, <CAP> and <PN>
and others may overlap. Looking at the exam-
ple in Table 3, we see that Abbey was born in
Chicago, Illinois, but the automatic abstractor mis-
interpreted the token ?Ill.,? marking it is <CAP> for
capitalized (possibly meaningful) word, but not as
<NAME> the name of the subject of the biography
<YEAR> four digits surrounded by white space,
probably a year
<D> sequence of number of digits other than
four digits, can be part of a date, age etc.
<CAP> a capitalized word in the middle of a
sentence that wasn?t substituted by any
other tag
<PN> a proper name that is not the subject of
the biography It substitutes any name
out of a list of thousand names
<PLACE> denotes a name of a place, city or coun-
try out of a list of more than thousand
places
<MONTH> denotes one of the twelve months
<NOM> denotes a nominative
Table 2: Seven meta-tags used for document ab-
straction
<PLACE>. A similar thing happens with the name
?Wooldridge? that is not very common; it should
have been <PN> instead of <CAP>.
All procedures described below are preformed on
abstract-meta-tagged documents.
5 Identifying Biography Documents
Given a document, the task of a biography classifier
is to decide whether a given document is a biogra-
phy or not. In this section we address the problem
of acquiring biography classifiers by training ma-
chine learning algorithms on data. We present two
biography classification algorithms: a naive classi-
fier based on Ripper (Cohen and Singer, 1996), and
another based on SVM (Joachims, 1998). The two
methods differ radically both in the way they rep-
resent the training data (i.e., document representa-
tion), and in their learning approaches. The naive
classifier is obtained by a repetitive rule learning al-
Original Lincoln, Abbey (b. Anna Marie
Wooldridge) 1930 ? Jazz singer, com-
poser/arranger, movie actress; born in
Chicago, Ill. While a teenager she
sang at school and church functions
and then toured locally with a dance
band.
Abstraction <NAME>, <NAME> ( b . <PN> <CAP>
<CAP> ) <YEAR> - <CAP> singer ,
composer/arranger , movie actress ;
born in <PLACE> <CAP> . While
a teenager <NOM> sang at school and
church functions and then toured lo-
cally with a dance band .
Table 3: Abstraction of jazz singer Abbey Wool-
ridge?s biography
gorithm. We modified this algorithm to specifically
fit the task of identifying biographies. The SVM
learns ?linear decision boundaries? between the dif-
ferent classes. We employ here the implementation
of SVMs by (Joachims, 1998). Next we discuss the
details of how each algorithm was used for learning
a biography classifier.
Naive Classifier
We employ this algorithm for its simplicity and scal-
ability. This algorithm learns user-friendly rules,
i.e., human-readable conjunctions of propositions,
which can be converted to queries for a Boolean
search engine. Furthermore, it is known to exhibit
relatively good results across a wide variety of class-
fication problems, including tasks that involve large
collections of noisy data, similar to the large doc-
ument collections that we face in definitional QA.
The naive classifier consists of two main stages:
(1) Rules building. This is similar to Ripper?s first
stage of building an initial rule set. Our algorithm
deviates from standard implementations of Ripper
in that the terms that serve as the literals in the
rules are n-grams of various lengths. We feel that
n-grams, as opposed to individual literals (as in (Co-
hen and Singer, 1996), better capture contextual ef-
fects, which could be crucial in text classification.
Our learner learns the rules as follows. The set of
k-most frequent n-grams representing the training
documents is split into two frequency-ordered lists:
TLP (term-list-positive) containing the positive ex-
ample set and TLN (term-list-negative) containing
the negative examples set. The vector ~w is initial-
ized to be TLP/(TLP ? TLN), i.e., the most fre-
quent n-grams extracted from the positive set that
are not top frequent in the negative set.
(2) Rule optimization. Instead of Ripper?s rule
pruning stage, our algorithm assigns a weight to
each rule/n-gram r in the rules vector according
to the formula g(n)?f(r)C , where g(n) is an increas-
ing function in the length of the n-gram (longer n-
grams receive higher weights), f(r) is the ratio of
the frequency of r in the positive examples to its
frequency in the negative examples, and C is the
size of the training set. The normalization by C
is merely for the purpose of tracking variations of
the weights in different sizes of training sets. The
preference for longer n-grams can be justified by
the intuition that longer n-grams are more informa-
tive as they stand for stricter contexts. For example,
the string ?(<NAME> , <NAME> born in <YEAR>?
seems more informative than the shorter string in
<YEAR>).
Training material. The corpus we used as our
training set is a collection of 350 biographies. Most
of the biographies were randomly sampled from
biography.com, while the rest were collected
from the web. About 130 documents from the New
York Times (NYT) 2000 collection were randomly
selected as negative example set. The volumes of
the positive and negative sets are equal.
Various considerations played a role in building
this corpus. The biographies from biography.
com are ?clean? in the sense that all of them were
written as biographies. To enable the learning of
features of informal biographies, some other ?noisy?
biographies such as biography-like newspaper re-
views were added. Furthermore, a small number of
different biographies of the same person were man-
ually added in order to enforce variation in style.
We also added a small number of biographies from
other different sources to avoid any bias towards the
biography.com domain.
Validation and tuning. We tuned the naive algo-
rithm on a separate validation set of documents. The
validation set was collected in the same way as the
training set. It contained 60 biographies, of which
40 were randomly sampled from biography.
com, 10 ?clean? biographies were collected from
various online sources, 10 other documents were
noisy biographies such as newspaper reviews. In
addition, another 40 non-biographical documents
were randomly retrieved from the web.
The vector ~w is now used to rank the documents
of the validation set V in order to set a threshold
? that minimizes the false-positive and the false-
negative errors. Each document dj ? V in the val-
idation set is represented by a vector ~x, where xi
counts the occurrences of wi in dj . The score of the
document is the normalized inner product of ~x and
~w given by the function score(dj) = ~x?~wlength(dj) .
In the validation stage some heuristic modifica-
tions were applied by the algorithm. For example,
when the person name tag is absent, the document
gets the score of zero even though other parameters
of the vector may be present. We also normalized
document scores by document length.
Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
Now we describe the learning of a biography clas-
sifier using SVMs. Unlike many other classifiers,
SVMs are capable of learning classification even of
non-linearly-separable classes. It is assumed that
classes that are non-linearly separable in one di-
mension may be linearly separable in higher di-
mension. SVMs offer two important advantages
for text classification (Joachims, 1998; Sebastiani,
2002): (1) Term selection is often not needed, as
SVMs tend to be fairly robust to overfitting and
can scale up to considerable dimensionalities, and
(2) No human and machine effort in parameter tun-
ing on a validation set is needed, as there is a the-
oretically motivated ?default? choice of parameter
settings which have been shown to provide best re-
sults.
The key idea behind SVMs is to boost the dimen-
sion of the representation vectors and then to find
the best line or hyper-plane from the widest set of
parallel hyper-planes. This hyper-plane maximizes
the distance between two elements in the set. The
elements in the set are the support vectors. Theo-
retically, the classifier is determined by a very small
number of examples defining the category frontier,
the support vectors. Practically, finding the support
vectors is not a trivial task.
Training SVMs. The implementation used is
SVM-light v.5 (Joachims, 1999). The classifier was
run with its default setting, with linear kernel func-
tion and no kernel optimization tricks. The SVM-
light was trained on the very same (meta-tagged)
training corpus the naive classifier was trained on.
Since SVM is supposed to be robust and to fit big
and noisy collections, no feature selection method
was applied. The special feature underlying SVMs
is the high dimensional representation of a docu-
ment, allowing categorization by a hyper-plane of
high dimension; therefore each document was rep-
resented by the vector of its stems. The dimen-
sion was boosted to include all the stems from the
positive set. The boosted vector dimension was
7935, the number of different stems in the collec-
tion. The number of support vectors discovered was
17, which turned out to be too small for this task.
Testing this model on the test set (the same test set
used to test the naive classifier from previous sec-
tion) yielded very poor results. It seemed that the
classification was totally random. Testing the classi-
fier on smaller subsets of the training set (200, 300,
400 documents) exposed signs of convergence, sug-
gesting the training set is too sparse for the SVM.
To overcome sparse data, more documents were
needed. The size of the training set was more than
doubled. A total of 9968 documents was used as
the training set. Just like the original training set,
most of the biographies were randomly extracted
from biography.com, while a few dozen bi-
ographies were manually extracted from various
online sources to correct for a possible bias in
biography.com. Training SVM-light on the
new training set yielded 232 support vectors, which
seems enough to perform this classification tasks.
6 Experimental Results
In order to test the effectiveness of the biography
classifiers in improving question answering, we in-
tegrated each one of them with the naive baseline
biographical QA system and tested the integrated
system, called BioGrapher (Figure 1). Before dis-
cussing the results of this experiment, we briefly
mention how the two classifiers performed on the
pure classification task. For this purpose, we cre-
ated a test set including 47 documents that were re-
trieved from the web. The evaluation measure was
the accuracy of the classifiers in recognizing biogra-
phies. The Ripper-based algorithm achieved 89%
success, outranking the SVM which achieved 83%.
A discussion of this difference is beyond the scope
of this paper (see (Tsur, 2003) for details).
We tested BioGrapher on 11 out of the 30 bio-
graphical questions in the TREC 2003 QA track.
Those 11 questions were chosen as a test set be-
cause the baseline system (Section 3) scored poorly
on them, suggesting that our baseline heuristics are
incapable of effectively dealing with this type of
questions.
Question
Question 
analyzer
Snippets filter
Answer 
snippets
Biography 
collection
Web
Retrieval 
engine
Document 
classifier
Figure 1: BioGrapher system overview
Two experiments were carried out, one for the
Ripper-based classifier and another for the SVM-
based one. For each definitional question Biogra-
pher submits two simple queries to a web search
engine (e.g., Sir John Hale and Sir John Hale biog-
raphy). It retrieves the top 20 documents returned
by the search engine, thus obtaining, for each ques-
tion, 40 documents amongst which it should find
a biography. BioGrapher then classifies the doc-
uments into biographies and non-biographic doc-
uments. The distribution of documents that were
classified as biographies can be found in Table 4.
To simplify the experiments, and especially the
Question Naive Classifier SVM
Who is Alberto Tomba? 2 4
Who is Albert Ghiorso? 8 2
Who is Alexander Pope? 13 11
Who is Alice Rivlin? 3 2
Who is Absalom? 2 3
Who is Nostradamus? 1 1
Who is Machiavelli? 3 6
Who is Andrea Bocceli? 1 1
Who is Al Sharpton? 2 6
Who is Aga Khan? 4 1
Who is Ben Hur? 2 1
Table 4: Distribution of documents retrieved (in-
cluding false-positive)
error analysis, we set up BioGrapher to return an-
swer snippets from a single biography or biography-
like document only. Recall, the test questions
were such that there were no biographies for the
question targets in the biography collection we
used (biography.com): the biographies used
were ones that BioGrapher identified on the web.
We evaluated BioGrapher in the following manner.
The assessor first determines whether the document
from which BioGrapher extracts answer snippets is
a proper biography or not. In case the document is
not a pure biography the F-score given to this ques-
tion is zero. Otherwise, the F-score was determined
in the manner described in Section 3.2
BioGrapher with the Ripper-based Classifier
The total number of documents that were classi-
fied as biographies is 41 (out of 440 retrieved docu-
ments). However, analysis of the results reveals that
the false positive ratio is high; only 20 of the 41 cho-
sen documents were proper biography-like pages,
the other ?biographies? were very noisy.
For 4 out of the 11 test questions, a proper
biography was returned as the top ranking docu-
ment. While all 4 questions scored 0 at the origi-
nal TREC evaluation, now their average F-score is
0.732, improving the average F-score over all biog-
raphy questions by 9.6% to 0.4659.
BioGrapher with the SVM Classifier
The total number of documents that were classi-
fied as biographies is 38 (out of 440 retrieved docu-
2Obviously, the F-score for snippets extracted from doc-
uments incorrectly classified as biographies could be higher
than zero because these documents could still contain valuable
pieces of biographical information that would contribute to the
answer?s F-score. However, we decided to compute precision
and recall only for snippets extracted from documents correctly
classified as biographies as we think of the biography classi-
fier as a means to identify (?on-the-fly?) quality documents that
could in principle be added to a biography collection.
ments). However, just like in the case of the Ripper-
based classifier, an analysis of the results reveals
that the false positive ratio is high; only 18 of the
38 chosen documents were biography-like.
The SVM classifier managed to return proper bi-
ographies (as top ranking documents) for 5 out of
11 questions. The average F-score for those ques-
tions is 0.674 instead of the original zero, improving
the average F-score over all biography questions by
9.7% to 0.4665.
No biographies at all were retrieved for 4 of the
11 definition targets in the test set, the same four
definition targets for which the Ripper-based classi-
fier did not find biographies. A closer look reveals
the same problems as with the Ripper-based classi-
fier: a relatively high false-positive error ratio and
weak ranking of the classified biographies.
7 Discussion
The results of the experiments using both classifiers
are quite similar. The system integrated with the
SVM-based classifier achieved a slightly higher F-
score but it still falls within the standard deviation.
Our experiment serves as a proof of concept for the
hypothesis that using text classification methods im-
proves the baseline QA system in a principled way.
In spite of the major improvement in the system?s
performance, we have found two main problems
with the classifiers. First, although the classifiers
managed to identify biography-like documents, they
have a high false-positive ratio and too many er-
rors in filtering out some of the non-pure-biography
documents. This happens when the documents re-
trieved by the web search engine simply cannot be
regarded as clean biographies by human assessors,
although they do contain many biographic details.
Second, most of the definition targets had biogra-
phies retrieved and even classified as biographies,
but the biographies were ranked below other noisy
biographical documents, therefore the best biogra-
phy was not presented as a source from which to
extract answer snippets. There are various obvi-
ous paths to improve over the current system: (1)
Improve the classifiers by better training and other
classification algorithms; (2) Enable the extraction
of answers from ?noisy? biography-like documents
in such a way that the gain in recall is not reversed
by a loss of precision; and (3) Allow for the extrac-
tion of answer snippets from multiple biography-
like documents, while avoiding to return overlap-
ping snippets.
8 Conclusion
In this paper we have addressed the problem of bi-
ographical question answering. The main challenge
in this restricted domain is the fact that the available
collections of biography documents are (unavoid-
ably) too small to admit answering all biographi-
cal questions. We use the web as a backoff source
for finding biography-like documents from which to
extract answers in case a given biography collec-
tion does not contain information about the ques-
tion target. We demonstrated the benefits of inte-
grating a text classifier into a restricted domain QA
system as a filter to web retrieval. Finally, we be-
lieve that the use of text classifiers can be benefi-
cial for definitional QA, especially for identifying
documents from which the final answer should be
extracted. Future work will address the weakness
of the current implementation: improved biography
classification and improved answer extraction from
biography-like documents.
Acknowledgments
Maarten de Rijke was supported by the Nether-
lands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO)
under project numbers 612-13-001, 365-20-
005, 612.069.006, 612.000.106, 220-80-001,
612.000.207, and 612.066.302.
References
J. Chu-Carroll and J. Prager. 2002. Use of Word-
Net hypernyms for answering what-is questions.
In Proceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval Con-
ference (TREC 2001). NIST Special Publication
500-250.
W. Cohen and Y. Singer. 1996. Context sensitive
learning methods. In Proceedings of the 19th
ACM International Conference on Research and
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR-
96), pages 307?315. ACM Press.
E. Hovy, U. Hermjakob, and C.Y. Lin. 2002. The
use of external knowledge in factoid QA. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval Conference
(TREC 2001). NIST Special Publication 500-
250.
V. Jijkoun, G. Mishne, C. Monz, M. de Rijke,
S. Schlobach, and O. Tsur. 2004. The Univer-
sity of Amsterdam at the TREC 2003 Question
Answering Track. In E.M. Voorhees, editor, Pro-
ceedings TREC 2003. NIST Special Publication
SP 500-255.
T. Joachims. 1998. Text categorization with sup-
port vector machines: Learning with many rele-
vant features. In Proceedings of ECML-98, 10th
European Conference on Machine Learning.
T. Joachims. 1999. Svm-light v.5, making large-
scale svm learning practical. advances in kernel
methods - support vector learning. B. Scholkopf
and C. Burges and A. Smola (ed.) MIT-Press.
D.D. Lewis. 1992. Representation and learning
in information retrieval. Ph.D. thesis, Graduate
School of the University of Maassachusetts.
D.D. Lewis. 1998. Naive (bayes) at forty: The in-
dependence assumption in information retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 10th European Conference
on Machine Learning, pages 137?142. Springer-
Verlag.
C.Y. Lin. 2002. The effectiveness of dictionary and
web based answer reranking. In The 19th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2002).
F. Sebastiani. 2002. Machine learning in auto-
mated text categorization. ACM Computing Sur-
veys, 34(1):1?47.
O. Tsur. 2003. Definitional question answering
using trainable text classifiers. Master?s thesis,
ILLC, University of Amsterdam.
E.M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview of the TREC 2003
question answering track. In Text REtrieval Con-
ference (TREC 2004). NIST Special Publication:
SP 500-255.
H. Yang, T.-S. Chua, S. Wang, and C.-K. Koh.
2003. Structured use of external knowledge for
event-based open domain question answering.
In Proceedings of the 26th annual international
ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in informaion retrieval, pages 33?40.
ACM Press.
