Extending Document Summarization to Information Graphics
?Sandra Carberry, ??Stephanie Elzer, ? ? ?Nancy Green, ?Kathleen McCoy and ?Daniel Chester
?Dept. of Computer Science, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
(carberry, mccoy, chester@cis.udel.edu)
??Dept. of Computer Science, Millersville Univ., Millersville, PA 17551
(elzer@cs.millersville.edu)
? ? ?Dept. of Math. Sciences, Univ. of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC 27402
(nlgreen@uncg.edu)
Abstract
Information graphics (non-pictorial graphics such
as bar charts or line graphs) are an important
component of multimedia documents. Often such
graphics convey information that is not contained
elsewhere in the document. Thus document summa-
rization must be extended to include summarization
of information graphics. This paper addresses our
work on graphic summarization. It argues that the
message that the graphic designer intended to con-
vey must play a major role in determining the con-
tent of the summary, and it outlines our approach
to identifying this intended message and using it to
construct the summary.
1 Introduction
Summarization work has focused primarily on the
written words in a document. However, graphics
are an important part of many documents, and they
often convey information that is not included else-
where in the document. Thus as text summarization
branches out, it is essential that it consider the sum-
marization of graphical information in documents.
Graph summarization has received some atten-
tion. (Yu et al, 2002) has used pattern recogni-
tion techniques to summarize interesting features of
automatically generated graphs of time-series data
from a gas turbine engine. (Futrelle and Nikolakis,
1995) developed a constraint grammar formalism
for parsing vector-based visual displays and produc-
ing structured representations of the elements com-
prising the display. The goal of Futrelle?s project
is to produce a graphic that summarizes one or
more graphics from a document (Futrelle, 1999).
The summary graphic might be a simplification of
a graphic or a merger of several graphics from the
document, along with an appropriate summary cap-
tion. Thus the end result of summarization will it-
self be a graphic.
Our project is concerned with information graph-
ics (non-pictorial graphics such as bar charts or line
graphs). Our current focus is on providing an ini-
tial summary of an information graphic, within a
larger interactive natural language system that can
respond to followup questions about the graphic.
There are several useful applications for a system
that can summarize information graphics. For dig-
ital libraries, the initial summary of the graphic
will be used in conjunction with the document
text/summary to provide a more complete represen-
tation of the content of the document to be used
for searching and indexing. In the case of environ-
ments with low-bandwidth transmission and minia-
ture viewing facilities, such as cellular telephones
for accessing the web, the initial summary and fol-
lowup capability will provide an alternative modal-
ity for access to the document.
However, the most compelling application of the
overall system is to provide effective access to in-
formation graphics for individuals with sight im-
pairments. The rapidly growing Information Infras-
tructure has had a major impact on society and the
development of technology. However, the growing
reliance on visual information display paradigms
obliges society to ensure that individuals with visual
impairments can access and assimilate information
resources as effectively as their sighted counter-
parts. The underlying hypothesis of our work is that
alternative access to what the graphic looks like is
not enough ? the user should be provided with the
message and knowledge that one would gain from
viewing the graphic in order to enable effective and
efficient use of this information resource. Thus our
system will present the user with an initial summary
that includes the primary message that the graphic
designer intended to convey, augmented with rel-
evant interesting features of the graphic, and then
interactively allow the user to access more detailed
summaries of information contained in the graphic.
As an example of the kinds of summaries that we
envision, consider the information graphic in Fig-
ure 1. The graphic designer?s communicative goal is
ostensibly to convey the sharp increase in bankrupt-
cies in 2001 compared with the previous decreasing
trend. More detailed features that might be of inter-
est include 1) that bankruptcies had been decreasing
at a steady rate since 1998, 2) that bankruptcies had
been decreasing slowly since 1998, 3) the percent-
age decrease each year, 4) the percentage increase
in bankruptcies in 2001, 5) the absolute increase in
bankruptcies in 2001, and 6) the total number of
bankruptcies in 2001. Thus the initial summary of
this graphic might be
This graphic shows that although
Delaware bankruptcy personal filings
decreased slowly and steadily from 1998
to 2000, they rose sharply in 2001.
Note that the proposed summary includes the hy-
pothesized intended message of the graphic, along
with the first two of the additional interesting fea-
tures of the graphic. The selection of additional fea-
tures to augment the summary is discussed further
in Section 3.3. The system would then respond to
user requests for additional information by present-
ing some or all of the other interesting features that
had been identified, as discussed in Section 3.4.
This paper provides an overview of our project.
Section 2 discusses the essential role of intention
recognition in graphics summarization. It argues
not only that the intended message of the graphic
designer must be inferred and included in a sum-
mary of a graphic, but also that the intended mes-
sage significantly influences the additional propo-
sitions that should be included in the summary.
Section 3 presents our approach to graph summa-
rization. It discusses how we use a computer vi-
sion module to construct an XML representation
that captures the components of the graphic and
their relationship to one another, and how we use
a Bayesian belief network to hypothesize the inten-
tions of the graph designer. The paper then dis-
cusses our plans for constructing a summary that
includes the graphic designer?s intended message
along with highly ranked additional propositions,
and how the lesser ranked propositions will be used
in an interactive natural language system that re-
sponds to the user?s requests for further summaries
of additional features of the graphic.
2 The Role of Intention in Graphics
Summarization
Text summarization has generally relied on statis-
tical techniques and identification and extraction
of key sentences from documents. However, it is
widely acknowledged that to truly understand a text
and produce the best summary, one must under-
stand the document and recognize the intentions of
the author. Recent work in text summarization has
personal filings
Delaware bankruptcy
3000
2500
1000
1500
2000
1998 1999 2000 2001
Figure 1: Graphic from a City Newspaper
60 70 80 90 01
$15
10
5
Black women
White women
Median Income
In thousands of 2001 dollars
1948
Figure 2: Graphic from Newsweek Magazine
begun to address this issue. For example, (Marcu,
2000) presents algorithms for automatically identi-
fying the rhetorical structure of a text and argues
that the hypothesized rhetorical structure can be
successfully used in text summarization.
Information graphics are an important component
of many documents. In some cases, information
graphics are stand-alone and constitute the entire
document. This is the case for many graphics ap-
pearing in newspapers, such as the graphic shown
in Figure 1. On the other hand, when an article is
comprised of text and graphics, the graphic gener-
ally expands on the text and contributes to the dis-
course purpose (Grosz and Sidner, 1986) of the arti-
cle. For example, Figure 2 illustrates a graphic from
Newsweek showing that the income of black women
has risen dramatically over the last decade and has
reached the level of white women. Although this in-
formation is not conveyed elsewhere in the article, it
contributes to the overall communicative intention
of this portion of the article ? namely, that there
has been a ?monumental shifting of the sands? with
regard to the achievements of black women.
Our project is concerned with the understand-
ing and summarization of information graphics: bar
charts, line graphs, pie charts, etc. We contend that
analyzing the data points underlying an informa-
tion graphic is insufficient. One must instead iden-
tify the message that the graphic designer intended
to convey via the design choices that were made
in constructing the graphic. (Although one might
suggest relying on captions to provide the intended
message of a graphic, Corio and Lapalme found
in a large corpus study (Corio and Lapalme, 1999)
that captions are often missing or are very general
and uninformative; our collected corpus of informa-
tion graphics supports their observations.) Design
choices include selection of chart type (bar chart,
pie chart, line graph, etc.), organization of informa-
tion in the chart (for example, aggregation of bars in
a bar chart), and attention-getting devices that high-
light certain aspects of a chart (such as coloring one
bar of a bar chart different from the others). Not
only should the graphic designer?s intended mes-
sage comprise the primary component of any sum-
mary, but this intended message has a strong influ-
ence on the salience of additional propositions that
might be included in the summary.
To see the importance of recognizing the graphic
designer?s intended message, consider the two
graphics in Figure 3. The one on the left, Fig-
ure 3a, appeared in an NSF publication. Both graph-
ics were constructed from the same data set. The
intended message of the graphic in Figure 3a is that
the salary of females is consistently less than that of
males for each of the science and engineering dis-
ciplines.1 Notice that the graphic designer selected
an organization for the graphic in Figure 3a that fa-
cilitated the comparison between male and female
salaries in each field. A different display of the
same data would facilitate different analyses. For
example, the graph in Figure 3b depicts the same
data as the graph in Figure 3a, yet the organiza-
tion tends to draw attention to comparisons within
male and female groups rather than between them,
1This graphic was constructed by a colleague who served
on the NSF panel that prepared the report. Thus we know the
intentions underlying the graphic.
and perhaps an integration/comparison of the mes-
sages conveyed by the two subgraphs. Thus the in-
tended message of the graphic in Figure 3b appears
to be that the ranking of the disciplines by salary are
about the same for both men and women. The dis-
tinctions between presentation formats illustrate the
extent to which the format can itself convey infor-
mation relevant to the graphic designer?s intended
message.
Now let us consider how the intended message
influences additional information that might be in-
cluded in a summary. Suppose that 1) the salary
differential between females and males was signif-
icantly larger in the life sciences than in other dis-
ciplines and 2) the average salary for both females
and males was much larger in engineering than in
any of the other disciplines. Feature 1) would be
particularly interesting and relevant to the intended
message of Figure 3a, and thus should be included
as part of the graphic?s summary. On the other hand,
this aspect would be less relevant to the intended
message of Figure 3b and thus not as important to
include. Similarly, Feature 2) would be particularly
relevant to the intended message of Figure 3b and
thus should be given high priority for inclusion in
its summary. Although an interactive system that
could analyze a graphic to any desired level of de-
tail might extract from the graphic the information
in both 1) and 2) above, we contend that a summary
of the graphic should prioritize content according to
its relevance to the designer?s intended message.
3 Graphic Summarization
Our architecture for graphic summarization consists
of modules for identifying the components of the
graphic, hypothesizing the graphic designer?s in-
tended message, planning the content of the sum-
mary, organizing a coherent summary, and interac-
tive followup. The following sections discuss four
of these modules.
3.1 Analyzing and Classifying a Graphic
The visual extraction module takes a screen image
of an information graphic. It is responsible for rec-
ognizing the individual components comprising the
graphic, identifying the relationship of the different
components to one another and to the graphic as a
whole, and classifying the graphic as to type. This
includes using heuristics (such as relative position
of a string of characters) to identify the axis labels
? for example, that the y-axis label is Delaware
2The source of the leftmost graph is the National Science
Foundation, Survey of Doctorate Recipients, 1997.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 




































		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		





































80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000 50,000
60,000
70,000
80,000
40,000
30,000
20,000 20,000
30,000
40,000
FEMALE SALARIES MALE SALARIES
Computer/All
Math Sci
Engin. Phys.
Sci. Sci.
Social
Sci.
Life Sci.
Social Sci.
A
ll
Com
puter/M
ath Sci.
Phys Sci.
Engineering
Social Sci.
Life Sci.
Com
puter/M
ath Sci.
A
ll
Phys Sci.
Engineering
Life
Female
Male
(a) (b)
Figure 3: Two alternative graphs from the same data2
bankruptcy personal filings in Figure 1. Our cur-
rent implementation deals only with gray scale im-
ages (in pgm format) of bar charts, pie charts, and
line graphs, though eventually it will be extended to
handle color and other kinds of information graph-
ics. The output of the visual extraction component
is an XML file that describes the chart and all of its
components.
3.2 Identifying the Intended Message
The second module of our architecture is respon-
sible for inferring the graphic designer?s intended
message. In their work on multimedia generation,
the AutoBrief group proposed that speech act the-
ory can be extended to the generation of graphical
presentations (Kerpedjiev and Roth, 2000; Green et
al., 2004). They contended that the graphic design
was intended to convey its message by facilitating
requisite perceptual and cognitive tasks. By percep-
tual tasks we mean tasks that can be performed by
simply viewing the graphic, such as finding the top
of a bar in a bar chart; by cognitive tasks we mean
tasks that are done via mental computations, such as
computing the difference between two numbers.
The goal of our intention recognizer is the inverse
of the design process: namely, to use the displayed
graphic as evidence to hypothesize the communica-
tive intentions of its author. This is done by an-
alyzing the graphic to identify evidence about the
designer?s intended message and then using plan
recognition (Carberry, 1990) to hypothesize the au-
thor?s communicative intent.
3.2.1 Evidence about Intention
Following AutoBrief (Kerpedjiev and Roth, 2000),
we hypothesize that the graphic designer chooses
a design that makes important tasks (the ones that
the viewer is intended to perform in recognizing the
graphic?s message) as salient or as easy as possi-
ble. Thus salience and ease of performance should
be taken into account in reasoning about the graphic
designer?s intentions.
There are several ways that a task can be made
salient. The graphic designer can draw attention
to a component of a graphic (make it salient) by
an attention-getting or highlighting device, such as
by coloring a bar in a bar chart differently from
the other bars as in Figure 1 or by exploding a
wedge in a pie chart (Mittal, 1997). Attributes of
the highlighted graphic component are treated as
focused entities. Nouns in captions also serve to
establish focused entities. For example, a caption
such as ?Studying not top priority? would estab-
lish the noun studying as a focused entity. Focused
entities that appear as instantiations of parameters
in perceptual or cognitive tasks serve as evidence
that those tasks might be particularly salient. Sim-
ilarly, verbs that appear in captions serve as evi-
dence for the salience of particular tasks. For ex-
ample, the verb beats in a caption such as ?Canada
Beats Europe? serves as evidence for the salience
of a Recognize relative difference task. In the fu-
ture, we plan to capture the influence of surrounding
text by identifying the important concepts from the
text using lexical chains. Lexical chains have been
used in text summarization (Barzilay et al, 1999),
and our linear time algorithm (Silber and McCoy,
2002) makes their computation feasible even for
large texts. Whether a task is salient and the method
by which it was made salient are used as evidence
in our plan inference system.
The graphic design makes some tasks easier than
others. We use a set of rules, based on research by
cognitive psychologists, to estimate the relative ef-
fort of performing different perceptual and cogni-
tive tasks. These rules, described in (Elzer et al,
2004), have been validated by eye-tracking experi-
ments. Since the viewer is intended to recognize the
message that the graphic designer wants to convey,
we contend that the designer will choose a graphic
design that makes the requisite tasks easy to per-
form. This was illustrated in the two graphics in
Figure 3. The relative effort of performing a task is
thus used as another source of evidence in our plan
inference framework.
3.2.2 The Plan Inference Process
Our plan inference framework takes the form of
a Bayesian belief network. Bayesian belief net-
works have been applied to a variety of problems,
including reasoning about utterances (Charniak and
Goldman, 1993) and observed actions (Albrecht et
al., 1997). The belief network uses plan operators,
along with evidence that is gleaned from the infor-
mation graphic itself (as discussed in the preceding
section), to reason about the likelihood that vari-
ous hypothesized candidate plans represent the in-
tentions of the graphic designer.
Plan Operators for Information Graphics Our
system uses plan operators that capture knowledge
about how the graphic designer?s goal of conveying
a message can be achieved via the viewer perform-
ing certain perceptual and cognitive tasks, as well
as knowledge about how information-access tasks,
such as finding the value of an entity in a graphic,
can be decomposed into simpler subgoals. Our plan
operators consist of:
? Goal: the goal that the operator achieves
? Data-requirements: requirements that the data
must satisfy in order for the operator to be ap-
plicable in a graphic planning paradigm
? Display-constraints: features that constrain
how the graphic is eventually constructed if
this operator is part of the final plan
? Body: lower-level subgoals that must be ac-
complished in order to achieve the overall goal
of the operator.
Figures 4 and 5 present two plan operators for the
goal of finding the value <v> of an attribute <att>
for a graphical element <e> (for example, the value
associated with the top of a bar in a bar chart). The
body of the operator in Figure 4 specifies that the
goal can be achieved by a primitive perceptual task
in which the viewer just perceives the value; this
could be done, for example, if the element in the
graphic is annotated with its value. On the other
hand, the body of the operator in Figure 5 captures a
different way of finding the value, one that presum-
ably requires more effort. It specifies the perceptual
task of finding the values <l1> and <l2> surround-
ing the desired value on the axis along with the frac-
tion <f> of the distance that the desired value lies
between <l1> and <l2>, followed by the cogni-
tive task of interpolating between the retrieved val-
ues <l1> and <l2>.
Plan inference uses the plan operators to reasons
backwards from the XML representation of the ob-
served graphic (constructed by the visual extraction
module briefly described in Section 3.1). The dis-
play constraints are used to eliminate operators from
consideration ? if the graphic does not capture the
operator?s constraints on the display, then the opera-
tor could not have been part of a plan that produced
the graphic. The data requirements are used to in-
stantiate parameters in the operator ? the data must
have had certain characteristics for the operator to
have been included in the graphic designer?s plan,
and these often limit how the operator?s arguments
can be instantiated.
The Bayesian Belief Network The plan operators
are used to dynamically construct a Bayesian net-
work for each new information graphic. The net-
work includes the possible top level communicative
intentions (with uninstantiated parameters), such as
the intention to convey a trend, and the alternative
ways of achieving them via different plan opera-
tors. The perceptual tasks of lowest effort and the
tasks that are hypothesized as potentially salient are
added to the network. Other tasks are entered into
the network as they are inferred during chaining on
the plan operators; unification serves to instantiate
parameters in higher-level nodes. Evidence nodes
are added for each of the tasks entered into the net-
work, and they provide evidence (such as the degree
of perceptual effort required for a task or whether
a parameter of the task is a focused entity in the
graphic as discussed in Section 3.2.1) for or against
the instantiated tasks to which they are linked. Af-
ter propagation of evidence, the top-level intention
with the highest probability is hypothesized as the
graphic designer?s primary intention for the graphic.
Of course, a Bayesian network requires a set of
conditional probabilities, such as 1) the probability
that perceptual Task-A will be of low, medium, or
high effort given that the graphic designer?s plan in-
cludes the viewer performing Task-A, 2) the prob-
ability that parameter <x> of Task-A will be a fo-
Goal: Find-value(<viewer>, <g>, <e>, <ds>, <att>, <v>)
Gloss: Given graphical element <e> in graphic <g>, <viewer> can find the value <v>
in dataset <ds> of attribute <att> for <e>
Data-req: Dependent-variable(<att>, <ds>)
Body: 1. Perceive-dependent-value(<viewer>, <g>, <att>, <e>, <v>)
Figure 4: Operator for achieving a goal perceptually
Goal: Find-value(<viewer>, <g>, <e>, <ds>, <att>, <v>)
Gloss: Given graphical element <e> in graphic <g>, <viewer> can find the value <v>
in dataset <ds> of attribute <att> for <e>
Data-req: Natural-quantitative-ordering(<att>)
Display-const: Ordered-values-on-axis(<g>, <axis>, <att>)
Body: 1. Perceive-info-to-interpolate(<viewer>,<g>,<axis>,<e>,<l1>,<l2>,<f>)
2. Interpolate(<viewer>, <l1>, <l2>, <f>, <v>)
Figure 5: Operator that employs both perceptual and cognitive subgoals
cused entity in the caption given that the graphic de-
signer?s plan includes the viewer performing Task-
A, or 3) the probability that the viewer perform-
ing Task-B will be part of the designer?s intended
plan given that Task-A is part of his plan. (Note that
there may be several alternative ways of perform-
ing a particular task, as illustrated by the two plan
operators displayed in Figures 4 and 5.) We have
collected a rapidly expanding corpus of information
graphics, and have analyzed a small part of this cor-
pus to construct an initial set of probabilities. The
results suggest that our approach is very promising.
We will increase the number of analyzed graphics
to improve the probability estimates.
3.3 Planning the Content of the Summary
The recognized intention of the graphic designer,
such as to convey an overall increasing trend or to
compare salaries of females and males in different
disciplines as in Figure 3a, will provide one set of
highly salient propositions that should be included
in the graphic?s summary. Once the intentions have
been recognized, other visual features of the graphic
will influence the identification of additional salient
propositions.
We conducted a set of experiments in which sub-
jects were asked to write a brief summary of a set of
line graphs, each of which arguably could be said
to have the same high-level intention. Although
each summary included the high-level intention, the
summaries often differed significantly for different
graphs. By comparing these with summaries of the
same graph by different subjects, we have hypoth-
esized that certain features, such as the variance of
the data, can influence the generated summary, and
that the importance of including a specific feature in
a summary is related to the high-level intention of
the graphic. For example, variation in the data will
be relevant for an intention of conveying a trend,
but it will be less important than the overall slope
of the data points. This impact of the intended mes-
sage on the priority of including a specific feature
in a graphic was illustrated in Section 2, where we
showed how a significantly larger differential be-
tween female and male salaries for one particular
discipline would be more relevant to the summary of
the graphic in Figure 3a than for the graphic in Fig-
ure 3b. In addition, our experiments indicate that the
strength of a feature in the graphic also influences
its inclusion in a summary. For example, the more
ragged a sequence of line segments, the more salient
variance becomes for inclusion in a summary.
Once the content planning module has identified
and ranked interesting features that might augment
the intended message of the graphic, the most im-
portant propositions will be organized into a coher-
ent summary that can be stored for access in a digital
library or presented to a user. In the future, we will
also investigate integrating the summary of an infor-
mation graphic with the summary of its surrounding
text.
3.4 Interactive Followup
One of the primary goals of our work is an inter-
active natural language system that can convey the
content of an information graphic to a user with
sight impairments. For this application, the sum-
mary will be rendered in natural language and con-
veyed as an initial summary to the user via speech
synthesis. The system will then provide the user
with the opportunity to seek additional information.
We will utilize the propositions that were not in-
cluded in the initial message as indicative of ad-
ditional information about the graphic that might
be useful. Several kinds of followup will be pro-
vided. For example, if the user requests focused
followup, the system will categorize the remaining
propositions (for example, extreme values, trend de-
tail, etc.) and ask the user to select one of the cate-
gories of further information. The system will then
construct a followup message summarizing the most
important (often all) of the remaining propositions
in the selected category. This interactive followup
will continue until either all the propositions have
been conveyed or the user terminates the followup
cycle.
4 Summary
This paper extends document summarization to the
summarization of information graphics. It argues
that an effective summary must be based on the
message that the graphic designer intended to con-
vey in constructing the graphic, and that this in-
tended message strongly influences the relevance
of other propositions that might be included in the
summary. The paper describes our approach to
graphic summarization, including our plan infer-
ence system for inferring the intended message un-
derlying a graphic. This work has many applica-
tions. These include enabling information graphics
to be accessed via content in a digital library, allow-
ing access to information graphics via devices with
small bandwidth (such as cellular phones), and most
importantly making information graphics accessible
to individuals with sight impairments via an interac-
tive natural language system that can provide sum-
maries at various levels of detail.
References
David Albrecht, Ingrid Zukerman, Ann Nicholson,
and A. Bud. 1997. Towards a bayesian model
for keyhole plan recognition in large domains.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Confer-
ence on User Modeling, pages 365?376.
R. Barzilay, K. McKeown, and M. Elhadad. 1999.
Information fusion in the context of multi-
document summarization. In Proc. of the 37th
Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 550?557.
Sandra Carberry. 1990. Plan Recognition in Natu-
ral Language Dialogue. ACL-MIT Press Series
on Natural Language Processing. MIT Press.
Eugene Charniak and Robert Goldman. 1993. A
bayesian model of plan recognition. Artificial In-
telligence Journal, 64:53?79.
Marc Corio and Guy Lapalme. 1999. Generation of
texts for information graphics. In Proceedings of
the 7th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation EWNLG?99, pages 49?58.
Stephanie Elzer, Nancy Green, Sandra Carberry,
and James Hoffman. 2004. Incorporating per-
ceptual task effort into the recognition of inten-
tion in information graphics. In Diagrammatic
Representation and Inference: Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on the Theory
and Application of Diagrams, LNAI 2980, pages
255?270.
Robert Futrelle and Nikos Nikolakis. 1995. Ef-
ficient analysis of complex diagrams using
constraint-based parsing. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Document
Analysis and Recognition.
Robert Futrelle. 1999. Summarization of diagrams
in documents. In I. Mani and M. Maybury, edi-
tors, Advances in Automated Text Summarization.
MIT Press.
Nancy Green, Giuseppe Carenini, Stephan Kerped-
jiev, Joe Mattis, Johanna Moore, and Steven
Roth. 2004. Autobrief: An experimental system
for the automatic generation of briefings in inte-
grated text and graphics. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies. to appear.
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986. Atten-
tion, Intentions, and the Structure of Discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12(3):175?204.
Stephan Kerpedjiev and Steven Roth. 2000. Map-
ping communicative goals into conceptual tasks
to generate graphics in discourse. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Intelli-
gent User Interfaces, pages 60?67.
Daniel Marcu. 2000. The rhetorical parsing of un-
restricted texts: A surface-based approach. Com-
putational Linguistics, 26(3):395?448.
Vibhu Mittal. 1997. Visual prompts and graphical
design: A framework for exploring the design
space of 2-d charts and graphs. In Proceedings
of the Fourteenth National Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence, pages 57?63.
Gregory Silber and Kathleen McCoy. 2002. Effi-
ciently computed lexical chains as an intermedi-
ate representation for automatic text summariza-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):487?496.
Jin Yu, Jim Hunter, Ehud Reiter, and Somaya-
julu Sripada. 2002. Recognising visual patterns
to communicate gas turbine time-series data. In
ES2002, pages 105?118.
