Language Learning: Beyond Thunderdome
Christopher D. Manning
Computer Science Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-9040
manning@cs.stanford.edu
Remember: no matter where you go, there you
are.
The eight years from 1988 to 1996 saw the introduc-
tion and soon widespread prevalence of probabilistic gen-
erative models in NLP. Probabilities were the answer to
learning, robustness and disambiguation, and we were all
Bayesians, if commonly in a fairly shallow way. The
eight years from 1996 to 2004 saw the rise to preemi-
nence of discriminative models. Soon we were all either
using SVMs or (in a few cases like myself) arguing that
other discriminative techniques were equally as good: the
sources of insight were margins and loss functions.
What might the next eight years hold? There will
doubtless be many more variants of SVMs deployed, but
it seems much less likely to me that major progress will
come from new learning methods. NLP pretty much al-
ready uses what is known, and commonly the difference
between one kernel or prior and another is small indeed.
If we are waiting for better two class classifiers to push
the performance of NLP systems into new realms, then
we may be waiting a very long time. What other oppor-
tunities are there?
One answer is to rely on more data, and this answer
has been rather fashionable lately. Indeed, it has been
known for a while now that ?There?s no data like more
data?. One cannot argue with the efficacy of this solu-
tion if you are dealing with surface visible properties of a
language with ample online text, and dealing with a stan-
dard problem over a stationary data set. Or if you have so
much money that you can compensate for lacks from any
of those directions. But I do not think this approach will
work for most of us.
Something that has almost snuck up upon the field is
that with modern discriminative approaches and the cor-
responding widely available software, anyone with mod-
est training can deploy state of the art classification meth-
ods. What then determines the better systems? The fea-
tures that they use. As a result, we need more linguists
back in the field (albeit ones with training in empirical,
quantitative methods, who are still in short supply, espe-
cially in North America). This viewpoint is still some-
what unfashionable, but I think it will increasingly be
seen to be correct. If you look through the results of re-
cent competitive evaluations, such as the various CoNLL
Shared Task evaluations, many of the groups are using
similar or the same machine learning methods. The of-
ten substantial differences between the systems is mainly
in the features employed. In the context of language,
doing ?feature engineering? is otherwise known as do-
ing linguistics. A distinctive aspect of language process-
ing problems is that the space of interesting and useful
features that one could extract is usually effectively un-
bounded. All one needs is enough linguistic insight and
time to build those features (and enough data to estimate
them effectively).
A second direction of the field is a renewed intererst
in the deeper problems of NLP: semantics, pragmatic in-
terpretation, and discourse. For both this issue and the
previous one, issues of representation become central. At
deeper levels of processing, there is less agreement on
representations, and less understanding of what are ef-
fective representations for language learning. Much of
our recent work in NLP has shown the importance and
effectiveness of good representations for both unsuper-
vised and supervised natural language learning problems.
Working with good representations will be even more im-
portant for deeper NLP problems, and will see a revival
of rich linguistic representations like in the 1980s.
Finally, a third direction (and perhaps the most pro-
ductive area for new types of machine learning research)
is to build systems that work effectively from less data.
Whether trying to build a text classifier that can classify
email into a folder based on only two examples, port-
ing your work to a different Arabic dialect, or wanting
to incorporate context into parsing and semantic interpre-
tation, the challenge is how to build systems that learn
from just a little data. This is also the cognitive science
challenge of tackling the phenomenon of one-shot learn-
ing, and it requires some different thinking from that of
relying on large hand-labeled data sets.
