Explorations in Disambiguation Using XML Text Representation
Kenneth C. Litkowski
CL Research
9208 Gue Road
Damascus, MD 20872
ken@clres.com
Abstract
In SENSEVAL-3, CL Research participated in
four tasks: English all-words, English lexical
sample, disambiguation of WordNet glosses, and
automatic labeling of semantic roles. This
participation was performed within the
development of CL Research?s Knowledge
Management System, which massively tags texts
with syntactic, semantic, and discourse
characterizations and attributes. This System is
fully integrated with CL Research?s DIMAP
dictionary maintenance software, which provides
access to one or more dictionaries for
disambiguation and representation. Our core
disambiguation functionality, unchanged since
SENSEVAL-2, performed at a level comparable
to our previous performance. Our participation
in the SENSEVAL-3 tasks was concerned
primarily with text processing and representation
issues and did not advance our disambiguation
capabilities.
Introduction
CL Research participated in four SENSEVAL-3
tasks: English all-words, English lexical sample,
disambiguation of WordNet glosses, and automatic
labeling of semantic roles. We also ran the latter two
tasks, but since their test sets were generated blindly,
our results did not involve use of any prior
information.
Our participation in these tasks is a continuation
and extension of our efforts to perform NLP tasks
within an integrated text processing system known as
the Knowledge Management System (KMS). KMS
parses and processes text into an XML representation
tagged with syntactic, semantic, and discourse
properties. This representation is then used for such
tasks as question answering and text summarization
(Litkowski, 2004a; Litkowski, 2004b).
The SENSEVAL-3 tasks were performed as part
of CL Research?s efforts to extend and improve the
semantic characterizations in the KMS XML
representations. For each SENSEVAL-3 task, the
corresponding texts in the test sets were processed
using the general KMS functionality. However, since
the texts involved in the SENSEVAL tasks were
quite small, the amount of processing was quite
minimal. The descriptions below focus on the
integration of disambiguation technology in a larger
system and do not present any advancements in this
technology.
1 The SENSEVAL-3 All-Words Task
Our procedures for performing this task and our
results were largely unchanged from SENSEVAL-2
(Litkowski, 2001; Litkowski, 2002). Our system is
unsupervised, instead relying on information in
whatever dictionary is being used to disambiguate the
words. In this case, as in SENSEVAL-2, WordNet
1.7.1 was used.
The main types of information used are default
sense selection, idiomatic usage, syntactic and
semantic clues, subcategorization patterns, word
forms, syntactic usage, context, and topics or subject
fields. As pointed out in Litkowski (2002), the
amount of information available in WordNet is
problematic. Additional information suitable for
disambiguation is available in WordNet 2.0, but we
were unable to test the effect of the changes, even
though we could have easily switched our system to
use this later version.
In performing this task, we spent some time
cleaning the text files, removing extraneous material
and creating a more natural text file (e.g., joining
contractions). Use of a preprocessed file is somewhat
difficult. Since some tokens to be disambiguated were
unnatural (e.g., ?that?s? broken into two tokens, with
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
only the ??s? to be disambiguated), this affected the
quality of our parse output.
After removing extraneous material, KMS parsed
and processed the XML source file, treating the text
in its ordinary manner. The first step of KMS
involves splitting a text into sentences and then
parsing each sentence. To customize KMS for this
task, we had to create a list of tokens, advancing
through this list in concert with the parse output. This
process was different from the normal processing of
KMS where every word is disambiguated in an
integrated fashion. Our results are shown in Table 1,
broken down by part of speech as indicated in the
answer key.
Table 1. All-Words Results
Run Items Precision
Nouns 895 0.523
Verbs 731 0.361
Adjectives 346 0.413
Adverbs 13 0.077
Hyphenated/U 56 0.179
Total 2041 0.434
These results are similar to our performance in
Senseval-2, where our precision was 0.451. Our
recall is the same, since we attempted each item.
As indicated, several factors degraded our
performance, primarily the quality of the information
available in the dictionary used for disambiguation.
We have not attempted to optimize our system for
WordNet, but rather emphasize use of
lexicographically-based dictionaries. KMS can use
several dictionaries at the same time, and the
additional effort to disambiguate against several
sense inventories at the same time is not demanding.
Our system?s performance was also degraded by
a difficulty in advancing through the token list, so
that we did not return a sense for 305 items (some of
which were due to our parser?s performance). We
also did not deal properly with the adverbs (most of
which were adverbial phrases) and hyphenated words
(which we learned about only after downloading the
test set).
As indicated in Table 1, our system?s
performance was lowest for verbs. We believe, based
on our earlier studies, that this lower score is affected
by the WordNet verb sense inventory.
2 The SENSEVAL-3 Lexical Sample Task
Disambiguation for the lexical sample task is quite
similar to that used for the all-words task. The effort
is somewhat easier in preparation, since the text for
each instance is generally in a form that has not been
preprocessed to an extensive degree. Each instance in
the test set generally consisted of a paragraph which
could be processed immediately within KMS. It was
only necessary to modify KMS in a minor way to
recognize and keep track of the target word to be
disambiguated.
The major difference in the SENSEVAL-3 task
from SENSEVAL-2 is the sense inventory. WordNet
1.7.1 was used for nouns and adjective, while
Wordsymth provided the verb senses. As indicated
above, we were able to use WordNet immediately.
For the Wordsmyth sense inventory, we had to
create a new dictionary with CL Research?s DIMAP
dictionary maintenance software. The Wordsmyth
definitions were very uncomplicated, and we were
able to create this dictionary quickly after
downloading the task training data. On the other
hand, the Wordsmyth data is not as rich as would be
found in ordinary dictionaries, particularly the
machine-readable versions of these dictionaries.
Nonetheless, we analyzed the dictionary data to
extract nuggets of information about each sense. This
included creation of synsets (as in WordNet),
identification of the definition proper, creation of
examples where provided, identification of ?clues?
(e.g., ?followed by ?to??), identification of typical
subjects and objects, and identification of a sense?s
topical area. We also used the online version of
Wordsmyth to identify the transitivity of each sense.
We ran our system first on the trial data and
obtained the results shown in Table 2, essentially
using the identical disambiguation routines developed
for SENSEVAL-2. We intended to use the training
data, not for use as in supervised systems, but to
analyze our results using methods we had established
for identifying factors significant in disambiguation
(Litkowski, 2002). We also briefly investigated the
value of using (1) the topical area characterization of
preceding sentences, (2) WordNet relations among
words in the sentences (including the target), and (3)
prepositions following the target in examples. Our
investigations indicated that only negligible changes
would occur from these possibilities.
Table 2. Lexical Sample Recall (Training)
Run Items Fine Coarse
Adjectives 314 0.382 0.516
Nouns 3593 0.490 0.561
Verbs 3961 0.409 0.525
Total 7868 0.445 0.541
We compared the results from the training data
with our performance in SENSEVAL-2 (Litkowski,
2001). In all categories, the recall was considerably
improved, on average about 0.15. This suggests that
the lexical sample task for SENSEVAL-3 is much
easier. The improvement was relatively greater for
verbs, suggesting that the sense inventory for
Wordsmyth is much closer to what might be found in
ordinary dictionaries.
As a result of these preliminary investigations,
we did not further modify our system for the test run.
Our results for the test data are shown in Table 3. As
is clear, the results are nearly identical with the test
data. These patterns also hold for the individual
lexical items (not shown), where there is much more
variation in performance. The major reason for the
variations appears to lie primarily in the ordering of
the senses in the dictionaries. In other words, the
sense inventories provide little discriminating
information, with the result that sense selection is
primarily to the default first sense. This indicates that
the sense inventories do not reflect the frequencies in
the training and test data.
Table 3. Lexical Sample Recall (Test)
Run Items Fine Coarse
Adjectives 159 0.409 0.503
Nouns 1806 0.488 0.576
Verbs 1977 0.419 0.540
Total 3942 0.450 0.555
3 Disambiguation of WordNet Glosses
The SENSEVAL-3 task to disambiguate content
words in WordNet glosses was a slight modification
of the all-words task. One main difference was that
tokens to be disambiguated were not identified,
requiring the systems to identify content words and
phrases. Content words were considered to be any of
the four major parts of speech, i.e., words or phrases
that could be found in WordNet. Another major
difference was that minimal context was provided,
i.e., only the gloss itself (although examples were
also available). The WordNet synset was also given,
providing some ?context? within the WordNet
network of synsets.
This task had no training data, but only test data
based on the tagging of content words by the
eXtended WordNet (XWN) project (Mihalcea and
Moldovan, 2001). The test data consisted of only and
all those glosses from WordNet for which one or
more word forms (a single word or a multiword unit)
had received a ?gold? quality WordNet sense
assignment. Scoring for this task is based only on a
system?s performance in assigning a sense to these
word forms. The test set consisted of 9257 glosses
containing 15179 ?gold? assignments (out of 42491
word forms in these glosses).
To perform this task1, we used KMS to process
each gloss (treated by KMS as a ?text?). Each gloss
was parsed and processed and converted into an
XML representation. (No gloss was a sentence, so
each parse was ?degenerate? in that only sentence
fragments were identified.)
KMS has only recently been modified to
incorporate ?all-words? disambiguation in the XML
representation. At present, the disambiguation has
only been partially implemented. One aspect still in
development is a determination of exactly which
items in the representation should be given a
disambiguation and represented (e.g., exactly how to
treat multiword units or verbs with particles). Also,
we have not yet integrated the full disambiguation
machinery (as used in the all-words and lexical
sample tasks) into KMS. As a result, only the first
(or default) sense of a word is selected.
CL Research?s DIMAP dictionary software
includes considerable functionality to parse and
analyze dictionary definitions. Part of the analysis
functionality makes use of WordNet relations in
order to propagate information to features associated
with a sense. CL Research has previously parsed
WordNet glosses as part of an investigation into
1Note that, although CL Research ran this task, and we
had access to the test data beforehand, we did not
actually work with the data until the date indicated for
other participants to download and work with the data
prior to submission. In any event, our participation in
this task was primarily to investigate the parsing and
processing of sentence fragments in KMS.
WordNet?s internal consistency. However, we did not
incorporate any of this experience in performing this
task. We also did not incorporate any routines that
make use of WordNet relations for disambiguation
(as enabled by identification of the WordNet synset
identifier). Determining the extent to which these
functionalities are relevant for KMS is a matter for
future investigation.
Our performance for this task reflects our
somewhat limited implementation, as shown in Table
4. Among 10 participating runs, our precision was
the second lowest and our recall was the third lowest.
We were only able to identify 76.8 percent of the test
items with our current implementation. However, in
comparing our results with our performance in the
all-words and lexical sample tasks, the results here
are not significantly different. Moreover, these results
suggest a minimum that might be obtained with a
disambiguation system that relies only on picking the
first sense.
Table 4. Disambiguation of WordNet Glosses
Items Precision Recall
?Gold? words 15179 0.449 0.345
4 Automatic Labeling of Semantic Roles
The SENSEVAL-3 task to label sentence
constituents with semantic roles was designed to
replicate the tagging and identification of frame
elements performed in the FrameNet project (Johnson
et al, 2003). This task was modeled on the study of
automatic labeling by Gildea & Jurafsky (2002), to
allow other participants to investigate methods for
assigning semantic roles. That study was based on
FrameNet 1.0, whereas this task used data from
FrameNet 1.1, which considerably expanded the
number of frames and the corpus sentences that were
tagged by FrameNet lexicographers.
The test data for this task consisted of 200
sentences that had been labeled with frame elements
for 40 different frames. Participants were provided
with the sentences, the target word (along with its
beginning and ending positions in the sentence), and
the frame name (i.e., no attempt was made to
determine the applicable frame). Specific training
data for the task consisted of all sentences not in the
test set for the individual frame (ranging from slightly
fewer than 200 sentences to as many as 1500
sentences). In addition, participants could use the
remainder of the FrameNet corpus for training
purposes (another 447 frames and nearly 133,000
sentences). Participants could submit two types of
runs: unrestricted (in which frame element
boundaries, but not frame element names, could be
used, i.e., essentially a classification task) and
restricted (in which these boundaries could not be
used, i.e., the more difficult task of segmenting
constituents and identifying their semantic role). CL
Research submitted only one run, for the restricted
task.
To perform this task2, we used KMS to parse and
process the sentences (where each sentence was
treated as a ?text?). We made a slight modification to
our system to enable to identify the applicable frame
and to keep track of the target word. We also created
a special dictionary for FrameNet frames. This
dictionary was put into an XML file and consisted
only of the frame name, the frame elements, the type
of frame element (a classification used by FrameNet
as ?core?, ?peripheral?, or ?extra-thematic?), and a
characterization or ?definition? of the frame element.
?Definitions? of frame elements were written as
specifications for the type of syntactic constituent
that was expected to instantiate a frame element in a
sentence. Thus, for frames usually associated with
verbs, a specification for a frame element might be
?subject? or ?object?. More generally, many frame
elements specified ?prepositional phrases? headed by
one of a set of prepositions (such as ?about? or
?with?). The basic structure of the FrameNet
dictionary was created automatically. The
specifications for each frame element was created
manually after inspecting the training set for only the
40 frames in the task (which we had processed to
show what frame elements had been identified for
2Note that, again, although CL Research ran this task,
and we had access to the test data beforehand, we did
not actually work with the data until the date indicated
for other participants to download and work with the
data prior to submission. We used only the training
data for development of our system. Our participation
in this task was exploratory in nature, designed to
examine the feasibility and issues involved in
integrating frame semantics into KMS. This involves
development of processing routines and examination of
methods for including frame elements in our XML
representation.
each sentence).
To process the test data and create answers, we
first parsed and processed each sentence with KMS
to create an XML representation using the full set of
tags and attributes normally generated. Then, we
used the applicable FrameNet ?definition? for the
frame, the XML representation of the sentence, and
the identification of the target word. We iterated
through the frame elements and if we had a
specification for that element, we used this
specification to create an XPath expression used to
query the XML representation of the sentence to
determine if the sentence contained a constituent of
the desired type. If a frame element was labeled as a
?core? element for the frame, but no constituent was
identified, KMS treated this a ?null? instantiation
(i.e., a situation where linguistic principles allow
frame elements to be omitted within a sentence). Each
frame element identified in the sentence was
appended to a growing list and the full list was
returned as the set of labeled semantic roles for the
sentence.
Our results for this task are shown in Table 5.
Precision and recall reflect standard measures of how
well we were able to identify frame elements. The
low recall is a reflection of the small percentage of
items attempted. The overlap indicates how well we
were able to identify the beginning and ending
positions of the constituents we identified.
Table 5. Automatic Labeling of Semantic Roles 
Items Precision Overlap Recall Attempted
16279 0.583 0.480 0.111 19.0
Our poor results stem in large part from only a
cursory development of our FrameNet dictionary. We
only created substantial entries for 16 of the 40
frames, minimal entries for another 11, and no
detailed specifications at all for the remaining 13.
The minimal entries were created on the basis of
frame elements with the same name (such as time,
manner, and duration), which appear in more than
one frame. In addition, our method of specification is
still somewhat limiting. For example, in frames
associated with both nouns and verbs, our method
only permitted us to specify the subject or object for
a verb and not also a prepositional phrase following
a noun. Another deficiency of our system was seen in
cases where a long constituent (such as a noun phrase
with multiple attached prepositional phrases) was
required. Notwithstanding, with only a limited time
for development, we able to obtain substantial
results, suggesting that simple methods may plausibly
be used for a large percentage of cases.
It appears that most participants in this task used
statistical methods in training their systems and
achieved results better than those obtained by Gildea
& Jurafsky. It is possible that these improved results
stem from the much larger corpus available in
FrameNet 1.1. These results suggest the possibility
that it may be feasible and more appropriate to
include statistical bases for identifying frame
elements in KMS.
Conclusions
In participating in four tasks of SENSEVAL-3, we
examined several aspects of disambiguation within
the framework of massive tagging of text with
syntactic, semantic, and discourse characterizations
and attributes. We established basic mechanisms for
integrating disambiguation and representational
procedures into a larger text processing and analysis
system. Our results further demonstrated difficulties
in using the WordNet sense inventory, but have
further illuminated a number of important issues in
disambiguation and representation. At the same time,
we have identified a significant number of
shortcomings in our system, but with considerable
opportunities for further refinement and development.
References
Gildea, Daniel, and Daniel Jurafsky. Automatic Labeling
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 28 (3),
245-288.
Johnson, Christopher; Miriam Petruck, Collin Baker,
Michael Ellsworth, Josef Ruppenhofer, and Charles
Fillmore, (2003). FrameNet: Theory and Practice.
Berkeley, California.
Litkowski, K. C. (2001, 5-6 July). Use of Machine-
Readable Dictionaries for Word-Sense Disambiguation
in SENSEVAL-2. Proceedings of SENSEVAL-2: 2nd
International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense
Disambiguation Systems. Toulouse, France, pp. 107-
110.
Litkowski, K. C. (2002, 11 July). Sense Information for
Disambiguation: Confluence of Supervised and
Unsupervised Methods. Word Sense Disambiguation:
Recent Successes and Future Directions. Philadelphia,
PA, pp. 47-53.
Litkowski, Kenneth. C. (2004a). Use of Metadata for
Question Answering and Novelty Tasks. In E. M.
Voorhees & L. P. Buckland (eds.), The Twelfth Text
Retrieval Conference (TREC 2003). (In press.)
Litkowski, Kenneth. C. (2004b). Summarization
Experiments in DUC 2004. (In press.)
Mihalcea, Rada and Dan Moldovan. (2001). EXtended
WordNet: Progress Report. In: WordNet and Other
Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions, and
Customizations. NAACL 2001 SIGLEX Workshop.
Pittsburgh, PA.: Association for Computational
Linguistics.
