Speech Graffiti habitability: What do users really say?                                 
Stefanie Tomko and Roni Rosenfeld 
Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh PA 15213 
{stef, roni}@cs.cmu.edu 
 
Abstract 
The Speech Graffiti interface is designed to be 
a portable, transparent interface for spoken 
language interaction with simple machines 
and information servers. Because it is a subset 
language, users must learn and adhere to the 
constraints of the language. We conducted a 
user study to determine habitability and found 
that more than 80% of utterances were Speech 
Graffiti-grammatical, suggesting that the lan-
guage is acceptably learnable and usable for 
most users. We also analyzed deviations from 
grammaticality and found that natural lan-
guage input accounted for the most deviations 
from Speech Graffiti. The results will suggest 
changes to the interface and can also inform 
design choices in other speech interfaces. 
1 Introduction 
Speech Graffiti (a.k.a. the Universal Speech Interface 
project) is an attempt to create a standardized, speech-
based interface for interacting with simple machines and 
information servers. Such standardization offers several 
benefits, including domain portability, lower speech 
recognition error rates and increased system transpar-
ency for users (Rosenfeld et al, 2001). This is realized 
via a subset language that must be learned and remem-
bered by users.  
This study was designed to assess habitability by 
measuring Speech Graffiti-grammaticality: how often 
do users actually speak within the subset grammar when 
interacting with a Speech Graffiti system? A high level 
of grammaticality would suggest that the language is 
reasonably habitable, while low grammaticality would 
indicate that the language design requires substantial 
changes.  
1.1 Speech Graffiti basics  
Speech Graffiti interfaces comprise a small set of stan-
dard rules and keywords that can be used in all Speech 
Graffiti applications. The rules are principles governing 
the regularities in the interaction, such as ?input is al-
ways provided in phrases with the syntax ?slot is 
value?? and ?the system will tersely paraphrase what-
ever part of the input it understood.? The keywords are 
designed to provide regular mechanisms for performing 
interaction universals such as help, orientation, naviga-
tion and error correction.  
By standardizing user input, Speech Graffiti aims to 
reduce the negative effects of variability on system 
complexity and recognition performance. At the same 
time, we hope that introducing a universal structure that 
is intended to be used with many different applications 
will mitigate any negative effects that might be other-
wise associated with learning an application-specific 
command language.  
1.2 Related work 
Although several studies have previously explored the 
usage of constrained or subset languages (for example, 
Hendler & Michaelis, 1983; Guindon & Shuldberg, 
1987; Ringle & Halstead-Nussloch, 1989; Sidner & 
Forlines, 2002), they have generally been concerned 
with performance effects such as task completion rates. 
Sidner & Forlines (2002) reported a ?correct utterance? 
rate of approximately 60-80% for their user studies, 
although this was not a main focus of their work. While 
we understand the focus on such performance measures, 
we believe that it is also important to understand how 
habitable the constrained language is for users, in what 
ways users deviate from it, and what impact habitability 
has on user satisfaction.  
2 Method 
Our data was generated from a user study in which par-
ticipants were asked to complete tasks using both a 
Speech Graffiti interface to a telephone-based movie 
information system (MovieLine) and a natural language 
interface to the same data. Tasks were designed to have 
the participants explore a variety of the functions of the 
systems (e.g. ?list what?s playing at the Squirrel Hill 
Theater? and ?find out & write down what the ratings 
are for the movies showing at the Oaks Theater?).  
After interacting with each system, each participant 
completed a user satisfaction questionnaire rating 34 
subjective-response items on a 7-point Likert scale. This 
questionnaire was based on the Subjective Assessment 
Figure 1. Grammaticality and user satis-
faction for Speech Graffiti MovieLine. 
of Speech System Interfaces (SASSI) project (Hone & 
Graham, 2001) and included statements such as ?I al-
ways knew what to say to the system? and ?the system 
makes few errors.? An overall user satisfaction rating 
was calculated for each user by averaging that user?s 
scores for each of the 34 response items. Users were 
also asked a few comparison questions, including sys-
tem preference. In this analysis we were only concerned 
with results from the Speech Graffiti MovieLine 
interactions and not the natural language MovieLine 
interactions (see Tomko & Rosenfeld, 2004). System 
presentation order was balanced and had no significant 
effect on grammaticality measures. 
2.1 Participants 
Twenty-three participants (12 female, 11 male) accessed 
the systems via telephone in our lab. Most were under-
graduate students from Carnegie Mellon University and 
all were native speakers of American English. We also 
asked users whether they considered themselves ?com-
puter science or engineering people? (CSE) and how 
often they did computer programming; the distributions 
of these categories were roughly equal. 
2.2 Training 
The Speech Graffiti approach requires users to learn the 
system prior to using it via a brief tutorial session. 15 
participants received unsupervised Speech Graffiti train-
ing consisting of a self-directed, web-based tutorial that 
presented sample dialog excerpts (in text) and proposed 
example tasks to the user. The other eight participants 
received supervised Speech Graffiti training. This train-
ing used the same web-based foundation as the unsu-
pervised version, but participants were encouraged to 
ask the experimenter questions if they were unsure of 
anything during the training session.  
Both supervised and unsupervised training sessions 
were balanced between web-based tutorials that used 
examples from the MovieLine and from a FlightLine 
system that provided simulated flight arrival, departure, 
and gate information. This enabled us to make an initial 
assessment of the effects of in-domain training.  
2.3 Analysis 
The user study generated 4062 Speech Graffiti Movie-
Line utterances, where an utterance is defined as one 
chunk of speech input sent to our Sphinx II speech rec-
ognizer (Huang et al, 1993). We removed all utterances 
containing non-task-related or unintelligible speech, or 
excessive noise or feed, resulting in a cleaned set of 
3626 utterances (89% of the total). We defined an utter-
ance to be grammatical if the Phoenix parser (Ward, 
1990) used by the system returns a complete parse with 
no extraneous words. 
3 Results 
82% (2987) of the utterances from the cleaned set were 
fully Speech Graffiti-grammatical. For individual users, 
grammaticality ranged from 41.1% to 98.6%, with a 
mean of 80.5% and a median of 87.4%. These averages 
are quite high, indicating that most users were able to 
learn and use Speech Graffiti reasonably well.  
The lowest individual grammaticality scores be-
longed to four of the six participants who preferred the 
natural language MovieLine interface to the Speech 
Graffiti one, which suggests that proficiency with the 
language is very important for its acceptance. Indeed, 
we found a moderate, significant correlation between 
grammaticality and user satisfaction, as shown in Fig. 1 
(r = 0.60, p < 0.01). We found no similar correlation for 
the natural language interface, using a strict definition 
of grammaticality. 
Users? grammaticality tended to increase over time. 
For each subject, we compared the grammaticality of 
utterances from the first half of their session with that of 
utterances in the second half. All but four participants 
increased their grammaticality in the second half of their 
Speech Graffiti session, with an average relative im-
provement of 12.4%. A REML analysis showed this 
difference to be significant, F = 7.54, p < 0.02. Only one 
of the users who exhibited a decrease in grammaticality 
over time was from the group that preferred the natural 
language interface. However, although members of that 
that group did tend to increase their grammaticality later 
in their interactions, none of their second-half gram-
maticality scores were above 80%. 
Summary by training and system preference. No 
significant effects on Speech Graffiti-grammaticality 
were found due to differences in CSE background, pro-
gramming experience, training supervision or training 
domain. This last point suggests that it may not be nec-
essary to design in-domain Speech Graffiti tutorials; 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25%
endpo int
plural + options
subject-verb agreement
missing is/are
value + options
time syntax
more syntax
disfluency
slo t-value mismatch
value only 
keyword problem
out-o f-vocabulary word
slot only
general syntax
portion of all ungrammaticalities
Figure 2. Distribution of ungrammatical
utterances by type. 
instead, a single training application could be devel-
oped. The six users who preferred the natural language 
MovieLine generated 45.4% of the ungrammaticalities, 
further supporting the idea of language proficiency as a 
major factor for system acceptance.  
3.1 Deviations from grammar  
To help determine how users can be encouraged to 
speak within the grammar, we analyzed the ways in 
which they deviated from it in this experiment. We 
identified 14 general types of deviations from the gram-
mar; Fig. 2 shows the distribution of each type. Four 
trivial deviation types (lighter bars in Fig. 2) that 
resulted from unintentional holes in our grammar cover-
age comprised about 20% of the ungrammaticalities. 
When these trivial deviations are counted as grammati-
cal, mean grammaticality rises to 85.5% and the median 
to 91.3%. However, we have not removed the trivial 
ungrammaticalities from our overall analysis since they 
are likely to have resulted in errors that may have af-
fected user satisfaction. Each of the ten other deviation 
types is discussed in further detail in the sections below.  
General natural language syntax, 20.6%: Speech 
Graffiti requires input to have a slot is value phrase syn-
tax for specifying and querying information. The most 
common type of deviation in the Speech Graffiti utter-
ances involved a natural language (NL) deviation from 
this standard phrase syntax. For example, a correctly 
constructed Speech Graffiti query to find movie times at 
a theater might be theater is Galleria, title is Sweet Home 
Alabama, what are the show times? For errors in this cate-
gory, users would instead make more NL-style queries, 
like when is Austin Powers playing at Showcase West?  
Slot only, 14.6%: In these cases, users stated a slot 
name without an accompanying value or query words. 
For example, a user might attempt to ask about a slot 
without using what, as in title is Abandon, show times. In 
about a third of slot-only instances, the ungrammatical 
input appeared to be an artifact of the options function, 
which lists slots that users can talk about at any given 
point; users would just repeat back a slot name without 
adding a value, confirming Brennan?s (1996) findings of 
lexical entrainment. 
Out-of-vocabulary word, 14.0%: These were often 
movie titles that were not included in the database or 
synonyms for Speech Graffiti-grammatical concepts 
(e.g. category instead of genre).    
Keyword problem, 8.1%: Participants used a key-
word that was not part of the system (e.g. clear) or they 
used an existing keyword incorrectly.   
Value only, 6.7%: Users specified a value (e.g. 
comedy) without an accompanying slot name. 
Slot-value mismatch, 5.1%: Users paired slots and 
values that did not belong together. This often occurred 
when participants were working on tasks involving lo-
cating movies in a certain neighborhood. For instance, 
instead of stating area is Monroeville, users would say 
theater is Monroeville. Since the input is actually in the 
correct slot is value format, this type of ungrammaticality 
could perhaps be considered more of a disfluency than a 
true habitability problem.  
Disfluency, 4.3%: This category includes utterances 
where the parser failed because of disfluent speech, 
usually repeated words. 81% of the utterances in this 
category were indeed grammatical when stripped of 
their disfluencies, but we prefer to leave this category as 
a component of the non-trivial deviations in order to 
account for the unpredictable disfluencies that will al-
ways occur in interactions. 
More syntax, 4.0%: This is are a special case of a 
keyword problem in which participants misused the 
keyword more by pairing it with a slot name (e.g. theater, 
more) rather than using it to navigate through a list. 
Time syntax, 1.3%: In this special case of natural 
language syntax ungrammaticality, users created time 
queries that were initially well-formed but which had 
time modifiers appended to the end, as in what are show 
times after seven o?clock? 
Value + options, 1.1%: In grammatical usage, the 
keyword options can be used either independently (to get 
a list of all available slots) or paired with a slot (to get a 
list of all appropriate values for that slot). In a few 
cases, users instead used options with a value, as in Squir-
rel Hill options. 
4 Discussion 
We have shown a significant correlation between 
grammaticality and user satisfaction for the Speech 
Graffiti system. Grammaticality scores were generally 
high and tended to increase over time, demonstrating 
that the system is acceptably habitable.  
Based on the data shown in Fig.1, it appears that 
80% is a good target for Speech Graffiti grammaticality. 
Nearly all participants with grammaticality scores over 
80% gave positive (i.e. > 4) user satisfaction scores, and 
more than half of our users achieved this level. Fur-
thermore, users with grammaticality above 80% com-
pleted an average of 6.9 tasks, while users with 
grammaticality below 80% completed an average of 
only 3.5 tasks. A fundamental question for our future 
work is ?what can we do to help everyone speak within 
the bounds of the system at the 80% level??  
Several possible refinements are immediately appar-
ent beyond fixing our trivial grammar problems. System 
responses to options should be reworked to reduce incor-
rect lexical entrainment and alleviate slot-only devia-
tions. The out-of-vocabulary instances can be analyzed 
to decide whether certain synonyms should be added to 
the current system, although this will generate only do-
main-specific improvements. Many ungrammaticality 
types can also be addressed through refinements to 
Speech Graffiti?s help and tutorial functions. 
Addressing the general NL syntax category poses 
the biggest problem. Although it is responsible for the 
largest portion of ungrammaticalities, simply changing 
the grammar to accommodate these variations would 
likely lead to increased system complexity. A main con-
cern of our work is domain portability, and Speech 
Graffiti?s standard structure currently allows for fairly 
rapid creation of new interfaces (Toth et al, 2002). Any 
natural language expansion of Speech Graffiti grammar 
will have to be balanced with the ability to port such a 
grammar to all domains. We are currently analyzing the 
ungrammatical utterances in this and the time syntax 
categories to determine whether any Speech Graffiti-
consistent modifications could be made to the interface. 
However, most of the improvement in this area will 
likely have to be generated via better help and training. 
An important additional finding from this work is 
the scope of general NL syntax deviations. Considering 
items like movie and theater names as equivalence class 
members, the NL utterances used by participants in the 
Speech Graffiti system reduced to 94 patterns. In com-
parison, the NL utterances used by participants in the 
natural language MovieLine reduced to about 580 pat-
terns. One of the main differences between the NL pat-
terns in the two systems was the lack of conversational 
phrases like ?can you give me?? and ?I would like to 
hear about?? in the Speech Graffiti system. Thus the 
knowledge that they are interacting with a restricted 
language system seems to be enough to make users 
speak more simply, matching results from Ringle & 
Halstead-Nussloch (1989).  
Although many of our ungrammaticality types may 
appear to be specific to Speech Graffiti, they reinforce 
lessons applicable to most speech interfaces. The slot-
only issue demonstrates that lexical entrainment truly is 
a factor in spoken language interfaces and its effects 
should not be underestimated. Out-of-vocabulary words 
are a persistent problem, and keywords should be cho-
sen with care to ensure that they are task-appropriate 
and that their functions are as intuitive as possible.   
Overall, this study has provided us with a target 
level for Speech Graffiti-grammaticality, suggested 
changes to the language and provided insight about 
what aspects of the system might need greater support 
through help and tutorial functions. We plan to imple-
ment changes based on these results and re-evaluate the 
system through further user testing. 
References 
Brennan, S.E. 1996. Lexical entrainment in spontaneous 
dialog. In Proceedings of the International Sympo-
sium on Spoken Dialogue, pp. 41-44. 
Guindon, R. & Shuldberg, K. 1987. Grammatical and 
ungrammatical structures in user-adviser dialogues: 
evidence for sufficiency of restricted languages in 
natural language interfaces to advisory systems. In 
Proc. of the Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 41-44. 
Hendler, J. A. & Michaelis, P. R. 1983. The Effects of 
Limited Grammar On Interactive Natural Language. 
In Proceedings of CHI, pp. 190-192. 
Hone, K. & Graham, R. 2001. Subjective Assessment of 
Speech-System Interface Usability. In Proceedings of 
Eurospeech, Aalborg, Denmark. 
Huang, X., Alleva, F., Hon, H.W., Hwang, M.Y., Lee, 
K.F. & Rosenfeld, R. 1993. The Sphinx-II Speech 
Recognition System: An Overview. Computer, 
Speech and Language, 7(2):137-148. 
Ringle, M.D. & Halstead-Nussloch, R. 1989. Shaping 
user input: a strategy for natural language design. In-
teracting with Computers 1(3):227-244 
Rosenfeld, R., Olsen, D. & Rudnicky, A. 2001. Univer-
sal Speech Interfaces. Interactions, 8(6):34-44.  
Sidner, C. & Forlines, C. 2002. Subset Languages for 
Conversing with Collaborative Interface Agents. In 
Proc. of ICSLP, Denver CO, pp. 281-284. 
Tomko, S. & Rosenfeld, R. 2004. Speech Graffiti vs. 
Natural Language: Assessing the User Experience. 
To be published in Proc. of HLT/NAACL. 
Toth, A., Harris, T., Sanders, J., Shriver, S. & Rosen-
feld, R. 2002. Towards Every-Citizen's Speech Inter-
face: An Application Generator for Speech Interfaces 
to Databases. In Proc. of  ICSLP, Denver, CO. 
Ward, W. 1990. The CMU Air Travel Information Ser-
vice: Understanding Spontaneous Speech. In Proc. of 
the DARPA Speech and Language Workshop. 
