JMdict: a Japanese-Multilingual Dictionary 
James BREEN 
Monash University 
Clayton 3800, Australia 
jwb@csse.monash.edu.au 
 
Abstract  
The JMdict project has at its aim the 
compilation of a multilingual lexical 
database with Japanese as the pivot 
language. Using an XML structure designed 
to cater for a mix of languages and a rich set 
of lexicographic information, it has reached 
a size of approximately 100,000 entries, 
with most entries having translations in 
English, French and German. The 
compilation involves information re-use, 
with the French and German translations 
being drawn from separately maintained 
lexicons. Material from other languages is 
also being included. The file is freely 
available for research purposes and for 
incorporation in dictionary application 
software, and is available in several WWW 
server systems.  
1 Introduction  
The JMdict project has as its primary goal 
the compilation of a Japanese-multilingual 
dictionary, i.e. a dictionary in which the 
headwords are from the Japanese lexicon, 
and the translations are in several other 
languages. It may be viewed as a synthesis 
of a series of Japanese-Other Language 
bilingual dictionaries, although, as discussed 
below, there is merit in having this 
information collocated.  
The project grew out of, and has now 
subsumed, an earlier Japanese-English 
dictionary project (EDICT: Electronic 
Dictionary) (Breen, 1995, 2004a). With 
Japanese being an important language in 
world trade, and with it being the second 
most common language used on the WWW, 
it is not surprising that there is considerable 
interest in electronic lexical resources for 
Japanese in combination with other 
languages.  
2 Project Goals and Development  
As mentioned above, the JMdict project 
grew out of the bilingual EDICT dictionary 
project. The EDICT project began in the 
early 1990s with a relatively simple goal of 
producing a Japanese-English dictionary file 
that could be used in basic software 
packages to provide traditional dictionary 
services, as well as facilities to assist reading 
Japanese text. The format was (and is) quite 
simple, comprising lines of text consisting 
of a Japanese word written using kanji 
and/or kana, the reading (pronunciation) of 
that word in kana, and one or more English 
translations.  
By the late 1990s, the file had outgrown its 
humble origins, having reached over 50,000 
entries, and having spun off a parallel 
project for recording Japanese proper nouns 
(see below). The material has partly been 
drawn from word lists, vocabulary lists, etc. 
in the public domain, and supplemented by 
material prepared by large numbers of users 
and other volunteers wishing to contribute. 
While it had been used in a variety of 
software systems, and as a source of lexical 
material in a number of projects, it was clear 
that its structure was quite inadequate for the 
lexical demands being made by users. In 
particular, it was not able to incorporate a 
suitable variety of information, nor represent 
the orthographical complexities of the 
source language. Accordingly, in 1999 it 
was decided to launch a new dictionary 
project incorporating the information from 
the EDICT file, but expanded to include 
translations from other languages with the 
Japanese entries remaining as the pivots. 
The project goals were:  
a. a file format, preferably using a 
recognized standard, which would enable 
ready access and parsing by a variety of 
software applications;  
b. the handling of orthographical and 
pronunciation variation within the single 
entry. This addressed a major problem with 
the EDICT format, as many Japanese words 
can be written with alternative kanji and 
with varying portions in kana (okurigana), 
and may have alternative pronunciations. 
The EDICT format required each variant to 
be treated as a separate entry, which added 
to the complexity of maintaining and 
extending the dictionary;  
c. additional and more appropriately 
associated tagging of grammatical and other 
information. Certain information such as the 
part of speech or the source language of loan 
words had been added to the EDICT file in 
parentheses within the translation fields, but 
the scope was limited and the information 
could not easily be parsed;  
d. provision for differentiation 
between different senses in the translations. 
While basic indication of polysemy had 
been provided in the EDICT file by 
prepending (1), (2), etc. to groups of 
translations, the result was difficult to parse. 
Also it did not support the case where a 
sense or nuance was tied to a particular 
pronunciation, as occurs occasionally in 
Japanese;  
e. provision for the inclusion of 
translational equivalents from several 
languages. The EDICT dictionary file was 
being used in a number of countries, and 
several informal projects had begun to 
develop equivalent files for Japanese and 
other target languages. A small Japanese-
German file (JDDICT) had been released in 
the EDICT format. There was considerable 
interest expressed in having translations in 
various languages collocated to enable such 
things as having a single reference file for 
several languages, cross-referencing of 
entries, cross-language retrieval, etc. as well 
as acting as a focus for the possible 
development of translations for as yet 
unrepresented languages;  
f. provision for inclusion of examples 
of the usage of words. As the file expanded, 
many users of the file requested some form 
of usage examples to be associated with the 
words in the file. The EDICT format was 
not capable of supporting this;  
g. provision for cross-references to 
related entries;  
h. continued generation of EDICT-
format files. As a large number of packages 
and servers had been built around the 
EDICT format, continued provision of 
content in this format was considered 
important, even if the information only 
contained a sub-set of what was available.  
An early decision was to use XML 
(Extensible Markup Language) as a format 
for the JMdict file, as this was expected to 
provide the appropriate flexibility in format, 
and was also expected to be supported by 
applications, parsing libraries, etc.  
An examination was made of other available 
dictionary formats to ascertain if a suitable 
formatting model was available. It was 
known that commercial dictionary 
publishers has well-structured databases of 
lexical information, and some were moving 
to XML, but none of the details were 
available. A large number of bilingual 
dictionary files and word lists were in the 
public domain; however in general they only 
used very simple structures, and none could 
be found which covered all the content 
requirements of the project. The dictionary 
section of the TEI (Text Encoding 
Initiative), which at the time of writing has a 
well-developed document structure for 
bilingual dictionaries, was at that stage quite 
limited (Sperberg-McQueen et al 1999). 
Accordingly, an XML DTD (Document 
Type Definition) was developed which was 
tailored to the requirements of the project.  
The EDICT file was parsed and reformatted 
into the JMdict structure, and at the same 
time, many of the orthographical variants 
were identified and merged. The initial 
release of the DTD and XML-format file 
took place in May 1999. At that stage, it 
contained the English translations from the 
EDICT file and the German translations 
from the JDDICT file. As described below, 
it has been expanded considerably since 
then, both in terms of number of entries and 
also in multi-lingual coverage.  
3 Project Status  
The JMdict file was first released in 1999, 
and updated versions are released 3-4 times 
each year along with versions of the EDICT 
file, which is generated at the same time 
from the same data files. The file now has 
over 99,300 entries, i.e. the size of a 
medium-large printed dictionary, and the 
growth in numbers of entries is now 
relatively slow, with most updates dealing 
with corrections and expansion of existing 
entries.  
The file is available under a liberal licence 
that allows its use for almost any purpose 
without fee. The only requirement is that its 
use be fully acknowledged and that any files 
developed from it continue under the same 
licence conditions.  
4 Structure  
The JMdict XML structure contains one 
element type: <entry>, which in turn 
contains sequence number, kanji word, kana 
word, information and translation elements. 
The sequence number is used for 
maintenance and identification.  
The kanji word and kana word elements 
contain the two forms of the Japanese 
headwords; the former is used for 
representations containing at least one kanji 
character, while the latter is for 
representations in kana alone. The kana 
word is effectively the pronunciation, but is 
also an important key for indexing the 
dictionary file, as Japanese dictionaries are 
usually ordered by kana words. The 
minimum content of these fields is a single 
word in the kana word element. In addition, 
each entry may contain information about 
the words (unusual orthographical variant, 
archaic kanji, etc.) and frequency of use 
information. The latter needs to be 
associated with the actual words rather than 
the entry as a whole because some 
combinations of kanji and kana words are 
used more frequently than others. (For 
example, ??? and ??? are 
orthographical variants of the one word 
(aikid?), but the former is more common.)  
The kana used in the elements follows 
modern Japanese orthography, i.e. hiragana 
is used for native Japanese words, and 
katakana for loan words, onomatopoeic 
words, etc.  
In most cases an entry has just one kanji and 
one kana word (approx. 75%), or one kana 
word alone (15%). In about 10% of entries 
there are multiple words in one of the 
elements. In some cases a kana reading can 
only be associated with a subset of the kanji 
words in the entry. For example, soyokaze 
(????: breeze) can be written either 
?? or ??? (the latter is more common 
as ?? is a non-standard reading of the ? 
kanji). However ?? can also be 
pronounced bifuu (???) with the same 
meaning, but clearly this pronunciation 
cannot be associated with the ??? form, 
as the kana portion is read "soyo". XML 
does not provide an elegant method for 
indicating a restricted mapping between 
portions of two elements, so when such a 
restriction is required, additional tags are 
used with each kana word supplying the 
kanji word with which it may be validly 
associated.  
The information element contains general 
information about the Japanese word or the 
entry as a whole. The contents allow for 
ISO-639 source language codes (for loan 
words), dialect codes, etymology, 
bibliographic information and update 
details.  
The translation area consists of one or more 
sense elements that contain at a minimum a 
single gloss. Associated with each sense is a 
set of elements containing part of speech, 
cross-reference, synonym/antonym, usage, 
etc. information. Also associated with the 
sense may be restriction codes tying the 
sense to a subset of the Japanese words. For 
example, ?? can be pronounced suiki 
(???) and mizuge (???); both 
meaning "moisture", but the former alone 
can also mean "dropsy".  
The gloss element has an attribute stating 
the target language of the translation. In its 
absence it is assumed the gloss is in English. 
There is also an attribute stating the gender, 
if for example, the part-of-speech is a noun 
and the gloss is in a language with gendered 
nouns. Figure 1 shows a slightly simplified 
example of an entry. The <ke_pri> and 
<re_pri> elements indicate the word is a 
member of a particular set of common 
words.  
<entry> 
<ent_seq>1206730</ent_seq> 
<k_ele> 
<keb>??</keb> 
<ke_pri>ichi1</ke_pri> 
</k_ele> 
<r_ele> 
<reb>????</reb> 
<re_pri>ichi1</re_pri> 
</r_ele> 
<sense> 
<pos>&n;</pos> 
<gloss>school</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="nl" g_gend="fg">school</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="fr" g_gend="fg">?cole</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="ru" g_gend="fg">?????</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="de" g_gend="fg">Schule</gloss> 
<gloss g_lang="de" 
g_gend="fg">Lehranstalt</gloss> 
</sense> 
</entry> 
Fig. 1: Example JMdict entry  
The potential to have multiple kanji and 
kana words within an entry brings attention 
to the issues of homonymy, homography 
and polysemy, and the policies for handling 
these, in particular the criteria for combining 
kanji and kana words into a single entry. As 
Japanese has a comparatively limited set of 
phonemes there are a large number of 
homophonous words. For example, over 
twenty different words have the kana 
representation ????? (k?j?). If we 
regard homography as only applying to 
words written wholly or partly with kanji, 
there are relatively few cases of it, however 
they do exist, e.g. ?? when read 
????? (senry?) means a comic poem, 
but when read ????? (kawayanagi) 
means a variety of willow tree.  
The combining rule that has been applied in 
the compilation of the JMdict file is as 
follows:  
a. treat each basic entry as a triplet 
consisting of: kanji representation, matching 
kana representation, senses;  
b. if for any basic entries two or more 
members of the triplet are the same, 
combine them into the one entry;  
i. if the entries differ in kanji 
or kana representation, include these 
as alternative forms;  
ii. if the entries differ in sense, 
treat as a case of polysemy;  
c. in other cases leave the entries 
separate.  
This rule has been applied successfully in a 
majority of cases. The main problems arise 
where the meanings are similar or related, as 
in the case of the entries: (??, ???, to 
separate; to set free; to turn loose) and 
(??, ???, to part; to divide; to 
separate), where the kana words are the 
same and the meanings overlap. Japanese 
dictionaries are divided on ?? and ??; 
some keeping them as separate entries, and 
others having them as the one entry with two 
main senses. (The two words derive from a 
common source.)  
5 Parts of Speech and Related Issues  
As languages differ in their parts of speech 
(POS), the recording of those details in 
bilingual dictionaries can be a problem (Al-
Kasimi, 1977). Traditionally bilingual 
dictionaries involving Japanese avoid 
recording any POS information, leaving it to 
the user to deduce that information from the 
translation and examples (if any). In the 
early stages of the EDICT project, POS 
information was deliberately kept to a 
minimum, e.g. indicating where a verb was 
transitive or intransitive when this was not 
apparent from the translation, mainly to 
conserve storage space. As there are a 
number of advantages in having POS 
information marked in an electronic 
dictionary file, a POS element was included 
in the JMdict structure, and publicly 
available POS classifications were used to 
populate much of the file. About 30% of 
entries remain to be classified; mostly nouns 
or short noun phrases.  
In the interests of saving space an early 
decision had been made to avoid listing 
derived forms of words. For example, the 
Japanese adjective ?? (takai) meaning 
"high, tall, expensive" has derived forms of 
?? (takasa) "height" and ?? (takaku) 
"highly". As this process is very regular, 
many Japanese dictionaries do not carry 
entries for the derived forms, and some 
bilingual dictionaries follow suit. Another 
such example is the common verb form, 
sometimes called a "verbal noun", which is 
created by adding the verb ?? (suru) "to 
do" to appropriate nouns. The verb "to 
study" is ???? (benky?suru) where 
?? is a noun meaning "study" in this 
context. Again, Japanese dictionaries often 
do not include these forms as headwords, 
preferring to indicate in the body of an entry 
that the formation is possible.  
The omission of such derived forms means 
that care needs to be taken when 
constructing the translations so that the user 
is readily able to identify the appropriate 
translation of one of the derived forms.  
In a multilingual context, the omission of 
derived forms can have other problems. The 
recording of ?? verbs only in their noun 
base form has been reported to lead to some 
discomfort among German users, as German 
language orthographical convention 
capitalizes the first letters of nouns but not 
verbs (the WaDokuJT file has ?? verbs as 
separate entries for this reason).  
6 Inclusion and Maintenance of Multiple 
Languages  
As mentioned above, part of the interest in 
having entries with translations in a range of 
languages came from the compilation of a 
number of dictionary files based on or 
similar to the EDICT file. There are a 
number of issues associated with the 
inclusion of material from other dictionary 
files, in particular those relating to the 
compilation policies: coverage, handling of 
inflected forms, etc. (Breen, 2002) There is 
also the major issue of the editing and 
maintenance of the material, which has the 
potential to become more complex as each 
language is incorporated.  
The approach taken with JMdict has been to:  
a. maintain a core Japanese-English 
file with a well-documented structure and 
set of inclusion and editing policies;  
b. encourage the development and 
maintenance of equivalent files in other 
languages paired with Japanese, which can 
draw on the JMdict/EDICT material as 
required;  
c. periodically build the complete 
multi-lingual JMdict from the different 
components.  
This approach has proved successful in that 
it has separated the compilation of the file 
from the ongoing editing of the components, 
and has left the latter in the hands of those 
with the skills and motivation to perform the 
task.  
At the time of writing, the JMdict file has 
over 99,300 entries (Japanese and English), 
of which 83,500 have German translations, 
58,000 have French translations, 4,800 have 
Russian translations and 530 have Dutch 
translations. A set of approximately 4,500 
Spanish translations is being prepared, with 
the prospects that some 20,000 will be 
available shortly.  
The major sources of these additional 
translations are:  
a. French translations from two 
projects:  
i. approximately 17,500 
entries have come from the 
Dictionnaire fran?ais-japonais Project 
(Desperrier, 2002), a project to 
translate the most common Japanese 
words from the EDICT File into 
French;  
ii. a further 40,500 entries 
drawn from the ?????? 
(French-Japanese Complementation 
Project) at 
http://francais.sourceforge.jp/ (This 
project is also based on the EDICT 
file.)  
b. German translations from the 
WaDokuJT Project (Apel, 2002). This is a 
large file of over 300,000 entries; however, 
unlike JMdict it includes many phrases, 
proper nouns and inflected forms of verbs, 
etc. The overlap of coverage with JMdict is 
quite high, leading to the large number of 
entries that have been included in the JMdict 
file.  
One of the issues that can lead to problems 
when incorporating translations from other 
project files is that of aligning the 
translations when an entry has several 
senses. In the case of the French 
translations, the project coordinator has 
marked the translations of polysemous 
entries with a sense code, thus enabling the 
translations to be inserted correctly when 
compiling the final file. For other languages, 
the translations are being appended to the set 
English translations. The appropriate 
handling of multiple senses is an item of 
future work.  
7 Examples of Word Usage  
When the project was begun and the DTD 
designed, it was intended that sets of 
bilingual examples of usage of the entry 
words would be included. For this reason an 
<example> element was associated with 
each sense to allow for such example 
phrases, sentences, etc, to be included.  
In practice, a quite different approach has 
been taken. With the availability since 2001 
of a large corpus of parallel 
Japanese/English sentences (Tanaka, 2001), 
it was decided to keep the corpus intact, and 
instead provide for the association of 
selected sentences from the corpus with 
dictionary entries via dictionary application 
software (Breen, 2003b). This strategy, 
which required the corpus to be parsed to 
extract a set of index words for each 
sentence, has proved effective at the 
application level. It also has the advantage 
of decoupling the maintenance of the 
dictionary file from that of the example 
corpus.  
8 Related Projects  
Apart from a few small word lists involving 
several European languages, the only other 
major current project attempting to compile 
a comprehensive multilingual database is the 
Papillon project (e.g. Boitet et al 2002). See 
http://www.papillon-dictionary.org/ for a 
full list of publications. The Papillon design 
involves linkages based on word-senses as 
proposed in (S?rasset, 1994) with the finer 
lexical structure based on Meaning-Text 
Theory (MTT) (Mel'cuk, 1984-1996). At the 
time of writing the Papillon database is still 
in the process of being populated with 
lexical information.  
Closely related to the JMdict project is the 
Japanese-Multilingual Named Entity 
Dictionary (JMnedict) project. This is a 
database of some 400,000 Japanese place 
and person names, and non-Japanese names 
in their Japanese orthographical form, along 
with a romanized transcription of the 
Japanese (Breen, 2004b). Some 
geographical names have English 
descriptions: cape, island, etc. which are in 
the process of being extended to other 
languages. The JMnedict file is in an XML 
format with a similar structure to JMdict.  
Another multilingual lexical database is 
KANJIDIC2 (Breen, 2004c), which contains 
a wide range of information about the 
13,039 kanji in the JIS X 0208, JIS X 0212 
and JIS X 0213 character standards. Among 
the information for each kanji are the set of 
readings in Japanese, Chinese and Korean, 
and the broad meanings of each kanji in 
English, German and Spanish. A set of 
Portuguese meanings is being prepared. The 
database is in an XML format.  
9 Applications  
While there are a number of experimental 
systems using the JMdict file, the only 
application system using the full 
multilingual file at present is the Papillon 
project server. Figure 2 shows the display 
from that server when looking up the word 
??. The author's WWWJDIC server 
(Breen, 2003a) uses the Japanese-English 
components of the file. Figure 3 is an extract 
from the WWWJDIC display for the word 
??, which is an example of an entry with 
multiple kana words, and senses restricted 
by reading. (The (P) markers indicate the 
more common readings.)  
 
Fig. 2: Papillon example for ?? 
 
Fig. 3: WWWJDIC example for ?? 
The EDICT Japanese-English dictionary 
file, which is generated from the same 
database as the JMdict file, continues to be a 
major non-commercial Japanese-English 
lexical resource, and is used in a large 
number of applications and servers, as well 
as in a number of research projects.  
10 Conclusion  
The JMdict project has successfully 
developed a multilingual lexical database 
using Japanese as the pivot language. In 
doing so, it has reached a lexical coverage 
comparable to medium-large printed 
dictionaries, and its components are used in 
a wide range of applications and research 
projects. It has also demonstrated the 
potential for re-use of material from related 
and cooperating lexicon projects. The files 
of the JMdict project are readily available 
for use by researchers and developers, and 
have the potential to be a significant lexical 
resource in a multilingual context.  
References  
Al-Kasami, A.M. 1977 Linguistics and 
Bilingual Dictionaries, E.J. Brill, 
Leiden  
Apel, U. 2002. WaDokuJT - A Japanese-
German Dictionary Database, 
Papillon 2002 Seminar, NII, Tokyo  
Boitet, C, Mangeot-Lerebours, M, 
S?rasset, G. 2002 The PAPILLON 
project: cooperatively building a 
multilingual lexical data-base to 
derive open source dictionaries & 
lexicons, Proc. of the 2nd Workshop 
NLPXML 2002, Post COLING 2002 
Workshop, Ed. Wilcock, Ide & 
Romary, Taipei, Taiwan.  
Breen, J.W. 1995. Building an Electronic 
Japanese-English Dictionary, JSAA 
Conference, Brisbane.  
Breen, J.W. 2002. Practical Issues and 
Problems in Building a Multilingual 
Lexicon, Papillon 2002 Seminar, NII, 
Tokyo.  
Breen, J.W. 2003a. A WWW Japanese 
Dictionary, in "Language Teaching at 
the Crossroads", Monash Asia 
Institute, Monash Univ. Press.  
Breen, J.W. 2003b. Word Usage 
Examples in an Electronic 
Dictionary, Papillon 2003 Seminar, 
Sapporo.  
Breen, J.W. 2004a. The EDICT Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
edict.html  
Breen, J.W. 2004b. The 
ENAMDICT/JMnedict Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
enamdict_doc.html  
Breen, J.W. 2004c. The KANJIDIC2 
Project, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jwb/
kanjidic2/  
Desperrier, J-M. 2002. Analysis of the 
results of a collaborative project for 
the creation of a Japanese-French 
dictionary, Papillon 2002 Seminar, 
NII, Tokyo.  
Mel'cuk, I, et al 1984-1996. DEC: 
dictionnaire explicatif et 
combinatoire du fran?ais 
contemporain, recherches lexico-
s?mantiques, Vols I-IV, Montreal 
Univ. Press.  
S?rasset, G. 1994. SUBLIM: un Syst?me 
Universel de Bases Lexicales 
Multilingues et NADIA: sa 
sp?cialisation aux bases lexicales 
interlingues par acceptions, (Doctoral 
Thesis) Joseph Fourier University, 
Grenoble  
Sperberg-McQueen, C.M.. and Burnard, 
L. (eds.) 1999. Guidelines for 
Electronic Text Encoding and 
Interchange. Oxford Univ. Press.  
Tanaka, Y. 2001. Compilation of a 
Multilingual Parallel Corpus 
PACLING 2001, Japan.  
