Preliminary Lexical Framework for  
English-Arabic Semantic Resource Construction 
Anne R. Diekema 
Center for Natural Language Processing  
4-206 Center for Science & Technology 
Syracuse, NY, 13210 USA 
diekemar@syr.edu 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes preliminary work 
concerning the creation of a Framework to aid 
in lexical semantic resource construction. The 
Framework consists of 9 stages during which 
various lexical resources are collected, 
studied, and combined into a single 
combinatory lexical resource. To evaluate the 
general Framework it was applied to a small 
set of English and Arabic resources, 
automatically combining them into a single 
lexical knowledge base that can be used for 
query translation and disambiguation in Cross-
Language Information Retrieval. 
1 Introduction 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval (CLIR) 
systems facilitate matching between queries and 
documents that do not necessarily share the same 
language. To accomplish this matching between 
distinct vocabularies, a translation step is required. 
The preferred method is to translate the query 
language into the document language by using 
machine translation, or lexicon lookup. While 
machine translation may work reasonably well on 
full sentences, queries tend to be short lists of 
keywords, and are often more suited for lexical 
lookup (Oard and Diekema, 1998). 
 
This paper describes a preliminary framework 
for the creation of a lexical resource through the 
combination of other lexical resources. The 
preliminary Framework will be applied to create a 
translation lexicon for use in an English-Arabic 
CLIR system. The resulting lexicon will be used to 
translate English queries into (unvocalized) Arabic. 
It will also provide the user of the system with 
lexical semantic information about each of the 
possible translations to aid with disambiguation of 
the Arabic query. While the combination of lexical 
resources is nothing new, establishing a sound 
methodology for resource combination, as 
presented in this paper on English-Arabic semantic 
resource construction, is an important contribution. 
Once the Framework has been evaluated for 
English-Arabic resource construction, it can be 
extended to additional languages and resource 
types. 
2 Related Work 
2.1 Arabic-English dictionary combination 
As pointed out previously, translation plays an 
important role in CLIR. Most of the CLIR systems 
participating in the (Arabic) Cross-Language 
Information Retrieval track1 at the Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC)2 used a query translation 
dictionary-based approach where each source 
query term was looked up in the translation 
resource and replaced by all or a subset of the 
available translations to create the target query 
(Larkey, Ballesteros, and Connell, 2002), (Gey and 
Oard, 2001), (Oard and Gey, 2002). The four main 
sources of translation knowledge that have been 
applied to CLIR are ontologies, bilingual 
dictionaries, machine translation lexicons, and 
corpora. 
 
Research shows that combining translation 
resources increases CLIR performance (Larkey et 
al., 2002) Not only does this combination increase 
translation coverage, it also refines translation 
probability calculations. Chen and Gey  used a 
combination of dictionaries for query translation 
and compared retrieval performance of this 
dictionary combination with machine translation 
(Chen and Gey, 2001). The dictionaries 
outperformed MT. Small bilingual dictionaries 
were created by Larkey and Connell (2001) for 
place names and also inverted an Arabic-English 
dictionary to English-Arabic. They found that 
using dictionaries that have multiple senses, 
                                                   
1
 There have been two large scale Arabic information 
retrieval evaluations as part of TREC. These Arabic 
tracks took place in 2001, and 2002 and had 
approximately 10 participating teams each. 
2
 http://trec.nist.gov 
though not always correct, outperform bilingual 
term lists with only one translation alternative. 
Combining dictionaries is especially important 
when working with ambiguous languages such as 
Arabic. 
 
Many TREC teams used translation probabilities 
to deal with translation ambiguity and term 
weighting issues, especially since a translation 
lexicon with probabilities was provided as a 
standard resource. However, most teams combined 
translation probabilities from different sources and 
achieved better retrieval results that way (Xu, 
Fraser, and Weischedel, 2002), (Chowdhury et al, 
2002), (Darwish and Oard, 2002). Darwish and 
Oard (2002) posit that since there is no such thing 
as a complete translation resource one should 
always use a combination of resources and that 
translation probabilities will be more accurate if 
one uses more resources. 
2.2 Resource combination methodologies 
Ruiz (2000) uses the term lexical triangulation 
to describe the process of mapping a bilingual 
English-Chinese lexicon into an existing WordNet-
based Conceptual Interlingua by using translation 
evidence from multiple sources. Recall that 
WordNet synsets are formed by groups of terms 
with similar meaning (Miller, 1990). By translating 
each of the synonyms into Chinese, Ruiz created a 
frequency-ranked list of translations, and assumed 
that the most frequent translations were most likely 
to be correct. By establishing certain translation 
evidence thresholds, mappings of varying 
reliability were created. This method was later 
augmented with additional translation evidence 
from a Chinese-English parallel corpus. 
 
A methodology to improve query translation is 
described by Chen (2003). The methodology is 
intended to improve translation through the use of 
NLP techniques and the combining of the 
document collection, available translation 
resources, and transliteration techniques. A basic 
mapping was created between the Chinese terms 
from the collection and the English terms in 
WordNet by using a simple Chinese-English 
lexicon. Missing terms such as Named Entities 
were added through the process of transliteration. 
By customizing the translation resources to the 
document collection Chen showed an improvement 
in retrieval performance. 
3 Establishing a Preliminary Framework 
The preliminary Framework provides a 
methodology for the automatic combination of 
various lexical semantic resources such as machine 
readable dictionaries, ontologies, encyclopedias, 
and machine translation lexicons. While these 
individual resources are all valuable individually, 
automatic intelligent lexical combination into one 
single lexical knowledge base will provide an 
enhancement that is larger than the sum of its parts. 
The resulting resource will provide better 
coverage, more reliable translation probability 
information, and additional information leveraged 
through the process of lexical triangulation. In an 
initial evaluation of the preliminary Framework, it 
was applied to the combination of English and 
Arabic lexical resources as described in section 4. 
 
The preliminary Framework consists of 9 stages: 
1) establish goals 
2) collect resources 
3) create resource feature matrix 
4) develop evidence combination strategies 
and thresholds 
5) construct combinatory lexical resource 
6) manage problems that arise during creation 
7) evaluate combinatory lexical resource 
8) implement possible improvements 
9) create final version of combinatory lexical 
resource. 
 
Stage 1: The first stage of the Framework is 
intended to establish the possible usage of the 
combinatory lexical resource (resulting form the 
combination of multiple resources). The 
requirements of this resource will drive the second 
stage: resource collection.  
 
Stage 2: Two types of resources should be 
collected: language processing resources such as 
stemmers and tokenizers; and lexical semantic 
resources such as dictionaries and lexicons. While 
not every resource may seem particularly useful at 
first, different resources can aid in mapping other 
resources together. During the second stage, 
conversion into a single encoding (such as UTF-8) 
will also take place.  
 
Stage 3: Once a set of resources has been 
collected, the resource feature matrix can be 
created. This matrix provides an overview of the 
types of information found in the collected 
resources and of certain resource characteristics. 
For example, it is important to note what base form 
the dictionary entries have. Some dictionaries use 
the singular form (for nouns) or indefinite form 
(for verbs), some use roots, others use stems, and 
free resources from the web often use a 
combination of all of the above. By studying the 
feature matrix the evidence combination strategies 
for stage four can be developed. 
  
A
ra
bi
c 
En
gl
ish
 
w
o
rd
 
st
em
 
ro
o
t 
v
o
ca
liz
ed
 
u
n
v
o
ca
liz
ed
 
po
s 
En
gl
ish
 
de
fin
iti
o
n
 
A
ra
bi
c 
de
fin
iti
o
n
 
sy
n
o
n
ym
s 
se
n
se
 
in
fo
rm
at
io
n
 
Arabeyes x x x    x      
Ajeeb x x x   x  x  x  x 
Buckwalter x x  x  x x x x   x 
Gigaword x  x    x      
WordNet 2.0  x      x x  x x 
 
Table 1:  Resource feature matrix 
 
Stage 4: An intelligent resource combination 
strategy should be informed by the features of the 
different resources. It may be, for example, that 
one resource uses vocalized Arabic only and that 
another resource uses both vocalized and 
unvocalized Arabic. This fact should be taken into 
account by the combination strategy since the 
second resource can serve as an intermediary to 
map the first resource. Thresholding decisions are 
also part of stage four because the certainty of 
some combinations will be higher than others.  
 
Stage 5: Stage five involves writing programs 
based on the findings in stage four that will 
automatically create the combinatory lexical 
resource. The combination programs should 
provide output concerning problematic instances 
that occur during the creation i.e. words that only 
occur in a single resource, so that these problems 
may be handled by alternative strategies in stage 
six.  
 
Stage 6: Most of the problems in stage six are 
likely to be uncommon words, such as named 
entities or transliteration. A transliteration step, 
where for example English letters, i.e. r, are 
mapped to the closest Arabic sounding letters, i.e. 
 , may be applied for languages that do not share 
the same orthographies.  
 
Stage 7: After the initial combinatory lexical 
resource has been created it needs to be evaluated. 
First the accuracy (quality) of the combination 
mappings of the various resources needs to be 
assessed in an intrinsic evaluation. After it has 
been established that the combination has been 
successful, an extrinsic evaluation can be carried 
out. In this evaluation the combinatory lexical 
resource is tested as part of the actual application 
the source was intended for, i.e. CLIR. (For a more 
detailed description of evaluation see Section 5 
below.) 
 
Stage 8: These two evaluations will inform stage 
eight where possible improvements are added to 
the combination process.  
 
Stage 9: The final version of the combinatory 
lexical resource can be created in stage nine. 
4 Application of the Framework to English-
Arabic 
The preliminary Framework as described in 
section 3 was applied to five English and Arabic 
language resources as a kind of feasibility test. 
Following the Framework, we first established the 
goals of the combinatory lexical resource. It was 
determined that the resource would be used as a 
translation resource for CLIR that would aid query 
translation as well as manual translation 
disambiguation by the user. This meant that the 
combinatory lexical resource would need 
translation probabilities as well as English 
definitions for Arabic translations to enable an 
English language user to select the correct Arabic 
translation. We collected five different resources: 
WordNet 2.03, the lexicon included with the 
Buckwalter Stemmer4, translations mined from 
Ajeeb5, the wordlist from the Arabeyes project6, 
and the LDC Arabic Gigaword corpus7. After the 
resources were collected the feature matrix was 
developed (see Table 1). 
                                                   
3
 http://www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn 
4
 http://www.qamus.org 
5
 http://english.ajeeb.com 
6
 http://www.arabeyes.org 
7
 
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?cat
alogId=LDC2003T12 
The established combinatory lexical resource 
goals and resource feature matrix were used to 
determine the combination strategy. Since the 
resource should provide the user with definitions 
of Arabic words and WordNet is most 
comprehensive in this regard, it was selected as our 
base resource. The AFP newswire collection from 
the Gigaword corpus was used to mine Ajeeb. As 
is evident in the matrix, all resources contain 
English terms as a common denominator. The 
information used for evidence combination was as 
follows. Evidence used for mapping the Ajeeb and 
Buckwalter lexicons is part-of-speech information. 
Additionally, these two resources also provide 
vocalized Arabic terms/stems that can be used for a 
more reliable (less ambiguous) match. The 
Arabeyes lexicon is not terribly rich but was used 
as additional evidence for a certain translation 
through frequency weighting. The combinatory 
lexical resource was constructed by mapping the 
three lexical resources into WordNet using the 
evidence as discussed above (see Table 2).  
 
 
world, human race, humanity, humankind, human 
beings, humans, mankind, man, all of the 
inhabitants of the earth 
all of the inhabitants of the earth 
	



	

 !"#$#
%&'(&	)*&+%&(	,
-'.&/%&0-%&01&%&-2%3&4+%
+%5/1%./34./01
342,&,+0+
$1341034
6-,	-060%
    
 
Table 2: Combinatory lexical resource entry 
example resulting from Step 5 
 
 After examining the combinatory lexical 
resource we found that the Arabeyes Arabic terms 
could not be compared directly to the Arabic terms 
in the other lexical resources since the determiner 
prefixes are still attached to the terms (as in $ 
for example). More problematic were the 
translations mined from Ajeeb since the part-of-
speech information of the Arabic term did not 
necessarily match the part-of-speech of the 
translations: 
 
#VB#2.1.2# 	
#do_sentry_duty,keep_watch_over, 
guard,watchdog,oversee,sentinel, 
shield,watch,ward
 
  
The first problem is easily fixed by applying a 
light stemmer to the dictionary. At this point it is 
not clear however, how to fix the second problem. 
It was also decided that the translation reliability 
weighting by frequency is too limited to be useful. 
A back-translation lookup needs to determine how 
many other terms can result in a certain translation. 
This data can then update the reliability score. 
5 Comprehensive Evaluation 
While we only have carried out a preliminary 
evaluation, we envision a comprehensive 
evaluation in the near future. As part of this 
evaluation three different types of evaluation can 
be carried out:  
1) evaluate the process of applying the 
Framework;  
2) evaluate the combinatory lexical resource 
itself; and  
3) evaluate the contribution of the 
combinatory lexical resource to the 
application the resource was created for. 
 
Evaluation of the process of applying the 
Framework will provide evidence as to the 
advantages and disadvantages of our Framework, 
and where it may have to be adjusted. 
The construction of a Combinatory Lexical 
Resource by applying the Framework is the first 
step toward an effective evaluation of the full 
Framework. The construction process detailed in 
Section 3 should be carefully documented. The 
evaluation will focus on the time and effort spent 
on the process, difficulties or ease with resources 
that are acquired, managed and processed, as well 
as problems or issues that arise during the process. 
 
The intrinsic evaluation of the combinatory 
lexical resource indicates the quality of the newly 
created combinatory lexical resource. For this 
evaluation a large random number of entries will 
need to be evaluated for correctness. The 
evaluation will provide accuracy and coverage 
measures for the resource. Also, descriptive 
statistics will be generated to provide general 
understanding of the lexical resource that has been 
produced. 
 
The extrinsic evaluation of the combinatory 
lexical resource is intended to measure the 
contribution of the resource to an application (i.e. 
CLIR, Information Extraction).  The application of 
choice should be run with the combinatory lexical 
resource, and without. Performance metrics 
appropriate for the type of application can be 
collected for both experiments and then compared. 
6 Conclusion and future research 
A general Framework for lexical resource 
construction was presented in the context of 
English-Arabic semantic resource combination. 
The initial evaluation of the Framework looks 
promising in that it was successfully applied to 
combine five English-Arabic resources. The stages 
of the Framework provided a useful guideline for 
lexical resource combination and can be applied to 
resources in any language. We plan to extend the 
evaluation of the Framework to a more in depth 
intrinsic evaluation where the quality of the 
mappings is tested. An extrinsic evaluation should 
also take place to evaluate the combinatory lexical 
resource as part of the CLIR system. As for future 
research we hope to extend the evidence 
combination algorithms to include more 
sophisticated information using back translation 
and transliteration. 
7 Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by the U.S. Department 
of Justice. 
References  
A. Chen, and F. Gey. 2001. Translation Term 
Weighting and Combining Translation 
Resources in Cross-Language Retrieval. In 
?Proceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC-10)?, E.M. Voorhees and 
D.K. Harman ed., pages 529-533,  NIST, 
Gaithersburg, MD. 
J. Chen. 2003. The Construction, Use, and 
Evaluation of a Lexical Knowledge Base for 
English-Chinese Cross-Language Information 
Retrieval. Dissertation. School of Information 
Studies, Syracuse University. 
A. Chowdhury, M. Aljalayl, E. Jensen, S. Beitzel, 
D. Grossman, O. Frieder. 2002. IIT at TREC-
2002: Linear Combinations Based on Document 
Structure and Varied Stemming for Arabic 
Retrieval. In ?Proceedings of the Eleventh Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-11)?, E.M. 
Voorhees and C.P. Buckland ed., pages 299-310,  
NIST, Gaithersburg, MD. 
K. Darwish and D.W. Oard. 2002. CLIR 
Experiments at Maryland for TREC-2002: 
Evidence combination for Arabic-English 
retrieval. In ?Proceedings of the Eleventh Text 
REtrieval Conference (TREC-11)?, E.M. 
Voorhees and C.P. Buckland ed., pages 703-710,  
NIST, Gaithersburg, MD. 
F.C. Gey, and Oard, D.W. 2001. The TREC-2001 
Cross-Language Information Retrieval Track: 
Searching Arabic using English, French, or 
Arabic Queries. In ?Proceedings of the Tenth 
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-10)?, E.M. 
Voorhees and D.K. Harman ed., pages 16-25,  
NIST, Gaithersburg, MD. 
L.S. Larkey, J. Allan,  M.E. Connell, A. Bolivar, 
and C. Wade. 2002. UMass at TREC 2002: 
Cross Language and Novelty Tracks. In 
?Proceedings of the Eleventh Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC-11)?, E.M. Voorhees and 
C.P. Buckland ed., pages 721-732,  NIST, 
Gaithersburg, MD. 
L.S. Larkey, L. Ballesteros, M. Connell. 2002. 
Improving Stemming for Arabic Information 
Retrieval: Light Stemming and Co-occurrence 
Analysis. In ?Proceedings of the 25th Annual 
International Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval?, M. 
Beaulieu et al ed., pages 275-282, ACM, NY, 
NY. 
L.S. Larkey, and M. E. Connell. 2001. Arabic 
Information Retrieval at UMass in TREC-10. In 
?Proceedings of the Tenth Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC-10)?, E.M. Voorhees and 
D.K. Harman ed., pages 562-570,  NIST, 
Gaithersburg, MD. 
G. Miller. 1990. WordNet: An On-line Lexical 
Database. International Journal of 
Lexicography, 3(4), Special Issue. 
D. Oard and A. Diekema. 1998. Cross-Language 
Information Retrieval. Annual Review of 
Information Science, 33: 223-256. 
D.W. Oard, and Gey, F.C.2002. The TREC-2002 
Arabic/English CLIR Track. In ?Proceedings of 
the Eleventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-
11)?, E.M. Voorhees and C.P. Buckland ed., 
pages 17-26,  NIST, Gaithersburg, MD. 
M.E. Ruiz, et al 2001. CINDOR TREC-9 English-
Chinese Evaluation. In ?Proceedings of the 9th 
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC-9)?, E.M. 
Voorhees and D.K. Harman ed., pages 379-388,  
NIST, Gaithersburg, MD. 
J. Xu, A. Fraser, R. Weischedel. 2002. Empirical 
Studies in Strategies for Arabic Retrieval. In 
?Proceedings of the 25th Annual International 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval?, M. Beaulieu et al ed., 
pages 269-274, ACM, NY, NY. 
 
 
