Finite-State Morphological Analysis of Persian 
Karine Megerdoomian 
Inxight Software, Inc. 
500 Macara Avenue  
Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA 
karinem@inxight.com 
University of California, San Diego 
Linguistics Department 
9500 Gilman Drive, #0108 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 
karinem@ling.ucsd.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a two-level 
morphological analyzer for Persian using a 
system based on the Xerox finite state tools. 
Persian language presents certain challenges to 
computational analysis: There is a complex 
verbal conjugation paradigm which includes 
long-distance morphological dependencies; 
phonological alternations apply at morpheme 
boundaries; word and noun phrase boundaries 
are difficult to define since morphemes may 
be detached from their stems and distinct 
words can appear without an intervening 
space. In this work, we develop these 
problems and provide solutions in a finite-
state morphology system. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes the design of a two-level 
morphological analyzer for Persian developed at 
Inxight Software, based on Xerox finite-state 
technology (Beesley and Karttunen, 2001), by 
focusing on some of the issues that arise in a 
computational analysis of the language.  
Persian morphology raises some interesting 
issues for a computational analysis. One of the 
main challenges of Persian resides in the 
tokenization of the input text, since word 
boundaries are not always respected in written text. 
Hence, morphemes may appear detached from 
their stems while distinct tokens may be written 
without an intervening space. Furthermore, the use 
of the Arabic script and the fact that short vowels 
are not written and capitalization is not used create 
ambiguities that impede computational analysis of 
text. Persian includes complex tokens whereby two 
distinct part of speech items may be joined; these 
attaching elements (e.g., prepositions, pronominal 
clitics or verbs) should be treated as inflectional 
morphemes in the morphological analyzer. Persian 
does not have the problems that have been 
observed in Semitic languages such as the 
template-based morphology of Arabic, and is in 
general more concatenative. However, the verbal 
conjugation consists of a complex paradigm, which 
includes long-distance dependencies that may be 
problematic for a linear approach depending solely 
on surface forms. Finally, the phonetic 
representation of Persian nominals directly affects 
the phonological alternations applying at 
morpheme boundaries; however, the orthographic 
realization of certain words may not reflect their 
phonetics and require special manipulations to 
eliminate the ambiguities. 
Although there have been some significant 
studies in the area of parsing and syntactic analysis 
for Persian, very little work has been done on 
computational morphology in this language. In this 
paper, we elaborate on some of the challenges 
presented by a morphological analysis of Persian 
and discuss the solutions provided with a two-level 
finite-state formalism. 
2 System Description 
The Persian system is developed using Xerox 
Finite-State Technology. The lexicons and 
morphological rules are written in the format of 
lexc, which is the lexicon compiler (Karttunen and 
Beesley, 1992).  The lexicon and grammar are 
compiled into a finite-state transducer (fst) where 
the lower side consists of the input string and the 
upper side provides the baseform of the word with 
associated morphosyntactic features. In this 
system, the fsts for each part of speech category 
are created separately and then composed. 
Similarly, phonological rules are composed on the 
relevant fst, thus performing the required phonetic 
and phonological alternations on the word forms. 
The composition of all the part of speech 
transducers with the rules results in the final lexical 
transducer used for morphological analysis. Since 
all intermediate levels disappear during a 
composition, the final transducer consists of a 
single two-level fst with surface strings in the 
bottom and the morphological output on the top. 
Consider the simple lexc example below. This 
lexc consists of three small LEXICONs, beginning 
with the one named Root, which marks the start of 
the network. The lexicon class named Root 
includes three entries and each entry consists of a 
form and a continuation class.  
 
LEXICON Root 
dog Noun ; 
cat Noun ; 
laugh Verb ; 
 
LEXICON Noun 
+Plural:s # ; 
+Singular:0 # ; 
 
LEXICON Verb 
+Present:s # ; 
+Past:ed # ; 
+Gerund:ing # ; 
 # ; !empty string 
 
The forms, such as ?dog?, are interpreted by the 
lexc as a regular expression as in {d o g}. 
Continuation classes are used to account for word-
formation by capturing morphotactic rules. In the 
example under consideration, the string ?dog? is 
followed by the continuation class Noun. As the 
Noun lexicon shows, the rule allows ?dog? to be 
followed either by the morpheme ?s? or by a null 
morpheme represented as ?0?. The Noun 
continuation class maps the lower string ?s? to the 
+Plural tag on the upper side of the two-level 
transducer. Similarly, the Verb continuation class 
allows the concatenation of the verbal stem ?laugh? 
with the various inflectional morphemes.  
The Persian morphological analyzer at Inxight 
currently consists of about 55,000 stem forms, 
including multiword tokens, and a system of rules 
that identify the baseform of each token. Examples 
of the output of the morphological analyzer are 
shown below where the left hand side represents 
the lower input string and the right hand side is the 
upper side output1: 
 
???????   ?travelers?     
 ms?fryn ? ms?fr+Noun+Pl 
???  ?he/she left?        
 rft ? rftn+Verb+Ind+Pret+3P+Sg  
?????? ?he/she is a lawyer?    
 vkylst?vkyl+Noun>bvdn+Verb+Ind+Pres+3P+Sg 
 
The rules are written as regular expressions and 
are represented as continuation paths within the 
lexc grammar. The morphological analyzer covers 
                                                     
1 Unless otherwise specified, the Persian examples 
are direct transliterations of the Persian script and do not 
include short vowels, since that would require 
disambiguation of word senses and is beyond the scope 
of the current application. For issues in automatic 
diacritization of Arabic script-based tests see (Vergyri 
and Kirchhoff, 2004) in this volume.  
all main features of the Persian language with full 
verbal conjugation and nonverbal inflection, 
including irregular morphology. In addition, about 
twenty phonological rules are used to capture the 
various surface word forms and alternations that 
occur in the language. Common Proper Nouns are 
also recognized and tagged. 
3 Challenges of the Persian System 
This section outlines some of the main issues 
that arise in a computational analysis of Persian 
text and presents the approach adopted in the 
current finite-state system. Comparisons are made 
with past work on Persian morphological analyzers 
when relevant. 
Persian is an affixal system consisting mainly of 
suffixes and a number of prefixes appearing in 
strict morphotactic order. The nonverbal paradigm 
consists of a relatively small number of affixes 
marking number, indefiniteness or comparatives, 
but the language has a complete verbal inflectional 
system, which can be obtained by the various 
combinations of prefixes, stems, person and 
number inflections and auxiliaries.  
3.1 Nonverbal Morphology 
The Arabic script used in Persian distinguishes 
between the attached and unattached (or final) 
forms of the characters. Thus, letters in a word are 
often connected to each other, whereas all but six 
characters have a final form if they appear at the 
end of a word or token. Thus, most characters have 
a different form depending on their position within 
the word and the final forms can therefore be used 
to mark word boundaries. But as we will see in this 
section, these boundaries are not without 
ambiguity. 
 
Detached inflectional morphemes. The 
Persian writing system allows certain morphemes 
to appear either as bound to the host or as free 
affixes ? free affixes could be separated by a final 
form character or with an intervening space. The 
three possible cases are illustrated for the plural 
suffix h? (??) in flsTyny h? (??????? ??) 
?Palestinians? and the imperfective prefix my  
(??) in my rvnd (?? ????) ?they are going?. In these 
examples, the tilde (~) is used to indicate the final 
form marker which is represented as the control 
character \u200C in Unicode (also known as the 
zero-width non-joiner). As shown, the affixes may 
be attached to the stem, they may be separated with 
the final form control marker, or they can be 
detached and appear with the intervening control 
marker as well as a whitespace. All of these 
surface forms are attested in various Persian 
corpora. 
 
Attached Final Form  Intervening Space
flsTynyh? flsTyny~h? flsTyny~ h?  
myrvnd  my~rvnd my~ rvnd 
 
In his two-level morphological analyzer, 
(Riazati, 1997) is unable to analyze the detached 
affixes and decides to treat these elements in 
syntax. Thus, the two surface realizations of 
morphemes such as the plural h? are analyzed in 
different levels of the system (the attached version 
in the morphological analyzer and the detached 
form in the syntactic parser). In the unification-
based system developed at CRL (Megerdoomian, 
2000), a post-tokenization component is used to 
join the detached morpheme to the stem, separated 
by the control character. The morphological 
grammar is then designed to recognize both 
surface forms.  
The advantage of the finite-state system 
described here is the ability to process multiword 
tokens in the analyzer. Thus, by treating the final 
form character (the zero-width non-joiner) as a 
space in the tokenization rules, we are able to 
analyze the detached morphemes in Persian as part 
of multiword tokens within the lexc grammar 
module. This allows us to treat both forms 
uniformly in the morphological analyzer and there 
is no need for a preprocessing module or for 
delaying the analysis of the detached morphemes 
to the syntactic level. 
 
Complex tokens. ?Complex tokens? refer to 
multi-element forms, which consist of affixes that 
represent a separate lexical category or part of 
speech than the one they attach to. As in languages 
such as Arabic and Hebrew, Persian also allows 
attached word-like morphemes such as the 
preposition bh (??) (b- in attached form), the 
determiner ayn (???), the postposition r? (??), or the 
relativizer kh (??), that form such complex tokens 
and need to be analyzed within the morphological 
analyzer. Similarly, a number of pronominal or 
verbal clitic elements may appear on various parts 
of speech categories, giving rise to complex 
tokens. The examples below illustrate some of 
these complex constructions where two distinct 
part of speech items appear attached. The word-
like affixes are shown in bold in the examples 
below. 
 
(i) beqydh    Sm?  ?????? ???   
 to+opinion you 
?in your opinion? 
(ii) aynk?r         ??????  
 this+work 
 ?this work? 
(iii) anqlaby-tryn-ha-ySan-nd     ??????????????????? 
 revolutionary+Sup+Plur+Pron.3pl+Cop.3pl 
  ?they are the most revolutionary ones? 
 
To account for these cases in the Persian system, 
the different part of speech items are analyzed 
within the morphological analyzer and they are 
separated with an angle bracket as shown below 
for ktabhayman ) ??????????(  ?our books? and 
beqydh )??????(   ?to+opinion?.  
 
ktabhayman  
?ktab+Noun+Pl>av+Pron+Pers+Poss+1P+Pl+Clit 
beqydh 
? bh+Prep< eqydh +Noun+Sg 
 
The angle brackets are used to distinguish these 
elements from regular inflectional morphemes 
since the distinct part of speech information may 
be needed at a later stage of processing, e.g., for 
parsing or machine translation. Each word-like 
prefix is presented by its stem form: av )??(  
?he/she? for the pronominal clitic and bh )??(  ?to? 
for the baseform of the preposition. This stem form 
is then followed by the relevant morphosyntactic 
tags. If the information is not required, as in the 
case of certain information retrieval applications, 
the elements separated by the angle brackets can 
easily be stripped off without losing the 
information of the content carrying category, 
namely the noun in these examples. 
In certain cases, two distinct syntactic categories 
may appear without an intervening space even 
though they are not attached. For instance, the 
preposition dr )??(  ?in? ends in the character ?r? 
which does not distinguish between a final form 
and an attached form. Sometimes dr appears 
without a space separating it from the following 
word and the tokenizer is not able to segment the 
two words since there is no final form to mark the 
word boundary. Similarly, in many online corpora 
sources, the coordination marker v )?(  ?and? 
appears juxtaposed with the following word 
without an intervening space; and since the letter 
?v? does not distinguish between a final and 
attached form, the tokenizer cannot determine the 
word boundary. These common words that often 
appear written without an intervening space, 
though not actually inflectional morphemes, are 
treated as prefixes in the system as illustrated 
below: 
 
vgft ? v+Coord< gftn+Verb+Pret+3P+Sg     ???? 
drdftr ? dr+Prep< dftr+Noun+Sg                ?????? 
 
Phonetics & Phonological Rules. In Persian, 
the form of morphological affixes varies based on 
the ending character of the stem. Hence, if an 
animate noun ends in a consonant, it receives the 
plural morpheme ??n as in zn?n )????(  ?women?. If 
the animate noun ends in a vowel, the glide ?y? is 
inserted between the stem and the plural 
morpheme as in gd?y?n )??????(  ?the poor?. 
Similarly, for animate nouns that end in a silent ?h? 
(i.e., the letter ?h? which is pronounced as ? ), they 
take the morpheme ?g?n as in frSth )?????(  ? 
frStg?n )???????(  ?angels?.  
A problem arises in Persian with characters that 
may be either vowels or consonants and cannot be 
analyzed correctly simply based on the 
orthography. For instance, the character ?v? is a 
consonant in g?v )???(  ?cow? (pronounced ?gaav?) 
but a vowel in d?nSJv )??????(  ?university student? 
(pronounced ?daneshjoo?). The character ?h? is 
pronounced as a consonant in m?h )???(  ?moon? but 
as a vowel in bynndh  )??????(  ?viewer? (pronounced 
?binand??).  Similarly, ?y? is a glide in r?ay ?vote? 
but a vowel  in m?hy )????(  ?fish? (pronounced 
?maahee?). Hence, it is clear that in Persian, the 
orthographic realization of a character does not 
necessarily correspond to the phonetic 
pronunciation, yet phonological alternations of 
morphemes are sensitive to the phonetics of stems. 
In the finite-state lexicon, the nonverbal and 
closed class lexical items are separated based on 
their final character, i.e., whether they end in a 
consonant or a vowel, and word boundary tags are 
used to determine the relevant phonological 
alternations. In particular, the words ending in a 
vowel sound are marked with a word boundary tag 
^WB. Hence, the words d?nSJv, bynndh and m?hy 
will be marked with a ^WB tag but not those 
ending in the consonant pronunciation of the same 
characters, namely g?v, m?h and r?ay. This allows 
us to convert the nominal endings of these words 
to their phonetic pronunciation rather than 
maintaining their orthographic realization, helping 
us disambiguate phonological rules for nominal 
affixes.  
The words tagged with the boundary marker 
^WB undergo phonetic alternations which convert 
the ending characters ?v?, ?h? and ?y? to ?u?, ?e? and 
?i?, respectively, in order to distinguish vowels and 
consonants when the phonological rules apply. 
Thus, after the phonetic alternations have applied, 
the word m?h ending in the consonant ?h? is 
transliterated as [mah] while the word bynndh 
ending in the vowel or silent ?h? is represented as 
[bynnde]. 
Once the ending vowel and consonant characters 
have been differentiated orthographically, the 
phonological alternation rules can apply correctly. 
We mark morpheme boundaries in the lexc with 
the tag ^NB. This permits the analysis routine to 
easily locate the area of application of the 
phonological alternations when the rules are 
composed with the lexicon transducer. One such 
phonological rule for the animate plural marker -?n 
is exemplified below: 
 
define plural [e %^NB ? g || _ a n]; 
 
This regular expression rule indicates that the 
word ending in the vowel ?e? and followed by a 
morpheme boundary marker is to be replaced by 
?g?, in the context of the plural morpheme ?an?. 
This rule captures the phonological alternation for 
bynndh )??????(  ?viewer? ? bynndg?n )????????(  
?viewers?. 
Thus, since the phonetic representation of 
Persian nouns and adjectives plays a crucial role in 
the type of phonological rule that should apply to 
morpheme boundaries, we manipulate the 
orthographic realization of certain words in order 
to eliminate the ambiguities that may arise 
otherwise. 
Past morphological analysis systems have either 
not captured the pronunciation-orthography 
discrepancy in Persian thus not constraining the 
analyses allowed, or they have preclassified the 
form of the morpheme that can appear on each 
token. The advantage of the current system is that, 
by using phonological rules that apply across the 
board at all morpheme boundaries, we can capture 
important linguistic generalizations. For instance, 
there is no need to write three distinct plural rules 
to represent the various surface forms of the plural 
suffix ??n (namely, -?n, -g?n, and ?y?n). Instead, 
we can write one single rule adding the ??n 
morpheme and apply phonological rules that can 
also apply to the boundaries for the pronoun clitic, 
indefinite, ?ezafe? and relativizing enclitic 
morphemes, providing a very effective linguistic 
generalization. 
3.2 Verbal Paradigm 
The inflectional system for Persian verbs is quite 
complex and consists of simple forms and 
compound forms; the latter are forms that require 
an auxiliary verb. There are two stems used in the 
formation of the verbal conjugation, which may 
combine with prefixes marking the imperfective, 
negation or subjunctive, person and number 
inflections, suffixes for marking participle forms, 
and the causative infix. Certain tenses also use 
auxiliaries to form the perfect forms, the future 
tense or the passive constructions. 
Two stems. One of the intricacies of the 
Persian verbal system  (and of Indo-Aryan verbal 
systems in general) is the existence of two distinct 
stem types used in the formation of different 
tenses: The present stem is used in the creation of 
Form Tense Prefix Stem Inflection Auxiliary 
mygryzd 
      ?? ????? 
Present Imperfective 
my 
Present 
gryz 
Present.3sg 
d 
--- 
 
mygryxt  
     ?? ????? 
Imperfect Imperfective 
my 
Past 
gryxt 
Past.3sg 
? ? 
--- 
 
mygryxth ast 
  ?? ?????? ???  
Compound 
Imperfect 
Imperfective 
my 
Past 
gryxt 
Participle 
h 
Present be.3sg) 
and 
bgryz  
            ????? 
Imperative Subjunctive 
b 
Present 
gryz 
Imperative.2sg 
? ? 
--- 
Table 1: Long-distance dependency between prefix and personal inflection 
the present tense, the simple subjunctive, the 
imperative and the present participle. On what is 
known as the past stem are formed the preterite, 
the imperfect, the past participle and past 
compounds. Furthermore, all infinitives and future 
tenses are built on the past stem while all 
causatives, regardless of tense, are created on the 
present stem. For computational purposes, the two 
stems are treated as distinct entities because they 
often have different surface forms and cannot be 
derived from each other. Two examples are given 
below for krdn (????) and gryxtn (??????) in the 
actual pronunciation2: 
 
Infinitival Present Stem  Past Stem
kardan kon kard ?to do/make? 
gorixtan goriz gorixt  ?to flee? 
 
Since the infinitival or citation form of the verbs 
is built on the past stem, the verbal finite-state 
transducer has to produce the past stem on the 
upper side, allowing the derivation of the 
infinitive. A problem arises when the input string 
is the present stem form as in the present tense  
my gryznd )?? ?????? (  ?they are fleeing?. In this 
instance, we would need to output the past stem 
form of the verb, namely gryxt )????? ( . In order to 
capture the association between the present and 
past stems in Persian, we link these forms in the 
verbal lexicon by allowing all present stems to map 
to the
transd
class 
listed
the pa
and u
forme
     
2 N
are n
transli
 
 
imperfect my gryxtnd  )?? ??????? ( ?they were 
fleeing?. 
 
LEXICON PresentStem 
gryxt:gryz VerbReg ; ! to flee 
nvSt:nvys VerbReg ; ! to write 
aftad:aft VerbReg ; ! to fall 
 
LEXICON PastStem 
gryxt InfBoundary ; ! to flee 
nvSt InfBoundary ; ! to write 
aftad InfBoundary ; ! to fall 
 
In both cases the upper side past stem string is 
marked with a delimiter tag ^INF which is later 
mapped to ?n?, forming the surface form of the 
infinitive. The resulting stem form for the finite 
verb my gryznd )?? ??????  (  ?they are fleeing? is 
thus the infinitival gryxtn  )?????? (  ?to flee?. 
  
Long-distance dependencies3.  As can be 
seen in the examples given above for the verb 
gryxtn )?????? (  ?to flee?, the prefix my- )??(  cannot 
be used to distinguish the tense of the verbal entry 
since it is used in the formation of the present, the 
imperfect or the compound imperfect. In order to 
decide whether my is forming e.g., the present 
tense or the past imperfect, the stem and final 
inflection need to be taken into account. Thus, if 
my is attached to the present stem, it forms the 
regular present tense forms but if it is attached to 
 simple 
ending 
le 1). 
 only 
unctive 
able 1, 
used if 
2) for a 
al long-
els of  past stem form in the upper side of the 
ucer, as illustrated in the first continuation 
below. In addition, the same verbs have to be 
 in a different lexical continuation class with 
st stems alone (i.e., past stem on both lower 
pper sides) in order to analyze the tenses 
d on the past stem of the verb such as the 
                                                
                                                     ote that in Persian, the short vowels such as o,a,e 
ot generally transcribed, hence the direct 
teration of the examples would be 
krdn kn krd ?to do, to make? 
gryxtn gryz gryxt ?to flee? 
the past stem, then it gives rise to either the
imperfect or the compound imperfect, dep
on the final inflection forms (see Tab
Similarly, the imperative inflection can
appear on a present stem with the subj
prefix ?b?, as shown in bgryz )????? (   in T
whereas only the present inflection can be 
3 See for instance (Sproat, 1992; pages 91-9
description of the issue raised by ?morphologic
distance dependencies? in finite-state mod
morphology. 
the imperfective prefix ?my? is used, as shown with 
my gryzd  )?? ?????  (  . 
Accounting for the long-distance dependency 
between the prefix and the personal inflection in 
Persian in a finite-state two-level morphological 
analyzer leads to very complex paths and 
continuation class structures in the lexical 
grammar. Also, using filters to capture long-
distance dependencies can sometimes largely 
increase the size of the transducer. Since there 
exist several cases of interdependencies between 
non-adjacent morphemes in Persian verb 
formation, we have opted to keep a simpler 
continuation class structure in the lexc grammars 
and to instead take advantage of  flag diacritics 
and their unification process.  
Flag diacritics are multicharacter symbols and 
can be used within the lexc grammar to permit the 
analysis routines to use the information provided in 
terms of feature-value settings to constrain 
subsequent paths. Hence, whether a transition to 
the following path would apply depends on the 
success of the operation defined by the flag 
diacritic. In essence, the flag diacritic allows the 
system to perform a unification of the features set 
in the analysis process. Xerox finite state 
technology includes a number of different flag 
diacritic operators but the only one used in this 
Persian system is the U-type or the Unification flag 
diacritic. The template for the format of these flags 
is as follows: @U.feature.value@. Flag diacritics 
are used to keep the fst small and yet be able to 
apply certain constraints, in particular when 
dealing with interdependencies between non-
adjacent morphemes within a word. 
For example, to capture the choice of the 
imperative vs. the present tense inflection based on 
the prefix that appears on the present stem of the 
verb, we use a flag diacritic with the attribute 
PFXTYP (PrefixType) which is then set to IMP 
(for imperfective) or SUB (for subjunctive). This 
flag diacritic is set when the prefixes are read and 
they are unified with the PFXTYP flags at the 
lexical class defining the personal inflectional 
paradigm. If the values of the PFXTYP flag 
diacritic match at this point, unification takes place 
allowing the concatenation of the prefix and 
present stem combination with the personal 
inflection. 
Similarly, the agentive, infinitive and participial 
forms can be formed only if there is no prefix at all 
on the verbal stem. This is captured by the flag 
diacritic attribute PFX, which has the two possible 
values PRESENT and ABSENT. Thus, the lexc 
rule for the Infinitive, for instance, requires that the 
PFX flag?s value be set to ABSENT. This, in 
effect, captures the fact that mygryxtn (my 
?imperfective? + gryxt ?past stem? + n ?infinitive 
marker?) is not a valid form since the infinitive 
marker ?n can only appear on a past stem that 
lacks an overt prefix. 
4 Evaluation 
The lexicon used in the Inxight system currently 
consists of 43,154 lemmas, which include nouns, 
adjectives, verbs, adverbs and closed class items. 
In addition, there are about 12,000 comomon 
proper noun entities listed in the lexicon. The 
system also recognizes date, number and internet 
expressions.  
The current Persian morphological analyzer has 
a coverage of 97.5% on a 7MB corpus collected 
mostly from online news sources. The accuracy of 
the system is about 95%. The unanalyzed tokens 
are often proper nouns or words missing from the 
lexicon. In addition, colloquial forms of speech are 
not covered in the current system.  
The finite state transducer consists of 178,452 
states and 928,982 arcs before optimization. And 
the speed of the analyzer is 20.84 CPU time in 
seconds for processing a 10MB file executed on a 
modern Sun SparcStation. 
5 Conclusion 
This paper describes some of the challenges 
encountered in a computational morphological 
analysis of Persian and discusses the solutions 
proposed within the finite state system developed 
at Inxight Software based on the Xerox Finite State 
Technology. The approaches adopted are 
compared with past systems of Persian whenever 
relevant. The paper presents the problems arising 
from detached inflectional morphemes, as well as 
attached word-like elements forming complex 
tokens, the discrepancy between orthography and 
phonetics in application of phonological rules, and 
the interdependency between non-adjacent 
morphemes in a word. In each case, it was argued 
that methods adopted from the finite-state calculus 
can capture linguistic generalizations and reduce 
the transducer to a manageable and commercially 
viable size. 
6 Acknowledgements 
We gratefully acknowledge the help and support 
provided by the development team at Inxight 
Software and the insightful suggestions of the 
members of the Lingware group. I would also like 
to thank the anonymous reviewers for their 
detailed comments. 
References  
Mohammad-Reza Bateni. 1995. Towsif-e 
Sakhteman-e Dastury-e Zaban-e Farsi 
[Description of the Linguistic Structure of 
Persian Language]. Amir Kabir Publishers, 
Tehran, Iran. 
Kenneth R. Beesley and Lauri Karttunen. 2003. 
Finite-State Morphology: Xerox Tools and 
Techniques. CSLI Publications, Palo Alto. 
Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R. Beesley. 1992. 
Two-Level Rule Compiler. Technical Report. 
ISTL-1992-2. Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. 
Palo Alto, California. 
Gilbert Lazard. 1992. A Grammar of 
Contemporary Persian. Mazda Publishers. 
Shahrzad Mahootian. 1997. Persian.Routledge. 
Karine Megerdoomian. 2000. Unification-Based 
Persian Morphology. In Proceedings of CICLing 
2000. Alexander Gelbukh, ed. Centro de 
Investigaci?n en Computaci?n-IPN, Mexico. 
Dariush Riazati.1997. Computational Analysis of 
Persian Morphology. MSc thesis, Department of 
Computer Science, RMIT. 
Richard Sproat. 1992. Morphology and 
Computation.MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts. 
