SENSEVAL-3 TASK
Word-Sense Disambiguation of WordNet Glosses
Kenneth C. Litkowski
CL Research
9208 Gue Road
Damascus, MD 20872
ken@clres.com
Abstract
The SENSEVAL-3 task to perform word-sense
disambiguation of WordNet glosses was
designed to encourage development of technology
to make use of standard lexical resources. The
task was based on the availability of sense-
disambiguated hand-tagged glosses created in the
eXtended WordNet project. The hand-tagged
glosses provided a ?gold standard? for judging
the performance of automated disambiguation
systems. Seven teams participated in the task,
with a total of 10 runs. Scoring these runs as an
?all-words? task, along with considerable
discussions among participants, provided more
insights than just the underlying technology. The
task identified several issues about the nature of
the WordNet sense inventory and the underlying
use of wordnet design principles, particularly the
significance of WordNet-style relations.
Introduction
In SENSEVAL-2, performance in the lexical sample
task dropped considerably (Kilgarriff, 2001).
Kilgarriff suggested that using WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) for SENSEVAL has drawbacks. WordNet was
not designed to serve as a lexical resource, but its
public availability and reasonable comprehensiveness
have been dominant factors in its selection as the
lexical resource of choice for Senseval and for many
applications. These factors have led to further
funding by U.S. government agencies and many
improvements are currently underway. Among these
improvements is a planned hand-tagging of the
WordNet glosses with their WordNet senses. At the
same time, sense-tagging of the glosses is being
performed in the Extended WordNet (XWN) project
under development at the University of Texas at
Dallas (Mihalcea and Moldovan, 2001)1. The XWN
project also parses the WordNet glosses into a part of
speech tree and transforms them into a logical
predicate form.
More generally, sense disambiguation of
definitions in any lexical resource is an important
objective in the language engineering community.
The first significant disambiguation of dictionary
definitions and creation of a hierarchy took place 25
years ago in the groundbreaking work of Amsler
(1980). However, while substantial research has been
performed on machine-readable dictionaries since
that time, technology has not yet been developed to
make systematic use of these resources. This
SENSEVAL task was designed to encourage the
lexical research community to take up the challenge
of disambiguating dictionary definitions.
XWN is used as a core knowledge base for
applications such as question answering, information
retrieval, information extraction, summarization,
natural language generation, inferences, and other
knowledge intensive applications. The glosses contain
a part of the world knowledge since they define the
most common concepts of the English language. In
the XWN project, many open-class words in
WordNet glosses have been hand-tagged and provide
a ?gold standard? against which disambiguation
systems can be judged. The SENSEVAL-3 task is to
replicate the hand-tagged results.
The Extended WordNet (XWN) project has
disambiguated the content words (nouns, verbs,
adjectives, and adverbs) of all glosses, combining
human annotation and automated methods using
WordNet 1.7.1. A ?quality? attribute was given to
each lemma. XWN used two automatic systems to
disambiguate the content words. When the two
systems agreed, the lemma was given a ?silver?
1http://www.hlt.utdallas.edu/
                                             Association for Computational Linguistics
                        for the Semantic Analysis of Text, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004
                 SENSEVAL-3: Third International Workshop on the Evaluation of Systems
quality. Otherwise, a lemma was given a ?normal?
quality (even when there was only one sense in
WordNet). In a complex process described in more
detail below, certain glosses or lemmas were selected
for hand annotation. Lemmas which were hand-
tagged were given a ?gold? tag.
The WordNet 1.7.1 data were next converted to
use WordNet 2.0 glosses. Word senses have been
assigned to 630,599 open class words, with 15,179
(less than 2.5 percent) of the open-class words in
these glosses assigned manually. Many glosses have
more than one word given a ?gold? assignment.  The
resultant test set provided to participants consists of
9,257 glosses, containing 15,179 ?gold? tagged
content words and a total of 42,491 content words,
distributed as follows:
Table 1. Gloss Test Set
POS Glosses Golds Words
Adjective 94 263 370
Adverb 1684 1826 3719
Noun 6706 10985 35539
Verb 773 2105 2863
Total 9257 15179 42491
The disambiguations (and hence the answer key) are
available at the XWN web site. Participants were
encouraged to investigate the XWN data as well as
the methods followed by the XWN team. However,
participants were expected to develop their own
systems, for comparison with the XWN manual
annotations.
1 The Senseval-3 Task
Participants were provided with all glosses from
WordNet in which at least one open-class word was
given a "Gold" quality assignment. These glosses
were provided in an XML file, each with its WordNet
synset number, its part of speech, and the gloss itself.
Glosses frequently include sample uses. The samples
uses were not parsed in the XWN project and were
not to be included in the submissions.
The task was configured as essentially identical
to the SENSEVAL-2 and SENSEVAL-3 "all-words"
tasks, except without any context and with the gloss
not constituting a complete sentence. Unlike the
all-words task, individual tokens to be disambiguated
were not identified, so that participants were required
to perform their own tokenization and identification
of multiword units. The number of words in a gloss
is quite small, but a few glosses do contain the same
word more than once. Participants were encouraged
to consider a synset's placement within WordNet (its
hypernyms, hyponyms, and other relations) to assist
in disambiguation. The XWN data contains part of
speech tags for each word in the glosses, as well as
parses and logical forms, which participants were
allowed to use. Most of the glosses in the test set
have hand-tagged words as well as words tagged by
the automatic XWN systems. The senses assigned to
other open-class words have a tag of ?silver? or
?normal?. In submitting test runs, participants did not
know which of the words had been assigned a ?gold?
quality, but were only scored for the ?gold? quality
words.2
No training data was available for this task since
the number of items in the test set was so small.
Participants were encouraged to become familiar
with the XWN dataset and to make use of it in ways
that would not compromise their performance of the
task.
2 Submissions
Seven teams participated in the task with one team
submitting two runs and one team submitting three
runs. A submission contained an identifier (the part
of speech of the gloss and its synset number) and a
WordNet sense for each content word or phrase
identified by the system. The answer key contains
part of speech/synset identifier, the XWN quality
assignment, the lemma and the word form from the
XWN data, and the WordNet sense. The scoring
program (a Perl script) stored the answers in three
hashes according to quality (?gold?, ?silver?, and
?normal?) and then also stored the system?s answers
in a hash. The program then proceeded through the
?gold? answers and determined if a system?s answers
included a match for that answer, equaling either the
(lemma, sense) or (word form, sense). No system
submitted more than one sense for each of its word
forms. An exact match received a score of 1.0. If a
2The answer key contains all assignments, so it is
possible that runs can be analyzed with these other
sense assignments with a voting system. However,
such an analysis has not yet been performed.
system returned either the lemma or the word form,
but had assigned an incorrect sense, the item was
counted as attempted.
Precision was computed as the number correct
divided by the number attempted. Recall was
computed as the number correct divided by the total
number of ?gold? items. The percent attempted was
computed as the number attempted divided by the
total number of ?gold? items. Results for all runs are
shown in Table 2.
Table 2. System Performance (All Items)
Run Prec Rec Att
01 (UPolit?cnica de Valencia) 0.534 0.405 76.0
02 (CL Research) 0.449 0.345 76.8
03 (LanguageComputerCorp) 0.701 0.504 71.9
04a (TALP Research Center) 0.686 0.683 99.5
04b (TALP Research Center) 0.574 0.558 97.2
05 (IRIT-ERSS) 0.388 0.385 99.1
06a (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.777 0.311 40.0
06b (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.668 0.667 99.9
06c (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.716 0.362 50.5
07 (Indian Inst Technology) 0.343 0.301 87.8
Systems 04a and 06b used the part of speech tags
available in the XWN files, while the other runs did
not.
3 Discussion
During discussions on the SENSEVAL-3 mailing list
and in interchanges assessing the scoring of the
systems, several issues of some importance arose.
Most of these concerned the nature of the XWN
annotation process and the ?correctness? of the
?gold? quality assignments.
Since glosses (or definitions) are only ?sentence?
fragments, parsing them poses some inherent
difficulties. In theory, a proper lexicographically-
based definition is one that contains a genus term
(hypernym or superordinate) and differentiae. A
gloss? hypernym is somewhat easily identified as the
head of the first phrase, particularly in noun and verb
definitions. Since most WordNet synsets have a
hypernym, a heuristic for disambiguating the head of
the first phrase would be to use the hypernym as the
proper disambiguated sense. And, indeed, the
instructions for the task encouraged participants to
make use of WordNet relations in their
disambiguation.
However, the XWN annotators were not given
this heuristic, but rather were presented with the set
of WordNet senses without awareness of the
WordNet relations. As a result, many glosses had
?gold? assignments that seemed incorrect when
considering WordNet?s own hierarchy. For example,
naught is defined as ?complete failure?; in WordNet,
its hypernym failure is sense 1 (?an act that fails?),
but the XWN annotators tagged it with sense 2 (?an
event that does not accomplish its intended
purpose?).
To investigate the use of WordNet relations
heuristics, we considered a set of 313 glosses
containing 867 ?gold? assignments which team 06
submitted as highly reliant on these relations. As
shown in Table 3 (scored on 8944 glosses with
14312 ?gold? assignments), precision scores changed
most for 03 (0.020), 06b (0.017), and 04a (0.016);
these runs had correspondingly much lower scores
for the 313 glosses in this set (results not shown).
These differences do not appear to be significant. A
more complete assessment of the significance of
WordNet relations in disambiguation would require
a more complete identification of glosses where
systems relied on such information.
Table 3. System Performance (Reduced Set)
Run Prec Rec Att
01 (UPolit?cnica de Valencia) 0.538 0.407 75.6
02 (CL Research) 0.446 0.342 76.6
03 (LanguageComputerCorp) 0.721 0.516 71.6
04a (TALP Research Center) 0.702 0.698 99.5
04b (TALP Research Center) 0.585 0.568 97.2
05 (IRIT-ERSS) 0.395 0.391 99.1
06a (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.826 0.323 39.1
06b (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.685 0.684 99.9
06c (Uni-Roma1-DI) 0.753 0.375 49.7
07 (Indian Inst Technology) 0.346 0.302 87.2
Further discussion with members of the XWN
project about the annotation process revealed some
factors that should be taken into account when
assessing the various systems? performances. Firstly,
the annotations of the 9257 glosses with ?gold?
assignments were annotated using three different
methods. The first group of 1032 glosses were fully
hand-tagged by two graduate students, with 80
percent agreement and with the project leader
choosing a sense when there was disagreement.
For the remaining glosses in WordNet, two
automated disambiguation programs were run. When
both programs agreed on a sense, they were given a
?silver? quality. In those glosses for which all but one
or two words had been assigned a ?silver? quality,
the one or two words were hand-tagged by a graduate
student, without any interannotator check or review.
There are 4077 noun glosses in this second set.
A third set, the remaining 4738 among the test
set, were glosses for which all the words but one had
been assigned a ?silver? quality. The single word was
then hand-tagged by a graduate student, and in some
cases by the project leader (particularly when a word
had been mistagged by the Brill tagger).
To assess the effect of these three different styles
of annotation, we ran the scoring program, restricting
the items scored to those in each of the three
annotation sets. The scores were changed much more
significantly for the various teams for the different
sets. For the first set, precision was down
approximately 0.07 for three runs, with much lower
changes for the other runs. For the second set,
precision was up approximately 0.075 for two runs,
down approximately 0.08 for two runs, and relatively
unchanged for the remaining runs. For the third set,
there was relatively little changes in the precision for
all runs (with a maximum change of 0.03).
4 Conclusions
The underlying guidance for this SENSEVAL-3 task
that, in the absence of significant context,
participants make use of WordNet relations for
disambiguating glosses has led to some significant
insights about the use and importance of wordnets.
These insights emerge from the tension between the
reliance on WordNet relations and the imprecision of
the tagging process.
Many investigators, including several of the
participants in this task, are attempting to exploit the
kinds of relations between lexical entries that are
embodied in WordNet. The use of wordnets in NLP
applications has become an important basic construct
and increasingly valuable.  However, the construction
of wordnets is expensive and time-consuming, and
without any significant prospects for commercial
support. While some dictionary publishers are
increasingly incorporating wordnet principles into
their lexical resources, this process is slow. At
present, the publicly available WordNet remains the
wordnet of choice.
The annotation process followed by the XWN
project, with the taggings used in this task, has again
indicated difficulties with the WordNet sense
inventory. The fact remains that WordNet has not
had the benefit of sufficient lexicographic resources
in the construction of its glosses and in the
acquisition of other lexicographic information in its
entries. The WordNet project continues its efforts to
add information, but with limited resources.
With the diverse set of approaches represented by
the participants in this task, it is possible to envision
sets of steps that might be employed to improve the
details of the WordNet sense inventory. One step
would include continued hand-tagging of WordNet
glosses without consideration of WordNet relations.
Another step would be the use of automated
disambiguation routines to act as checks on
consistency. Such systems would include those that
rely on WordNet relations as well as those that do
not, acting as checks on one another.
References
Amsler, Robert A. 1980. The Structure of the Merriam-
Webster Pocket Dictionary. Ph.D. Thesis., Austin:
University of Texas.
Fellbaum, Christiane (ed.). 1998. WordNet: An
Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA.
Kilgarriff, Adam. 2001. English Lexical Sample Task
Description. In Proceedings of SENSEVAL-2: Second
International Workshop on Evaluating Word Sense
Disambiguation Systems, Toulouse, France.
Mihalcea, Rada and Dan Moldovan. 2001. eXtended
WordNet: Progress Report. In Proceedings of NAACL
Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources,
Pittsburgh, PA.
