The Potsdam Commentary Corpus
Manfred Stede
University of Potsdam
Dept. of Linguistics
Applied Computational Linguistics
D-14415 Potsdam
Germany
stede@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
A corpus of German newspaper commentaries
has been assembled and annotated with differ-
ent information (and currently, to different de-
grees): part-of-speech, syntax, rhetorical struc-
ture, connectives, co-reference, and information
structure. The paper explains the design deci-
sions taken in the annotations, and describes a
number of applications using this corpus with
its multi-layer annotation.
1 Introduction
A corpus of German newspaper commentaries
has been assembled at Potsdam University, and
annotated with different linguistic information,
to different degrees. Two aspects of the corpus
have been presented in previous papers ((Re-
itter, Stede 2003) on underspecified rhetorical
structure; (Stede 2003) on the perspective of
knowledge-based summarization). This paper,
however, provides a comprehensive overview of
the data collection effort and its current state.
At present, the ?Potsdam Commentary Cor-
pus? (henceforth ?PCC? for short) consists of
170 commentaries from Ma?rkische Allgemeine
Zeitung, a German regional daily. The choice
of the genre commentary resulted from the fact
that an investigation of rhetorical structure,
its interaction with other aspects of discourse
structure, and the prospects for its automatic
derivation are the key motivations for building
up the corpus. Commentaries argue in favor
of a specific point of view toward some polit-
ical issue, often dicussing yet dismissing other
points of view; therefore, they typically offer a
more interesting rhetorical structure than, say,
narrative text or other portions of newspapers.
The choice of the particular newspaper was
motivated by the fact that the language used in
a regional daily is somewhat simpler than that
of papers read nationwide. (Again, the goal of
automatic analysis was responsible for this deci-
sion.) This is manifest in the lexical choices but
also in structural features. As an indication, in
our core corpus, we found an average sentence
length of 15.8 words and 1.8 verbs per sentence,
whereas a randomly taken sample of ten com-
mentaries from the national papers Su?ddeutsche
Zeitung and Frankfurter Allgemeine has 19.6
words and 2.1 verbs per sentence. The com-
mentaries in PCC are all of roughly the same
length, ranging from 8 to 10 sentences. For il-
lustration, an English translation of one of the
commentaries is given in Figure 1.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2
explains the different layers of annotation that
have been produced or are being produced. Sec-
tion 3 discusses the applications that have been
completed with PCC, or are under way, or are
planned for the future. Section 4 draws some
conclusions from the present state of the effort.
2 Layers of Annotation
The corpus has been annotated with six differ-
ent types of information, which are character-
ized in the following subsections. Not all the
layers have been produced for all the texts yet.
There is a ?core corpus? of ten commentaries,
for which the range of information (except for
syntax) has been completed; the remaining data
has been annotated to different degrees, as ex-
plained below.
All annotations are done with specific tools
and in XML; each layer has its own DTD.
This offers the well-known advantages for inter-
changability, but it raises the question of how
to query the corpus across levels of annotation.
We will briefly discuss this point in Section 3.1.
2.1 Part-of-speech tags
All commentaries have been tagged with
part-of-speech information using Brants? TnT1
tagger and the Stuttgart/Tu?bingen Tag Set
1www.coli.uni-sb.de/?thorsten/tnt/
Dagmar Ziegler is up to her neck in debt. Due to the dramatic fiscal situation in Brandenburg
she now surprisingly withdrew legislation drafted more than a year ago, and suggested to decide
on it not before 2003. Unexpectedly, because the ministries of treasury and education both had
prepared the teacher plan together. This withdrawal by the treasury secretary is understandable,
though. It is difficult to motivate these days why one ministry should be exempt from cutbacks
? at the expense of the others. Reiche?s colleagues will make sure that the concept is waterproof.
Indeed there are several open issues. For one thing, it is not clear who is to receive settlements or
what should happen in case not enough teachers accept the offer of early retirement. Nonetheless
there is no alternative to Reiche?s plan. The state in future has not enough work for its many
teachers. And time is short. The significant drop in number of pupils will begin in the fall of 2003.
The government has to make a decision, and do it quickly. Either save money at any cost - or give
priority to education.
Figure 1: Translation of PCC sample commentary
(STTS)2.
2.2 Syntactic structure
Annotation of syntactic structure for the core
corpus has just begun. We follow the guide-
lines developed in the TIGER project (Brants
et al 2002) for syntactic annotation of German
newspaper text, using the Annotate3 tool for in-
teractive construction of tree structures.
2.3 Rhetorical structure
All commentaries have been annotated with
rhetorical structure, using RSTTool4 and the
definitions of discourse relations provided by
Rhetorical Structure Theory (Mann, Thomp-
son 1988). Two annotators received training
with the RST definitions and started the pro-
cess with a first set of 10 texts, the results of
which were intensively discussed and revised.
Then, the remaining texts were annotated and
cross-validated, always with discussions among
the annotators. Thus we opted not to take the
step of creating more precise written annotation
guidelines (as (Carlson, Marcu 2001) did for En-
glish), which would then allow for measuring
inter-annotator agreement. The motivation for
our more informal approach was the intuition
that there are so many open problems in rhetor-
ical analysis (and more so for German than for
English; see below) that the main task is qual-
itative investigation, whereas rigorous quanti-
tative analyses should be performed at a later
stage.
One conclusion drawn from this annotation
effort was that for humans and machines alike,
2www.sfs.nphil.uni-tuebingen.de/Elwis/stts/
stts.html
3www.coli.uni-sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/annotate.
html
4www.wagsoft.com/RSTTool
assigning rhetorical relations is a process loaded
with ambiguity and, possibly, subjectivity. We
respond to this on the one hand with a format
for its underspecification (see 2.4) and on the
other hand with an additional level of annota-
tion that attends only to connectives and their
scopes (see 2.5), which is intended as an inter-
mediate step on the long road towards a system-
atic and objective treatment of rhetorical struc-
ture.
2.4 Underspecified rhetorical structure
While RST (Mann, Thompson 1988) proposed
that a single relation hold between adjacent
text segments, SDRT (Asher, Lascarides 2003)
maintains that multiple relations may hold si-
multaneously. Within the RST ?user commu-
nity? there has also been discussion whether two
levels of discourse structure should not be sys-
tematically distinguished (intentional versus in-
formational).
Some relations are signalled by subordinat-
ing conjunctions, which clearly demarcate the
range of the text spans related (matrix clause,
embedded clause). When the signal is a coordi-
nating conjunction, the second span is usually
the clause following the conjunction; the first
span is often the clause preceding it, but some-
times stretches further back. When the connec-
tive is an adverbial, there is much less clarity as
to the range of the spans.
Assigning rhetorical relations thus poses
questions that can often be answered only sub-
jectively. Our annotators pointed out that very
often they made almost random decisions as to
what relation to choose, and where to locate
the boundary of a span. (Carlson, Marcu 2001)
responded to this situation with relatively pre-
cise (and therefore long!) annotation guidelines
that tell annotators what to do in case of doubt.
Quite often, though, these directives fulfill the
goal of increasing annotator agreement without
in fact settling the theoretical question; i.e., the
directives are clear but not always very well mo-
tivated.
In (Reitter, Stede 2003) we went a different
way and suggested URML5, an XML format for
underspecifying rhetorical structure: a number
of relations can be assigned instead of a sin-
gle one, competing analyses can be represented
with shared forests. The rhetorical structure
annotations of PCC have all been converted to
URML. There are still some open issues to be re-
solved with the format, but it represents a first
step. What ought to be developed now is an
annotation tool that can make use of the for-
mat, allow for underspecified annotations and
visualize them accordingly.
2.5 Connectives with scopes
For the ?core? portion of PCC, we found that on
average, 35% of the coherence relations in our
RST annotations are explicitly signalled by a
lexical connective.6 When adding the fact that
connectives are often ambiguous, one has to
conclude that prospects for an automatic anal-
ysis of rhetorical structure using shallow meth-
ods (i.e., relying largely on connectives) are not
bright ? but see Sections 3.2 and 3.3 below.
Still, for both human and automatic rhetori-
cal analysis, connectives are the most important
source of surface information. We thus decided
to pay specific attention to them and introduce
an annotation layer for connectives and their
scopes. This was also inspired by the work on
the Penn Discourse Tree Bank7, which follows
similar goals for English.
For effectively annotating connec-
tives/scopes, we found that existing annotation
tools were not well-suited, for two reasons:
? Some tools are dedicated to modes of anno-
tation (e.g., tiers), which could only quite
un-intuitively be used for connectives and
scopes.
? Some tools would allow for the desired
annotation mode, but are so complicated
(they can be used for many other purposes
as well) that annotators take a long time
getting used to them.
5?Underspecified Rhetorical Markup Language?
6This confirms the figure given by (Schauer, Hahn
2001), who determined that in their corpus of German
computer tests, 38% of relations were lexically signalled.
7www.cis.upenn.edu/?pdtb/
Consequently, we implemented our own anno-
tation tool ConAno in Java (Stede, Heintze
2004), which provides specifically the function-
ality needed for our purpose. It reads a file
with a list of German connectives, and when
a text is opened for annotation, it highlights all
the words that show up in this list; these will
be all the potential connectives. The annotator
can then ?click away? those words that are here
not used as connectives (such as the conjunc-
tion und (?and?) used in lists, or many adverbials
that are ambiguous between connective and dis-
course particle). Then, moving from connective
to connective, ConAno sometimes offers sugges-
tions for its scope (using heuristics like ?for sub-
junctor, mark all words up to the next comma
as the first segment?), which the annotator can
accept with a mouseclick or overwrite, marking
instead the correct scope with the mouse. When
finished, the whole material is written into an
XML-structured annotation file.
2.6 Co-reference
We developed a first version of annotation
guidelines for co-reference in PCC (Gross 2003),
which served as basis for annotating the core
corpus but have not been empirically evaluated
for inter-annotator agreement yet. The tool we
use is MMAX8, which has been specifically de-
signed for marking co-reference.
Upon identifying an anaphoric expression
(currently restricted to: pronouns, preposi-
tional adverbs, definite noun phrases), the an-
notator first marks the antecedent expression
(currently restricted to: various kinds of noun
phrases, prepositional phrases, verb phrases,
sentences) and then establishes the link between
the two. Links can be of two different kinds:
anaphoric or bridging (definite noun phrases
picking up an antecedent via world-knowledge).
? Anaphoric links: the annotator is asked
to specify whether the anaphor is a repe-
tition, partial repetition, pronoun, epithet
(e.g., Andy Warhol ? the PopArt artist), or
is-a (e.g., Andy Warhol was often hunted
by photographers. This fact annoyed espe-
cially his dog...).
? Bridging links: the annotator is asked to
specify the type as part-whole, cause-effect
(e.g., She had an accident. The wounds
are still healing.), entity-attribute (e.g., She
8www.eml-research.de/english/Research/NLP/
Downloads
had to buy a new car. The price shocked
her.), or same-kind (e.g., Her health in-
surance paid for the hospital fees, but
the automobile insurance did not cover the
repair.).
2.7 Information structure
In a similar effort, (Go?tze 2003) developed a
proposal for the theory-neutral annotation of
information structure (IS) ? a notoriously dif-
ficult area with plenty of conflicting and over-
lapping terminological conceptions. And in-
deed, converging on annotation guidelines is
even more difficult than it is with co-reference.
Like in the co-reference annotation, Go?tze?s pro-
posal has been applied by two annotators to the
core corpus but it has not been systematically
evaluated yet.
We use MMAX for this annotation as well.
Here, annotation proceeds in two phases: first,
the domains and the units of IS are marked as
such. The domains are the linguistic spans that
are to receive an IS-partitioning, and the units
are the (smaller) spans that can play a role as a
constituent of such a partitioning. Among the
IS-units, the referring expressions are marked
as such and will in the second phase receive
a label for cognitive status (active, accessible-
text, accessible-situation, inferrable, inactive).
They are also labelled for their topicality (yes
/ no), and this annotation is accompanied by
a confidence value assigned by the annotator
(since it is a more subjective matter). Finally,
the focus/background partition is annotated,
together with the focus question that elicits the
corresponding answer. Asking the annotator to
also formulate the question is a way of arriving
at more reproducible decisions.
For all these annotation taks, Go?tze devel-
oped a series of questions (essentially a decision
tree) designed to lead the annotator to the ap-
propriate judgement.
3 Past, Present, Future Applications
Having explained the various layers of annota-
tion in PCC, we now turn to the question what
all this might be good for. This concerns on
the one hand the basic question of retrieval, i.e.
searching for information across the annotation
layers (see 3.1). On the other hand, we are in-
terested in the application of rhetorical analy-
sis or ?discourse parsing? (3.2 and 3.3), in text
generation (3.4), and in exploiting the corpus
for the development of improved models of dis-
course structure (3.5).
3.1 Retrieval
For displaying and querying the annoated text,
we make use of the Annis Linguistic Database
developed in our group for a large research effort
(?Sonderforschungsbereich?) revolving around
information structure.9 The implementation is
basically complete, yet some improvements and
extensions are still under way. The web-based
Annis imports data in a variety of XML formats
and tagsets and displays it in a tier-oriented
way (optionally, trees can be drawn more ele-
gantly in a separate window). Figure 2 shows a
screenshot (which is of somewhat limited value,
though, as color plays a major role in signalling
the different statuses of the information). In the
small window on the left, search queries can be
entered, here one for an NP that has been anno-
tated on the co-reference layer as bridging. The
portions of information in the large window can
be individually clicked visible or invisible; here
we have chosen to see (from top to bottom)
? the full text,
? the annotation values for the activated an-
notation set (co-reference),
? the actual annotation tiers, and
? the portion of text currently ?in focus?
(which also appears underlined in the full
text).
Different annotations of the same text are
mapped into the same data structure, so that
search queries can be formulated across annota-
tion levels. Thus it is possible, for illustration,
to look for a noun phrase (syntax tier) marked
as topic (information structure tier) that is in
a bridging relation (co-reference tier) to some
other noun phrase.
3.2 Stochastic rhetorical analysis
In an experiment on automatic rhetorical pars-
ing, the RST-annotations and PoS tags were
used by (Reitter 2003) as a training corpus
for statistical classification with Support Vector
Machines. Since 170 annotated texts constitute
a fairly small training set, Reitter found that
an overall recognition accuracy of 39% could
be achieved using his method. For the En-
glish RST-annotated corpus that is made avail-
able via LDC, his corresponding result is 62%.
Future work along these lines will incorporate
other layers of annotation, in particular the syn-
tax information.
9www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/sfb/
Figure 2: Screenshot of Annis Linguistic Database
3.3 Symbolic and knowledge-based
rhetorical analysis
We are experimenting with a hybrid statisti-
cal and knowledge-based system for discourse
parsing and summarization (Stede 2003), (Han-
neforth et al 2003), again targeting the genre
of commentaries. The idea is to have a pipeline
of shallow-analysis modules (tagging, chunk-
ing, discourse parsing based on connectives) and
map the resulting underspecified rhetorical tree
(see Section 2.4) into a knowledge base that may
contain domain and world knowledge for enrich-
ing the representation, e.g., to resolve references
that cannot be handled by shallow methods,
or to hypothesize coherence relations. In the
rhetorical tree, nuclearity information is then
used to extract a ?kernel tree? that supposedly
represents the key information from which the
summary can be generated (which in turn may
involve co-reference information, as we want to
avoid dangling pronouns in a summary). Thus
we are interested not in extraction, but actual
generation from representations that may be de-
veloped to different degrees of granularity.
In order to evaluate and advance this ap-
proach, it helps to feed into the knowledge base
data that is already enriched with some of the
desired information ? as in PCC. That is, we
can use the discourse parser on PCC texts, em-
ulating for instance a ?co-reference oracle? that
adds the information from our co-reference an-
notations. The knowledge base then can be
tested for its relation-inference capabilities on
the basis of full-blown co-reference information.
Conversely, we can use the full rhetorical tree
from the annotations and tune the co-reference
module. The general idea for the knowledge-
based part is to have the system use as much
information as it can find at its disposal to pro-
duce a target representation as specific as pos-
sible and as underspecified as necessary. For
developing these mechanisms, the possibility to
feed in hand-annotated information is very use-
ful.
3.4 Salience-based text generation
Text generation, or at least the two phases
of text planning and sentence planning, is a
process driven partly by well-motivated choices
(e.g., use this lexeme X rather than that more
colloquial near-synonym Y ) and partly by con-
ventionalized patterns (e.g., order of informa-
tion in news reports). And then there are deci-
sions that systems typically hard-wire, because
the linguistic motivation for making them is
not well understood yet. Preferences for con-
stituent order (especially in languages with rel-
atively free word order) often belong to this
group. Trying to integrate constituent ordering
and choice of referring expressions, (Chiarcos
2003) developed a numerical model of salience
propagation that captures various factors of au-
thor?s intentions and of information structure
for ordering sentences as well as smaller con-
stituents, and picking appropriate referring ex-
pressions.10 Chiarcos used the PCC annota-
tions of co-reference and information structure
to compute his numerical models for salience
projection across the generated texts.
3.5 Improved models of discourse
structure
Besides the applications just sketched, the over-
arching goal of developing the PCC is to build
up an empirical basis for investigating phe-
nomena of discourse structure. One key issue
here is to seek a discourse-based model of in-
formation structure. Since Danes?? proposals
of ?thematic development patterns?, a few sug-
gestions have been made as to the existence
of a level of discourse structure that would
predict the information structure of sentences
within texts. (Hartmann 1984), for example,
used the term Reliefgebung to characterize the
distibution of main and minor information in
texts (similar to the notion of nuclearity in
RST). (Brandt 1996) extended these ideas to-
ward a conception of kommunikative Gewich-
tung (?communicative-weight assignment?). A
different notion of information structure, is used
in work such as that of (?), who tried to char-
acterize felicitous constituent ordering (theme
choice, in particular) that leads to texts pre-
senting information in a natural, ?flowing? way
rather than with abrupt shifts of attention. ?
In order to ground such approaches in linguistic
observation and description, a multi-level anno-
10For an exposition of the idea as applied to the task
of text planning, see (Chiarcos, Stede 2004).
tation like that of PCC can be exploited to look
for correlations in particular between syntactic
structure, choice of referring expressions, and
sentence-internal information structure.
A different but supplementary perspective on
discourse-based information structure is taken
by one of our partner projects11, which is inter-
ested in correlations between prosody and dis-
course structure. A number of PCC commen-
taries will be read by professional news speak-
ers and prosodic features be annotated, so that
the various annotation layers can be set into
correspondence with intonation patterns. In fo-
cus is in particular the correlation with rhetor-
ical structure, i.e., the question whether spe-
cific rhetorical relations ? or groups of relations
in particular configurations ? are signalled by
speakers with prosodic means.
Besides information structure, the second
main goal is to enhance current models of
rhetorical structure. As already pointed out in
Section 2.4, current theories diverge not only on
the number and definition of relations but also
on apects of structure, i.e., whether a tree is
sufficient as a representational device or gen-
eral graphs are required (and if so, whether
any restrictions can be placed on these graph?s
structures ? cf. (Webber et al, 2003)). Again,
the idea is that having a picture of syntax,
co-reference, and sentence-internal information
structure at one?s disposal should aid in find-
ing models of discourse structure that are more
explanatory and can be empirically supported.
4 Conclusions
The PCC is not the result of a funded project.
Instead, the designs of the various annotation
layers and the actual annotation work are re-
sults of a series of diploma theses, of students?
work in course projects, and to some extent of
paid assistentships. This means that the PCC
cannot grow particularly quickly. After the first
step towards breadth had been taken with the
PoS-tagging, RST annotation, and URML con-
version of the entire corpus of 170 texts12, em-
phasis shifted towards depth. Hence we decided
to select ten commentaries to form a ?core cor-
pus?, for which the entire range of annotation
levels was realized, so that experiments with
multi-level querying could commence. Cur-
11www.ling.uni-potsdam.de/sfb/projekt a3.php
12This step was carried out in the course of the
diploma thesis work of David Reitter (2003), which de-
serves special mention here.
rently, some annotations (in particular the con-
nectives and scopes) have already moved be-
yond the core corpus; the others will grow step
by step.
The kind of annotation work presented here
would clearly benefit from the emergence of
standard formats and tag sets, which could lead
to sharable resources of larger size. Clearly this
poses a number of research challenges, though,
such as the applicability of tag sets across dif-
ferent languages. Nonetheless, the prospect of a
network of annotated discourse resources seems
particularly promising if not only a single anno-
tation layer is used but a whole variety of them,
so that a systematic search for correlations be-
tween them becomes possible, which in turn can
lead to more explanatory models of discourse
structure.
References
N. Asher, A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of Con-
versation. Cambridge University Press.
M. Brandt. 1996. Subordination und Parenthese
als Mittel der Informationsstrukturierung in
Texten. In. W. Motsch (ed.): Ebenen der
Textstruktur. Tu?bingen: Niemeyer.
S. Brants, S. Dipper, S. Hansen, W. Lezius, G.
Smith. 2002. The TIGER Treebank. In: Proc.
of the Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories. Sozopol.
L. Carlson, D. Marcu. 2001. Discourse Tagging
Reference Manual. Ms., Univ. of Southern
California / Information Sciences Institute.
C. Chiarcos. 2003. Eine Satzplanungskompo-
nente fu?r die Textgenerierung. In: Uta
Seewald-Heeg (ed.): Sprachtechnologie fu?r die
multilinguale Kommunikation. Bonn: gardez.
(Short version of Diploma Thesis, Technische
Universita?t Berlin)
C. Chiarcos, M. Stede. 2004. Salience-Driven
Text Planning. To appear in: Proc. of the
Third Int?l Conference on Natural Language
Generation (INLG), Careys Manor (UK).
P. Fries. 1981. On the Status of Theme in En-
glish. Forum Linguisticum 6.1:1-38.
M. Go?tze. 2003. Zur Annotation von Infor-
mationsstruktur. Diploma thesis, Universita?t
Potsdam, Inst. of Linguistics.
J. Gross. 2003. Algorithmen zur Behandlung
von Anaphora in Zeitungskommentaren.
Diploma thesis, Technische Universita?t
Berlin.
T. Hanneforth, S. Heintze, M. Stede. 2003.
Rhetorical Parsing with Underspecification
and Forests. In: Proc. of the HLT/NAACL
Conference (Companion Volume), Edmon-
ton/AL.
D. Hartmann. 1984. Reliefgebung: Infor-
mationsvordergrund und Informationshinter-
grund in Texten als Problem von Textlinguis-
tik und Stilistik. In: Wirkendes Wort 34:305-
323.
W. Mann, S. Thompson. 1988. Rhetorical
Structure Theory: A Theory of Text Orga-
nization. TEXT 8(3):243-281.
D. Reitter. 2003. Simple signals for complex
rhetorics: on rhetorical analysis with rich-
feature support vector modelds. In: Uta
Seewald-Heeg (ed.): Sprachtechnologie fu?r die
multilinguale Kommunikation. Bonn: gardez.
(Short version of Diploma Thesis, Universita?t
Potsdam, Inst. of Linguistics)
D. Reitter, M. Stede. 2003. Step by step: un-
derspecified markup in incremental rhetorical
analysis. In: Proc. of the 4th Int?l Workshop
on Linguistically Interpreted Corpora (LINC-
03), Budapest.
H. Schauer, U. Hahn. 2001. Anaphoric cues
for coherence relations. In: Proc. of ?Recent
Advances in Natural Language Processing?-
RANLP 2001. Tzigov Chark, Bulgaria.
M. Stede. 2003. Surfaces and depths in text un-
derstanding: the case of newspaper commen-
tary. In: Proc. of the HLT/NAACL Work-
shop on Text Meaning, Edmonton/AL.
M. Stede, S. Heintze. 2004. Machine-assisted
rhetorical structure annotation. To appear in:
Proc. of the 20th Int?l Conference on Compu-
tational Linguistics (COLING), Geneva.
B. Webber, A. Knott, M. Stone, A. Joshi. 2003.
Anaphora and Discourse Structure. Compu-
tational Linguistics 29(4):545-588.
