An Experiment Setup for Collecting Data for Adaptive Output Planning
in a Multimodal Dialogue System
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova?, Nate Blaylock,
Ciprian Gerstenberger, Verena Rieser
Saarland University, Saarbru?cken, Germany
korbay@coli.uni-sb.de
Tilman Becker, Michael Kai?er,
Peter Poller, Jan Schehl
DFKI, Saarbru?cken, Germany
tilman.becker@dfki.de
Abstract
We describe a Wizard-of-Oz experiment setup for
the collection of multimodal interaction data for a
Music Player application. This setup was devel-
oped and used to collect experimental data as part
of a project aimed at building a flexible multimodal
dialogue system which provides an interface to an
MP3 player, combining speech and screen input
and output. Besides the usual goal of WOZ data
collection to get realistic examples of the behav-
ior and expectations of the users, an equally im-
portant goal for us was to observe natural behavior
of multiple wizards in order to guide our system
development. The wizards? responses were there-
fore not constrained by a script. One of the chal-
lenges we had to address was to allow the wizards
to produce varied screen output a in real time. Our
setup includes a preliminary screen output planning
module, which prepares several versions of possi-
ble screen output. The wizards were free to speak,
and/or to select a screen output.
1 Introduction
In the larger context of the TALK project1 we are develop-
ing a multimodal dialogue system for a Music Player appli-
cation for in-car and in-home use, which should support nat-
ural, flexible interaction and collaborative behavior. The sys-
tem functionalities include playback control, manipulation of
playlists, and searching a large MP3 database. We believe
that in order to achieve this goal, the system needs to provide
advanced adaptive multimodal output.
We are conducting Wizard-of-Oz experiments
[Bernsen et al, 1998] in order to guide the development
of our system. On the one hand, the experiments should
give us data on how the potential users interact with such
an application. But we also need data on the multimodal
interaction strategies that the system should employ to
achieve the desired naturalness, flexibility and collaboration.
We therefore need a setup where the wizard has freedom of
1TALK (Talk and Look: Tools for Ambient Linguistic Knowl-
edge; www.talk-project.org) is funded by the EU as project
No. IST-507802 within the 6th Framework program.
choice w.r.t. their response and its realization through single
or multiple modalities. This makes it different from previous
multimodal experiments, e.g., in the SmartKom project
[Tu?rk, 2001], where the wizard(s) followed a strict script.
But what we need is also different in several aspects from
taking recordings of straight human-human interactions: the
wizard does not hear the user?s input directly, but only gets a
transcription, parts of which are sometimes randomly deleted
(in order to approximate imperfect speech recognition);
the user does not hear the wizard?s spoken output directly
either, as the latter is transcribed and re-synthesized (to
produce system-like sounding output). The interactions
should thus more realistically approximate an interaction
with a system, and thereby contain similar phenomena (cf.
[Duran et al, 2001]).
The wizard should be able to present different screen out-
puts in different context, depending on the search results and
other aspects. However, the wizard cannot design screens on
the fly, because that would take too long. Therefore, we de-
veloped a setup which includes modules that support the wiz-
ard by providing automatically calculated screen output op-
tions the wizard can select from if s/he want to present some
screen output.
Outline In this paper we describe our experiment setup and
the first experiences with it. In Section 2 we overview the
research goals that our setup was designed to address. The
actual setup is presented in detail in Section 3. In Section 4
we describe the collected data, and we summarize the lessons
we learnt on the basis of interviewing the experiment partici-
pants. We briefly discuss possible improvements of the setup
and our future plans with the data in Section 5.
2 Goals of the Multimodal Experiment
Our aim was to gather interactions where the wizard can com-
bine spoken and visual feedback, namely, displaying (com-
plete or partial) results of a database search, and the user can
speak or select on the screen.
Multimodal Presentation Strategies The main aim was to
identify strategies for the screen output, and for the multi-
modal output presentation. In particular, we want to learn
Figure 1: Multimodal Wizard-of-Oz data collection setup for
an in-car music player application, using the Lane Change
driving simulator. Top right: User, Top left: Wizard, Bottom:
transcribers.
when and what content is presented (i) verbally, (ii) graphi-
cally or (iii) by some combination of both modes. We expect
that when both modalities are used, they do not convey the
same content or use the same level of granularity. These are
important questions for multimodal fission and for turn plan-
ning in each modality.
We also plan to investigate how the presentation strategies
influence the responses of the user, in particular w.r.t. what
further criteria the user specifies, and how she conveys them.
Multimodal Clarification Strategies The experiments
should also serve to identify potential strategies for multi-
modal clarification behavior and investigate individual strat-
egy performance. The wizards? behavior will give us an ini-
tial model how to react when faced with several sources of
interpretation uncertainty. In particular we are interested in
what medium the wizard chooses for the clarification request,
what kind of grounding level he addresses, and what ?sever-
ity? he indicates. 2 In order to invoke clarification behavior
we introduced uncertainties on several levels, for example,
multiple matches in the database, lexical ambiguities (e.g., ti-
tles that can be interpreted denoting a song or an album), and
errors on the acoustic level. To simulate non-understanding
on the acoustic level we corrupted some of the user utterances
by randomly deleting parts of them.
3 Experiment Setup
We describe here some of the details of the experiment. The
experimental setup is shown schematically in Figure 1. There
are five people involved in each session of the experiment: an
experiment leader, two transcribers, a user and a wizard.
The wizards play the role of an MP3 player application
and are given access to a database of information (but not
actual music) of more than 150,000 music albums (almost 1
2Severity describes the number of hypotheses indicated by the
wizard: having no interpretation, an uncertain interpretation, or sev-
eral ambiguous interpretations.
Figure 2: Screenshot from the FreeDB-based database appli-
cation, as seen by the wizard. First-level of choice what to
display.
million songs), extracted from the FreeDB database.3 Fig-
ure 2 shows an example screen shot of the music database
as it is presented to the wizard. Subjects are given a set of
predefined tasks and are told to accomplish them by using
an MP3 player with a multimodal interface. Tasks include
playing songs/albums and building playlists, where the sub-
ject is given varying amounts of information to help them
find/decide on which song to play or add to the playlist. In
a part of the session the users also get a primary driving task,
using a Lane Change driving simulator [Mattes, 2003]. This
enabled us to test the viability of combining primary and sec-
ondary task in our experiment setup. We also aimed to gain
initial insight regarding the difference in interaction flow un-
der such conditions, particularly with regard to multimodal-
ity.
The wizards can speak freely and display the search result
or the playlist on the screen. The users can also speak as well
as make selections on the screen.
The user?s utterances are immediately transcribed by a typ-
ist and also recorded. The transcription is then presented to
the wizard.4 We did this for two reasons: (1) To deprive
the wizards of information encoded in the intonation of utter-
ances, because our system will not have access to it either. (2)
To be able to corrupt the user input in a controlled way, sim-
ulating understanding problems at the acoustic level. Unlike
[Stuttle et al, 2004], who simulate automatic speech recogni-
tion errors using phone-confusion models, we used a tool that
?deletes? parts of the transcribed utterances, replacing them
by three dots. Word deletion was triggered by the experiment
leader. The word deletion rate varied: 20% of the utterances
got weakly and 20% strongly corrupted. In 60% of the cases
the wizard saw the transcribed speech uncorrupted.
The wizard?s utterances are also transcribed (and recorded)
3Freely available at http://www.freedb.org
4We were not able to use a real speech recognition system, be-
cause we do not have one trained for this domain. This is one of the
purposes the collected data will be used for.
Figure 3: Screenshot from the display presentation tool offer-
ing options for screen output to the wizard for second-level
of choice what to display an how.
and presented to the user via a speech synthesizer. There are
two reasons for doing this: One is to maintain the illusion for
the subjects that they are actually interacting with a system,
since it is known that there are differences between human-
human and human-computer dialogue [Duran et al, 2001],
and we want to elicit behavior in the latter condition; the
other has to do with the fact that synthesized speech is imper-
fect and sometimes difficult to understand, and we wanted to
reproduce this condition.
The transcription is also supported by a typing and spelling
correction module to minimize speech synthesis errors and
thus help maintain the illusion of a working system.
Since it would be impossible for the wizard to construct
layouts for screen output on the fly, he gets support for his
task from the WOZ system: When the wizard performs a
database query, a graphical interface presents him a first level
of output alternatives, as shown in Figure 2. The choices are
found (i) albums, (ii) songs, or (iii) artists. For a second level
of choice, the system automatically computes four possible
screens, as shown in Figure 3. The wizard can chose one of
the offered options to display to the user, or decide to clear
the user?s screen. Otherwise, the user?s screen remains un-
changed. It is therefore up to the wizard to decide whether
to use speech only, display only, or to combine speech and
display.
The types of screen output are (i) a simple text-message
conveying how many results were found, (ii) output of a list
of just the names (of albums, songs or artists) with the cor-
responding number of matches (for songs) or length (for al-
bums), (iii) a table of the complete search results, and (iv) a
table of the complete search results, but only displaying a sub-
set of columns. For each screen output type, the system uses
heuristics based on the search to decide, e.g., which columns
should be displayed. These four screens are presented to the
wizard in different quadrants on a monitor (cf. Figure 3),
allowing for selection with a simple mouse click. The heuris-
tics for the decision what to display implement preliminary
strategies we designed for our system. We are aware that due
to the use of these heuristics, the wizard?s output realization
may not be always ideal. We have collected feedback from
both the wizards and the users in order to evaluate whether
the output options were satisfactory (cf. Section 4 for more
details).
Technical Setup To keep our experimental system modu-
lar and flexible we implemented it on the basis of the Open
Agent Architecture (OAA) [Martin et al, 1999], which is a
framework for integrating a community of software agents in
a distributed environment. Each system module is encapsu-
lated by an OAA wrapper to form an OAA agent, which is
able to communicate with the OAA community. The exper-
imental system consists of 12 agents, all of them written in
Java. We made use of an OAA monitor agent which comes
with the current OAA distribution to trace all communication
events within the system for logging purposes.
The setup ran distributed over six PCs running different
versions of Windows and Linux.5
4 Collected Data and Experience
The SAMMIE-26 corpus collected in this experiment contains
data from 24 different subjects, who each participated in one
session with one of our six wizards. Each subject worked on
four tasks, first two without driving and then two with driving.
The duration was restricted to twice 15 minutes. Tasks were
of two types: searching for a title either in the database or in
an existing playlist, building a playlist satisfying a number of
constraints. Each of the two sets for each subject contained
one task of each type. The tasks again differed in how specific
information was provided. We aimed to keep the difficulty
level constant across users. The interactions were carried out
in German.7
The data for each session consists of a video and audio
recording and a logfile. Besides the transcriptions of the spo-
ken utterances, a number of other features have been anno-
tated automatically in the log files of the experiment, e.g.,
the wizard?s database query and the number of found results,
the type and form of the presentation screen chosen by the
wizard, etc. The gathered logging information for a single
experiment session consists of the communication events in
chronological order, each marked by a timestamp. Based on
this information, we can recapitulate the number of turns and
the specific times that were necessary to accomplish a user
task. We expect to use this data to analyze correlations be-
5We would like to thank our colleagues from CLT Sprachtech-
nologie http://www.clt-st.de/ for helping us to set up the
laboratory.
6SAMMIE stands for Saarbru?cken Multimodal MP3 Player In-
teraction Experiment. We have so far conducted two series of data-
collection experiments: SAMMIE-1 involved only spoken interaction
(cf. [Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2005] for more details), SAMMIE-2 is
the multimodal experiment described in this paper.
7However, most of the titles and artist names in the music
database are in English.
tween queries, numbers of results, and spoken and graphical
presentation strategies.
Whenever the wizard made a clarification request, the
experiment leader invoked a questionnaire window on the
screen, where the wizard had to classify his clarification re-
quest according to the primary source of the understanding
problem. At the end of each task, users were asked to what
extent they believed they accomplished their tasks and how
satisfied they were with the results. Similar to methods used
by [Skantze, 2003] and [Williams and Young, 2004], we plan
to include subjective measures of task completion and cor-
rectness of results in our evaluation matrix, as task descrip-
tions can be interpreted differently by different users.
Each subject was interviewed immediately after the ses-
sion. The wizards were interviewed once the whole experi-
ment was over. The interviews were carried out verbally, fol-
lowing a prepared list of questions. We present below some
of the points gathered through these interviews.
Wizard Interviews All 6 wizards rated the overall under-
standing as good, i.e., that communication completed suc-
cessfully. However, they reported difficulties due to delays in
utterance transmission in both directions, which caused un-
necessary repetitions due to unintended turn overlap.
There were differences in how different wizards rated and
used the different screen output options: The table containing
most of the information about the queried song(s) or album(s)
was rated best and shown most often by some wizards, while
others thought it contained too much information and would
not be clear at first glance for the users and hence they used
it less or never. The screen option containing the least infor-
mation in tabular form, namely only a list of songs/albums
with their length, received complementary judgments: some
of the wizards found it useless because it contained too little
information, and they thus did not use it, and others found it
very useful because it would not confuse the user by present-
ing too much information, and they thus used it frequently.
Finally, the screen containing a text message conveying only
the number of matches, if any, has been hardly used by the
wizards. The differences in the wizards? opinions about what
the users would find useful or not clearly indicate the need
for evaluation of the usefulness of the different screen output
options in particular contexts from the users? view point.
When showing screen output, the most common pattern
used by the wizards was to tell the user what was shown (e.g.,
I?ll show you the songs by Prince), and to display the screen.
Some wizards adapted to the user?s requests: if asked to show
something (e.g., Show me the songs by Prince), they would
show it without verbal comments; but if asked a question
(e.g., What songs by Prince are there? or What did you find?),
they would show the screen output and answer in speech.
Concerning the adaptation of multimodal presentation
strategies w.r.t. whether the user was driving or not, four
of the six wizards reported that they consciously used speech
instead of screen output if possible when the user was driving.
The remaining two wizards did not adapt their strategy.
On the whole, interviewing the wizards brought valuable
information on presentation strategies and the use of modal-
ities, but we expect to gain even more insight after the an-
notation and evaluation of the collected data. Besides ob-
servations about the interaction with the users, the wizards
also gave us various suggestions concerning the software used
in the experiment, e.g., the database interface (e.g., the pos-
sibility to decide between strict search and search for par-
tial matches, and fuzzy search looking for items with similar
spelling when no hits are found), the screen options presenter
(e.g., ordering of columns w.r.t. their order in the database in-
terface, the possibility to highlight some of the listed items),
and the speech synthesis system.
Subject Interviews In order to use the wizards? behavior as
a model for interaction design, we need to evaluate the wiz-
ards? strategies. We used user satisfaction, task experience,
and multi-modal feedback behavior as evaluation metrics.
The 24 experimental subjects were all native speakers of
German with good English skills. They were all students
(equally spread across subject areas), half of them male and
half female, and most of them were between 20 to 30 years
old.
In order to calculate user satisfaction, users were inter-
viewed to evaluate the system?s performance with a user sat-
isfaction survey. The survey probed different aspects of the
users? perception of their interaction with the system. We
asked the users to evaluate a set of five core metrics on a
5-point Likert scale. We followed [Walker et al, 2002] def-
inition of the overall user satisfaction as the sum of text-to-
speech synthesis performance, task ease, user expertise, over-
all difficulty and future use. The mean for user satisfaction
across all dialogues was 15.0 (with a standard derivation of
2.9). 8 A one-way ANOVA for user satisfaction between wiz-
ards (df=5, F=1.52 p=0.05) shows no significant difference
across wizards, meaning that the system performance was
judged to be about equally good for all wizards.
To measure task experience we elicited data on perceived
task success and satisfaction on a 5-point Likert scale after
each task was completed. For all the subjects the final per-
ceived task success was 4.4 and task satisfaction 3.9 across
the 4 tasks each subject had to complete. For task success
as well as for task satisfaction no significant variance across
wizards was detected.
Furthermore the subjects were asked about the employed
multi-modal presentation and clarification strategies.
The clarification strategies employed by the wizards
seemed to be successful: From the subjects? point of view,
mutual understanding was very good and the few misunder-
standings could be easily resolved. Nevertheless, in the case
of disambiguation requests and when grounding an utterance,
subjects ask for more display feedback. It is interesting to
note that subjects judged understanding difficulties on higher
levels of interpretation (especially reference resolution prob-
lems and problems with interpreting the intention) to be more
costly than problems on lower levels of understanding (like
the acoustic understanding). For the clarification strategy this
8[Walker et al, 2002] reported an average user satisfaction of
16.2 for 9 Communicator systems.
implies that the system should engage in clarification at the
lowest level a error was detected.9
Multi-modal presentation strategies were perceived to be
helpful in general, having a mean of 3.1 on a 5-point Lik-
ert scale. However, the subjects reported that too much in-
formation was being displayed especially for the tasks with
driving. 85.7% of the subjects reported that the screen out-
put was sometimes distracting them. 76.2% of the sub-
jects would prefer to more verbal feedback, especially while
driving. On a 3-point Likert scale subjects evaluated the
amount of the information presented verbally to be about
right (mean of 1.8), whereas they found the information pre-
sented on the screen to be too much (mean of 2.3). Stud-
ies by [Bernsen and Dybkjaer, 2001] on the appropriateness
of using verbal vs. graphical feedback for in-car dialogues
indicate that the need for text output is very limited. Some
subjects in that study, as well subjects in our study report that
they would prefer to not have to use the display at all while
driving. On the other hand subjects in our study perceived the
screen output to be very helpful in less stressful driving situa-
tions and when not driving (e.g. for memory assistance, clari-
fications etc.). Especially when they want to verify whether a
complex task was finally completed (e.g. building a playlist),
they ask for a displayed proof. For modality selection in in-
car dialogues the driver?s mental workload on primary and
secondary task has to be carefully evaluated with respect to a
situation model.
With respect to multi-modality subjects also asked for
more personalized data presentation. We therefore need to
develop intelligent ways to reduce the amount of data being
displayed. This could build on prior work on the generation
of ?tailored? responses in spoken dialogue according to a user
model [Moore et al, 2004].
The results for multi-modal feedback behavior showed no
significant variations across wizards except for the general
helpfulness of multi-modal strategies. An ANOVA Planned
Comparison of the wizard with the lowest mean against the
other wizards showed that his behavior was significantly
worse. It is interesting to note, that this wizard was using
the display less than the others. We might consider not to in-
clude the 4 sessions with this wizard in our output generation
model.
We also tried to analyze in more detail how the wizards?
presentation strategies influenced the results. The option
which was chosen most of the time was to present a table
with the search results (78.6%); to present a list was only cho-
sen in 17.5% of the cases and text only 0.04%. The wizards?
choices varied significantly only for presenting the table op-
tion. The wizard who was rated lowest for multimodality was
using the table option less, indicating that this option should
be used more often. This is also supported by the fact that the
show table option is the only presentation strategy which is
positively correlated to how the user evaluated multimodality
(Spearman?s r = 0.436*). We also could find a 2-tailed corre-
9Note that engaging at the lowest level just helps to save dialogue
?costs?. Other studies have shown that user satisfaction is higher
for strategies that would ?hide? the understanding error by asking
questions on higher levels [Skantze, 2003], [Raux et al, 2005]
lation between user satisfaction and multimodality judgment
(Spearman?s r = 0.658**). This indicates the importance of
good multimodal presentation strategies for user satisfaction.
Finally, the subjects were asked for own comments. They
liked to be able to provide vague information, e.g., ask for ?an
oldie?, and were expecting collaborative suggestions. They
also appreciated collaborative proposals based on inferences
made from previous conversations.
In sum, as the measures for user satisfaction, task experi-
ence, and multi-modal feedback strategies, the subjects? judg-
ments show a positive trend. The dialogue strategies em-
ployed by most of the wizards seem to be a good starting
point for building a baseline system. Furthermore, the results
indicate that intelligent multi-modal generation needs to be
adaptive to user and situation models.
5 Conclusions and Future Steps
We have presented an experiment setup that enables us to
gather multimodal interaction data aimed at studying not only
the behavior of the users of the simulated system, but also
that of the wizards. In order to simulate a dialogue system in-
teraction, the wizards were only shown transcriptions of the
user utterances, sometimes corrupted, to simulate automatic
speech recognition problems. The wizard?s utterances were
also transcribed and presented to the user through a speech
synthesizer. In order to make it possible for the wizards to
produce contextually varied screen output in real time, we
have included a screen output planning module which auto-
matically calculated several screen output versions every time
the wizard ran a database query. The wizards were free to
speak and/or display screen output. The users were free to
speak or select on the screen. In a part of each session, the
user was occupied by a primary driving task.
The main challenge for an experiment setup as described
here is the considerable delay between user input and wizard
response. This is due partly to the transcription and spelling
correction step and partly due to the time it takes the wizard to
decide on and enter a query to the database, then select a pre-
sentation and in parallel speak to the user. We have yet to ana-
lyze the exact distribution of time needed for these tasks. Sev-
eral ways can be chosen to speed up the process. Transcrip-
tion can be eliminated either by using speech recognition and
dealing with its errors, or instead applying signal processing
software, e.g., to filter out prosodic information from the user
utterance and/or to transform the wizard?s utterance into syn-
thetically sounding speech (e.g., using a vocoder). Database
search can be sped up in a number of ways too, ranging from
allowing selection directly from the transcribed text to auto-
matically preparing default searches by analyzing the user?s
utterance. Note, however, that the latter will most likely prej-
udice the wizard to stick to the proposed search.
We plan to annotate the corpus, most importantly w.r.t.
wizard presentation strategies and context features relevant
for the choice between them. We also plan to compare the
presentation strategies to the strategies in speech-only mode,
for which we collected data in an earlier experiment (cf.
[Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2005]).
For clarification strategies previous studies already showed
that the decision process needs to be highly dynamic by tak-
ing into account various features such as interpretation uncer-
tainties and local utility [Paek and Horvitz, 2000]. We plan
to use the wizard data to learn an initial multi-modal clarifi-
cation policy and later on apply reinforcement learning meth-
ods to the problem in order to account for long-term dialogue
goals, such as task success and user satisfaction.
The screen output options used in the experiment will also
be employed in the baseline system we are currently imple-
menting. The challenges involved there are to decide (i) when
to produce screen output, (ii) what (and how) to display and
(iii) what the corresponding speech output should be. We will
analyze the corpus in order to determine what the suitable
strategies are.
References
[Bernsen and Dybkjaer, 2001] Niels Ole Bernsen and Laila
Dybkjaer. Exploring natural interaction in the car. In
CLASS Workshop on Natural Interactivity and Intelligent
Interactive Information Representation, 2001.
[Bernsen et al, 1998] N. O. Bernsen, H. Dybkj?r, and
L. Dybkj?r. Designing Interactive Speech Systems ?
From First Ideas to User Testing. Springer, 1998.
[Duran et al, 2001] Christine Duran, John Aberdeen, Laurie
Damianos, and Lynette Hirschman. Comparing several as-
pects of human-computer and human-human dialogues. In
Proceedings of the 2nd SIGDIAL Workshop on Discourse
and Dialogue, Aalborg, 1-2 September 2001, pages 48?57,
2001.
[Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2005] Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova?,
Tilman Becker, Nate Blaylock, Ciprian Gerstenberger,
Michael Kai?er, Peter Poler, Jan Schehl, and Verena
Rieser. Presentation strategies for flexible multimodal
interaction with a music player. In Proceedings of
DIALOR?05 (The 9th workshop on the semantics and
pragmatics of dialogue (SEMDIAL), 2005.
[Martin et al, 1999] D. L. Martin, A. J. Cheyer, and D. B.
Moran. The open agent architecture: A framework for
building distributed software systems. Applied Artificial
Intelligence: An International Journal, 13(1?2):91?128,
Jan?Mar 1999.
[Mattes, 2003] Stefan Mattes. The lane-change-task as a tool
for driver distraction evaluation. In Proceedings of IGfA,
2003.
[Moore et al, 2004] Johanna D. Moore, Mary Ellen Foster,
Oliver Lemon, and Michael White. Generating tailored,
comparative descriptions in spoken dialogue. In Proceed-
ings of the Seventeenth International Florida Artificial In-
telligence Research Sociey Conference, AAAI Press, 2004.
[Paek and Horvitz, 2000] Tim Paek and Eric Horvitz. Con-
versation as action under uncertainty. In Proceedings of
the Sixteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial In-
telligence, 2000.
[Raux et al, 2005] Antoine Raux, Brian Langner, Dan Bo-
hus, Allan W. Black, and Maxine Eskenazi. Let?s go pub-
lic! taking a spoken dialog system to the real world. 2005.
[Skantze, 2003] Gabriel Skantze. Exploring human error
handling strategies: Implications for spoken dialogue sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the ISCA Tutorial and Research
Workshop on Error Handling in Spoken Dialogue Systems,
2003.
[Stuttle et al, 2004] Matthew Stuttle, Jason Williams, and
Steve Young. A framework for dialogue data collection
with a simulated asr channel. In Proceedings of the IC-
SLP, 2004.
[Tu?rk, 2001] Ulrich Tu?rk. The technical processing in
smartkom data collection: a case study. In Proceedings
of Eurospeech2001, Aalborg, Denmark, 2001.
[Walker et al, 2002] Marylin Walker, R. Passonneau, J. Ab-
erdeen, J. Boland, E. Bratt, J. Garofolo, L. Hirschman,
A. Le, S. Lee, S. Narayanan, K. Papineni, B. Pellom,
J. Polifroni, A. Potamianos, P. Prabhu, A. Rudnicky,
G. Sandersa, S. Seneff, D. Stallard, and S. Whittaker.
Cross-site evaluation in darpa communicator: The june
2000 data collection. 2002.
[Williams and Young, 2004] Jason D. Williams and Steve
Young. Characterizing task-oriented dialog using a sim-
ulated asr channel. In Proceedings of the ICSLP, 2004.
