Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, pages 33?40, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluating Automatic Summaries of Meeting Recordings
Gabriel Murray
Centre for Speech Technology Research
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Steve Renals
Centre for Speech Technology Research
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Jean Carletta
Human Communication Research Centre
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Johanna Moore
Human Communication Research Centre
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Abstract
The research below explores schemes for
evaluating automatic summaries of busi-
ness meetings, using the ICSI Meeting
Corpus (Janin et al, 2003). Both au-
tomatic and subjective evaluations were
carried out, with a central interest be-
ing whether or not the two types of eval-
uations correlate with each other. The
evaluation metrics were used to compare
and contrast differing approaches to au-
tomatic summarization, the deterioration
of summary quality on ASR output ver-
sus manual transcripts, and to determine
whether manual extracts are rated signifi-
cantly higher than automatic extracts.
1 Introduction
In the field of automatic summarization, it is widely
agreed upon that more attention needs to be paid
to the development of standardized approaches to
summarization evaluation. For example, the cur-
rent incarnation of the Document Understanding
Conference is putting its main focus on the de-
velopment of evaluation schemes, including semi-
automatic approaches to evaluation. One semi-
automatic approach to evaluation is ROUGE (Lin
and Hovy, 2003), which is primarily based on n-
gram co-occurrence between automatic and human
summaries. A key question of the research con-
tained herein is how well ROUGE correlates with
human judgments of summaries within the domain
of meeting speech. If it is determined that the two
types of evaluations correlate strongly, then ROUGE
will likely be a valuable and robust evaluation tool in
the development stage of a summarization system,
when the cost of frequent human evaluations would
be prohibitive.
Three basic approaches to summarization are
evaluated and compared below: Maximal Marginal
Relevance, Latent Semantic Analysis, and feature-
based classification. The other major comparisons
in this paper are between summaries on ASR ver-
sus manual transcripts, and between manual and au-
tomatic extracts. For example, regarding the for-
mer, it might be expected that summaries on ASR
transcripts would be rated lower than summaries on
manual transcripts, due to speech recognition errors.
Regarding the comparison of manual and automatic
extracts, the manual extracts can be thought of as
a gold standard for the extraction task, represent-
ing the performance ceiling that the automatic ap-
proaches are aiming for.
More detailed descriptions of the summarization
approaches and experimental setup can be found in
(Murray et al, 2005). That work relied solely on
ROUGE as an evaluation metric, and this paper pro-
ceeds to investigate whether ROUGE alone is a reli-
able metric for our summarization domain, by com-
paring the automatic scores with recently-gathered
human evaluations. Also, it should be noted that
while we are at the moment only utilizing intrinsic
evaluation methods, our ultimate plan is to evalu-
ate these meeting summaries extrinsically within the
context of a meeting browser (Wellner et al, 2005).
33
2 Description of the Summarization
Approaches
2.1 Maximal Marginal Relevance (MMR)
MMR (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998) uses the
vector-space model of text retrieval and is particu-
larly applicable to query-based and multi-document
summarization. The MMR algorithm chooses
sentences via a weighted combination of query-
relevance and redundancy scores, both derived using
cosine similarity. The MMR score ScMMR(i)for a
given sentence Si in the document is given by
ScMMR(i) =
?(Sim(Si, D))? (1? ?)(Sim(Si, Summ)) ,
where D is the average document vector, Summ
is the average vector from the set of sentences al-
ready selected, and ? trades off between relevance
and redundancy. Sim is the cosine similarity be-
tween two documents.
This implementation of MMR uses lambda an-
nealing so that relevance is emphasized while the
summary is still short and minimizing redundancy is
prioritized more highly as the summary lengthens.
2.2 Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
LSA is a vector-space approach which involves pro-
jecting the original term-document matrix to a re-
duced dimension representation. It is based on the
singular value decomposition (SVD) of an m ? n
term-document matrix A, whose elements Aij rep-
resent the weighted term frequency of term i in doc-
ument j. In SVD, the term-document matrix is de-
composed as follows:
A = USV T
where U is an m?n matrix of left-singular vectors,
S is an n ? n diagonal matrix of singular values,
and V is the n ? n matrix of right-singular vectors.
The rows of V T may be regarded as defining top-
ics, with the columns representing sentences from
the document. Following Gong and Liu (Gong and
Liu, 2001), summarization proceeds by choosing,
for each row in V T , the sentence with the highest
value. This process continues until the desired sum-
mary length is reached.
Two drawbacks of this method are that dimen-
sionality is tied to summary length and that good
sentence candidates may not be chosen if they do
not ?win? in any dimension (Steinberger and Jez?ek,
2004). The authors in (Steinberger and Jez?ek, 2004)
found one solution, by extracting a single LSA-
based sentence score, with variable dimensionality
reduction.
We address the same concerns, following the
Gong and Liu approach, but rather than extracting
the best sentence for each topic, the n best sentences
are extracted, with n determined by the correspond-
ing singular values from matrix S. The number of
sentences in the summary that will come from the
first topic is determined by the percentage that the
largest singular value represents out of the sum of all
singular values, and so on for each topic. Thus, di-
mensionality reduction is no longer tied to summary
length and more than one sentence per topic can be
chosen. Using this method, the level of dimension-
ality reduction is essentially learned from the data.
2.3 Feature-Based Approaches
Feature-based classification approaches have been
widely used in text and speech summarization, with
positive results (Kupiec et al, 1995). In this work
we combined textual and prosodic features, using
Gaussian mixture models for the extracted and non-
extracted classes. The prosodic features were the
mean and standard deviation of F0, energy, and du-
ration, all estimated and normalized at the word-
level, then averaged over the utterance. The two lex-
ical features were both TFIDF-based: the average
and the maximum TFIDF score for the utterance.
For our second feature-based approach, we de-
rived single LSA-based sentence scores (Steinberger
and Jez?ek, 2004) to complement the six features de-
scribed above, to determine whether such an LSA
sentence score is beneficial in determining sentence
importance. We reduced the original term-document
matrix to 300 dimensions; however, Steinberger and
Jez?ek found the greatest success in their work by re-
ducing to a single dimension (Steinberger, personal
communication). The LSA sentence score was ob-
tained using:
ScLSAi =
?
?
?
?
n?
k=1
v(i, k)2 ? ?(k)2 ,
34
where v(i, k) is the kth element of the ith sentence
vector and ?(k) is the corresponding singular value.
3 Experimental Setup
We used human summaries of the ICSI Meeting cor-
pus for evaluation and for training the feature-based
approaches. An evaluation set of six meetings was
defined and multiple human summaries were created
for these meetings, with each test meeting having ei-
ther three or four manual summaries. The remaining
meetings were regarded as training data and a single
human summary was created for these. Our sum-
maries were created as follows.
Annotators were given access to a graphical user
interface (GUI) for browsing an individual meeting
that included earlier human annotations: an ortho-
graphic transcription time-synchronized with the au-
dio, and a topic segmentation based on a shallow hi-
erarchical decomposition with keyword-based text
labels describing each topic segment. The annota-
tors were told to construct a textual summary of the
meeting aimed at someone who is interested in the
research being carried out, such as a researcher who
does similar work elsewhere, using four headings:
? general abstract: ?why are they meeting and
what do they talk about??;
? decisions made by the group;
? progress and achievements;
? problems described
The annotators were given a 200 word limit for each
heading, and told that there must be text for the gen-
eral abstract, but that the other headings may have
null annotations for some meetings.
Immediately after authoring a textual summary,
annotators were asked to create an extractive sum-
mary, using a different GUI. This GUI showed
both their textual summary and the orthographic
transcription, without topic segmentation but with
one line per dialogue act based on the pre-existing
MRDA coding (Shriberg et al, 2004) (The dialogue
act categories themselves were not displayed, just
the segmentation). Annotators were told to extract
dialogue acts that together would convey the infor-
mation in the textual summary, and could be used to
support the correctness of that summary. They were
given no specific instructions about the number or
percentage of acts to extract or about redundant dia-
logue act. For each dialogue act extracted, they were
then required in a second pass to choose the sen-
tences from the textual summary supported by the
dialogue act, creating a many-to-many mapping be-
tween the recording and the textual summary.
The MMR and LSA approaches are both unsuper-
vised and do not require labelled training data. For
both feature-based approaches, the GMM classifiers
were trained on a subset of the training data repre-
senting approximately 20 hours of meetings.
We performed summarization using both the hu-
man transcripts and speech recognizer output. The
speech recognizer output was created using base-
line acoustic models created using a training set
consisting of 300 hours of conversational telephone
speech from the Switchboard and Callhome cor-
pora. The resultant models (cross-word triphones
trained on conversational side based cepstral mean
normalised PLP features) were then MAP adapted
to the meeting domain using the ICSI corpus (Hain
et al, 2005). A trigram language model was em-
ployed. Fair recognition output for the whole corpus
was obtained by dividing the corpus into four parts,
and employing a leave one out procedure (training
the acoustic and language models on three parts of
the corpus and testing on the fourth, rotating to ob-
tain recognition results for the full corpus). This
resulted in an average word error rate (WER) of
29.5%. Automatic segmentation into dialogue acts
or sentence boundaries was not performed: the dia-
logue act boundaries for the manual transcripts were
mapped on to the speech recognition output.
3.1 Description of the Evaluation Schemes
A particular interest in our research is how automatic
measures of informativeness correlate with human
judgments on the same criteria. During the devel-
opment stage of a summarization system it is not
feasible to employ many hours of manual evalua-
tions, and so a critical issue is whether or not soft-
ware packages such as ROUGE are able to measure
informativeness in a way that correlates with subjec-
tive summarization evaluations.
35
3.1.1 ROUGE
Gauging informativeness has been the focus
of automatic summarization evaluation research.
We used the ROUGE evaluation approach (Lin
and Hovy, 2003), which is based on n-gram co-
occurrence between machine summaries and ?ideal?
human summaries. ROUGE is currently the stan-
dard objective evaluation measure for the Document
Understanding Conference 1; ROUGE does not as-
sume that there is a single ?gold standard? summary.
Instead it operates by matching the target summary
against a set of reference summaries. ROUGE-1
through ROUGE-4 are simple n-gram co-occurrence
measures, which check whether each n-gram in the
reference summary is contained in the machine sum-
mary. ROUGE-L and ROUGE-W are measures of
common subsequences shared between two sum-
maries, with ROUGE-W favoring contiguous com-
mon subsequences. Lin (Lin and Hovy, 2003) has
found that ROUGE-1 and ROUGE-2 correlate well
with human judgments.
3.1.2 Human Evalautions
The subjective evaluation portion of our research
utilized 5 judges who had little or no familiarity with
the content of the ICSI meetings. Each judge eval-
uated 10 summaries per meeting, for a total of sixty
summaries. In order to familiarize themselves with
a given meeting, they were provided with a human
abstract of the meeting and the full transcript of the
meeting with links to the audio. The human judges
were instructed to read the abstract, and to consult
the full transcript and audio as needed, with the en-
tire familiarization stage not to exceed 20 minutes.
The judges were presented with 12 questions at
the end of each summary, and were instructed that
upon beginning the questionnaire they should not re-
consult the summary itself. 6 of the questions re-
garded informativeness and 6 involved readability
and coherence, though our current research concen-
trates on the informativeness evaluations. The eval-
uations used a Likert scale based on agreement or
disagreement with statements, such as the following
Informativeness statements:
1. The important points of the meeting are repre-
sented in the summary.
1http://duc.nist.gov/
2. The summary avoids redundancy.
3. The summary sentences on average seem rele-
vant.
4. The relationship between the importance of
each topic and the amount of summary space
given to that topic seems appropriate.
5. The summary is repetitive.
6. The summary contains unnecessary informa-
tion.
Statements such as 2 and 5 above are measuring
the same impressions, with the polarity of the state-
ments merely reversed, in order to better gauge the
reliability of the answers. The readability/coherence
portion consisted of the following statements:
1. It is generally easy to tell whom or what is be-
ing referred to in the summary.
2. The summary has good continuity, i.e. the sen-
tences seem to join smoothly from one to an-
other.
3. The individual sentences on average are clear
and well-formed.
4. The summary seems disjointed.
5. The summary is incoherent.
6. On average, individual sentences are poorly
constructed.
It was not possible in this paper to gauge how
responses to these readability statements correlate
with automatic metrics, for the reason that auto-
matic metrics of readability and coherence have not
been widely discussed in the field of summariza-
tion. Though subjective evaluations of summaries
are often divided into informativeness and readabil-
ity questions, only automatic metrics of informative-
ness have been investigated in-depth by the summa-
rization community. We believe that the develop-
ment of automatic metrics for coherence and read-
ability should be a high priority for researchers in
summarization evaluation and plan on pursuing this
avenue of research. For example, work on coher-
ence in NLG (Lapata, 2003) could potentially in-
form summarization evaluation. Mani (Mani et al,
36
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 1  2  3  41=FB1, 2=LSA, 3=MMR, 4=FB2
ROUGE-1-MANROUGE-2-MANROUGE-L-MANROUGE-1-ASRROUGE-2-ASRROUGE-L-ASR
Figure 1: ROUGE Scores for the Summarization Ap-
proaches
1999) is one of the few papers to have discussed
measuring summary readability automatically.
4 Results
The results of these experiments can be analyzed
in various ways: significant differences of ROUGE
results across summarization approaches, deterio-
ration of ROUGE results on ASR versus manual
transcripts, significant differences of human eval-
uations across summarization approaches, deterio-
ration of human evaluations on ASR versus man-
ual transcripts, and finally, the correlation between
ROUGE and human evaluations.
4.1 ROUGE results across summarization
approaches
All of the machine summaries were 10% of the orig-
inal document length, in terms of the number of di-
alogue acts contained. Of the four approaches to
summarization used herein, the latent semantic anal-
ysis method performed the best on every meeting
tested for every ROUGE measure with the excep-
tion of ROUGE-3 and ROUGE-4. This approach
was significantly better than either feature-based ap-
proach (p<0.05), but was not a significant improve-
ment over MMR. For ROUGE-3 and ROUGE-4,
none of the summarization approaches were signifi-
cantly different from each other, owing to data spar-
sity. Figure 1 gives the ROUGE-1, ROUGE-2 and
ROUGE-L results for each of the summarization ap-
proaches, on both manual and ASR transcripts.
4.1.1 ASR versus Manual
The results of the four summarization approaches
on ASR output were much the same, with LSA and
MMR being comparable to each other, and each of
them outperforming the feature-based approaches.
On ASR output, LSA again consistently performed
the best.
Interestingly, though the LSA approach scored
higher when using manual transcripts than when
using ASR transcripts, the difference was small and
insignificant despite the nearly 30% WER of the
ASR. All of the summarization approaches showed
minimal deterioration when used on ASR output
as compared to manual transcripts, but the LSA
approach seemed particularly resilient, as evidenced
by Figure 1. One reason for the relatively small
impact of ASR output on summarization results is
that for each of the 6 meetings, the WER of the
summaries was lower than the WER of the meeting
as a whole. Similarly, Valenza et al(Valenza et
al., 1999) and Zechner and Waibel (Zechner and
Waibel, 2000) both observed that the WER of
extracted summaries was significantly lower than
the overall WER in the case of broadcast news. The
table below demonstrates the discrepancy between
summary WER and meeting WER for the six
meetings used in this research.
Meeting Summary WER Meeting WER
Bed004 27.0 35.7
Bed009 28.3 39.8
Bed016 39.6 49.8
Bmr005 23.9 36.1
Bmr019 28.0 36.5
Bro018 25.9 35.6
WER% for Summaries and Meetings
There was no improvement in the second feature-
based approach (adding an LSA sentence score) as
compared with the first feature-based approach. The
sentence score used here relied on a reduction to 300
dimensions, which may not have been ideal for this
data.
The similarity between the MMR and LSA ap-
proaches here mirrors Gong and Liu?s findings, giv-
ing credence to the claim that LSA maximizes rele-
vance and minimizes redundancy, in a different and
more opaque manner then MMR, but with similar
37
STATEMENT FB1 LSA MMR FB2
IMPORT. POINTS 5.03 4.53 4.67 4.83
NO REDUN. 4.33 2.60 3.00 3.77
RELEVANT 4.83 4.07 4.33 4.53
TOPIC SPACE 4.43 3.83 3.87 4.30
REPETITIVE 3.37 4.70 4.60 3.83
UNNEC. INFO. 4.70 6.00 5.83 5.00
Table 1: Human Scores for 4 Approaches on Manual
Transcripts
results. Regardless of whether or not the singular
vectors of V T can rightly be thought of as topics or
concepts (a seemingly strong claim), the LSA ap-
proach was as successful as the more popular MMR
algorithm.
4.2 Human results across summarization
approaches
Table 1 presents average ratings for the six state-
ments across four summarization approaches on
manual transcripts. Interestingly, the first feature-
based approach is given the highest marks on each
criterion. For statements 2, 5 and 6 FB1 is signif-
icantly better than the other approaches. It is par-
ticularly surprising that FB1 would score well on
statement 2, which concerns redundancy, given that
MMR and LSA explicitly aim to reduce redundancy
while the feature-based approaches are merely clas-
sifying utterances as relevant or not. The second
feature-based approach was not significantly worse
than the first on this score.
Considering the difficult task of evaluating ten ex-
tractive summaries per meeting, we are quite satis-
fied with the consistency of the human judges. For
example, statements that were merely reworded ver-
sions of other statements were given consistent rat-
ings. It was also the case that, with the exception
of evaluating the sixth statement, judges were able
to tell that the manual extracts were superior to the
automatic approaches.
4.2.1 ASR versus Manual
Table 2 presents average ratings for the six state-
ments across four summarization approaches on
ASR transcripts. The LSA and MMR approaches
performed better in terms of having less deteri-
STATEMENT FB1 LSA MMR FB2
IMPORT. POINTS 3.53 4.13 3.73 3.50
NO REDUN. 3.40 2.97 2.63 3.57
RELEVANT 3.47 3.57 3.00 3.47
TOPIC SPACE 3.27 3.33 3.00 3.20
REPETITIVE 4.43 4.73 4.70 4.20
UNNEC. INFO. 5.37 6.00 6.00 5.33
Table 2: Human Scores for 4 Approaches on ASR
Transcripts
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 1  2  3  41=FB1, 2=LSA, 3=MMR, 4=FB2
HUMAN-1-MANHUMAN-1-ASR
Figure 2: INFORMATIVENESS-1 Scores for the
Summarization Approaches
oration of scores when used on ASR output in-
stead of manual transcripts. LSA-ASR was not
significantly worse than LSA on any of the 6 rat-
ings. MMR-ASR was significantly worse than
MMR on only 3 of the 6. In contrast, FB1-
ASR was significantly worse than FB1 for 5 of
the 6 approaches, reinforcing the point that MMR
and LSA seem to favor extracting utterances with
fewer errors. Figures 2, 3 and 4 depict the
how the ASR and manual approaches affect the
INFORMATIVENESS-1, INFORMATIVENESS-4
and INFORMATIVENESS-6 ratings, respectively.
Note that for Figure 6, a higher score is a worse rat-
ing.
4.3 ROUGE and Human correlations
According to (Lin and Hovy, 2003), ROUGE-
1 correlates particularly well with human judg-
ments of informativeness. In the human eval-
uation survey discussed here, the first statement
(INFORMATIVENESS-1) would be expected to
correlate most highly with ROUGE-1, as it is ask-
38
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 1  2  3  41=FB1, 2=LSA, 3=MMR, 4=FB2
HUMAN-4-MANHUMAN-4-ASR
Figure 3: INFORMATIVENESS-4 Scores for the
Summarization Approaches
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 5
 5.5
 6
 6.5
 7
 1  2  3  41=FB1, 2=LSA, 3=MMR, 4=FB2
HUMAN-6-MANHUMAN-6-ASR
Figure 4: INFORMATIVENESS-6 Scores for the
Summarization Approaches
ing whether the summary contains the important
points of the meeting. As could be guessed from the
discussion above, there is no significant correlation
between ROUGE-1 and human evaluations when
analyzing only the 4 summarization approaches
on manual transcripts. However, when looking
at the 4 approaches on ASR output, ROUGE-1
and INFORMATIVENESS-1 have a moderate and
significant positive correlation (Spearman?s rho =
0.500, p < 0.05). This correlation on ASR out-
put is strong enough that when ROUGE-1 and
INFORMATIVENESS-1 scores are tested for corre-
lation across all 8 summarization approaches, there
is a significant positive correlation (Spearman?s rho
= 0.388, p < 0.05).
The other significant correlations for ROUGE-
1 across all 8 summarization approaches are with
INFORMATIVENESS-2, INFORMATIVENESS-5
and INFORMATIVENESS-6. However, these are
negative correlations. For example, with regard to
INFORMATIVENESS-2, summaries that are rated
as having a high level of redundancy are given high
ROUGE-1 scores, and summaries with little redun-
dancy are given low ROUGE-1 scores. Similary,
with regard to INFORMATIVENESS-6, summaries
that are said to have a great deal of unnecessary in-
formation are given high ROUGE-1 scores. It is
difficult to interpret some of these negative correla-
tions, as ROUGE does not measure redundancy and
would not necessarily be expected to correlate with
redundancy evaluations.
5 Discussion
In general, ROUGE did not correlate well with the
human evaluations for this data. The MMR and
LSA approaches were deemed to be significantly
better than the feature-based approaches according
to ROUGE, while these findings were reversed ac-
cording to the human evaluations. An area of agree-
ment, however, is that the LSA-ASR and MMR-
ASR approaches have a small and insignificant de-
cline in scores compared with the decline of scores
for the feature-based approaches. One of the most
interesting findings of this research is that MMR and
LSA approaches used on ASR tend to select utter-
ances with fewer ASR errors.
ROUGE has been shown to correlate well with
human evaluations in DUC, when used on news cor-
pora, but the summarization task here ? using con-
versational speech from meetings ? is quite different
from summarizing news articles. ROUGE may sim-
ply be less applicable to this domain.
6 Future Work
It remains to be determined through further ex-
perimentation by researchers using various corpora
whether or not ROUGE truly correlates well with
human judgments. The results presented above are
mixed in nature, but do not present ROUGE as being
sufficient in itself to robustly evaluate a summariza-
tion system under development.
We are also interested in developing automatic
metrics of coherence and readability. We now have
human evaluations of these criteria and are ready to
39
begin testing for correlations between these subjec-
tive judgments and potential automatic metrics.
7 Acknowledgements
Thanks to Thomas Hain and the AMI-ASR group
for the speech recognition output. This work was
partly supported by the European Union 6th FWP
IST Integrated Project AMI (Augmented Multi-
party Interaction, FP6-506811, publication).
References
J. Carbonell and J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of MMR,
diversity-based reranking for reordering documents
and producing summaries. In Proc. ACM SIGIR,
pages 335?336.
Y. Gong and X. Liu. 2001. Generic text summarization
using relevance measure and latent semantic analysis.
In Proc. ACM SIGIR, pages 19?25.
T. Hain, J. Dines, G. Garau, M. Karafiat, D. Moore,
V. Wan, R. Ordelman, I.Mc.Cowan, J.Vepa, and
S.Renals. 2005. An investigation into transcription of
conference room meetings. Submitted to Eurospeech.
A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. Ellis, D. Gelbart,
N. Morgan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau, E. Shriberg, A. Stol-
cke, and C. Wooters. 2003. The ICSI meeting corpus.
In Proc. IEEE ICASSP.
J. Kupiec, J. Pederson, and F. Chen. 1995. A trainable
document summarizer. In ACM SIGIR ?95, pages 68?
73.
Mirella Lapata. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring: Ex-
periments with sentence ordering. In ACL, pages 545?
552.
C.-Y. Lin and E. H. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation of
summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statistics. In
Proc. HLT-NAACL.
Inderjeet Mani, Barbara Gates, and Eric Bloedorn. 1999.
Improving summaries by revising them. In Proceed-
ings of the 37th conference on Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 558?565, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
G. Murray, S. Renals, and J. Carletta. 2005. Extractive
summarization of meeting recordings. Submitted to
Eurospeech.
E. Shriberg, R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, J. Ang, , and H. Car-
vey. 2004. The ICSI meeting recorder dialog act
(MRDA) corpus. In Proc. 5th SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, pages 97?100.
J. Steinberger and K. Jez?ek. 2004. Using latent semantic
analysis in text summarization and summary evalua-
tion. In Proc. ISIM ?04, pages 93?100.
R. Valenza, T. Robinson, M. Hickey, and R. Tucker.
1999. Summarization of spoken audio through infor-
mation extraction. In Proc. ESCA Workshop on Ac-
cessing Information in Spoken Audio, pages 111?116.
Pierre Wellner, Mike Flynn, Simon Tucker, and Steve
Whittaker. 2005. A meeting browser evaluation test.
In CHI ?05: CHI ?05 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems, pages 2021?2024, New
York, NY, USA. ACM Press.
K. Zechner and A. Waibel. 2000. Minimizing word error
rate in textual summaries of spoken language. In Proc.
NAACL-2000.
40
