Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Parsing Technologies (IWPT), pages 192?193,
Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Parsing Generalized ID/LP Grammars
Michael W. Daniels
Department of Linguistics
Indiana University
402 Memorial Hall
1021 E Third Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
daniels@ling.osu.edu
1 Introduction
The Generalized ID/LP (GIDLP) grammar formal-
ism (Daniels and Meurers 2004a,b; Daniels 2005)
was developed to serve as a processing backbone for
linearization-HPSG grammars, separating the dec-
laration of the recursive constituent structure from
the declaration of word order domains. This pa-
per shows that the key aspects of this formalism ?
the ability for grammar writers to explicitly declare
word order domains and to arrange the right-hand
side of each grammar rule to minimize the parser?s
search space ? lead directly to improvements in pars-
ing efficiency.
2 Defining GIDLP Grammars
A brief overview of GIDLP syntax is given in 1, and
an example GIDLP grammar is given in 2 that recog-
nizes a very small fragment of German, focusing on
the free word order of arguments and adjuncts in the
Mittelfeld.1 The basic idea of this grammar is that
no word order constraints apply below the level of
the clause. This allows the verb?s arguments and ad-
juncts to freely intermingle, before being compacted
at the clause level, at which point the constraints on
the location of the finite verb apply. It is important to
note that this grammar cannot be straightforwardly
expressed in the ID/LP formalism, where LP con-
straints only apply within local trees.
3 The GIDLP Parsing Algorithm
The GIDLP parser Daniels and Meurers (2004a);
Daniels (2005) is based on Earley?s algorithm for
1For compactness, categories are described in this example
with prolog-style terms; the actual GIDLP syntax assumes fea-
ture structure categories.
Terminal: t
Non-terminal: C
Lexical entry: C ? t
Grammar rule: C ? C+;LP?; DD?
Start declaration: start (S) : LP?
LP [Constraint]: C1{<,}C2
D[omain] D[eclaration]: ?{C+}, C, LP??
Figure 1: GIDLP syntax
a) start(s): []
b) s ? s(cmp)
c) s ? s(que)
d) s(cmp) ? cmp, clause;
?{[0]}, s(cmp), cmp < , < v( )?
e) s(que) ? clause;?{[0]}, s(que), v( ) < ?
f) clause ? np(n), vp
g) vp ? v(ditr), np(a), np(d)
h) vp ? adv, vp
i) vp ? v(cmp), s(cmp)
j) [np(Case)] ? det(Case), n(Case);1  2
Figure 2: Example GIDLP Grammar
context-free parsing, suitably modified to handle
discontinuous constituents.
A central insight of the GIDLP parsing algorithm
is that the same data structure used to describe the
coverage of an edge can also encode restrictions on
the parser?s search space. This is done by adding two
bitvectors to each edge: a negative mask (n-mask),
which marks positions that must not be part of the
edge, and a positive mask (p-mask), which marks
positions that must be part of the edge. These masks
are generated during the prediction phase and then
tested during the completion phase using efficient
bitvector operations. Compiling LP constraints into
192
bitmasks in this way allows the LP constraints to be
integrated directly into the parser at a fundamental
level. Instead of weeding out inappropriate parses
in a cleanup phase, LP constraints in this parser can
immediately block an edge from being added to the
chart.
4 Evaluation
To evaluate the effectiveness of the GIDLP formal-
ism, a moderate-scale grammar of German was ob-
tained from Professor Martin Volk (Stockholm Uni-
versity). This grammar combines ID/LP rules with
PS rules, as argued for in (Volk 1996), and uses a
flat structure to encode the flexibility of the German
Mittelfeld. As an example, the rule for ditransitive
verbs is given in (1).
(1) S -> N2 V N2 N2 ADV* (ERG) (PRAEF)
This grammar can be mechanically translated into
the GIDLP format, as each of Volk?s PS rules cor-
responds to a GIDLP rule. This translation estab-
lishes an ?initial? GIDLP grammar.2 The grammar
was then optimized in two successive steps to take
advantage of the GIDLP formalism. First, a ?medial?
grammar was created in which word order domains
were introduced only when necessary. (In the ID/LP
formalism, every local tree is an order domain.) Sec-
ond, a ?final? grammar was created by reordering the
RHS order of each rule so as to put the most discrim-
inatory RHS element first ? generally the finite verb.
To compare these three grammars, a testsuite of
150 sentences was constructed. The sentences were
generally chosen to equally cover the sentence types
recognized by the grammar. The results from pars-
ing this testsuite with each grammar are summa-
rized in Figure 3, which shows the average number
of chart insertion attempts at each sentence length.
(Chart insertion attempts have traditionally been
used as an overall metric for parsing efficiency, as
parse time tends to be dominated by the time taken
searching the chart for blocking edges.) Overall, the
final grammar shows a clear improvement over the
medial and initial grammars.
2As Volk?s parser is not available, the relative performance
of the GIDLP parser on the initial grammar and of Volk?s parser
on his grammar cannot be determined. Thus Volk?s grammar is
only used as a basis for the three GIDLP grammars described
here.
 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
 60000
 70000
 3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11
Ch
ar
t S
iz
e 
(ed
ge
s)
Sentence Length (words)
Initial
Medial
Final
Figure 3: Average Chart Size per Sentence Length
Averaging over all 150 sentences, the final gram-
mar sees a decrease of 69.2% in the number of chart
insertion attempts compared to the initial grammar.
Thus the expressive capabilities provided by the
GIDLP formalism lead directly to improvements in
parsing efficiency.
5 Summary
This paper has shown that two key aspects of the
GIDLP grammar formalism ? the ability for gram-
mar writers to explicitly declare word order domains
in the spirit of the linearization-HPSG tradition and
the ability to completely order the RHS of a gram-
mar rule to minimize the parser?s overall search
space ? lead directly to improvements in parse ef-
ficiency.
References
Daniels, Michael W. 2005. Generalized ID/LP Grammar: A
Formalism for Parsing Linearization-Based HPSG Gram-
mars. Ph. D.thesis, The Ohio State University.
Daniels, Michael W. and Meurers, W. Detmar. 2004a. A Gram-
mar Formalism and Parser for Linearization-based HPSG.
In Proceedings of the Twentieth International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 169?175.
Daniels, Mike and Meurers, Detmar. 2004b. GIDLP: A Gram-
mar Format for Linearization-Based HPSG. In Stefan Mu?ller
(ed.), Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference
on Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, pages 93?111,
Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Volk, Martin. 1996. Parsing with ID/LP and PS rules. In Natu-
ral Language Processing and Speech Technology. Results of
the 3rd KONVENS Conference (Bielefeld), pages 342?353,
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
193
