Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pages 55?60,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Definition and Analysis of Intermediate Entailment Levels
Roy Bar-Haim, Idan Szpektor, Oren Glickman
Computer Science Department
Bar Ilan University
Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
{barhair,szpekti,glikmao}@cs.biu.ac.il
Abstract
In this paper we define two intermediate
models of textual entailment, which corre-
spond to lexical and lexical-syntactic lev-
els of representation. We manually anno-
tated a sample from the RTE dataset ac-
cording to each model, compared the out-
come for the two models, and explored
how well they approximate the notion of
entailment. We show that the lexical-
syntactic model outperforms the lexical
model, mainly due to a much lower rate
of false-positives, but both models fail to
achieve high recall. Our analysis also
shows that paraphrases stand out as a
dominant contributor to the entailment
task. We suggest that our models and an-
notation methods can serve as an evalua-
tion scheme for entailment at these levels.
1 Introduction
Textual entailment has been proposed recently as
a generic framework for modeling semantic vari-
ability in many Natural Language Processing ap-
plications, such as Question Answering, Informa-
tion Extraction, Information Retrieval and Docu-
ment Summarization. The textual entailment rela-
tionship holds between two text fragments, termed
text and hypothesis, if the truth of the hypothesis can
be inferred from the text.
Identifying entailment is a complex task that in-
corporates many levels of linguistic knowledge and
inference. The complexity of modeling entail-
ment was demonstrated in the first PASCAL Chal-
lenge Workshop on Recognizing Textual Entailment
(RTE) (Dagan et al, 2005). Systems that partici-
pated in the challenge used various combinations of
NLP components in order to perform entailment in-
ferences. These components can largely be classi-
fied as operating at the lexical, syntactic and seman-
tic levels (see Table 1 in (Dagan et al, 2005)). How-
ever, only little research was done to analyze the
contribution of each inference level, and on the con-
tribution of individual inference mechanisms within
each level.
This paper suggests that decomposing the com-
plex task of entailment into subtasks, and analyz-
ing the contribution of individual NLP components
for these subtasks would make a step towards bet-
ter understanding of the problem, and for pursuing
better entailment engines. We set three goals in this
paper. First, we consider two modeling levels that
employ only part of the inference mechanisms, but
perform perfectly at each level. We explore how
well these models approximate the notion of entail-
ment, and analyze the differences between the out-
come of the different levels. Second, for each of the
presented levels, we evaluate the distribution (and
contribution) of each of the inference mechanisms
typically associated with that level. Finally, we sug-
gest that the definitions of entailment at different
levels of inference, as proposed in this paper, can
serve as guidelines for manual annotation of a ?gold
standard? for evaluating systems that operate at a
particular level. Altogether, we set forth a possible
methodology for annotation and analysis of entail-
55
ment datasets.
We introduce two levels of entailment: Lexical
and Lexical-Syntactic. We propose these levels as
intermediate stages towards a complete entailment
model. We define an entailment model for each
level and manually evaluate its performance over a
sample from the RTE test-set. We focus on these
two levels as they correspond to well-studied NLP
tasks, for which robust tools and resources exist,
e.g. parsers, part of speech taggers and lexicons. At
each level we included inference types that represent
common practice in the field. More advanced pro-
cessing levels which involve logical/semantic infer-
ence are less mature and were left beyond the scope
of this paper.
We found that the main difference between the
lexical and lexical-syntactic levels is that the lexical-
syntactic level corrects many false-positive infer-
ences done at the lexical level, while introducing
only a few false-positives of its own. As for iden-
tifying positive cases (recall), both systems exhibit
similar performance, and were found to be comple-
mentary. Neither of the levels was able to iden-
tify more than half of the positive cases, which
emphasizes the need for deeper levels of analysis.
Among the different inference components, para-
phrases stand out as a dominant contributor to the
entailment task, while synonyms and derivational
transformations were found to be the most frequent
at the lexical level.
Using our definitions of entailment models as
guidelines for manual annotation resulted in a high
level of agreement between two annotators, suggest-
ing that the proposed models are well-defined.
Our study follows on previous work (Vander-
wende et al, 2005), which analyzed the RTE Chal-
lenge test-set to find the percentage of cases in
which syntactic analysis alone (with optional use
of thesaurus for the lexical level) suffices to decide
whether or not entailment holds. Our study extends
this work by considering a broader range of infer-
ence levels and inference mechanisms and providing
a more detailed view. A fundamental difference be-
tween the two works is that while Vanderwende et al
did not make judgements on cases where additional
knowledge was required beyond syntax, our entail-
ment models were evaluated over all of the cases,
including those that require higher levels of infer-
ence. This allows us to view the entailment model at
each level as an idealized system approximating full
entailment, and to evaluate its overall success.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: sec-
tion 2 provides definitions for the two entailment
levels; section 3 describes the annotation experiment
we performed, its results and analysis; section 4 con-
cludes and presents planned future work.
2 Definition of Entailment Levels
In this section we present definitions for two en-
tailment models that correspond to the Lexical and
Lexical-Syntactic levels. For each level we de-
scribe the available inference mechanisms. Table 1
presents several examples from the RTE test-set to-
gether with annotation of entailment at the different
levels.
2.1 The Lexical entailment level
At the lexical level we assume that the text T and
hypothesis H are represented by a bag of (possibly
multi-word) terms, ignoring function words. At this
level we define that entailment holds between T and
H if every term h in H can be matched by a corre-
sponding entailing term t in T . t is considered as en-
tailing h if either h and t share the same lemma and
part of speech, or t can be matched with h through a
sequence of lexical transformations of the types de-
scribed below.
Morphological derivations This inference mech-
anism considers two terms as equivalent if one can
be obtained from the other by some morphologi-
cal derivation. Examples include nominalizations
(e.g. ?acquisition ? acquire?), pertainyms (e.g.
?Afghanistan ? Afghan?), or nominal derivations
like ?terrorist ? terror?.
Ontological relations This inference mechanism
refers to ontological relations between terms. A
term is inferred from another term if a chain of valid
ontological relations between the two terms exists
(Andreevskaia et al, 2005). In our experiment we
regarded the following three ontological relations
as providing entailment inferences: (1) ?synonyms?
(e.g. ?free ? release? in example 1361, Table 1);
(2) ?hypernym? (e.g. ?produce ? make?) and (3)
?meronym-holonym? (e.g. ?executive ? company?).
56
No. Text Hypothesis Task Ent. Lex.
Ent.
Syn.
Ent.
322 Turnout for the historic vote for the first
time since the EU took in 10 new mem-
bers in May has hit a record low of
45.3%.
New members joined the
EU.
IR true false true
1361 A Filipino hostage in Iraq was released. A Filipino hostage was
freed in Iraq.
CD true true true
1584 Although a Roscommon man by birth,
born in Rooskey in 1932, Albert ?The
Slasher? Reynolds will forever be a
Longford man by association.
Albert Reynolds was born
in Co. Roscommon.
QA true true true
1911 The SPD got just 21.5% of the vote
in the European Parliament elections,
while the conservative opposition par-
ties polled 44.5%.
The SPD is defeated by
the opposition parties.
IE true false false
2127 Coyote shot after biting girl in Vanier
Park.
Girl shot in park. IR false true false
Table 1: Examples of text-hypothesis pairs, taken from the PASCAL RTE test-set. Each line includes the
example number at the RTE test-set, the text and hypothesis, the task within the test-set, whether entailment
holds between the text and hypothesis (Ent.), whether Lexical entailment holds (Lex. Ent.) and whether
Lexical-Syntactic entailment holds (Syn. Ent.).
Lexical World knowledge This inference mech-
anism refers to world knowledge reflected at the
lexical level, by which the meaning of one term
can be inferred from the other. It includes both
knowledge about named entities, such as ?Tal-
iban ? organization? and ?Roscommon ? Co.
Roscommon? (example 1584 in Table 1), and other
lexical relations between words, such as WordNet?s
relations ?cause? (e.g. ?kill ? die?) and ?entail? (e.g.
?snore ? sleep?).
2.2 The Lexical-syntactic entailment level
At the lexical-syntactic level we assume that the
text and the hypothesis are represented by the set of
syntactic dependency relations of their dependency
parse. At this level we ignore determiners and aux-
iliary verbs, but do include relations involving other
function words. We define that entailment holds be-
tween T and H if the relations within H can be
?covered? by the relations in T . In the trivial case,
lexical-syntactic entailment holds if all the relations
composing H appear verbatim in T (while addi-
tional relations within T are allowed). Otherwise,
such coverage can be obtained by a sequence of
transformations applied to the relations in T , which
should yield all the relations in H .
One type of such transformations are the lexical
transformations, which replace corresponding lexi-
cal items, as described in sub-section 2.1. When ap-
plying morphological derivations it is assumed that
the syntactic structure is appropriately adjusted. For
example, ?Mexico produces oil? can be mapped to
?oil production by Mexico? (the NOMLEX resource
(Macleod et al, 1998) provides a good example for
systematic specification of such transformations).
Additional types of transformations at this level
are specified below.
Syntactic transformations This inference mech-
anism refers to transformations between syntactic
structures that involve the same lexical elements and
preserve the meaning of the relationships between
them (as analyzed in (Vanderwende et al, 2005)).
Typical transformations include passive-active and
apposition (e.g. ?An Wang, a native of Shanghai ?
An Wang is a native of Shanghai?).
57
Entailment paraphrases This inference mecha-
nism refers to transformations that modify the syn-
tactic structure of a text fragment as well as some
of its lexical elements, while holding an entailment
relationship between the original text and the trans-
formed one. Such transformations are typically de-
noted as ?paraphrases? in the literature, where a
wealth of methods for their automatic acquisition
were proposed (Lin and Pantel, 2001; Shinyama et
al., 2002; Barzilay and Lee, 2003; Szpektor et al,
2004). Following the same spirit, we focus here on
transformations that are local in nature, which, ac-
cording to the literature, may be amenable for large
scale acquisition. Examples include: ?X is Y man
by birth ? X was born in Y? (example 1584 in Ta-
ble 1), ?X take in Y ? Y join X?1 and ?X is holy
book of Y ? Y follow X?2.
Co-reference Co-references provide equivalence
relations between different terms in the text and
thus induce transformations that replace one term
in a text with any of its co-referenced terms. For
example, the sentence ?Italy and Germany have
each played twice, and they haven?t beaten anybody
yet.?3 entails ?Neither Italy nor Germany have
won yet?, involving the co-reference transformation
?they ? Italy and Germany?.
Example 1584 in Table 1 demonstrates the
need to combine different inference mechanisms
to achieve lexical-syntactic entailment, requiring
world-knowledge, paraphrases and syntactic trans-
formations.
3 Empirical Analysis
In this section we present the experiment that we
conducted in order to analyze the two entailment
levels, which are presented in section 2, in terms of
relative performance and correlation with the notion
of textual entailment.
3.1 Data and annotation procedure
The RTE test-set4 contains 800 Text-Hypothesis
pairs (usually single sentences), which are typical
1Example no 322 in the PASCAL RTE test-set.
2Example no 1575 in the PASCAL RTE test-set.
3Example no 298 in the PASCAL RTE test-set.
4The complete RTE dataset can be obtained at
http://www.pascal-network.org/Challenges/RTE/Datasets/
to various NLP applications. Each pair is annotated
with a boolean value, indicating whether the hypoth-
esis is entailed by the text or not, and the test-set
is balanced in terms of positive and negative cases.
We shall henceforth refer to this annotation as the
gold standard. We constructed a sample of 240 pairs
from four different tasks in the test-set, which corre-
spond to the main applications that may benefit from
entailment: information extraction (IE), information
retrieval (IR), question answering (QA), and compa-
rable documents (CD). We randomly picked 60 pairs
from each task, and in total 118 of the cases were
positive and 122 were negative.
In our experiment, two of the authors annotated,
for each of the two levels, whether or not entailment
can be established in each of the 240 pairs. The an-
notators agreed on 89.6% of the cases at the lexical
level, and 88.8% of the cases at the lexical-syntactic
level, with Kappa statistics of 0.78 and 0.73, re-
spectively, corresponding to ?substantial agreement?
(Landis and Koch, 1977). This relatively high level
of agreement suggests that the notion of lexical and
lexical-syntactic entailment we propose are indeed
well-defined.
Finally, in order to establish statistics from the an-
notations, the annotators discussed all the examples
they disagreed on and produced a final joint deci-
sion.
3.2 Evaluating the different levels of entailment
L LS
True positive (118) 52 59
False positive (122) 36 10
Recall 44% 50%
Precision 59% 86%
F1 0.5 0.63
Accuracy 58% 71%
Table 2: Results per level of entailment.
Table 2 summarizes the results obtained from our
annotated dataset for both lexical (L) and lexical-
syntactic (LS) levels. Taking a ?system?-oriented
perspective, the annotations at each level can be
viewed as the classifications made by an idealized
system that includes a perfect implementation of the
inference mechanisms in that level. The first two
58
rows show for each level how the cases, which were
recognized as positive by this level (i.e. the entail-
ment holds), are distributed between ?true positive?
(i.e. positive according to the gold standard) and
?false positive? (negative according to the gold stan-
dard). The total number of positive and negative
pairs in the dataset is reported in parentheses. The
rest of the table details recall, precision, F1 and ac-
curacy.
The distribution of the examples in the RTE test-
set cannot be considered representative of a real-
world distribution (especially because of the con-
trolled balance between positive and negative exam-
ples). Thus, our statistics are not appropriate for
accurate prediction of application performance. In-
stead, we analyze how well these simplified models
of entailment succeed in approximating ?real? en-
tailment, and how they compare with each other.
The proportion between true and false positive
cases at the lexical level indicates that the correla-
tion between lexical match and entailment is quite
low, reflected in the low precision achieved by this
level (only 59%). This result can be partly attributed
to the idiosyncracies of the RTE test-set: as reported
in (Dagan et al, 2005), samples with high lexical
match were found to be biased towards the negative
side. Interestingly, our measured accuracy correlates
well with the performance of systems at the PAS-
CAL RTE Workshop, where the highest reported ac-
curacy of a lexical system is 0.586 (Dagan et al,
2005).
As one can expect, adding syntax considerably re-
duces the number of false positives - from 36 to only
10. Surprisingly, at the same time the number of true
positive cases grows from 52 to 59, and correspond-
ingly, precision rise to 86%. Interestingly, neither
the lexical nor the lexical-syntactic level are able to
cover more than half of the positive cases (e.g. ex-
ample 1911 in Table 1).
In order to better understand the differences be-
tween the two levels, we next analyze the overlap
between them, presented in Table 3. Looking at
Table 3(a), which contains only the positive cases,
we see that many examples were recognized only by
one of the levels. This interesting phenomenon can
be explained on the one hand by lexical matches that
could not be validated in the syntactic level, and on
the other hand by the use of paraphrases, which are
Lexical-Syntactic
H ? T H; T
Lexical H ? T 38 14H; T 21 45
(a) positive examples
Lexical-Syntactic
H ? T H; T
Lexical H ? T 7 29H; T 3 83
(b) negative examples
Table 3: Correlation between the entailment lev-
els. (a) includes only the positive examples from
the RTE dataset sample, and (b) includes only the
negative examples.
introduced only in the lexical-syntactic level. (e.g.
example 322 in Table 1).
This relatively symmetric situation changes as we
move to the negative cases, as shown in Table 3(b).
By adding syntactic constraints, the lexical-syntactic
level was able to fix 29 false positive errors, misclas-
sified at the lexical level (as demonstrated in exam-
ple 2127, Table 1), while introducing only 3 new
false-positive errors. This exemplifies the impor-
tance of syntactic matching for precision.
3.3 The contribution of various inference
mechanisms
Inference Mechanism f 4R %
Synonym 19 14.4% 16.1%
Morphological 16 10.1% 13.5%
Lexical World knowledge 12 8.4% 10.1%
Hypernym 7 4.2% 5.9%
Mernoym 1 0.8% 0.8%
Entailment Paraphrases 37 26.2% 31.3%
Syntactic transformations 22 16.9% 18.6%
Coreference 10 5.0% 8.4%
Table 4: The frequency (f ), contribution to recall
(4R) and percentage (%), within the gold standard
positive examples, of the various inference mecha-
nisms at each level, ordered by their significance.
59
In order to get a sense of the contribution of the
various components at each level, statistics on the in-
ference mechanisms that contributed to the coverage
of the hypothesis by the text (either full or partial)
were recorded by one annotator. Only the positive
cases in the gold standard were considered.
For each inference mechanism we measured its
frequency, its contribution to the recall of the related
level and the percentage of cases in which it is re-
quired for establishing entailment. The latter also
takes into account cases where only partial cover-
age could be achieved, and thus indicates the signif-
icance of each inference mechanism for any entail-
ment system, regardless of the models presented in
this paper. The results are summarized in Table 4.
From Table 4 it stands that paraphrases are the
most notable contributors to recall. This result in-
dicates the importance of paraphrases to the en-
tailment task and the need for large-scale para-
phrase collections. Syntactic transformations are
also shown to contribute considerably, indicating the
need for collections of syntactic transformations as
well. In that perspective, we propose our annota-
tion framework as means for evaluating collections
of paraphrases or syntactic transformations in terms
of recall.
Finally, we note that the co-reference moderate
contribution can be partly attributed to the idiosyn-
cracies of the RTE test-set: the annotators were
guided to replace anaphors with the appropriate ref-
erence, as reported in (Dagan et al, 2005).
4 Conclusions
In this paper we presented the definition of two en-
tailment models, Lexical and Lexical-Syntactic, and
analyzed their performance manually. Our experi-
ment shows that the lexical-syntactic level outper-
forms the lexical level in all measured aspects. Fur-
thermore, paraphrases and syntactic transformations
emerged as the main contributors to recall. These
results suggest that a lexical-syntactic framework
is a promising step towards a complete entailment
model.
Beyond these empirical findings we suggest that
the presented methodology can be used generically
to annotate and analyze entailment datasets.
In future work, it would be interesting to analyze
higher levels of entailment, such as logical inference
and deep semantic understanding of the text.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ido Dagan for helpful discus-
sions and for his scientific supervision. This work
was supported in part by the IST Programme of the
European Community, under the PASCAL Network
of Excellence, IST-2002-506778. This publication
only reflects the authors? views.
References
Alina Andreevskaia, Zhuoyan Li and Sabine Bergler.
2005. Can Shallow Predicate Argument Structures
Determine Entailment?. In Proceedings of Pascal
Challenge Workshop on Recognizing Textual Entail-
ment, 2005.
Regina Barzilay and Lillian Lee. 2003. Learning to
paraphrase: An unsupervised approach using multiple-
sequence alignment. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL
2003. pages 16-23, Edmonton, Canada.
Ido Dagan, Bernardo Magnini and Oren Glickman. 2005.
The PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment Chal-
lenge. In Proceedings of Pascal Challenge Workshop
on Recognizing Textual Entailment, 2005.
J.R. Landis and G.G. Koch. 1977. The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics,
33:159-174.
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. Discovery of infer-
ence rules for Question Answering. Natural Language
Engineering, 7(4):343-360.
C. Macleod, R. Grishman, A. Meyers, L. Barrett and R.
Reeves. 1998. Nomlex: A lexicon of nominalizations.
In Proceedings of the 8th International Congress of the
European Association for Lexicography, 1998. Lie`ge,
Belgium: EURALEX.
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine, Kiyoshi Sudo and
Ralph Grishman. 2002. Automatic paraphrase acqui-
sition from news articles. In Proceedings of Human
Language Technology Conference (HLT 2002). San
Diego, USA.
Idan Szpektor, Hristo Tanev, Ido Dagan and Bonnaven-
tura Coppola. 2004. Scaling Web-based Acquistion
of Entailment Relations. In Proceedings of EMNLP
2004.
Lucy Vanderwende, Deborah Coughlin and Bill Dolan.
2005. What Syntax Contribute in Entailment Task. In
Proceedings of Pascal Challenge Workshop on Recog-
nizing Textual Entailment, 2005.
60
