A context-dependent algorithm for generating
locative expressions in physically situated environments
John D. Kelleher & Geert-Jan M. Kruijff
Language Technology Lab
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
Saarbru?cken, Germany
{kelleher,gj}@dfki.de
Abstract
This paper presents a framework for generating
locative expressions. The framework addresses
the issue of combinatorial explosion inherent in
the construction of relational context models by:
(a) contextually defining the set of objects in the
context that may function as a landmark, and (b)
sequencing the order in which spatial relations are
considered using a cognitively motivated hierar-
chy of relations.
1 Introduction
Our long-term goal is to develop embodied conversational
robots that are capable of natural, fluent visually situated di-
alog with one or more interlocutors. An inherent aspect of
visually situated dialog is reference to objects located in the
physical environment. In this paper, we present a computa-
tional framework for the generation of a spatial locative ex-
pressions in such contexts.
In the simplest form of locative expression, a prepositional
phrase modifies a noun phrase to explicitly specify the loca-
tion of the object. (1) is an example of the type of locative
we focus on generating. In this example, the book is the sub-
ject of the expression and the table is the object. Following
[Langacker, 1987], we use the terms trajector and landmark
to respectively denote the subject and the object of a locative
expression: the location of the trajector is specified relative to
the landmark by the semantics of the preposition.
(1) a. the book [subject] on the table [object]
Generating locative expressions is part of the general field
of generating referring expressions (GRE). Most GRE algo-
rithms deal with the same problem: given a domain descrip-
tion and a target object generate a description of the target
object that distinguishes it from the other objects in the do-
main. The term distractor objects is used to describe the
objects in the context excluding the trajector that at a given
point in processing fulfil the description of the target object
that has been generated. The description generated is said to
be distinguishing when the set of distractor objects is empty.
Several GRE algorithms have addressed the issue of gen-
erating locative expressions [Dale and Haddock, 1991; Ho-
racek, 1997; Gardent, 2002; Krahmer and Theune, 2002;
Varges, 2004]. However, all these algorithms assume the
GRE component has access to a predefined scene model.
For an embodied conversational robot functioning in dynamic
partially known environments this assumption is a serious
drawback. If an agent wishes to generate a contextually ap-
propriate reference it cannot assume the availability of a do-
main model, rather it must dynamically construct one. How-
ever, constructing a model containing all the relationships be-
tween all the entities in the domain is prone to combinatorial
explosion, both in terms of the number of objects in the con-
text (the location of each object in the scene must be checked
against all the other objects in the scene) and number of inter-
object spatial relations (as a greater number of spatial rela-
tions will require a greater number of comparisons between
each pair of objects.1 Moreover, the context free a priori con-
struction of such an exhaustive scene model is cognitively im-
plausible. Psychological research indicates that spatial rela-
tions are not preattentively perceptually available [Treisman
and Gormican, 1988]. Rather, their perception requires atten-
tion [Logan, 1994; 1995]. These findings point to subjects
constructing contextually dependent reduced relational scene
models, rather than an exhaustive context free model.
Contributions In this paper we present a framework for
generating locative expressions. This framework addresses
the issue of combinatorial explosion inherent in relational
scene model construction by incrementally creating a series
of reduced scene models. Within each scene model only one
spatial relations is considered and only a subset of objects
are considered as candidate landmarks. This reduces both the
number of relations that must be computed over each object
pair and the number of object pairs. The decision as to which
relations should be included in each scene model is guided
by a cognitively motivated hierarchy of spatial relations. The
set of candidate landmarks in a given scene is dependent on
the set of objects in the scene that fulfil the description of the
1In English, the vast majority of spatial locatives are binary, some
notable exceptions include: between, amongst etc. However, we will
not deal with these exceptions in this paper
target object and the relation that is being considered.
Overview In ?2 we present some background data relevant
to our discussion. In ?3 we present our GRE framework. In
?4 we illustrate the framework with a worked example and
expand on some of the issues relevant to the framework. We
end with conclusions.
2 Data
When one considers that the English lexicon of spatial prepo-
sitions numbers above eighty members (not considering com-
pounds such as right next to) [Landau, 1996], the combina-
torial aspect of relational scene model construction becomes
apparent. It should be noted that for our purposes, the sit-
uation is somewhat ameliorated by the fact that a distinc-
tion can be made between static and dynamic prepositions:
static prepositions primarily2 denote the location of an object,
dynamic prepositions primarily denote the path of an object
[Jackendoff, 1983; Herskovits, 1986], see (2). However, even
focusing exclusively on the set of static prepositions does not
remove the combinatorial issues effecting the construction of
a scene model.
(2) a. the tree is behind [static] the house
b. the man walked across [dynamic] the road
In general, the set of static prepositions can be decomposed
into two sets called topological and projective. Topological
prepositions are the category of prepositions referring to a
region that is proximal to the landmark; e.g., at, near, etc.
Often, the distinctions between the semantics of the differ-
ent topological prepositions is based on pragmatic contraints,
for example the use of at licences the trajector to be in con-
tact with the landmark, by contrast the use of near does not.
Projective prepositions describe a region projected from the
landmark in a particular direction, the specification of the di-
rection is dependent on the frame of reference being used;
e.g., to the right of, to the left of, etc.
The semantics of static prepositions exhibit both qualita-
tive and quantitative properties. The qualitative aspect of their
semantics is evident when they are used to denote an object
by contrasting its location with the distractor objects location.
Taking Figure 1 as a visual context the locative expression the
circle on the left of the square exhibits the contrastive seman-
tics of a projective preposition. Only one of the circles in the
scene is located in the region to the right of the square. Tak-
ing Figure 2 as a visual context the locative expression the
circle near the black square illustrates the contrastive seman-
tics of a topological preposition. Again, of the two circles in
the scene only one of them may be appropriately described
as being near the black square, the other circle is more ap-
propriately described as being near the white square. The
quantitative aspect of the semantics of static prepositions is
evident when they denote an object using a relative scale. In
the context provided by Figure 3 the locative the circle to the
right of the square exhibits the relative semantics of a projec-
tive preposition. Although both the circles are located to the
2Static prepositions can be used in dynamic contexts, e.g. the
man ran behind the house, and dynamic prepositions can be used in
static ones, e.g. the tree lay across the road.
right of the square it is possible to adjudicate between them
based on their location in the region. The relative semantics
of a topological preposition can also be illustrated using Fig-
ure 3. A description such as the circle near the square could
be applied to either circle if the other circle was not present.
However, when both are present it is possible to interpret the
reference based on their relative proximity to the landmark
the square.
Figure 1: Visual context used to illustrate the contrastive se-
mantics of projective prepositions.
Figure 2: Visual context used to illustrate the contrastive se-
mantics of topological prepositions.
Figure 3: Visual context used to illustrate the relative seman-
tics of topological and projective prepositions.
3 Approach
The approach we adopt to generating locative expressions in-
volves extending the incremental algorithm [Dale and Reiter,
1995]. The motivation for this is the polynomial complexity
of the incremental algorithm. The incremental algorithm iter-
ates through the properties of the target and for each property
computes the set of distractor objects for which (a) the con-
junction of the properties selected so far, and (b) the current
property hold. A property is added to the list of selected prop-
erties if it reduces the size of the distractor object set. The al-
gorithm succeeds when all the distractors have been ruled out,
it fails if all the properties have been processed and there are
still some distractor objects. The algorithm can be refined by
ordering the checking of properties according to fixed prefer-
ences, e.g. first a taxonomic description of the target, second
an absolute property such as colour, third a relative property
such as size. [Dale and Reiter, 1995] also stipulate that the
type description of the target should be included in the de-
scription even if its inclusion does not distinguish the target
from any of the distractors, see Algorithm 1.
However, before applying the incremental algorithm we
must construct a context model within which we can check
whether or not the description generated distinguishes the tar-
get object. In order to constrain the combinatorial issues in-
herent in relational scene model construction we construct
a series of reduced scene models, rather than constructing
one complex exhaustive model. This construction process is
driven by a hierarchy of spatial relations and the partition-
ing of the context model into objects that may and may not
function as landmarks. These two components are developed
Algorithm 1 The Basic Incremental Algorithm
Require: T = target object; D = set of distractor objects.
Initialise: P = {type, colour, size}; DESC = {}
for i = 0 to |P | do
if |D| 6= 0 then
D? = {x : x ? D,P i(x) = P i(T )}
if |D?| < |D| then
DESC = DESC ? P i(T )
D = {x : x ? D,P i(x) = P i(T )}
end if
else
Distinguishing description generated
if type(x) 6? DESC then
DESC = DESC ? type(x)
end if
return DESC
end if
end for
Failed to generate distinguishing description
return DESC
in the next two sections. In ?3.1 we develop the hierarchy
of spatial relations and in ?3.2 we develop a classification of
landmarks and use these groupings to create a definition of
a distinguishing locative description. In ?3.3 we present the
generation algorithm that integrates these components.
3.1 Cognitive Ordering of Contexts
Psychological research indicates that spatial relations are not
preattentively perceptually available [Treisman and Gormi-
can, 1988]. Rather, their perception requires attention [Lo-
gan, 1994; 1995]. These findings point to subjects construct-
ing contextually dependent reduced relational scene models,
rather than an exhaustive context free model. Mimicking this,
we have developed an approach to context model construc-
tion that attempts to constrain the combinatorial explosion
inherent in the construction of relational context models by
incrementally constructing a series of reduced context mod-
els. Each context model focuses on a different spatial relation.
The ordering of the spatial relations is based on the cognitive
load of interpreting the relation. In this section, we motivate
and develop the ordering of relations used.
It seems reasonable to asssume that it takes less effort to
describe one object than two. Consequently, following the
Principle of Minimal Cooperative Effort [Clark and Wilkes-
Gibbs, 1986], a speaker should only use a locative expression
when they cannot create a distinguishing description of the
target object using a simple feature based approach. More-
over, the Principle of Sensitivity [Dale and Reiter, 1995]
states that when producing a referring expression, the speaker
should prefer features which the hearer is known to be able
to interpret and perceive. This points to a preference, due
to cognitive load, towards descriptions that distinguish an ob-
ject using purely physical and easily perceivable features over
descriptions that use spatial expressions. Psycholinguistic
results support this preference [van der Sluis and Krahmer,
2004].
Similarly, we can distinguish between the cognitive loads
of processing different forms of spatial relations. In com-
paring the cognitive load associated with different spatial re-
lations it is important to recognize that they are represented
and processed at several levels of abstraction. For example,
the geometric level, where metric properties are dealt with,
the functional level, where the specific properties of spatial
entities deriving from their functions in space are considered,
and the pragmatic level, which gathers the underlying prin-
ciples that people use in order to discard wrong relations or to
deduce more information [Edwards and Moulin, 1998]. Our
discussion is grounded at the geometric level of representa-
tion and processing.
Focusing on static prepositions, it is reasonable to
Figure 4: Cognitive load of
reference forms
propose that topologi-
cal prepositions have a
lower perceptual load
than projective prepo-
sitions, due to the
relative ease of per-
ceiving two objects
that are close to each
other and the complex
processing required to
handle frame of refer-
ence ambiguity [Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin, 1994;
Carlson-Radvansky and Logan, 1997]. Figure 4 lists these
preferences, with further distinctions among features: objects
type is the easiest to process, before absolute gradable
predicates (e.g. color), which is still easier than relative
gradable predicates (e.g. size) [Dale and Reiter, 1995].
This topological versus projective preference can be fur-
ther refined if we consider the contrastive and relative uses
of these relations noted in ?2. Perceiving and interpreting a
constrastive use of a spatial relation is computationally easier
than judging a relative use. Finally, within the set of projec-
tive prepositions, psycholinguistic data indicates a perceptu-
ally based ordering of the relations: above/below are easier
to percieve and interpret than in front of /behind which in turn
are easier than to the right of /to the left of [Bryant et al,
1992; Gapp, 1995].
In sum, we would like to propose the following ordering
of spatial relations:
1. topological contrastive
2. topological relative
3. projective constrastive [above/below, front/back/,
right/left]
4. projective relative [above/below, front/back, right/left]
For each level of this hierarchy we require a computational
model of the semantics of the relation at that level that acco-
modates both contrastive and relative representations. In ?2
we noted that the distinctions between the semantics of the
different topological prepositions is often based on functional
and pragmatic issues.3 Currently, however, more psycholin-
guistic data is required to distinguish the cognitive load asso-
ciated with the different topological prepositions. We use the
3See inter alia [Talmy, 1983; Herskovits, 1986; Vandeloise,
1991; Fillmore, 1997; Garrod et al, 1999] for more discussion on
these differences
model of topological proximity developed in [Kelleher and
Kruijff, 2005] to model all the relations at this level. Using
this model we can define the extent of a region proximal to
an object. If the trajector or one of the distractor objects is
the only object within the region of proximity around a given
landmark this is taken to model a contrastive use of a topo-
logical relation relative to that landmark. If the landmark?s
region of proximity contains more than one object from the
trajector and distractor object set then it is a relative use of
a topological relation. We handle the issue of frame of ref-
erence ambiguity and model the semantics of projective pre-
postions using the framework developed in [Kelleher and van
Genabith, 2005]. Here again, the contrastive-relative distinc-
tion is dependent on the number of objects within the region
of space defined by the preposition.
3.2 Landmarks and Distinguishing Descriptions
In order to use a locative expression an object in the context
must be selected to function as the landmark. An implicit
assumption in selecting an object to function as a landmark is
that the hearer can easily identify and locate the object within
the context. A landmark can be: the speaker (3)a, the hearer
(3)b, the scene (3)c, an object in the scene (3)d, or a group of
objects in the scene (3)e.4
(3) a. the ball on my right [speaker]
b. the ball to your left [hearer]
c. the ball on the right [scene]
d. the ball to the left of the box [an object in the
scene]
e. the ball in the middle [group of objects]
Currently, new empirical research is required to see if
there is a preference order between these landmark cate-
gories. Intuitively, in most situations, either of the inter-
locutors are ideal landmarks because the speaker can natu-
rally assume that the hearer is aware of the speaker?s location
and their own. Focusing on instances where an object in the
scene is used as a landmark, several authors [Talmy, 1983;
Landau, 1996; Gapp, 1995] have noted a trajector-landmark
asymmetry: generally, the landmark object is more perma-
nently located, larger, and taken to have greater geometric
complexity. These characteristics are indicative of salient ob-
jects and empirical results support this correlation between
object salience and landmark selection [Beun and Cremers,
1998]. However, the salience of an object is intrinsically
linked to the context it is embedded in. For example, in the
context provided by Figure 5 the ball has a relatively high
salience, because it is a singleton, despite the fact that it is
smaller and geometrically less complex than the other fig-
ures. Moreover, in this context, the ball is the only object in
the scene that can function as a landmark without recourse to
using the scene itself or a grouping of objects in the scene.
Clearly, deciding which objects in a given context are suit-
able to function as landmarks is a complex and contextually
dependent process. Some of the factors effecting this decision
4See [Gorniak and Roy, 2004] for further discussion on the use
of spatial extrema of the scene and groups of objects in the scene as
landmarks
Figure 5: Visual context used to illustrate the relative seman-
tics of topological and projective prepositions.
are object salience and the functional relationships between
objects. However, one basic constraint on landmark selection
is that the landmark should be distinguishable from the trajec-
tor. For example, given the context in Figure 5 and all other
factors being equal, using a locative such as the man to the left
of the man would be much less helpful than using the man to
the right of the ball. Following this observation, we treat an
object as a candidate landmark if the trajector object can be
distinguished from it using the basic incremental algorithm,
Algorithm 1.5 Furthermore, a trajector landmark is a mem-
ber of the candidate landmark set that stands in relation to
the trajector and a distractor landmark is a member of the
candidate landmark set that stands in relation to a distractor
object under the relation being considered. Using these cat-
egories of landmark we can define a distinguishing locative
description as a locative description where there is trajector
landmark that can be distinguished from all the members of
the set of distractor landmarks under the relation used in the
locative.
We can illustrate these different categories of landmark
using Figure 6 as the visual context. In this context, if
W1 is taken as the target object, the distractor set equals
{T1,B1,W2,B2}. Running the basic incremental algorithm
would generate the description white block. This distin-
guishes W1 from T1, B1 and B2 but not from W2. Conse-
quently, the set of candidate landmarks equals {T1,B1,B2}.
If we now create a context model for the relation near the set
of trajector landmarks would be {T1,B1} and the set of dis-
tractor landmarks would be {B1,B2}. Obviously, B1 cannot
be distinguished from all the distractor landmarks as it cannot
be distinguished from itself. As a result, B1 cannot function
as the landmark for a distinguishing locative description for
W1 using the relation near. However, T1 can be distinguished
from the distractor landmarks B1 and B2 by its type, triangle.
So the white block near the triangle would be considered a
distinguishing description.
Figure 6: Visual context used to illustrate the different cate-
gories of landmark.
5As noted by one of our reviewers, one unwanted effect of this
definition of a landmark is that it precludes the generation of descrip-
tions that use a landmark that are themselves distinguished using a
locative expression. For example, the block to the right of the block
which has a ball on it.
3.3 Algorithm
The basic approach is to try to generate a distinguishing de-
scription using the standard incremental algorithm. If this
fails, we divide the context into three components:
the trajector: the target object,
the distractor objects: the objects that match the descrip-
tion generated for the target object by the standard in-
cremental algorithm,
the set of candidate landmarks: the objects that do not
match the description generated for the target object by
the standard incremental algorithm.
We then begin to iterate through the hierarchy of relations
and for each relation we create a context model that defines
the set of trajector and distractor landmarks. Once a context
model has been created we iterate through the trajector land-
marks (using a salience ordering if there is more than one)6
and try to create a distinguishing locative description. A dis-
tinguishing locative description is created by using the basic
incremental algorithm to distinguish the trajector landmark
from the distractor landmarks. If we succeed in generating a
distinguishing locative description we return the description
and stop processing. Algorithm 2 lists the steps in the algo-
rithm.
Algorithm 2 The Locative Algorithm
Require: T = target object; D = set of distractor objects; R = hier-
archy of relations.
DESC = Basic-Incremental-Algorithm(T,D)
if DESC 6= Distinguishing then
create CL the set of candidate landmarks
CL = {x : x 6= T,DESC(x) = false}
for i = 0 to |R| do
create a context model for relation Ri consisting of TL the
set of trajector landmarks and DL the set of distractor land-
marks
DL = {z : z ? CL,Ri(D, z) = true}
TL = {y : y ? CL, y 6? DL,Ri(T, y) = true}
for j = 0 to |TL| by salience(TL) do
LANDDESC = Basic-Incremental-Algorithm(TLj , DL)
if LANDDESC = Distinguishing then
Distinguishing locative generated
return {DESC,Ri,LANDDESC}
end if
end for
end for
end if
FAIL
If we cannot create a distinguishing locative description we
are faced with a choice of: (1) iterate on to the next relation
6We model both visual and linguistic salience. Visual salience
is computed using a modified version of the visual saliency algo-
rithm described in [Kelleher and van Genabith, 2004]. Discourse
salience is computed based on recency of mention as defined in [Ha-
jicova?, 1993] except we represent the maximum overall salience in
the scene as 1, and use 0 to indicate object is not salient. We in-
tegrate these two components by summing them and dividing the
result by 2.
in the hierarchy, (2) create an embedded locative description
that distinguishes the landmark. Currently, we prefer option
(1) over (2), preferring the dog to the right of the car over
the dog near the car to the right of the house. However, the
algorithm can generate these longer embedded descriptions if
needed. This is done by replacing the call to the basic incre-
mental algorithm for the trajector landmark object with a call
to the whole locative expression generation algorithm, with
the trajector landmark as the target object and the set of dis-
tractor landmarks as the distractor objects. Algorithm 3 lists
the steps in the recursive version of the algorithm.
Algorithm 3 The Recursive Locative Algorithm
Require: T = target object; D = set of distractor objects; R = hier-
archy of relations.
DESC = Basic-Incremental-Algorithm(T,D)
if DESC 6= Distinguishing then
create CL the set of candidate landmarks
CL = {x : x 6= T,DESC(x) = false}
for i = 0 to |R| do
create a context model for relation Ri consisting of TL the
set of trajector landmarks and DL the set of distractor land-
marks
DL = {z : z ? CL,Ri(D, z) = true}
TL = {y : y ? CL, y 6? DL,Ri(T, y) = true}
for j = 0 to |TL| by salience(TL) do
LANDDESC =
Recursive-Locative-Algorithm(T=TLj ,D=DL,R)
if LANDDESC = Distinguishing then
Distinguishing locative generated
return {DESC,Ri,LANDDESC}
end if
end for
end for
end if
FAIL
For both versions of the locative algorithm an important
consideration is the issue of infinite regression. As noted by
[Dale and Haddock, 1991] a compositional GRE system may,
in certain contexts, generate an infinite description by trying
to distinguish the landmark in terms of the trajector and the
trajector in terms of the landmark, see (4). However, this in-
finite recursion can only occur if the context is not modified
between calls to the algorithm. This issue does not effect Al-
gorithm 2 because each call to the algorithm results in the
domain being partitioned into those objects that can and can-
not be used as landmarks. One effect of this partitioning is a
reduction in the number of object pairs that relations must be
computed for. However, and more importantly for this dis-
cussion, another consequence of this partitioning is that the
process of creating a distinguishing description for a land-
mark is carried out in a context that is a subset of the context
the trajector description was generated in. The distractor set
used during the generation of a landmark description is the
set of distractor landmarks. This minimally excludes the tra-
jector object, since by definition the landmark objects cannot
fulfill the description of the trajector generated by the basic
incremental algorithm. This naturally removes the possibility
for the algorithm to distinguish a landmark using its trajector.
Figure 7: A visual scene and the topological analsis of R1
and R2
(4) the bowl on the table supporting the bowl on the table
supporting the bowl ...
4 Discussion
We can illustrate the framework using the visual context pro-
vided by the scene on the left of Figure 7. This context con-
sists of two red boxes R1 and R2 and two blue balls B1 and
B2. Imagine that we want to refer to B1. We begin by call-
ing the locative incremental algorithm, Algorithm 2. This
in turn calls the basic incremental algorithm, Algorithm 1,
which will return the property ball. However, this is not suf-
ficient to create a distinguishing description as B2 is also a
ball. In this context the set of candidate landmarks equals
{R1,R2} and the first relation in the hierarchy is topological
proximity, which we model using the algorithm developed
in [Kelleher and Kruijff, 2005]. The image on the right of
Figure 7 illustrates the analysis of the scene using this frame-
work: the green region on the left defines the area deemed to
be proximal to R1, and the yellow region on the right defines
the area deemed to be proximal to R2. It is evident that B1
is in the area proximal to R1, consequently R1 is classified as
a trajector landmark. As none of the distractors (i.e., B2) are
located in a region that is proximal to a candidate landmark
there are no distractor landmarks. As a result when the basic
incremental algorithm is called to create a distinguishing de-
scription for the trajector landmark R1 it will return box and
this will be deemed to be a distinguishing locative descrip-
tion. The overall algorithm will then return the vector {ball,
proximal, box} which would result in the realiser generating
a reference of the form: the ball near the box.
The relational hierarchy used by the framework has some
commonalities with the relational subsumption hierarchy pro-
posed in [Krahmer and Theune, 2002]. However, there are
two important differences between them. First, an implica-
tion of the subsumption hierarchy proposed in [Krahmer and
Theune, 2002] is that the semantics of the relations at lower
levels in the hierarchy are subsumed by the semantics of their
parent relations. For example, in the portion of the subsump-
tion hierarchy illustrated in [Krahmer and Theune, 2002] the
relation next to subsumes the relations left of and right of.
By contrast, the relational hierarchy developed here is based
solely on the relative cognitive load associated with the se-
mantics of the spatial relations and makes no claims as to the
semantic relationships between the semantics of the spatial
relations. Secondly, [Krahmer and Theune, 2002] do not use
their relational hierarchy to guide the construction of domain
models.
By providing a basic contextual definition of a landmark
we are able to partition the context in an appropriate manner.
This partitioning has two advantages:
1. it reduces the complexity of the context model con-
struction, as the relationships between the trajector and
the distractor objects or between the distractor objects
themselves do not need to be computed;
2. the context used during the generation of a landmark
description is always a subset of the context used for
a trajector (as the trajector, its distractors and the other
objects in the domain that do not stand in relation to
the trajector or distractors under the relation being con-
sidered are excluded). As a result the framework avoids
the issue of infinite recusion. Furthermore, the trajector-
landmark relationship is automatically included as a
property of the landmark as its feature based descrip-
tion need only distinguish it from objects that stand in
relation to one of the distractor objects under the same
spatial relationship.
.
In future work we will focus on extending the framework
to handle some of the issues effecting the incremental algo-
rithm, see [van Deemter, 2001]. For example, generating
locative descriptions containing negated relations, conjunc-
tions of relations and involving sets of objects (sets of trajec-
tors and landmarks).
5 Conclusions
In this paper we have argued that an if an embodied conver-
sational agent functioning in dynamic partially known envi-
ronments wishes to generate contextually appropriate locative
expressions it must be able to construct a context model that
explicitly marks the spatial relations between objects in the
scene. However, the construction of such a model is prone
to the issue of combinatorial explosion both in terms of the
number of objects in the context (the location of each object
in the scene must be checked against all the other objects in
the scene) and number of inter-object spatial relations (as a
greater number of spatial relations will require a greater num-
ber of comparisons between each pair of objects.
We have presented a framework that address this issue by:
(a) contextually defining the set of objects in the context that
may function as a landmark, and (b) sequencing the order
in which spatial relations are considered using a cognitively
motivated hierarchy of relations. Defining the set of objects in
the scene that may function as a landmark reduces the number
of object pairs that a spatial relation must be computed over.
Sequencing the consideration of spatial relations means that
in each context model only one relation needs to be checked
and in some instances the agent need not compute some of the
spatial relations, as it may have succeeded in generating a dis-
tinguishing locative using a relation earlier in the sequence.
A further advantage of our approach stems from the parti-
tioning of the context into those objects that may function as
a landmark and those that may not. As a result of this parti-
tioning the algorithm avoids the issue of infinite recursion, as
the partitioning of the context stops the algorithm from dis-
tinguishing a landmark using its trajector.
References
[Beun and Cremers, 1998] R.J. Beun and A. Cremers. Object ref-
erence in a shared domain of conversation. Pragmatics and Cog-
nition, 6(1/2):121?152, 1998.
[Bryant et al, 1992] D.J. Bryant, B. Tversky, and N. Franklin. In-
ternal and external spatial frameworks representing described
scenes. Journal of Memory and Language, 31:74?98, 1992.
[Carlson-Radvansky and Irwin, 1994] L.A. Carlson-Radvansky
and D. Irwin. Reference frame activation during spatial term
assignment. Journal of Memory and Language, 33:646?671,
1994.
[Carlson-Radvansky and Logan, 1997] L.A. Carlson-Radvansky
and G.D. Logan. The influence of reference frame selection on
spatial template construction. Journal of Memory and Language,
37:411?437, 1997.
[Clark and Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986] H. Clark and D. Wilkes-Gibbs.
Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22:1?39, 1986.
[Dale and Haddock, 1991] R. Dale and N. Haddock. Generating
referring expressions involving relations. In Proceeding of the
Fifth Conference of the European ACL, pages 161?166, Berlin,
April 1991.
[Dale and Reiter, 1995] R. Dale and E. Reiter. Computational inter-
pretations of the Gricean maxims in the generation of referring
expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2):233?263, 1995.
[Edwards and Moulin, 1998] G. Edwards and B. Moulin. Towards
the simulation of spatial mental images using the vorono?? model.
In P. Oliver and K.P. Gapp, editors, Representation and process-
ing of spatial expressions, pages 163?184. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates., 1998.
[Fillmore, 1997] C. Fillmore. Lecture on Deixis. CSLI Publica-
tions, 1997.
[Gapp, 1995] K.P. Gapp. Angle, distance, shape, and their relation-
ship to projective relations. In Proceedings of the 17th Confer-
ence of the Cognitive Science Society, 1995.
[Gardent, 2002] C Gardent. Generating minimal definite descrip-
tions. In Proceedings of the 40th International Confernce of the
Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL-02), pages 96?
103, 2002.
[Garrod et al, 1999] S. Garrod, G. Ferrier, and S. Campbell. In and
on: investigating the functional geometry of spatial prepositions.
Cognition, 72:167?189, 1999.
[Gorniak and Roy, 2004] P. Gorniak and D. Roy. Grounded seman-
tic composition for visual scenes. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research, 21:429?470, 2004.
[Hajicova?, 1993] E. Hajicova?. Issues of sentence structure and dis-
course patterns. In Theoretical and Computational Linguistics,
volume 2, Charles University, Prague, 1993.
[Herskovits, 1986] A Herskovits. Language and spatial cognition:
An interdisciplinary study of prepositions in English. Studies
in Natural Language Processing. Cambridge University Press,
1986.
[Horacek, 1997] H. Horacek. An algorithm for generating referen-
tial descriptions with flexible interfaces. In Proceedings of the
35th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Madrid, 1997.
[Jackendoff, 1983] R. Jackendoff. Semantics and Cognition. Cur-
rent Studies in Linguistics. The MIT Press, 1983.
[Kelleher and Kruijff, 2005] J. Kelleher and G.J. Kruijff. A
context-dependent model of proximity is physically situated en-
vironments. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACL-SIGSEM Workshop
on The Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in
Computational Linguistics Formalisms and Applications, 2005.
[Kelleher and van Genabith, 2004] J. Kelleher and J. van Genabith.
A false colouring real time visual salency algorithm for refer-
ence resolution in simulated 3d environments. AI Review, 21(3-
4):253?267, 2004.
[Kelleher and van Genabith, 2005] J. Kelleher and J. van Genabith.
In press: A computational model of the referential semantics of
projective prepositions. In P. Saint-Dizier, editor, Dimensions
of the Syntax and Semantics of Prepositions. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2005.
[Krahmer and Theune, 2002] E. Krahmer and M. Theune. Efficient
context-sensitive generation of referring expressions. In K. van
Deemter and R. Kibble, editors, Information Sharing: Reference
and Presupposition in Language Generation and Interpretation.
CLSI Publications, Standford, 2002.
[Landau, 1996] B Landau. Multiple geometric representations of
objects in language and language learners. In P Bloom, M. Pe-
terson, L Nadel, and M. Garrett, editors, Language and Space,
pages 317?363. MIT Press, Cambridge, 1996.
[Langacker, 1987] R.W. Langacker. Foundations of Cognitive
Grammar: Theoretical Prerequisites, volume 1. Standford Uni-
versity Press, 1987.
[Logan, 1994] Gordon D. Logan. Spatial attention and the appre-
hension of spatial realtions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 20:1015?1036, 1994.
[Logan, 1995] G.D. Logan. Linguistic and conceptual control of vi-
sual spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12:523?533, 1995.
[Talmy, 1983] L. Talmy. How language structures space. In H.L.
Pick, editor, Spatial orientation. Theory, research and applica-
tion, pages 225?282. Plenum Press, 1983.
[Treisman and Gormican, 1988] A. Treisman and S. Gormican.
Feature analysis in early vision: Evidence from search assyme-
tries. Psychological Review, 95:15?48, 1988.
[van Deemter, 2001] K. van Deemter. Generating referring expres-
sions: Beyond the incremental algorithm. In 4th Int. Conf. on
Computational Semantics (IWCS-4), Tilburg, 2001.
[van der Sluis and Krahmer, 2004] I van der Sluis and E Krahmer.
The influence of target size and distance on the production of
speech and gesture in multimodal referring expressions. In Pro-
ceedings of International Conference on Spoken Language Pro-
cessing (ICSLP04), 2004.
[Vandeloise, 1991] C. Vandeloise. Spatial Prepositions: A Case
Study From French. The University of Chicago Press, 1991.
[Varges, 2004] S. Varges. Overgenerating referring expressions in-
volving relations and booleans. In Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Natural Language Generation, Univer-
sity of Brighton, 2004.
