Abstract 
Most NLG systems generate texts for readers with 
good reading ability, but SkillSum adapts its output 
for readers with poor literacy. Evaluation with low-
skilled readers confirms that SkillSum?s knowl-
edge-based microplanning choices enhance read-
ability. We also discuss future readability im-
provements. 
1 Introduction 
Most existing NLG systems assume that generated texts are 
read by proficient readers with good literacy levels. How-
ever, many people in the UK and elsewhere are not profi-
cient readers; indeed, according to a UK Government survey 
[Moser, 1999], twenty percent of the UK adult population 
have problems with reading (and an even greater number 
have problems with simple maths). Some of these individu-
als have physical or cognitive disabilities (such as dyslexia), 
but many have no such problems; their poor basic skills are 
because of factors such as social deprivation and attending 
low-quality schools. NLG systems that generate personal-
ised health information, for example Cawsey et al [2000] 
and Reiter et al [2003a], would probably be more effective 
if they could generate appropriate texts for poor readers as 
well as good readers. Certainly real world NLG applications 
should at least consider such readers; otherwise there is a 
danger that many readers will not understand the texts we 
generate. 
Generating appropriate texts for poor readers is a multifac-
eted problem. At a content level, texts should be short, ex-
plicit, and clearly useful to the reader  [Sripada et al, 2003], 
so that he or she is willing to make the effort required to 
read it. At a linguistic level, texts should use simple and 
easy-to-understand words and short sentences with simple 
syntactic structures [Harley, 2001]. At a presentation level, 
texts should have an easy-to-understand layout [Bouayad-
Agha et al, 2001] and be communicated in clear fonts par-
ticularly for dyslexic readers (e.g. K-type fonts, www.k-
type.com) and for readers with visual impairment (e.g. 
tiresias font, www.tiresias.org). 
The focus of our research is on the linguistic level, and to 
date we have looked at choices related to the expression of 
discourse structure, such as the order in which phrases re-
lated by a discourse relation are expressed. Our hope was 
that rules for linguistic choices at least would be generic and 
easy to ?plug in? to NLG systems intended for poor readers. 
Future work in the project will look at lexical choice and 
also at improved content selection and personalisation.  
1.1 The SkillSum project 
SkillSum is an on-going collaborative project between 
Cambridge Training and Development Ltd. (CTAD), who 
build educational resources, and NLG researchers at Aber-
deen University. The project is developing a web-based 
application that assesses adult basic skills in literacy (read-
ing and writing skills) or numeracy (maths skills) and gen-
erates feedback reports. Users of SkillSum take a test devel-
oped by CTAD that assesses their literacy or numeracy, and 
then SkillSum generates reports that summarise their 
performance. SkillSum is being developed in a user-centred 
manner involving rapid prototyping and frequent evalua-
tions with users. 
The ultimate goal of the SkillSum project is to build a sys-
tem that allows people who are concerned about their liter-
acy or numeracy to assess their skills with minimal support 
from others, and that encourages people with poor skills to 
take steps to improve them. Currently most people with 
poor skills do not in fact enrol in courses to improve their 
skills, and our hope is that making the assessment process as 
easy (and private) as possible will encourage more people 
who need help to seek it out.  
The SkillSum project originally used detailed diagnostic 
literacy and numeracy assessments developed by CTAD. 
However, in pilots with users, we found that these took too 
long to complete and it seemed unlikely that people would 
be able to use them in an unsupported environment. Our 
current solution uses modified versions of CTAD?s shorter 
literacy and numeracy screeners, i.e. tests that identify in a 
broader sense whether a user has problems with literacy or 
numeracy, but without a detailed analysis. These administer 
twenty-seven questions graded according to the Adult Basic 
Skills Core Curriculum for England and Wales [Steeds, 
2001] and covering a broad range of skills from simpler 
levels to higher levels in this curriculum. The tests adminis-
ter the easiest questions first. Ideally, the difficulty of the 
questions that are administered should change according to 
Generating readable texts for readers with low basic skills 
Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Aberdeen 
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, U.K. 
{ swilliam,ereiter }@csd.abdn.ac.uk 
a user?s ability to answer correctly, but at present if a user 
has difficulties with the questions, the test simply ends. 
The reports generated by SkillSum are, of course, tailored to 
individuals, but this tailoring is in terms of content, rather 
than language. The focus of research to date has been on 
how to generate appropriate texts for readers with below 
average literacy and numeracy; i.e. language tailoring for 
the group as a whole, not for individuals.  
1.2 Related work 
Using NLG in educational applications is not new, but the 
type of text generated is different from SkillSum?s reports. 
For example, generating turns in intelligent tutoring system 
(ITS) dialogues (e.g. [Di Eugenio et al, 2001; [Moore et al, 
2004]). Although turns can give feedback, the kind of feed-
back differs in that it attempts to teach a student about an 
immediate domain-specific learning problem, rather than to 
summarise his/her overall skills.  
With regard to tailoring texts for different readers, a number 
of previous researchers have looked at tailoring generated 
texts according to whether the reader is a domain expert or a 
novice (for example [Paris, 1988; McKeown et al, 1993; 
Milosavljevic and Oberlander, 1998]). Less work has been 
done on tailoring texts according to the reader?s literacy. 
Perhaps the best-known previous work in this area is PSET 
[Devlin et al, 1999], which focused on syntactic and lexical 
choices in texts intended for aphasic readers. Unfortunately 
most of PSET?s adaptation rules were not experimentally 
validated. Siddharthan [2003] similarly proposed and im-
plemented a system for simplifying texts, but did not evalu-
ate how readable his generated texts were for poor readers. 
Scott and de Souza [1990] suggested some psycholinguisti-
cally-motivated rules for expressing discourse relations, but 
did not evaluate them at all. 
2 Linguistic choices investigated 
Figure 1 ? Extract from typical content plan 
The document (content) planners of our system produce as 
output a tree, where core messages are related by discourse 
relations such as explanation or concession; this basically 
follows the architecture described by Reiter and Dale 
[2000]. Discourse relations are essentially rhetorical struc-
ture theory (RST) relations [Mann and Thompson, 1987], 
and messages are represented using a deep-syntactic repre-
sentation, which is loosely based on RealPro [Lavoie and 
Rambow, 1997]. An example of an extract from a typical 
content plan, with messages shown as text glosses instead of 
deep syntactic structures, is shown in Figure 1.  
Our focus to date has been on how discourse relations such 
as Concession and Condition in Figure 1 are expressed, in 
particular: 
? cue phrases: should a cue phrase (or multiple cue 
phrases) be used to express a discourse relation? If so, 
which one(s)? For example, should we generate: 
? If you practise reading, your skills will improve 
(one cue, If) 
? If you practise reading, then your skills will im-
prove (two cues, If and then) 
? ordering: which order should the constituents related 
by a discourse relation be expressed in? Should the 
nucleus (core) be first or second? For example, should 
we generate: 
? Your skills will improve if you practise reading 
(nucleus first) 
? If you practise reading, your skills will improve 
(nucleus second) 
? punctuation (sentence structure): should constituents 
be expressed in separate paragraphs, separate sen-
tences, in a single sentence with punctuation separat-
ing them, or in a single sentence without punctuation? 
For example, should we generate (just showing two of 
these options):  
? Many people find reading hard, but your skills 
will improve if you practise reading (single sen-
tence, comma separation)  
? Many people find reading hard. But your skills 
will improve if you practise reading (two sen-
tences)  
These choices are inter-dependent. For example, we cannot 
say, ?Then your skills will improve, if you practise reading? 
(both if and then cue phrases, nucleus first). 
This problem is related to the document structuring task of 
Power et al [2002]. Power et al?s approach is essentially 
algorithmic; whereas our approach is centred on the knowl-
edge required to make the choices, and the algorithm used is 
less important. Their task is how to map an input RST tree 
to a set of output trees representing possible alternative 
document structures and then choose the best; whereas 
SkillSum?s microplanning task is to map an input RST tree 
to flat, ordered lists of syntactic structures representing pos-
sible lists of alternative sentences and then pick the best. 
Power et al include document layout in their task, whereas 
SkillSum makes layout decisions later, during the final re-
alisation stage.  
3 Choice rules and the microplanner  
We created a microplanner (developed from the one de-
scribed in [Williams, 2004]) that made the above choices 
based on hard constraints and optimisation rules; the hard 
Concession 
Condition [Many people find 
reading hard] 
[Your skills will improve] [You practise reading] 
constraints forbade illegal combinations, and the optimisa-
tion rules expressed readability preferences. 
3.1 Hard constraints 
The hard constraints were intended to forbid combinations 
of choices that led to ungrammatical texts, such as ?Then 
your skills will improve, if you practise reading?. We cre-
ated these by analyzing the RST Discourse Treebank Cor-
pus (RST-DTC) [Carlson et al 2002]; this is a corpus of 
Wall Street Journal texts that have been annotated with dis-
course relations. For each discourse relation of the type that 
occurs in SkillSum texts, we extracted 200 instances of the 
relation from the RST-DTC (or as many as possible if the 
corpus contained fewer than 200 instances), and analysed 
what combination of the above choices were instantiated in 
each of these instances. We then created hard constraints 
that forbade any pair of choices which was not present in 
any of the RST-DTC instances that we analysed. These con-
straints were specified on pairs of choices (for example, 
ordering and punctuation), not a complete choice set (order-
ing, punctuation, cue phrases), because we did not have 
enough instances to make rules for complete choice sets.  
The RST-DTC corpus was not ideal for this exercise, as it is 
based on texts (Wall Street Journal articles) that are in-
tended for good readers and written in U.S. English. It 
would have been preferable to use a corpus of U.K. English 
texts intended for low-skilled readers. Unfortunately there is 
no such corpus that includes discourse relation annotations. 
3.2 Optimisation rules 
The optimisation rules expressed preferences between legal 
sets of choices. We created two sets of rules: control and 
enhanced-readability (ER). The control rules were based on 
the most common choices observed in the RST-DTC; they 
also penalised cue phrases which were highly ambiguous 
(could be used for many discourse relations). The ER rules 
expressed a set of preferences for the above choices which 
we hypothesized would result in more readable texts for 
low-skilled readers. 
The ER model was based on a literature review of relevant 
psycholinguistic findings (such as [Millis and Just, 1994; 
Degand et al, 1999; Harley, 2001]) and also on a series of 
pilot experiments that we performed with low-skilled read-
ers [Williams et al, 2003]. Essentially, it prefers that 
? each discourse relation should be expressed by a cue 
phrase. Only a single cue phrase should be used (for 
example, not both if and then for condition); 
? lexically common cue phrases are preferred, even if 
they are ambiguous; for example but instead of how-
ever for concession;  
? a cue phrase should be placed between the constituents 
if possible, and the nucleus (core) should come first if 
possible. For example, ?Your skills will improve if you 
practise reading? is preferred over ?If you practise 
reading, your skills will improve?; 
? constituents should preferably be in separate sentences; 
if they are in the same sentence, they should be sepa-
rated by a comma. 
With regard to the choice of cue phrases, obviously cue 
phrases do not have identical meanings; even if in a broad 
sense they express the same discourse relation, they have 
different connotations and applicability constraints [Knott, 
1996]. Hence the choice of cue phrases should be influenced   
 
Figure 2 ? Example text produced by SkillSum and generated with enhanced readability (ER) model. 
 
		

	



	


	

		

		







	

 !"!!#!#$!$
%


by how well the cue matches the context as well as how 
common (readable) it is. The issue is finessed in SkillSum 
by essentially hard-coding which cue phrases can be used to 
express a particular instance of a relation; this is clearly not 
a satisfactory long-term solution. 
3.3 Microplanner  
Our microplanner treats the decision-making problem as a 
constraint-satisfaction problem (CSP), using the above con-
straints and optimisation rules. It is in general terms similar 
to the CSP system that Power [2000] and Power et al 
[2002] used to make expression choices about rhetorical 
structures, as discussed above. However, we make different 
choices. For example, our microplanner decides whether 0, 
1, or 2 cue phrases should be used to express a discourse 
relation, whereas Power et al?s assumes that a single cue 
phrase is always used. Power et al?s microplanner makes 
choices about indentation, which our microplanner does not. 
Power et al ?s microplanner also attempts to optimize the 
document as a whole, whereas ours processes each relation 
separately, and does not consider interactions between the 
expressions of different relations.  
Our microplanner is implemented in Java, and uses a Java 
Constraint Library (http://liawww.epfl.ch/JCL) for CSP 
representation and solving. While we have not explicitly 
measured the amount of computation time needed by the 
microplanner, certainly the SkillSum system as a whole 
produces texts within a few seconds, which is acceptable to 
users. 
3.4 Example  
An example of a text produced by SkillSum is shown in 
Figure 2. This text was generated using the ER model. Some  
examples of differences in expression resulting from using 
the ER model over the control model for the same content 
are  
? cue phrase choice: the control model would choose un-
common, unambiguous thus to express evaluation; 
whereas the ER model chooses common but ambigu-
ous and (first paragraph in Figure 2);  
? ordering: the control model would generate, if you im-
prove your skills, it could help you do a course 
whereas the ER model generates it could help you do 
a course, if you improve your skills (sixth paragraph 
in Figure 2);  
? punctuation and sentence structure: the control model 
would choose to express the first three paragraphs in 
Figure 2 joined by commas and as a single sentence; 
whereas the same information is expressed in three 
different sentences (and indeed three different para-
graphs) by the ER model.  
Some colleagues have asked why the ER model allows sen-
tences to start with And (such as And you did well in Figure 
2). This is because its hard constraints are based on corpus 
analysis, and sentences beginning with And do in fact occur 
in corpora. 
4 Evaluation 
4.1 Pilots  
We conducted several pilot studies of the readability of 
SkillSum texts, generally in settings where subjects com-
pleted the literacy assessment and then were asked to read 
the summary texts that described their performance on the 
assessment. Perhaps the most important decision we made 
on the basis of these pilots was to evaluate readability by 
asking subjects to read texts aloud, and timing how long it 
took them to do so. We initially wanted to measure readabil-
ity by asking comprehension questions and by timing silent 
reading, but this proved problematical. The problem with 
comprehension questions was that subjects responded to 
them based on their beliefs about their literacy, not on the 
content of the report. For example, if we showed a subject a 
text similar to Figure 2 and asked her ?What does the report 
say you did well on?, she might respond ?I didn?t do well on 
anything? instead of ?It says I did well on grammar?.  
We also tried measuring reading rate using self-timed silent 
reading (subjects were asked to read text on a screen, and 
press a button when they finished), which is a common 
technique in psycholinguistics. Again, this did not work 
well with poor readers because they tended to skim-read or 
even simply press the button without reading the text at all. 
Therefore we decided to ask subjects to read texts aloud, 
and measure their reading rate. This also allowed us to 
measure reading errors, which cannot be measured with 
silent reading. Oral reading rates and reading errors are 
commonly used by psychologists [Kintsch and Vipond 
1979] and educationalists [ARCS, 2005] to measure reading 
difficulty.  
Generally in pilots, the ER model texts were read faster than 
control model texts by poor readers but the increase in read-
ing rate was not statistically significant. Good readers? read-
ing rates were not affected. We used these results to calcu-
late the sample size (number of subjects) required for the 
experiment in section 5.2, which did show a statistically 
significant increase in reading rate for poor readers.  
Other findings of the pilots included: 
? Texts needed to be short, no longer than the example 
shown in Figure 2. We tried giving people more de-
tailed feedback about their assessments, but they did 
not wish to read longer texts. 
? We got better results if we focused on subgroups with 
similar skills profiles, rather then trying to get sub-
jects with a wide range of reading (dis)abilities. In 
part this is because low-skilled readers have very dif-
ferent ability profiles; a dyslexic is quite different 
from someone who never learnt to read because she 
missed school, for example. Also, from a statistical 
perspective, a varied subject group meant high stan-
dard deviations in reading speed, which made it diffi-
cult to obtain statistically significant results. 
User preferences elicited in early pilots showed variation 
across good and poor readers. Some preferred the shorter 
sentences and simpler cue phrases of the ER model, while 
others preferred the control model output, describing its 
texts as ?more flowing?.  
4.2 Experiment  
In this experiment, we focused specifically on people with 
moderately poor skills but not people with severe learning 
difficulties.  
Goal. To test the readability of texts generated by SkillSum, 
our hypothesis was that participants would make fewer 
reading errors and have faster reading rates on a text gener-
ated using ER rules than on a text generated using control 
rules. We also took the opportunity to trial the latest version 
of SkillSum with real users. 
Materials. To measure readability, we showed participants 
reports generated for someone else (not themselves), in or-
der to de-personalise the experiment; in fact the reports used 
were the ER version shown in Figure 2 and text with the 
same content but generated using the control model. Col-
leagues have suggested that we could have shown a number 
of different texts tailored for different people, rather than 
showing everyone the same individual?s texts. This is a 
good idea and we will try it in the future.  
Participants. 60 students aged sixteen to twenty-eight years 
at a UK Further Education college (similar to an American 
community college), all of whom were enrolled in voca-
tional courses (e.g. Hairdressing, Sport and Travel and 
Tourism). The participants were selected by staff from the 
college?s basic skills department who knew their approxi-
mate levels of literacy and numeracy; they selected people 
who were known to have problems with basic skills, but did 
not have severe skills deficits. 
Ideally the SkillSum application requires users who are not 
already enrolled at college. In practice, however, we had 
some difficulty in finding such people. Community workers 
we contacted are protective of the people they work with 
and wary about involving them in experiments. To get 
around this problem, we work with people who are enrolled 
in community or FE college courses where we have existing 
contacts and have built up trust. We feel that although this is 
not ideal, the people we work with do, in fact have problems 
with basic skills and are thus well-placed to test SkillSum; 
to comment on any difficulties they have with using it and 
to make suggestions for improvements. 
Method. Each participant answered some questions about 
his/her background (e.g. age and college course) and com-
pleted one of the on-line SkillSum assessments; half did 
literacy and half did numeracy. SkillSum then generated a 
report and participants were asked (a) some simple ques-
tions about it to check comprehension (e.g. ?What was your 
score??) and (b) for their comments on SkillSum in general. 
Participants were then asked to read aloud the two texts; the 
texts were presented in random order. We recorded the 
speech digitally using a high-quality but unobtrusive lapel 
microphone. 
Analysis of recordings: Recordings were analysed accu-
rately using speech signal processing and annotation soft-
ware to mark beginning and end of reading the entire text 
and the beginnings and ends of reading errors. Reading time 
and rate for the entire text was calculated as well as total 
time spent making reading errors. 
We found a very strong practice effect on reading rate (the 
second text was almost always read significantly more 
quickly than the first) even when we attempted to factor this 
out using repeated measures statistics, so we decided to only 
use data from the first text read by each subject.  
Following Sanders and Noordman [2000], we decided to 
exclude as outliers subjects whose reading speed was more 
than twice the standard deviation from the mean; in practice 
this meant that we excluded three very poor readers (reading 
speed less than 110 words/min) from the analysis.  We also 
excluded six sets of recordings that were too noisy to ana-
lyse. 
We were interested in overall numbers of errors and particu-
larly in errors that caused increases in reading times. These 
would indicate an increase in reading difficulty of the text 
being read. We identified insertion errors and pause errors 
that both increase reading times, omission errors that de-
crease reading times and substitutions (miscues) where an-
other word or mispronunciation replaces the target word. 
Our classification was similar to van Hasselt?s [2002], but 
whereas her study only measured numbers of errors, ours  
measured error numbers and time spent making errors. 
Results: Oral reading rate results for the remaining fifty-one 
people are shown in Table 1. The ER version was read on 
average 16 words per minute faster than the control text (9% 
faster) and this result is statistically significant at p<0.05.   
Text n Mean oral reading 
rate (words/minute) 
Sig.  
(indep. samp t-test) 
control  25 173 0.040 
ER  26 189  
Table 1 ? Results for oral reading rate 
An analysis of reading error times gave the results shown in 
Table 2. Types of errors made were typically substitution 
errors, where one word had been substituted for another e.g. 
correct for contact, pauses (hesitations) that were not at 
phrase boundaries and insertion errors, where readers had 
uttered words, or parts of words that were not present in the 
texts, e.g. par before parliament. 
Text n Mean error time 
 (milliseconds) 
Sig.  
(indep. samp t-test) 
control  25 1588 0.058 
ER  26 874  
Table 2 ? Results for reading error times 
The table shows that subjects spent on average an extra 
714ms making errors on the control text, that is they spent 
82% more time making errors on the control text than on the 
ER text; this is weakly significant at p = 0.058.  
5 Discussion and future work  
Our evaluation experiment suggests that the ER choice rules 
at the discourse level do enhance the readability of gener-
ated texts for low-skilled and moderate-skilled readers. 
However, the effect is not as large as we believe SkillSum is 
capable of. We suspect this is partly because we only looked 
at a few linguistic choices, and in particular because we 
have not yet included lexical choice. This will be addressed 
in our future work, see below. Our reviewers pointed out 
that layout could also affect readability. This is another fac-
tor to investigate in future work.  
Another reason why the effect of our ER models on read-
ability is not so large is because we are using only one 
choice model for people with a wide range of skills and 
(dis)abilities. Our experiences suggest that there are major 
differences between moderately-low-skilled readers (such as 
most subjects in our evaluation experiment) and very-low-
skilled readers (such as the outlier subjects excluded from 
the experiment); and between people who are dyslexic, non-
native speakers, or simply have not had the chance to learn 
to read well. More generally, adults with poor reading skills 
are often said to have ?spiky? ability profiles; for example 
one person may have good vocabulary but poor grammar, 
and another may have the reverse. ARCS [2005] divides 
poor readers into 10 subgroups; building models for each of 
the ARCS subgroups would be one way of making our 
models less generic and more focused.  
Ultimately, we would like to explore building choice mod-
els for individuals, that is groups of 1. Building such models 
of course requires spending considerable effort in acquiring 
data about individual readers. However, if such models are 
significantly more effective than generic or subgroup mod-
els in terms of generating readable texts, they may be worth 
exploring, since the benefits of making health information 
(for example) more accessible to people with limited read-
ing skills could be very large. 
5.1 Future work on lexical choice  
Including lexical choice in our models will not be easy be-
cause true synonyms and paraphrases are rare [Edmonds 
and Hirst, 2002]. Hence we cannot simply select between N 
different lexicalisations that have exactly the same meaning, 
instead we have to determine which synonyms or para-
phrases are appropriate given the text?s content and the sys-
tem?s goals (as well as readability preferences).  
For example, since many people have problems with the 
technical term grammar, in our pilots we tried paraphrasing 
problems with grammar as problems writing good sen-
tences. However, many subjects interpreted the latter phrase 
as saying that they had problems with spelling (not gram-
mar), and this confused students whose spelling was in fact 
fine. Hence this paraphrase is probably not appropriate, at 
least for students with poor grammar but good spelling. We 
initially avoided lexical choice because of this issue (except 
for choice of cue phrases, where this problem in fact arose, 
as mentioned in Section 3.2).  
Recently, we carried out a small study on technical terms in 
English and maths (such as grammar) to find out what kinds 
of explanation basic skills students would understand. We 
elicited their own explanations of the terms as well as trying 
out uses of the terms themselves, paraphrases of the terms 
and illustrative examples of the terms. We asked basic skills 
students to think aloud while solving simple English and 
maths problems and then explained their errors to them us-
ing technical terms. In think-aloud, they varied a great deal: 
? Some people did not use technical terms at all. 
? Some people used technical terms inaccurately,  (e.g. 
spelling or capital letters were described as gram-
mar). 
? Some people used technical terms correctly. 
We concluded that it is dangerous to use technical terms 
when they are likely to be misunderstood. When explaining 
terms to people, however, they seemed to comprehend the 
illustrative examples best of all and we will try these in the 
next version of SkillSum.  
5.2 Future work on content selection 
Other future work will be to improve content selection and 
personalisation in SkillSum to help people understand their 
strengths and weaknesses. This poses a challenge because 
the topic of SkillSum?s reports is very sensitive indeed, e.g. 
telling vulnerable people that they have problems with their 
literacy and/or numeracy can be hurtful! To date, one of our 
biggest difficulties has been to generate feedback for people 
who did not answer any of the questions correctly. What 
should SkillSum say to them? This is particularly difficult 
because SkillSum does not know what might have gone 
wrong during the test: perhaps there was a problem with 
using the computer or the mouse; or perhaps the user had 
difficulties with reading the screen because of poor eye-
sight; or perhaps he/she has severe learning difficulties. 
Knowledge acquisition for SkillSum is difficult because the 
task of generating adult basic skills summary reports is 
novel, poorly-understood and complex. See Reiter et al 
2003b] for a detailed review of KA problems specific to 
NLG. Like the smoking cessation letters generated by the 
STOP system [Reiter et al, 2003a], adult basic skills reports 
did not previously occur naturally. That is, tutors do not 
tend to write down feedback and advice for basic learners. A 
related text type is school reports. However, Education lit-
erature on writing school reports is unhelpful because adult 
basic learners have often had bad experiences with school 
and school reports in the past [FENTO, 2004].  
We are currently involved in knowledge acquisition to de-
rive improved content selection rules. We elicited tutor-
authored reports for ten case studies in literacy and ten in 
numeracy. We gave tutors test results and a short user pro-
file containing background material, e.g. age, gender, course 
enrolled in and ambitions (these were built using ano-
nymised data from actual people who took part in earlier 
pilots and from [Swain et al, 2004]). An analysis of the 
tutor-authored reports demonstrated that they have similari-
ties in high-level content structures but individual author 
differences in lower-level content. Some issues that we are 
currently considering include: 
? Should reports mention students? mistakes as well as 
their correct answers? 
? Should reports congratulate students for doing well, 
when perhaps their performance was worse than nor-
mal, or, on the other hand, should they commiserate 
with students when perhaps their performance was 
better than normal? 
? Should reports refer to students? ambitions (e.g. in 
terms of qualifications or career)? 
? How much advice should be given? 
? How much motivational content should be included? 
We need to reconcile what tutors tell us with what students 
tell us. Tutors tend to agree that reports should be encourag-
ing, focus on positive aspects and not mention mistakes. On 
the other hand, when we talk to basic skills students, they 
often want to know what their mistakes were (it can be frus-
trating to score twenty-six out of twenty-seven and not 
know which one was wrong!).  
Not knowing an individual and how much effort he/she has 
put into the test is another problem. Evaluative comments in 
a report such as ?this is very good? are meaningless without 
such knowledge and, indeed they are meaningless without 
reference to some scale (but tutors have advised against 
mentioning the core curriculum scale as students are not 
familiar with it).  
We propose to elicit self-assessments and some background 
information about users? ambitions from an initial question-
naire in SkillSum. The former might help with choice of 
evaluative comments. But combining the latter with advice 
and motivational content e.g. ?you may be able to get a 
plumbing qualification if you do a course to improve your 
English? could be dangerous because the system has no 
way of knowing what an individual?s potential might be and 
the resulting content could be highly inaccurate.   
5.3 SkillSum final experiment 
Lastly, we are planning our final experiment in which we 
will evaluate SkillSum to find out if it meets the commercial 
and research goals of the project partners. More specifically, 
these goals are: 
? Basic research: Does SkillSum generate texts that can 
be read and understood by people who have some 
problems with literacy but not severe learning diffi-
culties?  In particular, is the ER linguistic choice 
model making the right microplanning choices for 
such readers? We will show low-skilled readers re-
ports generated with SkillSum using different linguis-
tic choice models, and see how the choice models af-
fect readability. 
? Applied research: Do NLG reports help students to 
understand their strengths and weaknesses, and 
whether their skills are adequate? We will test this 
with two versions of SkillSum (with and without the 
NLG component) with students who wish to do a 
course at an FE college; hence ?whether skills are 
adequate? will be judged relative to the needs of the 
student?s intended course.  
6 Conclusion 
SkillSum is an on-going project that is just starting to make 
some progress on generating readable texts for low-skilled 
readers and there is much more that can and should be done. 
Nevertheless, we would like to think that the choice prefer-
ences we used (Section 3.2) could be practically useful to 
people building systems that produce texts for low-skilled 
readers, and indeed systems that produce texts for the gen-
eral public (since good readers don?t seem to be affected by 
these choices, there is no harm in using low-skilled prefer-
ences for all readers). We also hope that our work encour-
ages other researchers to think about this topic, as making 
information more accessible to low skill readers would have 
major benefits for society.  
Acknowledgments 
This work is supported by U.K. PACCIT-LINK Grant 
ESRC RES-328-25-0026. We thank Liesl M. Osman, De-
partment of Medicine and Therapeutics; members of the 
Aberdeen Natural Language Generation Group and the 
anonymous reviewers. 
References 
[Bouayad-Agha et al, 2001] N. Bouayad-Agha, D. Scott, 
and R. Power. The influence of layout on the interpreta-
tion of referring expressions. Multidisciplinary Ap-
proaches to Discourse. L. Degand, Y. Bestgen, W. 
Spooren and L. van Waes (eds.), Stichting Neerlan-
distiek VU Amsterdam and Nodus Publikationen M?n-
ster, 2001. 
[ARCS, 2005] Adult Reading Components Study. 
www.nifl.gov/readingprofiles/FT_ARCS.htm 
[Carlson et al 2002] Lynn Carlson, Daniel Marcu, and 
Mary Ellen Okurowski. Building a Discourse-Tagged 
Corpus in the Framework of Rhetorical Structure The-
ory. In Current Directions in Discourse and Dialogue, J. 
van Kuppevelt and R. Smith eds., Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2002. 
[Cawsey et al 2000] Alison Cawsey, Ray Jones, and Janne 
Pearson. The Evaluation of a Personalised Information 
System for Patients with Cancer. User Modeling and 
User-Adapted Interaction, 10(1):47-72, 2000.  
[Degand et al 1999] L. Degand, N. Lef?vre, and Y. Best-
gen. The impact of connectives and anaphoric expres-
sions on expository discourse comprehension. Document 
Design: Journal of Research and Problem Solving in 
Organizational Communication, 1:39-51, 1999.  
[Devlin et al 1999] S. Devlin, J. Tait, Y.Canning, J. Carroll, 
G. Minnen and D. Pearce. The Application of Assistive 
Technology in Facilitating the Comprehension of News-
paper Text by Aphasic People. In C. Buhler and H. 
Knops (eds.) Assistive Technology on the Threshold of 
the New Millennium. IOS Press. 1999.  
[Di Eugenio et al 2001] Barbara Di Eugenio, Michael 
Glass, Michael J. Trolio and Susan Haller. Simple Natu-
ral Language Generation and Intelligent Tutoring Sys-
tems. Proc. of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 2001. 
[Edmonds and Hirst. 2002] Philip Edmonds and Graeme 
Hirst. Near-Synonymy and Lexical Choice. Computa-
tional Linguistics 28(2):105-144, 2002.  
[FENTO, 2004]. Further Education National Training Or-
ganisation (FENTO). Including Language, Literacy and 
Numeracy Learning in all Post-16 Education. Guidance 
on Curriculum and Methodology for generic initial 
teacher education programmes, www.nrdc.org.uk, 2004. 
[Harley, 2001] Trevor Harley. The psychology of language 
from data to theory. Psychology Press Ltd, 2001.  
[Kintsch and Vipond, 1979] Walter Kintsch and Douglas 
Vipond. Reading Comprehension and Readability in 
Educational Practice and Psychological Theory. In L.G. 
Nilsson (ed.) Perspectives on Memory Research. Law-
rence Erlbaum, 1979.  
[Knott 1996] Alistair Knott. A Data-Driven Methodology 
for Motivating a Set of Coherence Relations. PhD The-
sis, University of Edinburgh, 1996.  
[Lavoie and Rambow, 1997] Benoit Lavoie and Owen 
Rambow. A Fast and Portable Realizer for Text Genera-
tion. Proc. of ANLP-1997, pages 265-268, 1997.  
[Mann and Thompson, 1987] W. Mann and S. Thompson. 
Rhetorical Structure Theory: A Theory of Text Organi-
zation. Information Sciences Institute, Reprint Series no. 
ISI/RS-87-190, 1987. 
[McKeown et al 1993] Kathleen McKeown, Jacques Robin, 
and Michael Tanenblatt. Tailoring Lexical Choice to the 
User's Vocabulary in Multimedia Explanation Genera-
tion. Proc of ACL, pages 226-234, 1993. 
[Millis and Just, 1994] Keith Millis and Marcel Just. The 
Influence of Connectives on Sentence Comprehension. 
Journal of Memory and Language. 33:128-147, 1994.  
[Milosavljevic and Oberlander, 1998] Maria Milosavljevic 
and Jon Oberlander. Dynamic Hypertext Catalogues: 
Helping Users to Help Themselves. Proc. of Hypertext 
1998, pages 123-131, 1998. 
[Moore et al, 2004] Johanna D. Moore, Kaska Porayska-
Pomsta, Sebastian Varges, and Claus Zinn, Generating 
Tutorial Feedback with Affect, in Proc. of the 17th In-
ternational Florida Artificial Intelligence Research So-
ciety Conference, AAAI Press, 2004. 
[Moser 1999]. Claus Moser. Improving literacy and nu-
meracy: a fresh start (report of working group). 
http://www.lifelonglearning.co.uk/mosergroup/. 1999  
[Paris 1988] C?cile Paris. Tailoring Object Descriptions to a 
User's Level of Expertise. Computational Linguistics 
14(3):64-78, 1988.  
[Power, 2000] Richard Power: Planning texts by constraint 
satisfaction. Proc. of COLING 2000, pp. 642-648, 2000.  
[Power et al 2002] Richard Power, Donia Scott, and Nadjet 
Bouayad-Agha. Document Structure. Computational 
Linguistics 29(2):211-260, 2002.  
[Reiter and Dale 2000]. Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. Build-
ing Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge 
University Press, 2000.  
[Reiter et al, 2003a]. Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and 
Liesl Osman. Lessons from a Failure: Generating Tai-
lored Smoking Cessation Letters. Artificial Intelligence 
144:41-58, 2003.  
[Reiter et al, 2003b]. E. Reiter, S. Sripada, and R. Robert-
son. Acquiring Correct Knowledge for Natural Language 
Generation. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 
18:491-516., 2003.  
[Sanders and Noordman, 2000] Ted Sanders and Leo 
Noordman. The Role of Coherence Relations and Their 
Linguistic Markers in Text Processing. Discourse Proc-
esses, 29(1):37 ? 60, 2000.  
[Scott and de Souza, 1990] Donia Scott and Clarisse de 
Souza. Getting the Message Across in RST-Based Text 
Generation. In R Dale et al (eds), Current Research in 
Natural Language Generation. Academic Press, 1990.  
[Siddharthan 2003] Advaith Siddharthan. Syntactic 
Simplification and Text Cohesion. PhD Thesis, 
University of Cambridge Computing Lab, 2003. 
[Sripada et al, 2003]. Somayajulu G. Sripada, Ehud Reiter, 
Jim Hunter and Jin Yu. Generating English Summaries 
of Time Series Data using the Gricean Maxims. Proc. of 
KDD 2003, pp. 187-196, 2003. 
[Steeds, 2001] Steeds, Andrew (Ed.). Adult Literacy core 
curriculum including Spoken Communication.  Produced 
by Cambridge Training and Development Ltd. on behalf 
of The Basic Skills Agency. ISBN 1-85990-127-1, 2001. 
[Swain et al, 2004] Swain, Jon., Elizabeth Baker, Debbie 
Holder, Barbara Newmarch and Diana Coben. Beyond 
the daily application: Making numeracy teaching mean-
ingful to adult learners. National Research and Devel-
opment Center for adult literacy and numeracy. 
www.nrdc.org.uk. 2004. 
[van Hasselt, 2002] van Hasselt, Clare. Oral Reading 
Achievements, Strategies and Personal Characteristics 
of New Zealand Primary School Students Reading Be-
low Normal Expectation. Probe Study, National Educa-
tion Monitoring Project (NEMP), University of Otago, 
New Zealand, 2002. 
[Williams, 2004] Williams, Sandra, H. Natural Language 
Generation of discourse relations for different reading 
levels. PhD Thesis, University of Aberdeen, 2004. 
[Williams et al 2003] Sandra Williams, Ehud Reiter and 
Liesl Osman. Experiments with discourse-level choices 
and readability. Proc. of the 9th European Workshop on 
Natural Language Generation, pp. 127-134, 2003. 
