Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 68?75,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantically Rich Human-Aided Machine Annotation 
 
Marjorie McShane, Sergei Nirenburg, Stephen Beale, Thomas O?Hara 
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering 
University of Maryland Baltimore County 
1000 Hilltop Circle, Baltimore, Maryland, 21250   USA 
{marge, sergei, sbeale, tomohara}@umbc.edu 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a semantically rich, 
human-aided machine annotation system 
created within the Ontological Semantics 
(OntoSem) environment using the 
DEKADE toolset. In contrast to main-
stream annotation efforts, this method of 
annotation provides more information at a 
lower cost and, for the most part, shifts 
the maintenance of consistency to the sys-
tem itself. In addition, each tagging effort 
not only produces knowledge resources 
for that corpus, but also leads to im-
provements in the knowledge environ-
ment that will better support subsequent 
tagging efforts.  
1 Introduction 
Corpus tagging is a prerequisite for many machine 
learning methods in NLP but has the drawbacks of 
high cost, inter-annotator inconsistency and the 
insufficient treatment of meaning. A tagging ap-
proach that strives to ameliorate all of these draw-
backs is semantically rich, human-aided machine 
annotation (HAMA), implemented in the OntoSem 
(Ontological Semantics) environment using a tool-
set called DEKADE: the Development, Evaluation, 
Knowledge Acquisition and Demonstration Envi-
ronment of OntoSem. 
In brief, the OntoSem text analyzer takes as in-
put open text and outputs a text-meaning represen-
tation (TMR) that represents its meaning using an 
ontologically grounded, language-independent 
metalanguage (see Nirenburg and Raskin 2004). 
Since the processing leading up to the production 
of TMR includes, in addition to semantic analysis 
proper, preprocessing (roughly, segmentation, 
treatment of named entities and morphology) and 
syntactic analysis, the overall annotation of text in 
this approach includes tags relating to all of the 
above levels. Since the typical input for analysis in 
our practice is genuine sentences, which are on 
average 25 words long and contain all manner of 
complex phenomena, it is not uncommon for the 
automatically generated TMRs to contain errors. 
These errors?which can occur at the level of pre-
processing, syntactic analysis or semantic analy-
sis?can be corrected manually using the 
DEKADE environment, yielding ?gold standard? 
output. Making a human the final arbiter in the 
process means that such long-term complexities as 
treatment of metaphor, metonymy, PP-attachment, 
difficult cases of reference resolution and others 
can be resolved locally while we work on funda-
mental, implementable automatic solutions.  
In this paper we describe the Onto-
Sem/DEKADE environment for the creation of 
gold standard TMRs, which supports the first ever 
annotation effort that:  
 
? produces structures that can be used as input 
for both text generators and general reason-
ing systems: semantically rich representa-
tions of the meaning of text written in a 
language-independent metalanguage; these 
representations cover entities, propositions, 
relations, attributes, speaker attitudes, mo-
dalities, polarity, discourse relations, time, 
reference relations, and more; 
? produces semantic tagging of text largely 
automatically, thus making more realistic 
and affordable the tagging of large amounts 
of text in finite time; 
? almost fully circumvents the pitfalls of man-
ual tagging, including human tagger errors 
and inconsistencies;  
? produces richer semantic annotations than 
manual tagging realistically could, since ma-
nipulating large and complex static knowl-
68
edge sources would be impossible for hu-
mans if starting from scratch (i.e., our meth-
odology effectively turns an essay question 
into a multiple choice one, with most of the 
correct answers already provided); 
? incorporates humans as final arbiters for out-
put of three stages of text analysis (preproc-
essing, syntactic analysis and semantic 
analysis), thus maximally leveraging the 
automated capacity of the system but not re-
quiring of it blanket coverage at this point in 
its development; 
? promises to reduce, over time, the depend-
ence on human input because an important 
side effect of the operation of the human-
assisted machine annotation approach is en-
hancement of the static knowledge resources 
? the lexicon and the ontology ? underlying 
the OntoSem analyzer, so that the quality of 
automatic text analysis will grow as the 
HAMA system operates, leading to an ever 
improving quality of raw, unedited TMRs; 
? (as a corollary to the previous point) be-
comes more cost-efficient over time; and 
? can be cost-effectively extended to other 
languages (including less commonly taught 
languages), with much less work than was 
required for the first language since many of 
the necessary resources are language-
independent. 
 
Our approach to text analysis is a hybrid of 
knowledge-based and corpus-based, stochastic 
methods.   
In the remainder of the paper we will briefly de-
scribe the lay of the land in text annotation (Sec-
tion 2), the OntoSem environment (Section 3), the 
DEKADE environment for creating gold-standard 
TMRs from automatically generated ones (Section 
4), the portability of OntoSem to other languages 
(Section 5), and the broader implications of this 
R&D effort (Section 6).   
2 The Lay of the Land in Annotation 
In addition to the well-known bottlenecks of cost 
and inconsistency, it is widely assumed that low-
level (only syntactic or ?light semantic?) tagging is 
either sufficient or inevitable due to the complexity 
of semantic tagging. Past and ongoing tagging ef-
forts share this point of departure. 
Numerous projects have striven to achieve text 
annotation via a simpler task, like translation, 
sometimes assuming that one language has already 
been tagged (e.g., Pianta and Bentivogli 2003, and 
references therein). But results of such efforts are 
either of low quality, light semantic depth, or re-
main to be reported. Of significant interest is the 
porting of annotations across languages: for exam-
ple, Yarowsky et al 2001 present a method for 
automatic tagging of English and the projection of 
the tags to other languages; however, these tags do 
not include semantics. 
Post-editing of automatic annotation has been 
pursued in various projects (e.g., Brants 2000, and 
Marcus et al 1993). The latter group did an ex-
periment early on in which they found that ?man-
ual tagging took about twice as long as correcting 
[automated tagging], with about twice the inter-
annotator disagreement rate and an error rate that 
was about 50% higher? (Marcus et al 1993). This 
conclusion supports the pursuit of automated tag-
ging methods. The difference between our work 
and the work in the above projects, however, is 
that syntax for us is only a step in the progression 
toward semantics. 
 Interesting time- and cost-related observations 
are provided in Brants 2000 with respect to the 
manual correction of automated POS and syntactic 
tagging of a German corpus (semantics is not ad-
dressed). Although these tasks took approximately 
50 seconds per sentence, with sentences averaging 
17.5 tokens, the actual cost in time and money puts 
each sentence at 10 minutes, by the time two tag-
gers carry out the task, their results are compared, 
difficult issues are resolved, and taggers are trained 
in the first place. Notably, however, this effort 
used students as taggers, not professionals. We, by 
contrast, use professionals to check and correct 
TMRs and thus reduce to practically zero the train-
ing time, the need for multiple annotators (pro-
vided the size of a typical annotation task is 
commensurate with those in current projects), and 
costly correction of errors.  
Among past projects that have addressed se-
mantic annotation are the following: 
 1. Gildea and Jurafsky (2002) created a stochas-
tic system that labels case roles of predicates with 
either abstract (e.g., AGENT, THEME) or domain-
specific (e.g., MESSAGE, TOPIC) roles. The system 
69
trained on 50,000 words of hand-annotated text 
(produced by the FrameNet project). When tasked 
to segment constituents and identify their semantic 
roles (with fillers being undisambiguated textual 
strings) the system scored in the 60?s in precision 
and recall. Limitations of the system include its 
reliance on hand-annotated data, and its reliance on 
prior knowledge of the predicate frame type (i.e., it 
lacks the capacity to disambiguate productively). 
Semantics in this project is limited to case-roles.  
 2. The goal of the ?Interlingual Annotation of 
Multilingual Text Corpora? project 
(http://aitc.aitcnet.org/nsf/iamtc/) is to create a syn-
tactic and semantic annotation representation 
methodology and test it out on six languages (Eng-
lish, Spanish, French, Arabic, Japanese, Korean, 
and Hindi). The semantic representation, however, 
is restricted to those aspects of syntax and seman-
tics that developers believe can be consistently 
handled well by hand annotators for many lan-
guages. The current stage of development includes 
only syntax and light semantics ? essentially, the-
matic roles. 
 3. In the ACE project 
(http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/ACE/intro.htm
l), annotators carry out manual semantic annotation 
of texts in English, Chinese and Arabic to create 
training and test data for research task evaluations. 
The downside of this effort is that the inventory of 
semantic entities, relations and events is very small 
and therefore the resulting semantic representa-
tions are coarse-grained: e.g., there are only five 
event types. The project description promises more 
fine-grained descriptors and relations among 
events in the future.  
 4. Another response to the insufficiency of syn-
tax-only tagging is offered by the developers of 
PropBank, the Penn Treebank semantic extension. 
Kingsbury et al 2002 report: ?It was agreed that 
the highest priority, and the most feasible type of 
semantic annotation, is coreference and predicate 
argument structure for verbs, participial modifiers 
and nominalizations?, and this is what is included 
in PropBank.  
 To summarize, previous tagging efforts that 
have addressed semantics at all have covered only 
a relatively small subset of semantic phenomena. 
OntoSem, by contrast, produces a far richer anno-
tation, carried out largely automatically, within an 
environment that will improve over time and with 
use.  
3 A Snapshot of OntoSem 
OntoSem is a text-processing environment that 
takes as input unrestricted raw text and carries out 
preprocessing, morphological analysis, syntactic 
analysis, and semantic analysis, with the results of 
semantic analysis represented as formal text-
meaning representations (TMRs) that can then be 
used as the basis for many applications (for details, 
see, e.g., Nirenburg and Raskin 2004, Beale et al 
2003). Text analysis relies on:  
 
? The OntoSem language-independent ontology, 
which is written using a metalanguage of de-
scription and currently contains around 6,000 
concepts, each of which is described by an aver-
age of 16 properties.  
? An OntoSem lexicon for each language proc-
essed, which contains syntactic and semantic 
zones (linked using variables) as well as calls for 
procedural semantic routines when necessary. 
The semantic zone most frequently refers to on-
tological concepts, either directly or with prop-
erty-based modifications, but can also describe 
word meaning extra-ontologically, for example, 
in terms of modality, aspect, time, etc. The cur-
rent English lexicon contains approximately 
25,000 senses, including most closed-class items 
and many of the most frequent and polysemous  
verbs, as targeted by corpus analysis. (An exten-
sive description of the lexicon, formatted as a tu-
torial, can be found at http://ilit.umbc.edu.) 
? An onomasticon, or lexicon of proper names, 
which contains approximately 350,000 entries.  
? A fact repository, which contains real-world 
facts represented as numbered ?remembered in-
stances? of ontological concepts (e.g., SPEECH-
ACT-3366 is the 3366th instantiation of the con-
cept SPEECH-ACT in the world model constructed 
during the processing of some given text(s)). 
? The OntoSem syntactic-semantic analyzer, 
which covers preprocessing, syntactic analysis, 
semantic analysis, and the creation of TMRs. In-
stead of using a large, monolithic grammar of a 
language, which leads to ambiguity and ineffi-
ciency, we use a special lexicalized grammar 
created on the fly for each input sentence (Beale, 
et. al. 2003).  Syntactic rules are generated from 
the lexicon entries of each of the words in the 
sentence, and are supplemented by a small in-
ventory of generalized rules. We augment this 
70
basic grammar with transformations triggered by 
words or features present in the input sentence.  
? The TMR language, which is the metalanguage 
for representing text meaning.  
 
 Creating gold standard TMRs involves running 
text through the OntoSem processors and check-
ing/correcting the output after three stages of 
analysis: preprocessing, syntactic analysis, and 
semantic analysis. These outputs can 
be viewed and edited as text or as vis-
ual representations through the 
DEKADE interface. Although the gold 
standard TMR itself does not reflect 
the results of preprocessing or syntactic 
analysis, the gold standard results of 
those stages of processing are stored in 
the system and can be converted into a 
more traditional annotation format. 
4 TMRs in DEKADE 
TMRs represent propositions con-
nected by discourse relations (since 
space permits only the briefest of descriptions, in-
terested readers are directed to Nirenburg and 
Raskin 2004, Chapter 6 for details). Propositions 
are headed by instances of ontological concepts, 
parameterized for modality, aspect, proposition 
time, overall TMR time, and style. Each proposi-
tion is related to other instantiated concepts using 
ontologically defined relations (which include case 
roles and many others) and attributes. Coreference 
links form an additional layer of linking between 
instantiated concepts. OntoSem microtheories de-
voted to modality, aspect, time, style, reference, 
etc., undergo iterative extensions and improve-
ments in response to system needs as diagnosed 
during the processing of actual texts.    
 We use the following sentence to walk through 
the processes of automatically generating TMRs 
and viewing/editing those TMRs to create a gold-
standard annotated corpus.   
 
The Iraqi government has agreed to let 
U.S. Representative Tony Hall visit the 
country to assess the humanitarian crisis.  
 
Preprocessor. The preprocessor identifies the 
root word, part of speech and morphological fea-
tures of each word; recognizes sentence bounda-
ries, named entities, dates, times and numbers; and 
for named entities, determines the ontological type 
(i.e. HUMAN, PLACE, ORGANIZATION, etc.) of the 
entity as well as its subparts (e.g., the first, last, 
and middle names of a person). For the semi-
automatic creation of gold standard TMRs, much 
ambiguity can be removed at small cost by allow-
ing people to correct spurious part-of-speech tags, 
number and date boundaries, etc., through the 
DEKADE environment at the preprocessor stage 
(see Figure 1). Clicking on w+ permits a new POS 
tag/analysis, and clicking on w-, the more common 
action, removes spurious analyses. Preprocessor 
correction is a conceptually simple and logistically 
fast task that can be carried out by less trained, and 
therefore less expensive, annotators.  
Figure 1. Preprocesor Output Editor. 
Syntax. Syntax output can be viewed and ed-
ited in text or graphic form. The graphic 
viewer/editor presents the sentence using the tradi-
tional metaphor of color-coded labeled arcs. 
Mouse clicks show the components of arcs, permit 
arcs to be deleted along with the orphans they 
would leave, allow for the edges of arcs to be 
moved, etc. (no graphic of the syntax or semantics 
browsers/editors are provided due to space con-
straints).   
One common error in syntax output is spurious 
parses due to contextually incorrect POS or feature 
analysis. As shown above, this can be fixed from 
the outset by correcting the preprocessor. How-
ever, since the preprocessor will always contain 
spurious analyses that can usually be removed 
automatically by the syntactic analyzer, it is not 
necessarily most time efficient to always start with 
preprocessor editing. A more difficult, long-term 
research issue is genuine ambiguity caused, for 
example, by PP-attachments. While such issues are 
71
not likely to be solved computationally in the short 
term, they can be easily resolved when humans are 
used as the final arbiters in the creation of gold 
standard TMRs.  
 When the correct parse is not included in the 
syntactic output, either the necessary lexical 
knowledge is lacking (i.e. there is an unknown 
word or word sense), or an unknown grammatical 
construction has been used. While the syntax-
editing interface permits spot-correction of the 
problem by the addition of the necessary arc(s), a 
more fundamental knowledge-building approach is 
generally preferred ? except when the input is non-
standard, in which case systemic modifications are 
avoided.   
 Semantics. Within the OntoSem environment, 
there are two stages of text-meaning representa-
tions (TMRs): basic and extended. The basic TMR 
shows the basic ontological mappings and depend-
ency structure, whereas the extended TMR shows 
the results of procedural semantics, including ref-
erence resolution, reasoning about time relations, 
etc. The basic and extended stages of TMR crea-
tion can be viewed and edited separately within 
DEKADE.   
TMRs can be viewed and edited in text format 
or graphically. In the latter, concepts are shown as 
nodes and properties are shown as lines connecting 
them. A pretty-printed view of the textual extended 
TMR for our sample sentence, repeated for con-
venience, is as follows (concept names are in small 
caps; instance numbers are appended to them).  
 
The Iraqi government has agreed to let U.S.  
Representative Tony Hall visit the country to  
assess the humanitarian crisis. 
 
AGREE-268 
 textpointer agree 
THEME   MODALITY-200 
 AGENT   GOVERNMENTAL-ORGANIZATION-41 
 TIME   (< FIND-ANCHOR-TIME) 
GOVERNMENTAL-ORGANIZATION-41 
 textpointer government 
 RELATION  NATION-56      
 AGENT-OF  AGREE-268 
NATION-56 
 textpointer Iraq 
 RELATION  GOVERNMENTAL-ORGANIZATION-41 
MODALITY-200 
 textpointer let 
      TYPE    permissive 
SCOPE   TRAVEL-EVENT-272 
      VALUE       1 
TRAVEL-EVENT-272 
 textpointer visit 
 AGENT   SENATOR-4471  
 DESTINATION NATION-57 
 PURPOSE  EVALUATE-69 
 SCOPE-OF  MODALITY-200 
SENATOR-447 
 textpointer Representative Tony Hall2 
 REPRESENTATIVE-OF NATION-40 
NATION-40 
 textpointer U.S. 
 REPRESENTED-BY SENATOR-447 
NATION-57 
 textpointer country    
 COREFER  NATION-56 
EVALUATE-69 
 AGENT   SENATOR-447 
 THEME   DISASTER-EVENT-2 
DISASTER-EVENT-2 
 BENEFICIARY SET-23 
 THEME-OF  EVALUATE-69 
SET-23 
 MEMBER-TYPE HUMAN-1342 
 BENEFICIARY-OF DISASTER-EVENT-2 
 
Within the graphical browser, clicking on concept 
names or properties permits them to be deleted, 
edited, or permits new ones to be added. It also 
shows the expansion of any concept in text format. 
 Evaluating and editing the semantic output is 
the most challenging aspect of creating gold stan-
dard TMRs, since creating formal semantic repre-
sentations is arguably one of the most difficult 
tasks in all of NLP. If a knowledge engineer de-
termines that some aspect of the semantic repre-
sentation is incorrect, the problems can be 
corrected locally or by editing the knowledge re-
sources and rerunning the analyzer. Local correc-
tions are used, for example, in cases of metaphor 
and metonymy, which we do not record in our 
knowledge resources (we are working on a mi-
crotheory of tropes but it is not yet implemented).  
In all other cases, resource supplementation is pre-
ferred; it can be carried out either immediately or 
the problem can be fixed locally, in which case a 
request will be sent to a knowledge acquirer to 
carry out the necessary resource enhancements.  
                                                          
1 The concept SENATOR is defined as a member of a legislative 
assembly. 
2 Collocations of SOCIAL-ROLE + personal name are handled by 
the preprocessor. 
72
 Striking the balance between short-term goals 
(a gold standard TMR for the given text) and long-
term goals (better analysis of any text in the future) 
is always a challenge. For example, if a text con-
tained the word grass in the sense of ?marijuana?, 
and if the lexicon lacked the word ?grass? alto-
gether, we would want to acquire the meaning 
?green lawn cover? as well; however, doing this 
without constraint could mean getting bogged 
down by knowledge acquisition (as with the doz-
ens of idiomatic uses of ?have?) at the expense of 
actually producing gold-standard TMRs. There are 
also cases in which a local solution to semantic 
representation is very easy whereas a fundamental, 
machine-reproducible solution is very difficult. 
Consider the case of relative expressions, like re-
spective and respectively, as used in Smith and 
Matthews pleaded innocent and guilty, respec-
tively. Manually editing a TMR such that the ap-
propriate properties are linked to their heads is 
quite simple, whereas writing a program for this 
non-trivial case of reference resolution is not. 
Thus, in some cases we push through gold standard 
TMR production while keeping track of ? and de-
veloping as time permits ? the more difficult as-
pects of text processing that will enhance TMR 
output in the future.    
The gold standard TMR for the sentence dis-
cussed at length here was produced with only a 
few manual corrections: changing two part of 
speech tags and selecting the correct sense for one 
word. Work took less than the 10 minutes reported 
by Brants 2000 for their non-semantic tagging. 
5 Porting to Other Languages 
Recently the need for tagged corpora for less 
commonly taught languages has received much 
attention. While our group is not currently pursu-
ing such languages, it has in the past: TMRs have 
been automatically generated for languages such as 
Chinese, Georgian, Arabic and Persian. We take a 
short tangent to explain how OntoSem/DEKADE 
can be extended, at relatively low cost, to the anno-
tation of other languages ? showing yet another 
way in which this approach to annotation reaches 
beyond the results for any given text or corpus.  
Whereas it is typical to assume that lexicons are 
language-specific whereas ontologies are lan-
guage-independent, most aspects of the semantic 
structures (sem-strucs) of OntoSem lexicon entries 
are actually language-independent, apart from the 
linking of specific variables to their counterparts in 
the syntactic structure. Stated differently, if we 
consider sem-strucs ? no matter what lexicon they 
originate from ? to be building blocks of the repre-
sentation of word meaning (as opposed to concept 
meaning, as is done in the ontology), then we un-
derstand why building a large OntoSem lexicon for 
English holds excellent promise for future porting 
to other languages: most of the work is already 
done. This conception of cross-linguistic lexicon 
development derives in large part from the Princi-
ple of Practical Effability (Nirenburg and Raskin 
2004), which states that what can be expressed in 
one language can somehow be expressed in all 
other languages, be it by a word, a phrase, etc. (Of 
course, it is not necessary that every nuanced 
meaning be represented in the lexicon of every 
language and, as such, there will be some differ-
ences in the lexical stock of each language: e.g., 
whereas German has a word for white horse which 
will be listed in its lexicon, English will not have 
such a lexical entry, the collocation white horse 
being treated compositionally.) We do not intend 
to trivialize the fact that creating a new lexicon is a 
lot of work. It is, however, compelling to consider 
that a new lexicon of the same quality of our On-
toSem English one could be created with little 
more work than would be required to build a typi-
cal translation dictionary. In fact, we recently car-
ried out an experiment on porting the English 
lexicon to Polish and found that a) much of it could 
be done semi-automatically and b) the manual 
work for a second language is considerably less 
than for the first language (for further discussion, 
see McShane et al 2004).  
To sum up, the OntoSem ontology and the 
DEKADE environment are equally suited to any 
language, and the OntoSem English lexicon and 
analyzer can be configured to new languages with 
much less work required than for their initial de-
velopment. In short, semantic-rich tagging through 
TMR creation could be a realistic option for lan-
guages other than English.  
6 Discussion 
Lack of interannotator agreement presents a sig-
nificant problem in annotation efforts (see, e.g., 
Marcus et al 1993). With the OntoSem semi-
automated approach, there is far less possibility of 
73
interannotator disagreement since people only cor-
rect the output of the analyzer, which is responsi-
ble for consistent and correct deployment of the 
large and complex static resources:  if the knowl-
edge bases are held constant, the analyzer will pro-
duce the same output every time, ensuring 
reproducibility of the annotation.  
Evaluation of annotation has largely centered 
upon the demonstration of interannotator agree-
ment, which is at best a partial standard for evalua-
tion. On the one hand, agreement among 
annotators does not imply the correctness of the 
annotations: all annotators could be mistaken, par-
ticularly as students are most typically recruited for 
the job. On the other hand, there are cases of genu-
ine ambiguity, in which more than one annotation 
is equally correct. Such ambiguity is particularly 
common with certain classes of referring expres-
sions, like this and that, which can refer to chunks 
of text ranging from a noun phrase to many para-
graphs. Genuine ambiguity in the context of corpus 
tagging has been investigated by Poesio and Art-
stein (ms.), among others, who conclude, reasona-
bly, that a system of tags must permit multiple 
possible correct coreference relations and that it is 
useful to evaluate coreference based on corefer-
ence chains rather than individual entities. 
The abovementioned evidence suggests the need 
for ever more complex evaluation metrics which 
are costly to develop and deploy. In fact, evalua-
tion of a complex tagging effort will be almost as 
complex as the core work itself. In our case, TMRs 
need to be evaluated not only for their correctness 
with respect to a given state of knowledge re-
sources but also in the abstract. Speed of gold 
standard TMR creation must also be evaluated, as 
well as the number of mistakes at each stage of 
analysis, and the effect that the correction of output 
at one stage has on the next stage. No methods or 
standards for such evaluation are readily available 
since no work of this type has ever been carried 
out.  
In the face of the usual pressures of time and 
manpower, we have made the programmatic deci-
sion not to focus on all types of evaluation but, 
rather, to concentrate our evaluation metrics on the 
correctness of the automated output of the system, 
the extent to which manual correction is needed, 
and the depth and robustness of  our knowledge 
resources (see Nirenburg et al 2004 for our first 
evaluation effort). We do not deny the ultimate 
desirability of additional aspects of evaluation in 
the future. 
The main source of variation among knowledge 
engineers within our approach lies not in review-
ing/editing annotations as such, but in building the 
knowledge sources that give rise to them. To take 
an actual example we encountered: one member of 
our group described the phrase weapon of mass 
destruction in the lexicon as BIOLOGICAL-WEAPON 
or CHEMICAL-WEAPON, while another described it 
as a WEAPON with the potential to kill a very large 
number of people/animals. While both of these are 
correct, they focus on different salient aspects of 
the collocation. Another example of potential dif-
ferences at the knowledge level has to do with 
grain size: whereas one knowledge engineer re-
viewing a TMR might consider the current lexical 
mapping of neurosurgeon to SURGEON perfectly 
acceptable,  another might consider that this grain 
size is too rough and that, instead, we need a new 
concept NEUROSURGEON, whose special properties 
are ontologically defined. Such cases are to be ex-
pected especially as we work on new specialized 
domains which put greater demands on the depth 
of knowledge encoded about relevant concepts.  
There has been some concern that manual edit-
ing of automated annotation can introduce bias. 
Unfortunately, completely circumventing bias in 
semantic annotation is and will remain impossible 
since the process involves semantic interpretation, 
which often differs among individuals from the 
outset. As such, even agreements among annota-
tors can be questioned by a third (fourth, etc.) 
party.  
At the present stage of development, the TMR 
together with the static (ontology, lexicons) and 
dynamic (analyzer) knowledge sources that are 
used in generating and manipulating it, already 
provide substantial coverage for a broad variety of 
semantic phenomena and represent in a compact 
way practically attainable solutions for most issues 
that have concerned the computational linguistics 
and NLP community for over fifty years. Our 
TMRs have been used as the substrate for ques-
tion-answering, MT, knowledge extraction, and 
were also used as the basis for reasoning in the 
question-answering system AQUA, where they 
supplied knowledge to enable the operation of the  
JTP (Fikes et al, 2003) reasoning module. 
We are creating a database of TMRs paired 
with their corresponding sentences that we believe 
74
will be a boon to machine learning research. Re-
peatedly within the ML community, the creation of 
a high quality dataset (or datasets) for a particular 
domain has sparked development of applications, 
such as  learning semantic parsers, learning lexical 
items, learning about the structure of the underly-
ing domain of discourse, and so on. Moreover, as 
the quality of the raw TMRs increases due to gen-
eral improvements to the static resources (in part, 
as side effects of the operation of the HAMA proc-
ess) and processors (a long-term goal), the net 
benefit of this approach will only increase, as the 
production rate of gold-standard TMRs will in-
crease thus lowering the costs.  
TMRs are a useful medium for semantic repre-
sentation in part because they can capture any con-
tent in any language, and even content not 
expressed in natural language. They can, for ex-
ample, be used for recording the interim and final 
results of reasoning by intelligent agents. We fully 
expect that, as the actual coverage in the ontology 
and the lexicons and the quality of semantic analy-
sis grows, the TMR format will be extended to ac-
commodate these improvements. Such an 
extension, we believe, will largely involve move-
ment toward a finer grain size of semantic descrip-
tion, which the existing formalism should readily 
allow. The metalanguage of TMRs is quite trans-
parent, so that the task of converting them into a 
different representation language (e.g., OWL) 
should not be daunting.   
References  
Stephen Beale, Sergei Nirenburg and Marjorie 
McShane. 2003. Just-in-time grammar. Proceedings 
of the 2003 International Multiconference in Com-
puter Science and Computer Engineering. Las Ve-
gas, Nevada. 
Thorsten Brants. 2000. Inter-annotator agreement for a 
German newspaper corpus. LREC-2000. Athens, 
Greece. 
Richard Fikes, Jessica Jenkins and Gleb Frank. 2003. 
JTP: A system architecture and component library for 
hybrid reasoning. Proceedings of the Seventh World 
Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics, and In-
formatics. Orlando, Florida, USA. 
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic 
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics 
28:3, 245-288. 
Paul Kingsbury, Martha Palmer and Mitch Marcus. 
2002. Adding semantic annotation to the Penn Tree-
Bank. (http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~ace/ 
    HLT2002-propbank.pdf.) 
Marcus, Mitchell P., Beatrice Santorini and Mary Ann 
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated 
corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics 19. 
Marjorie McShane, Margalit Zabludowski, Sergei Ni-
renburg and Stephen Beale. 2004. OntoSem and 
SIMPLE: Two multi-lingual world views. Proceed-
ings of ACL-2004 Workshop on Text Meaning and 
Interpretation. Barcelona, Spain. 
Sergei Nirenburg, Stephen Beale and Marjorie 
McShane. 2004. Evaluating the performance of the 
OntoSem semantic analyzer. Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on Text Meaning Representation. Barce-
lona, Spain. 
Sergei Nirenburg and Victor Raskin. 2004. Ontological 
Semantics. The MIT Press.  
Emanuele Pianta and Luisa Bentivogli. 2003. Transla-
tion as annotation. Proceedings of the AI*IA 2003 
Workshop "Topics and Perspectives of Natural Lan-
guage Processing in Italy." Pisa, Italy. 
Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2005. The reliability 
of anaphoric annotation, reconsidered: Taking ambi-
guity into account. Proceedings of the ACL 2005 
Workshop ?Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II, Pie in 
the Sky?. 
David Yarowsky, Grace Ngai and Richard Wicen-
towski. 2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis 
tools via robust projection across aligned corpora. 
Proceedings of HLT 2001, First International Con-
ference on Human Language Technology Research, 
San Diego, California, USA. 
75
