Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, pages 41?48, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evaluating Summaries and Answers: Two Sides of the Same Coin?
Jimmy Lin1,3 and Dina Demner-Fushman2,3
1College of Information Studies
2Department of Computer Science
3Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA
jimmylin@umd.edu, demner@cs.umd.edu
Abstract
This paper discusses the convergence
between question answering and multi-
document summarization, pointing out
implications and opportunities for knowl-
edge transfer in both directions. As a
case study in one direction, we discuss
the recent development of an automatic
method for evaluating definition questions
based on n-gram overlap, a commonly-
used technique in summarization evalua-
tion. In the other direction, the move to-
wards topic-oriented summaries requires
an understanding of relevance and topi-
cality, issues which have received atten-
tion in the question answering literature.
It is our opinion that question answering
and multi-document summarization repre-
sent two complementary approaches to the
same problem of satisfying complex user
information needs. Although this points
to many exciting opportunities for system-
building, here we primarily focus on im-
plications for system evaluation.
1 Introduction
Recent developments in question answering (QA)
and multi-document summarization point to many
interesting convergences that present exciting oppor-
tunities for collaboration and cross-fertilization be-
tween these largely independent communities. This
position paper attempts to draw connections be-
tween the task of answering complex natural lan-
guage questions and the task of summarizing mul-
tiple documents, the boundaries between which are
beginning to blur, as anticipated half a decade
ago (Carbonell et al, 2000).
Although the complementary co-evolution of
question answering and document summarization
presents new directions for system-building, this
paper primarily focuses on implications for evalu-
ation. Although assessment of answer and sum-
mary quality employs different methodologies, there
are many lessons that each community can learn
from the other. The summarization community has
extensive experience in intrinsic metrics based on
n-gram overlap for automatically scoring system
outputs against human-generated reference texts?
these techniques would help streamline aspects of
question answering evaluation. In the other direc-
tion, because question answering has its roots in
information retrieval, much work has focused on
extrinsic metrics based on relevance and topical-
ity, which may be valuable to summarization re-
searchers.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2,
we discuss the evolution of question answering re-
search and how recent trends point to the conver-
gence of question answering and multi-document
summarization. In Section 3, we present a case
study of automatically evaluating definition ques-
tions by employing metrics based on n-gram over-
lap, a general technique widely used in summariza-
tion and machine translation evaluations. Section 4
highlights some opportunities for knowledge trans-
fer in the other direction: how the notions of rele-
41
vance and topicality, well-studied in the information
retrieval literature, can guide the evaluation of topic-
oriented summaries. We conclude with thoughts
about the future in Section 5.
2 Convergence of QA and Summarization
Question answering was initially conceived as es-
sentially a fine-grained information retrieval task.
Much research has focused on so-called factoid
questions, which can typically be answered by
named entities such as people, organizations, loca-
tions, etc. As an example, a system might return
?Bee Gees? as the answer to the question ?What
band did the music for the 1970?s film ?Saturday
Night Fever???. For such well-specified information
needs, question answering systems represent an im-
provement over traditional document retrieval sys-
tems because they do not require a user to manu-
ally browse through a ranked list of ?hits?. Since
1999, the NIST-organized question answering tracks
at TREC (see, for example, Voorhees 2003a) have
served as a focal point of research in the field, pro-
viding an annual forum for evaluating systems de-
veloped by teams from all over the world. The
model has been duplicated and elaborated on by
CLEF in Europe and NTCIR in Asia, both of which
have also introduced cross-lingual elements.
Recently, research in question answering has
shifted away from factoid questions to more com-
plex information needs. This new direction can be
characterized as a move towards answers that can
only be arrived at through some form of reason-
ing and answers that require drawing information
from multiple sources. Indeed, there are many types
of questions that would require integration of both
capabilities: extracting raw information ?nuggets?
from potentially relevant documents, reasoning over
these basic facts to draw additional inferences, and
synthesizing an appropriate answer based on this
knowledge. ?What is the role of the Libyan gov-
ernment in the Lockerbie bombing?? is an example
of such a complex question.
Commonalities between the task of answering
complex questions and summarizing multiple doc-
uments are evident when one considers broader re-
search trends. Both tasks require the ability to
draw together elements from multiple sources and
cope with redundant, inconsistent, and contradic-
tory information. Both tasks require extracting finer-
grained (i.e., sub-document) segments, albeit based
on different criteria. These observations point to
the convergence of question answering and multi-
document summarization.
Complementary developments in the summariza-
tion community mirror the aforementioned shifts
in question answering research. Most notably, the
DUC 2005 task requires systems to generate an-
swers to natural language questions based on a col-
lection of known relevant documents: ?The system
task in 2005 will be to synthesize from a set of 25?
50 documents a brief, well-organized, fluent answer
to a need for information that cannot be met by just
stating a name, date, quantity, etc.? (DUC 2005
guidelines). These guidelines were modeled after
the information synthesis task suggested by Amigo?
et al (2004), which they characterize as ?the process
of (given a complex information need) extracting,
organizing, and inter-relating the pieces of informa-
tion contained in a set of relevant documents, in or-
der to obtain a comprehensive, non-redundant report
that satisfies the information need?. One of the ex-
amples they provide, ?I?m looking for information
concerning the history of text compression both be-
fore and with computers?, looks remarkably like a
user information need current question answering
systems aspire to satisfy. The idea of topic-oriented
multi-document summarization isn?t new (Goldstein
et al, 2000), but only recently have the connections
to question answering become explicit. Incidentally,
it appears that the current vision of question answer-
ing is more ambitious than the information synthesis
task because in the former, the set of relevant doc-
uments is not known in advance, but must first be
discovered within a larger corpus.
There is, however, an important difference be-
tween question answering and topic-focused multi-
document summarization: whereas summaries are
compressible in length, the same cannot be said of
answers.1 For question answering, it is difficult to
fix the length of a response a priori: there may be
cases where it is impossible to fit a coherent, com-
plete answer into an allotted space. On the other
1Wewould like to thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing
this out.
42
1 vital american composer
2 vital musical achievements ballets symphonies
3 vital born brooklyn ny 1900
4 okay son jewish immigrant
5 okay american communist
6 okay civil rights advocate
7 okay had senile dementia
8 vital established home for composers
9 okay won oscar for ?the Heiress?
10 okay homosexual
11 okay teacher tanglewood music center boston symphony
Table 1: The ?answer key? to the question ?Who is Aaron Copland??
hand, summaries are condensed representations of
content, and should theoretically be expandable and
compressible based on the level of detail desired.
What are the implications, for system evaluations,
of this convergence between question answering and
multi-document summarization? We believe that the
two fields have much to benefit from each other. In
one direction, the question answering community
currently lacks experience in automatically evalu-
ating unstructured answers, which has been the fo-
cus of much research in document summarization.
In the other direction, the question answering com-
munity, due to its roots in information retrieval, has
a good grasp on the notions of relevance and topi-
cality, which are critical to the assessment of topic-
oriented summaries. In the next section, we present
a case study in leveraging summarization evaluation
techniques to automatically evaluate definition ques-
tions. Following that, we discuss how lessons from
question answering (and more broadly, information
retrieval) can be applied to assist in evaluating sum-
marization systems.
3 Definition Questions: A Case Study
Definition questions represent complex information
needs that involve integrating facts from multiple
documents. A typical definition question is ?What
is the Cassini space probe??, to which a system
might respond with answers that include ?interplan-
etary probe to Saturn?, ?carries the Huygens probe
to study the atmosphere of Titan, Saturn?s largest
moon?, and ?a joint project between NASA, ESA,
and ASI?. The goal of the task is to return as
many interesting ?nuggets? of information as possi-
ble about the target entity being defined (the Cassini
space probe, in this case) while minimizing the
amount of irrelevant information retrieved. In the
two formal evaluations of definition questions that
have been conducted at TREC (in 2003 and 2004),
an information nugget is operationalized as a fact for
which an assessor could make a binary decision as to
whether a response contained that nugget (Voorhees,
2003b). Additionally, information nuggets are clas-
sified as either vital or okay. Vital nuggets rep-
resent facts central to the target entity, and should
be present in a ?good? definition. Okay nuggets
contribute worthwhile information about the target,
but are not essential. As an example, assessors?
nuggets for the question ?Who is Aaron Copland??
are shown in Table 1. The distinction between vi-
tal and okay nuggets is consequential for the score
calculation, which we will discuss below.
In the TREC setup, a system response to a defi-
nition question is comprised of an unordered set of
answer strings paired with the identifier of the doc-
ument from which it was extracted. Each of these
answer strings is presumed to have one or more in-
formation nuggets contained within it. Although
there is no explicit limit on the length of each answer
string and the number of answer strings a system is
allowed to return, verbosity is penalized against, as
we shall see below.
To evaluate system output, NIST gathers answer
strings from all participants, hides their association
43
[NYT19990708.0196] Once past a rather routine apprenticeship, which included three years of study
with Nadia Boulanger in Paris, Copland became one of the few American composers to make a living
from composition.
Nugget present: 1
[NYT20000107.0305] A passionate advocate of civil rights, Copland conducted a performance of the
?Lincoln Portrait? with Coretta Scott King as narrator.
Nuggets present: 6
[NYT19991117.0369] after four prior nominations, he won an Oscar in 1949 for his music for ?The
Heiress?
Nugget present: 9
Figure 1: Examples of judging actual system responses.
with the runs that produced them, and presents all
answer strings to a human assessor. Using these re-
sponses and research performed during the original
development of the question (with an off-the-shelf
document retrieval system), the assessor creates an
?answer key?; Table 1 shows the official answer key
for the question ?Who is Aaron Copland??.
After this answer key has been created, NIST as-
sessors then go back over each run and manually
judge whether or not each nugget is present in a par-
ticular system?s response. Figure 1 shows a few ex-
amples of real system output and the nuggets that
were found in them.
The final score of a particular answer is com-
puted as an F-measure, the harmonic mean between
nugget precision and recall. The ? parameter con-
trols the relative importance of precision and recall,
and is heavily biased towards the latter to model the
nature of the task. Nugget recall is calculated solely
as a function of the vital nuggets, which means that
a system receives no ?credit? (in terms of recall) for
returning okay nuggets. Nugget precision is approx-
imated by a length allowance based on the number
of vital and okay nuggets returned; a response longer
than the allowed length is subjected to a verbosity
penalty. Using answer length as a proxy to precision
appears to be a reasonable compromise because a
pilot study demonstrated that it was impossible for
humans to consistently enumerate the total number
of nuggets in a response, a necessary step in calcu-
lating nugget precision (Voorhees, 2003b).
The current TREC setup for evaluating definition
Let
r # of vital nuggets returned in a response
a # of okay nuggets returned in a response
R # of vital nuggets in the answer key
l # of non-whitespace characters in the entire
answer string
Then
recall (R) = r/R
allowance (?) = 100? (r + a)
precision (P) =
{
1 if l < ?
1? l??l otherwise
Finally, F (?) = (?
2 + 1)? P ?R
?2 ? P +R
? = 5 in TREC 2003, ? = 3 in TREC 2004.
Figure 2: Official definition of F-measure.
questions necessitates having a human ?in the loop?.
Even though answer keys are available for questions
from previous years, determining if a nugget was ac-
tually retrieved by a system currently requires hu-
man judgment. Without a fully-automated evalu-
ation method, it is difficult to consistently and re-
producibly assess the performance of a system out-
side the annual TREC cycle. Thus, researchers can-
not carry out controlled laboratory experiments to
rapidly explore the solution space. In many other
fields in computational linguistics, the ability to con-
duct evaluations with quick turnaround has lead to
rapid progress in the state of the art. Question an-
44
swering for definition questions appears to be miss-
ing this critical ingredient.
To address this evaluation gap, we have re-
cently developed POURPRE, a method for automat-
ically evaluating definition questions based on idf-
weighted unigram co-occurrences (Lin and Demner-
Fushman, 2005). This idea of employing n-gram
co-occurrence statistics to score the output of a com-
puter system against one or more desired reference
outputs has its roots in the BLEU metric for ma-
chine translation (Papineni et al, 2002) and the
ROUGE (Lin and Hovy, 2003) metric for summa-
rization. Note that metrics for automatically eval-
uating definitions should be, like metrics for eval-
uating summaries, biased towards recall. Fluency
(i.e., precision) is not usually of concern because
most systems employ extractive techniques to pro-
duce answers. Our study reports good correlation
between the automatically computed POURPRE met-
ric and official TREC system ranks. This measure
will hopefully spur progress in definition question
answering systems.
The development of automatic evaluation metrics
based on n-gram co-occurrence for question answer-
ing is an example of successful knowledge transfer
from summarization to question answering evalua-
tion. We believe that there exist many more op-
portunities for future exploration; as an example,
there are remarkable similarities between informa-
tion nuggets in definition question answering and
recently-proposed methods for assessing summaries
based on fine-grained semantic units (Teufel and van
Halteren, 2004; Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004).
Another promising direction of research in defini-
tion question answering involves applying the Pyra-
mid Method (Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004) to
better model the vital/okay nuggets distinction. As
it currently stands, the vital/okay dichotomy is trou-
blesome because there is no way to operationalize
such a classification scheme within a system; see
Hildebrandt et al (2004) for more discussion. Yet,
the effects on score are significant: a system that re-
turns, for example, all the okay nuggets but none of
the vital nuggets would receive a score of zero. In
truth, the vital/okay distinction is a poor attempt at
modeling the fact that some nuggets about a target
are more important than others?this is exactly what
the Pyramid Method is designed to capture. ?Build-
ing pyramids? for definition questions is an avenue
of research that we are currently pursuing.
In the next section, we discuss opportunities for
knowledge transfer in the other direction; i.e., how
summarization evaluation can benefit from work in
question answering evaluation.
4 Putting the Relevance in Summarization
The definition of a meaningful extrinsic evalua-
tion metric (e.g., a task-based measure) is an issue
that the summarization community has long grap-
pled with (Mani et al, 2002). This issue has been
one of the driving factors towards summaries that
are specifically responsive to complex information
needs. The evaluation of such summaries hinges on
the notions of relevance and topicality, two themes
that have received much research attention in the in-
formation retrieval community, from which question
answering evolved.
Debates about the nature of relevance are al-
most as old as the field of information retrieval it-
self (Cooper, 1971; Saracevic, 1975; Harter, 1992;
Barry and Schamber, 1998; Mizzaro, 1998; Spink
and Greisdorf, 2001). Theoretical discussions aside,
there is evidence suggesting that there exist sub-
stantial inter-assessor differences in document-level
relevance judgments (Voorhees, 2000; Voorhees,
2002); in the TREC ad hoc tracks, for example,
overlap between two humans can be less than 50%.
For factoid question answering, it has also been
shown that the notion of answer correctness is less
well-defined than one would expect (Voorhees and
Tice, 2000; Lin and Katz, 2005 in press). This
inescapable fact about the nature of information
needs represents a fundamental philosophical differ-
ence between research in information retrieval and
computational linguistics. Information retrieval re-
searchers accept the fact that the notion of ?ground
truth? is not particularly meaningful, and any pre-
scriptive attempt to dictate otherwise would result in
brittle and overtrained systems of limited value. A
retrieval system must be sensitive to the inevitable
variations in relevance exhibited by different users.
This philosophy represents a contrast from com-
putational linguistics research, where ground truth
does in fact exist. For example, there is a single cor-
rect parse of a natural language sentence (modulo
45
truly ambiguous sentences), there is the notion of a
correct word sense (modulo granularity issues), etc.
This view also pervades evaluation in machine trans-
lation and document summarization, and is implic-
itly codified in intrinsic metrics, except that there is
now the notion of multiple correct answers (i.e., the
reference texts).
Faced with the inevitability of variations in hu-
mans? notion of relevance, how can information
retrieval researchers confidently draw conclusions
about system performance and the effectiveness of
various techniques? Meta-evaluations have shown
that while some measures such as recall are rela-
tively meaningless in absolute terms (e.g., the to-
tal number of relevant documents cannot be known
without exhaustive assessment of the entire corpus,
which is impractical for current document collec-
tions), relative comparisons between systems are re-
markably stable. That is, if system A performs bet-
ter than system B (by a metric such as mean average
precision, for example), system A is highly likely
to out-perform system B with any alternative sets of
relevance judgments that represent different notions
of relevance (Voorhees, 2000; Voorhees, 2002).
Thus, it remains possible to determine the relative
effectiveness of different retrieval techniques, and
use evaluation results to guide system development.
We believe that this philosophical starting point
for conducting evaluations is an important point that
summarization researchers should take to heart, con-
sidering that notions such as relevance and topicality
are central to the evaluation of the information syn-
thesis task. What concrete implications of this view
are there? We outline some thoughts below:
First, we believe that summarization metrics
should embrace variations in human judgment as an
inescapable part of the evaluation process. Mea-
sures for automatically assessing the quality of a
system?s output such as ROUGE implicitly assume
that the ?best summary? is a statistical agglomera-
tion of the reference summaries, which is not likely
to be true. Until recently, ROUGE ?hard-coded? the
so-called ?jackknifing? procedure to estimate aver-
age human performance. Fortunately, it appears re-
searchers have realized that ?model averaging? may
not be the best way to capture the existence of many
?equally good? summaries. As an example, the
Pyramid Method (Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004),
represents a good first attempt at a realistic model of
human variations.
Second, the view that variations in judgment are
an inescapable part of extrinsic evaluations would
lead one to conclude that low inter-annotator agree-
ment isn?t necessarily bad. Computational linguis-
tics research generally attaches great value to high
kappa measures (Carletta, 1996), which indicate
high human agreement on a particular task. Low
agreement is seen as a barrier to conducting repro-
ducible research and to drawing generalizable con-
clusions. However, this is not necessarily true?low
agreement in information retrieval has not been a
handicap for advancing the state of the art. When
dealing with notions such as relevance, low kappa
values can most likely be attributed to the nature
of the task itself. Attempting to raise agreement
by, for example, developing rigid assessment guide-
lines, may do more harm than good. Prescriptive
attempts to define what a good answer or summary
should be will lead to systems that are not useful
in real-world settings. Instead, we should focus re-
search on adaptable, flexible systems.
Third, meta-evaluations are important. The infor-
mation retrieval literature has an established tradi-
tion of evaluating evaluations post hoc to insure the
reliability and fairness of the results. The aforemen-
tioned studies examining the impact of different rel-
evance judgments are examples of such work. Due
to the variability in human judgments, systems are
essentially aiming at a moving target, which neces-
sitates continual examination as to whether evalu-
ations are accurately answering the research ques-
tions and producing trustworthy results.
Fourth, a measure for assessing the quality of au-
tomatic scoring metrics should reflect the philosoph-
ical starting points that we have been discussing.
As a specific example, the correlation between an
automatically-calculated metric and actual human
preferences is better quantified by Kendall?s ? than
by the coefficient of determination R2. Since rela-
tive system comparisons are more meaningful than
absolute scores, we are generally less interested in
correlations among the scores than in the rankings of
systems produced by those scores. Kendall?s ? com-
putes the ?distance? between two rankings as the
minimum number of pairwise adjacent swaps neces-
sary to convert one ranking into the other. This value
46
is normalized by the number of items being ranked
such that two identical rankings produce a correla-
tion of 1.0; the correlation between a ranking and its
perfect inverse is ?1.0; and the expected correlation
of two rankings chosen at random is 0.0. Typically,
a value of greater than 0.8 is considered ?good?, al-
though 0.9 represents a threshold researchers gener-
ally aim for.
5 Conclusion
What?s in store for the ongoing co-evolution of sum-
marization and question answering? Currently, def-
inition questions exercise a system?s ability to inte-
grate information from multiple documents. In the
process, it needs to automatically recognize similar
information units to avoid redundant information,
much like in multi-document summarization. The
other research direction in advanced question an-
swering, integration of reasoning capabilities to gen-
erate answers that cannot be directly extracted from
text, remains more elusive for a variety of reasons.
Finer-grained linguistic analysis at a large scale and
sufficiently-rich domain ontologies to support po-
tentially long inference chains are necessary pre-
requisites?both of which represent open research
problems. Furthermore, it is unclear how exactly
one would operationalize the evaluation of such ca-
pabilities.
Nevertheless, we believe that advanced reasoning
capabilities based on detailed semantic analyses of
text will receive much attention in the future. The
recent flurry of work on semantic analysis, based
on resources such as FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998)
and PropBank (Kingsbury et al, 2002), provide the
substrate for reasoning engines. Developments in
the automatic construction, adaptation, and merg-
ing of ontologies will supply the knowledge nec-
essary to draw inferences. In order to jump-start
the knowledge acquisition process, we envision the
development of domain-specific question answering
systems, the lessons from which will be applied to
systems that operate on broader domains. In terms
of operationalizing evaluations for these advanced
capabilities, the field has already made important
first steps, e.g., the Pascal Recognising Textual En-
tailment Challenge.
What effect will these developments have on sum-
marization research? We believe that future sys-
tems will employ more detailed linguistic analysis.
As a simple example, the ability to reason about
people?s age based on their birthdates would un-
doubtedly be useful for answering particular types
of questions, but may also play a role in redundancy
detection, for example. In general, we anticipate a
move towards more abstractive techniques in multi-
document summarization. Fluent, cohesive, and top-
ical summaries cannot be generated solely using
an extractive approach?sentences are at the wrong
level of granularity, a source of problems ranging
from dangling anaphoric references to verbose sub-
ordinate clauses. Only through more detailed lin-
guistic analysis can information from multiple doc-
uments be truly synthesized. Already, there are
hybrid approaches to multi-document summariza-
tion that employ natural language generation tech-
niques (McKeown et al, 1999; Elson, 2004), and
researchers have experimented with sentential op-
erations to improve the discourse structure of sum-
maries (Otterbacher et al, 2002).
The primary purpose of this paper was to identify
similarities between multi-document summarization
and complex question answering, pointing out po-
tential synergistic opportunities in the area of system
evaluation. We hope that this is merely a small part
of a sustained dialogue between researchers from
these two largely independent communities. An-
swering complex questions and summarizing mul-
tiple documents are essentially opposite sides of the
same coin, as they represent different approaches to
the common problem of addressing complex user in-
formation needs.
6 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Donna Harman and Ellen
Voorhees for many insights about the intricacies of
IR evaluation, Bonnie Dorr for introducing us to
DUC and bringing us into the summarization com-
munity, and Kiri for her kind support.
References
Enrique Amigo?, Julio Gonzalo, Victor Peinado, Anselmo
Pen?as, and Felisa Verdejo. 2004. An empirical study
of information synthesis task. In Proceedings of ACL
2004.
47
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Proceed-
ings of COLING/ACL 1998.
Carol Barry and Linda Schamber. 1998. Users? crite-
ria for relevance evaluation: A cross-situational com-
parison. Information Processing and Management,
34(2/3):219?236.
Jaime Carbonell, Donna Harman, Eduard Hovy, Steve
Maiorano, John Prange, and Karen Sparck-Jones.
2000. Vision statement to guide research in Question
& Answering (Q&A) and Text Summarization.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifi-
cation tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):249?254.
William S. Cooper. 1971. A definition of relevance for
information retrieval. Information Storage and Re-
trieval, 7:19?37.
David K. Elson. 2004. Categorization of narrative se-
mantics for use in generative multidocument summa-
rization. In Proceedings of INLG 2004, pages 192?
197.
Jade Goldstein, Vibhu Mittal, Jaime Carbonell, and
Jamie Callan. 2000. Creating and evaluating multi-
document sentence extract summaries. In Proceedings
of CIKM 2000.
Stephen P. Harter. 1992. Psychological relevance and
information science. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, 43(9):602?615.
Wesley Hildebrandt, Boris Katz, and Jimmy Lin. 2004.
Answering definition questions with multiple knowl-
edge sources. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004.
Paul Kingsbury, Martha Palmer, and Mitch Marcus.
2002. Adding semantic annotation to the Penn Tree-
Bank. In Proceeding of HLT 2002.
Jimmy Lin and Dina Demner-Fushman. 2005. Au-
tomatically evaluating answers to definition ques-
tions. Technical Report LAMP-TR-119/CS-TR-
4695/UMIACS-TR-2005-04, University of Maryland,
College Park.
Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy. 2003. Automatic evalu-
ation of summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statis-
tics. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2003.
Jimmy Lin and Boris Katz. 2005, in press. Building a
reusable test collection for question answering. Jour-
nal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology.
Inderjeet Mani, Therese Firmin, David House, Gary
Klein, Beth Sundheim, and Lynette Hirschman. 2002.
The TIPSTER SUMMAC text summarization evalua-
tion. Natural Language Engineering, 8(1):43?68.
Kathleen R. McKeown, Judith L. Klavans, Vasileios
Hatzivassiloglou, Regina Barzilay, and Eleazar Eskin.
1999. Towards multidocument summarization by re-
formulation: Progress and prospects. In Proceedings
of AAAI-1999.
Stefano Mizzaro. 1998. How many relevances in in-
formation retrieval? Interacting With Computers,
10(3):305?322.
Ani Nenkova and Rebecca Passonneau. 2004. Evaluat-
ing content selection in summarization: The Pyramid
Method. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004.
Jahna C. Otterbacher, Dragomir R. Radev, and Airong
Luo. 2002. Revisions that improve cohesion in multi-
document summaries: A preliminary study. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2002 Workshop on Automatic
Summarization.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL
2002.
Tefko Saracevic. 1975. Relevance: A review of and a
framework for thinking on the notion in information
science. Journal of the American Society for Informa-
tion Science, 26(6):321?343.
Amanda H. Spink and Howard Greisdorf. 2001. Regions
and levels: Mapping and measuring users relevance
judgments. Journal of the American Society for Infor-
mation Science and Technology, 52(2):161?173.
Simone Teufel and Hans van Halteren. 2004. Evaluating
information content by factoid analysis: Human anno-
tation and stability. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2004.
Ellen M. Voorhees and Dawn M. Tice. 2000. Building a
question answering test collection. In Proceedings of
SIGIR 2000.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2000. Variations in relevance judg-
ments and the measurement of retrieval effectiveness.
Information Processing and Management, 36(5):697?
716.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2002. The philosophy of information
retrieval evaluation. In Evaluation of Cross-Language
Information Retrieval Systems, Springer-Verlag LNCS
2406.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003a. Evaluating the evaluation: A
case study using the TREC 2002 question answering
track. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2003.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2003b. Overview of the TREC 2003
question answering track. In Proceedings of TREC
2003.
48
