Proceedings of the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep Lexical Acquisition, pages 48?56,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Extraction of Idioms using Graph Analysis and Asymmetric
Lexicosyntactic Patterns
Dominic Widdows
MAYA Design, Inc.
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
widdows@maya.com
Beate Dorow
Institute for Natural Language Processing
University of Stuttgart
dorowbe@IMS.Uni-Stuttgart.DE
Abstract
This paper describes a technique for ex-
tracting idioms from text. The tech-
nique works by finding patterns such as
?thrills and spills?, whose reversals (such
as ?spills and thrills?) are never encoun-
tered.
This method collects not only idioms, but
also many phrases that exhibit a strong
tendency to occur in one particular order,
due apparently to underlying semantic is-
sues. These include hierarchical relation-
ships, gender differences, temporal order-
ing, and prototype-variant effects.
1 Introduction
Natural language is full of idiomatic and metaphor-
ical uses. However, language resources such as dic-
tionaries and lexical knowledge bases give at best
poor coverage of such phenomena. In many cases,
knowledge bases will mistakenly ?recognize? a word
and this can lead to more harm than good: for exam-
ple, a typical mistake of blunt logic would be to as-
sume that ?somebody let the cat out of the bag? im-
plied that ?somebody let some mammal out of some
container.?
Idiomatic generation of natural language is, if
anything, an even greater challenge than idiomatic
language understanding. As pointed out decades ago
by Fillmore (1967), a complete knowledge of En-
glish requires not only an understanding of the se-
mantics of the word good, but also an awareness
that this special adjective (alone) can occur with the
word any to construct phrases like ?Is this paper
any good at all??, and traditional lexical resources
were not designed to provide this information. There
are many more general examples occur: for exam-
ple, ?the big bad wolf? sounds right and the ?the bad
big wolf? sounds wrong, even though both versions
are syntactically and semantically plausible. Such
examples are perhaps ?idiomatic?, though we would
perhaps not call them ?idioms?, since they are com-
positional and can sometimes be predicted by gen-
eral pattern of word-ordering.
In general, the goal of manually creating a com-
plete lexicon of idioms and idiomatic usage patterns
in any language is unattainable, and automatic ex-
traction and modelling techniques have been devel-
oped to fill this ever-evolving need. Firstly, auto-
matically identifying potential idioms and bringing
them to the attention of a lexicographer can be used
to improve coverage and reduce the time a lexicog-
rapher must spend in searching for such examples.
Secondly and more ambitiously, the goal of such
work is to enable computers to recognize idioms in-
dependently so that the inevitable lack of coverage
in language resources does not impede their ability
to respond intelligently to natural language input.
In attempting a first-pass at this task, the exper-
iments described in this paper proceed as follows.
We focus on a particular class of idioms that can
be extracted using lexicosyntactic patterns (Hearst,
1992), which are fixed patterns in text that suggest
that the words occurring in them have some inter-
esting relationship. The patterns we focus on are
occurrences of the form ?A and/or B?, where A and
48
B are both nouns. Examples include ?football and
cricket? and ?hue and cry.? From this list, we extract
those examples for which there is a strong prefer-
ence on the ordering of the participants. For exam-
ple, we do see the pattern ?cricket and football,? but
rarely if ever encounter the pattern ?cry and hue.?
Using this technique, 4173 potential idioms were ex-
tracted. This included a number of both true idioms,
and words that have regular semantic relationships
but do appear to have interesting orderings on these
relationships (such as earlier before later, strong be-
fore weak, prototype before variant).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 elaborates on some of the previous works
that motivate the techniques we have used. Sec-
tion 3 describes the precise method used to extract
idioms through their asymmetric appearance in a
large corpus. Section 4 presents and analyses several
classes of results. Section 5 describes the methods
attempted to filter these results into pairs of words
that are more and less contextually related to one an-
other. These include a statistical method that analy-
ses the original corpus for evidence of semantic re-
latedness, and a combinatoric method that relies on
link-analysis on the resulting graph structure.
2 Previous and Related Work
This section describes previous work in extracting
information from text, and inferring semantic or id-
iomatic properties of words from the information so
derived.
The main technique used in this paper to ex-
tract groups of words that are semantically or id-
iomatically related is a form of lexicosyntactic pat-
tern recognition. Lexicosyntactic patterns were pio-
neered by Marti Hearst (Hearst, 1992; Hearst and
Schu?tze, 1993) in the early 1990?s, to enable the
addition of new information to lexical resources
such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). The main in-
sight of this sort of work is that certain regular pat-
terns in word-usage can reflect underlying seman-
tic relationships. For example, the phrase ?France,
Germany, Italy, and other European countries? sug-
gests that France, Germany and Italy are part of
the class of European countries. Such hierarchi-
cal examples are quite sparse, and greater coverage
was later attained by Riloff and Shepherd (1997)
and Roark and Charniak (1998) in extracting rela-
tions not of hierarchy but of similarity, by find-
ing conjunctions or co-ordinations such as ?cloves,
cinammon, and nutmeg? and ?cars and trucks.? This
work was extended by Caraballo (1999), who built
classes of related words in this fashion and then rea-
soned that if a hierarchical relationship could be ex-
tracted for any member of this class, it could be ap-
plied to all members of the class. This technique
can often mistakenly reason across an ambiguous
middle-term, a situation that was improved upon
by Cederberg and Widdows (2003), by combining
pattern-based extraction with contextual filtering us-
ing latent semantic analysis.
Prior work in discovering non-compositional
phrases has been carried out by Lin (1999)
and Baldwin et al (2003), who also used LSA
to distinguish between compositional and non-
compositional verb-particle constructions and noun-
noun compounds.
At the same time, work in analyzing idioms and
asymmetry within linguistics has become more so-
phisticated, as discussed by Benor and Levy (2004),
and many of the semantic factors underlying our re-
sults can be understood from a sophisticated theoret-
ical perspective.
Other motivating and related themes of work for
this paper include collocation extraction and ex-
ample based machine translation. In the work of
Smadja (1993) on extracting collocations, prefer-
ence was given to constructions whose constituents
appear in a fixed order, a similar (and more generally
implemented) version of our assumption here that
asymmetric constructions are more idiomatic than
symmetric ones. Recent advances in example-based
machine translation (EBMT) have emphasized the
fact that examining patterns of language use can
significantly improve idiomatic language generation
(Carl and Way, 2003).
3 The Symmetric Graph Model as used for
Lexical Acquisition and Idiom
Extraction
This section of the paper describes the techniques
used to extract potentially idiomatic patterns from
text, as deduced from previously successful experi-
ments in lexical acquisition.
49
The main extraction technique is to use lexicosyn-
tactic patterns of the form ?A, B and/or C? to find
nouns that are linked in some way. For example,
consider the following sentence from the British Na-
tional Corpus (BNC).
Ships laden with nutmeg, cinnamon,
cloves or coriander once battled the
Seven Seas to bring home their precious
cargo.
Since the BNC is tagged for parts-of-speech, we
know that the words highlighted in bold are nouns.
Since the phrase ?nutmeg, cinnamon, cloves or co-
riander? fits the pattern ?A, B, C or D?, we create
nodes for each of these nouns and create links be-
tween them all. When applied to the whole of the
BNC, these links can be aggregated to form a graph
with 99,454 nodes (nouns) and 587,475 links, as de-
scribed by Widdows and Dorow (2002). This graph
was originally used for lexical acquisition, since
clusters of words in the graph often map to recog-
nized semantic classes with great accuracy (> 80%,
(Widdows and Dorow, 2002)).
However, for the sake of smoothing over sparse
data, these results made the assumption that the links
between nodes were symmetric, rather than directed.
In other words, when the pattern ?A and/or B? was
encountered, a link from A to B and a link from B
to A was introduced. The nature of symmetric and
antisymmetric relationships is examined in detail by
Widdows (2004). For the purposes of this paper, it
suffices to say that the assumption of symmetry (like
the assumption of transitivity) is a powerful tool for
improving recall in lexical acquisition, but also leads
to serious lapses in precision if the directed nature of
links is overlooked, especially if symmetrized links
are used to infer semantic similarity.
This problem was brought strikingly to our atten-
tion by the examples in Figure 1. In spite of appear-
ing to be a circle of related concepts, many of the
nouns in this group are not similar at all, and many
of the links in this graph are derived from very very
different contexts. In Figure 1, cat and mouse are
linked (they are re both animals and the phrase ?cat
and mouse? is used quite often): but then mouse
and keyboard are also linked because they are both
objects used in computing. A keyboard, as well
as being a typewriter or computer keyboard, is also
fiddle
cat
barrowbow
cello
flute
mouse
dog
game
kitten
violin
piano
bass
fortepiano
orchestra
keyboard
screen
monitor
memory
guitar
rat
human
Figure 1: A cluster involving several idiomatic links
used to mean (part of) a musical instrument such as
an organ or piano, and keyboard is linked to vio-
lin. A violin and a fiddle are the same instrument (as
often happens with synonyms, they don?t appear to-
gether often but have many neighbours in common).
The unlikely circle is completed (it turns out) be-
cause of the phrase from the nursery rhyme
Hey diddle diddle,
The cat and the fiddle,
The cow jumped over the moon;
It became clear from examples such as these that
idiomatic links, like ambiguous words, were a seri-
ous problem when using the graph model for lexical
acquisition. However, with ambiguous words, this
obstacle has been gradually turned into an opportu-
nity, since we have also developed ways to used the
apparent flaws in the model to detect which words
are ambiguous in the first place (Widdows, 2004, Ch
4). It is now proposed that we can take the same op-
portunity for certain idioms: that is, to use the prop-
erties of the graph model to work out which links
arise from idiomatic usage rather than semantic sim-
ilarity.
3.1 Idiom Extraction by Recognizing
Asymmetric Patterns
The link between the cat and fiddle nodes in Fig-
ure 1 arises from the phrase ?the cat and the fiddle.?
50
Table 1: Sample of asymmetric pairs extracted from
the BNC.
First word Second word
highway byway
cod haddock
composer conductor
wood charcoal
element compound
assault battery
north south
rock roll
god goddess
porgy bess
middle class
war aftermath
god hero
metal alloy
salt pepper
mustard cress
stocking suspender
bits bobs
stimulus response
committee subcommittee
continent ocean
However, no corpus examples were ever found of the
converse phrase, ?the fiddle and the cat.? In cases
like these, it may be concluded that placing a sym-
metric link between these two nodes is a mistake.
Instead, a directed link may be more appropriate.
We therefore formed the hypothesis that if the
phrase ?A and/or B? occurs frequently in a corpus,
but the phrase ?B and/or A? is absent, then the link
between A and B should be attributed to idiomatic
usage rather than semantic similarity.
The next step was to rebuild, finding those rela-
tionships that have a strong preference for occurring
in a fixed order. Sure enough, several British English
idioms were extracted in this way. However, several
other kinds of relationships were extracted as well,
as shown in the sample in Table 1.1
After extracting these pairs, groups of them were
gathered together into directed subgraphs.2 Some of
these directed subgraphs are reporduced in the anal-
ysis in the following section.
1The sample chosen here was selected by the authors to be
representative of some of the main types of results. The com-
plete list can be found at http://infomap.stanford.
edu/graphs/idioms.html.
2These can be viewed at http://infomap.
stanford.edu/graphs/directed_graphs.html
4 Analysis of Results
The experimental results include representatives of
several types of asymmetric relationships, including
the following broad categories.
?True? Idioms
There are many results that display genuinely id-
iomatic constructions. By this, we mean phrases that
have an explicitly lexicalized nature that a native
speaker may be expected to recognize as having a
special reference or significance. Examples include
the following:
thrills and spills
bread and circuses
Punch and Judy
Porgy and Bess
lies and statistics
cat and fiddle
bow and arrow
skull and crossbones
This category is quite loosely defined. It includes
1. historic quotations such as ?lies, damned lies
and statistics?3 and ?bread and circuses.?4
2. titles of well-known works.
3. colloquialisms.
4. groups of objects that have become fixed nom-
inals in their own right.
All of these types share the common property that
any NLP system that encounters such groups, in or-
der to behave correctly, should recognize, generate,
or translate them as phrases rather than words.
Hierarchical Relationships
Many of the asymmetric relationships follow
some pattern that may be described as roughly hi-
erarchical. A cluster of examples from two domains
is shown in Figure 2. In chess, a rook outranks a
bishop, and the phrase ?rook and bishop? is encoun-
tered much more often than the phrase ?bishop and
3Attributed to Benjamin Disraeli, certainly popularized by
Mark Twain.
4A translation of ?panem et circenses,? from the Roman
satirist Juvenal, 1st century AD.
51
Figure 2: Asymmetric relationships in the chess and
church hierarchies
Figure 3: Different beverages, showing their di-
rected relationships
rook.? In the church, a cardinal outranks a bishop,
a bishop outranks most of the rest of the clergy, and
the clergy (in some senses) outrank the laity.
Sometimes these relationships coincide with fig-
ure / ground and agent / patient distinctions. Ex-
amples of this kind, as well as ?clergy and laity?,
include ?landlord and tenant?, ?employer and em-
ployee?, ?teacher and pupil?, and ?driver and pas-
sengers?. An interesting exception is ?passengers
and crew?, for which we have no semantic explana-
tion.
Pedigree and potency appear to be two other di-
mensions that can be used to establish the directed-
ness of an idiomatic construction. For example, Fig-
ure 3 shows that alcoholic drinks normally appear
before their cocktail mixers, but that wine outranks
some stronger drinks.
Figure 4: Hierarchical relationships between aristo-
crats, some of which appear to be gender based
Gender Asymmetry
The relationship between corresponding concepts
of different genders also appear to be heavily biased
towards appearing in one direction. Many of these
relationships are shown in Figure 4. This shows
that, in cases where one class outranks another, the
higher class appears first, but if the classes are iden-
tical, then the male version tends to appear before
the female. This pattern is repeated in many pairs
of words such as ?host and hostess?, ?god and god-
dess?, etc. One exception appears to be in parent-
ing relationships, where female precedes male, as in
?mother and father?, ?mum and dad?, ?grandma and
grandpa?.
Temporal Ordering
If one word refers to an event that precedes an-
other temporally or logically, it almost always ap-
pears first. The examples in Table 2 were extracted
by our experiment. It has been pointed out that for
cyclical events, it is perfectly possible that the order
of these pairs may be reversed (e.g., ?late night and
early morning?), though the data we extracted from
the BNC showed strong tendencies in the directions
given.
A directed subgraph showing many events in hu-
man lives in shown in Figure 5.
Prototype precedes Variant
In cases where one participant is regarded as a
?pure? substance and the other is a variant or mix-
ture, the pure substance tends to come first. These
occur particularly in scientific writing, examples
including ?element and compound?, ?atoms and
52
Table 2: Pairs of events that have a strong tendency
to occur in asymmetric patterns.
Before After
spring autumn
morning afternoon
morning evening
evening night
morning night
beginning end
question answer
shampoo conditioner
marriage divorce
arrival departure
eggs larvae
molecules?, ?metals and alloys?. Also, we see ?ap-
ples and pears?, ?apple and plums?, and ?apples and
oranges?, suggesting that an apple is a prototypical
fruit (in agreement with some of the results of pro-
totype theory; see Rosch (1975)).
Another possible version of this tendency is that
core precedes periphery, which may also account for
asymmetric ordering of food items such as ?fish and
chips?, ?bangers and mash?, ?tea and coffee? (in the
British National Corpus, at least!) In some cases
such as ?meat and vegetables?, a hierarchical or fig-
ure / ground distinction may also be argued.
Mistaken extractions
Our preliminary inspection has shown that the ex-
traction technique finds comparatively few genuine
mistakes, and the reader is encouraged to follow the
links provided to check this claim. However, there
are some genuine errors, most of which could be
avoided with more sophisticated preprocessing.
To improve recall in our initial lexical acquisition
experiments, we chose to strip off modifiers and to
stem plural forms to singular forms, so that ?apples
and green pears? would give a link between apple
and pear.
However, in many cases this is a mistake, be-
cause the bracketing should not be of the form ?A
and (B C),? but of the form ?(A and B) C.? Us-
ing part-of-speech tags alone, we cannot recover
this information. One example is the phrase ?hard-
ware and software vendors,? from which we ob-
tain a link between hardware and vendors, in-
stead of a link between hardware and software.
A fuller degree of syntactic analysis would improve
this situation. For extracting semantic relationships,
Figure 5: Directed graph showing that life-events
are usually ordered temporally when they occur to-
gether
Cederberg and Widdows (2003) demonstrated that
nounphrase chunking does this work very satisfacto-
rily, while being much more tractable than full pars-
ing.
The mistaken pair middle and class shown in
Table 1 is another of these mistakes, arising from
phrases such as ?middle and upper class? and ?mid-
dle and working class.? These examples could be
avoided simply by more accurate part-of-speech tag-
ging (since the word ?middle? should have been
tagged as an adjective in these examples).
This concludes our preliminary analysis of re-
sults.
5 Filtering using Latent Semantic Analysis
and Combinatoric Analysis
From the results in the previous section, the follow-
ing points are clear.
1. It is possible to extract many accurate exam-
ples of asymmetric constructions, that would be
necessary knowledge for generation of natural-
sounding language.
2. Some of the pairs extracted are examples of
general semantic patterns, others are examples
of genuinely idiomatic phrases.
Even for semantically predictable phrases, the
fact that the words occur in fixed patterns can be
very useful for the purposes of disambiguation, as
demonstrated by (Yarowsky, 1995). However, it
53
would be useful to be able to tell which of the asym-
metric patterns extracted by our experiments corre-
spond to semantically regular phrases which hap-
pen to have a conventional ordering preference, and
which phrases correspond to genuine idioms. This
final section demonstrates two techniques for per-
forming this filtering task, which show promising re-
sults for improving our classification, though should
not yet be considered as reliable.
5.1 Filtering using Latent Semantic Analysis
Latent semantic analysis or LSA (Landauer and Du-
mais, 1997) is by now a tried and tested technique
for determining semantic similarity between words
by analyzing large corpus (Widdows, 2004, Ch 6).
Because of this, LSA can be used to determine
whether a pair of words is likely to participate in a
regular semantic relationship, even though LSA may
not contribute specific information regarding the na-
ture of the relationship. However, once a relation-
ship is expected, LSA can be used to predict whether
this relationship is used in contexts that are typical
uses of the words in question, or whether these uses
appear to be anomalies such as rare senses or idioms.
This technique was used successfully by (Cederberg
and Widdows, 2003) to improve the accuracy of hy-
ponymy extraction. It follows that it should be use-
ful to tell the difference between regularly related
words and idiomatically related words.
To test this hypothesis, we used an LSA model
built from the BNC using the Infomap NLP soft-
ware.5 This was used to measure the LSA similar-
ity between the words in each of the pairs extracted
by the techniques in Section 4. In cases where a
word was too infrequent to appear in the LSA model,
we used ?folding in,? which assigns a word-vector
?on the fly? by adding together the vectors of any
surrounding words of a target word that are in the
model.
The results are shown in Table 3. The hypothesis
is that words whose occurrence is purely idiomatic
would have a low LSA similarity score, because
they are otherwise not closely related. However, this
hypothesis does not seem to have been confirmed,
partly due to the effects of overall frequency. For
example, the word Porgy only occurs in the phrase
5Freely available from http://infomap-nlp.
sourceforge.net/
Table 3: Ordering of results from semantically sim-
ilar to semantically dissimilar using LSA
Word pair LSA similarity
north south 0.931
middle class 0.834
porgy bess 0.766
war aftermath 0.676
salt pepper 0.672
bits bobs 0.671
mustard cress 0.603
composer conductor 0.588
cod haddock 0.565
metal alloy 0.509
highway byway 0.480
committee subcommittee 0.479
god goddess 0.456
rock roll 0.398
continent ocean 0.300
wood charcoal 0.273
stimulus response 0.261
stocking suspender 0.177
god hero 0.115
element compound 0.044
assault battery -0.068
granite
cheese
bread
chalk
limestone   flint
marble  coal sand
 sandstone butter meat wine
sugar  margarine milk  clay
Figure 6: Nodes in the original symmetric graph in
the vicinity of chalk and cheese
?Porgy and Bess,? and the word bobs almost always
occurs in the phrase ?bits and bobs.? A more effec-
tive filtering technique would need to normalize to
account for these effects. However, there are some
good results: for example, the low score between
assault and battery reflects the fact that this usage,
though compositional, is a rare meaning of the word
battery, and the same argument can be made for el-
ement and compound. Thus LSA might be a better
guide for recognizing rarity in meaning of individual
words than it is for idiomaticity of phrases.
5.2 Link analysis
Another technique for determining whether a link is
idiomatic or not is to check whether it connects two
54
areas of meaning that are otherwise unconnected. A
hallmark example of this phenomenon is the ?chalk
and cheese? example shown in Figure 6. 6 Note that
none of the other members of the rock-types clus-
ters is linked to any of the other foodstuffs. We may
be tempted to conclude that the single link between
these clusters is an idiomatic phenomenon. This
technique shows promise, but has yet to be explored
in detail.
6 Conclusions and Further Work
It is possible to extract asymmetric constructions
from text, some of which correspond to idioms
which are indecomposable (in the sense that their
meaning cannot be decomposed into a combination
of the meanings of their constituent words).
Many other phrases were extracted which exhibit
a typical directionality that follows from underlying
semantic principles. While these are sometimes not
defined as ?idioms? (because they are still compos-
able), knowledge of their asymmetric behaviour is
necessary for a system to generate natural language
utterances that would sound ?idiomatic? to native
speakers.
While all of this information is useful for cor-
rectly interpreting and generating natural language,
further work is necessary to distinguish accurately
between these different categories. The first step in
this process will be to manually classify the results,
and evaluate the performance of different classifica-
tion techniques to see if they can reliably identify
different types of idiom, and also distinguish these
cases from false positives that were mistakenly ex-
tracted. Once some of these techniques have been
evaluated, we will be in a better position to broaden
our techniques by turning to larger corpora such as
the Web.
References
Timothy Baldwin, Colin Bannard, Takaaki Tanaka, and
Dominic Widdows. 2003. An empirical model of
multiword expression decomposability. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-2003 Workshop on Multiword Expres-
6
?Chalk and cheese? is a widespread idiom in British En-
glish, used to contrast two very different objects, e.g. ?They
are as different as chalk and cheese.? A roughly corresponding
(though more predictable) phrase in American English might be
?They are as different as night and day.?
sions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, Sapporo,
Japan.
Sarah Bunin Benor and Roger Levy. 2004. The chicken
or the egg? a probabilistic analysis of english bi-
nomials. http://www.stanford.edu/?rog/
papers/binomials.pdf.
Sharon Caraballo. 1999. Automatic construction of a
hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In 37th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Proceedings of the Conference, pages
120?126.
M Carl and A Way, editors. 2003. Recent Advances in
Example-Based Machine Translation. Kluwer.
Scott Cederberg and Dominic Widdows. 2003. Using
LSA and noun coordination information to improve
the precision and recall of automatic hyponymy ex-
traction. In Conference on Natural Language Learn-
ing (CoNNL), Edmonton, Canada.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1967. The grammar of hitting and
breaking. In R. Jacobs, editor, In Readings in English:
Transformational Grammar, pages 120?133.
Marti Hearst and Hinrich Schu?tze. 1993. Customizing
a lexicon to better suit a computational task. In ACL
SIGLEX Workshop, Columbus, Ohio.
Marti A. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hy-
ponyms from large text corpora. In COLING, Nantes,
France.
Thomas Landauer and Susan Dumais. 1997. A solution
to plato?s problem: The latent semantic analysis the-
ory of acquisition. Psychological Review, 104(2):211?
240.
Dekang Lin. 1999. Automatic identification of non-
compositional phrases. In ACL:1999, pages 317?324.
Ellen Riloff and Jessica Shepherd. 1997. A corpus-based
approach for building semantic lexicons. In Claire
Cardie and Ralph Weischedel, editors, Proceedings of
the Second Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing, pages 117?124. Association
for Computational Linguistics, Somerset, New Jersey.
Brian Roark and Eugene Charniak. 1998. Noun-phrase
co-occurence statistics for semi-automatic semantic
lexicon construction. In COLING-ACL, pages 1110?
1116.
Eleanor Rosch. 1975. Cognitive representations of se-
mantic categories. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 104:192?233.
55
Frank Smadja. 1993. Retrieving collocations from text:
Xtract. Computational Linguistics, 19(1):143?177.
Dominic Widdows and Beate Dorow. 2002. A graph
model for unsupervised lexical acquisition. In 19th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 1093?1099, Taipei, Taiwan, August.
Dominic Widdows. 2004. Geometry and Meaning.
CSLI publications, Stanford, California.
David Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word sense dis-
ambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceed-
ings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 189?196.
56
