Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 115?118,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
Aligning words in English-Hindi parallel corpora 
 
Niraj Aswani Robert Gaizauskas 
Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science 
University of Sheffield University of Sheffield 
Regent Court 211, Portobello Street Regent Court 211, Portobello Street 
Sheffield S1 4DP, UK Sheffield S1 4DP, UK 
N.Aswani@dcs.shef.ac.uk R.Gaizauskas@dcs.shef.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper, we describe a word 
alignment algorithm for English-Hindi 
parallel data. The system was developed 
to participate in the shared task on word 
alignment for languages with scarce 
resources at the ACL 2005 workshop, on 
?Building and using parallel texts: data 
driven machine translation and beyond?.  
Our word alignment algorithm is based on 
a hybrid method which performs local 
word grouping on Hindi sentences and 
uses other methods such as dictionary 
lookup, transliteration similarity, expected 
English words and nearest aligned 
neighbours. We trained our system on the 
training data provided to obtain a list of 
named entities and cognates and to collect 
rules for local word grouping in Hindi 
sentences. The system scored 77.03% 
precision and 60.68% recall on the shared 
task unseen test data. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
This paper describes a word alignment system 
developed as a part of shared task on word 
alignment for languages with scarce resources at 
the ACL 2005 workshop on ?building and using 
parallel texts: data driven machine translation and 
beyond?.  Participants in the shared task were 
provided with common sets of training data, 
consisting of English-Inuktitut, Romanian-English, 
and English-Hindi parallel texts and the 
participating teams could choose to evaluate their 
system on one, two, or all three language pairs.  
Our system is for aligning English-Hindi parallel 
data at the word level.  The word-alignment 
algorithm described here is based on a hybrid ? 
multi-feature approach, which groups Hindi words 
locally within a Hindi sentence and uses dictionary 
lookup (DL) as the main method of aligning words 
along with other methods such as Transliteration 
Similarity (TS), Expected English Words (EEW) 
and Nearest Aligned Neighbors (NAN).  We used 
the training data supplied to derive rules for local 
word grouping in Hindi sentences and to find 
Named Entities (NE) and cognates using our TS 
approach.  In the following sections we briefly 
describe our approach. 
 
2 Training Data 
 
The training data set was composed of 
approximately 3441 English-Hindi parallel 
sentence pairs drawn from the EMILLE (Enabling 
Minority Language Engineering) corpus (Baker et 
al., 2004).  The data was pre-tokenized. For the 
English data, a token was a sequence of characters 
that matches any of the ?Dr.?, ?Mr.?, ?Hon.?, 
?Mrs.?, ?Ms.?, ?etc.?, ?i.e.?, ?e.g.?, ?[a-zA-Z0-
9]+?, words ending with apostrophe and all special 
characters except the currency symbols ? and $.  
Similarly for the Hindi, a token consisted of a 
sequence of characters with spaces on both ends 
and all special characters except the currency 
symbols ? and $.  
 
3 Word Alignment 
 
Given a pair of parallel sentences, the task of word 
alignment can be described as finding one-to-one, 
one-to-many, and many-to-many correspondences 
115
between the words of source and target sentences.  
It becomes more complicated when aligning 
phrases of one language with the corresponding 
words or phrases in the target language.  For some 
words, it is also possible not to find any translation 
in the target language. Such words are aligned to 
null.   
 
The algorithm presented in this paper, is a blend of 
various methods. We categorize words of a Hindi 
sentence into one of four different categories and 
use different techniques to deal with each of them. 
These categories include: 1) NEs and cognates 2) 
Hindi words for which it is possible to predict their 
corresponding English words 3) Hindi words that 
match certain pre-specified regular expression 
patterns specified in a rule file (explained in 
section 3.3.) and finally 4) words which do not fit 
in any of the above categories.  In the following 
sections we explain different methods to deal with 
words from each of these categories. 
 
3.1 Named Entities and Cognates 
 
According to WWW1, the Named Entity Task is 
the process of annotating expressions in the text 
that are ?unique identifiers? of entities (e.g. 
Organization, Person, Location etc.).  For example: 
?Mr. Niraj Aswani?, ?United Kingdom?, and 
?Microsoft? are examples of NEs. In most text 
processing systems, this task is achieved by using 
local pattern-matching techniques e.g. a word that 
is in upper initial orthography or a Title followed 
by the two adjacent words that are in upper initial 
or in all upper case.  We use a Hindi gazetteer list 
that contains a large set of NEs.  This gazetteer list 
is distributed as a part of Hindi Gazetteer 
processing resource in GATE (Maynard et al, 
2003).  The Gazetteer list contains various NEs 
including person names, locations, organizations 
etc.  It also contains other entities such as time 
units ? months, dates, and number expressions.   
Cognates can be defined as two words having a 
common etymology and thus are similar or 
identical.  In most cases they are pronounced in a 
similar way or with a minor change. For example 
?Bungalow? in English is derived from the word 
??????? in Hindi, which means a house in the 
Bengali style (WWW2).  We use our TS method to 
locate such words.  Section 3.2 describes the TS 
approach. 
 
3.2 Transliteration Similarity 
 
For the English-Hindi alphabets, it is possible to 
come up with a table consisting of 
correspondences between the letters of the two 
alphabets.  This table is generated based on the 
various sounds that each letter can produce. For 
example a letter ?c? can be mapped to two letters 
in Hindi, ??? and ???. This mapping is not 
restricted to one-to-one but also includes many-to-
many correspondences.  It is also possible to map a 
sequence of two or more characters to a single 
character or to a sequence two or more characters.  
For example ?tio? and ?sh? in English correspond 
to the character ??? in Hindi.   
 
Prior to executing our word alignment algorithm, 
we use the TS approach to build a table of NEs and 
cognates. We consider one pair of parallel 
sentences at a time and for each word in a Hindi 
sentence, we generate different English words 
using our TS table.  We found that before 
comparing words of two languages, it is more 
accurate to eliminate vowels from the words 
except those that appear at the start of words.  We 
use a dynamic programming algorithm called 
?edit-distance? to measure the similarity between 
these words (WWW3). We calculate the similarity 
measure for each word in a Hindi sentence by 
comparing it with each and every word of an 
English sentence.  We come up with an m x n 
matrix, where m and n refer to the number of 
words in Hindi and English respectively. This 
matrix contains a similarity measure for each word 
in a Hindi sentence corresponding to each word in 
a parallel English sentence.  From our experiments 
of comparing more than 100 NE and cognate pairs, 
we found that the word pairs should be considered 
valid matches only if the similarity is greater than 
75%.  Therefore, we consider only those pairs 
which have the highest similarity among the other 
pairs with similarity greater than 75%.  The 
following example shows how TS is used to 
compare a pair of English-Hindi words. For 
example consider a pair ?aswani  ???????? and 
the TS table entries as shown below:  
116
A?,  S?,  SS?,  V?,  W? and N?  
 
We remove vowels from both words: ?aswn  
?????, and then convert the Hindi word into 
possible English words. This gives four different 
combinations: ?asvn?, ?assvn?, ?aswn? and 
?asswn?. These words are then compared with the 
actual English word ?aswn?.  Since we are able to 
locate at least one word with similarity greater than 
75%, we consider ?aswani  ???????? as a NE. 
Once a list of NEs and cognates is ready, we 
switch to our next step: local word grouping, 
where all words in Hindi sentences, either those 
available in the gazetteer list or in the list derived 
using TS approach, are aligned using TS approach.  
 
3.3 Local Word Grouping 
 
Hindi is a partially free order language (i.e. the 
order of the words in a Hindi sentence is not fixed 
but the order of words in a group/phrase is fixed).  
Unlike English where the verbs are used in 
different inflected forms to indicate different 
tenses, Hindi uses one or two extra words after the 
verb to indicate the tense.  Therefore, if the English 
verb is not in its base form, it needs to be aligned 
with one or more words in a parallel Hindi 
sentence.  Sometimes a phrase is aligned with 
another phrase. For example ?customer benefits? 
aligns with ????? ?? ??????.  In this example the 
first word ?customer? aligns with the first word 
?????? and the second word ?benefits? aligns with 
the third word ???????. Considering ?customer 
satisfaction? and ????? ?? ?????? as phrases to be 
aligned with each other, ???? is the word that 
indicates the relation between the two words 
?????? and ???????, which means the ?benefits of 
customer? in English.  These words in a phrase 
need to be grouped together in order to align them 
correctly. In the case of certain prepositions, 
pronouns and auxiliaries, it is possible to predict 
the respective Hindi postpositions, pronouns and 
other words. We derived a set of more than 250 
rules to group such patterns by consulting the 
provided training data and other grammar 
resources such as Bal Anand (2001).  The rule file 
contains the following information for each rule: 
1) Hindi Regular Expression for a word or 
phrase.  This must match one or more words in 
the Hindi sentence. 
2) Group name or a part-of-speech category. 
3) Expected English word(s) that this Hindi word 
group may align to. 
4) In case a group of one or more English words 
aligns with a group of one or more Hindi 
words, information about the key words in 
both groups.  Key words must match each 
other in order to align English-Hindi groups. 
5) A rule to convert Hindi word into its base 
form. 
 
We list some of the derived rules below: 
1) Group a sequence of [X + Postposition], where 
X can be any category in the above list except 
postposition or verb. For example: ?For X? = 
?X ?? ?????, where ?For? = ??? ?????.  
2) Root Verb + (???, ??? or ??)? + (PH).  Present 
continuous tense.  We use ?PH? as an 
abbreviation to refer to the present/past tense 
conjunction of the verb ?????? - ?,? ??, ?,? ??, etc. 
3) Group two words that are identical to each 
other.  For example: "??? ???", which means 
?different? in English. Such bi-grams are 
common in Hindi and are used to stress the 
importance of a word/activity in a sentence. 
 
Once the words are grouped in a Hindi sentence, 
we identify those word groups which do not fit in 
any of the TS and EEW categories.  Such words 
are then aligned using the DL approach. 
 
3.3 Dictionary lookup 
 
Since the most dictionaries contain verbs in their 
base forms, we use a morphological analyzer to 
convert verbs in their base forms. The English-
Hindi dictionary is obtained from (WWW4).  The 
dictionary returns, on average, two to four Hindi 
words referring to a particular English word.  The 
formula for finding the lemma of any Hindi verb 
is: infinitive = root verb + ????.  Since in most 
cases, our dictionary contains Hindi verbs in their 
infinitive forms, prior to comparing the word with 
the unaligned words, we remove the word ???? 
from the end of it.  Due to minor spelling mistakes 
it is also possible that the word returned from 
dictionary does not match with any of the words in 
117
a Hindi sentence.  In this case, we use edit-distance 
algorithm to obtain similarity between the two 
words.  If the similarity is greater than 75%, we 
consider them similar.  We use EEW approach for 
the words which remain unaligned after the DL 
approach. 
 
3.4 Expected English words 
 
Candidates for the EEW approach are the Hindi 
word groups (HWG) that are created by our Hindi 
local word grouping algorithm (explained in 
section 3.3).  The HWGs such as postpositions, 
number expressions, month-units, day-units etc. 
are aligned using the EEW approach.  For 
example, for the Hind word ?????? in a Hindi 
sentence, which means ?fifty two? in English, the 
algorithm tries to locate ?fifty two? in its parallel 
English sentence and aligns them if found. For the 
remaining unaligned Hindi words we use the NAN 
approach.  
 
3.5 Nearest Aligned Neighbors 
 
In certain cases, words in English-Hindi phrases 
follow a similar order.  The NAN approach works 
on this principle and aligns one or more words 
with one of the English words. Considering one 
HWG at a time, we find the nearest Hindi word 
that is already aligned with one or more English 
word(s). Aligning a phrase ?customer benefits? 
with ????? ?? ?????? (example explained in section 
3.3) is an example of NAN approach.  Similarly 
consider a phrase ?tougher controls?, where for its 
equivalent Hindi phrase ????? ???????, the 
dictionary returns a correct pair ?controls  
???????, but fails to locate ?tougher  ?????. For 
aligning the word ?tougher?, NAN searches for the 
nearest aligned word, which, in this case, is 
?controls?. Since the word ?controls? is already 
aligned with the word ????????, the NAN method 
aligns the word ?tougher? with the nearest 
unaligned word ??????. 
 
4 Test Data results 
 
We executed our algorithm on the test data 
consisting of 90 English-Hindi sentence pairs. We 
obtained the following results for non-null 
alignment pairs.  
 
Word Alignment Evaluation 
Evaluation of SURE alignments 
Precision = 0.7703 
Recall    = 0.6068 
F-measure = 0.6788 
Evaluation of PROBABLE alignments 
Precision = 0.7703 
Recall    = 0.6068 
F-measure = 0.6788 
AER       = 0.3212 
 
References 
 
Bal Anand, 2001, Hindi Grammar Books for 
standard 5 to standard 10, Navneet Press, India. 
 
Baker P., Bontcheva K., Cunningham H., 
Gaizauskas R., Hamza O., Hardie A., Jayaram 
B.D., Leisher M., McEnery A.M., Maynard D., 
Tablan V., Ursu C., Xiao Z., 2004, Corpus 
linguistics and South Asian languages: Corpus 
creation and tool development, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 19(4), pp. 509-524. 
 
Maynard D., Tablan V., Bontcheva K., 
Cunningham H., 2003, Rapid customisation of 
an Information Extraction system for surprise 
languages, ACM Transactions on Asian 
Language Information Processing, Special issue 
on Rapid Development of Language 
Capabilities: The Surprise Languages. 
 
WWW1, Named Entity Task Definition,  
http://www.cs.nyu.edu/cs/faculty/grishman/NEta
sk20.book_2.html#HEADING1 [15/04/2005] 
 
WWW2, Britannica Online Encyclopaedia, 
http://www.britannica.com/eb/article?tocId=901
8081 [15/04/2005] 
 
WWW3, Dynamic Programming Algorithm (DPA) 
for Edit-Distance,  
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~lloyd/tildeAlg
DS/Dynamic/Edit/ [22/03/05] 
 
WWW4, English-Hindi dictionary source,  
http://sanskrit.gde.to/hindi/dict/eng-hin_guj.itx 
[22/03/05]. 
118
