Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, pages 47?54,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Part of Speech tagging for Amharic using Conditional Random Fields
Sisay Fissaha Adafre
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam
Kruislaan 403, 1098 SJ Amsterdam, The Netherlands
sfissaha@science.uva.nl
Abstract
We applied Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) to the tasks of Amharic word seg-
mentation and POS tagging using a small
annotated corpus of 1000 words. Given
the size of the data and the large number of
unknown words in the test corpus (80%),
an accuracy of 84% for Amharic word
segmentation and 74% for POS tagging
is encouraging, indicating the applicabil-
ity of CRFs for a morphologically com-
plex language like Amharic.
1 Introduction
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is often considered
as the first phase of a more complex natural lan-
guage processing application. The task is partic-
ularly amenable to automatic processing. Specifi-
cally, POS taggers that are trained on pre-annotated
corpora achieve human-like performance, which is
adequate for most applications. The road to such
high performance levels is, however, filled with a
hierarchy of sub-problems. Most techniques gener-
ally assume the availability of large POS annotated
corpora. The development of annotated corpora in
turn requires a standard POS tagset. None of these
resources are available for Amharic. This is due
mainly to the fact that data preparation, i.e., devel-
oping a comprehensive POS tagset and annotating a
reasonably sized text, is an arduous task. Although
the POS tagging task, taken as a whole, seems chal-
lenging, a lot can be gained by analyzing it into sub-
problems and dealing with each one step-by-step,
and also bringing in the experience from other lan-
guages in solving these problems, since POS taggers
have been developed for several languages resulting
in a rich body of knowledge.
Several attempts have been made in the past
to develop algorithms for analyzing Amharic
words. Among these is the stemming algorithm
of Nega (1999), which reduces Amharic words
into their common stem forms by removing affixes.
Nega?s work focuses on investigating the effective-
ness of the stemming algorithm in information re-
trieval for Amharic. Abyot (2000) developed a word
parser for Amharic verbs that analyses verbs into
their constituting morphemes and determines their
morphosyntactic categories. Abyot?s work only cov-
ers verbs and their derivations. Mesfin (2001) devel-
oped a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) based part of
speech tagger for Amharic. Building on the work of
Mesfin, Atelach (2002) developed a stochastic syn-
tactic parser for Amharic. Sisay and Haller (2003a;
2003b) applied finite-state tools, and corpus-based
methods for the Amharic morphological analysis.
This work provided important insights into the is-
sues surrounding the development of Amharic nat-
ural language processing applications, especially, in
compiling a preliminary POS tagset for Amharic.
In this paper, our aim is to explore recent develop-
ments in the morphological analysis of related lan-
guages, such as Arabic and Hebrew, and machine
learning approaches, and apply them to the Amharic
language. Amharic belongs to the Semitic family of
languages, and hence shares a number of common
morphological properties with Arabic and Hebrew
for which active research is being carried out. Stud-
47
ies on these languages propose two alternative POS
tagging approaches which differ on the unit of anal-
ysis chosen; morpheme-based and word-based (Bar-
Haim et al, 2004). The former presupposes a seg-
mentation phase in which words are analysed into
constituting morphemes which are then passed to
the POS tagging step, whereas the latter applies POS
tagging directly on fully-inflected word forms. Due
to scarce resources, it is impossible for us to fully
carry out these tasks for Amharic. Therefore, the
segmentation and POS tagging tasks are carried out
independently. Furthermore, POS tagging is applied
only on fully-inflected word forms. The motivation
for doing the segmentation task comes from the need
to provide some measure of the complexity of the
task in the context of the Amharic language. As
regards implementation, new models have been in-
troduced recently for segmentation and sequence-
labeling tasks. One such model is Conditional Ran-
dom Fields (CRFs) (Lafferty et al, 2001). In this
paper, we describe important morphosyntactic char-
acteristics of Amharic, and apply CRFs to Amharic
word segmentation and POS tagging.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 pro-
vides a brief description of Amharic morphology.
Section 3 presents some of the work done in the
area of Amharic morphological analysis, and exam-
ines one POS tagset proposed by previous studies.
This tagset has been revised and applied on a sample
Amharic newspaper text, which is discussed in Sec-
tion 4. Section 5 describes the tasks in greater de-
tail. Section 6 provides a brief description of CRFs,
the machine learning algorithm that will be applied
in this paper. Section 7 describes the experimental
setup and Section 8 presents the result of the exper-
iment. Finally, Section 9 makes some concluding
remarks.
2 Amharic Morphology
Amharic is one of the most widely spoken lan-
guages in Ethiopia. It has its own script that is bor-
rowed from Ge?ez, another Ethiopian Semitic lan-
guage (Leslau, 1995). The script is believed to have
originated from the South Sabean script. It is a syl-
labary writing system where each character repre-
sents an open CV syllable, i.e., a combination of a
consonant followed by a vowel (Daniels, 1997).
Amharic has a complex morphology. Word
formation involves prefixation, suffixation, infixa-
tion, reduplication, and Semitic stem interdigitation,
among others. Like other Semitic languages, e.g.,
Arabic, Amharic verbs and their derivations con-
stitute a significant part of the lexicon. In Semitic
languages, words, especially verbs, are best viewed
as consisting of discontinuous morphemes that are
combined in a non-concatenative manner. Put dif-
ferently, verbs are commonly analyzed as consist-
ing of root consonants, template patterns, and vowel
patterns. With the exception of very few verb forms
(such as the imperative), all derived verb forms take
affixes in order to appear as independent words.
Most function words in Amharic, such as Con-
junction, Preposition, Article, Relative marker,
Pronominal affixes, Negation markers, are bound
morphemes, which are attached to content words,
resulting in complex Amharic words composed of
several morphemes. Nouns inflect for the mor-
phosyntactic features number, gender, definiteness,
and case. Amharic adjectives share some morpho-
logical properties with nouns, such as definiteness,
case, and number. As compared to nouns and verbs,
there are fewer primary adjectives. Most adjec-
tives are derived from nouns or verbs. Amharic
has very few lexical adverbs. Adverbial meaning
is usually expressed morphologically on the verb or
through prepositional phrases. While prepositions
are mostly bound morphemes, postpositions are typ-
ically independent words.
The segmentation task (cf. Section 7.1) consid-
ers the following bound morphemes as segments:
Prepositions, Conjunctions, Relative Makers, Aux-
iliary verbs, Negation Marker and Coordinate Con-
junction. Other bound morphemes such as definite
article, agreement features (i.e., number, gender),
case markers, etc are not considered as segments and
will be treated as part of the word. These are chosen
since they are commonly treated as separate units in
most syntactic descriptions.
Although the above description of Amharic is far
from complete, it highlights some of the major char-
acteristics of Amharic, which it shares with other
Semitic languages such as Arabic. It is, therefore,
worthwhile to take into consideration the work done
for other Semitic languages in proposing a method
for Amharic natural language processing.
48
3 Amharic POS Tagset
Mesfin (2001) compiled a total of 25 POS tags: N,
NV, NB, NP, NC, V, AUX, VCO, VP, VC, J, JC,
JNU, JPN, JP, PREP, ADV, ADVC, C, REL, ITJ,
ORD, CRD, PUNC, and UNC. These tags capture
important properties of the language at a higher level
of description. For example, the fact that there
is no category for Articles indicates that Amharic
does not have independent lexical forms for arti-
cles. However, a close examination of the de-
scription of some of the tags reveals some miss-
classification that we think will lead to tagging in-
consistency. For example, the tag JPN is assigned
to nouns with the ?ye? prefix morpheme that func-
tion as an adjective, e.g. yetaywan sahn - A
Taiwan made plate (Mesfin, 2001). This ex-
ample shows that grammatical function takes prece-
dence over morphological form in deciding the POS
category of a word. In Amharic, the ye+NOUN con-
struction can also be used to represent other kinds
of relation such as Possession relation. On the
other hand, the ye+NOUN construction is a simple
morphological variant of the NOUN that can easily
be recognized. Therefore, treating ye+NOUN con-
struction as a subclass of a major noun class will re-
sult in a better tagging consistency than treating it as
an adjective. Furthermore, a hierarchical tagset, or-
ganized into major classes and subclasses, seems to
be a preferred design strategy (Wilson, 1996; Khoja
et al, 2001). Although it is possible to guess (from
the tagset description) some abstract classes such as,
N* (nouns), V* (verbs), J* (adjectives), etc., such a
hierarchical relation is not clearly indicated. One ad-
vantage of such a hierarchical organization is that it
allows one to work at different levels of abstraction.
The POS tags that are used in this paper are ob-
tained by collapsing some of the categories proposed
by Mesfin (2001). The POS tags are Noun (N), Verb
(V), Auxiliary verbs (AUX), Numerals (NU), Ad-
jective (AJ), Adverb (AV), Adposition (AP), Inter-
jection (I), Residual (R), and Punctuation (PU). The
main reason for working with a set of abstract POS
tags is resource limitation, i.e., the absence of a large
annotated corpus. Since we are working on a small
annotated corpus, 25 POS tags make the data sparse
and the results unreliable. Therefore, we have found
it necessary to revise the tagset.
4 Application of the Revised Tagset
The above abstract POS tags are chosen by tak-
ing into account the proposals made in Amharic
grammar literature and the guidelines of other lan-
guages (Baye, 1986; Wilson, 1996; Khoja et al,
2001). It is, however, necessary to apply the revised
tagset to a real Amharic text and see if it leads to any
unforeseeable problems. It is also useful to see the
distribution of POS tags in a typical Amahric news-
paper text. Therefore, we selected 5 Amharic news
articles and applied the above tagset.
All the tokens in the corpus are assigned one
of the tags in the proposed tagset relatively easily.
There do not seem to be any gaps in the tagset.
Unlike Mesfin (2001), who assigns collocations a
single POS tag, we have assumed that each token
should be treated separately. This means that words
that are part of a collocation are assigned tags indi-
vidually. This in turn contributes towards a better
tagging consistency by minimizing context depen-
dent decision-making steps.
Table 1 shows the distribution of POS tags in the
corpus. Nouns constitute the largest POS category
in the corpus based on the above tagging scheme.
This seems to be characteristic of other languages
too. However, Amharic makes extensive use of noun
clauses for representing different kinds of subordi-
nate clauses. Noun clauses are headed by a verbal
noun, which is assigned a noun POS tag. This adds
to the skewedness of POS tag distributions which
in turn biases the POS tagger that relies heavily on
morphological features as we will show in Section 7.
Interjections, on the other hand, do not occur in the
sample corpus, as these words usually do not appear
often in newspaper text.
Once the POS tagset has been compiled and
tested, the next logical step is to explore automatic
methods of analyzing Amharic words, which we ex-
plore in the next section.
5 POS Tagging of Amharic
Semitic languages like Arabic, Hebrew and Amharic
have a much more complex morphology than En-
glish. In these languages, words usually consist
of several bound morphemes that would normally
have independent lexical entries in languages like
English. Furthermore, in Arabic and Hebrew, the
49
Description POS tag Frequency
Noun N 586
Verb V 203
Auxiliary AUX 20
Numeral NU 65
Adjective AJ 31
Adverb AV 8
Adposition AP 30
Interjection I 0
Punctuation PU 36
Residual R 15
Table 1: Distribution of POS tags
diacritics that represent most vowels and gemina-
tion patterns are missing in written texts. Although
Amharic does not have a special marker for gem-
ination, the Amharic script fully encodes both the
vowels and the consonants, hence it does not suffer
from the ambiguity problem that may arise due to
the missing vowels.
As mentioned briefly in Section 1, the morpho-
logical complexity of these languages opens up dif-
ferent alternative approaches in developing POS
taggers for them (Bar-Haim et al, 2004; Diab
et al, 2004). Bar-Haim et al (2004) showed
that morpheme-based tagging performs better than
word-based tagging; they used Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs) for developing the tagger.
On the basis of the idea introduced by Bar-Haim
et al (2004), we formulate the following two related
tasks for the analysis of Amharic words: segmen-
tation and POS tagging (sequence labeling). Seg-
mentation refers to the analysis of a word into con-
stituting morphemes. The POS tagging task, on the
other hand, deals with the assignment of POS tags
to words. The revised POS tags that are introduced
in Section 3 will be used for this task. The main
reason for choosing words as a unit of analysis and
adopting the abstract POS tags is that the limited re-
source that we have prohibits us from carrying out
fine-grained classification experiments. As a result
of this, we choose to aim at a less ambitious goal of
investigating to what extent the strategies used for
unknown word recognitions can help fill the gap left
by scarce resources. Therefore, we mainly focus on
word-based tagging and explore different kinds of
features that contribute to tagging accuracy.
Although the segmentation and POS tagging tasks
look different, both can be reduced to sequence la-
beling tasks. Since the size of the annotated cor-
pora is very small, a method needs to be chosen
that allows an optimal utilization of the limited re-
sources that are available for Amharic. In this re-
spect, CRFs are more appropriate than HMMs since
they allow us to integrate information from different
sources (Lafferty et al, 2001). In the next section,
we provide a brief description of CRFs.
6 Conditional Random Fields
Conditional Random Fields are conditional proba-
bility distributions that take the form of exponential
models. A special case of CRFs, linear chain CRF,
which takes the following form, has been widely
used for sequence labeling tasks.
P (y | x) =
1
Z (x)
exp
(
?
t=1
?
k
?kfk (t, yt?1, yt, x)
)
,
where Z (x) is the normalization factor, X =
{x1, . . . , xn} is the observation sequence, Y =
{y1, . . . , yT } is the label sequences, fk and ?k
are the feature functions and their corresponding
weights respectively (Lafferty et al, 2001).
An important property of these models is that
probabilities are computed based on a set of feature
functions, i.e. fk, (usually binary valued), which
are defined on both the observation X and label se-
quences Y . These feature functions describe differ-
ent aspect of the data and may overlap, providing
a flexible way of describing the task. CRFs have
been shown to perform well in a number of natural
language processing applications, such as POS tag-
ging (Lafferty et al, 2001), shallow parsing or NP
chunking (Sha and Pereira, 2003), and named entity
recognition (McCallum and Li, 2003).
In POS tagging, context information such as sur-
rounding words and their morphological features,
i.e., suffixes and prefixes, significantly improves per-
formance. CRFs allow us to integrate large set of
such features easily. Therefore, it would be interest-
ing to see to what extent the morphological features
help in predicting Amharic POS tags. We used the
minorThird implementation of CRF (Cohen, 2004).
50
7 Experiments
There are limited resources for the Amharic lan-
guage, which can be used for developing POS tag-
ger. One resource that may be relevant for the cur-
rent task is a dictionary consisting of some 15,000
entries (Amsalu, 1987). Each entry is assigned one
of the five POS tags; Noun, Verb, Adjectives, Ad-
verb, and Adposition. Due to the morphological
complexity of the language, a fully inflected dic-
tionary consisting only of 15,000 entries is bound
to have limited coverage. Furthermore, the dictio-
nary contains entries for phrases, which do not fall
into any of the POS categories. Therefore the actual
number of useful entries is a lot less than 15,000.
The data for the experiment that will be described
below consists of 5 annotated news articles (1000
words). The Amharic text has been transliterated us-
ing the SERA transliteration scheme, which encodes
Amharic scripts using Latin alphabets (Daniel,
1996). This data is very small compared to the data
used in other segmentation and POS tagging experi-
ments. However, it is worthwhile to investigate how
such a limited resource can meaningfully be used for
tackling the aforementioned tasks.
7.1 Segmentation
The training data for segmentation task consists of 5
news articles in which the words are annotated with
segment boundaries as shown in the following ex-
ample.
. . .<seg>Ind</seg><seg>
astawequt</seg>#
<seg>le</seg><seg>arso
</seg>#<seg> aderu
</seg># <seg>be</seg>
<seg>temeTaTaN</seg> . . .
In this example, the morphemes are enclosed in
<seg> and </seg> XML tags. Word-boundaries
are indicated using the special symbol #. The reduc-
tion of the segmentation task to a sequence labeling
task is achieved by converting the XML-annotated
text into a sequence of character-tag pairs. Each
character constitutes a training (test) instance. The
following five tags are used for tagging the char-
acters; B(egin), C(ontinue), E(nd), U(nique) and
N(egative). Each character in the segment is as-
signed one of these tags depending on where it ap-
pears in the segment; at the beginning (B), at the end
(E), inside (C), or alone (U). While the tags BCE are
used to capture multi-character morphemes, the U
tag is used to represent single-character morphemes.
The negative tag (N) is assigned to the special sym-
bol # used to indicate the word boundary. Though
experiments have been carried out with less elab-
orate tagging schemes such as BIO (Begin-Inside-
Outside), no significant performance improvement
has been observed. Therefore, results are reported
only for the BCEUN tagging scheme.
The set of features that are used for training are
composed of character features, morphological fea-
tures, dictionary features, the previous tag, and char-
acter bi-grams. We used a window of eleven charac-
ters centered at the current character. The charac-
ter features consist of the current character, the five
characters to the left and to the right of the current
characters. Morphological features are generated by
first merging the set of characters that appear be-
tween the word boundaries (both left and right) and
the current character. Then a binary feature will be
generated in which its value depends on whether the
resulting segment appears in a precompiled list of
valid prefix and suffix morphemes or not. The same
segment is also used to generate another dictionary-
based feature, i.e., it is checked whether it exists in
the dictionary. Character bi-grams that appear to the
left and the right of the current character are also
used as features. Finally, the previous tag is also
used as a feature.
7.2 POS Tagging
The experimental setup for POS tagging is similar to
that of the segmentation task. However, in our cur-
rent experiments, words, instead of characters, are
annotated with their POS tags and hence we have
more labels now. The following example shows the
annotation used in the training data.
. . .<V>yemikahEdut</V>
<N>yemrmr</N>
<N>tegbarat</N>
<V>yatekorut</V>
<N>bemgb</N> <N>sebl</N>
. . .
51
Each word is enclosed in an XML tag that denotes its
POS tag. These tags are directly used for the training
of the sequence-labeling task. No additional reduc-
tion process is carried out.
The set of features that are used for training are
composed of lexical features, morphological fea-
tures, dictionary features, the previous two POS
tags, and character bi-grams. We used a window of
five words centered at the current word. The lex-
ical features consist of the current word, the two
words to the left and to the right of the current word.
Morphological features are generated by extracting
a segment of length one to four characters long from
the beginning and end of the word. These segments
are first checked against a precompiled list of valid
prefix and suffix morphemes of the language. If the
segment is a valid morpheme then an appropriate
feature will be generated. Otherwise the null pre-
fix or suffix feature will be generated to indicate the
absence of an affix. The dictionary is used to gen-
erate a binary feature for a word based on the POS
tag found in the dictionary. In other words, if the
word is found in the dictionary, its POS tag will be
used as a feature. For each word, a set of character
bi-grams has been generated and each character bi-
gram is used as a feature. Finally, the last two POS
tags are also used as a feature.
8 Results
We conducted a 5-fold cross-validation experiment.
In each run, one article is used as a test dataset and
the remaining four articles are used for training. The
results reported in the sections below are the average
of these five runs. On average 80% of the words in
the test files are unknown words. Most of the un-
known words (on average 60%) are nouns.
8.1 Segmentation Result
As mentioned in Section 7.1, four sets of features,
i.e., character features, morphological features, dic-
tionary features, and previous label, are used for the
segmentation task. Table 2 shows results for some
combinations of these features. The results without
the previous label feature are also shown (Without
Prev. Label).
The simple character features are highly informa-
tive features, as can be seen in Table 2 (Row 1).
Using only these features, the system with previous
label feature already achieved an accuracy of 0.819.
The dictionary feature improved the result by 2%
whereas the morphological features brought minor
improvements. As more features are added the vari-
ation between the different runs increases slightly.
Performace significantly decreases when we omit
the previous label feature as it is shown in Without
Prev. Label column.
8.2 POS Tagging Results
Table 3 shows the word-based evaluation results of
the POS tagging experiment. The baseline (Row 1)
means assigning all the words the most frequently
occurring POS tag, i.e., N (noun). The result ob-
tained using only lexical features (Row 2) is bet-
ter than the baseline. Adding morphological fea-
tures improves the result almost by the same amount
(Row 3). Incorporation of the dictionary feature,
however, has brought only slight improvement. The
addition of bi-gram features improved the result by
3%.
As mentioned before, it is not possible to com-
pare the results, i.e. 74% accuracy (With Prev. La-
bel), with other state of the art POS taggers since our
data is very small compared to the data used by other
POS taggers. It is also difficult to claim with abso-
lute certainty as to the applicability of the technique
we have applied. However, given the fact that 80%
of the test instances are unseen instances, an accu-
racy of 74% is an acceptable result. This claim re-
ceives further support when we look at the results re-
ported for unknown word guessing methods in other
POS tagging experiments (Nakagawa et al, 2001).
As we add more features, the system shows less vari-
ation among the different folds. As with segmenta-
tion task, the omission of the previous label feature
decreases performace. The system with only lexical
features and without previous label feature has the
same performace as the baseline system.
8.3 Error Analysis
The results of both the segmentation and POS tag-
ging tasks show that they are not perfect. An ex-
amination of the output of these systems shows cer-
tain patterns of errors. In case of the segmenta-
tion task, most of the words that are incorrectly seg-
mented have the same beginning or ending charac-
52
With Prev. Label Without Prev. Label
Features accuracy stddev accuracy stddev
Char. 0.819 0.7 0.661 4.7
Char.+Dict. 0.837 1.6 0.671 4.1
Char.+Dict.+Morph. 0.841 1.7 0.701 3.9
Table 2: Segmentation Results
With Prev. Label Without Prev. Label
Features accuracy stddev accuracy stddev
Baseline 0.513 6.4 ? ?
Lex. 0.613 5.3 0.513 6.4
Lex.+Morph. 0.700 5.0 0.688 5.2
Lex.+Morph.+Dict. 0.713 4.3 0.674 5.6
Lex.+Morph.+Dict.+Bigram 0.748 4.3 0.720 2.9
Table 3: Word-based evaluation results of POS tagging
ters as words with affix morphemes. Increasing the
size of the lexical resources, such as the dictionary,
can help the system in distinguishing between words
that have affixes from those that do not.
The POS tagging system, on the other hand,
has difficulties in distinguishing between nouns and
other POS tags. This in turn shows how similar
nouns are to words in other POS tags morpholog-
ically, since our experiment relies heavily on mor-
phological features. This is not particularly sur-
prising given that most Amharic affixes are shared
among nouns and words in other POS tags. In
Amharic, if a noun phrase contains only the head
noun, most noun affixes, such as prepositions, def-
inite article, and case marker appear on the head
noun. If, on the other hand, a noun phrase contains
prenominal constituents such as adjectives, numer-
als, and other nouns, then the above noun affixes
appear on prenominal constituents, thereby blurring
the morphological distinction between the nouns
and other constituents. Furthermore, similar sets
of morphemes are used for prepositions and subor-
dinate conjunctions, which again obscures the dis-
tinction among the nouns and verbs. This, together
with the fact that nouns are the dominant POS cate-
gory in the data, resulted in most words being miss-
classified as nouns.
In general, we believe that the above problems can
be alleviated by making more training data available
to the system, which will enable us to determine im-
proved parameters for both segmentation and POS
tagging models.
9 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we provided preliminary results of the
application of CRFs for Amharic word segmentation
and POS tagging tasks. Several features were exam-
ined for these tasks. Character features were found
to be useful for the segmentation task whereas mor-
phological and lexical features significantly improve
the results of the POS tagging task. Dictionary-
based features contribute more to the segmentation
task than to the POS tagging task. In both experi-
ments, omition of previous label feature hurts per-
formance.
Although the size of the data limits the scope of
the claims that can be made on the basis of the re-
sults, the results are good especially when we look
at them from the perspective of the results achieved
in unknown word recognition methods of POS tag-
ging experiments. These results could be achieved
since CRFs allow us to integrate several overlapping
features thereby enabling optimum utilization of the
available information.
In general, the paper dealt with a restricted as-
pect of the morphological analysis of Amharic, i.e.,
Amharic word segmentation and POS tagging. Fur-
thermore, these tasks were carried out relatively in-
dependently. Future work should explore how these
tasks could be integrated into a single system that
53
allows for fine-grained POS tagging of Amharic
words. Parallel to this, resource development needs
to be given due attention. As mentioned, the lack
of adequate resources such as a large POS annotated
corpus imposes restrictions on the kind of methods
that can be applied. Therefore, the development of
a standard Amharic POS tagset and annotation of a
reasonably sized corpus should be given priority.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) under
project number 220-80-001.
References
Nega Alemayehu. 1999. Development of stemming al-
gorithm for Amharic text retrieval. PhD Thesis, Uni-
versity of Sheffield.
Atelach Alemu. 2002. Automatic Sentence Parsing
for Amharic Text: An Experiment using Probabilistic
Context Free Grammars. Master Thesis, Addis Ababa
University.
Amsalu Aklilu. 1987. Amharic-English Dictionary. Ku-
raz Publishing Agency.
Roy Bar-Haim, Khalil Simaan and Yoad Winter. 2004.
Part-of-Speech Tagging for Hebrew and Other Semitic
Languages. Technical Report.
Abiyot Bayou. 2000. Developing automatic word parser
for Amharic verbs and their derivation. Master The-
sis, Addis Ababa University.
W. Cohen. 2004. Methods for Identifying Names
and Ontological Relations in Text using Heuristics
for Inducing Regularities from Data. http://
minorthird.sourceforge.net
Peter T. Daniels, 1997. Script of Semitic Languages in:
Robert Hetzron, editor,Proceedings of the Corpus Lin-
guistics. 16?45.
Mona Diab, Kadri Hacioglu and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004.
Automatic tagging of Arabic text: From row text to
base phrase chunks. In Daniel Marku, Susan Dumais
and Salim Roukos, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004: Short
papers, pages 149?152, Boston, Massachusetts, USA,
May 2?May 7. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Johann Haller. 2003a.
Amharic verb lexicon in the context of machine trans-
lation. Traitement Automatique des Langues Na-
turelles 2:183?192
Sisay Fissaha Adafre and Johann Haller. 2003b. Ap-
plication of corpus-based techniques to Amharic texts.
Machine Translation for Semitic languages MT Sum-
mit IX Workshop, New Orleans
Mesfin Getachew. 2001. Automatic part of speech
tagging for Amharic language: An experiment using
stochastic HMM. Master Thesis, Addis Ababa Uni-
versity.
Wolf Leslau. 1995. Reference Grammar of Amharic.
Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden.
A. McCallum and W. Li. 2003. Early results for Named
Entity Recognition with conditional random fields,
feature induction and web-enhanced lexicons. Pro-
ceedings of the 7th CoNLL.
Tetsuji Nakagawa, Taku Kudo and Yuji Matsumoto.
2001. Unknown Word Guessing and Part-of-
Speech Tagging Using Support Vector Machines.
NLPRS pages 325-331, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA, May 2?May 7. http://www.afnlp.org/
nlprs2001/pdf/0053-01.pdf
J. Lafferty, F. Pereira and A. McCallum. 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. Proceedings of
the International Conference on Machine Learning.
F. Sha and F. Pereira. 2004. Shallow parsing with con-
ditional random fields. Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technology-NAACL.
Khoja S., Garside R., and Knowles G. 2001. A Tagset for
the Morphosyntactic Tagging of Arabic Proceedings
of the Corpus Linguistics. Lancaster University (UK),
Volume 13 - Special issue, 341.
Leech G. Wilson. 1996. Recommendations
for the Morphosyntactic Annotation of Cor-
pora. EAGLES Report EAG-TCWG-MAC/R,
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/
annotate/annotate.html
Daniel Yacob. 1996. System for Ethiopic Representation
in ASCII. http://www.abyssiniagateway.
net/fidel
Baye Yimam. 1999. Root. Ethiopian Journal of Lan-
guage Studies, 9:56?88.
Baye Yimam. 1986. Yamara Swasw E.M.P.D.A, Addis
Ababa.
54
