Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 53?60,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Annotating Attributions and Private States
Theresa Wilson
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
twilson@cs.pitt.edu
Janyce Wiebe
Department of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
This paper describes extensions to a corpus
annotation scheme for the manual annotation
of attributions, as well as opinions, emotions,
sentiments, speculations, evaluations and other
private states in language. It discusses the
scheme with respect to the ?Pie in the Sky?
Check List of Desirable Semantic Information
for Annotation. We believe that the scheme is a
good foundation for adding private state anno-
tations to other layers of semantic meaning.
1 Introduction
This paper describes a fine-grained annotation scheme
for key components and properties of opinions, emo-
tions, sentiments, speculations, evaluations, and other
private states in text. We first give an overview of the
core scheme. We then describe recent extensions to the
scheme, namely refined annotations of attitudes and tar-
gets, or objects, of private states. Finally, we discuss re-
lated items from the ?Pie in the Sky? Check List of De-
sirable Semantic Information for Annotation, and related
work. We believe our scheme would provide a founda-
tion for adding private state annotations to other layers of
semantic and pragmatic meaning.
2 The Core Scheme
This section overviews the core of the annotation scheme.
Further details may be found in (Wilson and Wiebe,
2003; Wiebe et al, 2005).
2.1 Means of Expressing Private States
The goals of the annotation scheme are to represent inter-
nal mental and emotional states, and to distinguish sub-
jective information from material presented as fact. As
a result, the annotation scheme is centered on the no-
tion of private state, a general term that covers opinions,
beliefs, thoughts, feelings, emotions, goals, evaluations,
and judgments. As Quirk et al (1985) define it, a private
state is a state that is not open to objective observation
or verification: ?a person may be observed to assert that
God exists, but not to believe that God exists. Belief is in
this sense ?private?.? (p. 1181) Following literary theo-
rists such as Banfield (1982), we use the term subjectivity
for linguistic expressions of private states in the contexts
of texts and conversations.
We can further view private states in terms of their
functional components ? as states of experiencers hold-
ing attitudes, optionally toward targets. For example, for
the private state in the sentence John hates Mary, the ex-
periencer is ?John,? the attitude is ?hate,? and the target
is ?Mary.?
We create private state frames for three main types of
private state expressions in text:
? explicit mentions of private states
? speech events expressing private states
? expressive subjective elements
An example of an explicit mention of a private state is
?fears? in (1):
(1) ?The U.S. fears a spill-over,? said Xirao-
Nima.
An example of a speech event expressing a private state
is ?said? in (2):
(2) ?The report is full of absurdities,? Xirao-
Nima said.
Note that we use the term speech event to refer to both
speaking and writing events.
The phrase ?full of absurdities? in (2) above is an ex-
pressive subjective element (Banfield, 1982). Other ex-
amples can be found in (3):
(3) The time has come, gentlemen, for
Sharon, the assassin, to realize that injustice
cannot last long.
53
The private states in this sentence are expressed entirely
by the words and the style of language that is used. In
(3), although the writer does not explicitly say that he
hates Sharon, his choice of words clearly demonstrates
a negative attitude toward him. As used in these sen-
tences, the phrases ?The time has come,? ?gentlemen,?
?the assassin,? and ?injustice cannot last long? are all ex-
pressive subjective elements. Expressive subjective el-
ements are used by people to express their frustration,
anger, wonder, positive sentiment, etc., without explic-
itly stating that they are frustrated, angry, etc. Sarcasm
and irony often involve expressive subjective elements.
2.2 Private State Frames
We propose two types of private state frames: expressive
subjective element frames will be used to represent
expressive subjective elements; and direct subjective
frames will be used to represent both subjective speech
events (i.e., speech events expressing private states) and
explicitly mentioned private states. The frames have the
following attributes:
Direct subjective (subjective speech event or explicit
private state) frame:
? text anchor: a pointer to the span of text that rep-
resents the speech event or explicit mention of a pri-
vate state.
? source: the person or entity that expresses or expe-
riences the private state, possibly the writer.
? target: the target or topic of the private state, i.e.,
what the speech event or private state is about.
? properties:
? intensity: the intensity of the private state (low,
medium, high, or extreme).
? expression intensity: the contribution of the
speech event or private state expression itself
to the overall intensity of the private state. For
example, ?say? is often neutral, even if what is
uttered is not neutral, while ?excoriate? itself
implies a very strong private state.
? insubstantial: true, if the private state is not
substantial in the discourse. For example, a pri-
vate state in the context of a conditional often
has the value true for attribute insubstantial.
? attitude type: the type of attitude(s) compos-
ing the private state.
Expressive subjective element frame:
? text anchor: a pointer to the span of text that de-
notes the subjective or expressive phrase.
? source: the person or entity that is expressing the
private state, possibly the writer.
? properties:
? intensity: the intensity of the private state.
? attitude type
2.3 Objective Speech Event Frames
To distinguish opinion-oriented material from material
presented as factual, we also define objective speech
event frames. These are used to represent material that is
attributed to some source, but is presented as objective
fact. They include a subset of the slots in private state
frames:
Objective speech event frame:
? text anchor: a pointer to the span of text that de-
notes the speech event.
? source: the speaker or writer.
? target: the target or topic of the speech event, i.e.,
the content of what is said.
For example, an objective speech event frame is cre-
ated for ?said? in the following sentence (assuming no
undue influence from the context):
(4) Sargeant O?Leary said the incident took
place at 2:00pm.
That the incident took place at 2:00pm is presented as a
fact with Sargeant O?Leary as the source of information.
2.4 Agent Frames
The annotation scheme includes an agent frame for noun
phrases that refer to sources of private states and speech
events, i.e., for all noun phrases that act as the experi-
encer of a private state, or the speaker/writer of a speech
event. Each agent frame generally has two slots. The text
anchor slot includes a pointer to the span of text that de-
notes the noun phrase source. The source slot contains
a unique alpha-numeric ID that is used to denote this
source throughout the document. The agent frame as-
sociated with the first informative (e.g., non-pronominal)
reference to this source in the document includes an id
slot to set up the document-specific source-id mapping.
2.5 Nested Sources
The source of a speech event is the speaker or writer. The
source of a private state is the experiencer of the private
state, i.e., the person whose opinion or emotion is being
expressed. The writer of an article is always a source, be-
cause he or she wrote the sentences of the article, but the
writer may also write about other people?s private states
54
and speech events, leading to multiple sources in a single
sentence. For example, each of the following sentences
has two sources: the writer (because he or she wrote the
sentences), and Sue (because she is the source of a speech
event in (5) and of private states in (6) and (7)).
(5) Sue said, ?The election was fair.?
(6) Sue thinks that the election was fair.
(7) Sue is afraid to go outside.
Note, however, that we don?t really know what Sue says,
thinks or feels. All we know is what the writer tells us.
For example, Sentence (5) does not directly present Sue?s
speech event but rather Sue?s speech event according to
the writer. Thus, we have a natural nesting of sources in
a sentence.
In particular, private states are often filtered through
the ?eyes? of another source, and private states are of-
ten directed toward the private states of others. Consider
sentence (1) above and (8) following:
(8) China criticized the U.S. report?s criticism
of China?s human rights record.
In sentence (1), the U.S. does not directly state its fear.
Rather, according to the writer, according to Xirao-Nima,
the U.S. fears a spill-over. The source of the private state
expressed by ?fears? is thus the nested source ?writer,
Xirao-Nima, U.S.?. In sentence (8), the U.S. report?s crit-
icism is the target of China?s criticism. Thus, the nested
source for ?criticism? is ?writer, China, U.S. report?.
Note that the shallowest (left-most) agent of all nested
sources is the writer, since he or she wrote the sentence.
In addition, nested source annotations are composed of
the IDs associated with each source, as described in
the previous subsection. Thus, for example, the nested
source ?writer, China, U.S. report? would be represented
using the IDs associated with the writer, China, and the
report being referred to, respectively.
2.6 Examples
We end this section with examples of direct subjective,
expressive subjective element, and objective speech event
frames (sans target and attitude type attributes, which are
discussed in the next section).
First, we show the frames that would be associated
with sentence (9), assuming that the relevant source ID?s
have already been defined:
(9) ?The US fears a spill-over,? said Xirao-
Nima.
Objective speech event:
Text anchor: the entire sentence
Source: <writer>
Implicit: true
Objective speech event:
Text anchor: said
Source: <writer,Xirao-Nima>
Direct subjective:
Text anchor: fears
Source: <writer,Xirao-Nima,U.S.>
Intensity: medium
Expression intensity: medium
The first objective speech event frame represents that, ac-
cording to the writer, it is true that Xirao-Nima uttered
the quote and is a professor at the university referred
to. The implicit attribute is included because the writer?s
speech event is not explicitly mentioned in the sentence
(i.e., there is no explicit phrase such as ?I write?).
The second objective speech event frame represents
that, according to the writer, according to Xirao-Nima, it
is true that the US fears a spillover. Finally, when we drill
down to the subordinate clause we find a private state: the
US fear of a spillover. Such detailed analyses, encoded
as annotations on the input text, would enable a person
or an automated system to pinpoint the subjectivity in a
sentence, and attribute it appropriately.
Now, consider sentence (10):
(10) ?The report is full of absurdities,? Xirao-
Nima said.
Objective speech event:
Text anchor: the entire sentence
Source: <writer>
Implicit: true
Direct subjective:
Text anchor: said
Source: <writer,Xirao-Nima>
Intensity: high
Expression intensity: neutral
Expressive subjective element:
Text anchor: full of absurdities
Source: <writer,Xirao-Nima>
Intensity: high
The objective frame represents that, according to the
writer, it is true that Xirao-Nima uttered the quoted string.
The second frame is created for ?said? because it is a sub-
jective speech event: private states are conveyed in what
is uttered. Note that intensity is high but expression inten-
sity is neutral: the private state being expressed is strong,
but the specific speech event phrase ?said? does not it-
self contribute to the intensity of the private state. The
third frame is for the expressive subjective element ?full
of absurdities.?
3 Annotation Process
To date, over 11,000 sentences in 550 documents have
been annotated according to the annotation scheme de-
scribed above. The documents are English-language ver-
sions of news documents from the world press. The doc-
uments are from 187 different news sources in a variety
55
of countries. The original documents and their annota-
tions are available at
http://nrrc.mitre.org/NRRC/publications.htm.
The annotation process and inter-annotator agreement
studies are described in (Wiebe et al, 2005). Here, we
want to highlight two themes of the annotation instruc-
tions:
1. There are no fixed rules about how particular words
should be annotated. The instructions describe the
annotations of specific examples, but do not state
that specific words should always be annotated a cer-
tain way.
2. Sentences should be interpreted with respect to the
contexts in which they appear. The annotators
should not take sentences out of context and think
what they could mean, but rather should judge them
as they are being used in that particular sentence and
document.
We believe that these general strategies for annotation
support the creation of corpora that will be useful for
studying expressions of subjectivity in context.
4 Extensions: Attitude and Target
Annotations
Before we describe the new attitude and target annota-
tions, consider the following sentence.
(11) ?I think people are happy because Chavez
has fallen.?
This sentence contains two private states, represented by
direct subjective annotations anchored on ?think? and
?happy,? respectively.
The word ?think? is used to express an opinion about
what is true according to its source (a positive arguing
attitude type; see Section 4.1). The target of ?think? is
?people are happy because Chavez has fallen.?
The word ?happy? clearly expresses a positive attitude,
with target ?Chavez has fallen.? However, looking more
closely at the private state for ?happy,? we see that we
can also infer a negative attitude toward Chavez, from
the phrase ?happy because Chavez has fallen.?
Sentence (11) illustrates some of the things we need to
consider when representing attitudes and targets. First,
we see that more than one type of attitude may be in-
volved when a private state is expressed. In (11), there
are three (a positive attitude, a negative attitude, and a
positive arguing attitude). Second, more than one target
may be associated with a private state. Consider ?happy?
in (11). The target of the positive attitude is ?Chavez has
fallen,? while the target of the inferred negative attitude
is ?Chavez.?
Positive Attitudes Positive Arguing
Negative Attitudes Negative Arguing
Positive Intentions Speculation
Negative Intentions Other Attitudes
Table 1: Attitude Types
The representation also must support multiple targets
for a single attitude, as illustrated by Sentence (12):
(12) Tsvangirai said the election result was a
clear case of highway robbery by Mugabe, his
government and his party, Zanu-PF.
In (12), the phrase ?a clear case of highway robbery? ex-
presses a negative attitude of Tsvangirai. This negative
attitude has two targets: ?the election results? and ?Mu-
gabe, his government and his party, Zanu-PF.?
To capture the kind of detailed attitude and target in-
formation that we described above, we propose two new
types of annotations: attitude frames and target frames.
We describe these new annotations in Sections 4.2 and
4.3, but first we introduce the set of attitude types that we
developed for the annotation scheme.
4.1 Types of Attitudes
One of our goals in extending the annotation scheme for
private states was to develop a set of attitude types that
would be useful for NLP applications. It it also important
that the set of attitude types provide good coverage for the
range of possible private states. Working with our anno-
tators and looking at the private states already annotated,
we developed the set of attitude types listed in Table 1.
Below we give a brief description of each attitude
type, followed by an example. In each example, the span
of text that expresses the attitude type is in bold, and the
span of text that refers to the target of the attitude type (if
a target is given) is in angle brackets.
Positive Attitudes: positive emotions, evaluations, judg-
ments and stances.
(13) The Namibians went as far as to say
?Zimbabwe?s election system? was ?water
tight, without room for rigging?.
Negative Attitudes: negative emotions, evaluations,
judgments and stances.
(14) His disenfranchised supporters were
seething.
Positive Arguing: arguing for something, arguing that
something is true or so, arguing that something did hap-
pen or will happen, etc.
56
(15) Iran insists ?its nuclear program is purely
for peaceful purposes?.
Negative Arguing: arguing against something, arguing
that something is not true or not so, arguing that some-
thing did not happen or will not happen, etc.
(16) Officials in Panama denied that ?Mr.
Chavez or any of his family members had asked
for asylum?.
Positive Intentions: aims, goals, plans, and other overtly
expressed intentions.
(17) The Republic of China government be-
lieves in the US committment ?to separating
its anti-terrorism campaign from the Taiwan
Strait issue?, an official said Thursday.
Negative Intentions: expressing that something is not an
aim, not a goal, not an intention, etc.
(18) The Bush administration has no plans ?to
ease sanctions against mainland China?.
Speculation: speculation or uncertainty about what may
or may not be true, what may or may not happen, etc.
(19) ?The president is likely to endorse the
bill?.
Other Attitudes: other types of attitudes that do not fall
into one of the above categories.
(20) To the surprise of many, ?the dollar hit
only 2.4 pesos and closed at 2.1?.
4.2 Attitude Frames
With the introduction of the attitude frames, two issues
arise. First, which spans of text should the new atti-
tudes be anchored to? Second, how do we tie the attitude
frames back to the private states that they are part of?
The following sentence illustrates the first issue.
(21) The MDC leader said systematic cheating,
spoiling tactics, rigid new laws, and shear ob-
struction - as well as political violence and in-
timidation - were just some of the irregularities
practised by the authorities in the run-up to, and
during the poll.
In (21), there are 5 private state frames attributed
to the MDC leader: a direct subjective frame an-
chored to ?said,? and four expressive subjective ele-
ment frames anchored respectively to ?systematic cheat-
ing . . . obstruction,? ?as well as,? ?violence and intimida-
tion,? and ?just some of the irregularities.? We could cre-
ate an attitude frame for each of these private state frames,
but we believe the following is a better solution. For each
direct subjective frame, the annotator is asked to consider
the direct subjective annotation and everything within the
scope of the annotation when deciding what attitude types
are being expressed by the source of the direct subjective
frame. Then, for each attitude type identified, the an-
notator creates an attitude frame and anchors the frame
to whatever span of text completely captures the attitude
type. In to sentence (21), this results in just one attitude
frame being created to represent the negative attitude of
the MDC leader. The anchor for this attitude frame begins
with ?systematic cheating? and ends with ?irregularities.?
Turning to the second issue, tying attitude frames to
their private states, we do two things. First, we create a
unique ID for the attitude frame. Then, we change the
attitude type attribute on the direct subjective annotation
into a new attribute called an attitude link. We place the
attitude frame ID into the attitude link slot. The attitude
link slot can hold more then one attitude frame ID, allow-
ing us to represent a private state composed of more than
one type of attitude.
Because we expect the attitude annotations to overlap
with most of the expressive subjective element annota-
tions, we chose not to link attitude frames to expressive
subjective element frames. However, this would be pos-
sible to do should it become necessary.
The attitude frame has the following attributes:
Attitude frame:
? id: a unique alphanumeric ID for identifying the at-
titude annotation. The ID is used to link the attitude
annotation to the private state it is part of.
? text anchor: a pointer to the span of text that cap-
tures the attitude being expressed.
? attitude type: one of the attitude types listed in Ta-
ble 1.
? target link: one or more target annotation IDs (see
Section 4.3).
? intensity: the intensity of the attitude.
? properties:
? inferred: true, if the attitude is inferred.
? sarcastic: true, if the attitude is realized
through sarcasm.
? repetition: true, if the attitude is realized
through the repetition of words, phrases, or
syntax.
? contrast: true, if the attitude is realized only
through contrast with another attitude.
57
Of the four attitude-frame properties, inferred was al-
ready discussed. The property sarcastic marks attitudes
expressed using sarcasm. In general, we think this prop-
erty will be of interest for NLP applications working with
opinions. Detecting sarcasm may also help a system learn
to distinguish between positive and negative attitudes.
The sarcasm in Sentence (22), below, makes the word
?Great? an expression of a negative rather than a positive
attitude.
(22) ?Great, keep on buying dollars so there?ll
be more and more poor people in the country,?
shouted one.
The repetition and contrast properties are also for mark-
ing different ways in which an attitude might be realized.
We feel these properties will be useful for developing an
automatic system for recognizing different types of atti-
tudes.
4.3 Target Frames
The target frame is used to mark the target of each atti-
tude. A target frame has two slots, the id slot and the text
anchor slot. The id slot contains a unique alpha-numeric
ID for identifying the target annotation. We use the target
frame ID to link the target back to the attitude frame. The
attitude frame has a target-link slot that can hold one or
more target frame IDs. This allows us to represent when
a single attitude is directed at more than one target.
The text anchor slot has a pointer to the span of text that
denotes the target. If there is more than one reference to
the target in the sentence, the most syntactically relevant
reference is chosen.
To illustrate what we mean by syntactically relevant,
consider the following sentence.
(23) African observers generally approved of
?his victory? while Western governments de-
nounced ?it?.
The target of the two attitudes (in bold) in the above sen-
tence is the same entity in the discourse. However, al-
though we anchor the target for the first attitude to ?his
victory,? the anchor for the target of the second attitude is
the pronoun ?it.? As the direct object of the span that de-
notes the attitude ?denounced,? ?it? is more syntactically
relevant than ?his victory.?
4.4 Illustrative Examples
Figures 4.4 and 4.4 give graphical representations for the
annotations in sentences (11) and (12). With attitude
frame and target frame extensions, we are able to capture
more detail about the private states being expressed in the
text than the original core scheme presented in (Wiebe et
al., 2005).
5 Pie in the Sky Annotation
Among the items on the ?Pie in the Sky? Check List
of Desirable Semantic Information for Annotation, 1 the
most closely related are epistemic values (?attitude??),
epistemic, deontic, and personal attitudes. These all
fundamentally involve a self (Banfield, 1982), a subject
of consciousness who is the source of knowledge as-
sessments, judgments of certainty, judgments of obliga-
tion/permission, personal attitudes, and so on. Any ex-
plicit epistemic, deontic, or personal attitude expressions
are represented by us as private state frames, either direct
subjective frames (e.g., for verbs such as ?know? refer-
ring to an epistemic state) or expressive subjective ele-
ment frames (e.g., for modals such as ?must? or ?ought
to?). Importantly, many deontic, epistemic, and personal
attitude expressions do not directly express the speaker
or writer?s subjectivity, but are attributed by the speaker
or writer to agents mentioned in the text (consider, e.g.,
?John believes that Mary should quit her job?). Our frame
and nested-source representations were designed to sup-
port attributing subjectivity to appropriate sources. In fu-
ture work, additional attributes could be added to private
state frames to distinguish between, for example, deontic
and epistemic usages of ?must? and to represent different
epistemic values.
Other phenomena on the list overlap with subjectivity,
such as modality and social style/register. As mentioned
above, some modal expressions are subjective, such as
those expressing deontic or epistemic judgments. How-
ever, hypotheticals and future expressions need not be
subjective. For example, ?The company announced that
if its profits decrease in the next quarter, it will lay off
some employees? may easily be interpreted as presenting
objective fact. As for style, some are subjective by their
nature. One is the literary style represented thought, used
to present consciousness in fiction (Cohn, 1978; Banfield,
1982). Others are sarcastic or dismissive styles of speak-
ing or writing. In our annotation scheme, sentences per-
ceived to represent a character?s consciousness are repre-
sented with private-state frames, as are expressions per-
ceived to be sarcastic or dismissive. On the other hand,
some style distinctions, such as degree of formality, are
often realized in other ways than with explicit subjective
expressions (e.g., ?can?t? versus ?cannot?).
Polarity, another item on the checklist, also overlaps
with subjective positive and negative attitude types. Al-
though many negative and positive polarity words are sel-
dom used outside subjective expressions (such as ?hate?
and ?love?), others often are. For example, words such
as ?addicted? and ?abandoned? are included as negative
polarity terms in the General Inquirer lexicon (General-
Inquirer, 2000), but they can easily appear in objective
1Available at: http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/meyers/frontiers/2005.html
58
 direct subjective frame
   text anchor: think
   source: <writer, I>
   intensity: medium
   expression intensity: medium
   attitude link: a10
 attitude frame
   id: a10
   text anchor: think 
   attitude type: positive arguing
   intensity: medium
   target link: t10
 direct subjective frame
   text anchor: are happy
   source: <writer, I, people>
   intensity: medium
   expression intensity: medium
   attitude link: a20    , a30
 target frame
   id: t30 
   text anchor: Chavez
 attitude frame
   id: a20
   text anchor: are happy
   attitude type: positive attitude
   intensity: medium
   target link: t20  target frame
   id: t20
   text anchor: Chavez has fallen
 target frame
   id: t10
   text anchor: people are happy 
     because Chavez has fallen 
  
 attitude frame
   id: a30
   text anchor: are happy because 
      Chavez has fallen
   attitude type: negative attitude
   intensity: medium
   inferred: true
   target link: t30
 objective speech event
   text anchor: the entire sentence
   source: <writer>
   implicit: true
Figure 1: Graphical representation of annotations for Sentence (11)
 direct subjective frame
   text anchor: said
   source: <writer, Tsvangirai>
   intensity: high
   expression intensity: neutral
   attitude link: a40
 attitude frame
   id: a40
   text anchor: clear case of highway robbery 
   attitude type: negative attitude
   intensity: high
   target link: t40    , t45
 target frame
   id: t40
   text anchor: election result
 target frame
   id: t45
   text anchor: Mugabe, his government 
       and his party, Zanu-PF
 objective speech event
   text anchor: the entire sentence
   source: <writer>
   implicit: true
 expressive subjective element frame
   source: <writer, Tsvangirai>
   text anchor: clear case of highway robbery 
   intensity: high
   
Figure 2: Graphical representation of annotations for Sentence (12)
59
sentences (e.g., ?Thomas De Quincy was addicted to
opium and lived in an abandoned shack?).
Integrating subjectivity with other layers of annotation
proposed in the ?Pie in the Sky? project would afford the
opportunity to investigate how they interact. It would
also enrich our subjectivity representations. While our
scheme promises to be a good base, much remains to be
added. For example, annotations of thematic roles and
co-reference would add needed structure to the target an-
notations, which are now only spans of text. In addi-
tion, temporal and modal annotations would flesh out the
insubstantial attribute, which is currently only a binary
marker. Furthermore, individual private state expressions
must be integrated with respect to the discourse context.
For example, which expressions of opinions oppose ver-
sus support one another? Which sentences presented as
objective fact are included to support a subjective opin-
ion? A challenging dimension to add to the ?Pie in the
Sky? project would be the deictic center as conceived of
in (Duchan et al, 1995), which consists of here, now, and
I reference points updated as the text or conversation un-
folds. Our annotation scheme was developed with this
framework in mind.
6 Related Work
The work most similar to ours is Appraisal Theory (Mar-
tin, 2000; White, 2002) from systemic functional linguis-
tics (see Halliday (19851994)). Both Appraisal Theory
and our annotation scheme are concerned with identify-
ing and characterizing expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in context. The two schemes, however, make differ-
ent distinctions. Appraisal Theory distinguishes different
types of positive and negative attitudes and also various
types of ?intersubjective positioning? such as attribution
and expectation. Appraisal Theory does not distinguish,
as we do, the different ways that private states may be ex-
pressed (i.e., directly, or indirectly using expressive sub-
jective elements). It also does not include a representa-
tion for nested levels of attribution.
In addition to Appraisal Theory, subjectivity annota-
tion of text in context has also been performed in Yu and
Hatzivassiloglou (2003), Bruce and Wiebe (1999), and
Wiebe et al (2004). The annotations in Yu and Hatzi-
vassiloglou (2003) are sentence-level subjective vs. ob-
jective and polarity judgments. The annotation schemes
used in Bruce and Wiebe (1999) and Wiebe et al (2004)
are earlier, much less detailed versions of the annotation
scheme presented in this paper.
7 Conclusion
We have described extensions to an annotation scheme
for private states and objective speech events in lan-
guage. We look forward to integrating and elaborating
this scheme with other layers of semantic meaning in the
future.
8 Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under grant IIS-0208798 and by the Ad-
vanced Research and Development Activity (ARDA).
References
A. Banfield. 1982. Unspeakable Sentences. Routledge and
Kegan Paul, Boston.
R. Bruce and J. Wiebe. 1999. Recognizing subjectivity: A case
study of manual tagging. Natural Language Engineering,
5(2):187?205.
D. Cohn. 1978. Transparent Minds: Narrative Modes for
Representing Consciousness in Fiction. Princeton Univer-
sity Press, Princeton, NJ.
J. Duchan, G. Bruder, and L. Hewitt, editors. 1995. Deixis
in Narrative: A Cognitive Science Perspective. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
The General-Inquirer. 2000.
http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/?inquirer/spreadsheet guide.htm.
M.A.K. Halliday. 1985/1994. An Introduction to Functional
Grammar. London: Edward Arnold.
J.R. Martin. 2000. Beyond exchange: APPRAISAL systems
in English. In Susan Hunston and Geoff Thompson, editors,
Evaluation in Text: Authorial stance and the construction of
discourse, pages 142?175. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
R. Quirk, S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik. 1985. A
Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language. Long-
man, New York.
P.R.R. White. 2002. Appraisal: The language of attitudi-
nal evaluation and intersubjective stance. In Verschueren,
Ostman, blommaert, and Bulcaen, editors, The Handbook
of Pragmatics, pages 1?27. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John
Benjamins Publishing Company.
J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, R. Bruce, M. Bell, and M. Martin. 2004.
Learning subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277?308.
J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, and C. Cardie. 2005. Annotating expres-
sions of opinions and emotions in language. Language Re-
sources and Evalution (formerly Computers and the Human-
ities), 1(2).
T. Wilson and J. Wiebe. 2003. Annotating opinions in the
world press. In SIGdial-03.
H. Yu and V. Hatzivassiloglou. 2003. Towards answering opin-
ion questions: Separating facts from opinions and identifying
the polarity of opinion sentences. In EMNLP-2003.
60
