Proceedings of the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep Lexical Acquisition, pages 67?76,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Bootstrapping Deep Lexical Resources: Resources for Courses
Timothy Baldwin
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering
University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia
tim@csse.unimelb.edu.au
Abstract
We propose a range of deep lexical acqui-
sition methods which make use of mor-
phological, syntactic and ontological lan-
guage resources to model word similarity
and bootstrap from a seed lexicon. The
different methods are deployed in learn-
ing lexical items for a precision gram-
mar, and shown to each have strengths and
weaknesses over different word classes. A
particular focus of this paper is the rela-
tive accessibility of different language re-
source types, and predicted ?bang for the
buck? associated with each in deep lexical
acquisition applications.
1 Introduction
Over recent years, computational linguistics has
benefitted considerably from advances in statisti-
cal modelling and machine learning, culminating
in methods capable of deeper, more accurate au-
tomatic analysis, over a wider range of languages.
Implicit in much of this work, however, has been
the existence of deep language resources (DLR
hereafter) of ever-increasing linguistic complexity,
including lexical semantic resources (e.g. Word-
Net and FrameNet), precision grammars (e.g. the
English Resource Grammar and the various Par-
Gram grammars) and richly-annotated treebanks
(e.g. PropBank and CCGbank).
Due to their linguistic complexity, DLRs are in-
variably constructed by hand and thus restricted in
size and coverage. Our aim in this paper is to de-
velop general-purpose automatic methods which can
be used to automatically expand the coverage of an
existing DLR, through the process of deep lexical
acquisition (DLA hereafter).
The development of DLRs can be broken down
into two basic tasks: (1) design of a data represen-
tation to systematically capture the generalisations
and idiosyncracies of the dataset of interest (system
design); and (2) classification of data items accord-
ing to the predefined data representation (data clas-
sification). In the case of a deep grammar, for exam-
ple, system design encompasses the construction of
the system of lexical types, templates, and/or phrase
structure rules, and data classification corresponds
to the determination of the lexical type(s) each in-
dividual lexeme conforms to. DLA pertains to the
second of these tasks, in automatically mapping a
given lexeme onto a pre-existing system of lexical
types associated with a DLR.
We propose to carry out DLA through a boot-
strap process, that is by employing some notion of
word similarity, and learning the lexical types for a
novel lexeme through analogy with maximally sim-
ilar word(s) for which we know the lexical types. In
this, we are interested in exploring the impact of dif-
ferent secondary language resources (LRs) on DLA,
and estimating how successfully we can expect to
learn new lexical items from a range of LR types.
That is, we estimate the expected DLA ?bang for the
buck? from a range of secondary LR types of vary-
ing size and complexity. As part of this, we look
at the relative impact of different LRs on DLA for
different open word classes, namely nouns, verbs,
adjectives and adverbs.
We demonstrate the proposed DLA methods rel-
ative to the English Resource Grammar (see Sec-
tion 2.1), and in doing so assume the lexical types
of the target DLR to be syntactico-semantic in na-
ture. For example, we may predict that the word
dog has a usage as an intransitive countable noun
(n intr le,1 cf. The dog barked), and also as a
transitive verb (v np trans le, cf. It dogged my
every step).
A secondary interest of this paper is the consid-
eration of how well we could expect to perform
DLA for languages of differing density, from ?low-
1All example lexical types given in this paper are taken di-
rectly from the English Resource Grammar ? see Section 2.1.
67
density? languages (such as Walpiri or Uighur) for
which we have limited LRs, to ?high-density? lan-
guages (such as English or Japanese) for which we
have a wide variety of LRs. To this end, while we ex-
clusively target English in this paper, we experiment
with a range of LRs of varying complexity and type,
including morphological, syntactic and ontological
LRs. Note that we attempt to maintain consistency
across the feature sets associated with each, to make
evaluation as equitable as possible.
The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. Section 2 outlines the process of DLA and re-
views relevant resources and literature. Sections 3,
4 and 5 propose a range of DLA methods based on
morphology, syntax and ontological semantics, re-
spectively. Section 6 evaluates the proposed meth-
ods relative to the English Resource Grammar.
2 Task Outline
This research aims to develop methods for DLA
which can be run automatically given: (a) a pre-
existing DLR which we wish to expand the cover-
age of, and (b) a set of secondary LRs/preprocessors
for that language. The basic requirements to achieve
this are the discrete inventory of lexical types in the
DLR, and a pre-classification of each secondary LR
(e.g. as a corpus or wordnet, to determine what set of
features to employ). Beyond this, we avoid making
any assumptions about the language family or DLR
type.
The DLA strategy we propose in this research is
to use secondary LR(s) to arrive at a feature sig-
nature for each lexeme, and map this onto the sys-
tem of choice indirectly via supervised learning, i.e.
observation of the correlation between the feature
signature and classification of bootstrap data. This
methodology can be applied to unannotated corpus
data, for example, making it possible to tune a lex-
icon to a particular domain or register as exempli-
fied in a particular repository of text. As it does not
make any assumptions about the nature of the sys-
tem of lexical types, we can apply it fully automat-
ically to any DLR and feed the output directly into
the lexicon without manual intervention or worry of
misalignment. This is a distinct advantage when the
inventory of lexical types is continually undergoing
refinement, as is the case with the English Resource
Grammar (see below).
A key point of interest in this paper is the investi-
gation of the relative ?bang for the buck? when dif-
ferent types of LR are used for DLA. Crucially, we
investigate only LRs which we believe to be plausi-
bly available for languages of varying density, and
aim to minimise assumptions as to the pre-existence
of particular preprocessing tools. The basic types of
resources and tools we experiment with in this paper
are detailed in Table 1.
Past research on DLA falls into two basic cat-
egories: expert system-style DLA customised to
learning particular linguistic properties, and DLA
via resource translation. In the first instance, a spe-
cialised methodology is proposed to (automatically)
learn a particular linguistic property such as verb
subcategorisation (e.g. Korhonen (2002)) or noun
countability (e.g. Baldwin and Bond (2003a)), and
little consideration is given to the applicability of
that method to more general linguistic properties. In
the second instance, we take one DLR and map it
onto another to arrive at the lexical information in
the desired format. This can take the form of a one-
step process, in mining lexical items directly from
a DLR (e.g. a machine-readable dictionary (Sanfil-
ippo and Poznan?ski, 1992)), or two-step process in
reusing an existing system to learn lexical properties
in one format and then mapping this onto the DLR
of choice (e.g. Carroll and Fang (2004) for verb sub-
categorisation learning).
There have also been instances of more gen-
eral methods for DLA, aligned more closely with
this research. Fouvry (2003) proposed a method
of token-based DLA for unification-based precision
grammars, whereby partially-specified lexical fea-
tures generated via the constraints of syntactically-
interacting words in a given sentence context, are
combined to form a consolidated lexical entry for
that word. That is, rather than relying on indi-
rect feature signatures to perform lexical acquisition,
the DLR itself drives the incremental learning pro-
cess. Also somewhat related to this research is the
general-purpose verb feature set proposed by Joanis
and Stevenson (2003), which is shown to be appli-
cable in a range of DLA tasks relating to English
verbs.
2.1 English Resource Grammar
All experiments in this paper are targeted at the
English Resource Grammar (ERG; Flickinger
(2002), Copestake and Flickinger (2000)). The ERG
is an implemented open-source broad-coverage
precision Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar
68
Secondary LR type Description Preprocessor(s)
Word list??? List of words with basic POS ?
Morphological lexicon? Derivational and inflectional word relations ?
Compiled corpus??? Unannotated text corpus POS tagger??
Chunk parser?
Dependency parser?
WordNet-style ontology? Lexical semantic word linkages ?
Table 1: Secondary LR and tool types targeted in this research (??? = high expectation of availability for a
given language; ?? = medium expectation of availability; ? = low expectation of availability)
(HPSG) developed for both parsing and generation.
It contains roughly 10,500 lexical items, which,
when combined with 59 lexical rules, compile out
to around 20,500 distinct word forms.2 Each lex-
ical item consists of a unique identifier, a lexical
type (one of roughly 600 leaf types organized into
a type hierarchy with a total of around 4,000 types),
an orthography, and a semantic relation. The gram-
mar also contains 77 phrase structure rules which
serve to combine words and phrases into larger con-
stituents. Of the 10,500 lexical items, roughly 3,000
are multiword expressions.
To get a basic sense of the syntactico-semantic
granularity of the ERG, the noun hierarchy, for ex-
ample, is essentially a cross-classification of count-
ability/determiner co-occurrence, noun valence and
preposition selection properties. For example, lex-
ical entries of n mass count ppof le type can
be either countable or uncountable, and optionally
select for a PP headed by of (example lexical items
are choice and administration).
As our target lexical type inventory for DLA, we
identified all open-class lexical types with at least
10 lexical entries, under the assumption that: (a)
the ERG has near-complete coverage of closed-class
lexical entries, and (b) the bulk of new lexical entries
will correspond to higher-frequency lexical types.
This resulted in the following breakdown:3
2All statistics and analysis relating to the ERG in this paper
are based on the version of 11 June, 2004.
3Note that all results are over simplex lexemes only, and that
we choose to ignore multiword expressions in this research.
Word class Lexical types Lexical items
Noun 28 3,032
Verb 39 1,334
Adjective 17 1,448
Adverb 26 721
Total 110 5,675
Note that it is relatively common for a lexeme to
occur with more than one lexical type in the ERG:
22.6% of lexemes have more than one lexical type,
and the average number of lexical types per lexeme
is 1.12.
In evaluation, we assume we have prior knowl-
edge of the basic word classes each lexeme belongs
to (i.e. noun, verb, adjective and/or adverb), infor-
mation which could be derived trivially from pre-
existing shallow lexicons and/or the output of a tag-
ger.
Recent development of the ERG has been tightly
coupled with treebank annotation, and all major ver-
sions of the grammar are deployed over a common
set of treebank data to help empirically trace the
evolution of the grammar and retrain parse selection
models (Oepen et al, 2002). We treat this as a held-
out dataset for use in analysis of the token frequency
of each lexical item, to complement analysis of type-
level learning performance (see Section 6).
2.2 Classifier design
The proposed procedure for DLA is to generate a
feature signature for each word contained in a given
secondary LR, take the subset of lexemes contained
in the original DLR as training data, and learn lex-
ical items for the remainder of the lexemes through
supervised learning. In order to maximise compara-
bility between the results for the different DLRs, we
employ a common classifier design wherever possi-
ble (in all cases other than ontology-based DLA),
69
using TiMBL 5.0 (Daelemans et al, 2003); we
used the IB1 k-NN learner implementation within
TiMBL, with k = 9 throughout.4 We additionally
employ the feature selection method of Baldwin and
Bond (2003b), which generates a combined ranking
of all features in descending order of ?informative-
ness? and skims off the top-N features for use in
classification; N was set to 100 in all experiments.
As observed above, a significant number of lex-
emes in the ERG occur in multiple lexical items. If
we were to take all lexical type combinations ob-
served for a single lexeme, the total number of lex-
ical ?super?-types would be 451, of which 284 are
singleton classes. Based on the sparseness of this
data and also the findings of Baldwin and Bond
(2003b) over a countability learning task, we choose
to carry out DLA via a suite of 110 binary classifiers,
one for each lexical type.
We deliberately avoid carrying out extensive fea-
ture engineering over a given secondary LR, choos-
ing instead to take a varied but simplistic set of fea-
tures which is parallelled as much as possible be-
tween LRs (see Sections 3?5 for details). We addi-
tionally tightly constrain the feature space to a max-
imum of 3,900 features, and a maximum of 50 fea-
ture instances for each feature type; in each case,
the 50 feature instances are selected by taking the
features with highest saturation (i.e. the highest ra-
tio of non-zero values) across the full lexicon. This
is in an attempt to make evaluation across the differ-
ent secondary LRs as equitable as possible, and get
a sense of the intrinsic potential of each secondary
LR in DLA. Each feature instance is further trans-
lated into two feature values: the raw count of the
feature instance for the target word in question, and
the relative occurrence of the feature instance over
all target word token instances.
One potential shortcoming of our classifier archi-
tecture is that a given word can be negatively clas-
sified by all unit binary classifiers and thus not as-
signed any lexical items. In this case, we fall back
on the majority-class lexical type for each word class
the word has been pre-identified as belonging to.
4We also experimented with bsvm and SVMLight, and a
maxent toolkit, but found TiMBL to be superior overall, we hy-
pothesise due to the tight integration of continuous features in
TiMBL.
3 Morphology-based Deep Lexical
Acquisition
We first perform DLA based on the following mor-
phological LRs: (1) word lists, and (2) morphologi-
cal lexicons with a description of derivational word
correspondences. Note that in evaluation, we pre-
suppose that we have access to word lemmas al-
though in the first instance, it would be equally pos-
sible to run the method over non-lemmatised data.5
3.1 Character n-grams
In line with our desire to produce DLA methods
which can be deployed over both low- and high-
density languages, our first feature representation
takes a simple word list and converts each lexeme
into a character n-gram representation.6 In the case
of English, we generated all 1- to 6-grams for each
lexeme, and applied a series of filters to: (1) filter out
all n-grams which occurred less than 3 times in the
lexicon data; and (2) filter out all n-grams which oc-
cur with the same frequency as larger n-grams they
are proper substrings of. We then select the 3,900
character n-grams with highest saturation across the
lexicon data (see Section 2.2).
The character n-gram-based classifier is the sim-
plest of all classifiers employed in this research, and
can be deployed on any language for which we have
a word list (ideally lemmatised).
3.2 Derviational morphology
The second morphology-based DLA method makes
use of derivational morphology and analysis of the
process of word formation. As an example of how
derivational information could assist DLA, know-
ing that the noun achievement is deverbal and in-
corporates the -ment suffix is a strong predictor of
it being optionally uncountable and optionally se-
lecting for a PP argument (i.e. being of lexical type
n mass count ppof le).
We generate derivational morphological features
for a given lexeme by determining its word clus-
ter in CATVAR7 (Habash and Dorr, 2003) and then
for each sister lexeme (i.e. lexeme occurring in the
5Although this would inevitably lose lexical generalisations
among the different word forms of a given lemma.
6We also experimented with syllabification, but found the
character n-grams to produce superior results.
7In the case that the a given lemma is not in CATVAR, we
attempt to dehyphenate and then deprefix the word to find a
match, failing which we look for the lexeme of smallest edit
distance.
70
same cluster as the original lexeme with the same
word stem), determine if there is a series of edit
operations over suffixes and prefixes which maps
the lexemes onto one another. For each sister lex-
eme where such a correspondence is found to ex-
ist, we output the nature of the character transforma-
tion and the word classes of the lexemes involved.
E.g., the sister lexemes for achievementN in CAT-
VAR are achieveV, achieverN, achievableAdj and
achievabilityN; the mapping between achievementN
and achieverN, e.g., would be analysed as:
N ?ment$ ? N +r$
Each such transformation is treated as a single fea-
ture.
We exhaustively generate all such transformations
for each lexeme, and filter the feature space as for
character n-grams above.
Clearly, LRs which document derivational mor-
phology are typically only available for high-density
languages. Also, it is worth bearing in mind that
derivational morphology exists in only a limited
form for certain language families, e.g. agglutinative
languages.
4 Syntax-based Deep Lexical Acquisition
Syntax-based DLA takes a raw text corpus and pre-
processes it with either a tagger, chunker or depen-
dency parser. It then extracts a set of 39 feature types
based on analysis of the token occurrences of a given
lexeme, and filters over each feature type to produce
a maximum of 50 feature instances of highest satura-
tion (e.g. if the feature type is the word immediately
proceeding the target word, the feature instances are
the 50 words which proceed the most words in our
lexicon). The feature signature associated with a
word for a given preprocessor type will thus have
a maximum of 3,900 items (39? 50? 2).8
4.1 Tagging
The first and most basic form of syntactic pre-
processing is part-of-speech (POS) tagging. For
our purposes, we use a Penn treebank-style tagger
custom-built using fnTBL 1.0 (Ngai and Florian,
2001), and further lemmatise the output of the tagger
using morph (Minnen et al, 2000).
8Note that we will have less than 50 feature instances for
some feature types, e.g. the POS tag of the target word, given
that the combined size of the Penn POS tagset is 36 elements
(not including punctuation).
The feature types used with the tagger are detailed
in Table 2, where the position indices are relative to
the target word (e.g. the word at position ?2 is two
words to the left of the target word, and the POS
tag at position 0 is the POS of the target word). All
features are relative to the POS tags and words in the
immediate context of each token occurrence of the
target word. ?Bi-words? are word bigrams (e.g. bi-
word (1, 3) is the bigram made up of the words one
and three positions to the right of the target word);
?bi-tags? are, similarly, POS tag bigrams.
4.2 Chunking
The second form of syntactic preprocessing, which
builds directly on the output of the POS tagger, is
CoNLL 2000-style full text chunking (Tjong Kim
Sang and Buchholz, 2000). The particular chun-
ker we use was custom-built using fnTBL 1.0 once
again, and operates over the lemmatised output of
the POS tagger.
The feature set for the chunker output includes a
subset of the POS tagger features, but also makes
use of the local syntactic structure in the chunker in-
put in incorporating both intra-chunk features (such
as modifiers of the target word if it is the head of a
chunk, or the head if it is a modifier) and inter-chunk
features (such as surrounding chunk types when the
target word is chunk head). See Table 2 for full de-
tails.
Note that while chunk parsers are theoretically
easier to develop than full phrase-structure or tree-
bank parsers, only high-density languages such as
English and Japanese have publicly available chunk
parsers.
4.3 Dependency parsing
The third and final form of syntactic preprocessing
is dependency parsing, which represents the pinna-
cle of both robust syntactic sophistication and inac-
cessibility for any other than the highest-density lan-
guages.
The particular dependency parser we use is
RASP9 (Briscoe and Carroll, 2002), which outputs
head?modifier dependency tuples and further classi-
fies each tuple according to a total of 14 relations;
RASP also outputs the POS tag of each word to-
ken. As our features, we use both local word and
POS features, for comparability with the POS tagger
9RASP is, strictly speaking, a full syntactic parser, but we
use it in dependency parser mode
71
Feature type Positions/description Total
TAGGER 39
POS tag (?4,?3,?2,?1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) 9
Word (?4,?3,?2,?1, 1, 2, 3, 4) 8
POS bi-tag ( (?4,?1), (?4, 0), (?3,?2), (?3,?1), (?3, 0), (?2,?1), (?2, 0),
(?1, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (0, 4), (1, 2), (1, 3), (1, 4), (2, 3) ) 16
Bi-word ((?3,?2), (?3,?1), (?2,?1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 3)) 6
CHUNKER 39
Modifierhead Chunk heads when target word is modifier 1
Modifierchunk Chunk types when target word is modifier 1
Modifieeword Modifiers when target word is chunk head 1
ModifieePOS POS tag of modifiers when target word is chunk head 1
Modifieeword+POS Word + POS tag of modifiers when target word is chunk head 1
POS tag (?3,?2,?1, 0, 1, 2, 3) 7
Word (?3,?2,?1, 1, 2, 3) 6
Chunk (?4,?3,?2,?1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) 9
Chunk head (?3,?2,?1, 1, 2, 3) 6
Bi-chunk ((?2,?1), (?2, 0), (?1, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (1, 2)) 6
DEPENDENCY PARSER 39
POS tag (?2,?1, 0, 1, 2) 5
Word (?2,?1, 1, 2) 4
Conjword Words the target word coordinates with 1
ConjPOS POS of words the target word coordinates with 1
Head Head word when target word modifier in dependency relation (? 14) 14
Modifier Modifier when target word head of dependency relation (? 14) 14
Table 2: Feature types used in syntax-based DLA for the different preprocessors
and chunker, and also dependency-derived features,
namely the modifier of all dependency tuples the tar-
get word occurs as head of, and conversely, the head
of all dependency tuples the target word occurs as
modifier in, along with the dependency relation in
each case. See Table 2 for full details.
4.4 Corpora
We ran the three syntactic preprocessors over a to-
tal of three corpora, of varying size: the Brown cor-
pus (?460K tokens) and Wall Street Journal corpus
(?1.2M tokens), both derived from the Penn Tree-
bank (Marcus et al, 1993), and the written compo-
nent of the British National Corpus (?98M tokens:
Burnard (2000)). This selection is intended to model
the effects of variation in corpus size, to investigate
how well we could expect syntax-based DLA meth-
ods to perform over both smaller and larger corpora.
Note that the only corpus annotation we make use
of is sentence tokenisation, and that all preproces-
sors are run automatically over the raw corpus data.
This is in an attempt to make the methods maximally
applicable to lower-density languages where anno-
tated corpora tend not to exist but there is at least the
possibility of accessing raw text collections.
5 Ontology-based Deep Lexical
Acquisition
The final DLA method we explore is based on the
hypothesis that there is a strong correlation between
the semantic and syntactic similarity of words, a
claim which is best exemplified in the work of Levin
(1993) on diathesis alternations. In our case, we
take word similarity as given and learn the syntactic
behaviour of novel words relative to semantically-
similar words for which we know the lexical types.
We use WordNet 2.0 (Fellbaum, 1998) to determine
word similarity, and for each sense of the target
word in WordNet: (1) construct the set of ?seman-
tic neighbours? of that word sense, comprised of all
synonyms, direct hyponyms and direct hypernyms;
and (2) take a majority vote across the lexical types
of the semantic neighbours which occur in the train-
ing data. Note that this diverges from the learning
paradigm adopted for the morphology- and syntax-
based DLA methods in that we use a simple voting
strategy rather than relying on an external learner to
carry out the classification. The full set of lexical
entries for the target word is generated by taking the
union of the majority votes across all senses of the
word, such that a polysemous lexeme can potentially
give rise to multiple lexical entries. This learning
72
procedure is based on the method used by van der
Beek and Baldwin (2004) to learn Dutch countabil-
ity.
As for the suite of binary classifiers, we fall back
on the majority class lexical type as the default in
the instance that a given lexeme is not contained in
WordNet 2.0 or no classification emerges from the
set of semantic neighbours. It is important to re-
alise that WordNet-style ontologies exist only for the
highest-density languages, and that this method will
thus have very limited language applicability.
6 Evaluation
We evaluate the component methods over the 5,675
open-class lexical items of the ERG described in
Section 2.1 using 10-fold stratified cross-validation.
In each case, we calculate the type precision (the
proportion of correct hypothesised lexical entries)
and type recall (the proportion of gold-standard lex-
ical entries for which we get a correct hit), which
we roll together into the type F-score (the harmonic
mean of the two) relative to the gold-standard ERG
lexicon. We also measure the token accuracy for
the lexicon derived from each method, relative to
the Redwoods treebank of Verbmobil data associ-
ated with the ERG (see Section 2.1).10 The token ac-
curacy represents a weighted version of type preci-
sion, relative to the distribution of each lexical item
in a representative text sample, and provides a crude
approximation of the impact of each DLA method
on parser coverage. That is, it gives more credit for a
method having correctly hypothesised a commonly-
occurring lexical item than a low-frequency lexical
item, and no credit for having correctly identified a
lexical item not occurring in the corpus.
The overall results are presented in Figure 1,
which are then broken down into the four open
word classes in Figures 2?5. The baseline method
(Base) in each case is a simple majority-class classi-
fier, which generates a unique lexical item for each
lexeme pre-identified as belonging to a given word
class of the following type:
Word class Majority-class lexical type
Noun n intr le
Verb v np trans le
Adjective adj intrans le
Adverb adv int vp le
10Note that the token accuracy is calculated only over the
open-class lexical items, not the full ERG lexicon.
In each graph, we present the type F-score and to-
ken accuracy for each method, and mark the best-
performing method in terms of each of these evalua-
tion measures with a star (?). The results for syntax-
based DLA (SPOS, SCHUNK and SPARSE) are based
on the BNC in each case. We return to investigate
the impact of corpus size on the performance of the
syntax-based methods below.
Looking first at the combined results over all lex-
ical types (Figure 1), the most successful method
in terms of type F-score is syntax-based DLA,
with chunker-based preprocessing marginally out-
performing tagger- and parser-based preprocessing
(type F-score = 0.641). The most successful method
in terms of token accuracy is ontology-based DLA
(token accuracy = 0.544).
The figures for token accuracy require some qual-
ification: ontology-based DLA tends to be liberal
in its generation of lexical items, giving rise to
over 20% more lexical items than the other meth-
ods (7,307 vs. 5-6000 for the other methods) and
proportionately low type precision. This correlates
with an inherent advantage in terms of token ac-
curacy, which we have no way of balancing up in
our token-based evaluation, as the treebank data of-
fers no insight into the true worth of false nega-
tive lexical items (i.e. have no way of distinguishing
between unobserved lexical items which are plain
wrong from those which are intuitively correct and
could be expected to occur in alternate sets of tree-
bank data). We leave investigation of the impact of
these extra lexical items on the overall parser perfor-
mance (in terms of chart complexity and parse se-
lection) as an item for future research.
The morphology-based DLA methods were
around baseline performance overall, with charac-
ter n-grams marginally more successful than deriva-
tional morphology in terms of both type F-score and
token accuracy.
Turning next to the results for the proposed meth-
ods over nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs (Fig-
ures 2?5, respectively), we observe some interest-
ing effects. First, morphology-based DLA hovers
around baseline performance for all word classes
except adjectives, where character n-grams produce
the highest F-score of all methods, and nouns, where
derivational morphology seems to aid DLA slightly
(providing weak support for our original hypothesis
in Section 3.2 relating to deverbal nouns and affixa-
tion).
73
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
OntBase  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Typ
e F-s
core
Tok
en a
ccur
acy
Method S    PARSES    CHUNKS    POSM    DERIVM    CHAR
* *
Figure 1: Results for the proposed deep lexical ac-
quisition methods over ALL lexical types
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
OntBase  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Tok
en a
ccur
acy
MethodM    DERIVM    CHAR S    PARSES    CHUNKS    POS
* *
Typ
e F-s
core
Figure 2: Results for the proposed deep lexical ac-
quisition methods over NOUN lexical types
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
OntBase  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Tok
en a
ccur
acy
MethodM    DERIVM    CHAR S    PARSES    CHUNKS    POS
*
*
Typ
e F-s
core
Figure 3: Results for the proposed deep lexical ac-
quisition methods over VERB lexical types
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
OntBase  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Tok
en a
ccur
acy
MethodM    DERIVM    CHAR S    PARSES    CHUNKS    POS
**
Typ
e F-s
core
Figure 4: Results for the proposed deep lexical ac-
quisition methods over ADJECTIVE lexical types
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
OntBase  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Tok
en a
ccur
acy
MethodM    DERIVM    CHAR S    PARSES    CHUNKS    POS
*
*Type
 F-sc
ore
Figure 5: Results for the proposed deep lexical ac-
quisition methods over ADVERB lexical types
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
BNCWSJBrown  0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
Typ
e F-
sco
re (
  )
Tok
en a
ccu
rac
y (  
)
Corpus
Noun
Verb
Adj
Adv
o
erb
Adj
F-sc
ore
Tok
en a
cc
Figure 6: Results for the syntax-based deep lexical
acquisition methods over corpora of differing size
Note: Base = baseline, MCHAR = morphology-based DLA with character n-grams, MDERIV = derivational
morphology-based DLA, SPOS = syntax-based DLA with POS tagging, SCHUNK = syntax-based DLA with
chunking, SPARSE = syntax-based DLA with dependency parsing, and Ont = ontology-based DLA
74
Syntax-based DLA leads to the highest type F-
score for nouns, verbs and adverbs, and the highest
token accuracy for adjectives and adverbs. The dif-
ferential in results between syntax-based DLA and
the other methods is particularly striking for ad-
verbs, with a maximum type F-score of 0.544 (for
chunker-based preprocessing) and token accuracy of
0.340 (for tagger-based preprocessing), as compared
to baseline figures of 0.471 and 0.017 respectively.
There is relatively little separating the three styles
of preprocessing in syntax-based DLA, although
chunker-based preprocessing tends to have a slight
edge in terms of type F-score, and tagger-based pre-
processing generally produces the highest token ac-
curacy.11 This suggests that access to a POS tagger
for a given language is sufficient to make syntax-
based DLA work, and that syntax-based DLA thus
has moderately high applicability across languages
of different densities.
Ontology-based DLA is below baseline in terms
of type F-score for all word classes, but results in
the highest token accuracy of all methods for nouns
and verbs (although this finding must be taken with
a grain of salt, as noted above).
Another noteworthy feature of Figures 2?5 is the
huge variation in absolute performance across the
word classes: adjectives are very predictable, with a
majority class-based baseline type F-score of 0.832
and token accuracy of 0.847; adverbs, on the other
hand, are similar to verbs and nouns in terms of their
baseline type F-score (at 0.471), but the adverbs that
occur commonly in corpus data appear to belong to
less-populated lexical types (as seen in the baseline
token accuracy of a miniscule 0.017). Nouns appear
the hardest to learn in terms of the relative incre-
ment in token accuracy over the baseline. Verbs are
extremely difficult to get right at the type level, but it
appears that ontology-based DLA is highly adept at
getting the commonly-occurring lexical items right.
To summarise these findings, adverbs seem to
benefit the most from syntax-based DLA. Adjec-
tives, on the other hand, can be learned most effec-
tively from simple character n-grams, i.e. similarly-
spelled adjectives tend to have similar syntax, a
somewhat surprising finding. Nouns are surpris-
ingly hard to learn, but seem to benefit to some de-
gree from corpus data and also ontological similar-
ity. Lastly, verbs pose a challenge to all methods
11This trend was observed across all three corpora, although
we do no present the full results here.
at the type level, but ontology-based DLA seems to
be able to correctly predict the commonly-occurring
lexical entries.
Finally, we examine the impact of corpus size on
the performance of syntax-based DLA with tagger-
based preprocessing.12 In Figure 6, we examine
the relative change in type F-score and token ac-
curacy across the four word classes as we increase
the corpus size (from 0.5m words to 1m and fi-
nally 100m words, in the form of the Brown cor-
pus, WSJ corpus and BNC, respectively). For verbs
and adjectives, there is almost no change in either
type F-score or token accuracy when we increase
the corpus size, whereas for nouns, the token ac-
curacy actually drops slightly. For adverbs, on the
other hand, the token accuracy jumps up from 0.020
to 0.381 when we increase the corpus size from
1m words to 100m words, while the type F-score
rises only slightly. It thus seems to be the case that
large corpora have a considerable impact on DLA
for commonly-occurring adverbs, but that for the
remaining word classes, it makes little difference
whether we have 0.5m or 100m words. This can
be interpreted either as evidence that modestly-sized
corpora are good enough to perform syntax-based
DLA over (which would be excellent news for low-
density languages!), or alternatively that for the sim-
plistic syntax-based DLA methods proposed here,
more corpus data is not the solution to achieving
higher performance.
Returning to our original question of the ?bang
for the buck? associated with individual LRs, there
seems to be no simple answer: simple word lists are
useful in learning the syntax of adjectives in particu-
lar, but offer little in terms of learning the other three
word classes. Morphological lexicons with deriva-
tional information are moderately advantageous in
learning the syntax of nouns but little else. A POS
tagger seems sufficient to carry out syntax-based
DLA, and the word class which benefits the most
from larger amounts of corpus data is adverbs, other-
wise the proposed syntax-based DLA methods don?t
seem to benefit from larger-sized corpora. Ontolo-
gies have the greatest impact on verbs and, to a lesser
degree, nouns. Ultimately, this seems to lend weight
to a ?horses for courses?, or perhaps ?resources for
courses? approach to DLA.
12The results for chunker- and parser-based preprocessing are
almost identical, and this omitted from the paper.
75
7 Conclusion
We have proposed three basic paradigms for deep
lexical acquisition, based on morphological, syntac-
tic and ontological language resources, and demon-
strated the effectiveness of each strategy at learn-
ing lexical items for the lexicon of a precision En-
glish grammar. We discovered surprising variation
in the results for the different DLA methods, with
each learning method performing particularly well
for at least one basic word class, but the best overall
methods being syntax- and ontology-based DLA.
The results presented in this paper are based on
one particular language (English) and a very spe-
cific style of DLR (a precision grammar, namely the
English Resource Grammar), so some caution must
be exercised in extrapolating the results too liberally
over new languages/DLA tasks. In future research,
we are interested in carrying out experiments over
other languages and alternate DLRs to determine
how well these results generalise and formulate al-
ternate strategies for DLA.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported in part by NTT
Communication Science Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and
Telephone Corporation. We would like to thank the members
of the University of Melbourne LT group and the three anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable input on this research.
References
Timothy Baldwin and Francis Bond. 2003a. Learning the
countability of English nouns from corpus data. In Proc. of
the 41st Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 463?70, Sapporo,
Japan.
Timothy Baldwin and Francis Bond. 2003b. A plethora of
methods for learning English countability. In Proc. of the
2003 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP 2003), pages 73?80, Sapporo,
Japan.
Ted Briscoe and John Carroll. 2002. Robust accurate statistical
annotation of general text. In Proc. of the 3rd International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2002), pages 1499?1504, Las Palmas, Canary Islands.
Lou Burnard. 2000. User Reference Guide for the British Na-
tional Corpus. Technical report, Oxford University Comput-
ing Services.
John Carroll and Alex Fang. 2004. The automatic acquisi-
tion of verb subcategorisations and their impact on the per-
formance of an HPSG parser. In Proc. of the First Inter-
national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(IJCNLP-04), pages 107?14, Sanya City, China.
Ann Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2000. An open-source
grammar development environment and broad-coverage En-
glish grammar using HPSG. In Proc. of the 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2000), Athens, Greece.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Ko van der Sloot, and An-
tal van den Bosch. 2003. TiMBL: Tilburg Memory Based
Learner, version 5.0, Reference Guide. ILK Technical Re-
port 03-10.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, USA.
Dan Flickinger. 2002. On building a more efficient grammar by
exploiting types. In Stephan Oepen, Dan Flickinger, Jun?ichi
Tsujii, and Hans Uszkoreit, editors, Collaborative Language
Engineering. CSLI Publications, Stanford, USA.
Frederik Fouvry. 2003. Robust Processing for Constraint-
based Grammar Formalisms. Ph.D. thesis, University of Es-
sex.
Nizar Habash and Bonnie Dorr. 2003. CATVAR: A database
of categorial variations for English. In Proc. of the Ninth
Machine Translation Summit (MT Summit IX), pages 471?4,
New Orleans, USA.
Eric Joanis and Suzanne Stevenson. 2003. A general feature
space for automatic verb classification. In Proc. of the 10th
Conference of the EACL (EACL 2003), pages 163?70, Bu-
dapest, Hungary.
Anna Korhonen. 2002. Subcategorization Acquisition. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Cambridge.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alterations. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, Chicago, USA.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated corpus
of English: the Penn treebank. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):313?30.
Guido Minnen, John Carroll, and Darren Pearce. 2000. Ro-
bust, applied morphological generation. In Proceedings of
the first International Natural Language Genration Confer-
ence, Mitzpe Ramon, Israel.
Grace Ngai and Radu Florian. 2001. Transformation-based
learning in the fast lane. In Proc. of the 2nd Annual Meeting
of the North American Chapter of Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (NAACL2001), pages 40?7, Pittsburgh,
USA.
Stephan Oepen, Dan Flickinger, Kristina Toutanova, and
Christoper D. Manning. 2002. LinGO Redwoods: A rich
and dynamic treebank for HPSG. In Proc. of The First Work-
shop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT2002), So-
zopol, Bulgaria.
Antonio Sanfilippo and Victor Poznan?ski. 1992. The acquisi-
tion of lexical knowledge from combined machine-readable
dictionary sources. In Proc. of the 3rd Conference on Ap-
plied Natural Language Processing (ANLP), pages 80?7,
Trento, Italy.
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang and Sabine Buchholz. 2000. Introduc-
tion to the CoNLL-2000 shared task: Chunking. In Proc.
of the 4th Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL-2000), Lisbon, Portugal.
Leonoor van der Beek and Timothy Baldwin. 2004. Crosslin-
gual countability classification with EuroWordNet. In Pa-
pers from the 14th Meeting of Computational Linguistics in
the Netherlands, pages 141?55, Antwerp, Belgium. Antwerp
Papers in Linguistics.
76
