Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 159?162,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
Competitive Grouping in Integrated Phrase Segmentation
and Alignment Model
Ying Zhang Stephan Vogel
Language Technologies Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
{joy+,vogel+}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
This article describes the competitive
grouping algorithm at the core of our Inte-
grated Segmentation and Alignment (ISA)
model. ISA extracts phrase pairs from a
bilingual corpus without requiring the pre-
calculated word alignment as many other
phrase alignment models do. Experiments
conducted within the WPT-05 shared task
on statistical machine translation demon-
strate the simplicity and effectiveness of
this approach.
1 Introduction
In recent years, various phrase translation ap-
proaches (Marcu and Wong, 2002; Och et al, 1999;
Koehn et al, 2003) have been shown to outper-
form word-to-word translation models (Brown et al,
1993). Many of these phrase alignment strategies
rely on the pre-calculated word alignment and use
different heuristics to extract the phrase pairs from
the Viterbi word alignment path. The Integrated
Segmentation and Alignment (ISA) model (Zhang
et al, 2003) does not require such word alignment.
ISA segments the sentence into phrases and finds
their alignment simultaneously. ISA is simple and
fast. Translation experiments have shown compara-
ble performance to other phrase alignment strategies
which require complicated statistical model training.
In this paper, we describe the key idea behind this
model and connect it with the competitive linking al-
gorithm (Melamed, 1997) which was developed for
word-to-word alignment.
2 Translation Likelihood as a Statistical
Test
Given a bilingual corpus of language pair F (For-
eign, source language) and E (English, target lan-
guage), if we know the word alignment for each sen-
tence pair we can calculate the co-occurrence fre-
quency for each source/target word pair type C(f, e)
and the marginal frequency C(f) = ?e C(f, e) and
C(e) = ?f C(f, e). We can apply various sta-
tistical tests (Manning and Schu?tze, 1999) to mea-
sure how likely is the association between f and
e, in other words how likely they are mutual trans-
lations. In the following sections, we will use ?2
statistics to measure the the mutual translation like-
lihood (Church and Hanks, 1990).
3 The Core of the Integrated Phrase
Segmentation and Alignment
The competitive linking algorithm (CLA)
(Melamed, 1997) is a greedy word alignment
algorithm. It was designed to overcome the problem
of indirect associations using a simple heuristic:
whenever several word tokens fi in one half of the
bilingual corpus co-occur with a particular word to-
ken e in the other half of the corpus, the word that is
most likely to be e?s translation is the one for which
the likelihood L(f, e) of translational equivalence
is highest. The simplicity of this algorithm depends
on a one-to-one alignment assumption. Each word
translates to at most one other word. Thus when
one pair {f, e} is ?linked?, neither f nor e can be
aligned with any other words. This assumption
renders CLA unusable in phrase level alignment.
159
We propose an extension, the competitive grouping,
as the core component in the ISA model.
3.1 Competitive Grouping Algorithm (CGA)
The key modification to the competitive linking al-
gorithm is to make it less greedy. When a word pair
is found to be the winner of the competition, we al-
low it to invite its neighbors to join the ?winner?s
club? and group them together as an aligned phrase
pair. The one-to-one assumption is thus discarded
in CGA. In addition, we introduce the locality as-
sumption for phrase alignment. Locality states that a
source phrase of adjacent words can only be aligned
to a target phrase composed of adjacent words. This
is not true of most language pairs in cases such as
the relative clause, passive tense, and prepositional
clause, etc.; however this assumption renders the
problem tractable. Here is a description of CGA:
For a sentence pair {f , e}, represent the word pair
statistics for each word pair {f, e} in a two dimen-
sional matrix LI?J , where L(i, j) = ?2(fi, ej) in
our implementation. 1
Figure 1: Expanding the current phrase pair
Denote an aligned phrase pair {f? , e?} as
a tuple [istart, iend, jstart, jend] where f? is
fistart , fistart+1 , . . . , fiend and similarly for e?.
1. Find i? and j? such that L(i?, j?) is the highest.
Create a seed phrase pair [i?, i?, j?, j?] which is
simply the word pair {fi? , ej?} itself.
2. Expand the current phrase pair
[istart, iend, jstart, jend] to the neighboring
territory to include adjacent source and target
words in the phrase alignment group. There
1?2 statistics were found to be more discriminative in our
experiments than other symmetric word association measures,
such as the averaged mutual information, ?2 statistics and Dice-
coefficient.
are 8 ways to group new words into the phrase
pair. For example, one can expand to the
north by including an additional source word
fistart?1 to be aligned with all the target words
in the current group; or one can expand to the
northeast by including fistart?1 and ejend+1
(Figure 1).
Two criteria have to be satisfied for each expan-
sion:
(a) If a new source word fi? is to be grouped,
maxjstart?j?jend L(i?, j) should be no
smaller than max1?j?J L(i?, j). Since
CGA is a greedy algorithm as described
below, this is to guarantee that fi? will not
?regret? the decision of joining the phrase
pair because it does not have other ?better?
target words to be aligned with. Similar
constraint is applied if a new target word
ej? is to be grouped.
(b) The highest value in the newly-expanded
area needs to be ?similar? to the seed value
L(i?, j?).
Expand the current phrase pair to the largest ex-
tend possible as long as both criteria are satis-
fied.
3. The locality assumption means that the aligned
phrase cannot be aligned again. Therefore, all
the source and target words in the phrase pair
are marked as ?invalid? and will be skipped in
the following steps.
4. If there is another valid pair {fi, ej}, then re-
peat from Step 1.
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show a simple example
of applying CGA on the sentence pair {je de?clare
reprise la session/i declare resumed the session}.
Figure 2: Seed pair {je / i}, no expansion allowed
160
Figure 3: Seed pair {session/session}, expanded to
{la session/the session}
3.2 Exploring all possible groupings
The similarity criterion 2-(b) described previously
is used to control the granularity of phrase pairs.
In cases where the pairs {f1f2, e1e2}, {f1, e1} and
{f2, e2} are all valid translations pairs, similar-
ity is used to control whether we want to align
{f1f2, e1e2} as one phrase pair or two shorter ones.
The granularity of the phrase pairs is hard to op-
timize especially when the test data is unknown. On
the one hand, we prefer long phrases since inter-
action among the words in the phrase, for example
word sense, morphology and local reordering could
be encapsulated. On the other hand, long phrase
pairs are less likely to occur in the test data than the
shorter ones and may lead to low coverage. To have
both long and short phrases in the alignment, we ap-
ply a range of similarity thresholds for each of the
expansion operations. By applying a low similarity
threshold, the expanded phrase pairs tend to be large,
while a higher similarity threshold results in shorter
phrase pairs. As described above, CGA is a greedy
algorithm and the expansion of the seed pair restricts
the possible alignments for the rest of the sentence.
Figure 4 shows an example as we explore all the pos-
sible grouping choices in a depth-first search. In the
end, all unique phrase pairs along the path traveled
are output as phrase translation candidates for the
current sentence pair.
3.3 Phrase translation probabilities
Each aligned phrase pair {f? , e?} is assigned a likeli-
hood score L(f? , e?), defined as:
?
i maxj logL(fi, ej) +
?
j maxi logL(fi, ej)
|f? |+ |e?|
where i ranges over all words in f? and similarly j in
e?.
Given the collected phrase pairs and their likeli-
hood, we estimate the phrase translation probability
Figure 4: Depth-first itinerary of all possible group-
ing choices.
by their weighted frequency:
P (f? |e?) = count(f? , e?) ? L(f? , e?)?
f? count(f? , e?) ? L(f? , e?)
No smoothing is applied to the probabilities.
4 Learning co-occurrence information
In most cases, word alignment information is not
given and is treated as a hidden parameter in the
training process. We initialize a word pair co-
occurrence frequency by assuming uniform align-
ment for each sentence pair, i.e. for sentence pair
(f , e) where f has I words and e has J words, each
word pair {f, e} is considered to be aligned with fre-
quency 1I?J . These co-occurrence frequencies will
be accumulated over the whole corpus to calculate
the initial L(f, e). Then we iterate the ISA model:
1. Apply the competitive grouping algorithm to
each sentence pair to find all possible phrase
pairs.
2. For each identified phrase pair {f? , e?}, increase
the co-occurrence counts for all word pairs in-
side {f? , e?} with weight 1|f? |?|e?| .
3. Calculate L(f, e) again and goto Step 1 for sev-
eral iterations.
5 Experiments
We participated the shared task in the WPT05 work-
shop2 and applied ISA to all four language pairs
2http://www.statmt.org/wpt05/mt-shared-task/
161
(French-English, Finnish-English, German-English
and Spanish-English). Table 1 shows the n-gram
coverage of the dev-test set. French and Spanish
data are better covered by the training data com-
pared to the German and Finnish sets. Since our
phrase alignment is constrained by the locality as-
sumption and we can only extract phrase pairs of
adjacent words, lower n-gram coverage will result in
lower translation scores. We used the training data
Dev-test DE ES FI FR
N=1 99.2 99.6 98.2 99.8
N=2 88.2 93.3 73.0 94.7
N=3 59.4 71.7 38.2 76.0
N=4 30.0 42.9 17.0 50.6
N=5 13.0 21.7 6.8 29.8
N=16 (8) (65) (1) (101)
N=19 (1) (23) (34)
N=23 (1) (1)
Table 1: Percentage of dev-test n-grams covered by
the training data. Numbers in parenthesis are the
actual counts of n-gram tokens in the dev-test data.
and the language model as provided and manually
tuned the parameters of the Pharaoh decoder3 to op-
timize BLEU scores. Table 2 shows the translation
results on the dev-test and the test set of WPT05.
The BLEU scores appear comparable to those of
other state-of-the-art phrase alignment systems, in
spite of the simplicity of the ISA model and ease of
training.
DE ES FI FR
Dev-test 18.63 26.20 12.88 26.20
Test 18.93 26.14 12.66 26.71
Table 2: BLEU scores of ISA in WPT05
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced the competitive group-
ing algorithm which is at the core of the ISA phrase
alignment model. As an extension to the competitive
linking algorithm which is used for word-to-word
alignment, CGA overcomes the assumption of one-
to-one mapping and makes it possible to align phrase
3http://www.isi.edu/licensed-sw/pharaoh/
pairs. Despite its simplicity, the ISA model has
achieved competitive translation results. We plan to
release ISA toolkit4 to the community in the near
future.
References
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathemat-
ics of statistical machine translation: parameter esti-
mation. Comput. Linguist., 19(2):263?311.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicogra-
phy. Comput. Linguist., 16(1):22?29.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of the Human Language Technology and North
American Association for Computational Linguistics
Conference (HLT/NAACL), Edomonton, Canada, May
27-June 1.
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Schu?tze. 1999.
Foundations of statistical natural language process-
ing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A phrase-based,
joint probability model for statistical machine transla-
tion. In Proc. of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing, Philadephia, PA,
July 6-7.
I. Dan Melamed. 1997. A word-to-word model of trans-
lational equivalence. In Proceedings of the 8-th con-
ference on EACL, pages 490?497, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Franz Josef Och, Christoph Tillmann, and Hermann Ney.
1999. Improved alignment models for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and Very Large Corpora, pages 20?28, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, June.
Ying Zhang, Stephan Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2003. In-
tegrated phrase segmentation and alignment algorithm
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
NLP-KE?03, Beijing, China, October.
4http://projectile.is.cs.cmu.edu/research/public/isa/index.htm
162
