Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine Translation
and/or Summarization, pages 65?72, Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
METEOR: An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments 
 
 
Satanjeev Banerjee Alon Lavie 
Language Technologies Institute Language Technologies Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
banerjee+@cs.cmu.edu alavie@cs.cmu.edu 
Abstract 
We describe METEOR, an automatic 
metric for machine translation evaluation 
that is based on a generalized concept of 
unigram matching between the machine-
produced translation and human-produced 
reference translations. Unigrams can be 
matched based on their surface forms, 
stemmed forms, and meanings; further-
more, METEOR can be easily extended to 
include more advanced matching strate-
gies.  Once all generalized unigram 
matches between the two strings have 
been found, METEOR computes a score 
for this matching using a combination of 
unigram-precision, unigram-recall, and a 
measure of fragmentation that is designed 
to directly capture how well-ordered the 
matched words in the machine translation 
are in relation to the reference.  We 
evaluate METEOR by measuring the cor-
relation between the metric scores and 
human judgments of translation quality.  
We compute the Pearson R correlation 
value between its scores and human qual-
ity assessments of the LDC TIDES 2003 
Arabic-to-English and Chinese-to-English 
datasets.  We perform segment-by-
segment correlation, and show that 
METEOR gets an R correlation value of 
0.347 on the Arabic data and 0.331 on the 
Chinese data.  This is shown to be an im-
provement on using simply unigram-
precision, unigram-recall and their har-
monic F1 combination. We also perform 
experiments to show the relative contribu-
tions of the various mapping modules. 
 
1 Introduction 
Automatic Metrics for machine translation (MT) 
evaluation have been receiving significant atten-
tion in the past two years, since IBM's BLEU met-
ric was proposed and made available (Papineni et 
al 2002).  BLEU and the closely related NIST met-
ric (Doddington, 2002) have been extensively used 
for comparative evaluation of the various MT sys-
tems developed under the DARPA TIDES research 
program, as well as by other MT researchers.  The 
utility and attractiveness of automatic metrics for 
MT evaluation has consequently been widely rec-
ognized by the MT community.  Evaluating an MT 
system using such automatic metrics is much 
faster, easier and cheaper compared to human 
evaluations, which require trained bilingual evalua-
tors.  In addition to their utility for comparing the 
performance of different systems on a common 
translation task, automatic metrics can be applied 
on a frequent and ongoing basis during system de-
velopment, in order to guide the development of 
the system based on concrete performance im-
provements. 
Evaluation of Machine Translation has tradi-
tionally been performed by humans.  While the 
main criteria that should be taken into account in 
assessing the quality of MT output are fairly intui-
tive and well established, the overall task of MT 
evaluation is both complex and task dependent.  
MT evaluation has consequently been an area of 
significant research in itself over the years.  A wide 
range of assessment measures have been proposed, 
not all of which are easily quantifiable. Recently 
developed frameworks, such as FEMTI (King et al 
2003), are attempting to devise effective platforms 
for combining multi-faceted measures for MT 
evaluation in effective and user-adjustable ways.  
While a single one-dimensional numeric metric 
cannot hope to fully capture all aspects of MT 
65
evaluation, such metrics are still of great value and 
utility.  
In order to be both effective and useful, an 
automatic metric for MT evaluation has to satisfy 
several basic criteria.  The primary and most intui-
tive requirement is that the metric have very high 
correlation with quantified human notions of MT 
quality.  Furthermore, a good metric should be as 
sensitive as possible to differences in MT quality 
between different systems, and between different 
versions of the same system.  The metric should be 
consistent (same MT system on similar texts 
should produce similar scores), reliable (MT sys-
tems that score similarly can be trusted to perform 
similarly) and general (applicable to different MT 
tasks in a wide range of domains and scenarios).  
Needless to say, satisfying all of the above criteria 
is extremely difficult, and all of the metrics that 
have been proposed so far fall short of adequately 
addressing most if not all of these requirements.  
Nevertheless, when appropriately quantified and 
converted into concrete test measures, such re-
quirements can set an overall standard by which 
different MT evaluation metrics can be compared 
and evaluated.  
In this paper, we describe METEOR1, an auto-
matic metric for MT evaluation which we have 
been developing.  METEOR was designed to ex-
plicitly address several observed weaknesses in 
IBM's BLEU metric.   It is based on an explicit 
word-to-word matching between the MT output 
being evaluated and one or more reference transla-
tions.  Our current matching supports not only 
matching between words that are identical in the 
two strings being compared, but can also match 
words that are simple morphological variants of 
each other (i.e. they have an identical stem), and 
words that are synonyms of each other.  We envi-
sion ways in which this strict matching can be fur-
ther expanded in the future, and describe these at 
the end of the paper.  Each possible matching is 
scored based on a combination of several features.  
These currently include unigram-precision, uni-
gram-recall, and a direct measure of how out-of-
order the words of the MT output are with respect 
to the reference.   The score assigned to each indi-
vidual sentence of MT output is derived from the 
best scoring match among all matches over all ref-
erence translations.  The maximal-scoring match-
                                                           
1 METEOR: Metric for Evaluation of Translation with Explicit ORdering 
ing is then also used in order to calculate an aggre-
gate score for the MT system over the entire test 
set.  Section 2 describes the metric in detail, and 
provides a full example of the matching and scor-
ing.  
In previous work (Lavie et al, 2004), we com-
pared METEOR with IBM's BLEU metric and it?s 
derived NIST metric, using several empirical 
evaluation methods that have been proposed in the 
recent literature as concrete means to assess the 
level of correlation of automatic metrics and hu-
man judgments.  We demonstrated that METEOR 
has significantly improved correlation with human 
judgments.  Furthermore, our results demonstrated 
that recall plays a more important role than preci-
sion in obtaining high-levels of correlation with 
human judgments.  The previous analysis focused 
on correlation with human judgments at the system 
level.  In this paper, we focus our attention on im-
proving correlation between METEOR score and 
human judgments at the segment level. High-levels 
of correlation at the segment level are important 
because they are likely to yield a metric that is sen-
sitive to minor differences between systems and to 
minor differences between different versions of the 
same system.  Furthermore, current levels of corre-
lation at the sentence level are still rather low, of-
fering a very significant space for improvement.  
The results reported in this paper demonstrate that 
all of the individual components included within 
METEOR contribute to improved correlation with 
human judgments.  In particular, METEOR is 
shown to have statistically significant better corre-
lation compared to unigram-precision, unigram-
recall and the harmonic F1 combination of the two. 
We are currently in the process of exploring 
several further enhancements to the current 
METEOR metric, which we believe have the po-
tential to significantly further improve the sensitiv-
ity of the metric and its level of correlation with 
human judgments.  Our work on these directions is 
described in further detail in Section 4. 
 
2 The METEOR Metric 
2.1 Weaknesses in BLEU Addressed in 
METEOR 
The main principle behind IBM?s BLEU metric 
(Papineni et al 2002) is the measurement of the 
66
overlap in unigrams (single words) and higher or-
der n-grams of words, between a translation being 
evaluated and a set of one or more reference trans-
lations.  The main component of BLEU is n-gram 
precision: the proportion of the matched n-grams 
out of the total number of n-grams in the evaluated 
translation.  Precision is calculated separately for 
each n-gram order, and the precisions are com-
bined via a geometric averaging.  BLEU does not 
take recall into account directly.  Recall ? the pro-
portion of the matched n-grams out of the total 
number of n-grams in the reference translation, is 
extremely important for assessing the quality of 
MT output, as it reflects to what degree the transla-
tion covers the entire content of the translated sen-
tence.  BLEU does not use recall because the 
notion of recall is unclear when matching simulta-
neously against a set of reference translations 
(rather than a single reference).  To compensate for 
recall, BLEU uses a Brevity Penalty, which penal-
izes translations for being ?too short?.  The NIST 
metric is conceptually similar to BLEU in most 
aspects, including the weaknesses discussed below. 
BLEU and NIST suffer from several weak-
nesses, which we attempt to address explicitly in 
our proposed METEOR metric: 
The Lack of Recall:  We believe that the fixed 
brevity penalty in BLEU does not adequately com-
pensate for the lack of recall.  Our experimental 
results strongly support this claim. 
Use of Higher Order N-grams: Higher order 
N-grams are used in BLEU as an indirect measure 
of a translation?s level of grammatical well-
formedness.  We believe an explicit measure for 
the level of grammaticality (or word order) can 
better account for the importance of grammatical-
ity as a factor in the MT metric, and result in better 
correlation with human judgments of translation 
quality. 
Lack of Explicit Word-matching Between 
Translation and Reference:  N-gram counts don?t 
require an explicit word-to-word matching, but this 
can result in counting incorrect ?matches?, particu-
larly for common function words. 
Use of Geometric Averaging of N-grams: 
Geometric averaging results in a score of ?zero? 
whenever one of the component n-gram scores is 
zero.  Consequently, BLEU scores at the sentence 
(or segment) level can be meaningless.  Although 
BLEU was intended to be used only for aggregate 
counts over an entire test-set (and not at the sen-
tence level), scores at the sentence level can be 
useful indicators of the quality of the metric.  In 
experiments we conducted, a modified version of 
BLEU that uses equal-weight arithmetic averaging 
of n-gram scores was found to have better correla-
tion with human judgments. 
2.2 The METEOR Metric 
METEOR was designed to explicitly address the 
weaknesses in BLEU identified above.  It evaluates 
a translation by computing a score based on ex-
plicit word-to-word matches between the transla-
tion and a reference translation. If more than one 
reference translation is available, the given transla-
tion is scored against each reference independ-
ently, and the best score is reported. This is 
discussed in more detail later in this section.   
Given a pair of translations to be compared (a 
system translation and a reference translation), 
METEOR creates an alignment between the two 
strings. We define an alignment as a mapping be-
tween unigrams, such that every unigram in each 
string maps to zero or one unigram in the other 
string, and to no unigrams in the same string. Thus 
in a given alignment, a single unigram in one string 
cannot map to more than one unigram in the other 
string. This alignment is incrementally produced 
through a series of stages, each stage consisting of 
two distinct phases. 
In the first phase an external module lists all the 
possible unigram mappings between the two 
strings. Thus, for example, if the word ?computer? 
occurs once in the system translation and twice in 
the reference translation, the external module lists 
two possible unigram mappings, one mapping the 
occurrence of ?computer? in the system translation 
to the first occurrence of ?computer? in the refer-
ence translation, and another mapping it to the sec-
ond occurrence. Different modules map unigrams 
based on different criteria. The ?exact? module 
maps two unigrams if they are exactly the same 
(e.g. ?computers? maps to ?computers? but not 
?computer?). The ?porter stem? module maps two 
unigrams if they are the same after they are 
stemmed using the Porter stemmer (e.g.: ?com-
puters? maps to both ?computers? and to ?com-
puter?). The ?WN synonymy? module maps two 
unigrams if they are synonyms of each other.  
In the second phase of each stage, the largest 
subset of these unigram mappings is selected such 
67
that the resulting set constitutes an alignment as 
defined above (that is, each unigram must map to 
at most one unigram in the other string). If more 
than one subset constitutes an alignment, and also 
has the same cardinality as the largest set, 
METEOR selects that set that has the least number 
of unigram mapping crosses. Intuitively, if the two 
strings are typed out on two rows one above the 
other, and lines are drawn connecting unigrams 
that are mapped to each other, each line crossing is 
counted as a ?unigram mapping cross?. Formally, 
two unigram mappings (ti, rj) and (tk, rl) (where ti 
and tk are unigrams in the system translation 
mapped to unigrams rj and rl in the reference trans-
lation respectively) are said to cross if and only if 
the following formula evaluates to a negative 
number:  
(pos(ti) ? pos(tk)) * (pos(rj) ? pos(rl)) 
where pos(tx) is the numeric position of the uni-
gram tx in the system translation string, and pos(ry) 
is the numeric position of the unigram ry in the ref-
erence string. For a given alignment, every pair of 
unigram mappings is evaluated as a cross or not, 
and the alignment with the least total crosses is 
selected in this second phase. Note that these two 
phases together constitute a variation of the algo-
rithm presented in (Turian et al 2003). 
Each stage only maps unigrams that have not 
been mapped to any unigram in any of the preced-
ing stages. Thus the order in which the stages are 
run imposes different priorities on the mapping 
modules employed by the different stages. That is, 
if the first stage employs the ?exact? mapping 
module and the second stage employs the ?porter 
stem? module, METEOR is effectively preferring 
to first map two unigrams based on their surface 
forms, and performing the stemming only if the 
surface forms do not match (or if the mapping 
based on surface forms was too ?costly? in terms 
of the total number of crosses). Note that 
METEOR is flexible in terms of the number of 
stages, the actual external mapping module used 
for each stage, and the order in which the stages 
are run. By default the first stage uses the ?exact? 
mapping module, the second the ?porter stem? 
module and the third the ?WN synonymy? module.  
In section 4 we evaluate each of these configura-
tions of METEOR.  
Once all the stages have been run and a final 
alignment has been produced between the system 
translation and the reference translation, the 
METEOR score for this pair of translations is 
computed as follows.  First unigram precision (P) 
is computed as the ratio of the number of unigrams 
in the system translation that are mapped (to uni-
grams in the reference translation) to the total num-
ber of unigrams in the system translation. 
Similarly, unigram recall (R) is computed as the 
ratio of the number of unigrams in the system 
translation that are mapped (to unigrams in the ref-
erence translation) to the total number of unigrams 
in the reference translation. Next we compute 
Fmean by combining the precision and recall via a 
harmonic-mean (van Rijsbergen, 1979) that places 
most of the weight on recall.  We use a harmonic 
mean of P and 9R.  The resulting formula used is: 
PR
PRFmean
9
10
+=  
Precision, recall and Fmean are based on uni-
gram matches. To take into account longer 
matches, METEOR computes a penalty for a given 
alignment as follows. First, all the unigrams in the 
system translation that are mapped to unigrams in 
the reference translation are grouped into the few-
est possible number of chunks such that the uni-
grams in each chunk are in adjacent positions in 
the system translation, and are also mapped to uni-
grams that are in adjacent positions in the reference 
translation. Thus, the longer the n-grams, the fewer 
the chunks, and in the extreme case where the en-
tire system translation string matches the reference 
translation there is only one chunk. In the other 
extreme, if there are no bigram or longer matches, 
there are as many chunks as there are unigram 
matches. The penalty is then computed through the 
following formula: 
3
_#
#*5.0 ???
?
???
?=
matchedunigrams
chunksPenalty  
For example, if the system translation was ?the 
president spoke to the audience? and the reference 
translation was ?the president then spoke to the 
audience?, there are two chunks: ?the president? 
and ?spoke to the audience?. Observe that the pen-
alty increases as the number of chunks increases to 
a maximum of 0.5. As the number of chunks goes 
to 1, penalty decreases, and its lower bound is de-
cided by the number of unigrams matched. The 
parameters if this penalty function were deter-
mined based on some experimentation with de-
68
veopment data, but have not yet been trained to be 
optimal. 
Finally, the METEOR Score for the given 
alignment is computed as follows:  
 
)1(* PenaltyFmeanScore ?=  
 
This has the effect of reducing the Fmean by the 
maximum of 50% if there are no bigram or longer 
matches. 
For a single system translation, METEOR com-
putes the above score for each reference transla-
tion, and then reports the best score as the score for 
the translation. The overall METEOR score for a 
system is calculated based on aggregate statistics 
accumulated over the entire test set, similarly to 
the way this is done in BLEU.  We calculate ag-
gregate precision, aggregate recall, an aggregate 
penalty, and then combine them using the same 
formula used for scoring individual segments. 
3 Evaluation of the METEOR Metric 
3.1. Data 
We evaluated the METEOR metric and compared 
its performance with BLEU and NIST on the 
DARPA/TIDES 2003 Arabic-to-English and Chi-
nese-to-English MT evaluation data released 
through the LDC as a part of the workshop on In-
trinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT 
and/or Summarization, at the Annual Meeting of 
the Association of Computational Linguistics 
(2005). The Chinese data set consists of 920 sen-
tences, while the Arabic data set consists of 664 
sentences. Each sentence has four reference trans-
lations.  Furthermore, for 7 systems on the Chinese 
data and 6 on the Arabic data, every sentence 
translation has been assessed by two separate hu-
man judges and assigned an Adequacy and a Flu-
ency Score.  Each such score ranges from one to 
five (with one being the poorest grade and five the 
highest).  For this paper, we computed a Combined 
Score for each translation by averaging the ade-
quacy and fluency scores of the two judges for that 
translation.  We also computed an average System 
Score for each translation system by averaging the 
Combined Score for all the translations produced 
by that system. (Note that although we refer to 
these data sets as the ?Chinese? and the ?Arabic? 
data sets, the MT evaluation systems analyzed in 
this paper only evaluate English sentences pro-
duced by translation systems by comparing them to 
English reference sentences). 
3.2 Comparison with BLEU and NIST MT 
Evaluation Algorithms  
In this paper, we are interested in evaluating 
METEOR as a metric that can evaluate translations 
on a sentence-by-sentence basis, rather than on a 
coarse grained system-by-system basis. The stan-
dard metrics ? BLEU and NIST ? were however 
designed for system level scoring, hence comput-
ing sentence level scores using BLEU or the NIST 
evaluation mechanism is unfair to those algo-
rithms. To provide a point of comparison however, 
table 1 shows the system level correlation between 
human judgments and various MT evaluation algo-
rithms and sub components of METEOR over the 
Chinese portion of the Tides 2003 dataset. Specifi-
cally, these correlation figures were obtained as 
follows: Using each algorithm we computed one 
score per Chinese system by calculating the aggre-
gate scores produced by that algorithm for that sys-
tem. We also obtained the overall human judgment 
for each system by averaging all the human scores 
for that system?s translations. We then computed 
the Pearson correlation between these system level 
human judgments and the system level scores for 
each algorithm; these numbers are presented in 
table 1.  
 
System ID Correlation 
BLEU 0.817 
NIST 0.892 
Precision 0.752 
Recall 0.941 
F1 0.948 
Fmean 0.952 
METEOR 0.964 
 
Table 1: Comparison of human/METEOR correlation 
with BLEU and NIST/human correlations 
 
Observe that simply using Recall as the MT 
evaluation metric results in a significant improve-
ment in correlation with human judgment over 
both the BLEU and the NIST algorithms. These 
correlations further improve slightly when preci-
sion is taken into account (in the F1 measure), 
69
when the recall is weighed more heavily than pre-
cision (in the Fmean measure) and when a penalty 
is levied for fragmented matches (in the main 
METEOR measure).  
3.3 Evaluation Methodology  
As mentioned in the previous section, our main 
goal in this paper is to evaluate METEOR and its 
components on their translation-by-translation 
level correlation with human judgment. Towards 
this end, in the rest of this paper, our evaluation 
methodology is as follows: For each system, we 
compute the METEOR Score for every translation 
produced by the system, and then compute the cor-
relation between these individual scores and the 
human assessments (average of the adequacy and 
fluency scores) for the same translations. Thus we 
get a single Pearson R value for each system for 
which we have human assessments. Finally we 
average the R values of all the systems for each of 
the two language data sets to arrive at the overall 
average correlation for the Chinese dataset and the 
Arabic dataset. This number ranges between -1.0 
(completely negatively correlated) to +1.0 (com-
pletely positively correlated).  
We compare the correlation between human as-
sessments and METEOR Scores produced above 
with that between human assessments and preci-
sion, recall and Fmean scores to show the advan-
tage of the various components in the METEOR 
scoring function. Finally we run METEOR using 
different mapping modules, and compute the corre-
lation as described above for each configuration to 
show the effect of each unigram mapping mecha-
nism. 
3.4 Correlation between METEOR Scores 
and Human Assessments 
 
System ID Correlation 
ame 0.331 
ara 0.278 
arb 0.399 
ari 0.363 
arm 0.341 
arp 0.371 
Average 0.347 
 
Table 2: Correlation between METEOR Scores and 
Human Assessments for the Arabic Dataset 
We computed sentence by sentence correlation 
between METEOR Scores and human assessments 
(average of adequacy and fluency scores) for each 
translation for every system. Tables 2 and 3 show 
the Pearson R correlation values for each system, 
as well as the average correlation value per lan-
guage dataset.  
 
System ID Correlation 
E09 0.385 
E11 0.299 
E12 0.278 
E14 0.307 
E15 0.306 
E17 0.385 
E22 0.355 
Average 0.331 
 
Table 3: Correlation between METEOR Scores and 
Human Assessments for the Chinese Dataset 
3.5 Comparison with Other Metrics 
We computed translation by translation correla-
tions between human assessments and other met-
rics besides the METEOR score, namely precision, 
recall and Fmean. Tables 4 and 5 show the correla-
tions for the various scores.  
 
Metric Correlation 
Precision 0.287 
Recall 0.334 
Fmean 0.340 
METEOR 0.347 
 
Table 4: Correlations between human assessments and 
precision, recall, Fmean and METEOR Scores, aver-
aged over systems in the Arabic dataset 
 
 
Metric Correlation 
Precision 0.286 
Recall 0.320 
Fmean 0.327 
METEOR 0.331 
 
Table 5: Correlations between human assessments and 
precision, recall, Fmean and METEOR Scores, aver-
aged over systems in the Chinese dataset 
 
We observe that recall by itself correlates with 
human assessment much better than precision, and 
that combining the two using the Fmean formula 
70
described above results in further improvement. By 
penalizing the Fmean score using the chunk count 
we get some further marginal improvement in cor-
relation. 
3.6 Comparison between Different Map-
ping Modules 
To observe the effect of various unigram mapping 
modules on the correlation between the METEOR 
score and human assessments, we ran METEOR 
with different sequences of stages with different 
mapping modules in them. In the first experiment 
we ran METEOR with only one stage that used the 
?exact? mapping module. This module matches 
unigrams only if their surface forms match. (This 
module does not match unigrams that belong to a 
list of ?stop words? that consist mainly of function 
words). In the second experiment we ran 
METEOR with two stages, the first using the ?ex-
act? mapping module, and the second the ?Porter? 
mapping module. The Porter mapping module 
matches two unigrams to each other if they are 
identical after being passed through the Porter 
stemmer. In the third experiment we replaced the 
Porter mapping module with the WN-Stem map-
ping module. This module maps two unigrams to 
each other if they share the same base form in 
WordNet. This can be thought of as a different 
kind of stemmer ? the difference from the Porter 
stemmer is that the word stems are actual words 
when stemmed through WordNet in this manner. 
In the last experiment we ran METEOR with three 
stages, the first two using the exact and the Porter 
modules, and the third the WN-Synonymy map-
ping module.  This module maps two unigrams 
together if at least one sense of each word belongs 
to the same synset in WordNet. Intuitively, this 
implies that at least one sense of each of the two 
words represent the same concept. This can be 
thought of as a poor-man?s synonymy detection 
algorithm that does not disambiguate the words 
being tested for synonymy. Note that the 
METEOR scores used to compute correlations in 
the other tables (1 through 4) used exactly this se-
quence of stages.  
Tables 6 and 7 show the correlations between 
METEOR scores produced in each of these ex-
periments and human assessments for both the 
Arabic and the Chinese datasets. On both data sets, 
adding either stemming modules to simply using 
the exact matching improves correlations. Some 
further improvement in correlation is produced by 
adding the synonymy module.  
 
Mapping module sequence 
used (Arabic) 
Correlation 
Exact 0.312 
Exact, Porter 0.329 
Exact, WN-Stem 0.330 
Exact, Porter, WN-Synonym 0.347 
 
Table 6: Comparing correlations produced by different 
module stages on the Arabic dataset. 
 
Mapping module sequence 
used (Chinese) 
Correlation 
Exact 0.293 
Exact, Porter 0.318 
Exact, WN-Stem 0.312 
Exact, Porter, WN-Synonym 0.331 
 
Table 7: Comparing correlations produced by different 
module stages, on the Chinese dataset 
3.7 Correlation using Normalized Human 
Assessment Scores 
One problem with conducting correlation ex-
periments with human assessment scores at the 
sentence level is that the human scores are noisy ? 
that is, the levels of agreement between human 
judges on the actual sentence level assessment 
scores is not extremely high.  To partially address 
this issue, the human assessment scores were nor-
malized by a group at the MITRE Corporation.  To 
see the effect of this noise on the correlation, we 
computed the correlation between the METEOR 
Score (computed using the stages used in the 4th 
experiment in section 7 above) and both the raw 
human assessments as well as the normalized hu-
man assessments.  
 
 Arabic Dataset 
Chinese 
Dataset 
Raw human as-
sessments 0.347 0.331 
Normalized hu-
man assessments 0.403 0.365 
 
Table 8: Comparing correlations between METEOR 
Scores and both raw and normalized human assessments 
 
71
Table 8 shows that indeed METEOR Scores cor-
relate better with normalized human assessments. 
In other words, the noise in the human assessments 
hurts the correlations between automatic scores 
and human assessments. 
4 Future Work 
The METEOR metric we described and evaluated 
in this paper, while already demonstrating great 
promise, is still relatively simple and na?ve.  We 
are in the process of enhancing the metric and our 
experimentation in several directions: 
Train the Penalty and Score Formulas on 
Data: The formulas for Penalty and METEOR 
score were manually crafted based on empirical 
tests on a separate set of development data. How-
ever, we plan to optimize the formulas by training 
them on a separate data set, and choosing that for-
mula that best correlates with human assessments 
on the training data.  
Use Semantic Relatedness to Map Unigrams:   
So far we have experimented with exact mapping, 
stemmed mapping and synonymy mapping be-
tween unigrams. Our next step is to experiment 
with different measures of semantic relatedness to 
match unigrams that have a related meaning, but 
are not quite synonyms of each other.  
More Effective Use of Multiple Reference 
Translations:  Our current metric uses multiple 
reference translations in a weak way: we compare 
the translation with each reference separately and 
select the reference with the best match.  This was 
necessary in order to incorporate recall in our met-
ric, which we have shown to be highly advanta-
geous.  As our matching approach improves, the 
need for multiple references for the metric may in 
fact diminish.  Nevertheless, we are exploring 
ways in which to improve our matching against 
multiple references.  Recent work by (Pang et al 
2003) provides the mechanism for producing se-
mantically meaningful additional ?synthetic? refer-
ences from a small set of real references.  We plan 
to explore whether using such synthetic references 
can improve the performance of our metric. 
Weigh Matches Produced by Different Mod-
ules Differently: Our current multi-stage approach 
prefers metric imposes a priority on the different 
matching modules. However, once all the stages 
have been run, unigrams mapped through different 
mapping modules are treated the same.  Another 
approach to treating different mappings differently 
is to apply different weights to the mappings pro-
duced by different mapping modules. Thus ?com-
puter? may match ?computer? with a score of 1, 
?computers? with a score of 0.8 and ?workstation? 
with a score of 0.3. As future work we plan to de-
velop a version of METEOR that uses such 
weighting schemes. 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge Kenji Sagae and Shyamsundar 
Jayaraman for their work on the METEOR system. 
We also wish to thank John Henderson and Wil-
liam Morgan from MITRE for providing us with 
the normalized human judgment scores used for 
this work. 
References  
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of 
Machine Translation Quality using N-gram Co-
occurrence Statistics.  In Proceedings of 2nd Human 
Language Technologies Conference (HLT-02). San 
Diego, CA. pp. 128-132.  
Margaret King, Andrei Popescu-Belis and Eduard 
Hovy. 2003.  FEMTI: Creating and Using a Frame-
work for MT Evaluation.  In Proceedings of MT 
Summit IX, New Orleans, LA. Sept. 2003. pp. 224-
231. 
Alon Lavie, Kenji Sagae and Shyamsundar Jayaraman, 
2004.  The Significance of Recall in Automatic Met-
rics for MT Evaluation.  In Proceedings of AMTA-
2004, Washington DC.  September 2004. 
Bo Pang, Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2003.  Syn-
tax-based Alignment of Multiple Translations: Ex-
tracting Paraphrases and Generating New 
Sentences. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003.  
Edmonton, Canada. May 2003. 
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002.  BLEU: a Method for Automatic 
Evaluation of Machine Translation.  In Proceedings 
of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL-02).  Philadelphia, 
PA. July 2002. pp. 311-318. 
Joseph P. Turian, Luke Shen and I. Dan Melamed. 
2003.  Evaluation of Machine Translation and its 
Evaluation.  In Proceedings of MT Summit IX, New 
Orleans, LA. Sept. 2003.  pp. 386-393. 
C. van Rijsbergen. 1979.  Information Retrieval.  But-
terworths.  London, England. 2nd Edition. 
72
