Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 155?158,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
First Steps towards Multi-Engine Machine Translation
Andreas Eisele
Computational Linguistics
Saarland University P.O.Box 151150
D-66041 Saarbru?cken, Germany
eisele@coli.uni-saarland.de
Abstract
We motivate our contribution to the shared
MT task as a first step towards an inte-
grated architecture that combines advan-
tages of statistical and knowledge-based
approaches. Translations were generated
using the Pharaoh decoder with tables de-
rived from the provided alignments for all
four languages, and for three of them us-
ing web-based and locally installed com-
mercial systems. We then applied statis-
tical and heuristic algorithms to select the
most promising translation out of each set
of candidates obtained from a source sen-
tence. Results and possible refinements
are discussed.
1 Motivation and Long-term Perspective
?The problem of robust, efficient and reliable
speech-to-speech translation can only be cracked
by the combined muscle of deep and shallow pro-
cessing approaches.? (Wahlster, 2001) Although this
statement has been coined in the context of VerbMo-
bil, aiming at translation for direct communication,
it appears also realistic for many other translation
scenarios, where demands on robustness, coverage,
or adaptability on the input side and quality on the
output side go beyond today?s technological possi-
bilities. The increasing availability of MT engines
and the need for better quality has motivated con-
siderable efforts to combine multiple engines into
one ?super-engine? that is hopefully better than any
of its ingredients, an idea pionieered in (Frederking
and Nirenburg, 1994). So far, the larger group of
related publications has focused on the task of se-
lecting, from a set of translation candidates obtained
from different engines, one translation that looks
most promising (Tidhar and Ku?ssner, 2000; Akiba et
al., 2001; Callison-Burch and Flournoy, 2001; Ak-
iba et al, 2002; Nomoto, 2004). But also the more
challenging problem of decomposing the candidates
and re-assembling from the pieces a new sentence,
hopefully better than any of the given inputs, has
recently gained considerable attention (Rayner and
Carter, 1997; Hogan and Frederking, 1998; Banga-
lore et al, 2001; Jayaraman and Lavie, 2005).
Although statistical MT approaches currently
come out as winners in most comparative evalua-
tions, it is clear that the achievable quality of meth-
ods relying purely on lookup of fixed phrases will be
limited by the simple fact that for any given combi-
nation of topic, application scenario, language pair,
and text style there will never be sufficient amounts
of pre-existing translations to satisfy the needs of
purely data-driven approaches.
Rule-based approaches can exploit the effort that
goes into single entries in their knowledge reposi-
tories in a broader way, as these entries can be un-
folded, via rule applications, into large numbers of
possible usages. However, this increased generality
comes at significant costs for the acquisition of the
required knowledge, which needs to be encoded by
specialists in formalisms requiring extensive train-
ing to be used. In order to push the limits of today?s
MT technology, integrative approaches will have to
be developed that combine the relative advantages of
155
both paradigms and use them to compensate for their
disadvantages. In particular, it should be possible
to turn single instances of words and constructions
found in training data into internal representations
that allow them to be used in more general ways.
In a first step towards the development of inte-
grated solutions, we need to investigate the relative
strengths and weaknesses of competing systems on
the level of the target text, i.e. find out which sen-
tences and which constructions are rendered well
by which type of engine. In a second step, such
an analysis will then make it possible to take the
outcomes of various engines apart and re-assemble
from the building blocks new translations that avoid
errors made by the individual engines, i.e. to find in-
tegrated solutions that improve over the best of the
candidates they have been built from. Once this can
be done, the third and final step will involve feed
back of corrections into the individual systems, such
that differences between system behaviour can trig-
ger (potentially after manual resolution of unclear
cases) system updates and mutual learning.
In the long term, one would hope to achieve a
setup where a group of MT engines can converge
to a committee that typically disagrees only in truly
difficult cases. In such a committee, remaining dis-
sent between the members would be a symptom of
unresolved ambiguity, that would warrant the cost
of manual intervention by the fact that the system as
a whole can actually learn from the additional ev-
idence. We expect this setup to be particularly ef-
fective when existing MT engines have to be ported
to new application domains. Here, a rule-based en-
gine would be able to profit from its more generic
knowledge during the early stages of the transition
and could teach unseen correspondences of known
words and phrases to the SMT engine, whereas the
SMT system would bring in its abilities to apply
known phrase pairs in novel contexts and quickly
learn new vocabulary from examples.
2 Collecting Translation Candidates
2.1 Setting up Statistical MT
In the general picture laid out in the preceding sec-
tion, statistical MT plays an important role for sev-
eral reasons. On one hand, the construction of a rel-
atively well-performing phrase-based SMT system
from a given set of parallel corpora is no more overly
difficult, especially if ? as in the case in this shared
task ? word alignments and a decoder are provided.
Furthermore, once the second task in our chain will
have been surmounted, it will be relatively easy to
feed back building blocks of improved translations
into the phrase table, which constitutes the central
resource of the SMT system Therefore, SMT facili-
tates experiments aiming at dynamic and interactive
adaptation, the results of which should then also be
applicable to MT engines that represent knowledge
in a more condensed form.
In order to collect material for testing these ideas,
we constructed phrase tables for all four languages,
following roughly the procedure given in (Koehn,
2004) but deviating in one detail related to the treat-
ment of unaligned words at the beginning or end of
the phrases1. We used the Pharaoh decoder as de-
scribed on http://www.statmt.org/wpt05/mt-shared-
task/ after normalization of all tables to lower case.
2.2 Using Commercial Engines
As our main interest is in the integration of statis-
tical and rule-based MT, we tried to collect results
from ?conventional? MT systems that had more or
less uniform characteristics across the languages in-
volved. We could not find MT engines supporting all
four source languages, and therefore decided to drop
Finnish for this part of the experiment. We sent the
texts of the other three languages through several in-
carnations of Systran-based MT Web-services2 and
through an installation of Lernout & Hauspie Power
Translator Pro, Version 6.43.3
1We used slightly more restrictive conditions that resulted in
a 5.76% reduction of phrase table size
2The results were incomplete and different, but sufficiently
close to each other so that it did not seem worthwhile to explore
the differences systematically. Instead we ranked the services
according to errors in an informal comparison and took for each
sentence the first available translation in this order.
3After having collected or computed all translations, we ob-
served that in the case of French, both systems were quite sen-
sitive to the fact that the apostrophes were formatted as separate
tokens in the source texts (l ? homme instead of l?homme). We
therefore modified and retranslated the French texts, but did not
explore possible effects of similar transformations in the other
languages.
156
3 Heuristic Selection
3.1 Approach
We implemented two different ways to select, out
of a set of alternative translations of a given sen-
tence, one that looks most promising. The first ap-
proach is purely heuristic and is limited to the case
where more than two candidates are given. For each
candidate, we collect a set of features, consisting of
words and word n-grams (n ? {2, 3, 4}). Each of
these features is weighted by the number of can-
didates it appears in, and the candidate with the
largest feature weight per word is taken. This can
be seen as the similarity of each of the candidate
to a prototypical version composed as a weighted
mixture of the collection, or as being remotely re-
lated to a sentence-specific language model derived
from the candidates. The heuristic measure was used
to select ?favorite? from each group of competing
translations obtained from the same source sentence,
yielding a fourth set of translations for the sentences
given in DE, FR, and ES.
A particularity of the shared task is the fact that
the source sentences of the development and test sets
form a parallel corpus. Therefore, we can not only
integrate multiple translations of the same source
sentence into a hopefully better version, but we can
merge the translations of corresponding parts from
different source languages into a target form that
combines their advantages. This approach, called
triangulation in (Kay, 1997), can be motivated by
the fact that most cases of translation for dissemi-
nation involve multiple target languages; hence one
can assume that, except for the very first of them,
renderings in multiple languages exist and can be
used as input to the next step4. See also (Och and
Ney, 2001) for some related empirical evidence. In
order to obtain a first impression of the potential of
triangulation in the domain of parliament debates,
we applied the selection heuristics to a set of four
translations, one from Finnish, the other three the
result of the selections mentioned above.
3.2 Results and Discussion
The BLEU scores (Papineni et al, 2002) for 10 di-
rect translations and 4 sets of heuristic selections
4Admittedly, in typical instances of such chains, English
would appear earlier.
Source MT BLEU
Language Engine score
DE Pharaoh 20.48
L & H 13.97
Systran 14.92
heuristic selection 16.01
statistical selection 20.55
FR Pharaoh 26.29
L & H 17.82
Systran 20.29
heuristic selection 21.44
statistical selection 26.49
ES Pharaoh 26.69
L & H 17.28
Systran 17.38
heuristic selection 19.16
statistical selection 26.74
FI Pharaoh 16.76
all heuristic selection 22.83
statistical selection 25.80
Table 1: BLEU scores of various MT engines and
combinations
thereof are given in Table 1. These results show
that in each group of translations for a given source
language, the statistical engine came out best. Fur-
thermore, our heuristic approach for the selection
of the best among a small set of candidate transla-
tions did not result in an increase of the measured
BLEU score, but typically gave a score that was
only slightly better than the second best of the in-
gredients. This somewhat disappointing result can
be explained in two ways. Apparently, the selection
heuristic does not give effective estimates of trans-
lation quality for the candidates. Furthermore, the
granularity on which the choices have to bee made
is too coarse, i.e. the pieces for which the symbolic
engines do produce better translations than the SMT
engine are accompanied by too many bad choices so
that the net effect is negative.
4 Statistical Selection
The other score we used was based on probabilities
as computed by the trigram language model for En-
glish provided by the organizers of the task, in a
representation compatible with the SRI LM toolkit
157
(Stolcke, 2002). However, a correct implementa-
tion for obtaining these estimates was not available
in time, so the selections generated from the statis-
tical language model could not be used for official
submissions, but were generated and evaluated af-
ter the closing date. The results, also displayed in
Table 1, show that this approach can lead to slight
improvements of the BLEU score, which however
turn out not to be statistically sigificant in then sense
of (Zhang et al, 2004).
5 Next Steps
When we started the experiments reported here, the
hope was to find relatively simple methods to select
the best among a small set of candidate translations
and to achieve significant improvements of a hybrid
architecture over a purely statistical approach. Al-
though we could indeed measure certain improve-
ments, these are not yet big enough for a conclu-
sive ?proof of concept?. We have started a refine-
ment of our approach that can not only pick the best
among translations of complete sentences, but also
judge the quality of the building blocks from which
the translations are composed. First informal results
look very promising. Once we can replace single
phrases that appear in one translation by better alter-
natives taken from a competing candidate, chances
are good that a significant increase of the overall
translation quality can be achieved.
6 Acknowledgements
This work has been funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft. We want to thank two
anonymous reviewers for numerous pointers to rel-
evant literature, Bogdan Sacaleanu for his help with
the collection of translations from on-line MT en-
gines, as well as the organizers of the shared task for
making these interesting experiments possible.
References
Yasuhiro Akiba, Kenji Imamura, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2001. Using multiple edit distances to automatically
rank machine translation output. In Proceedings of MT
Summit VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Yasuhiro Akiba, Taro Watanabe, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2002. Using language and translation models to se-
lect the best among outputs from multiple mt systems.
In COLING.
Srinivas Bangalore, German Bordel, and Giuseppe Ric-
cardi. 2001. Computing consensus translation from
multiple machine translation systems. In ASRU, Italy.
Chris Callison-Burch and Raymond S. Flournoy. 2001.
A program for automatically selecting the best output
from multiple machine translation engines. In Proc. of
MT Summit VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Robert E. Frederking and Sergei Nirenburg. 1994. Three
heads are better than one. In ANLP, pages 95?100.
Christopher Hogan and Robert E. Frederking. 1998. An
evaluation of the multi-engine mt architecture. In Pro-
ceedings of AMTA, pages 113?123.
Shyamsundar Jayaraman and Alon Lavie. 2005. Multi-
engine machine translation guided by explicit word
matching. In Proc. of EAMT, Budapest, Hungary.
Martin Kay. 1997. The proper place of men and ma-
chines in language translation. Machine Translation,
12:3?23. First appeared as a Xerox PARC working
paper in 1980.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A beam search decoder
for phrase-based statistical machine translation mod-
els. In AMTA, pages 115?124.
Tadashi Nomoto. 2004. Multi-engine machine transla-
tion with voted language model. In Proc. of ACL.
Franz-Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2001. Statistical
multi-source translation. In Proceedings of MT Sum-
mit VIII, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, September.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of ACL,
pages 311?318.
Manny Rayner and David M. Carter. 1997. Hybrid lan-
guage processing in the spoken language translator. In
Proc. ICASSP ?97, pages 107?110, Munich, Germany.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proc. Intl. Conf. on Spoken Lan-
guage Processing.
Dan Tidhar and Uwe Ku?ssner. 2000. Learning to select
a good translation. In COLING, pages 843?849.
Wolfgang Wahlster. 2001. Robust translation of spon-
taneous speech: A multi-engine approach. In IJCAI,
pages 1484?1493. Invited Talk.
Ying Zhang, Stephan Vogel, and Alex Waibel. 2004. In-
terpreting BLEU/NIST scores: How much improve-
ment do we need to have a better system? In Proceed-
ings of LREC, Lisbon, Portugal.
158
