Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 76?83,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Reliability of Anaphoric Annotation, Reconsidered: Taking Ambiguity
into Account
Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein
University of Essex,
Language and Computation Group / Department of Computer Science
United Kingdom
Abstract
We report the results of a study of the
reliability of anaphoric annotation which
(i) involved a substantial number of naive
subjects, (ii) used Krippendorff?s ? in-
stead of K to measure agreement, as re-
cently proposed by Passonneau, and (iii)
allowed annotators to mark anaphoric ex-
pressions as ambiguous.
1 INTRODUCTION
We tackle three limitations with the current state of
the art in the annotation of anaphoric relations. The
first problem is the lack of a truly systematic study of
agreement on anaphoric annotation in the literature:
none of the studies we are aware of (Hirschman,
1998; Poesio and Vieira, 1998; Byron, 2003; Poe-
sio, 2004) is completely satisfactory, either because
only a small number of coders was involved, or
because agreement beyond chance couldn?t be as-
sessed for lack of an appropriate statistic, a situation
recently corrected by Passonneau (2004). The sec-
ond limitation, which is particularly serious when
working on dialogue, is our still limited understand-
ing of the degree of agreement on references to ab-
stract objects, as in discourse deixis (Webber, 1991;
Eckert and Strube, 2001).
The third shortcoming is a problem that affects all
types of semantic annotation. In all annotation stud-
ies we are aware of,1 the fact that an expression may
not have a unique interpretation in the context of its
1The one exception is Rosenberg and Binkowski (2004).
occurrence is viewed as a problem with the anno-
tation scheme, to be fixed by, e.g., developing suit-
ably underspecified representations, as done partic-
ularly in work on wordsense annotation (Buitelaar,
1998; Palmer et al, 2005), but also on dialogue act
tagging. Unfortunately, the underspecification solu-
tion only genuinely applies to cases of polysemy, not
homonymy (Poesio, 1996), and anaphoric ambigu-
ity is not a case of polysemy. Consider the dialogue
excerpt in (1):2 it?s not clear to us (nor was to our
annotators, as we?ll see below) whether the demon-
strative that in utterance unit 18.1 refers to the ?bad
wheel? or ?the boxcar?; as a result, annotators? judg-
ments may disagree ? but this doesn?t mean that the
annotation scheme is faulty; only that what is being
said is genuinely ambiguous.
(1) 18.1 S: ....
18.6 it turns out that the boxcar
at Elmira
18.7 has a bad wheel
18.8 and they?re .. gonna start
fixing that at midnight
18.9 but it won?t be ready until 8
19.1 M: oh what a pain in the butt
This problem is encountered with all types of anno-
tation; the view that all types of disagreement indi-
cate a problem with the annotation scheme?i.e., that
somehow the problem would disappear if only we
could find the right annotation scheme, or concen-
trate on the ?right? types of linguistic judgments?
is, in our opinion, misguided. A better approach
2This example, like most of those in the rest of the paper, is
taken from the first edition of the TRAINS corpus collected at
the University of Rochester (Gross et al, 1993). The dialogues
are available at ftp://ftp.cs.rochester.edu/pub/
papers/ai/92.tn1.trains_91_dialogues.txt.
76
is to find when annotators disagree because of in-
trinsic problems with the text, or, even better, to
develop methods to identify genuinely ambiguous
expressions?the ultimate goal of this work.
The paper is organized as follows. We first briefly
review previous work on anaphoric annotation and
on reliability indices. We then discuss our experi-
ment with anaphoric annotation, and its results. Fi-
nally, we discuss the implications of this work.
2 ANNOTATING ANAPHORA
It is not our goal at this stage to propose a new
scheme for annotating anaphora. For this study we
simply developed a coding manual for the purposes
of our experiment, broadly based on the approach
adopted in MATE (Poesio et al, 1999) and GNOME
(Poesio, 2004), but introducing new types of annota-
tion (ambiguous anaphora, and a simple form of dis-
course deixis) while simplifying other aspects (e.g.,
by not annotating bridging references).
The task of ?anaphoric annotation? discussed here
is related, although different from, the task of an-
notating ?coreference? in the sense of the so-called
MUCSS scheme for the MUC-7 initiative (Hirschman,
1998). This scheme, while often criticized, is still
widely used, and has been the basis of coreference
annotation for the ACE initiative in the past two
years. It suffers however from a number of prob-
lems (van Deemter and Kibble, 2000), chief among
which is the fact that the one semantic relation ex-
pressed by the scheme, ident, conflates a number
of relations that semanticists view as distinct: be-
sides COREFERENCE proper, there are IDENTITY
ANAPHORA, BOUND ANAPHORA, and even PRED-
ICATION. (Space prevents a fuller discussion and
exemplification of these relations here.)
The goal of the MATE and GNOME schemes (as
well of other schemes developed by Passonneau
(1997), and Byron (2003)) was to devise instructions
appropriate for the creation of resources suitable for
the theoretical study of anaphora from a linguis-
tic / psychological perspective, and, from a compu-
tational perspective, for the evaluation of anaphora
resolution and referring expressions generation. The
goal is to annotate the discourse model resulting
from the interpretation of a text, in the sense both of
(Webber, 1979) and of dynamic theories of anaphora
(Kamp and Reyle, 1993). In order to do this, annota-
tors must first of all identify the noun phrases which
either introduce new discourse entities (discourse-
new (Prince, 1992)) or are mentions of previously
introduced ones (discourse-old), ignoring those that
are used predicatively. Secondly, annotators have
to specify which discourse entities have the same
interpretation. Given that the characterization of
such discourse models is usually considered part
of the area of the semantics of anaphora, and that
the relations to be annotated include relations other
than Sidner?s (1979) COSPECIFICATION, we will use
the term ANNOTATION OF ANAPHORA for this task
(Poesio, 2004), but the reader should keep in mind
that we are not concerned only with nominal expres-
sions which are lexically anaphoric.
3 MEASURING AGREEMENT ON
ANAPHORIC ANNOTATION
The agreement coefficient which is most widely
used in NLP is the one called K by Siegel and Castel-
lan (1988). Howewer, most authors who attempted
anaphora annotation pointed out that K is not appro-
priate for anaphoric annotation. The only sensible
choice of ?label? in the case of (identity) anaphora
are anaphoric chains (Passonneau, 2004); but ex-
cept when a text is very short, few annotators will
catch all mentions of the same discourse entity?most
forget to mark a few, which means that agreement
as measured with K is always very low. Follow-
ing Passonneau (2004), we used the coefficient ? of
Krippendorff (1980) for this purpose, which allows
for partial agreement among anaphoric chains.3
3.1 Krippendorf?s alpha
The ? coefficient measures agreement among a set
of coders C who assign each of a set of items I to
one of a set of distinct and mutually exclusive cat-
egories K; for anaphora annotation the coders are
the annotators, the items are the markables in the
text, and the categories are the emerging anaphoric
chains. The coefficient measures the observed dis-
agreement between the coders Do, and corrects for
3We also tried a few variants of ?, but these differed from ?
only in the third to fifth significant digit, well below any of the
other variables that affected agreement. In the interest of space
we only report here the results obtained with ?.
77
chance by removing the amount of disagreement ex-
pected by chance De. The result is subtracted from 1
to yield a final value of agreement.
? = 1?
Do
De
As in the case of K, the higher the value of ?,
the more agreement there is between the annotators.
? = 1 means that agreement is complete, and ? = 0
means that agreement is at chance level.
What makes ? particularly appropriate for
anaphora annotation is that the categories are not
required to be disjoint; instead, they must be or-
dered according to a DISTANCE METRIC?a func-
tion d from category pairs to real numbers that spec-
ifies the amount of dissimilarity between the cate-
gories. The distance between a category and itself is
always zero, and the less similar two categories are,
the larger the distance between them. Table 1 gives
the formulas for calculating the observed and ex-
pected disagreement for ?. The amount of disagree-
ment for each item i ? I is the arithmetic mean of the
distances between the pairs of judgments pertaining
to it, and the observed agreement is the mean of all
the item disagreements. The expected disagreement
is the mean of the distances between all the judg-
ment pairs in the data, without regard to items.
Do =
1
ic(c?1) ?i?I ?k?K ?k??K niknik?dkk?
De =
1
ic(ic?1) ?k?K ?k??K nknk?dkk?
c number of coders
i number of items
nik number of times item i is classified in category k
nk number of times any item is classified in category k
dkk? distance between categories k and k?
Table 1: Observed and expected disagreement for ?
3.2 Distance measures
The distance metric is not part of the general defini-
tion of ?, because different metrics are appropriate
for different types of categories. For anaphora anno-
tation, the categories are the ANAPHORIC CHAINS:
the sets of markables which are mentions of the
same discourse entity. Passonneau (2004) proposes
a distance metric between anaphoric chains based on
the following rationale: two sets are minimally dis-
tant when they are identical and maximally distant
when they are disjoint; between these extremes, sets
that stand in a subset relation are closer (less distant)
than ones that merely intersect. This leads to the fol-
lowing distance metric between two sets A and B.
dAB =
?
???
???
0 if A = B
1/3 if A ? B or B ? A
2/3 if A?B 6= /0, but A 6? B and B 6? A
1 if A?B = /0
We also tested distance metrics commonly used
in Information Retrieval that take the size of the
anaphoric chain into account, such as Jaccard and
Dice (Manning and Schuetze, 1999), the ratio-
nale being that the larger the overlap between two
anaphoric chains, the better the agreement. Jac-
card and Dice?s set comparison metrics were sub-
tracted from 1 in order to get measures of distance
that range between zero (minimal distance, identity)
and one (maximal distance, disjointness).
dAB = 1?
|A?B|
|A?B|
(Jaccard)
dAB = 1?
2 |A?B|
|A|+ |B|
(Dice)
The Dice measure always gives a smaller distance
than the Jaccard measure, hence Dice always yields
a higher agreement coefficient than Jaccard when
the other conditions remain constant. The difference
between Dice and Jaccard grows with the size of the
compared sets. Obviously, the Passonneau measure
is not sensitive to the size of these sets.
3.3 Computing the anaphoric chains
Another factor that affects the value of the agree-
ment coefficient?in fact, arguably the most impor-
tant factor?is the method used for constructing from
the raw annotation data the ?labels? used for agree-
ment computation, i.e., the anaphoric chains. We
experimented with a number of methods. How-
ever, since the raw data are highly dependent on
the annotation scheme, we will postpone discussing
our chain construction methods until after we have
described our experimental setup and annotation
scheme. We will also discuss there how compar-
isons are made when an ambiguity is marked.
78
4 THE ANNOTATION STUDY
4.1 The Experimental Setup
Materials. The text annotated in the experiment
was dialogue 3.2 from the TRAINS 91 corpus. Sub-
jects were trained on dialogue 3.1.
Tools. The subjects performed their annotations
on Viglen Genie workstations with LG Flatron mon-
itors running Windows XP, using the MMAX 2 anno-
tation tool (Mu?ller and Strube, 2003).4
Subjects. Eighteen paid subjects participated in
the experiment, all students at the University of Es-
sex, mostly undergraduates from the Departments of
Psychology and Language and Linguistics.
Procedure. The subjects performed the experi-
ment together in one lab, each working on a separate
computer. The experiment was run in two sessions,
each consisting of two hour-long parts separated by
a 30 minute break. The first part of the first session
was devoted to training: subjects were given the an-
notation manual and taught how to use the software,
and then annotated the training text together. After
the break, the subjects annotated the first half of the
dialogue (up to utterance 19.6). The second session
took place five days later. In the first part we quickly
pointed out some problems in the first session (for
instance reminding the subjects to be careful during
the annotation), and then immediately the subjects
annotated the second half of the dialogue, and wrote
up a summary. The second part of the second session
was used for a separate experiment with a different
dialogue and a slightly different annotation scheme.
4.2 The Annotation Scheme
MMAX 2 allows for multiple types of markables;
markables at the phrase, utterance, and turn lev-
els were defined before the experiment. All noun
phrases except temporal ones were treated as phrase
markables (Poesio, 2004). Subjects were instructed
to go through the phrase markables in order (us-
ing MMAX 2?s markable browser) and mark each
of them with one of four attributes: ?phrase? if it
referred to an object which was mentioned earlier
in the dialogue; ?segment? if it referred to a plan,
4Available from http://mmax.eml-research.de/
event, action, or fact discussed earlier in the dia-
logue; ?place? if it was one of the five railway sta-
tions Avon, Bath, Corning, Dansville, and Elmira,
explicitly mentioned by name; or ?none? if it did
not fit any of the above criteria, for instance if it re-
ferred to a novel object or was not a referential noun
phrase. (We included the attribute ?place? in order
to avoid having our subjects mark pointers from ex-
plicit place names. These occur frequently in the
dialogue?49 of the 151 markables?but are rather un-
interesting as far as anaphora goes.) For markables
designated as ?phrase? or ?segment? subjects were
instructed to set a pointer to the antecedent, a mark-
able at the phrase or turn level. Subjects were in-
structed to set more than one pointer in case of am-
biguous reference. Markables which were not given
an attribute or which were marked as ?phrase? or
?segment? but did not have an antecedent specified
were considered to be data errors; data errors oc-
curred in 3 out of the 151 markables in the dialogue,
and these items were excluded from the analysis.
We chose to mark antecedents using MMAX 2?s
pointers, rather than its sets, because pointers allow
us to annotate ambiguity: an ambiguous phrase can
point to two antecedents without creating an asso-
ciation between them. In addition, MMAX 2 makes
it possible to restrict pointers to a particular level.
In our scheme, markables marked as ?phrase? could
only point to phrase-level antecedents while mark-
ables marked as ?segment? could only point to turn-
level antecedents, thus simplifying the annotation.
As in previous studies (Eckert and Strube, 2001;
Byron, 2003), we only allowed a constrained form
of reference to discourse segments: our subjects
could only indicate turn-level markables as an-
tecedents. This resulted in rather coarse-grained
markings, especially when a single turn was long
and included discussion of a number of topics. In
a separate experiment we tested a more compli-
cated annotation scheme which allowed a more fine-
grained marking of reference to discourse segments.
4.3 Computing anaphoric chains
The raw annotation data were processed using
custom-written Perl scripts to generate coreference
chains and calculate reliability statistics.
The core of Passonneau?s proposal (Passonneau,
2004) is her method for generating the set of dis-
79
tinct and mutually exclusive categories required by
? out of the raw data of anaphoric annotation. Con-
sidering as categories the immediate antecedents
would mean a disagreement every time two anno-
tators mark different members of an anaphoric chain
as antecedents, while agreeing that these different
antecedents are part of the same chain. Passonneau
proposes the better solution to view the emerging
anaphoric chains themselves as the categories. And
in a scheme where anaphoric reference is unambigu-
ous, these chains are equivalence classes of mark-
ables. But we have a problem: since our annotation
scheme allows for multiple pointers, these chains
take on various shapes and forms.
Our solution is to associate each markable m with
the set of markables obtained by following the chain
of pointers from m, and then following the pointers
backwards from the resulting set. The rationale for
this method is as follows. Two pointers to a single
markable never signify ambiguity: if B points to A
and C points to A then B and C are cospecificational;
we thus have to follow the links up and then back
down. However, two pointers from a single mark-
able may signify ambiguity, so we should not follow
an up-link from a markable that we arrived at via a
down-link. The net result is that an unambiguous
markable is associated with the set of all markables
that are cospecificational with it on one of their read-
ings; an ambiguous markable is associated with the
set of all markables that are cospecificational with at
least one of its readings. (See figure 1.)
Unambiguous
A
B C
 
 
@
@I
A 7? {A,B,C}
B 7? {A,B,C}
C 7? {A,B,C}
Ambiguous
D E
F
@
@I
 
 
D 7? {D,F}
E 7? {E,F}
F 7? {D,E,F}
Figure 1: Anaphoric chains
This method of chain construction also allows to
resolve apparent discrepancies between reference to
phrase-level and turn-level markables. Take for ex-
ample the snippet below: many annotators marked
a pointer from the demonstrative that in utterance
unit 4.2 to turn 3; as for that in utterance unit 4.3,
some marked a pointer to the previous that, while
others marked a pointer directly to turn 3.
(2) 3.1 M: and while it?s there it
should pick up the tanker
4.1 S: okay
4.2 and that can get
4.3 we can get that done by
three
In this case, not only do the annotators mark differ-
ent direct antecedents for the second that; they even
use different attributes??phrase? when pointing to a
phrase antecedent and ?segment? when pointing to
a turn. Our method of chain construction associates
both of these markings with the same set of three
markables ? the two that phrases and turn 3 ? captur-
ing the fact that the two markings are in agreement.5
4.4 Taking ambiguity into account
The cleanest way to deal with ambiguity would be
to consider each item for which more than one an-
tecedent is marked as denoting a set of interpreta-
tions, i.e., a set of anaphoric chains (Poesio, 1996),
and to develop methods for comparing such sets
of sets of markables. However, while our instruc-
tions to the annotators were to use multiple point-
ers for ambiguity, they only followed these instruc-
tions for phrase references; when indicating the ref-
erents of discourse deixis, they often used multi-
ple pointers to indicate that more than one turn had
contributed to the development of a plan. So, for
this experiment, we simply used as the interpreta-
tion of markables marked as ambiguous the union
of the constituent interpretations. E.g., a markable E
marked as pointing both to antecedent A, belonging
to anaphoric chain {A,B}, and to antecedent C, be-
longing to anaphoric chain {C,D}, would be treated
by our scripts as being interpreted as referring to
anaphoric chain {A,B,C,D}.
5 RESULTS
5.1 Agreement on category labels
The following table reports for each of the four cate-
gories the number of cases (in the first half) in which
5It would be preferable, of course, to get the annotators to
mark such configurations in a uniform way; this however would
require much more extensive training of the subjects, as well as
support which is currently unavailable from the annotation tool
for tracking chains of pointers.
80
a good number (18, 17, 16) annotators agreed on a
particular label?phrase, segment, place, or none?or
no annotators assigned a particular label to a mark-
able. (The figures for the second half are similar.)
Number of judgments 18 17 16 0
phrase 10 3 1 30
segment 1 52
place 16 1 1 54
none 10 5 1 29
Table 2: Cases of good agreement on categories
In other words, in 49 cases out of 72 at least 16
annotators agreed on a label.
5.2 Explicitly annotated ambiguity, and its
impact on agreement
Next, we attempted to get an idea of the amount
of explicit ambiguity?i.e., the cases in which coders
marked multiple antecedents?and the impact on re-
liability resulting by allowing them to do this. In
the first half, 15 markables out of 72 (20.8%) were
marked as explicitly ambiguous by at least one an-
notator, for a total of 55 explicit ambiguity mark-
ings (45 phrase references, 10 segment references);
in the second, 8/76, 10.5% (21 judgments of ambi-
guity in total). The impact of these cases on agree-
ment can be estimated by comparing the values of
K and ? on the antecedents only, before the con-
struction of cospecification chains. Recall that the
difference between the coefficients is that K does
not allow for partial disagreement while ? gives it
some credit. Thus if one subject marks markable A
as antecedent of an expression, while a second sub-
ject marks markables A and B, K will register a dis-
agreement while ? will register partial agreement.
Table 3 compares the values of K and ?, computed
separately for each half of the dialogue, first with
all the markables, then by excluding ?place? mark-
ables (agreement on marking place names was al-
most perfect, contributing substantially to overall
agreement). The value of ? is somewhat higher than
that of K, across all conditions.
5.3 Agreement on anaphora
Finally, we come to the agreement values obtained
by using ? to compare anaphoric chains computed
With place Without place
First Half K 0.62773 0.50066
? 0.65615 0.53875
Second Half K 0.66201 0.44997
? 0.67736 0.47490
The coefficient reported here as K is the one called K by Siegel
and Castellan (1988).
The value of ? is calculated using Passonneau?s distance metric;
for other distance metrics, see table 4.
Table 3: Comparing K and ?
as discussed above. Table 4 gives the value of ? for
the first half (the figures for the second half are sim-
ilar). The calculation of ? was manipulated under
the following three conditions.
Place markables. We calculated the value of ? on
the entire set of markables (with the exception of
three which had data errors), and also on a subset of
markables ? those that were not place names. Agree-
ment on marking place names was almost perfect:
45 of the 48 place name markables were marked cor-
rectly as ?place? by all 18 subjects, two were marked
correctly by all but one subject, and one was marked
correctly by all but two subjects. Place names thus
contributed substantially to the agreement among
the subjects. Dropping these markables from the
analysis resulted in a substantial drop in the value
of ? across all conditions.
Distance measure. We used the three measures
discussed earlier to calculate distance between sets:
Passonneau, Jaccard, and Dice.6
Chain construction. Substantial variation in the
agreement values can be obtained by making
changes to the way we construct anaphoric chains.
We tested the following methods.
NO CHAIN: only the immediate antecedents of an
anaphoric expression were considered, instead
of building an anaphoric chain.
PARTIAL CHAIN: a markable?s chain included only
phrase markables which occurred in the dia-
6For the nominal categories ?place? and ?none? we assign
a distance of zero between the category and itself, and of one
between a nominal category and any other category.
81
With place markables Without place markables
Pass Jacc Dice Pass Jacc Dice
No chain 0.65615 0.64854 0.65558 0.53875 0.52866 0.53808
Partial 0.67164 0.65052 0.67667 0.55747 0.53017 0.56477
Inclusive [?top] 0.65380 0.64194 0.69115 0.53134 0.51693 0.58237
Exclusive [?top] 0.62987 0.60374 0.64450 0.49839 0.46479 0.51830
Inclusive [+top] 0.60193 0.58483 0.64294 0.49907 0.47894 0.55336
Exclusive [+top] 0.57440 0.53838 0.58662 0.46225 0.41766 0.47839
Table 4: Values of ? for the first half of dialogue 3.2
logue before the markable in question (as well
as all discourse markables).
FULL CHAIN: chains were constructed by looking
upward and then back down, including all
phrase markables which occurred in the dia-
logue either before or after the markable in
question (as well as the markable itself, and all
discourse markables).
We used two separate versions of the full chain con-
dition: in the [+top] version we associate the top of
a chain with the chain itself, whereas in the [?top]
version we associate the top of a chain with its orig-
inal category label, ?place? or ?none?.
Passonneau (2004) observed that in the calcula-
tion of observed agreement, two full chains always
intersect because they include the current item. Pas-
sonneau suggests to prevent this by excluding the
current item from the chain for the purpose of cal-
culating the observed agreement. We performed the
calculation both ways ? the inclusive condition in-
cludes the current item, while the exclusive condi-
tion excludes it.
The four ways of calculating ? for full chains,
plus the no chain and partial chain condition, yield
the six chain conditions in Table 4. Other things be-
ing equal, Dice yields a higher agreement than Jac-
card; considering both halves of the dialogue, the
Passonneau measure always yielded a higher agree-
ment that Jaccard, while being higher than Dice in
10 of the 24 conditions, and lower in the remaining
14 conditions.
The exclusive chain conditions always give lower
agreement values than the corresponding inclusive
chain conditions, because excluding the current item
reduces observed agreement without affecting ex-
pected agreement (there is no ?current item? in the
calculation of expected agreement).
The [?top] conditions tended to result in a higher
agreement value than the corresponding [+top] con-
ditions because the tops of the chains retained their
?place? and ?none? labels; not surprisingly, the ef-
fect was less pronounced when place markables
were excluded from the analysis. Inclusive [?top]
was the only full chain condition which gave ? val-
ues comparable to the partial chain and no chain
conditions. For each of the four selections of mark-
ables, the highest ? value was given by the Inclusive
[?top] chain with Dice measure.
5.4 Qualitative Analysis
The difference between annotation of (identity!)
anaphoric relations and other semantic annotation
tasks such as dialogue act or wordsense annotation
is that apart from the occasional example of care-
lessness, such as marking Elmira as antecedent for
the boxcar at Elmira,7 all other cases of disagree-
ment reflect a genuine ambiguity, as opposed to dif-
ferences in the application of subjective categories.8
Lack of space prevents a full discussion of the
data, but some of the main points can already be
made with reference to the part of the dialogue in
(2), repeated with additional context in (3).
7According to our (subjective) calculations, at least one an-
notator made one obvious mistake of this type for 20 items out
of 72 in the first half of the dialogue?for a total of 35 careless
or mistaken judgment out of 1296 total judgments, or 2.7%.
8Things are different for associative anaphora, see (Poesio
and Vieira, 1998).
82
(3) 1.4 M: first thing I?d like you to do
1.5 is send engine E2 off with a boxcar
to Corning to pick up oranges
1.6 uh as soon as possible
2.1 S: okay [6 sec]
3.1 M: and while it?s there it
should pick up the tanker
The two it pronouns in utterance unit 3.1 are exam-
ples of the type of ambiguity already seen in (1).
All of our subjects considered the first pronoun a
?phrase? reference. 9 coders marked the pronoun
as ambiguous between engine E2 and the boxcar, 6
marked it as unambiguous and referring to engine
E2, and 3 as unambiguous and referring to the box-
car. This example shows that when trying to de-
velop methods to identify ambiguous cases it is im-
portant to consider not only the cases of explicit am-
biguity, but also so-called implicit ambiguity?cases
in which subjects do not provide evidence of being
consciously aware of the ambiguity, but the presence
of ambiguity is revealed by the existence of two or
more annotators in disagreement (Poesio, 1996).
6 DISCUSSION
In summary, the main contributions of this work so
far has been (i) to further develop the methodology
for annotating anaphoric relations and measuring the
reliability of this type of annotation, adopting ideas
from Passonneau and taking ambiguity into account;
and (ii) to run the most extensive study of reliabil-
ity on anaphoric annotation todate, showing the im-
pact of such choices. Our future work includes fur-
ther developments of the methodology for measur-
ing agreement with ambiguous annotations and for
annotating discourse deictic references.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was in part supported by EPSRC project
GR/S76434/01, ARRAU. We wish to thank Tony
Sanford, Patrick Sturt, Ruth Filik, Harald Clahsen,
Sonja Eisenbeiss, and Claudia Felser.
References
P. Buitelaar. 1998. CoreLex : Systematic Polysemy and
Underspecification. Ph.D. thesis, Brandeis University.
D. Byron. 2003. Annotation of pronouns and their an-
tecedents: A comparison of two domains. Technical
Report 703, University of Rochester.
M. Eckert and M. Strube. 2001. Dialogue acts, synchro-
nising units and anaphora resolution. Journal of Se-
mantics.
D. Gross, J. Allen, and D. Traum. 1993. The TRAINS 91
dialogues. TRAINS Technical Note 92-1, Computer
Science Dept. University of Rochester, June.
L. Hirschman. 1998. MUC-7 coreference task definition,
version 3.0. In N. Chinchor, editor, In Proc. of the 7th
Message Understanding Conference.
H. Kamp and U. Reyle. 1993. From Discourse to Logic.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
K. Krippendorff. 1980. Content Analysis: An introduc-
tion to its Methodology. Sage Publications.
C. D. Manning and H. Schuetze. 1999. Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press.
C. Mu?ller and M. Strube. 2003. Multi-level annotation
in MMAX. In Proc. of the 4th SIGDIAL.
M. Palmer, H. Dang, and C. Fellbaum. 2005. Mak-
ing fine-grained and coarse-grained sense distinctions,
both manually and automatically. Journal of Natural
Language Engineering. To appear.
R. J. Passonneau. 1997. Instructions for applying dis-
course reference annotation for multiple applications
(DRAMA). Unpublished manuscript., December.
R. J. Passonneau. 2004. Computing reliability for coref-
erence annotation. In Proc. of LREC, Lisbon.
M. Poesio and R. Vieira. 1998. A corpus-based investi-
gation of definite description use. Computational Lin-
guistics, 24(2):183?216, June.
M. Poesio, F. Bruneseaux, and L. Romary. 1999. The
MATE meta-scheme for coreference in dialogues in
multiple languages. In M. Walker, editor, Proc. of the
ACL Workshop on Standards and Tools for Discourse
Tagging, pages 65?74.
M. Poesio. 1996. Semantic ambiguity and perceived am-
biguity. In K. van Deemter and S. Peters, editors, Se-
mantic Ambiguity and Underspecification, chapter 8,
pages 159?201. CSLI, Stanford, CA.
M. Poesio. 2004. The MATE/GNOME scheme for
anaphoric annotation, revisited. In Proc. of SIGDIAL,
Boston, May.
E. F. Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: subjects, def-
initeness, and information status. In S. Thompson
and W. Mann, editors, Discourse description: diverse
analyses of a fund-raising text, pages 295?325. John
Benjamins.
A. Rosenberg and E. Binkowski. 2004. Augmenting the
kappa statistic to determine interannotator reliability
for multiply labeled data points. In Proc. of NAACL.
C. L. Sidner. 1979. Towards a computational theory
of definite anaphora comprehension in English dis-
course. Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
S. Siegel and N. J. Castellan. 1988. Nonparametric
statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. McGraw-Hill.
K. van Deemter and R. Kibble. 2000. On coreferring:
Coreference in MUC and related annotation schemes.
Computational Linguistics, 26(4):629?637. Squib.
B. L. Webber. 1979. A Formal Approach to Discourse
Anaphora. Garland, New York.
B. L. Webber. 1991. Structure and ostension in the inter-
pretation of discourse deixis. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 6(2):107?135.
83
