Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pages 31?36,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Local Textual Inference: can it be defined or circumscribed?
Annie Zaenen
Palo Alto Research Center
3333, Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto, CA 94304
zaenen@parc.com
Lauri Karttunen
Palo Alto Research Center
3333, Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto, CA 94304
karttunen@parc.com
Richard Crouch
Palo Alto Research Center
3333, Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto, CA 94304
crouch@parc.com
Abstract
This paper argues that local textual in-
ferences come in three well-defined vari-
eties (entailments, conventional implica-
tures/presuppositions, and conversational
implicatures) and one less clearly defined
one, generally available world knowledge.
Based on this taxonomy, it discusses some
of the examples in the PASCAL text suite
and shows that these examples do not fall
into any of them. It proposes to enlarge the
test suite with examples that are more di-
rectly related to the inference patterns dis-
cussed.
1 Introduction
The PASCAL initiative on ?textual entailment? had
the excellent idea of proposing a competition testing
NLP systems on their ability to understand language
separate from the ability to cope with world knowl-
edge. This is obviously a welcome endeavor: NLP
systems cannot be held responsible for knowledge
of what goes on in the world but no NLP system can
claim to ?understand? language if it can?t cope with
textual inferences. The task also shies away from
creative metaphorical or metonymic use of language
and makes the assumption that referential assign-
ments remain constant for entities that are described
in the same way. These all seem good features of the
proposal as it stands.
Looking at the challenge as it was put before the
community, however, we feel that it might be useful
to try to circumscribe more precisely what exactly
should count as linguistic knowledge. In this paper
we make a stab at this in the hope of getting a discus-
sion going. For reasons that will become clear, we
prefer to talk about TEXTUAL INFERENCES rather
than about textual entailments when referring to the
general enterprise. We first explicitate what we think
should be covered by the term textual inferences, we
then look at the PASCAL development suite in the
light of our discussion and we conclude with a short
proposal for extensions to the test suite.
Before even starting at this, a point of clarification
needs to be made: the correspondence of a linguis-
tic object to an object in the real world goes beyond
what can be learned from the text itself. When some-
body says or writes The earth is flat or The king of
France is bald because (s)he is a liar or ill-informed,
nothing in these linguistic expressions in themselves
alerts us to the fact that they do not correspond to sit-
uations in the real world (we leave texts in which the
author signals consciously or unconsiously that he is
lying or fibbing out of consideration here.) What the
text does is give us information about the stance its
author takes vis-a`-vis the events or states described.
It is thus useful to distinguish between two ingre-
dients that go into determining the truth value of an
utterance, one is the trustworthiness of the utterer
and the other is the stance of the utterer vis-a`-vis
the truth of the content. The latter we will call the
veridicity of the content. When we talk about tex-
tual inferences we are only interested in veridicity
not in the truth which lies beyond what can be in-
ferred from texts. Or, maybe more realistically, we
assume a trustworthy author so that veridical state-
ments are also true.
31
2 Varieties of local textual inferences
Under this assumption of trustworthiness, semantics
and pragmatics as practiced by philosophers and lin-
guists can give us some insights that are of practical
relevance. Work done in the last century has led re-
searchers to distinguish between entailments, con-
ventional implicatures and conversational implica-
tures. We describe these three classes of inferences
and illustrate why the distinctions are important for
NLP.
2.1 Entailments
The most uncontroversional textual inferences are
those that can be made on the basis of what is as-
serted in a text. If the author makes the statement
that Tony Hall arrived in Baghdad on Sunday night,
then we can conclude that Tony Hall was in Bagh-
dad on Sunday night (keeping referring expressions
constant, as proposed in the PASCAL task). The sec-
ond sentence is true when the first is true (assum-
ing we are talking about the same Tony Hall, the
same Baghdad and the same Sunday) just by virtue
of what the words mean.
In simple examples such as that in (1)
(1) Bill murdered John.
Bill killed John.
one can go to a resource such as WordNet, look up
murder, discover that it means kill with some fur-
ther conditions. ?Ontologies? or thesauruses typi-
cally order terms in a hierarchy that encodes a re-
lation from less specific at the top of the hierarchy
to more specific at the bottom. In simple clauses
the replacement of a more specific term with a less
specific one, ensures an upward monotonic relation
between these sentences. As is well known this re-
lation is inversed when the sentences are negated.1
(2) Bill didn?t murder John.
does not entail Bill didn?t kill John.
but
(3) Bill didn?t kill John.
does entail Bill didn?t murder John.
Monotonicity relations also hold when adjectival
modification is introduced as in (4)
1A sentence is downward monotonic iff it remains true when
it is narrowed. A sentence is upward monotonic when it remains
true when it is broadened.
(4) Ames was a clever spy.
entails Ames was a spy.
Again negation reverses the entailment:
(5) Ames wasn?t a spy.
entails Ames wasn?t a clever spy.
Quantifiers, easily among the most intensively
studied lexical items, also exhibit upward or down-
ward monotonicity.2 To give just one example:
(6) All companies have to file annual reports.
entails All Fortune 500 companies have to file
annual reports.
but
(7) All companies have to file annual reports.
does not entail All companies have to file an-
nual reports to the SEC.
The fact that there are both upwards monotonic
and downwards monotonic expressions means that
simple matching on an inclusion of relevant mate-
rial cannot work as a technique to detect entailments.
Upward monotone expressions preserve truth by
leaving out material whereas downward monotone
expressions don?t: adding material to them can be
truth preserving.3
Apart from a more specific/less specific relation,
lexical items can establish a part-subpart relation be-
tween the events they describe. If we followed the
first sentence in (1) by
(8) John died.
we would still have a lexical inference. In this case
one in which the event described in the second sen-
tence is a subpart of the event described in the first.
The investigation of entailments leads one to dis-
tinguish several types of lexical items that have pre-
dictable effects on meaning that can be exploited to
discover sentences that are inferentially related (by
real entailments in this case). Other examples are
scope bearing elements (an aspect of meaning that
often leads to ambiguities which are not always eas-
ily perceived) and perception reports.
2A quantifier Q is downward monotonic with respect to its
restrictor ? iff ((Q ?) ?) remains true when the ? is narrowed,
e.g. from companies to Fortune 500 companies. A quantifier Q
is upward monotonic with respect to its scope ? iff ((Q ?) ?)
remains true when ? is broadened, e.g. from have to file reports
to the SCE to just have to file reports.
3Dagan and Glickman (2004) explore inferencing by syn-
tactic pattern matching techniques but consider only upward
monotonic expressions. Their proposal ensures loss of recall
on downward monotonic expressions.
32
Two types of relations deserve special mention
here because they are pervasive and they are at the
borderline between linguistic and world knowledge:
temporal relations and spatial relations. Whether
knowing that Tuesday follows Monday or that there
are leap years and non-leap years is linguistic knowl-
edge or world knowledge might not be totally clear
but it is clear that one wants this information to be
part of what textual entailment can draw upon. The
consequences in a Eucledian space of the place and
movement of objects are similar. There is a rich set
of entailment relations that builds on these temporal
and spatial notions.
2.2 Conventional Implicatures4
Apart from making assertions, however, an author
will often ?conventionally implicate? certain things.
We use here the term conventional implicature for
what has been called by that name or labeled as (se-
mantic) presupposition. Some of us have argued
elsewhere there is no need for a distinction between
these two notions (Karttunen and Peters, 1979) and
that presupposition is a less felicitous term because
it tends to be confused with ?old information?.
Traditionally these implications are not consid-
ered to be part of what makes the sentence true, but
the author is COMMITTED to them and we consider
them part of what textual inferences should be based
on. We take this position because we think it is rea-
sonable, for IE tasks, to assume that material that is
conventionally implicated can be used in the same
way as assertions, for instance, to provide answers
to questions. When somebody says Bill acknowl-
edges that the earth is round, we know something
about the author?s as well as Bill?s beliefs in the mat-
ter, namely that the author is committed to the belief
that the earth is round.
If all conventionally implied material were also
discourse old information, this might not matter very
much as the same information would be available
elsewhere in the text, but often conventionally im-
plied material is new information that is presented
as not being under discussion. Conventional impli-
catures are a rich source of information for IE tasks
because the material presented in them is supposed
4For more on conventional implicatures, see e.g. Karttunen
and Peters (1979) and Potts (2005)
to be non-controversial. In newspapers and other in-
formation sources they are a favorite way to distin-
guish background knowledge, that the reader might
have or not, without confusing it with what is news-
worthy in the report at hand. A very common ex-
ample of this, exploited in the PASCAL test suite, is
the use of appositives. illustrated in the following
example:
(9) The New York Times reported that Hanssen,
who sold FBI secrets to the Russians, could face
the death penalty.
Did Hanssen sell FBI reports to the Russians?
YES
From the perspective of IE tasks, the way conven-
tional implicatures behave under negation is one rea-
son to pay close attention to them. The following
examples illustrate this:
(10) Kerry realized that Bush was right.
Bush was right.
(11) Kerry didn?t realize that Bush was right.
Bush was right.
Other types of embedded clauses that are conven-
tionally implicated are temporal adverbials (except
those introduced by before or until. Other types of
material that can introduce a conventional implica-
ture are adverbial expressions such as evidently and
simple adverbs such as again or still.
It is important to point out that the syntactic struc-
ture doesn?t guide the interpretation here. Consider
the following contrast:
(12) As the press reported, Ames was a successful
spy.
conventionally implicates that Ames was a success-
ful spy, but
(13) According to the press, Ames was a successful
spy.
does not.
2.3 Conversational Implicatures5
Authors can be held responsible for more than just
assertions and conventional implicatures. Conversa-
tional implicatures are another type of author com-
mitment. A conversational implicature rests on the
assumption that, in absence of evidence to the con-
trary, a collaborative author will say as much as she
5For more on conversational implicatures, see e.g. Grice
(1989) and Horn (2003)
33
knows. So if Sue says that she has four children,
we tend to conclude that she has no more than four.
This type of implicature can be destroyed without
any contradiction arising: He not only ate some of
the cake, he ate all of it. Within the context of a tex-
tual inference task such as that defined in the PAS-
CAL initiative, it is clear that inferences based on
conversational implicatures might be wrong: PAS-
CAL doesn?t give the context. In a more developed
type of inference task, a distinction should be made
between this type of inference and the ones we dis-
cussed earlier, but when inferencing is reduced to
one sentence it seems more reasonable to take gen-
eralized conversational implicatures into account as
bona fide cases of inferences (except of course if
they are cancelled in the sentence itself, as in the
example above).
(14) I had the time to read your paper.
conversationally implies that I read your paper. But
it could be followed by but I decided to go play ten-
nis instead.
(15) Some soldiers were killed.
conversationally implies Not all soldiers were killed.
But it could be cancelled by In fact we fear that all
of them are dead.
(16) He certainly has three children.
conversationally implies He doesn?t have more than
three children but it could be followed by In fact he
has five, three daughters and two sons.
Apart from the general conversational implica-
tures, implicatures can also arise by virtue of some-
thing being said or not said in a particular context. If
in a letter of recommendation, one praises the can-
didate?s handwriting without saying anything about
his intellectual abilities, this allows the reader to
draw some conclusions. We assume here that this
type of inference is not part of the PASCAL task, as
too little context is given for it to be reliably calcu-
lated.
One might agree with the analysis of various
sources of author commitment given above but be
of the opinion that it doesn?t matter because, given
enough data, it will come out in the statistical wash.
We doubt, however, that this will happen any time
soon without some help: the semantic distinctions
are rather subtle and knowing about them will help
develop adequate features for statistical training.
It might also be thought that the generalizations
that we need here can be reduced to syntactic dis-
tinctions. We don?t have the space to show in great
detail that this is not the case but some reflection
on and experimentation with the examples given
throughout this paper will convince the reader that
this is not the cases. For instance, if one replaces the
adjective clever with the equally good adjective al-
leged in (4) above, the entailment relation between
the sentences doesn?t hold anymore. Substituting
show for realize in (11) has the same effect.
2.4 Some world knowledge?
In our mind this exhausts the ways in which an au-
thor can be held responsible for her writings on the
basis of text internal elements. Textual inferences
are based on textual material that is either an en-
tailment of what is explicitly asserted, or material
that conventionally or conversationally implied by
the author. These inferences can be made solely on
the basis of the way the meaning of the words and
construction she uses are related to other words and
constructions in the language. But even in a task that
tries to separate out linguistic knowledge from world
knowledge, it is not possible to avoid the latter com-
pletely. There is world knowledge that underlies just
about everything we say or write: the societies we
live in use a common view of time to describe events
and rely on the assumptions of Euclidean geometry,
leading to shared calendars and measurement sys-
tems. It would be impossible to separate these from
linguistic knowledge. Then there is knowledge that
is commonly available and static, e.g. that Baghdad
is in Iraq. It seems pointless to us to exclude the
appeal to such knowledge from the test suite but it
would be good to define it more explicitly.
3 The PASCAL development suite.
We now discuss some of the PASCAL development
set examples in the light of the discussion above and
explain why we think some of them do not belong
in a textual inference task. First a number of PAS-
CAL examples are based on spelling variants or even
spelling mistakes. While it is clear that coping with
this type of situation is important for NLP applica-
tions we think they do not belong in a textual infer-
ence test bed. We first discuss a couple of examples
34
that we think should not have been in the test suite
and then some that do not confirm to our view on
inferencing but which might belong in a textual in-
ference test suite.
3.1 Errors?
A problem arises with an example like the follow-
ing:
(17) A farmer who was in contact with cows suffer-
ing from BSE ? the so-called mad cow disease
? has died from what is regarded as the human
form of the disease.
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy is another
name for the ?mad cow disease?.
TRUE
If one googles BSE, one finds that it is an abbre-
viation that can stand for many things, including
the Bombay, Bulgarian, Baku or Bahrain Stock Ex-
change, Breast Self-Examination, and Brain Sur-
face Extractor. To select the right alternative, one
needs the knowledge that ?bovine spongiform en-
cephalopathy? is a name of a disease and the other
competing BSE expansions are not.
The authors of the PASCAL test suite don?t seem
to allow for as much world knowledge when they
mark the following relation as FALSE.
(18) ?I just hope I don?t become so blissful I be-
come boring? ? Nirvana leader Kurt Cobain
said, giving meaning to his ?Teen Spirit? coda,
a denial.
?Smells Like Teen Spirit? is a song by Nirvana.
FALSE
Apparently, it is NOT OK to know that the Nirvana
song ?Smells like Teen Spirit? is often referred to as
?Teen Spirit?. But why should we then know that
bovine spongiform encephalopathy is a disease?
The test suite also contains examples that can only
be classified as plain errors. A couple of examples
are the following:
(19) Green cards are becoming more difficult to ob-
tain.
Green card is now difficult to receive.
TRUE
Something that is becoming more difficult can still
be easy, if it starts out that way.
(20) Hippos do come into conflict with people quite
often.
Hippopotamus attacks human.
TRUE
For somebody who knows a lot about hippos it might
be reasonable to assume that a conflict is necessarily
an attack but in general there is no inference: conflict
is the less general term and attack the more specific
one.
(21) A statement said to be from al Qaida claimed
the terror group had killed one American and
kidnapped another in Riyadh.
A U.S. citizen working in Riyadh has been kid-
napped.
TRUE
This seems betray a rather implausible belief in the
claims of al Qaida and while we are assuming that
the author of the text is trustworthy, this assumption
does not extend to the sources he invokes. In this
case especially, the use of claim can be construed as
indication the doubt of the author about the veracity
of what the source says.
(22) Wal-Mart is being sued by a number of its
female employees who claim they were kept
out of jobs in management because they were
women.
Wal-Mart is sued for sexual discrimination.
TRUE
A minute of reflection will make clear that here the
relation between the two sentences involves quite a
bit of specialized legal knowledge and goes beyond
textual inferencing. How is sexual discrimination
different from sexual harassment?
(23) South Korean?s deputy foreign minister says
his country won?t change its plan to send 3000
soldiers to Iraq.
South Korea continues to send troops.
TRUE
We assume that in context the second sentence
means that South Korea continues to plan to send
troops but normally continue does not mean con-
tinue to plan and the first sentence certainly doesn?t
imply that South Korea has already sent troops. Here
the way the test suite has been put together leads
to odd results. A headline is paired up with a full
sentence. Headlines are not meant to be understood
completely out of context and it would be prudent to
use them sparingly in inference tasks of the sort pro-
posed here. We discuss other consequences of the
way the test suite was constructed in the next sub-
section with examples that to our mind need some
kind of accommodation.
35
3.2 Not a textual inference as such but . . .
There are a couple of examples such as the following
in the test suite:
(24) The White House failed to act on the domes-
tic threat from al Qaida prior to September 11,
2001.
White House ignored the threat of attack.
TRUE
Here there is no entailment either way and surely
fail to act is not a synonym of ignore. The examples
are due to the way the PASCAL test suite was put to-
gether. It was evidently at least in part developed by
finding snippets of text that refer to the same event
in different news sources; this is a fertile method for
finding inferences but it will lead to the inclusion of
some material that mixes factual description and var-
ious APPRECIATIONS of the described facts. For in-
stance in (24) above, two different authors described
what the White house did, putting a different spin
on it. While the fact described in both cases was
the same, the appreciations that the two renderings
give, while both negative, are not equivalent. But
although there is no legitimate inference for the sen-
tences as a whole, they both entail that the White
House did not act. Here the test suite is the victim of
its self imposed constraints, namely that the relation
has to be established between two sentences found
in ?real? text. We propose to give up this constraint.
Another maybe simpler illustration of the same
problem is (25):
(25) The report catalogues 10 missed opportunities.
The report lists 10 missed opportunities.
Although catalogue and list do not have the same
meaning, they may in some cases be used inter-
changeably because, again, there is a common en-
tailment:
(26) According to the report, there were 10 missed
opportunities.
One can conceive of a thesaurus where catalogue
and list would have a low level common hypernym
(in WordNet they don?t) or a statistically inferred
word class that would make the common entailment
explicit, but that relation should not be confused
with an inference between the two sentences in (25).
4 A proposal for some refinements
As the discussion above has shown, the way the test
suite was put together leads sometimes to the in-
clusion of material that should not be there given
the definition of the task. Most of the data that
form the basis of PASCAL are extracted from differ-
ent newspaper articles about the same event, often
from the same newswire. This means that the infor-
mation packaging is very similar, reducing the con-
structional and lexical range that can be used to ex-
press a same idea. This situation will not pertain in
the more general setting of question answering and
many types of paraphrases or inferences that would
be useful for question answering in general will not
be found or will be very rare in PASCAL-like suites.
We would propose to augment the types of pairs
that one can get through the PASCAL extraction tech-
niques with some that take the type of relations that
we have discussed explicitly into account. It can be
objected that this introduces a new level of artificial-
ity by allowing made-up sentences but the separa-
tion of world knowledge from linguistic knowledge
is in any case artificial. But it is necessary because
we will not be able to solve the inferencing problem
without slicing the task into manageable pieces.
Acknowledgments
This article was supported in part by the Advanced
Research and Development Agency (ARDA) within
the program for Advanced Question Answering for
Intelligence (AQUAINT). Thanks to all the members
of PARC?s AQUAINT team.
References
Ido Dagan and Oren Glickman. 2004. Probabilistic tex-
tual entailment: Generic applied modeling of language
variablity. In Learning Methods for Text Understand-
ing and Mining, Grenoble, January.
Paul H. Grice. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words. Har-
vard University, Cambridge, MA.
Larry Horn. 2003. Implicature. In Horn and Ward, edi-
tors, Handbook of Pragmatics. Blackwell, Oxford.
Lauri Karttunen and Stanley Peters. 1979. Conventional
implicature. In Choon-Kyu Oh and David A. Dinneen,
editors, Syntax and Semantics, Volume 11: Presuppo-
sition, pages 1?56. Academic Press, New York.
Christopher Potts. 2005. The Logic of Conventional Im-
plicatures. Oxford Studies in Theoretical Linguistics.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
36
