Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky, pages 21?28,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Parallel Entity and Treebank Annotation
Ann Bies
Linguistic Data Consortium
3600 Market Street, 810
Philadelphia, PA 19104
bies@ldc.upenn.edu
Seth Kulick
Institute for Research
in Cognitive Science
3401 Walnut Street
Suite 400A
Philadelphia, PA 19104
skulick@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Mark Mandel
Linguistic Data Consortium
3600 Market Street, 810
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mamandel@ldc.upenn.edu
Abstract
We describe a parallel annotation ap-
proach for PubMed abstracts. It includes
both entity/relation annotation and a tree-
bank containing syntactic structure, with a
goal of mapping entities to constituents in
the treebank. Crucial to this approach is a
modification of the Penn Treebank guide-
lines and the characterization of entities as
relation components, which allows the in-
tegration of the entity annotation with the
syntactic structure while retaining the ca-
pacity to annotate and extract more com-
plex events.
1 Introduction
A great deal of annotation effort for many different
corpora has been devoted to annotation for entities
and syntactic structure (treebanks). However, pre-
vious efforts at treebanking have largely been inde-
pendent of the constituency of entities, and previous
efforts at entity annotation have likewise been inde-
pendent of corresponding layers of syntactic struc-
ture. We describe here a corpus being developed
for biomedical information extraction with levels of
both entity annotation and treebank annotation, with
a goal that entities can be mapped to constituents in
the treebank.
We are collaborating with researchers in the Di-
vision of Oncology at The Children?s Hospital of
Philadelphia, for the purpose of automatically min-
ing the corpus of cancer literature for those as-
sociations that link specified variations in individ-
ual genes with known malignancies. In particular,
we are interested in extracting three entities (Gene,
Variation event, and Malignancy) in the following
relationship: Gene X with genomic Variation event
Y is correlated with Malignancy Z. For example,
WT1 is deleted in Wilms Tumor #5. In addition, Vari-
ation events are themselves relations, consisting of
entities representing different aspects of a Variation
event.
Mapping entities to treebank constituents is a de-
sirable goal since the entities can then be viewed
as semantic types associated with syntactic con-
stituents, and we expect that automated analyses of
these related levels will interact in a mutually rein-
forcing and beneficial way for development of sta-
tistical taggers.
In this paper we describe aspects of the entity
and treebank annotation that allow this mapping
to be largely successful. Potentially large enti-
ties that would otherwise cut across syntactic con-
stituents are decomposed into components of a re-
lation. While this is worthwhile by itself on con-
ceptual grounds for entity definition, and was in fact
not done for reasons of mapping to syntactic con-
stituents, it makes such a mapping easier. The tree-
bank annotation has been modified from the Penn
Treebank guidelines in various ways, such as greater
structure for prenominal modifiers. Again, while
this would have been done regardless of the map-
ping of entities, it does make such a mapping more
successful.
Previous work on integrating syntactic structure
with entity information, as well as relation infor-
21
mation, is described in (Miller et al, 2000). Our
work is in much the same spirit, although we do
not integrate relation annotation into the syntactic
trees. PubMed abstracts are quite different from the
newswire sources used in that earlier work, with sev-
eral consequences discussed throughout, such as the
use of discontinuous entities.
Section 2 discusses some of the main issues
around the development of the guidelines for en-
tity annotation, and Section 3 discusses some of the
changes that have been made for the treebank guide-
lines. Section 4 describes the annotation workflow
and the resulting merged representation. Section
5 evaluates the mapping between entities and con-
stituents, and Section 6 is the conclusion.
2 Guidelines for Entity Annotation
Here we give a summary of the main features of
our annotation guidelines. We have been influenced
in this by the annotation guidelines for the Auto-
matic Content Extraction (ACE) project (Consor-
tium, 2004).1 However, our source materials are
medical abstracts from PubMed2, and important dif-
ferences between the domains have required sig-
nificant changes and additions to many definitions,
guidelines, and procedures.
Most obviously, the vocabulary is very different.
Many of the tokens in our source texts are chemical
terms with a complex productive morphology, and a
certain number are unique in PubMed. Many oth-
ers are strings of notation, like S37F, often contain-
ing relevant entity references that must be isolated
(S, 37, and F). And even apart from these, we are
looking at a very different dialect of English from
that used by the Wall Street Journal and the Asso-
ciated Press. Annotation of English newswire re-
quires native English competency; entity annotation
of biomedical English requires a background in bi-
ology as well.
The entity instances in the text are also qualita-
tively different. Instead of individual pieces of the
physical or social universe ? Emanuel Sosa, the Eif-
fel Tower, the man in the yellow hat ? we have ab-
1Another source of influence is previous work in annota-
tion for biomedical information extraction, such as (Ohta et al,
2002). Space prevents adequate discussion of here of the differ-
ences.
2http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/
stractions, categories that are not to be confused with
their instantiations: neuroblastoma, K-ras (a gene),
codon 42.3 We are not currently annotating pronom-
inal or other forms of coreference.
2.1 Entities Annotated
2.1.1 Gene Entity
For the sake of this project the definition for
?Gene Entity? has two significant characteristics.
First, as just mentioned, ?Gene? refers to a concep-
tual entity as opposed to the specific manifestation
of a gene (e.g., not the ?K-ras? in some specific cell
in some individual, but an abstraction that cannot be
pointed to).
Second, ?Gene? refers to a composite entity as op-
posed to the strict biological definition. There are
often ambiguities in the usage of the entity names. I
is sometimes unclear as to whether the gene or pro-
tein is being referenced, and the same name can refer
to the gene or the protein at different locations in the
same document. In a similar way as the ACE project
allows ?geopolitical? entities to have different roles,
such as ?location? or ?organization?, we consider a
?Gene? to be a composite entity that can have differ-
ent roles throughout a document. Therefore, Gene
entity mentions can have types Gene-generic, Gene-
protein, and Gene-RNA.
2.1.2 Variation Events as Relations
As mentioned in the introduction, Variation
events are relations between entities representing
different aspects of a Variation; specifically, a Vari-
ation is a relationship between two or more of
the following entities: Type (e.g., point mutation,
translocation, or inversion), Location (e.g., codon
14, 1p36.1, or base pair 278), Original-State and
Altered-State (e.g., Thymine).
The entities as such are independent and uncon-
nected. We add a level of relation to annotate the
associations between them: For example, the text
fragment a single nucleotide substitution at codon
249, predicting a serine to cysteine amino acid sub-
stitution (S249C) contains the entities:
Variation-type substitution
Variation-location codon 249
3This domain shows no such clear distinction between Name
and Nominal mentions as in the texts covered by ACE.
22
Variation-state-original serine
Variation-state-altered cysteine
These entities are annotated individually but are also
collected into a single Variation relation.
It is also possible for a Variation relation to arise
from a more compact collection of entities. For ex-
ample, the text S249C consists of three entities col-
lected into a Variation relation:
Variation-location 249
Variation-state-original S
Variation-state-altered C
These four components represent the key ele-
ments necessary to describe any genomic variation
event. Variations are often underspecified in the lit-
erature. For example, the first relation above has
all four components while the second is missing
the Variation-type. Characterizing individual Varia-
tions as relations among such components provides
us with a great deal of flexibility.
The ?Gene? entities are analogous to the ACE
geopolitical entity, in that the second part of the en-
tity names (?-RNA?, ?-generic?,?-protein?) disam-
biguates the metonymy of the ?Gene?. The subtypes
of the Variation entities, in contrast, indicate differ-
ent kinds of entities in their own right, which can
also function as components of a Variation relation.
2.1.3 Malignancy
The Malignancy annotation guidelines were un-
der development during the annotation of the corpus
described here. While they have since been more
completely defined, they are not included as part of
the annotated files discussed here, and so are not fur-
ther discussed in this paper.
2.2 Discontinuous Entities
We have introduced a mechanism we call ?chain-
ing? to annotate discontinuous entities, which may
be more common in abstracts than in full text be-
cause of the pressure to reduce word count. For ex-
ample, in K- and N-ras there are two entities, K-ras
and N-ras, of which only the second is a solid block
of text. Our entity annotators are allowed to change
the tokenization if necessary to isolate the compo-
nents of K-ras:
text K- and N-ras
original tokenization [K-][and][N-ras]
Multiple Tokens
Entity Single Non-
Type Tokens chains Chains
Gene-generic 104 6 0
Gene-protein 921 349 6
Gene-RNA 1987 156 36
Var-
location 95 445 125
Var-
state-orig 151 5 0
Var-
state-altered 162 10 0
Var-type 235 271 1
Table 1: Entity Instances
modified tokenization
[K][-][and][N][-][ras]
entity annotation
1. K- ... ras (chain with separated to-
kens)
2. N-ras (contiguous tokens)
2.3 Entity Frequencies
Table 1 shows the number of instances of each of the
entity types in the 318 abstracts, discussed further
in Section 4, that have been both entity annotated
and treebanked. We separate the entities into single-
token and multiple-token categories since it is only
the multiple-token categories that raise an issue for
mapping constituents.
3 Treebank Annotation
The Penn Treebank II guidelines (Bies et al, 1995)
were followed as closely as possible, but the nature
of the biomedical corpus has made some changes
necessary or desirable. We have also taken this
opportunity to address several long-standing issues
with the original set of guidelines, with regard to NP
structure in particular. This has resulted in the intro-
duction of one new node label for sub-NP nominal
substrings (NML). One additional empty category
(*P*) has been introduced in order to improve the
match-up of chained entity categories with treebank
nodes. It is used as a placeholder to represent dis-
tributed modification in nominals and does not rep-
resent the trace of movement.
23
3.1 Tokenization/Part-of-Speech
We have also adopted several changes in word-level
tokenization, leading to a number of part-of-speech
and structural differences as well. Many hyphenated
words are now treated as separate tokens (New York
- based would be four tokens, for example). These
hyphens now have the part-of-speech tag HYPH. If
the separated prefix is a morphological unit that does
not exist as a free-standing word, it has the part-of-
speech tag AFX. With chemical names and scien-
tific notation in the biomedical corpus in particular,
spaces and punctuation may occur within a single
?token?, which will have a single POS tag.
3.2 Right-Branching Default
We assume a default binary right-branching struc-
ture under any NP and NML node. Each daughter
of the phrase (whether a single token or itself a con-
stituent node) is assumed to have scope over every-
thing to its right. This means that every daughter
also forms a constituent with everything to its right.
This assumption makes the annotation process for
multi-token nominals less complex and the resulting
trees more legible, but still allows us to readily de-
rive constituent nodes not explicitly represented. For
example, in
(NP (JJ primary) (NN liver)
(NN cancer))
we assume that ?liver cancer? is a constituent, and
that ?primary? has scope over it.
So, although we do not show the intermediate
nodes explicitly in our annotation, our assumed
structure for this NP could be derived as
(NP (JJ primary)
(newnode (NN liver)
(newnode (NN cancer))))
As discussed in Section 5, entities sometimes map
to such implicit constituents, and a node needs to
be added to make the constituent explicit so the the
entity can be mapped to it.
3.3 New Node Level for Non-Right-Branching:
NML
We use the NML node label to mark nominal sub-
constituents that do not follow the default binary
right-branching structure. Any two or more non-
final elements that form a constituent are bound to-
gether by NML.
(NP (NML (NN human)
(NN liver)
(NN tumor))
(NN analysis))
3.4 New Empty Category for Distributed
Readings within NP: *P*
As discussed in Section 2.2, discontinuous enti-
ties are annotated using the ?chaining? mechanism.
Analogously, we have introduced a placeholder,
*P*, for distributed material in the treebank. It is
used exclusively in coordinated nominal structures,
placed in coordinated elements that are missing ei-
ther a distributed head or a distributed premodifier.
In K- and N-ras, the coordinated premodifier K- is
missing the distributed head ras, so the placeholder
*P* is inserted after K- and coindexed with ras:
(NP (NP (NN K) (HYPH -)
(NML-1 (-NONE- *P*)))
(CC and)
(NP (NN N) (HYPH - )
(NML-1 (NN ras))))
This creates constituent nodes K-ras and N-ras
that align with the entities being represented by
chaining.4
4 Annotation Process
The annotation process comprises the following
steps: Paragraph and sentence annotation (includ-
ing the delimitation of irrelevant text such as au-
thor names); tokenization; entity annotation; part-
of-speech (POS) annotation; treebanking; merged
representation.
Entity annotation precedes POS annotation, since
the entity annotators often have to correct the tok-
enization, which affects the POS labels. For exam-
ple, nephro- and hepatocarcinoma refers to two en-
tities, nephrocarcinoma and hepatocarcinoma, and
so the entity annotator would split hepatocarcinoma
into two tokens, for chaining nephro and carcinoma
4In spite of the apparent similarity between *P* and right
node raising structures (*RNR*), they are not interchangeable
as the shared element often occurs to the left rather than the
right (e.g., codon 12 or 13 in Section 5.3).
24
(see Section 2.2). Since the entity annotators are not
qualified for POS annotation, doing POS annotation
after entity annotation allows the POS annotators to
annotate any such tokenization changes.
Treebank annotation uses the same tokenization
as for the corresponding entity file. Continuing the
above example, the treebank file would have sepa-
rate tokens for hepato and carcinoma. Note that this
would be the case even if we did not have the goal
of mapping entities to constituents. It arises from the
more minimal requirement of maintaining identical
tokenization in the treebank and entity files, and so
leads to changes in treebank annotation such as dis-
cussed in Section 3.4.
All of the annotation steps except entity annota-
tion use automated taggers (or a parser in the case of
treebanking),5 producing annotation that then gets
hand-corrected.
The use of the parser for producing a parse for
correction by the treebankers include a somewhat
unusual feature that arises from our parallel entity
and treebank annotation. The parser that we are us-
ing, (Bikel, 2004),6 allows prebracketing of parts
of the parser input, so that the parser will respect
the prebracketing. We use this ability to prebracket
entities, which can also help to disambiguate the
constituencies for prenominal modifiers, which can
often be unclear for annotators without a medical
background. For example, the input to the parser
might contain something like:
...(NN activation)
(IN of)
(PRP$ its)
(* (NN tyrosine)
(NN kinase) )
(NN activity)...
indicating by the (* ) that tyrosine kinase should
be a constituent. (It is a Gene-protein.)
Our first release of data, PennBioIE Release 0.9
(http://bioie.ldc.upenn.edu/
publications), contains 1157 oncology
PubMed abstracts, all annotated for entities and
POS, of which 318 have also been treebanked. The
website also contains full documentation for the
5Entity taggers have been developed (McDonald et al,
2004) but have not yet been integrated into the project.
6Available at http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~dbikel
/software.html#stat-parser
;sentence 4 Span:331..605
;In the present study, we screened for
;the K-ras exon 2 point mutations in a
;group of 87 gynecological neoplasms
;(82 endometrial carcinomas, four
;carcinomas of the uterine cervix and
;one uterine carcinosarcoma) using the
;non-isotopic PCR-SSCP-direct
;sequencing techniques.
;[373..378]:gene-rna:"K-ras"
;[379..385]:variation-location:"exon 2"
;[386..401]:variation-type:
"point mutations"
(SENT
(S
(PP (IN:[331..333] In)
(NP (DT:[334..337] the)
(JJ:[338..345] present)
(NN:[346..351] study)))
(,:[351..352] ,)
(NP-SBJ (PRP:[353..355] we))
(VP (VBD:[356..364] screened)
(PP-CLR (IN:[365..368] for)
(NP (DT:[369..372] the)
(NN:[373..378] K-ras)
(NML (NN:[379..383] exon)
(CD:[384..385] 2))
(NN:[386..391] point)
(NNS:[392..401] mutations)))
(PP (IN:[402..404] in)
(NP
(NP (DT:[405..406] a)
(NN:[408..413] group))
(PP (IN:[414..416] of)
(NP (CD:[417..419] 87)
(JJ:[420..433]
gynecological)
(NNS:[434..443]
neoplasms)
[...]
Figure 1: Example .mrg file
various annotation guidelines mentioned in this
paper.
4.1 Example of Merged Output
The 318 files that have been both treebanked and en-
tity annotated are also available in a merged ?.mrg?
format. The treebank and entity annotations are both
stand-off, referring to character spans in the same
source file, and we take advantage of this so that the
merged representation relates the entities and con-
stituents by these spans. Figure 1 shows a fragment
of one such .mrg file.
This .mrg file excerpt shows the text of sen-
tence 4 in the file, which spans the character offsets
331..605. Each entity is listed by span (which can in-
25
clude several tokens), entity type, and the text of the
entity. The treebank part is the same basic format as
the .mrg files from the Penn Treebank, except that
each terminal has the format
(POSTag:[from..to] terminal)
where [from..to] is that terminal?s span in the
source file.
The first entity listed, K-ras, is a Gene-RNA entity
with span [373..378], which corresponds to the
single token:
(NN:[373..378] K-ras)
The second entity, exon 2, is a Variation-location
with span [379..385], which corresponds to the
two tokens:
(NN:[379..383] exon)
(CD:[384..385] 2)
The third entity, point mutations, is a Variation-type
with span [386..401], which corresponds to the
two tokens:
(NN:[386..391] point)
(NNS:[392..401] mutations)
By including the terminal span information in the
treebank, we make explicit how the tokens that make
up the entities are treated in the treebank representa-
tion.
5 Entity-Constituent Mapping
One of our goals for the release of the corpus is to
allow users to choose how they wish to handle the
integration of the entity and treebank information.
By providing the corresponding spans for both as-
pects of the annotation, we provide the raw material
for any integrated approach.
We therefore do not attempt to force the entities
and constituents to line up perfectly. However, given
the parallel annotation just illustrated, we can an-
alyze how close we come to the ideal of the en-
tities behaving as semantic types on syntactic con-
stituents.
5.1 Mapping Categories
Leaving aside chains for the moment, we categorize
each entity/treebank mapping in one of three ways:
Exact match There is a node in the tree that yields
exactly the entity. For example, the entity exon 2 in
Figure 1
;[379..385]:variation-location:
"exon 2"
corresponds exactly to the NML node in Figure 1
(NML (NN:[379..383] exon)
(CD:[384..385] 2))
Missing node There is no node in the tree that
yields exactly that entity, but it is possible to add a
node to the tree that would yield the entity. A com-
mon reason for this is that the default right branch-
ing treebank annotation (Section 3.2) does not make
explicit the required node.
For example, the entity point mutations in Figure
1
;[386..401]:variation-type:
"point mutations"
does not correspond to a node in the relevant part of
the tree:
(NP (DT:[369..372] the)
(NN:[373..378] K-ras)
(NML (NN:[379..383] exon)
(CD:[384..385] 2))
(NN:[386..391] point)
(NNS:[392..401] mutations))
However, it is possible to insert a node into the tree
to yield exactly the entity:
(NP (DT:[369..372] the)
(NN:[373..378] K-ras)
(NML (NN:[379..383] exon)
(CD:[384..385] 2))
(newnode (NN:[386..391] point)
(NNS:[392..401]
mutations)))
Note that this node corresponds exactly to the im-
plicit constituency assumed by the right branching
rule. For our own internal research purposes we have
generated a version of the treebank with such nodes
added, although they are not in the current release.
Crossing The most troublesome case, in which the
entity does not match a node in the tree and also cuts
across constituent boundaries, so it is not even pos-
sible to add a node yielding the entity. Typically this
26
Exact Miss- Cross-
Entity Type Total Match ing ing
Gene-generic 6 4 1 1
Gene-protein 349 236 103 10
Gene-RNA 156 115 35 6
Var-
location 445 348 68 29
Var-
state-orig 5 3 1 1
Var-
state-altered 10 8 0 2
Var-type 271 123 142 6
Total 1242 837 350 55
Table 2: Matching Status of Non-Chained Multiple
Token Instances
is due to an entity containing text corresponding to
a prepositional phrase. For example, the sentence
One ER showed a G-to-T mutation in
the second position of codon 12
has the entity
[1280..1307]:variation-location:
"second position
of codon 12"
The relevant part of the corresponding tree is
(PP-LOC (IN:[1272..1274] in)
(NP
(NP (DT:[1276..1279] the)
(JJ:[1280..1286] second)
(NN:[1287..1295] position))
(PP (IN:[1296..1298] of)
(NP (NN:[1299..1304] codon)
(CD:[1305..1307] 12)))))
Due to the inclusion of the determiner in the NP
the second position, while it is absent from the en-
tity definition which does include the following PP,
it is not possible to add a node to the tree yielding
exactly second position of codon 12.7 It is possible
7The inclusion of the PP in an entity can be a problem for
the constituent mapping even aside from the determiner issue.
It is possible for the PP, such as of codon 12, to be followed by
another PP, such as in K-ras. Since all PPs are attached at the
same level, of codon 12 and in K-ras are sisters, and so, even
if the determiner was included in the entity name, there is no
constituent consisting of just the second position of codon 12.
However, in that case it is then possible to add a node yield-
ing the NP and first PP. A similar issue sometimes arises when
attempting to relate Propbank arguments to tree constituents.
Exact Not Exact
Entity Type Total Match Match
Gene-generic 0 0 0
Gene-protein 6 4 2
Gene-RNA 36 29 7
Var-
location 125 103 22
Var-
state-orig 0 0 0
Var-
state-altered 0 0 0
Var-type 1 0 1
Total 168 136 32
Table 3: Matching Status of Chained Multiple Token
Instances
to relax the requirements on exact match to include
the determiner.8
However, one of our initial goals in this investi-
gation was to determine whether this sort of limited
crossing is indeed a major source of the mapping
mismatches.
5.2 Overall Mapping Results
Table 2 is a breakdown of how well the (non-chain)
entities can be mapped to constituents. Here we are
concerned only with entities that consist of multiple
tokens, since single-token entities can of course map
directly to the relevant token.
The number of crossing cases is relatively small.
One reason for this is the use of relations for break-
ing potentially large entities into component parts,
since the component entities either already map to
an entity or can easily be made to do so by mak-
ing implicit constituents explicit to disambiguate the
tree structure. The crossing cases tend to be ones in
which the entities are in a sense a bit too ?big?, such
as including a prepositional phrase.9
8Another alternative would be to modify the treatment of
noun phrases and determiners in the treebank annotation to be
more akin to DPs. However, this has proved to be an impractical
addition to the annotation process.
9As discussed in Section 4, we are prebracketing entities in
the parses prepared for the treebankers to correct. There are two
possibilities for how the entities can therefore ever cross tree-
bank constituents: (1) the treebank annotation was done before
we started doing such prebracketing, so the treebank annotator
was not aware of the entities, or (2) the prebracketing was in-
27
5.3 Chained Entities
Table 3 shows the matching status of multiple token
instances that are also chains (and so were not in-
cluded in Table 2). The presence of chains is mostly
localized to certain entity types, and the mapping is
mostly successful. Variation-location contains many
of the chains due to the occurrences of phrases such
as codon 12 or 13, which map exactly to the corre-
sponding use of the *P* placeholder, such as:
(NP (NP
(NML-1 (NN codon))
(CD 12))
(CC or)
(NP
(NML-1 (-NONE- *P*))
(CD 13)))
Cases that do not map exactly are ones in which
the syntactic context does not permit the use of
the placeholder *P*. For example, the text spe-
cific codons (12, 13, and 61), has three discontin-
uous entities (codons..12, codons..13, codons..61),
but the parenthetical context does not permit using
the placeholder *P*:
(NP (JJ specific) (NNS codons)
(PRN (-LRB- -LRB-)
(NP (NP (CD 12))
(, ,)
(NP (CD 13))
(, ,) (CC and)
(NP (CD 61)))
(-RRB- -RRB-)))
and so this example contains three mismatches.
6 Conclusion
We have described here parallel syntactic and entity
annotation and how changes in the guidelines facil-
itate a mapping between entities and syntactic con-
stituents. Our main purpose in this paper has been to
investigate the success of this mapping. As Tables 2
and 3 show, once we make explicit the implicit right-
branching binary structure, only 6.2%10 of the enti-
ties cannot be mapped directly to a node in the tree.
It also appears likely that a significant percentage of
even the non-matching cases can match as well, with
a slight relaxation of the matching requirement (e.g.,
allowing entities to have an optional determiner).
deed done, but the treebank annotator could not abide by the
resulting tree and modified the parser output accordingly.
101410 total multiple token entities, both chained and non-
chained, with 87 cases that cannot be mapped (55 crossing, 32
chained non-exact match).
We view this in part as a successful experiment
illustrating how both linguistic content and entity
annotation can be enhanced by their interaction.
We expect this enhancement to be useful both for
biomedical information extraction in particular and
more generally for the development of statistical
systems that can take into account different levels
of annotation in a mutually beneficial way.
Acknowledgements
The project described in this paper is based at the In-
stitute for Research in Cognitive Science at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania and is supported by grant
EIA-0205448 from the National Science Founda-
tion?s Information Technology Research (ITR) pro-
gram. We would like to thank Yang Jin, Mark Liber-
man, Eric Pancoast, Colin Warner, Peter White, and
Scott Winters for their comments and assistance, as
well as the invaluable feedback of all the annotators
listed at http://bioie.ldc.upenn.edu/
index.jsp?page=aboutus.html.
References
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert Mac-
Intyre. 1995. Bracketing guidelines for Treebank II
Style, Penn Treebank Project. Tech report MS-CIS-
95-06, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Daniel M. Bikel. 2004. On the Parameter Space of Lex-
icalized Statistical Parsing Models. Ph.D. thesis, De-
partment of Computer and Information Sciences, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania.
Linguistic Data Consortium. 2004. Anno-
tation guidelines for entity detection and
tracking (edt), version 4.2.6 200400401.
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/ACE/docs/
EnglishEDTV4-2-6.PDF.
Ryan McDonald, Scott Winters, Mark Mandel, Yang Jin,
Pete White, and Fernando Pereira. 2004. An entity
tagger for recognizing acquired genomic variations in
cancer literature. Bioinformatics, 22(20):3249?3251.
Scott Miller, Heidi Fox, Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph
Weischedel. 2000. A novel use of statistical parsing to
extract information from text. In 6th Applied Natural
Language Processing Conference.
Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi, Jin-Dong Kim, and Jun?ici
Tsuji. 2002. The GENIA corpus: An annotated cor-
pus in molecular biology domain. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Intelligent Sys-
tems for Molecular Biology.
28
