Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 163?166,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
 Deploying Part-of-Speech Patterns to Enhance Statistical Phrase-Based 
Machine Translation Resources 
Christina Lioma 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Glasgow 
G12 8QQ 
xristina@dcs.gla.ac.uk 
Iadh Ounis 
Department of Computing Science 
University of Glasgow 
G12 8QQ 
ounis@dcs.gla.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract 
Part-of-Speech patterns extracted from 
parallel corpora have been used to en-
hance a translation resource for statistical 
phrase-based machine translation. 
1 Introduction 
The use of structural and syntactic information in 
language processing implementations in recent 
years has been producing contradictory results. 
Whereas language generation has benefited from 
syntax [Wu, 1997; Alshawi et al, 2000], the per-
formance of statistical phrase-based machine trans-
lation when relying solely on syntactic phrases has 
been reported to be poor [Koehn et al, 2003].  
We carry out a set of experiments to explore 
whether heuristic learning of part-of-speech pat-
terns from a parallel corpus can be used to enhance 
phrase-based translation resources.   
2 System 
The resources used for our experiments are as fol-
lows. The statistical machine translation GIZA++ 
toolkit was used to generate a bilingual translation 
table from the French-English parallel and sen-
tence-aligned Europarl corpus. Additionally, a 
phrase table generated from the Europarl French-
English corpus, and a training test set of 2000 
French and English sentences that were made 
available on the webpage of the ACL 2005 work-
shop1 were also used. Syntactic tagging was real-
ized by the TreeTagger, which is a probabilistic 
part-of-speech tagger and lemmatizer. The decoder 
used to produce machine translations was Pharaoh, 
version 1.2.3.  
We used GIZA++ to generate a translation table 
from the parallel corpus. The table produced con-
sisted of individual words and phrases, followed by 
their corresponding translation and a unique prob-
ability value. Specifically, every line of the said 
table consisted of a French entry (in the form of 
one or more tokens), followed by an English entry 
(in the form of one or more tokens), followed by 
P(f|e), which is the probability P of translation to 
the French entry f given the English entry e. We 
added the GIZA++-generated table to the phrase-
based translation table downloaded from the work-
shop webpage. During this merging of translation 
tables, no word or phrase was omitted, replaced or 
altered. We chose to combine the two aforemen-
tioned translation tables in order to achieve better 
coverage. We called the resulting merged transla-
tion table lexical phrase table.  
In order to utilize the syntactic information 
stemming from our resources, we used the Tree-
Tagger to tag both the parallel corpus and the lexi-
cal phrase table. The probability values included 
in the lexical phrase table were not tagged. The 
TreeTagger uses a slightly modified version of the 
Penn Treebank tagset, different for each language. 
In order to achieve tag-uniformity, we performed 
the following dual tag-smoothing operation. 
                                                     
1
 The Europarl French-English corpus and phrase table, and 
the training test set are available at: 
http://www.statmt.org/wpt05/mt-shared-
task/ 
163
Firstly, we changed the French tags into their Eng-
lish equivalents, i.e. NOM (noun ? French) became 
NN (noun ? English). Secondly, we simplified the 
tags, so that they reflected nothing more than gen-
eral part-of-speech information. For example, tags 
denoting predicate-argument structures, wh-
movement, passive voice, inflectional variation, 
and so on, were simplified. For example, NNS 
(noun ? plural) became NN (noun). 
Once our resources were uniformly tagged, we 
used them to extract part-of-speech correspon-
dences between the two languages. Specifically, 
we extracted a sentence-aligned parallel corpus of 
French and English part-of-speech patterns from 
the tagged Europarl parallel corpus. We called this 
corpus of parallel and corresponding part-of-
speech patterns pos-corpus. The format of the pos-
corpus remained identical to the format of the 
original parallel corpus, with the sole difference 
that individual words were replaced by their corre-
sponding part-of-speech tag. Similarly, we ex-
tracted a translation table of part-of-speech patterns 
from the tagged lexical phrase table. We called 
this part-of-speech translation table pos-table. The 
pos-table had exactly the same format as the lexi-
cal phrase table, with the unique difference that 
individual words were replaced by their corre-
sponding part-of-speech tag. The translation prob-
ability values included in the lexical phrase table 
were copied onto the pos-table intact.  
Each of the part-of-speech patterns contained in 
the pos-corpus was matched against the part-of-
speech patterns contained in the pos-table. Match-
ing was realized similarly to conventional left-to-
right string matching operations. Matching was 
considered to be successful not simply when a 
part-of-speech pattern was found to be contained 
in, or part of a longer pattern, but when patterns 
were found to be absolutely identical. When a per-
fect match was found, the translation probability 
value of the specific pattern in the pos-table was 
increased to the maximum value of 1. If the score 
were already 1, it remained unchanged. When 
there were no matches, values remained un-
changed. We chose to match identical part-of-
speech patterns, and not to accept partial pattern 
matches, because the latter would require a revi-
sion of our probability recomputation method. This 
point is discussed in section 3 of this paper. 
Once all matching was complete, the newly en-
hanced pos-table, which now contained translation 
probability scores reflecting the syntactic features 
of the relevant languages, was used to update the 
original lexical phrase table. This update consisted 
in matching each and every part-of-speech pattern 
with its original lexical phrase, and replacing the 
initial translation probability score with the values 
contained in the pos-table. The identification of the 
original lexical phrases that generated each and 
every part-of-speech pattern was facilitated by the 
use of pattern-identifiers (pos-ids) and phrase-
identifiers (phrase-ids), which were introduced at a 
very early stage in the process for that purpose. 
The resulting translation phrase table contained 
exactly the same entries as the lexical phrase table, 
but had different probability scores assigned to 
some of these entries, in line with the parallel part-
of-speech co-occurrences and correspondences 
found in the Europarl corpus. We called this table 
enhanced phrase table. Table 1 illustrates the 
process described above with the example of a 
phrase, the part-of-speech analysis of which has 
been used to increase its original translation prob-
ability value from 0.333333 to 1. 
 
Lexical phrase table 
actions ext?rieures | external action | 0.333333 
Tagged lexical phrase table  
actions_NN ext?rieures_JJ | external_JJ action_NN 
| 0.333333 
pos-corpus 
NN JJ | JJ NN 
Enhanced phrase table 
actions ext?rieures | external action | 1 
 
Table 1: Extracting and matching a part-of-
speech pattern to increase translation probability. 
 
We used the Pharaoh decoder firstly with our 
lexical phrase table, and secondly with our en-
hanced phrase table in order to generate statistical 
machine translations of source and target language 
variations of the French and English training test 
set. We measured performance using the BLEU 
score [Papineri et al, 2001], which estimates the 
accuracy of translation output with respect to a 
reference translation. For both source-target lan-
guage combinations, the use of the lexical phrase 
table received a slightly lower score than the score 
achieved when using the enhanced phrase table. 
The difference between these two approaches is 
not significant (p-value > 0.05). The results of our 
164
experiments are displayed in Table 2 and discussed 
in Section 3.  
 
Language Pair Lexical  Enhanced  
English-French 25.50 25.63 
French-English 26.59 26.89 
 
Table 2: Our translation performance 
(measured with BLEU) 
 
3 Discussion 
The motivation behind this investigation has been 
to test whether syntactic or structural language as-
pects can be reflected or represented in the re-
sources used in statistical phrase-based machine 
translation.  
We adopted a line of investigation that concen-
trates on the correspondence of part-of-speech pat-
terns between French and English. We measured 
the usability of syntactic structures for statistical 
phrase-based machine translation by comparing 
translation performance when a standard phrase 
table was used, and when a syntactically enhanced 
phrase table was used. Both approaches scored 
very similarly. This similarity in the performance 
is justified by the following three factors. 
Firstly, the difference between the two transla-
tion resources, namely the lexical phrase table and 
the enhanced phrase table, does not relate to their 
entries, and thus their coverage, but to a simple 
alteration of the translation probability values of 
some of their entries.  The coverage of these re-
sources is exactly identical. 
Secondly, a closer examination of the transla-
tion probability value alterations that took place in 
order to reflect part-of-speech correspondences 
reveals that the proportion of the entries of the 
phrase table that were matched syntactically to 
phrases from the parallel corpus, and thus under-
went a modification in their translation probability 
score, was very low (less than 1%). The reason 
behind this is the fact that the part-of-speech pat-
terns produced by the parallel corpus were long 
strings in their vast majority, while the part-of-
speech patterns found in the phrase table were sig-
nificantly shorter strings. The inclusion of phrases 
longer than three words in translation resources has 
been avoided, as it has been shown not to have a 
strong impact on translation performance [Koehn 
et al, 2003].  
Thirdly, the above described translation prob-
ability value modifications were not parameterized, 
but consisted in a straightforward increase of the 
translation probability to its maximum value. It 
remains to be seen how these probability value 
alterations can be expanded to a type of probability 
value ?reweighing?, in line with specific parame-
ters, such as the size of the resources involved, the 
frequency of part-of-speech patterns in the re-
sources, the length of part-of-speech patterns, as 
well as the syntactic classification of the members 
of part-of-speech patterns. If one is to compare the 
impact that such parameters have had upon the 
performance of automatic information summarisa-
tion [Mani, 2001] and retrieval technology [Belew, 
2000], it may be worth experimenting with such 
parameter tuning when refining machine transla-
tion resources. 
A note should be made to the choice of tagger 
for our experiments. A possible risk when attempt-
ing any syntactic examination of a large set of data 
may stem from the overriding role that syntax of-
ten assumes over semantics. Statistical phrase-
based machine translation has been faced with in-
stances of this phenomenon, often disguised as 
linguistic idiosyncrasies. This phenomenon ac-
counts for such instances as when nouns appear in 
pronominal positions, or as adverbial modifiers. 
On these occasions, and in order for the syntactic 
examination to be precise, words would have to be 
defined on the basis of their syntactic distribution 
rather than their semantic function. The TreeTag-
ger abides by this convention, which is one of the 
main reasons why we chose it over a plethora of 
other freely available taggers, the remaining rea-
sons being its high speed and low error rate. In ad-
dition, it should be clarified that there is no 
statistical, linguistic, or other reason why we chose 
to adopt the English version of the Penn TreeBank 
tagset over the French, as they are both equally 
conclusive and transparent. 
The overall driving force behind our investiga-
tion has been to test whether part-of-speech struc-
tures can be of assistance to the enhancement of 
translation resources for statistical phrase-based 
machine translation. We view our use of part-of-
speech patterns as a natural extension to the intro-
duction of structural elements to statistical machine 
translation by Wang [1998] and Och et al [1999]. 
165
Our empirical results suggest that the use of part-
of-speech pattern correspondences to enhance ex-
isting translation resources does not damage ma-
chine translation performance. What remains to be 
investigated is how this approach can be opti-
mized, and how it would respond to known statis-
tical machine translation issues, such as mapping 
nested structures, or the handling of ?unorthodox? 
language pairs, i.e. agglutinative-fusion languages. 
4 Conclusion 
Syntactic and structural language information con-
tained in a bilingual parallel corpus has been ex-
tracted and used to refine the translation 
probability values of a translation phrase table, 
using simple heuristics. The usability of the said 
translation table in statistical phrase-based machine 
translation has been tested in the shared task of the 
second track of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Build-
ing and Using Parallel Corpora. Findings suggest 
that using part-of-speech information to alter trans-
lation probabilities has had no significant effect 
upon translation performance. Further investiga-
tion is required to reveal how our approach can be 
optimized in order to produce significant perform-
ance improvement. 
References 
Alshawi, H., Bangalore, S., and Douglas, S. (2000). 
Learning Dependency Translation Models as Collec-
tions of Finite State Head Transducers. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 26(1).  
Belew, R. K. (2000). Finding Out About: Search Engine 
Technology from a Cognitive Perspective. Cam-
bridge University Press, USA. 
Koehn, P., Och, F. J., and Marcu, D. (2003). Statistical 
Phrase-Based Translation. In Proceedings of the Hu-
man Language Technology Conference 2003 
(HLT/NAACL 2003), pages 127-133. 
Mani, I. (2001). Automatic Summarization. John Ben-
jamins Publishing Company, Amsterdam. 
Och, F. J., Tilmann, C., and Ney, H. (1999). Improved 
Alignment Models for Statistical Machine Transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the Joint SIGDAT Conference 
of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing and Very Large Corpora 1999 (EMNLP 1999), 
pages 20-28. 
Papineri, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. 
(2001). BLEU: A Method for Automatic Evaluation 
of Machine Translation. Technical Report 
RC22176(W0109-022), IBM Research Report. 
Wang, Y. (1998). Grammar Inference and Statistical 
Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Melon 
University. 
Wu, D. (1997). Stochastic Inversion transduction 
Grammars and Bilingual Parsing of Parallel Corpora. 
Computational Linguistics, 23(3). 
Yamada, K. and Knight, K. (2001). A Syntax-based 
Statistical Translation Model. In Proceedings of the 
39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL 39), pages 6-11. 
166
