Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts, pages 57?64,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005
A hybrid approach to align sentences and words  
in English-Hindi parallel corpora 
 
Niraj Aswani Robert Gaizauskas 
Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science 
University of Sheffield University of Sheffield 
Regent Court 211, Portobello Street Regent Court 211, Portobello Street 
Sheffield S1 4DP, UK Sheffield S1 4DP, UK 
N.Aswani@dcs.shef.ac.uk R.Gaizauskas@dcs.shef.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper we describe an alignment 
system that aligns English-Hindi texts 
at the sentence and word level in 
parallel corpora. We describe a simple 
sentence length approach to sentence 
alignment and a hybrid, multi-feature 
approach to perform word alignment. 
We use regression techniques in order 
to learn parameters which characterise 
the relationship between the lengths of 
two sentences in parallel text.  We use 
a multi-feature approach with 
dictionary lookup as a primary 
technique and other methods such as 
local word grouping, transliteration 
similarity (edit-distance) and a nearest 
aligned neighbours approach to deal 
with many-to-many word alignment.  
Our experiments are based on the 
EMILLE (Enabling Minority Language 
Engineering) corpus.  We obtained 
99.09% accuracy for many-to-many 
sentence alignment and 77% precision 
and 67.79% recall for many-to-many 
word alignment. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Text alignment is not only used for the tasks such 
as bilingual lexicography or machine translation 
but also in other language processing applications 
such as multilingual information retrieval and word 
sense disambiguation.  Whilst resources like 
bilingual dictionaries and parallel grammars help 
to improve Machine Translation (MT) quality, text 
alignment, by aligning two texts at various levels 
(i.e. documents, sections, paragraphs, sentences 
and words), helps in the creation of such lexical 
resources (Manning & Sch?tze, 2003).   
 
In this paper, we describe a system that aligns 
English-Hindi texts at the sentence and word level.  
Our system is motivated by the desire to develop 
for the research community an alignment system 
for the English and Hindi languages.  Building on 
this, alignment results can be used in the creation 
of other Hindi language processing resources (e.g. 
part-of-speech taggers).  We present a simple 
sentence length approach to align English-Hindi 
sentences and a hybrid approach with local word 
grouping and dictionary lookup as the primary 
techniques to align words.   
 
2 Sentence Alignment 
 
Sentence alignment techniques vary from simple 
character-length or word-length techniques to more 
sophisticated techniques which involve lexical 
constraints and correlations or even cognates (Wu 
2000). Examples of such alignment techniques are 
Brown et al (1991), Kay and Roscheisen (1993), 
Warwick et al (1989), and the ?align? programme 
by Gale and Church (1993).   
 
2.1 Length-based methods 
 
Length-based approaches are computationally 
better, while lexical methods are more resource 
57
hungry. Brown et al (1991) and Gale and Church 
(1993) are amongst the most cited works in text 
alignment work.  Purely length-based techniques 
have no concern with word identity or meaning 
and as such are considered knowledge-poor 
approaches.  The method used by Brown et al 
(1991) measures sentence length in number of 
words.  Their approach is based on matching 
sentences with the nearest length. Gale and Church 
(1993) used a similar algorithm, but measured 
sentence length in number of characters.  Their 
method performed well on the Union Bank of 
Switzerland (UBS) corpus giving a 2% error rate 
for 1:1 alignment.   
 
2.2 Lexical methods 
 
Moving towards knowledge-rich methods, lexical 
information can be vital in cases where a string 
with the same length appears in two languages. 
Kay and Roscheisen (1993) tried lexical methods 
for sentence alignment.  In their algorithm, they 
consider the most reliable pair of source and target 
sentences, i.e. those that contain many possible 
lexical correspondences. They achieved 96% 
coverage on Scientific American articles after four 
passes of the algorithm. Other examples of lexical 
methods are Warwick et al (1989), Mayers et al 
(1998), Chen (1993) and Haruno and Yamazaki 
(1996).   
 
Warwick et al (1989) calculate the probability of 
word pairings on the basis of frequency of source 
word and the number of possible translations 
appearing in target segments.  They suggest using 
a bilingual dictionary to build word-pairs. Mayers 
et al (1998) propose a method that is based on a 
machine readable dictionary.  Since bilingual 
dictionaries contain base forms, they pre-process 
the text to find the base form for each word. They 
tried this method in an English-Japanese alignment 
system and got accuracy of about 89.5% for 1-to-1 
and 42.9% for 2-to-1 sentence alignments. Chen 
(1993) constructs a simple word-to-word 
translation model and then takes the alignment that 
maximizes the likelihood of generating the corpus 
given the translation model. Haruno and Yamazaki 
(1996) use a POS tagger for source and target 
languages and use an online dictionary to find 
matching word pairs.  Haruno and Yamazaki 
(1996) pointed out that though dictionaries cannot 
capture context dependent keywords in the corpus, 
they can be very useful to obtain information about 
words that appear only once in the corpus.  Lexical 
methods for sentence alignment may also result in 
partial word alignment.  Given that lexical methods 
can be computationally expensive, our idea was to 
try a simple length-based approach similar to that 
of Brown et al (1991) for sentence alignment and 
then use lexical methods to align words within 
aligned sentences. 
 
2.3 Algorithm 
 
We use English-Hindi parallel data from the 
EMILLE corpus for our experiments.  EMILLE is 
a 63 Million word electronic corpus of South Asian 
languages, especially those spoken as minority 
languages in UK.  It has around 120,000 words of 
parallel data in each of English, Hindi, Urdu, 
Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati, Sinhala and Tamil 
(Baker et al, 2004).   
 
 
Figure 2.1 Sentence Alignment Parameter  
Learning algorithm 
58
Table 2.1 Rules for the Sentence Alignment Algorithm 
Rule If Hindi:English Alignment 
H1 |hi| - (|ej| + |ej+1|) < 0.17 * |hi| 1-To-2 
H2 |hi| - ( |ej| + |ej+1| + |ej+2| ) < 0.17 * |hi| 1-To-3 
E1 |ej| - ( |hi| + |hi+1| ) < 0.17 * |ej | 2-To-1 
E2 |ej| - ( |hi| + |hi+1| + |hi+2| ) < 0.14 * |ej| 3-To-1 
Default ( |ej| = |hi| )  ||  (Rule H1 and E1 Fails) 1-To-1 
Examining the data, we observe that it is possible 
to align one English sentence with one or more 
Hindi sentences or vice-versa.  In the method 
described below, sentence length is calculated in 
number of words. We define our task as that of 
learning rules that characterise the relationship 
between the lengths of two sentences in parallel 
texts.  We used 60 manually aligned paragraphs 
from the EMILLE corpus, each with an average of 
3 sentences, as a dataset for our learning task.  
Initially we derived minimum and maximum 
length differences in percentages for each of the 
one-to-one, one-to-two and one-to-three parallel 
sentence pairs. Later we used these values as input 
to our algorithm to learn new rules that maximize 
the probability of aligning sentences.   
 
Learning: Let T = [1:1, 1:2, 1:3, 2:1, 3:1], a set of 
possible alignment types between the English and 
Hindi sentences.  For each alignment type t ? T, 
minimum and maximum length differences in 
number of words, normalized to percentages, can 
be described as mint and maxt.   For each alignment 
type t ? T, a constant parameter ?t, where ?t ? 
[mint , mint + 0.01, mint + 0.02, ?, maxt ] was 
learned using an algorithm described in figure 2.1.    
?t is a value that describes the length relationship 
between the sentences of a pair of type t. For 
example, given a pair of one Hindi and two 
English sentences and a value ?t, where t = 1:2, it 
is possible to check if these sentences can be 
aligned with each other.  Suppose for a given pair 
of parallel sentences that consist of hi (Hindi 
sentence at ith position) and ej and ej+1 (English 
sentences at jth and j+1th positions), let |hi|, |ej| and 
|ej+1| be the lengths of Hindi and English sentences. 
hi, ej and ej+1 are said to have 1:2 alignment if |hi| - 
(|ej| + |ej+1|) < 0.17 * |hi|, i.e. the difference 
between the length of the Hindi sentence and the 
length of the two consecutive English sentences is 
less than (?t=1:2 = 0.17) times the length of the 
Hindi sentence.  Table 2.1 lists rules for different 
possible alignments. Before we decide on the final 
alignment, we check each possibility of one Hindi 
sentence being aligned with one, two or three 
consecutive English sentences and vice-versa.  We 
use rules H1 and H2 to check the possibility of one 
Hindi sentence being aligned with two or three 
consecutive English sentences.  Similarly, rules E1 
and E2 are used to check the possibility of one 
English sentence being aligned with two or three 
consecutive Hindi sentences. If none of the rules 
from H1, H2, E1 and E2 return true, we consider 
the default alignment (1-To-1) between the English 
and Hindi sentences.  We give preference to the 
higher alignment over the possible lower 
alignments, i.e. given 1-To-2 and 1-To-3 possible 
alignment mappings, we consider 1-To-3 mapping.  
We tested our algorithm on parallel texts with total 
of 3441 English-Hindi sentence pairs and obtained 
an accuracy of 99.09%; i.e., the correctly aligned 
pairs were 3410. 
 
3 Word Alignment 
 
Extending sentence alignment to word alignment is 
a process of locating corresponding word pairs in 
two languages.  In some cases, a word is not 
translated, or is translated by several words.  A 
word can also be a part of an expression that is 
translated as a whole, and therefore the entire 
expression must be translated as a whole (Manning 
& Sch?tze, 2003).  We present a hybrid method for 
many-to-many word alignment.  Hindi is a partial 
free order language where the order of word 
groups in a Hindi sentence is not fixed, but the 
order of words within groups is fixed (Ray et al, 
2003).  According to Ray et al (2003), fixed order 
word group extraction is essential for decreasing 
the load on the free word order parser.  The word 
alignment algorithm takes as input a pair of aligned 
sentences and groups words in sentences of both 
languages.  We have observed a few facts about 
the Hindi language. For example, there are no 
59
articles in Hindi (Bal Anand, 2001).  Since there 
are no articles in Hindi, articles are aligned to null.   
 
3.1 Local word grouping 
 
A separate group is created for each token in the 
English text.  Every English word has one property 
associated with it: the lemma of the word. This is 
necessary because a dictionary lookup approach is 
at the heart of our word alignment algorithm.  
Verbs are used in different inflected forms in 
different sentences.  For a verb, it is common not 
to find all inflected forms listed in a dictionary, i.e. 
most dictionaries contain verbs only in their base 
forms. Therefore we use a morphological analyzer 
to find the lemma of each English word.   
 
Word groups in Hindi are created using two 
resources: a Hindi gazetteer list that contains a 
large set of named entities (NE) and a rule file that 
contains more than 250 rules. The gazetteer list is 
available as a part of Hindi Gazetteer Processing 
Resource in GATE (Maynard et al, 2003).  For 
each rule in the rule file, it contains the following 
information:  
1. Hindi Regular Expression (RE) for a word 
or phrase.  This must match one or more 
words in the Hindi sentence. 
2. Group name or a part-of-speech category. 
3. Expected English word(s) (EEW) that this 
Hindi word group may align to. 
4. Expected Number of English words (NW) 
that the Hindi group may align to. 
5. In case a group of one or more English 
words aligns with a group of one or more 
Hindi words, information about the key 
words (KW) in both groups.  Key words 
must match each other in order to align 
English-Hindi groups. 
6. A rule to convert the Hindi word into its 
base form (BF). 
Rules in the rule file identify verbs, postpositions, 
noun phrases and also a set of words, whose 
translation is expected to occur in the same order 
as the English words in the English sentence.  The 
local word grouping algorithm considers one rule 
at a time and tries to match the regular expression 
in the Hindi sentence.  If the expression is 
matched, a separate group for each found pattern is 
created.  When a Hindi group is created, based on 
its pattern type, one of the following categories is 
assigned to that group: 
 
proper-noun city job-title location 
country number day-unit date-unit 
month-unit verb auxiliary pronoun 
post-position other   
 
These rules have been obtained mainly through 
consulting Hindi grammar material (Bal Anand, 
2001 and Ta, 2002) and by observing the EMILLE 
corpus. For example, consider the following rules:  
 
No RE Cat EEW NW KW BF 
1 ???? num fifty two 2   
2 (.)+ ??? verb   1  
3 (.)+ ? ??? verb   1 1,?? = ?? 
4 (.)+ ?? ???? prep for (.)+ 2 1-2  
5 ??? ??? other different 1   
i) ???? ?, ?????, ????? are used to indicate the progressive tense.  They 
can be seen as analogous to the English (-ing) ending. 
ii) ????, ????, and ???? are used as verb endings to indicate the habitual 
tense.  They must agree with subject number and gender. 
iii) ???? is a past tense conjunction of the verb ??????. 
 
In the first rule, if we find a word ?????? (bavan) 
in Hindi, we mark it as a ?Number? and search for 
the English string with two words that is equal to 
the expected string ?fifty two?.  In the second rule, 
we locate a string where the second word is ????? 
(raha). ?1? in the fifth column specifies that the first 
word is the keyword. We use the dictionary to 
locate the word in the English sentence that 
matches with the key word. If the English word is 
located, we align ?(.)+ ???? with the English word 
found. In the third rule, if we find a Hindi string 
with two words where the first word ends with ???? 
(te) and the second word is ???? (the), we group them 
as a verb.  As specified in the sixth column, we 
replace the characters ???? with ???? (na) to convert 
the first word into its base form (e.g. ?????? (gaate) 
into ?????? (gaana)). In the fourth rule, we align ?X 
?? ????? with ?For X?, where ?For? = ??? ?????. As 
specified in the fifth column, we align the first 
word in Hindi with the second word in English. In 
the final example, we group two words that are 
identical to each other.  For example: "??? ???" 
(alag alag) which means ?different? in English.  
Such bigrams are used to stress the importance of a 
word/activity in a sentence. 
60
 Figure 3.1 Dictionary Lookup Approach 
 
example, in rule 3 and 4 if the word ends with 
either of ??, ? ?or ?? followed by (PH), it is assumed 
that the word is a verb.  The formula for finding 
the lemma of any Hindi verb is: infinitive = root 
verb + ????.  Sometimes it is possible to predict 
the corresponding English translation. For 
example, for the postposition ??? ??????, one is 
likely to find the preposition ?in front of? in the 
English sentence.  We store this information as an 
expected English word(s) in Hindi Word Groups 
(HWGs) and search for it in the English sentence.  
In the case of rules 4 and 5, though the HWG 
contains more than one word, only one is the actual 
verb (key word) that is expected to be available in 
a dictionary.  We specify the index of this key 
word in the HWG, so as to consider only the word 
at the specified index to compare with key word in 
English word group.  If they match, the full HWG 
is aligned to the word in English sentence.   
 
3.2 Alignment Algorithm 
 
After applying the local word grouping rules to the 
Hindi sentence(s), based on their categories of 
HWGs, we use four methods to process and align 
HWGs with their respective English Word Groups. 
   
1. Dictionary lookup approach (DL) 
2. Transliteration similarity approach (TS) 
3. Expected English words approach (EEW) 
4. Nearest aligned neighbour approach 
 
Whilst the verbs and other groups are processed 
with DL approach, HWGs with categories such as 
proper nouns, city, job-title, location, and country 
are processed with TS approach. HWGs such as 
number, day-unit, date-unit, month-unit, auxiliary, 
pronoun and postpositions, where the expected 
English words are specified, are processed with 
EEW approach.  Sometimes the combination of 
DL and TS is also used to identify the proper 
alignment.  At the end, nearest aligned neighbour 
approach is used to align the unaligned HWGs. 
 
Dictionary Lookup 
 
The corpus we used in our experiments is encoded 
in Unicode and therefore the word matching 
process requires dictionary entries to be in Unicode 
encoding. The only English-Hindi dictionary we 
found is called, ?shabdakoSha? and is freely 
available from (WWW2).  In this dictionary, the 
ITRANS transliteration system is followed, i.e. 
Hindi entries are not written in the Devanagari 
script, but in the Roman script. This dictionary has 
around 15,000 English words, each with an 
average of 4 relevant Hindi words. Following  
61
 Figure 3.2 Nearest Aligned Neighbours Approach 
 
ITRANS conventions, a parser was developed to 
convert all these entries into Unicode.  Given a set 
of English and Hindi words, the algorithm 
presented in figure 3.1 is executed to search for the 
best translation among the English words.  
 
Transliteration Similarity 
 
A transliteration system maintains a consistent 
correspondence between the alphabets of two 
languages, irrespective of sound (Manning & 
Sch?tze, 2003).  Given two words, each from a 
different language, we define ?transliteration 
similarity? as the measure of likeness between 
them.  This could exist due to the word in one 
language being inherited or adopted by the other 
language, or because the word is a proper noun. 
Named entities such as city, job-title, location, 
country and proper nouns, all recognized by the 
local word grouping algorithm are compared using 
a transliteration similarity approach. This likeness 
is counted using a table that lists letter 
correspondences between the alphabets of two 
languages.  For the English and Hindi languages, it 
is possible to come up with a table that defines 
letter correspondence between the alphabets of two 
languages.  For example,  
 
A  ?, B  ?, Bh  ?, Ch  ?,  
D  ?,  Dh  ? and so on? 
 
A bidirectional mapping is established between 
each character in the English and Hindi alphabets.  
When DL is not able to find any specific English 
word in dictionary, this approach is used to find the 
transliteration similarity between the unaligned 
words. Sometimes because the words in a Hindi 
sentence are not spelled correctly, when DL issues 
a query to dictionary, none of the Hindi words 
appearing in a Hindi sentence match with the 
words returned from dictionary.  We use a 
dynamic programming algorithm ?edit-distance? to 
calculate similarity between these words 
(WWW3).  According to WWW3, ?The edit 
distance of two strings, s1 and s2, is defined as the 
minimum number of point mutations required to 
change s1 into s2, where a point mutation is one 
of:  change a letter, insert a letter or delete a 
letter.? The lower the distance, the greater the 
similarity. From our experiments of 100 proper 
noun pairs, we found that if the similarity is greater 
than 75%, the words can be reliably aligned with 
each other.  We consider a pair with the highest 
similarity.  E.g.: Aswani  ???????.  Here we 
remove vowels in both strings, except those that 
appear at the start of words.  After the removal of 
vowels from the English and Hindi texts, the 
resulting text would be: Aswn  ????.  The 
Hindi text is then converted into English text using 
the transliteration table:  Aswn  Aswn. The two 
texts are then compared using an ?edit-distance? 
algorithm.  
 
Expected English word(s) 
 
For HWGs which are categorised as numbers, job-
titles or postpositions, it is possible to specify the 
expected English word or words that can be found 
in the parallel English text. The algorithm retrieves 
expected English word(s) from the HWGs and tries 
to locate them in the English sentence. This 
approach can be useful to locate one or more 
English words that align with one or more Hindi 
words.  For example, the number ???????? whose 
equivalent translation in English is ?forty two? has 
two words in English, and the postposition ??? 
??????, whose equivalent translation in English is 
?in front of?, has three words in English.  These 
are examples of many-to-many word alignment. 
62
Nearest Aligned Neighbours 
 
At the end of the first three stages of the word 
alignment process, many words remain unaligned.  
Here we introduce a new approach, called the 
?Nearest Aligned Neighbours approach?.  In 
certain cases, words in English-Hindi phrases 
follow a similar order.  The Nearest Aligned 
Neighbours approach works on this principle and 
aligns one or more words with one of the English 
words. A local word grouping algorithm, explained 
in section 3.1, groups such phrases and tags them 
as ?group?. Considering one HWG at a time, we 
find the nearest Hindi word that is already aligned 
with one or more English word(s).  We assume that 
the words in English-Hindi phrases follow a 
similar order and align the rest words in that group 
accordingly.  An example of alignment using the 
Nearest Aligned Neighbours approach is given in 
Figure 3.2. Word H4 is already aligned with E5, 
and H3, H5, H6 and H7 are yet to be aligned.  The 
local word grouping algorithm has tagged a 
sequence of H4, H5, H6 and H7 as a single group.  
At the same time, H6 and H7 are also grouped as a 
single group.  The algorithm searches for the 
aligned Hindi word, which, in this case, is H4 and 
aligns H5 with E6 and the group of H6 and H7 
with E7.   
 
4 Results 
 
 
Figure 4.1 Word Alignment Results 
 
We performed manual evaluation of our word 
alignment algorithm on a set of parallel data 
aligned at the sentence level.  The parallel texts 
consist of 3954 English and 5361 Hindi words 
taken from the EMILLE Corpus.  We calculate our 
results in terms of the number of aligned English 
word groups. The precision is calculated as the 
ratio of the number of correctly aligned English 
word groups to the total number of English word 
groups aligned by the system, and recall is 
calculated as the ratio of the number of correctly 
aligned English word groups to the total number of 
English word groups created by the system. We 
obtained 77% precision and 67.79% recall for 
many-to-many word alignment.  Figure 4.1 shows 
an example of the word alignment results.  
 
5 Future works 
 
It would be useful to evaluate separate stages (i.e. 
DL, TS, EEW and Nearest Aligned Neighbours 
approach) in the word alignment algorithm 
separately.  We aim to do this as part of a failure 
analysis of the algorithm in future. We also aim to 
improve our alignment results by using Part-of-
Speech information for the English texts. We aim 
to implement or use local word grouping rules for 
the English text and improve our existing word 
grouping rules for the Hindi texts.  The Nearest 
Aligned Neighbours approach suggests possible 
alignments, but we are trying to integrate some 
statistical ranking algorithms in order to suggest 
more reliable pairs of alignment. Yarowsky et al 
(2001) introduced a new method for developing a 
Part-of-Speech tagger by projecting tags across 
aligned corpora.  They used this technique to 
supply data for a supervised learning technique to 
acquire a French part-of-speech tagger. We aim to 
use our English-Hindi word alignment results to 
bootstrap a Part-of-Speech tagger for the Hindi 
language.   
 
References 
 
Bal Anand, 2001, Hindi Grammar Books for 
standard 5 to standard 10, Navneet Press, India.   
 
Baker P., Bontcheva K., Cunningham H., 
Gaizauskas R., Hamza O., Hardie A., Jayaram 
B.D., Leisher M., McEnery A.M., Maynard D., 
Tablan V., Ursu C., Xiao Z., 2004, Corpus 
linguistics and South Asian languages: Corpus 
creation and tool development, Literary and 
Linguistic Computing, 19(4), pp. 509-524. 
 
63
Brown, P., Lai, J. C., and Mercer, R., 1991, 
Aligning Sentences in Parallel Corpora,  
In Proceedings of ACL-91, Berkeley CA. 
 
Chen S., 1993, Aligning sentences in bilingual 
corpora using lexical information, Proceedings 
of the 31st conference on Association for   
Computational Linguistics, pp. 9 ? 16, 
Columbus, Ohio. 
 
Gale W., and Church K., 1993, A program for 
aligning sentences in bilingual corpora, 
Proceedings of the 29th conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 
pp.177-184, June 18-21, 1991, Berkeley, 
California. 
 
Haruno M. and Yamazaki T., 1996, High-
performance bilingual text alignment using 
statistical and dictionary information, 
Proceedings of the 34th conference of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 
131 ? 138, Santa Cruz, California. 
 
Kay M. and Roscheisen M., 1993, Text translation 
alignment, Computational Linguistics, 19(1):75--
102. 
 
Manning C. and Sch?tze H., 2003, Foundations of 
Statistical Natural Language Processing, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
 
Mark D., 2004, Technical Report on Unicode 
Standard Annex #29 - Text Boundaries, Version 
4.0.1, Unicode Inc.,  
 http://www.unicode.org/reports/tr29/ [22/11/04]. 
 
Mayers A., Grishman R., Kosaka M., 1998, A 
Multilingual Procedure for Dictionary-Based 
Sentence Alignment, Proceedings of the Third 
Conference of the Association for Machine 
Translation in the Americas on Machine 
Translation and the Information Soup.   
 
Maynard D., Tablan V., Bontcheva K., 
Cunningham H., 2003, Rapid customisation of 
an Information Extraction system for surprise 
languages, ACM Transactions on Asian 
Language Information Processing, Special issue 
on Rapid Development of Language 
Capabilities: The Surprise Languages. 
Ray, P, Harish V., Sarkar, S., and Basu, A., 2003, 
Part of Speech Tagging and Local Word 
Grouping Techniques for Natural Language 
Parsing in Hindi, Proceedings of the 1st 
International Conference on Natural Language 
Processing (ICON 2003); Mysore. 
 
Simard M. and Pierre P., 1996, Bilingual Sentence 
Alignment: Balancing Robustness and Accuracy, 
Proceedings of the First Conference of the 
Association for Machine Translation in the 
Americas (AMTA-96), pp. 135-144, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada. 
 
Ta A., 2002, A Door into Hindi, NC State 
University, 
http://www.ncsu.edu/project/hindi_lessons/lesso
ns.html [22/11/04] 
 
Warwick S., Catizone, R., and Graham R., 1989, 
Deriving Translation Data from Bilingual Texts, 
in Proceedings of the First International Lexical 
Acquisition Workshop, Detroit.   
 
WU D., Jul 2000, Alignment, In Robert DALE, 
Hermann MOISL, and Harold SOMERS 
(editors), Handbook of Natural Language 
Processing. pp. 415-458. New York: Marcel 
Dekker. ISBN 0-8247-9000-6.  
 
WWW1, Devanagari Unicode Chart, the Unicode 
Standard, Version 4.0, Unicode 
Inc.,http://www.unicode.org/charts/PDF/U0900.
pdf [22/03/05]. 
 
WWW2, English-Hindi dictionary source, 
http://sanskrit.gde.to/hindi/dict/eng-hin_guj.itx 
[22/03/05]. 
 
WWW3, Dynamic Programming Algorithm (DPA) 
for Edit-Distance, 
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~lloyd/tildeAlg
DS/Dynamic/Edit/ [22/03/05] 
 
Yarowsky, D., G. Ngai and R. Wicentowski, 2001, 
Inducing Multilingual Text Analysis Tools via 
Robust Projection across Aligned Corpora, In 
Proceedings of HLT 2001, First International 
Conference on Human Language Technology 
Research. 
64
