Proceedings of the Second ACL Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodologies for Teaching NLP and CL, pages 62?68,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Hands-On NLP for an Interdisciplinary Audience 
 
 
Elizabeth D. Liddy and Nancy J. McCracken 
Center for Natural Language Processing 
School of Information Studies 
Syracuse University 
liddy@syr.edu, njm@ecs.syr.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The need for a single NLP offering for a 
diverse mix of graduate students (including 
computer scientists, information scientists, 
and linguists) has motivated us to develop a 
course that provides students with a breadth 
of understanding of the scope of real world 
applications, as well as depth of knowledge 
of the computational techniques on which 
to build in later experiences. We describe 
the three hands-on tasks for the course that 
have proven successful, namely: 1) in-class 
group simulations of computational proc-
esses;  2) team posters and public presenta-
tions on state-of-the-art commercial NLP 
applications, and; 3) team projects imple-
menting various levels of human language 
processing using open-source software on 
large textual collections. Methods of 
evaluation and indicators of success are 
also described. 
1 Introduction 
This paper presents both an overview and some of 
the details regarding audience, assignments, tech-
nology, and projects in an interdisciplinary course 
on Natural Language Processing that has evolved 
over time and been successful along multiple di-
mensions ? both from the students? and the fac-
ulty?s perspective in terms of accomplishments and 
enjoyment. This success has required us to meet 
the challenges of enabling students from a range of 
disciplines and diverse experience to each gain a 
real understanding of what is entailed in Natural 
Language Processing. 
2 A Course Within Multiple Curricula 
The course is entitled Natural Language Processing 
and is taught at the 600 graduate course level in a 
School of Information Studies in a mid to large-
size private university. While NLP is not core to 
any of the three graduate degree programs in the 
Information School, it is considered an important 
area within the Information School for both profes-
sional careers and advanced research, as well as in 
the Computer Science and Linguistic Programs on 
campus. The course has been taught every 1? to 2 
years for the last 18 years. While some aspects of 
the course have changed dramatically, particularly 
in regards to the nature of the student team pro-
jects, the basic structure ? the six levels of lan-
guage processing ? has remained essentially the 
same, with updates to topics within these levels 
reflecting recent research findings and new appli-
cations. 
3 Audience 
At the moment, this is the only course offering on 
NLP within the university, but a second-level, 
seminar course, entitled Content Analysis Research 
Using Natural Language Processing, geared to-
wards PhD students doing social science research 
on large textual data sets, will be offered for the 
first time in Fall 2005. Given that the current NLP 
course is the only one taught, it cannot, by neces-
sity, have the depth that could be achieved in cur-
ricula where there are multiple courses. In a more 
extensive curriculum, courses provide a greater 
depth than is possible in our single course.  Our 
goal is to provide students with a solid, broad basis 
on which to build in later experiences, and to en-
62
able real understanding of a complex topic for 
which students realize there is a much greater 
depth of understanding that could be reached. 
The disciplinary mix of students in the course is 
usually an even mix of information science and 
computer science students, with slightly fewer lin-
guistics majors. Recently the Linguistics Depart-
ment has established a concentration in 
Information Representation and Retrieval, for 
which the NLP course is a required course. Also, 
the course is cross-listed as an elective for com-
puter science graduate students. All of the above 
facts contribute to the widely diverse mix of stu-
dents in the NLP course, and has required us to 
develop a curriculum that enables all students to be 
successful in achieving solid competency in NLP. 
4 Topics Covered 
The topics in the course include typical ones cov-
ered in most NLP courses and are organized 
around the levels of language processing and the 
specific computational techniques within each of 
these. Discussions of more general theoretic no-
tions such as statistical vs. symbolic NLP, repre-
sentation theories, and language modeling are 
interspersed. A single example of topics that are 
taught within the levels of language processing 
include: 
 
Morphology - Finite state automata 
Lexicology - Part-of-speech tagging 
Syntax - Parsing with context free grammars 
Semantics - Word sense disambiguation 
Discourse - Sublanguage analysis 
Pragmatics - Gricean Maxims 
 
Each of the topics has assigned readings, from the 
course?s textbook, Speech and Language Process-
ing: An Introduction to Natural Language Process-
ing, Computational Linguistics, and Speech 
Recognition by Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Mar-
tin, as well as from recent and seminal papers. 
5 Methods 
What really enables the students to fully grasp the 
content of the course are the three important hands-
on features of the course, namely: 
1. Small, in-class group simulations of compu-
tational processes.   
2. Team posters and public presentations re-
porting on the state-of-the-art in commer-
cial NLP applications such as 
summarization, text mining, machine 
translation, question answering, speech 
recognition, and natural language genera-
tion.  
3. Team projects implementing various levels 
of human language processing using open-
source software on large collections. 
Each of these features of the course is described in 
some detail in the following sections.  
The course is designed around group projects, 
while the membership of the teams changes for 
each assignment. This is key to enabling a diverse 
group to learn to work with students from different 
disciplines and to value divergent experience. It 
has also proven extremely successful in forming a 
class that thinks of itself as a community and in 
encouraging sharing of best practices so that eve-
ryone advances their learning significantly further 
than if working alone or with the same team 
throughout the course. The way that teams are 
formed for the three types of projects varies, and 
will be described in each of the following three 
sections. 
Furthermore, constant, frequent presentations to 
the class of the group work, no matter how brief, 
enable students to own their newly-gained under-
standings. In fact, this course no longer requires 
any written papers, but instead focuses on applica-
tion of what is learned, first at the specific level of 
language processing, then to new data for new 
purposes, and then, to understanding real-world 
NLP systems performing various applications ? 
with the group constantly reporting their findings 
back to the class. 
5.1 In-class Group Simulations of Computa-
tional Processes 
During the first third of the course, lectures on 
each level of language processing are followed by 
a 30 to 45 minute exercise that enables the students 
who work in small groups to simulate the process 
they have just learned about, i.e. morphological 
analysis, part-of-speech tagging, or parsing some 
sample sentences with a small grammar. These 
groups are formed by the professor in an ad hoc 
manner by counting off by 4 in a different pattern 
each week to ensure that students work with stu-
63
dents on the other side of the room, given that 
friends or students from the same school tend to sit 
together. After the exercise, each group has 5 min-
utes to report back to the class on how they ap-
proached the task, with visuals.  
We?ve found that the formation of these small 
groups is pedagogically sound and enables learning 
in three ways. First, the groups break down social 
barriers and as the course advances the students 
find it much easier to work together and are more 
comfortable in sharing their work. Secondly, the 
students begin to understand and value what the 
students from different disciplines bring to bear on 
NLP problems. That is, the computer scientists 
recognize the value of the deeper understanding of 
language of the linguistic students, and the linguis-
tic students learn how the computer science stu-
dents approach the task computationally. Thirdly, 
while there were concerns on our part that these 
simulations might be too easy, the students have 
affirmed in mid-term course evaluations (which are 
not required, but do provide invaluable insight into 
a class?s engagement with and assimilation of the 
material) that these simulations really help them to 
understand conceptually what the task is and how 
it might be accomplished before they have to 
automate the processes. 
5.2 Real World Applications of NLP 
This year, two semester-long team projects were 
assigned ? the usual team-based computer imple-
mentation of NLP for a particular computational 
task ? and an investigation into how NLP is util-
ized in various state-of-the-art commercial NLP 
applications. The motivation for adding this second 
semester-long team project was that a number of 
the students in the course, particularly the masters 
students in Information Management, are most 
likely to encounter NLP in their work world when 
they need to advise on particular language-based 
applications. It has become clear, however, that as 
a result of this assignment, all of the students are 
quite pleased with their own improved ability to 
understand what a language-based technology is 
actually doing. Even if a student is more research-
focused, they are intrigued by what might be done 
to improve or add to a particular technology. 
Students are given two weeks to familiarize 
themselves outside of class with the suggested ap-
plications sufficiently to select a topic of real inter-
est to them. This year?s choices included Spell 
Correction, Machine Translation, Search Engines, 
Text Mining, Summarization, Question Answer-
ing, Speech Recognition, Cross-Language Infor-
mation Retrieval, Natural Language Generation, 
and Dialogue Agents.  
Students then sign up, on a first-come basis, for 
their preferred application. The teams are kept 
small (up to four) to ensure that each student con-
tributes. At times a single student is sufficiently 
interested in a topic that a team of one is formed. 
Students arrange their own division of labor. There 
are three 10 to 20 minute report-backs by each 
team over the course of the semester, the first two 
to the class and the final one during an open invita-
tion, school-wide Poster & Reception event. There 
are guidelines for each of the three presentations, 
as well as a stated expectation that the teams ac-
tively critique and comment on the presentations, 
both in terms of the information presented as well 
as presentational factors. Five minutes are allowed 
for class comments and students are graded on how 
actively they participate and provide feedback. 
The 1st presentation is a non-technical overview 
of what the particular NLP application does and 
includes examples of publicly available systems / 
products the class might know. The 2nd presenta-
tion covers technical details of the application, 
concentrating on the computational linguistic as-
pects, particularly how such an application typi-
cally works, and the levels of NL processing that 
are involved (e.g., lexical, syntactic, etc). The 3rd 
presentation involves a poster which incorporates 
the best of their first two presentations and sugges-
tions from the class, plus a laptop demo if possible. 
As stated above, the 3rd presentation is done in 
an open school-wide Poster and Reception event 
which is attended by faculty and students, mainly 
PhD students. The Poster Receptions have proven 
very successful along multiple dimensions ? first, 
the students take great pride in the work they are 
presenting;  second, posters are better than one-
time, in-class presentations as the multiple oppor-
tunities to explain their work and get feedback im-
prove the students? ability to create the best 
presentation of their work; third, the wider expo-
sure of the field and its applications builds an audi-
ence for future semesters and instills in the student 
body a sense of the reach and importance of NLP. 
5.3 Hands-On NL Processing of Text  
64
The second of the semester-long team projects is 
the computer implementation of NLP.  The goal of 
the project is for students to gain hands-on experi-
ence in utilizing NLP software in the context of 
accomplishing analysis of a large, real-world data 
set. The project comprises two tasks, each of which 
is reported back to the class by each team. These 
presentations were not initially in the syllabus, but 
interestingly, the students requested that each team 
present after each task so that they could all learn 
from the experiences of the other teams. 
The corpus chosen was the publicly available 
Enron email data set, which consists of about 
250,000 unique emails from 150 people. With du-
plication, the data has approximately 500,000 files 
and takes up 2.75 gigabytes. The data set was pre-
pared for public release by William Cohen at CMU 
and, available at http://www-2.cs.cmu.edu/~enron/. 
This data set is useful not only as real text of the 
email genre, but it can be easily divided into 
smaller subsets suitable for student projects. (And, 
of course, there is also the human interest factor in 
that the data set is available due to its use in the 
Enron court proceedings!) 
The goal of the project is to use increasing lev-
els of NLP to characterize a selected subset of En-
ron email texts. The project is designed to be 
carried out in two parts, involving two assigned 
levels of NLP. The first level, part-of-speech tag-
ging, is accomplished as Task 1 and the second, 
phrase-bracketing or chunk-parsing, is assigned as 
Task 2. However, the overall characterization of 
the text is left open-ended, and the student teams 
chose various dimensions for their analyses.  Pro-
jects included analyzing the topics of the emails of 
different people, social network analyses based on 
people and topics mentioned in the email text, and 
analyses based on author and recipient header in-
formation about each email. 
Teams are established for these projects by the 
professor based on the capabilities and interests of 
the individual students as reported in short self-
surveys. This resulted in teams on which there is a 
mix of computer science, linguistics and informa-
tion science expertise. The teams accomplished the 
tasks of choosing a data analysis method, process-
ing data subsets, designing NL processing to ac-
complish the analysis, programming the NL 
processing, conducting the data analysis, and pre-
paring the in-class reports. 
5.3.1 Tools Used in the Project  
For preliminary processing of the Enron email 
files, programs and data made available by Profes-
sor Andr?s Corrada-Emmanuel at the University of 
Massachusetts at Amherst, and available at 
http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/~corrada/ were used. The 
emails were assigned MD5-digest numbers in or-
der to identify them uniquely, and the data con-
sisted of mappings from the digest numbers to 
files, as well as to authors and recipients of the 
email. The programs contained filters that could be 
used to remove extraneous text such as headers and 
forwarded text. The teams adapted parts of these 
programs to convert the email files to files with 
text suitable for NL processing. 
For the NL processing, the Natural Language 
Toolkit (NL Toolkit or NLTK), developed at the 
University of Pennsylvania by Loper and Bird 
(2002), and available for download from Source-
Forge at http://nltk.sourceforge.net/ was used.  The 
NL Toolkit is a set of libraries written in the Py-
thon programming language that provides core 
data types for processing natural language text, 
support for statistical processing, and a number of 
standard processing algorithms used in NLP, in-
cluding tokenization, part of speech (POS) tagging, 
chunk parsing, and syntactic parsing. The toolkit 
provides demonstration packages, tutorials, exam-
ple corpora and documentation to support its use in 
educational classes.  Experience using the Toolkit 
shows that in order to use the NL Toolkit, one 
member of each team should have at least some 
programming background in order to write Python 
programs that use the NL Toolkit libraries.  The 
use of Python as the programming language was 
successful in that the level needed to use the NL 
Toolkit was manageable by the students with only 
a little programming background and in that the 
computer science students were able to adapt to the 
Python programming style and could easily utilize 
the classes and libraries. 
At the beginning of the term project, the stu-
dents were offered a lab session and lab materials 
to get them started. Since no one knew the Python 
programming language at the outset, there was an 
initial learning curve for the Python language as 
well as for the NL Toolkit. The lab materials pro-
vided to the students consisted of installation in-
structions for Python and NL Toolkit and a number 
of example programs that combined programming 
65
snippets from the NL Toolkit tutorials to process 
text through the NLP phases of tokenization, POS 
tagging and the construction of frequency distribu-
tions over the POS tagged text. During the lab ses-
sion, some of the example programs were worked 
through as a group with the goal of enabling the 
students to become competent in Python and to 
introduce them to the NL Toolkit tutorials that had 
additional materials. The NL Toolkit tutorials are 
extensive on the lower levels of NL processing 
(e.g. lexical and syntactic) and students with some 
programming background were able to utilize 
them. 
As part of their first task, the student teams were 
asked to select a subset of the Enron emails to 
work with. The entire Enron email directories were 
placed on a server for the teams to look at in mak-
ing their selections. The teams also used informa-
tion about the Enron employees as described in a 
paper by Corrada-Emmanuel (2005). Some student 
teams elected to work with different email topic 
folders for one person, while others chose a few 
email folders each from a small number of people 
(2-5). Their selected emails first needed to be 
processed to text using programs adapted from 
Corrada-Emmanuel. For the most part, the sub-
corpora choices of the student teams worked out 
well in terms of size and content. Several hundred 
emails turned out to be a good size, providing 
enough data to experience the challenges of long 
processing times and to appreciate why NLP is 
useful in processing large amounts of data, without 
being unduly overwhelmed. Initially, one team 
chose all the emails from several people. The 
number of email files involved was several thou-
sand and it took several hours to unzip those direc-
tories, let alne process them, and they 
subsequently reduced the number of files for their 
analysis. 
The first task was to analyze the chosen emails 
based solely on lexical level information, namely 
words with POS tags. NL Toolkit provides librar-
ies for tokenization where the user can define the 
tokens through regular expressions, and the stu-
dents used these to tailor the tokenization of their 
emails. The Toolkit also provides a regular expres-
sion POS tagger as well as n-gram taggers, and the 
students used these in combination for their POS 
tagging. Students experimented with the Brown 
corpus and a part of the Penn Treebank corpus, 
provided by NL Toolkit to train the POS taggers, 
and compared the results.  
Building on the first task, the second task ex-
tended the analysis of the chosen emails to phrases 
from the text. Again, NL Toolkit provides a library 
for chunk parsing where regular expressions can be 
used to specify patterns of words with POS tags 
either to be included or excluded from phrases. 
Since chunk parsing depends on POS tagging, 
there was a need for a larger training corpus. A 
research center within the Information School has 
a license for Penn Treebank, and  provided addi-
tional Penn Treebank files for the class to use for 
that purpose. Most teams used regular expressions 
to bracket proper names, minimal noun phrases, 
and verb phrases. One team used these to group 
maximal noun phrases, and another team used 
regular expressions to find patterns of communica-
tion verbs for use in social network analysis.   
In retrospect, it was found that the chunk pars-
ing did not take the teams far enough in NLP 
analysis of text. Experience in teaching using the 
NL Toolkit suggests that use of the syntactic pars-
ing libraries to find more complex structures in the 
text would have provided more depth of analysis. 
Students also suggested that they would have liked 
to incorporate semantic level capabilities, such as 
the use of WordNet to find conceptual groupings 
via synonym recognition. The next offering of the 
course will include these improvements. 
Using the NL Toolkit for NL processing worked 
out well overall and enabled the students to ob-
serve and appreciate details of the processing steps 
without having to write a program for every algo-
rithm themselves. The tutorials are good, both at 
explaining concepts and providing programming 
examples. There were a few places where some 
data structure details did not seem to be suffi-
ciently documented, either in the tutorials or in the 
API.  This was true for  the recently added Brill 
POS tagger, and is likely due to its recency of ad-
dition to the toolkit.  However for the most part, 
the coverage of the documentation is impressive. 
6 Evaluation  
Multiple types of evaluation are associated with 
the course. First, the typical evaluation of the stu-
dents by the professor (here, 2 professors) was 
done on multiple dimensions that contributed pro-
portionately to the student?s final grade as follows: 
66
 
? In-Class group exercises 20% 
? NLToolkit Team Assignments 35% 
? NLP Application Team Poster &  
         Presentations 
35% 
? Contributions to class discussion  
         (both quality and quantity) 
10% 
 
Additionally, each team member evaluated each of 
their fellow team members as well as themselves. 
This was done for both of the teams in which a 
student participated. For each team member, the 
questions covered:  the role or tasks of the student 
on the project; an overall performance rating from 
1 for POOR to 4 for EXCELLENT; the rationale 
for this score, and finally; what the student could 
have done to improve their contribution. Knowl-
edge of this end-of-semester team self-evaluation 
tended to ensure that students were active team 
contributors. 
The professor was also evaluated by the stu-
dents. And while there are quantitative scores that 
are used by the university for comparison across 
faculty and to track individual faculty improve-
ments over time, the most useful feature of the stu-
dent evaluations is the set of open-ended questions 
concerning what worked well in the course, what 
didn?t work well, and what could be done to im-
prove the course. Over the years of teaching this 
course, these comments (plus the mid-term evalua-
tions) have been most instructive in efforts to find 
ways to improve the course. Frequently the sugges-
tions are very practical and easy to implement, 
such as showing a chart with the distribution of 
grades on each assignment when they are returned 
so that the students know where they stand relative 
to the class as grading is on a scale of 1 to 10. 
 
7. Indicators of Success 
 
Finally, how is the success of this course measured 
in the longer term?  For this, success is measured 
by:  whether students elect to do continued work in 
NLP, either in the context of further courses in 
which NLP is utilized, such as Information Re-
trieval or Text Mining;  whether the masters (and 
undergraduate) students decide to pursue an ad-
vanced degree based on the excitement engendered 
and knowledge gained from the NLP course; or 
whether PhD students elect to do continued re-
search either in the school?s Center for Natural 
Language Processing or as part of their disserta-
tion. For students in a terminal degree program, 
success is reflected by their seeking and obtaining 
jobs that utilize the NLP they have learned in the 
course and that has provided them with a solid, 
broad basis on which to build. For several of the 
undergraduate computer science students in the 
course, their NLP experience has given them an 
added dimension of specialization and competitive 
advantage in a tight hiring market.  
An additional measure of success was the re-
quest by the doctoral students in the home school 
for a PhD level seminar course to build on the NLP 
course. This course is entitled Content Analysis 
Research Using Natural Language Processing and 
will enable PhD students doing social science re-
search on large textual data sets to explore and ap-
ply the NLP tools that are developed within the 
school, as well as to understand how these NLP 
tools can be successfully interleaved with commer-
cial content analysis tools to support rich explora-
tion of their data. As is the current course, this 
seminar will be open to PhD students from all 
schools across campus and already has enrollees 
from public policy, communications, and man-
agement, as well as information science. 
 
8. Summary 
 
While it might appear that a disproportionate 
amount of thought and attention is given to the 
more human and social aspects of designing and 
conducting this course, experience shows that such 
attention is the key to the success of this diverse 
body of students in learning and understanding the 
content of the course. Furthermore, given the great 
diversity in class-level and disciplinary back-
ground of students, this attention to structuring the 
course has paid off in the multiple ways exempli-
fied above. While it is obvious that a course for 
computer-science majors alone would be designed 
quite differently, it would not provide the enriched 
understanding of the field of NLP and its applica-
tion value that is possible with the contributions by 
the variety of disciplines brought together in this 
course. 
Acknowledgements 
67
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of 
the students in all the classes over the years whose 
efforts and suggestions have continually improved 
the course. We would to especially acknowledge 
this year?s class, who were especially contributory 
of ideas for improving and building on a currently 
successful course, namely Agnieszka Kwiat-
kowska, Anatoliy Gruzd, Carol Schwartz, Cun-
Fang Cheng, Freddie Wade, Joshua Legler, Kei-
suke Inoue, Matthew Wolf, Michael Fudge, Michel 
Tinuiri, Olga Azarova, Rebecca Gilbert, Shuyuan 
Ho, Tuncer Can, Xiaozhony Liu, and Xue Xiao. 
References  
Loper, E. & Bird, S., 2002.  NLTK, the Natural 
Language Toolkit. In Proceedings of the ACL 
Workshop on Effective Tools and Methodolo-
gies for Teaching Natural Language Processing 
and Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia: 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 
 
Corrada-Emmanuel, A. McCallum, A., Smyth, P., 
Steyvers, M. & Chemudugunta, C., 2005. Social 
Network Analysis and Topic Discovery for the 
Enron Email Dataset. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Link Analysis, Counterterrorism 
and Security at 2005 SIAM International Con-
ference in Data Mining. 
68
