Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages, pages 63?70,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Impact of Morphological Stemming on Arabic Mention
Detection and Coreference Resolution
Imed Zitouni, Jeff Sorensen, Xiaoqiang Luo, Radu Florian
{izitouni, sorenj, xiaoluo, raduf}@watson.ibm.com
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
Abstract
Arabic presents an interesting challenge to
natural language processing, being a highly
inflected and agglutinative language. In
particular, this paper presents an in-depth
investigation of the entity detection and
recognition (EDR) task for Arabic. We
start by highlighting why segmentation is
a necessary prerequisite for EDR, continue
by presenting a finite-state statistical seg-
menter, and then examine how the result-
ing segments can be better included into
a mention detection system and an entity
recognition system; both systems are statis-
tical, build around the maximum entropy
principle. Experiments on a clearly stated
partition of the ACE 2004 data show that
stem-based features can significantly im-
prove the performance of the EDT system
by 2 absolute F-measure points. The sys-
tem presented here had a competitive per-
formance in the ACE 2004 evaluation.
1 Introduction
Information extraction is a crucial step toward un-
derstanding and processing language. One goal of
information extraction tasks is to identify important
conceptual information in a discourse. These tasks
have applications in summarization, information re-
trieval (one can get al hits for Washington/person
and not the ones for Washington/state or Washing-
ton/city), data mining, question answering, language
understanding, etc.
In this paper we focus on the Entity Detection and
Recognition task (EDR) for Arabic as described in
ACE 2004 framework (ACE, 2004). The EDR has
close ties to the named entity recognition (NER) and
coreference resolution tasks, which have been the fo-
cus of several recent investigations (Bikel et al, 1997;
Miller et al, 1998; Borthwick, 1999; Mikheev et al,
1999; Soon et al, 2001; Ng and Cardie, 2002; Florian
et al, 2004), and have been at the center of evalu-
ations such as: MUC-6, MUC-7, and the CoNLL?02
and CoNLL?03 shared tasks. Usually, in computa-
tional linguistics literature, a named entity is an in-
stance of a location, a person, or an organization, and
the NER task consists of identifying each of these
occurrences. Instead, we will adopt the nomencla-
ture of the Automatic Content Extraction program
(NIST, 2004): we will call the instances of textual
references to objects/abstractions mentions, which
can be either named (e.g. John Mayor), nominal
(the president) or pronominal (she, it). An entity is
the aggregate of all the mentions (of any level) which
refer to one conceptual entity. For instance, in the
sentence
President John Smith said he has no com-
ments
there are two mentions (named and pronomial) but
only one entity, formed by the set {John Smith, he}.
We separate the EDR task into two parts: a men-
tion detection step, which identifies and classifies all
the mentions in a text ? and a coreference resolution
step, which combinines the detected mentions into
groups that refer to the same object. In its entirety,
the EDR task is arguably harder than traditional
named entity recognition, because of the additional
complexity involved in extracting non-named men-
tions (nominal and pronominal) and the requirement
of grouping mentions into entities. This is particu-
larly true for Arabic where nominals and pronouns
are also attached to the word they modify. In fact,
most Arabic words are morphologically derived from
a list of base forms or stems, to which prefixes and
suffixes can be attached to form Arabic surface forms
(blank-delimited words). In addition to the differ-
ent forms of the Arabic word that result from the
63
derivational and inflectional process, most preposi-
tions, conjunctions, pronouns, and possessive forms
are attached to the Arabic surface word. It is these
orthographic variations and complex morphological
structure that make Arabic language processing chal-
lenging (Xu et al, 2001; Xu et al, 2002).
Both tasks are performed with a statistical frame-
work: the mention detection system is similar to
the one presented in (Florian et al, 2004) and
the coreference resolution system is similar to the
one described in (Luo et al, 2004). Both systems
are built around from the maximum-entropy tech-
nique (Berger et al, 1996). We formulate the men-
tion detection task as a sequence classification prob-
lem. While this approach is language independent,
it must be modified to accomodate the particulars of
the Arabic language. The Arabic words may be com-
posed of zero or more prefixes, followed by a stem and
zero or more suffixes. We begin with a segmentation
of the written text before starting the classification.
This segmentation process consists of separating the
normal whitespace delimited words into (hypothe-
sized) prefixes, stems, and suffixes, which become the
subject of analysis (tokens). The resulting granular-
ity of breaking words into prefixes and suffixes allows
different mention type labels beyond the stem label
(for instance, in the case of nominal and pronominal
mentions). Additionally, because the prefixes and
suffixes are quite frequent, directly processing unseg-
mented words results in significant data sparseness.
We present in Section 2 the relevant particularities
of the Arabic language for natural language process-
ing, especially for the EDR task. We then describe
the segmentation system we employed for this task in
Section 3. Section 4 briefly describes our mention de-
tection system, explaining the different feature types
we use. We focus in particular on the stem n-gram,
prefix n-gram, and suffix n-gram features that are
specific to a morphologically rich language such as
Arabic. We describe in Section 5 our coreference
resolution system where we also describe the advan-
tage of using stem based features. Section 6 shows
and discusses the different experimental results and
Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Why is Arabic Information
Extraction difficult?
The Arabic language, which is the mother tongue of
more than 300 million people (Center, 2000), present
significant challenges to many natural language pro-
cessing applications. Arabic is a highly inflected and
derived language. In Arabic morphology, most mor-
phemes are comprised of a basic word form (the root
or stem), to which many affixes can be attached to
form Arabic words. The Arabic alphabet consists
of 28 letters that can be extended to ninety by ad-
ditional shapes, marks, and vowels (Tayli and Al-
Salamah, 1990). Unlike Latin-based alphabets, the
orientation of writing in Arabic is from right to left.
In written Arabic, short vowels are often omitted.
Also, because variety in expression is appreciated
as part of a good writing style, the synonyms are
widespread. Arabic nouns encode information about
gender, number, and grammatical cases. There are
two genders (masculine and feminine), three num-
bers (singular, dual, and plural), and three gram-
matical cases (nominative, genitive, and accusative).
A noun has a nominative case when it is a subject,
accusative case when it is the object of a verb, and
genitive case when it is the object of a preposition.
The form of an Arabic noun is consequently deter-
mined by its gender, number, and grammatical case.
The definitive nouns are formed by attaching the
Arabic article ?

@ to the immediate front of the
nouns, such as in the word ??Q???

@ (the company).
Also, prepositions such as H. (by), and ? (to) can beattached as a prefix as in ??Q???? (to the company).
A noun may carry a possessive pronoun as a suffix,
such as in ?? D?Q?? (their company). For the EDR task,
in this previous example, the Arabic blank-delimited
word ?? D?Q?? should be split into two tokens: ??Q?? and
??. The first token ??Q?? is a mention that refers to
an organization, whereas the second token ?? is also
a mention, but one that may refer to a person. Also,
the prepositions (i.e., H. and ?) not be considered a
part of the mention.
Arabic has two kinds of plurals: broken plurals and
sound plurals (Wightwick and Gaafar, 1998; Chen
and Gey, 2002). The formation of broken plurals is
common, more complex and often irregular. As an
example, the plural form of the noun ?g. P (man) is
?A g. P (men), which is formed by inserting the infix
@. The plural form of the noun H. A
J? (book) is I. J?
(books), which is formed by deleting the infix @. The
plural form and the singular form may also be com-
pletely different (e.g. ?

@Q?@ for woman, but ZA
?	 for
women). The sound plurals are formed by adding
plural suffixes to singular nouns (e.g., IkAK. meaning
researcher): the plural suffix is H@ for feminine nouns
in grammatical cases (e.g., HA
JkAK.), 	?? for masculine
nouns in the nominative case (e.g., 	??JkAK.), and 	?K

for masculine nouns in the genitive and accusative
cases (e.g., 	?
JkAK.). The dual suffix is 	?@ for the nom-
inative case (e.g., 	?A
JkAK.), and 	?K
 for the genitive or
accusative (e.g., 	?
JkAK.).
Because we consider pronouns and nominals as men-
tions, it is essential to segment Arabic words into
these subword tokens. We also believe that the in-
64
formation denoted by these affixes can help with the
coreference resolution task1.
Arabic verbs have perfect and imperfect tenses (Ab-
bou and McCarus, 1983). Perfect tense denotes com-
pleted actions, while imperfect denotes ongoing ac-
tions. Arabic verbs in the perfect tense consist of a
stem followed by a subject marker, denoted as a suf-
fix. The subject marker indicates the person, gender,
and number of the subject. As an example, the verb
?K. A
? (to meet) has a perfect tense I?K. A
? for the third
person feminine singular, and @?

?K. A
? for the third per-
son masculine plural. We notice also that a verb with
a subject marker and a pronoun suffix can be by itself
a complete sentence, such us in the word ?? D?K. A
?: it
has a third-person feminine singular subject-markerH (she) and a pronoun suffix ?? (them). It is also
a complete sentence meaning ?she met them.? The
subject markers are often suffixes, but we may find
a subject marker as a combination of a prefix and a
suffix as in ???K. A
?K (she meets them). In this example,
the EDR system should be able to separate ???K. A
?K,
to create two mentions ( H and ??). Because the
two mentions belong to different entities, the EDR
system should not chain them together. An Arabic
word can potentially have a large number of vari-
ants, and some of the variants can be quite complex.
As an example, consider the word A ?D
JkAJ. ?? (and to
her researchers) which contains two prefixes and one
suffix ( A ? + ?

?kAK. + ? + ?).
3 Arabic Segmentation
Lee et al (2003) demonstrates a technique for seg-
menting Arabic text and uses it as a morphological
processing step in machine translation. A trigram
language model was used to score and select among
hypothesized segmentations determined by a set of
prefix and suffix expansion rules.
In our latest implementation of this algorithm, we
have recast this segmentation strategy as the com-
position of three distinct finite state machines. The
first machine, illustrated in Figure 1 encodes the pre-
fix and suffix expansion rules, producing a lattice of
possible segmentations. The second machine is a dic-
tionary that accepts characters and produces identi-
fiers corresponding to dictionary entries. The final
machine is a trigram language model, specifically a
Kneser-Ney (Chen and Goodman, 1998) based back-
off language model. Differing from (Lee et al, 2003),
we have also introduced an explicit model for un-
1As an example, we do not chain mentions with dif-
ferent gender, number, etc.
known words based upon a character unigram model,
although this model is dominated by an empirically
chosen unknown word penalty. Using 0.5M words
from the combined Arabic Treebanks 1V2, 2V2 and
3V1, the dictionary based segmenter achieves a exact
word match 97.8% correct segmentation.
SEP/epsilon
a/A#
epsilon/#
a/epsilon
a/epsilon
b/epsilon
b/B
UNK/epsilon
c/C
b/epsilon
c/BC
e/+E
epsilon/+
d/epsilon
d/epsilon
epsilon/epsilon
b/AB#
b/A#B#
e/+DE
c/epsilon d/BCD e/+D+E
Figure 1: Illustration of dictionary based segmenta-
tion finite state transducer
3.1 Bootstrapping
In addition to the model based upon a dictionary of
stems and words, we also experimented with models
based upon character n-grams, similar to those used
for Chinese segmentation (Sproat et al, 1996). For
these models, both arabic characters and spaces, and
the inserted prefix and suffix markers appear on the
arcs of the finite state machine. Here, the language
model is conditioned to insert prefix and suffix mark-
ers based upon the frequency of their appearance in
n-gram character contexts that appear in the train-
ing data. The character based model alone achieves
a 94.5% exact match segmentation accuracy, consid-
erably less accurate then the dictionary based model.
However, an analysis of the errors indicated that the
character based model is more effective at segment-
ing words that do not appear in the training data.
We seeked to exploit this ability to generalize to im-
prove the dictionary based model. As in (Lee et al,
2003), we used unsupervised training data which is
automatically segmented to discover previously un-
seen stems. In our case, the character n-gram model
is used to segment a portion of the Arabic Giga-
word corpus. From this, we create a vocabulary of
stems and affixes by requiring that tokens appear
more than twice in the supervised training data or
more than ten times in the unsupervised, segmented
corpus.
The resulting vocabulary, predominately of word
stems, is 53K words, or about six times the vo-
cabulary observed in the supervised training data.
This represents about only 18% of the total num-
ber of unique tokens observed in the aggregate
training data. With the addition of the automat-
ically acquired vocabulary, the segmentation accu-
racy achieves 98.1% exact match.
65
3.2 Preprocessing of Arabic Treebank Data
Because the Arabic treebank and the gigaword cor-
pora are based upon news data, we apply some
small amount of regular expression based preprocess-
ing. Arabic specific processing include removal of
the characters tatweel (), and vowels. Also, the fol-
lowing characters are treated as an equivalence class
during all lookups and processing: (1) ? ,?
 , and
(2)

@ , @ ,

@ ,

@. We define a token and introduce whites-
pace boundaries between every span of one or more
alphabetic or numeric characters. Each punctuation
symbol is considered a separate token. Character
classes, such as punctuation, are defined according
to the Unicode Standard (Aliprand et al, 2004).
4 Mention Detection
The mention detection task we investigate identifies,
for each mention, four pieces of information:
1. the mention type: person (PER), organiza-
tion (ORG), location (LOC), geopolitical en-
tity (GPE), facility (FAC), vehicle (VEH), and
weapon (WEA)
2. the mention level (named, nominal, pronominal,
or premodifier)
3. the mention class (generic, specific, negatively
quantified, etc.)
4. the mention sub-type, which is a sub-category
of the mention type (ACE, 2004) (e.g. OrgGov-
ernmental, FacilityPath, etc.).
4.1 System Description
We formulate the mention detection problem as a
classification problem, which takes as input seg-
mented Arabic text. We assign to each token in the
text a label indicating whether it starts a specific
mention, is inside a specific mention, or is outside
any mentions. We use a maximum entropy Markov
model (MEMM) classifier. The principle of maxi-
mum entropy states that when one searches among
probability distributions that model the observed
data (evidence), the preferred one is the one that
maximizes the entropy (a measure of the uncertainty
of the model) (Berger et al, 1996). One big advan-
tage of this approach is that it can combine arbitrary
and diverse types of information in making a classi-
fication decision.
Our mention detection system predicts the four la-
bels types associated with a mention through a cas-
cade approach. It first predicts the boundary and
the main entity type for each mention. Then, it uses
the information regarding the type and boundary in
different second-stage classifiers to predict the sub-
type, the mention level, and the mention class. Af-
ter the first stage, when the boundary (starting, in-
side, or outside a mention) has been determined, the
other classifiers can use this information to analyze
a larger context, capturing the patterns around the
entire mentions, rather than words. As an example,
the token sequence that refers to a mention will be-
come a single recognized unit and, consequently, lex-
ical and syntactic features occuring inside or outside
of the entire mention span can be used in prediction.
In the first stage (entity type detection and classifica-
tion), Arabic blank-delimited words, after segment-
ing, become a series of tokens representing prefixes,
stems, and suffixes (cf. section 2). We allow any
contiguous sequence of tokens can represent a men-
tion. Thus, prefixes and suffixes can be, and often
are, labeled with a different mention type than the
stem of the word that contains them as constituents.
4.2 Stem n-gram Features
We use a large set of features to improve the predic-
tion of mentions. This set can be partitioned into
4 categories: lexical, syntactic, gazetteer-based, and
those obtained by running other named-entity clas-
sifiers (with different tag sets). We use features such
as the shallow parsing information associated with
the tokens in a window of 3 tokens, POS, etc.
The context of a current token ti is clearly one of
the most important features in predicting whether ti
is a mention or not (Florian et al, 2004). We de-
note these features as backward token tri-grams and
forward token tri-grams for the previous and next
context of ti respectively. For a token ti, the back-
ward token n-gram feature will contains the previous
n ? 1 tokens in the history (ti?n+1, . . . ti?1) and the
forward token n-gram feature will contains the next
n ? 1 tokens (ti+1, . . . ti+n?1).
Because we are segmenting arabic words into
multiple tokens, there is some concern that tri-
gram contexts will no longer convey as much
contextual information. Consider the following
sentence extracted from the development set:
H. 	Qj?? ?
??A
J
??@ I. J?
??? Q
??? @ ?J??
 @
	Y? (transla-
tion ?This represents the location for Political
Party Office?). The ?Political Party Office? is
tagged as an organization and, as a word-for-word
translation, is expressed as ?to the Office of the
political to the party?. It is clear in this example
that the word Q?? (location for) contains crucial
information in distinguishing between a location
and an organization when tagging the token I. J?
?
66
(office). After segmentation, the sentence becomes:
+ I. J?
? + ?

@ + ? + Q?? + ?

@ + ?J? + ?
 + @
	Y?
.H. 	Qk + ?

@ + ? + ?
??A
J
? + ?

@
When predicting if the token I. J?
? (office) is the
beginning of an organization or not, backward and
forward token n-gram features contain only ?

@ + ?
(for the) and ?
??A
J
? + ?

@ (the political). This is
most likely not enough context, and addressing the
problem by increasing the size of the n-gram context
quickly leads to a data sparseness problem.
We propose in this paper the stem n-gram features as
additional features to the lexical set. If the current
token ti is a stem, the backward stem n-gram feature
contains the previous n ? 1 stems and the forward
stem n-gram feature will contain the following n? 1
stems. We proceed similarly for prefixes and suffixes:
if ti is a prefix (or suffix, respectively) we take the
previous and following prefixes (or suffixes)2. In the
sentence shown above, when the system is predict-
ing if the token I. J?
? (office) is the beginning of an
organization or not, the backward and forward stem
n-gram features contain Q?? ?J? (represent location
of) and H. 	Qk ?
??A
J
? (political office). The stem fea-
tures contain enough information in this example to
make a decision that I. J?
? (office) is the beginning of
an organization. In our experiments, n is 3, therefore
we use stem trigram features.
5 Coreference Resolution
Coreference resolution (or entity recognition) is de-
fined as grouping together mentions referring to the
same object or entity. For example, in the following
text,
(I) ?John believes Mary to be the best student?
three mentions ?John?, ?Mary?, ?student? are un-
derlined. ?Mary? and ?student? are in the same en-
tity since both refer to the same person.
The coreference system system is similar to the Bell
tree algorithm as described by (Luo et al, 2004).
In our implementation, the link model between a
candidate entity e and the current mention m is com-
puted as
PL(L = 1|e, m) ? maxmk?e P?L(L = 1|e, mk, m), (1)
2Thus, the difference to token n-grams is that the to-
kens of different type are removed from the streams, be-
fore the features are created.
where mk is one mention in entity e, and the basic
model building block P?L(L = 1|e, mk, m) is an ex-
ponential or maximum entropy model (Berger et al,
1996).
For the start model, we use the following approxima-
tion:
PS(S = 1|e1, e2, ? ? ? , et, m) ?
1 ? max
1?i?t
PL(L = 1|ei, m) (2)
The start model (cf. equation 2) says that the prob-
ability of starting a new entity, given the current
mention m and the previous entities e1, e2, ? ? ? , et, is
simply 1 minus the maximum link probability be-
tween the current mention and one of the previous
entities.
The maximum-entropy model provides us with a
flexible framework to encode features into the the
system. Our Arabic entity recognition system uses
many language-indepedent features such as strict
and partial string match, and distance features (Luo
et al, 2004). In this paper, however, we focus on the
addition of Arabic stem-based features.
5.1 Arabic Stem Match Feature
Features using the word context (left and right to-
kens) have been shown to be very helpful in corefer-
ence resolution (Luo et al, 2004). For Arabic, since
words are morphologically derived from a list of roots
(stems), we expected that a feature based on the
right and left stems would lead to improvement in
system accuracy.
Let m1 and m2 be two candidate mentions where
a mention is a string of tokens (prefixes, stems,
and suffixes) extracted from the segmented text.
In order to make a decision in either linking the
two mentions or not we use additional features
such as: do the stems in m1 and m2 match, do
stems in m1 match all stems in m2, do stems
in m1 partially match stems in m2. We proceed
similarly for prefixes and suffixes. Since prefixes and
suffixes can belong to different mention types, we
build a parse tree on the segmented text and we can
explore features dealing with the gender and number
of the token. In the following example, between
parentheses we make a word-for-word translations in
order to better explain our stemming feature. Let us
take the two mentions H. 	Qj?? ?
??A
J
??@ I. J?
???
(to-the-office the-politic to-the-party) and
?
G.
	Qm?'@ I. J?
? (office the-party?s) segmented as
H. 	Qk + ?

@ + ? + ?
??A
J
? + ?

@ + I. J?
? + ?

@ + ?
and ?
 + H. 	Qk + ?

@ + I. J?
? respectively. In our
67
development corpus, these two mentions are chained
to the same entity. The stemming match feature
in this case will contain information such us all
stems of m2 match, which is a strong indicator
that these mentions should be chained together.
Features based on the words alone would not help
this specific example, because the two strings m1
and m2 do not match.
6 Experiments
6.1 Data
The system is trained on the Arabic ACE 2003 and
part of the 2004 data. We introduce here a clearly
defined and replicable split of the ACE 2004 data,
so that future investigations can accurately and cor-
rectly compare against the results presented here.
There are 689 Arabic documents in LDC?s 2004 re-
lease (version 1.4) of ACE data from three sources:
the Arabic Treebank, a subset of the broadcast
(bnews) and newswire (nwire) TDT-4 documents.
The 178-document devtest is created by taking
the last (in chronological order) 25% of docu-
ments in each of three sources: 38 Arabic tree-
bank documents dating from ?20000715? (i.e., July
15, 2000) to ?20000815,? 76 bnews documents from
?20001205.1100.0489? (i.e., Dec. 05 of 2000 from
11:00pm to 04:89am) to ?20001230.1100.1216,? and
64 nwire documents from ?20001206.1000.0050? to
?20001230.0700.0061.? The time span of the test
set is intentionally non-overlapping with that of the
training set within each data source, as this models
how the system will perform in the real world.
6.2 Mention Detection
We want to investigate the usefulness of stem n-
gram features in the mention detection system. As
stated before, the experiments are run in the ACE?04
framework (NIST, 2004) where the system will iden-
tify mentions and will label them (cf. Section 4)
with a type (person, organization, etc), a sub-type
(OrgCommercial, OrgGovernmental, etc), a mention
level (named, nominal, etc), and a class (specific,
generic, etc). Detecting the mention boundaries (set
of consecutive tokens) and their main type is one of
the important steps of our mention detection sys-
tem. The score that the ACE community uses (ACE
value) attributes a higher importance (outlined by
its weight) to the main type compared to other sub-
tasks, such as the mention level and the class. Hence,
to build our mention detection system we spent a lot
of effort in improving the first step: detecting the
mention boundary and their main type. In this pa-
per, we report the results in terms of precision, recall,
and F-measure3.
Lexical features
Precision Recall F-measure
(%) (%) (%)
Total 73.3 58.0 64.7
FAC 76.0 24.0 36.5
GPE 79.4 65.6 71.8
LOC 57.7 29.9 39.4
ORG 63.1 46.6 53.6
PER 73.2 63.5 68.0
VEH 83.5 29.7 43.8
WEA 77.3 25.4 38.2
Lexical features + Stem
Precision Recall F-measure
(%) (%) (%)
Total 73.6 59.4 65.8
FAC 72.7 29.0 41.4
GPE 79.9 67.2 73.0
LOC 58.6 31.9 41.4
ORG 62.6 47.2 53.8
PER 73.8 64.6 68.9
VEH 81.7 35.9 49.9
WEA 78.4 29.9 43.2
Table 1: Performance of the mention detection sys-
tem using lexical features only.
To assess the impact of stemming n-gram features
on the system under different conditions, we consider
two cases: one where the system only has access to
lexical features (the tokens and direct derivatives in-
cluding standard n-gram features), and one where
the system has access to a richer set of information,
including lexical features, POS tags, text chunks,
parse tree, and gazetteer information. The former
framework has the advantage of being fast (making
it more appropriate for deployment in commercial
systems). The number of parameters to optimize in
the MaxEnt framework we use when only lexical fea-
tures are explored is around 280K parameters. This
number increases to 443K approximately when all in-
formation is used except the stemming feature. The
number of parameters introduced by the use of stem-
ming is around 130K parameters. Table 1 reports
experimental results using lexical features only; we
observe that the stemming n-gram features boost the
performance by one point (64.7 vs. 65.8). It is im-
portant to notice the stemming n-gram features im-
proved the performance of each category of the main
type.
In the second case, the systems have access to a large
amount of feature types, including lexical, syntac-
tic, gazetteer, and those obtained by running other
3The ACE value is an important factor for us, but its
relative complexity, due to different weights associated
with the subparts, makes for a hard comparison, while
the F-measure is relatively easy to interpret.
68
AllFeatures
Precision Recall F-measure
(%) (%) (%)
Total 74.3 64.0 68.8
FAC 72.3 36.8 48.8
GPE 80.5 70.8 75.4
LOC 61.1 35.4 44.8
ORG 61.4 50.3 55.3
PER 75.3 70.2 72.7
VEH 83.2 38.1 52.3
WEA 69.0 36.6 47.8
All-Features + Stem
Precision Recall F-measure
(%) (%) (%)
Total 74.4 64.6 69.2
FAC 68.8 38.5 49.4
GPE 80.8 71.9 76.1
LOC 60.2 36.8 45.7
ORG 62.2 51.0 56.1
PER 75.3 70.2 72.7
VEH 81.4 41.8 55.2
WEA 70.3 38.8 50.0
Table 2: Performance of the mention detection sys-
tem using lexical, syntactic, gazetteer features as well
as features obtained by running other named-entity
classifiers
named-entity classifiers (with different semantic tag
sets). Features are also extracted from the shal-
low parsing information associated with the tokens
in window of 3, POS, etc. The All-features system
incorporates all the features except for the stem n-
grams. Table 2 shows the experimental results with
and without the stem n-grams features. Again, Ta-
ble 2 shows that using stem n-grams features gave
a small boost to the whole main-type classification
system4. This is true for all types. It is interesting to
note that the increase in performance in both cases
(Tables 1 and 2) is obtained from increased recall,
with little change in precision. When the prefix and
suffix n-gram features are removed from the feature
set, we notice in both cases (Tables 1 and 2) a in-
significant decrease of the overall performance, which
is expected: what should a feature of preceeding (or
following) prepositions or finite articles captures?
As stated in Section 4.1, the mention detection sys-
tem uses a cascade approach. However, we were curi-
ous to see if the gain we obtained at the first level was
successfully transfered into the overall performance
of the mention detection system. Table 3 presents
the performance in terms of precision, recall, and F-
measure of the whole system. Despite the fact that
the improvement was small in terms of F-measure
(59.4 vs. 59.7), the stemming n-gram features gave
4The difference in performance is not statistically sig-
nificant
interesting improvement in terms of ACE value to
the hole EDR system as showed in section 6.3.
Precision Recall F-measure
(%) (%) (%)
All-Features 64.2 55.3 59.4
All-Features+Stem 64.4 55.7 59.7
Lexical 64.4 50.8 56.8
Lexical+Stem 64.6 52.0 57.6
Table 3: Performance of the mention detection sys-
tem including all ACE?04 subtasks
6.3 Coreference Resolution
In this section, we present the coreference results on
the devtest defined earlier. First, to see the effect of
stem matching features, we compare two coreference
systems: one with the stem features, the other with-
out. We test the two systems on both ?true? and
system mentions of the devtest set. ?True? men-
tions mean that input to the coreference system are
mentions marked by human, while system mentions
are output from the mention detection system. We
report results with two metrics: ECM-F and ACE-
Value. ECM-F is an entity-constrained mention F-
measure (cf. (Luo et al, 2004) for how ECM-F is
computed), and ACE-Value is the official ACE eval-
uation metric. The result is shown in Table 4: the
baseline numbers without stem features are listed un-
der ?Base,? and the results of the coreference system
with stem features are listed under ?Base+Stem.?
On true mention, the stem matching features im-
prove ECM-F from 77.7% to 80.0%, and ACE-value
from 86.9% to 88.2%. The similar improvement is
also observed on system mentions.The overall ECM-
F improves from 62.3% to 64.2% and the ACE value
improves from 61.9 to 63.1%. Note that the increase
on the ACE value is smaller than ECM-F. This is
because ACE-value is a weighted metric which em-
phasizes on NAME mentions and heavily discounts
PRONOUN mentions. Overall the stem features give
rise to consistent gain to the coreference system.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we present a fully fledged Entity Detec-
tion and Tracking system for Arabic. At its base, the
system fundamentally depends on a finite state seg-
menter and makes good use of the relationships that
occur between word stems, by introducing features
which take into account the type of each segment.
In mention detection, the features are represented as
stem n-grams, while in coreference resolution they
are captured through stem-tailored match features.
69
Base Base+Stem
ECM-F ACEVal ECM-F ACEVal
Truth 77.7 86.9 80.0 88.2
System 62.3 61.9 64.2 63.1
Table 4: Effect of Arabic stemming features on coref-
erence resolution. The row marked with ?Truth?
represents the results with ?true? mentions while the
row marked with ?System? represents that mentions
are detected by the system. Numbers under ?ECM-
F? are Entity-Constrained-Mention F-measure and
numbers under ?ACE-Val? are ACE-values.
These types of features result in an improvement in
both the mention detection and coreference resolu-
tion performance, as shown through experiments on
the ACE 2004 Arabic data. The experiments are per-
formed on a clearly specified partition of the data, so
comparisons against the presented work can be cor-
rectly and accurately made in the future. In addi-
tion, we also report results on the official test data.
The presented system has obtained competitive re-
sults in the ACE 2004 evaluation, being ranked
amongst the top competitors.
8 Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency and monitored
by SPAWAR under contract No. N66001-99-2-8916.
The views and findings contained in this material are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of policy of the U.S. government and no
official endorsement should be inferred.
References
Peter F. Abbou and Ernest N. McCarus, editors. 1983.
Elementary modern standard Arabic. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
ACE. 2004. Automatic content extraction.
http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/Projects/ACE/.
Joan Aliprand, Julie Allen, Joe Becker, Mark Davis,
Michael Everson, Asmus Freytag, John Jenkins, Mike
Ksar, Rick McGowan, Eric Muller, Lisa Moore, Michel
Suignard, and Ken Whistler. 2004. The unicode stan-
dard. http://www.unicode.org/.
A. Berger, S. Della Pietra, and V. Della Pietra. 1996. A
maximum entropy approach to natural language process-
ing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39?71.
D. M. Bikel, S. Miller, R. Schwartz, and R. Weischedel.
1997. Nymble: a high-performance learning name-finder.
In Proceedings of ANLP-97, pages 194?201.
A. Borthwick. 1999. A Maximum Entropy Approach to
Named Entity Recognition. Ph.D. thesis, New York Uni-
versity.
Egyptian Demographic Center. 2000.
http://www.frcu.eun.eg/www/homepage/cdc/cdc.htm.
Aitao Chen and Fredic Gey. 2002. Building an arabic
stemmer for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2002), Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology, November.
S. F. Chen and J. Goodman. 1998. An empirical study
of smoothing techinques for language modeling. Techni-
cal Report TR-10-98, Center for Research in Comput-
ing Technology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusettes, August.
R. Florian, H. Hassan, A. Ittycheriah, H. Jing, N. Kamb-
hatla, X. Luo, N Nicolov, and S Roukos. 2004. A statisti-
cal model for multilingual entity detection and tracking.
In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004, pages 1?8.
Y.-S. Lee, K. Papineni, S. Roukos, O. Emam, and H. Has-
san. 2003. Language model based Arabic word segmen-
tation. In Proceedings of the ACL?03, pages 399?406.
Xiaoqiang Luo, Abe Ittycheriah, Hongyan Jing, Nanda
Kambhatla, and Salim Roukos. 2004. A mention-
synchronous coreference resolution algorithm based on
the bell tree. In Proc. of ACL?04.
A. Mikheev, M. Moens, and C. Grover. 1999. Named
entity recognition without gazetteers. In Proceedings of
EACL?99.
S. Miller, M. Crystal, H. Fox, L. Ramshaw, R. Schwarz,
R. Stone, and R. Weischedel. 1998. Bbn: Description of
the SIFT system as used for MUC-7. In MUC-7.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine learning
approaches to coreference resolution. In Proceedings of
the ACL?02, pages 104?111.
NIST. 2004. Proceedings of ace evaluation and pi meet-
ing 2004 workshop. Alexandria, VA, September. NIST.
W. M. Soon, H. T. Ng, and C. Y. Lim. 2001. A ma-
chine learning approach to coreference resolution of noun
phrases. Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521?544.
R. Sproat, C. Shih, W. Gale, and N. Chang. 1996. A
stochastic finite-state word-segmentation algorithm for
Chinese. Computational Linguistics, 22(3).
M. Tayli and A. Al-Salamah. 1990. Building bilingual
microcomputer systems. Communications of the ACM,
33(5):495?505.
J. Wightwick and M. Gaafar. 1998. Arabic Verbs and
Essentials of Grammar. Passport Books.
J. Xu, A. Fraser, and R. Weischedel. 2001. Trec2001
cross-lingual retrieval at bbn. In TREC 2001, Gaithers-
burg: NIST.
J. Xu, A. Fraser, and R. Weischedel. 2002. Empirical
studies in strategies for arabic information retrieval. In
SIGIR 2002, Tampere, Finland.
70
