Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Empirical Modeling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pages 43?48,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Probabilistic Setting and Lexical Cooccurrence Model  
for Textual Entailment  
Oren Glickman and Ido Dagan 
Department of Computer Science 
 Bar Ilan University 
{glikmao,Dagan}@cs.biu.ac.il 
 
Abstract 
This paper proposes a general probabilis-
tic setting that formalizes a probabilistic 
notion of textual entailment.  We further 
describe a particular preliminary model 
for lexical-level entailment, based on 
document cooccurrence probabilities, 
which follows the general setting. The 
model was evaluated on two application 
independent datasets, suggesting the rele-
vance of such probabilistic approaches for 
entailment modeling.  
1 Introduction 
Many Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
applications need to recognize when the meaning 
of one text can be expressed by, or inferred from, 
another text. Information Retrieval (IR), Question 
Answering (QA), Information Extraction (IE), text 
summarization and Machine Translation (MT) 
evaluation are examples of applications that need 
to assess this semantic relationship between text 
segments. The Textual Entailment Recognition 
task (Dagan et al, 2005) has recently been pro-
posed as an application independent framework for 
modeling such inferences.  
Within the textual entailment framework, a text 
t is said to entail a textual hypothesis h if the truth 
of h can be inferred from t. Textual entailment cap-
tures generically a broad range of inferences that 
are relevant for multiple applications. For example, 
a QA system has to identify texts that entail a hy-
pothesized answer. Given the question "Does John 
Speak French?", a text that includes the sentence 
"John is a fluent French speaker" entails the sug-
gested answer "John speaks French." In many 
cases, though, entailment inference is uncertain 
and has a probabilistic nature. For example, a text 
that includes the sentence "John was born in 
France." does not strictly entail the above answer. 
Yet, it is clear that it does increase substantially the 
likelihood that the hypothesized answer is true.  
The uncertain nature of textual entailment calls 
for its explicit modeling in probabilistic terms. We 
therefore propose a general generative probabilistic 
setting for textual entailment, which allows a clear 
formulation of concrete probabilistic models for 
this task. We suggest that the proposed setting may 
provide a unifying framework for modeling uncer-
tain semantic inferences from texts.   
An important sub task of textual entailment, 
which we term lexical entailment, is recognizing if 
the lexical concepts in a hypothesis h are entailed 
from a given text t, even if the relations which hold 
between these concepts may not be entailed from t. 
This is typically a necessary, but not sufficient, 
condition for textual entailment. For example, in 
order to infer from a text the hypothesis "Chrysler 
stock rose," it is a necessary that the concepts of 
Chrysler, stock and rise must be inferred from the 
text. However, for proper entailment it is further 
needed that the right relations hold between these 
concepts. In this paper we demonstrate the rele-
vance of the general probabilistic setting for mod-
eling lexical entailment, by devising a preliminary 
model that is based on document co-occurrence 
probabilities in a bag of words representation.  
Although our proposed lexical system is rela-
tively simple, as it doesn?t rely on syntactic or 
other deeper analysis, it nevertheless was among 
the top ranking systems in the first Recognising 
Textual Entailment (RTE) Challenge (Glickman et 
al., 2005a). The model was evaluated also on an 
additional dataset, where it compares favorably 
with a state-of-the-art heuristic score. These results 
suggest that the proposed probabilistic framework 
is a promising basis for devising improved models 
that incorporate richer information.  
43
2 Probabilistic Textual Entailment 
2.1 Motivation 
A common definition of entailment in formal se-
mantics (Chierchia. and McConnell-Ginet, 1990) 
specifies that a text t entails another text h (hy-
pothesis, in our terminology) if h is true in every 
circumstance (possible world) in which t is true. 
For example, in examples 1 and 3 from Table 1 
we?d assume humans to agree that the hypothesis 
is necessarily true in any circumstance for which 
the text is true. In such intuitive cases, textual en-
tailment may be perceived as being certain, or, tak-
ing a probabilistic perspective, as having a 
probability of 1. 
In many other cases, though, entailment infer-
ence is uncertain and has a probabilistic nature. In 
example 2, the text doesn?t contain enough infor-
mation to infer the hypothesis? truth. And in exam-
ple 4, the meaning of the word hometown is 
ambiguous and therefore one cannot infer for cer-
tain that the hypothesis is true. In both of these 
cases there are conceivable circumstances for 
which the text is true and the hypothesis false. Yet, 
it is clear that in both examples, the text does in-
crease substantially the likelihood of the correct-
ness of the hypothesis, which naturally extends the 
classical notion of certain entailment. Given the 
text, we expect the probability that the hypothesis 
is indeed true to be relatively high, and signifi-
cantly higher than its probability of being true 
without reading the text. Aiming to model applica-
tion needs, we suggest that the probability of the 
hypothesis being true given the text reflects an ap-
propriate confidence score for the correctness of a 
particular textual inference. In the next sub-
sections we propose a concrete probabilistic setting 
that formalizes the notion of truth probabilities in 
such cases.  
2.2 A Probabilistic Setting 
Let T denote a space of possible texts, and t?T a 
specific text. Let H denote the set of all possible 
hypotheses. A hypothesis h?H is a propositional 
statement which can be assigned a truth value. For 
now it is assumed that h is represented as a textual 
statement, but in principle it could also be ex-
pressed as a formula in some propositional lan-
guage.  
A semantic state of affairs is captured by a 
mapping from H to {0=false, 1=true}, denoted by 
w: H ? {0, 1} (called here possible world, follow-
ing common terminology). A possible world w 
represents a concrete set of truth value assignments 
for all possible propositions. Accordingly, W de-
notes the set of all possible worlds. 
2.2.1 A Generative Model 
We assume a probabilistic generative model for 
texts and possible worlds. In particular, we assume 
that texts are generated along with a concrete state 
of affairs, represented by a possible world. Thus, 
whenever the source generates a text t, it generates 
also corresponding hidden truth assignments that 
constitute a possible world w. 
The probability distribution of the source, over 
all possible texts and truth assignments T ? W, is 
assumed to reflect inferences that are based on the 
generated texts. That is, we assume that the distri-
bution of truth assignments is not bound to reflect 
the state of affairs in a particular "real" world, but 
only the inferences about propositions' truth which 
are related to the text. In particular, the probability 
for generating a true hypothesis h that is not related 
at all to the corresponding text is determined by 
some prior probability P(h). For example, h="Paris 
is the capital of France" might have a prior smaller 
than 1 and might well be false when the generated 
text is not related at all to Paris or France. In fact, 
we may as well assume that the notion of textual 
entailment is relevant only for hypotheses for 
which P(h) < 1, as otherwise (i.e. for tautologies) 
there is no need to consider texts that would sup-
port h's truth. On the other hand, we assume that 
the probability of h being true (generated within w) 
would be higher than the prior when the corre-
sponding t does contribute information that sup-
ports h's truth. 
example text hypothesis 
1 John is a French Speaker 
2 John was born in France John speaks French  
3 Harry's birthplace is Iowa 
4 Harry is returning to his Iowa hometown  Harry was born in Iowa 
Table 1: example sentence pairs  
 
44
We define two types of events over the prob-
ability space for T ? W: 
I) For a hypothesis h, we denote as Trh the random 
variable whose value is the truth value assigned to 
h in a given world. Correspondingly, Trh=1 is the 
event of h being assigned a truth value of 1 (true). 
II) For a text t, we use t itself to denote also the 
event that the generated text is t (as usual, it is 
clear from the context whether t denotes the text or 
the corresponding event).  
2.3 Probabilistic textual entailment 
definition 
We say that a text t probabilistically entails a hy-
pothesis h (denoted as t ? h) if t increases the like-
lihood of h being true, that is, if P(Trh = 1| t) > 
P(Trh  = 1) or equivalently if the pointwise mutual 
information, I(Trh=1,t), is greater then 0. Once 
knowing that t?h, P(Trh=1| t) serves as a probabil-
istic confidence value for h being true given t. 
Application settings would typically require 
that P(Trh = 1| t) obtains a high value; otherwise, 
the text would not be considered sufficiently rele-
vant to support h's truth (e.g. a supporting text in 
QA or IE should entail the extracted information 
with high confidence). Finally, we ignore here the 
case in which t contributes negative information 
about h, leaving this relevant case for further in-
vestigation. 
2.4 Model Properties 
It is interesting to notice the following properties 
and implications of our model: 
A) Textual entailment is defined as a relationship 
between texts and propositions whose representa-
tion is typically based on text as well, unlike logi-
cal entailment which is a relationship between 
propositions only. Accordingly, textual entail-
ment confidence is conditioned on the actual gen-
eration of a text, rather than its truth. For 
illustration, we would expect that the text ?His 
father was born in Italy? would logically entail 
the hypothesis ?He was born in Italy? with high 
probability ? since most people who?s father was 
born in Italy were also born there. However we 
expect that the text would actually not probabilis-
tically textually entail the hypothesis since most 
people for whom it is specifically reported that 
their father was born in Italy were not born in 
Italy.1 
B) We assign probabilities to propositions (hy-
potheses) in a similar manner to certain probabil-
istic reasoning approaches (e.g. Bacchus, 1990; 
Halpern, 1990). However, we also assume a gen-
erative model of text, similar to probabilistic lan-
guage and machine translation models, which 
supplies the needed conditional probability distri-
bution. Furthermore, since our conditioning is on 
texts rather than propositions we do not assume 
any specific logic representation language for text 
meaning, and only assume that textual hypotheses 
can be assigned truth values.     
C) Our framework does not distinguish between 
textual entailment inferences that are based on 
knowledge of language semantics (such as mur-
dering ? killing) and inferences based on domain 
or world knowledge (such as live in Paris ? live 
in France). Both are needed in applications and it 
is not clear at this stage where and how to put 
such a borderline. 
D) An important feature of the proposed frame-
work is that for a given text many hypotheses are 
likely to be true. Consequently, for a given text t 
and hypothesis h, ?hP(Trh=1|t) does not sum to 1.  
This differs from typical generative settings for 
IR and MT (Ponte and croft, 1998; Brown et al, 
1993), where all conditioned events are disjoint 
by construction.  In the proposed model, it is 
rather the case that P(Trh=1|t) + P(Trh=0|t) = 1, as 
we are interested in the probability that a single 
particular hypothesis is true (or false). 
E) An implemented model that corresponds to our 
probabilistic setting is expected to produce an 
estimate for P(Trh = 1| t). This estimate is ex-
pected to reflect all probabilistic aspects involved 
in the modeling, including inherent uncertainty of 
the entailment inference itself (as in example 2 of 
Table 1), possible uncertainty  regarding the cor-
rect disambiguation of the text (example 4), as 
well as probabilistic estimates that stem from the 
particular model structure.  
3 A Lexical Entailment Model 
We suggest that the proposed setting above pro-
vides the necessary grounding for probabilistic 
                                                          
1
 This seems to be the case, when analyzing the results of en-
tering the above text in a web search engine.     
45
modeling of textual entailment. Since modeling the 
full extent of the textual entailment problem is 
clearly a long term research goal, in this paper we 
rather focus on the above mentioned sub-task of 
lexical entailment - identifying when the lexical 
elements of a textual hypothesis h are inferred 
from a given text t.  
To model lexical entailment we first assume that 
the meanings of the individual content words in a 
hypothesis can be assigned truth values. One pos-
sible interpretation for such truth values is that 
lexical concepts are assigned existential meanings. 
For example, for a given text t, Trbook=1 if it can be 
inferred in t?s state of affairs that a book exists. 
Our model does not depend on any such particular 
interpretation, though, as we only assume that truth 
values can be assigned for lexical items but do not 
explicitly annotate or evaluate this sub-task.  
Given this setting, a hypothesis is assumed to be 
true if and only if all its lexical components are 
true as well. This captures our target perspective of 
lexical entailment, while not modeling here other 
entailment aspects. When estimating the entailment 
probability we assume that the truth probability of 
a term u in a hypothesis h is independent of the 
truth of the other terms in h, obtaining:  
P(Trh = 1| t) = ?u?hP(Tru=1|t) 
P(Trh = 1) = ?u?hP(Tru=1) (1) 
In order to estimate P(Tru=1|v1, ?, vn) for a 
given word u and text t={v1, ?, vn}, we further 
assume that the majority of the probability mass 
comes from a specific entailing word in t: 
)|1(max)|1( vutvu TTrtTr =?==? ?  (2) 
where Tv denotes the event that a generated text 
contains the word v. This corresponds to expecting 
that each word in h will be entailed from a specific 
word in t (rather than from the accumulative con-
text of t as a whole2). Alternatively, one can view 
(2) as inducing an alignment between terms in the 
h to the terms in the t, somewhat similar to align-
ment models in statistical MT (Brown et al, 1993).  
Thus we propose estimating the entailment 
probability based on lexical entailment probabili-
ties from (1) and (2) as follows: 
?? ? =?==? hu vutvh TTrtTr )|1(max)|1(  (3) 
                                                          
2
 Such a model is proposed in (Glickman et al, 2005b)  
3.1 Estimating Lexical Entailment 
Probabilities   
We perform unsupervised empirical estimation of 
the lexical entailment probabilities, P(Tru=1|Tv), 
based on word co-occurrence frequencies in a cor-
pus. Following our proposed probabilistic model 
(cf. Section  2.2.1), we assume that the domain 
corpus is a sample generated by a language source. 
Each document represents a generated text and a 
(hidden) possible world. Given that the possible 
world of the text is not observed we do not know 
the truth assignments of hypotheses for the ob-
served texts. We therefore further make the sim-
plest assumption that all hypotheses stated 
verbatim in a document are true and all others are 
false and hence P(Tru=1|Tv) = P(Tu |Tv). This simple 
co-occurrence probability, which we denote as 
lexical entailment probability ? lep(u,v), is easily 
estimated from the corpus based on maximum like-
lihood counts:  
v
vu
vu
n
n
TTrvulep ,)|1(),( ?=?=
 
(4) 
where nv is the number of documents containing 
word v and nu,v is the number of documents con-
taining both u and v.  
Given our definition of the textual entailment 
relationship (cf. Section  2.3) for a given word v we 
only consider for entailment words u for which 
P(Tru=1|Tv)> P(Tru=1) or based on our estimations, 
for which nu,v/nu > nv/N (N is total number of 
documents in the corpus).  
We denote as tep the textual entailment probability 
estimation as derived from (3) and (4) above: 
? ? ?= hu tv vulephttep ),(max),(  (5) 
3.2 Baseline model 
As a baseline model for comparison, we use a 
score developed within the context of text summa-
rization. (Monz and de Rijke, 2001) propose mod-
eling the directional entailment between two texts 
t1, t2 via the following score:  
?
?
?
??=
2
21
)(
)(
),( )(21
tw
ttw
widf
widf
ttentscore
 (6) 
where idf(w) = log(N/nw), N is total number of 
documents in corpus and nw is number of docu-
46
ments containing word w.  A practically equivalent 
measure was independently proposed in the con-
text of QA by (Saggion et al, 2004)3. This baseline 
measure captures word overlap, considering only 
words that appear in both texts and weighs them 
based on their inverse document frequency. 
4 The RTE challenge dataset 
The RTE dataset (Dagan et al, 2005) consists 
of sentence pairs annotated for entailment. Fo this 
dataset we used word cooccurrence frequencies 
obtained from a web search engine. The details of 
this experiment are described in Glickman et al, 
2005a. The resulting accuracy on the test set was 
59% and the resulting confidence weighted score 
was 0.57. Both are statistically significantly better 
than chance at the 0.01 level. The baseline model 
(6) from Section  3.2, which takes into account only 
terms appearing in both the text and hypothesis, 
achieved an accuracy of only 56%. Although our 
proposed lexical system is relatively simple, as it 
doesn?t rely on syntactic or other deeper analysis, 
it nevertheless was among the top ranking systems 
in the RTE Challenge. 
5 RCV1 dataset  
In addition to the RTE dataset we were interested 
in evaluating the model on a more representative 
set of texts and hypotheses that better corresponds 
to applicative settings. We focused on the informa-
tion seeking setting, common in applications such 
as QA and IR, in which a hypothesis is given and it 
is necessary to identify texts that entail it.  
An annotator was asked to choose 60 hypothe-
ses based on sentences from the first few docu-
ments in the Reuters Corpus Volume 1 (Rose et al, 
2002). The annotator was instructed to choose sen-
tential hypotheses such that their truth could easily 
be evaluated. We further required that the hypothe-
ses convey a reasonable information need in such a 
way that they might correspond to potential ques-
tions, semantic queries or IE relations. Table 2 
shows a few of the hypotheses.  
In order to create a set of candidate entailing 
texts for the given set of test hypotheses, we fol-
lowed the common practice of WordNet based ex-
                                                          
3
 (Saggion et al, 2004) actually proposed the above score with 
no normalizing denominator. However for a given hypothesis 
it results with the same ranking of candidate entailing texts. 
pansion (Nie and Brisebois, 1996; Yang and Chua, 
2002). Using WordNet, we expanded the hypothe-
ses? terms with morphological alternations and 
semantically related words4.  
For each hypothesis stop words were removed 
and all content words were expanded as described 
above. Boolean Search included a conjunction of 
the disjunction of the term?s expansions and was 
performed at the paragraph level over the full 
Reuters corpus, as common in IR for QA. Since we 
wanted to focus our research on semantic variabil-
ity we excluded from the result set paragraphs that 
contain all original words of the hypothesis or their 
morphological derivations. The resulting dataset 
consists of 50 hypotheses and over a million re-
trieved paragraphs (10 hypotheses had only exact 
matches). The number of paragraphs retrieved per 
hypothesis range from 1 to 400,000.5  
5.1 Evaluation 
The model?s entailment probability, tep, was com-
pared to the following two baseline models. The 
first, denoted as base, is the na?ve baseline in 
which all retrieved texts are presumed to entail the 
hypothesis with equal confidence. This baseline 
corresponds to systems which perform blind ex-
pansion with no weighting. The second baseline, 
entscore, is the entailment score (6) from  3.2.  
The top 20 best results for all methods were 
given to judges to be annotated for entailment. 
Judges were asked to annotate an example as true 
if given the text they can infer with high confi-
dence that the hypothesis is true (similar to the 
guidelines published for the RTE Challenge data-
set). Accordingly, they were instructed to annotate 
the example as false if either they believe the hy-
pothesis is false given the text or if the text is unre-
lated to the hypothesis. In total there were 1683 
text-hypothesis pairs, which were randomly di-
vided between two judges. In order to measure 
agreement, we had 200 of the pairs annotated by 
both judges, yielding a moderate agreement (a 
Kappa of 0.6). 
                                                          
4
 The following WordNet relations were used: Synonyms, see 
also, similar to, hypernyms/hyponyms, meronyms/holonyms, 
pertainyms, attribute, entailment, cause and domain 
5
 The dataset is available at:  
http://ir-srv.cs.biu.ac.il:64080/emsee05_dataset.zip 
47
5.2 Results 
 base entscore tep 
precision 0.464 0.568 0.647 
cws 0.396 0.509 0.575 
Table 2: Results 
Table 2 includes the results of macro averaging the 
precision at top-20 and the average confidence 
weighted score (cws) achieved for the 50 hypothe-
ses. Applying Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test, our 
model performs significantly better (at the 0.01 
level) than entscore and base for both precision and 
cws. Analyzing the results showed that many of 
the mistakes were not due to wrong expansion but 
rather to a lack of a deeper analysis of the text and 
hypothesis (e.g. example 3 in Table 2). Indeed this 
is a common problem with lexical models. Incor-
porating additional linguistic levels into the prob-
abilistic entailment model, such as syntactic 
matching, co-reference resolution and word sense 
disambiguation, becomes a challenging target for 
future research. 
6 Conclusions 
This paper proposes a generative probabilistic set-
ting that formalizes the notion of probabilistic tex-
tual entailment, which is based on the conditional 
probability that a hypothesis is true given the text. 
This probabilistic setting provided the necessary 
grounding for a concrete probabilistic model of 
lexical entailment that is based on document co-
occurrence statistics in a bag of words representa-
tion.  Although the illustrated lexical system is 
relatively simple, as it doesn?t rely on syntactic or 
other deeper analysis, it nevertheless achieved en-
couraging results. The results suggest that such a 
probabilistic framework is a promising basis for 
improved implementations incorporating deeper 
types of knowledge and a common test-bed for 
more sophisticated models.   
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported in part by the IST Pro-
gramme of the European Community, under the 
PASCAL Network of Excellence, IST-2002-
506778. This publication only reflects the authors' 
views. We would also like to thank Ruthie Mandel 
and Tal Itzhak Ron for their annotation work. 
 
References 
Fahiem Bacchus. 1990. Representing and Reasoning 
with Probabilistic Knowledge, M.I.T. Press. 
Peter F. Brown, Vincent J. Della Pietra, Stephen A. 
Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The 
Mathematics of Statistical Machine Translation: Pa-
rameter Estimation. Computational Linguistics, 
19(2):263?311. 
Chierchia, Gennaro, and Sally McConnell-Ginet. 2001. 
Meaning and grammar: An introduction to seman-
tics, 2nd. edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman and Bernardo Magnini. 
2005. The PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment 
Challenge. In Proceedings of the PASCAL Chal-
lenges Workshop for Recognizing Textual Entail-
ment. Southampton, U.K. 
Oren Glickman, Ido Dagan and Moshe Koppel. 2005a. 
Web Based Probabilistic Textual Entailment, 
PASCAL Challenges Workshop for Recognizing 
Textual Entailment. 
Oren Glickman, Ido Dagan and Moshe Koppel. 2005b. 
A Probabilistic Classification Approach for Lexical 
Textual Entailment, Twentieth National Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-05). 
Joseph Y. Halpern. 1990. An analysis of first-order lo-
gics of probability. Artificial Intelligence 46:311-350. 
Christof Monz, Maarten de Rijke. 2001. Light-Weight 
Entailment Checking for Computational Semantics. 
In Proc. of the third workshop on inference in com-
putational semantics (ICoS-3).  
Jian-Yun Nie and Martin Brisebois. 1996. An Inferential 
Approach to Information Retrieval and Its Implemen-
tation Using a Manual Thesaurus. Artificial Intelli-
gence Revue 10(5-6): 409-439. 
Jay M. Ponte, W. Bruce Croft, 1998. A Language Mod-
eling Approach to Information Retrieval. SIGIR con-
ference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval. 
Tony G. Rose, Mary Stevenson, and Miles Whitehead. 
2002. The Reuters Corpus volume 1 - from yester-
day?s news to tomorrow?s language resources. Third 
International Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC). 
Hui Yang and Tat-Seng Chua. 2002. The integration of 
lexical knowledge and external resources for ques-
tion answering. The eleventh Text REtrieval Confer-
ence (TREC-11). 
48
