Proceedings of the ACL-SIGLEX Workshop on Deep Lexical Acquisition, pages 18?27,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Identifying Concept Attributes Using a Classifier 
Massimo Poesio  
University of Essex 
Computer Science /  
Language and Computation 
poesio at essex.ac.uk 
Abdulrahman Almuhareb 
University of Essex 
Computer Science /  
Language and Computation  
aalmuh at essex.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract 
We developed a novel classification of 
concept attributes and two supervised 
classifiers using this classification to iden-
tify concept attributes from candidate at-
tributes extracted from the Web. Our 
binary (attribute / non-attribute) classifier 
achieves an accuracy of 81.82% whereas 
our 5-way classifier achieves 80.35%. 
1 Introduction 
The assumption that concept attributes and, more 
in general, features1 are an important aspect of 
conceptual representation is widespread in all dis-
ciplines involved with conceptual representations, 
from Artificial Intelligence / Knowledge Represen-
tation (starting with at least (Woods, 1975) and 
down to (Baader et al 2003)), Linguistics (e.g., in 
the theories of the lexicon based on typed feature 
structures and/or Pustejovsky?s Generative Lexi-
con theory: (Pustejovsky 1995)) and Psychology 
(Murphy 2002, Vinson et al2003).  This being the 
case, it is surprising how little attention has been 
devoted to this aspect of lexical representation in 
work on large-scale lexical semantics in Computa-
tional Linguistics. The most extensive resource at 
                                                          
1 The term attribute is used informally here to indicate the 
type of relational information about concepts that is expressed 
using so-called roles in Description Logics (Baader et al 
2003)?i.e., excluding IS-A style information (that cars are 
vehicles, for instance).  It is meant to be a more restrictive 
term than the term feature, often used to indicate any property 
of concepts, particularly in Psychology. We are carrying out a 
systematic analysis of the sets of features used in work such as 
(Vinson et al 2003) (see Discussion).  
our disposal, WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) contains 
very little information that would be considered as 
being about ?attributes??only information about  
parts, not about qualities such as height, or even to 
the values of such attributes in the adjective net-
work?and this information is still very sparse. On 
the other hand, the only work on the extraction of 
lexical semantic relations we are aware of has con-
centrated on the type of relations found in Word-
Net: hyponymy (Hearst, 1998; Caraballo, 1999) 
and meronymy (Berland and Charniak, 1999; Poe-
sio et al 2002).2 
The work discussed here could be perhaps best 
described as an example of empirical ontology: 
using linguistics and philosophical ideas to im-
prove the results of empirical work on lexical / on-
tology acquisition, and vice versa, using findings 
from empirical analysis to question some of the 
assumptions of theoretical work on ontology and 
the lexicon. Specifically, we discuss work on the 
acquisition of (nominal) concept attributes whose 
goal is twofold: on the one hand, to clarify the no-
tion of ?attribute? and its role in lexical semantics, 
if any; on the other, to develop methods to acquire 
such information automatically (e.g., to supple-
ment WordNet).  
The structure of the paper is as follows. After a 
short review of relevant literature on extracting 
semantic relations and on attributes in the lexicon, 
we discuss our classification of attributes, followed 
by the features we used to classify them. We then 
discuss our training methods and the results we 
achieved.  
                                                          
2 In work on the acquisition of lexical information about verbs 
there has been some work on the acquisition of thematic roles, 
(e.g., Merlo and Stevenson, 2001). 
18
2 Background 
2.1 Using Patterns to Extract Semantic Rela-
tions 
The work discussed here belongs to a line of re-
search attempting to acquire information about 
lexical and other semantic relations other than 
similarity / synonymy by identifying syntactic 
constructions that are often (but not always!) used 
to express such relations. The earliest work of this 
type we are aware of is the work by Hearst (1998) 
on acquiring information about hyponymy (= IS-A 
links) by searching for instances of patterns such as  
NP {, NP}* or other NP 
(as in, e.g., bruises ?. broken bones and other 
INJURIES).   A similar approach was used by Ber-
land and Charniak (1999) and Poesio et al(2002) 
to extract information about part-of relations using 
patterns such as 
the N of the N is ?. 
(as in the wheel of the CAR is) and by Girju and 
Moldovan (2002) and Sanchez-Graillet and Poesio 
(2004) to extract causal relations. In previous work 
(Almuhareb and Poesio, 2004) we used this same 
approach to extract attributes, using the pattern  
?the * of the C [is|was]? 
(suggested by, e.g., (Woods, 1975) as a test for 
?attributehood?) to search for attributes of concept 
C in the Web, using the Google API. Although the 
information extracted this way proved a useful ad-
dition to our lexical representations from a cluster-
ing perspective, from the point of view of lexicon 
building this approach results in too many false 
positives, as very few syntactic constructions are 
used to express exclusively one type of semantic 
relation. For example, the ?attributes? of deer ex-
tracted using the text pattern above include ?the 
majority of the deer,? ?the lake of the deer,? and 
?the picture of the deer.? Girju and Moldovan 
(2002) addressed the problem of false positives for 
causal relations by developing WordNet-based fil-
ters to remove unlikely candidates. In this work, 
we developed a semantic filter for attributes based 
on a linguistic theory of attributes which does not 
rely on WordNet except as a source of morpho-
logical information (see below). 
2.2 Two Theories of Attributes 
The earliest attempt to classify attributes and other 
properties of substances we are aware of goes back 
to Aristotle, e.g., in Categories,3 but our classifica-
tion of attributes was inspired primarily by the 
work of Pustejovsky (1995) and Guarino (e.g., 
(1992)). According to Pustejovsky?s Generative 
Lexicon theory (1995), an integral part of a lexical 
entry is its Qualia Structure, which consists of 
four ?roles?:4 the Formal Role, specifying what 
type of object it is: e.g., in the case of a book, that 
it has a shape, a color, etc.; the Constitutive Role, 
specifying the stuff and parts that it consists of 
(e.g., in the case of a book,  that it is made of pa-
per, it has chapters and an index, etc.); the Telic 
Role, specifying the purpose of the object (e.g., in 
the case of a book, reading);  and the Agentive 
Role, specifying how the object was created (e.g., 
in the case of a book, by writing).   
Guarino (1992) argues that there are two types 
of attributes: relational and non-relational. Rela-
tional attributes include qualities such as color and 
position, and relational social roles such as son 
and spouse. Non-relational attributes include parts 
such as wheel and engine. Activities are not 
viewed as attributes in Guarino?s classification. 
3 Attribute Extraction and Classification 
The goal of this work is to identify genuine attrib-
utes by classifying candidate attributes collected 
using text patterns as discussed in (Almuhareb and 
Poesio, 2004) according to a scheme inspired by 
those proposed by Guarino and Pustejovsky.  
The scheme we used to classify the training 
data in the experiment discussed below consists of 
six categories:   
? Qualities: Analogous to Guarino?s qualities 
and Pustejovsky?s formal ?role?. (E.g., ?the 
color of the car?.) 
? Parts: Related to Guarino?s non-relational 
attributes and Pustejovsky?s constitutive 
?roles?. (E.g., ?the hood of the car?). 
? Related-Objects: A new category intro-
duced to cover the numerous physical ob-
jects which are ?related? to an object but are 
not part of it?e.g., ?the track of the deer?. 
                                                          
3 E.g., http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/substance. Thanks to 
one of the referees for drawing our attention to this. 
4 ?Facets? would be perhaps a more appropriate term to avoid 
confusions with the use of the term ?role? in Knowledge Rep-
resentation. 
19
? Activities: These include both the types of 
activities which are part of Pustejovsky?s 
telic ?role? and those which would be in-
cluded in his agentive ?role?. (E.g., ?the re-
pairing of the car?.) 
? Related-Agents: For the activities in which 
the concept in question is acted upon, the 
agent of the activity: e.g., ?the writer of the 
book?, ?the driver of the car?. 
? Non-Attributes: This category covers the 
cases in which the construction ?the N of the 
N? expresses other semantic relations, as in: 
?the last of the deer?, ?the majority of the 
deer,? ?the lake of the deer,? and ?in the 
case of the deer?. 
We will quickly add that (i) we do not view this 
classification as definitive?in fact, we already 
collapsed the classes ?part? and ?related objects?  in 
the  experiments discussed below?and (ii) not all 
of these distinctions are very easy even for human 
judges to do.  For example, design, as an attribute 
of a car, can be judged to be a quality if we think 
of it as taking values such as modern and standard; 
on the other hand, design might also be viewed as 
an activity in other contexts discussing the design-
ing process. Another type of difficulty is that a 
given attribute may express different things for 
different objects. For example, introduction is a 
part of a book, and an activity for a product. An 
additional difficulty results from the strong similar-
ity between parts and related-objects. For example, 
?key? is a related-object to a car but it is not part 
of it. We will return to this issue and to agreement 
on this classification scheme when discussing the 
experiment. 
One difference from previous work is that we 
use additional linguistic constructions to extract 
candidate attributes. The construction ?the X of the 
Y is? used in our previous work is only one exam-
ple of genitive construction. Quirk et al(1985) list 
eight types of genitives in English, four of which 
are useful for our purposes:  
? Possessive Genitive: used to express quali-
ties, parts, related-objects, and related-
agents. 
? Genitive of Measure: used to express quali-
ties. 
? Subjective & Objective Genitives: used to 
express activities. 
We used all of these constructions in the work 
discussed here.  
4 Information Used to Classify Attributes 
Our attribute classifier uses four types of informa-
tion: morphological information, an attribute 
model, a question model, and an attributive-usage 
model. In this section we discuss how this informa-
tion is automatically computed.  
4.1 Morphological Information 
Our use of morphological information is based on 
the noun classification scheme proposed by Dixon 
(1991). According to Dixon, derivational morphol-
ogy provides some information about attribute typ-
e. Parts are concrete objects and almost all of them 
are expressed using basic noun roots (i.e., not de-
rived from adjectives or verbs). Most of qualities 
and properties are either basic noun roots or de-
rived from adjectives. Finally, activities are mostly 
nouns derived from verbs. Although these rules 
only have a heuristic value, we found that morpho-
logically based heuristics did provide useful cues 
when used in combination with the other types of 
information discussed below.  
As we are not aware of any publicly available 
software performing automatic derivational mor-
phology, we developed our own (and very basic) 
heuristic methods. The techniques we used involve 
using information from WordNet, suffix-checking, 
and a POS tagger. 
WordNet was used to find nouns that are de-
rived from verbs and to filter out words that are not 
in the noun database. Nouns in WordNet are linked 
to their derivationally related verbs, but there is no 
indication about which is derived from which. We 
use a heuristic based on length to decide this: the 
system checks if the noun contains more letters 
than the most similar related verb. If this is the 
case, then the noun is judged to be derived from 
the verb. If the same word is used both as a noun 
and as a verb, then we check the usage familiarity 
of the word, which can also be found in WordNet. 
If the word is used more as a verb and the verbal 
usage is not rare, then again the system treats the 
noun as derived from the verb. 
20
To find nouns that are derived from adjectives 
we used simple heuristics based on suffix-
checking. (This was also done by Berland and 
Charniak (1999).) All words that end with ?ity? or 
?ness? are considered to be derived from adjec-
tives. A noun not found to be derived from a verb 
or an adjective is assumed to be a basic noun root. 
In addition to derivational morphology, we used 
the Brill tagger (Brill, 1995) to filter out adjectives 
and other types of words that can occasionally be 
used as nouns such as better, first, and whole be-
fore training. Only nouns, base form verbs, and 
gerund form verbs were kept in the candidate at-
tribute list. 
4.2 Clustering Attributes  
Attributes are themselves concepts, at least in the 
sense that they have their own attributes: for ex-
ample, a part of a car, such as a wheel, has its own 
parts (the tyre) its qualities (weight, diameter) etc.  
This observation suggests that it should be possible 
to find similar attributes in an unsupervised fashion 
by looking at their attributes, just as we did earlier 
for concepts (Almuhareb and Poesio, 2004). In 
order to do this, we used our text patterns for find-
ing attributes to collect from the Web up to 500 
pattern instances for each of the candidate attrib-
utes. The collected data were used to build a vecto-
rial representation of attributes as done in 
(Almuhareb and Poesio, 2004).  We then used 
CLUTO (Karypis, 2002) to cluster attributes using 
these vectorial representations. In a first round of 
experiments we found that the classes ?parts? and 
?related objects? were difficult to differentiate, and 
therefore we merged them. The final model clus-
ters candidate attributes into five classes: activities, 
parts & related-objects, qualities, related-agents, 
and non-attributes. This classification was used as 
one of the input features in our supervised classi-
fier for attributes.  
We also developed a measure to identify par-
ticularly distinctive ?attributes of attributes??
attributes which have a strong tendency to occur 
primarily with attributes (or any concept) of a 
given class?which has proven to work pretty well. 
This measure, which we call Uniqueness, actually 
is the product of two factors: the degree of unique-
ness proper, i.e., the probability P(classi | attrib-
utej) that  an attribute (or, in fact, any other noun) 
will belong to class i given than it has attribute j; 
and a measure of ?definitional power? ?the prob-
ability P(attribute j | classi) that a concept belong-
ing to a given class will have a certain attribute. 
Using MLE to estimate these probabilities, the de-
gree of uniqueness of attributesj of classi is com-
puted as follows: 
 
)(
),( 2
,
ji
ji
ji attributeCn
attributeclassC
Uniqueness ?=  
 
where ni is the number of concepts in classi. C is a 
count function that counts concepts that are associ-
ated with the given attribute. Uniqueness ranges 
from 0 to 1. 
Table 1 shows the 10 most distinctive attributes 
for each of the five attribute classes, as determined 
by the Uniqueness measure just introduced, for the 
1,155 candidate attributes in the training data for 
the experiment discussed below. 
 
Class Top 10 Distinctive Attributes 
Related-Agent 
(0.39) 
identity, hands, duty, consent, 
responsibility, part, attention, 
voice, death, job 
Part &  
Related-Object 
(0.40) 
inside, shape, top, outside, sur-
face, bottom, center, front, size, 
interior 
Activity 
(0.29) 
time, result, process, results, 
timing, date, effect, beginning, 
cause, purpose 
Quality 
(0.23) 
measure, basis, determination, 
question, extent, issue, meas-
urement, light, result, increase 
Non-Attribute 
(0.18) 
content, value, rest, nature, 
meaning, format, interpretation, 
essence, size, source 
Table 1: Top 10 distinctive attributes of the five 
classes of candidate attributes. Average distinct-
iveness (uniqueness) for the top 10 attributes is 
shown between parentheses 
 
 Most of the top 10 attributes of related-agents, 
parts & related-objects, and activities are genuinely 
distinctive attributes for such classes. Thus, attrib-
utes of related-agents reflect the ?intentionality? 
aspect typical of members of this class: identity, 
duty, and responsibility. Attributes of parts are 
common attributes of physical objects (e.g., inside, 
shape). Most attributes of activities have to do with 
temporal properties and causal structure: e.g., be-
ginning, cause. The ?distinctive? attributes of the 
21
quality class are less distinctive, but four such at-
tributes (measure, extent, measurement, and in-
crease) are related to values since many of the 
qualities can have different values (e.g., small and 
large for the quality size). There are however sev-
eral attributes in common between these classes of 
attributes, emphasizing yet again how some of 
these distinctions at least are not completely clear 
cut:  e.g., result, in common between activities and 
qualities (two classes which are sometimes diffi-
cult to distinguish). Finally, as one would expect, 
the attributes of the non-attribute class are not 
really distinctive: their average uniqueness score is 
the lowest. This is because ?non-attribute? is a het-
erogeneous class. 
4.3 The Question Model 
Certain types of attributes can only be used when 
asking certain types of questions. For example, it is 
possible to ask ?What is the color of the car?? but 
not ??When is the color of the car??.  
We created a text pattern for each type of ques-
tion and used these patterns to search the Web and 
collect counts of occurrences of particular ques-
tions. An example of such patterns would be: 
? ?what is|are the A  of the? 
where A is the candidate attribute under investiga-
tion. Patterns for who, when, where, and how are 
similar.  
After collecting occurrence frequencies for all 
the candidate attributes, we transform these counts 
into weights using the t-test weighting function as 
done for all of our counts, using the following for-
mula from Manning and Schuetze (1999): 
 
 
2
2
, ),(
N
)()(),(
N
attributequestionC
attributeCquestionC
N
attributequestionC
t
ji
jiji
ji
??
?
 
where N is the total number of relations, and C is a 
count function. 
Table 2 shows the 10 most frequent attributes 
for each question type. This data was collected us-
ing a more restricted form of the question patterns 
and a varying number of instances for each type of 
questions. The restricted form includes a question 
mark at the end of the phrase and was used to im-
prove the precision. For example, the what-pattern 
would be ?what is the * of the *??. 
Question Top 10 Attributes 
what purpose, name, nature, role, cost, func-tion, significance, size, source, status 
who author, owner, head, leader, president, sponsor, god, lord, father, king 
where rest, location, house, fury, word, edge, center, end, ark, voice 
how 
quality, rest, pace, level, length, mo-
rale, performance, content, organiza-
tion, cleanliness 
when end, day, time, beginning, date, onset, running, birthday, fast, opening 
Table 2: Frequent attributes for each question type 
 
Instances of the what-pattern are frequent in the 
Web: the Google count was more than 2,000,000 
for a query issued in mid 2004. The who-pattern is 
next in terms of occurrence, with about 350,000 
instances. The when-pattern is the most infrequent 
pattern, about 5,300 instances. 
The counts broadly reflected our intuitions 
about the use of such questions. What-questions 
are mainly used with qualities, whereas who-
questions are used with related-agents. Attributes 
occurring with when-questions have some tempo-
ral aspects; attributes occurring with how-questions 
are mostly qualities and activities, and attributes in 
where-questions are of different types but some are 
related to locations. Parts usually do not occur with 
these types of questions. 
4.4 Attributive Use  
Finally, we exploited the fact that certain types of 
attributes are used more in language as concepts 
rather than as attributes. For instance, it is more 
common to encounter the phrase ?the size of the 
?? than ?the ?  of the size?. On the other hand, it is 
more common to encounter the phrase ?the * of 
the window? than ?the window of the *?. Gener-
ally speaking, parts, related-objects, and related-
agents are more likely to have more attributes than 
qualities and activities. We used the two patterns 
?the * of the A? and ?the A of the *? to collect 
Google counts for all of the candidate attributes. 
These counts were also weighted using the t-test as 
in the question model. 
Table 3 illustrates the attributive and conceptual 
usage for each attribute class using a training data 
of 1,155 attributes. The usage averages confirm the 
initial assumption.  
22
Average T-Test Score Attribute Class Conceptual Attributive
Parts & 
Related-Objects 18.81 3.00 
Non-Attributes 13.29 11.07 
Related-Agents 12.15 2.54 
Activities 3.22 5.08 
Qualities 0.23 17.09 
Table 3: Conceptual and attributive usage averages 
for each attribute class 
5 The Experiment 
We trained two classifiers: a 2-way classifier that 
simply classifies candidate attributes into attributes 
and non-attributes, and a 5-way classifier that clas-
sifies candidate attributes into activities, parts & 
related-objects, qualities, related-agents, and non-
attributes. These classifiers were trained using de-
cision trees algorithm (J48) from WEKA (Witten 
and Frank, 1999). 
 
Feature 
el
ec
tio
n 
ab
do
m
en
 
ac
id
ity
 
cr
ea
to
r 
pr
ob
le
m
 
Cluster Id 1 2 4 0 3 
What 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.80 
When 2.62 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Where 0.78 0.94 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Who 0.00 0.00 0.00 30.28 0.00 
How 2.05 0.00 1.54 0.00 2.61 
Conceptual 38.16 20.15 0.00 0.00 135.40 
Attributive 0.00 0.00 10.22 1.60 0.00 
Morph DV BN DA DV BN 
Attribute 
Class  
(Output) 
Activity Part Quality RelatedAgent 
Non- 
Attribute
Table 4: Five examples of training instances. The 
values for morph are as follows: DV: derived from 
verb; BN: basic noun; DA: derived from adjective 
 
Our training and testing material was acquired 
as follows. We started from the 24,178 candidate 
attributes collected for the concepts in the balanced 
concept dataset we recently developed (Almuhareb 
and Poesio, 2005). We threw out every candidate 
attribute with a Google frequency less than 20; this 
reduced the number of candidate attributes to 
4,728. We then removed words other than nouns 
and gerunds as discussed above, obtaining 4,296 
candidate attributes.   
The four types of input features for this filtered 
set of candidate attributes were computed as dis-
cussed in the previous section. The best results 
were obtained using all of these features. A train-
ing set of 1,155 candidate attributes was selected 
and hand-classified (see below for agreement fig-
ures). We tried to include enough samples for each 
attribute class in the training set. Table 4 shows the 
input features for five different training examples, 
one for each attribute class. 
6  Evaluation 
For a qualitative idea of the behavior of our classi-
fier, the best attributes for some concepts are listed 
in Appendix A. We concentrate here on quantita-
tive analyses. 
6.1 Classifier Evaluation 1: Cross-Validation 
Our two classifiers were evaluated, first of all, us-
ing 10-fold cross-validation. The 2-way classifier 
correctly classified 81.82% of the candidate attrib-
utes (the baseline accuracy is 80.61%). The 5-way 
classifier correctly classified 80.35% of the attrib-
utes (the baseline accuracy is 23.55%). The preci-
sion / recall results are shown in Table 5. 
 
Attribute Class P R F 
2-Way Classifier 
Attribute 0.854 0.934 0.892
Non-Attribute 0.551 0.335 0.417
5-Way Classifier 
Related-Agent 0.930 0.970 0.950
Part & Related-Object 0.842 0.882 0.862
Activity 0.822 0.878 0.849
Quality 0.799 0.821 0.810
Non-Attribute 0.602 0.487 0.538
Table 5: Cross-validation results for the two  
attribute classifiers 
 
As it can be seen from Table 5, both classifiers 
achieve good F values for all classes except for the 
non-attribute class: F-measures range from 81% to 
95%. With the 2-way classifier, the valid attribute 
class has an F-measure of 89.2%. With the 5-way 
classifier, related-agent is the most accurate class 
(F = 95%) followed by part & related-object, 
activity, and quality (86.2%, 84.9%, and 81.0%, 
23
respectively). With non-attribute, however, we 
find an F of 41.7% in the 2-way classification, and 
53.8% in the 5-way classification. This suggests 
that the best strategy for lexicon building would be 
to use these classifiers to ?find? attributes rather 
than ?filter? non-attributes. 
6.2 Classifier Evaluation 2: Human Judges 
Next, we evaluated the accuracy of the attribute 
classifiers against two human judges (the authors). 
We randomly selected a concept from each of the 
21 classes in the balanced dataset.  Next, we used 
the classifiers to classify the 20 best candidate at-
tributes of each concept, as determined by their t-
test scores. Then, the judges decided if the as-
signed classes are correct or not. For the 5-way 
classifier, the judges also assigned the correct class 
if the automatic assigned class is incorrect.  
After a preliminary examination we decided not 
to consider two troublesome concepts: constructor 
and future. The reason for eliminating constructor 
is that we discovered it is ambiguous: in addition 
to the sense of ?a person who builds things?, we 
discovered that constructor is used widely in the 
Web as a name for a fundamental method in object 
oriented programming languages such as Java. 
Most of the best candidate attributes (e.g., call, 
arguments, code, and version) related to the latter 
sense, that doesn?t exist in WordNet. Our system is 
currently not able to do word sense discrimination, 
but we are currently working on this issue. The 
reason for ignoring the concept future was that this 
word is most commonly used as a modifier in 
phrases such as: ?the car of the future?, and ?the 
office of the future?, and that all of the best candi-
date attributes occurred in this type of construction.  
This reduced the number of evaluated concepts to 
19. 
According to the judges, the 2-way classifier 
was on average able to correctly assign attribute 
classes for 82.57% of the candidate attributes. This 
is very close to its performance in evaluation 1. 
The results using the F-measure reveal similar re-
sults too. Table 6 shows the results of the two clas-
sifiers based on the precision and recall measures. 
According to the judges, the 5-way classifier 
correctly classified 68.72% on average. This per-
formance is good but not as good as its perform-
ance in evaluation 1 (80.35%). The decrease in the 
performance was also shown in the F-measure. 
The F-measure ranges from 0.712 to 0.839 exclud-
ing the non-attribute class. 
  
Attribute Class P R F 
2-Way Classifier 
Attribute 0.928 0.872 0.899
Non-Attribute 0.311 0.459 0.369
5-Way Classifier 
Related-Agent 0.813 0.868 0.839
Part & Related-Object 0.814 0.753 0.781
Activity 0.870 0.602 0.712
Quality 0.821 0.658 0.730
Non-Attribute 0.308 0.632 0.414
Table 6: Evaluation against human judges results 
for the two classifiers 
 
An important question when using human 
judges is the degree of agreement among them. 
The K-statistic was used to measure this agree-
ment. The values of K are shown in Table 7. In the 
2-way classification, the judges agreed on 89.84% 
of the cases. On the other hand, the K-statistic for 
this classification task is 0.452. This indicates that 
part of this strong agreement is because that the 
majority of the candidate attributes are valid attrib-
utes. It also shows the difficulty of identifying non-
attributes even for human judges. In the 5-way 
classification, the two judges have a high level of 
agreement; Kappa statistic is 0.749. The judges 
and the 5-way classifier agreed on 63.71% of the 
cases. 
 
Description 2-Way 5-Way
Human Judges 89.84% 80.69%
Human Judges (Kappa) 0.452 0.749 
Human Judges & Classifier 78.36% 63.71%
Table 7: Level of agreement between the human 
judges and the classifiers 
6.3 Re-Clustering the Balanced Dataset 
Finally, we looked at whether using the classifiers 
results in a better lexical description for the pur-
poses of clustering (Almuhareb and Poesio, 2004). 
In Table 8 we show the results obtained using the 
output of the 2-way classifier to re-cluster the 402 
concepts of our balanced dataset, comparing these 
results with those obtained using all attributes (first 
column) and all attributes that remain after fre-
quency cutoff and POS filtering (column 2). The 
results are based on the CLUTO evaluation meas-
24
ures: Purity (which measures the degree of cohe-
sion of the clusters obtained) and Entropy. The 
purity and entropy formulas are shown in Table 9. 
 
Description 
All 
Candidate 
Attributes
Filtered 
Candidate 
Attributes 
2-Way 
Attributes
Purity 0.657 0.672 0.693 
Entropy 0.335 0.319  0.302  
Vector Size 24,178 4,296 3,824 
Table 8: Results of re-clustering concepts using 
different sets of attributes 
 
Clustering the concepts using only filtered can-
didate attributes improved the clustering purity 
from 0.657 to 0.672. This improvement in purity is 
not significant. However, clustering using only the 
attributes sanctioned by  the 2-way classifier im-
proved the purity further to 0.693, and this im-
provement in purity from the initial purity  was 
significant (t = 2.646, df = 801, p < 0.05). 
 
 Entropy Purity 
Single 
Cluster ?=?=
q
i r
i
r
r
i
r
r n
n
n
n
q
SE
1
log
log
1)(  )(max
1)( iri
r
r nn
SP =
Over-
all )(1
r
k
r
r SE
n
nEntropy ?
=
=  )(
1
r
k
r
r SP
n
nPurity ?
=
=
Table 9: Entropy and Purity in CLUTO. 
Sr is a cluster, nr is the size of the cluster, q is the number of 
classes, nir is the number of concepts from the  ith class that 
were assigned to the rth cluster, n is the number of concepts, 
and k is the number of clusters. 
7 Discussion and Conclusions 
The lexicon does not simply contain information 
about synonymy and hyponymy relations; it also 
contains information about the attributes of the 
concepts expressed by senses, as in Qualia struc-
tures. In previous work, we developed techniques 
for mining candidate attributes from the Web; in 
this paper we presented a method for improving 
the quality of attributes thus extracted, based on a 
classification for attributes derived from work in 
linguistics and philosophy, and a classifier that 
automatically tags candidate attributes with such 
classes. Both the 2-way and the 5-way classifiers 
achieve good precision and recall. Our work also 
reveals, however, that the notion of attribute is not 
fully understood. On the one hand, that attribute 
judgments are not always easy for humans even 
given a scheme; on the other hand, the results for 
certain types of attributes, especially activities and 
qualities, could certainly be improved. We also 
found that whereas attributes of physical objects 
are relatively easy to classify, the attributes of 
other types of concepts are harder ?particularly 
with activities. (See the Appendix for examples.) 
Our longer term goal is thus to further clarify the 
notion of attribute, possibly refining our classifica-
tion scheme, in collaboration with linguists, phi-
losophers, and psycholinguists. One comparison 
we are particularly interested in pursuing at the 
moment is that with feature lists used by psycholo-
gist, for whom knowledge representation is en-
tirely concept-based, and virtually every property 
of a concept counts as an attribute, including prop-
erties that would be viewed as IS-A links and what 
would be considered a value. Is it possible to make 
a principled, yet cognitively based distinction? 
Acknowledgments 
Abdulrahman Almuhareb is supported by King 
Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology 
(KACST), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. We wish to thank 
the anonymous referees for many helpful sugges-
tions.  
 References 
Almuhareb, A. and Poesio, M. (2004). Attribute-Based 
and Value-Based Clustering: An Evaluation. In Proc. 
of EMNLP. Barcelona, July. 
Almuhareb, A. and Poesio, M. (2005). Concept Learn-
ing and Categorization from the Web. In Proc. of 
CogSci. Italy, July. 
Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D., Nardi, D. 
and Patel-Schneider, P. (Editors). (2003). The De-
scription Logic Handbook. Cambridge University 
Press. 
Berland, M. and Charniak, E. (1999). Finding parts in 
very large corpora. In Proc. of the 37th ACL, (pp. 
57?64). University of Maryland. 
Brill, E. (1995). Transformation-Based Error-Driven 
Learning and Natural Language Processing: A Case 
Study in Part of Speech Tagging. Computational 
Linguistics. 
25
Caraballo, S. A. (1999). Automatic construction of a 
hypernym-labeled noun hierarchy from text. In Proc. 
of  the 37th  ACL. 
Dixon, R. M. W. (1991). A New Approach to English 
Grammar, on Semantic Principles. Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
Fellbaum, C. (Editor). (1998). WordNet: An electronic 
lexical database. The MIT Press. 
Girju, R. and Moldovan, D. (2002). Mining answers for 
causal questions. In Proc. AAAI.   
Guarino, N. (1992). Concepts, attributes and arbitrary 
relations: some linguistic and ontological criteria for 
structuring knowledge base. Data and Knowledge 
Engineering, 8, (pp. 249?261). 
Hearst, M. A. (1998). Automated discovery of WordNet 
relations. In Fellbaum, C. (Editor). WordNet: An 
Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press. 
Karypis, G. (2002). CLUTO: A clustering toolkit. Tech-
nical Report 02-017. University of Minnesota. At 
http://www-users.cs.umn.edu/~karypis/cluto/. 
Manning, C. D. and Schuetze H. (1999). Foundations of 
Statistical NLP. MIT Press. 
Merlo, P. and Stevenson, S. (2001). Automatic Verb 
Classification Based on Statistical Distributions of 
Argument Structure. Computational Linguistics. 27: 
3, 373-408. 
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts. The 
MIT Press. 
Poesio, M., Ishikawa, T., Schulte im Walde, S. and 
Vieira, R. (2002).  Acquiring lexical knowledge for 
anaphora resolution. In Proc. Of LREC.     
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. MIT 
Press. 
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and Svartvik, J. 
(1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English 
language. London: Longman. 
Sanchez-Graillet, O. and Poesio, M. (2004). Building 
Bayesian Networks from text. In Proc. of LREC, Lis-
bon, May. 
Vinson, D. P., Vigliocco, G., Cappa, S., and Siri, S. 
(2003). The breakdown of semantic knowledge: in-
sights from a statistical model of meaning representa-
tion. Brain and Language, 86(3), 347-365(19). 
Witten, I. H. and Frank, E. (1999). Data Mining: Prac-
tical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with 
Java Implementations, Morgan Kaufmann. 
Woods, W. A. (1975). What?s in a link: Foundations for 
semantic networks. In Daniel G. Bobrow and Alan 
M. Collins, editors, Representation and Understand-
ing: Studies in Cognitive Science, (pp. 35-82). Aca-
demic Press, New York. 
 
 
 
Appendix A.   5-Way Automatic Classification of the Best Candidate Attributes of 
Some Concepts 
 
Car 
Class Best Attributes 
Activity acceleration, performance, styling, construction, propulsion, insurance, stance, ride, move-ment 
Part & 
Related-
Object  
front, body, mass, underside, hood, roof, nose, graphics, side, trunk, engine, boot, frame, bot-
tom, backseat, chassis, wheelbase, silhouette, floor, battery, windshield, seat, undercarriage, 
tank, window, steering, drive, finish  
Quality  speed, weight, handling, velocity, color, condition, width, look, colour, feel, momentum, heritage, shape, appearance, ownership, make, convenience, age, quality, reliability 
Related-
Agent  driver, owner, buyer, sponsor, occupant, seller 
Non-
Attribute  
rest, price, design, balance, motion, lure, control, use, future, cost, inertia, model, wheel, 
style, position, setup, sale, supply, safety  
 
26
 
Camel 
Class Best Attributes 
Activity introduction, selling, argument, exhaustion 
Part & 
Related-
Object  
nose, hump, furniture, saddle, hair, flesh, neck, milk, head, reins, foot, eye, hooves, humps, 
ass, feet, hoof, flanks, bones, ears, bag, skin, haunches, stomach, legs, urine, meat, penis, 
load, breast, backside, testicles, rope, corpse, house, nostrils, foam, bell, sight, butt, fur, bod-
ies, toe, hoofs, heads, knees, pancreas, mouth, coat, uterus, necks, chin, udders 
Quality  origins, gait, domestication, usefulness, pace, fleetness, smell, existence, appeal, birth, awk-wardness  
Related-
Agent  ghost 
Non-
Attribute  gift, rhythm, physiology, battle, case, example, dance, manner, description 
 
Cancer 
Class Best Attributes 
Activity 
growth, development, removal, treatment, recurrence, diagnosis, pain, spreading, metastasis, 
detection, eradication, elimination, production, discovery, remission, advance, excision, pre-
vention, evolution, disappearance, anxiety 
Part & 
Related-
Object  
location, site, lump, nature, root, cells, margin, formation, margins, roots, world, region 
Quality  
extent, size, seriousness, progression, severity, aggressiveness, cause, progress, symptoms, 
effects, risk, incidence, staging, biology, onset, characteristics, histology, ability, status, ap-
pearance, thickness, sensitivity, causes, prevalence, responsiveness, ravages, frequency, aeti-
ology, circumstances, rarity, outcome, behavior, genetics 
Related-
Agent  club, patient 
Non-
Attribute  
stage, spread, grade, origin, course, power, return, area, response, presence, type, particulars, 
occurrence, prognosis, pathogenesis, source, news, cure, pathology, properties, genesis, 
boundaries, drama, stages, chapter 
 
Family 
Class Best Attributes 
Activity disintegration, protection, decline, destruction, breakup, abolition, participation, reunifica-tion, reconciliation, dissolution, composition, restoration 
Part & 
Related-
Object  
head, institution, support, flower, core, fabric, culture, dimension, food, lineage, cornerstone, 
community 
Quality  
breakdown, importance, honor, structure, sociology, integrity, unity, sanctity, health, privacy, 
survival, definition, influence, honour, involvement, continuity, stability, size, preservation, 
upbringing, centrality, ancestry, solidarity, hallmark, status, functioning, primacy, autonomy  
Related-
Agent  
father, baby, member, mother, members, patriarch, breadwinner, matriarch, man, foundation, 
founder, heir, daughter 
Non-
Attribute  
rest, role, income, history, concept, welfare, pedigree, genealogy, presence, context, origin, 
bond, tradition, taxonomy, system, wealth, lifestyle, surname, crisis, ideology, rights, eco-
nomics, safety 
 
27
