Proceedings of the Ninth International Workshop on Parsing Technologies (IWPT), pages 204?205,
Vancouver, October 2005. c?2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Robust Extraction of Subcategorization Data from Spoken Language 
 
Jianguo Li & Chris Brew Eric Fosler-Lussier 
Department of Linguistics Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
The Ohio State University, USA The Ohio State University, USA 
{jianguo|cbrew}@ling.ohio-state.edu fosler@cse.ohio-state.edu 
 
 
 
 
1 Introduction 
Subcategorization data has been crucial for various 
NLP tasks. Current method for automatic SCF ac-
quisition usually proceeds in two steps: first, gen-
erate all SCF cues from a corpus using a parser, 
and then filter out spurious SCF cues with statisti-
cal tests. Previous studies on SCF acquisition have 
worked mainly with written texts; spoken corpora 
have received little attention. Transcripts of spoken 
language pose two challenges absent in written 
texts: uncertainty about utterance segmentation and 
disfluency. 
     Roland & Jurafsky (1998) suggest that there are 
substantial subcategorization differences between 
spoken and written corpora. For example, spoken 
corpora tend to have fewer passive sentences but 
many more zero-anaphora structures than written 
corpora. In light of such subcategorization differ-
ences, we believe that an SCF set built from spo-
ken language may, if of acceptable quality, be of 
particular value to NLP tasks involving syntactic 
analysis of spoken language.  
2 SCF Acquisition System  
Following the design proposed by Briscoe and 
Carroll (1997), we built an SCF acquisition system 
consisting of the following four components: 
Charniak?s parser (Charniak, 2000); an SCF ex-
tractor; a lemmatizer; and an SCF evaluator. The 
first three components are responsible for generat-
ing SCF cues from the training corpora and the last 
component, consisting of the Binomial Hypothesis 
Test (Brent, 1993) and a back-off algorithm 
(Sarkar & Zeman, 2000), is used to filter SCF cues 
on the basis of their reliability and likelihood.  
We evaluated our system on a million word 
written corpus and a comparable spoken corpus 
from BNC.  For type precision and recall, we used 
14 verbs selected by Briscoe & Carroll (1997) and 
evaluated our results against SCF entries in 
COMLEX (Grishman et al, 1994). We also calcu-
lated token recall and the results are summarized in 
the following table. 
Corpus Written Spoken 
type precision 93.1% 91.2% 
type recall 48.2% 46.4% 
token recall 82.3% 80% 
Table 1: Type precision, recall and token recall 
3 Detecting Incorrect SCF Cues 
We examined the way segmentation errors and 
disfluency affects our acquisition system ? the sta-
tistical parser and the extractor in particular ? in 
proposing SCF cues and explored ways to detect 
incorrect SCF cues. We extracted 500 SCF cues 
from the ViC corpus (Pitt, et al 2005) and identi-
fied four major reasons that seem to have caused 
the extractor to propose incorrect SCF cues: multi-
ple utterances; missing punctuation; disfluency; 
parsing errors.  
Error analysis reveals that segmentation errors 
and disfluencies cause the parser and the extractor 
to tend to make systematic errors in proposing SCF 
cues ? incorrect SCF cues are likely to have an 
extra complement. We therefore proposed the fol-
lowing two sets of linguistic heuristics for auto-
matically detecting incorrect SCF cues: 
Linguistic Heuristic Set 1: The following SCF 
cues are extremely unlikely whatever the verb. Re-
ject an SCF cue as incorrect if it contains the fol-
lowing patterns: 
? [(NP) PP NP]: We reach out [to your friends] [your 
neighbor]. 
? [NP PP-to S]: Would I want them to say [that][to 
me] [would I want them to do that to me]. 
? [NP NP S]: They just beat [Indiana in basketball] 
[the- Saturday] [I think it was um-hum]. 
204
? [PP-p PP-p]: He starts living [with the] [with the 
guys]. 
Linguistic Heuristic Set 2: The following SCF 
cues are all possibly valid SCFs: for SCF cues of 
the following type, check if the given verb takes it 
in COMLEX. If not, reject it: 
? [(NP) S]: When he was dying [what did he say]. 
? [PP-to S]: The same thing happened [to him] [uh 
he had a scholarship]. 
? [(NP) NP]: OU had a heck of time beating [them] 
[uh-hum]. 
? [(NP) INF]: You take [the plate] from the table 
[rinse them off] and put them by the sink. 
Given the utilization of a gold standard in the 
heuristics, it would be improper to build an end-to-
end system and evaluate against COMLEX. In-
stead, we evaluate by seeing how often our heuris-
tics succeed producing results agreeable to a 
human judge. 
To evaluate the robustness of our linguistic heu-
ristics, we conducted a cross-corpora and cross-
parser comparison. We used 1,169 verb tokens 
from the ViC corpus and another 1,169 from the 
Switchboard corpus. 
Cross-corpus Comparison: The purpose of the 
cross-corpus comparison is to show that our lin-
guistic heuristics based on the data from one spo-
ken corpus can be applied to other spoken corpora. 
Therefore, we applied our heuristics to the ViC and 
the Switchboard corpus parsed by Charniak?s 
parser. We calculated the percentage of incorrect 
SCF cues before and after applying our linguistic 
heuristics. The results are shown in Table 2.  
Charniak?s parser ViC Switchboard 
before heuristics 18.8% 9.5% 
after heuristics 6.4% 4.6% 
Table 2: Incorrect SCF cue rate before and after heuristics 
 
Table 2 shows that the incorrect SCF cue rate 
has been reduced to roughly the same level for the 
two spoken corpora after applying our linguistic 
heuristics. 
Cross-parser Comparison: The purpose of the 
cross-parser comparison is to show that our lin-
guistic heuristics based on the data parsed by one 
parser can be applied to other parsers as well. To 
this end, we applied our heuristics to the 
Switchboard corpus parsed by both Charniak?s 
parser and Bikel?s parsing engine (Bikel, 2004). 
Again, we calculated the percentage of incorrect 
SCF cues before and after applying our heuristics. 
The results are displayed in Table 3. 
Although our linguistic heuristics works slightly 
better for data parsed by Charniak? parser, the in-
correct SCF cue rate after applying heuristics re-
mains at about the same level for the two different 
parsers we used. 
Switchboard Charniak Bikel 
before heuristics 9.5% 9.2% 
after heuristics 4.6% 5.4% 
Table 3: Incorrect SCF cue rate before and after heuristics 
4 Conclusion 
We showed that it should not be assumed that stan-
dard statistical parsers will fail on language that is 
very different from what they are trained on. Spe-
cifically, the results of Experiment 1 showed that it 
is feasible to apply current SCF extraction 
technology to spoken language. Experiment 2 
showed that incorrect SCF cues due to segmenta-
tion errors and disfluency can be recognized by our 
linguistic heuristics. We have shown that our SCF 
acquisition system as a whole will work for the 
different demands of spoken language. 
5 Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by NSF grant 0347799 to 
the second author, and by a summer fellowship 
from the Ohio State Center for Cognitive Science 
to the first author. 
References  
Biekl, D. 2004. Intricacies of Collins? Parsing Model. Computational 
Linguistics, 30(4): 470-511 
Brent, M. 1993. From Grammar to Lexicon: Unsupervised Learning 
of Lexical Syntax. Computational Lingusitics: 19(3): 243-262 
Briscoe, E. & Carroll, G. 1997. Automatic Extraction of Subcategori-
zation from Corpora. In Proceedings of the 5th ACL Conference on 
Applied Natural Language Processing, Washington, DC. 356-363 
Chaniak, E. 2000. A Maximum-Entropy-Inspired Parser. In Proceed-
ings of the 2000 Conference of the North American Chapter of 
ACL. 132-139 
Grishman, R., Macleod, C. & Meyers, A. 1994. COMLEX Syntax: 
Building a Computational Lexicon. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Lingusitics, COLING-94, 
Kyoto, Japan. 268-272 
Pitt, M., Johnson, K., Hume, E., Kiesling, S., Raymond, W. 2005. 
They Buckeye Corpus of Conversational Speech: Labeling Con-
ventions and a Test of Transcriber Reliability. Speech Communica-
tion, 45: 89-95 
Roland, D. & Jurafsky, D. 1998. How Verb Subcategorization Fre-
quency Affected by the Corpus Choice. In Proceedings of 17th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Lingusitics, 2: 1122-
1128 
Sarkar, A. & Zeman, D. 2000. Automatic Extraction of Subcategoriza-
tion Frames for Czech. In Proceedings of the 19th International 
Conference on Computational Lingusitics. 691-697 
205
