Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2006), pages 431?439,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Joint Extraction of Entities and Relations for Opinion Recognition
Yejin Choi and Eric Breck and Claire Cardie
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
{ychoi,ebreck,cardie}@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
We present an approach for the joint ex-
traction of entities and relations in the con-
text of opinion recognition and analysis.
We identify two types of opinion-related
entities ? expressions of opinions and
sources of opinions ? along with the link-
ing relation that exists between them. In-
spired by Roth and Yih (2004), we employ
an integer linear programming approach
to solve the joint opinion recognition task,
and show that global, constraint-based in-
ference can significantly boost the perfor-
mance of both relation extraction and the
extraction of opinion-related entities. Per-
formance further improves when a seman-
tic role labeling system is incorporated.
The resulting system achieves F-measures
of 79 and 69 for entity and relation extrac-
tion, respectively, improving substantially
over prior results in the area.
1 Introduction
Information extraction tasks such as recognizing
entities and relations have long been considered
critical to many domain-specific NLP tasks (e.g.
Mooney and Bunescu (2005), Prager et al (2000),
White et al (2001)). Researchers have further
shown that opinion-oriented information extrac-
tion can provide analogous benefits to a variety of
practical applications including product reputation
tracking (Morinaga et al, 2002), opinion-oriented
question answering (Stoyanov et al, 2005), and
opinion-oriented summarization (e.g. Cardie et
al. (2004), Liu et al (2005)). Moreover, much
progress has been made in the area of opinion ex-
traction: it is possible to identify sources of opin-
ions (i.e. the opinion holders) (e.g. Choi et al
(2005) and Kim and Hovy (2005b)), to determine
the polarity and strength of opinion expressions
(e.g. Wilson et al (2005)), and to recognize propo-
sitional opinions and their sources (e.g. Bethard
et al (2004)) with reasonable accuracy. To date,
however, there has been no effort to simultane-
ously identify arbitrary opinion expressions, their
sources, and the relations between them. Without
progress on the joint extraction of opinion enti-
ties and their relations, the capabilities of opinion-
based applications will remain limited.
Fortunately, research in machine learning has
produced methods for global inference and joint
classification that can help to address this defi-
ciency (e.g. Bunescu and Mooney (2004), Roth
and Yih (2004)). Moreover, it has been shown that
exploiting dependencies among entities and/or re-
lations via global inference not only solves the
joint extraction task, but often boosts performance
on the individual tasks when compared to clas-
sifiers that handle the tasks independently ? for
semantic role labeling (e.g. Punyakanok et al
(2004)), information extraction (e.g. Roth and Yih
(2004)), and sequence tagging (e.g. Sutton et al
(2004)).
In this paper, we present a global inference ap-
proach (Roth and Yih, 2004) to the extraction
of opinion-related entities and relations. In par-
ticular, we aim to identify two types of entities
(i.e. spans of text): entities that express opin-
ions and entities that denote sources of opinions.
More specifically, we use the term opinion expres-
sion to denote all direct expressions of subjectiv-
ity including opinions, emotions, beliefs, senti-
ment, etc., as well as all speech expressions that
introduce subjective propositions; and use the term
source to denote the person or entity (e.g. a re-
431
port) that holds the opinion.1 In addition, we
aim to identify the relations between opinion ex-
pression entities and source entities. That is, for
a given opinion expression Oi and source entity
Sj , we determine whether the relation Li,j def=
(Sj expresses Oi) obtains, i.e. whether Sj is the
source of opinion expression Oi. We refer to this
particular relation as the link relation in the rest
of the paper. Consider, for example, the following
sentences:
S1. [Bush](1) intends(1) to curb the increase in
harmful gas emissions and is counting on(1)
the good will(2) of [US industrialists](2) .
S2. By questioning(3) [the Imam](4)?s edict(4) [the
Islamic Republic of Iran](3) made [the people
of the world](5) understand(5)...
The underlined phrases above are opinion expres-
sions and phrases marked with square brackets are
source entities. The numeric superscripts on en-
tities indicate link relations: a source entity and
an opinion expression with the same number sat-
isfy the link relation. For instance, the source en-
tity ?Bush? and the opinion expression ?intends?
satisfy the link relation, and so do ?Bush? and
?counting on.? Notice that a sentence may con-
tain more than one link relation, and link relations
are not one-to-one mappings between sources and
opinions. Also, the pair of entities in a link rela-
tion may not be the closest entities to each other, as
is the case in the second sentence, between ?ques-
tioning? and ?the Islamic Republic of Iran.?
We expect the extraction of opinion relations to
be critical for many opinion-oriented NLP appli-
cations. For instance, consider the following ques-
tion that might be given to a question-answering
system:
? What is the Imam?s opinion toward the Islamic
Republic of Iran?
Without in-depth opinion analysis, the question-
answering system might mistake example S2 as
relevant to the query, even though S2 exhibits the
opinion of the Islamic Republic of Iran toward
Imam, not the other way around.
Inspired by Roth and Yih (2004), we model
our task as global, constraint-based inference over
separately trained entity and relation classifiers.
In particular, we develop three base classifiers:
two sequence-tagging classifiers for the extraction
1See Wiebe et al (2005) for additional details.
of opinion expressions and sources, and a binary
classifier to identify the link relation. The global
inference procedure is implemented via integer
linear programming (ILP) to produce an optimal
and coherent extraction of entities and relations.
Because many (60%) opinion-source relations
appear as predicate-argument relations, where the
predicate is a verb, we also hypothesize that se-
mantic role labeling (SRL) will be very useful for
our task. We present two baseline methods for
the joint opinion-source recognition task that use
a state-of-the-art SRL system (Punyakanok et al,
2005), and describe two additional methods for in-
corporating SRL into our ILP-based system.
Our experiments show that the global inference
approach not only improves relation extraction
over the base classifier, but does the same for in-
dividual entity extractions. For source extraction
in particular, our system achieves an F-measure of
78.1, significantly outperforming previous results
in this area (Choi et al, 2005), which obtained an
F-measure of 69.4 on the same corpus. In addition,
we achieve an F-measure of 68.9 for link relation
identification and 82.0 for opinion expression ex-
traction; for the latter task, our system achieves
human-level performance.2
2 High-Level Approach and Related
Work
Our system operates in three phases.
Opinion and Source Entity Extraction We
begin by developing two separate token-level
sequence-tagging classifiers for opinion expres-
sion extraction and source extraction, using linear-
chain Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) (Laf-
ferty et al, 2001). The sequence-tagging classi-
fiers are trained using only local syntactic and lex-
ical information to extract each type of entity with-
out knowledge of any nearby or neighboring enti-
ties or relations. We collect n-best sequences from
each sequence tagger in order to boost the recall of
the final system.
Link Relation Classification We also develop
a relation classifier that is trained and tested on
all pairs of opinion and source entities extracted
from the aforementioned n-best opinion expres-
sion and source sequences. The relation classifier
is modeled using Markov order-0 CRFs(Lafferty
2Wiebe et al (2005) reports human annotation agreement
for opinion expression as 82.0 by F1 measure.
432
et al, 2001), which are equivalent to maximum en-
tropy models. It is trained using only local syntac-
tic information potentially useful for connecting a
pair of entities, but has no knowledge of nearby or
neighboring extracted entities and link relations.
Integer Linear Programming Finally, we for-
mulate an integer linear programming problem for
each sentence using the results from the previous
two phases. In particular, we specify a number
of soft and hard constraints among relations and
entities that take into account the confidence val-
ues provided by the supporting entity and relation
classifiers, and that encode a number of heuristics
to ensure coherent output. Given these constraints,
global inference via ILP finds the optimal, coher-
ent set of opinion-source pairs by exploiting mu-
tual dependencies among the entities and relations.
While good performance in entity or relation
extraction can contribute to better performance of
the final system, this is not always the case. Pun-
yakanok et al (2004) notes that, in general, it is
better to have high recall from the classifiers in-
cluded in the ILP formulation. For this reason, it is
not our goal to directly optimize the performance
of our opinion and source entity extraction models
or our relation classifier.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Related work is outlined below. Section 3 de-
scribes the components of the first phase of our
system, the opinion and source extraction classi-
fiers. Section 4 describes the construction of the
link relation classifier for phase two. Section 5
describes the ILP formulation to perform global
inference over the results from the previous two
phases. Experimental results that compare our ILP
approach to a number of baselines are presented in
Section 6. Section 7 describes how SRL can be in-
corporated into our global inference system to fur-
ther improve the performance. Final experimental
results and discussion comprise Section 8.
Related Work The definition of our source-
expresses-opinion task is similar to that of Bethard
et al (2004); however, our definition of opin-
ion and source entities are much more extensive,
going beyond single sentences and propositional
opinion expressions. In particular, we evaluate
our approach with respect to (1) a wide variety
of opinion expressions, (2) explicit and implicit3
sources, (3) multiple opinion-source link relations
3Implicit sources are those that are not explicitly men-
tioned. See Section 8 for more details.
per sentence, and (4) link relations that span more
than one sentence. In addition, the link rela-
tion model explicitly exploits mutual dependen-
cies among entities and relations, while Bethard
et al (2004) does not directly capture the potential
influence among entities.
Kim and Hovy (2005b) and Choi et al (2005)
focus only on the extraction of sources of
opinions, without extracting opinion expressions.
Specifically, Kim and Hovy (2005b) assume a pri-
ori existence of the opinion expressions and ex-
tract a single source for each, while Choi et al
(2005) do not explicitly extract opinion expres-
sions nor link an opinion expression to a source
even though their model implicitly learns approxi-
mations of opinion expressions in order to identify
opinion sources. Other previous research focuses
only on the extraction of opinion expressions (e.g.
Kim and Hovy (2005a), Munson et al (2005) and
Wilson et al (2005)), omitting source identifica-
tion altogether.
There have also been previous efforts to si-
multaneously extract entities and relations by ex-
ploiting their mutual dependencies. Roth and
Yih (2002) formulated global inference using a
Bayesian network, where they captured the influ-
ence between a relation and a pair of entities via
the conditional probability of a relation, given a
pair of entities. This approach however, could not
exploit dependencies between relations. Roth and
Yih (2004) later formulated global inference using
integer linear programming, which is the approach
that we apply here. In contrast to our work, Roth
and Yih (2004) operated in the domain of factual
information extraction rather than opinion extrac-
tion, and assumed that the exact boundaries of en-
tities from the gold standard are known a priori,
which may not be available in practice.
3 Extraction of Opinion and Source
Entities
We develop two separate sequence tagging classi-
fiers for opinion extraction and source extraction,
using linear-chain Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) (Lafferty et al, 2001). The sequence tag-
ging is encoded as the typical ?BIO? scheme.4
Each training or test instance represents a sen-
tence, encoded as a linear chain of tokens and their
4
?B? is for the token that begins an entity, ?I? is for to-
kens that are inside an entity, and ?O? is for tokens outside an
entity.
433
associated features. Our feature set is based on
that of Choi et al (2005) for source extraction5,
but we include additional lexical and WordNet-
based features. For simplicity, we use the same
features for opinion entity extraction and source
extraction, and let the CRFs learn appropriate fea-
ture weights for each task.
3.1 Entity extraction features
For each token xi, we include the following fea-
tures. For details, see Choi et al (2005).
word: words in a [-4, +4] window centered on xi.
part-of-speech: POS tags in a [-2, +2] window.6
grammatical role: grammatical role (subject, ob-
ject, prepositional phrase types) of xi derived from
a dependency parse.7
dictionary: whether xi is in the opinion expres-
sion dictionary culled from the training data and
augmented by approximately 500 opinion words
from the MPQA Final Report8. Also computed
for tokens in a [-1, +1] window and for xi?s parent
?chunk? in the dependency parse.
semantic class: xi?s semantic class.9
WordNet: the WordNet hypernym of xi.10
4 Relation Classification
We also develop a maximum entropy binary clas-
sifier for opinion-source link relation classifica-
tion. Given an opinion-source pair, Oi-Sj , the re-
lation classifier decides whether the pair exhibits
a valid link relation, Li,j . The relation classifier
focuses only on the syntactic structure and lexical
properties between the two entities of a given pair,
without knowing whether the proposed entities are
correct. Opinion and source entities are taken from
the n-best sequences of the entity extraction mod-
els; therefore, some are invariably incorrect.
From each sentence, we create training and test
instances for all possible opinion-source pairings
that do not overlap: we create an instance for Li,j
only if the span of Oi and Sj do not overlap.
For training, we also filter out instances for
which neither the proposed opinion nor source en-
5We omit only the extraction pattern features.
6Using GATE: http://gate.ac.uk/
7Provided by Rebecca Hwa, based on the Collins parser:
ftp://ftp.cis.upenn.edu/pub/mcollins/PARSER.tar.gz
8https://rrc.mitre.org/pubs/mpqaFinalReport.pdf
9Using SUNDANCE: (http://www.cs.utah.edu/r?iloff/
publications.html#sundance)
10http://wordnet.princeton.edu/
tity overlaps with a correct opinion or source en-
tity per the gold standard. This training instance
filtering helps to avoid confusion between exam-
ples like the following (where entities marked in
bold are the gold standard entities, and entities
in square brackets represent the n-best output se-
quences from the entity extraction classifiers):
(1) [The president] s1 walked away from [the
meeting] o1, [ [revealing] o2 his disap-
pointment] o3 with the deal.
(2) [The monster] s2 walked away, [revealing] o4
a little box hidden underneath.
For these sentences, we construct training in-
stances for L1,1, L1,2, and L1,3, but not L2,4,
which in fact has very similar sentential structure
as L1,2, and hence could confuse the learning al-
gorithm.
4.1 Relation extraction features
The training and test instances for each (potential)
link Li,j (with opinion candidate entity Oi and
source candidate entity Sj) include the following
features.
opinion entity word: the words contained in Oi.
phrase type: the syntactic category of the con-
stituent in which the entity is embedded, e.g. NP
or VP. We encode separate features for Oi and Sj .
grammatical role: the grammatical role of the
constituent in which the entity is embedded.
Grammatical roles are derived from dependency
parse trees, as done for the entity extraction classi-
fiers. We encode separate features for Oi and Sj .
position: a boolean value indicating whether Sj
precedes Oi.
distance: the distance between Oi and Sj in num-
bers of tokens. We use four coarse categories: ad-
jacent, very near, near, far.
dependency path: the path through the depen-
dency tree from the head of Sj to the head of Oi.
For instance, ?subj?verb? or ?subj?verb?obj?.
voice: whether the voice of Oi is passive or active.
syntactic frame: key intra-sentential relations be-
tween Oi and Sj . The syntactic frames that we use
are:
? [E1:role] [distance] [E2:role], where distance
? {adjacent, very near, near, far}, and Ei:role
is the grammatical role of Ei. Either E1 is an
opinion entity and E2 is a source, or vice versa.
? [E1:phrase] [distance] [E2:phrase], where
Ei:phrase is the phrasal type of entity Ei.
434
? [E1:phrase] [E2:headword], where E2 must be
the opinion entity, and E1 must be the source en-
tity (i.e. no lexicalized frames for sources). E1
and E2 can be contiguous.
? [E1:role] [E2:headword], where E2 must be the
opinion entity, and E1 must be the source entity.
? [E1:phrase] NP [E2:phrase] indicates the
presence of specific syntactic patterns, e.g.
?VP NP VP? depending on the possible phrase
types of opinion and source entities. The three
phrases do not need to be contiguous.
? [E1:phrase] VP [E2:phrase] (See above.)
? [E1:phrase] [wh-word] [E2:phrase] (See
above.)
? Src [distance] [x] [distance] Op, where x ?
{by, of, from, for, between, among, and, have,
be, will, not, ], ?, . . . }.
When a syntactic frame is matched to a sen-
tence, the bracketed items should be instantiated
with particular values corresponding to the sen-
tence. Pattern elements without square brackets
are constants. For instance, the syntactic frame
?[E1:phrase] NP [E2:phrase]? may be instantiated
as ?VP NP VP?. Some frames are lexicalized with
respect to the head of an opinion entity to reflect
the fact that different verbs expect source enti-
ties in different argument positions (e.g. SOURCE
blamed TARGET vs. TARGET angered SOURCE).
5 Integer Linear Programming
Approach
As noted in the introduction, we model our task
as global, constraint-based inference over the sep-
arately trained entity and relation classifiers, and
implement the inference procedure as binary in-
teger linear programming (ILP) ((Roth and Yih,
2004), (Punyakanok et al, 2004)). ILP consists
of an objective function which is a dot product
between a vector of variables and a vector of
weights, and a set of equality and inequality con-
straints among variables. Given an objective func-
tion and a set of constraints, LP finds the opti-
mal assignment of values to variables, i.e. one that
minimizes the objective function. In binary ILP,
the assignments to variables must be either 0 or 1.
The variables and constraints defined for the opin-
ion recognition task are summarized in Table 1 and
explained below.
Entity variables and weights For each opinion
entity, we add two variables, Oi and O?i, where
Oi = 1 means to extract the opinion entity, and
Objective function f
=
?
i(woiOi) +
?
i(w?oiO?i)
+
?
j(wsjSj) +
?
j(w?sj S?j)
+
?
i,j(wli,jLi,j) +
?
i(w?li,j L?i,j)
?i, Oi + O?i = 1
?j, Sj + S?j = 1
?i, j, Li,j + L?i,j = 1
?i, Oi =
?
j Li,j
?j, Sj + Aj =
?
i Li,j
?j, Aj ? Sj ? 0
?i, j, i < j, Xi + Xj = 1,X ? {S,O}
Table 1: Binary ILP formulation
O?i = 1 means to discard the opinion entity. To
ensure coherent assignments, we add equality con-
straints ?i, Oi + O?i = 1. The weights woi and
w?oi for Oi and O?i respectively, are computed as
a negative conditional probability of the span of
an entity to be extracted (or suppressed) given the
labelings of the adjacent variables of the CRFs:
woi
def= ?P (xk, xk+1, ..., xl|xk?1, xl+1)
where xk = ?B?
& xm = ?I? for m ? [k + 1, l]
w?oi
def= ?P (xk, xk+1, ..., xl|xk?1, xl+1)
where xm = ?O? for m ? [k, l]
where xi is the value assigned to the random vari-
able of the CRF corresponding to an entity Oi.
Likewise, for each source entity, we add two vari-
ables Sj and S?j and a constraint Sj + S?j = 1. The
weights for source variables are computed in the
same way as opinion entities.
Relation variables and weights For each link
relation, we add two variables Li,j and L?i,j , and
a constraint Li,j + L?i,j = 1. By the definition of
a link, if Li,j = 1, then it is implied that Oi = 1
and Sj = 1. That is, if a link is extracted, then the
pair of entities for the link must be also extracted.
Constraints to ensure this coherency are explained
in the following subsection. The weights for link
variables are based on probabilities from the bi-
nary link classifier.
Constraints for link coherency In our corpus, a
source entity can be linked to more than one opin-
ion entity, but an opinion entity is linked to only
435
one source. Nonetheless, the majority of opinion-
source pairs involve one-to-one mappings, which
we encode as hard and soft constraints as follows:
For each opinion entity, we add an equality con-
straint Oi =
?
j Li,j to enforce that only one
link can emanate from an opinion entity. For each
source entity, we add an equality constraint and an
inequality constraint that together allow a source
to link to at most two opinions: Sj +Aj =
?
i Li,j
and Aj ? Sj ? 0, where Aj is an auxiliary vari-
able, such that its weight is some positive constant
value that suppresses Aj from being assigned to 1.
And Aj can be assigned to 1 only if Sj is already
assigned to 1. It is possible to add more auxiliary
variables to allow more than two opinions to link
to a source, but for our experiments two seemed to
be a reasonable limit.
Constraints for entity coherency When we use
n-best sequences where n > 1, proposed entities
can overlap. Because this should not be the case
in the final result, we add an equality constraint
Xi + Xj = 1, X ? {S,O} for all pairs of entities
with overlapping spans.
Adjustments to weights To balance the preci-
sion and recall, and to take into account the per-
formance of different base classifiers, we apply ad-
justments to weights as follows.
1) We define six coefficients cx and c?x, where
x ? {O,S,L} to modify a group of weights
as follows.
?i, x, wxi := wxi ? cx;
?i, x, w?xi := w?xi ? c?x;
In general, increasing cx will promote recall,
while increasing c?x will promote precision.
Also, setting co > cs will put higher confi-
dence on the opinion extraction classifier than
the source extraction classifier.
2) We also define one constant cA to set the
weights for auxiliary variable Ai. That is,
?i, wAi := cA.
3) Finally, we adjust the confidence of the link
variable based on n-th-best sequences of the en-
tity extraction classifiers as follows.
?i, wLi,j := wLi,j ? d
where d def= 4/(3 + min(m,n)), when Oi is
from an m-th sequence and Sj is from a n-th
sequence.11
11This will smoothly degrade the confidence of a link
based on the entities from higher n-th sequences. Values of d
decrease as 4/4, 4/5, 4/6, 4/7....
6 Experiments?I
We evaluate our system using the NRRC Multi-
Perspective Question Answering (MPQA) corpus
that contains 535 newswire articles that are man-
ually annotated for opinion-related information.
In particular, our gold standard opinion entities
correspond to direct subjective expression anno-
tations and subjective speech event annotations
(i.e. speech events that introduce opinions) in the
MPQA corpus (Wiebe et al, 2005). Gold stan-
dard source entities and link relations can be ex-
tracted from the agent attribute associated with
each opinion entity. We use 135 documents as a
development set and report 10-fold cross valida-
tion results on the remaining 400 documents in all
experiments below.
We evaluate entity and link extraction using
both an overlap and exact matching scheme.12 Be-
cause the exact start and endpoints of the man-
ual annotations are somewhat arbitrary, the over-
lap scheme is more reasonable for our task (Wiebe
et al, 2005). We report results according to both
matching schemes, but focus our discussion on re-
sults obtained using overlap matching.13
We use the Mallet14 implementation of CRFs.
For brevity, we will refer to the opinion extraction
classifier as CRF-OP, the source extraction classi-
fier as CRF-SRC, and the link relation classifier as
CRF-LINK. For ILP, we use Matlab, which pro-
duced the optimal assignment in a matter of few
seconds for each sentence. The weight adjustment
constants defined for ILP are based on the devel-
opment data.15
The link-nearest baselines For baselines, we
first consider a link-nearest heuristic: for each
opinion entity extracted by CRF-OP, the link-
nearest heuristic creates a link relation with the
closest source entity extracted by CRF-SRC. Re-
call that CRF-SRC and CRF-OP extract entities
from n-best sequences. We test the link-nearest
heuristic with n = {1, 2, 10} where larger n will
boost recall at the cost of precision. Results for the
12Given two links L1,1 = (O1, S1) and L2,2 = (O2, S2),
exact matching requires the spans of O1 and O2, and the
spans of S1 and S2, to match exactly, while overlap matching
requires the spans to overlap.
13Wiebe et al (2005) also reports the human annotation
agreement study via the overlap scheme.
14Available at http://mallet.cs.umass.edu
15co = 2.5, c?o = 1.0, cs = 1.5, c?s = 1.0, cL = 2.5, c?L =
2.5, cA = 0.2. Values are picked so as to boost recall while
reasonably suppressing incorrect links.
436
Overlap Match Exact Match
r(%) p(%) f(%) r(%) p(%) f(%)
NEAREST-1 51.6 71.4 59.9 26.2 36.9 30.7
NEAREST-2 60.7 45.8 52.2 29.7 19.0 23.1
NEAREST-10 66.3 20.9 31.7 28.2 00.0 00.0
SRL 59.7 36.3 45.2 32.6 19.3 24.2
SRL+CRF-OP 45.6 83.2 58.9 27.6 49.7 35.5
ILP-1 51.6 80.8 63.0 26.4 42.0 32.4
ILP-10 64.0 72.4 68.0 31.0 34.8 32.8
Table 2: Relation extraction performance
NEAREST-n : link-nearest heuristic w/ n-best
SRL : all V-A0 frames from SRL
SRL+CRF-OP : all V-A0 filtered by CRF-OP
ILP-n : ILP applied to n-best sequences
link-nearest heuristic on the full source-expresses-
opinion relation extraction task are shown in the
first three rows of table 2. NEAREST-1 performs
the best in overlap-match F-measure, reaching
59.9. NEAREST-10 has higher recall (66.3%), but
the precision is really low (20.9%). Performance
of the opinion and source entity classifiers will be
discussed in Section 8.
SRL baselines Next, we consider two base-
lines that use a state-of-the-art SRL system (Pun-
yakanok et al, 2005). In many link relations,
the opinion expression entity is a verb phrase and
the source entity is in an agent argument posi-
tion. Hence our second baseline, SRL, extracts
all verb(V)-agent(A0) frames from the output of
the SRL system and provides an upper bound on
recall (59.7%) for systems that use SRL in isola-
tion for our task. A more sophisticated baseline,
SRL+CRF-OP, extracts only those V-A0 frames
whose verb overlaps with entities extracted by the
opinion expression extractor, CRF-OP. As shown
in table 2, filtering out V-A0 frames that are in-
compatible with the opinion extractor boosts pre-
cision to 83.2%, but the F-measure (58.9) is lower
than that of NEAREST-1.
ILP results The ILP-n system in table 2 de-
notes the results of the ILP approach applied to the
n-best sequences. ILP-10 reaches an F-measure
of 68.0, a significant improvement over the high-
est performing baseline16 , and also a substantial
improvement over ILP-1. Note that the perfor-
mance of NEAREST-10 was much worse than that
16Statistically significant by paired-t test, where p <
0.001.
Overlap Match Exact Match
r(%) p(%) f(%) r(%) p(%) f(%)
ILP-1 51.6 80.8 63.0 26.4 42.0 32.4
ILP-10 64.0 72.4 68.0 31.0 34.8 32.8
ILP+SRL-f -1 51.7 81.5 63.3 26.6 42.5 32.7
ILP+SRL-f -10 65.7 72.4 68.9 31.5 34.3 32.9
ILP+SRL-fc-10 64.0 73.5 68.4 28.4 31.3 29.8
Table 3: Relation extraction with ILP and SRL
ILP-n : ILP applied to n-best sequences
ILP+SRL-f -n : ILP w/ SRL features, n-best
ILP+SRL-fc-n : ILP w/ SRL features,
and SRL constraints, n-best
of NEAREST-1, because the 10-best sequences in-
clude many incorrect entities whereas the corre-
sponding ILP formulation can discard the bad en-
tities by considering dependencies among entities
and relations.17
7 Additional SRL Incorporation
We next explore two approaches for more directly
incorporating SRL into our system.
Extra SRL Features for the Link classifier We
incorporate SRL into the link classifier by adding
extra features based on SRL. We add boolean fea-
tures to check whether the span of an SRL argu-
ment and an entity matches exactly. In addition,
we include syntactic frame features as follows:
? [E1:srl-arg] [E2:srl-arg], where Ei:srl-arg indi-
cates the SRL argument type of entity Ei.
? [E1.srl-arg] [E1:headword] [E2:srl-arg], where
E1 must be an opinion entity, and E2 must be a
source entity.
Extra SRL Constraints for the ILP phase We
also incorporate SRL into the ILP phase of our
system by adding extra constraints based on SRL.
In particular, we assign very high weights for links
that match V-A0 frames generated by SRL, in or-
der to force the extraction of V-A0 frames.
17A potential issue with overlap precision and recall is that
the measures may drastically overestimate the system?s per-
formance as follows: a system predicting a single link rela-
tion whose source and opinion expression both overlap with
every token of a document would achieve 100% overlap pre-
cision and recall. We can ensure this does not happen by mea-
suring the average number of (source, opinion) pairs to which
each correct or predicted pair is aligned (excluding pairs not
aligned at all). In our data, this does not exceed 1.08, (except
for baselines), so we can conclude these evaluation measures
are behaving reasonably.
437
Opinion Source Link
r(%) p(%) f(%) r(%) p(%) f(%) r(%) p(%) f(%)
Before ILP CRF-OP/SRC/LINK with 1 best 76.4 88.4 81.9 67.3 81.9 73.9 60.5 50.5 55.0
merged 10 best 95.7 31.2 47.0 95.3 24.5 38.9 N/A
After ILP ILP-SRL-f -10 75.1 82.9 78.8 80.6 75.7 78.1 65.7 72.4 68.9
ILP-SRL-f -10 ? CRF-OP/SRC with 1 best 82.3 81.7 82.0 81.5 73.4 77.3 N/A
Table 4: Entity extraction performance (by overlap-matching)
8 Experiments?II
Results using SRL are shown in Table 3 (on the
previous page). In the table, ILP+SRL-f denotes
the ILP approach using the link classifier with
the extra SRL ?f ?eatures, and ILP+SRL-fc de-
notes the ILP approach using both the extra SRL
?f ?eatures and the SRL ?c?onstraints. For compar-
ison, the ILP-1 and ILP-10 results from Table 2
are shown in rows 1 and 2.
The F-measure score of ILP+SRL-f -10 is 68.9,
about a 1 point increase from that of ILP-10,
which shows that extra SRL features for the link
classifier further improve the performance over
our previous best results.18 ILP+SRL-fc-10 also
performs better than ILP-10 in F-measure, al-
though it is slightly worse than ILP+SRL-f -10.
This indicates that the link classifier with extra
SRL features already makes good use of the V-A0
frames from the SRL system, so that forcing the
extraction of such frames via extra ILP constraints
only hurts performance by not allowing the extrac-
tion of non-V-A0 pairs in the neighborhood that
could have been better choices.
Contribution of the ILP phase In order to
highlight the contribution of the ILP phase for our
task, we present ?before? and ?after? performance
in Table 4. The first row shows the performance
of the individual CRF-OP, CRF-SRC, and CRF-
LINK classifiers before the ILP phase. Without the
ILP phase, the 1-best sequence generates the best
scores. However, we also present the performance
with merged 10-best entity sequences19 in order
to demonstrate that using 10-best sequences with-
out ILP will only hurt performance. The precision
of the merged 10-best sequences system is very
low, however the recall level is above 95% for both
18Statistically significant by paired-t test, where p <
0.001.
19If an entity Ei extracted by the ith-best sequence over-
laps with an entity Ej extracted by the jth-best sequence,
where i < j, then we discard Ej . If Ei and Ej do not over-
lap, then we extract both entities.
CRF-OP and CRF-SRC, giving an upper bound for
recall for our approach. The third row presents
results after the ILP phase is applied for the 10-
best sequences, and we see that, in addition to the
improved link extraction described in Section 7,
the performance on source extraction is substan-
tially improved, from F-measure of 73.9 to 78.1.
Performance on opinion expression extraction de-
creases from F-measure of 81.9 to 78.8. This de-
crease is largely due to implicit links, which we
will explain below. The fourth row takes the union
of the entities from ILP-SRL-f -10 and the entities
from the best sequences from CRF-OP and CRF-
SRC. This process brings the F-measure of CRF-
OP up to 82.0, with a different precision-recall
break down from those of 1-best sequences with-
out ILP phase. In particular, the recall on opinion
expressions now reaches 82.3%, while maintain-
ing a high precision of 81.7%.
Overlap Match Exact Match
r(%) p(%) f(%) r(%) p(%) f(%)
DEV.CONF 65.7 72.4 68.9 31.5 34.3 32.9
NO.CONF 63.7 76.2 69.4 30.9 36.7 33.5
Table 5: Relation extraction with ILP weight ad-
justment. (All cases using ILP+SRL-f -10)
Effects of ILP weight adjustment Finally, we
show the effect of weight adjustment in the ILP
formulation in Table 5. The DEV.CONF row shows
relation extraction performance using a weight
configuration based from the development data.
In order to see the effect of weight adjustment,
we ran an experiment, NO.CONF, using fixed de-
fault weights.20 Not surprisingly, our weight ad-
justment tuned from the development set is not the
optimal choice for cross-validation set. Neverthe-
less, the weight adjustment helps to balance the
precision and recall, i.e. it improves recall at the
20To be precise, cx = 1.0, c?x = 1.0 for x ? {O, S, L},
but cA = 0.2 is the same as before.
438
cost of precision. The weight adjustment is more
effective when the gap between precision and re-
call is large, as was the case with the development
data.
Implicit links A good portion of errors stem
from the implicit link relation, which our system
did not model directly. An implicit link relation
holds for an opinion entity without an associated
source entity. In this case, the opinion entity is
linked to an implicit source. Consider the follow-
ing example.
? Anti-Soviet hysteria was firmly oppressed.
Notice that opinion expressions such as ?Anti-
Soviet hysteria? and ?firmly oppressed? do not
have associated source entities, because sources of
these opinion expressions are not explicitly men-
tioned in the text. Because our system forces
each opinion to be linked with an explicit source
entity, opinion expressions that do not have ex-
plicit source entities will be dropped during the
global inference phase of our system. Implicit
links amount to 7% of the link relations in our
corpus, so the upper bound for recall for our ILP
system is 93%. In the future we will extend our
system to handle implicit links as well. Note that
we report results against a gold standard that in-
cludes implicit links. Excluding them from the
gold standard, the performance of our final sys-
tem ILP+SRL-f -10 is 72.6% in recall, 72.4% in
precision, and 72.5 in F-measure.
9 Conclusion
This paper presented a global inference approach
to jointly extract entities and relations in the con-
text of opinion oriented information extraction.
The final system achieves performance levels that
are potentially good enough for many practical
NLP applications.
Acknowledgments We thank the reviewers for their
many helpful comments and Vasin Punyakanok for running
our data through his SRL system. This work was sup-
ported by the Advanced Research and Development Activity
(ARDA), by NSF Grants IIS-0535099 and IIS-0208028, and
by gifts from Google and the Xerox Foundation.
References
S. Bethard, H. Yu, A. Thornton, V. Hativassiloglou and
D. Jurafsky 2004. Automatic Extraction of Opin-
ion Propositions and their Holders. In AAAI Spring
Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text.
R. Bunescu and R. J. Mooney 2004. Collective In-
formation Extraction with Relational Markov Net-
works. In ACL.
C. Cardie, J. Wiebe, T. Wilson and D. Litman 2004.
Low-Level Annotations and Summary Representa-
tions of Opinions for Multi-Perspective Question
Answering. New Directions in Question Answering.
Y. Choi, C. Cardie, E. Riloff and S. Patwardhan 2005.
Identifying Sources of Opinions with Conditional
Random Fields and Extraction Patterns. In HLT-
EMNLP.
S. Kim and E. Hovy 2005. Automatic Detection of
Opinion Bearing Words and Sentences. In IJCNLP.
S. Kim and E. Hovy 2005. Identifying Opinion
Holders for Question Answering in Opinion Texts.
In AAAI Workshop on Question Answering in Re-
stricted Domains.
J. Lafferty, A. K. McCallum and F. Pereira 2001 Con-
ditional Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for
Segmenting and Labeling Sequence Data. In ICML.
B. Liu, M. Hu and J. Cheng 2005 Opinion Observer:
Analyzing and Comparing Opinions on the Web. In
WWW.
R. J. Mooney and R. Bunescu 2005 Mining Knowl-
edge from Text Using Information Extraction. In
SIGKDD Explorations.
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi and T.
Fukushima 2002. Mining product reputations on
the Web. In KDD.
M. A. Munson, C. Cardie and R. Caruana. 2005. Opti-
mizing to arbitrary NLP metrics using ensemble se-
lection. In HLT-EMNLP.
J. Prager, E. Brown, A. Coden and D. Radev 2000.
Question-answering by predictive annotation. In SI-
GIR.
V. Punyakanok, D. Roth and W. Yih 2005. General-
ized Inference with Multiple Semantic Role Label-
ing Systems (Shared Task Paper). In CoNLL.
V. Punyakanok, D. Roth, W. Yih and D. Zimak 2004.
Semantic Role Labeling via Integer Linear Program-
ming Inference. In COLING.
D. Roth and W. Yih 2004. A Linear Programming For-
mulation for Global Inference in Natural Language
Tasks. In CoNLL.
D. Roth and W. Yih 2002. Probabilistic Reasoning for
Entity and Relation Recognition. In COLING.
V. Stoyanov, C. Cardie and J. Wiebe 2005. Multi-
Perspective Question Answering Using the OpQA
Corpus. In HLT-EMNLP.
C. Sutton, K. Rohanimanesh and A. K. McCallum
2004. Dynamic Conditional Random Fields: Fac-
torized Probabilistic Models for Labeling and Seg-
menting Sequence Data. In ICML.
M. White, T. Korelsky, C. Cardie, V. Ng, D. Pierce and
K. Wagstaff 2001. Multi-document Summarization
via Information Extraction In HLT.
J. Wiebe and T. Wilson and C. Cardie 2005. Annotat-
ing Expressions of Opinions and Emotions in Lan-
guage. In Language Resources and Evaluation, vol-
ume 39, issue 2-3.
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe and P. Hoffmann 2005. Recogniz-
ing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level Sentiment
Analysis. In HLT-EMNLP.
439
