Projecting POS tags and syntactic dependencies from English and French
to Polish in aligned corpora
Sylwia Ozdowska
ERSS - CNRS & Universit? Toulouse-le Mirail
Maison de la Recherche
5 all?es Antonio Machado
F-31058 Toulouse Cedex 9
ozdowska@univ-tlse2.fr
Abstract
This paper presents the first step to project
POS tags and dependencies from English
and French to Polish in aligned corpora.
Both the English and French parts of the
corpus are analysed with a POS tagger
and a robust parser. The English/Polish
bi-text and the French/Polish bi-text are
then aligned at the word level with the
GIZA++ package. The intersection of
IBM-4 Viterbi alignments for both trans-
lation directions is used to project the an-
notations from English and French to Pol-
ish. The results show that the precision
of direct projection vary according to the
type of induced annotations as well as the
source language. Moreover, the perfor-
mances are likely to be improved by defin-
ing regular conversion rules among POS
tags and dependencies.
1 Introduction
A clear imbalance may be observed between lan-
guages, such as English or French, for which a
number of NLP tools as well as different linguistic
resources exist (Leech, 1997) and those for which
they are sparse or even absent, such as Polish.
One possible option to enrich resource-poor lan-
guages consists in taking advantage of resource-
rich/resource-poor language aligned corpora to in-
duce linguistic information for the resource-poor
side from the resource-rich side (Yarowski et al,
2001; Borin, 2002; Hwa et al, 2002). For Pol-
ish, this has been made possible on account of its
accessing to the European Union (EU) which has
resulted in the construction of a large multilingual
corpus of EU legislative texts and a growing inter-
est for new Member States languages.
This paper presents a direct projection of vari-
ous morpho-syntactic informations from English
and French to Polish. First, a short survey of re-
lated works is made in order to motivate the is-
sues addressed in this study. Then, the principle of
annotation projection is explained and the frame-
work of the experiment is decribed (corpus, POS
tagging and parsing, word alignment). The re-
sults of applying the annotation projection princi-
ple from two different source languages are finally
presented and discussed.
2 Background
Yarowski, Ngai and Wicentowski (2001) have
used annotation projection from English in order
to induce statistical NLP tools for instance for Chi-
nese, Czech, Spanish and French. Different kinds
of analysis were produced: POS tagging, noun
phrase bracketing, named entity tagging and in-
flectional morphological analysis, and relied on to
train statistical tools for each task. The authors re-
port that training allows to overcome the problem
of erroneous and incomplete word alignment thus
improving the accuracy as compared to direct pro-
jection: 96% for core POS tags in French.
The study proposed by Hwa, Resnik, Weinberg
and Kolak (2002) aims at quantifying the degree to
which syntactic dependencies are preserved in En-
glish/Chinese aligned corpora. Syntactic relation-
ships are projected to Chinese either directly or us-
ing elementary transformation rules which leads to
68% precision and about 66% recall.
Finally, Borin (2002) has tested the projection
of major POS tags and associated grammatical
informations (number, case, person, etc.) from
53
Swedish to German. 95% precision has been
obtained for major POS tags1 whereas associ-
ated grammatical informations have turned out
not to be applicable across the studied languages.
A rough comparison has been made between
Swedish, German and additional languages (Pol-
ish, English and Finnish). It tends to show that
it should be possible to derive indirect yet regular
POS correspondences, at least across fairly similar
languages.
The projection from French and English to Pol-
ish presented in this paper is basically a direct
one. It concerns different linguistic informations:
POS tags and associated grammatical information
as well as syntactic dependencies. Regarding the
works mentioned above, uneven results are ex-
pected depending on the type of annotations in-
duced. This is the first point this study considers.
The second one is to identify regularity in render-
ing some French or English POS tags or depen-
dencies with some Polish ones. Finally, the idea is
to test if the results vary significantly with respect
to the source language used for the induction.
3 Projecting morpho-syntactic
annotations
We take as the starting point of annotation projec-
tion the direct correspondence assumption as for-
mulated in (Hwa et al, 2002): ?for two sentences
in parallel translation, the syntactic relationships
in one language directly map the syntactic rela-
tionships in the other?, and extend it to POS tags
as well. The general principle of annotation pro-
jection in aligned corpora may be explained as fol-
lows:
if two words w1 and w2 are translation equiv-
alents within aligned sentences, the morpho-
syntactic informations associated to w1 are
assigned to w2
In this study, the projected annotations are POS
tags, with gender and number subcategories for
nouns and adjectives, on one hand, and syntactic
dependencies on the other hand.
Let us take the example of Commission and
Komisja, respectively w1i and w2m, two aligned
words (figure 1). In accordance with the annota-
tion projection principle, Komisja is first assigned
the POS N (noun) as well as the information on
its number, sg (singular), and gender f (feminine).
1Assessed on correct alignments.
Furthermore, the dependencies connecting w1i to
other words w1j are examined. Foreach w1j , if
there is an alignment linking w1j and w2n, the de-
pendency identified between w1i and w2j is pro-
jected to w2m and w2n. For example, the noun
Commission (w1i) is syntactically connected to
the verb adopte (w1j) through the subject relation
and adopte is aligned to przyjmuje (w2n). There-
fore, it is possible to induce a dependency relation,
namely a subject one, between Komisja (w2m) and
przyjmuje (w2n)2.
Nfsg
Nfsg
subj
Komisja przyjmuje roczny program
La Commission adopte un programme  annuel
V
V
NmsgDET ADJmsg
ADJmsg Nmsg
DET
subj
Figure 1: Projection of POS tags and dependen-
cies from French to Polish
The induced dependencies are given the same la-
bel as the source dependencies that is to say that
the noun Komisja and the verb przyjmuje are con-
nected through the subject relation. Moreover, in
this preliminary study, the projection is basically
limited to cases where there is exactly one relation
going from w1i and w1j on the one hand, and from
w2m and w2n on the other hand. Thus, as shown
in figure 2, the relation connecting Komisja and
przyjmuje could not be induced from English since
Commission and adapt are not linked directly but
by means of the modal shall.
AUX ADJ
ADJ N
DET DET
auxsubj
N
N V
V
Komisja przyjmuje roczny program
N
The Commission shall adopt an annual program
Figure 2: Projection of POS tags and dependen-
cies from English to Polish
2The POS and the additional grammatical informations
available are also projected from the verb adopte to przyj-
muje.
54
The only exception concerns the complement and
prepositional complement relations. Indeed, Pol-
ish is a highly inflected language which means
that: 1) word order is less constrained than in
French and English 2) syntactic relations between
words are indicated by the case. This is the reason
why, going back to figure 1, the projection from
the nouns programme and travail, linked by the
preposition de, results in the induction of a rela-
tion between the nouns program and pracy.
4 Experimental framework
4.1 Bi-texts
The countries wishing to join the EU have first to
approve the Acquis Communautaire. The Acquis
communautaire encompasses the core EU law, its
resolutions and declarations as well as the com-
mon aims pursued since its creation in the 1950s.
It comprises about 8,000 documents that have
been translated and published by official institu-
tions3 thus ensuring a high quality of translation.
Each language version of the Acquis is considered
semantically equivalent to the others and legally
binding. This collection of documents is made
available on Europe?s website4.
The AC corpus is made of a part of the Acquis texts
in 20 languages5, and in particular the languages
of the new Member States6. It has been collected
and aligned at the sentence level by the Language
Technology team at the Joint Research Centre
working for the European Commision7 (Erjavec
et al, 2005; Pouliquen and Steinberger, 2005).
It is one of the largest parallel corpus regarding
its size8 and the number of different languages it
covers. A portion of the English, French and Pol-
ish parts form the multilingual parallel corpus se-
lected for this study. Table 1 gives the main fea-
tures of each part of the corpus.
3Only European Community legislation printed in the pa-
per edition of the Official Journal of the European Union is
deemed authentic.
4http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/lex
5German, English, Danish, Spanish, Estonian, Finish,
French, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Mal-
tese, Deutch, Polish, Portugese, Slovak, Slovene, Swedish
and Czech.
6In 2004, the EU welcomed ten new Member States:
Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia.
7http://www.jrc.cec.eu.int/langtech/index.html
8The number of word forms goes from 6 up to 13 million
according to the language. The parts corresponding to the
languages of the new Member States range from 6 up to 10
million word forms as compared to 10 up to 13 million for
English French Polish
word forms 562,458 809,036 764,684
sentences 52,432
Table 1: AC ? the English/French/Polish parallel
corpus
4.2 Bi-text processing
4.2.1 POS tagging
Both the English and French parts of the corpus
have been POS tagged and parsed. The POS tag-
ging has been performed using the TreeTagger
(Schmidt, 1994). Among the morpho-syntactic in-
formations provided by the TreeTagger?s tagset,
only the main distinctions are kept for further anal-
ysis: noun, verb, present participle, adjective, past
participle, adverb, pronoun and conjunction (co-
ordination and subordination). Nouns, adjectives
and past participles are assigned data related to
their number and gender and verbs are assigned
information on voice, gender and form (infinitive
or not), if available (table 2). The TreeTagger?s
output is given as input to the parser after a post-
processing stage which modifies the tokenization.
Some multi-word units are conflated (for exam-
ple complex prepositions such as in accordance
with, as well as for English, conform?ment ?, sous
forme de for French, adverbs like in particular, at
least, en particulier, au moins, or even verbs pren-
dre en consid?ration, avoir recours).
4.2.2 Parsing
Each post-processed POS-tagged corpus is anal-
ysed with a deep and robust dependency parser:
SYNTEX (Fabre and Bourigault, 2001; Bourigault
et al, fothcoming). For each sentence, SYN-
TEX identifies syntactic relations between words
such as subject (SUBJ), object (OBJ), preposi-
tional modifier (PMOD), prepositional comple-
ment (PCOMP), modifier (MOD), etc. Both ver-
sions of the parser are being developed accord-
ing to the same procedure and architecture. The
outputs are quite homogeneous in both languages
since the dependencies are identified and repre-
sented in the same way, thus allowing the compar-
ision of annotations induced from either French or
English. Table 2 gives some examples of the basic
relations taken into account as well as the tags as-
signed to the syntactically connected words. The
the languages of the ?pre-enlargement? EU.
55
parts of speech are in upper case (N represents a
noun, V a verb, etc.) and the grammatical informa-
tion (number, gender) is in lower case (sg reprents
the singular, pl the plural, f the feminine and m the
masculine).
(the) Regulation_Nsg SUBJ?? establishes_Vsg
(le) r?glement_Nmsg SUBJ?? d?termine_Vsg
covering_PPR OBJ?? placing_PPR PMOD?? on_PREP
PCOMP
?? (the) market_Nsg
(qui) r?gissent_Vpl OBJ?? (la) mise_Nfsg PMOD?? sur_PREP
PCOMP
?? (le) march?_Nmsg
further_ADJ MOD?? calls_Npl
appels_Nmpl MOD?? suppl?mentaires_ADJpl
(the) Member_Nsg MOD?? States_Npl
(les) ?tats_Nmpl MOD?? Membres_Nmpl
(the debates) clearly_ADV MOD?? illustrate_Vpl
(les d?bats) montrent_Vpl MOD?? clairement_ADV
(placing on) the_DET DET?? market_Nsg
la_DET DET?? mise (sur) le_DET DET?? march?_Nmsg
Table 2: Syntactic dependencies identified with
SYNTEX
4.2.3 Word alignment
The English/Polish parts of the corpus on the one
hand, and the French/Polish parts on the other
hand, have been aligned at the word level using the
GIZA++ package9 (Och and Ney, 2003). GIZA++
consists of a set of statistical translation mod-
els of different complexity, namely the IBM ones
(Brown et al, 1993). For both corpora, the tok-
enization resulting from the post-processing stage
prior to parsing was used in the alignment pro-
cess for the English and Polish parts in order to
keep the same segmentation especially to facilitate
manual annotation for evaluation purposes. More-
over, each word being assigned a lemma at the
POS tagging stage, the sentences given as input to
GIZA++ were lemmatized, as lemmatization has
proven to boost statistical word alignment perfor-
mances. On the Polish side, a rough tokeniza-
tion using blanks and punctuation was realised; no
lemmatization was performed. The IBM-4 model
has been trained on each bi-text in both trans-
lation directions and the intersection of Viterbi
9GIZA++ is available at
http://www.jfoch.com/GIZA++.html.
alignments obtained has been used to project the
morpho-syntactic annotations. In other words, our
first goal was to test the extent to which the di-
rect projection across English or French and Polish
was accurate. Therefore, we relied only on one-
to-one alignments, thus favouring precision to the
detriment of recall for this preliminary study. Fig-
ure 3 shows an example of word alignment output.
The intersection in both directions is represented
with plain arrows; the dotted ones represent uni-
directional alignments. It shows that the intersec-
tion results in an incomplete alignment which may
differ depending on the pair of languages consid-
ered and the segmentation performed in each lan-
guage10.
Les sanctions sont r?gl?es dans la convention de subvention
Sankcje sa uregulowane w porozumiewaniach o dotacji
Sanctions are_regulated in grant agreements
Figure 3: Intersection of IMB-4 model Viterbi
alignments in both translation directions
5 Evaluation
5.1 Method
In order to evaluate the annotation projection,
an a posteriori reference was constructed, which
means that a sample of the output was selected
randomly and annotated manually. There are some
advantages to work with this kind of reference.
First, it is less time-consuming than an a apri-
ori reference built independently from the output
obtained. Second, it allows to skip the cases for
which it is difficult to decide whether they are cor-
rect or not: syntactic analysis may be ambiguous
and translation often makes it difficult to deter-
mine which source unit corresponds to which tar-
get one (Och and Ney, 2003). A better level of
confidence may thus be ensured with an a poste-
riori reference in comparison with a human anno-
tation task where a choice is to be made for each
case. Finally, whatever strategy is adopted, there
is always a part of subjectivity in human annota-
tion. Thus, the results may vary from one person
to another. The major drawback of an a posteriori
reference is that it allows to assess only precision
10The underscore indicates token conflation .
56
and not recall since it precisely only contains data
provided as output of the algorihtm subjected to
evaluation.
5.2 Parameters
The sample used in order to constitute the a pos-
teriori reference is made of 50 French/Polish sen-
tences and 50 English/Polish sentences. The same
sentences in each language version were selected.
Indeed, one of the goals of this study is to deter-
mine if the choice of the source language has an
influence on annotation projection results. These
50 sentences correspond to 800 evaluated tags and
400 evaluated dependencies in the French/Polish
bi-text, and 782 evaluated POS tags and 391 de-
pendencies in the English/Polish bi-text.
Several parameters have been taken into account
for each type of annotation projection by answer-
ing yes or no to the points listed below.
For POS tags:
1a. the projected POS is the correct one;
2a. the gender and number of nouns, adjectives
and past participles are correct.
The gender parameter has been evaluated only for
the projection from French to Polish as this infor-
mation was not available in English.
For dependencies:
1b. there is a dependency relation between two
given Polish words regardless of its label;
2b. the label of the dependency is correct.
Each time the answer to points 2a and 2b was no,
the information about the correct annotation was
added.
6 Results
6.1 Performances
Table 3 presents the number of projected POS tags
and dependencies with respect to each source lan-
guage. It gives the precision for each parameter,
POS tag (1a), number and gender (2a), unlabeled
dependencies (1b) and labeled dependencies (2b)
assessed against the a posteriori reference.
It shows that the number of projected POS tags as
well as syntactic relations is slightly lower when
English is used as source language. A lower num-
ber of identified alignment links or dependencies
may explain this difference. It also should be
Fr/Pl En/Pl
projected POS tags 800 782
1a POS tags .87 .88
2a number .88 .91
2a gender .59 ?
projected dependencies 400 391
1b unlabeled dependencies .83 .82
2b labeled dependencies .62 .67
Table 3: Precision according to each evaluated pa-
rameter
noted that the evaluated projections are not nec-
essarily the same in both corpora. As mentioned
in section 5.1, the same sentences were chosen for
evaluation. Nevertheless, since word alignment
depends on the pair of languages involved, it has
an impact on the projections obtained and the a
posteriori reference built on their basis.
The precision rates vary according to the type of
informations induced. No significant difference is
observed whether the source language is French
or English. The number subcategory achieves
the highest score: 0.88 and 0.91 respectively for
French/Polish and English/Polish. Dependencies
rank second?0.83 and 0.82?but an important
decrease in accuracy?about 20%?is observed
when their labels are taken into account. Finally,
for French, the gender category achieves the low-
est score: 0.59. The main reasons for which an-
notation projection fails are investigated hereafter.
The projection of the number and gender subcate-
gories are not taken into account.
6.2 Result analysis
There are various reasons for the failure of the
POS tags and dependencies? projection: a) word
alignment, b) lexical density, c) tokenization, d)
POS tagging/parsing errors and e) insertion (for
dependencies). In following examples, the word
alignments are bold faced and in order to avoid
confusion, the POS tags on the Polish side are the
intended POS tags and not the induced POS tags.
a) The noun countries is aligned to trzecich11
which is actually an adjective. On the other
hand, participation and udzia? being aligned, the
projected dependency is also erroneous.
Participation_N
1
of third countries_N
2
Udzia?_N
1
pan?stw trzecich_ADJ
2
11The correct alignment is pan?stw.
57
b)Under is translated by the prepositionnal phrase
na podstawie but is aligned only to podstawie
which is a noun. Thus, the projected tag cannot be
assigned just to podstawie, which is also the case
with the PMOD dependency between zawarte and
podstawie.
concluded_PPA
1
under_PREP
2
the general
framework
zawarte_PPA
1
na podstawie_N
2
og?lnych ram
c) This case is similar to the previous but
the difference in lexical density is partly caused
by the conflation of in accordance with, which
corresponds to the prepositionnal phrase zgodnie
z, at the post-processing stage of the POS tagging.
They must be constituted
in_accordance_with_PREP
1
the law_N
2
Musza? byc? ustanowione zgodnie_ADV
1
z
prawem_N
2
d) The following example shows an error in
PCOMP attachement resulting in an error in
dependency projection: with is linked to pursue
instead of activities and the same relation is
assigned to o and zajmowac?.
They must pursue_V
1
activities with_PREP
2
a
European dimension
Musza? zajmowac?_V
1
sie? dzia?alnos?cia? o_PREP
2
europejskim wymiarze
e) On the Polish side, the inserted noun
postanowien? governs traktatu. Thus, the PCOMP
dependency does not link dla and traktatu but dla
and postanowien?.
Without prejudice for_PREP
1
the Treaty_N
2
Bez uszczerbku dla_PREP
1
postanowien?
Traktatu_N
2
Considering the precision figures, in partic-
ular those accounting for the projection of
dependencies which decrease significantly when
labels are considered, we tried to determine if
there are indirect yet regular French/Polish and
English/Polish correspondences. By indirect
correspondence we mean that a given source
POS tag or dependency is usually rendered by
a given Polish POS tag or dependency. The
correspondences are calculated provided there
is no error prior to projection (word alignment,
tagging or parsing).
Table 4 shows the direct and indirect correspon-
dences among the POS tags which occur in the
reference set. We can see that there is a direct
correspondence among POS tags in 92% and 93%
of the cases respectively for French/Polish and
English/Polish projection. Moreover, the indirect
correspondences, for example noun/adjective or
verb/noun, are similar for both source languages.
The following examples show occurrences of
noun/adjective and verb/noun correspondences.
the exercice of implementing_N powers
l?exercice des comp?tences d?ex?cution_N
wykonywania uprawnien? wykonawczych_ADJ
measures planned to ensure_V dissemina-
tion
mesures pr?vues pour assurer_V la diffu-
sion s?rodki zaplanowane dla zapewnienia_N
rozpowszechnienia
Some indirect correspondences are more probable
than others that seem unexpected. Most of the
time the latter come from the differences in
tokenization mentioned above.
Fr POS Pl POS c
N_359 N_349; ADJ_6; PPA_3; V_1 .97
ADJ_74 ADJ_69; N_3; V_1; DET_1 .93
V_68 V_55; N_13 .80
PPA_67 PPA_59; V_6; ADJ_1; N_1 .88
PREP_35 PREP_24; N_7; DET_2; V_1;
PPR_1
.68
others_61 same_56 .91
664 612 .92
En POS Pl POS c
N_374 N_364; ADJ_9; PPA_1 .97
PREP_64 PREP_53; N_7; DET_4 .83
V_51 V_35; PPA_10; N_6 .69
ADJ_46 ADJ_42; N_2; V_1; DET_1 .91
DET_36 DET_33; N_2 .91
others_73 same_70 .95
644 597 .93
Table 4: French/Polish and English/Polish POS
tag correspondences
Table 5 summarizes direct and indirect correspon-
dences among syntactic dependency relations.
It can be seen that direct correspondence rates
for dependencies are lower than direct corre-
spondences for POS tags: 78% when the source
language is French source and 82% when it is
58
English. Moreover, the difference according to
the source language?5% in favour of English?is
more important than for POS tags?1% in favour
of English. It is mainly due to the PMOD and
PCOMP relations: the first connects a preposition
to its governor and the second connects the
dependent to a preposition. Since Polish is an
inflected language, the connections between
words are indicated through cases. In particular,
it results in a noun not being necessarily linked
to another noun by a preposition. This is also
the case for English, as far as compounds are
concerned, while in French a preposition is almost
always required to form noun phrases. This is
one of the reasons why the direct correspondence
rate between English and Polish is higher than
between French and Polish. The following
example shows a direct MOD/MOD correspon-
dence for the English/Polish pair and an indirect
PMOD_PCOMP/MOD correspondence for the
French/Polish one.
purity MOD?? criteria_N substances_N listed
les crit?res_N PMOD_de_PCOMP?? puret? des
substances ?num?r?s
kryteria_N MOD?? czysztos?ci_N dla substancji
wymienionych
Fr DEP Pl DEP c
PMOD_111 PMOD_56; MOD_51; OBJ_4 .50
MOD_106 MOD_106 1
PCOMP_35 PCOMP_25; MOD_7; OBJ_2;
PMOD_1;
.71
OBJ_23 OBJ_16; MOD_5; PMOD_2 .69
SUJ_19 SUJ_18; OBJ_1 .94
others_38 same_38 1
332 259 .78
En DEP Pl DEP c
MOD_95 MOD_90; PMOD_5 .94
PMOD_93 PMOD_59; MOD_26; PCOMP_4;
OBJ_3; SUBJ_1
.63
PCOMP_64 PCOMP_49; MOD_8; PMOD_7 .76
DET_29 DET_29 1
OBJ_23 OBJ_22; PMOD_1 .95
others_18 same_18 1
322 267 .83
Table 5: French/Polish and English/Polish syntac-
tic correspondences
7 Discussion
The results of the projection of POS tags and de-
pendencies concur with those reported in the re-
lated works presented in section 2. First, concern-
ing the number and gender subcategories, Borin
(2002) has found that the former is applicable
across languages whereas the latter is less relevant,
at least for the German/Swedish language pair. As
seen in section 3, the projection of the number
subcategory offers the highest score and the pro-
jection of the gender the lowest?0.59. It was to
be expected that gender would perform the worst
considering its arbitrary nature at least in French
and Polish. Indeed, there are three genders in Pol-
ish, masculine, feminine and neutral, as well as
in English, and two in French. Thus, not only the
number of genders across French and Polish is dif-
ferent but they are not distributed in the same way
in both languages. The information on gender was
not available for English, gender being assigned
according to the human/non-human feature.
Considering POS tags, the level of direct corre-
spondence is the highest one when compared to
the number and gender subcategories as well as to
dependencies. The precision performed is how-
ever lower with respect to the figures obtained by
Borin (2002) on the one hand, and Yarowski et
al.?s (2001) on the other hand. In Borin?s study,
precision was assessed provided the word align-
ments used to project POS tags were correct. In
this study, precision has been evaluated regardless
of possible errors prior to projection. When these
errors are discarded, the precision rates are simi-
lar. In Yarowski et al?s work (2001), the evalua-
tion did not concern annotation projection but an
induced tagger trained on 500K occurrences of au-
tomatically derived POS tag projections. Indeed,
the authors claim that direct annotation projection
is quite noisy. This study shows that such a simple
approach can perform fairly well as far as preci-
sion is concerned. The results are likely to be im-
proved by implementing basic POS tag conversion
rules as suggested in (Borin, 2002).
For the projection of dependencies, defining such
conversion rules seems necessary as suggested by
the significant difference in precision when the
projection of unlabeled and labeled dependencies
are compared. Polish does not proceed in the
same way to encode syntactic functions as com-
pared to English or French. Nevertheless, some
of the syntactic divergences observed seem regu-
59
lar enough to be used to derive indirect correspon-
dences. Hwa et al (2002) have noticed that ap-
plying elementary linguistic transformations con-
siderably increases precision and recall when pro-
jecting syntactic relations, at least for the En-
glish/Chinese language pair. The present study
suggests that this kind of approach is promising
for the English/Polish and French/Polish pairs as
well.
The exceptionnal status of the corpus certainly in-
fluences the quality of the results. Legislative texts
of the EU in their different language versions are
legally binding. Thus, they have to be as close
as possible semantically and this constraint may
favour the direct correspondences observed.
8 Conclusion
We have presented a simple yet promising method
based on aligned corpora to induce linguistic an-
notations in Polish texts. POS tags and depen-
dencies are directly projected to the Polish part of
the corpus from the automatically annotated En-
glish or French part. As far as precision is con-
cerned, the direct projection is fairly efficient for
POS tags but appears to be too restrictive for de-
pendencies. Nevetheless, the results are encour-
aging since they are likely to be improved by ap-
plying indirect correspondence rules. They vali-
date the idea of the existence of direct or indirect
yet regular correspondences on the English/Polish
and French/Polish language pairs which has al-
ready been tested with some syntax-based align-
ment techniques (Ozdowska, 2004; Ozdowska and
Claveau, 2005). The next step will consist in ex-
ploiting the indirect correspondences and the mul-
tiple sources of information provided by two dif-
ferent source languages. Moreover, using IBM-4
word alignments in one direction instead of the in-
tersection will be considered.
This work mainly focusses on precision thus lack-
ing information on recall. Larger scale evalua-
tions would be necessary to validate the approach,
particularly evaluations that could measure recall,
since the amount of evaluation data used is this
study could be considered too limited.
References
Lars Borin. 2002. Alignment and tagging. In Lars
Borin, editor, Parallel corpora, parallel worlds: se-
lected papers from a symposium on parallel and
comparable corpora at Uppsala University, pages
207?217. Rodopi, Amsterdam/New York.
Didier Bourigault, C?cile Fabre, C?cile Fr?rot, Marie-
Paule Jacques, and Sylwia Ozdowska. fothcoming.
Acquisition et ?valuation sur corpus de propri?t?s de
sous-cat?gorisation syntaxique. T.A.L (Traitement
Automatique des Langues).
Peter F. Brown, Stephen. A. Della Pietra, Vincent
J. Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993.
The mathematics of statistical machine translation:
parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):263?311.
Toma? Erjavec, Camelia Ignat, Bruno Pouliquen, and
Ralf Steinberger. 2005. Massive multilingual cor-
pus compilation: Acquis communautaire and TO-
TALE. In 2nd Language and Technology Confer-
ence.
C?cile Fabre and Didier Bourigault. 2001. Linguistic
clues for corpus-based acquisition of lexical depen-
dencies. In Corpus Linguisitc Conference.
Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, and
Okan Kolak. 2002. Evaluating translational cor-
respondence using annotation projection. In 40th
Annual Conference of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Geoffrey Leech. 1997. Introducting corpus annotation.
In Roger Garside, Geoffrey Leech, and Anthony
McEnery, editors, Corpus Annotation. Linguistic In-
formation from Computer Text corpora, pages 1?18.
Longman, London/New York.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statisical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 1(29):19?51.
Sylwia Ozdowska and Vincent Claveau. 2005. Aligne-
ment de mots par apprentissage de r?gles de prop-
agation syntaxique en corpus de taille restreinte.
In Conf?rence sur le Traitement Automatique des
Langues Naturelles, pages 243?252.
Sylwia Ozdowska. 2004. Identifying correspondences
between words: an approach based on a bilingual
syntactic analysis of French/English parallel cor-
pora. In Multilingual Linguistic Resources Work-
shop of COLING?04.
Bruno Pouliquen and Ralf Steinberger. 2005. The ac-
quis communautaire corpus. In JRC Enlargement
and Integration Workshop.
Helmut Schmidt. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In 1st International
Conference on New Methods in Natural Language
Processing.
David Yarowski, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicen-
towski. 2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis
tools via robust projection across aligned corpora.
In 1st Human Language Technology Conference.
60
