BRUJA: Question Classification for Spanish.
Using Machine Translation and an English Classifier.
Miguel ?A. Garc??a Cumbreras
SINAI Group
Computer Sciences
University of Jae?n. Spain
magc@ujaen.es
L. Alfonso Uren?a Lo?pez
SINAI Group
Computer Sciences
University of Jae?n. Spain
laurena@ujaen.es
Fernando Mart??nez Santiago
SINAI Group
Computer Sciences
University of Jae?n .Spain
dofer@ujaen.es
Abstract
Question Classification is an important
task in Question Answering Systems. This
paper presents a Spanish Question Classi-
fier based on machine learning, automatic
online translators and different language
features. Our system works with Eng-
lish collections and bilingual questions
(English/Spanish). We have tested two
Spanish-English online translators to iden-
tify the lost of precision. We have made
experiments using lexical, syntactic and
semantic features to test which ones made
a better performance. The obtained results
show that our system makes good classifi-
cations, over a 80% in terms of accuracy
using the original English questions and
over a 65% using Spanish questions and
machine translation systems. Our conclu-
sion about the features is that a lexical,
syntactic and semantic features combina-
tion obtains the best result.
1 Introduction
A Question Answering (QA) system seeks and
shows the user an accurate and concise answer,
given a free-form question, and using a large text
data collection.
The use of Cross Language Information Re-
trieval Systems (CLIR) is growing, and also the
application of these ones into other general sys-
tems, such as Question Answering or Question
Classification.
A CLIR system is an Information Retrieval Sys-
tem that works with collections in several lan-
guages, and extract relevant documents or pas-
sages (Grefenstette, 1998).
We have proposed a Multilingual Question An-
swering System (BRUJA - in Spanish ?Busqueda
de Respuestas University of Jaen?) that works with
collections in several languages. Since there are
several languages, tasks such as obtaining rele-
vant documents and extracting the answer could
be accomplished in two ways: using NPL tools
and resources for each language or for a pivot lan-
guage only (English) and translating to the pivot
language the rest of the relevant information when
it is required. Because of the translation step, the
second approach is less accurate but more practi-
cal since we need only NPL resources for English.
The central question is the noise, because of the
translation process, is too high in order to use this
approach in spite of their practical advantages.
The first step of this system is a Question Clas-
sifier (QC). Given a query, a question classifica-
tion module obtains the class of such question.
This information is useful for the extraction of the
answer. For example, given the query ?Where
is Madrid?, the QA system expects a location
entity as answer type. The proposed QA mod-
ule works with questions in several languages,
translates them into English using different online
translators, and obtains the type of questions and
some features, such as the focus, the keywords
or the context. In this work we aim to find out
whether a multilingual QC module is possible by
using translation tools and English as pivot lan-
guage or not.
2 Question Classification
Question Classification is the task that, given a
question, classifies it in one of k semantic classes.
Some QC systems are based on regular expres-
sions and manual grammatical rules (Van Durme
et al, 2003).
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
39
Recent works in QC have studied different ma-
chine learning methods. (Zhang and Lee, 2003)
propose a QC system that uses Support Vec-
tor Machine (SVM) as the best machine learn-
ing algorithm. They compare the obtained results
with other algorithms, such as Nearest Neighbors,
Naive Bayes, Decision Tree or Sparse Network of
Winnows (SNoW).
(Li and Roth, 2002) propose a system based on
SNoW. They used five main classes and fifty fined
classes. Other systems have used SVM and modi-
fied kernels.
QC systems have some restrictions (Hacioglu
and Ward, 2003), such as:
? Traditional question classification uses a set
of rules, for instance ?questions that start
with Who ask about a person?. These are
manual rules that have to be revised to im-
prove the results.
? These rules are very weak, because when new
questions arise, the system has to be updated
to classify them.
Most of the QC systems use English as the main
language, and some of the best and standard re-
sources are developed for English.
It would be possible to build a question classi-
fier for every language based on machine learning,
using a good training corpus for each language,
but is something expensive to produce. For this
reason we have used Machine Translation Sys-
tems.
Machine Translation (MT) systems are very ap-
preciated in CLIR (McNamee et al, 2000). Last
years these systems have improved the results, but
there are not translators for each language pair and
the quality of the result depends on this pair.
The reason of using MT and not a Spanish clas-
sifier is simple: we have developed a multilingual
QA system that works in this moment with three
languages: English, Spanish and French. Because
it is too complex for us to work with resources into
these three languages and also to manage the in-
formation into three languages, our kernel system
works into English, and we use MT to translate
information when it is necessary.
We have developed a QC system that covers
three tasks:
? It uses machine learning algorithms. We have
tested methods based on Support Vector Ma-
chine, for instance SVMLight or LibSVM,
and TiMBL. TiMBL 1 is a program that
implements several Memory-Based Learning
techniques. It stores a representation of the
training set explicitly in memory, and classi-
fies new cases by extrapolation from the most
similar stored cases.
? To classify Spanish questions we have
checked two online machine translators. Our
proposal is to study how the translation can
affect in the final results, compared to the
original English results.
? Finally, we would obtain different results ap-
plying different levels of features (lexical,
syntactic and semantic). In the next section
well explain them and in results chapter we
will see these differences.
Our QC system has three independent modules,
so it will be easy to replace each one with other to
improve the final results. In Figure 1 we can see
them.
Figure 1: QC system Modules.
The first module translates the question into
other languages, Spanish in this case. We have
used two machine translation systema that work
well for the language pair Spanish-English: Epals
and Prompt. This module could work with other
machine translation systems and other languages
if there would be a good translator for the language
pair used.
The second module extracts some relevant fea-
tures (see next section) using the original or the
translated English questions. Some of these fea-
tures will be used by the machine learning module
(lexical, syntactic and semantic features) and the
1ILK Research Group, Tilburg University and CNTS Re-
search Group, University of Antwerp
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
40
others will be used later in the answers extraction
phase. Take into account that the second module
also extracts important features such as the context
of the question, the focus or the keywords that we
would use in next steps of the Question Answering
system.
The final module applies the machine learn-
ing algorithm and returns the question category
or class. In our first experiments we used Li-
brary for Support Vector Machines (LibSVM) and
Bayesian Logistic Regression (BBR), but for this
one we have used Tilburg Memory Based Learner
(TiMBL).
TiMBL (Daelemans et al, 2004) implements
several Memory-Based Learning techniques, clas-
sic k-NN classification kernel and several metrics.
It implements Stanfill modified value difference
metric (MVDM), Jeffrey Divergence and Class
voting in the k-NN kernel according to the dis-
tance of the nearest neighbors. It makes classifi-
cation using heuristic approximations, such as the
IGTREE decision tree algorithm and the TRIBL
and TRIBL2 hybrids. It also has optimizations for
fast classification.
2.1 Features in Question Classification
We have analyzed each question in order to extract
the following features:
? Lexical Features
? The two first words of the question
? All the words of the question in lower-
case
? The stemming words
? Bigrams of the question
? Each word with its position in the ques-
tion
? The interrogative pronoun of the ques-
tion
? The headwords of the nouns and verbs
? Syntactic Features
? The interrogative pronoun and the Part
of Speech (POS) of the rest of the words
? The headword (a word to which an in-
dependent meaning can be assigned) of
the first noun phrase
? All POS
? Chunks
? The first verb chunk
? The length of the question
? Semantic Features
? The question focus (a noun phrase that
is likely to be present in the answer)
? POS with the named entities recognized
? The type of the entity if the focus is one
of them
? Wordnet hypernyms for the nouns and
Wordnet synonyms for the verbs
We have used some English resources such as
the POS tagger TreeTagger (Schmid, 1994), Ling-
pipe 2 to make Named Entity Recognition, and the
Porter stemmer (Porter, 1980). We have also used
Wordnet to expand the queries.
3 Experiments and Results
3.1 Experimental Method
The experiments are made using some public
datasets available by USC (Hovy et al, 1999),
UIUC and TREC 3 as training and test collections.
These datasets have been labeled manually by
UIUC group by means of the following general
and detailed categories:
ABBR: abbreviation, expansion.
DESC: definition, description, manner, reason.
ENTY: animal, body, color, creation, cur-
rency, disease/medical, event, food, instrument,
language, letter, other, plant, product, religion,
sport, substance, symbol, technique, term, vehicle,
word.
HUM: description, group, individual, title.
LOC: city, country, mountain, other, state.
NUM: code, count, date, distance, money, or-
der, other, percent, period, speed, temperature,
size, weight.
For instance the question ?What does NATO
mean?? is an ABBR (abbreviation) category,
?What is a receptionist?? is a DESC (definition)
category or ?When did George Bush born?? is a
NUM (numeric) category.
The training data are a set of 5500 questions and
the test data are a set of 500 questions. All ques-
tions were labelled for the 10th conference Cross-
Language Evaluation Forum of Question Answer-
ing (CLEF-QA).
2LingPipe is a suite of Java tools designed to perform
linguistic analysis on natural language data, available in
http://www.alias-i.com/lingpipe
3http://trec.nist.gov
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
41
The same dataset has been used in other inves-
tigations, such as in (Li and Roth, 2002).
The distribution of these 5500 training ques-
tions, with respect to its interrogative pronoun or
the initial word is showed in Table 1.
Likewise, the distribution of categories of these
5500 training questions is showed in Table 2.
Table 1: Training questions distribution according
with its interrogative pronoun
Type Number
What 3242
Who 577
How 764
Where 273
When 131
Which 105
Why 103
Name 91
In 67
Define 4
Whom 4
Others 91
Table 2: Training questions distribution according
with its general category.
Category Number
ABBR 86
DESC 1162
ENTY 1251
HUM 1223
LOC 835
NUM 896
The distribution of the 500 test questions, with
respect to its interrogative pronoun or the initial
word, is showed in Table 3, and the distribution of
categories of these 500 test questions is showed in
Table 4.
Table 3: Test questions distribution according with
its interrogative pronoun.
Type Number
What 343
Who 47
How 35
Where 26
When 26
Which 6
Why 4
Name 2
In 5
Others 6
In our experiments we try to identify the general
category. Our proposal is to try a detailed classifi-
cation later.
Table 4: Test questions distribution according with
its general category.
Category Number
ABBR 9
DESC 138
ENTY 94
HUM 65
LOC 81
NUM 113
We have used the Accuracy as a general mea-
sure and the Precision of each category as a de-
tailed measure.
Accuracy = ]ofcorrectpredictions
]ofpredictions
(1)
precision(c) = ]ofcorrectpredictionsofthecategoryc
]ofpredictionsofthecategoryc
(2)
Other measure used is the F-score, defined
as the harmonic mean of precision and recall
(Van Rijsbergen, 1979). It is a commonly used
metric to summarize precision and recall in one
measure.
F ? score = 2 ? precision ? recall
precision + recall
(3)
3.2 Results
We have made some experiments changing the
machine translation systems:
? 5500 training questions and 500 test ques-
tions, all into English. This is the basic case.
? 5500 training questions into English and 500
test questions translated from Spanish using
the MT Epals.
? 5500 training questions into English and 500
test questions translated from Spanish using
the MT Prompt.
The MT resources are available in the following
URLs:
? Epals
http://www.epals.com
? Prompt
http://translation2.paralink.com
According to the lexical, syntactic and semantic
features we have made seven features sets. Our
proposal here is to check which ones increase the
final results. These features sets are the following:
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
42
1. Lexical Features: interrogative pronoun
(lex1)
2. Lexical and Syntactic Features: Two first
words of the question + All the words of the
question in lowercase + Stemming words +
Headwords (lexsyn2)
3. Lexical and Syntactic Features: previous four
+ Each word with its position in the ques-
tion + interrogative pronoun + The first verb
chunk (lexsyn3)
4. Semantic Features: The question focus +
POS with the named entities recognized +
The type of the entity if the focus is one of
them (sem4)
5. Syntactic Features: The interrogative pro-
noun and the Part of Speech (POS) of the
rest of the words + All POS + Chunks + The
length of the question (sin5)
6. All Lexical + all Syntactic + all Semantic
(lexsemsin6)
7. Lexical Features: Two first words of the
question + interrogative pronoun ; Syntactic
Features: + The headwords of the nouns and
verbs + The first verb chunk + the interrog-
ative pronoun + the Part of Speech (POS) of
the rest of the words + The length of the ques-
tion; Semantic Features: POS with the named
entities recognized (lexsemsin7)
We can see in the Table 5 the obtained results in
terms of global accuracy.
Table 5: Results in terms of Accuracy.
Features English original Epals Prompt
lex1 0,458 0,334 0,414
lexsyn2 0,706 0,656 0,632
lexsyn3 0,718 0,638 0,612
sem4 0,675456 0,59798 0,629555
sin5 0,608 0,438 0,518
lexsemsin6 0,839757 0,662626 0,722672
lexsemsin7 0,8 0,678 0,674
Note that the average loss of precision is around
17% if we use Epals, and around 12% if we use
Prompt.
(Li and Roth, 2002) obtain a better performance
for English, around a 92.5% in terms of accuracy.
The best results are obtained when we use a
combination of all lexical, syntactic and seman-
tic features. The main reason is that the classifier
works better when the number of features, which
can be different to each category, is increased.
For future work, it will be also necessary to
study the time consumption for each features set,
to decide which ones can be used.
Table 6 shows the results in terms of F-score.
Table 6: Results in terms of F-score.
Features English original Epals Prompt
lex1 0,476077 0,319793 0,441075
lexsyn2 0,708444 0,669692 0,6455
lexsyn3 0,721258 0,644813 0,614353
sem4 0,649405 0,593019 0,620068
sin5 0,576356 0,404038 0,48739
lexsemsin6 0,827789 0,664122 0,726667
lexsemsin7 0,795897 0,680039 0,68014
As an example in Table 7 we show detailed re-
sults for the best case, where the result for each
general category is showed.
Table 7: Detailed results for each category, using
the combination lexsemsin6 and the original Eng-
lish questions and the translated questions by us-
ing Prompt
Class English original Prompt
Precision F-score Precision F-score
ABBR 0.857 0.750 1 0.611
DESC 0.8442 0.906 0.695 0.806
ENTY 0.731 0.727 0.595 0.737
HUM 0.839 0.825 0.898 0.914
LOC 0.847 0.867 0.680 0.859
NUM 0.935 0.843 0.798 0.856
As we have seen there are no important differ-
ences between categories. In addition, this table
shows that the translation results are reliable since
for every category the lost of precision is similar
(about 15%).
There are some reasons for the lost of precision.
Some of them are the following:
1. Bad translation of synonym words. For in-
stance we can compare an English original
sentence: ?What are the animals that don?t
have backbones called??, and its Prompt
translation: ?How are they called the animals
that have no spines??. The word backbone
has been replaced with spine, so the IR sys-
tem cannot find the same lists of relevant doc-
uments.
2. Translation of Named Entities. For instance
we can compare an English original sentence:
?Who was Galileo??, and its Prompt transla-
tion: ?Who was Galilean??.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
43
3. General bad translations. For instance we can
compare an English original sentence: ?Who
discovered x-rays??, and its Prompt transla-
tion: ?Who discovered the beams the Xth??.
4 Conclusions
Multilingual Question Answering systems have
opened a new investigation task, where the ques-
tion classification is an important first phase to
know the type of answer and some relevant infor-
mation about this question.
Our option is to use some standards resources
for English and translate Spanish questions.
Of course we could develop a multilingual QC
system using good training corpus for every lan-
guage, but it is expensive to produce.
The use of machine translation systems is, then,
very important, so the study of different online
translators is a main task. In our case we have
applied them to translate questions from Spanish
into English.
We have made a complete investigation using
the two datasets of training and test questions that
have been used by other groups, all labelled man-
ually. Different parameters have been the test
file used (originally in English or translated from
Spanish with the MT Epals or Prompt), the ma-
chine learning algorithm, some TiMBL parame-
ters and the lexical, syntactic or semantic features.
The best results have been obtained using the
original English questions and a combination of
lexical, syntactic and semantic features. The best
MT has been Prompt.
We have some conclusions:
? Applying machine learning with a complete
set of training questions we obtain good re-
sults, over 0,8 in terms of accuracy.
? The use of machine translation systems de-
creases the results around 15%, but it will
be possible to increase the performance us-
ing other models based on machine learning
or a voting system for instance.
? A combination of all lexical, syntactic and se-
mantic features obtains the best results.
As future work we want to check the system
with other training and test datasets. We also want
to design a voting system using different QC mod-
els; models based on patterns (to detect the class
for some types of questions); models based on
rules (filtering non-redundancy types of questions.
For instance all questions with ?who? are related
to a person).
It could be also interested to test the combina-
tion between a better QC system, the current one
by Li and Roths for instance (Li and Roth, 2002),
and our machine translation method.
Finally, we want to study types of questions
with poor results in order to improve them apply-
ing other techniques, such as question expansion.
Acknowledgement This work has been sup-
ported by Spanish Government (MCYT) with
grant TIC2003-07158-C04-04.
References
W. Daelemans, J. Zavrel, K. van der Sloot, and
A. van den Bosch. 2004. Timbl: Tilburgmemory
based learner, version 5.1, reference guide. ilk tech-
nical report 04-02.
G. Grefenstette, editor. 1998. Cross-Language Infor-
mation Retrieval, volume 1. Kluwer academic pub-
lishers, Boston, USA.
K. Hacioglu and W. Ward. 2003. Question classifi-
cation with support vector machines and error cor-
recting codes. In Proceedings of Human Language
Technology conference (HLT-NAACL).
E. Hovy, L. Gerber, U. Hermjakob, C. Lin, and
D. Ravichandran. 1999. Towards sematics-based
answer pinpointing. In Proceedings of the DARPA
Human Language Technology conference (HLT).
X. Li and D. Roth. 2002. Learning question classifiers.
In In COLING?02.
P. McNamee, J. Mayfield, and C. Piatko. 2000. The
jhu/apl haircut system at trec- 8. In Proceedings of
the Eighth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC8).
M. F. Porter. 1980. An algorithm for suffix stripping.
In Program 14.
H. Schmid. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging
using decision trees. In Proceedings of International
Conference on New Methods in Language Process-
ing.
B. Van Durme, Y. Huang, A. Kupsc, and E. Nyberg.
2003. Towards light semantic processing for ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of Human Language
Technology conference (HLT-NAACL).
C.J. Van Rijsbergen. 1979. Information retrieval.
D. Zhang and W. Sun Lee. 2003. Question classifica-
tion using support vector machines. In Proceedings
of the 26th Annual International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Informa-
tion Retrieval.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
44
