Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding, pages 25?32,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Increasing the coverage of a domain independent dialogue lexicon with
VERBNET
Benoit Crabbe??, Myroslava O. Dzikovska?, William de Beaumont?, Mary Swift?
? ICCS-HCRC, University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place, EH8 9LW, Edinburgh, UK
{bcrabbe,mdzikovs}@inf.ed.ac.uk
?Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester NY, USA
{wdebeaum,swift}@cs.rochester.edu
Abstract
This paper investigates how to extend cov-
erage of a domain independent lexicon tai-
lored for natural language understanding.
We introduce two algorithms for adding
lexical entries from VERBNET to the lexi-
con of the TRIPS spoken dialogue system.
We report results on the efficiency of the
method, discussing in particular precision
versus coverage issues and implications
for mapping to other lexical databases.
1 Introduction
This paper explores how different lexicons can be
integrated with the goal of extending coverage of
a deep parser and semantic interpreter. Lexical
semantic databases (Kipper et al, 2000; Johnson
and Fillmore, 2000; Dorr, 1997) use a frame-based
model of lexical semantics. Each database groups
words in classes where predicative words and their
arguments are described. The classes are generally
organised in an inheritance structure. Each such
database can be used, among other things, to per-
form semantic interpretation. However, their actual
structures are quite different, reflecting different un-
derlying methodological approaches to lexical de-
scription, and this results in representation that are
not directly compatible. Since no such database has
full coverage of English, it is worth combining them
in order to get a lexicon with better coverage and a
unified representation for English.
We explore the issues related to merging verb
descriptions from two lexical databases, which
have both syntactic and semantic incompatibilities,
and compare two techniques for aligning semantic
classes and the syntax-semantics mappings between
them. The resulting lexicon is to be used in precise
interpretation tasks, so its consistency and accuracy
are a high priority. Thus, though it is possible to gen-
erate lexical entries automatically (Kwon and Hovy,
2006; Swift, 2005), we use a semi-automatic method
in which an expert hand-checks the automatically
generated entries before adding them to the lexicon.
Therefore, our goal is to maximise the number of
new useful entries added to the lexicon while min-
imising the number of entries that are discarded or
hand-edited.
We take the mapping between the TRIPS lexicon
and the VERBNET lexical database as a case study
for our experiment. The TRIPS lexicon is used to-
gether with a parser to provide a natural language
understanding component for several dialogue ap-
plications in different domains. It outputs highly de-
tailed semantic representations suitable for complex
dialogue tasks such as problem-solving and tutoring
dialogue, inter alia. An essential feature of TRIPS
is the integration of a detailed lexical semantic rep-
resentation, semantic classes and theta role assign-
ments in the parsing process.
Semantic types and role labelling are helpful in
both deep (Tetreault, 2005) and shallow interpreta-
tion tasks (Narayanan and Harabagiu, 2004). TRIPS
provides a convenient test case because its grammar
is already equipped with the formal devices required
to build up a frame-based semantic representation
including this information.1
1While wide coverage grammars such as the English Re-
25
We chose VERBNET to extend the TRIPS lexicon
because it includes a detailed syntax-semantic map-
pings, thus providing a more convenient interface to
the syntactic component of the grammar than lexi-
cons where this connection is left unclear, such as
FRAMENET. However the methods described here
are designed to be reusable for merging other lexi-
cal databases, in particular we intend to experiment
with FRAMENET in the near future.
The plan of the paper is as follows: we first de-
scribe the target lexicon (Section 2) and the source
lexicon (Section 3) for our experiment before de-
scribing the methodology for integration (Section 4).
We finally present an evaluation of the techniques in
Section 5.
2 The TRIPS Lexicon
The TRIPS lexicon (Dzikovska, 2004) is the target
of the mapping procedure we describe in Section
4. It includes syntactic and semantic information
necessary to build semantic representations usable
in dialogue systems. The TRIPS parser is equipped
with a fairly detailed grammar, but a major restric-
tion on coverage in new domains is often lack of
lexical information. The lexicon used in our eval-
uation comprised approximately 700 verb lemmas
with 1010 senses (out of approximately 2500 total
word senses, covering both open- and closed-class
words). The lexicon is designed for incremental
growth, since the lexical representation is domain-
independent and the added words are then re-used
in new domains.
A graphical representation of the information
stored in the TRIPS lexicon and used in parsing is
shown in Figure 1. The lexicon is a list of canon-
ical word entries each of which is made of a set
of sense definitions comprised of a LF type and a
syntax-semantic template.
Semantic classes (LF types) in the TRIPS lexi-
con are organised in a domain-independent ontol-
ogy (the LF ontology). The LF Ontology was orig-
inally based on a simplified version of FRAMENET
source Grammar (Copestake and Flickinger, 2000) build deep
semantic representations which account for scoping and tempo-
ral structure, their lexicons do not provide information related
to word senses and role labels, in part due to the additional dif-
ficulty involved building a wide coverage lexicon with the nec-
essary lexical semantic information.
The tourists admired the paintings
LSUBJ LOBJ
LF::Experiencer-Emotion
LF::Experiencer LF::Theme
Figure 1: Information in the TRIPS word sense def-
inition for mapping between syntactic and semantic
roles.
(Baker et al, 1998; Dzikovska et al, 2004), with
each LF type describing a particular situation, object
or event and its participants. Syntax-Semantics Tem-
plates (or templates) capture the linking between the
syntax and semantics (LF type and semantic roles)
of a word. The semantic properties of an argument
are described by means of a semantic role assigned
to it and selectional restrictions.2
The TRIPS grammar contains a set of indepen-
dently described lexical rules, such as the passive or
dative shift rules, which are designed to create non-
canonical lexical entries automatically, while pre-
serving the linking properties defined in the canoni-
cal entry.
In this context adding an entry to the lexicon re-
quires determining both the list of LF types and
the list of templates for canonical contexts, that is,
the list of mappings between a logical frame and a
canonical subcategorization frame.
3 VERBNET
VERBNET (Kipper et al, 2000) provides an actual
implementation of the descriptive work carried out
by Levin (1993), which has been extended to cover
prepositional constructions and corpus-based sub-
categorization frames (Kipper et al, 2004; Kipper
et al, 2006).
VERBNET is a hierarchical verb lexicon in which
verbs are organised in classes. The fundamental
assumption underlying the classification is that the
members of a given class share a similar syntactic
2The selectional restrictions are domain independent and
specified using features derived from EuroWordNet (Vossen,
1997; Dzikovska et al, to appear).
26
behaviour, that is, they pattern in the same set of al-
ternations, and are further assumed to share common
semantic properties.3
VERBNET classes are organised in an inheritance
hierarchy. Each class includes a set of members
(verbs), a set of (subcategorization) frames and a set
of semantic descriptions. Frames are descriptions of
the linking between syntax and semantics for that
class. Each frame argument contains a syntactic cat-
egory augmented with syntactic features, and a cor-
responding thematic role. Each class also specifies
a set of additional selectional restriction features.
VERBNET further includes for each class a semantic
description stated in terms of event semantics, that
we ignore in this paper.
4 Methodology
The methodology used in the mapping process con-
sists of two steps. First we translate the source,
VERBNET, to an intermediate representation best
suited for parsing purposes. Second this interme-
diate representation is translated to a specific tar-
get, here the TRIPS lexicon. At this stage of our
work, the translation from VERBNET to the inter-
mediate representation mainly concerns normalising
syntactic information coded in VERBNET to make
them easier to handle for parsing purposes, and the
translation from the intermediate representation to
the TRIPS lexicon focuses on translating semantic
information. This architecture is best understood
as a cross compilation scheme: we further expect
to reuse this intermediate representation for produc-
ing outputs for different parsers and to accept inputs
from other lexical databases such as FRAMENET.
4.1 The intermediate representation
The intermediate representation is a lexical repre-
sentation scheme mainly tailored for parsing: in this
context, a lexicon is thus made of a set of words,
each of which consists of a lemma, a syntactic cate-
gory and a list of sense definitions. Each sense def-
inition has a name and a frame. The name of the
sense definition is actually the name of the VERB-
NET class it derives from. The frame of the sense
definition has a list of arguments, each of which con-
3In practice, it turns out that there are exceptions to that hy-
pothesis (Kipper, 2005).
sists of a syntactic category, a syntactic function, a
thematic role and possibly a set of prepositions and
syntactic feature structures.
The content of the intermediate representation
uses the following data categories. Syntactic cate-
gories, thematic roles and features are those used in
VERBNET. We further add the syntactic functions
described in (Carroll et al, 1998). Specifically, two
categories left implicit in VERBNET by the use of
feature structures are made explicit here: preposi-
tional phrases (PP) and sentential arguments (S).
Each argument described in a sense definition
frame is marked with respect to its coreness status.
The coreness status aims to provide the lexicon with
an operational account for common discrepancies
between syntax and semantics descriptions. This
status may be valued as core, non-core or non-sem
and reflects the status of the argument with respect
to the syntax-semantics interface.
Indeed, there is a methodological pitfall concern-
ing the mapping between thematic roles and syntac-
tic arguments: semantic arguments are not defined
following criteria identical to those for syntactic ar-
guments. The main criterion for describing semantic
arguments is their participation in the event, situa-
tion, object described by the frame whereas the cri-
terion for describing syntactic arguments is based on
the obligatoriness or the specificity of the argument
with respect to the verb. The following example il-
lustrates such conflicts:
(1) a. It is raining
b. I am walking to the store
The It in example (1a) plays no role in the seman-
tic representation, but is obligatory in syntax since
it fills a subject position. The locative PP in exam-
ple (1b) is traditionally not treated as an argument
in syntax, rather as a modifier, hence it does not fill
a complement position. Such phrases are, however,
classified in VERBNET as part of the frames. Fol-
lowing this, we distinguish three kinds of arguments:
non-sem as in (1a) are syntactic-only arguments with
no semantic contribution. non-core as in (1b) con-
tribute to the semantics but are not subcategorized.
27
4.2 From VERBNET to the intermediate
representation
Given VERBNET as described in Section 3 and the
intermediate representation we described above, the
translation process requires mainly (1) to turn the
class based representation of VERBNET into a list-
of-word based representation (2) to mark arguments
for coreness (3) to merge some arguments and (4) to
annotate arguments with syntactic functions.
The first step is quite straightforward. Every
member m of every VERBNET class C is associated
with every frame of C yielding a new sense defini-
tion in the intermediate representation for m.
In the second step, each argument receives a core-
ness mark. Arguments marked as non-core are ad-
verbs, and prepositional phrases introduced by a
large class of prepositions (e.g. spatial preposi-
tions). The arguments marked as non-sem are those
with an impersonal it, typically members of the
weather class. All other arguments listed in VERB-
NET frames are marked as core.
In the third step, syntactic arguments are merged
to correspond better to phrase-based syntax.4 For
example, the VERBNET encoding of subcategoriza-
tion frames splits prepositional frames on two slots:
one for the preposition and one for the noun phrase.
We have merged the two arguments, to become a
PP, also merging their syntactic and semantic fea-
tures. Other merges at this stage include merging
possessive arguments such as John?s brother which
are described with three argument slots in VERB-
NET frames. We merged them as a single NP.
The last step in the translation is the inference of
syntactic functions. It is possible to reasonably infer
syntactic functions from positional arguments and
syntactic categories by (a) considering the follow-
ing oblicity order over the set of syntactic functions
used in the intermediate representation:5
(2) NCSUBJ < DOBJ < OBJ2 < {IOBJ, XCOMP,CCOMP}
4We also relabel some categories for convenience without
affecting the process. For instance, VERBNET labels both
clausal arguments and noun phrases with the category NP. The
difference is made with syntactic features. We take advantage
of the features to relabel clausal arguments with the category S.
5This order is partial, such that the 3 last functions are un-
ordered wrt to each other. These functions are the subset of the
functions described in (Carroll et al, 1998) relevant for han-
dling VERBNET data.
and by (b) considering this problem as a transduc-
tion problem over two tapes. One tape being the tape
of syntactic categories and the second the tape of
syntactic functions. Given that, we designed a trans-
ducer that implements a category to function map-
ping. It implements the above oblicity order together
with an additional mapping constraint: nouns can
only map to NCSUBJ, DOBJ, prepositional phrases
can only map to OBJ2, IOBJ, infinitival clauses can
only map to XCOMP and finite clauses to CCOMP.
We further added refinements to account for
frames that do not encode their arguments follow-
ing the canonical oblicity order: for dealing with
dative shift encoded in VERBNET with two differ-
ent frames and for dealing with impersonal contexts,
so that we eventually used the transducer in Figure
2. All states except 0 are meant to be final. The
transduction operates only on core and non-sem ar-
guments, non-core arguments are systematically as-
sociated with an adjunct function. This transducer is
capable of correctly handling the majority of VERB-
NET frames, finding a functional assignment for
more than 99% of the instances.
0 1
2
NP:ncSubj
NP:
? 3
PP: Dobj, Iobj
PP:Iobj
PP:Iobj
S[inf]: Xcomp
S[fin]:Ccomp
S[inf]: Dobj, Xcomp
S[fin]: Dobj, Ccomp
S[fin
]:Cc
omp
S[in
f]:Xc
omp
it[+be]:SUBJ
NP: Iobj,Obj2
4
?:Dobj
Adj:Adj
Adj:Adj
Adj:Adj
Figure 2: A transducer for assigning syntactic func-
tions to ordered subcategorization frames
4.3 From Intermediate representation to TRIPS
Recall that a TRIPS lexical entry is comprised of an
LF type with a set of semantic roles and a template
representing the mappings from syntactic functions
to semantic roles. Converting from our intermedi-
ate representation to the TRIPS format involves two
steps:
28
? For every word sense, determine the appropri-
ate TRIPS LF type
? Establish the correspondence between VERB-
NET and TRIPS syntactic and semantic argu-
ments, and generate the appropriate mapping in
the TRIPS format.
We investigated two strategies to align semantic
classes (VERBNET classes and TRIPS LFs). Both
use a class intersection algorithm as a basis for deci-
sion: two semantic classes are considered a match if
they are associated with the same lexical items.
The intersection algorithm takes advantage of the
fact that both VERBNET and TRIPS contain lexical
sets. A lexical set for VERBNET is a class name
and the set of its members, for TRIPS it is an LF
type and the set of words that are associated with it
in the lexicon. Our intersection algorithm computes
the intersection between every VERBNET lexical set
and every TRIPS lexical set. The sets which intersect
are then considered as candidate mappings from a
VERBNET class to a TRIPS class.
However, this technique produces many 1-word
class intersections, and leads to spurious entries. We
considered two ways of improving precision: first
by requiring a significantly large intersection, sec-
ond by using syntactic structure as a filter. We dis-
cuss them in turn.
4.4 Direct Mapping Between Semantic
Representations
The first technique which we tried for mapping
between TRIPS and VERBNET semantic represen-
tations is to map the classes directly. We con-
sider all candidate mappings between the TRIPS
and VERBNET classes, and take the match with the
largest intersection. We then align the semantic roles
between the two classes and produce all possible
syntax-semantics mappings specified by VERBNET.
This technique has the advantage of providing the
most complete set of syntactic frames and syntax-
semantics mappings which can be retrieved from
VERBNET. However, since VERBNET lists many
possible subcategorization frames for every word,
guessing the class incorrectly is very expensive, re-
sulting in many spurious senses generated. We use a
class intersection threshold to improve reliability.
VERBNET ROLE TRIPS ROLES
Theme LF::THEME, LF::ADDRESSEE,
LF::ALONG, LF::ENTITY
Cause LF::CAUSE, LF::THEME
Experiencer LF::EXPERIENCER, LF::COGNIZER
Source LF::FROM-LOC, LF::SOURCE,
LF::PATH
Destination LF::GOAL, LF::TO-LOC
Recipient LF::RECIPIENT, LF::ADDRESSEE,
LF::GOAL
Instrument LF::INSTRUMENT
Table 1: Sample VERBNET to TRIPS role mappings
At present, we count an LF type match as suc-
cessfully guessed if there is an intersection in lex-
ical entries above the threshold (we determined 3
words as a best value by finding an optimal balance
of precision/recall figures over a small gold-standard
mapping set). Since the classes contain closely re-
lated items, larger intersection means a more reliable
mapping. If the VERBNET class is not successfully
mapped to an LF type then no TRIPS lexical entry is
generated.
Once the correspondence between the LF type
and the VERBNET class has been established, se-
mantic arguments have to be aligned between the
two classes. We established a role mapping table
(a sample is shown in Table 1), which is an extended
version of the mapping from Swift (2005). The role
mapping is one to many (each VERBNET role maps
to 1 to 8 TRIPS roles), however, since the appropriate
LF type has been identified prior to argument map-
ping, we usually have a unique mapping based on
the roles defined by the LF type.6
Once the classes and semantic roles have been
aligned, the mapping of syntactic functions between
the intermediate representation and TRIPS syntax
is quite straightforward. Functional and category
mappings are one to one and do not raise specific
problems. Syntactic features are also translated into
TRIPS representation.
To illustrate the results obtained by the automatic
mapping process, two of the sense definitions gener-
ated for the verb relish are shown in Figure 3. The
TRIPS entries contain references to the class descrip-
tion in the TRIPS LF ontology (line introduced by
6In rare cases where more than 1 correspondence is possible,
we are using the first value in the intersection as the default.
29
;; entries
(relish
(SENSES
((EXAMPLE "The tourists admired the paintings")
(LF-PARENT LF::EXPERIENCER-EMOTION)
(TEMPL VN-EXPERIENCER-THEME-TEMPL-84))
((EXAMPLE "The children liked that the clown had a red nose")
(LF-PARENT LF::EXPERIENCER-EMOTION)
(TEMPL VN-EXPERIENCER-THEME-XP-TEMPL-87))
))
;;Templates
(VN-EXPERIENCER-THEME-TEMPL-84
(ARGUMENTS
(LSUBJ (% NP) LF::EXPERIENCER)
(LOBJ (% NP) LF::THEME)
))
(VN-EXPERIENCER-THEME-XP-TEMPL-87
(ARGUMENTS
(LSUBJ (% NP) LF::EXPERIENCER)
(LCOMP (% CP (vform fin) (ctype s-finite)) LF::THEME)
))
Figure 3: Sample TRIPS generated entries
LF-PARENT) and to a template (line introduced by
TEMPL) generated on the fly by our syntactic con-
version algorithm. The first sense definition and
template in Figure 3 represent the same information
shown graphically in Figure 1. Each argument in a
template is assigned a syntactic function, a feature
structure describing its syntactic properties, and a
mapping to a semantic role defined in the LF type
definition (not depicted here).
4.5 Filtering with syntactic structure
The approach described in the previous section pro-
vides a fairly complete set of subcategorization
frames for each word, provided that the class corre-
spondence has been established successfully. How-
ever, it misses classes with small intersections and
classes for which some but not all members match
(see Section 5 for discussion). To address these is-
sues we tried another approach that automatically
generates all possible class matches between TRIPS
and VERBNET, again using class member intersec-
tion, but using the a TRIPS syntactic template as an
additional filter on the class match. For each poten-
tial match, a human evaluator is presented with the
following:
{confidence score
{verbs in TRIPS-VN class intersection}/
LF-type TRIPS-template
=> VN-class: {VN class members}}
The confidence score is based on the number of
verbs in the intersection, weighted by taking into ac-
count the number of verbs remaining in the respec-
tive TRIPS and VERBNET classes. The template
used for filtering is taken from all templates that oc-
cur with the TRIPS words in this intersection (one
match per template is generated for inspection). For
example:
93.271%
{clutch,grip,clasp,hold,wield,grasp}/
lf::body-manipulation agent-theme-xp-templ
=> hold-15.1-1: {handle}
This gives the evaluator additional syntactic in-
formation to make the judgement on class intersec-
tions. The evaluator can reject entire class matches,
or just individual verbs from the VERBNET class
which don?t quite fit an otherwise good match. We
only used the templates already in TRIPS (those cor-
responding to each of the word senses in the inter-
section) to avoid overwhelming the evaluator with a
large number of possibly spurious template matches
resulting from an incorrect class match. This tech-
nique allows us to pick up class matches based on a
single member intersection, such as:
7.814%
{swallow}/
lf::consume agent-theme-xp-templ
=> gobble-39.3-2: {gulp,guzzle,quaff,swig}
However, the entries obtained are not guaranteed
to cover all frames in VERBNET because if a given
alternation is not already covered in TRIPS, it is not
derived from VERBNET with this method.
5 Evaluation and discussion
Since our goal in this evaluation is to balance the
coverage of VERBNET with precision, we corre-
spondingly evaluate along those two dimensions.
For both techniques, we evaluate how many word
senses were added, and the number of different
words defined and VERBNET classes covered. As a
measure of precision we use, for those entries which
were retrieved, the percentage of those which could
be taken ?as is? (good entries) and the percentage of
entries which could be taken with minor edits (for
example, changing an LF type to a more specific
subclass, or changing a semantic role in a template).
The results of evaluation are shown in Table 2.7
Since for mapping with syntax filtering we con-
sidered all possible TRIPS-VERBNET intersections,
it in effect presents an upper bound the number of
words shared between the two databases. Further
7
?nocos? table rows exclude the other cos VERBNET class,
which is exceptionally broad and skews evaluation results.
30
Class mapping Mapping with syntax filtering
Type Total Good Edit Bad %usable Total Good Edit Bad %usable
Sense 3075 1000 196 1879 0.39 11036 1688 87 9261 0.16
Word 744 274 98 372 0.5 2138 1211 153 714 0.64
Class 15 10 1 4 0.73 198 129 2 67 0.66
Sense-nocos 1136 654 196 286 0.75 7989 1493 87 6409 0.20
Word-nocos 422 218 98 106 0.75 1763 1059 153 491 0.69
Class-nocos 14 9 1 4 0.71 197 128 2 67 0.65
Table 2: Evaluation results for different acquisition techniques. %usable = (good + editable) / bad?.
extension would require extending the TRIPS LF
Ontology with additional types to cover the miss-
ing classes. As can be seen from this table, 65%
of VERBNET classes have an analogous class in
TRIPS. At the same time, there is a very large num-
ber of class intersections possible, so if all possible
intersections are generated, only a very small per-
centage of generated word senses (16%) is usable in
the combined system. Thus developing techniques
to filter out the irrelevant senses and class matches
is important for successful hand-checking.
Our evaluation also shows that while class inter-
section with thresholding provides higher precision,
it does not capture many words and verb senses. One
reason for this is data sparsity. TRIPS is relatively
small, and both TRIPS and VERBNET contain a
number of 1-word classes, which cannot be reliably
mapped without human intervention. This problem
can be alleviated in part as the size of the database
grows. We expect this technique to have better recall
when the combined lexicon is used to merge with a
different lexical database such as FRAMENET.
However, a more difficult issue to resolve is dif-
ferences in class structure. VERBNET was built
around the theory of syntactic alternations, while
TRIPS used FRAMENET structure as a starting point,
simplifying the role structure to make connection
to parsing more straightforward (Dzikovska et al,
2004). Therefore TRIPS does not require that all
words associated with the same LF type share syn-
tactic behaviour, so there are a number of VERB-
NET classes with members which have to be split
between different TRIPS classes based on additional
semantic properties. 70% of all good matches in the
filtering technique were such partial matches. This
significantly disadvantages the thresholding tech-
nique, which provides the mappings on class level,
not allowing for splitting word entries between the
classes.
We believe that the best solution can be found
by combining these two techniques. The thresh-
olding technique could be used to establish reliable
class mappings, providing classes where many en-
tries could be transferred ?as is?. The mapping can
then be examined to determine incorrect class map-
pings as well as the cases where classes should be
split based on individual words. For those entries
judged reliable in the first pass, the syntactic struc-
ture can be transferred fully and quickly, while the
syntactic filtering technique, which requires more
manual checking, can be used to transfer other en-
tries in the intersections where class mapping could
not be established reliably.
Establishing class and member correspondence is
a general problem with merging any two semantic
lexicons. Similar issues have been noted in compar-
ing FRAMENET and VERBNET (Baker and Ruppen-
hofer, 2002). A method recently proposed by Kwon
and Hovy (2006) aligns words in different seman-
tic lexicons to WordNet senses, and then aligns se-
mantic roles based on those matches. Since we are
designing a lexicon for semantic interpretation, it is
important for us that all words should be associated
with frames in a shared hierarchy, to be used in fur-
ther interpretation tasks. We are considering using
this alignment technique to further align semantic
classes, in order to produce a shared database for in-
terpretation covering words from multiple sources.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a methodology for merg-
ing lexicons including syntactic and lexical semantic
31
information. We developed a model based on cross-
compilation ideas to provide an intermediate repre-
sentation which could be used to generate entries
for different parsing formalisms. Mapping semantic
properties is the most difficult part of the process,
and we evaluated two different techniques for estab-
lishing correspondence between classes and lexical
entries, using TRIPS and VERBNET lexicons as a
case study. We showed that a thresholding technique
has a high precision, but low recall due to inconsis-
tencies in semantic structure, and data sparsity. We
can increase recall by partitioning class intersections
more finely by filtering with syntactic structure. Fur-
ther refining the mapping technique, and using it
to add mappings to other lexical databases such as
FRAMENET is part of our ongoing work.
Acknowledgements
We thank Karin Kipper for providing us useful doc-
umentation on the VERBNET feature system, and
Charles Callaway for technical help with the final
version. This material is based on work supported
by grants from the Office of Naval Research un-
der numbers N000140510048 and N000140510043,
from NSF #IIS-0328811, DARPA #NBCHD030010
via subcontract to SRI #03-000223 and NSF #E1A-
0080124.
References
C. F. Baker and J. Ruppenhofer. 2002. Framenet?s
frames vs. Levin?s verb classes. In Proceedings of the
28th Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Soci-
ety, pages 27?38.
C. F. Baker, C. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe. 1998. The
Berkeley Framenet project. In Proceedings of CoLing-
ACL, Montreal.
J. Carroll, E. Briscoe, and A. Sanfilippo. 1998. Parser
evaluation: A survey and a new proposal. In Proceed-
ings of LREC-98.
A. Copestake and D. Flickinger. 2000. An open
source grammar development environment and broad-
coverage English grammar using HPSG. In Proceed-
ings of LREC-2000, Athens, Greece.
B. Dorr. 1997. Large-scale dictionary construction
for foreign language tutoring and interlingual machine
translation. Machine Translation, 12(4):271?375.
M. O. Dzikovska, M. D. Swift, and J. F. Allen. 2004.
Building a computational lexicon and ontology with
FrameNet. In Proceedings of LREC workshop on
Building Lexical Resources from Semantically Anno-
tated Corpora, Lisbon.
M. O. Dzikovska, M. D. Swift, and J. F. Allen. to ap-
pear. Customizing meaning: Building domain-specific
semantic representations from a generic lexicon. In
H. Bunt, editor, Computing Meaning, Volume 3, Stud-
ies in Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer.
M. O. Dzikovska. 2004. A Practical Semantic Repre-
sentation for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Rochester, Rochester NY.
C. Johnson and C. J. Fillmore. 2000. The FrameNet
tagset for frame-semantic and syntactic coding of
predicate-argument structure. In Proceedings ANLP-
NAACL 2000, Seattle, WA.
K. Kipper, H. T. Dang, and M. Palmer. 2000. Class-
based construction of a verb lexicon. In Proceedings
of AAAI, Austin.
K. Kipper, B. Snyder, and M. Palmer. 2004. Us-
ing prepositions to extend a verb lexicon. In Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop on Compu-
tational Lexical Semantics, pages 23?29, Boston, MA.
K. Kipper, A. Korhonen, N. Ryant, and M. Palmer. 2006.
Extending Verbnet with novel verb classes. In Pro-
ceedings of LREC-2006.
K. Kipper. 2005. Verbnet: A broad coverage, compre-
hensive verb lexicon. Ph.D. thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.
N. Kwon and E. H. Hovy. 2006. Integrating semantic
frames from multiple sources. In A. F. Gelbukh, edi-
tor, CICLing, volume 3878 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pages 1?12. Springer.
B. Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations.
The University of Chicago Press.
S. Narayanan and S. Harabagiu. 2004. Question answer-
ing based on semantic structures. In Proceedings of
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics (COLING 2004), Geneva, Switzerland.
M. Swift. 2005. Towards automatic verb acquisition
from Verbnet for spoken dialog processing. In Pro-
ceedings of Interdisciplinary Workshop on the Identi-
fication and Representation of Verb Features and Verb
Classes, Saarbruecken, Germany.
J. Tetreault. 2005. Empirical Evaluations of Pronoun
Resolution. Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester.
P. Vossen. 1997. Eurowordnet: A multilingual database
for information retrieval. In Proceedings of the Delos
workshop on Cross-language Information Retrieval.
32
