Evaluating Task Performance for a Unidirectional Controlled Language 
Medical Speech Translation System 
 
 
Nikos Chatzichrisafis, Pierrette Bouillon, Manny Rayner, Marianne Santaholma, 
Marianne Starlander 
University of Geneva, TIM/ISSCO 
40 bvd du Pont-d'Arve, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland 
 
Nikos.Chatzichrisafis@vozZup.com, Pierrette.Bouillon@issco.unige.ch, 
Emmanuel.Rayner@issco.unige.ch, Marianne.Santaholma@eti.unige.ch, 
Marianne.Starlander@eti.unige.ch  
 
Beth Ann Hockey 
UCSC 
NASA Ames Research Center 
Moffett Field, CA 94035 
bahockey@email.arc.nasa.gov 
 
  
Abstract 
We present a task-level evaluation of the 
French to English version of MedSLT, a 
medium-vocabulary unidirectional con-
trolled language medical speech transla-
tion system designed for doctor-patient 
diagnosis interviews. Our main goal was 
to establish task performance levels of 
novice users and compare them to expert 
users. Tests were carried out on eight 
medical students with no previous expo-
sure to the system, with each student us-
ing the system for a total of three 
sessions. By the end of the third session, 
all the students were able to use the sys-
tem confidently, with an average task 
completion time of about 4 minutes. 
1 Introduction 
Medical applications have emerged as one of the 
most promising application areas for spoken lan-
guage translation, but there is still little agreement 
about the question of architectures. There are in 
particular two architectural dimensions which we 
will address: general processing strategy (statistical 
or grammar-based), and top-level translation func-
tionality (unidirectional or bidirectional transla-
tion). Given the current state of the art in 
recognition and machine translation technology, 
what is the most appropriate combination of 
choices along these two dimensions? 
Reflecting current trends, a common approach 
for speech translation systems is the statistical one. 
Statistical translation systems rely on parallel cor-
pora of source and target language texts, from 
which a translation model is trained. However, this 
is not necessarily the best alternative in safety-
critical medical applications. Anecdotally, many 
doctors express reluctance to trust a translation 
device whose output is not readily predictable, and 
most of the speech translation systems which have 
reached the stage of field testing rely on various 
types of grammar-based recognition and rule-based 
translation (Phraselator, 2006; S-MINDS, 2006; 
MedBridge, 2006). Even though statistical systems 
exhibit many desirable properties (purely data-
driven, domain independence), grammar-based 
systems utilizing probabilistic context-free gram-
mar tuning appear to deliver better results when 
training data is sparse (Rayner et al, 2005a). 
One drawback of grammar-based systems is that 
out-of-coverage utterances will be neither recog-
nized nor translated, an objection that critics have 
sometimes painted as decisive. It is by no means 
obvious, however, that restricted coverage is such 
a serious problem. In text processing, work on sev-
eral generations of controlled language systems has 
developed a range of techniques for keeping users 
within the bounds of system coverage (Kittredge, 
2003; Mitamura, 1999). If these techniques work 
for text processing, it is surely not inconceivable 
that variants of them will be equally successful for 
spoken language applications. Users are usually 
able to adapt to a controlled language system given 
enough time. The critical questions are how to 
provide efficient support to guide them towards the 
system's coverage, and how much time they will 
then need before they have acclimatized. 
With regard to top-level translation functional-
ity, the choice is between unidirectional and bidi-
rectional systems. Bidirectional systems are 
certainly possible today1, but the arguments in fa-
vor of them are not as clear-cut as might first ap-
pear. Ceteris paribus, doctors would certainly 
prefer bidirectional systems; in particular, medical 
students are trained to conduct examination dia-
logues using ?open questions? (WH-questions), 
and to avoid leading the patient by asking YN-
questions. 
The problem with a bidirectional system is, 
however, that open questions only really work well 
if the system can reliably handle a broad spectrum 
of replies from the patients, which is over-
optimistic given the current state of the art. In prac-
tice, the system's coverage is always more or less 
restricted, and some experimentation is required 
before the user can understand what language it is 
capable of handling. A doctor, who uses the system 
regularly, will acquire the necessary familiarity. 
The same might be true for a few patients, if spe-
cial circumstances mean that they encounter 
speech translation applications reasonably fre-
quently. Most patients, however, will have had no 
previous exposure to the system, and may be un-
willing to use a type of technology which they 
have trouble understanding.  
A unidirectional system, in which the doctor 
mostly asks YN-questions, will never be ideal. If, 
                                                          
1
 For example, the S-MINDS system (S-MINDS, 2006) 
offers bidirectional translation. 
however, the doctor can become proficient in using 
it, it may still be very much better than the alterna-
tive of no translation assistance at all.  
To summarize, today?s technology definitely 
lets us build unidirectional grammar-based medical 
speech translation systems which work for regular 
users who have had time to adapt to their limita-
tions. While bidirectional systems are possible, the 
case for them is less obvious, since users on the 
patient side may not in practice be able to use them 
effectively. 
In this paper, we will empirically investigate the 
ability of medical students to adapt to the coverage 
of unidirectional spoken language translation sys-
tem. We report a series of experiments, carried out 
using a French to English speech translation sys-
tem, in which medical students with no previous 
experience to the system were asked to use it to 
carry out a series of verbal examinations on sub-
jects who were simulating the symptoms of various 
types of medical conditions. Evaluation will be 
focused on usability. We primarily want to know 
how quickly subjects learn to use the system, and 
how their performance compares to that of expert 
users. 
2 The MedSLT system 
MedSLT (MedSLT, 2005; Bouillon et al, 2005) 
is a unidirectional, grammar-based medical speech 
translation system intended for use in doctor-
patient diagnosis dialogues. The system is built on 
top of Regulus (Regulus, 2006), an Open Source 
platform for developing grammar-based speech 
applications. Regulus supports rapid construction 
of complex grammar-based language models using 
an example-based method (Rayner et al, 2003; 
Rayner et al, 2006), which extracts most of the 
structure of the model from a general linguistically 
motivated resource grammar. Regulus-based rec-
ognizers are reasonably easy to maintain, and 
grammar structure is shared automatically across 
different subdomains. Resource grammars are now 
available for several languages, including English, 
Japanese (Rayner et al, 2005b), French (Bouillon 
et al, 2006) and Spanish. 
MedSLT includes a help module, whose purpose 
is to add robustness to the system and guide the 
user towards the supported coverage. The help 
module uses a second backup recognizer, equipped 
with a statistical language model; it matches the 
results from this second recognizer against a cor-
pus of utterances, which are within system cover-
age and have already been judged to give correct 
translations. In previous studies (Rayner et al, 
2005a; Starlander et al, 2005), we showed that the 
grammar-based recognizer performs much better 
than the statistical one on in-coverage utterances, 
and rather worse on out-of-coverage ones. We also 
found that having the help module available ap-
proximately doubled the speed at which subjects 
learned to use the system, measured as the average 
difference in semantic error rate between the re-
sults for their first quarter-session and their last 
quarter-session. It is also possible to recover from 
recognition errors by selecting one of the displayed 
help sentences; in the cited studies, we found that 
this increased the number of acceptably processed 
utterances by about 10%. 
The version of MedSLT used for the experi-
ments described in the present paper was config-
ured to translate from spoken French into spoken 
English in the headache subdomain. Coverage is 
based on standard headache-related examination 
questions obtained from a doctor, and consists 
mostly of yes/no questions. WH-questions and el-
liptical constructions are also supported. A typical 
short session with MedSLT might be as follows: 
- is the pain in the side of the head? 
- does the pain radiate to the neck? 
- to the jaw? 
- do you usually have headaches in the morn-
ing ?  
The recognizer?s vocabulary is about 1000 sur-
face words; on in-grammar material, Word Error 
Rate is about 8% and semantic error rate (per ut-
terance) about 10% (Bouillon et al, 2006). Both 
the main grammar-based recognizer and the statis-
tical recognizer used by the help system were 
trained from the same corpus of about 975 utter-
ances. Help sentences were also taken from this 
corpus. 
3 Experimental Setup 
In previous work, we have shown how to build a 
robust and extendable speech translation system. 
We have focused on performance metrics defined 
in terms of recognition and translation quality, and 
tested the system on na?ve users without any medi-
cal background (Bouillon et al, 2005; Rayner et 
al., 2005a; Starlander et al, 2005). 
In this paper, our primary goal was rather to fo-
cus on task performance evaluation using plausible 
potential users. The basic methodology used is 
common in evaluating usability in software sys-
tems in general, and spoken language systems in 
particular (Cohen et. al 2000). We defined a simu-
lated situation, where a French-speaking doctor 
was required to carry out a verbal examination of 
an English-speaking patient who claimed to be suf-
fering from a headache, using the MedSLT system 
to translate all their questions. The patients were 
played by members of the development team, who 
had been trained to answer questions consistently 
with the symptoms of different medical conditions 
which could cause headaches. We recruited eight 
native French-speaking medical students to play 
the part of the doctor. All of the students had com-
pleted at least four years of medical school; five of 
them were already familiar with the symptoms of 
different types of headaches, and were experienced 
in real diagnosis situations. 
The experiment was designed to study how well 
users were able to perform the task using the 
MedSLT system. In particular, we wished to de-
termine how quickly they could adapt to the re-
stricted language and limited coverage of the 
system. As a comparison point, representing near-
perfect performance, we also carried out the same 
test on two developers who had been active in im-
plementing the system, and were familiar with its 
coverage. 
Since it seemed reasonable to assume that most 
users would not interact with the system on a daily 
basis, we conducted testing in three sessions, with 
an interval of two days between each session. At 
the beginning of the first session, subjects were 
given a standardized 10-minute introduction to the 
system. This consisted of instruction on how to set 
up the microphone, a detailed description of the 
MedSLT push-to-talk interface, and a video clip 
showing the system in action. At the end of the 
presentation, the subject was given four sample 
sentences to get familiar with the system. 
After the training was completed, subjects were 
asked to play the part of a doctor, and conduct an 
examination through the system. Their task was to 
identify the headache-related condition simulated 
by the ?patient?, out of nine possible conditions. 
Subjects were given definitions of the simulated 
headache types, which included conceptual infor-
mation about location, duration, frequency, onset 
and possible other symptoms the particular type of 
headache might exhibit. 
Subjects were instructed to signal the conclusion 
of their examination when they were sure about the 
type of simulated headache. The time required to 
reach a conclusion was noted in the experiment 
protocols by the experiment supervisor. 
The subjects repeated the same diagnosis task on 
different predetermined sets of simulated condi-
tions during the second and third sessions. The ses-
sions were concluded either when a time limit of 
30 minutes was reached, or when the subject com-
pleted three headache diagnoses. At the end of the 
third session, the subject was asked to fill out a 
questionnaire. 
4 Results 
Performance of a speech translation system is 
best evaluated by looking at system performance 
as a whole, and not separately for each subcompo-
nent in the systems processing pipeline (Rayner et. 
al. 2000, pp. 297-pp. 312). In this paper, we conse-
quently focus our analysis on objective and subjec-
tive usability-oriented measures. 
In Section 4.1, we present objective usability 
measures obtained by analyzing user-system inter-
actions and measuring task performance. In Sec-
tion 4.2, we present subjective usability figures and 
a preliminary analysis of translation quality. 
4.1 Objective Usability Figures 
4.1.1 Analysis of User Interactions 
Most of our analysis is based on data from the 
MedSLT system log, which records all interactions 
between the user and the system. An interaction is 
initiated when the user presses the ?Start Recogni-
tion? button. The system then attempts to recog-
nize what the user says. If it can do so, it next 
attempts to show the user how it has interpreted the 
recognition result, by first translating it into the 
Interlingua, and then translating it back into the 
source language (in this case, French). If the user 
decides that the back-translation is correct, they 
press the ?Translate? button. This results in the 
system attempting to translate the Interlingua rep-
resentation into the target language (in this case, 
English), and speak it using a Text-To-Speech en-
gine. The system also displays a list of ?help sen-
tences?, consisting of examples that are known to 
be within coverage, and which approximately 
match the result of performing recognition with the 
statistical language model. The user has the option 
of choosing a help sentence from the list, using the 
mouse, and submitting this to translation instead.  
We classify each interaction as either ?success-
ful? or ?unsuccessful?. An interaction is defined to 
be unsuccessful if either 
i) the user re-initiates recognition without 
asking the system for a translation, or 
ii) the system fails to produce a correct 
translation or back translation. 
Our definition of ?unsuccessful interaction? in-
cludes instances where users accidentally press the 
wrong button (i.e. ?Start Recognition? instead of 
?Translate?), press the button and then say nothing, 
or press the button and change their minds about 
what they want to ask half way through. We ob-
served all of these behaviors during the tests. 
Interactions where the system produced a trans-
lation were counted as successful, irrespective of 
whether the translation came directly from the 
user?s spoken input or from the help list. In at least 
some examples, we found that when the translation 
came from a help sentence it did not correspond 
directly to the sentence the user had spoken; to our 
surprise, it could even be the case that the help sen-
tence expressed the directly opposite question to 
the one the user had actually asked. This type of 
interaction was usually caused by some deficiency 
in the system, normally bad recognition or missing 
coverage. Our informal observation, however, was 
that, when this kind of thing happened, the user 
perceived the help module positively: it enabled 
them to elicit at least some information from the 
patient, and was less frustrating than being forced 
to ask the question again. 
Table I to Table III show the number of total in-
teractions per session, the proportion of successful 
interactions, and the proportion of interactions 
completed by selecting a sentence from the help 
list. The total number of interactions required to 
complete a session decreased over the three ses-
sions, declining from an average of 98.6 interac-
tions in the first session to 63.4 in the second (36% 
relative) and 53.9 in the third (45% relative). It is 
interesting to note that interactions involving the 
help system did not decrease in frequency, but re-
mained almost constant over the first two sessions 
(15.5% and 14.0%), and were in fact most com-
mon during the third session (21.7%). 
 
Session 1 
Subject Interactions % Successful % Help 
User 1 57 56.1% 0.0% 
User 2 98 52.0% 25.5% 
User 3 91 63.7% 15.4% 
User 4 156 69.9% 10.3% 
User 5 86 64.0% 22.1% 
User 6 134 47.0% 19.4% 
User 7 56 53.6% 5.4% 
User 8 111 63.1% 26.1% 
AVG 98.6 58.7% 15.5% 
Table I Total interaction rounds, percentage of 
successful interactions, and interactions involving 
the help system by subject for the 1st session 
 
Session 2 
Subject Interactions % Successful % Help 
User 1 50 74.0% 2.0% 
User 2 63 55.6% 27.0% 
User 3 34 88.2% 23.5% 
User 4 96 57.3% 17.7% 
User 5 64 65.6% 21.9% 
User 6 93 68.8% 10.8% 
User 7 48 60.4% 4.2% 
User 8 59 79.7% 5.1% 
AVG 63.4 68.7% 14.0% 
Table II Total interaction rounds, percentage of 
successful interactions, and interactions involving 
the help system by subject for the 2nd session 
 
Session 3 
Subject Interactions % Successful % Help 
User 1 33 90.9% 33.3% 
User 2 57 56.1% 22.8% 
User 3 48 72.9% 29.2% 
User 4 67 70.2% 16.4% 
User 5 68 73.5% 27.9% 
User 6 60 70.0% 6.7% 
User 7 41 65.9% 14.6% 
User 8 57 56.1% 22.8% 
AVG 53.9 69.5% 21.7% 
Table III Total interaction rounds, percentage of 
successful interactions, and interactions involving 
the help system by subject for the 3rd session 
In order to establish a performance baseline, we 
also analyzed interaction data for two expert users, 
who performed the same experiment. The expert 
users were two native French-speaking system de-
velopers, which were both familiar with the diag-
nosis domain. Table IV summarizes the results of 
those users. One of our expert users, listed as Ex-
pert 2, is the French grammar developer, and had 
no failed interactions. This confirms that recogni-
tion is very accurate for users who know the cov-
erage. 
 
Session 1 / Expert Users 
Subject Interactions % Successful % Help 
Expert 1 36 77.8% 13.9% 
Expert 2 30 100.0% 3.3% 
AVG 33 88.9% 8.6% 
Table IV Number of interactions, and percentages 
of successful interactions, and interactions 
involving the help component 
 
The expert users were able to complete the ex-
periment using an average of 33 interaction rounds. 
Similar performance levels were achieved by some 
subjects during the second and third session, which 
suggests that it is possible for at least some new 
users to achieve performance close to expert level 
within a few sessions. 
4.1.2 Task Level Performance 
One of the important performance indicators for 
end users is how long it takes to perform a given 
task. During the experiments, the instructors noted 
completion times required to reach a definite diag-
nosis in the experiment log. Table VI shows task 
completion times, categorized by session (col-
umns) and task within the session (rows).  
 Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 
Diagnosis 1 17:00 min 11:00 min 7:54 min 
Diagnosis 2 11:00 min 6:18 min 5:34 min 
Diagnosis 3 7:54 min 4:10 min 4:00 min 
Table V Average time required by subjects to 
complete diagnoses 
 
In the last two sessions, after subjects had ac-
climatized to the system, a diagnosis takes an aver-
age of about four minutes to complete. This 
compares to a three-minute average required to 
complete a diagnosis by our expert users. 
4.1.3 System coverage 
Table VI shows the percentage of in-coverage 
sentences uttered by the users on interactions that 
did not involve invocation of the help component. 
 
 IN-COVERAGE SENTENCES 
Session 1 54.9% 
Session 2 60.7% 
Session 3 64.6% 
Table VI Percentage of in-coverage sentences 
 
This indicates that subjects learn and adapt to 
the system coverage as they use the system more. 
The average proportion of in-coverage utterances 
is 10 percent higher during the third session than 
during the first session. 
4.2 Subjective Usability Measures 
4.2.1 Results of Questionnaire 
After finishing the third session, subjects were 
asked to fill in a short questionnaire, where re-
sponses were on a five-point scale ranging from 1 
(?strongly disagree?) to 5 (?strongly agree?). The 
results are presented in Table VIII. 
 
STATEMENT SCORE 
I quickly learned how to use the system. 4.4 
System response times were generally 
satisfactory. 
4.5 
When the system did not understand me, 
the help system usually showed me an-
other way to ask the question. 
4.6 
When I knew what I could say, the sys-
tem usually recognized me correctly. 
4.3 
I was often unable to ask the questions I 
wanted. 
3.8 
I could ask enough questions that I was 
sure of my diagnosis. 
4.3 
This system is more effective than non-
verbal communication using gestures. 
4.3 
I would use this system again in a simi-
lar situation. 
4.1 
Table VIII Subject responses to questionnaire. 
Scores are on a 5-point scale, averaged over all 
answers. 
 
Answers were in general positive, and most of 
the subjects were clearly very comfortable with the 
system after just an hour and a half of use. Interest-
ingly, even though most of the subjects answered 
?yes? to the question ?I was often unable to ask the 
questions I wanted?, the good performance of the 
help system appeared to compensate adequately for 
missing coverage. 
4.2.2 Translation Performance 
In order to evaluate the translation quality of the 
newly developed French-to-English system, we 
conducted a preliminary performance evaluation, 
similar to the evaluation method described in 
(Bouillon 2005). 
We performed translation judgment in two 
rounds. In the first round, an English-speaking 
judge was asked to categorize target utterances as 
comprehensible or not without looking at corre-
sponding source sentences. 91.1% of the sentences 
were judged as comprehensible. The remaining 
8.9% consisted of sentences where the terminology 
used was not familiar to the judge and of sentences 
where the translation component failed to produce 
a sufficiently good translation. An example sen-
tence is 
- Are the headaches better when you experi-
ence dark room? 
which stems from the French source sentence 
- Vos maux de t?te sont ils soulag?s par obs-
curit?? 
In the second round, English-speaking judges, 
sufficiently fluent in French to understand source 
language utterances, were shown the French source 
utterance, and asked to decide whether the target 
language utterance correctly reflected the meaning 
of the source language utterance. They were also 
asked to judge the style of the target language ut-
terance. Specifically, judges were asked to classify 
sentences as ?BAD? if the meaning of the English 
sentence did not reflect the meaning of the French 
sentence. Sentences were categorized as ?OK? if 
the meaning was transferred correctly and the sen-
tence was comprehensible, but the style of the re-
sulting English sentence was not perfect. Sentences 
were judged as ?GOOD? when they were compre-
hensible, and both meaning and style were consid-
ered to be completely correct. Table VIII 
summarizes results of two judges. 
 
 Good OK Bad  
Judge 1 15.8% 73.80% 10.3% 
Judge 2 46.6% 47.1% 6.3% 
Table VIII Judgments of the quality of the transla-
tions of 546 utterances 
 
It is apparent that translation judging is a highly 
subjective process. When translations were marked 
as ?bad?, the problem most often seemed to be re-
lated to lexical items where it was challenging to 
find an exact correspondence between French and 
English. Two common examples were ?troubles de 
la vision?, which was translated as ?blurred vi-
sion?, and ?faiblesse musculaire?, which was trans-
lated as ?weakness?. It is likely that a more careful 
choice of lexical translation rules would deal with 
at least some of these cases. 
5 Summary 
We have presented a first end-to-end evaluation 
of the MedSLT spoken language translation sys-
tem. The medical students who tested it were all 
able to use the system well, with performance in 
some cases comparable to that of that of system 
developers after only two sessions. At least for the 
fairly simple type of diagnoses covered by our sce-
nario, the system?s performance appeared clearly 
adequate for the task.  
This is particularly encouraging, since the 
French to English version of the system is quite 
new, and has not yet received the level of attention 
required for a clinical system. The robustness 
added by the help system was sufficient to com-
pensate for that, and in most cases, subjects were 
able to find ways to maneuver around coverage 
holes and other problems. It is entirely reasonable 
to hope that performance, which is already fairly 
good, would be substantially better with another 
couple of months of development work. 
In summary, we feel that this study shows that 
the conservative architecture we have chosen 
shows genuine potential for use in medical diagno-
sis situations. Before the end of 2006, we hope to 
have advanced to the stage where we can start ini-
tial trials with real doctors and patients. 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Agnes Lisowska, Alia 
Rahal, and Nancy Underwood for being impartial 
judges over our system?s results. 
This work was funded by the Swiss National 
Science Foundation. 
References 
P. Bouillon, M. Rayner, N. Chatzichrisafis, B.A. 
Hockey, M. Santaholma, M. Starlander, Y. Nakao, K. 
Kanzaki, and H. Isahara. 2005. A generic multi-
lingual open source platform for limited-domain 
medical speech translation. In Proceedings of the 
10th Conference of the European Association for 
Machine Translation (EAMT), Budapest, Hungary. 
P. Bouillon, M. Rayner, B. Novellas, Y. Nakao, M. San-
taholma, M. Starlander, and N. Chatzichrisafis. 2006. 
Une grammaire multilingue partag?e pour la recon-
naissance et la g?n?ration. In Proceedings of TALN 
2006, Leuwen, Belgium. 
M. Cohen, J. Giangola, and J. Balogh. 2004, Voice User 
Interface Design. Addison Wesley Publishing. 
R. I. Kittredge. 2003. Sublanguages and comtrolled 
languages. In R. Mitkov, editor, The Oxford Hand-
book of Computational Linguistics, pages 430?447. 
Oxford University Press. 
MedBridge, 2006. http://www.medtablet.com/. As of 
15th March 2006. 
MedSLT, 2005. http://sourceforge.net/projects/medslt/. 
As of 15th March 2006. 
T. Mitamura. 1999. Controlled language for multilin-
gual machine translation. In Proceedings of Machine 
Translation Summit VII, Singapore. 
Phraselator, 2006. http://www.phraselator.com. As of 
15 February 2006. 
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and J. Dowding. 2003. An 
open source environment for compiling typed unifi-
cation grammars into speech recognisers. In Pro-
ceedings of the 10th EACL (demo track), Budapest, 
Hungary. 
M. Rayner, N. Chatzichrisafis, P. Bouillon, Y. Nakao, 
H. Isahara, K. Kanzaki, and B.A. Hockey. 2005b. 
Japanese speech understanding using grammar spe-
cialization. In HLT-NAACL 2005: Demo Session, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
M. Rayner, P. Bouillon, N. Chatzichrisafis, B.A. 
Hockey, M. Santaholma,M. Starlander, H. Isahara, 
K. Kankazi, and Y. Nakao. 2005a. A methodology for 
comparing grammar-based and robust approaches to 
speech understanding. In Proceedings of the 9th In-
ternational Conference on Spoken Language Process-
ing (ICSLP), Lisboa, Portugal. 
M. Rayner, D. Carter, P. Bouillon, V. Digalakis, and M. 
Wir?n. 2000. The Spoken Language Translator, 
Cambridge University Press.  
M. Rayner, N. Chatzichrisafis, P. Bouillon, Y. Nakao, 
H. Isahara, K. Kanzaki, and B.A. Hockey. 2005b. 
Japanese speech understanding using grammar spe-
cialization. In HLT-NAACL 2005: Demo Session, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, and P. Bouillon. 2006. Put-
ting Linguistics into Speech Recognition: The 
Regulus Grammar Compiler. CSLI Press, Chicago.  
Regulus, 2006. http://sourceforge.net/projects/regulus/. 
As of 15 March 2006. 
S-MINDS, 2006. http://www.sehda.com/. As of 15 
March 2006. 
M. Starlander, P. Bouillon, N. Chatzichrisafis, M. San-
taholma, M. Rayner, B.A. Hockey, H. Isahara, K. 
Kanzaki, and Y. Nakao. 2005. Practicing controlled 
language through a help system integrated into the 
medical speech translation system (MedSLT). In Pro-
ceedings of the MT Summit X, Phuket, Thailand 
 
