Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora 2006, pages 1?4,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Challenges for annotating images for sense disambiguation
Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm
Dept. of Linguistics
University of Illinois, UC
ebbaalm@uiuc.edu
Nicolas Loeff
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Illinois, UC
loeff@uiuc.edu
David A. Forsyth
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Illinois, UC
daf@uiuc.edu
Abstract
We describe an unusual data set of thou-
sands of annotated images with interest-
ing sense phenomena. Natural language
image sense annotation involves increased
semantic complexities compared to dis-
ambiguating word senses when annotating
text. These issues are discussed and illus-
trated, including the distinction between
word senses and iconographic senses.
1 Introduction
We describe a set of annotated images, each asso-
ciated with a sense of a small set of words. Build-
ing this data set exposes important sense phenom-
ena which not only involve natural language but
also vision. The context of our work is Image
Sense Discrimination (ISD), where the task is to
assign one of several senses to a web image re-
trieved by an ambiguous keyword. A compan-
ion paper introduces the task, presents an unsuper-
vised ISD model, drawing on web page text and
image features, and shows experimental results
(Loeff et al, 2006). The data was subject to single-
annotator labeling, with verification judgements
on a part of the data set as a step toward study-
ing agreement. Besides a test bed for ISD, the
data set may be applicable to e.g. multimodal word
sense disambiguation and cross-language image
retrieval. The issues discussed concern concepts,
and involve insights into semantics, perception,
and knowledge representation, while opening up a
bridge for interdisciplinary work involving vision
and NLP.
2 Related work
The complex relationship between annotations
and images has been explored by the library com-
munity, who study management practices for im-
age collections, and by the computer vision com-
munity, who would like to provide automated im-
age retrieval tools and possibly learn object recog-
nition methods.
Commercial picture collections are typically an-
notated by hand, e.g. (Enser, 1993; Armitage and
Enser, 1997; Enser, 2000). Subtle phenomena can
make this very difficult, and content vs. interpreta-
tion may differ; an image of the Eiffel tower could
be annotated with Paris or even love, e.g. (Ar-
mitage and Enser, 1997), and the resulting annota-
tions are hard to use, cf. (Markkula and Sormunen,
2000), or Enser?s result that a specialized indexing
language gives only a ?blunt pointer to regions of
the Hulton collections?, (Enser, 1993), p. 35.
Users of image collections have been well stud-
ied. Important points for our purposes are: Users
request images both by object kinds, and individ-
ual identities; users request images both by what
they depict and by what they are about; and that
text associated with images is extremely useful in
practice, newspaper archivists indexing largely on
captions (Markkula and Sormunen, 2000).
The computer vision community has stud-
ied methods to predict annotations from images,
e.g. (Barnard et al, 2003; Jeon et al, 2003; Blei
and Jordan, 2002). The annotations that are pre-
dicted most successfully tend to deal with ma-
terials whose identity can be determined without
shape analysis, like sky, sea and the like. More
complex annotations remain difficult. There is no
current theory of word sense in this context, be-
cause in most current collections, words appear in
the most common sense only. Sense is known to
be important, and image information can disam-
biguate word senses (Barnard and Johnson, 2005).
1
Word (#Annot. images) QueryTerms Senses Coverage Examples of visual annotation cues
BASS
(2881)
5: bass, bass guitar,
bass instrument,
bass fishing, sea
bass
1. fish 35% any fish, people holding catch
2. musical instrument 28% any bass-looking instrument, playing
3. related: fish 10% fishing (gear, boats, farms), rel. food, rel. charts/maps
4. related: musical instrument 8% speakers, accessories, works, chords, rel. music
5. unrelated 12% miscellaneous (above senses not applicable)
6. people 7% faces, crowds (above senses not applicable)
CRANE
(2650)
5: crane,
construction cranes,
whooping crane,
sandhill crane,
origami cranes
1. machine 21% machine crane, incl. panoramas
2. bird 26% crane bird or chick
3. origami 4% origami bird
4. related: machine 11% other machinery, construction, motor, steering, seat
5. related: bird 11% egg, other birds, wildlife, insects, hunting, rel. maps/charts
6. related: origami 1% origami shapes (stars, pigs), paper folding
7. people 7% faces, crowds (above senses not applicable)
8. unrelated 18% miscellaneous (above senses not applicable)
9. karate 1% martial arts
SQUASH
(1948)
10: squash+: rules,
butternut, vegetable,
grow, game of,
spaghetti, winter,
types of, summer
1. vegetable 24% squash vegetable
2. sport 13% people playing, court, equipment
3. related:vegetable 31% agriculture, food, plant, flower, insect, vegetables
4. related:sport 6% other sports, sports complex
5. people 10% faces, crowds (above senses not applicable)
6. unrelated 16% miscellaneous (above senses not applicable)
Table 1: Overview of annotated images for three ambiguous query terms, inspired by the WSD literature. For each term,
the number of annotated images, the expanded query retrieval terms (taken terms from askjeeves.com), the senses, their
distribution coverage, and rough sample annotation guidelines are provided, with core senses marked in bold.
(a) machine (b)
bird
(c) origami (d)
karate
(e) rel. to a (f) rel. to b (g)
rel. to c
(h)
people
(i) unrel.
Figure 1: CRANE images with clear senses: (a-d) core senses, (e-g) related senses, (h) people and (i) unrelated. Related
senses are associated with the semantic field of a core sense, but the core sense is visually absent or undeterminable.
3 Data set
The data set has images retrieved from a web
search engine. We deliberately focused on three
keywords, which cover a range of phenomena in
semantic ambiguity: BASS, CRANE, and SQUASH.
Table 1 gives an overview of the data set, anno-
tated by one author (CA).1 The webpage was not
considered to avoid bias, given the ISD task.
For each query, 2 to 4 core word senses were
distinguished from inspecting the data using com-
mon sense. We chose this approach rather than
ontology senses which tend to be incomplete or
too specific for our purposes. For example, the
origami sense of CRANE is not included in Word-
Net under CRANE, but for BASS three different
senses appear with fish. WordNet contains bird
as part of the description for the separate entry
origami, and some query expansion terms are hy-
ponyms which occur as separate WordNet entries
(e.g. bass guitar, sea bass, summer squash). Im-
ages may show multiple objects; a general strategy
preferred a core sense if it was included.
An additional complication is that given that the
images are retrieved by a search engine there is no
guarantee that they depict the query term, so ad-
ditional senses were introduced. Thus, for most
1We call the data set the UIUC-ISD data set. It is currently
at http://www.visionpc.cs.uiuc.edu/isd/.
core senses, a RELATED label was included for
meanings related to the semantic field of a core
sense. Also, a PEOPLE label was included since
such images may occur due to how people take
pictures (e.g. portraits of persons, group pictures,
or other representations of people outside core and
related senses). An UNRELATED label accounted
for images that did not fit other labels, or were ir-
relevant or undeterminable. In fact, distinguish-
ing between PEOPLE and UNRELATED was not al-
ways straightforward. Fig. 1 shows examples of
CRANE when sense assignment was quite straight-
forward. However, distinguishing image senses
was often not this clear. In fact, many border-line
cases occurred when one could argue for different
label assignments. Also, annotation cues are sub-
ject to interpretation, and disagreements between
judges are expected. They simply reflect that im-
age senses are located on a semantic continuum.
4 Why annotating image senses is hard
In general, annotating images involves special
challenges, such as what to annotate and how ex-
tensively. We assign an image one sense. Never-
theless, compared to disambiguating a word, sev-
eral issues are added for annotation. As noted
above, a core sense may not occur, and judge-
ments are characterized by increased subjectivity,
with semantics beyond prototypical and peripheral
2
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j)
(k) (l) (m) (n) (o) (p) (q)
Figure 2: Annotating images is often challenging for different reasons. Are these images of CRANE birds? (a-c) depiction
(d-f) gradient change (g-h) partial display (i-j) domain knowledge (k) unusual appearance (l-n) distance (o-q) not animate.
exemplars. Also, the disambiguating context is
limited to image contents, rather than collocations
of an ambiguous token. Fig. 2 illustrates selected
challenging judgement calls for assigning or not
the bird sense of CRANE, as discussed below.
Depiction: Images may include man-made de-
pictions of an object in artistic depictions, and the
question is whether this counts as the object or
not, e.g. Fig. 2(a-c). Gradient changes: Recog-
nition is complicated by objects taking different
forms and shapes, cf. the insight by (Labov, 1973)
on gradual categories.2 For example, as seen in
Fig. 2(d-f), birds change with age; an egg may be
a bird, but a chick is, as is a fledgeling. Partial
display: Objects may be rendered in incomplete
condition. For example, Fig. 2(g-h) show merely
feathers or a bird neck. Domain knowledge: Peo-
ple may disagree due to differences in domain
knowledge, e.g. some non-experts may have a dif-
ficult time determining whether or not other sim-
ilar bird species can be distinguished from a bird
crane, cf. Fig. 2(i-j). This also affected annota-
tions? granularity depending on keyword, see Ta-
ble 1?s example cues. Unusual appearance: Ob-
jects may occur in less frequent visual appear-
ance, or lack distinguishing properties. For in-
stance, Fig. 2(k) illustrates how sunset background
masks birds? color information. Scale: The dis-
tance to objects may render them unclear and in-
fluence judgement accuracy, and people may dif-
fer in the degree of certainty required for assign-
ing a sense. For example, Fig. 2(l-n) show flying
or standing potential cranes at distance. Animate:
Fig. 2(o-q) raise the question whether dead, skele-
tal, or artificial objects are instantiations or not.
Other factors complicating the annotation task in-
clude image crowdedness disguising objects, cer-
tain entities having less salience, and lacking or
unclear reference to object proportions. Senses
2Function or properties may also influence (Labov, 1973).
may also be etymologically related or blend occa-
sionally, or be guided by cultural interpretations,
and so on.
Moreover, related senses are meant to capture
images associated with the semantic field of a core
sense. However, because the notion and borders of
a semantic field are non-specific, related senses
are tricky. Annotators may build associations
quite wildly, based on personal experience and
opinion, thus what is or is not a related sense may
very quickly get out of hand. For instance, a per-
son may by association reason that if bird cranes
occur frequently in fields, then an image of a field
alone should be marked as related. To avoid this,
guidelines attempted to restrict related senses, as
exemplified in Table 1, with some data-driven re-
visions during the annotation process. However,
guidelines are also based on judgement calls. Be-
sides, for abstract concepts like LOVE, differenti-
ating core versus related sense is not really valid.
Lastly, an additional complexity of image
senses is that in addition to traditional word
senses, images may also capture repeatedly oc-
curring iconographic patterns or senses. As illus-
trated in Fig. 3, the iconography of flying cranes
is quite different from that of standing cranes, as
regards motion, shape, identity, and color of figure
and ground, respectively. Mixed cases also occur,
e.g. when bird cranes are taking off or are about
to land in relation to flight. Iconographic senses
may compare to more complex linguistic struc-
tures than nominal categories, e.g. a modified NP
or clause, but are represented by image properties.
A policy for annotating iconographic senses is
still lacking. Image groups based on iconographic
senses seem to provide increased visual and se-
mantic harmony for the eye, but experiments are
needed to confirm how iconographic senses cor-
respond to humans? perception of semantic image
similarity, and at what level of semantic differen-
3
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h)
Figure 3: Iconographic bird CRANE senses: (a-c) flying cranes, (d-f) standing cranes, and (g-h) mixed cases in-between.
(a) 5/2 (b) 1/4 (c) 4/1 (d) 4/1 (e) 4/8 (f) 8/2 (g) 8/1 (h) 6/8,5 (i) 4/1
Figure 4: Disagreement examples (sense numbers in Table 1): (a) crane or other bird? (b) toy crane or scales? (c) crane or
other steel structure/elevator? (d) crane or other machine? (e) company is related or not? (f) bird or abstract art? (g) crane in
background or not? (h) origami-related paper? (i) inside of crane? (and is inside sufficient to denote image as machine crane?)
tiation they become relevant for sense assessment.
Lastly, considering the challenges of image an-
notation, it is interesting to look at annotation dis-
agreements. Thus, another author (NL) inspected
CRANE annotations, and recorded disagreement
candidates, which amounted to 5%. Rejecting or
accepting a category label seems less hard than
independent annotation but still can give insights
into disagreement tendencies. Several disagree-
ments involved a core category vs. its related label
vs. unrelated, rather than two core senses. Also,
some disagreement candidates had tiny, fuzzy,
partial or peripheral potential sense objects, or
lacked distinguishing object features, so interpre-
tation became quite idiosyncratic. The disagree-
ment candidates were discussed together, result-
ing in 2% being true disagreements, 2% false dis-
agreements (resolved by consensus on CA?s la-
bels), and 1% annotation mistakes. Examples of
true disagreements are in Fig. 4. Often, both par-
ties could see each others? points, but opted for an-
other interpretation; this confirms that border lines
tend to merge, indicating that consistency is chal-
lenging and not always guaranteed. As the annota-
tion procedure advances, criteria may evolve and
modify the fuzzy sense boundaries.
5 Conclusion
This work draws attention to the need for consid-
ering natural language semantics in multi-modal
settings. Annotating image senses adds increased
complexity compared to word-sense annotation
in text due to factors such as image proper-
ties, subjective perception, and annotator domain-
knowledge. Moreover, the concept of related
senses as well as iconographic senses go beyond
and diversify the notion of word sense. In the fu-
ture, we would like to perform experimentation
with human subjects to explore both similarity
judgements for image pairs or groups, as well as
issues in interannotator agreement for image dis-
ambiguation, and, finally, to better understand the
role of iconography for semantic interpretation.
6 Acknowledgements
Thanks to anonymous reviewers, R. Girju and R.
Sproat for feedback. Any fallacies are our own.
References
L. H. Armitage and P. G. B. Enser. 1997. Analysis
of user need in image archives. J. of Inform. Sci.,
23(4):287?299.
K. Barnard and M. Johnson. 2005. Word sense disam-
biguation with pictures. Artif. Intel., 167:13?30.
K. Barnard, P. Duygulu, N. Freitas, D. Forsyth, D. Blei,
and M. I. Jordan. 2003. Matching words and pic-
tures. J. of Mach. Learn. Research, 3:1107?1135.
D. M. Blei and M. I. Jordan. 2002. Modeling anno-
tated data. Technical Report CSD-02-1202, Div. of
Computer Science, Univ. of California, Berkeley.
P. G. B. Enser. 1993. Query analysis in a visual infor-
mation retrieval context. J. of Doc. and Text Man-
agement, 1(1):25?52.
P. G. B. Enser. 2000. Visual image retrieval: seek-
ing the alliance of concept based and content based
paradigms. J. of Inform. Sci., 26(4):199?210.
J. Jeon, V. Lavrenko, and R. Manmatha. 2003. Auto-
matic image annotation and retrieval using crossme-
dia relevance models. In SIGIR, pages 119?126.
W. Labov. 1973. The boundaries of words and their
meanings. In C. J. Baily and R. Shuy, editors, New
ways of analyzing variation in English, pages 340?
373. Washington D.C: Georgetown Univ. Press.
N. Loeff, C. O. Alm, and D. A. Forsyth. 2006. Dis-
criminating image senses by clustering with multi-
modal features. In ACL (forthcoming).
M. Markkula and E. Sormunen. 2000. End-user
searching challenges indexing practices in the digital
newspaper photo archive. Inform. Retr., 1:259?285.
4
