Proceedings of the BioNLP Workshop on Linking Natural Language Processing and Biology at HLT-NAACL 06, pages 134?135,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Summarizing Key Concepts using Citation Sentences
Ariel S. Schwartz and Marti Hearst
EECS and SIMS
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
sariel@cs.berkeley.edu, hearst@sims.berkeley.edu
Citations have great potential to be a valuable re-
source in mining the bioscience literature (Nakov et
al., 2004). The text around citations (or citances)
tends to state biological facts with reference to the
original papers that discovered them. The cited facts
are typically stated in a more concise way in the
citing papers than in the original. We hypothesize
that in many cases, as time goes by, the citation
sentences can more accurately indicate the most im-
portant contributions of a paper than its original ab-
stract.
One can use various NLP tools to identify and
normalize the important entities in (a) the abstract
of the original article, (b) the body of the original
article, and (c) the citances to the article. We hy-
pothesize that grouping entities by their occurrence
in the citances represents a better summary of the
original paper than using only the first two sources
of information.
To help determine the utility of the approach, we
are applying it to the problem of identifying arti-
cles that discuss critical residue functionality, for use
in PhyloFacts a phylogenomic database (Sjolander,
2004).
Consider the article shown in Figure 1. This paper
is a prominent one, published in 1992, with nearly
500 papers citing it. For about 200 of these papers,
we downloaded the sentences that surround the cita-
tion within the full text. Some examples are shown
in Figure 2.
We are developing a statistical model that will
group these entities into potentially overlapping
groups, where each group represents a central idea
in the original paper. In the example shown, some of
the citances emphasize what the paper reports about
the structural elements of the SH2 domain, whereas
other emphasize its findings on interactions and oth-
ers focus on the critical residues.
Often several articles are cited in the same citance,
so it is important to untangle which entities belong
to which citation; by pursuing overlapping sets, our
model should be able to eliminate most spurious ref-
erences.
The same entity is often described in many differ-
ent ways. Prior work has shown how to use redun-
dant information across citations to help normalize
entities (Wellner et al, 2004; Pasula et al, 2003);
similar techniques may work with entities men-
tioned in citances. This can be combined with prior
work on normalizing entity names in bioscience text,
e.g, (Morgan et al, 2004). For a detailed review of
related work see (Nakov et al, 2004).
By emphasizing entities the model potentially
misses important relationships between the entities.
It remains to be determined whether or not relation-
ships must be modeled explicitly in order to create a
useful summary.
134
References
A. A. Morgan, L. Hirschman, M. Colosimo, A. S. Yeh, and J. B. Colombe. 2004. Gene name identification and normalization
using a model organism database. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37(6):396?410.
P. I. Nakov, A. S. Schwartz, and M. Hearst. 2004. Citances: Citation sentences for semantic analysis of bioscience text. In
Proceedings of the SIGIR?04 workshop on Search and Discovery in Bioinformatics.
H. Pasula, B. Marthi, B. Milch, S. Russell, and I. Shiptser. 2003. Identity uncertainty and citation matching. Advances In Neural
Information Processing Systems, 15.
K. Sjolander. 2004. Phylogenomic inference of protein molecular function: advances and challenges. Bioinf., 20(2):170?179.
B. Wellner, A. McCallum, F. Peng, and M. Hay. 2004. An integrated, conditional model of information extraction and coreference
with application to citation graph construction. In 20th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI).
Waksman G, Kominos D, Robertson SC, Pant N, Baltimore D, Birge RB, Cowburn D, Hanafusa H,
Mayer BJ, Overduin M, et al, Abstract Crystal structure of the phosphotyrosine recognition domain
SH2 of v-src complexed with tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides.
Nature. 1992 Aug 20;358(6388):646-53. [PMID: 1379696]
Three-dimensional structures of complexes of the SH2 domain of the v-src oncogene product with two
phosphotyrosyl peptides have been determined by X-ray crystallography at resolutions of 1.5 and 2.0
A, respectively. A central antiparallel beta-sheet in the structure is flanked by two alpha-helices, with
peptide binding mediated by the sheet, intervening loops and one of the helices. The specific recognition
of phosphotyrosine involves amino-aromatic interactions between lysine and arginine side chains and the
ring system in addition to hydrogen-bonding interactions with the phosphate.
Figure 1: Target article for summarization.
Binding of IFNgamma R and gp130 phosphotyrosine peptides to the STAT SH2 domains was mod-
eled by using the coordinates of peptides pYIIPL (pY, phosphotyrosine) and pYVPML bound to the
phospholipase C-gamma 1 and v-src kinase SH2 domains, respectively (#OTHER CITATION, #TAR-
GET CITATION).
The ligand-binding surface of the SH2 domain of the Lck nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinase con-
tains two pockets, one for the Tyr(P) residue and another for the amino acid residue three positions
C-terminal to it, the +3 amino acid (#OTHER CITATION, #TARGET CITATION).
Given the inherent specificity of SH2 phosphopeptide interactions (#TARGET CITATION), a high
degree of selectivity is possible for STAT dimerizations and for STAT activation by different ligand-
receptor combinations.
In fact, the v-src SH2 domain was previously shown to bind a peptide pYVPML of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor in a rather unconventional manner (#TARGET CITATION).
Figure 2: Sample citances pointing to target article, with some key terms highlighted.
135
