Incorporating User Models in Question Answering to Improve Readability
Silvia Quarteroni and Suresh Manandhar
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York YO10 5DD
United Kingdom
{silvia,suresh}@cs.york.ac.uk
Abstract
Most question answering and information
retrieval systems are insensitive to differ-
ent users? needs and preferences, as well
as their reading level. In (Quarteroni and
Manandhar, 2006), we introduce a hybrid
QA-IR system based on a a user model.
In this paper we focus on how the system
filters and re-ranks the search engine re-
sults for a query according to their reading
difficulty, providing user-tailored answers.
Keywords: question answering, informa-
tion retrieval, user modelling, readability.
1 Introduction
Question answering (QA) systems are information
retrieval systems accepting queries in natural lan-
guage and returning the results in the form of sen-
tences (or paragraphs, or phrases). They move
beyond standard information retrieval (IR) where
results are presented in the form of a ranked list
of query-relevant documents. Such a finer answer
presentation is possible thanks to the application
of computational linguistics techniques in order
to filter irrelevant documents, and of a consistent
amount of question pre-processing and result post-
processing.
However, in most state-of-the-art QA systems
the output remains independent of the questioner?s
characteristics, goals and needs; in other words,
there is a lack of user modelling. For instance, an
elementary school child and a University history
student would get the same answer to the question:
?When did the Middle Ages begin??.
Secondly, most QA systems focus on factoid
questions, i.e. questions concerning people, dates,
numerical quantities etc., which can generally be
answered by a short sentence or phrase (Kwok et
al., 2001). The mainstream approach to QA evalu-
ation, represented by TREC-QA campaigns1, has
long fostered the criterion that a ?good? system
is one that returns the ?correct? answer in the
shortest possible formulation. Although recent ef-
forts in TREC 2003 and 2004 (Voorhees, 2003;
Voorhees, 2004) denoted an interest towards list
questions and definitional (or ?other?) questions,
we believe that there has not been enough inter-
est towards non-factoid answers. The real issue is
?realizing? that the answer to a question is some-
times too complex to be formulated and evaluated
as a factoid: some queries have multiple, com-
plex or controversial answers (take e.g. ?What
were the causes of World War II??). In such sit-
uations, returning a short paragraph or text snip-
pet is more appropriate than exact answer spot-
ting. For instance, the answer to ?What is a
metaphor?? may be better understood with the in-
clusion of examples. This viewpoint is supported
by recent user behaviour studies which showed
that even in the case of factoid-based QA systems,
the most eligible result format consisted in a para-
graph where the sentence containing the answer
was highlighted (Lin et al, 2003).
The issue of non-factoids is related to the user
modelling problem: while factoid answers do not
necessarily require to be contextualized within the
user?s knowledge and viewpoint, the need is much
stronger in the case of definitions, explanations
and descriptions. This is mentioned in the TREC
2003 report (Voorhees, 2003) when discussing the
evaluation of definitional questions: however, the
issue is expeditiously solved by assuming a fixed
user profile (the ?average news reader?).
We are currently developing an adaptive sys-
tem which adjusts its output with respect to a user
model. The system can be seen as an enhanced IR
system which adapts both the content and presen-
tation of the final results, improving their quality.
1http://trec.nist.gov
50 KRAQ06
In this paper, we show that QA systems can benefit
from the contribution of user models, and explain
how these can be used to filter the information pre-
sented as an answer based on readability. Eventu-
ally, we describe preliminary results obtained via
an evaluation framework inspired by user-centered
search engine evaluation.
2 System Architecture
The high-level architecture as represented in Fig-
ure 1 shows the basic components of the system,
the QA module and the user model.
QUESTION 
PROCESSING
DOCUMENT
RETRIEVAL
ANSWER 
EXTRACTION
Question
Answer
QA MODULE
USER MODEL
Webpage
Webpages
Age Range
Reading 
Level
Figure 1: High level system architecture
The QA module, described in the following sec-
tion, is organized according to the three-tier parti-
tion underlying most state-of-the-art systems: 1)
question processing, 2) document retrieval, 3) an-
swer generation. The module makes use of a web
search engine for document retrieval and consults
the user model to obtain the criteria to filter and
re-rank the search engine results and to eventually
present them appropriately to the user.
2.1 User model
Depending on the application of interest, the user
model (UM) can be designed to suit the informa-
tion needs of the QA module in different ways.
Our current application, YourQA2, is a learning-
oriented system to help students find information
on the Web for their assignments. Our UM con-
sists of the user?s:
? age range, a ? {7? 11, 11? 16, adult}
? reading level, r ? {poor,medium, good}
? webpages of interest/bookmarks, w
The age range parameter has been chosen to
match the partition between primary school, con-
temporary school and higher education age in
2http://www.cs.york.ac.uk/aig/aqua
Britain; our reading level parameter takes three
values which ideally (but not necessarily) corre-
spond to the three age ranges and may be further
refined in the future for more fine-grained mod-
elling.
Analogies can be found with the SeAn (Ardis-
sono et al, 2001), and SiteIF (Magnini and Strap-
parava, 2001) news recommender systems, where
information such as age and browsing history,
resp. are part of the UM. More generally, our
approach is similar to that of personalized search
systems (Teevan et al, 2005; Pitkow et al, 2002),
which construct UMs based on the user?s docu-
ments and webpages.
In our system, UM information is explicitly col-
lected from the user; while age and reading level
are self-assessed, the user?s interests are extracted
from the document set w using a keyphrase ex-
tractor (see further for details). Eventually, a di-
alogue framework with a history component will
contribute to the construction and update of the
user model in a less intruding and thus more user-
friendly way. In this paper we focus on how to
adapt search result presentation using the reading
level parameter: age and webpages will not be dis-
cussed.
2.2 Related work
Non-factoids and user modelling As men-
tioned above, the TREC-QA evaluation campaign,
to which the vast majority of current QA systems
abide, mainly approaches factoid-based answers.
To our knowledge, our system is among the first to
address the need for a different approach to non-
factoid answers. The structure of our QA compo-
nent reflects the typical structure of a web-based
QA system in its three-tier composition. Analo-
gies in this can be found for instance in MUL-
DER (Kwok et al, 2001), which is organized ac-
cording to a question processing/answer extrac-
tion/passage ranking pipeline. However, a signifi-
cant aspect of novelty in our architecture is that the
QA component is supported by the user model.
Additionally, we have changed the relative im-
portance of the different tiers: while we drastically
reduce linguistic processing during question pro-
cessing and answer generation, we give more re-
lief to the post-retrieval phase and to the role of
the UM. Having removed the need for fine-grained
answer spotting, the emphasis is shifted towards
finding closely connected sentences that are highly
51 KRAQ06
relevant to answer the query.
Readability Within computational linguistics,
several applications have been designed to address
the needs of users with low reading skills. The
computational approach to textual adaptation is
commonly based on natural language generation:
the process ?translate? a difficult text into a syntac-
tically and lexically simpler version. In the case of
PSET (Carroll et al, 1999) for instance, a tagger, a
morphological analyzer and generator and a parser
are used to reformulate newspaper text for users
affected by aphasia. Another interesting research
is Inui et al?s lexical and syntactical paraphrasing
system for deaf students (Inui et al, 2003). In this
system, the judgment of experts (teachers) is used
to learn selection rules for paraphrases acquired
using various methods (statistical, manual, etc.).
In the SKILLSUM project (Williams and Reiter,
2005), used to generate literacy test reports, a set
of choices regarding output (cue phrases, order-
ing and punctuation) are taken by a micro-planner
based on a set of rules.
Our approach is conceptually different from the
above: exploiting the wealth of information avail-
able in the context of a Web-based QA system, we
can afford to choose among the documents avail-
able on a given subject those which best suit our
readability requirements. This is possible thanks
to the versatility of language modelling, which al-
lows us to tailor the readability estimation of doc-
uments to any kind of user profile in a dynamic
manner, as explained in section 3.2.3.
3 QA Module
In this section we discuss the information flow
among the subcomponents of the QA module (see
Figure 2 for a representative diagram) and focus
on reading level estimation and document filter-
ing. For further details on the implementation of
the QA module, see (Quarteroni and Manandhar,
2006).
3.1 Question Processing
The first step performed by YourQA is query ex-
pansion: additional queries are created replacing
question terms with synonyms using WordNet3.
3http://wordnet.princeton.edu
Question
QUERY 
EXPANSION
DOCUMENT
RETRIEVAL
KEYPHRASE
EXTRACTION
ESTIMATION
OF READING
LEVELS
CLUSTERING
Language
Models
UM-BASED
FILTERING
SEMANTIC 
SIMILARITY
RANKING
User Model
Reading 
Level
Ranked
Answer
Candidates
Figure 2: Diagram of the QA module
3.2 Retrieval and Result Processing
3.2.1 Document retrieval
We use Google4 to retrieve the top 20 docu-
ments returned for each of the queries issued from
the query expansion phase. The subsequent steps
will progressively narrow the parts of these docu-
ments where relevant information is located.
3.2.2 Keyphrase extraction
Keyphrase extraction is useful in two ways:
first, it produces features to group the retrieved
documents thematically during the clustering
phase, and thus enables to present results by
groups. Secondly, when the document parame-
ter (w) of the UM is active, matches are sought
between the keyphrases extracted from the docu-
ments and those extracted from the user?s set of
interesting documents; thus it is possible to pri-
oritize results which are more compatible with
his/her interests.
Hence, once the documents are retrieved, we
extract their keyphrases using Kea (Witten et al,
1999), an extractor based on Na?ve Bayes classifi-
cation. Kea first splits each document into phrases
and then takes short subsequences of these initial
phrases as candidate keyphrases. Two attributes
are used to classify a phrase p as a keyphrase or
a non-keyphrase: its TF? IDF score within the
set of retrieved documents and the index of p?s
first appearance in the document. Kea outputs a
ranked list of phrases, among which we select the
top three as keyphrases for each of our documents.
4http://www.google.com
52 KRAQ06
3.2.3 Estimation of reading levels
In order to adjust search result presentation to
the user?s reading ability, we estimate the read-
ing difficulty of each retrieved document using the
Smoothed Unigram Model, a variation of a Multi-
nomial Bayes classifier (Collins-Thompson and
Callan, 2004). Whereas other popular approaches
such as Flesch-Kincaid (Kincaid et al, 1975) are
based on sentence length, the language modelling
approach accounts especially for lexical informa-
tion. The latter has been found to be more effective
as the former when approaching the reading level
of subjects in primary and secondary school age
(Collins-Thompson and Callan, 2004). Moreover,
it is more applicable than length-based approach
for Web documents, where sentences are typically
short regardless of the complexity of the text.
The language modelling approach proceeds in
two phases: in the training phase, given a range of
reading levels, a set of representative documents
is collected for each reading level. A unigram lan-
guage model lms is then built for each set s; the
model consists of a list of the word stems appear-
ing in the training documents with their individual
probabilities. Textual readability is not modelled
at a conceptual level: thus complex concepts ex-
plained in simple words might be classified as suit-
able even for a poor reading level; However we
have observed that in most Web documents lexi-
cal, syntactic and conceptual complexity are usu-
ally consistent within documents, hence it makes
sense to apply a reasoning-free technique with-
out impairing readability estimation. Our unigram
language models account for the following read-
ing levels:
1) poor, i.e. suitable for ages 7 ? 11;
2) medium, suitable for ages 11?16;
3) good, suitable for adults.
This partition in three groups has been chosen to
suit the training data available for our school appli-
cation, which consists of about 180 HTML pages
(mostly from the ?BBC schools?5, ?Think En-
ergy?6, ?Cassini Huygens resource for schools?7
and ?Magic Keys storybooks?8 websites), explic-
itly annotated by the publishers according to the
reading levels above.
In the test phase, given an unclassified docu-
5http://bbc.co.uk/schools
6http://www.think-energy.com
7http://www.pparc.ac.uk/Ed/ch/Home.htm
8http://www.magickeys.com/books/
ment D, the estimated reading level of D is the
language model lmi maximizing the likelihood
L(lmi|D) that D has been generated by lmi. Such
likelihood is estimated using the formula:
L(lmi|D) =
?
w?D
C(w,D) ? log(P (w|lmi))
where w is a word in the document, C(w, d) rep-
resents the number of occurrences of w in D and
P (w|lmi) is the probability that w occurs in lmi
(approached by its frequency).
An advantage of language modelling is its
portability, since it is quite quick to create word
stem/frequency histograms on the fly. This implies
that models can be produced to represent more
fine-grained reading levels as well as the specific
requirements of a single user: the only necessary
information are sets of training documents repre-
senting each level to be modelled.
3.2.4 Clustering
As an indicator of inter-document relatedness,
we use document clustering (Steinbach et al,
2000) to group them using both their estimated
reading difficulty and their topic (i.e. their
keyphrases). In particular we use a hierarchi-
cal algorithm, Cobweb (implemented using the
WEKA suite of tools (Witten and Frank, 2000) as
it produces a cluster tree which is visually sim-
ple to analyse: each leaf corresponds to one doc-
ument, and sibling leaves denote documents that
are strongly related both in topic and in reading
difficulty. Figure 3 illustrates an example clus-
ter tree for the the query: ?Who painted the Sis-
tine chapel??. Leaf labels represent document
keyphrases extracted by Kea for the corresponding
documents and ovals represent non-terminal nodes
in the cluster tree (these are labelled using the most
common keyphrases in their underlying leaves).
3.3 Answer Extraction
The purpose of answer extraction is to present the
most interesting excerpts of the retrieved docu-
ments according to both the user?s query topics
and reading level. This process, presented in sec-
tions 3.3.1 ? 3.3.4, follows the diagram in Figure
2: we use the UM to filter the clustered documents,
then compute the similarity between the question
and the filtered document passages in order to re-
turn the best ones in a ranked list.
53 KRAQ06
0 chapel
1 ceiling 4 michelangelo art
7 chapel
 ceiling 
paint 
pope 2
 painted 
ceiling 
frescoes 3
 art 
michelangelo 
paint 5
 art 
michelangelo 
download 6
8 chapel michelangelo
11 chapel
 michelangelo 
paintings 
chapel 9
 chapel 
michelangelo 
christ 10
12 chapel
 red_ball 
chapel 
vaticano 15
 chapel 
sistine_chapel 
walls 13
 fresco 
cappella_sistina 
chapel 14
Figure 3: Cluster tree for ?Who painted the Sistine
chapel??. Leaf 3 and the leaves grouped under
nodes 8 and 12 represent documents with an esti-
mated good reading level; leaf 15 and the leaves
underlying node 4 have a medium reading level;
leaf 2 represents a poor reading level document.
3.3.1 UM-based filtering
The documents in the cluster tree are filtered ac-
cording to the UM reading level, r: only those
compatible with the user?s reading ability are re-
tained for further analysis. However, if the num-
ber of retained documents does not exceed a given
threshold, we accept in our candidate set part of
the documents having the next lowest readability
in case r ? {good,medium} or a medium read-
ability in case r = poor.
3.3.2 Semantic similarity
Within each of the documents retained, we seek
for the sentences which are semantically most rel-
evant to the query. Given a sentence p and the
query q, we represent them as two sets of words
P = {pw1, . . . , pwm} and Q = {qw1, . . . , qwn}.
The semantic distance from p to q is then:
distq(p) =
?
1?i?m minj [d(pwi, qwj)]
where d(pwi, qwj) represents the Jiang-Conrath
word-level distance between pwi and qwj (Jiang
and Conrath, 1997), based on WordNet 2.0. The
intuition is that for each question word, we find the
word in the candidate answer sentence which min-
imizes the word-level distance and then we com-
pute the sum of such minima.
3.3.3 Passage and cluster ranking
For a given document, we can thus isolate a sen-
tence s minimizing the distance to the query. The
passage P , i.e. a window of up to 5 sentences cen-
tered on s, will be a candidate result. We assign
to such passage a score equal to the similarity of s
to the query; in turn, the score of P is used as the
score of the document containing it. We also de-
fine a ranking function for clusters, which allows
to order them according to the maximal score of
their component documents. Passages from the
highest ranking cluster will be presented first to
the user, in decreasing order of score, followed by
the passages from lower ranking clusters.
3.3.4 Answer presentation
To present our answers, we fix a threshold for
the number of results to be returned following the
ranking exposed above. Each result consists of
a title and document passage where the sentence
which best answers the query is highlighted; the
URL of the original document is also available for
loading if the user finds the passage interesting and
wants to read more.
4 Results
We report the results of running our system on
a range of queries, which include factoid/simple,
complex and controversial questions9.
4.1 Simple answer
As an example of a simple query, we present the
results for: ?Who painted the Sistine Chapel??,
the system returned the following passages:
?UMgood: ?Sistine Chapel (sis-teen). A chapel adjoin-
ing Saint Peter?s Basilica, noted for the frescoes of biblical
subject painted by Michelangelo on its walls and ceilings.?
?UMmed: ?In all Michelangelo painted more than 300
different figures on the Sistine Chapel ceiling.?
?UMpoor: ?My name is Jacopo L?Indaco and I was
an assistant to Michelangelo when he painted the Sistine
Chapel.?
To obtain the above answers the system was run 3
times with different values for the reading level pa-
rameter in the UM, as defined in 3.2.3. As we can
see, in all cases the correct information is present
although not always explicitly, as in the first two
cases. This is because our current semantic sim-
ilarity metric only operates at word level. In this
example, all sentences containing ?painted?, ?Sis-
tine? and ?Chapel? obtain a distance of 0 to the
query, regardless of their formulation. Also no-
tice how the difference in language complexity is
clearly discernible in the different answers.
4.2 Complex answer
We illustrate the results of our system with the
query ?Definition of metaphor?, which relates to
a difficult concept. Our top results, highlighted in
9Notice that this partition is not to be interpreted as a
methodological division, as we currently approach complex
and controversial answers the same way.
54 KRAQ06
boldface within their containing passages, are:
?UMgood: ?Definition of Metaphor. Metaphor is a pro-
cess by which we conceive "one thing in terms of another,
and its primary function is understanding" (Lakoff and
Johnson, Metaphors We Live By 36). That is, we often do
(and must) talk about things that do not physically exist, that
we cannot reach out and touch or take apart with our hands
to see what is inside and how it works: love, time, anger,
life. [. . . ] We make them tangible by, in a process of thought,
applying models of physical things to them: love is falling;
argument is war. ?
?UMmed: ?Definition: A metaphor is a figure of speech
that compares unlike things by saying that one thing is the
other. Often metaphors are simple comparisons, but they can
be extended so that different aspects of the things compared
are treated separately. ?
?UMpoor: we did not find any document exactly match-
ing the reading level, we thus returned the results forUMmed
(see above).
As before, there is a clear difference in the lan-
guage complexity of the two answers.
4.3 Controversial answer
We illustrate this case using the query ?Who wrote
the Iliad??, which is a subject of debate: the exis-
tence of a single author, as well as the historicity
of the poet Homer are under discussion. These are
among our top results:
?UMgood: ?Most Classicists would agree that, whether
there was ever such a composer as "Homer" or not, the
Homeric poems are the product of an oral tradition, a
generations-old technique that was the collective inheritance
of many singer-poets, aoidoi. [. . . ] Could the Iliad and
Odyssey have been oral-formulaic poems, composed on the
spot by the poet using a collection of memorized traditional
verses and phases??
?UMmed: ?No reliable ancient evidence for Homer ?
earliest traditions involve conjecture (e.g. conflicting claims
to be his place of origin) and legend (e.g. Homer as son
of river-god). General ancient assumption that same poet
wrote Iliad and Odyssey (and possibly other poems) ques-
tioned by many modern scholars: differences explained bi-
ographically in ancient world (e g wrote Od. in old age);
but similarities could be due to imitation.?
?UMpoor: ?Homer wrote The Iliad and The Odyssey (at
least, supposedly a blind bard named "Homer" did).?
In this case we can see how the problem of attri-
bution of the Iliad is made clearly visible: in the
three results, document passages provide a context
which helps to explain such controversy at differ-
ent levels of difficulty.
5 Evaluation
5.1 Methodology
Our system is not a QA system in the strict
sense, as it does not single out one correct an-
swer phrase. The key objective is an improved sat-
isfaction of the user towards its adaptive results,
which are hopefully more suitable to his read-
ing level. A user-centred evaluation methodology
that assesses how the system meets individual in-
formation needs is therefore more appropriate for
YourQA than TREC-QA metrics.
We draw our evaluation guidelines from (Su,
2003), which proposes a comprehensive search
engine evaluation model. We define the following
metrics (see Table 1):
1. Relevance:
? strict precision (P1): the ratio between
the number of results rated as relevant
and all the returned results,
? loose precision (P2): the ratio between
the number of results rated as relevant
or partially relevant and all the returned
results.
2. User satisfaction: a 7-point Likert scale10 is
used to assess satisfaction with:
? loose precision of results (S1),
? query success (S2).
3. Reading level accuracy (Ar). This metric
was not present in (Su, 2003) and has been
introduced to assess the reading level estima-
tion. Given the set R of results returned by
the system for a reading level r, it is the ratio
between the number of documents ? R rated
by the users as suitable for r and |R|. We
compute Ar for each reading level.
4. Overall utility (U ): the search session as a
whole is assessed via a 7-point Likert scale.
We have discarded some of the metrics proposed
by (Su, 2003) when they appeared as linked to
technical aspects of search engines (e.g. connec-
tivity), and when response time was concerned as
at the present stage this has not been considered
10This measure ? ranging from 1= ?extremely unsatisfac-
tory? to 7=?extremely satisfactory? ? is particularly suitable
to assess the degree to which the system meets the user?s
search needs. It was reported in (Su, 1991) as the best sin-
gle measure for information retrieval among 20 tested.
55 KRAQ06
an issue. Also, we exclude metrics relating to the
user interface which are not relevant for this study.
Metric field description
Relevance P1 strict precision
P2 loose precision
Satisfaction S1 with loose precision
S2 with query success
Accuracy Ag good reading level
Am medium reading level
Ap poor reading level
Utility U overall session
Table 1: Summary of evaluation metrics
5.2 Evaluation results
We performed our evaluation by running 24
queries (partly reported in Table 3) on both Google
and YourQA11. The results ? i.e. snippets from
the Google result page and passages returned by
YourQA ? were given to 20 evaluators. These
were aged between 16 and 52, all having a self-
assessed good or medium English reading level.
They came from various backgrounds (University
students/graduates, professionals, high school)
and mother-tongues. Evaluators filled in a ques-
tionnaire assessing the relevance of each passage,
the success and result readability of the single
queries, and the overall utility of the system; val-
ues were thus computed for the metrics in Table 1.
P1 P2 S1 S2 U
Google 0,39 0,63 4,70 4,61 4,59
YourQA 0,51 0,79 5,39 5,39 5,57
Table 2: Evaluation results
5.2.1 Relevance
The precision results (see Table 2) for the whole
search session were computed by averaging the
values obtained for the 20 queries. Although quite
close, they show a 10-15% difference in favour of
the YourQA system for both strict precision (P1)
and loose precision (P2). This suggests that the
coarse semantic processing applied and the visu-
alisation of the context contribute to the creation
of more relevant passages.
11To make the two systems more comparable, we turned
off query expansion and only submitted the original question
sentence
5.2.2 User satisfaction
After each query, we asked evaluators the fol-
lowing questions: ?How would you rate the ratio
of relevant/partly relevant results returned?? (as-
sessing S1) and ?How would you rate the success
of this search?? (assessing S2). Table 2 denotes a
higher level of satisfaction tributed to the YourQA
system in both cases.
5.2.3 Reading level accuracy
Adaptivity to the users? reading level is the dis-
tinguishing feature of the YourQA system: we
were thus particularly interested in its perfor-
mance in this respect. Table 3 shows that alto-
gether, evaluators found our results appropriate for
the reading levels to which they were assigned.
The accuracy tended to decrease (from 94% to
72%) with the level: this was predictable as it is
more constraining to conform to a lower reading
level than to a higher one. However this also sug-
gests that our estimation of document difficulty
was perhaps too ?optimisitic?: we are currently
working with better quality training data which al-
lows to obtain more accurate language models.
Query Ag Am Ap
Who painted the Sistine Chapel? 0,85 0,72 0,79
Who was the first American in space? 0,94 0,80 0,72
Who was Achilles? best friend? 1,00 0,98 0,79
When did the Romans invade Britain? 0,87 0,74 0,82
Definition of metaphor 0,95 0,81 0,38
What is chickenpox? 1,00 0,97 0,68
Define german measles 1,00 0,87 0,80
Types of rhyme 1,00 1,00 0,79
Who was a famous cubist? 0,90 0,75 0,85
When did the Middle Ages begin? 0,91 0,82 0,68
Was there a Trojan war? 0,97 1,00 0,83
Shakespeare?s most famous play? 0,90 0,97 0,83
average 0,94 0,85 0,72
Table 3: Queries and reading level accuracy
5.2.4 Overall utility
At the end of the whole search session, users
answered the question: ?Overall, how was this
search session?? relating to their search experi-
ence with Google and the YourQA system. The
values obtained for U in Table 2 show a clear pref-
erence (a difference of ' 1 on the 7-point scale) of
the users for YourQA, which is very positive con-
56 KRAQ06
sidering that it represents their general judgement
on the system.
5.3 Future work
We plan to run a larger evaluation by including
more metrics, such as user vs system ranking of
results and the contribution of cluster by cluster
presentation. We intend to conduct an evaluation
also involving users with a poor reading level, so
that each evaluator will only examine answers tar-
geted to his/her reading level. We will analyse our
results with respect to the individual reading levels
and the different types of questions proposed.
6 Conclusion
A user-tailored open domain QA system is out-
lined where a user model contributes to elaborat-
ing answers corresponding to the user?s needs and
presenting them efficiently. In this paper we have
focused on how the user?s reading level (a param-
eter in the UM) can be used to filter and re-order
the candidate answer passages. Our preliminary
results show a positive feedback from human as-
sessors on the utility of the system in an informa-
tion seeking domain. Our short term goals involve
performing a more extensive evaluation, exploit-
ing more UM parameters in answer selection and
implementing a dialogue interface to improve the
system?s interactivity.
References
L. Ardissono, L. Console, and I. Torre. 2001. An adap-
tive system for the personalized access to news. AI
Commun., 14(3):129?147.
J. Carroll, G. Minnen, D. Pearce, Y. Canning, S. De-
vlin, and J. Tait. 1999. Simplifying text for
language-impaired readers. In Proceedings of
EACL?99, pages 269?270.
K. Collins-Thompson and J. P. Callan. 2004. A lan-
guage modeling approach to predicting reading dif-
ficulty. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL.
K. Inui, A. Fujita, T. Takahashi, R. Iida, and T. Iwakura.
2003. Text simplification for reading assistance: a
project note. In ACL Workshop on Paraphrasing:
Paraphrase Acquisition and Applications, pages 9?
16.
J. J. Jiang and D. W. Conrath. 1997. Semantic similar-
ity based on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy.
In Proceedings of the International Conference Re-
search on Computational Linguistics (ROCLING X).
J. Kincaid, R. Fishburne, R. Rodgers, and B. Chissom.
1975. Derivation of new readability formulas for
navy enlisted personnel. Technical Report Branch
Report 8-75, Chief of Naval Training.
C. C. T. Kwok, O. Etzioni, and D. S. Weld. 2001. Scal-
ing question answering to the web. In World Wide
Web, pages 150?161.
J. Lin, D. Quan, V. Sinha, and K Bakshi. 2003. What
makes a good answer? the role of context in question
answering. In Proceedings of INTERACT 2003.
Bernardo Magnini and Carlo Strapparava. 2001. Im-
proving user modelling with content-based tech-
niques. In UM: Proceedings of the 8th Int. Confer-
ence, volume 2109 of LNCS. Springer.
James Pitkow, Hinrich Schuetze, Todd Cass, Rob Coo-
ley, Don Turnbull, Andy Edmonds, Eytan Adar, and
Thomas Breuel. 2002. Personalized search. Com-
mun. ACM, 45(9):50?55.
S. Quarteroni and S. Manandhar. 2006. User mod-
elling for adaptive question answering and informa-
tion retrieval. In Proceedings of FLAIRS?06.
M. Steinbach, G. Karypid, and V. Kumar. 2000. A
comparison of document clustering techniques.
L. T. Su. 1991. An investigation to find appropriate
measures for evaluating interactive information re-
trieval. Ph.D. thesis, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
L. T. Su. 2003. A comprehensive and systematic
model of user evaluation of web search engines: Ii.
an evaluation by undergraduates. J. Am. Soc. Inf.
Sci. Technol., 54(13):1193?1223.
Jaime Teevan, Susan T. Dumais, and Eric Horvitz.
2005. Personalizing search via automated analysis
of interests and activities. In Proceedings of SIGIR
?05, pages 449?456, New York, NY, USA. ACM
Press.
E. M. Voorhees. 2003. Overview of the TREC 2003
question answering track. In Text REtrieval Confer-
ence.
E. M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview of the TREC 2004
question answering track. In Text REtrieval Confer-
ence.
S. Williams and E. Reiter. 2005. Generating readable
texts for readers with low basic skills. In Proceed-
ings of ENLG-2005, pages 140?147.
H. Witten and E. Frank. 2000. Data Mining: Practical
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java
Implementation. Morgan Kaufmann.
I. H. Witten, G. W. Paynter, E. Frank, C. Gutwin, and
C. G. Nevill-Manning. 1999. KEA: Practical au-
tomatic keyphrase extraction. In ACM DL, pages
254?255.
57 KRAQ06
