The NITE XML Toolkit: Demonstration from ve corpora
Jonathan Kilgour and Jean Carletta
University of Edinburgh
United Kingdom
jonathan@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The NITE XML Toolkit (NXT) is open
source software for working with multi-
modal, spoken, or text language corpora.
It is specifically designed to support the
tasks of human annotators and analysts
of heavily cross-annotated data sets, and
has been used successfully on a range of
projects with varying needs. In this text
to accompany a demonstration, we de-
scribe NXT along with four uses on dif-
ferent corpora that together span its most
novel features. The examples involve the
AMI and ICSI Meeting Corpora; a study
of multimodal reference; a syntactic anal-
ysis of Genesis in classical Hebrew; and
discourse annotation of Switchboard dia-
logues.
1 Introduction
Of the software packages that provide support for
working with language corpora, the NITE XML
Toolkit (NXT) is arguably the most mature, of-
fering to combine multiple audio and video sig-
nals with crossing structures of linguistic annota-
tion. It is currently in use on a range of corpora.
Current users both create annotations in NXT na-
tively and ?up-translate? existing data from other
tools into NXT?s storage format. Although its
biggest strengths are for multimodal language re-
search, some users have found it to be the right so-
lution for work on text and speech corpora with-
out video because of the way it handles anno-
tation and analysis. NXT is open source soft-
ware, available from Sourceforge and documented
at http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/NITE. It is written in
Java and uses the Java Media Framework (JMF)
for its handling of signals.
In this text to accompany a demonstration, we
summarize NXT?s functionality, comment on its
use for four corpora that together showcase its
most novel features, and describe funded future
development.
2 The NITE XML Toolkit
At its core, NXT consists of three libraries: one
for data handling, one for searching data, and one
for building GUIs for working with data. The data
handling libraries include support for loading, se-
rialization using a stand-off XML format, naviga-
tion around loaded data, and changes to the data
in line with a specific data model that is intended
especially for data sets that contain both timing in-
formation and overlapping structural markup. The
search facility implements a query language that
is designed particularly for the data model and al-
lows the user to find n-tuples of data objects that
match a set of conditions based on types, tempo-
ral conditions, and structural relationships in the
data. The GUI library defines signal players and
data displays that update against loaded data and
can highlight parts of the display that correspond
to current time on the signals or that correspond
to matches to a query typed into a standard search
interface. This includes support for selection as re-
quired for building annotation tools and a specific
transcription-oriented display.
NXT also contains a number of end user inter-
faces and utilities built on top of these libraries.
These include a generic display that will work for
any NXT format data, configurable GUIs for some
common hand-annotation tasks such as markup of
named entities, dialogue acts, and a tool for seg-
menting and labelling a signal as it plays. They
also include command line utilities for common
search tasks such as counting query results and
65
Figure 1: Named entity coding on the AMI corpus
some utilities for transforming data into, for in-
stance, tab-delimited tables.
Finally, a number of projects have contributed
sample data and annotation tools as well as mech-
anisms for transforming data to and from other
formats. Writing and testing a new up-translation
typically takes someone who understands NXT?s
format between one and three days. The actual
time depends on the complexity of the structure
represented in the input data and whether a parser
for the data format must be written from scratch.
Badly documented formats and ill-formed data
take longer to transform.
3 Examples
Example 1: The AMI and ICSI Meeting
Corpora
The AMI Project (http://www.amiproject.org) is
currently NXT?s biggest user, and is also its largest
provider of financial support. AMI, which is col-
lecting and transcribing 100 hours of meeting data
(Carletta et al, 2005) and annotating part or all of
it for a dozen different phenomena, is using NXT?s
data storage for its reference format, with data be-
ing generated natively using NXT GUIs as well
as up-translated from other sources. The project
uses ChannelTrans (ICSI, nd) for orthographic
transcription and Event Editor (Sumec, nd) for
straightforward timestamped labelling of video;
although NXT comes with an interface for the lat-
ter, Event Editor, which is Windows-only and not
based on JMF, has better video control and was al-
ready familiar to some of the annotators. For anno-
tation, AMI is using the configurable dialogue act
and named entity tools as well as tailored GUIs for
topic segmentation and extractive summarization
that links extracted dialogue acts to the sentences
of an abstractive summary they support. Figure 1
shows the named entity annotation tool as config-
ured for the AMI project. Aside from the sheer
scale of the exercise, the AMI effort is unique in
requiring simultaneous annotation of different lev-
els at different sites. NXT does not support data
management, but its stand-off XML data format
has made it relatively easy to manage the process
using a combination of a CVS repository for ver-
sion control, web forms for data upload, and wikis
for work assignment and progress reports.
The AMI Project piloted many of their
techniques on the ICSI Meeting Corpus
(Janin et al, 2003), which shares some character-
istics with the AMI corpus but is audio-only. More
information about this closely related use of NXT
can be found in (Carletta and Kilgour, 2005).
66
Figure 2: DIAGRAMS corpus: linking gesture and dialogue acts.
Example 2: Multimodal reference
This example is a small project that is looking at
the relationship between referring expressions and
the hand gestures used to point at a map. Although
the transcription, referring expression, and gesture
annotations were done in other tools and then up-
translated, NXT gave the best support for linking
referring expressions with gestures and analysing
the results. Figure 2 shows the linking tool. One
interesting aspect of this project was that the anal-
ysis was performed by a postgraduate psycholo-
gist. Analysts with no computational experience
find it more difficult to learn how to use the query
language, but several have done so. With this kind
of data set, simply the ability to play the signals
and annotations together and highlight query re-
sults provides insights into behaviours that are dif-
ficult to reach otherwise.
Example 3: Syntax in Genesis
This example is an annotation of Genesis in clas-
sical Hebrew that shows its structural division
into books, chapters, verses, and half-verses. The
data itself, which is purely textual, was originally
stored in an MS Access relational database, but
overlapping hierarchies in the structure made it
difficult to query in this format. After finding NXT
on the web and consulting us about the best way to
represent the data using the NXT data model, the
user successfully up-translated his data, searched
it using NQL, and exported counts to SPSS to cre-
ate corpus statistics.
Example 4: The Switchboard Corpus
The Switchboard Dialogue Corpus
(Godfrey et al, 1992) has been popu-
lar for computational discourse research.
(Carletta et al, 2004) describes an effort which
up-translated its Penn Treebank syntactic analysis
to NXT format, added annotations of ?markables?
for animacy, information structure, and corefer-
ence, and used this information all together. This
project made heavy use of NXT?s query language,
including the ability to index query results in the
data storage format itself for easy access. The
work is now being extended to align an improved
version of the transcriptions that includes word
timestamps derived by forced alignment with the
transcriptions used for the syntactic and discourse
67
annotation, and to add annotations for phonology
and syllable structure, all within the same corpus
structure.
4 Discussion
It should not be supposed from our list of ex-
amples that NXT has been used only for these
applications. Particularly novel NXT uses in-
clude simultaneous display of annotation with a
re-enactment of a human-computer tutorial dia-
logue driven by the dialogue system itself; hand-
annotation of head orientation from video using
a flock-of-birds motion sensor mounted on a cof-
fee mug; and annotation of the critiques expressed
in conversations about movies. However, most
NXT users are applying some kind of discourse
annotation. They choose NXT because they need
to combine signal labellings with annotations that
give structure over the top of orthography, because
they want to combine annotations from different
sources and so find the stand-off format attrac-
tive, or because they need the GUI library in or-
der to develop novel interfaces. Academic soft-
ware is often inadequately documented, and there-
fore only usable with the help of its developers.
It is inevitable given the size of the target user
community that most of them are at least ?friends
of friends?. Enough users have worked indepen-
dently of the developers that we are confident that
all but the newest parts of NXT are understandable
from the documentation.
Although NXT is mature enough for use, sev-
eral projects are investing in further development.
The largest current efforts are to create an annota-
tion and analysis tool with a time-aligned ?tiered?
data display and a query processor with better per-
formance (Mayo et al, 2006). Another priority is
better packaging, particularly of the configurable
interfaces and of the existing translations from the
formats used in transcription and other annotation
tools. Finally, contributing projects plan work that
will improve interoperability between NXT and
other tools, including eyetrackers, NLP applica-
tions such as part-of-speech taggers, and machine
learning software.
Acknowledgments
NXT prototyping and development has been sup-
ported primarily by the European Commission
(MATE, LE4-8370; NITE, IST-2000-2609; and
AMI, FP6-506811) and Scottish Enterprise via the
Edinburgh-Stanford Link. The examples shown
are by kind permission of Scottish Enterprise, the
AMI Project, and Dr. Matthew Anstey of Charles
Sturt University.
References
[Carletta and Kilgour2005] J.C. Carletta and J. Kilgour.2005. The NITE XML Toolkit meets the ICSIMeeting Corpus: Import, annotation, and brows-
ing. In S. Bengio and H. Bourlard, editors, Machine
Learning for Multimodal Interaction: First Interna-
tional Workshop, MLMI 2004, Martigny, Switzer-
land, June 21-23, 2004, Revised Selected Papers,Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3361, pages111?121. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
[Carletta et al2004] Jean Carletta, Shipra Dingare,
Malvina Nissim, and Tatiana Nikitina. 2004. Usingthe NITE XML Toolkit on the switchboard corpus tostudy syntactic choice: a case study. In Fourth Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation Conference, Lis-bon, Portugal.
[Carletta et al2005] J. Carletta, Simone Ashby, Se-bastien Bourban, Mike Flynn, Mael Guillemot,
Thomas Hain, Jaroslav Kadlec, Vasilis Karaiskos,Wessel Kraaij, Melissa Kronenthal, Guillaume Lath-oud, Mike Lincoln, Agnes Lisowska, Iain Mc-
Cowan, Wilfried M. Post, Dennis Reidsma, andPierre Wellner. 2005. The AMI Meeting Corpus:A pre-announcement. In S. Renals and S. Bengio,
editors, 2nd Joint Workshop on Multimodal Interac-
tion and Related Machine Learning Algorithms, Ed-inburgh.
[Godfrey et al1992] J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, andJ. McDaniel. 1992. Switchboard: Telephone speech
corpus for research development. In International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro-
cessing, pages 517?520, San Francisco, CA, USA.
[ICSInd] ICSI. n.d. Extensions to Tran-
scriber for meeting recorder transcription.http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/Speech/mr/channeltrans.html; accessed 14 Oct 05.
[Janin et al2003] A. Janin, D. Baron, J. Edwards, D. El-
lis, D. Gelbart, N. Morgan, B. Peskin, T. Pfau,E. Shriberg, A. Stolcke, and C. Wooters. 2003. TheICSI Meeting Corpus. In IEEE International Con-
ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing,Hong Kong.
[Mayo et al2006] Neil Mayo, Jonathan Kilgour, andJean Carletta. 2006. Towards an alternative im-
plementation of NXT?s query language via XQuery.In EACL Workshop on Multi-dimensional Markup in
Natural Language Processing (NLPXML), Trento,
Italy.
[Sumecnd] Stanislav Sumec. n.d. Event Editor.
http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/research/grants/m4/editor/;accessed 14 Oct 05.
68
