ANNIS: Complex Multilevel Annotations in a Linguistic Database
Michael Go?tze and Stefanie Dipper
Department of Linguistics, University of Potsdam
14415 Potsdam, Germany
{goetze,dipper}@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
We present ANNIS, a linguistic database
that aims at facilitating the process of ex-
ploiting richly annotated language data by
naive users. We describe the role of the
database in our research project and the
project requirements, with a special focus
on aspects of multilevel annotation. We
then illustrate the usability of the database
by illustrative examples. We also address
current challenges and next steps.
1 Introduction
Until recently, working with data that is anno-
tated at multiple levels with different types of an-
notation required rather advanced computer skills,
which cannot be expected from the majority of po-
tentially interested users.
We present ANNIS, a linguistic database that
aims at providing the infrastructure for supporting
linguists in their work on multilevel annotations.
We describe and illustrate the current state of our
work and sketch the next steps.
In sec. 2, we present the research scenario AN-
NIS is developed for, show the role of the linguis-
tic database therein, and sketch the major require-
ments it aims to fulfill. We then describe the archi-
tecture and current functionality, and discuss the
way difficult aspects of multidimensional annota-
tions are treated (sec. 3). In sec. 4, we illustrate
the work with the database by three exemplary ap-
proaches. Finally, we sketch our next steps.
2 Background
Research Scenario
The database ANNIS is being developed in the
Collaborative Research Center SFB 632 on Infor-
mation Structure, which consists of 13 individual
research projects from disciplines such as theoret-
ical linguistics, psycholinguistics, first and second
language acquisition, typology and historical lin-
guistics.1 In the research center, data of various
languages is collected and annotated at the levels
of phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and
pragmatics?levels that contribute in ways yet to
be determined to the information structural parti-
tioning of discourse and utterances.
For annotation, task-specific tools are being
used, e.g. EXMARaLDA, annotate, RSTTool, and
MMAX.2 Data is then converted into a standoff
data interchange format, which is fed into the lin-
guistic database ANNIS. ANNIS aims at providing
functionalities for exploring and querying the data,
offering suitable means for both visualization and
export.
User Requirements
Central requirements evolving out of the scenario
sketched above and, as we believe, for multilevel
annotation in general are Data heterogeneity, Data
reuse, and Accessibility (cf. (Dipper and Go?tze,
2005)).
Data heterogeneity is a result of: (i) the lan-
guage data to be annotated, varying with respect
to size (single sentences vs. narrations), modal-
ity (monologue vs. dialogue, text vs. speech) and
language; (ii) the annotations, which use different
1http://www.sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/.
For more information about ANNIS, see http://www.
sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/annis/ and (Dipper et al,
2004).
2http://www.rrz.uni-hamburg.de/
exmaralda/
http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/
projects/sfb378/negra-corpus/
http://www.wagsoft.com/RSTTool
http://mmax.eml-research.de/
61
data structures (attribute-value pairs, trees, point-
ers, etc.); and (iii) data formats that stem from dif-
ferent task-specific annotation tools.
Data reuse must be supported, e.g. for further
or re-annotation, statistical analyses, or reuse of
the data in other tools.
Accessibility of both tools and data is an obvi-
ous prerequisite for data reuse.
In the following section, we will address those
aspects that are particularly relevant for these re-
quirements and discuss their treatment in ANNIS.
3 ANNIS
3.1 Main Features
ANNIS is a Java servlet application that can be ac-
cessed via standard web browsers. In its current
state, it is not database-backed; data is read into
memory and exploited for querying and visualiza-
tion in memory.3
Data format and interoperability The data
model must be suffiently expressive for captur-
ing the data heterogeneity sketched above, includ-
ing the representation of overlapping segments, in-
tersecting hierarchies, and alternative annotations
(e.g., for ambiguous annotations). It should fur-
ther facilitate the addition of new annotations.
In our approach, we use a flexible standoff
XML format, the SFB-standard interchange for-
mat, as the interface format (Dipper, 2005). In this
format, primary data is stored in a file that option-
ally specifies a header, followed by a tag <body>,
which contains the source text. The format makes
use of generic XML elements to encode data struc-
tures and annotations: <mark> (markable) tags
specify text positions or spans of text (or spans of
other markables) that can be annotated by linguis-
tic information. Trees and graphs are encoded by
<struct> (structure) and <rel> (relation) el-
ements, which specify local subtrees. <feat>
(feature) tags specify the information that is an-
notated to markables or structures, which are re-
ferred to by xlink attributes. Each type of anno-
tation is stored in a separate file, hence, competing
or ambiguous annotations can be represented in
a straightforward way: by distributing them over
different files.
Our format allows us to represent different
kinds of annotations in a uniform way. We pro-
3For a more elaborate discussion of the basic concepts of
ANNIS, see (Dipper et al, 2004).
vide importers for the export format of the an-
notation tools annotate, EXMARaLDA, RST Tool,
and MMAX. Our PCC corpus (see sec. 4) im-
ports and synchronizes the following annotations,
which have been annotated by these tools: syn-
tax, information structure, rhetorical structure, and
coreference.
Visualization Suitable means for visualizing in-
formation is crucial for exploring and interpreting
linguistic data. Due to the high degree of data
heterogeneity, special attention has been paid to
the support of visualizing various data structures.
In addition, annotations may refer to segments of
different sizes, e.g. syntax vs. discourse structure.
Furthermore, richness of information in multilevel
annotations has to be taken into account; this re-
quires a certain degree of user-adaptivity, allowing
the user to modify the way information of interest
is displayed.
In ANNIS, we start from a basic interactive tier-
based view, which allows for a compact simulta-
neous representation of many annotation types and
whose appearance can be modified by the user in a
format file. In addition, a discourse view helps the
user to orient him/herself in the discourse. Further
views can be added.
Query support Among the numerous require-
ments for a good query facility for multilevel
annotation, expressiveness, efficiency, and user-
friendly query-formulation appear to be the most
relevant. Even a very brief discussion of these is-
sues would go beyond the limits of this paper, the
reader is instead referred to (Heid et al, 2004).
Currently, ANNIS uses a query language proto-
type which allows the user to query text and anno-
tations, by means of regular expressions and wild-
cards, and various common relational operators
(e.g. for stating relations in tree structures, such as
dominance or sibling relations). However, the set
for querying sequential relations is not sufficiently
expressive, and querying co-reference relations is
not supported yet. Furthermore, user support for
formulating queries is rather poor.
3.2 Open Issues
Data alignment Alignment of annotations cre-
ated by different annotation tools appears to be
most suitable at the level of tokens. However, tools
often come with their own tokenizers and mis-
matches do occur frequently. We currently use a
62
Figure 1: The ANNIS user interface, displaying data from the PCC
simple script that checks for text and token iden-
tity in the standoff files that we generate from the
output of the individual tools. However, all mis-
matches have to be corrected manually. At least
for white-space differences, an automatic fixing
procedure should be feasible (similar to the one
implemented by (Witt et al, 2005)).
Efficient Querying Current querying is re-
stricted to rather small amounts of data, and com-
plex queries may take some time until finishing the
search.
Overlapping elements and intersecting hierar-
chies The query language does not yet support
comfortable searching for overlapping elements.
However, exactly what kinds of queries on over-
lapping segments or intersecting relations should
be supported is an open question.
4 Use Cases
We illustrate the use of ANNIS in linguistic re-
search, exemplified with research questions from
three different linguistic areas.
Historical investigations The project B4: The
role of information structure in the development of
word order regularities in Germanic investigates
the verb-second phenomenon, which occurred in
certain Germanic languages only (e.g., it did in
Modern German, but not in Modern English). One
of their findings is that verb placement in the Old
High German translation of Tatian correlates with
discourse relations: verb-initial sentences usually
occur in narrative contexts and signal continuation
of the story. In contrast, verb-second sentences
indicate subordinative relations (Hinterho?lzl and
Petrova, 2005).
Typological studies In the research project D2:
Typology of Information Structure (cf., e.g.,
(Go?tze et al, To appear)), a typological question-
naire is designed, with which language data can be
elicited using largely language-independent meth-
ods. Currently, data from 13 different languages is
elicited and annotated with information from var-
ious linguistic levels (morphosyntax, phonology,
semantics, and information structure).
An interesting query might look for nominal
phrases (const=np) that are new in the discourse
(given=new) and belong to the (information-) fo-
cus of a sentence (focus=ans), e.g. for inves-
tigating the phonological realization of these.
63
The according query has the form: const=np &
given=new & focus=ans & #1 = #2.4
Queries in ANNIS can be restricted to subsets
of a corpus, by queries such as focus=ans &
doc=*81-11*, which searches for all answer foci
in the data that has been elicited by means of the
task 81-11 in the questionnaire, yielding matching
data from all languages in our database.
Discourse studies The Potsdam Commentary
Corpus, PCC (Stede, 2004), consists of 173 news-
paper commentaries, annotated for morphosyn-
tax, coreference, discourse structure according
to Rhetorical Structure Theory, and information
structure.
A question of interest here is the information-
structural pattern of sentences introducing dis-
course segments that elaborate on another part
of the discourse: elaboration & rel=satellite &
(cat=vroot & aboutness-topic) & #1 > #2 &
#2 = #3. Another research issue is the relation-
ship of coreference and discourse structure. How-
ever, querying for coreference relations is not sup-
ported yet.
5 Future Work
Currently we are working on integrating a native
XML database into our system. To make process-
ing more efficient, we are developing an internal
inline representation of the standoff interchange
format, encoding overlapping segments by means
of milestones or fragments (Barnard et al, 1995).
Furthermore, the query language will be ex-
tended to cover different kinds of queries on se-
quential relations as well as coreference relations.
Finally, we will add basic statistical means to
the query facility, which, e.g., can point to rare
and, hence, potentially interesting feature combi-
nations.
6 Demo
In our demonstration of ANNIS, we will show ex-
ample data from the PCC, Old High German, and
data elicited by the typological questionnaire. We
then illustrate by means of example queries how
the researchers make use of our database in their
daily work, as described above. This includes pre-
senting the visualization and querying facilities of
ANNIS.
4The expression #n refers to the nth constraint stated in
the query; the binary operator = requires extensional iden-
tity (Dipper et al, 2004).
References
David Barnard, Lou Burnard, Jean-Pierre Gaspart,
Lynne A. Price, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, and Gio-
vanni Batista Varile. 1995. Hierarchical encod-
ing of text: Technical problems and SGML solu-
tions. Text Encoding Initiative: Background and
Context. Special Issue of Computers and the Hu-
manities, 29(211?231).
Stefanie Dipper and Michael Go?tze. 2005. Access-
ing heterogeneous linguistic data ? generic XML-
based representation and flexible visualization. In
Proceedings of the 2nd Language & Technology
Conference 2005.
Stefanie Dipper, Michael Go?tze, Manfred Stede, and
Tillmann Wegst. 2004. ANNIS: A linguistic
database for exploring information structure. In
Shinichiro Ishihara, Michaela Schmitz, and Anne
Schwarz, editors, Interdisciplinary Studies on Infor-
mation Structure (ISIS), volume 1, pages 245?279.
Universita?tsverlag Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
Stefanie Dipper. 2005. XML-based stand-off repre-
sentation and exploitation of multi-level linguistic
annotation. In Proceedings of Berliner XML Tage
2005 (BXML 2005), pages 39?50, Berlin, Germany.
Michael Go?tze, Torsten Roloff, Stavros Skopeteas,
and Ruben Stoel. To appear. Exploring a cross-
linguistic production data corpus. In Proceedings of
the Sixth International Tbilisi Symposium on Lan-
guage, Logic and Computation. Batumi, Georgia.
Ulrich Heid, Holger Voormann, Jan-Torsten Milde, Ul-
rike Gut, Katrin Erk, and Sebastian Pado?. 2004.
Querying both time-aligned and hierarchical corpora
with NXT Search. In Proceedings of the Forth In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004), pages 1455?1458, Lisbon.
Roland Hinterho?lzl and Svetlana Petrova. 2005.
Rhetorical relations and verb placement in early ger-
manic languages. Evidence from the Old High Ger-
man Tatian translation (9th century). In M. Stede,
C. Chiarcos, M. Grabski, and L. Lagerwerf, edi-
tors, Salience in Discourse. Multidisciplinary Ap-
proaches to Discourse, pages 71?79.
Manfred Stede. 2004. The Potsdam Commentary Cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Dis-
course Annotation, pages 96?102, Barcelona.
Andreas Witt, Daniela Goecke, Felix Sasaki, and Har-
ald Lu?ngen. 2005. Unification of XML documents
with concurrent markup. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 20(1):103?116.
64
