Grouping Multi-word Expressions According to Part-Of-Speech in
Statistical Machine Translation
Patrik Lambert
TALP Research Center
Jordi Girona Salgado, 1-3
08034 Barcelona, Spain
lambert@gps.tsc.upc.edu
Rafael Banchs
TALP Research Center
Jordi Girona Salgado, 1-3
08034 Barcelona, Spain
rbanchs@gps.tsc.upc.edu
Abstract
This paper studies a strategy for identify-
ing and using multi-word expressions in
Statistical Machine Translation. The per-
formance of the proposed strategy for var-
ious types of multi-word expressions (like
nouns or verbs) is evaluated in terms of
alignment quality as well as translation ac-
curacy. Evaluations are performed by us-
ing real-life data, namely the European
Parliament corpus. Results from trans-
lation tasks from English-to-Spanish and
from Spanish-to-English are presented and
discussed.
1 Introduction
Statistical machine translation (SMT) was origi-
nally focused on word to word translation and was
based on the noisy channel approach (Brown et
al., 1993). Present SMT systems have evolved
from the original ones in such a way that mainly
differ from them in two issues: first, word-based
translation models have been replaced by phrase-
based translation models (Zens et al, 2002) and
(Koehn et al, 2003); and second, the noisy chan-
nel approach has been expanded to a more general
maximum entropy approach in which a log-linear
combination of multiple feature functions is im-
plemented (Och and Ney, 2002).
Nevertheless, it is interesting to call the atten-
tion about one important fact. Despite the change
from a word-based to a phrase-based translation
approach, word to word approaches for inferring
alignment models from bilingual data (Vogel et al,
1996; Och and Ney, 2003) continue to be widely
used.
On the other hand, from observing bilingual
data sets, it becomes evident that in some cases it
is just impossible to perform a word to word align-
ment between two phrases that are translations of
each other. For example, certain combination of
words might convey a meaning which is somehow
independent from the words it contains. This is
the case of bilingual pairs such as ?fire engine?
and ?camio?n de bomberos?.
Notice that a word-to-word alignment strategy
would most probably1 provide the follow-
ing Viterbi alignments for words contained
in the previous example: ?camio?n:truck?,
?bomberos:firefighters?, ?fuego:fire?, and
?ma?quina:engine?.
Of course, it cannot be concluded from these
examples that a SMT system which uses a word
to word alignment strategy will not be able to han-
dle properly the kind of word expression described
above. This is because there are other models and
feature functions involved which can actually help
the SMT system to get the right translation.
However these ideas motivate for exploring
alternatives for using multi-word expression in-
formation in order to improve alignment quality
and consequently translation accuracy. In this
sense, our idea of a multi-word expression (here-
after MWE) refers in principle to word sequences
which cannot be translated literally word-to-word.
However, the automatic technique studied in this
work for extracting and identifying MWEs does
not necessarily follow this definition rigorously.
In a preliminary study (Lambert and Banchs,
2005), we presented a technique for extracting
bilingual multi-word expressions (BMWE) from
parallel corpora. In that study, BMWEs identified
in a small corpus2 were grouped as a unique to-
1Of course, alignment results strongly depends on corpus
statistics.
2VERBMOBIL (Arranz et al, 2003)
9
ken before training alignment models. As a re-
sult, both alignment quality and translation accu-
racy were slightly improved.
In this paper we applied the same BMWE ex-
traction technique, with various improvements, to
a large corpus (EPPS, described in section 4.1).
Since this is a statistical technique, and frequen-
cies of multi-word expressions are low (Baldwin
and Villavicencio, 2002), the size of the corpus is
an important factor. A few very basic rules based
on part-of-speech have also been added to filter out
noisy entries in the dictionary. Finally, BMWEs
have been classified into three categories (nouns,
verbs and others). In addition to the impact of the
whole set, the impact of each category has been
evaluated separately.
The technique will be explained in section 3, af-
ter presenting the baseline translation system used
(section 2). Experimental results are presented in
section 4. Finally some conclusions are presented
and further work in this area is depicted.
2 Baseline Translation System
This section describes the SMT approach that was
used in this work. A more detailed description
of the presented translation system is available in
Marin?o et al (2005). This approach implements
a translation model which is based on bilingual
n-grams, and was developed by de Gispert and
Marin?o (2002).
The bilingual n-gram translation model actu-
ally constitutes a language model of bilingual units
which are referred to as tuples. This model ap-
proximates the joint probability between source
and target languages by using 3-grams as it is de-
scribed in the following equation:
p(T, S) ?
N?
n=1
p((t, s)n|(t, s)n?2, (t, s)n?1) (1)
where t refers to target, s to source and (t, s)n to
the nth tuple of a given bilingual sentence pair.
Tuples are extracted from a word-to-word
aligned corpus. More specifically, word-to-
word alignments are performed in both direc-
tions, source-to-target and target-to-source, by us-
ing GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003), and tuples are
extracted from the union set of alignments accord-
ing to the following constraints (de Gispert and
Marin?o, 2004):
? a monotonous segmentation of each bilingual
sentence pairs is produced,
? no word inside the tuple is aligned to words
outside the tuple, and
? no smaller tuples can be extracted without vi-
olating the previous constraints.
As a consequence of these constraints, only one
segmentation is possible for a given sentence pair.
Figure 1 presents a simple example illustrating the
tuple extraction process.
Figure 1: Example of tuple extraction from an
aligned bilingual sentence pair.
A tuple set is extracted for each transla-
tion direction, Spanish-to-English and English-to-
Spanish. Then the tuple 3-gram models are trained
by using the SRI Language Modelling toolkit
(Stolcke, 2002).
The search engine for this translation system
was developed by Crego et al (2005). It imple-
ments a beam-search strategy based on dynamic
programming. The decoder?s monotonic search
modality was used.
This decoder was designed to take into account
various different models simultaneously, so trans-
lation hypotheses are evaluated by considering a
log-linear combination of feature functions. These
feature functions are the translation model, a tar-
get language model, a word bonus model, a lexical
model and an inverse lexical model.
3 Experimental Procedure
In this section we describe the technique used to
see the effect of multi-words information on the
translation model described in section 2.
3.1 Bilingual Multi-words Extraction
First, BMWEs were automatically extracted from
the parallel training corpus and the most relevant
ones were stored in a dictionary.
3.1.1 Asymmetry Based Extraction
For BMWE extraction, the method proposed
by Lambert and Castell (2004) was used. This
10
verdad . . . . . . +
es . . . . . + .
esto . . . . + . .
; . . . + . . .
siento . ?+ . . .
lo ? ? . . . .
I ?m so
rr
y
, th
is
is tru
e
Figure 2: There is an asymmetry in the word-to-
word alignments of the idiomatic expression ?lo
siento ? I ?m sorry?. Source-target and target-
source links are represented respectively by hor-
izontal and vertical dashes.
method is based on word-to-word alignments
which are different in the source-target and target-
source directions, such as the alignments trained
to extract tuples (section 2). Multi-words like id-
iomatic expressions or collocations can typically
not be aligned word-to-word, and cause a (source-
target and target-source) asymmetry in the align-
ment matrix. An asymmetry in the alignment ma-
trix is a sub-matrix where source-target and target-
source links are different. If a word is part of an
asymmetry, all words linked to it are also part of
this asymmetry. An example is depicted in figure
2.
In this method, asymmetries in the training cor-
pus are detected and stored as possible BMWEs.
Accurate statistics are needed to score each
BMWE entry. In the identification phase (sec-
tion 3.3), these scores permit to prioritise for
the selection of some entries with respect to oth-
ers. Previous experiments (Lambert and Banchs,
2005) have shown than the large set of bilingual
phrases described in the following section pro-
vides better statistics than the set of asymmetry-
based BMWEs.
3.1.2 Scoring Based on Bilingual Phrases
Here we refer to Bilingual Phrase (BP) as the
bilingual phrases used by Och and Ney (2004).
The BP are pairs of word groups which are sup-
posed to be the translation of each other. The set
of BP is consistent with the alignment and con-
sists of all phrase pairs in which all words within
the target language are only aligned to the words
of the source language and vice versa. At least
one word of the target language phrase has to be
aligned with at least one word of the source lan-
guage phrase. Finally, the algorithm takes into ac-
count possibly unaligned words at the boundaries
of the target or source language phrases.
We extracted all BP of length up to four words,
with the algorithm described by Och and Ney.
Then we estimated the phrase translation proba-
bility distribution by relative frequency:
p(t|s) =
N(t, s)
N(s)
(2)
In equation 2, s and t stand for the source and
target side of the BP, respectively. N(t, s) is the
number of times the phrase s is translated by t,
and N(s) is the number of times s occurs in the
corpus. We took the minimum of both direct and
inverse relative frequencies as probability of a BP.
If this minimum was below some threshold, the
BP was pruned. Otherwise, this probability was
multiplied by the number of occurrences N(t, s)
of this phrase pair in the whole corpus. A weight
? was introduced to balance the respective impor-
tance of relative frequency and number of occur-
rences, as shown in equation 3:
score = min(p(t|s), p(s|t)) N(t, s)?
= min(
N(t, s)1+?
N(s)
,
N(t, s)1+?
N(t)
)
(3)
We performed the intersection between the en-
tire BP set and the entire asymmetry based multi-
words set, keeping BP scores. Notice that the en-
tire set of BP is not adequate for our dictionary be-
cause BP are extracted from all parts of the align-
ment (and not in asymmetries only), so most BP
are not BMWEs but word sequences that can be
decomposed and translated word to word.
3.2 Lexical and Morpho-syntactic Filters
In English and Spanish, a list of stop words3
(respectively 19 and 26) was established. The
BMWE dictionary was also processed by a Part-
Of-Speech (POS) tagger and eight rules were writ-
ten to filter out noisy entries. These rules depend
on the tag set used. Examples of criteria to reject
a BMWE include:
? Its source or target side only contains stop
words
? Its source or target side ends with a coordina-
tion conjunction
3frequently occurring, semantically insignificant words
like ?in?, ?of?, ?on?.
11
? Its source or target side begins with a coordi-
nation conjunction (except ?nor?, in English)
? Its source or target side ends with an indefi-
nite determiner
English data have been POS-tagged using the TnT
tagger (Brants, 2000), after the lemmas have been
extracted with wnmorph, included in the Wordnet
package (Miller et al, 1991). POS-tagging for
Spanish has been performed using the FreeLing
analysis tool (Carreras et al, 2004).
Finally, the BMWE set has been divided in three
subsets, according to the following criteria, ap-
plied in this order:
? If source AND target sides of a BMWE con-
tain at least a verb, it is assigned to the ?verb?
class.
? If source AND target sides of a BMWE con-
tain at least a noun, it is assigned to the
?noun? class.
? Otherwise, it is assigned to the ?misc? class
(miscellaneous). Note that this class is
mainly composed of adverbial phrases.
3.3 Multi-Words Identification
Identification consists, first, of the detection of all
possible BMWE(s) in the corpus, and second, of
the selection of the relevant candidates.
The detection part simply means matching the
entries of the dictionaries described in the previ-
ous subsections. In the example of figure 2, the
following BMWEs would have been detected (the
number on the right is the score):
i am sorry ||| lo siento ||| 1566
am sorry ||| siento ||| 890
it is ||| es ||| 1004407
it is ||| esto es ||| 269
true ||| es verdad ||| 63
Then, selection in a sentence pair runs as fol-
lows. First, the BMWE with highest score among
the possible candidates is considered and its cor-
responding positions are set as covered. If this
BMWE satisfies the selection criterion, the corre-
sponding words in the source and target sentences
are grouped as a unique token. This process is re-
peated until all word positions are covered in the
sentence pair, or until no BMWE matches the po-
sitions remaining to cover.
The selection criterion rejects candidates whose
words are linked to exactly one word. Thus in the
example, ?esto ? this is? would not be selected.
This is correct, because the subject ?esto? (this)
of the verb ?es? (is) in Spanish is not omitted, so
that ?this is ? es? does not act as BMWE (?esto?
should be translated to ?this? and ?is? to ?es?).
At the end of the identification process the sen-
tence pair of figure 2 would be the following:
?lo siento ; esto es verdad ? I ?m sorry , this is
true?.
In order to increase the recall, BMWE detec-
tion was insensitive to the case of the first letter
of each multi-word. The detection engine also al-
lows a search based on lemmas. Two strategies
are possible. In the first one, search is first carried
out with full forms, so that lemmas are resorted to
only if no match is found with full forms. In the
second strategy, only lemmas are considered.
3.4 Re-alignment
The modified training corpus, with identified
BMWEs grouped in a unique ?super-token? was
aligned again in the same way as explained in sec-
tion 2. By grouping multi-words, we increased the
size of the vocabulary and thus the sparseness of
data. However, we expect that if the meaning of
the multi-words expressions we grouped is effec-
tively different from the meaning of the words they
contain, the individual word probabilities should
be improved.
After re-aligning, we unjoined the super-tokens
that had been grouped in the previous stage, cor-
recting the alignment set accordingly. More pre-
cisely, if two super-tokens A and B were linked
together, after ungrouping them into various to-
kens, every word of A was linked to every word
of B. Translation units were extracted from this
corrected alignment, with the unjoined sentence
pairs (i.e.the same as in the baseline). So the only
difference with respect to the baseline lied in the
alignment, and thus in the distribution of transla-
tion units and in lexical model probabilities.
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Training and Test Data
Our task was word alignment and translation of
parliamentary session transcriptions of the Eu-
ropean Parliament (EPPS). These data are cur-
rently available at the Parliament?s website.4 They
were distributed through the TC-STAR consor-
tium.5 The training and translation test data used
4http://www.euro parl.eu.int/
5http: //www.tc-star.org/
12
included session transcriptions from April 1996
until September 2004, and from November 15th
until November 18th, 2004, respectively. Transla-
tion test data include two reference sets. Align-
ment test data was a subset of the training data
(Lambert et al, 2006).
Table 1 presents some statistics of the various
data sets for each considered language: English
(eng) and Spanish (spa). More specifically, the
statistics presented in Table 1 are, the total num-
ber of sentences, the total number of words, the
vocabulary size (or total number of distinct words)
and the average number of words per sentence.
1.a.- Training data set
Lang. Sentences Words Vocab. Aver.
Eng 1.22 M 33.4 M 105 k 27.3
Spa 1.22 M 35.0 M 151 k 28.6
1.b.- Test data set for translation
Lang. Sentences Words Vocab. Aver.
Eng 1094 26.8 k 3.9 k 24.5
Spa 840 22.7 k 4.0 k 27.0
1.c.- Word alignment reference
Lang. Sentences Words Vocab. Aver.
Eng 400 11.7 k 2.7 k 29.1
Spa 400 12.3 k 3.1 k 30.4
Table 1: Basic statistics for the considered training
(a) translation test (b) and alignment test (c) data
sets (M and k stands for millions and thousands,
respectively).
4.2 Evaluation measures
Details about alignment evaluation can be found
in Lambert et al (2006). The alignment test data
contain unambiguous links (called S or Sure) and
ambiguous links (called P or Possible). If there
is a P link between two words in the reference, a
computed link (i.e. to be evaluated) between these
words is acceptable, but not compulsory. On the
contrary, if there would be an S link between these
words in the reference, a computed link would
be compulsory. In this paper, precision refers to
the proportion of computed links that are present
in the reference. Recall refers to the proportion
of reference Sure links that were computed. The
alignment error rate (AER) is given by the follow-
ing formula:
AER = 1?
|A ? GS |+ |A ? G|
|A|+ |GS |
(4)
where A is the set of computed links, GS is the set
of Sure reference links and G is the entire set of
reference links.
As for translation evaluation, we used the fol-
lowing measures:
WER (word error rate) or mWER (multi-
reference word error rate) The WER is the
minimum number of substitution, insertion
and deletion operations that must be per-
formed to convert the generated sentence into
the reference target sentence. For the mWER,
a whole set of reference translations is used.
In this case, for each translation hypothesis,
the edit distance to the most similar sentence
is calculated.
BLEU score This score measures the precision of
unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, and fourgrams
with respect to a whole set of reference trans-
lations, and with a penalty for too short sen-
tences (Papineni et al, 2001). BLEU mea-
sures accuracy, thus larger scores are better.
4.3 Multi-words in Training Data
In this section we describe the results of the
BMWE extraction and detection techniques ap-
plied to the training data.
4.3.1 Description of the BMWE dictionaries
Parameters of the extraction process have been
optimised with the alignment development corpus
available with the alignment test corpus. With
these parameters, a dictionary of 60k entries was
extracted. After applying the lexical and morpho-
syntactic filters, 45k entries were left. The best
30k entries (hereinafter referred to as all) have
been selected for the experiments and divided in
the three groups mentioned in section 3.2. verb,
noun and misc (miscellaneous) dictionaries con-
tained respectively 11797, 9709 and 8494 entries.
Table 2 shows recall and precision for the
BMWEs identified with each dictionary. The
first line is the evaluation of the MWEs obtained
with the best 30k entries of the dictionary before
filtering. Alignments evaluated in table 2 con-
tained only links corresponding to the identified
BMWEs. For an identified BMWE, a link was in-
troduced between each word of the source side and
each word of the target side. Nevertheless, the test
data contained the whole set of links.
From table 2 we see the dramatic effect of the
filters. The precision for nouns is lower than for
13
Recall Precision
Best 30k (no filters) 13.6 53.6
Best 30k (filters) 11.4 79.3
VERB (filters) 3.7 81.8
NOUN (filters) 4.0 72.8
MISC (filters) 4.1 80.8
Table 2: Quality of the BMWEs identified from
the various dictionaries.
the other categories because many word groups
which were identified, like ?European Parliament -
Parlamento europeo?, are not aligned as a group in
the alignment reference. Notice also that the data
in table 2 reflects the precision of bilingual MWE,
which is a lower bound of the precision of ?super-
tokens? formed in each sentence, the quantity that
matters in our experiment.
Identification of BMWE based on lemmas has
also been experimented. However, with lemmas,
the selection phase is more delicate. With our ba-
sic selection criterion (see section 3.3), the quality
of MWEs identified was worse so we based iden-
tification on full forms.
Figure 3 shows the first 10 entries in the misc
dictionary, along with their renormalised score.
Notice that ?the EU - la UE?, ?young people -
jo?venes? and ?the WTO - la OMC? have been in-
correctly classified due to POS-tagging errors.
the EU ||| la UE ||| 770731
secondly ||| en segundo lugar ||| 610599
however ||| sin embargo ||| 443042
finally ||| por u?ltimo ||| 421879
firstly ||| en primer lugar ||| 324396
thirdly ||| en tercer lugar ||| 286924
young people ||| jo?venes ||| 178571
the WTO ||| la OMC ||| 174496
once again ||| una vez ma?s ||| 169317
once ||| una vez ||| 150139
Figure 3: Examples of BMWEs of the misc cate-
gory.
4.3.2 BMWE Identification Statistics
Table 3 shows, for each language, the MWE vo-
cabulary size after the identification process, and
how many times a MWE has been grouped as a
unique token (instances). The different number
of instances between Spanish and English corre-
spond to one-to-many BMWEs. In general more
MWEs are grouped in the Spanish side, because
English is a denser language. However, the omis-
sion of the subject in Spanish causes the inverse
situation for verbs.
Vocabulary Instances
ENG SPA ENG SPA
ALL 12.2k 12.6k 1.28M 1.56M
VERB 6.0k 3.3k 738k 237k
NOUN 3.9k 5.9k 288k 827k
MISC 3.1k 4.3k 336k 557k
Table 3: Statistics for the BMWEs identified from
the various dictionaries. ALL refers to the 30k best
entries with filters.
4.4 Alignment and Translation Results
Tables 4 and 5 show the effect of aligning the cor-
pus when the various categories of multi-words
have been previously grouped.
IBM1 lexical probabilities baseline All
p(in other words|es decir) - 0.94
p(words|decir) 0.23 0.0013
p(other|decir) 0.026 6 10?5
p(say|decir) 0.45 0.49
Table 4: Single word lexical probabilities of the
alignment model in the baseline and after group-
ing MWE with all dictionary entries. The multi-
word tokens ?in other words? and ?es decir? do
not exist in the baseline.
In table 4 we see how word-to-word lexi-
cal probabilities of the alignment model can be
favourably modified. In the baseline, due to pres-
ence of the fixed expression ?in other words -
es decir?, the probability of ?words? given ?de-
cir? (?say? in English) is high. With this ex-
pression grouped, probabilities p(words|decir) and
p(other|decir) vanish, while p(say|decir) is rein-
forced. These observations allowed to expect that
with many individual probabilities improved, a
global improvement of the alignment would occur.
However, table 5 shows that alignment is not
better when trained with BMWEs grouped as a
unique token.
A closer insight into alignments confirms that
they have not been improved globally. Changes
with respect to the baseline are very localised and
correspond directly to the grouping of the BMWEs
present in each sentence pair.
Table 6 presents the automatic translation eval-
14
Recall Precision AER
Baseline 76.3 85.0 19.4
All 78.0 82.0 19.9
Verb 77.0 84.5 19.3
Noun 76.8 83.0 20.0
Misc 77.0 84.1 19.4
Table 5: Alignment results
uation results. In the Spanish to English direc-
tion, BMWEs seem to have a negative influence.
In the English to Spanish direction, no significant
improvement or worsening is observed.
S?E E?S
mWER BLEU mWER BLEU
Baseline 34.4 0.547 40.2 0.472
All 36.4 0.517 40.7 0.470
Verb 35.1 0.537 40.2 0.472
Noun 35.1 0.537 40.7 0.469
Misc 35.8 0.527 41.1 0.466
Table 6: Translation results in Spanish-to-English
(S?E) and English-to-Spanish (E?S) directions.
In order to understand these results better, we
performed a manual error analysis for the first 50
sentences of the test corpus. We analysed, for the
experiment with all dictionary entries (?All? line
of table 6), the changes in translation with respect
to the baseline. We counted how many changes
had a neutral, positive or negative effect on trans-
lation quality. Results are shown in table 7. Notice
that approximatively half of these changes were
directly related to the presence some BMWE.
This study permitted to see interesting qualita-
tive features. First, BMWEs have a clear influence
on translation, sometimes positive and sometimes
negative, with a balance which appears to be null
in this experiment. In many examples BMWEs
allowed a group translation instead of an incor-
rect word to word literal translation. For instance,
?Red Crescent? was translated by ?Media Luna
Roja? instead of ?Cruz Luna? (cross moon).
Two main types of error were observed. The
first ones are related to the quality of BMWEs. De-
terminers, or particles like ?of?, which are present
in BMWEs are mistakenly inserted in the trans-
lations. Some errors are caused by inadequate
BMWEs. For example ?looking at ? si anal-
izamos? (?if we analyse?) cannot be used in the
sense of looking with the eyes. The second type of
error is related to the rigidity and data sparseness
introduced in the bilingual n-gram model. For ex-
ample, when inflected forms are encapsulated in
a BMWE, the model looses flexibility to trans-
late the correct inflection. Another typical error
is caused by the use of back-off (n-1)-grams in
the bilingual language model, when the n-gram is
not any more available because of increased data
sparseness.
The error analysis did not give explanation for
why the effect of BMWEs is so different for dif-
ferent translation directions. A possible hypothe-
sis would be that BMWEs help in translating from
a denser language. However, in this case, verbs
would be expected to help relatively more in the
Spanish to English direction, since there are more
verb group instances in the English side.
Neutral Positive Negative
S?E 43 20 22
E?S 49 19 17
Table 7: Effect on quality of differences in the
translations between the baseline and the BMWE
experiment with ?ALL? dictionary. S and E stand
for Spanish and English, respectively.
5 Conclusions and Further work
We applied a technique for extracting and using
BMWEs in Statistical Machine Translation. This
technique is based on grouping BMWEs before
performing statistical alignment. On a large cor-
pus with real-life data, this technique failed to
clearly improve alignment quality or translation
accuracy.
After performing a detailed error analysis, we
believe that when the considered MWEs are fixed
expressions, grouping them before training helps
for their correct translation in test. However,
grouping MWEs which could in fact be translated
word to word, doesn?t help and introduces unnec-
essary rigidity and data sparseness in the models.
The main strength of the n-gram translation
model (its history capability) is reduced when tu-
ples become longer. So we plan to run this experi-
ment with a phrase-based translation model. Since
these models use unigrams, they are more flexible
and less sensitive to data sparseness.
Some errors were also caused by noise in the
automatic generation of BMWEs. Thus filter-
15
ing techniques should be improved, and differ-
ent methods for extracting and identifying MWEs
must be developed and evaluated. Resources build
manually, like Wordnet multi-word expressions,
should also be considered.
The proposed method considers the bilingual
multi-words as units ; the use of each side of the
BMWEs as independent monolingual multi-words
must be considered and evaluated.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially funded by the Eu-
ropean Union under the integrated project TC-
STAR - Technology and Corpora for Speech
to Speech Translation -(IST-2002-FP6-506738,
http://www.tc-star.org).
References
V. Arranz, N. Castell, and J. Gime?nez. 2003. Devel-
opment of language resources for speech-to-speech
translation. In Proc. of the International Conference
on Recent Advances in Natural Language Process-
ing (RANLP), Borovets, Bulgary, September, 10-12.
T. Baldwin and A. Villavicencio. 2002. Extracting the
unextractable: A case study on verb-particles. In
Computational Natural Language Learning Work-
shop (CoNLL).
T. Brants. 2000. Tnt ? a statistical part-of-speech
tagger. In Proc. of Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing (ANLP), Seattle, WA.
P. Brown, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, and R. Mer-
cer. 1993. The mathematics of statistical machine
translation: Parameter estimation. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):263?311.
Xavier Carreras, I. Chao, L. Padro?, and M. Padro?.
2004. Freeling: An open-source suite of lan-
guage analyzers. In Proc. of the 4th International
Conference on Linguistic Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), Lisbon, Portugal, May.
J. M. Crego, J. Marin?o, and A. de Gispert. 2005. A
ngram-based statistical machine translation decoder.
In Proc. of the 9th European Conf. on Speech Com-
munication and Technology (Interspeech), pages
3185?88, Lisbon, Portugal.
A. de Gispert and J. Marin?o. 2002. Using X-grams for
speech-to-speech translation. Proc. of the 7th Int.
Conf. on Spoken Language Processing, ICSLP?02,
September.
A. de Gispert and J. Marin?o. 2004. Talp: Xgram-
based spoken language translation system. Proc. of
the Int. Workshop on Spoken Language Translation,
IWSLT?04, pages 85?90, October.
P. Koehn, F.J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical
phrase-based translation. In Proc. of the 41th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics.
P. Lambert and R. Banchs. 2005. Data inferred multi-
word expressions for statistical machine translation.
In Proc. of Machine Translation Summit X, pages
396?403, Phuket, Tailandia.
P. Lambert and N. Castell. 2004. Alignment of parallel
corpora exploiting asymmetrically aligned phrases.
In Proc. of the LREC 2004 Workshop on the Amaz-
ing Utility of Parallel and Comparable Corpora,
Lisbon, Portugal, May 25.
P. Lambert, A. de Gispert, R. Banchs, and J. Marin?o.
2006. Guidelines for word alignment and manual
alignment. Accepted for publication in Language
Resources and Evaluation.
J. Marin?o, R. Banchs, J. M. Crego, A. de Gispert,
P. Lambert, J.A. Fonollosa, and M. Ruiz. 2005.
Bilingual n-gram statistical machine translation. In
Proc. of Machine Translation Summit X, pages 275?
82, Phuket, Thailand.
G.A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross,
K. Miller, and R. Tengi. 1991. Five papers on word-
net. Special Issue of International Journal of Lexi-
cography, 3(4):235?312.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2002. Dicriminative training
and maximum entropy models for statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proc. of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 295?302, Philadelphia, PA, July.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison
of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19?51, March.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2004. The alignment template
approach to statistical machine translation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 30(4):417?449, December.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2001. Bleu: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. IBM Research Re-
port, RC22176, September.
A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM: an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Spo-
ken Language Processing, pages 901?904, Denver,
CO.
S. Vogel, H. Ney, and C. Tillmann. 1996. HMM-
based word alignment in statistical translation. In
COLING?96: The 16thInt. Conf. on Computational
Linguistics, pages 836?841, Copenhagen, Denmark,
August.
R. Zens, F.J. Och, and H. Ney. 2002. Phrase-based
statistical machine translation. In Springer Verlag,
editor, Proc. German Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence (KI), september.
16
