Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Ontology Learning and Population, pages 26?32,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Ontology Population from Textual Mentions:
Task Definition and Benchmark
Bernardo Magnini, Emanuele Pianta, Octavian Popescu and
Manuela Speranza
ITC-irst, Istituto per la Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica
Via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo (TN), Italy
{magnini, pianta, popescu, manspera}@itc.it
Abstract
In this paper we propose and investigate
Ontology Population from Textual Mentions
(OPTM), a sub-task of Ontology Population
from text where we assume that mentions for
several kinds of entities (e.g. PERSON,
O R G A N I Z A T I O N , LO C A T I O N , GEO-
POLITICAL_ ENTITY) are already extracted
from a document collection. On the one
hand, OPTM simplifies the general Ontology
Population task, limiting the input textual
material; on the other hand, it introduces
challenging extensions to Ontology Popula-
tion restricted to named entities, being open
to a wider spectrum of linguistic phenomena.
We describe a manually created benchmark
for OPTM and discuss several factors which
determine the difficulty of the task.
1 Introduction
Mentions are portions of text which refer to enti-
ties
1
. As an example, given a particular textual
context, both the mentions ?George W. Bush?
and ?the U.S. President.? refer to the same entity,
i.e. a particular instance of Person whose first
name is ?George?, whose middle initial is ?W.?,
whose family name is ?Bush? and whose role is
?U.S. President?.
In this paper we propose and investigate Ontol-
ogy Population from Textual Mentions (OPTM),
a sub-task of Ontology Learning and Population
                                                 
1
 The terms ?mention? and ?entity? have been intro-
duced within the ACE Program (Linguistic Data Con-
sortium, 2004). ?Mentions? are equivalent to ?refer-
ring expressions? and ?entities? are equivalent to
?referents?, as widely used in computational linguis-
tics. In this paper, we use italics for ?mentions? and
small caps for ENTITY and ENTITY_ATTRIBUTE.
(OLP) from text where we assume that mentions
for several kinds of entities (e.g. PERSON,
ORGANIZATION, LO C A T I O N , GEO-POLITICAL
_ENTITY) are already extracted from a document
collection.
We assume an ontology with a set of classes
C={c
1
, ?, c
n
} with each class c
1
 being described
by a set of attribute value pairs [a
1
, v
1
]. Given a
set of mentions M={m
1,c1
, ?,  m
n,cn
}, where each
mention m
j
 is classified into a class c
i
 in C, the
OPTM task is defined in three steps: Recognition
and Classification of Entity Attributes, Normali-
zation, and Resolution of inter-text Entity Co-
reference.
(i) Recognition and Classification of Entity
Attributes (RCEA). The textual material
expressed in a mention is extracted and dis-
tributed along the attribute-value pairs al-
ready defined for the class c
i
 of the mention;
as an example, given the PERSON mention
?U.S. President Bush?, we expect that the
attribute LAST_NAME is filled with the value
?Bush? and the attribute ROLE is filled with
the value ?U.S. President?. Note that fillers,
at this step, are still portions of text.
(ii) Normalization. The textual material ex-
tracted at step (i) is assigned to concepts and
relations already defined in the ontology; for
example, the entity BUSH is created as an in-
stance of COUNTRY_PRESIDENT, and an in-
stance of the relation PRESIDENT_OF is cre-
ated between BUSH and U.S.A. At this step
different instances are created for co-
referring mentions.
(iii) Resolution of inter-text Entity Co-
reference (REC). Each mention m
j
 has to be
assigned to a single individual entity be-
longing to a class in C . For example, we
recognize that the instances created at step
(i) for ?U.S. President Bush? and ?George
W. Bush? actually refer to the same entity.
26
In this paper we address steps (i) and (iii),
while step (ii) is work in progress. The input of
the OPTM task consists of classified mentions
and the output consists of individual entities
filled with textual material (i.e. there is no nor-
malization) with their co-reference relations. The
focus is on the definition of the task and on an
empirical analysis of the aspects that determine
its complexity, rather than on approaches and
methods for the automatic solution of OPTM.
There are several advantages of OPTM which
make it appealing for OLP. First, mentions pro-
vide an obvious simplification with respect to the
more general Ontology Population from text (cf.
Buitelaar et al 2005); in particular, mentions are
well defined and there are systems for automatic
mention recognition. Although there is no univo-
cally accepted definition for the OP task, a useful
approximation has been suggested by
(Bontcheva and Cunningham, 2005) as Ontology
Driven Information Extraction with the goal of
extracting and classifying instances of concepts
and relations defined in a Ontology, in place of
filling a template. A similar task has been ap-
proached in a variety of perspectives, including
term clustering (Lin, 1998 and Almuhareb and
Poesio, 2004) and term categorization (Avancini
et al 2003). A rather different task is Ontology
Learning, where new concepts and relations are
supposed to be acquired, with the consequence of
changing the definition of the Ontology itself
(Velardi et al 2005). However, since mentions
have been introduced as an evolution of the tra-
ditional Named Entity Recognition task (see
Tanev and Magnini, 2006), they guarantee a rea-
sonable level of difficulty, which makes OPTM
challenging both for the Computational Linguis-
tic side and the Knowledge Representation
community. Second, there already exist anno-
tated data with mentions, delivered under the
ACE (Automatic Content Extraction) initiative
(Ferro et al 2005, Linguistic Data Consortium
2004), which makes the exploitation of machine
learning based approaches possible. Finally,
having a limited scope with respect to OLP, the
OPTM task allows for a better estimation of per-
formance; in particular, it is possible to evaluate
more easily the recall of the task, i.e. the propor-
tion of information correctly assigned to an en-
tity out of the total amount of information pro-
vided by a certain mention.
In the paper we both define the OPTM task
and describe an OPTM benchmark, i.e. a docu-
ment collection annotated with mentions as well
as an ontology where information from mentions
has been manually extracted. The general archi-
tecture of the OPTM task has been sketched
above, considering three sub tasks. The docu-
ment collection we use consists of about 500
Italian news items. Currently, mentions referring
to PE R S O N , ORGANIZATION and GEO-
POLITICAL_ ENTITY have been annotated and co-
references among such mentions have been es-
tablished. As for the RCEA sub task, we have
considered mentions referring to PERSON and
have built a knowledge base of instances, each
described with a number of attribute-value pairs.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
provides the useful background as far as men-
tions and entities are concerned. Section 3 de-
fines the OPTM task and introduces the dataset
we have used, as well as the annotation proce-
dures and guidelines we have defined for the re-
alization of the OPTM benchmark corpus. Sec-
tion 4 reports on a number of quantitative and
qualitative analyses of the OPTM benchmark
aimed at determining the difficulty of the task.
Finally, Section 5 proposes future extensions and
developments of our work.
2 Mentions and Entities
As indicated in the ACE Entity Detection
task, the annotation of entities (e.g. PERSON,
ORGANIZAT I O N , LOCAT I O N  a n d  GEO-
POLITICAL_ENTITY) requires that the entities
mentioned in a text be detected, their syntactic
head marked, their sense disambiguated, and that
selected attributes of these entities be extracted
and merged into a unified representation for each
entity.
As it often happens that the same entity is
mentioned more than once in the same text, two
inter-connected levels of annotation have been
defined: the level of the entity, which provides a
representation of an object in the world, and the
level of the entity mention, which provides in-
formation about the textual references to that
object.  For instance, if  the entity
GEORGE_W._BUSH (e.g. the individual in the
world who is the current president of the U.S.) is
mentioned in two different sentences of a text as
?the U.S. president? and as ?the president?, these
two expressions are considered as two co-
referring entity mentions.
The kinds of reference made by entities to
something in the world are described by the fol-
lowing four classes:
? specific referential entities are those where
the entity being referred to is a unique object
27
or set of objects (e.g. ?The president of
thecompany is here?)
 2
;
? generic referential entities refer to a kind or
type of entity and not to a particular object (or
set of objects) in the world (e.g. ?The presi-
dent is elected every 5 years?);
? under-specified referential entities are non-
generic non-specific references, including im-
precise quantifications (e.g. ?everyone?) and
estimates (e.g. ?more than 10.000 people?);
? negatively quantified entities refer to the
empty set of the mentioned type of object (e.g.
?No lawyer?).
The textual extent of mentions is defined as
the entire nominal phrase used to refer to an en-
tity, thus including modifiers (e.g. ?a big fam-
ily?), prepositional phrases (e.g. ?the President of
the Republic?) and dependent clauses (e.g. ?the
girl who is working in the garden?).
The classification of entity mentions is based
on syntactic features; among the most significant
categories defined by LDD (Linguistic Data
Consortium 2004) there are:
- NAM: proper names (e.g. ?Ciampi?, ?the
UN?);
- NOM: nominal constructions (e.g. ?good chil-
dren?, ?the company?);
- PRO: pronouns, e.g. personal (?you?) and in-
definite (?someone?);
- WHQ: wh-words, such as relatives and inter-
rogatives (e.g. ?Who?s there??);
- PTV: partitive constructions (e.g. ?some of
them?, ?one of the schools?);
- APP: appositive constructions (e.g. ?Dante,
famous poet? , ?Juventus, Italian football
club?).
Since the dataset presented in this paper has
been developed for Italian, some new types of
mentions have been added to those listed in the
LDC guidelines; for instance, we have created a
specific tag, ENCLIT, to annotate the clitics
whose extension can not be identified at word-
level (e.g. ?veder[lo]?/?to see him?). Some types
of mentions, on the other hand, have been elimi-
nated; this is the case for pre-modifiers, due to
syntactic differences between English, where
both adjectives and nouns can be used as pre-
modifiers, and Italian, which only admits adjec-
tives in that position.
In extending the annotation guidelines, we
have decided to annotate all conjunctions of en-
tities, not only those which share the same modi-
fiers as indicated in the ACE guidelines, and to
mark them using a specific new tag, CONJ (e.g.
                                                 
2
 Notice that the corpus is in Italian, but we present English
examples for the sake of readability.
?mother and child?)
3
.
According to the ACE standards, each dis-
tinct person or set of people mentioned in a
document refers to an entity of type PERSON. For
example, people may be specified by name
(?John Smith?), occupation (?the butcher?),
family relation (?dad?), pronoun (?he?), etc., or
by some combination of these.
PERSON (PE), the class we have considered
for the Ontology Population from Textual Men-
tion task, is further classified with the following
subtypes:
? INDIVIDUAL_PERSON: PES which refer to a
single person (e.g. ?George W. Bush?);
? GROUP_PERSON: PES which refer to more than
one person (e.g. ?my parents?, ?your family?,
etc.);
? INDEFINITE_PERSON: a PE is classified as in-
definite when it is not possible to judge from
the context whether it refers to one or more
persons (e.g. ?I wonder who came to see me?).
3 Task definition
In Section 3.1 we first describe the document
collection we have used for the creation of the
OPTM benchmark. Then, Section 3.2 provides
details about RCEA, the first step in OPTM.
3.1 Document collection
The OPTM benchmark is built on top of a
document collection (I-CAB, Italian Content
Annotated Bank)
4
 annotated with entity men-
tions. I-CAB (Magnini et al 2006) consists of
525 news documents taken from the local news-
paper ?L?Adige?
5
. The selected news stories be-
long to four different days (September, 7th and
8th 2004 and October, 7th and 8th 2004) and are
grouped into five categories: News Stories, Cul-
tural News, Economic News, Sports News and
Local News (see Table 1).
09/07 09/08 10/07 10/08 Total
News 23 25 18 21 87
Culture 20 18 16 18 72
Economy 13 15 12 14 54
Sport 29 41 27 26 123
Local 46 43 49 51 189
TOTAL 131 142 122 130 525
Table 1: Number of news stories per category.
                                                 
3
 Appositive and conjoined mentions are complex construc-
tions. Although LDC does not identify heads for complex
constructions, we have decided to annotate all the extent as
head.
4
 A demo is available at http://ontotext.itc.it/webicab
5
 http://www.ladige.it/
28
I-CAB is further divided into training and
test sections, which contain 335 and 190 docu-
ments respectively. In total, I-CAB consists of
around 182,500 words: 113,500 and 69,000
words in the training and the test sections re-
spectively (the average length of a news story is
around 339 words in the training section and 363
words in the test section).
The annotation of I-CAB is being carried out
manually, as we intend I-CAB to become a
benchmark for various automatic Information
Extraction tasks, including recognition and nor-
malization of temporal expressions, entities, and
relations between entities (e.g. the relation af-
filiation connecting a person to the organization
to which he or she is affiliated).
3.2 Recognition and Classification
As stated in Section 1, we assume that for
each type of entity there is a set of attribute-value
pairs, which typically are used for mentioning
that entity type. The same entity may have dif-
ferent values for the same attribute and, at this
point no normalization of the data is made, so
there is no way to differentiate between different
values of the same attribute, e.g. there is no
stipulation regarding the relationship between
?politician? and ?political leader?. Finally, we
currently assume a totally flat structure among
the possible values for the attributes.
The work we describe in this Section and in
the next one concerns a pilot study on entities of
type PERSON. After an empirical investigation on
the dataset described in Section 3.1 we have as-
sumed that the attributes listed in the first column
of Table 2 constitute a proper set for this type of
entity. The second column lists some possible
values for each attribute.
The textual extent of a value is defined as the
maximal extent containing pertinent information.
For instance, if we have a person mentioned as
?the thirty-year-old sport journalist?, we will
select ?sport journalist? as value for the attribute
ACTIVITY. In fact, the age of the journalist in not
pertinent to the activity attribute and is left out,
whereas ?sport? contributes to specifying the
activity performed.
As there are always less paradigmatic values
for a given attribute, we shortly present further
the guidelines in making a decision in those
cases. Generally, articles and prepositions are not
admitted at the beginning of the textual extent of
a value, an exception being made in the case of
articles in nicknames.
Attributes Possible values
FIRST_NAME Ralph, Greg
MIDDLE_NAME J., W.
LAST_NAME McCarthy, Newton
NICKNAME Spider, Enigmista
TITLE prof., Mr.
SEX actress
ACTIVITY
AFFILIATION
ROLE
journalist, doctor
The New York Times
director, president
PROVENIENCE South American
FAMILY_RELATION father, cousin
AGE_CATEGORY boy, girl
MISCELLANEA The men with red shoes
Table 2. Attributes for PERSON.
Typical examples for the TITLE attribute are
?Mister?, ?Miss?, ?Professor?, etc. We consider
as TITLE the words which are used to address
people with special status, but which do not refer
specifically to their activity. In Italian, profes-
sions are often used to address people (e.g. ?av-
vocato/lawyer?, ?ingegnere/engineer?). In order
to avoid a possible overlapping between the
TITLE attribute and the ACTIVITY attribute, pro-
fessions are considered values for title only if
they appear in abbreviated forms (?avv.?, ?ing.?
etc.) before a proper name.
With respect to the SEX attribute, we con-
sider as values all the portions of text carrying
this information. In most cases, first and middle
names are relevant. In addition, the values of the
SEX attribute can be gendered words (e.g. ?Mis-
ter? vs. ?Mrs.?, ?husband? vs. ?wife?) and words
from grammatical categories carrying informa-
tion about gender (e.g. adjectives).
The attributes A CTIVITY, RO L E , AF -
FILIATION are three strictly connected attributes.
ACTIVITY refers to the actual activity performed
by a person, while ROLE refers to the position
they occupy. So, for instance, ?politician? is a
possible value for ACTIVITY, while ?leader of the
Labour Party? refers to a ROLE. Each group of
these three attributes is associated with a mention
and all the information within a group has to be
derived from the same mention. If different
pieces of information derive from distinct men-
tions, we will have two separate groups. Con-
sider the following three mentions of the same
entity:
29
(1) ?the journalist of Radio Liberty?
(2) ?the redactor of breaking news?
(3) ?a spare time astronomer?
These three mentions lead to three different
groups of ACTIVITY, ROLE and AFFILIATION.
The obvious inference that the first two mentions
conceptually belong to the same group is not
drawn. This step is to be taken at a further stage.
The PROVENIENCE attribute can have as
values all phrases denoting geographical/racial
origin or provenience and religious affiliation.
The attribute AGE_CATEGORY can have either
numerical values, such as ?three years old?, or
words indicating age, such as ?middle-aged?, etc.
In the next section we will analyze the occur-
rences of the values of these attributes in a news
corpus.
4 Data analysis
The difficulty of the OPTM task is directly cor-
related to four factors: (i) the extent to which the
linguistic form of mentions varies; (ii) the per-
plexity of the values of the attributes; (iii) the
size of the set of the potential co-references and
(iv) the number of different mentions per entity.
In this section we present the work we have un-
dertaken so far and the results we have obtained
regarding the above four factors.
We started with a set of 175 documents be-
longing to the I-CAB corpus (see Section 3.1).
Each document has been manually annotated
observing the specifications described in Section
3.2. We focused on mentions referring to
INDIVIDUAL PERSON (Mentions in Table 3), ex-
cluding from the dataset both mentions referring
to different entity types (e.g. ORGANIZATION)
and PERSON GROUP. In addition, for the pur-
poses of this work we decided to filter out the
following mentions: (i) mentions consisting of a
single pronoun; (ii) nested mentions, (in particu-
lar in the case where a larger mention, e.g.
?President Ciampi?, contained a smaller one, e.g.
?Ciampi?, only the larger mention was consid-
ered). The total number of remaining mentions
(Meaningful mentions in Table 3) is 2343. Fi-
nally, we filtered out repetitions of mentions (i.e.
string equal) that co-refer inside the same docu-
ment, obtaining a set of 1139 distinct mentions.
The average number of mentions for an entity
in a document is 2.09, while the mentions/entity
proportion within the whole collection is 2.68.
The detailed distribution of mentions with re-
spect to document entities is presented in Table
4. Columns 1 and 3 list the number of mentions
and columns 2 and 4 list the number of entities
which are mentioned for the respective number
of times (from 1 to 9 and more than 10). For in-
stance, in the dataset there are 741 entities which,
within a single document, have just one mention,
while there are 27 entities which are mentioned
more than 10 times in the same document. As an
indication of variability, only 14% of document
entities have been mentioned in two different
ways.
Documents 175
Words 57 033
Words in mentions 8116
Mentions 3157
Meaningful mentions 2343
Distinct mentions 1139
Document entities 1117
Collection entities 873
Table 3. Documents, mentions and entities in the
OPTM dataset.
#M/E #occ #M/E #occ
1 741 6 15
2 164 7 11
3 64 8 12
4 47 9 5
5 31 ?10 27
Table 4. Distribution of mentions per entity.
4.1 Co-reference density
We can estimate the a priori probability that two
entities selected from different documents co-
refer. Actually, this is the estimate of the prob-
ability that two entities co-refer conditioned by
the fact that they have been correctly identified
inside the documents. We can compute such
probability as the complement of the ratio be-
tween the number of different entities and the
number of the document entities in the collec-
tion.
entitiesdocument
entitiescollection
corefcrossP
?
?
?=?
#
#
1)(
From Table 3 we read these values as 873
and 1117 respectively, therefore, for this corpus,
the probability of intra-document co-reference is
approximately 0.22.
30
A cumulative factor in estimating the diffi-
culty of the co-reference task is the ratio between
the number of different entities and the number
of mentions. We call this ratio the co-reference
density and it shows the a priori expectation that
a correct identified mention refers to a new en-
tity.
mentions
entitiescollection
densitycoref
#
# ?
=?
The co-reference density takes values in the
interval with limits [0-1]. The case where the co-
reference density tends to 0 means that all the
mentions refer to the same entity, while where
the value tends to 1 it means that each mention in
the collection refers to a different entity. Both
limits render the co-reference task superfluous.
The figure for co-reference density we found in
our corpus is 873/2343 ? 0.37, and it is far from
being close to one of the extremes.
A last measure we introduce is the ratio
between the number of different entities and the
number of distinct mentions. Let?s call it pseudo
co-reference density. In fact it shows the value of
co-reference density conditioned by the fact that
one knows in advance whether two mentions that
are identical also co-refer.
mentionsdistinct
entitiescollection
densitypcoref
?
?
=?
#
#
The pseudo co-reference for our corpus is
873/1139 ? 0.76. This information is not directly
expressed in the collection, so it should be ap-
proximated. The difference between co-reference
density and pseudo co-reference density (see Ta-
ble 5) shows the increase in recall, if one consid-
ers that two identical mentions refer to the same
entity with probability 1. On the other hand, the
loss in accuracy might be too large (consider for
example the case when two different people hap-
pen to have the same first name).
co-reference density 0.37
pseudo co-reference density 0.76
cross co-reference 0.22
Table 5. A priori estimation of difficulty of co-
reference
4.2 Attribute variability
The estimation of the variability of the values for
a certain attribute is given in Table 6. The first
column indicates the attribute under considera-
tion; the second column lists the total number of
mentions of the attribute found in the corpus; the
third column lists the number of different values
that the attribute actually takes and, between pa-
rentheses, its proportion over the total number of
values; the fourth column indicates the propor-
tion of the occurrences of the attribute with re-
spect to the total number of mentions (distinct
mentions are considered).
Table 6. Variability of values for attributes.
In Table 7 we show the distribution of the at-
tributes inside one mention. That is, we calculate
how many times one entity contains more than
one attribute. Columns 1 and 3 list the number of
attributes found in a mention, and columns 2 and
4 list the number of mentions that actually con-
tain that number of values for attributes.
#attributes #mentions #attributes #mentions
1 398 5 55
2 220 6 25
3 312 7 8
4 117 8 4
Table 7. Number of attributes inside a mention.
An example of a mention from our dataset that
includes values for eight attributes is the follow-
ing:
The correspondent of Al Jazira, Amr Abdel
Hamid, an Egyptian of Russian nationality?
We conclude this section with a statistic re-
garding the coverage of attributes (miscellanea
excluded). There are 7275 words used in 1139
Attributes total
occ.
distinct
occ. (%)
occ.
prob.
FIRST_NAME 535 303 (44%) 27,0%
MIDDLE_NAME 25 25 (100%) 2,1%
LAST_NAME 772 690 (11%) 61,0%
NICKNAME 14 14 (100%) 1,2%
TITLE 12 10 (17%) 0,8%
SEX 795 573 (23%) 51,0%
ACTIVITY 145 88 (40%) 7,0%
AFFILIATION 134 121 (10%) 11,0%
ROLE 155 92 (42%) 8,0%
PROVENIENCE 120 80 (34%) 7,3%
FAMILY_REL. 17 17(100%) 1,4%
AGE_CATEGORY 31 31(100%) 2,7%
MISCELLANEA 106 106 (100%) 9,3%
31
distinct mentions, out of which 3606, approxi-
mately 49%, are included in the values of the
attributes.
5 Conclusion and future work
We have presented work in progress aiming at
a better definition of the general OLP task. In
particular we have introduced Ontology Popula-
tion from Textual Mentions (OPTM) as a simpli-
fication of OLP, where the source textual mate-
rial are already classified mentions of entities.
An analysis of the data has been conducted over
a OPTM benchmark manually built from a cor-
pus of Italian news. As a result a number of indi-
cators have been extracted that suggest the com-
plexity of the task for systems aiming at auto-
matic resolution of OPTM.
Our future work is related to the definition and
extension of the OPTM benchmark for the nor-
malization step (see Introduction). For this step it
is crucial the construction and use of a large-
scale ontology, including the concepts and rela-
tions referred by mentions. A number of inter-
esting relations between mentions and ontology
are likely to emerge.
The work presented in this paper is part of the
ONTOTEXT project, a larger initiative aimed at
developing text mining technologies to be ex-
ploited in the perspective of the Semantic Web.
The project focuses on the study and develop-
ment of innovative knowledge extraction tech-
niques for producing new or less noisy informa-
tion to be made available to the Semantic Web.
ONTOTEXT addresses three key research as-
pects: annotating documents with semantic and
relational information, providing an adequate
degree of interoperability of such relational in-
formation, and updating and extending the on-
tologies used for Semantic Web annotation. The
concrete evaluation scenario in which algorithms
will be tested with a number of large-scale ex-
periments is the automatic acquisition of infor-
mation about people from newspaper articles.
6 Acknowledgements
This work was partially funded the three-
year project ONTOTEXT
6
 funded by the Provin-
cia Autonoma di Trento. We would like to thank
Nicola Tovazzi for his contribution to the anno-
tation of the dataset.
                                                 
6
 http://tcc.itc.it/projects/ontotext
References
Almuhareb, A. and Poesio, M.. 2004. Attribute-
based and value-based clustering: An evalua-
tion. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2004, pages
158--165, Barcelona, Spain.
Avancini, H., Lavelli, A., Magnini, B.,
Sebastiani, F., Zanoli, R. (2003). Expanding
Domain-Specific Lexicons by Term Categori-
zation. In: Proceedings of SAC 2003, 793-79.
Cunningham, H. and Bontcheva, K. Knowledge
Management and Human Language: Crossing
the Chasm. Journal of Knowledge Manage-
ment, 9(5), 2005.
Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P. and Magnini, B. (Eds.)
Ontology Learning from Text: Methods,
Evaluation and Applications. IOS Press, 2005.
Ferro, L., Gerber, L., Mani, I., Sundheim, B. and
Wilson, G. (2005). TIDES 2005 Standard for
the Annotation of Temporal Expressions.
Technical report, MITRE.
Lavelli, A., Magnini, B., Negri, M., Pianta, E.,
Speranza, M. and Sprugnoli, R. (2005). Italian
Content Annotation Bank (I-CAB): Temporal
Expressions (V. 1.0.). Technical Report T-
0505-12. ITC-irst, Trento.
Lin, D. (1998). Automatic Retrieval and Clus-
tering of Similar Words. In: Proceedings of
COLING-ACL98, Montreal, Canada, 1998.
Linguistic Data Consortium (2004). ACE
(Automatic Content Extraction) English An-
notation Guidelines for Entities, version 5.6.1
2005.05.23.
http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/ace/docs/English-
Entities-Guidelines_v5.6.1.pdf
Magnini, B., Pianta, E., Girardi, C., Negri, M.,
Romano, L., Speranza, M., Bartalesi Lenzi, V.
and Sprugnoli, R. (2006). I-CAB: the Italian
Content Annotation Bank. Proceedings of
LREC-2006, Genova, Italy, 22-28 May, 2006.
Tanev, H. and Magnini, B. Weakly Supervised
Approaches for Ontology Population. Pro-
ceedings of EACL-2006, Trento, Italy, 3-7
April, 2006.
Velardi, P., Navigli, R., Cuchiarelli, A., Neri, F.
(2004). Evaluation of Ontolearn, a Methodol-
ogy for Automatic Population of Domain On-
tologies. In: Buitelaar, P., Cimiano, P.,
Magnini, B. (eds.): Ontology Learning from
Text: Methods, Evaluation and Applications,
IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2005.
32
