Tagging Portuguese with a Spanish Tagger Using Cognates
Jirka Hana
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
hana.1@osu.edu
Anna Feldman
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
afeldman@ling.osu.edu
Luiz Amaral
Department of Spanish and Portuguese
The Ohio State University
amaral.1@osu.edu
Chris Brew
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
cbrew@acm.org
Abstract
We describe a knowledge and resource
light system for an automatic morpholog-
ical analysis and tagging of Brazilian Por-
tuguese.1 We avoid the use of labor in-
tensive resources; particularly, large anno-
tated corpora and lexicons. Instead, we
use (i) an annotated corpus of Peninsular
Spanish, a language related to Portuguese,
(ii) an unannotated corpus of Portuguese,
(iii) a description of Portuguese morphol-
ogy on the level of a basic grammar book.
We extend the similar work that we have
done (Hana et al, 2004; Feldman et al,
2006) by proposing an alternative algo-
rithm for cognate transfer that effectively
projects the Spanish emission probabili-
ties into Portuguese. Our experiments use
minimal new human effort and show 21%
error reduction over even emissions on a
fine-grained tagset.
1 Introduction
Part of speech (POS) tagging is an important step
in natural language processing. Corpora that have
been POS-tagged are very useful both for linguis-
tic research, e.g. finding instances or frequencies
of particular constructions (Meurers, 2004) and for
further computational processing, such as syntac-
tic parsing, speech recognition, stemming, word-
sense disambiguation. Morphological tagging is
the process of assigning POS, case, number, gen-
der and other morphological information to each
word in a corpus. Despite the importance of mor-
phological tagging, there are many languages that
1We thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments on an earlier version of the paper.
lack annotated resources of this kind, mainly due
to the lack of training corpora which are usually
required for applying standard statistical taggers.
Applications of taggers include syntactic pars-
ing, stemming, text-to-speech synthesis, word-
sense disambiguation, information extraction. For
some of these getting all the tags right is inessen-
tial, e.g. the input to noun phrase chunking does
not necessarily require high accuracy fine-grained
tag resolution.
Cross-language information transfer is not new;
however, most of the existing work relies on par-
allel corpora (e.g. Hwa et al, 2004; Yarowsky
and Ngai, 2001) which are difficult to find, es-
pecially for lesser studied languages. In this pa-
per, we describe a cross-language method that re-
quires neither training data of the target language
nor bilingual lexicons or parallel corpora. We re-
port the results of the experiments done on Brazil-
ian Portuguese and Peninsular Spanish, however,
our system is not tied to these particular languages.
The method is easily portable to other (inflected)
languages. Our method assumes that an anno-
tated corpus exists for the source language (here,
Spanish) and that a text book with basic linguis-
tic facts about the source language is available
(here, Portuguese). We want to test the generality
and specificity of the method. Can the systematic
commonalities and differences between two ge-
netically related languages be exploited for cross-
language applications? Is the processing of Por-
tuguese via Spanish different from the processing
of Russian via Czech (Hana et al, 2004; Feldman
et al, 2006)?
33
Spanish Portuguese
1. sg. canto canto
2. sg. cantas cantas
3. sg. canta canta
1. pl. catamos cantamos
2. pl. cantais cantais
3. pl. cantan cantam
Table 1: Verb conjugation present indicative: -ar
regular verb: cantar ?to sing?
2 Brazilian Portuguese (BP)
vs. Peninsular Spanish (PS)
Portuguese and Spanish are both Romance lan-
guages from the Iberian Peninsula, and share
many morpho-syntactic characteristics. Both lan-
guages have a similar verb system with three main
conjugations (-ar, -er, -ir), nouns and adjectives
may vary in number and gender, and adverbs are
invariable. Both are pro-drop languages, they have
a similar pronominal system, and certain phenom-
ena, such as clitic climbing, are prevalent in both
languages. They also allow rather free constituent
order; and in both cases there is considerable de-
bate in the literature about the appropriate char-
acterization of their predominant word order (the
candidates being SVO and VSO).
Sometimes the languages exhibit near-complete
parallelism in their morphological patterns, as
shown in Table 1.
The languages are also similar in their lexicon and
syntactic word order:
(1) Os
Los
The
estudantes
estudiantes
students
ja?
ya
already
comparam
compraron
bought
os
los
the
livros.
libros.
books
[BP]
[PS]
?The students have already bought the
books.?
One of the main differences is the fact that
Brazilian Portuguese (BP) accepts object drop-
ping, while Peninsular Spanish (PS) doesn?t. In
addition, subjects in BP tend to be overt while in
PS they tend to be omitted.
(2) a. A: O que
What
voce?
you
fez
did
com
with
o
the
livro?
book?
[BP]
A: ?What did you do with the book??
B: Eu
I
dei
gave
para
to
Maria.
Mary
B: ?I gave it to Mary.?
b. A: ?Que?
What
hiciste
did
con
with
el
the
libro?
book?
[PS]
A: ?What did you do with the book??
B: Se
Her.dat
lo
it.acc
di
gave
a
to
Mar??a.
Mary.
B: ?I gave it to Mary.?
Notice also that in the Spanish example (2b) the
dative pronoun se ?her? is obligatory even when
the prepositional phrase a Mar??a ?to Mary? is
present.
3 Resources
3.1 Tagset
For both Spanish and Portuguese, we used posi-
tional tagsets developed on the basis of Spanish
CLiC-TALP tagset (Torruella, 2002). Every tag is
a string of 11 symbols each corresponding to one
morphological category. For example, the Por-
tuguese word partires ?you leave? is assigned the
tag VM0S---2PI-, because it is a verb (V), main
(M), gender is not applicable to this verb form (0),
singular (S), case, possesor?s number and form are
not applicable to this category(-), 2nd person (2),
present (P), indicative (I) and participle type is not
applicable (-).
A comparison of the two tagsets is in Table 2.2
When possible the Spanish and Portuguese tagsets
use the same values, however some differences are
unavoidable. For instance, the pluperfect is a com-
pound verb tense in Spanish, but a separate word
that needs a tag of its own in Portuguese. In ad-
dition, we added a tag for ?treatment? Portuguese
pronouns.
The Spanish tagset has 282 tags, while that for
Portuguese has 259 tags.
3.2 Training corpora
Spanish training corpus. The Spanish corpus
we use for training the transition probabilities as
well as for obtaining Spanish-Portuguese cognate
pairs is a fragment (106,124 tokens, 18,629 types)
of the Spanish section of CLiC-TALP (Torruella,
2Notice that we have 6 possible values for the gender po-
sition: M (masc.), F (fem.), N (neutr., for certain pronouns), C
(common, either M or F), 0 (unspecified for this form within
the category), - (the category does not distinguish gender)
34
No. Description No. of values
Sp Po
1 POS 14 11
2 SubPOS ? detailed POS 30 29
3 Gender 6 6
4 Number 5 5
5 Case 6 6
6 Possessor?s Number 4 4
7 Form 3 3
8 Person 5 5
9 Tense 7 9
10 Mood 8 9
11 Participle 3 3
Table 2: Overview and comparison of the tagsets
2002). CLiC-TALP is a balanced corpus, contain-
ing texts of various genres and styles. We automat-
ically translated the CLiC-TALP tagset into our
system (see Sect. 3.1) for easier detailed evalua-
tion and for comparison with our previous work
that used a similar approach for tagging (Hana
et al, 2004; Feldman et al, 2006).
Raw Portuguese corpus. For automatic lexi-
con acquisition, we use NILC corpus,3 containing
1.2M tokens.
3.3 Evaluation corpus
For evaluation purposes, we selected and manually
annotated a small portion (1,800 tokens) of NILC
corpus.
4 Morphological Analysis
Our morphological analyzer (Hana, 2005) is an
open and modular system. It allows us to com-
bine modules with different levels of manual in-
put ? from a module using a small manually pro-
vided lexicon, through a module using a large lex-
icon automatically acquired from a raw corpus, to
a guesser using a list of paradigms, as the only
resource provided manually. The general strat-
egy is to run modules that make fewer errors and
less overgenerate before modules that make more
errors and overgenerate more. This, for exam-
ple, means that modules with manually created
resources are used before modules with resources
3Nu?cleo Interdisciplinar de Lingu???stica Computacional;
available at http://nilc.icmc.sc.usp.br/nilc/,
we used the version with POS tags assigned by PALAVRAS.
We ignored the POS tags.
automatically acquired. In the experiments below,
we used the following modules ? lookup in a list
of (mainly) closed-class words, a paradigm-based
guesser and an automatically acquired lexicon.
4.1 Portuguese closed class words
We created a list of the most common preposi-
tions, conjunctions, and pronouns, and a number
of the most common irregular verbs. The list con-
tains about 460 items and it required about 6 hours
of work. In general, the closed class words can be
derived either from a reference grammar book, or
can be elicited from a native speaker. This does
not require native-speaker expertise or intensive
linguistic training. The reason why the creation
of such a list took 6 hours is that the words were
annotated with detailed morphological tags used
by our system.
4.2 Portuguese paradigms
We also created a list of morphological paradigms.
Our database contains 38 paradigms. We just en-
coded basic facts about the Portuguese morphol-
ogy from a standard grammar textbook (Cunha
and Cintra, 2001). The paradigms include all three
regular verb conjugations (-ar, -er, -ir), the most
common adjective and nouns paradigms and a rule
for adverbs of manner that end with -mente (anal-
ogous to the English -ly). We ignore majority of
exceptions. The creation of the paradigms took
about 8 h of work.
4.3 Lexicon Acquisition
The morphological analyzer supports a module or
modules employing a lexicon containing informa-
tion about lemmas, stems and paradigms. There is
always the possibility to provide this information
manually. That, however, is very costly. Instead,
we created such a lexicon automatically.
Usually, automatically acquired lexicons and
similar systems are used as a backup for large
high-precision high-cost manually created lexi-
cons (e.g. Mikheev, 1997; Hlava?c?ova?, 2001). Such
systems extrapolate the information about the
words known by the lexicon (e.g. distributional
properties of endings) to unknown words. Since
our approach is resource light, we do not have any
such large lexicon to extrapolate from.
The general idea of our system is very sim-
ple. The paradigm-based Guesser, provides all the
possible analyses of a word consistent with Por-
tuguese paradigms. Obviously, this approach mas-
35
sively overgenerates. Part of the ambiguity is usu-
ally real but most of it is spurious. We use a large
corpus to weed the spurious analyses out of the
real ones. In such corpus, open-class lemmas are
likely to occur in more than one form. Therefore,
if a lemma+paradigm candidate suggested by the
Guesser occurs in other forms in other parts of the
corpus, it increases the likelihood that the candi-
date is real and vice versa. If we encounter the
word cantamos ?we sing? in a Portuguese corpus,
using the information about the paradigms we can
analyze it in two ways, either as being a noun in
the plural with the ending -s, or as being a verb in
the 1st person plural with the ending -amos. Based
on this single form we cannot say more. However
if we also encounter the forms canto, canta, can-
tam the verb analysis becomes much more prob-
able; and therefore, it will be chosen for the lex-
icon. If the only forms that we encounter in our
Portuguese corpus were cantamos and (the non-
existing) cantamo (such as the existing word ramo
and ramos) then we would analyze it as a noun and
not as a verb.
With such an approach, and assuming that the
corpus contains the forms of the verb matar ?to
kill?, mato1sg matas2sg, mata3sg, etc., we would
not discover that there is also a noun mata ?forest?
with a plural form matas ? the set of the 2 noun
forms is a proper subset of the verb forms. A sim-
ple solution is to consider not the number of form
types covered in a corpus, but the coverage of the
possible forms of the particular paradigm. How-
ever this brings other problems (e.g. it penalizes
paradigms with large number of forms, paradigms
with some obsolete forms, etc.). We combine both
of these measures in Hana (2005).
Lexicon Acquisition consists of three steps:
1. A large raw corpus is analyzed with a
lexicon-less MA (an MA using a list of
mainly closed-class words and a paradigm
based guesser);
2. All possible hypothetical lexical entries over
these analyses are created.
3. Hypothetical entries are filtered with aim to
discard as many nonexisting entries as possi-
ble, without discarding real entries.
Obviously, morphological analysis based on
such a lexicon still overgenerates, but it overgener-
ates much less than if based on the endings alone.
Lexicon no yes
recall 99.0 98.1
avg ambig (tag/word) 4.3 3.5
Tagging (cognates) ? accuracy 79.1 82.1
Table 3: Evaluation of Morphological analysis
Consider for example, the form func?o?es ?func-
tions? of the feminine noun func?a?o. The analyzer
without a lexicon provides 11 analyses (6 lemmas,
each with 1 to 3 tags); only one of them is cor-
rect. In contrast, the analyzer with an automati-
cally acquired lexicon provides only two analyses:
the correct one (noun fem. pl.) and an incorrect
one (noun masc. pl., note that POS and number
are still correct). Of course, not all cases are so
persuasive.
The evaluation of the system is in Table 3. The
98.1% recall is equivalent to the upper bound for
the task. It is calculated assuming an oracle-
Portuguese tagger that is always able to select the
correct POS tag if it is in the set of options given
by the morphological analyzer. Notice also that
for the tagging accuracy, the drop of recall is less
important than the drop of ambiguity.
5 Tagging
We used the TnT tagger (Brants, 2000), an im-
plementation of the Viterbi algorithm for second-
order Markov model. In the traditional approach,
we would train the tagger?s transitional and emis-
sion probabilities on a large annotated corpus of
Portuguese. However, our resource-light approach
means that such corpus is not available to us and
we need to use different ways to obtain this infor-
mation.
We assume that syntactic properties of Spanish
and Portuguese are similar enough to be able to
use the transitional probabilities trained on Span-
ish (after a simple tagset mapping).
The situation with the lexical properties as cap-
tured by emission probabilities is more complex.
Below we present three different ways how to ob-
tains emissions, assuming:
1. they are the same: we use the Spanish emis-
sions directly (?5.1).
2. they are different: we ignore the Spanish
emissions and instead uniformly distribute
36
the results of our morphological analyzer.
(?5.2)
3. they are similar: we map the Spanish emis-
sions onto the result of morphological analy-
sis using automatically acquired cognates.
(?5.3)
5.1 Tagging ? Baseline
Our lowerbound measurement consists of training
the TnT tagger on the Spanish corpus and apply-
ing this model directly to Portuguese.4 The overall
performance of such a tagger is 56.8% (see the the
min column in Table 4). That means that half of
the information needed for tagging of Portuguese
is already provided by the Spanish model. This
tagger has seen no Portuguese whatsoever, and is
still much better than nothing.
5.2 Tagging ? Approximating Emissions I
The opposite extreme to the baseline, is to assume
that Spanish emissions are useless for tagging Por-
tuguese. Instead we use the morphological an-
alyzer to limit the number of possibilities, treat-
ing them all equally ? The emission probabilities
would then form a uniform distribution of the tags
given by the analyzer. The results are summarized
in Table 4 (the e-even column) ? accuracy 77.2%
on full tags, or 47% relative error reduction against
the baseline.
5.3 Tagging ? Approximating Emissions II
Although it is true that forms and distributions of
Portuguese and Spanish words are not the same,
they are also not completely unrelated. As any
Spanish speaker would agree, the knowledge of
Spanish words is useful when trying to understand
a text in Portuguese.
Many of the corresponding Portuguese and
Spanish words are cognates, i.e. historically they
descend from the same ancestor root or they are
mere translations. We assume two things: (i) cog-
nate pairs have usually similar morphological and
distributional properties, (ii) cognate words are
similar in form.
Obviously both of these assumptions are ap-
proximations:
1. Cognates could have departed in their mean-
ings, and thus probably also have dif-
4Before training, we translated the Spanish tagset into the
Portuguese one.
ferent distributions. For example, Span-
ish embarazada ?pregnant? vs. Portuguese
embarac?ada ?embarrassed?.
2. Cognates could have departed in their mor-
phological properties. For example, Span-
ish cerca ?near?.adverb vs. Portuguese cerca
?fence?.noun (from Latin circa, circus ?cir-
cle?).
3. There are false cognates ? unrelated,
but similar or even identical words. For
example, Spanish salada ?salty?.adj vs. Por-
tuguese salada ?salad?.noun, Spanish doce
?twelve?.numeral vs. Portuguese doce
?candy?.noun
Nevertheless, we believe that these examples
are true exceptions from the rule and that in major-
ity of cases, the cognates would look and behave
similarly. The borrowings, counter-borrowings
and parallel developments of the various Romance
languages have of course been extensively studied,
and we have no space for a detailed discussion.
Identifying cognates. For the present work,
however, we do not assume access to philologi-
cal erudition, or to accurate Spanish-Portuguese
translations or even a sentence-aligned corpus. All
of these are resources that we could not expect to
obtain in a resource poor setting. In the absence
of this knowledge, we automatically identify cog-
nates, using the edit distance measure (normalized
by word length).
Unlike in the standard edit distance, the cost of
operations is dependent on the arguments. Simi-
larly as Yarowsky and Wicentowski (2000), we as-
sume that, in any language, vowels are more muta-
ble in inflection than consonants, thus for example
replacing a for i is cheaper that replacing s by r.
In addition, costs are refined based on some well
known and common phonetic-orthographic regu-
larities, e.g. replacing a q with c is less costly than
replacing m with, say s. However, we do not want
to do a detailed contrastive morpho-phonological
analysis, since we want our system to be portable
to other languages. So, some facts from a simple
grammar reference book should be enough.
Using cognates. Having a list of Spanish-
Portuguese cognate pairs, we can use these to
map the emission probabilities acquired on Span-
ish corpus to Portuguese.
37
Let?s assume Spanish word ws and Portuguese
word wp are cognates. Let Ts denote the tags that
ws occurs within the Spanish corpus, and let ps(t)
be the emission probability of a tag t (t 6? Ts ?
ps(t) = 0). Let Tp denote tags assigned to the
Portuguese word wp by our morphological ana-
lyzer, and the pp(t) is the even emission proba-
bility: pp(t) = 1|Tp| . Then we can assign the new
emission probability p?p(t) to every tag t ? Tp in
the following way (followed by normalization):
p?p(t) =
ps(t) + pp(t)
2
(1)
Results. This method provides the best results.
The full-tag accuracy is 82.1%, compared to
56.9% for baseline (58% error rate reduction) and
77.2% for even-emissions (21% reduction). The
accuracy for POS is 87.6%. Detailed results are in
column e-cognates of Table 4.
6 Evaluation & Comparison
The best way to evaluate our results would be to
compare it against the TnT tagger used the usual
way ? trained on Portuguese and applied on Por-
tuguese. We do not have access to a large Por-
tuguese corpus annotated with detailed tags. How-
ever, we believe that Spanish and Portuguese are
similar enough (see Sect. 2) to justify our assump-
tion that the TnT tagger would be equally success-
ful (or unsuccessful) on them. The accuracy of
TnT trained on 90K tokens of the CLiC-TALP cor-
pus is 94.2% (tested on 16K tokens). The accuracy
of our best tagger is 82.1%. Thus the error-rate is
more than 3 times bigger (17.9% vs. 5.4%).
Branco and Silva (2003) report 97.2% tagging
accuracy on 23K testing corpus. This is clearly
better than our results, on the other hand they
needed a large Portuguese corpus of 207K tokens.
The details of the tagset used in the experiments
are not provided, so precise comparison with our
results is difficult.
7 Related work
Previous research in resource-light language
learning has defined resource-light in different
ways. Some have assumed only partially tagged
training corpora (Merialdo, 1994); some have be-
gun with small tagged seed wordlists (Cucerzan
and Yarowsky, 1999) for named-entity tagging,
while others have exploited the automatic trans-
fer of an already existing annotated resource in a
min e-even e-cognates
Tag: 56.9 77.2 82.1
POS: 65.3 84.2 87.6
SubPOS: 61.7 83.3 86.9
gender: 70.4 87.3 90.2
number: 78.3 95.3 96.0
case: 93.8 96.8 97.2
possessor?s num: 85.4 96.7 97.0
form: 92.9 99.2 99.2
person: 74.5 91.2 92.7
tense: 90.7 95.1 96.1
mood: 91.5 95.0 96.0
participle: 99.9 100.0 100.0
Table 4: Tagging Brazilian Portuguese
different genres or a different language (e.g. cross-
language projection of morphological and syn-
tactic information in (Yarowsky et al, 2001;
Yarowsky and Ngai, 2001), requiring no direct su-
pervision in the target language).
Ngai and Yarowsky (2000) observe that the to-
tal weighted human and resource costs is the most
practical measure of the degree of supervision.
Cucerzan and Yarowsky (2002) observe that an-
other useful measure of minimal supervision is the
additional cost of obtaining a desired functional-
ity from existing commonly available knowledge
sources. They note that for a remarkably wide
range of languages, there exist a plenty of refer-
ence grammar books and dictionaries which is an
invaluable linguistic resource.
7.1 Resource-light approaches to Romance
languages
Cucerzan and Yarowsky (2002) present a method
for bootstrapping a fine-grained, broad coverage
POS tagger in a new language using only one
person-day of data acquisition effort. Similarly
to us, they use a basic library reference gram-
mar book, and access to an existing monolingual
text corpus in the language, but they also use a
medium-sized bilingual dictionary.
In our work, we use a paradigm-based mor-
phology, including only the basic paradigms from
a standard grammar textbook. Cucerzan and
Yarowsky (2002) create a dictionary of regular in-
flectional affix changes and their associated POS
and on the basis of it, generate hypothesized in-
flected forms following the regular paradigms.
38
Clearly, these hypothesized forms are inaccurate
and overgenerated. Therefore, the authors perform
a probabilistic match from all lexical tokens actu-
ally observed in a monolingual corpus and the hy-
pothesized forms. They combine these two mod-
els, a model created on the basis of dictionary in-
formation and the one produced by the morpho-
logical analysis. This approach relies heavily on
two assumptions: (i) words of the same POS tend
to have similar tag sequence behavior; and (ii)
there are sufficient instances of each POS tag la-
beled by either the morphology models or closed-
class entries. For richly inflectional languages,
however, there is no guarantee that the latter as-
sumption would always hold.
The accuracy of their model is comparable to
ours. On a fine-grained (up to 5-feature) POS
space, they achieve 86.5% for Spanish and 75.5%
for Romanian. With a tagset of a similar size (11
features) we obtain the accuracy of 82.1% for Por-
tuguese.
Carreras et al (2003) present work on develop-
ing low-cost Named Entity recognizers (NER) for
a language with no available annotated resources,
using as a starting point existing resources for a
similar language. They devise and evaluate several
strategies to build a Catalan NER system using
only annotated Spanish data and unlabeled Cata-
lan text, and compare their approach with a classi-
cal bootstrapping setting where a small initial cor-
pus in the target language is hand tagged. It turns
out that the hand translation of a Spanish model is
better than a model directly learned from a small
hand annotated training corpus of Catalan. The
best result is achieved using cross-linguistic fea-
tures. Solorio and Lo?pez (2005) follow their ap-
proach; however, they apply the NER system for
Spanish directly to Portuguese and train a classi-
fier using the output and the real classes.
7.2 Cognates
Mann and Yarowsky (2001) present a method for
inducing translation lexicons based on trasduction
modules of cognate pairs via bridge languages.
Bilingual lexicons within language families are in-
duced using probabilistic string edit distance mod-
els. Translation lexicons for abitrary distant lan-
guage pairs are then generated by a combination
of these intra-family translation models and one
or more cross-family online dictionaries. Simi-
larly to Mann and Yarowsky (2001), we show that
languages are often close enough to others within
their language family so that cognate pairs be-
tween the two are common, and significant por-
tions of the translation lexicon can be induced with
high accuracy where no bilingual dictionary or
parallel corpora may exist.
8 Conclusion
We have shown that a tagging system with a small
amount of manually created resources can be suc-
cessful. We have previously shown that this ap-
proach can work for Czech and Russian (Hana
et al, 2004; Feldman et al, 2006). Here we have
shown its applicability to a new language pair.
This can be done in a fraction of the time needed
for systems with extensive manually created re-
sources: days instead of years. Three resources
are required: (i) a reference grammar (for infor-
mation about paradigms and closed class words);
(ii) a large amount of text (for learning a lexicon;
e.g. newspapers from the internet); (iii) a limited
access to a native speaker ? reference grammars
are often too vague and a quick glance at results
can provide feedback leading to a significant in-
crease of accuracy; however both of these require
only limited linguistic knowledge.
In this paper we proposed an algorithm for cog-
nate transfer that effectively projects the source
language emission probabilities into the target lan-
guage. Our experiments use minimal new human
effort and show 21% error reduction over even
emissions on a fine-grained tagset.
In the near future, we plan to compare the ef-
fectiveness (time and price) of our approach with
that of the standard resource-intensive approach to
annotating a medium-size corpus (on a corpus of
around 100K tokens). A resource-intensive sys-
tem will be more accurate in the labels which it of-
fers to the annotator, so annotator can work faster
(there are fewer choices to make, fewer keystrokes
required). On the other hand, creation of the in-
frastructure for such a system is very time con-
suming and may not be justified by the intended
application.
The experiments that we are running right now
are supposed to answer the question of whether
training the system on a small corpus of a closely
related language is better than training on a larger
corpus of a less related language. Some prelim-
inary results (Feldman et al, 2006) suggest that
using cross-linguistic features leads to higher pre-
39
cision, especially for the source languages which
have target-like properties complementary to each
other.
9 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Maria das Grac?as
Volpe Nunes, Sandra Maria Alu??sio, and Ricardo
Hasegawa for giving us access to the NILC cor-
pus annotated with PALAVRAS and to Carlos
Rodr??guez Penagos for letting us use the Spanish
part of the CLiC-TALP corpus.
References
Branco, A. and J. Silva (2003). Portuguese-
specific Issues in the Rapid Development of
State-of-the-art Taggers. In Workshop on Tag-
ging and Shallow Processing of Portuguese:
TASHA?2000.
Brants, T. (2000). TnT ? A Statistical Part-
of-Speech Tagger. In Proceedings of ANLP-
NAACL, pp. 224?231.
Carreras, X., L. Ma`rquez, and L. Padro? (2003).
Named Entity Recognition for Catalan Using
Only Spanish Resources and Unlabelled Data.
In Proceedings of EACL-2003.
Cucerzan, S. and D. Yarowsky (1999). Lan-
guage Independent Named Entity Recognition
Combining Morphological and Contextual Ev-
idence. In Proceedings of the 1999 Joint SIG-
DAT Conference on EMNLP and VLC, pp. 90?
99.
Cucerzan, S. and D. Yarowsky (2002). Boot-
strapping a Multilingual Part-of-speech Tagger
in One Person-day. In Proceedings of CoNLL
2002, pp. 132?138.
Cunha, C. and L. F. L. Cintra (2001). Nova
Grama?tica do Portugue?s Contempora?neo. Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil: Nova Fronteira.
Feldman, A., J. Hana, and C. Brew (2006). Experi-
ments in Morphological Annotation Transfer. In
Proceedings of Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing).
Hana, J. (2005). Knowledge and labor light mor-
phological analysis. Unpublished manuscript.
Hana, J., A. Feldman, and C. Brew (2004). A
Resource-light Approach to Russian Morphol-
ogy: Tagging Russian using Czech resources.
In Proceedings of EMNLP 2004, Barcelona,
Spain.
Hlava?c?ova?, J. (2001). Morphological Guesser
or Czech Words. In V. Matous?ek (Ed.), Text,
Speech and Dialogue, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, pp. 70?75. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Hwa, R., P. Resnik, A. Weinberg, C. Cabezas,
and O. Kolak (2004). Bootstrapping Parsers via
Syntactic Projection across Parallel Texts. Nat-
ural Language Engineering 1(1), 1?15.
Mann, G. S. and D. Yarowsky (2001). Multipath
Translation Lexicon via Bridge Languages. In
Proceedings of NAACL 2001.
Merialdo, B. (1994). Tagging English Text with
a Probabilistic Model. Computational Linguis-
tics 20(2), 155?172.
Meurers, D. (2004). On the Use of Electronic Cor-
pora for Theoretical Linguistics. Case Studies
from the Syntax of German. Lingua.
Mikheev, A. (1997). Automatic Rule Induction
for Unknown Word Guessing. Computational
Linguistics 23(3), 405?423.
Ngai, G. and D. Yarowsky (2000). Rule Writing or
Annotation: Cost-efficient Resource Usage for
Base Noun Phrase Chunking. In Proceedings of
the 38th Meeting of ACL, pp. 117?125.
Solorio, T. and A. L. Lo?pez (2005). Learning
named entity recognition in Portuguese from
Spanish. In Proceedings of Computational Lin-
guistics and Intelligent Text Processing (CI-
CLing).
Torruella, M. (2002). Gu??a para la anotacio?n mor-
folo?gica del corpus CLiC-TALP (Versio?n 3).
Technical Report WP-00/06, X-Tract Working
Paper.
Yarowsky, D. and G. Ngai (2001). Inducing Mul-
tilingual POS Taggers and NP Bracketers via
Robust Projection Across Aligned Corpora. In
Proceedings of NAACL-2001, pp. 200?207.
Yarowsky, D., G. Ngai, and R. Wicentowski
(2001). Inducing Multilingual Text Analy-
sis Tools via Robust Projection across Aligned
Corpora. In Proceedings of HLT 2001, First
International Conference on Human Language
Technology Research.
Yarowsky, D. and R. Wicentowski (2000). Min-
imally supervised morphological analysis by
multimodal alignment. In Proceedings of the
38th Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pp. 207?216.
40
