Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 136?138,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
GENEVAL: A Proposal for Shared-task Evaluation in NLG
Ehud Reiter
University of Aberdeen, UK
ereiter@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Anja Belz
University of Brighton, UK
a.s.belz@brighton.ac.uk
Abstract
We propose to organise a series of shared-
task NLG events, where participants are
asked to build systems with similar in-
put/output functionalities, and these sys-
tems are evaluated with a range of differ-
ent evaluation techniques. The main pur-
pose of these events is to allow us to com-
pare different evaluation techniques, by
correlating the results of different evalua-
tions on the systems entered in the events.
1 Background
Evaluation is becoming increasingly important in
Natural Language Generation (NLG), as in most
other areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP).
NLG systems can be evaluated in many differ-
ent ways, with different associated resource re-
quirements. For example, a large-scale task-
effectiveness study with human subjects could last
over a year and cost more than US$100,000 (Re-
iter et al, 2003); on the other hand, a small-scale
comparison of generated texts to human-written
reference texts can be done in a manner of days.
However, while the latter kind of study is very
appealing in terms of cost and time, and cheap
and reliable evaluation techniques would be very
useful for people developing and testing new NLG
techniques, it is only worth doing if we have rea-
son to believe that its results tell us something
about how useful the generated texts are to real
human users. It is not obvious that this is the case
(Reiter and Sripada, 2002).
Perhaps the best way to study the reliability of
different evaluation techniques, and more gener-
ally to develop a better empirical understanding of
the strengths and problems of different evaluation
techniques, is to perform studies where a range of
different evaluation techniques are used to evalu-
ate a set of NLG systems with similar functional-
ities. Correlating the results of the different eval-
uation techniques will give us empirical insight as
to how well these techniques work in practice.
Unfortunately, few such studies have been car-
ried out, perhaps because (to date) few NLG sys-
tems have been built with comparable functional-
ity (our own work in this area is discussed below).
We hope to surmount this problem, by organising
?shared task? events to which NLG researchers can
submit systems based on a supplied data set of in-
puts and (human-written) text outputs. We will
then carry out our evaluation experiments on the
submitted systems. We hope that such shared-task
events will also make it easier for new researchers
to get involved in NLG, by providing data sets and
an evaluation framework.
2 Comparative Evaluations in NLG
There is a long history of shared task initiatives
in NLP, of which the best known is perhaps MUC
(Hirschman, 1998); others include TREC, PARSE-
VAL, SENSEVAL, and the range of shared tasks or-
ganised by CoNLL. Such exercises are now com-
mon in most areas of NLP, and have had a major
impact on many areas, including machine transla-
tion and information extraction (see discussion of
history of shared-task initiatives and their impact
in Belz and Kilgarriff (2006)).
One of the best-known comparative studies
of evaluation techniques was by Papineni et al
(2002) who proposed the BLEU metric for machine
translation and showed that BLEU correlated well
with human judgements when comparing several
machine translation systems. Several other studies
of this type have been carried out in the MT and
Summarisation communities.
The first comparison of NLG evaluation tech-
niques which we are aware of is by Bangalore et al
(2000). The authors manually created several
variants of sentences from the Wall Street Jour-
nal, and evaluated these sentences using both hu-
man judgements and several corpus-based metrics.
They used linear regression to suggest a combina-
tion of the corpus-based metrics which they be-
136
lieve is a better predictor of human judgements
than any of the individual metrics.
In our work (Belz and Reiter, 2006), we used
several different evaluation techniques (human
and corpus-based) to evaluate the output of five
NLG systems which generated wind descriptions
for weather forecasts. We then analysed how well
the corpus-based evaluations correlated with the
human-based evaluations. Amongst other things,
we concluded that BLEU-type metrics work rea-
sonably well when comparing statistical NLG sys-
tems, but less well when comparing statistical NLG
systems to knowledge-based NLG systems.
We worked in this domain because of the avail-
ability of the SumTime corpus (Sripada et al,
2003), which contains both numerical weather
prediction data (i.e., inputs to NLG) and human
written forecast texts (i.e., target outputs from
NLG). We are not aware of any other NLG-related
corpora which contain a large number of texts and
corresponding input data sets, and are freely avail-
able to the research community.
3 Our Proposal
We intend to apply for funding for a three-year
project to create more shared input/output data sets
(we are focusing on data-to-text tasks for the rea-
sons discussed in Belz and Kilgarriff (2006)), or-
ganise shared task workshops, and create and test
a range of methods for evaluating submitted sys-
tems.
3.1 Step 1: Create data sets
We intend to create input/output data sets that con-
tain the following types of representations:
? raw non-linguistic input data;
? structured content representations, roughly
corresponding to document plans (Reiter and
Dale, 2000);
? semantic-level representations, roughly cor-
responding to text specifications (Reiter and
Dale, 2000);
? actual human-authored corpus texts.
The presence of intermediate representations in
our data sets means that researchers who are just
interested in document planning, microplanning,
or surface realisation do not need to build com-
plete NLG systems in order to participate.
We will create the semantic-level representa-
tions by parsing the corpus texts, probably us-
ing a LinGO parser1. We will create the content
representations using application-specific analysis
tools, similar to a tool we have already created for
SumTime wind statements. The actual data sets
we currently intend to create are as follows (see
also summary in Table 1).
SumTime weather statements: These are brief
statements which describe predicted precipitation
and cloud over a forecast period. We will extract
the texts (and the corresponding input data) from
the existing SumTime corpus.
Statistics summaries: We will ask people (prob-
ably students) to write paragraph-length textual
summaries of statistical data. The actual data will
come from opinion polls or national statistics of-
fices. The corpus will also include data about the
authors (e.g., age, sex, domain expertise).
Nurses? reports: As part of a new project at Ab-
erdeen, Babytalk2, we will be acquiring a corpus
of texts written by nurses to summarise the status
of a baby in a neonatal intensive care unit, along
with the raw data this is based on (sensor read-
ings, records of actions taken such as giving med-
ication).
3.2 Step 2: Organise workshops
The second step is to organise workshops. We
intend to use a fairly standard organisation (Belz
and Kilgarriff, 2006). We will release the data
sets (but not the reference texts), give people six
months to develop systems, and invite people who
submit systems to a workshop. Participants can
submit either complete data-to-text NLG systems,
or components which just do document planning,
microplanning, or realisation.
We are planning to increase the number and
complexity of tasks from one round to the next,
as this has been useful in other NLP evaluations
(Belz and Kilgarriff, 2006); for example, we will
add surface realisation as a separate task in round
2 and layout/structuring task in round 3.
We will carry out all evaluation activities (see
below) ourselves, workshop participants will not
be involved in this.
3.3 Step 3: Evaluation
The final step is to evaluate the systems and com-
ponents submitted to the workshop. As the main
1http://lingo.stanford.edu/
2http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/research/babytalk/
137
Corpus num texts num ref (*) text size main NLG challenges
Weather statements 3000 300 1-2 sentences content det, lex choice, aggregation
Statistical summaries 1000 100 paragraph above plus surface realisation
Nurses? reports 200 50 several paras above plus text structuring/layout
(*) In addition to the main corpus, we will also gather texts which will be used as reference texts for
corpus-based evaluations; ?num ref? is the number of such texts. These texts will not be released.
Table 1: Planned GENEVAL data sets.
purpose of this whole exercise is to see how well
different evaluation techniques correlate with each
other, we plan to carry out a range of different
evaluations, including the following.
Corpus-based evaluations: We will develop
new, linguistically grounded evaluation metrics,
and compare these to existing metrics including
BLEU, NIST, and string-edit distance. We will also
investigate how sensitive different metrics are to
size and make-up of the reference corpus.
Human-based preference judgements: We will
investigate different experimental designs and
methods for overcoming respondent bias (e.g.
what is known as ?central tendency bias?, where
some respondents avoid judgements at either end
of a scale). As we showed previously (Belz and
Reiter, 2006) that there are significant inter-subject
differences in ratings, one thing we want to deter-
mine is how many subjects are needed to get reli-
able and reproducible results.
Task performance. This depends on the do-
main, but e.g. in the nurse-report domain we
could use the methodology of (Law et al, 2005),
who showed medical professionals the texts, asked
them to make a treatment decision, and then rated
the correctness of the suggested treatments.
As well as recommendations about the appro-
priateness of existing evaluation techniques, we
hope the above experiments will allow us to sug-
gest new evaluation techniques for NLG.
4 Next Steps
At this point, we encourage NLG researchers to
give us their views regarding our plans for the or-
ganisation of GENEVAL, the data and evaluation
methods we are planning to use, to suggest addi-
tional data sets or evaluation techniques, and espe-
cially to let us know whether they would be inter-
ested in participating.
If our proposal is successful, we hope that the
project will start in summer 2007, with the first
data set released in late 2007 and the first work-
shop in summer 2008. ELRA/ELDA have also al-
ready agreed to help us with this work, contribut-
ing human and data resources.
References
Srinavas Bangalore, Owen Rambow, and Steve Whit-
taker. 2000. Evaluation metrics for generation. In
Proceedings of INLG-2000, pages 1?8.
Anja Belz and Adam Kilgarriff. 2006. Shared-task
evaluations in HLT: Lessons for NLG. In Proceed-
ings of INLG-2006.
Anja Belz and Ehud Reiter. 2006. Comparing auto-
matic and human evaluation of NLG systems. In
Proceedings of EACL-2006, pages 313?320.
Lynette Hirschman. 1998. The evolution of evaluation:
Lessons from the Message Understanding Confer-
ences. Computer Speech and Language, 12:283?
285.
Anna Law, Yvonne Freer, Jim Hunter, Robert Logie,
Neil McIntosh, and John Quinn. 2005. Generat-
ing textual summaries of graphical time series data
to support medical decision making in the neonatal
intensive care unit. Journal of Clinical Monitoring
and Computing, 19:183?194.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of ACL-2002, pages 311?318.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Ehud Reiter and Somayajulu Sripada. 2002. Should
corpora texts be gold standards for NLG? In Pro-
ceedings of INLG-2002, pages 97?104.
Ehud Reiter, Roma Robertson, and Liesl Osman. 2003.
Lessons from a failure: Generating tailored smoking
cessation letters. Artificial Intelligence, 144:41?58.
Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Jin
Yu. 2003. Exploiting a parallel text-data corpus. In
Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2003, pages 734?
743.
138
