Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 86?93,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Contextual Bitext-Derived Paraphrases in Automatic MT Evaluation 
 
Karolina Owczarzak Declan Groves Josef Van Genabith Andy Way 
National Centre for Language Technology 
School of Computing 
Dublin City University 
Dublin 9, Ireland 
{owczarzak,dgroves,josef,away}@computing.dcu.ie 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present a novel method 
for deriving paraphrases during automatic 
MT evaluation using only the source and 
reference texts, which are necessary for 
the evaluation, and word and phrase 
alignment software. Using target language 
paraphrases produced through word and 
phrase alignment a number of alternative 
reference sentences are constructed auto-
matically for each candidate translation. 
The method produces lexical and low-
level syntactic paraphrases that are rele-
vant to the domain in hand, does not use 
external knowledge resources, and can be 
combined with a variety of automatic MT 
evaluation system. 
1 Introduction 
Since their appearance, BLEU (Papineni et al, 
2002) and NIST (Doddington, 2002) have been the 
standard tools used for evaluating the quality of 
machine translation. They both score candidate 
translations on the basis of the number of n-grams 
it shares with one or more reference translations 
provided. Such automatic measures are indispen-
sable in the development of machine translation 
systems, because they allow the developers to con-
duct frequent, cost-effective, and fast evaluations 
of their evolving models.  
These advantages come at a price, though: an 
automatic comparison of n-grams measures only 
the string similarity of the candidate translation to 
one or more reference strings, and will penalize 
any divergence from them. In effect, a candidate 
translation expressing the source meaning accu-
rately and fluently will be given a low score if the 
lexical choices and syntactic structure it contains, 
even though perfectly legitimate, are not present in 
at least one of the references. Necessarily, this 
score would not reflect a much more favourable 
human judgment that such a translation would re-
ceive. 
The limitations of string comparison are the 
reason why it is advisable to provide multiple ref-
erences for a candidate translation in the BLEU- or 
NIST-based evaluation in the first place. While 
(Zhang and Vogel, 2004) argue that increasing the 
size of the test set gives even more reliable system 
scores than multiple references, this still does not 
solve the inadequacy of BLEU and NIST for sen-
tence-level or small set evaluation. On the other 
hand, in practice even a number of references do 
not capture the whole potential variability of the 
translation. Moreover, often it is the case that mul-
tiple references are not available or are too difficult 
and expensive to produce: when designing a statis-
tical machine translation system, the need for large 
amounts of training data limits the researcher to 
collections of parallel corpora like Europarl 
(Koehn, 2005), which provides only one reference, 
namely the target text; and the cost of creating ad-
ditional reference translations of the test set, usu-
ally a few thousand sentences long, often exceeds 
the resources available. Therefore, it would be de-
sirable to find a way to automatically generate le-
gitimate translation alternatives not present in the 
reference(s) already available. 
86
In this paper, we present a novel method that 
automatically derives paraphrases using only the 
source and reference texts involved in for the 
evaluation of French-to-English Europarl transla-
tions produced by two MT systems: statistical 
phrase-based Pharaoh (Koehn, 2004) and rule-
based Logomedia.1 In using what is in fact a minia-
ture bilingual corpus our approach differs from the 
mainstream paraphrase generation based on mono-
lingual resources. We show that paraphrases pro-
duced in this way are more relevant to the task of 
evaluating machine translation than the use of ex-
ternal lexical knowledge resources like thesauri or 
WordNet2, in that our paraphrases contain both 
lexical equivalents and low-level syntactic vari-
ants, and in that, as a side-effect, evaluation bitext-
derived paraphrasing naturally yields domain-
specific paraphrases. The paraphrases generated 
from the evaluation bitext are added to the existing 
reference sentences, in effect creating multiple ref-
erences and resulting in a higher score for the can-
didate translation. Our hypothesis, confirmed by 
the experiments in this paper, is that the scores 
raised by additional references produced in this 
way will correlate better with human judgment 
than the original scores. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows: Section 2 describes related work; Section 3 
describes our method and presents examples of 
derived paraphrases; Section 4 presents the results 
of the comparison between the BLUE and NIST 
scores for a single-reference translation and the 
same translation using the paraphrases automati-
cally generated from the bitext, as well as the cor-
relations between the scores and human judgment; 
Section 5 discusses ongoing work; Section 6 con-
cludes. 
2 
2.1 
                                                          
Related work 
Word and phrase alignment 
Several researchers noted that the word and 
phrase alignment used in training translation mod-
els in Statistical MT can be used for other purposes 
as well. (Diab and Resnik, 2002) use second lan-
guage alignments to tag word senses. Working on 
an assumption that separate senses of a L1 word 
2.2 
1 http://www.lec.com/ 
2 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
can be distinguished by its different translations in 
L2, they also note that a set of possible L2 transla-
tions for a L1 word may contain many synonyms. 
(Bannard and Callison-Burch, 2005), on the other 
hand, conduct an experiment to show that para-
phrases derived from such alignments can be se-
mantically correct in more than 70% of the cases. 
Automatic MT evaluation 
The insensitivity of BLEU and NIST to per-
fectly legitimate variation has been raised, among 
others, in (Callison-Burch et al, 2006), but the 
criticism is widespread. Even the creators of BLEU 
point out that it may not correlate particularly well 
with human judgment at the sentence level (Pap-
ineni et al, 2002), a problem also noted by (Och et 
al., 2003) and (Russo-Lassner et al, 2005). A side 
effect of this phenomenon is that BLEU is less re-
liable for smaller data sets, so the advantage it pro-
vides in the speed of evaluation is to some extent 
counterbalanced by the time spent by developers 
on producing a sufficiently large test data set in 
order to obtain a reliable score for their system.  
Recently a number of attempts to remedy these 
shortcomings have led to the development of other 
automatic machine translation metrics. Some of 
them concentrate mainly on the word reordering 
aspect, like Maximum Matching String (Turian et 
al., 2003) or Translation Error Rate (Snover et al, 
2005). Others try to accommodate both syntactic 
and lexical differences between the candidate 
translation and the reference, like CDER (Leusch 
et al, 2006), which employs a version of edit dis-
tance for word substitution and reordering; 
METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), which uses 
stemming and WordNet synonymy; and a linear 
regression model developed by (Russo-Lassner et 
al., 2005), which makes use of stemming, Word-
Net synonymy, verb class synonymy, matching 
noun phrase heads, and proper name matching. 
A closer examination of these metrics suggests 
that the accommodation of lexical equivalence is 
as difficult as the appropriate treatment of syntactic 
variation, in that it requires considerable external 
knowledge resources like WordNet, verb class da-
tabases, and extensive text preparation: stemming, 
tagging, etc. The advantage of our method is that it 
produces relevant paraphrases with nothing more 
than the evaluation bitext and a widely available 
word and phrase alignment software, and therefore 
can be used with any existing evaluation metric. 
87
3 Contextual bitext-derived paraphrases 
The method presented in this paper rests on a 
combination of two simple ideas. First, the compo-
nents necessary for automatic MT evaluation like 
BLEU or NIST, a source text and a reference text, 
constitute a miniature parallel corpus, from which 
word and phrase alignments can be extracted 
automatically, much like during the training for a 
statistical machine translation system. Second, tar-
get language words ei1, ?,  ein aligned as the likely 
translations to a source language word fi are often 
synonyms or near-synonyms of each other. This 
also holds for phrases: target language phrases epi1, 
?, epin aligned with a source language phrase fpi 
are often paraphrases of each other. For example, 
in our experiment, for the French word question 
the most probable automatically aligned English 
translations are question, matter, and issue, which 
in English are practically synonyms. Section 3.2 
presents more examples of such equivalent expres-
sions.  
3.1 
3.2 
                                                          
Experimental design 
For our experiment, we used two test sets, 
each consisting of 2000 sentences, drawn ran-
domly from the test section of the Europarl parallel 
corpus. The source language was French and the 
target language was English. One of the test sets 
was translated by Pharaoh trained on 156,000 
French-English sentence pairs. The other test set 
was translated by Logomedia, a commercially 
available rule-based MT system. Each test set con-
sisted therefore of three files: the French source 
file, the English translation file, and the English 
reference file. 
Each translation was evaluated by the BLEU 
and NIST metrics first with the single reference, 
then with the multiple references for each sentence 
using the paraphrases automatically generated 
from the source-reference mini corpus. A subset of 
a 100 sentences was randomly extracted from each 
test set and evaluated by two independent human 
judges with respect to accuracy and fluency; the 
human scores were then compared to the BLEU 
and NIST scores for the single-reference and the 
automatically generated multiple-reference files. 
Word alignment and phrase extraction 
We used the GIZA++ word alignment soft-
ware3 to produce initial word alignments for our 
miniature bilingual corpus consisting of the source 
French file and the English reference file, and the 
refined word alignment strategy of (Och and Ney, 
2003; Koehn et al, 2003; Tiedemann, 2004) to 
obtain improved word and phrase alignments. 
For each source word or phrase fi that is 
aligned with more than one target words or 
phrases, its possible translations ei1, ..., ein were 
placed in a list as equivalent expressions (i.e. 
synonyms, near-synonyms, or paraphrases of each 
other). A few examples are given in (1). 
 
(1) agreement - accordance 
adopted - implemented 
matter - lot - case 
funds - money 
arms - weapons 
area - aspect  
question ? issue ? matter 
we would expect - we cer-
tainly expect 
bear on - are centred 
around 
 
Alignment divides target words and 
phrases into equivalence sets; each set corresponds 
to one source word/phrase that was originally 
aligned with the target elements. For example, for 
the French word citoyens three English words were 
deemed to be the most appropriate translations: 
people, public, and citizens; therefore these three 
words constitute an equivalence set. Another 
French word population was aligned with two 
English translations: population and people; so the 
word people appears in two equivalence set (this 
gives rise to the question of equivalence transitiv-
ity, which will be discussed in Section 3.3). From 
the 2000-sentence evaluation bitext we derived 769 
equivalence sets, containing in total 1658 words or 
phrases. Each set contained on average two or 
three elements. In effect, we produced at least one 
equivalent expression for 1658 English words or 
phrases. 
An advantage of our method is that the tar-
get paraphrases and words come ordered with re-
3 http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++ 
88
spect to their likelihood of being the translation of 
the source word or phrase ? each of them is as-
signed a probability expressing this likelihood, so 
we are able to choose only the most likely transla-
tions, according to some experimentally estab-
lished threshold. The experiment reported here was 
conducted without such a threshold, since the word 
and phrase alignment was of a very high quality. 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
Domain-specific lexical and syntactic 
paraphrases 
It is important to notice here how the para-
phrases produced are more appropriate to the task 
at hand than synonyms extracted from a general-
purpose thesaurus or WordNet. First, our para-
phrases are contextual - they are restricted to only 
those relevant to the domain of the text, since they 
are derived from the text itself. Given the context 
provided by our evaluation bitext, the word area in 
(1) turns out to be only synonymous with aspect, 
and not with land, territory, neighbourhood, divi-
sion, or other synonyms a general-purpose thesau-
rus or WordNet would give for this entry. This 
allows us to limit our multiple references only to 
those that are likely to be useful in the context pro-
vided by the source text. Second, the phrase align-
ment captures something neither a thesaurus nor 
WordNet will be able to provide: a certain amount 
of syntactic variation of paraphrases. Therefore, we 
know that a string such as we would expect in (1), 
with the sequence noun-aux-verb, might be para-
phrased by we certainly expect, a sequence of 
noun-adv-verb. 
Open and closed class items 
One important conclusion we draw from 
analysing the synonyms obtained through word 
alignment is that equivalence is limited mainly to 
words that belong to open word classes, i.e. nouns, 
verbs, adjectives, adverbs, but is unlikely to extend 
to closed word classes like prepositions or pro-
nouns. For instance, while the French preposition ? 
can be translated in English as to, in, or at, depend-
ing on the context, it is not the case that these three 
prepositions are synonymous in English. The divi-
sion is not that clear-cut, however: within the class 
of pronouns, he, she, and you are definitely not 
synonymous, but the demonstrative pronouns this 
and that might be considered equivalent for some 
purposes. Therefore, in our experiment we exclude 
prepositions and in future work we plan to examine 
the word alignments more closely to decide 
whether to exclude any other words. 
Creating multiple references 
After the list of synonyms and paraphrases is 
extracted from the evaluation bitext, for each 
reference sentence a string search replaces every 
eligible word or phrase with its equivalent(s) from 
the paraphrase list, one at a time, and the resulting 
string is added to the array of references. The 
original string is added to the array as well. This 
process results in a different number of reference 
sentences for every test sentence, depending on 
whether there was anything to replace in the refer-
ence and how many paraphrases we have available 
for the original substring. One example of this 
process is shown in (2). 
 
(2) Original reference: 
i admire the answer mrs parly 
gave this morning but we have 
turned a blind eye to that 
Paraphrase 1: 
i admire the reply mrs parly 
gave this morning but we have 
turned a blind eye to that 
Paraphrase 2: 
i admire the answer mrs parly 
gave this morning however we 
have turned a blind eye to 
that  
Paraphrase 3: 
i admire the answer mrs parly 
gave this morning but we have 
turned a blind eye to it 
 
Transitivity 
As mentioned before, an interesting question 
that arises here is the potential transitivity of our 
automatically derived synonyms/paraphrases. It 
could be argued that if the word people is equiva-
lent to public according to one set from our list, 
and to the word population according to another 
set, then public can be thought of as equivalent to 
population. In this case, the equivalence is not con-
troversial. However, consider the following rela-
tion: if sure in one of the equivalence sets is 
synonymous to certain, and certain in a different 
89
set is listed as equivalent to some, then treating 
sure and some as synonyms is a mistake. In our 
experiment we do not allow synonym transitivity; 
we only use the paraphrases from equivalence sets 
containing the word/phrase we want to replace.  
Multiple simultaneous substitution 
Note that at the moment the references we are 
producing do not contain multiple simultaneous 
substitutions of equivalent expressions; for exam-
ple, in (2) we currently do not produce the follow-
ing versions: 
 
(3) Paraphrase 4:  
i admire the reply mrs parly 
gave this morning however we 
have turned a blind eye to 
that 
Paraphrase 5: 
i admire the answer mrs parly 
gave this morning however we 
have turned a blind eye to it 
Paraphrase 6: 
i admire the reply mrs parly 
gave this morning but we have 
turned a blind eye to it 
 
This can potentially prevent higher n-grams being 
successfully matched if two or more equivalent 
expressions find themselves within the range of n-
grams being tested by BLEU and NIST. To avoid 
combinatorial problems, implementing multiple 
simultaneous substitutions could be done using a 
lattice, much like in (Pang et al, 2003). 
4 Results 
As expected, the use of multiple references 
produced by our method raises both the BLEU and 
NIST scores for translations produced by Pharaoh 
(test set PH) and Logomedia (test set LM). The 
results are presented in Table 1. 
 
 BLEU NIST 
PH single ref 0.2131 6.1625 
PH multi ref 0.2407 7.0068 
LM single ref 0.1782 5.5406 
LM multi ref 0.2043 6.3834 
 
Table 1. Comparison of single-reference and multi-
reference scores for test set PH and test set LM 
 
The hypothesis that the multiple-reference 
scores reflect better human judgment is also con-
firmed. For 100-sentence subsets (Subset PH and 
Subset LM) randomly extracted from our test sets 
PH and LM, we calculated Pearson?s correlation 
between the average accuracy and fluency scores 
that the translations in this subset received from 
two human judges (for each subset) and the single-
reference and multiple-reference sentence-level 
BLEU and NIST scores.  
There are two issues that need to be noted at 
this point. First, BLEU scored many of the sen-
tences as zero, artificially leveling many of the 
weaker translations.4 This explains the low, al-
though still statistically significant (p value < 
0.015) correlation with BLEU for both single and 
multiple reference translations. Using a version of 
BLEU with add-one smoothing we obtain consid-
erably higher correlations. Table 2 shows Pear-
son?s correlation coefficient for BLEU, BLEU 
with add-one smoothing, NIST, and human judg-
ments for Subsets PH. Multiple paraphrase refer-
ences produced by our method consistently lead to 
a higher correlation with human judgment for 
every metric.6 
 
                           Subset PH 
Metric  
single 
ref 
multi 
ref 
H & BLEU 0.297 0.307 
H & BLEU smoothed 0.396 0.404 
H & NIST  0.323 0.355 
 
Table 2. Pearson?s correlation between human 
judgment and single-reference and multiple-
reference BLEU, smoothed BLEU, and NIST for 
subset PH (of test set PH)  
 
The second issue that requires explanation is 
the lower general scores Logomedia?s translation 
received on the full set of 2000 sentences, and the 
extremely low correlation of its automatic evalua-
tion with human judgment, irrespective of the 
number of references. It has been noticed (Calli-
                                                          
4 BLEU uses a geometric average while calculating the sen-
tence-level score and will score a sentence as 0 if it does not 
have at least one 4-gram.  
5 A critical value for Pearson?s correlation coefficient for the 
sample size between 90 and 100 is 0.267, with p < 0.01. 
6 The significance of the rise in scores was confirmed in a 
resampling/bootstrapping test, with p < 0.0001. 
90
son-Burch et al, 2006) that BLEU and NIST fa-
vour n-gram based MT models such as Pharaoh, so 
the translation produced by Logomedia scored 
lower on the automatic evaluation, even though the 
human judges rated Logomedia output higher than 
Pharaoh?s translation. Both human judges consis-
tently gave very high scores to most sentences in 
subset LM (Logomedia), and as a consequence 
there was not enough variation in the scores as-
signed by them to create a good correlation with 
the BLEU and NIST scores. The average human 
scores for the subsets PH and LM and the coeffi-
cients of variation are presented in Table 3. It is 
easy to see that Logomedia?s translation received a 
higher mean score (on a scale 0 to 5) from the hu-
man judges and with less variance than Pharaoh. 
 
 Mean score  Variation 
Subset PH 3.815 19.1% 
Subset LM 4.005 16.25% 
 
Table 3. Human judgment mean scores and coeffi-
cients of variation for Subset PH and Subset LM 
 
As a result of the consistently high human scores 
for Logomedia, none of the Pearson?s correlations 
computed for Subset LM is high enough to be sig-
nificant. The values are lower than the critical 
value 0.164 corresponding to p < 0.10. 
 
                          Subset LM 
Metric  
single 
ref 
multi 
ref 
H & BLEU 0.046* 0.067* 
H & BLEU smoothed 0.163* 0.151* 
H & NIST  0.078* 0.116* 
 
Table 4. Pearson?s correlation between human 
judgment and single-reference and multiple-
reference BLEU, smoothed BLEU, and NIST for 
subset LM (of test set LM). * denotes values with p >  
0.10. 
5 Current and future work 
We would like to experiment with the way in 
which the list of equivalent expressions is pro-
duced. One possible development would be to de-
rive the expressions from a very large training 
corpus used by a statistical machine translation 
system, following (Bannard and Callison-Burch, 
2005), for instance, and use it as an external wider-
purpose knowledge resource (rather than a current 
domain-tailored resource as in our experiment), 
which would be nevertheless improve on a thesau-
rus in that it would also include phrase equivalents 
with some syntactic variation. According to (Ban-
nard and Callison-Burch, 2005), who derived their 
paraphrases automatically from a corpus of over a 
million German-English Europarl sentences, the 
baseline syntactic and semantic accuracy of the 
best paraphrases (those with the highest probabil-
ity) reaches 48.9% and 64.5%, respectively. That 
is, by replacing a phrase with its one most likely 
paraphrase the sentence remained syntactically 
well-formed in 48.9% of the cases and retained its 
meaning in 65% of the cases. 
In a similar experiment we generated para-
phrases from a French-English Europarl corpus of 
700,000 sentences. The data contained a consid-
erably higher level of noise than our previous ex-
periment on the 2000-sentence test set, even 
though we excluded any non-word entities from 
the results. Like (Bannard and Callison-Burch, 
2005), we used the product of probabilities p(fi|ei1) 
and p(ei2|fi) to determine the best paraphrase for a 
given English word ei1. We then compared the ac-
curacy across four samples of data. Each sample 
contained 50 randomly drawn words/phrases and 
their paraphrases. For the first two samples, the 
paraphrases were derived from the initial 2000-
sentence corpus; for the second two, the para-
phrases were derived from the 700,000-sentence 
corpus. For each corpus, one of the two samples 
contained only one best paraphrase for each entry, 
while the other listed all possible paraphrases. We 
then evaluated the quality of each paraphrase with 
respect to its syntactic and semantic accuracy. In 
terms of syntax, we considered the paraphrase ac-
curate either if it had the same category as the 
original word/phrase; in terms of semantics, we 
relied on human judgment of similarity. Tables 5 
and 6 summarize the syntactic and semantic accu-
racy levels in the samples. 
 
                       Paraphrases 
Derived from 
Best All 
2000-sent. corpus 59% 60% 
700,000-sent. corpus 70% 48% 
 
Table 5. Syntactic accuracy of paraphrases 
 
 
91
                       Paraphrases 
Derived from 
Best All 
2000-sent. corpus 83% 74% 
700,000-sent. corpus 76% 68% 
 
Table 6. Semantic accuracy of paraphrases 
 
Although it has to be kept in mind that these 
percentages were taken from relatively small sam-
ples, an interesting pattern emerges from compar-
ing the results. It seems that the average syntactic 
accuracy of all paraphrases decreases with in-
creased corpus size, but the syntactic accuracy of 
the one best paraphrase improves. This reflects the 
idea behind word alignment: the bigger the corpus, 
the more potential alignments there are for a given 
word, but at the same time the better their order in 
terms of probability and the likelihood to obtain 
the correct translation. Interestingly, the same pat-
tern is not repeated for semantic accuracy, but 
again, these samples are quite small. In order to 
address this issue, we plan to repeat the experiment 
with more data. 
Additionally, it should be noted that certain 
expressions, although not completely correct syn-
tactically, could be retained in the paraphrase lists 
for the purposes of machine translation evaluation. 
Consider the case where our equivalence set looks 
like this: 
 
(4) abandon ? abandoning ? 
abandoned 
 
The words in (4) are all inflected forms of the verb 
abandon, and although they would produce rather 
ungrammatical paraphrases, those ungrammatical 
paraphrases still allow us to score our translation 
higher in terms of BLEU or NIST if it contains one 
of the forms of abandon than when it contains 
some unrelated word like piano instead. This is 
exactly what other scoring metrics mentioned in 
Section 2 attempt to obtain with the use of stem-
ming or prefix matching. 
6 Conclusions 
In this paper we present a novel combination 
of existing ideas from statistical machine transla-
tion and paraphrase generation that leads to the 
creation of multiple references for automatic MT 
evaluation, using only the source and reference 
files that are required for the evaluation. The 
method uses simple word and phrase alignment 
software to find possible synonyms and para-
phrases for words and phrases of the target text, 
and uses them to produce multiple reference sen-
tences for each test sentence, raising the BLEU and 
NIST evaluation scores and reflecting human 
judgment better. The advantage of this method 
over other ways to generate paraphrases is that (1) 
unlike other methods, it does not require extensive 
parallel monolingual paraphrase corpora, but it 
extracts equivalent expressions from the miniature 
bilingual corpus of the source and reference 
evaluation files; (2) unlike other ways to accom-
modate synonymy in automatic evaluation, it does 
not require external lexical knowledge sources like 
thesauri or WordNet; (3) it extracts only synonyms 
that are relevant to the domain in hand; and (4) the 
equivalent expressions it produces include a certain 
amount of syntactic paraphrases.  
The method is general and it can be used with 
any automatic evaluation metric that supports mul-
tiple references. In our future work, we plan to ap-
ply it to newly developed evaluation metrics like 
CDER and TER that aim to allow for syntactic 
variation between the candidate and the reference, 
therefore bringing together solutions for the two 
shortcomings of automatic evaluation systems: 
insensitivity to allowable lexical differences and 
syntactic variation. 
References 
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: 
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Im-
proved Correlation with Human Judgments. Proceed-
ings of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or Sum-
marization: 65-73. 
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-
phrasing with Bilingual Parallel Corpora. Proceed-
ings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005): 597-604. 
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne and Philipp 
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in 
Machine Translation Research. To appear in Pro-
ceedings of EACL-2006. 
Mona Diab and Philip Resnik. 2002. An unsupervised 
Method for Word Sense Tagging using Parallel Cor-
pora. Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the 
92
Association for Computational Linguistics, Philadel-
phia, PA. 
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of MT 
Quality using N-gram Co-occurrence Statistics. Pro-
ceedings of Human Language Technology Confer-
ence 2002: 138?145. 
Philipp Koehn, Franz Och and Daniel Marcu. 2003. 
Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. Proceedings of 
the  Human Language Technology Conference (HLT-
NAACL 2003): 48-54. 
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a beam search decoder 
for phrase-based statistical machine translation mod-
els. Machine translation: From real users to re-
search. 6th Conference of the Association for 
Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA 2004): 
115-124. 
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for 
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of MT 
Summit 2005: 79-86. 
Gregor Leusch, Nicola Ueffing and Hermann Ney. 
2006. CDER: Efficient MT Evaluation Using Block 
Movements. To appear in Proceedings of the 11th 
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (EACL 2006). 
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Modes. 
Computational Linguistics, 29:19?51. 
Franz Josef Och, Daniel Gildea, Sanjeev Khudanpur, 
Anoop Sarkar, Kenji Yamada, Alex Fraser, Shankar 
Kumar, Libin Shen, David Smith, Katherine Eng, 
Viren Jain, Zhen Jin, and Dragomir Radev. 2003. 
Syntax for statistical machine translation. Technical 
report, Center for Language and Speech Processing, 
John Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.  
Bo Pang, Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Syn-
tax-based Alignment of Multiple Translations: Ex-
tracting Paraphrases and Generating New Sentences. 
Proceedings of Human Language Technology-North 
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (HLT-NAACL) 2003: 181?188. 
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of 
ACL: 311-318. 
Grazia Russo-Lassner, Jimmy Lin, and Philip Resnik. 
2005. A Paraphrase-based Approach to Machine 
Translation Evaluation. Technical Report LAMP-
TR-125/CS-TR-4754/UMIACS-TR-2005-57, Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park, MD. 
Mathew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, John 
Makhoul, Linnea Micciula and Ralph Weischedel. 
2005. A Study of Translation Error Rate with Tar-
geted Human Annotation. Technical Report LAMP-
TR-126, CS-TR-4755, UMIACS-TR-2005-58, Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park. MD. 
J?rg Tiedemann. 2004. Word to word alignment strate-
gies. Proceedings of the 20th International Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2004): 
212-218. 
Joseph P. Turian, Luke Shen, and I. Dan Melamed. 
2003. Evaluation of Machine translation and Its 
Evaluation. Proceedings of MT Summit 2003: 386-
393. 
Ying Zhang and Stephan Vogel. 2004. Measuring con-
fidence intervals for the machine translation evalua-
tion metrics. TMI-2004: Proceedings of the 10th 
Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Is-
sues in Machine Translation: 85-94. 
93
