Proceedings of the 7th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 54?59,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Resolution of Referents Groupings in Practical Dialogues 
 
 
Alexandre Denis,  Guillaume Pitel,  Matthieu Quignard 
LORIA  
BP239 F-54206 Vandoeuvre-l?s-nancy, France 
denis@loria.fr,pitel@loria.fr,quignard@loria.fr 
 
  
Abstract 
This paper presents an extension to the 
Reference Domain Theory (Salmon-Alt, 
2001) in order to solve plural references. 
While this theory doesn?t take plural 
reference into account in its original 
form, this paper shows how several 
entities can be grouped together by 
building a new domain and how they can 
be accessed later on. We introduce the 
notion of super-domain, representing the 
access structure to all the plural referents 
of a given type. 
1 Introduction 
In the course of a discourse or a dialogue, 
referents introduced separately could be 
referenced with a single plural expression 
(pronoun, demonstratives, etc.). The grouping of 
these referents may depend on many factors: it 
may be explicit if they were syntactically 
coordinated or juxtaposed or implicit if they just 
share common semantic features (Eschenbach et 
al., 1989). Time is also an important factor while 
it may be difficult to group old mentioned 
referents with new ones. Because of this 
multiplicity of factors, choosing the right 
discursive grouping for a referential plural 
expression is ambiguous, and this ambiguity 
needs to be explicitly described.  
We present a model of grouping based on 
reference domains theory (Salmon-Alt, 2001) 
that considers that a reference operation consists 
of extracting a referent in a domain. However the 
original theory barely takes into account plural 
reference. This paper shows how several entities 
can be grouped together by building a new 
domain and how they can be accessed later on. It 
introduces also the notion of super-domain D+ 
that represents the access structure to all the 
plural referents of type D. This work is currently 
being implemented and evaluated in the MEDIA 
project of the EVALDA framework, a national 
french understanding evaluation campaign 
(Devillers, 2004). 
2 Groupings of Referents  
Several kinds of clues can specify that referents 
should be grouped together, or at least could be 
grouped together. These clues may occur at 
several language levels, from the noun phrase 
level to the rhetorical structure level. We have 
not explored in detail the different ways of 
groupings entities together in a discourse or 
dialogue. What is described here are just some of 
the phenomenon we got confronted with while 
developing a reference resolution module for a 
dialogue understanding system. 
 Explicit Coordination - The most basic 
way to explicitly express the grouping of two 
or more referents is using a connector such as 
and, or, as well as, etc.  
?Good afternoon, I would like to book a 
single room and a double room? 
 Implicit Sentential Coordination - An 
implicit coordination occurs when two or 
more referents of the same kind are present in 
one sentence, without explicit connector 
between them. ?Does the hotel de la gare 
have a restaurant, like the Holiday Inn?? 
 Implicit Discursive Coordination ? 
Such a coordination occurs when several 
reference are evoked in separate sentences. 
The grouping must be done based on 
rhetorical structuring. Here we consider short 
pieces of dialogue, admitting only one level 
of implicit discursive coordination.  ?I would 
like an hotel close to the sea... I also need an 
hotel downtown... And the hotels have to 
accept dogs.? 
54
 Repetitions/Specifications ? In some 
particular cases, groupings make explicit a 
previous expression. For instance ?Two 
rooms. A single room, a double room?. 
3 Reference Domain Theory 
We are willing to try a pragmatic approach to 
reference resolution in practical multimodal 
dialogues (Gieselman, 2004). For example we 
need to process frequent phenomena like 
ordinals for choosing in a list (discursive, or 
visual) or otherness when re-evoking old 
referents. Hence keeping the track of the way the 
context is modified when introducing a referent 
or referring, is mandatory. The Reference 
Domains Theory (Salmon-Alt, 2001) supposes 
that every act of reference is related to a certain 
domain of interpretation. It endorses the 
cognitive grammar concept of domain, defined  
as a cognitive structure presupposed by the 
semantics of the expression (Kumar et al, 2003).  
In other words, a referring expression has to be 
interpreted in a given domain, highlighting and 
specifying a particular referent in this domain. A 
reference domain is composed of a group of 
entities in the hearer?s memory which can be 
discursive referents, visual objects, or concepts. 
It describes how each entity could be addressed 
through a referential expression.  
This theory views the referring process as a 
dynamic extraction of a referent in a domain 
instead of a binding between two entities 
(Salmon-Alt, 2000). Hence doing a reference act 
consists in isolating a particular entity from other 
rejected candidates, amongst all the accessible 
entities composing the domain (Olson, 1970). 
This dynamic discrimination relies on projecting 
an access structure focusing the referent in the 
domain.  The domain then becomes salient for 
further interpretations. The preferences for 
choosing a suitable domain are inspired from the 
Relevance theory (Sperber & Wilson, 1986) 
taking into account such focalization and 
salience.  
Landragin & Romary (2003) have also studied 
the usage of reference domains in order to model 
a visual scene. The grouping factors for visual 
objects are those given by the Gestalt theory, 
proximity, similarity, and good continuation. 
Each perceptual groups or groups designated by 
a gesture could be the base domain for an 
extraction. Referential expressions work the 
same way either the domains are discursive, 
perceptual or gestural, they extract and highlight 
referents in these domains. See (Landragin et al, 
2001) for a review of perceptual groupings.  
4 Basic Type 
A referential domain is defined by:  
? a set of entities accessible through this 
domain (ground of domain), 
? a description subsuming the description 
of all these entities (type of domain), 
? a set of access structures to these 
entities. 
For instance: ?the Ibis hotel (h1) and the hotel 
Lafayette (h2)? forms a referential domain, 
whose type would be Hotel, and whose 
accessible entities would be h1 and h2, 
themselves defined as domains of type Hotel. 
These two hotels could be accessed later on by 
their names. 
4.1 Access structures 
We suppose that the distinction between the 
referents from the excluded alternatives requires 
highlighting a discrimination criterion opposing 
them. This criterion behaves like a partition of 
the accessible entities, grouping them together 
according to their similarities and their 
differences. A partition may have one of its parts 
focused. There are, at least, three kinds of 
discrimination criteria: 
? discrimination on description. Entities 
can be discriminated by their type, their 
properties, or by the relations they have with 
other entities. For example the name of the 
hotels is a discrimination criterion in ?the Ibis 
hotel and the hotel Lafayette?. 
? discrimination on focus. Entities can 
also be discriminated by the focus they have 
when they are mentioned in the discourse or 
designed by a gesture. For example, ?this 
room? would select a focused referent in a 
domain, whereas ?the other room? would 
select a non-focused one. 
? discrimination on time of occurrence. 
Entities can finally be discriminated by their 
occurrence in the discourse. For example ?the 
second hotel? would discriminate this hotel 
by its rank in the domain. 
4.2 Classical resolution algorithm 
Each activated domain belongs to list of domains 
ordered along their recentness (the referential 
55
space).  The resolution algorithm consists of two 
phases: 
1. Searching a suitable, preferred domain in 
the referential space when interpreting a 
referring expression. The suitability is 
defined by the minimal conditions the domain 
has to conform to in order to be the base of an 
interpretation (particular description, or 
presence of a particular access structure with 
focus or not). The main preference factor is 
the minimization of the access cost 
(recentness or salience), however other 
criteria like thematic structure could be taken 
into account and will be future work. Each 
domain is tested according to the constraints 
given by the referential expression. We allow 
several layers of constraints for each type of 
expression : if the stronger constraints are not 
met, then weaker constraints are tried. 
2. Extracting a referent and restructuring the 
referential space, taking into account this 
extraction. It not only focuses the referent in 
its domain, but also moves the domain itself 
to a more recent place. When one referent 
acquires the focus, the alternative  members 
of the same partition loose it. 
This generic scheme is instantiated for each type 
of access modes (a modality plus an expression). 
For example a definite ?the N? will search for a 
domain in which a particular entity of type ?N? 
can be discriminated, and the restructuring 
consists in focalizing in this domain the referent 
found. See (Landragin & Romary, 2003) for a 
description of the different access modes. 
The algorithm highlights the two types of 
ambiguities, domain or referent ambiguities, 
which occur when there is no preference 
available to make a choice between multiples 
entities in the first or the second phase. We guess 
that natural ambiguities should eventually be 
solved through the dialogue between the agents 
of the communication.  
5 Super-Domains 
In order to take groupings into account in the 
Reference Domains Theory, we introduce two 
constructs in our formal toolbox. Indeed, having 
only one kind of domain construct doesn?t allow 
for a correct distinction between different 
referent statuses.  
First we distinguish plural and simple domains. 
The simple domains D serve as bases for 
profiling, or highlighting, a subpart, or related 
part of a simple referent. For instance, if D = 
Room, then one can profile a Price from D. The 
plural domains D* serve as either as a generic 
base or as a plural representative for profiling 
a simple domain D. A generic base is mandatory 
in our model to support the insertion of new 
extra-linguistic referents evoked with an 
indefinite construct (for instance ?I saw a black 
bird on the roof?), while plural representatives 
are used for explicit groupings. A domain D*1 
can also be profiled from a D*0, provided D*1 
profiles a subset of the elements of D*0. 
Second, we introduce the notion of super-
domain D+, from which a D* can be profiled. 
The relations allowed between domains are  
represented on figure 1. A super-domain D+ is 
the domain of all groupings D*, including a 
special D*all grouping which is the representative 
of all evoked instances of a given category. This 
configuration is not intended to deal with long 
dialogues where several, trans-sentential 
groupings occur, and where older groupings may 
become out of access. Doing this would require 
a rhetorically driven structuring of the D*all.  
 
Figure 1: Access structure of Reference 
Domains 
 
As Reference Domain Theory is primarily 
targeted toward extra-linguistic referents 
occurring in practical dialogue, the construction 
of the domain trees, representing the supposed 
structuring of referents accessibility, is based on 
ontology. As a consequence, for each ?natural? 
type and each subtype (for instance 
Room?Single), a domain tree is potentially 
created (actually, one can easily imagine how 
this creation may be driven ?on-demand?). 
Another evolution from the initial Reference 
Domain Theory is the possibility to focalize 
several items of a partition. Indeed, since the 
resolution algorithm can focalize a whole plural 
domain, all elements of this domain must be 
focalized in all the plural domains they occur in. 
In order to refer to plural entities the idea is to 
build plural domains dynamically : when some 
sentence-level grouping, either implicit or 
explicit occurs or when a plural extra-linguistic 
referent is evoked, a D* is created and focussed 
D+ 
D* D D* 
D+ : super-domain 
D* : plural domain 
D  : simple domain 
 
        : gives access to 
56
in D+, with each of its components as children, 
when possible (that is, when each component is 
described). When new extra-linguistic referents 
(singular or plural) are evoked, they are 
individually profiled under the D*all 
corresponding to their types (that is, their 
?natural? type, and all the subtypes they are 
eligible to). 
In short, for all referents of type D: 
? they become subdomains of D*all 
? if they are plural referents, they also build 
up a focalized subdomain of D+
 
?
 all the referents of a given type are then 
grouped together under a new focalized 
subdomain of D+.  
  Figure 2 illustrates the state of the Hotel+ 
domain tree after a scenario with three dialogue 
acts, the first one introducing Hotel1, the second 
one inserting a grouping of Hotel2 and Hotel3. 
and the third one referring to it.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: A domain tree built from a scenario 
above (focus in bold) 
The operations are the following : 
U1 : Hotel1 becomes a subdomain of Hotel*all 
which gains focus in Hotel+. 
S1 : Hotel2 and Hotel3 become subdomains of 
Hotel*all. In addition Hotel2 and Hotel3 are 
grouped in Hotel*1 which gains the focus in 
Hotel+ while Hotel*all loses it. 
U2 : The pronoun is solved in Hotel+, and Hotel*1 
is retrieved. 
One can see that Hotel*all is inaccessible by a  
generic expression like a demonstrative without 
modifiers but only by a special expression like 
"all the hotels". In our point of view, the reason 
is that the grouping Hotel*1 lowers the salience 
of Hotel*all. 
6 Implementation  
We used description logics for modelling 
domains and domain-reasoning. One has to deal 
with plural entities and can follow (Franconi, 93) 
by using collection theory, representing 
collections as individuals and membership by a 
role (plus plural quantifiers). But we should use 
another way considering that the inference 
engine we use, Racer (Haarslev and M?ller, 03), 
does not take into account ALCS. Hence we 
tried representing the domains by concepts, 
given their semantic are set of individuals. The 
domain D+ corresponds to the concept D, and 
the domain-subdomain relation is a 
subsumption. All basic manipulation with 
domains could be done using Tbox assertions. 
Additionnally, a partition structure is simply a 
sequence of subdomains which are different 
from each other (disjoint concepts) and whose 
elements could be focussed. The algorithm goes 
through the referential space and tests each 
domain in the recency order against the 
constraints given by the referential expression. 
Conceptual tests on the description and 
partitional tests on the focus or possible 
discriminations are made to retrieve the domain 
and the referent. If none are found, they may be 
created by accomodation. Groupings are created 
only for explicit coordinations, implicit 
sentential coordinations (two referents could be 
grouped if they have the same basic type) and 
some kind of specifications.  
Domains and groupings creation entails the 
creation of new concepts in the Tbox. Each 
concept insertion requires a costly 
reclassification, therefore we preferred an 
approximation considering only that new 
groupings assert primitive concepts. Other 
domains are concept terms i.e. descriptions 
which do not have to be asserted in the Tbox 
automatically. 
Implicit discursive groupings are not 
implemented considering the need of a rhetorical 
structure  (like in SDRT, Asher 93) or a mental 
space model. The following example shows the 
needs : 
 U1 : I would like an hotel (h1) 
 S1 : I propose you the hotel Ibis (h2) and 
 the Lafayette hotel (h3). 
Hotel h1 could very hardly be grouped with h2 
and h3, even by ?all these hotels? (or maybe by a 
third speaker). We guess among other factors 
that they belong to different levels of 
interpretation, h1 in the domain of the desires of 
Hotel+ 
Hotel*all Hotel*1 
Hotel1 Hotel2 Hotel3 
U1: The Ibis Hotel (Hotel1) is too expensive 
S1: Maybe the Hotel Lafayette (Hotel2) or 
the Hotel de la cloche (Hotel3) 
U2: Those hotels are too far from the airport. 
 
57
the user, and the others in the domain of existing 
hotels. The link between the two domains is 
possible if one knows that S1 is an answer of to 
U's request. Such discrimination criterion and 
high level domains are not yet implemented. 
Instead we concentrated on extra-linguistic 
referents which are assumed to be interpreted in 
the real/system world (like hotels, rooms). We 
are currently testing the approach to see if it 
could be extended to any type of entities 
provided accurate discrimination criteria (like 
the predication). 
7 Example 
A sample dialogue (table 1) is analyzed through 
the preceding algorithm. This example shows 
how the referents introduced in an explicit 
coordination could be referenced as a whole ?the 
two hotels?, or extracted discriminately by an 
ordinal ?the second one? or by an otherness 
expression ?the other one?. All the subdomains 
of H+ (i.e. the plural domains of hotels) are 
indicated after each interpretation using a 
simplified notation. Only the ordered list of 
accessible entities and their focalization (bold) 
are noted for each subdomain. For instance 
H*all= (h1, h2, h3) means that the domain H*all is 
focalized in H+, and that h3 is focalized in H*all. 
Table 1: Example of dialogue (focus in bold) 
 
In order to interpret U1, U2 or U3 one needs to 
rely on the previous structuring of H+. In U1, the 
previously focalized domain H*1 is preferred to 
be the base for interpreting ?the second one? 
because of the order discrimination. This leads 
to extracting h1 hence focalizing it in H*1 but 
also in H*0 and in H*all. In U2, H*1 cannot be the 
base for interpreting ?the third one? because no 
entity could be discriminate this way. Therefore 
the only suitable domain is H*all. It is also 
impossible to interpret U3 : ?the other one? in 
H*1 because of the lack of a focus discrimination 
between h1 and h2.  
It is however possible to choose H*all for the 
domain of interpretation: the excluded referents 
h1 and h2 are unfocused while h3 gains focus. 
 
8 Evaluation in progress 
This work is currently being evaluated in the 
MEDIA/EVALDA framework, a national 
understanding evaluation campaign. (Devillers et 
al., 04). It aims to evaluate the semantic and 
referential abilities of systems with various 
approaches of natural language processing. The 
results of each system are compared to manually 
annotated utterances transcribed from a Woz 
corpus in a hotel reservation task. For the 
referential facet, referential expressions 
(excluding indefinites, and proper names) are 
annotated by a semantic description of their 
referents. 
Our system which relies on a symbolic approach 
using deep parsing and description logics for 
semantic currently scores 64% (f-measure) for 
identifying and describing accurately the 
referents. We guess that such evaluation will be 
an occasion for us to test different hypothesis on  
reference resolution using domains (for exemple 
different criteria for grouping). However we do 
not have yet more precise results on plurals and 
ordinals specifically.  
9 Conclusion 
The extension we made to the Reference 
Domains Theory is still limited because it 
considers only extra-linguistic referents, i.e. 
those also having an existence outside discourse. 
In addition the trans-sentential groupings are not 
fully studied yet. We guess that such groupings 
should need a rhetorical description of the 
discourse or dialogue. In spite of its limits, the 
extension can render dynamic effects allowing 
ordinals and otherness in plural contexts. An 
Dialogue H+ 
U: Is there a bathroom at 
the Ibis hotel (h1) and the 
hotel Lafayette (h2)? 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2) 
S: No they don't have 
bathrooms 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2) 
S: But I propose you the 
Campanile hotel (h3) 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2, h3) 
U: Hmm no, how much 
were the two hotels? 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2, h3) 
S: The hotel Lafayette is 
100 euros, the Ibis hotel is 
75 euros 
H*1 = (h2, h1) 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2, h3) 
U1: Ok, I take the second 
one 
H*1 = (h2, h1) 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2, h3) 
U2: Ok, I take the third 
one 
U3 : and the other one ? 
H*1 = (h2, h1) 
H*0 = (h1, h2) 
H*all = (h1, h2, h3) 
58
implementation in description logics is  currently 
being evaluated in the MEDIA/EVALDA 
framework. 
References 
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects   
in English: A Philosophical Semantics for Natural 
Language Metaphysics. In Studies in Linguistics 
and Philosophy, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Laurence Devillers, H?l?ne Maynard, St?phanie 
Rosset, Patrice Paroubek, Kevin McTait, Djamel 
Mostefa, Khalid Choukri, Caroline Bousquet, 
Laurent Charnay, Nadine Vigouroux, Fr?d?ric 
B?chet, Laurent Romary, Jean-Yves Antoine, 
Jeanne Villaneau, Myriam Vergnes, and J?r?me 
Goulian. 2004. The French MEDIA/EVALDA 
Project : the Evaluation of the Understanding 
Capability of Spoken Language Dialog System. In 
Proceedings of LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal. 
Carola Eschenbach, Christopher Habel, Michael 
Herweg, Klaus Rehk?mper. 1989. Remarks on 
plural anaphora. In Proc. Fourth Conference of the 
European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Enrico Franconi. 1993. A treatment of plurals and 
plural quantifications based on a theory of 
collections. Minds and Machines (3)4:453-474, 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, November 1993 
Petra Gieselmann: 2004. Reference Resolution 
Mechanisms in Dialogue Management. In: 
Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop on the 
Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue 
(CATALOG), Barcelona, 2004. 
Volker Haarslev, and Ralf M?ller. 2003. Racer: A 
Core Inference Engine for the Semantic Web. In 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on 
Evaluation of Ontology-based Tools (EON2003), 
located at the 2nd International Semantic Web 
Conference ISWC 2003, Sanibel Island, Florida, 
USA, October 20, 2003, pp. 27-36. 
Ashwani Kumar, Susanne Salmon-Alt, and Laurent 
Romary. 2003. Reference resolution as a 
facilitating process towards robust multimodal 
dialogue management: A cognitive grammar 
approach. In International Symposium on 
Reference Resolution and Its Application to 
Question Answering and Summarization. 
Fr?d?ric Landragin, and Laurent Romary. 2003. 
Referring to Objects Through Sub-Contexts in 
Multimodal Human-Computer Interaction. In Proc. 
Seventh Workshop on the Semantics and 
Pragmatics of Dialogue (DiaBruck'03), 
Saarbr?cken, Germany, 2003, pp. 67-74. 
Fr?d?ric Landragin, Nadia Bellalem and Laurent 
Romary. 2001. Visual Salience and Perceptual 
Grouping in Multimodal Interactivity. In: First 
International Workshop on Information 
Presentation and Natural Multimodal Dialogue, 
Verona, Italy, 2001 
David R. Olson. 1970. Language and Thought: 
Aspects of a Cognitive Theory of Semantics. 
Psychological Review, 77/4, 257-273. 
Susanne Salmon-alt. 2000. Interpreting referring 
expressions by restructuring context. Proc. ESSLLI 
2000, Student Session, Birmingham, UK, August 
2000. 
Susanne Salmon-Alt. 2001. Reference Resolution 
within the Framework of Cognitive Grammar. 
Proc. International Colloquium on Cognitive 
Science, San Sebastian, Spain 
Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson. 1986. Relevance, 
Communication and Cognition. Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford. 
59
