Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 55?62,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Overspecified reference in hierarchical domains:
measuring the benefits for readers
Ivandre? Paraboni
University of Sao Paulo
EACH - Av.Arlindo Bettio, 1000
03828-000 Sao Paulo, Brazil
ivandre@usp.br
Judith Masthoff
University of Aberdeen
Dep.of Computing Science
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, Scotland, UK
jmasthoff@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Kees van Deemter
University of Aberdeen
Dep.of Computing Science
Aberdeen AB24 3UE, Scotland, UK
kvdeemte@csd.abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
It is often desirable that referring expres-
sions be chosen in such a way that their
referents are easy to identify. In this paper,
we investigate to what extent identification
becomes easier by the addition of logically
redundant properties.We focus on hierar-
chically structured domains, whose con-
tent is not fully known to the reader when
the referring expression is uttered.
Introduction
Common sense suggests that speakers and writ-
ers who want to get their message across should
make their utterances easy to understand. Broadly
speaking, this view is confirmed by empirical
research (Deutsch 1976, Mangold 1986, Levelt
1989, Sonnenschein 1984, Clark 1992, Cremers
1996, Arts 2004, Paraboni and van Deemter 2002,
van der Sluis, 2005). The present paper follows in
the footsteps of Paraboni and van Deemter (2002)
by focussing on hierarchically structured domains
and asking whether any benefits are obtained when
an algorithm for the generation of referring ex-
pressions (GRE) builds logical redundancy into the
descriptions that it generates. Where Paraboni and
van Deemter (2002) reported on the results of a
simple experiment in which subjects were asked
to say which description they preferred in a given
context, the present paper describes a much more
elaborate experiment, measuring how difficult it is
for subjects to find the referent of a description.
1 Background
Let us distinguish between two aspects of the ?un-
derstanding? of a referring expression, which we
shall denote by the terms interpretation and reso-
lution. We take interpretation to be the process
whereby a hearer/reader determines the meaning
or logical form of the referring expression; we take
resolution to be the identification of the referent of
the expression once its meaning has been deter-
mined. It is resolution that will take centerstage in
our investigation.
Difficulty of resolution and interpretation do not
always go hand in hand. Consider sentences (1a)
and (1b), uttered somewhere in Brighton but not
on Lewes Road.
(1a) 968 Lewes Road
(1b) number 968
Assume that (1a) refers uniquely. If other streets
in Brighton do not have numbers above 900, then
even (1b) is a unique description ? but a pretty
useless one, since it does not help you to find the
house unless your knowledge of Brighton is ex-
ceptional. The description in (1a) is longer (and
might therefore take more time to read and in-
terpret) than (1b), but the additional material in
(1a) makes resolution easier once interpretation is
successfully completed. We explore how an GRE
program should make use of logically redundant
properties so as to simplify resolution (i.e., the
identification of the referent).
In corpus-based studies, it has been shown that
logically redundant properties tend to be included
when they fulfill one of a number of pragmatic
functions, such as to indicate that a property is of
particular importance to the speaker, or to high-
light the speaker?s awareness that the referent has
the property in question (Jordan 2000). However,
redundancy has been built into GRE algorithms
55
only to a very limited extent. Perhaps the most in-
teresting account of overspecification so far is the
one proposed by Horacek (2005), where logically
redundant properties enter the descriptions gener-
ated when the combined certainty of other prop-
erties falls short of what is contextually required.
Uncertainty can arise, for example, if the hearer
does not know about a property, or if she does not
know whether it applies to the target referent.
Our own work explores the need for overspecifi-
cation in situations where each of the properties
in question is unproblematic (i.e., certain) in prin-
ciple, but where the reader has to make an effort
to discover their extension (i.e., what objects are
truthfully described by the property). We ask how
a generator can use logically redundant informa-
tion to reduce the search space within which a
reader has to ?find? a referent. (Cf., Edmonds 1994
for a related set of problems.)
2 Hierarchical domains
Existing work on GRE tends to focus on fairly
simple domains, dominated by one-place proper-
ties. When relations (i.e., two-place properties)
are taken into account at all (e.g., Dale and Had-
dock 1991, Krahmer and Theune 2002), the mo-
tivating examples are kept so small that it is rea-
sonable to assume that speaker and hearer know
all the relevant facts in advance. Consequently,
search is not much of an issue (i.e., resolution is
easy): the hearer can identify the referent by sim-
ply intersecting the denotations of the properties
in the description. While such simplifications per-
mit the study of many aspects of reference, other
aspects come to the fore when larger domains are
considered.
Interesting questions arise, for example, when a
large domain is hierarchically ordered. We con-
sider a domain to be hierarchically ordered if its
inhabitants can be structured like a tree in which
everything that belongs to a given node n be-
long to at most one of n?s children, while every-
thing that belongs to one of n?s children belongs
to n. Examples include countries divided into
provinces which, in turn, may be divided into re-
gions, etc.; years into months then into weeks
and then into days; documents into chapters then
sections then subsections; buildings into floors
then rooms. Clearly, hierarchies are among our
favourite ways of structuring the world.
A crucial question, in all such cases, is what
knowledge is shared between speaker and hearer
at utterance time. It will be convenient to start by
focussing on the extreme case where, before the
start of resolution, knows nothing about the do-
main. When the utterance is made, the hearer?s
blindfold is removed, so to speak, and resolution
can start. No similar assumption about the speaker
is made: we assume that the speaker knows every-
thing about the domain, and that he knows that the
hearer can achieve the same knowledge. Many of
our examples will be drawn from a simple model
of a University campus, structured into buildings
and rooms; the intended referent will often be a
library located in one of the rooms. The location
of the library is not known to the hearer, but it is
known to the speaker. Each domain entity r will be
(d)
   library                                         
Watts building                                                        Cockcroft building
  room100       ...       room120     ...        room140  room100       ...       room110     ...        room120   
University of Brighton
Figure 1: A hierarchically structured domain.
associated with a TYPE (e.g., the type ?room?), and
with some additional attributes such as its ROOM
NUMBER or NAME, and we will assume that it is
always possible to distinguish r from its siblings
in the tree structure by using one or more of these
properties. (For example, ?R.NUMBER=102? iden-
tifies a room uniquely within a given building) 1.
3 Obstacles for resolution
Generating a uniquely referring expression is not
always enough, because such an expression can
leave the hearer with an unnecessarily large search
space. But the issue is an even starker one, es-
pecially when the locations of speaker and hearer
are taken into account. (For simplicity, we assume
that the locations coincide.)
Suppose a hierarchically-ordered domain D con-
tains only one entity whose TYPE is LIBRARY.
Consider the following noun phrases, uttered in
the position marked by d in Figure 1. (The first
three have the same intended referent.)
1This is a useful assumption, since the existence of a dis-
tinguishing description cannot be otherwise guaranteed.
56
(2a) the library, in room 120 in the Cockcroft bld.
(2b) the library, in room 120
(2c) the library
(2d) room 120
Utterances like (2a) and (2b) make use of the hi-
erarchical structure of the domain. Their content
can be modelled as a list
L = ?(x1, P1), (x2, P2)...(xn, Pn)?,
where x1 = r is the referent of the referring ex-
pression and, for every j > 1, xj is an ances-
tor (not necessarily the parent) of xj?1 in D. For
every j, Pj is a set of properties that jointly iden-
tify xj within xj+1 or, if j = n, within the whole
domain. For example, (2a) is modelled as
L = ?(r, {type = library}),
(x2, {type = room, r.number = 120}),
(x3, {type = building,
name = Cockcroft})?
We focus on the search for xn because, under the
assumptions that were just made this is the only
place where problems can occur (since no parent
node is available).
Even though each of (2a)-(2d) succeeds in char-
acterising their intended referent uniquely, some
of these descriptions can be problematic for the
hearer. One such problem occurs in (2d). The
expression is logically sufficient. But, intuitively
speaking, the expression creates an expectation
that the referent may be found nearby, within the
Watts building whereas, in fact, a match can only
be found in another building. In this case we will
speak of Lack of Orientation (LO).
Even more confusion might occur if another li-
brary was added to our example, e.g., in Watts 110,
while the intended referent was kept constant. In
this case, (2c) would fail to identify the referent, of
course. The expression (2b), however, would suc-
ceed, by mutually using two parts of the descrip-
tion (?the library? and ?room 120?) to identify an-
other: there are two libraries, and two rooms num-
bered 120, but there is only one pair (a, b) such
that a is a library and b is a room numbered 120,
while a is located in b. Such cases of mutual iden-
tification are unproblematic in small, transparent,
domains where search is not an issue, but in large
hierarchical domains, they are not. For, like (2d),
(2b) would force a reader to search through an un-
necessarily large part of the domain; worse even,
the search ?path? that the reader is likely to follow
leads via an obstacle, namely room 120 Watts, that
matches a part of the description, while not being
the intended referent of the relevant part of the de-
scription (i.e., room 120 Cockcroft). Confusion
could easily result. In cases like this, we speak of
a Dead End (DE).
In section 5 we will present evidence suggesting
that instances of Dead End and Lack of Orienta-
tion may disrupt search in a sufficiently large or
complex domain. For a theoretical discussion we
refer to Paraboni and van Deemter (2002).
4 Generation algorithms
What kinds of expression would existing GRE al-
gorithms produce in the situations of interest?
Since hierarchies involve relations, the first al-
gorithm that comes to mind is the one pro-
posed by Dale and Haddock (1991). Essen-
tially, this algorithm combines one- and two-
place predicates, until a combination is found that
pins down the target referent. A standard ex-
ample involves a domain containing two tables
and two bowls, while only one of the two tables
has a bowl on it. In this situation, the combi-
nation {bowl(x), on(x, y), table(y)} identifies x
(and, incidentally, also y) uniquely, since only one
value of x can be used to verify the three pred-
icates; this justifies the description ?the bowl on
the table?. This situation can be ?translated? di-
rectly into our university domain. Consider Fig-
ure 2, with one additional library in room 110
of the Watts building. In this situation, the com-
University of Brighton
   
  room100       ...       room110     ...        room120   room100       ...       room120     ...        room140
Watts building                                                        Cockcroft building
   library                                         
(d)
   library                                         
Figure 2: A university campus with two libraries.
bination {library(x), in(x, y), room(y), room ?
number(y) = 2} identifies x (and, incidentally,
also y) uniquely, because no other library is lo-
cated in a room with number 120 (and no other
room numbered 120 contains a library). Thus, the
standard approach to relational descriptions allows
precisely the kinds of situation that we have de-
scribed as DE. Henceforth, we shall describe this
57
as the Minimal Description (MD) approach to ref-
erence because, in the situations of interest, it uses
the minimum number of properties by which the
referent can be distinguished.
Paraboni and van Deemter (2002) have sketched
two GRE algorithms, both of which are guaran-
teed to prevent DE and LO by including logi-
cally redundant information into the generated de-
scriptions so as to reduce the reader?s search space.
These algorithms, called Full Inclusion (FI) and
Scope-Limited (SL), are not the only ways in
which resolution may be aided, but we will see that
they represent two natural options. Both take as
input a hierarchical domain D, a location d where
the referring expression will materialise, and an
intended referent r.
Briefly, the FI algorithm represents a straightfor-
ward way of reducing the length of search paths,
without particular attention to DE or LO. It lines
up properties that identify the referent uniquely
within its parent node, then moves up to identify
this parent node within its parent node, and so on
until reaching a subtree that includes the starting
point d 2. Applied to our earlier example of a ref-
erence to room 120, FI first builds up the list
L = ?(r, {type = room, r.number = 120})?,
then expands it to
L = ?(r, {type = room, r.number = 120}),
(x1, {type = building,
buildingname = Cockcroft})?.
Now that Parent(X) includes d , r has been iden-
tified uniquely within D and we reach STOP. L
might be realised as e.g., ?room 120 in Cockcroft?.
FI gives maximal weight to ease of resolution.
But something has to give, and that is brevity:
By conveying logical redundancy, descriptions are
lengthened, and this can have drawbacks. The
second algorithm in Paraboni and van Deemter
(2002), called SCOPE-LIMITED (SL), constitutes
a compromise between brevity and ease of resolu-
tion. SL prevents DE and LO but opts for brevity
when DE and LO do not occur. This is done
by making use of the notion of SCOPE, hence the
name of the algorithm.
2The idea behind not moving up beyond this subtree is
a natural extension of Krahmer and Theune?s treatment of
salience in GRE: see Paraboni and van Deemter (2002).
The difference between FI and SL becomes ev-
ident when we consider a case in which the min-
imally distinguishing description does not lead to
DE or LO. For example, a reference to r = li-
brary would be realised by FI as ?the library in
room 120 in Cockcroft?. By using SL, however,
the same description would be realised by the SL
algorithm simply as ?the library?, since there is no
risk of DE or LO. With the addition of a second
library in the Watts building, the behaviour of the
SL algorithm would change accordingly, produc-
ing ?the library in Cockcroft?. Similarly, had we
instead included the second library under another
room of Cockcroft, SL would describe r as ?the li-
brary in room 120 of Cockcroft?, just like FI . For
details of both algorithms we refer to Paraboni and
van Deemter (2002).
5 The new experiment
In Paraboni and van Deemter (2002) an experi-
ment was described to find out what types of ref-
erences are favoured by human judges when their
opinion about these references is asked. As an
example of a hierarchically ordered domain, the
experiment made use of a document structured in
sections and subsections. This allowed Paraboni
and van Deemter (2002) to show their subjects the
domain itself, rather than, for example, a pictorial
representation (as it would be necessary in most
other cases such as that of a University campus,
which motivated many of our examples so far).
The experiment investigated the choice of so-
called document-deictic references, such as ?the
picture in part x of section y? made by authors of
documents to check whether they choose to avoid
potential DE and LO situations by adding redun-
dant properties (favouring ease of resolution) and,
conversely, whether they choose shorter descrip-
tions when there is no such risk (favouring ease
of interpretation). The results suggested that hu-
man authors often prefer logically redundant ref-
erences, particularly when DE and LO can arise.
While this approach had the advantage that sub-
jects could compare different expressions (per-
haps balancing ease of interpretation with ease
of resolution), the method is limited in other re-
spects. For example, meta-linguistic judgements
are sometimes thought to be an unreliable pre-
dictor of people?s linguistic behaviour (e.g., van
Deemter 2004). Perhaps more seriously, the ex-
58
periment fails to tell us how difficult a given type
of reference (for example, one of the DE type)
would actually be for a reader. Therefore, in this
paper we report on a second experiment investigat-
ing the effect of the presence or absence of logical
redundancy on the performance of readers. We are
primarily interested in understanding the search
process, so resolution rather than interpretation.
5.1 Experiment design
Subjects: Forty-two computing science students
participated in the experiment, as part of a sched-
uled practical.
Procedure: A within-subjects design was used.
Each subject was shown twenty on-line docu-
ments, in a random order. The entire document
structure was always visible, and so was the con-
tent of the current document part. A screenshot of
an example document providing this level of infor-
mation is shown in Figure 3. Each document was
Figure 3: Fragment of the experiment interface.
initially opened in Part B of either Section 2 or
3, where a task was given of the form ?Let?s talk
about [topic]. Please click on [referring expres-
sion]? . For instance ?Let?s talk about elephants.
Please click on picture 5 in part A?. Subjects
could navigate through the document by clicking
on the names of the parts (e.g. Part A as visi-
ble under Section 3). As soon as the subject had
correctly clicked on the picture indicated, the next
document was presented. Subjects were reminded
throughout the document about the task to be ac-
complished, and the location at which the task
was given. All navigation actions were recorded.
At the start of the experiment, subjects were in-
structed to try to accomplish the task with a mini-
mal number of navigation actions.
We assume that readers do not have complete
knowledge of the domain. So, they do not know
which pictures are present in each part of each sec-
tion. If readers had complete knowledge, then a
minimal description would suffice. We do, how-
ever, not assume readers to be completely ignorant
either3: we allowed them to see the current doc-
ument part (where the question is asked) and its
content, as well as the hierarchical structure (sec-
tions and parts) of the remainder of the document
as in Figure 3 above.
Research Questions: We want to test whether
longer descriptions indeed help resolution, partic-
ularly in so-called problematic situations. Table 1
shows the types of situation (potential DE, LO,
and non-problematic)4 , reader and referent loca-
tion, and descriptions used.
Hypothesis 1: In a problematic (DE/LO) situ-
ation, the number of navigation actions required
for a long (FI /SL) description is smaller than
that required for a short (MD) description.
We will use the DE and LO situations in Ta-
ble 1 to test this hypothesis, comparing for each
situation the number of navigation actions of the
short, that is, minimally distinguishing (MD) and
long (FI/SL) expressions. In Paraboni and van
Deemter (2002) there was an additional hypothe-
sis about non-problematic situations, stating that
MD descriptions would be preferred to long de-
scriptions in non-problematic situations. We can-
not use this hypothesis in this experiment, as it is
highly unlikely that a shorter description will lead
to fewer navigation actions. (Note that the experi-
ment in Paraboni and van Deemter (2002) looked
at the combination of interpretation and resolution,
while we are now focussing on resolution only).
Instead, we will look at gain: the number of navi-
gation actions required for a short description mi-
nus the number required for a long description.
3Readers will always have some knowledge: if in Part B
of Section 2, then they would know (by convention) that there
will also be a Section 1, and a Part A in Section 2 etc.
4In DE situations, there is another picture with the same
number as the referent, but not in a part with the same name
as the part in which the referent is. In LO situations, there
is no other picture with the same number as the referent, and
the reader location contains pictures. In non-problematic sit-
uations, there is another picture with the same number as the
referent, but not in a part with the same name as the part in
which the referent is.
59
Sit. Type Reader Loc. Referent Loc. Short (MD) Long (FI/SL) Long (other)
1 DE Part B Sec 3 Part A Sec 2 Pic 3 in Part A Pic 3 in Part A Sec 2
2 DE Part B Sec 2 Part C Sec 3 Pic 4 in Part C Pic 4 in Part C Sec 3
3 LO Part B Sec 3 Part A Sec 3 Pic 5 Pic 5 in Part A Pic 5 in Part A Sec 3
4 LO Part B Sec 2 Part C Sec 2 Pic 4 Pic 4 in Part C Pic 4 in Part C Sec 2
5 LO Part B Sec 3 Part A Sec 4 Pic 5 Pic 5 in Part A Sec 4 Pic 5 in Part A
6 LO Part B Sec 2 Part C Sec 1 Pic 4 Pic 4 in Part C Sec 1 Pic 4 in Part C
7 NONE Part B Sec 2 Part A Sec 2 Pic 3 in Part A Pic 3 in Part A Sec 2
8 NONE Part B Sec 3 Part C Sec 3 Pic 4 in Part C Pic 4 in Part C Sec 3
Table 1: Situations of reference
Hypothesis 2: The gain achieved by a long
description over an MD description will be
larger in a problematic situation than in a non-
problematic situation.
We will use the DE and non-problematic situa-
tions in Table 1 to test this hypothesis, comparing
the gain of situation 1 with that of situation 7, and
the gain of situation 2 with that of situation 8.
Longer descriptions may always lead to fewer nav-
igation actions, and it can be expected that com-
plete descriptions of the form picture x in Part y of
Section z will outperform shorter descriptions in
any situation. So, from a resolution point of view,
an algorithm that would always give a complete
description may produce better results than the al-
gorithms we proposed, which do not always give
complete descriptions (e.g. situation 3 in Table 1).
The aim of our algorithms is to make the descrip-
tions complete enough to prevent DE and LO in
resolution, but not overly redundant as this may
affect interpretation. We would like to show that
the decisions taken by FI and SL are sensible, i.e.
that they produce descriptions that are neither too
short nor too long. Therefore:
S1: We want to consider situations in which FI
and SL have produced an incomplete descrip-
tion, and investigate how much gain could have
been made by using a complete description in
those cases. We would like this gain to be negli-
gible. We will use situations 3 and 4 for this, cal-
culating the gain of the long, complete descrip-
tions (namely, long (other) in Table 1) over the
short, incomplete descriptions generated by our
algorithms (long (FI /SL) in Table 1).
S2: We want to consider situations in which FI
and SL have produced a complete description,
and investigate how much gain has been made by
using this compared to a less complete descrip-
tion that is still more complete than MD. We
would like this gain to be large. We will use situ-
ations 5 and 6 for this, calculating the gain of the
long complete descriptions generated by our al-
gorithms (long (FI /SL) in Table 1) over the less
complete descriptions (long (other) in Table 1).
Introducing separate hypotheses for cases S1 and
S2 poses the problem of defining when a gain is
?negligible? and when a gain is ?large?. Instead,
we will compare the gain achieved in S1 with the
gain achieved in S2, expecting that the gain in S2
(which we believe to be large) will be larger than
the gain in S1 (which we believe to be negligible).
Hypothesis 3: The gain of a complete descrip-
tion over a less complete one will be larger for
situations in which FI and SL generated the
complete one, than for situations in which they
generated the less complete one.
Materials: Twenty on-line documents were pro-
duced, with the same document structure (sec-
tions 1 to 5 with parts A to C) and containing
10 pictures. Documents had a unique background
colour, title and pictures appropriate for the title.
The number of pictures in a section or part varied
per document. All of this was done to prevent sub-
jects relying on memory.
Documents were constructed specifically for the
experiment. Using real-world documents might
have made the tasks more realistic, but would have
posed a number of problems. Firstly, documents
needed to be similar enough in structure to allow
a fair comparison between longer and shorter de-
scriptions. However, the structure should not al-
low subjects to learn where pictures are likely to be
(for instance, in patient information leaflets most
pictures tend to be at the beginning). Secondly,
the content of documents should not help subjects
find a picture: e.g., if we were using a real docu-
ment on animals, subjects might expect a picture
of a tiger to be near to a picture of a lion. So,
60
Short Long (FI/SL) Long (Other)
Sit. Type Mean STDEV Mean STDEV Mean STDEV
1 DE 3.58 2.14 1.10 0.50
2 DE 3.85 3.28 1.30 1.31
3 LO 5.60 4.84 1.93 1.29 1.23 1.27
4 LO 2.50 1.97 1.60 1.28 1.38 2.07
5 LO 8.53 4.15 1.15 0.53 5.65 6.74
6 LO 7.38 5.49 1.25 1.03 4.08 2.35
7 NONE 1.58 0.98 1.63 2.61
8 NONE 1.48 0.96 1.05 0.32
Table 2: Number of clicks used to complete the tasks.
Sit. Type Mean STDEV
1 DE 2.48 2.24
7 NONE -0.05 2.77
2 DE 2.55 3.62
8 NONE 0.43 1.04
Table 3: Gain as used for Hypothesis 2.
we do not want subjects to use semantic informa-
tion or their background knowledge of the domain.
Thirdly, real documents might not have the right
descriptions in them, so we would need to change
their sentences by hand.
5.2 Results and discussion
Forty subjects completed the experiment. Table
2 shows descriptive statistics for the number of
clicks subjects made to complete each task. To
analyse the results with respect to Hypothesis 1,
we used a General Linear Model (GLM ) with re-
peated measures. We used two repeated factors:
Situation (sit. 1 to 6) and Description Length
(short and long(FI/SL) ). We found a highly sig-
nificant effect of Description Length on the num-
ber of clicks used to complete the task (p<.001).
In all potential problematic situations the number
of clicks is smaller for the long than for the short
description. This confirms Hypothesis 1.
Table 3 shows descriptive statistics for the gain as
used for Hypothesis 2. We again used a GLM
with repeated measures, using two repeated fac-
tors: Descriptions Content (that of situations 1 and
7, and that of situations 2 and 8) and Situation
Type (potential DE and non-problematic). We
found a highly significant effect of Situation Type
on the gain (p<.001). In the non-problematic situ-
ations the gain is smaller than in the potential DE
situations. This confirms Hypothesis 2.
Table 4 shows descriptive statistics for the gain as
used for Hypothesis 3. We again used a GLM
Sit. FI Decision Mean STDEV
3 NOT COMPLETE 0.70 1.40
5 COMPLETE 4.50 6.67
4 NOT COMPLETE 0.23 2.51
6 COMPLETE 2.83 2.16
Table 4: Gain as used for Hypothesis 3.
with repeated measures, using two repeated fac-
tors: Descriptions Content (that of situations 3 and
5, and that of 4 and 6) and FI Decision (with 2
levels: complete and not complete). We found
a highly significant effect of FI Decision on the
gain (p<.001). The gain is smaller for situations
were our algorithm decided to use an incomplete
description than in situations were it chose a com-
plete description. This confirms Hypothesis 3.
6 Conclusion
We have discussed generation strategies that facil-
itate resolution of referring expressions by adding
logically redundant information to the descriptions
generated. Redundancy has a role to play in dif-
ferent kinds of situation (see Introduction for ref-
erences), but we have focussed on a class of cases
that we believe to be widespread, namely where
the domain is hierarchical. We have argued that,
in such situations, minimally distinguishing de-
scriptions can sometimes be useless. Various al-
gorithms for generating logically redundant ref-
erences have been implemented. The extensive
experiment of section 5 indicates that these algo-
rithms are fundamentally on the right track.
The new algorithms discussed in this paper are an
alternative to classical GRE algorithms. This raises
the question how one knows whether to use the
new FI or SL instead of one of its competitors?
Let us compare the predictions made by our al-
gorithms with those made by Dale and Haddock
(1991). Suppose their description ?the bowl on the
table? was said when there are two tables and two
61
bowls, while (only) the table furthest away from
the hearer has a bowl on it. In this situation, FI
and SL would generate something redundant like
the bowl on the far-away table. Which of the two
descriptions is best? We submit that it depends on
the situation: when all the relevant facts are avail-
able to the hearer without effort (e.g., all the do-
main objects are visible at a glance) then minimal
descriptions are fine. But in a huge room, where
it is not obvious to the hearer what is on each ta-
ble, search is required. It is this type of situation
that there is a need for the kind of ?studied? redun-
dancy embodied in FI and SL, because the min-
imally ?the bowl on the table? would not be very
helpful. The new algorithms are designed for situ-
ations where the hearer may have to make an effort
to uncover the relevant facts.
By focussing on the benefits for the reader (in
terms of the effort required for identifying the ref-
erent), we have not only substantiated the claims
in Paraboni and van Deemter (2002), to the effect
that it can be good to add logically redundant in-
formation to a referring expression; we have also
been able to shed light on the reason why redun-
dant descriptions are sometimes preferred (com-
pared with the experiment in Paraboni and van
Deemter (2002), which did not shed light on the
reason for this preference): we can now say with
some confidence that, in the circumstances speci-
fied, the generated redundant descriptions are re-
solved with particular ease. By counting the num-
ber of clicks that subjects need to find the referent,
we believe that we may have achieved a degree of
insight into the ?resolution? processes in the head
of the reader, not unlike the insights coming out
of the kind of eye-tracking experiments that have
been popular in psycholinguistics for a number of
years now. It would be interesting to see whether
our ideas can be confirmed using such a more en-
trenched experimental paradigm.
7 References
Arts, Anja. 2004. Overspecification in instructive
texts. PhD. Tilburg University, The Netherlands.
Wolf Publishers, Nijmegen.
Cremers, Anita. 1996. Reference to Objects;
an empirically based study of task-oriented dia-
logues. Ph.D. thesis, University of Eindhoven.
Dale, Robert and Nicholas Haddock. 1991. Gen-
erating Referring Expressions involving Relations.
EACL, Berlin, pp.161-166.
Dale, Robert and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computa-
tional Interpretations of the Gricean Maxims in the
Generation of Referring Expressions. Cognitive
Science 18:pp.233-263.
Deutsch, W. 1976. ?Sprachliche Redundanz und
Objectidentifikation.? Unpublished PhD disserta-
tion, University of Marburg.
Edmonds, Philip G. 1994. Collaboration on ref-
erence to objects that are not mutually known.
COLING-1994, Kyoto, pp.1118-1122.
Krahmer, E. and Theune, M. 2002. Efficient
Context-Sensitive Generation of Referring Ex-
pressions. In K. van Deemter and R. Kibble (eds.)
Information Sharing. CSLI Publ., Stanford.
Horacek, Helmut. 2005. Generating referential
descriptions under conditions of uncertainty. 10th
European workshop on Natural Language Gener-
ation (ENLG-2005). Aberdeen, pp.58-67.
Jordan, Pamela W. 2000. Can Nominal Expres-
sions Achieve Multiple Goals?: An Empirical
Study. ACL-2000, Hong Kong.
Levelt, W.J.M. 1989. Speaking: From Intention to
Articulation. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Mangold, Roland. 1986. Sensorische Faktoren
beim Verstehen ueberspezifizierter Objektbenen-
nungen. Frankfurt: Peter Lang Verlag.
Paraboni, Ivandre. 2000. An algorithm for gen-
erating document-deictic references. INLG-2000
Workshop Coherence in Generated Multimedia,
Mitzpe Ramon, pp.27-31.
Paraboni, Ivandre and van Deemter, K. (2002).
Generating Easy References: the Case of Docu-
ment Deixis. INLG-2002, New York, pp.113-119.
Sonnenschein, Susan. 1984. The effect of redun-
dant communication on listeners: Why different
types may have different effects. Journal of Psy-
cholinguistic Research 13, pp.147-166.
van Deemter, Kees. 2004. Finetuning an NLG
system through experiments with human subjects:
the case of vague descriptions. INLG-04, Brock-
enhurst, UK, pp.31-40.
van der Sluis, I. 2005. Multimodal Reference,
Studies in Automatic Generation of Multimodal
Referring Expressions. Ph.D. thesis, Tilburg Uni-
versity, the Netherlands.
62
