Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2006), pages 308?316,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Priming Effects in Combinatory Categorial Grammar
David Reitter
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
dreitter@inf.ed.ac.uk
Julia Hockenmaier
Inst. for Res. in Cognitive Science
University of Pennsylvania
3401 Walnut Street
Philadelphia PA 19104, USA
juliahr@cis.upenn.edu
Frank Keller
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK
keller@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a corpus-based ac-
count of structural priming in human sen-
tence processing, focusing on the role that
syntactic representations play in such an
account. We estimate the strength of struc-
tural priming effects from a corpus of
spontaneous spoken dialogue, annotated
syntactically with Combinatory Catego-
rial Grammar (CCG) derivations. This
methodology allows us to test a range of
predictions that CCG makes about prim-
ing. In particular, we present evidence
for priming between lexical and syntactic
categories encoding partially satisfied sub-
categorization frames, and we show that
priming effects exist both for incremental
and normal-form CCG derivations.
1 Introduction
In psycholinguistics, priming refers to the fact that
speakers prefer to reuse recently encountered lin-
guistic material. Priming effects typically man-
ifest themselves in shorter processing times or
higher usage frequencies for reused material com-
pared to non-reused material. These effects are at-
tested both in language comprehension and in lan-
guage production. Structural priming occurs when
a speaker repeats a syntactic decision, and has
been demonstrated in numerous experiments over
the past two decades (e.g., Bock, 1986; Branigan
et al, 2000). These experimental findings show
that subjects are more likely to choose, e.g., a
passive voice construction if they have previously
comprehended or produced such a construction.
Recent studies have used syntactically anno-
tated corpora to investigate structural priming.
The results have demonstrated the existence of
priming effects in corpus data: they occur for spe-
cific syntactic constructions (Gries, 2005; Szm-
recsanyi, 2005), consistent with the experimen-
tal literature, but also generalize to syntactic rules
across the board, which repeated more often than
expected by chance (Reitter et al, 2006b; Dubey
et al, 2006). In the present paper, we build on
this corpus-based approach to priming, but focus
on the role of the underlying syntactic represen-
tations. In particular, we use priming to evaluate
claims resulting from a particular syntactic theory,
which is a way of testing the representational as-
sumptions it makes.
Using priming effects to inform syntactic the-
ory is a novel idea; previous corpus-based priming
studies have simply worked with uncontroversial
classes of constructions (e.g., passive/active). The
contribution of this paper is to overcome this limi-
tation by defining a computational model of prim-
ing with a clear interface to a particular syntac-
tic framework. The general assumption we make
is that priming is a phenomenon relating to gram-
matical constituents ? these constituents determine
the syntactic choices whose repetition can lead to
priming. Crucially, grammatical frameworks dif-
fer in the grammatical constituents they assume,
and therefore predict different sets of priming ef-
fects.
We require the following ingredients to pursue
this approach: a syntactic theory that identifies
a set of constituents, a corpus of linguistic data
annotated according to that syntactic theory, and
a statistical model that estimates the strength of
priming based on a set of external factors. We can
then derive predictions for the influence of these
factors from the syntactic theory, and test them
using the statistical model. In this paper, we use
regression models to quantify structural priming
effects and to verify predictions made by Com-
binatory Categorial Grammar (CCG, Steedman
(2000)), a syntactic framework that has the theo-
retical potential to elegantly explain some of the
phenomena discovered in priming experiments.
308
CCG is distinguished from most other gram-
matical theories by the fact that its rules are
type-dependent, rather than structure-dependent
like classical transformations. Such rules adhere
strictly to the constituent condition on rules, i.e.,
they apply to and yield constituents. Moreover,
the syntactic types that determine the applicability
of rules in derivations are transparent to (i.e., are
determined, though not necessarily uniquely, by)
the semantic types that they are associated with.
As a consequence, syntactic types are more ex-
pressive and more numerous than standard parts of
speech: there are around 500 highly frequent CCG
types, against the standard 50 or so Penn Treebank
POS tags. As we will see below, these properties
allow CCG to discard a number of traditional as-
sumptions concerning surface constituency. They
also allow us to make a number of testable pre-
dictions concerning priming effects, most impor-
tantly (a) that priming effects are type-driven and
independent of derivation, and, as a corollary;
(b) that lexical and derived constituents of the
same type can prime each other. These effects are
not expected under more traditional views of prim-
ing as structure-dependent.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2
explains the relationship between structural prim-
ing and CCG, which leads to a set of specific pre-
dictions, detailed in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5
present the methodology employed to test these
predictions, describing the corpus data and the sta-
tistical analysis used. Section 6 then presents the
results of three experiments that deal with priming
of lexical vs. phrasal categories, priming in incre-
mental vs. normal form derivations, and frequency
effects in priming. Section 7 provides a discussion
of the implications of these findings.
2 Background
2.1 Structural Priming
Previous studies of structural priming (Bock,
1986; Branigan et al, 2000) have made few the-
oretical assumptions about syntax, regardless of
whether the studies were based on planned exper-
iments or corpora. They leverage the fact that al-
ternations such as He gave Raquel the car keys vs.
He gave the car keys to Raquel are nearly equiva-
lent in semantics, but differ in their syntactic struc-
ture (double object vs. prepositional object). In
such experiments, subjects are first exposed to a
prime, i.e., they have to comprehend or produce
either the double object or the prepositional ob-
ject structure. In the subsequent trial, the target,
they are the free to produce or comprehend either
of the two structures, but they tend to prefer the
one that has been primed. In corpus studies, the
frequencies of the alternative constructions can be
compared in a similar fashion (Gries, 2005; Szm-
recsanyi, 2005).
Reitter et al (2006b) present a different method
to examine priming effects in the general case.
Rather than selecting specific syntactic alterna-
tions, general syntactic units are identified. This
method detects syntactic repetition in corpora and
correlates its probability with the distance between
prime and target, where at great distance, any rep-
etition can be attributed to chance. The size of
the priming effect is then estimated as the differ-
ence between the repetition probability close to
the prime and far away from the prime. This is
a way of factoring out chance repetition (which
is required if we do not deal with syntactic alter-
nations). By relying on syntactic units, the prim-
ing model includes implicit assumptions about the
particular syntactic framework used to annotate
the corpus under investigation.
2.2 Priming and Lexicalized Grammar
Previous work has demonstrated that priming ef-
fects on different linguistic levels are not indepen-
dent (Pickering and Branigan, 1998). Lexical rep-
etition makes repetition on the syntactic level more
likely. For instance, suppose we have two verbal
phrases (prime, target) produced only a few sec-
onds apart. Priming means that the target is more
likely to assume the same syntactic form (e.g., a
passive) as the prime. Furthermore, if the head
verbs in prime and target are identical, experi-
ments have demonstrated a stronger priming ef-
fect. This effect seems to indicate that lexical and
syntactic representations in the grammar share the
same information (e.g., subcategorization infor-
mation), and therefore these representations can
prime each other.
Consequently, we treat subcategorization as
coterminous with syntactic type, rather than as a
feature exclusively associated with lexemes. Such
types determine the context of a lexeme or phrase,
and are determined by derivation. Such an anal-
ysis is exactly what categorial grammars suggest.
The rich set of syntactic types that categories af-
ford may be just sufficient to describe all and only
309
the units that can show priming effects during
syntactic processing. That is to say that syntac-
tic priming is categorial type-priming, rather than
structural priming.
Consistent with this view, Pickering and Brani-
gan (1998) assume that morphosyntactic features
such as tense, aspect or number are represented in-
dependently from combinatorial properties which
specify the contextual requirements of a lexical
item. Property groups are represented centrally
and shared between lexicon entries, so that they
may ? separately ? prime each other. For ex-
ample, the pre-nominal adjective red in the red
book primes other pre-nominal adjectives, but not
a post-nominal relative clause (the book that?s red)
(Cleland and Pickering, 2003; Scheepers, 2003).
However, if a lexical item can prime a phrasal
constituent of the same type, and vice versa, then
a type-driven grammar formalism like CCG can
provide a simple account of the effect, because
lexical and derived syntactic types have the same
combinatory potential, which is completely spec-
ified by the type, whereas in structure-driven the-
ories, this information is only implicitly given in
the derivational process.
2.3 Combinatory Categorial Grammar
CCG (Steedman, 2000) is a mildly context-
sensitive, lexicalized grammar formalism with a
transparent syntax-semantics interface and a flex-
ible constituent structure that is of particular in-
terest to psycholinguistics, since it allows the con-
struction of incremental derivations. CCG has also
enjoyed the interest of the NLP community, with
high-accuracy wide-coverage parsers(Clark and
Curran, 2004; Hockenmaier and Steedman, 2002)
and generators1 available (White and Baldridge,
2003).
Words are associated with lexical categories
which specify their subcategorization behaviour,
eg. ((S[dcl]\NP)/NP)/NP is the lexical category
for (tensed) ditransitive verbs in English such as
gives or send, which expect two NP objects to
their right, and one NP subject to their left. Com-
plex categories X/Y or X\Y are functors which
yield a constituent with category X, if they are ap-
plied to a constituent with category Y to their right
(/Y) or to their left (\Y).
Constituents are combined via a small set of
combinatory rule schemata:
Forward Application: X/Y Y ?> X
1http://opennlp.sourceforge.net/
Backward Application: Y X\Y ?> X
Forward Composition: X/Y Y/Z ?B X/Z
Backward Composition: Y\Z X\Y ?B X\Z
Backw. Crossed Composition: Y/Z X\Y ?B X/Z
Forward Type-raising: X ?T T/(T\X)
Coordination: X conj X ?? X
Function application is the most basic operation
(and used by all variants of categorial grammar):
I saw the man
NP (S\NP)/NP NP
>
S\NP
<
S
Composition (B) and type-raising (T) are neces-
sary for the analysis of long-range dependencies
and for incremental derivations. CCG uses the
same lexical categories for long-range dependen-
cies that arise eg. in wh-movement or coordina-
tion as for local dependencies, and does not re-
quire traces:
the man that I saw
NP (NP\NP)/(S/NP) NP (S\NP)/NP
>T
S/(S\NP)
>B
S/NP
>
NP\NP
I saw and you heard the man
NP (S\NP)/NP conj NP (S\NP)/NP
>T >T
S/(S\NP) S/(S\NP)
>B >B
S/NP S/NP
<?>
S/NP
>
S
The combinatory rules of CCG allow multiple,
semantically equivalent, syntactic derivations of
the same sentence. This spurious ambiguity is
the result of CCG?s flexible constituent structure,
which can account for long-range dependencies
and coordination (as in the above example), and
also for interaction with information structure.
CCG parsers often limit the use of the combi-
natory rules (in particular: type-raising) to obtain
a single right-branching normal form derivation
(Eisner, 1996) for each possible semantic inter-
pretation. Such normal form derivations only use
composition and type-raising where syntactically
necessary (eg. in relative clauses).
3 Predictions
3.1 Priming Effects
We expect priming effects to apply to CCG cat-
egories, which describe the type of a constituent
including the arguments it expects. Under our as-
sumption that priming manifests itself as a ten-
dency for repetition, repetition probability should
be higher for short distances from a prime (see
Section 5.2 for details).
310
3.2 Terminal and Non-terminal Categories
In categorial grammar, lexical categories specify
the subcategorization behavior of their heads, cap-
turing local and non-local arguments, and a small
set of rule schemata defines how constituents can
be combined.
Phrasal constituents may have the same cate-
gories as lexical items. For example, the verb saw
might have the (lexical) category (S\NP)/NP,
which allows it to combine with an NP to the right.
The resulting constituent for saw Johanna would
be of category S\NP ? a constituent which expects
an NP (the subject) to its left, and also the lexi-
cal category of an intransitive verb. Similarly, the
constituent consisting of a ditransitive verb and its
object, gives the money, has the same category as
saw. Under the assumption that priming occurs for
these categories, we proceed to test a hypothesis
that follows from the fact that categories merely
encode unsatisfied subcategorized arguments.
Given that a transitive verb has the same cat-
egory as the constituent formed by a ditransitive
verb and its direct object, we would expect that
both categories can prime each other, if they are
cognitive units. More generally, we would expect
that lexical (terminal) and phrasal (non-terminal)
categories of the same syntactic type may prime
each other. The interaction of such conditions with
the priming effect can be quantified in the statisti-
cal model.
3.3 Incrementality of Analyses
Type-raising and composition allow derivations
that are mostly left-branching, or incremental.
Adopting a left-to-right processing order for a sen-
tence is important, if the syntactic theory is to
make psycholinguistically viable predictions (Niv,
1994; Steedman, 2000).
Pickering et al (2002) present priming experi-
ments that suggest that, in production, structural
dominance and linearization do not take place in
different stages. Their argument involves verbal
phrases with a shifted prepositional object such
as showed to the mechanic a torn overall. At a
dominance-only level, such phrases are equivalent
to non-shifted prepositional constructions (showed
a torn overall to the mechanic), but the two vari-
ants may be differentiated at a linearization stage.
Shifted primes do not prime prepositional objects
in their canonical position, thus priming must oc-
cur at a linearized level, and a separate dominance
level seems unlikely (unless priming is selective).
CCG is compatible with one-stage formulations of
syntax, as no transformation is assumed and cate-
gories encode linearization together with subcate-
gorization.
CCG assumes that the processor may produce
syntactically different, but semantically equivalent
derivations.2 So, while neither the incremental
analysis we generate, nor the normal-form, rep-
resent one single correct derivation, they are two
extremes of a ?spectrum? of derivations. We hy-
pothesize that priming effects predicted on the ba-
sis of incremental CCG analyses will be as strong
than those predicted on the basis of their normal-
form equivalents.
4 Corpus Data
4.1 The Switchboard Corpus
The Switchboard (Marcus et al, 1994) corpus con-
tains transcriptions of spoken, spontaneous con-
versation annotated with phrase-structure trees.
Dialogues were recorded over the telephone
among randomly paired North American speak-
ers, who were just given a general topic to talk
about. 80,000 utterances of the corpus have been
annotated with syntactic structure. This portion,
included in the Penn Treebank, has been time-
aligned (per word) in the Paraphrase project (Car-
letta et al, 2004).
Using the same regression technique as em-
ployed here, Reitter et al (2006b) found a marked
structural priming effect for Penn-Treebank style
phrase structure rules in Switchboard.
4.2 Disfluencies
Speech is often disfluent, and speech repairs are
known to repeat large portions of the preceding
context (Johnson and Charniak, 2004). The orig-
inal Switchboard transcripts contains these disflu-
encies (marked up as EDITED):
( (S >>>(EDITED
(RM (-DFL- \bs [) )
(EDITED
(RM (-DFL- \bs [) )
(CC And)
(, ,)
(IP (-DFL- \bs +) ))
(CC and)
(, ,)
(RS (-DFL- \bs ]) )
(IP (-DFL- \bs +) ))<<<
2Selectional criteria such as information structure and in-
tonation allow to distinguish between semantically different
analyses.
311
(CC and)
>>>(RS (-DFL- \bs ]) )<<<
(NP-SBJ (PRP I) )
(VP (VBP guess)
(SBAR (-NONE- 0)
(S (NP-SBJ (DT that) )
(VP (BES ?s)
(SBAR-NOM-PRD
(WHNP-1 (WP what) )
(S (NP-SBJ (PRP I) )
(ADVP (RB really) )
(VP (VBP like)
(NP (-NONE- *T*-1) ))))))))
(. .) (-DFL- E_S) ))
It is unclear to what extent these repetitions
are due to priming rather than simple correc-
tion. In disfluent utterances, we therefore elimi-
nate reparanda and only keep repairs (the portions
marked with >...< are removed). Hesitations (uh,
etc.), and utterances with unfinished constituents
are also ignored.
4.3 Translating Switchboard to CCG
Since the Switchboard annotation is almost iden-
tical to the one of the Penn Treebank, we use a
similar translation algorithm to Hockenmaier and
Steedman (2005). We identify heads, arguments
and adjuncts, binarize the trees, and assign cat-
egories in a recursive top-down fashion. Nonlo-
cal dependencies that arise through wh-movement
and right node raising (*T* and *RNR* traces) are
captured in the resulting derivation. Figure 1 (left)
shows the rightmost normal form CCG derivation
we obtain for the above tree. We then transform
this normal form derivation into the most incre-
mental (i.e., left-branching) derivation possible, as
shown in Figure 1 (right).
This transformation is done by a top-down re-
cursive procedure, which changes each tree of
depth two into an equivalent left-branching anal-
ysis if the combinatory rules allow it. This pro-
cedure is run until no further transformation can
be executed. The lexical categories of both deriva-
tions are identical.
5 Statistical Analysis
5.1 Priming of Categories
CCG assumes a minimal set of combinatory rule
schemata. Much more than in those rules, syntac-
tic decisions are evident from the categories that
occur in the derivation.
Given the categories for each utterance, we can
identify their repeated use. A certain amount
of repetition will obviously be coincidental. But
structural priming predicts that a target category
will occur more frequently closer to a potential
prime of the same category. Therefore, we can
correlate the probability of repetition with the dis-
tance between prime and target. Generalized Lin-
ear Mixed Effects Models (GLMMs, see next sec-
tion) allow us to evaluate and quantify this corre-
lation.
Every syntactic category is counted as a poten-
tial prime and (almost always) as a target for prim-
ing. Because interlocutors tend to stick to a topic
during a conversation for some time, we exclude
cases of syntactic repetition that are a results of
the repetition of a whole phrase.
Previous work points out that priming is sensi-
tive to frequency (Scheepers (2003) for high/low
relative clause attachments, (Reitter et al, 2006a)
for phrase structure rules). Highly frequent items
do not receive (as much) priming. We include
the logarithm of the raw frequency of the syntac-
tic category in Switchboard (LNFREQ) to approx-
imate the effect that frequency has on accessibility
of the category.
5.2 Generalized Linear Mixed Effects
Regression
We use generalized linear mixed effects regression
models (GLMM, Venables and Ripley (2002)) to
predict a response for a number of given categorial
(?factor?) or continuous (?predictor?) explanatory
variables (features). Our data is made up of in-
stances of repetition examples and non-repetition
examples from the corpus. For each target in-
stance of a syntactic category c occurring in a
derivation and spanning a constituent that begins
at time t, we look back for possible instances of
constituents with the same category (the prime)
in a time frame of [t ? d ? 0.5; t ? d + 0.5] sec-
onds. If such instances can be found, we have a
positive example of repetition. Otherwise, c is in-
cluded as a data point with a negative outcome.
We do so for a range of different distances d, com-
monly 1 ? d ? 15 seconds.3 For each data point,
we include the logarithm of the distance d between
priming period and target as an explanatory vari-
able LNDIST. (See Reitter et al (2006b) for a
worked example.)
In order to eliminate cases of lexical repeti-
tion of a phrase, e.g., names or lexicalized noun
3This approach uses a number of data points per target,
looking backwards for primes. The opposite way ? looking
forwards for targets ? would make similar predictions.
312
Normal form derivation Incremental derivation
S[dcl]
S/S
and
S[dcl]
S/(S\NP)
NP
I
S[dcl]\NP
(S[dcl]\NP)/S[dcl]
guess
S[dcl]
S/(S\NP)
NP
that
S[dcl]\NP
(S[dcl]\NP)/NP
?s
NP
NP/(S[dcl]/NP)
what
S[dcl]/NP
S/(S\NP)
NP
I
(S[dcl]\NP)/NP
(S\NP)/(S\NP)
really
(S[dcl]\NP)/NP
like
S[dcl]
S[dcl]/(S[dcl]/NP)
S[dcl]/NP
S[dcl]/(S\NP)
S[dcl]/S[dcl]
S/(S\NP)
S/S
and
S/(S\NP)
NP
I
(S[dcl]\NP)/S[dcl]
guess
S/(S\NP)
NP
that
(S[dcl]\NP)/NP
?s
NP/(S[dcl]/NP)
what
S[dcl]/NP
S/(S\NP)
S/(S\NP)
NP
I
(S\NP)/(S\NP)
really
(S[dcl]\NP)/NP
like
Figure 1: Two derivations (normal form: left), incremental: right) for the sentence fragment and I guess
that?s what I really like from Switchboard.
phrases, which we consider topic-dependent or in-
stances of lexical priming, we only collect syntac-
tic repetitions with at least one differing word.
Without syntactic priming, we would assume
that there is no correlation between the probabil-
ity that a data point is positive (repetition occurs)
and distance d. With priming, we would expect
that the probability is inversely proportional to d.
Our model uses lnd as predictor LNDIST, since
memory effects usually decay exponentially.
The regression model fitted is then simply a
choice of coefficients ?i, among them one for each
explanatory variable i. ?i expresses the contribu-
tion of i to the probability of the outcome event,
that is, in our case, successful priming. The coeffi-
cient of interest is the one for the time correlation,
i.e. ?lnDist . It specifies the strength of decay of
repetition probability over time. If no other vari-
ables are present, a model estimates the repetition
probability for a data point i as
p?i = ?0 +?lnDist ln DISTi
Priming is present if the estimated parameter is
negative, i.e. the repetition probability decreases
with increasing distance between prime and target.
Other explanatory variables, such as ROLE,
which indicates whether priming occurs within a
speaker (production-production priming, PP) or
in between speakers (comprehension-production
priming, CP), receive an interaction coefficient
that adds linearly to ?lnDist . Additional interac-
tion variables are included depending on the ex-
perimental question.4
4Lastly, we identify the target utterance in a random fac-
tor in our model, grouping the several measurements (15 for
the different distances from each target) as repeated measure-
ments, since they depend on the same target category occur-
rence and are partially inter-dependent.
From the data produced, we include all cases
of reptition and a an equal number of randomly
sampled non-repetition cases.5
6 Experiments
6.1 Experiment 1: Priming in Incremental
and Normal-form Derivations
Hypothesis CCG assumes a multiplicity of se-
mantically equivalent derivations with different
syntactic constituent structures. Here, we in-
vestigate whether two of these, the normal-form
and the most incremental derivation, differ in the
strength with which syntactic priming occurs.
Method A joint model was built containing rep-
etition data from both types of derivations. Since
we are only interested in cases where the two
derivations differ, we excluded all constituents
where a string of words was analyzed as a con-
stituent in both derivations. This produced a data
set where the two derivations could be contrasted.
A factor DERIVATION in the model indicates
whether the repetition occurred in a normal-form
(NF) or an incremental derivation (INC).
Results Significant and substantial priming is
present in both types of derivations, for both PP
and CP priming. There is no significant difference
in priming strength between normal-form and
incremental derivations (?lnDist:NF = 0.008, p =
0.95). The logarithm of the raw category fre-
quency is negatively correlated with the priming
strength (?lnDist:lnFreq = 0.151, p < 0.0001. Note
that a negative coefficient for LNDIST indicates
5We trained our models using Penalized Quasi-
Likelihood (Venables and Ripley, 2002). This technique
works best if data is balanced, i.e. we avoid having very rare
positive examples in the data. Experiment 2 was conducted
on a subset of the data.
313
CP:NormalForm
PP:NormalForm
CP:Incremental
PP:Incremental
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6
- - - -
Figure 2: Decay effect sizes in Experiment 1
for combinations of comprehension-production or
production-production priming and in incremental
or normal-form derivations. Error bars show (non-
simultaneous) 95% confidence intervals.
decay. The lower this coefficient, the more decay,
hence priming).
If there was no priming of categories for incre-
mentally formed constituents, we would expect to
see a large effect of DERIVATION. In the contrary,
we see no effect at a high p, where the that the
regression method used is demonstrably powerful
enough to detect even small changes in the prim-
ing effect. We conclude that there is no detectable
difference in priming between the two derivation
types. In Fig. 2, we give the estimated priming
effect sizes for the four conditions.6
The result is compatible with CCG?s separation
of derivation structure and the type of the result
of derivation. It is not the derivation structure that
primes, but rather the type of the result. It is also
compatible with the possibility of a non-traditional
constituent structure (such as the incremental anal-
ysis), even though it is clear that neither incremen-
tal nor normal-form derivations necessarily repre-
sent the ideal analysis.
The category sets occurring in both derivation
variants was largely disjunct, making testing for
actual overlap between different derivations im-
possible.
6.2 Experiment 2: Priming between Lexical
and Phrasal Categories
Hypothesis Since CCG categories simply en-
code unsatisfied subcategorization constraints,
constituents which are very different from a tradi-
tional linguistic perspective can receive the same
category. This is, perhaps, most evident in phrasal
6Note that Figures 2 and 3 stem from nested models that
estimate the effect of LNDIST within the four/eight condi-
tions. Confidence intervals will be larger, as fewer data-
points are available than when the overall effect of a single
factor is compared.
CP:lex?lex
PP:lex?lex
CP:lex?phr
PP:lex?phr
CP:phr?lex
PP:phr?lex
CP:phr?phr
PP:phr?phr
?1.0 ?1.2 ?1.4 ?1.6 ?1.8 ?2.0
Figure 3: Decay effect sizes in Experiment 2,
for combinations of comprehension-production
or production-production priming and lexical or
phrasal primes and targets, e.g. the third bar
denotes the decay in repetition probability of a
phrasal category as prime and a lexical one as
target, where prime and target occurred in utter-
ances by the same speaker. Error bars show (non-
simultaneous) 95% confidence intervals.
and lexical categories (where, e.g., an intransitive
verb is indistinguishable from a verb phrase).
Bock and Loebell (1990)?s experiments suggest
that priming effects are independent of the subcat-
egorization frame. There, an active voice sentence
primed a passive voice one with the same phrase
structure, but a different subcategorization. If we
find priming from lexical to phrasal categories,
then our model demonstrates priming of subcat-
egorization frames.
From a processing point of view, phrasal cat-
egories are distinct from lexical ones. Lexical
categories are bound to the lemma and thereby
linked to the lexicon, while phrasal categories
are the result of a structural composition or de-
composition process. The latter ones represent
temporary states, encoding the syntactic process.
Here, we test whether lexical and phrasal cate-
gories can prime each other, and if so, contrast the
strength of these priming effects.
Method We built a model which allowed lex-
ical and phrasal categories to prime each other.
A factor, STRUCTURAL LEVEL was introduced
314
to distinguish the four cases: priming in between
phrasal categories and in between lexical ones,
from lexical ones to phrasal ones and from phrasal
ones to lexical ones.
Recall that each data point encodes a possibility
to repeat a CCG category, referring to a particular
instance of a target category at time t and a time
span of duration of one second [t?d?0.5, t?d +
0.5] in which a priming instance of the same cate-
gory could occur. If it occurred at least once, the
data point was counted as a possible example of
priming (response variable: true), otherwise it was
included as a counter-example (response variable:
false). For the target category, its type (lexical or
phrasal) was clear. For the category of the prime,
we included two data points, one for each type,
with a response indicating whether a prime of the
category of such a type occurred in the time win-
dow. We built separate models for incremental and
normal form derivations. Models were fitted to
a balanced subset, including all repetitions and a
randomly sampled subset of non-repetitions.
Results Both the normal-form and the incre-
mental model show qualitatively the same re-
sults. STRUCTURALLEVEL has a significant
influence on priming strength (LN DIST) for
the cases where a lexical item serves as prime
(e.g., normal-form PP: ?lnDist:lex?lex = 0.261,
p < 0.0001; ?lnDist:lex?phr = 0.166, p < 0.0001;
?lnDist:phr?lex = 0.056, p < 0.05; as compared to
the baseline phr? phr. N.B. higher values denote
less decay & priming). Phrasal categories prime
other phrasal and lexical categories, but there is a
lower priming effect to be seen from lexical cate-
gories. Figure 3 presents the resulting effect sizes.
Albeit significant, we assume the effect of prime
type is attributable to processing differences rather
than the strong difference that would indicate that
there is no priming of, e.g., lexical subcategoriza-
tion frames. As the analysis of effect sizes shows,
we can see priming from and in between both lex-
ical and phrasal categories.
Additionally, there is no evidence suggesting
that, once frequency is taken into account, syntac-
tic processes happening high up in derivation trees
show more priming (see Scheepers 2003).
7 Discussion
We can confirm the syntactic priming effect for
CCG categories. Priming occurs in incremental
as well as in normal-form CCG derivations, and at
different syntactic levels in those derivations: we
demonstrated that priming effects persists across
syntactic stages, from the lowest one (lexical cate-
gories) up to higher ones (phrasal categories). This
is what CCG predicts if priming of categories is
assumed.
Linguistic data is inherently noisy. Annotations
contain errors, and conversions such as the one to
CCG may add further error. However, since noise
is distributed across the corpus, it is unlikely to af-
fect priming effect strength or its interaction with
the factors we used: priming, in this study, is de-
fined as decay of repetition probability. We see
the lack of control in the collection of a corpus like
Switchboard not only as a challenge, but also as an
advantage: it means that realistic data is present in
the corpus, allowing us to conduct a controlled ex-
periments to validate a claim about a specific the-
ory of competence grammar.
The fact that CCG categories prime could be
explained in a model that includes a basic form
of subcategorization. All categories, if lexical or
phrasal, contain a subcategorization frame, with
only those categories present that have yet to be
satisfied. Our CCG based models make predic-
tions for experimental studies, e.g., that specific
heads with open subcategorization slots (such as
transitive verbs) will be primed by phrases that re-
quire the same kinds of arguments (such as verbal
phrases with a ditransitive verb and an argument).
The models presented take the frequency of the
syntactic category into account, reducing noise,
especially in the conditions with lower numbers
of (positive) reptition examples (e.g., CP and in-
cremental derivations in Experiment 1). Whether
there are significant qualitative and quantitative
differences of PP and CP priming with respect to
choice of derivation type ? which would point out
processing differences in comprehension vs. pro-
duction priming ? will be a matter of future work.
At this point, we do not explicitly discriminate
different syntactic frameworks. Comparing prim-
ing effects in a corpus annotated in parallel accord-
ing to different theories will be a matter of future
work.
8 Conclusions
We have discussed an empirical, corpus-based ap-
proach to use priming effects in the validation of
general syntactic models. The analysis we pre-
sented is compatible with the reality of a lexical-
315
ized, categorial grammar such as CCG as a com-
ponent of the human sentence processor. CCG is
unusual in allowing us to compare different types
of derivational analyses within the same grammar
framework. Focusing on CCG allowed us to con-
trast priming under different conditions, while still
making a statistical and general statement about
the priming effects for all syntactic phenomena
covered by the grammar.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mark Steedman, Roger Levy, Jo-
hanna Moore and three anonymous reviewers for their com-
ments. The authors are grateful for being supported by the
following grants: DR by The Edinburgh Stanford Link, JH
by NSF ITR grant 0205456, FK by The Leverhulme Trust
(grant F/00 159/AL ? Syntactic Parallelism).
References
J. Kathryn Bock. 1986. Syntactic persistence in language pro-
duction. Cognitive Psychology, 18:355?387.
J. Kathryn Bock and Helga Loebell. 1990. Framing sen-
tences. Cognition, 35:1?39.
Holly P. Branigan, Martin J. Pickering, and Alexandra A. Cle-
land. 2000. Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cogni-
tion, 75:B13?25.
Jean Carletta, S. Dingare, Malvina Nissim, and T. Nikitina.
2004. Using the NITE XML toolkit on the Switchboard
corpus to study syntactic choice: a case study. In Proc. 4th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference. Lisbon,
Portugal.
Stephen Clark and James R. Curran. 2004. Parsing the WSJ
using CCG and log-linear models. In Proc. of the 42nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. Barcelona, Spain.
A. A. Cleland and M. J. Pickering. 2003. The use of lexi-
cal and syntactic information in language production: Ev-
idence from the priming of noun-phrase structure. Journal
of Memory and Language, 49:214?230.
Amit Dubey, Frank Keller, and Patrick Sturt. 2006. Inte-
grating syntactic priming into an incremental probabilistic
parser, with an application to psycholinguistic modeling.
In Proc. of the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and 44th Annual Mtg of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. Sydney, Australia.
Jason Eisner. 1996. Efficient normal-form parsing for com-
binatory categorial grammar. In Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 79?86. Santa Cruz,CA.
Stefan Th. Gries. 2005. Syntactic priming: A corpus-
based approach. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research,
34(4):365?399.
Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2002. Generative
models for statistical parsing with Combinatory Catego-
rial Grammar. In Proc. 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. Philadelphia, PA.
Julia Hockenmaier and Mark Steedman. 2005. CCGbank:
Users? manual. Technical Report MS-CIS-05-09, Com-
puter and Information Science, University of Pennsylva-
nia.
Mark Johnson and Eugene Charniak. 2004. A tag-based noisy
channel model of speech repairs. In Proc. 42nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 33?39. Barcelona, Spain.
M. Marcus, G. Kim, M. Marcinkiewicz, R. MacIntyre,
A. Bies, M. Ferguson, K. Katz, and B. Schasberger. 1994.
The Penn treebank: Annotating predicate argument struc-
ture. In Proc. ARPA Human Language Technology Work-
shop. Plainsboro, NJ.
Michael Niv. 1994. A psycholinguistically motivated parser
for CCG. In Mtg. of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 125?132.
Martin J. Pickering and Holly P. Branigan. 1998. The rep-
resentation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in
language production. Journal of Memory and Language,
39:633?651.
Martin J. Pickering, Holly P. Branigan, and Janet F. McLean.
2002. Constituent structure is formulated in one stage.
Journal of Memory and Language, 46:586?605.
David Reitter, Frank Keller, and Johanna D. Moore. 2006a.
Computational modelling of structural priming in dia-
logue. In Proc. Human Language Technology conference
- North American chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics annual mtg. New York City.
David Reitter, Johanna D. Moore, and Frank Keller. 2006b.
Priming of syntactic rules in task-oriented dialogue and
spontaneous conversation. In Proc. 28th Annual Confer-
ence of the Cognitive Science Society.
Christoph Scheepers. 2003. Syntactic priming of relative
clause attachments: Persistence of structural configuration
in sentence production. Cognition, 89:179?205.
Mark Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. MIT Press.
Benedikt Szmrecsanyi. 2005. Creatures of habit: A corpus-
linguistic analysis of persistence in spoken english. Cor-
pus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 1(1):113?149.
William N. Venables and Brian D. Ripley. 2002. Modern
Applied Statistics with S. Fourth Edition. Springer.
Mike White and Jason Baldridge. 2003. Adapting chart re-
alization to CCG. In Proc. 9th European Workshop on
Natural Language Generation. Budapest, Hungary.
316
