Using WordNet-based Context Vectors
to Estimate the Semantic Relatedness of Concepts
Siddharth Patwardhan
School of Computing
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA
sidd@cs.utah.edu
Ted Pedersen
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota, Duluth
Duluth, MN, 55812, USA
tpederse@d.umn.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a WordNet-
based measure of semantic relatedness
by combining the structure and content
of WordNet with co?occurrence informa-
tion derived from raw text. We use the
co?occurrence information along with the
WordNet definitions to build gloss vectors
corresponding to each concept in Word-
Net. Numeric scores of relatedness are as-
signed to a pair of concepts by measuring
the cosine of the angle between their re-
spective gloss vectors. We show that this
measure compares favorably to other mea-
sures with respect to human judgments
of semantic relatedness, and that it per-
forms well when used in a word sense dis-
ambiguation algorithm that relies on se-
mantic relatedness. This measure is flex-
ible in that it can make comparisons be-
tween any two concepts without regard to
their part of speech. In addition, it can
be adapted to different domains, since any
plain text corpus can be used to derive the
co?occurrence information.
1 Introduction
Humans are able to quickly judge the relative se-
mantic relatedness of pairs of concepts. For exam-
ple, most would agree that feather is more related
to bird than it is to tree.
This ability to assess the semantic relatedness
among concepts is important for Natural Lan-
guage Understanding. Consider the following sen-
tence: He swung the bat, hitting the ball into the
stands. A reader likely uses domain knowledge of
sports along with the realization that the baseball
senses of hitting, bat, ball and stands are all se-
mantically related, in order to determine that the
event being described is a baseball game.
Consequently, a number of techniques have
been proposed over the years, that attempt to au-
tomatically compute the semantic relatedness of
concepts to correspond closely with human judg-
ments (Resnik, 1995; Jiang and Conrath, 1997;
Lin, 1998; Leacock and Chodorow, 1998). It has
also been shown that these techniques prove use-
ful for tasks such as word sense disambiguation
(Patwardhan et al, 2003), real-word spelling cor-
rection (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2001) and informa-
tion extraction (Stevenson and Greenwood, 2005),
among others.
In this paper we introduce a WordNet-based
measure of semantic relatedness inspired by Har-
ris? Distributional Hypothesis (Harris, 1985). The
distributional hypothesis suggests that words that
are similar in meaning tend to occur in similar lin-
guistic contexts. Additionally, numerous studies
(Carnine et al, 1984; Miller and Charles, 1991;
McDonald and Ramscar, 2001) have shown that
context plays a vital role in defining the mean-
ings of words. (Landauer and Dumais, 1997) de-
scribe a context vector-based method that simu-
lates learning of word meanings from raw text.
(Schu?tze, 1998) has also shown that vectors built
from the contexts of words are useful representa-
tions of word meanings.
Our Gloss Vector measure of semantic related-
ness is based on second order co?occurrence vec-
tors (Schu?tze, 1998) in combination with the struc-
ture and content of WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), a
semantic network of concepts. This measure cap-
tures semantic information for concepts from con-
textual information drawn from corpora of text.
We show that this measure compares favorably
1
to other measures with respect to human judg-
ments of semantic relatedness, and that it performs
well when used in a word sense disambiguation al-
gorithm that relies on semantic relatedness. This
measure is flexible in that it can make comparisons
between any two concepts without regard to their
part of speech. In addition, it is adaptable since
any corpora can be used to derive the word vec-
tors.
This paper is organized as follows. We start
with a description of second order context vectors
in general, and then define the Gloss Vector mea-
sure in particular. We present an extensive evalua-
tion of the measure, both with respect to human re-
latedness judgments and also relative to its perfor-
mance when used in a word sense disambiguation
algorithm based on semantic relatedness. The pa-
per concludes with an analysis of our results, and
some discussion of related and future work.
2 Second Order Context Vectors
Context vectors are widely used in Information
Retrieval and Natural Language Processing. Most
often they represent first order co?occurrences,
which are simply words that occur near each other
in a corpus of text. For example, police and car are
likely first order co?occurrences since they com-
monly occur together. A first order context vector
for a given word would simply indicate all the first
order co?occurrences of that word as found in a
corpus.
However, our Gloss Vector measure is based on
second order co?occurrences (Schu?tze, 1998). For
example, if car and mechanic are first order co?
occurrences, then mechanic and police would be
second order co?occurrences since they are both
first order co?occurrences of car.
Schu?tze?s method starts by creating a Word
Space, which is a co?occurrence matrix where
each row can be viewed as a first order context
vector. Each cell in this matrix represents the fre-
quency with which two words occur near one an-
other in a corpus of text. The Word Space is usu-
ally quite large and sparse, since there are many
words in the corpus and most of them don?t occur
near each other. In order to reduce the dimension-
ality and the amount of noise, non?content stop
words such as the, for, a, etc. are excluded from
being rows or columns in the Word Space.
Given a Word Space, a context can then be rep-
resented by second order co?occurrences (context
vector). This is done by finding the resultant of the
first order context vectors corresponding to each
of the words in that context. If a word in a context
does not have a first order context vector created
for it, or if it is a stop word, then it is excluded
from the resultant.
For example, suppose we have the following
context:
The paintings were displayed in the art
gallery.
The second order context vector would be the
resultant of the first order context vectors for
painting, display, art, and gallery. The words
were, in, and the are excluded from the resultant
since we consider them as stop words in this ex-
ample. Figure 1 shows how the second order con-
text vector might be visualized in a 2-dimensional
space.
dim1
dim2
Context
Vector
gallery
display
art
painting
Figure 1: Creating a context vector from word vec-
tors
Intuitively, the orientation of each second order
context vector is an indicator of the domains or
topics (such as biology or baseball) that the con-
text is associated with. Two context vectors that lie
close together indicate a considerable contextual
overlap, which suggests that they are pertaining to
the same meaning of the target word.
3 Gloss Vectors in Semantic Relatedness
In this research, we create a Gloss Vector for each
concept (or word sense) represented in a dictio-
nary. While we use WordNet as our dictionary,
the method can apply to other lexical resources.
3.1 Creating Vectors from WordNet Glosses
A Gloss Vector is a second order context vector
formed by treating the dictionary definition of a
2
concept as a context, and finding the resultant of
the first order context vectors of the words in the
definition.
In particular, we define a Word Space by cre-
ating first order context vectors for every word w
that is not a stop word and that occurs above a min-
imum frequency in our corpus. The specific steps
are as follows:
1. Initialize the first order context vector to a
zero vector
?w.
2. Find every occurrence of w in the given cor-
pus.
3. For each occurrence of w, increment those di-
mensions of ?w that correspond to the words
from the Word Space and are present within
a given number of positions around w in the
corpus.
The first order context vector ?w, therefore, en-
codes the co?occurrence information of word w.
For example, consider the gloss of lamp ? an ar-
tificial source of visible illumination. The Gloss
Vector for lamp would be formed by adding the
first order context vectors of artificial, source, vis-
ible and illumination.
In these experiments, we use WordNet as the
corpus of text for deriving first order context vec-
tors. We take the glosses for all of the concepts
in WordNet and view that as a large corpus of
text. This corpus consists of approximately 1.4
million words, and results in a Word Space of
approximately 20,000 dimensions, once low fre-
quency and stop words are removed. We chose the
WordNet glosses as a corpus because we felt the
glosses were likely to contain content rich terms
that would distinguish between the various con-
cepts more distinctly than would text drawn from
a more generic corpus. However, in our future
work we will experiment with other corpora as the
source of first order context vectors, and other dic-
tionaries as the source of glosses.
The first order context vectors as well as the
Gloss Vectors usually have a very large number
of dimensions (usually tens of thousands) and it is
not easy to visualize this space. Figure 2 attempts
to illustrate these vectors in two dimensions. The
words tennis and food are the dimensions of this 2-
dimensional space. We see that the first order con-
text vector for serve is approximately halfway be-
tween tennis and food, since the word serve could
Normalized
gloss vector
for "fork"
Food
Tennis
Eat
Serve
= Word Vector
= Gloss Vector
Cutlery
Figure 2: First Order Context Vectors and a Gloss
Vector
mean to ?serve the ball? in the context of tennis or
could mean ?to serve food? in another context.
The first order context vectors for eat and cut-
lery are very close to food, since they do not have
a sense that is related to tennis. The gloss for the
word fork, ?cutlery used to serve and eat food?,
contains the words cutlery, serve, eat and food.
The Gloss Vector for fork is formed by adding the
first order context vectors of cutlery, serve, eat and
food. Thus, fork has a Gloss Vector which is heav-
ily weighted towards food. The concept of food,
therefore, is in the same semantic space as and is
related to the concept of fork.
Similarly, we expect that in a high dimensional
space, the Gloss Vector of fork would be heavily
weighted towards all concepts that are semanti-
cally related to the concept of fork. Additionally,
the previous demonstration involved a small gloss
for representing fork. Using augmented glosses,
described in section 3.2, we achieve better repre-
sentations of concepts to build Gloss Vectors upon.
3.2 Augmenting Glosses Using WordNet
Relations
The formulation of the Gloss Vector measure de-
scribed above is independent of the dictionary
used and is independent of the corpus used. How-
ever, dictionary glosses tend to be rather short, and
it is possible that even closely related concepts will
be defined using different sets of words. Our be-
lief is that two synonyms that are used in different
glosses will tend to have similar Word Vectors (be-
cause their co?occurrence behavior should be sim-
ilar). However, the brevity of dictionary glosses
may still make it difficult to create Gloss Vectors
that are truly representative of the concept.
3
(Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003) encounter a sim-
ilar issue when measuring semantic relatedness by
counting the number of matching words between
the glosses of two different concepts. They ex-
pand the glosses of concepts in WordNet with the
glosses of concepts that are directly linked by a
WordNet relation. We adopt the same technique
here, and use the relations in WordNet to augment
glosses for the Gloss Vector measure. We take the
gloss of a given concept, and concatenate to it the
glosses of all the concepts to which it is directly
related according to WordNet. The Gloss Vector
for that concept is then created from this big con-
catenated gloss.
4 Other Measures of Relatedness
Below we briefly describe five alternative mea-
sures of semantic relatedness, and then go on to
include them as points of comparison in our exper-
imental evaluation of the Gloss Vector measure.
All of these measures depend in some way upon
WordNet. Four of them limit their measurements
to nouns located in the WordNet is-a hierarchy.
Each of these measures takes two WordNet con-
cepts (i.e., word senses or synsets) c1 and c2 as in-
put and return a numeric score that quantifies their
degree of relatedness.
(Leacock and Chodorow, 1998) finds the path
length between c1 and c2 in the is-a hierarchy of
WordNet. The path length is then scaled by the
depth of the hierarchy (D) in which they reside to
obtain the relatedness of the two concepts.
(Resnik, 1995) introduced a measure that is
based on information content, which are numeric
quantities that indicate the specificity of concepts.
These values are derived from corpora, and are
used to augment the concepts in WordNet?s is-a hi-
erarchy. The measure of relatedness between two
concepts is the information content of the most
specific concept that both concepts have in com-
mon (i.e., their lowest common subsumer in the
is-a hierarchy).
(Jiang and Conrath, 1997) extends Resnik?s
measure to combine the information contents of
c1, c2 and their lowest common subsumer.
(Lin, 1998) also extends Resnik?s measure, by
taking the ratio of the shared information content
to that of the individual concepts.
(Banerjee and Pedersen, 2003) introduce Ex-
tended Gloss Overlaps, which is a measure that de-
termines the relatedness of concepts proportional
to the extent of overlap of their WordNet glosses.
This simple definition is extended to take advan-
tage of the complex network of relations in Word-
Net, and allows the glosses of concepts to include
the glosses of synsets to which they are directly
related in WordNet.
5 Evaluation
As was done by (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2001), we
evaluated the measures of relatedness in two ways.
First, they were compared against human judg-
ments of relatedness. Second, they were used in an
application that would benefit from the measures.
The effectiveness of the particular application was
an indirect indicator of the accuracy of the related-
ness measure used.
5.1 Comparison with Human Judgment
One obvious metric for evaluating a measure of se-
mantic relatedness is its correspondence with the
human perception of relatedness. Since semantic
relatedness is subjective, and depends on the hu-
man view of the world, comparison with human
judgments is a self-evident metric for evaluation.
This was done by (Budanitsky and Hirst, 2001) in
their comparison of five measures of semantic re-
latedness. We follow a similar approach in evalu-
ating the Gloss Vector measure.
We use a set of 30 word pairs from a study
carried out by (Miller and Charles, 1991). These
word pairs are a subset of 65 word pairs used by
(Rubenstein and Goodenough, 1965), in a similar
study almost 25 years earlier. In this study, human
subjects assigned relatedness scores to the selected
word pairs. The word pairs selected for this study
ranged from highly related pairs to unrelated pairs.
We use these human judgments for our evaluation.
Each of the word pairs have been scored by hu-
mans on a scale of 0 to 5, where 5 is the most re-
lated. The mean of the scores of each pair from all
subjects is considered as the ?human relatedness
score? for that pair. The pairs are then ranked with
respect to their scores. The most related pair is the
first on the list and the least related pair is at the
end of the list. We then have each of the measures
of relatedness score the word pairs and a another
ranking of the word pairs is created corresponding
to each of the measures.
4
Table 1: Correlation to human perception
Relatedness Measures M & C R & G
Gloss Vector 0.91 0.90
Extended Gloss Overlaps 0.81 0.83
Jiang & Conrath 0.73 0.75
Resnik 0.72 0.72
Lin 0.70 0.72
Leacock & Chodorow 0.74 0.77
Spearman?s Correlation Coefficient (Spearman,
1904) is used to assess the equivalence of two
rankings. If the two rankings are exactly the
same, the Spearman?s correlation coefficient be-
tween these two rankings is 1. A completely re-
versed ranking gets a value of ?1. The value is 0
when there is no relation between the rankings.
We determine the correlation coefficient of the
ranking of each measure with that of the human
relatedness. We use the relatedness scores from
both the human studies ? the Miller and Charles
study as well as the Rubenstein and Goodenough
research. Table 1 summarizes the results of our
experiment. We observe that the Gloss Vector has
the highest correlation with humans in both cases.
Note that in our experiments with the Gloss
Vector measure, we have used not only the gloss
of the concept but augmented that with the gloss
of all the concepts directly related to it accord-
ing to WordNet. We observed a significant drop
in performance when we used just the glosses of
the concept alone, showing that the expansion is
necessary. In addition, the frequency cutoffs used
to construct the Word Space played a critical role.
The best setting of the frequency cutoffs removed
both low and high frequency words, which elimi-
nates two different sources of noise. Very low fre-
quency words do not occur enough to draw dis-
tinctions among different glosses, whereas high
frequency words occur in many glosses, and again
do not provide useful information to distinguish
among glosses.
5.2 Application-based Evaluation
An application-oriented comparison of five mea-
sures of semantic relatedness was presented in
(Budanitsky and Hirst, 2001). In that study they
evaluate five WordNet-based measures of seman-
tic relatedness with respect to their performance in
context sensitive spelling correction.
We present the results of an application-oriented
Table 2: WSD on SENSEVAL-2 (nouns)
Measure Nouns
Jiang & Conrath 0.45
Extended Gloss Overlaps 0.44
Gloss Vector 0.41
Lin 0.36
Resnik 0.30
Leacock & Chodorow 0.30
evaluation of the measures of semantic related-
ness. Each of the seven measures of semantic re-
latedness was used in a word sense disambigua-
tion algorithm described by (Banerjee and Peder-
sen, 2003).
Word sense disambiguation is the task of deter-
mining the meaning (from multiple possibilities)
of a word in its given context. For example, in the
sentence The ex-cons broke into the bank on Elm
street, the word bank has the ?financial institution?
sense as opposed to the ?edge of a river? sense.
Banerjee and Pedersen attempt to perform this
task by measuring the relatedness of the senses of
the target word to those of the words in its context.
The sense of the target word that is most related to
its context is selected as the intended sense of the
target word.
The experimental data used for this evaluation
is the SENSEVAL-2 test data. It consists of 4,328
instances (or contexts) that each includes a single
ambiguous target word. Each instance consists of
approximately 2-3 sentences and one occurrence
of a target word. 1,754 of the instances include
nouns as target words, while 1,806 are verbs and
768 are adjectives. We use the noun data to com-
pare all six of the measures, since four of the mea-
sures are limited to nouns as input. The accuracy
of disambiguation when performed using each of
the measures for nouns is shown in Table 2.
6 Gloss Vector Tuning
As discussed in earlier sections, the Gloss Vector
measure builds a word space consisting of first or-
der context vectors corresponding to every word in
a corpus. Gloss vectors are the resultant of a num-
ber of first order context vectors. All of these vec-
tors encode semantic information about the con-
cepts or the glosses that the vectors represent.
We note that the quality of the words used as the
dimensions of these vectors plays a pivotal role in
5
getting accurate relatedness scores. We find that
words corresponding to very specific concepts and
are highly indicative of a few topics, make good
dimensions. Words that are very general in nature
and that appear all over the place add noise to the
vectors.
In an earlier section we discussed using stop
words and frequency cutoffs to keep only the high
?information content? words. In addition to those,
we also experimented with a term frequency ? in-
verse document frequency cutoff.
Term frequency and inverse document frequency
are commonly used metrics in information re-
trieval. For a given word, term frequency (tf ) is
the number of times a word appears in the corpus.
The document frequency is number of documents
in which the word occurs. Inverse document fre-
quency (idf ) is then computed as
idf = logNumber of DocumentsDocument Frequency (1)
The tf ? idf value is an indicator of the speci-
ficity of a word. The higher the tf ? idf value, the
lower the specificity.
Figure 3 shows a plot of tf ? idf cutoff on the
x-axis against the correlation of the Gloss Vector
measure with human judgments on the y-axis.
 0.6
 0.65
 0.7
 0.75
 0.8
 0.85
 0.9
 0  500  1000  1500  2000  2500  3000  3500  4000  4500
Co
rre
la
tio
n
tf.idf cutoff
M&C
R&G
Figure 3: Plot of tf ? idf cutoff vs. correlation
The tf ? idf values ranged from 0 to about 4200.
Note that we get lower correlation as the cutoff is
raised.
7 Analysis
We observe from the experimental results that the
Gloss Vector measure corresponds the most with
human judgment of relatedness (with a correlation
of almost 0.9). We believe this is probably be-
cause the Gloss Vector measure most closely im-
itates the representation of concepts in the human
mind. (Miller and Charles, 1991) suggest that the
cognitive representation of a word is an abstrac-
tion derived from its contexts (encountered by the
person). Their study also suggested the semantic
similarity of two words depends on the overlap be-
tween their contextual representations. The Gloss
Vector measure uses the contexts of the words and
creates a vector representation of these. The over-
lap between these vector representations is used to
compute the semantic similarity of concepts.
(Landauer and Dumais, 1997) additionally per-
form singular value decomposition (SVD) on their
context vector representation of words and they
show that reducing the number of dimensions of
the vectors using SVD more accurately simulates
learning in humans. We plan to try SVD on the
Gloss Vector measure in future work.
In the application-oriented evaluation, the Gloss
Vector measure performed relatively well (about
41% accuracy). However, unlike the human study,
it did not outperform all the other measures. We
think there are two possible explanations for this.
First, the word pairs used in the human relatedness
study are all nouns, and it is possible that the Gloss
Vector measure performs better on nouns than on
other parts of speech. In the application-oriented
evaluation the measure had to make judgments for
all parts of speech. Second, the application itself
affects the performance of the measure. The Word
Sense Disambiguation algorithm starts by select-
ing a context of 5 words from around the target
word. These context words contain words from all
parts of speech. Since the Jiang-Conrath measure
assigns relatedness scores only to noun concepts,
its behavior would differ from that of the Vector
measure which would accept all words and would
be affected by the noise introduced from unrelated
concepts. Thus the context selection factors into
the accuracy obtained. However, for evaluating
the measure as being suitable for use in real ap-
plications, the Gloss Vector measure proves rela-
tively accurate.
The Gloss Vector measure can draw conclu-
sions about any two concepts, irrespective of part-
of-speech. The only other measure that can make
this same claim is the Extended Gloss Overlaps
measure. We would argue that Gloss Vectors
present certain advantages over it. The Extended
6
Gloss Overlap measure looks for exact string over-
laps to measure relatedness. This ?exactness?
works against the measure, in that it misses po-
tential matches that intuitively would contribute to
the score (For example, silverware with spoon).
The Gloss Vector measure is more robust than the
Extended Gloss Overlap measure, in that exact
matches are not required to identify relatedness.
The Gloss Vector measure attempts to overcome
this ?exactness? by using vectors that capture the
contextual representation of all words. So even
though silverware and spoon do not overlap, their
contextual representations would overlap to some
extent.
8 Related Work
(Wilks et al, 1990) describe a word sense disam-
biguation algorithm that also uses vectors to de-
termine the intended sense of an ambiguous word.
In their approach, they use dictionary definitions
from LDOCE (Procter, 1978). The words in these
definitions are used to build a co?occurrence ma-
trix, which is very similar to our technique of
using the WordNet glosses for our Word Space.
They augment their dictionary definitions with
similar words, which are determined using the co?
occurrence matrix. Each concept in LDOCE is
then represented by an aggregate vector created by
adding the co?occurrence counts for each of the
words in the augmented definition of the concept.
The next step in their algorithm is to form a con-
text vector. The context of the ambiguous word
is first augmented using the co?occurrence ma-
trix, just like the definitions. The context vector
is formed by taking the aggregate of the word vec-
tors of the words in the augmented context. To
disambiguate the target word, the context vector
is compared to the vectors corresponding to each
meaning of the target word in LDOCE, and that
meaning is selected whose vector is mathemati-
cally closest to that of the context.
Our approach differs from theirs in two primary
respects. First, rather than creating an aggregate
vector for the context we compare the vector of
each meaning of the ambiguous word with the vec-
tors of each of the meanings of the words in the
context. This adds another level of indirection in
the comparison and attempts to use only the rele-
vant meanings of the context words. Secondly, we
use the structure of WordNet to augment the short
glosses with other related glosses.
(Niwa and Nitta, 1994) compare dictionary
based vectors with co?occurrence based vectors,
where the vector of a word is the probability that
an origin word occurs in the context of the word.
These two representations are evaluated by apply-
ing them to real world applications and quantify-
ing the results. Both measures are first applied to
word sense disambiguation and then to the learn-
ing of positives or negatives, where it is required
to determine whether a word has a positive or neg-
ative connotation. It was observed that the co?
occurrence based idea works better for the word
sense disambiguation and the dictionary based ap-
proach gives better results for the learning of pos-
itives or negatives. From this, the conclusion is
that the dictionary based vectors contain some dif-
ferent semantic information about the words and
warrants further investigation. It is also observed
that for the dictionary based vectors, the network
of words is almost independent of the dictionary
that is used, i.e. any dictionary should give us al-
most the same network.
(Inkpen and Hirst, 2003) also use gloss?based
context vectors in their work on the disambigua-
tion of near?synonyms ? words whose senses
are almost indistinguishable. They disambiguate
near?synonyms in text using various indicators,
one of which is context-vector-based. Context
Vectors are created for the context of the target
word and also for the glosses of each sense of the
target word. Each gloss is considered as a bag
of words, where each word has a corresponding
Word Vector. These vectors for the words in a
gloss are averaged to get a Context Vector corre-
sponding to the gloss. The distance between the
vector corresponding to the text and that corre-
sponding to the gloss is measured (as the cosine
of the angle between the vectors). The nearness
of the vectors is used as an indicator to pick the
correct sense of the target word.
9 Conclusion
We introduced a new measure of semantic relat-
edness based on the idea of creating a Gloss Vec-
tor that combines dictionary content with corpus
based data. We find that this measure correlates
extremely well with the results of these human
studies, and this is indeed encouraging. We be-
lieve that this is due to the fact that the context vec-
tor may be closer to the semantic representation
of concepts in humans. This measure can be tai-
7
lored to particular domains depending on the cor-
pus used to derive the co?occurrence matrices, and
makes no restrictions on the parts of speech of the
concept pairs to be compared.
We also demonstrated that the Vector measure
performs relatively well in an application-oriented
setup and can be conveniently deployed in a real
world application. It can be easily tweaked and
modified to work in a restricted domain, such as
bio-informatics or medicine, by selecting a spe-
cialized corpus to build the vectors.
10 Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by a Na-
tional Science Foundation Faculty Early CAREER
Development Award (#0092784).
All of the experiments in this paper were
carried out with the WordNet::Similarity pack-
age, which is freely available for download from
http://search.cpan.org/dist/WordNet-Similarity.
References
S. Banerjee and T. Pedersen. 2003. Extended gloss
overlaps as a measure of semantic relatedness. In
Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-03), Acapulco,
Mexico, August.
A. Budanitsky and G. Hirst. 2001. Semantic distance
in WordNet: An experimental, application-oriented
evaluation of five measures. In Workshop on Word-
Net and Other Lexical Resources, Second meeting of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Pittsburgh, June.
D. Carnine, E. J. Kameenui, and G. Coyle. 1984. Uti-
lization of contextual information in determining the
meaning of unfamiliar words. Reading Research
Quarterly, 19:188?204.
C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An electronic
lexical database. MIT Press.
Z. Harris. 1985. Distributional structure. In J. J. Katz,
editor, The Philosophy of Linguistics, pages 26?47.
Oxford University Press, New York.
D. Inkpen and G. Hirst. 2003. Automatic sense disam-
biguation of the near-synonyms in a dictionary en-
try. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Intel-
ligent Text Processing and Computational Linguis-
tics (CICLing-2003), pages 258?267, Mexico City,
February.
J. Jiang and D. Conrath. 1997. Semantic similar-
ity based on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy.
In Proceedings on International Conference on Re-
search in Computational Linguistics, Taiwan.
T. K. Landauer and S. T. Dumais. 1997. A solution
to plato?s problem: The latent semantic analysis the-
ory of acquisition, induction and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104:211?240.
C. Leacock and M. Chodorow. 1998. Combining local
context and WordNet similarity for word sense iden-
tification. In C. Fellbaum, editor, WordNet: An elec-
tronic lexical database, pages 265?283. MIT Press.
D. Lin. 1998. An information-theoretic definition of
similarity. In Proceedings of International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, Madison, Wisconsin,
August.
S. McDonald and M. Ramscar. 2001. Testing the dis-
tributional hypothesis: The influence of context on
judgements of semantic similarity. In Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Sci-
ence Society, Edinburgh, Scotland.
G.A. Miller and W.G. Charles. 1991. Contextual cor-
relates of semantic similarity. Language and Cogni-
tive Processes, 6(1):1?28.
Y. Niwa and Y. Nitta. 1994. Co-occurrence vec-
tors from corpora versus distance vectors from dic-
tionaries. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 304?309, Kyoto, Japan.
S. Patwardhan, S. Banerjee, and T. Pedersen. 2003.
Using measures of semantic relatedness for word
sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Intelligent Text Pro-
cessing and Computational Linguistics (CICLING-
03), Mexico City, Mexico, February.
P. Procter, editor. 1978. Longman Dictionary of Con-
temporary English. Longman Group Ltd., Essex,
UK.
P. Resnik. 1995. Using information content to evalu-
ate semantic similarity in a taxonomy. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Montreal, August.
H. Rubenstein and J.B. Goodenough. 1965. Contex-
tual correlates of synonymy. Communications of the
ACM, 8:627?633, October.
H. Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimina-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?123.
C. Spearman. 1904. Proof and measurement of as-
sociation between two things. American Journal of
Psychology, 15:72?101.
M. Stevenson and M. Greenwood. 2005. A seman-
tic approach to ie pattern induction. In Proceedings
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 379?386, Ann Ar-
bor, Michigan, June.
Y. Wilks, D. Fass, C. Guo, J. McDonald, T. Plate, and
B. Slator. 1990. Providing machine tractable dictio-
nary tools. Machine Translation, 5:99?154.
8
