Improving Name Discrimination: A Language Salad Approach
Ted Pedersen and Anagha Kulkarni
Department of Computer Science
University of Minnesota, Duluth
Duluth, MN 55812 USA
{tpederse,kulka020}@d.umn.edu
Roxana Angheluta
Attentio SA
B-1030 Brussels, Belgium
roxana@attentio.com
Zornitsa Kozareva
Dept. de Lenguajes y Sistemas Informa?ticos
University of Alicante
03080 Alicante, Spain
zkozareva@dlsi.ua.es
Thamar Solorio
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, TX 79902 USA
tsolorio@utep.edu
Abstract
This paper describes a method of discrim-
inating ambiguous names that relies upon
features found in corpora of a more abun-
dant language. In particular, we discrim-
inate ambiguous names in Bulgarian, Ro-
manian, and Spanish corpora using infor-
mation derived from much larger quan-
tities of English data. We also mix to-
gether occurrences of the ambiguous name
found in English with the occurrences of
the name in the language in which we are
trying to discriminate. We refer to this as
a language salad, and find that it often re-
sults in even better performance than when
only using English or the language itself
as the source of information for discrimi-
nation.
1 Introduction
Name ambiguity is a problem that is increasing
in complexity and scope as online information
sources grow and expand their coverage. Like
words, names are often ambiguous and can refer
to multiple underlying entities or concepts. Web
searches for names can often return results asso-
ciated with multiple people or organizations in a
disorganized and unclear fashion. For example,
the top 10 results of a Google search for George
Miller includes a mixture of entries for two dif-
ferent entities, one a psychology professor from
Princeton University and the other the director of
the film Mad Max.1
Name discrimination takes some number of
contexts that include an ambiguous name, and di-
vides them into groups or clusters, where the con-
1Search conducted January 4, 2006.
texts in each cluster should ideally refer to the
same underlying entity (and each cluster should
refer to a different entity). Thus, if we are given
10,000 contexts that include the name John Smith,
we would want to divide those contexts into clus-
ters corresponding to each of the different under-
lying entities that share that name.
We have developed an unsupervised method of
name discrimination (Pedersen et al, 2005). We
have shown the method to be language indepen-
dent (Pedersen et al, 2006), which is to say we
can apply it to English contexts as easily as we
can apply it to Romanian or French. However,
we have observed that there are situations where
the number of contexts in which an ambiguous
name occurs is relatively small, perhaps because
the name itself is unusual, or because the quantity
of data available for language is limited in general.
These problems of scarcity can make it difficult to
apply these methods and discriminate ambiguous
names, especially in languages with fewer online
resources.
This paper presents a method of name discrim-
ination is based on using a larger number of con-
texts in English that include an ambiguous name,
and applying information derived from these con-
texts to the discrimination of that name in another
language, where there are many fewer contexts.
We also show that mixing English contexts with
the contexts to be discriminated can result in a
performance improvement over only using the En-
glish or the original contexts alone.
2 Discrimination by Clustering Contexts
Our method of name discrimination is described in
more detail in (Pedersen et al, 2005), but in gen-
eral is based on an unsupervised approach to word
sense discrimination introduced by (Purandare and
25
Pedersen, 2004), which builds upon earlier work
in word sense discrimination, including (Schu?tze,
1998) and (Pedersen and Bruce, 1997).
Our method treats each occurrence of an am-
biguous name as a context that is to be clustered
with other contexts that also include the same
name. In this paper, each context consists of about
50 words, where the ambiguous name is generally
in the middle of the context. The goal is to cluster
similar contexts together, based on the presump-
tion that the occurrences of a name that appear
in similar contexts will refer to the same underly-
ing entity. This approach is motivated by both the
distributional hypothesis (Harris, 1968) and the
strong contextual hypothesis (Miller and Charles,
1991).
2.1 Feature Selection
The contexts to be clustered are represented by
lexical features which may be selected from either
the contexts being clustered, or from a separate
corpus. In this paper we use both approaches. We
cluster the contexts based on features identified in
those very same contexts, and we also cluster the
contexts based on features identified in a separate
set of data (in this case English). We explore the
use of a mixed feature selection strategy where we
identify features both from the data to be clustered
and the separate corpus of English text. Thus, our
feature selection data may come from one of three
sources: the contexts to be clustered (which we
will refer to as the evaluation contexts), English
contexts which include the same name but are not
to be clustered, and the combination of these two
(our so-called Language Salad or Mix).
The lexical features we employ are bigrams,
that is consecutive words that occur together in the
corpora from which we are identifying features. In
this work we identify bigram features using Point-
wise Mutual Information (PMI). This is defined as
the log of the ratio of the observed frequency with
which the two words occur together in the feature
selection data, to the expected number of times
the two words would occur together in a corpus if
they were independent. This expected value is es-
timated simply by taking the product of the num-
ber of times the two words occur individually, and
dividing this by the total number of bigrams in the
feature selection data. Thus, larger values of PMI
indicate that the observed frequency of the bigram
is greater than would be expected if the two words
were independent.
In these experiments we take the top 500 ranked
bigrams that occur five or more times in the feature
selection data. We also exclude any bigram from
consideration that is made up of one or two stop
words, which are high frequency function words
that have been specified in a manually created list.
Note that with smaller numbers of contexts (usu-
ally 200 or fewer), we lower the frequency thresh-
old to two or more.
In general PMI is known to have a bias towards
pairs of words (bigrams) that occur a small num-
ber of times and only with each other. In this work
that is a desirable quality, since that will tend to
identify pairs of words that are very strongly as-
sociated with each other and also provide unique
discriminating information.
2.2 Context Representation
Once the bigram features have been identified,
then the contexts to be clustered are represented
using second order co-occurrences that are de-
rived from those bigrams. In general a second
order co-occurrence is a pair of words that may
not occur with each other, but that both occur fre-
quently with a third word. For example, garden
and fire may not occur together often, but both
commonly occur with hose. Thus, garden hose
and fire hose represent first order co?occurrences,
and garden and fire represent a second order co?
occurrence.
The process of creating the second order repre-
sentation has several steps. First, the bigram fea-
tures identified by PMI (the top ranked 500 bi-
grams that have occurred 5 or more times in the
feature selection data) are used to create a word
by word co?occurrence matrix. The first word in
each bigram represents a row in the matrix, and the
second word in each bigram represents a column.
The cells in the matrix contain the PMI scores.
Note that this matrix is not symmetric, and that
there are many words that only occur in either a
row or a column (and not both) because they tend
to occur as the first or second word in a bigram.
For example, President might tend to be a first
word in a bigram (e.g., President Clinton, Presi-
dent Putin), whereas last names will tend to be the
second word.
Once the co?occurrence matrix is created, then
the contexts to be clustered can be represented.
Each word in the context is checked to see if it
26
has a corresponding row (i.e., vector) in the co?
occurrence matrix. If it does, that word is replaced
in the context by the row from the matrix, so that
the word in the context is now represented by the
vector of words with which it occurred in the fea-
ture selection data. If a word does not have a corre-
sponding entry in the co?occurrence matrix, then
it is simply removed from the context. After all
the words in the context are checked, then all of
the vectors that are selected are averaged together
to create a vector representation of the context.
Then these contexts are clustered into a pre?
specified number of clusters using the k?means
algorithm. Note that we are currently develop-
ing methods to automatically select the number of
clusters in the data (e.g., (Pedersen and Kulkarni,
2006)), although we have not yet applied them to
this particular work.
3 The Language Salad
In this paper, we explore the creation of a second
order representation for a set of evaluation con-
texts using three different sets of feature selection
data. The co?occurrence matrix may be derived
from the evaluation contexts themselves, or from
a separate set of contexts in a different language,
or from the combination of these two (the Salad or
Mix).
For example, suppose we have 100 Romanian
evaluation contexts that include an ambiguous
name, and that same name also occurs 10,000
times in an English language corpus.2 Our goal
is to cluster the 100 Romanian contexts, which
contain all the information that we have about the
name in Romanian. While we could derive a sec-
ond order representation of the contexts, the re-
sulting co?occurrence matrix would likely be very
small and sparse, and insufficient for making good
discrimination decisions. We could instead rely
on first order features, that is look for frequent
words or bigrams that occur in the evaluation con-
texts, and try and find evaluation contexts that
share some of the same words or phrases, and clus-
ter them based on this type of information. How-
ever, again, the small number of contexts available
would likely result in very sparse representations
for the contexts, and unreliable clustering results.
Thus, our method is to derive a co?occurrence
matrix from a language for which we have many
2We assume that the names either have the same spelling
in both languages, or that translations are readily available.
occurrences of the ambiguous name, and then use
that co?occurrence matrix to represent the evalua-
tion contexts. This relies on the fact that the eval-
uation contexts will contain at least a few names
or words that are also used in the larger corpus (in
this case English). In general, we have found that
while this is not always true, it is often the case.
We have also experimented with combining the
English contexts with the evaluation contexts, and
building a co?occurrence matrix based on this
combined or mixed collection of contexts. This
is the language salad that we refer to, a mixture of
contexts in two different languages that are used to
derive a representation of the evaluation contexts.
4 Experimental Data
We use data in four languages in these experi-
ments, Bulgarian, English, Romanian, and Span-
ish.
4.1 Raw Corpora
The Romanian data comes from the 2004 archives
of the newspaper Adevarul (The Truth)3. This is a
daily newspaper that is among the most popular in
Romania. While Romanian normally has diacrit-
ical markings, this particular newspaper does not
include those in their online edition, so the alpha-
bet used was the same as English.
The Bulgarian data is from the Sega 2002 news
corpus, which was originally prepared for the
CLEF competition.4 This is a corpus of news arti-
cles from the Newspaper Sega5, which is based in
Sofia, Bulgaria. The Bulgarian text was translit-
erated (phonetically) from Cyrillic to the Roman
alphabet. Thus, the alphabet used was the same
as English, although the phonetic transliteration
leads to fewer cognates and borrowed English
words that are spelled exactly the same as in En-
glish text.
The Spanish corpora comes from the Spanish
news agency EFE from the year 1994 and 1995.
This collection was used in the Question Answer-
ing Track at CLEF-2003, and also for CLEF-2005.
This text is represented in Latin-1, and includes
the usual accents that appear in Spanish.
The English data comes from the GigaWord
corpus (2nd edition) that is distributed by the Lin-
guistic Data Consortium. This consists of more
3http://www.adevarulonline.ro/arhiva
4http://www.clef-campaign.org
5http://www.segabg.com
27
than 2 billion words of newspaper text that comes
from five different news sources between the years
1994 and 2004. In fact, we subdivide the English
data into three different corpora, where one is from
2004, another from 2002, and the third from 1994-
95, so that for each of the evaluation languages
(Bulgarian, Spanish, and Romanian) we have an
English corpus from the same time period.
4.2 Evaluation Contexts
Our experimental data consists of evaluation con-
texts derived from the Bulgarian, Romanian, and
Spanish corpora mentioned above. We also have
English corpora that includes the same ambiguous
names as found in the evaluation contexts.
In order to quickly generate a large volume of
experimental data, we created evaluation contexts
from the corpora for each of our four languages
by conflating together pairs of well known names
or places, and that are generally not highly am-
biguous (although some might be rather general).
For example, one of the pairs of names we con-
flate is George Bush and Tony Blair. To do that,
every occurrence of both of these names is con-
verted to an ambiguous form (GB TB, for exam-
ple), and the discrimination task is to cluster these
contexts such that their original and correct name
is re?discovered. We retain a record of the orig-
inal name for each occurrence, so as to evaluate
the results of our method. Of course we do not use
this information anywhere in the process outside
of evaluation.
The following pairs of names were conflated in
all four of the languages: George Bush-Tony Blair,
Mexico-India, USA-Paris, Ronaldo-David Beck-
ham (2002 and 2004), Diego Maradona-Roberto
Baggio (1994-95 only), and NATO-USA. Note
that some of these names have different spellings
in some of our languages, so we look for and con-
flate the native spelling of the names in the differ-
ent language corpora. These pairs were selected
because they occur in all four of our languages,
and they represent name distinctions that are com-
monly of interest, that is they represent ambiguity
in names of people and places. With these pairs
we are also following (Nakov and Hearst, 2003)
who suggest that if one is introducing ambiguity
by creating pseudo?words or conflating names,
then these words should be related in some way
(in order to avoid the creation of very sharp or ob-
vious sense distinctions).
4.3 Discussion
For each of the three evaluation languages (Bul-
garian, Romanian, and Spanish) we have contexts
for five different name conflate pairs that we wish
to discriminate. We have corresponding English
contexts for each evaluation language, where the
dates of both are approximately the same. This
temporal consistency between the evaluation lan-
guage and English is important because the con-
texts in which a name is used may change over
time. In 1994, for example, Tony Blair was not
yet Prime Minister of England (he became PM in
1997), and references to George Bush most likely
refer to the US President who served from 1988
until 1992, rather than the current US President
(who began his term in office in 2001). In 1994
the current (as of 2006) US President had just been
elected governor of Texas, and was not yet a na-
tional figure. This points out that George Bush is
an example of an ambiguous name, but our ob-
servation has been that in the 2002 and 2004 data
(Romanian and Bulgarian) nearly all occurrences
are associated with the current president, and that
most of the occurrences in 1994-95 (Spanish) re-
fer to the former US President. This illustrates
an important point: it is necessary to consider the
perspective represented by the different corpora.
There is little reason to expect that news articles
from Spain in 1994 and 1995 would focus much
attention on the newly elected governor of Texas
in the United States.
Tables 1, 2, and 3 show the number of contexts
that have been collected for each name conflate
pair. For example, in Table 1 we see that there are
746 Bulgarian contexts that refer to either Mex-
ico or India, and that of these 51.47% truly re-
fer to Mexico, and 48.53% to India. There are
149,432 English contexts that mention Mexico or
India, and the Mix value shown is simply the sum
of the number of Bulgarian and English contexts.
In general these tables show that the English
contexts are much larger in number, however,
there are a few exceptions with the Spanish data.
This is because the EFE corpus is relatively large
as compared to the Bulgarian and Romanian cor-
pora, and provides frequency counts that are in
some cases comparable to those in the English cor-
pus.
28
5 Experimental Methodology
For each of the three evaluation languages (Bul-
garian, Romanian, Spanish) there are five name
conflate pairs. The same name conflate pairs
are used for all three languages, except for
Diego Maradona-Roberto Baggio which is only
used with Spanish, and Ronaldo-David Beckham,
which is only used with Bulgarian and Romanian.
This is due to the fact that in 1994-95 (the era
of the Spanish data) neither Ronaldo nor David
Beckham were as famous as they later became, so
they were mentioned somewhat less often than in
the 2002 and 2004 corpora. The other four name
conflate pairs are used in all of the languages.
For each name conflate pair we create a second
order representation using three different sources
of features selection data: the evaluation contexts
themselves, the corresponding English contexts,
and then the mix of the evaluation contexts and the
English contexts (the Mix). The objective of these
experiments is to determine which of these sources
of feature selection data results in the highest F-
Measure, which is the harmonic mean of the pre-
cision and recall of an experiment.
The precision of each experiment is the num-
ber of evaluation contexts clustered correctly, di-
vided by the number of contexts that are clustered.
The clustering algorithm may choose not to assign
every context to a cluster, which is why that de-
nominator may not be the same as the number of
evaluation contexts. The recall of each experiment
is the the number of correctly clustered evaluation
contexts divided by the total number of evaluation
contexts. Note that for each of the three variations
for each name conflate pair experiment exactly the
same evaluation language contexts are being dis-
criminated, all that is changing in each experiment
is the source of the feature selection data. Thus the
F-measures for a name conflate pair in a particular
language can be compared directly. Note however
that the F-measures across languages are harder to
compare directly, since different evaluation con-
texts are used, and different English contexts are
used as well.
There is a simple baseline that can be used as a
point of comparison, and that is to place all of the
contexts for each name conflate pair into one clus-
ter, and say that there is no ambiguity. If that is
done, then the resulting F-Measure will be equal
to the majority percentage of the true underlying
entity as shown in Tables 1, 2, and 3. For exam-
ple, for Bulgarian, if the 746 Bulgarian contexts
for Mexico and India are all put into the same clus-
ter, the resulting F-Measure would be 51.47%, be-
cause we would simply assign all the contexts in
the cluster to the more common of the two entities,
which is Mexico in this case.
6 Experimental Results
Tables 1, 2, and 3 show the results for our exper-
iments, language by language. Each table shows
the results for the 15 experiments done for each
language: five name conflate pairs, each with
three different sources of feature selection data.
The row labeled with the name of the evalua-
tion language reports the F-Measure for the eval-
uation contexts (whose number of occurrences is
shown in the far right column) when the fea-
ture selection data is the evaluation contexts them-
selves. The rows labeled English and Mix report
the F-Measures obtained for the evaluation con-
texts when the feature selection data is the English
contexts, or the Mix of the English and evaluation
contexts.
6.1 Bulgarian Results
The Bulgarian results are shown in Table 1. Note
that the number of contexts for English is consid-
erably larger than for Bulgarian for all five name
conflate pairs. The Bulgarian and English data
came from 2002 news reports.
The Mix of feature selection data results in the
best performance for three of the five name con-
flate pairs: George Bush - Tony Blair, Ronaldo -
David Beckham, and NATO - USA. For remain-
ing two name conflate pairs, just using the Bul-
garian evaluation contexts results in the highest F-
Measure (Mexico-India, USA-Paris).
We believe that this may be partially due to the
fact that the two cases where Bulgarian leads to the
best results are for very general or generic underly-
ing entities: Mexico and India, and then the USA
and Paris. In both cases, contexts that mention
these entities could be discussing a wide range of
topics, and the larger volumes of English data may
simply overwhelm the process with a huge num-
ber of second order features. In addition, it may
be that the English and Bulgarian corpora contain
different content that reflects the different interests
of the original readership of this text. For example,
news that is reported about India might be rather
different in the United States (the source of most
29
Table 1: Bulgarian Results (2002): Feature Selec-
tion Data, F-Measure, and Number of Contexts
George Bush (73.43) - Tony Blair (26.57)
Mix 68.37 11,570
Bulgarian 55.78 651
English 36.15 10,919
Mexico (51.47) - India (48.53)
Bulgarian 70.97 746
Mix 55.01 150,178
English 48.15 149,432
USA (79.53) - Paris (20.47)
Bulgarian 58.67 3,283
Mix 51.68 56,044
English 49.66 52,761
Ronaldo (61.25) - David Beckham (38.75)
Mix 64.88 8,649
Bulgarian 52.75 320
English 48.11 8,329
NATO (87.37) - USA (12.63)
Mix 75.44 54,193
Bulgarian 65.92 3,770
English 60.44 50,423
of the English data) than in Bulgaria. Thus, the
use of the English corpora might not have been
as helpful in those cases where the names to be
discriminated are more global figures. For exam-
ple, Tony Blair and George Bush are probably in
the news in the USA and Bulgaria for many of the
same reasons, thus the underlying content is more
comparable than that of the more general entities
(like Mexico and India) that might have much dif-
ferent content associated with them.
We observed that Bulgarian tends to have fewer
cognates or shared names with English than do
Romanian and English. This is due to the fact
that the Bulgarian text is transliterated. This may
account for the fact that the English-only results
for Bulgarian are very poor, and it is only in com-
bination with the Bulgarian contexts that the En-
glish contexts show any positive effect. This sug-
gests that there are only a few words in the Bulgar-
ian contexts that also occur in English, but those
that do have a positive impact on clustering per-
formance.
6.2 Romanian Results
The Romanian results are shown in Table 2. The
Romanian and English contexts come from 2004.
Table 2: Romanian Results (2004): Feature Selec-
tion Data, F-Measure, and Number of Contexts
Tony Blair (72.00) - George Bush (28.00)
English 64.23 11,616
Mix 54.31 11,816
Romanian 50.75 200
India (53.66) - Mexico (46.34)
Romanian 50.93 82
English 47.30 88,247
Mix 42.55 88,329
USA (60.29) - Paris (39.71)
English 59.05 45,346
Romanian 58.76 700
Mix 57.91 46,046
David Beckham (55.56) - Ronaldo (44.44)
Mix 81.00 4,365
English 70.85 4,203
Romanian 52.47 162
NATO (58.05) - USA (41.95)
Mix 60.48 43,508
Romanian 51.20 1,168
English 38.91 42,340
The Mix of Romanian and English contexts for
feature selection results in improvements for two
of the five pairs (David Beckham - Ronaldo, and
NATO - USA). The use of English contexts only
provides the best results for two other pairs (Tony
Blair - George Bush, and USA - Paris, although in
the latter case the difference in the F-Measures that
result from the three sources of data is minimal).
There is one case (Mexico-India) where using the
Romanian contexts as feature selection data re-
sults in a slightly better F-measure than when us-
ing English contexts.
The improvement that the Mix shows for David
Beckham-Ronaldo is significant, and is perhaps
due to fact that in both English and Romanian text,
the content about Beckham and Ronaldo is simi-
lar, making it more likely that the mix of English
and Romanian contexts will be helpful. However,
it is also true that the Mix results in a significant
improvement for NATO-USA, and it seems likely
that the local perspective in Romania and the USA
would be somewhat different on these two entities.
However, NATO-USA has a relatively large num-
ber of contexts in Romanian as well as English, so
perhaps the difference in perspective had less of
an impact in those cases where the number of Ro-
30
Table 3: Spanish Results (1994-95): Feature Se-
lection Data, F-Measure, and Number of Contexts
George Bush (75.58) - Tony Blair (24.42)
Mix 78.59 2,353
Spanish 64.45 1,163
English 54.29 1,190
D. Maradona (51.55) - R. Baggio (48.45)
English 67.65 1,588
Mix 61.35 3,594
Spanish 60.70 2,006
India (92.34) - Mexico (7.66)
English 72.76 19,540
Spanish 66.57 2,377
Mix 61.54 21,917
USA (62.30) - Paris (37.70)
Spanish 69.31 1,000
English 64.30 17,344
Mix 59.40 18,344
NATO (63.86) - USA (36.14)
Spanish 62.04 2,172
Mix 58.47 27,426
English 56.00 25,254
manian contexts is much smaller (as is the case for
Beckham and Ronaldo).
6.3 Spanish Results
The Spanish results are shown in Table 3. The
Spanish and English contexts come from 1994-
1995, which puts them in a slightly different his-
torical era than the Bulgarian and Romanian cor-
pora.
Due to this temporal difference, we used Diego
Maradona and Roberto Baggio as a conflated pair,
rather than David Beckham and Ronaldo, who
were much younger and somewhat less famous at
that time. Also, Ronaldo is a highly ambiguous
name in Spanish, as it is a very common first name.
This is true in English text as well, although casual
inspection of the English text from 2002 and 2004
(where the Ronaldo-Beckham pair was included
experimentally) reveals that Ronaldo the soccer
player tends to occur more so than any other single
entity named Ronaldo, so while there is a bit more
noise for Ronaldo, there is not really a significant
ambiguity.
For the Spanish results we only note one pair
(George Bush - Tony Blair) where the Mix of En-
glish and Spanish results in the best performance.
This again suggests that the perspective of the
Spanish and English corpora were similar with re-
spect to these entities, and their combination was
helpful. In two other cases (Maradona-Baggio,
India-Mexico) English only contexts achieve the
highest F-Measure, and then in the two remaining
cases (USA-Paris, NATO-USA) the Spanish con-
texts are the best source of features.
Note that for Spanish we have reasonably large
numbers of contexts (as compared to Bulgarian
and Romanian). Given that, it is especially inter-
esting that English-only contexts are the most ef-
fective in two of five cases. This suggests that this
approach may have merit even when the evalua-
tion language does not suffer from problems of ex-
treme scarcity. It may simply be that the informa-
tion in the English corpora provides more discrim-
inating information than does the Spanish, and that
it is somewhat different in content than the Span-
ish, otherwise we would expect the Mix of English
and Spanish contexts to do better than being most
accurate for just one of five cases.
7 Discussion
Of the 15 name conflate experiments (five pairs,
three languages), in only five cases did the use of
the evaluation contexts as a source of feature se-
lection data result in better F-Measure scores than
did either using the English contexts alone or as a
Mix with the evaluation language contexts. Thus,
we conclude that there is a clear benefit to using
feature selection data that comes from a different
language than the one for which discrimination is
being performed.
We believe that this is due to the volume of
the English data, as well as to the nature of the
name discrimination task. For example, a per-
son is often best described or identified by observ-
ing the people he or she tends to associate with,
or the places he or she visits, or the companies
with which he or she does business. If we ob-
serve that George Miller and Mel Gibson occur
together, then it seems we can safely infer that
George Miller the movie director is being referred
to, rather than George Miller the psychologist and
father of WordNet.
This argument might suggest that first order
co?occurrences would be sufficient to discrimi-
nate among the names. That is, simply group the
evaluation contexts based on the features that oc-
cur within them, and essentially cluster evaluation
31
contexts based on the number of features they have
in common with other evaluation contexts. In fact,
results on word sense discrimination (Purandare
and Pedersen, 2004) suggest that first order rep-
resentations are more effective with larger number
of context than second order methods. However,
we see examples in these results that suggests this
may not always be the case. In the Bulgarian re-
sults, the largest number of Bulgarian contexts are
for NATO-USA, but the Mix performs quite a bit
better than Bulgarian only. In the case of Roma-
nian, again NATO-USA has the largest number of
contexts, but the Mix still does better than Roma-
nian only. And in Spanish, Mexico-India has the
largest number of contexts and English-only does
better. Thus, even in cases where we have an abun-
dant number of evaluation contexts, the indirect
nature of the second order representation provides
some added benefit.
We believe that the perspective of the news or-
ganizations providing the corpora certainly has an
impact on the results. For example, in Romanian,
the news about David Beckham and Ronaldo is
probably much the same as in the United States.
These are international figures that are both ex-
ternal to countries where the news originates, and
there is no reason to suppose there would be a
unique local perspective represented by any of the
news sources. The only difference among them
might be in the number of contexts available. In
this situation, the addition of the English contexts
may provide enough additional information to im-
prove discrimination performance in another lan-
guage.
For example, in the 162 Romanian contexts
for Ronaldo-Beckham, there is one occurrence of
Posh, which was the stage name of Beckham?s
wife Victoria. This is below our frequency cut-
off threshold for feature selection, so it would be
discarded when using Romanian?only contexts.
However, in the English contexts Posh is men-
tioned 6 times, and is included as a feature. Thus,
the one occurrence of Posh in the Romanian cor-
pus can be well represented by information found
in the English contexts, thus allowing that Roma-
nian context to be correctly discriminated.
8 Conclusions
This paper shows that a method of name discrim-
ination based on second order context representa-
tions can take advantage of English contexts, and
the mix of English and evaluation contexts, in or-
der to perform more accurate name discrimination.
9 Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a National Sci-
ence Foundation Faculty Early CAREER Devel-
opment Award (#0092784). All of the experiments
in this paper were carried out with version 0.71
SenseClusters package, which is freely available
from http://senseclusters.sourceforge.net.
References
Z. Harris. 1968. Mathematical Structures of Lan-
guage. Wiley, New York.
G.A. Miller and W.G. Charles. 1991. Contextual cor-
relates of semantic similarity. Language and Cogni-
tive Processes, 6(1):1?28.
P. Nakov and M. Hearst. 2003. Category-based pseu-
dowords. In Companion Volume to the Proceedings
of HLT-NAACL 2003 - Short Papers, pages 67?69,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, May 27 - June 1.
T. Pedersen and R. Bruce. 1997. Distinguishing word
senses in untagged text. In Proceedings of the Sec-
ond Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 197?207, Providence,
RI, August.
T. Pedersen and A. Kulkarni. 2006. Selecting the
r?ightn?umber of senses based on clustering criterion
functions. In Proceedings of the Posters and Demo
Program of the Eleventh Conference of the Euro-
pean Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, Trento, Italy, April.
T. Pedersen, A. Purandare, and A. Kulkarni. 2005.
Name discrimination by clustering similar contexts.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational
Linguistics, pages 220?231, Mexico City, February.
T. Pedersen, A. Kulkarni, R. Angheluta, Z. Kozareva,
and T. Solorio. 2006. An unsupervised language in-
dependent method of name discrimination using sec-
ond order co-occurrence features. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Conference on Intelli-
gent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics,
pages 208?222, Mexico City, February.
A. Purandare and T. Pedersen. 2004. Word sense dis-
crimination by clustering contexts in vector and sim-
ilarity spaces. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Computational Natural Language Learning, pages
41?48, Boston, MA.
H. Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimina-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?123.
32
