The SAMMIE Multimodal Dialogue Corpus Meets the Nite XML Toolkit
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova?, Verena Rieser,
Ciprian Gerstenberger
Saarland University, Saarbru?cken, Germany
vrieser@coli.uni-sb.de
Jan Schehl, Tilman Becker
DFKI, Saarbru?cken, Germany
jan.schehl@dfki.de
Abstract
We demonstrate work in progress1 us-
ing the Nite XML Toolkit on a cor-
pus of multimodal dialogues with an
MP3 player collected in a Wizard-of-Oz
(WOZ) experiments and annotated with
a rich feature set at several layers. We
designed an NXT data model, converted
experiment log file data and manual tran-
scriptions into NXT, and are building an-
notation tools using NXT libraries.
1 Introduction
In the TALK project2 we are developing a mul-
timodal dialogue system for an MP3 application
for in-car and in-home use. The system should
support natural, flexible interaction and collabo-
rative behavior. To achieve this, it needs to pro-
vide advanced adaptive multimodal output.
To determine the interaction strategies and
range of linguistic behavior naturally occurring
in this scenario, we conducted two WOZ exper-
iments: SAMMIE-1 involved only spoken inter-
action, SAMMIE-2 was multimodal, with speech
and screen input and output.3
We have been annotating the corpus on sev-
eral layers, representing linguistic, multimodal
and context information. The annotated corpus
will be used (i) to investigate various aspects of
1Our demonstration results from the efforts of a larger
team including also N. Blaylock, B. Fromkorth, M. Gra?c,
M. Kai?er, A. Moos, P. Poller and M. Wirth.
2TALK (Talk and Look: Tools for Ambient Linguis-
tic Knowledge; http://www.talk-project.org), funded by the
EU 6th Framework Program, project No. IST-507802.
3SAMMIE stands for Saarbru?cken Multimodal MP3
Player Interaction Experiment.
multimodal presentation and interaction strate-
gies both within and across the annotation lay-
ers; (ii) to design an initial policy for reinforce-
ment learning of multimodal clarifications.4 We
use the Nite XML Toolkit (NXT) (Carletta et al,
2003) to represent and browse the data and to de-
velop annotation tools.
Below we briefly describe our experiment
setup, the collected data and the annotation lay-
ers; we comment on methods and tools for data
representation and annotation, and then present
our NXT data model.
2 Experiment Setup
24 subjects in SAMMIE-1 and 35 in SAMMIE-2
performed several tasks with an MP3 player ap-
plication simulated by a wizard. For SAMMIE-
1 we had two, for SAMMIE-2 six wizards. The
tasks involved searching for titles and building
playlists satisfying various constraints. Each ses-
sion was 30 minutes long. Both users and wiz-
ards could speak freely. The interactions were
in German (although most of the titles and artist
names in the database were English).
SAMMIE-2 had a more complex setup. The
tasks the subjects had to fulfill were divided in
two classes: with vs. without operating a driv-
ing simulator. When presenting the search re-
sults, the wizards were free to produce mono-
or multimodal output as they saw fit; they could
speak freely and/or select one of four automati-
cally generated screen outputs, which contained
tables and lists of found songs/albums. The
users also had free choice between unconstrained
4See (Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2006) for more details
about the annotation goals and further usage of the corpus.
69
natural language and/or selecting items on the
screen. Both wizard and user utterances were im-
mediately transcribed. The wizard?s utterances
were presented to the user via a speech synthe-
sizer. To simulate acoustic understanding prob-
lems, the wizard sometimes received only part
of the transcribed user?s utterance, to elicit CRs.
(See (Kruijff-Korbayova? et al, 2005) for details.)
3 Collected Data
The SAMMIE-2 data for each session consists of
a video and audio recording and a log file.5 The
gathered logging information per session con-
sists of Open Agent Architecture (Martin et al,
1999) (OAA) messages in chronological order,
each marked by a timestamp. The log files con-
tain various information, e.g., the transcriptions
of the spoken utterances, the wizard?s database
query and the number of results, the screen op-
tion chosen by the wizard, classification of clari-
fication requests (CRs), etc.
4 Annotation Methods and Tools
The rich set of features we are interested in nat-
urally gives rise to a multi-layered view of the
corpus, where each layer is to be annotated inde-
pendently, but subsequent investigations involve
exploration and automatic processing of the inte-
grated data across layers.
There are two crucial technical requirements
that must be satisfied to make this possible: (i)
stand-off annotation at each layer and (ii) align-
ment of base data across layers. Without the for-
mer, we could not keep the layers separate, with-
out the latter we would not be able to align the
separate layers. An additional equally important
requirement is that elements at different layers
of annotation should be allowed to have overlap-
ping spans; this is crucial because, e.g., prosodic
units and syntactic phrases need not coincide.
Among the existing toolkits that support
multi-layer annotation, it was decided to use
NXT (Carletta et al, 2003)6 in the TALK
project. The NXT-based SAMMIE-2 corpus we
5For 19 sessions the full set of data files exists.
6http://www.ltg.ed.ac.uk/NITE/
are demonstrating has been created in several
steps: (1) The speech data was manually tran-
scribed using the Transcriber tool.7 (2) We auto-
matically extracted features at various annotation
layers by parsing the OAA messages in the log
files. (3) We automatically converted the tran-
scriptions and the information from the log files
into our NXT-based data representation format;
features annotated in the transcriptions and fea-
tures automatically extracted from the log files
were assigned to elements at the appropriate lay-
ers of representation in this step.
Manual annotation: We use tools specifi-
cally designed to support the particular annota-
tion tasks. We describe them below.
As already mentioned, we used Transcriber for
the manual transcriptions. We also performed
certain relatively simple annotations directly on
the transcriptions and coded them in-line by us-
ing special notation. This includes the identifica-
tion of self-speech, the identification of expres-
sions referring to domain objects (e.g., songs,
artists and albums) and the identification of utter-
ances that convey the results of database queries.
For other manual annotation tasks (the annota-
tion of CRs, task segmentation and completion,
referring expressions and the relations between
them) we have been building specialized tools
based on the NXT library of routines for build-
ing displays and interfaces based on Java Swing
(Carletta et al, 2003). Although NXT comes
with a number of example applications, these are
tightly coupled with the architecture of the cor-
pora they were built for. We therefore developed
a core basic tool for our own corpus; we mod-
ify this tool to suite each annotation task. To fa-
cilitate tool development, NXT provides GUI el-
ements linked directly to corpora elements and
support for handling complex multi-layer cor-
pora. This proved very helpful.
Figure 4 shows a screenshot of our CR anno-
tation tool. It allows one to select an utterance
in the left-hand side of the display by clicking
on it, and then choose the attribute values from
the pop-down lists on the right-hand side. Cre-
7http://trans.sourceforge.net/
70
ating relations between elements and creating el-
ements on top of other elements (e.g., words or
utterances) are extensions we are currently im-
plementing (and will complete by the time of the
workshop). First experiences using the tool to
identify CRs are promising.8 When demonstrat-
ing the system we will report the reliability of
other manual annotation tasks.
Automatic annotation using indexing: NXT
also provides a facility for automatic annotation
based on NiteQL query matches (Carletta et al,
2003). Some of our features, e.g., the dialogue
history ones, can be easily derived via queries.
5 The SAMMIE NXT Data Model
NXT uses a stand-off XML data format that con-
sist of several XML files that point to each other.
The NXT data model is a multi-rooted tree with
arbitrary graph structure. Each node has one set
of children, and can have multiple parents.
Our corpus consists of the following layers.
Two base layers: words and graphical output
events; both are time-aligned. On top of these,
structural layers correspond to one session per
subject, divided into task sections, which con-
sist of turns, and these consist of individual ut-
terances, containing words. Graphical output
events will be linked to turns at a featural layer.
Further structural layers are defined for CRs
and dialogue acts (units are utterances), domain
objects and discourse entities (units are expres-
sions consisting of words). We keep independent
layers of annotation separate, even when they can
in principle be merged into a single hierarchy.
Figure 2 shows a screenshot made with Ami-
gram (Lauer et al, 2005), a generic tool for
browsing and searching NXT data. On the left-
hand side one can see the dependencies between
the layers. The elements at the respective layers
are displayed on the right-hand side.
Below we indicate the features per layer:
? Words: Time-stamped words and other
sounds; we mark self-speech, pronuncia-
tion, deletion status, lemma and POS.
8Inter-annotator agreement of 0.788 (? corrected for
prevalence).
? Graphical output: The type and amount of
information displayed, the option selected
by the wizard, and the user?s choices.
? Utterances: Error rates due to word dele-
tion, and various features describing the
syntactic structure, e.g., mood, polarity,
diathesis, complexity and taxis, the pres-
ence of marked syntactic constructions such
as ellipsis, fronting, extraposition, cleft, etc.
? Turns: Time delay, dialogue duration so
far, and other dialogue history features, i.e.
values which accumulate over time.
? Domain objects and discourse entities:
Properties of referring expressions reflect-
ing the type and information status of dis-
course entities, and coreference/bridging
links between them.
? Dialogue acts: DAs based on an agent-
based approach to dialogue as collaborative
problem-solving (Blaylock et al, 2003),
e.g., determining joint objectives, find-
ing and instantiating recipes to accomplish
them, executing recipes and monitoring for
success. We also annotate propositional
content and the database queries.
? CRs: Additional features including the
source and degree of uncertainty, and char-
acteristics of the CRs strategy.
? Tasks: A set of features for estimating user
satisfaction online for reinforcement learn-
ing (Rieser et al, 2005).
? Session: Subject and wizard information,
user questionnaire aswers, and accumulat-
ing attribute values from other layers.
6 Summary
We described a multi-layered corpus of multi-
modal dialogues represented and annotated us-
ing NXT-based tools. Our data model relates lin-
guistic and graphical realization to a rich set of
context features and represents structural, hierar-
chical interactions between different annotation
layers. We combined different annotation meth-
ods to construct the corpus. Manual annotation
and annotation evaluation is on-going. The cor-
pus will be used (i) investigate multimodal pre-
sentation and interaction strategies with respect
71
Figure 1: NXT-based tool for annotating CRs
Figure 2: SAMMIE-2 corpus displayed in Amigram
to dialogue context and (ii) to design an initial
policy for reinforcement learning of multimodal
clarification strategies.
References
[Blaylock et al2003] N. Blaylock, J. Allen, and G. Fergu-
son. 2003. Managing communicative intentions with
collaborative problem solving. In Current and New
Directions in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 63?84.
Kluwer, Dordrecht.
[Carletta et al2003] J. Carletta, S. Evert, U. Heid, J. Kil-
gour, J. Robertson, and H. Voormann. 2003. The NITE
XML Toolkit: flexible annotation for multi-modal lan-
guage data. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
and Computers, special issue on Measuring Behavior.
Submitted.
[Kruijff-Korbayova? et al2005] I. Kruijff-Korbayova?,
T. Becker, N. Blaylock, C. Gerstenberger, M. Kai?er,
P. Poller, J. Schehl, and V. Rieser. 2005. An experiment
setup for collecting data for adaptive output planning in
a multimodal dialogue system. In Proc. of ENLG.
[Kruijff-Korbayova? et al2006] I. Kruijff-Korbayova?,
T. Becker, N. Blaylock, C. Gerstenberger, M. Kai?er,
P. Poller, V. Rieser, and J. Schehl. 2006. The SAMMIE
corpus of multimodal dialogues with an mp3 player. In
Proc. of LREC (to appear).
[Lauer et al2005] C. Lauer, J. Frey, B. Lang, T. Becker,
T. Kleinbauer, and J. Alexandersson. 2005. Amigram
- a general-purpose tool for multimodal corpus annota-
tion. In Proc. of MLMI.
[Martin et al1999] D. L. Martin, A. J. Cheyer, and D. B.
Moran. 1999. The open agent architecture: A frame-
work for building distributed software systems. Applied
Artificial Intelligence: An International Journal, 13(1?
2):91?128, Jan?Mar.
[Rieser et al2005] V. Rieser, I. Kruijff-Korbayova?, and
O. Lemon. 2005. A corpus collection and annotation
framework for learning multimodal clarification strate-
gies. In Proc. of SIGdial.
72
