Converser?:  
Highly Interactive Speech-to-Speech 
Translation for Healthcare 
 
Mike Dillinger Mark Seligman 
Spoken Translation, Inc. Spoken Translation, Inc. 
Berkeley, CA, USA 94705 Berkeley, CA, USA 94705 
mike.dillinger 
@spokentranslation.com 
mark.seligman 
@spokentranslation.com 
 
  
Abstract 
We describe a highly interactive system for 
bidirectional, broad-coverage spoken lan-
guage communication in the healthcare area. 
The paper briefly reviews the system's inter-
active foundations, and then goes on to dis-
cuss in greater depth our Translation 
Shortcuts facility, which minimizes the need 
for interactive verification of sentences after 
they have been vetted. This facility also con-
siderably speeds throughput while maintain-
ing accuracy, and allows use by minimally 
literate patients for whom any mode of text 
entry might be difficult.  
1 Introduction 
Spoken Translation, Inc. (STI) of Berkeley, CA 
has developed a commercial system for interactive 
speech-to-speech machine translation designed for 
both high accuracy and broad linguistic and topical 
coverage. Planned use is in situations requiring 
both of these features, for example in helping 
Spanish-speaking patients to communicate with 
English-speaking doctors, nurses, and other health-
care staff. 
The twin goals of accuracy and broad cov-
erage have until now been in opposition: speech 
translation systems have gained tolerable accuracy 
only by sharply restricting both the range of topics 
which can be discussed and the sets of vocabulary 
and structures which can be used to discuss them. 
The essential problem is that both speech recogni-
tion and translation technologies are still quite er-
ror-prone. While the error rates may be tolerable 
when each technology is used separately, the errors 
combine and even compound when they are used 
together. The resulting translation output is gener-
ally below the threshold of usability ? unless re-
striction to a very narrow domain supplies 
sufficient constraints to significantly lower the er-
ror rates of both components. 
STI?s approach has been to concentrate on inter-
active monitoring and correction of both technolo-
gies.   
First, users can monitor and correct the 
speaker-dependent speech recognition system to 
ensure that the text, which will be passed to the 
machine translation component, is completely cor-
rect. Voice commands (e.g. Scratch That or Cor-
rect <incorrect text>) can be used to repair 
speech recognition errors. While these commands 
are similar in appearance to those of IBM's 
ViaVoice or ScanSoft?s Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
dictation systems, they are unique in that they will 
remain usable even when speech recognition oper-
ates at a server. Thus, they will provide for the first 
time the capability to interactively confirm or cor-
rect wide-ranging text, which is dictated from any-
where. 
Next, during the MT stage, users can monitor, 
and if necessary correct, one especially important 
aspect of the translation ? lexical disambiguation. 
STI's approach to lexical disambiguation is 
twofold: first, we supply a specially controlled 
back translation, or translation of the translation. 
Using this paraphrase of the initial input, even a 
monolingual user can make an initial judgment 
concerning the quality of the preliminary machine 
translation output. To make this technique effec-
tive, we use proprietary facilities to ensure that the 
lexical senses used during back translation are ap-
propriate. 
In addition, in case uncertainty remains about 
the correctness of a given word sense, we supply a 
proprietary set of Meaning Cues? ? synonyms, 
definitions, etc. ? which have been drawn from 
various resources, collated in a unique database 
(called SELECT?), and aligned with the respec-
tive lexica of the relevant machine translation sys-
tems. With these cues as guides, the user can select 
the preferred meaning from among those available. 
Automatic updates of translation and back transla-
tion then follow. 
The result is an utterance, which has been 
monitored and perhaps repaired by the user at two 
levels ? those of speech recognition and transla-
tion. By employing these interactive techniques 
while integrating state-of-the-art dictation and ma-
chine translation programs ? we work with Dragon 
Naturally Speaking for speech recognition; with 
Word Magic MT (for the current Spanish system); 
and with ScanSoft for text-to-speech ? we have 
been able to build the first commercial-grade 
speech-to-speech translation system which can 
achieve broad coverage without sacrificing accu-
racy. 
2 Translation Shortcuts 
In order to accumulate translations that have been 
verified by hand and to simplify interaction with 
the system, we have developed additional func-
tionality called Translation Shortcuts?. 
Shortcuts are designed to provide two main ad-
vantages:  
First, re-verification of a given utterance is un-
necessary. That is, once the translation of an utter-
ance has been verified interactively, it can be saved 
for later reuse, simply by activating a Save as 
Shortcut button on the translation verification 
screen. The button gives access to a dialogue in 
which a convenient Shortcut Category for the 
Shortcut can be selected or created. At reuse time, 
no further verification will be required. (In addition 
to such dynamically created Personal Shortcuts, 
any number of prepackaged Shared Shortcuts can 
be included in the system.) 
Second, access to stored Shortcuts is very 
quick, with little or no need for text entry. Several 
facilities contribute to meeting this design crite-
rion.  
? A Shortcut Search facility can retrieve a 
set of relevant Shortcuts given only keywords or 
the first few characters or words of a string. The 
desired Shortcut can then be executed with a single 
gesture (mouse click or stylus tap) or voice com-
mand.  
NOTE: If no Shortcut is found, the system 
automatically gives access to the full power of 
broad-coverage, interactive speech translation. T-
hus, a seamless transition is provided between 
Shortcuts and full translation. 
? A Translation Shortcuts Browser is pro-
vided, so that users can find needed Shortcuts by 
traversing a tree of Shortcut categories. Using this 
interface, users can execute Shortcuts even if their 
ability to input text is quite limited, e.g. by tapping 
or clicking alone. 
The demonstration will show the Shortcut 
Search and Shortcuts Browser facilities in use. 
Points to notice:  
? The Translation Shortcuts Panel contains 
the Translation Shortcuts Browser, split into two 
main areas, Shortcuts Categories (above) and 
Shortcuts List (below).  
? The Categories section of the Panel shows 
the current selected category, for example Conver-
sation, which contains everyday expressions. This 
category has a Staff subcategory, containing ex-
pressions most likely to be used by healthcare staff 
members. There is also a Patients subcategory, 
used for patient responses. Such categories as Ad-
ministrative topics and Patient?s Current Condi-
tion are also available; and new ones can be freely 
created. 
? Below the Categories section is the Short-
cuts List section, containing a scrollable list of al-
phabetized Shortcuts. (Various other sorting 
criteria will be available in the future, e.g. sorting 
by frequency of use, recency, etc.)  
? Double clicking on any visible Shortcut in 
the List will execute it. Clicking once will select 
and highlight a Shortcut. Typing Enter will exe-
cute the currently highlighted Shortcut, if any.  
? It is possible to automatically relate op-
tions for a patient's response to the previous staff 
member?s utterance, e.g. by automatically going to 
the sibling Patient subcategory if the prompt was 
given from the Staff subcategory. 
Because the Shortcuts Browser can be used 
without text entry, simply by pointing and clicking, 
it enables responses by minimally literate users. In 
the future, we plan to enable use even by com-
pletely illiterate users, through two devices: we 
will enable automatic pronunciation of Shortcuts 
and categories in the Shortcuts Browser via text-to-
speech, so that these elements can in effect be read 
aloud to illiterate users; and we will augment 
Shared Shortcuts with pictorial symbols, as clues 
to their meaning. 
A final point concerning the Shortcuts Browser: 
it can be operated entirely by voice commands, 
although this mode is more likely to be useful to 
staff members than to patients. 
We turn our attention now to the Input Window, 
which does double duty for Shortcut Search and 
arbitrary text entry for full translation. We will 
consider the search facility first. 
? Shortcuts Search begins automatically as 
soon as text is entered by any means ? voice, 
handwriting, touch screen, or standard keyboard ? 
into the Input Window. 
? The Shortcuts Drop-down Menu appears 
just below the Input Window, as soon as there are 
results to be shown. The user can enter a few 
words at a time, and the drop-down menu will per-
form keyword-based searches and present the 
changing results dynamically.  
? The results are sorted alphabetically. Vari-
ous other sorting possibilities may be useful: by 
frequency of use, proportion of matched words, 
etc.  
? The highest priority Shortcut according to 
the specified sorting procedure can be highlighted 
for instant execution.  
? Highlighting in the drop-down menu is 
synchronized with that of the Shortcuts list in the 
Shortcuts Panel.  
? Arrow keys or voice commands can be 
used to navigate the drop-down menu. 
? If the user goes on to enter the exact text of 
any Shortcut, e.g. ?Good morning,? a message will 
show that this is in fact a Shortcut, so that verifica-
tion will not be necessary. However, final text not 
matching a Shortcut, e.g. ?Good job,? will be 
passed to the routines for full translation with veri-
fication. 
3 Future developments 
We have already mentioned plans to augment the 
Translation Shortcuts facility with text-to-speech 
and iconic pictures, thus moving closer to a system 
suitable for communication with completely illiter-
ate or incapacitated patients. 
Additional future directions follow. 
? Server-based architectures:  We plan to 
move toward completely or partially server-based 
arrangements, in which only a very thin client 
software application ? for example, a web interface 
? will run on the client device. Such architectures 
will permit delivery of our system on smart phones 
in the Blackberry or Treo class. Delivery on hand-
helds will considerably diminish the issues of 
physical awkwardness discussed above, and any-
time/anywhere/any-device access to the system 
will considerably enlarge its range of uses. 
? Pooling Translation Shortcuts:  As ex-
plained above, the current system now supports 
both Personal (do-it-yourself) and Shared (pre-
packaged) Translation Shortcuts. As yet, however, 
there are no facilities to facilitate pooling of Per-
sonal Shortcuts among users, e.g. those in a work-
ing group. In the future, we will add facilities for 
exporting and importing shortcuts. 
? Translation memory: Translation Short-
cuts can be seen as a variant of Translation Mem-
ory, a facility that remembers past successful 
translations so as to circumvent error-prone re-
processing. However, at present, we save Shortcuts 
only when explicitly ordered. If all other successful 
translations were saved, there would soon be far 
too many to navigate effectively in the Translation 
Shortcuts Browser. In the future, however, we 
could in fact record these translations in the back-
ground, so that there would be no need to re-verify 
new input that matched against them. Messages 
would advise the user that verification was being 
bypassed in case of a match. 
? Additional languages: The full SLT sys-
tem described here is presently operational only for 
bidirectional translation between English and 
Spanish. We expect to expand the system to Man-
darin Chinese next. Limited working prototypes 
now exist for Japanese and German, though we 
expect these languages to be most useful in appli-
cation fields other than healthcare. 
4 Conclusion 
We have described a highly interactive system for 
bidirectional, broad-coverage spoken language 
communication in the healthcare area. The paper 
has briefly reviewed the system's interactive foun-
dations, and then gone on to discuss in greater 
depth issues of practical usability.   
We have presented our Translation Shortcuts 
facility, which minimizes the need for interactive 
verification of sentences after they have been vet-
ted once, considerably speeds throughput while 
maintaining accuracy, and allows use by minimally 
literate patients for whom any mode of text entry 
might be difficult.  
We have also discussed facilities for multimo-
dal input, in which handwriting, touch screen, and 
keyboard interfaces are offered as alternatives to 
speech input when appropriate. In order to deal 
with issues related to physical awkwardness, we 
have briefly mentioned facilities for hands-free or 
eyes-free operation of the system.   
Finally, we have pointed toward several direc-
tions for future improvement of the system. 
 
