Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Ontology Learning and Population, pages 57?64,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A hybrid approach for extracting semantic relations from texts 
 
 
Lucia Specia and Enrico Motta 
Knowledge Media Institute & Centre for Research in Computing 
The Open University, Walton Hall, MK7 6AA, Milton Keynes, UK 
{L.Specia,E.Motta}@open.ac.uk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
We present an approach for extracting re-
lations from texts that exploits linguistic 
and empirical strategies, by means of a 
pipeline method involving a parser, part-
of-speech tagger, named entity recogni-
tion system, pattern-based classification 
and word sense disambiguation models, 
and resources such as ontology, knowl-
edge base and lexical databases. The rela-
tions extracted can be used for various 
tasks, including semantic web annotation 
and ontology learning. We suggest that 
the use of knowledge intensive strategies 
to process the input text and corpus-
based techniques to deal with unpredicted 
cases and ambiguity problems allows to 
accurately discover the relevant relations 
between pairs of entities in that text. 
1 Introduction 
Semantic relations extracted from texts are useful 
for several applications, including question an-
swering, information retrieval, semantic web an-
notation, and construction and extension of lexi-
cal resources and ontologies. In this paper we 
present an approach for relation extraction de-
veloped to semantically annotate relational 
knowledge coming from raw text, within a 
framework aiming to automatically acquire high 
quality semantic metadata for the Semantic Web.  
In that framework, applications such as se-
mantic web portals (Lei et al, 2006) analyze data 
from texts, databases, domain ontologies, and 
knowledge bases in order to extract the semantic 
knowledge in an integrated way. Known entities 
occurring in the text, i.e., entities that are in-
cluded in the knowledge base, are semantically 
annotated with their properties, also provided by 
the knowledge base and by databases. New enti-
ties, as given by a named entity recognition sys-
tem according to the possible types of entities in 
the ontology, are annotated without any addi-
tional information. In this context, the goal of the 
relation extraction approach presented here is to 
extract relational knowledge about entities, i.e., 
to identify the semantic relations between pairs 
of entities in the input texts. Entities can be both 
known and new, since named entity recognition 
is also carried out. Relations include those al-
ready existent in the knowledge base, new rela-
tions predicted as possible by the domain ontol-
ogy, or completely new (unpredicted) relations.  
The approach makes use of a domain ontol-
ogy, a knowledge base, and lexical databases, 
along with knowledge-based and empirical re-
sources and strategies for linguistic processing. 
These include a lemmatizer, syntactic parser, 
part-of-speech tagger, named entity recognition 
system, and pattern matching and word sense 
disambiguation models. The input data used in 
the experiments with our approach consists of 
English texts from the Knowledge Media Insti-
tute (KMi)1 newsletters. We believe that by inte-
grating corpus and knowledge-based techniques 
and using rich linguistic processing strategies in 
a completely automated fashion, the approach 
can achieve effective results, in terms of both 
accuracy and coverage.  
With relational knowledge, a richer represen-
tation of the input data can be produced. More-
over, by identifying new entities, the relation 
extraction approach can also be applied to ontol-
ogy population. Finally, since it extracts new 
relations, it can also be used as a first step for 
ontology learning. 
In the remaining of this paper we first describe 
some cognate work on relation extraction, par-
ticularly those exploring empirical methods, for 
various applications (Section 2). We then present 
                                                 
1
 http://kmi.open.ac.uk/ 
57
our approach, showing its architecture and de-
scribing each of its main components (Section 3). 
Finally, we present the next steps (Section 4). 
2 Related Work 
Several approaches have been proposed for the 
extraction of relations from unstructured sources. 
Recently, they have focused on the use of super-
vised or unsupervised corpus-based techniques in 
order to automate the task. A very common ap-
proach is based on pattern matching, with pat-
terns composed by subject-verb-object (SVO) 
tuples. Interesting work has been done on the 
unsupervised automatic detection of relations 
from a small number of seed patterns. These are 
used as a starting point to bootstrap the pattern 
learning process, by means of semantic similarity 
measures (Yangarber, 2000; Stevenson, 2004).  
Most of the approaches for relation extraction 
rely on the mapping of syntactic dependencies, 
such as SVO, onto semantic relations, using ei-
ther pattern matching or other strategies, such as 
probabilistic parsing for trees augmented with 
annotations for entities and relations (Miller et al 
2000), or clustering of semantically similar syn-
tactic dependencies, according to their selec-
tional restrictions (Gamallo et al, 2002).  
In corpus-based approaches, many variations 
are found concerning the machine learning tech-
niques used to produce classifiers to judge rela-
tion as relevant or non-relevant. (Roth and Yih, 
2002), e.g., use probabilistic classifiers with con-
straints induced between relations and entities, 
such as selectional restrictions. Based on in-
stances represented by a pair of entities and their 
position in a shallow parse tree, (Zelenko et al, 
2003) use support vector machines and voted 
perceptron algorithms with a specialized kernel 
model. Also using kernel methods and support 
vector machines, (Zhao and Grishman, 2005) 
combine clues from different levels of syntactic 
information and applies composite kernels to 
integrate the individual kernels.  
Similarly to our proposal, the framework pre-
sented by (Iria and Ciravegna, 2005) aims at the 
automation of semantic annotations according to 
ontologies. Several supervised algorithms can be 
used on the training data represented through a 
canonical graph-based data model. The frame-
work includes a shallow linguistic processing 
step, in which corpora are analyzed and a repre-
sentation is produced according to the data 
model, and a classification step, where classifiers 
run on the datasets produced by the linguistic 
processing step.  
Several relation extraction approaches have 
been proposed focusing on the task of ontology 
learning (Reinberger and Spyns, 2004; Schutz 
and Buitelaar, 2005; Ciaramita et al, 2005). 
More comprehensive reviews can be found in 
(Maedche, 2002) and (Gomez-Perez and Man-
zano-Macho, 2003). These approaches aim to 
learn non-taxonomic relations between concepts, 
instead of lexical items. However, in essence, 
they can employ similar techniques to extract the 
relations. Additional strategies can be applied to 
determine whether the relations can be lifted 
from lexical items to concepts, as well as to de-
termine the most appropriate level of abstraction 
to describe a relation (e.g. Maedche, 2002). 
In the next section we describe our relation ex-
traction approach, which merges features that 
have shown to be effective in several of the pre-
vious works, in order to achieve more compre-
hensive and accurate results. 
3 A hybrid approach for relation ex-
traction 
The proposed approach for relation extraction is 
illustrated in Figure 1. It employs knowledge-
based and (supervised and unsupervised) corpus-
based techniques. The core strategy consists of 
mapping linguistic components with some syn-
tactic relationship (a linguistic triple) into their 
corresponding semantic components. This in-
cludes mapping not only the relations, but also 
the terms linked by those relations. The detection 
of the linguistic triples involves a series of lin-
guistic processing steps. The mapping between 
terms and concepts is guided by a domain ontol-
ogy and a named entity recognition system. The 
identification of the relations relies on the 
knowledge available in the domain ontology and 
in a lexical database, and on pattern-based classi-
fication and sense disambiguation models. 
The main goal of this approach is to provide 
rich semantic annotations for the Semantic Web. 
Other potential applications include:  
1) Ontology population: terms are mapped 
into new instances of concepts of an ontology, 
and relations between them are identified, ac-
cording to the possible relations in that ontology.  
3) Ontology learning: new relations between 
existent concepts are identified, and can be used 
as a first step to extend an existent ontology. A 
subsequent step to lift relations between in-
stances to an adequate level of abstraction may 
be necessary. 
58
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed approach 
 
3.1 Context and resources 
The input to our experiments consists of elec-
tronic Newsletter Texts2. These are short texts 
describing news of several natures related to 
members of a research group: projects, publica-
tions, events, awards, etc. The domain Ontology 
used (KMi-basic-portal-ontology) was designed 
based on the AKT reference ontology3 to include 
concepts relevant to our domain. The instantia-
tions of concepts in this ontology are stored in 
the knowledge base (KB) KMi-basic-portal-kb. 
The other two resources used in our architecture 
are the lexical database WordNet (Fellbaum, 
1998) and a repository of Patterns of relations, 
described in Section 3.4. 
3.2 Identifying linguistic triples 
Given a newsletter text, the first step of the rela-
tion extraction approach is to process the natural 
language text in order to identify linguistic tri-
ples, that is, sets of three elements with a syntac-
tic relationship, which can indicate potentially 
relevant semantic relations. In our architecture, 
                                                 
2
 http://news.kmi.open.ac.uk/kmiplanet/ 
3
 http://kmi.open.ac.uk/projects/akt/ref-onto/ 
 
this is accomplished by the Linguistic Compo-
nent module, and adaptation of the linguistic 
component designed in Aqualog (Lopez et al, 
2005), a question answering system.  
The linguistic component uses the infrastruc-
ture and the following resources from GATE 
(Cunningham et al, 2002): tokenizer, sentence 
splitter, part-of-speech tagger, morphological 
analyzer and VP chunker. On the top of these 
resources, which produce syntactic annotations 
for the input text, the linguistic component uses a 
grammar to identify linguistic triples. This 
grammar was implemented in Jape (Cunningham 
et al, 2000), which allows the definition of pat-
terns to recognize regular expressions using the 
annotations provided by GATE.  
The main type of construction aimed to be 
identified by our grammar involves a verbal ex-
pression as indicative of a potential relation and 
two noun phrases as terms linked by that rela-
tion. However, our patterns also account for 
other types of constructions, including, e.g., the 
use of comma to implicitly indicate a relation, as 
in sentence (1). In this case, when mapping the 
terms into entities (Section 3.3), having identi-
fied that ?KMi? is an organization and ?Enrico 
ESpotter++ Linguistic 
Component 
yes 
 
yes 
Pattern-based 
classification 
POS + 
Lemmatizer 
 
WSD 
module 
no, n rela-
tions 
Annotate & 
add to patterns 
Patterns 
 
no 
yes 
RSS_2 
 
 
WordNet 
Ontology 
yes no, 0 rela-
tions 
yes 
 
no 
WordNet Patterns 
no, case 1  
with n  
relations 
 
no 
yes 
Annotate & 
add to patterns 
 
Patterns  
 
yes 
no 
RSS_1 
Linguistic 
triple 
Newsletter Texts 
Case (1) Case (2) 
Case (3) 
Types 
identified 
1 relation  
matches 
Ontology  
+ KB 
 
Classific
ation 
 
no 
 
Disambigu
ated 
WordNet 
 
59
Motta? is a person, it is possible to guess the re-
lation indicated by the comma (e.g., work). Some 
examples triples identified by our patterns for the 
newsletter in Figure 2 are given in Figure 3. 
(1) ?Enrico Motta, at KMi now, is leading a 
project on ?.?.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Example of newsletter 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Examples of linguistic triples for the 
newsletter in Figure 2 
Jape patterns are based on shallow syntactic in-
formation only, and therefore they are not able to 
capture certain potentially relevant triples. To 
overcome this limitation, we employ a parser as 
a complementary resource to produce linguistic 
triples. We use Minipar (Lin, 1993), which pro-
duces functional relations for the components in 
a sentence, including subject and object relations 
with respect to a verb. This allows capturing 
some implicit relations, such as indirect objects 
and long distance dependence relations.  
Minipar?s representation is converted into a 
triple format and therefore the intermediate rep-
resentation provided by both GATE and Minipar 
consists of triples of the type: <noun_phrase, 
verbal_expression, noun_phrase>. 
3.3 Identifying entities and relations 
Given a linguistic triple, the next step is to verify 
whether the verbal expression in that triple con-
veys a relevant semantic relationship between 
entities (given by the terms) potentially belong-
ing to an ontology. This is the most important 
phase of our approach and is represented by a 
series of modules in our architecture in Figure 1. 
As first step we try to map the linguistic triple 
into an ontology triple, by using an adaptation of 
Aqualog?s Relation Similarity Service (RSS).  
RSS tries to make sense of the linguistic triple 
by looking at the structure of the domain ontol-
ogy and the information stored in the KB. In or-
der to map a linguistic triple into an ontology 
triple, besides looking for an exact matching be-
tween the components of the two triples, RSS 
considers partial matching by using a set of re-
sources in order to account for minor lexical or 
conceptual discrepancies between these two ele-
ments. These resources include metrics for string 
similarity matching, synonym relations given by 
WordNet, and a lexicon of previous mappings 
between the two types of triples. Different strate-
gies are employed to identify a matching for 
terms and relations, as we describe below.  
Since we do not consider any interaction with 
the user in order to achieve a fully automated 
annotation process, other modules were devel-
oped to complete the mapping process even if 
there is no matching (Section 3.4) or if there is 
ambiguity (Section 3.5), according to RSS. 
Strategies for mapping terms 
 
To map terms into entities, the following at-
tempts are accomplished (in the given order): 
1) Search the KB for an exact matching of the 
term with any instance. 
2) Apply string similarity metrics4 to calculate 
the similarity between the given term and each 
instance of the KB. A hybrid scheme combining 
three metrics is used: jaro-Winkler, jlevelDis-
tance a wlevelDistance. Different combinations 
of threshold values for the metrics are consid-
ered. The elements in the linguistic triples are 
lemmatized in order to avoid problems which 
could be incorrectly handled by the string simi-
larity metrics (e.g., past tense). 
2.1) If there is more that one possible match-
ing, check whether any of them is a substring 
of the term. For example, the instance name 
for ?Enrico Motta? is a substring of the term 
?Motta?, and thus it should be preferred.  
 
For example, the similarity values returned for 
the term ?vanessa? with instances potentially 
relevant for the mapping are given in Figure 4. 
The combination of thresholds is met for the in-
stance ?Vanessa Lopez?, and thus the mapping is 
accomplished. If there is still more than one pos-
sible mapping, we assume there is not enough 
evidence to map that term and discard the triple. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. String similarity measures for the term 
?vanessa? and the instance ?Vanessa Lopez? 
                                                 
4
 http://sourceforge.net/projects/simmetrics/ 
Nobel Summit on ICT and public services 
 
Peter Scott attended the Public Services Summit in Stock-
holm, during Nobel Week 2005. The theme this year was 
Responsive Citizen Centered Public Services. The event 
was hosted by the City of Stockholm and Cisco Systems 
Thursday 8 December - Sunday 11 December 2005. 
? 
<peter-scott,attend,public-services-summit> 
<public-services-summit,located,stockholm> 
<theme,is,responsive-citizen-centered-public-services> 
<city-of-stockholm-and-cisco-systems,host,event> 
 
jaroDistance for ?vanessa? and ?vanessa-lopez? = 
0.8461538461538461wlevel for ?vanessa? and ?vanessa-
lopez? = 1.0jWinklerDistance for ?vanessa? and ?vanessa-
lopez? = 0.9076923076923077 
60
Strategies for mapping relations 
 
In order to map the verbal expression into a con-
ceptual relation, we assume that the terms of the 
triple have already been mapped either into in-
stances of classes in the KB by RSS, or into po-
tential new instances, by a named entity recogni-
tion system (as we explain in the next section). 
The following attempts are then made for the 
verb-relation mapping: 
1) Search the KB for an exact matching of the 
verbal expression with any existent relation for 
the instances under consideration or any possible 
relation between the classes (and superclasses) of 
the instances under consideration. 
2) Apply the string similarity metrics to calcu-
late the similarity between the given verbal ex-
pression and the possible relations between in-
stances (or their classes) corresponding to the 
terms in the linguistic triple. 
3) Search for similar mappings for the 
types/classes of entities under consideration in a 
lexicon of mappings automatically created ac-
cording to users? choices in the question answer-
ing system Aqualog. This lexicon contains on-
tology triples along with the original verbal ex-
pression, as illustrated in Table 1. The use of this 
lexicon represents a simplified form of pattern 
matching in which only exact matching is con-
sidered. 
 
given_relation class_1 conceptual relation class_2 
works project has-project-member person 
cite project has-publication publication 
Table 1. Examples of lexicon patterns 
4) Search for synonyms of the given verbal 
expression in WordNet, in order to verify if there 
is a synonym that matches (complete or partially, 
using string similarity metrics) any existent rela-
tion for the instances under consideration, or any 
possible relation between the classes (or super-
classes) of those instances (likewise in step 1). 
If there is no possible mapping for the term, 
the pattern-based classification model is trig-
gered (Section 3.4). Conversely, if there is more 
than one possible mapping, the disambiguation 
model is called (Section 3.5). 
The application of these strategies to map the 
linguistic triples into existent or new instances 
and relations is described in what follows. 
Applying RSS to map entities and relations 
 
In our architecture, RSS is represented by mod-
ules RSS_1 and RSS_2. RSS_1 first checks if 
the terms in the linguistic triple are instances of a 
KB (cf. strategies for mapping terms). If the 
terms can be mapped to instances, it checks 
whether the relation given in the triple matches 
any already existent relation between for those 
instances, or, alternatively, if that relation 
matches any of the possible relations for the 
classes (and superclasses) of the two instances in 
the domain ontology (cf. strategies for mapping 
relations). Three situations may arise from this 
attempt to map the linguistic triple into an ontol-
ogy triple (Cases (1), (2), and (3) in Fig. 1): 
Case (1): complete matching with instances of 
the KB and a relation of the KB or ontology, 
with possibly more than one valid conceptual 
relation being identified: 
<instance1, (conceptual_relation)+, instance2>. 
 
Case (2): no matching or partial matching 
with instances of the ontology (the relation is not 
analyzed (na) when there is not a matching for 
instances): 
<instance1, na , ?>   or   <?, na, instance2>   or    
<?, na, ?> 
 
Case (3): matching with instances of the KB, 
but no matching with a relation of the KB or on-
tology:  
<instance1, ?, instance2> 
 
If the matching attempt results in Case (1) with 
only one conceptual relation, then the triple can 
be formalized into a semantic annotation. This 
yields the annotation of an already existent rela-
tion for two instances of the KB, as well as a new 
relation for two instances of the KB, although 
this relation was already predicted in the ontol-
ogy as possible between the classes of those in-
stances. The generalization of the produced triple 
for classes/types of entities, i.e., <class, concep-
tual_relation, class>, is added to the repository of 
Patterns. 
On the other hand, if there is more than one 
possible conceptual relation in case (1), the sys-
tem tries to find the correct one by means of a 
sense disambiguation model, described in Sec-
tion 3.5. Conversely, if there is no matching for 
the relation (Case (3)), the system tries an alter-
native strategy: the pattern-based classification 
model (Section 3.4). Finally, if there is no com-
plete matching of the terms with instances of the 
KB (Case (2)), it means that the entities can be 
new to the KB. 
In order to check if the terms in the linguistic 
triple express new entities, the system first iden-
61
tifies to what classes of the ontology they belong. 
This is accomplished by means of ESpotter++, 
and extension of the named entity recognition 
system ESpotter (Zhu et al 2005).  
ESpotter is based on a mixture of lexicon 
(gazetteers) and patterns. We extended ESpotter 
by including new entities (extracted from other 
gazetteers), a few relevant new types of entities, 
and a small set of efficient patterns. All types of 
entities correspond to generic classes of our do-
main ontology, including: person, organization, 
event, publication, location, project, research-
area, technology, etc.  
In our architecture, if ESpotter++ is not able to 
identify the types of the entities, the process is 
aborted and no annotation is produced. This may 
be either because the terms do not have any con-
ceptual mapping (for example ?it?), or because 
the conceptual mapping is not part of our domain 
ontology. Otherwise, if ESpotter++ succeeds, 
RSS is triggered again (RSS_2) in order to verify 
whether the verbal expression encompasses a 
semantic relation. Since at least one of the two 
entities is recognized by Espotter++, and there-
fore at least one entity is new, it is only possible 
to check if the relation matches the possible rela-
tions between the classes of the recognized enti-
ties (cf. strategies for mapping relations).  
If the matching attempt results in only one 
conceptual relation, then the triple will be for-
malized into a semantic annotation. This repre-
sents the annotation of a new (although pre-
dicted) relation and two or at least one new en-
tity/instance. The produced triple of the type 
<class, conceptual_relation, class> is added to 
the repository of Patterns. 
Again, if there are multiple valid conceptual 
relations, the system tries to find the correct one 
by means of a disambiguation model (Section 
3.5). Conversely, if it there is no matching for the 
relation, the pattern-based classification model is 
triggered (Section 3.4).  
3.4 Identifying new relations 
The process described in Section 3.3 for the 
identification of relations accounts only for the 
relations already predicted as possible in the do-
main ontology. However, we are also interested 
in the additional information that can be pro-
vided by the text, in the form of new types of 
relations for known or new entities. In order to 
discover these relations, we employ a pattern 
matching strategy to identify relevant relations 
between types of terms. 
 
The pattern matching strategy has proved to be 
an efficient way to extract semantic relations, but 
in general has the drawback of requiring the pos-
sible relations to be previously defined. In order 
to overcome this limitation, we employ a Pat-
tern-based classification model that can identify 
similar patterns based on a very small initial 
number of patterns. 
We consider patterns of relations between 
types of entities, instead of the entities them-
selves, since we believe that it would be impos-
sible to accurately judge the similarity for the 
kinds of entities we are addressing (names of 
people, locations, etc). Thus, our patterns consist 
of triples of the type <class, conceptual_relation, 
class>, which are compared against a given triple 
using its classes (already provided by the linguis-
tic component or by ESpotter++) in order to clas-
sify relations in that triple as relevant or non-
relevant. 
The classification model is based on the ap-
proach presented in (Stevenson, 2004). It is an 
unsupervised corpus-based module which takes 
as examples a small set of relevant SVO patterns, 
called seed patterns, and uses a WordNet-based 
semantic similarity measure to compare the pat-
tern to be classified against the relevant ones. 
Our initial seed patterns (see examples in Table 
2) mixes patterns extracted from the lexicon gen-
erated by Aqualog?s users (cf. Section 3.3) and a 
small number of manually defined relevant pat-
terns. This set of patterns is expected to be en-
riched with new patterns as our system annotates 
relevant relations, since the system adds new tri-
ples to the initial set of patterns. 
 
class_1 conceptual relation class_2 
project has-project-member person 
project has-publication publication 
person develop technology 
person attend event 
Table 2. Examples of seed patterns 
 
Likewise (Stevenson, 2004), we use a semantic 
similarity metric based on the information con-
tent of the words in WordNet hierarchy, derived 
from corpus probabilities. It scores the similarity 
between two patterns by computing the similarity 
for each pair of words in those patterns. A 
threshold of 0.90 for this score was used here to 
classify two patterns as similar. In that case, a 
new annotation is produced for the input triple 
and it is added to the set of patterns. 
It is important to notice that, although Word-
Net is also used in the RSS module, in that case 
62
only synonyms are checked, while here the simi-
larity metric explores deeper information in 
WordNet, considering the meaning (senses) of 
the words. It is also important to distinguish the 
semantic similarity metrics employed here from 
the string metrics used in RSS. String similarity 
metrics simply try to capture minor variations on 
the strings representing terms/relations, they do 
not account for the meaning of those strings.  
3.5 Disambiguating relations 
The ambiguity arising when more than one pos-
sible relation exists for a pair of entities is a 
problem neglected in most of the current work on 
relation extraction. In our architecture, when the 
RSS finds more than one possible relation, we 
choose one relation by using the word sense dis-
ambiguation (WSD) system SenseLearner (Mi-
halcea and Csomai, 2005).  
SenseLearner is supervised WSD system to 
disambiguate all open class words in any given 
text, after being trained on a small data set, ac-
cording to global models for word categories. 
The current distribution includes two default 
models for verbs, which were trained on a corpus 
containing 200,000 content words of journalistic 
texts tagged with their WordNet senses. Since 
SenseLeaner requires a sense tagged corpus in 
order to be trained to specific domains and there 
is not such a corpus for our domain, we use one 
of the default training models. This is a contex-
tual model that relies on the first word before and 
after the verb, and its POS tags. To disambiguate 
new cases, it requires only that the words are an-
notated with POS tags. The use of lemmas of the 
words instead of the words yields better results, 
since the models were generated for lemmas. In 
our architecture, these annotations are produced 
by the component POS + Lemmatizer.  
Since the WSD module disambiguates among 
WordNet senses, it is employed only after the 
use of the WordNet subcomponent by RSS. This 
subcomponent finds all the synonyms for the 
verb in a linguistic triple and checks which of 
them matches existent or possible relations for 
the terms in that triple. In some cases, however, 
there is a matching for more than one synonym. 
Since in WordNet synonyms usually represent 
different uses of the verb, the WSD module can 
identify in which sense the verb is being used in 
the sentence, allowing the system to choose one 
among all the matching options. 
For example, given the linguistic triple <en-
rico_motta, head, kmi>, RSS is able to identify 
that ?enrico_motta? is a person, and that ?kmi? is 
an organization. However, it cannot find an ex-
act or partial matching (using string metrics), or 
even a matching (given by the user lexicon) for 
the relation ?head?. After getting all its syno-
nyms in WordNet, RSS verifies that two of them 
match possible relations in the ontology between 
a person and an organization: ?direct? and 
?lead?. In this case, the WSD module disam-
biguates the sense of ?head? as ?direct?. 
3.6 Example of extracted relations 
As an example of the relations that can be ex-
tracted in our approach, consider the representa-
tion of the entity ?Enrico Motta? and all the rela-
tions involving this entity in Figure 5. The rela-
tions were extracted from the text in Figure 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Example of newsletter 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Semantic annotations produced for the 
news in Figure 5 
In this case, ?Enrico-Motta? is an instance of 
kmi-academic-staff-member, a subclass of person 
in the domain ontology. The mapped relation 
?works-in? ?knowledge-media-institute? already 
existed in the KB. The new relations pointed out 
by our approach are the ones referring to the 
award received from the ?European Commis-
sion? (an organization, here), for three projects: 
?NeOn?, ?XMEDIA?, and ?OK?. 
4 Conclusions and future work 
We presented a hybrid approach for the extrac-
tion of semantic relations from text. It was de-
KMi awarded ?4M for Semantic Web Research 
 
Professor Enrico Motta and Dr John Domingue of the 
Knowledge Media Institute have received a set of record-
breaking awards totalling ?4m from the European Commis-
sion's Framework 6 Information Society Technologies (IST) 
programme. This is the largest ever combined award ob-
tained by KMi associated with a single funding programme. 
The awards include three Integrated Projects (IPs) and 
three Specific Targeted Research Projects (STREPs) and 
they consolidate KMi?s position as one of the leading inter-
national research centers in semantic technologies. Specifi-
cally Professor Motta has been awarded:  
 
a.. ?1.55M for the project NeOn: Lifecycle Support for Net-
worked Ontologies  
b.. ?565K for XMEDIA: Knowledge Sharing and Reuse 
across Media and  
c.. ?391K for OK: Openknowledge - Open, coordinated 
knowledge sharing architecture. ? 
(def-instance Enrico-Motta kmi-academic-staff-member 
 ((works-in knowledge-media-institute) 
  (award-from european-commission) 
  (award-for NeOn) 
  (award-for XMEDIA) 
  (award-for OK))) 
63
signed mainly to enrich the annotations produced 
by a semantic web portal, but can be used for 
other domains and applications, such as ontology 
population and development. Currently we are 
concluding the integration of the several modules 
composing our architecture. We will then carry 
experiments with our corpus of newsletters in 
order to evaluate the approach. Subsequently, we 
will incorporate the architecture to a semantic 
web portal and accomplish an extrinsic evalua-
tion in the context of that application. Since the 
approach uses deep linguistic processing and 
corpus-based strategies not requiring any manual 
annotation, we expect it will accurately discover 
most of the relevant relations in the text.  
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by the Advanced 
Knowledge Technologies (AKT) project. AKT is 
an Interdisciplinary Research Collaboration 
(IRC), which is sponsored by the UK Engineer-
ing and Physical Sciences Research Council un-
der grant number GR/N15764/01.  
References 
Massimiliano Ciaramita, Aldo Gangemi, Esther 
Ratsch, Jasmim Saric, Isabel Rojas. 2005. Unsu-
pervised learning of semantic relations between 
concepts of a molecular biology ontology. 19th 
IJCAI, pp. 659-664 
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina 
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE: A 
Framework and Graphical Development Environ-
ment for Robust NLP Tools and Applications. 40th 
ACL Meeting, Philadelphia. 
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, and Valentin 
Tablan. 2000. JAPE: a Java Annotation Patterns 
Engine. Tech. Report CS--00--10, University of 
Sheffield, Department of Computer Science. 
Christiane D. Fellbaum (ed). 1998. Wordnet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press. 
Pablo Gamallo, Marco Gonzalez, Alexandre Agustini, 
Gabriel Lopes, and Vera S. de Lima. 2002. Map-
ping syntactic dependencies onto semantic rela-
tions. ECAI Workshop on Machine Learning and 
Natural Language Processing for Ontology Engi-
neering, Lyon, France. 
Asuncion Gomez-Perez and David Manzano-Macho. 
2003. A Survey of Ontology Learning Methods and 
Techniques. Deliverable 1.5, OntoWeb Project. 
Jose Iria and Fabio Ciravegna. 2005. Relation Extrac-
tion for Mining the Semantic Web. Dagstuhl Semi-
nar on Machine Learning for the Semantic Web, 
Dagstuhl, Germany. 
Yuangui Lei, Marta Sabou, Vanessa Lopez, Jianhan 
Zhu, Victoria Uren, and Enrico Motta. 2006. An 
infrastructure for Acquiring High Quality Semantic 
Metadata. To appear in the 3rd ESWC, Budva. 
Dekang Lin. 1993. Principle based parsing without 
overgeneration. 31st ACL, Columbus, pp. 112-120. 
Vanessa Lopez, Michele Pasin, and Enrico Motta. 
2005. AquaLog: An Ontology-portable Question 
Answering System for the Semantic Web. 2nd 
ESWC, Creete, Grece. 
Alexander D. Maedche. 2002. Ontology Learning for 
the Semantic Web, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Norwell, MA. 
Scott Miller, Heidi Fox, Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph 
Weischedel. 2000. A novel use of statistical pars-
ing to extract information from text. 6th ANLP-
NAACL, Seattle, pp. 226-233. 
Rada Mihalcea and Andras Csomai. 2005. Sense-
Learner: Word Sense Disambiguation for All 
Words in Unrestricted Text. 43rd ACL Meeting, 
Ann Arbor. 
Marie-Laure Reinberger and Peter Spyns. 2004. Dis-
covering knowledge in texts for the learning of 
DOGMA inspired ontologies. ECAI 2004 Work-
shop on Ontology Learning and Population, Va-
lencia, pp. 19-24. 
Dan Roth and Wen-tau Yih. 2002. Probabilistic rea-
soning for entity & relation recognition. 19th COL-
ING, Taipei, Taiwan, pp. 1-7. 
Alexander Schutz and Paul Buitelaar. 2005. RelExt: A 
Tool for Relation Extraction from Text in Ontology 
Extension. 4th ISWC, pp. 593-606. 
Mark Stevenson. 2004. An Unsupervised WordNet-
based Algorithm for Relation Extraction. 4th LREC 
Workshop Beyond Named Entity: Semantic Label-
ing for NLP Tasks, Lisbon. 
Dmitry Zelenko, Chinatsu Aone, and Anthony Rich-
ardella. 2003. Kernel Methods for Relation Extrac-
tion. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 
(3):1083-1106. 
Shubin Zhao and Ralph Grishman. 2005. Extracting 
Relations with Integrated Information Using Ker-
nel Methods. 43d ACL Meeting, Ann Arbor. 
Jianhan Zhu, Victoria Uren, and Enrico Motta. 2005. 
ESpotter: Adaptive Named Entity Recognition for 
Web Browsing. 3rd Conf. on Professional Knowl-
edge Management, Kaiserslautern, pp. 518-529. 
Roman Yangarber, Ralph Grishman and Pasi Tapana-
inen, P. 2000. Unsupervised Discovery of Sce-
nario-Level Patterns for Information Extraction. 
6th ANLP, pp. 282-289. 
64
