Proceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2006), pages 94?102,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Learning Information Status of Discourse Entities
Malvina Nissim?
Laboratory for Applied Ontology
Institute for Cognitive Science and Technology
National Research Council (ISTC-CNR), Roma, Italy
malvina.nissim@loa-cnr.it
Abstract
In this paper we address the issue of au-
tomatically assigning information status to
discourse entities. Using an annotated cor-
pus of conversational English and exploit-
ing morpho-syntactic and lexical features,
we train a decision tree to classify entities
introduced by noun phrases as old, medi-
ated, or new. We compare its performance
with hand-crafted rules that are mainly
based on morpho-syntactic features and
closely relate to the guidelines that had
been used for the manual annotation. The
decision tree model achieves an overall ac-
curacy of 79.5%, significantly outperform-
ing the hand-crafted algorithm (64.4%).
We also experiment with binary classifica-
tions by collapsing in turn two of the three
target classes into one and retraining the
model. The highest accuracy achieved on
binary classification is 93.1%.
1 Introduction
Information structure is the way a speaker or
writer organises known and new information in
text or dialogue. Information structure has been
the subject of numerous and very diverse linguistic
studies (Halliday, 1976; Prince, 1981; Hajic?ova?,
1984; Vallduv??, 1992; Lambrecht, 1994; Steed-
man, 2000, for instance), thus also yielding a
wide range of terms and definitions (see (Vallduv??,
?The work reported in this paper was carried out while
the author was a research fellow at the Institute for Com-
municating and Collaborative Systems of the University
of Edinburgh, United Kingdom, and was supported by a
Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh-Stanford Link grant (265000-
3102-R36766).
1992; Kruijff-Korbayova? and Steedman, 2003) for
a discussion). In the present study, we adopt the
term ?Information Status?, following the defini-
tion employed for the annotation of the corpus we
use for our experiments (Nissim et al, 2004). In-
formation status describes to which degree a dis-
course entity is available to the hearer, in terms
of the speaker?s assumptions about the hearer?s
knowledge and beliefs. Although there is a fine
line in the distinction between Information Sta-
tus and Information Structure, it is fair to say that
whereas the latter models wider discourse coher-
ence, the former focuses mainly on the local level
of discourse entities. Section 2 provides more de-
tails on how this notion is encoded in our corpus.
Information status has generated large interest
among researchers because of its complex interac-
tion with other linguistic phenomena, thus affect-
ing several Natural Language Processing tasks.
Since it correlates with word order and pitch ac-
cent (Lambrecht, 1994; Hirschberg and Nakatani,
1996), for instance, incorporating knowledge on
information status would be helpful for natural
language generation, and in particular text-to-
speech systems. Sto?ber and colleagues, for ex-
ample, ascribe to the lack of such information the
lower performance of text-to-speech compared to
concept-to-speech generation, where such knowl-
edge could be made directly available to the sys-
tem (Sto?ber et al, 2000).
Another area where information status can play
an important role is anaphora resolution. A major
obstacle in the resolution of definite noun phrases
with full lexical heads is that only a small pro-
portion of them is actually anaphoric (ca. 30%
(Vieira and Poesio, 2000)). Therefore, in the ab-
sence of anaphoricity information, a resolution
system will try to find an antecedent also for non-
94
anaphoric definite noun phrases, thus severely af-
fecting performance. There has been recent in-
terest in determining anaphoricity before perform-
ing anaphora resolution (Ng and Cardie, 2002;
Uryupina, 2003), but results have not been en-
tirely satisfactory. Given that old entities are more
likely to be referred to by anaphors, for instance,
identification of information status could improve
anaphoricity determination.
Postolache et al (2005) have recently shown
that learning information structure with high ac-
curacy is feasible for Czech. However, there are
yet no studies that explore such a task for English.
Exploiting an existing annotated corpus, in this pa-
per we report experiments on learning a model for
the automatic identification of information status
in English.
2 Data
For our experiments we annotated a portion of the
transcribed Switchboard corpus (Godfrey et al,
1992), consisting of 147 dialogues (Nissim et al,
2004).1 In the following section we provide a brief
description of the annotation categories.
2.1 Annotation
Our annotation of information status mainly builds
on (Prince, 1992), and employs a distinction into
old, mediated, and new entities similar to the work
of (Strube, 1998; Eckert and Strube, 2001).
All noun phrases (NPs) were extracted as mark-
able entities using pre-existing parse information
(Carletta et al, 2004). An entity was annotated as
new if it has not been previously referred to and
is yet unknown to the hearer. The tag mediated
was instead used whenever an entity that is newly
mentioned in the dialogue can be inferred by the
hearer thanks to prior or general context.2 Typ-
ical examples of mediated entities are generally
known objects (such as ?the sun?, or ?the Pope?
(Lo?bner, 1985)), and bridging anaphors (Clark,
1975; Vieira and Poesio, 2000), where an entity
is related to a previously introduced one. When-
ever an entity was neither new nor mediated, it was
considered as old.
1Switchboard is a collection of spontaneous phone con-
versations, averaging six minutes in length, between speakers
of American English on predetermined topics. A third of the
corpus is syntactically parsed as part of the Penn Treebank
(Marcus et al, 1993)
2This type corresponds to Prince?s (1981; 1992) in-
ferrables.
In order to account for the complexity of the
notion of information status, the annotation also
includes a sub-type classification for old and me-
diated entities that provides a finer-grained dis-
tinction with information on why a given entity is
mediated (e.g., set-relation, bridging) or old (e.g.,
coreference, generic pronouns). In order to test
the feasibility of automatically assigning informa-
tion status to discourse entities, we took a modular
approach and only considered the coarser-grained
distinctions for this first study. Information about
the finer-grained subtypes will be used in future
work.
In addition to the main categories, we used two
more annotation classes: a tag non-applicable,
used for entities that were wrongly extracted in the
automatic selection of markables (e.g. ?course? in
?of course?), for idiomatic occurrences, and ex-
pletive uses of ?it?; and a tag not-understood to be
applied whenever an annotator did not fully under-
stand the text. Instances annotated with these two
tags, as well as all traces, which were left unanno-
tated, were excluded from all our experiments.
Inter-annotator agreement was measured using
the kappa (K) statistics (Cohen, 1960; Carletta,
1996) on 1,502 instances (three Switchboard dia-
logues) marked by two annotators who followed
specific written guidelines. Given that the task
involves a fair amount of subjective judgement,
agreement was remarkably high. Over the three
dialogues, the annotation yielded K = .845 for
the old/med/new classification (K = .788 when
including the finer-grained subtype distinction).
Specifically, ?old? proved to be the easiest to dis-
tinguish, with K = .902; for ?med? and ?new?
agreement was measured at K = .800 and K =
.794, respectively. A value of K > .76 is usually
considered good agreement. Further details on the
annotation process and corpus description are pro-
vided in (Nissim et al, 2004)
2.2 Setup
We split the 147 dialogues into a training, a de-
velopment and an evaluation set. The training set
contains 40,865 NPs distributed over 94 dialogues,
the development set consists of 23 dialogues for a
total of 10,565 NPs, and the evaluation set com-
prises 30 dialogues with 12,624 NPs. Instances
were randomised, so that occurrences of NPs from
the same dialogue were possibly split across the
different sets.
95
Table 1 reports the distribution of classes for
the training, development and evaluation sets. The
distributions are similar, with a majority of old en-
tities, followed by mediated entities, and lastly by
new ones.
Table 1: Information status distribution of NPs in
training, development and evaluation sets
TRAIN DEV EVAL
old 19730 (48.3%) 5181 (49.0%) 6049 (47.9%)
med 15184 (37.1%) 3762 (35.6%) 4644 (36.8%)
new 5951 (14.6%) 1622 (15.4%) 1931 (15.3%)
total 40865 (100%) 10565 (100%) 12624 (100%)
3 Classification with hand-crafted rules
The target classes for our classification experi-
ments are the annotation tags: old, mediated, and
new. As baseline, we could take a simple ?most-
frequent-class? assignment that would classify all
entities as old, thus yielding an accuracy of 47.9%
on the evaluation set (see Table 1). Although the
?all-old? assumption makes a reasonable baseline,
it would not provide a particularly interesting solu-
tion from a practical perspective, since a dialogue
should also contain not-old information. Thus,
rather than adopting this simple strategy, we de-
veloped a more sophisticated baseline working on
a set of hand-crafted rules.
This hand-crafted algorithm is based on rather
straightforward, intuitive rules, partially reflecting
the instructions specified in the annotation guide-
lines. As shown in Figure 1, the top split is the
NP type: whether the instance to classify is a pro-
noun, a proper noun, or a common noun. The
other information that the algorithm uses is about
complete or partial string overlapping with respect
to the dialogue?s context. For common nouns we
also consider the kind of determiner (definite, in-
definite, demonstrative, possessive, or bare).
In order to obtain the NP type information, we
exploited the pre-existing morpho-syntactic tree-
bank annotation of Switchboard. Whenever the
extraction failed, we assigned a type ?other? and
always backed-off these cases to old (the most fre-
quent class in training data). Values for the other
features were obtained by simple pattern matching
and NP extraction.
Evaluation measures The algorithm?s perfor-
mance is evaluated with respect to its general ac-
curacy (Acc): the number of correctly classified
instances over all assignments. Moreover, for each
case NP is a pronoun
status := old
case NP is a proper noun
if first occurrence then
status := med
else
status := old
endif
case NP is a common noun
if identical string already mentioned then
status := old
else
if partial string already mentioned then
status := med
else
if determiner is def/dem/poss then
status := med
else
status := new
endif
endif
endif
otherwise
status := old
Figure 1: Hand-crafted rule-based algorithm for
the assignment of information status to NPs.
class (c), we report precision (P), recall (R), and f-
score (F) thus calculated:
Pc =
correct assignments of c
total assignments of c
Rc =
correct assignments of c
total corpus instances of c
Fc = 2PcRcPc+Rc
The overall accuracy of the rule-based algo-
rithm is 65.8%. Table 2 shows the results for each
target class in both the development and evaluation
sets. We discuss results on the latter.
Although a very high proportion of old entities
is correctly retrieved (93.5%), this is done with
relatively low precision (66.7%). Moreover, both
precision and recall for the other classes are dis-
appointing. Unsurprisingly, the rules that apply
to common nouns (the most ambiguous with re-
spect to information status) generate a large num-
96
Table 2: Per class performance of hand-crafted
rules on the development and evaluation sets
DEV EVAL
P R F P R F
old .677 .932 .784 .667 .935 .779
med .641 .488 .554 .666 .461 .545
new .517 .180 .267 .436 .175 .250
ber of false positives. The rule that predicts an
old entity in case of a full previous mention, for
example, has a precision of only 39.8%. Better,
but not yet satisfactory, is the precision of the rule
that predicts a mediated entity for a common noun
that has a previous partial mention (64.7%). The
worst performing rule is the one that assigns the
most frequent class (old) to entities of syntactic
type ?other?, with a precision of 35.4%. To give an
idea of the correlation between NP type and infor-
mation status, in Table 3 we report the distribution
observed in the evaluation set.
Table 3: Distribution of information status over
NP types in the evaluation set
old med new
pronoun 4465 159 13
proper 107 198 27
common 752 2874 1256
other 725 1413 635
4 Learning Information Status
Our starting point for the automatic assignment
of information status are the three already intro-
duced classes: old, mediated and new. Addition-
ally, we experiment with binary classifications, by
collapsing mediated entities in turn with old and
new ones.
For training, developing and evaluating the
model we use the split described in Section 2.2
(see Table 1). Performance is evaluated accord-
ing to overall accuracy and per class precision, re-
call, and f-score as described in Section 3. To train
a C4.5 decision tree model we use the J48 Weka
implementation (Witten and Frank, 2000). The
choice of features to build the tree is described in
the following section.
4.1 Features
The seven features we use are automatically ex-
tracted from the annotated data exploiting pre-
existing morpho-syntactic markup and using sim-
Table 4: Feature set for learning experiments
FEATURE VALUES
full prev mention numeric
mention time {first,second,more}
partial prev mention {yes,no,na}
determiner {bare,def,dem,indef,poss,na}
NP length numeric
grammatical role {subject,subjpass,object,pp,other}
NP type {pronoun,common,proper,other}
ple pattern matching techniques. They are sum-
marised in Table 4.
The choice of features is motivated by the fol-
lowing observations. The information coming
from partial previous mentions is particularly use-
ful for the identification of mediated entities. This
should account specifically for cases of media-
tion via set-relations; for example, ?your children?
would be considered a partial previous mention of
?my children? or ?your four children?. The value
?na? stands for ?non-applicable? and is mainly
used for pronouns. Full previous mention is likely
to be a good indicator of old entities. Both full and
partial previous mentions are calculated within
each dialogue without any constraints based on
distance.
NP type and determiner type are expected to be
helpful for all categories, with pronouns, for in-
stance, tending to be old and indefinite NPs being
often new. We included the length of NPs (mea-
sured in number of words) since linguistic studies
have shown that old entities tend to be expressed
with less lexical material (Wasow, 2002). In exper-
iments on the development data we also included
the NP string itself, on the grounds that it might
be of use in cases of general mediated instances
(common knowledge entities), such as ?the sun?,
?people?, ?Mickey Mouse?, and so on. However,
this feature turned out to negatively affect perfor-
mance, and was not included in the final model.
4.2 Results
With an overall final accuracy of 79.5% on the
evaluation set, C4.5 significantly outperforms the
hand-crafted algorithm (65.8%). Although the
identification of old entities is quite successful
(F=.928), performance is not entirely satisfactory.
This is especially true for the classification of new
entities, for which the final f-score is .320, mainly
due to extremely low recall (.223). Mediated enti-
ties, instead, are retrieved with a fairly low preci-
sion but higher recall. Table 5 summarises preci-
sion, recall, and f-score for each class.
97
Table 5: Per class performance of C4.5 on the de-
velopment and evaluation sets
DEV EVAL
P R F P R F
old .935 .911 .923 .941 .915 .928
med .673 .878 .762 .681 .876 .766
new .623 .234 .341 .563 .223 .320
The major confusion in the classification arises
between mediated and new (the most difficult de-
cision to make for human annotators too, see Sec-
tion 2.1), which are often distinguished on the ba-
sis of world knowledge, not available to the classi-
fier. This is clearly shown by the confusion matrix
in Table 6: the highest proportion of mistakes is
due to 1,453 new instances classified as mediated.
Also significant is the wrong assignment of me-
diated tags to old entities. Such behaviour of the
classifier is to be expected, given the ?in-between?
nature of mediated entities.
Table 6: Confusion matrix for evaluation set.
C=Classifier tag; G=Gold tag
C ?
G ?
old med new
old 5537 452 60
med 303 4066 275
new 47 1453 431
4.3 Classification with two categories only
Given the above observations, we collapsed me-
diated entities in turn with old ones (focusing on
their non-newness) or new ones (enhancing their
non complete givenness), thus reducing the task to
a binary classification.
Since it appears to be more difficult to distin-
guish mediated and new rather than mediated and
old (Table 6), we expect the classifier to perform
better when mediated is binned with new rather
than old. Also, in the case where mediated and old
entities are collapsed into one single class as op-
posed to new ones, the distribution of classes be-
comes highly skewed towards old entities (84.7%)
so that the learner is likely to lack sufficient infor-
mation for identifying new entities.
Table 7 shows the final accuracy for the two bi-
nary classifications (and the three-way one). As
expected, when mediated entities are joint with
new ones, the classifier performs best (93.1%),
with high f-scores for both old and new, and is sig-
nificantly better than the alternative binary classi-
fication (t-test, p < 0.001). Indeed, the old+med
vs new classification is nearly an all-old assign-
ment and its overall final accuracy (85.5%) is not
a significant improvement over the all-old baseline
(84.7%). Results suggest that mediated NPs are
more similar to new than to old entities and might
provide interesting feedback for the theoretical as-
sumptions underlying the corpus annotation.
4.4 Comparison with two categories only
For a fair comparison, we performed a two-way
classification using the hand-crafted algorithm,
which had to be simplified to account for the lack
of a mediated class.
In the case where all mediated instances where
collapsed together with the old ones, the decision
rules are very simple: pronouns, proper nouns, and
common nouns that have been previously fully or
partially mentioned are classified as old; first men-
tion common nouns are new; everything else is
old. Both precision and recall for old instances
are quite high (.868 and .906 respectively), for a
resulting f-score of .887. Conversely, the perfor-
mance on identifying new entities is very poor,
with a precision of .337 and a recall of .227, for
a combined f-score of .271. The overall accuracy
is .803, and this is significantly lower than the per-
formance of C4.5, which achieves an overall accu-
racy of .850 (t-test, p < 0.001).
When mediated entities are collapsed with new
ones, rule-based classification is done again with
a very basic algorithm derived from the rules in
Figure 1: pronouns are old; proper nouns are new
if first mention, old otherwise; common nouns
that have been fully previously mentioned are old,
otherwise new. Everything else is new, which in
the training set is now the most frequent class
(51.7%). The overall accuracy of .849 is signif-
icantly lower than that achieved by C4.5, which
is .931 (t-test, p < 0.001). Differently from the
previous case (mediated collapsed with old), the
performance on each class is comparable, with a
precision, recall and f-score of .863, .815, and .838
for old and of .838, .881, and .859 for new.
5 Discussion
5.1 Influence of training size
In order to assess the contribution of training size
to performance, we experimented with increas-
98
Table 7: Overview of accuracy for hand-crafted
rules and C4.5 on three-way and binary classifica-
tions on development and evaluation sets
DEV EVAL
classification rules C4.5 rules C4.5
old vs med vs new .658 .796 .644 .795
old+med vs new .810 .861 .803 .855
old vs med+new .844 .926 .849 .931
ingly larger portions of the training data (from 50
to 30,000 instances). For each training size we ran
the classifier 5 times, each with a different ran-
domly picked set of instances. This was done for
the three-way and the two binary classifications.
Reported results are always averaged over the 5
runs. Figure 2 shows the three learning curves.
Figure 2: Learning curves for three- and two-way
classifications
The curve for the three-way classification shows a
slight constant improvement, though it appears to
reach a plateau after 5,000 instances. The result
obtained training on the full set (40865 instances)
is significantly better only if compared to a train-
ing set of 4,000 or less (t-test, p < 0.05). No other
significant difference in accuracy can be observed.
Increasing the training size over 5,000 instances
when learning to classify old+mediated vs new
leads to a slight improvement due to the learner
being able to identify some new entities. With a
smaller training set the proportion of new entities
is far too small to be of use. However, as said, the
overall final accuracy of 85.5% (see Table 7) does
not significantly improve over the baseline.
Table 8: Performance of leave-one-out and single-
feature classifiers on three-way classification
FEATURE
ACCURACY
removed single
full prev mention .793 .730
mention time .795 .730
partial prev mention .791 .769
determiner .789 .775
NP length .793 .733
gram role .782 .656
NP type .784 .701
full set .795
5.2 Feature contribution
We are also interested in the contribution of each
single feature. Therefore, we ran the classifier
again, leaving out one feature at a time. No sig-
nificant drop or gain was observed in any of the
runs (t-test, p < 0.01), though the worst detri-
ments were yielded by removing the grammati-
cal role and the NP type. These two features,
however, also appear to be the least informative
in single-feature classification experiments, thus
suggesting that such information comes very use-
ful only when combined with other evidence (see
also Section 5.4. All results for leave-one-out and
single-feature classifiers are shown in Table 8.
5.3 Error Analysis
The overwhelming majority of mistakes (1,453,
56.1% of all errors) in the three-way classification
stems from classifying as mediated entities that
are in fact new (Table 6). Significant confusion
arises from proper nouns, as they are annotated as
mediated or new entities, depending on whether
they are generally known (such as names of US
presidents, for example), or domain/community-
specific (such as the name of a local store that only
the speaker knows). This inconsistency in the an-
notation might reflect well the actual status of en-
tities in the dialogues, but it can be misleading for
the classifier.
Another large group of errors is formed by old
entities classified as mediated (452 cases). This is
probably due to the fact that the first node in the
decision tree is the ?partial mention? feature (see
Figure 3). The tree correctly captures the fact that
a firstly mentioned entity which has been partially
mentioned before is mediated. An entity that has
a previous partial mention but also a full previous
mention is classified as old only if it is a proper
noun or a pronoun, but as mediated if it is a com-
mon noun. This yields a large number of mis-
99
takes, since many common nouns that have been
previously mentioned (both in full and partially)
are in fact old. Another problem with previous
mentions is the lack of restriction in distance: we
consider a previous mention any identical mention
of a given NP anywhere in the dialogue, and we
have no means of checking that it is indeed the
same entity that is referred to. A way to alleviate
this problem might be exploiting speaker turn in-
formation. Using anaphoric chains could also be
of help, but see Section 6.
5.4 Learnt trees meet hand-crafted rules
The learnt trees provide interesting insights on the
intuitions behind the choice of hand-crafted rules.
partial = yes
| full <= 1
| | det = def: med
| | det = indef
| | | length <= 2
| | | | gramm = subj: med
| | | | gramm = subjpassive: new
| | | | gramm = obj: med
| | | | gramm = pp: med
| | | | gramm = other
| | | | | type = proper: med
| | | | | type = common: new
| | | | | type = pronoun: new
| | | | | type = other: med
| | | length > 2: med
| | det = dem
| | | gramm = subj
. . .
Figure 3: Top of C.5, full training set, three classes
Figure 3 shows the top of C4.5 (trained on the full
training set for the three-way classification), which
looks remarkably different from the rules in Fig-
ure 1. We had based our decision of emphasising
the importance of the NP type on the linguistic ev-
idence that different syntactic realisations reflect
different degrees of availability of discourse enti-
ties (Givo?n, 1983; Ariel, 1990; Grosz et al, 1995).
In the learnt model, however, knowledge about NP
type is only used as subordinate to other features.
This is indeed mirrored in the fact that removing
NP type information from the feature set causes
accuracy to drop, but a classifier building on NP
type alone performs poorly (see Table 8).3 In-
terestingly, though, more informative knowledge
about syntactic form seems to be derived from the
determiner type, which helps distinguish degrees
of oldness among common nouns.
3The NPtype-only classifier assigns old to pronouns and
med to all other types; it never assigns new.
5.5 Naive Bayes model
For additional comparison, we also trained a Naive
Bayes classifier with the same experimental set-
tings. Results are significantly worse than C4.5?s
in all three scenarios (t-test, p < 0.005), with an
accuracy of 74.6% in the three-way classification,
63.3% for old+mediated vs new, and 91.0% for old
vs mediated+new. The latter distribution appears
again to be the easiest to learn.
6 Related Work
To our knowledge, there are no other studies on the
automatic assignment of information status in En-
glish. Recently, (Postolache et al, 2005) have re-
ported experiments on learning information struc-
ture in the Prague TreeBank. The Czech tree-
bank is annotated following the Topic-Focus artic-
ulation theory (Hajic?ova? et al, 1998). The theo-
retical definitions underlying the Prague Treebank
and the corpus we are using are different, with the
former giving a more global picture of informa-
tion structure, and the latter a more entity-specific
one. For this reason, and due to the fact that Pos-
tolache et al?s experiments are on Czech (with a
freer word order than English), comparing results
is not straightforward.
Their best system (C4.5 decision tree) achieves
an accuracy of 90.69% on the topic/focus identi-
fication task. This result is comparable with the
result we obtain when training and testing on the
corpus where mediated and new entities are not
distinguished (93.1%). Postolache and colleagues
also observe a slowly flattening learning curve af-
ter a very small amount of data (even 1%, in their
case). Therefore, they predict an increase in per-
formance will mainly come from better features
rather than more training data. This is likely to be
true in our case as well, also because our feature
set is currently small and we will further benefit
from incorporating additional features. Postolache
et al use a larger feature set, which also includes
coreference information. The corpus we use has
manually annotated coreference links. However,
because we see anaphoricity determination as a
task that could benefit from automatic information
status assignment, we decided not to exploit this
information in the current experiments. Moreover,
we did not want our model to rely too heavily on a
feature that is not easy to obtain automatically.
100
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented a model for the automatic as-
signment of information status in English. On the
three-way classification into old, mediated, and
new that reflects the corpus annotation tags, the
learnt tree outperforms a hand-crafted algorithm
and achieves an accuracy of 79.5%, with high pre-
cision and recall for old entities, high recall for
mediated entities, and a fair precision, but very
poor recall, for new ones. When we collapsed me-
diated and new entities into one category only op-
posing this to old ones, the classifier performed
with an accuracy of 93.1%, with high f-scores for
both classes. Binning mediated and old entities to-
gether did not produce interesting results, mainly
due to the highly skewed distribution of the result-
ing corpus towards old entities. This suggests that
mediated entities are more similar to new than to
old ones, and might provide interesting feedback
for the theoretical assumptions underlying the an-
notation. Future work will examine specific cases
and investigate how such insights can be used to
make the theoretical framework more accurate.
As the first experiments run on English to learn
information status, we wanted to concentrate on
the task itself and avoid noise introduced by au-
tomatic processing. More realistic settings for in-
tegrating an information status model in a large-
scale NLP system would imply obtaining syntactic
information via parsing rather than directly from
the treebank. Future experiments will assess the
impact of automatic preprocessing of the data.
Results are very promising but there is room for
improvement. First, the syntactic category ?other?
is far too large, and finer distinctions must be made
by means of better extraction rules from the trees.
Second, and most importantly, we believe that us-
ing more features will be the main trigger of higher
accuracy. In particular, we plan to use additional
lexical and relational features derived from knowl-
edge sources such as WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998)
and FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998) which should
be especially helpful in distinguishing mediated
from new entities, the most difficult decision to
make. For example, an entity that is linked in
WordNet (within a given depth) and/or FrameNet
to a previously introduced one is more likely to be
mediated than new.
Additionally, we will attempt to exploit dia-
logue turns, since knowing which speaker said
what is clearly very valuable information. In a
similar vein, we will experiment with distance
measures, in terms of turns, sentences, or even
time, for determining when an introduced entity
might stop to be available.
We also plan to run experiments on the auto-
matic classification of old and mediated subtypes
(the finer-grained classification) that is included
in the corpus but that we did not consider for the
present study (see Section 2.1). The major benefit
of this would be a contribution to the resolution of
bridging anaphora.
References
Mira Ariel. 1990. Accessing Noun Phrase An-
tecedents. Routledge, London-New York.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Christian
Boitet and Pete Whitelock, editors, Proceedings of
COLING-ACL, pages 86?90.
Jean Carletta, Shipra Dingare, Malvina Nissim, and
Tatiana Nikitina. 2004. Using the NITE XML
Toolkit on the Switchboard Corpus to study syntac-
tic choice: a case study. In Proceedings of the 4th In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC2004), Lisbon, May 2004.
Jean Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classi-
fication tasks: the kappa statistic. Computational
Linguistics, 22(2):249?254.
Herbert H. Clark. 1975. Bridging. In Roger Schank
and Bonnie Nash-Webber, editors, Theoretical Is-
sues in Natural Language Processing. The MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement
for nominal scales. Educational and Psychological
Measurements, 20:37?46.
Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube. 2001. Dialogue
acts, synchronising units and anaphora resolution.
Journal of Semantics, 17(1):51?89.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Talmy Givo?n. 1983. Introduction. In Talmy Givo?n,
editor, Topic Continuity in Discourse: A Quantita-
tive Cross-language Study. John Benjamins, Ams-
terdam/Philadelphia.
J. Godfrey, E. Holliman, and J. McDaniel. 1992.
SWITCHBOARD: Telephone speech corpus for
research and development. In Proceedings of
ICASSP-92, pages 517?520.
Barbara Grosz, Aravind K. Joshi, and Scott Weinstein.
1995. Centering: a framework for modeling the lo-
cal coherence of discourse. Computational Linguis-
tics, 21(2):203?225.
101
Eva Hajic?ova?, Barbara Partee, and Petr Sgall. 1998.
Topic-focus articulation, tripartite structures, and se-
mantic content. In Studies in Linguistics and Philos-
ophy, volume 71. Dordrecht.
Eva Hajic?ova?. 1984. Topic and focus. In Petr
Sgall, editor, Contributions to Functional Syntax.
Semantics and Language Comprehension (LLSEE
16), pages 189?202. John Benjamins, Amsterdam.
M.A.K. Halliday. 1976. Notes on transitivity and
theme in English. Part 2. Journal of Linguistics,
3(2):199?244.
Julia Hirschberg and Christine H. Nakatani. 1996. A
prosodic analysis of discourse segments in direction
giving monologues. In Proceedings of 34th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova? and Mark Steedman. 2003.
Discourse and information structure. Journal of
Logic, Language, and Information, 12:249?259.
Knud Lambrecht. 1994. Information structure and
sentence form. Topic, focus, and the mental repre-
sentation of discourse referents. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge.
Sebastian Lo?bner. 1985. Definites. Journal of Seman-
tics, 4:279?326.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and May Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The Penn treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19:313?330.
Vincent Ng and Claire Cardie. 2002. Identifying
anaphoric and non-anaphoric noun phrases to im-
prove coreference resolution. In Proc of the 19th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics; Taipei, Taiwan, pages 730?736.
Malvina Nissim, Shipra Dingare, Jean Carletta, and
Mark Steedman. 2004. An annotation scheme for
information status in dialogue. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC2004), Lisbon, May
2004.
Oana Postolache, Ivana Kruijff-Korbayova, and Geert-
Jan Kruijff. 2005. Data-driven approaches for in-
formation structure identification. In Proceedings
of Human Language Technology Conference and
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 9?16, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada, October. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given-
new information. In Peter Cole, editor, Radical
Pragmatics. Academic Press, New York.
Ellen Prince. 1992. The ZPG letter: subjects, definite-
ness, and information-status. In Sandra Thompson
and William Mann, editors, Discourse description:
diverse analyses of a fund raising text, pages 295?
325. John Benjamins, Philadelphia/Amsterdam.
Mark Steedman. 2000. The Syntactic Process. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
K. Sto?ber, P. Wagner, Jo?rg Helbig, S. Ko?ster, D. Stall,
M. Thomas, J. Blauert, W. Hess, R. Hoffmann, and
H. Mangold. 2000. Speech synthesis using multi-
level selection and concatenation of units from large
speech corpora. In W. Wahlster, editor, Verbmobil:
Foundations of Speech-to-Speech Translation, pages
519?534. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Michael Strube. 1998. Never look back: An alterna-
tive to centering. In Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 1251?1257, Montre?al,
Que?bec, Canada.
Olga Uryupina. 2003. High-precision identification of
discourse new and unique noun phrases. In Proc. of
the ACL 2003 Student Workshop, pages 80?86.
Enric Vallduv??. 1992. The Informational Component.
Garland, New York.
Renata Vieira and Massimo Poesio. 2000. An
empirically-based system for processing definite de-
scriptions. Computational Linguistics, 26(4).
Thomas Wasow. 2002. Postverbal Behavior. CSLI
Publications.
Ian H. Witten and Eibe Frank. 2000. Data Mining:
Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques
with Java Implementations. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Diego, CA.
102
