Proceedings of the Third ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions, pages 45?50,
Trento, Italy, April 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Ontology-Based View on Prepositional Senses
Tine Lassen
Roskilde University
Denmark
tlassen@ruc.dk
Abstract
This paper describes ongoing work, aimed
at producing a lexicon of prepositions, i.e.
relations denoted by prepositions, to be
used for information retrieval purposes.
The work is ontology based, which for this
project means that the ontological types of
the arguments of the preposition are con-
sidered, rather than the word forms. Thus,
sense distinctions are made based on onto-
logical constraints on the arguments.
1 Introduction
In traditional web search engines, information re-
trieval relies more or less exclusively on sim-
ple string match. In the OntoQuery project1,
ontology-based search in text databases is per-
formed based on a match between the concep-
tual content of the search phrase and the text seg-
ments in the database.(Andreasen et al, 2002; An-
dreasen et al, 2004). In short, concepts are identi-
fied through their corresponding surface form and
mapped into an ontology. The use of an ontology
makes it possible to introduce the notion of con-
ceptual distance and thereby ranking the search re-
sult by semantic similarity. E.g. ?pony? and ?ze-
bra? may be more similar concepts than ?pony?
and ?lion?, because the distance when traversing
a graph representation of the ontology is longer
going from ?pony? to ?lion? than from ?pony? to
?zebra?. See figure 1 for a simplified excerpt of
the ontology.
However, only relatively simple noun phrases
are currently recognized and mapped into the on-
tology, and we are thus investigating the possibil-
ities of expanding the scope of our concept-based
1http://www.ontoquery.dk
Figure 1: Excerpt from the ontology with the con-
cepts ?horse? and ?cat?
analysis by including the semantic relations that
hold between noun phrases. Our first experiments
in this have been an analysis of prepositions and
their surrounding noun phrases. The immediate
aim is to be able to include a lexicon of preposi-
tions, consisting of a lexicon entry for each sense
of a given preposition (a sense, in this context, is
a relation that it can denote). Each entry has an
argument structure and ontological constraints on
the arguments. Thus, a preposition in a given con-
text will be assigned a pertinent sense based on the
ontological types of its surrounding noun phrases.
If this can be achieved, we will be able to say, e.g.,
that the text segments ?she is riding her pony in the
morning? and ?he was riding a pony during the
war? are more closely related, i.e. the relational
distance is smaller, than any of the two to ?she
was riding her pony in the hall?. The relations that
hold between ?pony? and ?morning?, and ?pony?
and ?war?, denoted by in and during respectively,
are of a temporal nature, whereas the relation that
holds between ?pony? and ?hall?, denoted by in, is
of a locative nature. The notion of relational dis-
tance is similar to that of conceptual distance; the
distance when traversing a graph representation of
the relation ontology. A combined measure, that
takes into account both the conceptual and rela-
45
tional distance would have to be introduced in or-
der to express the combined distance between such
more complex structures (structures that are more
complex than the simple noun phrases, that is), but
this question is beyond the scope of this paper2.
Initially, we use a predefined set of relations that
was originally proposed in (Nilsson, 2001) (see
table 1). This set is hierarchically unstructured,
which means that per default, the conceptual dis-
tance between any given two pairs of relations is
the same. We will later introduce an ontology of
relations, which will make it possible to express
that the distance between e.g. the partitive and the
locative relation is smaller than the distance be-
tween the locative and the causal relation (see sec-
tion 4.1).
2 Approach
We are using a bottom-up approach, in which we
manually annotate a corpus3 with semantic rela-
tions for all occurences of prepositions that are
surrounded by noun phrases. Further we anno-
tate the heads of the surrounding noun phrases
with their ontological type and subsequently an-
alyze the result in order to produce ontological
constraint rules. The ontology that was used for
the ontological type annotation, is the SIMPLE top
ontology (Pedersen, 1999; Lenci et al, 2000).
Relations exist between the entities referred to in
discourse, and can exist at different syntactic lev-
els; across sentence boundaries as in Peter owns
a pony. It is stubborn , or whithin a sentence, a
phrase or a word. The relations can be denoted by
different parts of speech, such as a verb, a prepo-
sition or an adjective, or they can be implicitly
present in compounds and genitive constructions
as in Peter?s pony.
The following account is based on the work of
(Jensen and Nilsson, 2006): Semantic relations are
n-ary (where n?1): In the example Peter owns a
pony the verb ?owns? denotes a binary relation be-
tween Peter and a pony, and in example Peter gave
the pony a carrot, the verb ?give? denotes a ternary
relation between Peter, the pony and a carrot. In
the example The pony in the field the preposition
?in? denotes a binary relation between the pony
2For a discussion of a distance measure between noun
phrases, see e.g. (Bulskov and Andreasen, 2004) or (Knappe
and Andreasen, 2002)
3The corpus is a small corpus of approximately 18,500
running words has been compiled from texts from the domain
of nutrition.
and the field. In the framework of this project,
however, we will only consider binary relations
denoted by prepositions. Using the algebraic de-
scription language OntoLog (Nilsson, 2001), we
express binary relations as A[REL:B], where the
first argument of the relation, A, relates to the sec-
ond argument, B, in the manner REL.
A preposition, however, can be ambiguous in re-
gard to which relation it denotes (we assume a re-
stricted set of possible relations for prepositions,
see table 1). As an example, let us consider the
Danish preposition i (Eng: in): The surface form i
in ?A i B? can denote at least five different relations
between A and B:
1. A patient relation PNT; a relation where one of the ar-
guments? case role is patient, e.g. ??ndringer i stof-
skiftet? (changes in the metabolism).
2. A locational relation LOC; a relation that denotes the
location/position of one of the arguments compared to
the other argument, e.g. ?skader i hjertemuskulaturen?
(injuries in the heart muscle).
3. A temporal relation TMP; a relation that denotes the
placement in time of one of the arguments compared
to the other, e.g. ?generalforsamlingen i 1981? (the
general assembly in 1981).
4. A property ascription relation CHR; a relation that de-
notes a characterization relation between one of the ar-
guments and a property, e.g. ?antioxidanter i renfrem-
stillet form? (antioxidants in a pure form)
5. A ?with respect to? relation WRT; an underspecified re-
lation that denotes an ?aboutness? relation between the
arguments, e.g. ?forskelle i saltindtagelsen? (differ-
ences in the salt intake) .
Role Description
TMP Temporal aspects
LOC Location, position
PRP Purpose, function
WRT With respect to
CHR Characteristic (property ascription)
CUM Cum (i.e., with, accompanying)
CBY Caused by
CAU Causes
BMO By means of, instrument, via
CMP Comprising, has part
POF Part of
AGT Agent of act or process
PNT Patient of act or process
SRC Source of act or process
RST Result of act or process
DST Destination of moving process
Table 1: The set of possible relations used in the
annotation process (Nilsson, 2001)
46
3 Results
Following the initial annotation, we performed an
analysis of all occurences of the relations and the
ontological types of their arguments. Could we
identify patterns that could result in lexical rules
for the lexicon? The limited space here does not
allow us to show the full results of the analysis,
so we will focus on one preposition, the Danish
preposition i (Eng: in) and later focus on one
relation type denoted by that preposition, namely
the locative relation. There are 199 occurences of
the preposition i in the corpus, and the relations
that it denotes are distributed as follows:
LOC (137/199 : 68,8%)
WRT (25/199 : 12,5%)
TMP (17/199 : 8,5%)
PNT (11/199 : 5.5%)
CHR (9/199 : 4,5%)
If we look at the LOC relation, which is the
most frequent relation denoted by i in the corpus,
we get this distribution of ontological types for the
arguments: Of the 137 instances of i denoting a
locative relation, there are 57 different ontological
type-pairs, if we consider unique occurences of a
given onlogical type-pair (a pair, meaning the on-
tological types of the two arguments combined),
31 different first arguments, and 16 different sec-
ond arguments. The most significant ontological
type for arguments is the type ?body part? (BPA),
which occurs 10 times as first argument, and 66
times as second argument. However, in total, the
type occurs 119 times (13 times as first argument
and 106 times as second argument) in the corpus
as a whole. If we were to implement a rule that
would assign the relation LOC to any preposition
that has the ontological type ?body part? as any ar-
gument, we would get a precision4 score of 68.9.,
a higher score of 92.3 if we only consider the first
argument, and 66 if we only consider the second
argument.
However, if we limit the rule to assign the relation
LOC only to occcurences of the preposition i, with
arguments of the type BPA, then we get a precision
score of 100. This sounds promising, but it should
be noted that the coverage of the best rule ?IF any
argument is BPA AND preposition is ?i? THEN as-
4Precision = number of correct matches / number of
matches
sign LOC to preposition? is quite low: the recall5
score for the rule is 55.8, which means that we can
correctly assign a relation to 55.8% of the LOC
senses of the preposition i, and these only make
up 68.8% of the total number of i-occurences. In
fact, we can only correctly assign the LOC rela-
tion to 38.7% of the actual relations denoted by i
in the corpus using this rule. Only if we can pro-
duce more rules of this type with high precision
scores, we can be optimistic about the outcome of
the project.
Rule Precision Recall
IF any argument is BPA
THEN assign LOC to preposition 68.9 56.5
IF first argument is BPA
THEN assign LOC to preposition 92.3 8.3
IF second argument is BPA
THEN assign LOC to preposition 66 48.3
IF any argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC to preposition 100 55.8
IF first argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC to preposition 100 7.2
IF second argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC to preposition 100 48.6
Table 2: Precision and recall scores for rules that
assign the LOC relation to prepositions with a
BPA constraint on the ontological type of argu-
ments
4 Suggestions to improve the results
In the following, we propose a way of improving
the results by introducing a relation ontology, and
further, by either generalizing or specializing the
ontological type level for the arguments. Our
hypothesis is that by doing this, we will end
up with rules that have broader coverage. By
coverage, we mean the number of occurences
that the rule applies to, compared to the number
of occurences that potentially could be covered
by the rule.If the relations are too general, then
we miss out on some of the semantic content of
the relation between the items that we consider,
and we want to capture as much semantics as we
can. On the other hand, in some cases it may be
that we have made distinctions in the relation set
that are not detectable when analyzing the data.
Also, if the ontological type distribution for the
5Recall = number of correct matches / ideal number of
matches
47
arguments is too coarse or too fine grained, the
patterns that appear when we analyze the data,
will not be general enough to produce rules from.
4.1 The relation ontology
The flat list of possible relations, as can be seen
in table 1, that we initially used, now has to be
transformed into a relation ontology. Our heuris-
tics for doing this, in short, is to group relations
that are more closely related than others in sub-
branches, such that the distance between them is
shorter than the distance to other less closely re-
lated relations. In figure 2, the intralocal and ex-
tralocal relations are more closely related than e.g.
the intralocal and dynamic relation, because the
distance when traversing the graph is two archs for
the former, and three arcs for the latter. One way
of deciding relatedness, is to say that if two rela-
tions have proven difficult to differentiate in the
initial annotation process, then they are probably
more closely related. This is the approach we have
chosen. Also, we have grouped together other re-
lations, such as the bidirective relations ?part of?
and ?has parts?, and ?causes? and ?caused by?, and
other relations that naturally group together, such
as the theta roles ?agent?-?patient? and ?source?-
?result?.
A possible next step is to specialize the rela-
tions that can be specialized. The relations that
intuitively make sense to specialize are the tem-
poral (as has been done in OWL-Time ontology
(formerly DAML-Time) (Hobbs and Pan, 2004)),
partitive (Winston and Hermann, 1987) and spa-
tial/local relations (e.g. DOLCE Spatialrel ontol-
ogy)6.
Our work with specialisations of the relation
ontology, particularly the local relations, is largely
inspired by Pustejovsky?s work on event struc-
tures (Pustejovsky, 1996). Pustejovsky suggests a
subdivision of complex events into subevents.
However, another way of expressing the dif-
ference between events with one or more
subevents is, as we will do in the following,
static and dynamic relations: static relations only
consist of one subevent, and dynamic relations
have more than one subevent.
? A dynamic locative relation is a com-
plex event, that consists of more than one
6http://www.loa-cnr.it/Files/DLPOnts/SpatialRel 397.owl
Figure 2: Illustration of static locative relations
subevent, and it denotes a source or a goal of
a process, or a place where a process unfolds.
? A static locative relation consists of just one
subevent, and it denotes ?being located at?.
Another type of specialisation of the locative re-
lation could be a subdivision into relations con-
cerning area, region, distance, etc. (as it has been
done in DOLCE), but the aforementioned static
and dynamic locative relations appears to be more
appropriate when the subject is relations denoted
by prepositions.
As a possible further specialisation of dynamic
and static relations we suggest:
? Intralocal: an intralocal relation denotes a
goal of a process (e.g. into the box), or a
location within a delimited area.
? Extralocal: an extralocal relation denotes a
point of departure of a process (e.g. out of
the box), or a location outside or touching
the outer limitation of a delimited area.
? Translocal: a translocal relation denotes a
location or a process through a delimited
area (e.g. through the box).
48
Figure 4: Excerpt of the relation ontology containing the locative relations
Figure 3: Illustration of dynamic locative relations
We now reannotate the locative relations ac-
cording to these new subtypes of the locative re-
lation; but conforming to the bottom-up approach,
we initially only subdivide into static and dynamic
locative relations. Can we observe a clearer pat-
tern with respect to the ontological types of the
arguments, if we do this? If so, then we try a more
fine grained subdivision.
The results of the LOC dynamic and LOC static
subdivision show that of the original 137 instances
of i that denote a locative relation, 33 denote a
LOC dynamic relation, and 104 denote a LOC
static relation. The patterns that we observe, are
actually clearer: for all, but one, of the dynamic
relations the first arguments denote some kind of
process or event, whereas the second arguments
are all more or less specialized types of concrete
entity. The most prevalent ontological type for the
static local relation is ?natural substance?, which
occurs 50 times. For the dynamic local relation,
the most prevalent relation for the first argument is
?change?, which occurs 17 times. The most preva-
lent second argument is again ?body part?, which
also occurs 17 times. If we now calculate preci-
sion and recall for rules that constrain arguments
of the static and dynamic locative relations to the
most prevalent ones, we get the results shown in
tables 3 and 4. However, we only calculate scores
for rules constraining the first argument, and only
for the preposition i, because only part of the cor-
pus has been annotated with these relations.
The precision score for the best rule is lower
than for the original LOC-rules (92.1 compared
to 100). However, considering that we capture
more semantics, and the fact that the arguments of
the static and dynamic locative relations are more
49
Rule Precision Recall
IF any argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC>static to preposition 64.1 48.1
IF first argument is NSU
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC>static to preposition 92.1 33.7
IF second argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC>static to preposition 68.7 47.1
Table 3: Precision and recall scores for the rule
that assign the LOC>static relation to the preposi-
tion i with constraints on the ontological types the
arguments
Rule Precision Recall
IF first argument is CHA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC>dynamic to preposition 58.6 51.5
IF second argument is BPA
AND preposition is ?i?
THEN assign LOC>dynamic to preposition 25.4 51.5
Table 4: Precision and recall scores for the rule
that assign the LOC>dynamic relation to the
preposition i with constraints on the ontological
type of the first and second argument
uniform in their distribution, this indicates that a
generalisation of the ontological types of the ar-
guments will result in even better rules, i.e. rules
with a larger coverage.
5 Conclusion and further work
Our aim is to show that ontological types can be
used as constraints in a lexicon of semantic rela-
tions denoted by prepositions. In this paper we
have presented our preliminary results, that are
based on an analysis of a Danish corpus, com-
piled of texts from the domain of nutrition. We
have introduced an ontology of relations, which
will make it possible to measure relational dis-
tance between complex structures in addition to
the conceptual distance that we can measure be-
tween concepts. The results are promising: We
can produce rules that have good precision scores
for the locative relation, and we expect to improve
the rules by generalizing the ontological types of
the prepositional arguments. Also, we plan to ex-
pand our research to cover other relations than the
ones treated in this paper.
6 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Troels Andreasen, Per
Anker Jensen and three anonymous reviewers for
fruitful comments and suggestions.
References
Troels Andreasen, Per Anker Jensen, J?rgen Fischer
Nilsson, Patrizia Paggio, Bolette Sandford Pedersen,
and Hanne Erdman Thomsen. 2002. Ontological
extraction of content for text querying. In Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, volume 2553, pages 123
? 136. Springer-Verlag.
Troels Andreasen, Per Anker Jensen, J?rgen Fischer
Nilsson, Patrizia Paggio, Bolette Sandford Pedersen,
and Hanne Erdman Thomsen. 2004. Content-based
text querying with ontological descriptors. Data &
Knowledge Engineering, 48(2):199?219.
R. Knappe H. Bulskov and T. Andreasen. 2004. Per-
spectives on ontology-based querying. Interna-
tional Journal of Intelligent Systems, to appear.
Jerry R. Hobbs and Feng Pan. 2004. An ontology of
time for the semantic web. ACM Trans. Asian Lang.
Inf. Process., 3(1):66?85.
Per Anker Jensen and J?rgen Fischer Nilsson, 2006.
Syntax and Semantics of Prepositions, volume 29
of Text, Speech and Language Technology, chap-
ter Ontology-Based Semantics for Prepositions.
Springer.
H. Bulskov R. Knappe and T. Andreasen, 2002. Flex-
ible Query Answering Systems, chapter On Measur-
ing Similarity for Conceptual Querying, pages pp.
100?111. Number 2522 in Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence.
Alessandro Lenci, Nuria Bel, Federica Busa, Nico-
letta Calzolari1, Elisabetta Gola, Monica Mona-
chini, Antoine Ogonowski, Ivonne Peters, Wim Pe-
ters, Nilda Ruimy, Marta Villegas, and Antonio
Zampolli. 2000. Simple: A general framework for
the development of multilingual lexicons. Interna-
tional Journal of Lexicography, 13(4):249?263.
J?rgen Fischer Nilsson. 2001. A logico-algebraic
framework for ontologies, ontolog. In Jensen and
Skadhauge, editors, Proceedings of the First Inter-
national OntoQuery Workshop Ontology-based in-
terpretation of NP?s. University of Southern Den-
mark, Kolding.
Bolette Sandford Pedersen. 1999. Den danske simple-
ordbog. en semantisk, ontologibaseret ordbog. In
C. Poulsen, editor, DALF 99, Datalingvistisk Foren-
ings a?rsm?de 1999. Center for sprogteknologi.
James Pustejovsky. 1996. The generative lexicon.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Roger Winston, Morton E. Chaffin and Douglas Her-
mann. 1987. A taxonomy of part-whole relations.
Cognitive Science, 11:417?444.
50
