Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora 2006, pages 54?61,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Manual Annotation of Opinion Categories in Meetings  
 
 
Swapna Somasundaran1,    Janyce Wiebe1,    Paul Hoffmann2,    Diane Litman1 
            1Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
                          2Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260 
{swapna,wiebe,hoffmanp,litman}@cs.pitt.edu 
 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper applies the categories from an 
opinion annotation scheme developed for 
monologue text to the genre of multiparty 
meetings. We describe modifications to 
the coding guidelines that were required 
to extend the categories to the new type 
of data, and present the results of an in-
ter-annotator agreement study. As re-
searchers have found with other types of 
annotations in speech data, inter-
annotator agreement is higher when the 
annotators both read and listen to the data 
than when they only read the transcripts.   
Previous work exploited prosodic clues 
to perform automatic detection of speaker 
emotion (Liscombe et al 2003). Our 
findings suggest that doing so to recog-
nize opinion categories would be a prom-
ising line of work. 
1 Introduction 
Subjectivity refers to aspects of language that 
express opinions, beliefs, evaluations and specu-
lations (Wiebe et al 2005).  Many natural lan-
guage processing applications could benefit from 
being able to distinguish between facts and opin-
ions of various types, including speech-oriented 
applications such as meeting browsers, meeting 
summarizers, and speech-oriented question an-
swering (QA) systems. Meeting browsers could 
find instances in meetings where opinions about 
key topics are expressed. Summarizers could in-
clude strong arguments for and against issues, to 
make the final outcome of the meeting more un-
derstandable.  A preliminary user survey 
(Lisowska 2003) showed that users would like to 
be able to query meeting records with subjective 
questions like ?Show me the conflicts of opin-
ions between X and Y? , ?Who made the highest 
number of positive/negative comments? and 
?Give me all the contributions of participant X in 
favor of alternative A regarding the issue I.?  A 
QA system with a component to recognize opin-
ions would be able to help find answers to such 
questions. 
Consider the following example from a meet-
ing about an investment firm choosing which car 
to buy1. (In the examples, the words and phrases 
describing or expressing the opinion are under-
lined): 
(1)2 OCK: Revenues of less 
than a million and losses of 
like five million you know 
that's pathetic 
Here, the speaker, OCK, shows his strong nega-
tive evaluation by using the expression ?That?s 
pathetic.? 
(2) OCK: No it might just be 
a piece of junk cheap piece 
of junk that's not a good 
investment 
In (2), the speaker uses the term ?just a piece of 
junk? to express his negative evaluation and uses 
this to argue for his belief that it is ?not a good 
investment.? 
(3) OCK: Yeah I think that's 
the wrong image for an in-
vestment bank he wants sta-
bility and s safety and you 
don't want flashy like zip-
                                                 
1 Throughout this paper we take examples from a meeting 
where a group of people are deciding on a new car for an 
investment bank. The management wants to attract younger 
investors with a sporty car.  
2 We have presented the examples the way they were ut-
tered by the speaker. Hence they may show many false 
starts and repetitions. Capitalization was added to improve 
readability. 
54
ping around the corner kind 
of thing you know 
The example above shows that the speaker has a 
negative judgment towards the suggestion of a 
sports car (that was made in the previous turn) 
which is indicated by the words ?wrong image.? 
The speaker then goes on to positively argue for 
what he wants. He further argues against the cur-
rent suggestion by using more negative terms 
like ?flashy? and ?zipping around the corner.? 
The speaker believes that ?zipping around the 
corner? is bad as it would give a wrong impres-
sion of the bank to the customers. In the absence 
of such analyses, the decision making process 
and rationale behind the outcomes of meetings, 
which form an important part of the organiza-
tion?s memory, might remain unavailable. 
In this paper, we perform annotation of a 
meeting corpus to lay the foundation for research 
on opinion detection in speech. We show how 
categories from an opinion (subjectivity) annota-
tion scheme, which was developed for news arti-
cles, can be applied to the genre of multi-party 
meetings. The new genre poses challenges as it is 
significantly different from the text domain, 
where opinion analysis has traditionally been 
applied. Specifically, differences arise because:  
1) There are many participants interacting with 
one another, each expressing his or her own 
opinion, and eliciting reactions in the process. 
2) Social interactions may constrain how openly 
people express their opinions; i.e., they are often 
indirect in their negative evaluations. 
We also  explore the influence of speech on hu-
man perception of opinions.  
Specifically, we annotated some meeting data 
with the opinion categories Sentiment and Argu-
ing as defined in Wilson and Wiebe (2005). In 
our annotation we first distinguish whether a 
Sentiment or Arguing is being expressed. If one 
is, we then mark the polarity (i.e., positive or 
negative) and the intensity (i.e., how strong the 
opinion is). Annotating the individual opinion 
expressions is useful in this genre, because we 
see many utterances that have more than one 
type of opinion (e.g. (3) above). To investigate 
how opinions are expressed in speech, we divide 
our annotation into two tasks, one in which the 
annotator only reads the raw text, and the other 
in which the annotator reads the raw text and also 
listens to the speech. We measure inter-annotator 
agreement for both tasks.  
We found that the opinion categories apply 
well to the multi-party meeting data, although 
there is some room for improvement: the Kappa 
values range from 0.32 to 0.69.  As has been 
found for other types of annotations in speech, 
agreement is higher when the annotators both 
read and listen to the data than when they only 
read the transcripts. Interestingly, the advantages 
are more dramatic for some categories than oth-
ers.  And, in both conditions, agreement is higher 
for the positive than for the negative categories.  
We discuss possible reasons for these disparities. 
Prosodic clues have been exploited to perform 
automatic detection of speaker emotion (Lis-
combe et al 2003).  Our findings suggest that 
doing so to recognize opinion categories is a 
promising line of work.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
In Section 2 we discuss the data and the annota-
tion scheme and present examples. We then pre-
sent our inter-annotator agreement results in Sec-
tion 3, and in Section 4 we discuss issues and 
observations. Related work is described in Sec-
tion 5. Conclusions and Future Work are pre-
sented in Section 6. 
2 Annotation  
2.1 Data 
The data is from the ISL meeting corpus (Bur-
ger et al 2002).  We chose task oriented meet-
ings from the games/scenario and discussion 
genres, as we felt they would be closest to the 
applications for which the opinion analysis will 
be useful. The ISL speech is accompanied by 
rich transcriptions, which are tagged according to 
VERBMOBIL conventions. However, since real-
time applications only have access to ASR out-
put, we gave the annotators raw text, from which 
all VERBMOBIL tags, punctuation, and capitali-
zations were removed.  
In order to see how annotations would be af-
fected by the presence or absence of speech, we 
divided each raw text document into 2 segments. 
One part was annotated while reading the raw 
text only. For the annotation of the other part, 
speech as well as the raw text was provided.   
2.2 Opinion Category Definitions  
We base our annotation definitions on the 
scheme developed by Wiebe et al (2005) for 
news articles. That scheme centers on the notion 
of subjectivity, the linguistic expression of pri-
vate states. Private states are internal mental 
states that cannot be objectively observed or veri-
fied (Quirk et al 1985) and include opinions, 
beliefs, judgments, evaluations, thoughts, and 
feelings. Amongst these many forms of subjec-
55
tivity, we focus on the Sentiment and Arguing 
categories proposed by Wilson and Wiebe 
(2005). The categories are broken down by po-
larity and defined as follows:  
Positive Sentiments: positive emotions, 
evaluations, judgments and stances. 
(4) TBC: Well ca How about 
one of the the newer Cadil-
lac the Lexus is good 
In (4), taken from the discussion of which car to 
buy, the speaker uses the term ?good? to express 
his positive evaluation of the Lexus . 
Negative Sentiments: negative emotions, 
evaluations, judgments and stances. 
(5) OCK: I think these are 
all really bad choices 
In (5), the speaker expresses his negative evalua-
tion of the choices for the company car. Note that 
?really? makes the evaluation more intense.  
Positive Arguing:  arguing for something, ar-
guing that something is true or is so, arguing that 
something did happen or will happen, etc. 
(6) ZDN: Yeah definitely 
moon roof  
In (6), the speaker is arguing that whatever car 
they get should have a moon roof. 
Negative Arguing: arguing against some-
thing, arguing that something is not true or is not 
so, arguing that something did not happen or will 
not happen, etc. 
(7) OCK: Like a Lexus or 
perhaps a Stretch Lexus 
something like that but that 
might be too a little too 
luxurious 
In the above example, the speaker is using the 
term ?a little too luxurious? to argue against a 
Lexus for the car choice.  
In an initial tagging experiment, we applied 
the above definitions, without modification, to 
some sample meeting data. The definitions cov-
ered much of the arguing and sentiment we ob-
served. However, we felt that some cases of Ar-
guing that are more prevalent in meeting than in 
news data needed to be highlighted more, namely 
Arguing opinions that are implicit or that under-
lie what is explicitly said. Thus we add the fol-
lowing to the arguing definitions. 
Positive Arguing: expressing support for or 
backing the acceptance of an object, viewpoint, 
idea or stance by providing reasoning, justifica-
tions, judgment, evaluations or beliefs. This sup-
port or backing may be explicit or implicit. 
(8) MHJ: That's That's why I 
wanna What about the the 
child safety locks I think I 
think that would be a good 
thing because if our custom-
ers happen to have children  
Example (8) is marked as both Positive Arguing 
and Positive Sentiment. The more explicit one is 
the Positive Sentiment that the locks are good. 
The underlying Argument is that the company 
car they choose should have child safety locks. 
Negative Arguing: expressing lack of support 
for or attacking the acceptance of an object, 
viewpoint, idea or stance by providing reasoning, 
justifications, judgment, evaluations or beliefs. 
This may be explicit or implicit. 
(9) OCK: Town Car But it's a 
little a It's a little like 
your grandf Yeah your grand-
father would drive that 
Example (9) is explicitly stating who would drive 
a Town Car, while implicitly arguing against 
choosing the Town Car (as they want younger 
investors). 
2.3 Annotation Guidelines 
Due to genre differences, we also needed to 
modify the annotation guidelines. For each Argu-
ing or Sentiment the annotator perceives, he or 
she identifies the words or phrases used to ex-
press it (the text span), and then creates an anno-
tation consisting of the following. 
? Opinion Category and Polarity 
? Opinion Intensity 
? Annotator Certainty 
Opinion Category and Polarity: These are 
defined in the previous sub-section. Note that the 
target of an opinion is what the opinion is about. 
For example, the target of ?John loves baseball? 
is baseball.   An opinion may or may not have a 
separate target.  For example, ?want stability? in 
?We want stability? denotes a Positive Senti-
ment, and there is no separate target.  In contrast, 
?good? in ?The Lexus is good? expresses a Posi-
tive Sentiment and there is a separate target, 
namely the Lexus. 
In addition to Sentiments toward a topic of 
discussion, we also mark Sentiments toward 
other team members (e.g. ?Man you guys 
are so limited?). We do not mark 
agreements or disagreements as Sentiments, as 
these are different dialog acts (though they some-
times co-occur with Sentiments and Arguing).  
Intensity: We use a slightly modified version 
of Craggs and Wood's (2004) emotion intensity 
56
annotation scheme. According to that scheme, 
there are 5 levels of intensity. Level ?0? denotes 
a lack of the emotion (Sentiment or Arguing in 
our case), ?1? denotes traces of emotion, ?2? de-
notes a low level of emotion, ?3? denotes a clear 
expression while ?4? denotes a strong expres-
sion. Our intensity levels mean the same, but we 
do not mark intensity level 0 as this level implies 
the absence of opinion. 
If a turn has multiple, separate expressions 
marked with the same opinion tag (category and 
polarity), and all expressions refer to the same 
target, then the annotators merge all the expres-
sions into a larger text span, including the sepa-
rating text in between the  expressions. This re-
sulting text span has the same opinion tag as its 
constituents, and it has an intensity that is greater 
than or equal to the highest intensity of the con-
stituent expressions that were merged. 
Annotator Certainty: The annotators use this 
tag if they are not sure that a given opinion is 
present, or if, given the context, there are multi-
ple possible interpretations of the utterance and 
the annotator is not sure which interpretation is 
correct. This attribute is distinct from the Inten-
sity attribute, because the Intensity attribute indi-
cates the strength of the opinion, while the Anno-
tator Certainty attribute indicates whether the 
annotator is sure about a given tag (whatever the 
intensity is). 
2.4 Examples 
We conclude this section with some examples 
of annotations from our corpus.  
(10) OCK: So Lexun had reve-
nues of a hundred and fifty 
million last year and prof-
its of like six million.  
That's pretty good 
Annotation: Text span=That's 
pretty good Cate-
gory=Positive Sentiment In-
tensity=3 Annotator Cer-
tainty=Certain  
The annotator marked the text span ?That?s 
pretty good? as Positive Sentiment because this 
this expression is used by OCK to show his fa-
vorable judgment towards the company reve-
nues. The intensity is 3, as it is a clear expression 
of Sentiment.  
(11) OCK: No it might just 
be a piece of junk Cheap 
piece of junk that?s not a 
good investment 
Annotation1: Text span=it 
might just be a piece of 
junk Cheap piece of junk 
that?s not a good investment 
Category=Negative Sentiment 
Intensity=4 Annotator Cer-
tainty=Certain 
Annotation2: Text span=Cheap 
piece of junk that?s not a 
good investment Category 
=Negative Arguing Inten-
sity=3 Annotator Certainty 
=Certain  
In the above example, there are multiple expres-
sions of opinions. In Annotation1, the expres-
sions ?it might just be a piece of junk?, ?cheap 
piece of junk? and ?not a good investment? ex-
press negative evaluations towards the car choice 
(suggested by another participant in a previous 
turn). Each of these expressions is a clear case of 
Negative Sentiment (Intensity=3). As they are all 
of the same category and polarity and towards 
the same target, they have been merged by the 
annotator into one long expression of Inten-
sity=4. In Annotation2, the sub-expression 
?cheap piece of junk that is not a good invest-
ment? is also used by the speaker OCK to argue 
against the car choice. Hence the annotator has 
marked this as Negative Arguing.  
3 Guideline Development and Inter-
Annotator Agreement 
3.1 Annotator Training 
Two annotators (both co-authors) underwent 
three rounds of tagging. After each round, dis-
crepancies were discussed, and the guidelines 
were modified to reflect the resolved ambiguities. 
A total of 1266 utterances belonging to sections 
of four meetings (two of the discussion genre and 
two of the game genre) were used in this phase. 
3.2 Agreement  
The unit for which agreement was calculated 
was the turn. The ISL transcript provides demar-
cation of speaker turns along with the speaker ID. 
If an expression is marked in a turn, the turn is 
assigned the label of that expression. If there are 
multiple expressions marked within a turn with 
different category tags, the turn is assigned all 
those categories. This does not pose a problem 
for our evaluation, as we evaluate each category 
separately. 
A previously unseen section of a meeting con-
taining 639 utterances was selected and divided 
57
into 2 segments. One part of 319 utterances was 
annotated using raw text as the only signal, and 
the remaining 320 utterances were annotated us-
ing text and speech. Cohen?s Kappa (1960) was 
used to calculate inter-annotator agreement. We 
calculated inter-annotator agreement for both 
conditions: raw-text-only and raw-text+speech. 
This was done for each of the categories: Posi-
tive Sentiment, Positive Arguing, Negative Sen-
timent, and Negative Arguing. To evaluate a 
category, we did the following:  
? For each turn, if both annotators tagged 
the turn with the given category, or both 
did not tag the turn with the category, then 
it is a match.  
? Otherwise it is a mismatch 
Table 1 shows the inter-annotator Kappa val-
ues on the test set. 
 
Agreement (Kappa) Raw Text only 
Raw Text 
+ Speech 
Positive Arguing 0.54 0.60 
Negative Arguing 0.32 0.65 
Positive Sentiment 0.57 0.69 
Negative Sentiment 0.41 0.61 
Table 1 Inter-annotator agreement on different 
categories. 
 
With raw-text-only annotation, the Kappa 
value is in the moderate range according to 
Landis and Koch (1977), except for Negative 
Arguing for which it is 0.32. Positive Arguing 
and Positive Sentiment were more reliably de-
tected than Negative Arguing and Negative Sen-
timent. We believe this is because participants 
were more comfortable with directly expressing 
their positive sentiments in front of other partici-
pants.  Given only the raw text data, inter-
annotator reliability measures for Negative Argu-
ing and Negative Sentiment are the lowest. We 
believe this might be due to the fact that partici-
pants in social interactions are not very forthright 
with their Negative Sentiments and Arguing. 
Negative Sentiments and Arguing towards some-
thing may be expressed by saying that something 
else is better. For example, consider the follow-
ing response of one participant to another par-
ticipant?s suggestion of aluminum wheels for the 
company car 
(12) ZDN: Yeah see what kind 
of wheels you know they have 
to look dignified to go with 
the car 
The above example was marked as Negative Ar-
guing by one annotator (i.e., they should not get 
aluminum wheels) while the other annotator did 
not mark it at all. The implied Negative Arguing 
toward getting aluminum wheels can be inferred 
from the statement that the wheels should look 
dignified. However the annotators were not sure, 
as the participant chose to focus on what is desir-
able (i.e., dignified wheels). This utterance is 
actually both a general statement of what is de-
sirable, and an implication that aluminum wheels 
are not dignified. But this may be difficult to as-
certain with the raw text signal only.  
When the annotators had speech to guide their 
judgments, the Kappa values go up significantly 
for each category. All the agreement numbers for 
raw text+speech are in the substantial range ac-
cording to Landis and Koch (1977). We observe 
that with speech, Kappa for Negative Arguing 
has doubled over the Kappa obtained without 
speech. The Kappa for Negative Sentiment 
(text+speech) shows a 1.5 times improvement 
over the one with only raw text. Both these ob-
servations indicate that speech is able to help the 
annotators tag negativity more reliably. It is quite 
likely that a seemingly neutral sentence could 
sound negative, depending on the way words are 
stressed or pauses are inserted. Comparing the 
agreement on Positive Sentiment, we get a 1.2 
times improvement by using speech. Similarly, 
agreement improves by 1.1 times for Positive 
Arguing when speech is used. The improvement 
with speech for the Positive categories is not as 
high as compared to negative categories, which 
conforms to our belief that people are more 
forthcoming about their positive judgments, 
evaluations, and beliefs.  
In order to test if the turns where annotators 
were uncertain were the places that caused mis-
match, we calculated the Kappa with the annota-
tor-uncertain cases removed. The corresponding 
Kappa values are shown in Table 2 
 
Agreement ( Kappa) Raw Text only 
Raw Text 
+ Speech 
Positive Arguing 0.52 0.63 
Negative Arguing 0.36 0.63 
Positive Sentiment 0.60 0.73 
Negative Sentiment 0.50 0.61 
Table-2 Inter-annotator agreement on different 
categories, Annotator Uncertain cases removed. 
 
The trends observed in Table 1 are seen in Ta-
ble 2 as well, namely annotation reliability im-
proving with speech. Comparing Tables 1 and 2, 
58
we see that for the raw text, the inter-annotator 
agreement goes up by 0.04 points for Negative 
Arguing and goes up by 0.09 points for Negative 
Sentiment. However, the agreement for Negative 
Arguing and Negative Sentiment on raw-text+ 
speech between Tables 1 and 2 remains almost 
the same. We believe this is  because we had 
20% fewer Annotator Uncertainty tags in the 
raw-text+speech annotation as compared to raw-
text-only, thus indicating that some types of un-
certainties seen in raw-text-only were resolved in 
the raw-text+speech due to the speech input. The 
remaining cases of Annotator Uncertainty could 
have been due to other factors, as discussed in 
the next section 
Table 3 shows Kappa with the low intensity 
tags removed. The hypothesis was that low in-
tensity might be borderline cases, and that re-
moving these might increase inter-annotator reli-
ability.  
 
Agreement ( Kappa) Raw Text only 
Raw Text 
+ Speech 
Positive Arguing 0.53 0.66 
Negative Arguing 0.26 0.65 
Positive Sentiment 0.65 0.74 
Negative Sentiment 0.45 0.59 
Table-3 Inter-annotator agreement on different 
categories, Intensity 1, 2 removed. 
 
Comparing Tables 1 and 3 (the raw-text col-
umns), we see that there is an improvement in 
the agreement on sentiment (both positive and 
negative) if the low intensity cases are removed.  
The agreement for Negative Sentiment (raw-text) 
goes up marginally by 0.04 points.  Surprisingly, 
the agreement for Negative Arguing (raw-text) 
goes down by 0.06 points. Similarly in raw-
text+speech results, removal of low intensity 
cases does not improve the agreement for Nega-
tive Arguing while hurting Negative Sentiment 
category (by 0.02 points). One possible explana-
tion is that it may be equally difficult to detect 
Negative categories at both low and high intensi-
ties. Recall that in (12) it was difficult to detect if 
there is  Negative Arguing at all. If the annotator 
decided that it is indeed a Negative Arguing, it is 
put at intensity level=3 (i.e., a clear case). 
4 Discussion 
There were a number of interesting subjectiv-
ity related phenomena in meetings that we ob-
served during our annotation. These are issues 
that will need to be addressed for improving in-
ter-annotator reliability. 
Global and local context for arguing: In the 
context of a meeting, participants argue for (posi-
tively) or against (negatively) a topic. This may 
become ambiguous when the participant uses an 
explicit local Positive Arguing and an implicit 
global Negative Arguing. Consider the following 
speaker turn, at a point in the meeting when one 
participant has suggested that the company car 
should have a moon roof and another participant 
has opposed it, by saying that a moon roof would 
compromise the headroom. 
(13) OCK: We wanna make sure 
there's adequate headroom 
for all those six foot six 
investors 
In the above example, the speaker OCK, in the 
local context of the turn, is arguing positively 
that headroom is important. However, in the 
global context of the meeting, he is arguing 
against the idea of a moon roof that was sug-
gested by a participant. Such cases occur when 
one object (or opinion) is endorsed which auto-
matically precludes another, mutually exclusive 
object (or opinion).  
Sarcasm/Humor: The meetings we analyzed 
had a large amount of sarcasm and humor. Issues 
arose with sarcasm due to our approach of mark-
ing opinions towards the content of the meeting 
(which forms the target of the opinion). Sarcasm 
is difficult to annotate because sarcasm can be 
1) On topic: Here the target is the topic of dis-
cussion and hence sarcasm is used as a Negative 
Sentiment. 
2) Off topic: Here the target is not a topic un-
der discussion, and the aim is to purely elicit 
laughter. 
3) Allied topic: In this case, the target is re-
lated to the topic in some way, and it?s difficult 
to determine if the aim of the sarcasm/humor was 
to elicit laughter or to imply something negative 
towards the topic.  
Multiple modalities: In addition to text and 
speech, gestures and visual diagrams play an im-
portant role in some types of meetings. In one 
meeting that we analyzed, participants were 
working together to figure out how to protect an 
egg when it is dropped from a long distance, 
given the materials they have. It was evident they 
were using some gestures to describe their ideas 
(?we can put tape like this?) and that they drew 
diagrams to get points across. In the absence of 
visual input, annotators would need to guess 
59
what was happening. This might further hurt the 
inter-annotator reliability. 
5 Related Work  
Our opinion categories are from the subjectiv-
ity schemes described in Wiebe et al (2005) and 
Wilson and Wiebe (2005). Wiebe et al (2005) 
perform expression level annotation of opinions 
and subjectivity in text. They define their annota-
tions as an experiencer having some type of atti-
tude (such as Sentiment or Arguing), of a certain 
intensity, towards a target. Wilson and Wiebe 
(2005) extend this basic annotation scheme to 
include different types of subjectivity, including 
Positive Sentiment, Negative Sentiment, Positive 
Arguing, and Negative Arguing. 
Speech was found to improve inter-annotator 
agreement in discourse segmentation of mono-
logs (Hirschberg and Nakatani 1996). Acoustic 
clues have been successfully employed for the 
reliable detection of the speaker?s emotions, in-
cluding frustration, annoyance, anger, happiness, 
sadness, and boredom (Liscombe et al 2003).  
Devillers et al (2003) performed perceptual tests 
with and without speech in detecting the 
speaker?s fear, anger, satisfaction and embar-
rassment.  Though related, our work is not con-
cerned with the speaker?s emotions, but rather 
opinions toward the issues and topics addressed 
in the meeting. 
Most annotation work in multiparty conversa-
tion has focused on exchange structures and dis-
course functional units like common grounding 
(Nakatani and Traum, 1998). In common ground-
ing research, the focus is on whether the partici-
pants of the discourse are able to understand each 
other, and not their opinions towards the content 
of the discourse. Other tagging schemes like the 
one proposed by Flammia and Zue (1997) focus 
on information seeking and question answering 
exchanges where one participant is purely seek-
ing information, while the other is providing it. 
The SWBD DAMSL (Jurafsky et al, 1997) an-
notation scheme over the Switchboard telephonic 
conversation corpus labels shallow discourse 
structures. The SWBD-DAMSL had a label ?sv? 
for opinions. However, due to poor inter-
annotator agreement, the authors discarded these 
annotations. The ICSI MRDA annotation scheme 
(Rajdip et al, 2003) adopts the SWBD DAMSL 
scheme, but does not distinguish between the 
opinionated and objective statements. The ISL 
meeting corpus (Burger and Sloane, 2004) is an-
notated with dialog acts and discourse moves like 
initiation and response, which in turn consist of 
dialog tags such as query, align, and statement. 
Their statement dialog category would not only 
include Sentiment and Arguing tags discussed in 
this paper, but it would also include objective 
statements and other types of subjectivity. 
?Hot spots? in meetings closely relate to our 
work because they find sections in the meeting 
where participants are involved in debates or 
high arousal activity (Wrede and Shriberg 2003). 
While that work distinguishes between high 
arousal and low arousal, it does not distinguish 
between  opinion or non-opinion or the different 
types of opinion. However, Janin et al (2004) 
suggest that there is a relationship between dia-
log acts and involvement, and that involved ut-
terances contain significantly more evaluative 
and subjective statements as well as extremely 
positive or negative answers. Thus we believe it 
may be beneficial for such works to make these 
distinctions. 
Another closely related work that finds par-
ticipants? positions regarding issues is argument 
diagramming (Rienks et al 2005). This ap-
proach, based on the IBIS system (Kunz and Rit-
tel 1970), divides a discourse into issues, and 
finds lines of deliberated arguments. However 
they do not distinguish between subjective and 
objective contributions towards the meeting. 
6 Conclusions and Future Work 
In this paper we performed an annotation 
study of opinions in meetings, and investigated 
the effects of speech. We have shown that it is 
possible to reliably detect opinions within multi-
party conversations. Our consistently better 
agreement results with text+speech input over 
text-only input suggest that speech is a reliable 
indicator of opinions. We have also found that 
Annotator Uncertainty decreased with speech 
input. Our results also show that speech is a more 
informative indicator for negative versus positive 
categories. We hypothesize that this is due to the 
fact the people express their positive attitudes 
more explicitly. The speech signal is thus even 
more important for discerning negative opinions. 
This experience has also helped us gain insights 
to the ambiguities that arise due to sarcasm and 
humor. 
Our promising results open many new avenues 
for research. It will be interesting to see how our 
categories relate to other discourse structures, 
both at the shallow level (agree-
ment/disagreement) as well as at the deeper level 
60
(intentions/goals). It will also be interesting to 
investigate how other forms of subjectivity like 
speculation and intention are expressed in multi-
party discourse. Finding prosodic correlates of 
speech as well as lexical clues that help in opin-
ion detection would be useful in building subjec-
tivity detection applications for multiparty meet-
ings.  
References 
Susanne Burger and Zachary A Sloane. 2004. The ISL 
Meeting Corpus: Categorical Features of Commu-
nicative Group Interactions. NIST Meeting Recog-
nition Workshop 2004, NIST 2004, Montreal, Can-
ada, 2004-05-17 
Susanne Burger, Victoria MacLaren and Hua Yu. 
2002. The ISL Meeting Corpus: The Impact of 
Meeting Type on Speech Style. ICSLP-2002. Den-
ver, CO: ISCA, 9 2002. 
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for 
nominal scales. Educational and Psychological 
Meas., 20:37?46. 
Richard Craggs and Mary McGee Wood. 2004. A 
categorical annotation scheme for emotion in the 
linguistic content of dialogue. Affective Dialogue 
Systems. 2004. 
Laurence Devillers, Lori Lamel and Ioana Vasilescu. 
2003. Emotion detection in task-oriented spoken 
dialogs. IEEE International Conference on Multi-
media and Expo (ICME). 
Rajdip Dhillon, Sonali Bhagat, Hannah Carvey and 
Elizabeth Shriberg. 2003. ?Meeting Recorder Pro-
ject: Dialog Act Labeling Guide,? ICSI Technical 
Report TR-04-002, Version 3, October 2003 
Giovanni Flammia and Victor Zue. 1997. Learning 
The Structure of Mixed Initiative Dialogues Using 
A Corpus of Annotated Conversations. Eurospeech 
1997, Rhodes, Greece 1997, p1871?1874 
Julia Hirschberg and Christine Nakatani. 1996. A Pro-
sodic Analysis of Discourse Segments in Direction-
Giving Monologues Annual Meeting- Association 
For Computational Linguistics 1996, VOL 34, 
pages 286-293 
Adam Janin, Jeremy Ang, Sonali Bhagat, Rajdip Dhil-
lon, Jane Edwards, Javier Mac??as-Guarasa, Nelson 
Morgan, Barbara Peskin, Elizabeth Shriberg, An-
dreas Stolcke, Chuck Wooters and Britta Wrede. 
2004. ?The ICSI Meeting Project: Resources and 
Research,?  ICASSP-2004 Meeting Recognition 
Workshop. Montreal; Canada: NIST, 5 2004 
Daniel Jurafsky, Elizabeth Shriberg and Debra Biasca, 
1997. Switchboard-DAMSL Labeling Project 
Coder?s Manual. 
http://stripe.colorado.edu/?jurafsky/manual.august1 
Werner Kunz and Horst W. J. Rittel. 1970. Issues as 
elements of information systems. Working Paper 
WP-131, Univ. Stuttgart, Inst. Fuer Grundlagen der 
Planung, 1970 
Richard Landis and Gary Koch. 1977. The Measure-
ment of Observer Agreement for Categorical Data 
Biometrics, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Mar., 1977) , pp. 159-
174 
Agnes Lisowska. 2003. Multimodal interface design 
for the multimodal meeting domain: Preliminary 
indications from a query analysis study. Technical 
Report IM2.  Technical report, ISSCO/TIM/ETI. 
Universit de Genve, Switserland, November 2003. 
Jackson Liscombe, Jennifer Venditti and Julia 
Hirschberg. 2003. Classifying Subject Ratings of 
Emotional Speech Using Acoustic Features. Eu-
rospeech 2003. 
Christine Nakatani and David Traum. 1998. Draft: 
Discourse Structure Coding Manual version 
2/27/98 
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffry Leech 
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Gram-
mar of the English Language. Longman, New 
York.s 
Rutger Rienks, Dirk Heylen and Erik van der Wei-
jden. 2005. Argument diagramming of meeting 
conversations. In Vinciarelli, A. and Odobez, J., 
editors, Multimodal Multiparty Meeting Process-
ing, Workshop at the 7th International Conference 
on Multimodal Interfaces, pages 85?92, Trento, It-
aly 
Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson and Claire Cardie. 
2005. Annotating expressions of opinions and emo-
tions in language. Language Resources and 
Evaluation (formerly Computers and the Humani-
ties), volume 39, issue 2-3, pp. 165-210.  
Theresa Wilson and Janyce Wiebe. 2005. Annotating 
attributions and private states. ACL Workshop on 
Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky.  
Britta Wrede and Elizabeth Shriberg. 2003. Spotting 
"Hotspots" in Meetings: Human Judgments and 
Prosodic Cues.  Eurospeech 2003, Geneva 
 
61
