Proceedings of the Interactive Question Answering Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 9?16,
New York City, NY, USA. June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
WoZ Simulation of Interactive Question Answering
Tsuneaki Kato
The University of Tokyo
kato@boz.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Fumito Masui
Mie University
masui@ai.info.mie-u.ac.jp
Jun?ichi Fukumoto
Ritsumeikan University
fukumoto@media.ritsumei.ac.jp
Noriko Kando
National Institute of Informatics
kando@nii.ac.jp
Abstract
QACIAD (Question Answering Chal-
lenge for Information Access Dialogue)
is an evaluation framework for measur-
ing interactive question answering (QA)
technologies. It assumes that users inter-
actively collect information using a QA
system for writing a report on a given
topic and evaluates, among other things,
the capabilities needed under such cir-
cumstances. This paper reports an ex-
periment for examining the assumptions
made by QACIAD. In this experiment, di-
alogues under the situation that QACIAD
assumes are collected using WoZ (Wiz-
ard of Oz) simulating, which is frequently
used for collecting dialogue data for de-
signing speech dialogue systems, and then
analyzed. The results indicate that the set-
ting of QACIAD is real and appropriate
and that one of the important capabilities
for future interactive QA systems is pro-
viding cooperative and helpful responses.
1 Introduction
Open-domain question answering (QA) technolo-
gies allow users to ask a question using natural lan-
guage and obtain the answer itself rather than a list
of documents that contain the answer (Voorhees et
al.2000). While early research in this field concen-
trated on answering factoid questions one by one in
an isolated manner, recent research appears to be
moving in several new directions. Using QA sys-
tems in an interactive environment is one of those
directions. A context task was attempted in order
to evaluate the systems? ability to track context for
supporting interactive user sessions at TREC 2001
(Voorhees 2001). Since TREC 2004, questions in
the task have been given as collections of questions
related to common topics, rather than ones that are
isolated and independent of each other (Voorhees
2004). It is important for researchers to recognize
that such a cohesive manner is natural in QA, al-
though the task itself is not intended for evaluating
context processing abilities since, as it is given the
common topic, sophisticated context processing is
not needed.
Such a direction has also been envisaged as a re-
search roadmap, in which QA systems become more
sophisticated and can be used by professional re-
porters and information analysts (Burger et al2001).
At some stage of that sophistication, a young re-
porter writing an article on a specific topic will be
able to translate the main issue into a set of simpler
questions and pose those questions to the QA sys-
tem.
Another research trend in interactive QA has been
observed in several projects that are part of the
ARDA AQUAINT program. These studies concern
scenario-based QA, the aim of which is to handle
non-factoid, explanatory, analytical questions posed
by users with extensive background knowledge. Is-
sues include managing clarification dialogues in or-
der to disambiguate users? intentions and interests;
and question decomposition to obtain simpler and
more tractable questions (Small et al2003)(Hickl et
9
al.2004).
The nature of questions posed by users and pat-
terns of interaction vary depending on the users who
use a QA system and on the environments in which
it is used (Liddy 2002). The user may be a young re-
porter, a trained analyst, or a common man without
special training. Questions can be answered by sim-
ple names and facts, such as those handled in early
TREC conferences (Chai et al2004), or by short
passages retrieved like some systems developed in
the AQUAINT program do (Small et al2003). The
situation in which QA systems are supposed to be
used is an important factor of the system design and
the evaluation must take such a factor into account.
QACIAD (Question Answering Challenge for Infor-
mation Access Dialogue) is an objective and quan-
titative evaluation framework to measure the abil-
ities of QA systems used interactively to partici-
pate in dialogues for accessing information (Kato et
al.2004a)(Kato et al2006). It assumes the situation
in which users interactively collect information us-
ing a QA system for writing a report on a given topic
and evaluates, among other things, the capabilities
needed under such circumstances, i.e. proper inter-
pretation of questions under a given dialogue con-
text; in other words, context processing capabilities
such as anaphora resolution and ellipses handling.
We are interested in examining the assumptions
made by QACIAD, and conducted an experiment,
in which the dialogues under the situation QACIAD
assumes were simulated using the WoZ (Wizard of
Oz) technique (Fraser et al1991) and analyzed. In
WoZ simulation, which is frequently used for col-
lecting dialogue data for designing speech dialogue
systems, dialogues that become possible when a sys-
tem has been developed are simulated by a human, a
WoZ, who plays the role of the system, as well as a
subject who is not informed that a human is behav-
ing as the system and plays the role of its user. An-
alyzing the characteristics of language expressions
and pragmatic devices used by users, we confirm
whether QACIAD is a proper framework for eval-
uating QA systems used in the situation it assumes.
We also examine what functions will be needed for
such QA systems by analyzing intelligent behavior
of the WoZs.
2 QACIAD and the previous study
QACIAD was proposed by Kato et al as a task of
QAC, which is a series of challenges for evaluat-
ing QA technologies in Japanese (Kato et al2004b).
QAC covers factoid questions in the form of com-
plete sentences with interrogative pronouns. Any
answers to those questions should be names. Here,
?names? means not only names of proper items
including date expressions and monetary values
(called ?named entities?), but also common names
such as those of species and body parts. Although
the syntactical range of the names approximately
corresponds to compound nouns, some of them,
such as the titles of novels and movies, deviate from
that range. The underlying document set consists
of newspaper articles. Being given various open-
domain questions, systems are requested to extract
exact answers rather than text snippets that contain
the answers, and to return the answer along with the
newspaper article from which it was extracted. The
article should guarantee the legitimacy of the answer
to a given question.
In QACIAD, which assumes interactive use of
QA systems, systems are requested to answer series
of related questions. The series of questions and the
answers to those questions comprise an information
access dialogue. All questions except the first one of
each series have some anaphoric expressions, which
may be zero pronouns, while each question is in the
range of those handled in QAC. Although the sys-
tems are supposed to participate in dialogue inter-
actively, the interaction is only simulated; systems
answer a series of questions in batch mode. Such
a simulation may neglect the inherent dynamics of
dialogue, as the dialogue evolution is fixed before-
hand and therefore not something that the systems
can control. It is, however, a practical compromise
for an objective evaluation. Since all participants
must answer the same set of questions in the same
context, the results for the same test set are compa-
rable with each other, and the test sets of the task are
reusable by pooling the correct answers.
Systems are requested to return one list consisting
of all and only correct answers. Since the number of
correct answers differs for each question and is not
given, a modified F measure is used for the evalu-
ation, which takes into account both precision and
10
recall.
Two types of series were included in the QA-
CIAD, which correspond to two extremes of infor-
mation access dialogue: a gathering type in which
the user has a concrete objective such as writing a
report and summary on a specific topic, and asks
a system a series of questions related to that topic;
and a browsing type in which the user does not
have any fixed topic of interest. Although the QA-
CIAD assumes that users are interactively collect-
ing information on a given topic and the gathering-
type dialogue mainly occurs under such circum-
stances, browsing-type series are included in the task
based on the observation that even when focusing
on information access dialogue for writing reports,
the systems must handle focus shifts appearing in
browsing-type series. The systems must identify the
type of series, as it is not given, although they need
not identify changes of series, as the boundary is
given. The systems must not look ahead to questions
following the one currently being handled. This re-
striction reflects the fact that the QACIAD is a simu-
lation of interactive use of QA systems in dialogues.
Examples of series of QACIAD are shown in Fig-
ure 1. The original questions are in Japanese and the
figure shows their direct translations.
The evaluation of QA technologies based on QA-
CIAD were conducted twice in QAC2 and QAC3,
which are a part of the NTCIR-4 and NTCIR-5
workshops1, respectively (Kato et al2004b)(Kato et
al.2005). It was one of the three tasks of QAC2 and
the only task of QAC3. On each occasion, several
novel techniques were proposed for interactive QA.
Kato et al conducted an experiment for confirm-
ing the reality and appropriateness of QACIAD, in
which subjects were presented various topics and
were requested to write down series of questions
in Japanese to elicit information for a report on
that topic (Kato et al2004a)(Kato et al2006). The
report was supposed to describe facts on a given
topic, rather than state opinions or prospects on the
topic. The questions were restricted to wh-type
questions, and a natural series of questions that may
contain anaphoric expressions and ellipses was con-
1The NTCIR Workshop is a series of evaluation workshops
designed to enhance research in information access technolo-
gies including information retrieval, QA, text summarization,
extraction, and so on (NTCIR 2006).
Series 30002
What genre does the ?Harry Potter? series belong to?
Who is the author?
Who are the main characters in the series?
When was the first book published?
What was its title?
How many books had been published by 2001?
How many languages has it been translated into?
How many copies have been sold in Japan?
Series 30004
When did Asahi breweries Ltd. start selling their low-malt
beer?
What is the brand name?
How much did it cost?
What brands of low-malt beer were already on the
market at that time?
Which company had the largest share?
How much low-malt beer was sold compared to regular
beer?
Which company made it originally?
Series 30024
Where was Universal Studio Japan constructed?
What is the nearest train station?
Which actor attended the ribbon-cutting ceremony on the
opening day?
Which movie that he featured in was released in the New
Year season of 2001?
What movie starring Kevin Costner was released in the
same season?
What was the subject matter of that movie?
What role did Costner play in that movie?
Figure 1: Examples of Series in QACIAD
structed. Analysis of the question series collected
in such a manner showed that 58% to 75% of ques-
tions for writing reports could be answered by val-
ues or names; a wide range of reference expres-
sions is observed in questions in such a situation;
and sequences of questions are sometimes very com-
plicated and include subdialogues and focus shifts.
From these observations they concluded the reality
and appropriateness of the QACIAD, and validated
the needs of browsing-type series in the task.
One of the objectives of our experiment is to con-
firm these results in a more realistic situation. The
previous experiment setting is far from the actual
situations in which QA systems are used, in which
subjects have to write down their questions without
getting the answers. Using WoZ simulation, it is
confirmed whether or not this difference affected the
result. Moreover, observing the behavior of WoZs,
the capabilities and functions needed for QA sys-
11
tems used in such a situation are investigated.
3 Setting
Referring to the headlines in Mainichi and Yomi-
uri newspapers from 2000 and 2001, we selected
101 topics, which included events, persons, and or-
ganizations. On each of those topics, a summary
of between 800 and 1600 characters long and an
abstract of around 100 characters long were con-
structed using a full text search system on the news-
paper articles.2 Four experts shared this prepara-
tion work. Twenty topics were selected from among
the original 101 on the basis that enough informa-
tion was gathered and compiled into the summary.3
The topics consisted of 5 persons, 2 organizations,
7 events, 5 artifacts, and 1 syndrome, which include
Mr. Colin Powell, Charles, Prince of Wales, An ac-
cident of a Russian nuclear-powerd submarine, Con-
corde, ?Harry Potter?, and Windows XP.
The four experts who shared the preparation work
acted as a WoZ in the simulated QA systems, and
each expert participated in dialogues on the topic for
which she/he wrote the summary and abstract, and
tried to answer questions from users using the sum-
mary, a full text search system, and her/his memory.
Six subjects participated in the experiment and 10
topics were assigned to each subject. That is, each
topic was handled by three subjects. The subjects
behaved as users of simulated QA systems. Pre-
sented with the topic and abstract, the subjects were
directed to think about questions beforehand assum-
ing that they had to write a report on that topic, and
then they participated in an information access dia-
logue with the ?QA system.? The suggested number
of questions for each topic was around 10.
The dialogues were conducted through keyboards
and character displays. The subjects were told that
the system could answer only simple factoid ques-
tions, and the WoZs were instructed not to answer
complicated questions such as asking for reasons
and opinions. No restrictions on the usage of lan-
guage expressions were imposed but were left to
the discretion of the WoZs, though canned phrases
2Those lengths of Japanese texts roughly correspond to 300
to 600 words and 40 words of English text, respectively.
3We prepared 101 topics to meet the additional needs of
other experiments. It is absolutely not the case that only 20
out of 101 were acceptable for our experiments.
USR: What is the title of the first book of the ?Harry
Potter? series?
SYS: ?Harry Potter and the Sorcerer?s Stone.?
USR: How many books were sold?
SYS: The Japanese translation sold 600 thousand copies
in the first half year after its publication.
USR: Who is the author?
SYS: J. K. Rowling.
USR: Who are the main characters (in that series)?
SYS: Harry Potter, Ron Weasley, Hagrid and so on.
USR: What kind of person is Harry Potter?
SYS: A child with a wizard and a witch for parents.
USR: What is the plot?
SYS: It is an adventure story involving Harry Potter and his
friends who enter a school for witchcraft and wizardry.
USR: How many people went to the movie?
SYS: In the US, box-office sales of the movie ?Harry Potter
and the Sorcerer?s Stone? reached 188 million
dollars in the first 10 days after release.
Figure 2: Example of dialogues collected
such as ?Please wait a moment? and ?Sorry, the an-
swer could not be found? were prepared in advance.
The WoZs were also instructed that they could clar-
ify users? questions when they were ambiguous or
vague, and that their answers should be simple but
cooperative and helpful responses were not forbid-
den.
An example of the dialogues collected is shown in
Figure 2. In the figure, SYS stands for utterances of
the QA system simulated by a WoZ and USR repre-
sents that of the user, namely a subject. In the rest of
the paper, these are referred to as system?s utterances
and user?s utterances, respectively.
4 Coding and Results
Excluding meta-utterances for dialogue control such
as ?Please wait a moment? and ?That?s all,? 620
pairs of utterances were collected, of which 22 sys-
tem utterances were for clarification. Among the re-
maining 598 cases, the system gave some answers in
502 cases, and the other 94 utterances were negative
responses: 86 utterances said that the answer could
not found; 10 utterances said that the question was
too complicated or that they could not answer such
type of question.
4.1 Characteristics of questions and answers
The syntactic classification of user utterances and its
distribution is shown in Table 1. The numbers in
12
Table 1: Syntactic classification of user utterances
Syntactic form
Wh-type Question 87.7% (544)
Yes-no Question 9.5% (59)
Imperative (Information request) 2.6% (16)
Declarative (Answer to clarification) 0.2% (1)
Table 2: Categorization of user utterances by subject
Asking about
Who, Where, What 32.5% (201)
When 16.3% (101)
How much/many 16.8% (104)(for several types of numerical values)
Why 6.5% (40)
How (for procedures or situations) 17.0% (105)
Definitions, Descriptions, Explanations 10.8% (67)
Other (Multiple Whs) 0.2% (1)
parentheses are numbers of occurrences. In spite of
the direction of using wh-type questions, more than
10% of utterances are yes-no questions and impera-
tives for requesting information. Most of the user
responses to clarification questions from the sys-
tem are rephrasing of the question concerned; only
one response has a declarative form. Examples of
rephrasing will be shown in section 4.3.
The classification of user questions and requests
according to the subject asked or requested is shown
in Table 2; the classification of system answers ac-
cording to their syntactic and semantic categoriza-
tion is shown in Table 3. In Table 2, the classification
of yes-no questions was estimated based on the in-
formation provided in the helpful responses to those.
The classification in Table 3 was conducted based on
the syntactic and semantic form of the exact part of
the answer itself rather than on whole utterances of
the system. For example, the categorization of the
system utterance ?He was born on April 5, 1935,?
which is the answer to ?When was Mr. Colin Powell
born?? is not a sentence but a date expression.
4.2 Pragmatic phenomena
Japanese has four major types of anaphoric devices:
pronouns, zero pronouns, definite noun phrases,
Table 3: Categorization of user utterances by answer
type
Answered in
Numerical values 14.3% (72)
Date expressions 16.7% (84)
Proper names 22.1% (111)
Common names 8.8% (44)
Compound nouns except names 4.2% (21)
Noun phrases 6.2% (31)
Clauses, sentences, or texts 27.7% (139)
Table 4: Pragmatic phenomena observed
Type
No reference expression 203
Pronouns 14
Zero pronouns 317
Definite noun phrases 104
Ellipses 1
and ellipses. Zero pronouns are very common in
Japanese, in which pronouns are not apparent on the
surface. As Japanese also has a completely different
determiner system from English, the difference be-
tween definite and indefinite is not apparent on the
surface, and definite noun phrases usually have the
same form as generic noun phrases. Table 4 shows
a summary of such pragmatic phenomena observed.
The total number is more than 620 as some utter-
ances contain more than one anaphoric expression.
?How many crew members were in the submarine
when the accident happened?? is an example of such
a question with multiple anaphoric expressions.
Among 203 questions with no reference expres-
sion, 60 questions (30%) are the first one of a series
of utterances on the same topic. The others are di-
vided into two cases. In the first and major case, the
current foci appear literally rather than in pronouns
or definite noun phrases. The second case, which is
relatively minor, is the beginning of and the resume
from a subdialogue. For example, when a user him-
self resumed talking about Charles, Prince of Wales
after a few questions about his children, the user
used a literal expression like ?Who is the long-term
partner of Charles, Prince of Wales??; after talking
13
about the details of the accident, a user asked ?What
is the major characteristic of Concorde??
Out of 437 reference expressions excluding el-
lipses in Table 4, 94 expressions (22%) refer to items
other than the global topic. Moreover, 76 expres-
sions of those (81%) are a sole reference expression
in the utterance. The existence of questions with-
out referring to the global topic, accompanied with
the existence of some questions with no reference
expression, means that the focus shifts in those dia-
logues, and then the local focus can differ from the
global topic.
4.3 Clarifications
As mentioned above, only 22 clarification utterances
were observed in the experiment. They are catego-
rized into those asking about an ambiguous referent
(13 utterances) and those asking about a vague ques-
tion subject (9 utterances). Examples of each case
are shown below.
Clarification asking about an ambiguous referent
USR: When was he [Mr. Colin Powell] installed as head of
security of the United States?
SYS: December 6, 2000.
USR: Who was the president at that time?
SYS: Mr. George W. Bush.
USR: Which political party did he belong to?
SYS: Whose political party are you asking about?
USR: Which political party did Mr. Colin Powell belong to?
Clarification asking about a vague question subject
USR: Who developed Windows XP?
SYS: Are you asking for a company name?
USR: What company developed Windows XP?
4.4 Cooperative and helpful responses
Rather than simple and literal answers to the users?
questions and requests, cooperative and helpful re-
sponses, in which, for example, information not re-
quested directly by a user was additionally provided
(Kaplan 1983), were observed frequently. The re-
sults of analyzing such cooperative and helpful be-
havior in the system responses are shown in Table
5. Questions asking reasons, procedures, situations,
definitions, descriptions or explanations, which are
categorized into the last three categories except oth-
ers in Table 2, were excluded from this analysis,
since for those questions it is difficult to judge objec-
Table 5: Cooperative and helpful behavior observed
Type of behavior
Providing additional information 52 (15.6%)
Providing detailed information 38 (11.4%)
Elaboration of subject 38 (11.4%)
Providing alternative information 47 (14.1%)
Exemplification 28 (8.4%)
Providing speculations 3 (0.9%)
tively whether some information is additional or not
and, in addition, most of those are out of the scope
of QACIAD, which is our main interest. Table 5
shows the number of occurrences and its percentage
among positive responses. Sometimes, more than
one behavior was observed in one utterance. 148
utterances out of 334 positive responses (44%) con-
tained some helpful behavior. The definitions and
manually constructed examples of cooperative and
helpful behavior listed in Table 5 are shown below.
Providing additional information Information
not requested directly from a user is addition-
ally provided.
USR: What year was Mr. Colin Powell born?
SYS: He was born in 1935 in New York.
Providing detailed information More detailed in-
formation than that requested directly by a user
is provided.
USR: What year was Mr. Colin Powell born?
SYS: He was born on April 5, 1935.
Elaboration of subject A relatively vague subject
of a question is elaborated and made concrete.
In the following example, a question with a
vague expression, ?how well? is answered by
a value as a concrete statistic.
USR: How well did the movie do?
SYS: In the US, box-office sales reached 188 million
dollars in the first 10 days after release.
Providing alternative information Rather than
exact information a user requested, alternative
related information is provided. An alternative
may be proposed by relaxing the condition
imposed by the user. In the following example,
attendance figures were altered to box-office
sales.
USR: How many people went to the movie?
14
SYS: In the US, box-office sales reached 188 million
dollars in the first 10 days after release.
Exemplification Instead of a comprehensive list or
abstracted general description, some major in-
stances are listed.
USR: What kinds of character goods are on sale?
SYS: Stuffed owls, uniforms for schools of witchcraft and
wizardry, and so on.
Providing speculation Rather than fact, specula-
tions and opinions are provided, which can be
considered a special case of providing alterna-
tive information. Although there are few cases
of such behavior in Table 5, there were many
such answers in response to questions asking
for reasons and situations.
USR: What exploded?
SYS: It is surmised that torpedoes in the shed at the fore
exploded.
Detecting and correcting erroneous user assump-
tions is a famous helpful behavior discussed in the
literature (Pollack 1989) (Kaplan 1983). Only two
occurrences of such behavior were observed, one of
which is shown below.
USR: How long did it take from the explosion until the
shipwreck?
SYS: The explosion happened while the submarine was going
down, and ...
5 Discussion
The analysis of dialogue collected by the WoZ sim-
ulation showed very similar results to those obtained
in a previous study, in which sequences of questions
were written down by subjects without knowing the
answers to questions. That is, as shown in Table 2,
when users asked questions to get information for a
report, the number of why-questions was relatively
small. Moreover, there were fewer questions re-
questing an explanation or definition than expected,
probably because definition questions such as ?Who
is Mr. Colin Powell?? were decomposed into rela-
tively concrete questions such as those asking for his
birthday and birthplace. The remainder (65%) could
be answered in values and names. Table 3 indicates
that 62% of the questions in our experiments were
answered by values or names. If compound nouns
describing events or situations, which are usually
distinguished from names, are considered to be in
the range of answers, the percentage of answerable
questions reaches 68%. From these results, the set-
ting of QACIAD looks realistic where users write re-
ports interacting with a QA system handling factoid
questions that have values and names as answers.
A wide range of reference expressions is observed
in information access dialogues for writing reports.
Moreover, our study confirmed that those sequences
of questions were sometimes very complicated and
included subdialogues and focus shifts. It is ex-
pected that using an interactive QA system that can
manage those pragmatic phenomena will enable flu-
ent information access dialogue for writing reports.
In this sense, the objective of QACIAD is appropri-
ate.
It could be concluded from these results that the
reality and appropriateness of QACIAD was recon-
firmed in a more realistic situation. And yet suspi-
cion remains that even in our WoZ simulation, the
subjects were not motivated appropriately, as sug-
gested by the lack of dynamic dialogue development
in the example shown in Figure 2. Especially, the
users often gave up too easily when they did not
obtain answers to prepared questions.4 The truth,
however, may be that in the environment of gath-
ering information for writing reports, dynamic dia-
logue development is limited compared to the case
when trained analysts use QA systems for problem
solving. If so, research on this type of QA systems
represents a proper milestone toward interactive QA
systems in a broad sense.
Another finding of our experiment is the impor-
tance of cooperative and helpful responses. Nearly
half of WoZ utterances were not simple literal re-
sponses but included some cooperative and helpful
behavior. This situation contrasts with a relatively
small number of clarification dialogues. The im-
portance of this behavior, which was emphasized
in research on dialogues systems in the 80s and
90s, was reconfirmed in the latest research, although
question-answering technologies were redefined in
the late 90s. Some behavior such as providing alter-
native information could be viewed as a second-best
4It is understandable, however, that there were few rephras-
ing attempts since users were informed that paraphrasing such
as ?What is the population of the US?? to ?How many people
are living in the US?? are usually in vain.
15
strategy of resource-bounded human WoZs. Even
so, it is impossible to eliminate completely the need
for such a strategy by improving core QA technolo-
gies. In addition, intrinsic cooperative and helpful
behavior such as providing additional information
was also often observed. These facts, accompanied
by the fact that such dialogues are perceived as fluent
and felicitous, suggest that the capability to behave
cooperatively and helpfully is essential for interac-
tive QA technologies.
6 Conclusion
Through WoZ simulation, the capabilities and func-
tions needed for interactive QA systems used as a
participant in information access dialogues for writ-
ing reports were examined. The results are compati-
ble with those of previous research, and reconfirmed
the reality and appropriateness of QACIAD. A new
finding of our experiment is the importance of coop-
erative and helpful behavior of QA systems, which
was frequently observed in utterances of the WoZs
who simulated interactive QA systems. Designing
such cooperative functions is indispensable. While
this fact is well known in the context of past research
on dialogue systems, it has been reconfirmed in the
context of the latest interactive QA technologies.
References
Joyce Y. Chai and Rong Jin. 2004. Discource Struc-
ture for Context Question Answering. Proceedings of
HLT-NAACL2004 Workshop on Pragmatics of Ques-
tion Answering, pp. 23-30.
John Burger, Claire Cardie, Vinay Chaudhri, et al 2001.
Issues, Tasks and Program Structures to Roadmap Re-
search in Question & Answering (Q&A)
http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/projrcts/
duc/roadmpping.html.
Norma M. Fraser and G. Nigel Gilbert. 1991. Simulating
speech systems. Computer Speech and Language, Vol
5, No.1, pp. 81-99.
Andrew Hickl, Johm Lehmann, John Williams, and
Sanda Harabagiu. 2004. Experiments with Interactive
Question Answering in Complex Scenarios. Proceed-
ings of HLT-NAACL2004 Workshop on Pragmatics of
Question Answering, pp. 60-69.
Joerrold Kaplan. 1983. Cooperative Responses from a
Portable Natural Language Database Query System.
Michael Brady and Robert C. Berwick eds. Compu-
tational Models of Discourse, pp. 167?208, The MIT
Press.
Tsuneaki Kato, Jun?ichi Fukumoto, Fumito Masui and
Noriko Kando. 2004a. Handling Information Access
Dialogue through QA Technologies ? A novel chal-
lenge for open-domain question answering ?. Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL2004 Workshop on Pragmat-
ics of Question Answering, pp. 70-77.
Tsuneaki Kato, Jun?ici Fukumoto and Fumito Masui.
2004b. Question Answering Challenge for Informa-
tion Access Dialogue ? Overview of NTCIR4 QAC2
Subtask 3 ?. Proceedings of NTCIR-4 Workshop Meet-
ing.
Tsuneaki Kato, Jun?ici Fukumoto and Fumito Masui.
2005. An Overview of NTCIR-5 QAC3. Proceedings
of Fifth NTCIR Workshop Meeting, pp. 361?372.
Tsuneaki Kato, Jun?ici Fukumoto, Fumito Masui and
Noriko Kando. 2006. Are Open-domain Question
Answering Technologies Useful for Information Ac-
cess Dialogues? ? An empirical study and a proposal
of a novel challenge ? ACL Trans. of Asian Language
Information Processing, In Printing.
Elizabeth D. Liddy. 2002. Why are People Asking
these Questions? : A Call for Bringing Situation into
Question-Answering System Evaluation. LREC Work-
shop Proceedings on Question Answering ? Strategy
and Resources, pp. 5-8.
NTCIR Project Home Page. 2006.
http://research.nii.ac.jp/?ntcadm/
index-en.html
Martha E. Pollack. 1989. Plans as Complex Mental At-
titudes. Philip R. Cohen, Jerry Morgan and Martha E.
Pollack eds. Intentions in Communication, pp. 77?103,
The MIT Press.
Sharon Small, Nobuyuki Shimizu, Tomek Strzalkowski,
and Liu Ting 2003. HITIQA: A Data Driven Ap-
proach to Interactive Question Answering: A Prelim-
inary Report AAAI 2003 Spring Symposium New Di-
rections in Question Answering, pp. 94-104.
Ellen M. Voorhees and Dawn M. Tice. 2000. Building a
Question Answering Test Collection the Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval, pp. 200 - 207.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2001. Overview of the TREC 2001
Question Answering Track. Proceedings of TREC
2001.
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview of the TREC 2004
Question Answering Track. Proceedings of TREC
2004.
16
