Relating WordNet Senses for Word Sense Disambiguation
Diana McCarthy
Department of Informatics,
University of Sussex
Brighton BN1 9QH, UK
dianam@sussex.ac.uk
Abstract
The granularity of word senses in current
general purpose sense inventories is of-
ten too fine-grained, with narrow sense
distinctions that are irrelevant for many
NLP applications. This has particularly
been a problem with WordNet which is
widely used for word sense disambigua-
tion (WSD). There have been several at-
tempts to group WordNet senses given a
number of different information sources
in order to reduce granularity. We pro-
pose relating senses as a matter of de-
gree to permit a softer notion of relation-
ships between senses compared to fixed
groupings so that granularity can be var-
ied according to the needs of the applica-
tion. We compare two such approaches
with a gold-standard produced by humans
for this work. We also contrast this gold-
standard and another used in previous re-
search with the automatic methods for re-
lating senses for use with back-off meth-
ods for WSD.
1 Introduction
It is likely that accurate word-level semantic dis-
ambiguation would benefit a number of different
types of NLP application; however it is gener-
ally acknowledged by word sense disambiguation
(WSD) researchers that current levels of accuracy
need to be improved before WSD technology can
usefully be integrated into applications (Ide and
Wilks, in press). There are at least two major prob-
lems facing researchers in this area. One major
problem is the lack of sufficient training data for
supervised WSD systems. One response to this is
WNs# gloss
1 your basis for belief or disbelief; knowledge on
which to base belief; ?the evidence that smoking
causes lung cancer is very compelling?
2 an indication that makes something evident;
?his trembling was evidence of his fear?
3 (law) all the means by which any alleged
matter of fact whose truth is investigated at
judicial trial is established or disproved
Figure 1: The senses of evidence in WordNet
to exploit the natural skew of the data and focus on
finding the first (predominant) sense from a sam-
ple of text (McCarthy et al, 2004). Further con-
textual WSD may be required, but the technique
provides a useful unsupervised back-off method.
The other major problem for WSD is the granu-
larity of the sense inventory since a pre-existing
lexical resource is often too fine-grained, with nar-
row sense distinctions that are irrelevant for the in-
tended application. For example, WordNet (Fell-
baum, 1998) which is widely used and publicly
available, has a great many subtle distinctions that
may in the end not be required. For example, in
figure 1 we show the three senses (WNs#) for ev-
idence from WordNet version 1.7. 1 These are all
clearly related.
One promising approach for improving accu-
racy is to disambiguate to a coarser-grained inven-
tory, which groups together the related senses of
a word. This can be done either by defining the
inventory specifically for the application, which
might be most appropriate for machine translation,
where correspondences across languages could
1We use WordNet 1.7 throughout this paper since the re-
sources we use for evaluation were produced for this version.
17
determine the inventory (Resnik and Yarowsky,
2000). There are however many systems using
man-made resources, particularly WordNet, which
have other purposes in mind, such as entailment
for applications such as question-answering and
information-extraction (Dagan et al, 2005). There
have been several attempts to group WordNet
senses using various different types of information
sources. This paper describes work to automati-
cally relate WordNet word senses using automati-
cally acquired thesauruses (Lin, 1998) and Word-
Net similarity measures (Patwardhan and Peder-
sen, 2003).
This work proposes using graded word sense re-
lationships rather than fixed groupings (clusters).
Previous research has focused on clustering Word-
Net senses into groups. One problem is that to
do this a stopping condition is required such as
the number of clusters required for each word.
This has been done with the numbers determined
by the gold-standard for the purposes of evalu-
ation (Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle, 2003) but
ultimately the right number of classes for each
word cannot usually be predetermined even if one
knows the application, unless only a sample of
words are being handled. In cases where a gold-
standard is provided by humans it is clear that
further relationships could be drawn. For exam-
ple, in the groups (hereafter referred to as SEGR)
made publicly available for the SENSEVAL-2 En-
glish lexical sample (Kilgarriff, 2001) (hereafter
referred to as SEVAL-2 ENG LEX) child is grouped
as shown in table 1. Whilst it is perfectly reason-
able the grouping decision was determined by the
?youth? vs ?descendant? distinction, the relation-
ships between non-grouped senses, notably sense
numbers 1 and 2 are apparent. It is quite possible
that these senses will share contextual cues use-
ful for WSD and distinction between the two might
not be relevant in a given application, for exam-
ple because they are translated in the same way
(nin?o/a in Spanish can mean both young boy/girl
and son/daughter) or have common substitutions
(boy/girl can be used as both offspring or young
person). Instead of clustering senses into groups
we evaluate 2 methods that produce ranked lists of
related senses for each target word sense. We refer
to these as RLISTs. Such listings resemble nearest
neighbour approaches for automatically acquired
thesauruses. They allow for a sense to be related
to others which may not themselves be closely re-
WNs# SEGR gloss
1 1 a young person
2 2 a human offspring
3 1 an immature childish person
4 2 a member of a clan or tribe
Table 1: SEGR for child in SEVAL-2 ENG LEX
lated. Since only a fixed number of senses are de-
fined for each word, the RLISTs include all senses
of the word. A cut-off can then be determined for
any particular application.
Previous research on clustering word senses
has focused on comparison to the SEGR gold-
standard. We evaluate the RLISTs against a new
gold-standard produced by humans for this re-
search since the SEGR does not have documenta-
tion with figures for inter-tagger agreement. As
well as evaluating against a gold-standard, we also
look at the effect of the RLISTs and the gold-
standards themselves on WSD. Since the focus of
this paper is not the WSD system, but the sense
inventory, we use a simple WSD heuristic which
uses the first sense of a word in all contexts, where
the first sense of every word is specified by a re-
source. While contextual evidence is required for
accurate WSD, it is useful to look at this heuris-
tic since it is so widely used as a back-off model
by many systems and is hard to beat on an all-
words task (Snyder and Palmer, 2004). We con-
trast the performance of first sense heuristics i)
from SemCor (Miller et al, 1993) and ii) derived
automatically from the BNC following (McCarthy
et al, 2004) and also iii) an upper-bound first sense
heuristic extracted from the test data.
The paper is organised as follows. In the next
section we describe some related work. In sec-
tion 3 we describe the two methods we will use
to relate senses. Our experiments are described in
section 4. In 4.1 we describe the construction of a
new gold-standard produced using the same sense
inventory used for SEGR, and give inter-annotator
agreement figures for the task. In section 4.2 we
compare our methods to the new gold-standard
and in section 4.3 we investigate how much effect
coarser grained sense distinctions have onWSD us-
ing naive first sense heuristics. We follow this with
a discussion and conclusion.
18
2 Related Work
There is a significant amount of previous work
on grouping WordNet word senses using a num-
ber of different information sources, such as pred-
icate argument structure (Palmer et al, forthcom-
ing), information from WordNet (Mihalcea and
Moldovan, 2001; Tomuro, 2001) 2 and other lex-
ical resources (Peters and Peters, 1998) transla-
tions, system confusability, topic signature and
contextual evidence (Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle,
2003). There is also work on grouping senses
of other inventories using information in the in-
ventory (Dolan, 1994) along with information re-
trieval techniques (Chen and Chang, 1998).
One method presented here (referred to as DIST
and described in section 3) relates most to that
of Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle (2003). They
use contexts of the senses gathered directly from
either manually sense tagged corpora, or using
instances of ?monosemous relatives? which are
monosemous words related to one of the target
word senses in WordNet. We use contexts of
occurrence indirectly. We obtain ?nearest neigh-
bours? which occur in similar contexts to the tar-
get word. A vector is created for each word sense
with a WordNet similarity score between the sense
and each nearest neighbour of the target word. 3
While related senses may not have a lot of shared
contexts directly, because of sparse data, they may
have semantic associations with the same subset
of words that share similar distributional contexts
with the target word. This method avoids re-
liance on sense-tagged data or monosemous rela-
tives because the distributional neighbours can be
obtained automatically from raw text.
Our other method relates to the findings of
Kohomban and Lee (2005). We use the Jiang-
Conrath score (JCN) in the WordNet Similarity
Package. This is a distance measure between
WordNet senses given corpus frequency counts
and the structure of the WordNet hierarchy. It is
described in more detail below. Kohomban and
Lee (2005) get good results on disambiguation of
the SENSEVAL all-words tasks using the 25 unique
beginners from the WordNet hierarchy for train-
ing a coarse-grained WSD system and then using a
first sense heuristic (provided using the frequency
2Mihalcea and Moldovan group WordNet synonym sets
(synsets) rather than word senses.
3We have not tried using these vectors for relating senses
of different words, but leave that for future research.
data in SemCor) to determine the fine-grained out-
put. This shows that the structure of WordNet is
indeed helpful when selecting coarse senses for
WSD. We use the JCN measure to contrast with
our DIST measure which uses a combination of
distributional neighbours and JCN. We have exper-
imented only with nouns to date, although in prin-
ciple our method can be extended for other POS.
3 Methods for producing RLISTs
JCN This is a measure from the WordNet sim-
ilarity package (Patwardhan and Pedersen, 2003)
originally proposed as a distance measure (Jiang
and Conrath, 1997). JCN uses corpus data to pop-
ulate classes (synsets) in the WordNet hierarchy
with frequency counts. Each synset is incremented
with the frequency counts from the corpus of all
words belonging to that synset, directly or via the
hyponymy relation. The frequency data is used to
calculate the ?information content? (IC) of a class
(IC(s) = ?log(p(s))) and with this, Jiang and
Conrath specify a distance measure:
Djcn(s1, s2) = IC(s1)+IC(s2)?2?IC(s3)
where the third class (s3) is the most informative,
or most specific, superordinate synset of the two
senses s1 and s2. This is transformed from a dis-
tance measure in the WN-Similarity package by
taking the reciprocal:
jcn(s1, s2) = 1/Djcn(s1, s2)
We use raw BNC data for calculating IC values.
DIST We use a distributional similarity mea-
sure (Lin, 1998) to obtain a fixed number (50)
of the top ranked nearest neighbours for the tar-
get nouns. For input we used grammatical relation
data extracted using an automatic parser (Briscoe
and Carroll, 2002). We used the 90 million words
of written English from the British National Cor-
pus (BNC) (Leech, 1992). For each noun we
collect co-occurrence triples featuring the noun
in a grammatical relationship with another word.
The words and relationships considered are co-
occurring verbs in the direct object and subject
relation, the modifying nouns in noun-noun rela-
tions and the modifying adjectives in adjective-
noun relations. Using this data, we compute the
distributional similarity proposed by Lin between
each pair of nouns, where the nouns have at least
10 triples. Each noun (w) is then listed with k (=
50) most similar nouns (the nearest neighbours).
The nearest neighbours for a target noun (w)
share distributional contexts and are typically se-
19
..jcn( president)>
Vs4
3 chairperson
4 electric chair
1 seat
chair
2 professorship
senses
nearest neighbours
stool, chairman.......president
= <jcn(V professorship stool), jcn( ...professorship professorshipchairman),
president)>..jcn(chairpersonchairman),...chairpersonstool), jcn(chairpersonV
president)>electric chair..jcn(...chairman),electric chairstool), jcn(electric chair= <jcn(
= <jcn(
= <jcn( seat, stool), jcn( seat,V chairman), .....jcn(seat, president)>s
s
s
1
2
3
Figure 2: Vectors for chair
mantically related to the various senses (Sw) of
w. The relationships between the various senses
are brought out by the shared semantic relation-
ships with the neighbours. For example the top
nearest neighbours of chair include: stool, bench,
chairman, furniture, staff, president. The senses of
chair are 1 seat, 2 professorship, 3 chairperson
and 4 electric chair. The seat and electric chair
senses share semantic relationships with neigh-
bours such as stool, bench, furniture whilst the
professorship and chairperson senses are related
via neighbours such as chairman, president, staff.
The semantic similarity between a neighbour
(n) e.g. stool and a word sense (si ? Sw) e.g.
electric chair is measured using the JCN measure
described above.
To relate the set of senses (Sw) of a word (w)
we produce a vector ~Vsi = (f1...fk) with k fea-
tures for each si ? Sw. The jth feature in ~Vsi
is the highest JCN score between all senses of the
jth neighbour and si. Figure 2 illustrates this
process for chair. In contrast to using JCN be-
tween senses directly, the nearest neighbours per-
mit senses in unrelated areas of WordNet to be re-
lated e.g. painting - activity and painting - ob-
ject since both senses may have neighbours such
as drawing in common. The vectors are used to
produce RLISTs for each si. To produce the RLIST
of a sense si of w we obtain a value for the Spear-
man rank correlation coefficient (r) between the
vector for si and that for each of the other senses
of w (sl ? Sw, where l 6= i). r is calculated by
obtaining rankings for the neighbours on ~Vsi and~Vsl using the JCN values for ranking. We then list
si with the other senses ordered according to the r
value, for example the RLIST for sense 1 of chair
is [4 (0.50), 3 (0.34), 2 (0.20)] where the sense
number is indicated before the bracketed r score.
4 Experiments
For our experiments we use the same set of 20
nouns used by Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle
(2003). The gold standard used in that work was
SEGR. These groupings were released for SEN-
SEVAL-2 but we cannot find any documentation
on how they were produced or on inter-annotator
agreement. 4 We have therefore produced a new
gold-standard (referred to as RS) for these nouns
which we describe in section 4.1. We compare
the results of our methods for relating senses and
SEGR to RS. We then look at the performance of
both the gold-standard groupings (SEGR and RS)
compared to our automatic methods for coarser
grained WSD of SEVAL-2 ENG LEX using some
first sense heuristics.
4.1 Creating a Gold Standard
To create the gold-standard we gave 3 native en-
glish speakers a questionnaire with all possible
pairings of WordNet 1.7 word senses for each of
the 20 nouns in turn. The pairs were derived from
all possible combinations of senses of the given
noun and the judges were asked to indicate a ?re-
lated?, ?unrelated? or don?t know response for
each pair. 5 This task allows a sense to be re-
lated to others which are not themselves related.
The ordering of the senses was randomised and
fake IDs were generated instead of using the sense
numbers provided with WordNet to avoid possi-
ble bias from indications of sense predominance.
The words were presented one at a time and each
combination of senses was presented along with
the WordNet gloss. 6 Table 2 provides the pair-
wise agreement (PWA) figures for each word along
with the overall PWA figure. The number of word
senses for each noun is given in brackets. Overall,
more relationships were identified compared to the
rather fine-grained classes in SEGR, although there
was some variation. The proportion of related
items for our three judges were 52.2%, 56.5% and
22.6% respectively. Given this variation, the last
row gives the pairwise agreement for pairs where
the more lenient judge has said the pair is un-
related. These figures are reasonable given that
humans differ in their tendency to lump or split
4We have asked Agirre and Lopez de Lacalle as well as
those involved with the original SENSEVAL-2 task.
5We are grateful to Adam Kilgarriff for suggesting the
task.
6We will make the questionnaire publicly available with
the gold standard.
20
word (#senses) PWA
art (4) 44.44
authority (7) 52.38
bar (13) 87.07
bum (4) 100.00
chair (4) 43.75
channel (7) 46.03
child (4) 66.67
circuit (6) 46.67
day (10) 64.44
facility (5) 86.67
fatigue (4) 44.44
feeling (6) 42.22
hearth (3) 55.56
mouth (8) 40.48
nation (4) 100.00
nature (5) 73.33
post (8) 92.86
restraint (6) 42.22
sense (5) 73.33
stress (5) 73.33
overall PWA 66.94
given leniency 88.10
Table 2: Pairwise agreement %
senses and the fact that figures for sense annotation
with three judges (as opposed to two, with a third
to break ties) are reported in this region (Koeling
et al, 2005). Again, there are no details on anno-
tation and agreement for SEGR.
4.2 Agreement of automatic methods with RS
Figure 3 shows the PWA of the automatic methods
JCN and DIST when calculated against the RS gold-
standard at various threshold cut-offs. The differ-
ence of the best performance for these two meth-
ods (61.1% DIST and 62.2% for JCN) are not statis-
tically significant (using the chi-squared test). The
baseline which assumes that all pairs are unrelated
is 54.1%. If we compare the SEGR to RS we get
68.9% accuracy. 7 This shows that the SEGR ac-
cords with RS more than the automatic methods.
4.3 Application to SEVAL-2 ENG LEX
We used the same words as in the experiment
above and applied our methods as back-off to
naive WSD heuristics on the SEVAL-2 ENG LEX
7Since these are groupings, there is only one possible an-
swer and no thresholds are applied.
 44
 46
 48
 50
 52
 54
 56
 58
 60
 62
 64
 0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8  0.9  1
ac
cu
ra
cy
threshold
"JCN"
"DISTSIM"
Figure 3: Accuracy of match of RS to JCN and
DIST
test data. 8 Using predominant senses is use-
ful as a back-off method where local context is
not sufficient. Disambiguation is performed us-
ing the first sense heuristic from i) SemCor (Sem-
cor FS) ii) automatic rankings from the BNC pro-
duced using the method proposed by McCarthy et
al. (2004) (Auto FS) and iii) an upper-bound first
sense heuristic from the SEVAL-2 ENG LEX data
itself (SEVAL-2 FS). This represents how well the
method would perform if we knew the first sense.
The results are shown in table 3. The accu-
racy figures are equivalent to both recall and pre-
cision as there were no words in this data with-
out a first sense in either SemCor or the auto-
matic rankings. The fourth row provides a ran-
dom baseline which incorporates the number of
related senses for each instance. Usually this is
calculated as the sum of
?
w?tokens
1
|Sw| over all
word tokens. Since we are evaluating RLISTs,
as well as groups, the number of senses for a
given word is not fixed, but depends in the token
sense. We therefore calculate the random base-
line as
?
ws?tokens
|related senses to ws|
|Sw| , where ws
is a word sense of word w. The columns show the
results for different ways of relating senses; the
senses are in the same group or above the thresh-
old for RLISTs. The second column (fine-grained)
are the results for these first sense heuristics with
the raw WordNet synsets. The third and fourth
columns are the results for the SEGR and RS gold
standards. The final four columns give the results
for RLISTs with JCN and DIST with the threshold
indicated.
8We performed the experiment on both the SENSEVAL-2
English lexical sample training and test data with very similar
results, but just show the results on the test corpus due to lack
of space.
21
groupings thresh on RLISTs
DIST JCN
fine-grained SEGRs RS 0.90 0.20 0.09 0.0585
SEVAL-2 FS 55.6 65.7 87.8 68.0 85.1 68.2 84.7
SemCor FS 47.0 59.1 82.8 55.9 81.7 59.7 79.4
Auto FS 35.5 48.8 82.9 50.2 72.3 53.4 83.3
random BL 17.5 34.8 65.3 32.6 69.7 34.9 63.5
Table 3: Accuracy of Coarse-grained first sense heuristic on SEVAL-2 ENG LEX
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1
ac
cu
ra
cy
threshold
"senseval2"
"SemCor"
"auto"
"random"
Figure 4: Accuracy on SEVAL-2 ENG LEX for
First Sense Heuristics using DIST RLISTs and a
threshold
SemCor FS outperforms Auto FS, and is itself
outperformed by the upper-bound, SEVAL-2 FS.
All methods of relating WordNet synsets increase
the accuracy at the expense of an increased base-
line because the task is easier with less senses to
discriminate between. Both JCN and DIST have
threshold values which improve performance of
the first sense heuristics more than the manually
created SEGR given a comparable or a lower base-
line (smaller classes, and a harder task) e.g. SE-
VAL-2 FS and Auto FS for both types of RLISTs
though SemCor FS only for JCN. RS should be
compared to performance of JCN and DIST at a
similar baseline so we show these in the 6th and
8th columns of the table. In this case the RS seems
to outperform the automatic methods, but the re-
sults for JCN are close enough to be encouraging,
especially considering the baseline 63.5 is lower
than that for RS (65.3).
The RLISTs permit a trade-off between accuracy
and granularity. This can be seen by the graph in
figure 5 which shows the accuracy obtained for the
three first sense heuristics at a range of threshold
values. The random baseline is also shown. The
difference in performance compared to the base-
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  0.05  0.1  0.15  0.2
ac
cu
ra
cy
threshold
"senseval2"
"SemCor"
"auto"
"random"
Figure 5: Accuracy on SEVAL-2 ENG LEX for
First Sense Heuristics using JCN RLISTs and a
threshold
line for a given heuristic is typically better on the
fine-grained task, however the benefits of a coarse-
grained inventory will depend not on this differ-
ence, but on the utility of the relationships and dis-
tinctions made between senses. We return to this
point in the discussion and conclusions.
5 Discussion
The RLISTs show promising results when com-
pared to the human produced gold-standards on a
WSD task and even outperform the SEGR in most
cases. There are other methods proposed in the
literature which also make use of information in
WordNet, particularly looking for senses with re-
lated words in common (Tomuro, 2001; Mihalcea
and Moldovan, 2001). Tomuro does this to find
systematic polysemy, by looking for overlap in
words in different areas of WordNet. Evaluation
is performed using WordNet cousins and inter-
tagger agreement. Mihalcea and Moldovan look
for related words in common between different
senses of words to merge WordNet synsets. They
also use the hand tagged data in SemCor to remove
low frequency synsets. They demonstrate a large
reduction in polysemy of the words in SemCor (up
22
sense JCN RLIST
1 2 (0.11) 3 (0.096) 4 (0.095)
2 4 (0.24) 1 (0.11) 3 (0.099)
3 2 (0.099) 1 (0.096) 4 (0.089)
4 2 (0.24) 1 (0.095) 3 (0.089)
sense DIST RLIST
1 3 (0.88) 4 (0.50) 2 (0.48)
2 4 (0.99) 3 (0.60) 1 (0.48)
3 1 (0.88) 4 (0.60) 2 (0.60)
4 2 (0.99) 3 (0.60) 1 (0.50)
Table 4: RLISTs for child
to 39%) with a small error rate (5.6%) measured
on SemCor. Our DIST approach relates to Agirre
and Lopez de Lacalle (2003) though they pro-
duced groups and evaluated against the SEGR. We
use nearest neighbours and associate these with
word senses, rather than finding occurrences of
word senses in data directly. Nearest neighbours
have been used previously to induce word senses
from raw data (Pantel and Lin, 2002), but not for
relating existing inventories of senses. Measures
of distance in the WordNet hierarchy such as JCN
have been widely used for WSD (Patwardhan et
al., 2003) as well as the information contained in
the structure of the hierarchy (Kohomban and Lee,
2005) which has been used for backing off when
training a supervised system.
Though coarser groupings can improve inter-
tagger agreement and WSD there is also a need to
examine which distinctions are useful since there
are many ways that items can be grouped (Palmer
et al, forthcoming). A major difference to previ-
ous work is our use of RLISTs, allowing for the
level of granularity to be determined for a given
application, and allowing for ?soft relationships?
so that a sense can be related to several others
which are not themselves related. This might also
be done with soft hierarchical clusters, but has not
yet been tried. The idea of relating word sense
as a matter of degree also relates to the methods
of Schu?tze (1998) although his work was evalu-
ated using binary sense distinctions.
The child example in table 1 demonstrate prob-
lems with hard, fixed groupings. Table 4 shows
the RLISTs obtained with our methods, with the
r scores in brackets. While many of the relation-
ships in the SEGR are found, the relationships to
the other senses are apparent. In SEGR no rela-
tionship is retained between the offspring sense
(2) and the young person sense (1). According to
the RS, all paired meanings of child are related. 9
A distance measure, rather than a fixed grouping,
seems appropriate to us because one might want
the young person sense to be related to both hu-
man offspring and immature person, but not have
the latter two senses directly related.
6 Conclusion
We have investigated methods for relating Word-
Net word senses based on distributionally simi-
lar nearest neighbours and using the JCN measure.
Whilst the senses for a given word can be clustered
into sense groups, we propose the use of ranked
lists to relate the senses of a word to each other.
In this way, the granularity can be determined for
a given application and the appropriate number of
senses for a given word is not needed a priori. We
have encouraging results for nouns when compar-
ing RLISTs to manually created gold-standards.
We have produced a new gold-standard for eval-
uation based on the words used in SEVAL-2 ENG
LEX. We did this because there is no available doc-
umentation on inter-annotator agreement for the
SEGR. In future, we hope to produce another gold-
standard resource where the informants indicate a
degree of relatedness, rather than a binary choice
of related or unrelated for each pair.
We would like to see the impact that coarser-
grained WSD has on a task or application. Given
the lack of a plug and play application for feeding
disambiguated data, we hope to examine the ben-
efits on some lexical acquisition tasks that might
feed into an application, for example sense rank-
ing (McCarthy et al, 2004) or selectional prefer-
ence acquisition.
At this stage we have only experimented with
nouns, we hope to go on relating senses in other
parts-of-speech, particularly verbs since they have
very fine-grained distinctions in WordNet and
many of the subtler distinctions are quite proba-
bly not important for some applications. (Palmer
et al, forthcoming) has clearly demonstrated the
necessity for using predicate-argument structure
when grouping verb senses, so we want to exploit
such information for verbs.
We have focused on improving the first sense
heuristic, but we plan to use our groupings with
context-based WSD. To avoid a requirement for
9The two more lenient judges related all the senses of
child.
23
hand-tagged training data, we plan to exploit the
collocates of nearest neighbours.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by a Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin
Fellowship and a UK EPSRC project ? Ranking Word Senses
for Disambiguation: Models and Applications.? We thank
Siddharth Patwardhan and Ted Pedersen for making the WN
Similarity package publicly available. We would also like
to thank Adam Kilgarriff for suggesting the creation of the
RS resource and Eneko Agirre, Oier Lopez de Lacalle, John
Carroll and Rob Koeling for helpful discussions.
References
Eneko Agirre and Oier Lopez de Lacalle. 2003. Clustering
wordnet word senses. In Recent Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, Borovets, Bulgaria.
Edward Briscoe and John Carroll. 2002. Robust accurate sta-
tistical annotation of general text. In Proceedings of the
Third International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC), pages 1499?1504, Las Palmas,
Canary Islands, Spain.
Jer Nan Chen and Jason S. Chang. 1998. Topical clustering
of MRD senses based on information retrieval techniques.
Computational Linguistics, 24(1):61?96.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini. 2005.
The pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In
Proceedings of the PASCAL First Challenge Workshop,
pages 1?8, Southampton, UK.
William B. Dolan. 1994. Word sense disambiguation :
Clustering related senses. In Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference of Computational Linguistics.
COLING-94, volume II, pages 712?716.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet, An Electronic
Lexical Database. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nancy Ide and Yorick Wilks. in press. Making sense
about sense. In Eneko Agirre and Phil Edmonds, edi-
tors, Word Sense Disambiguation, Algorithms and Appli-
cations. Springer.
Jay Jiang and David Conrath. 1997. Semantic similarity
based on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy. In Inter-
national Conference on Research in Computational Lin-
guistics, Taiwan.
Adam Kilgarriff. 2001. English lexical sample task descrip-
tion. In Proceedings of the SENSEVAL-2 workshop, pages
17?20.
Rob Koeling, Diana McCarthy, and John Carroll. 2005.
Domain-specific sense distributions and predominant
sense acquisition. In Proceedings of the joint conference
on Human Language Technology and Empirical methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 419?426, Vancou-
ver, B.C., Canada.
Upali Kohomban and Wee Sun Lee. 2005. Learning seman-
tic classes for word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings
of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (ACL?05), pages 34?41, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, June. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Geoffrey Leech. 1992. 100 million words of English: the
British National Corpus. Language Research, 28(1):1?13.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of
similar words. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL 98, Mon-
treal, Canada.
Diana McCarthy, Rob Koeling, Julie Weeds, and John Car-
roll. 2004. Finding predominant senses in untagged text.
In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 280?287,
Barcelona, Spain.
Rada Mihalcea and Dan I. Moldovan. 2001. Automatic
generation of a coarse grained WordNet. In Proceedings
of WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Applications,
Extensions and Customizations, NAACL 2001 Workshop,
Pittsburgh, PA.
George A. Miller, Claudia Leacock, Randee Tengi, and
Ross T Bunker. 1993. A semantic concordance. In
Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on Human Language
Technology, pages 303?308. Morgan Kaufman.
Martha Palmer, Hoa Trang Dang, and Christiane Fellbaum.
forthcoming. Making fine-grained and coarse-grained
sense distinctions, both manually and automatically.
Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2002. Discovering word
senses from text. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
613?619, Edmonton, Canada.
Siddharth Patwardhan and Ted Pedersen.
2003. The cpan wordnet::similarity package.
http://search.cpan.org/author/SID/WordNet-Similarity-
0.03/.
Siddharth Patwardhan, Satanjeev Banerjee, and Ted Peder-
sen. 2003. Using measures of semantic relatedness for
word sense disambiguation. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing
and Computational Linguistics (CICLing 2003), Mexico
City.
Wim Peters and Ivonne Peters. 1998. Automatic sense clus-
tering in EuroWordNet. In Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC), pages 409?416, Granada, Spain.
Philip Resnik and David Yarowsky. 2000. Distinguishing
systems and distinguishing senses: New evaluation meth-
ods for word sense disambiguation. Natural Language
Engineering, 5(3):113?133.
Hinrich Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimina-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?123.
Benjamin Snyder and Martha Palmer. 2004. The English
all-words task. In Proceedings of the ACL SENSEVAL-3
workshop, pages 41?43, Barcelona, Spain.
Noriko Tomuro. 2001. Tree-cut and a lexicon based on sys-
tematic polysemy. In Proceedings of the Second Meet-
ing of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. (NAACL 2001), Pittsburgh,
PA.
24
