Proceedings of the Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, pages 1?8,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
 Extracting Opinions, Opinion Holders, and Topics Expressed in 
Online News Media Text 
Soo-Min Kim and Eduard Hovy 
USC Information Sciences Institute 
4676 Admiralty Way 
Marina del Rey, CA 90292-6695 
{skim, hovy}@ISI.EDU 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a method for identi-
fying an opinion with its holder and 
topic, given a sentence from online news 
media texts. We introduce an approach of 
exploiting the semantic structure of a 
sentence, anchored to an opinion bearing 
verb or adjective. This method uses se-
mantic role labeling as an intermediate 
step to label an opinion holder and topic 
using data from FrameNet. We decom-
pose our task into three phases: identify-
ing an opinion-bearing word, labeling 
semantic roles related to the word in the 
sentence, and then finding the holder and 
the topic of the opinion word among the 
labeled semantic roles. For a broader 
coverage, we also employ a clustering 
technique to predict the most probable 
frame for a word which is not defined in 
FrameNet. Our experimental results show 
that our system performs significantly 
better than the baseline. 
1 Introduction   
The challenge of automatically identifying opin-
ions in text automatically has been the focus of 
attention in recent years in many different do-
mains such as news articles and product reviews. 
Various approaches have been adopted in subjec-
tivity detection, semantic orientation detection, 
review classification and review mining. Despite 
the successes in identifying opinion expressions 
and subjective words/phrases, there has been less 
achievement on the factors closely related to sub-
jectivity and polarity, such as opinion holder, 
topic of opinion, and inter-topic/inter-opinion 
relationships. This paper addresses the problem 
of identifying not only opinions in text but also 
holders and topics of opinions from online news 
articles. 
Identifying opinion holders is important espe-
cially in news articles. Unlike product reviews in 
which most opinions expressed in a review are 
likely to be opinions of the author of the review, 
news articles contain different opinions of differ-
ent opinion holders (e.g. people, organizations, 
and countries). By grouping opinion holders of 
different stance on diverse social and political 
issues, we can have a better understanding of the 
relationships among countries or among organi-
zations. 
An opinion topic can be considered as an ob-
ject an opinion is about. In product reviews, for 
example, opinion topics are often the product 
itself or its specific features, such as design and 
quality (e.g. ?I like the design of iPod video?, 
?The sound quality is amazing?). In news arti-
cles, opinion topics can be social issues, gov-
ernment?s acts, new events, or someone?s opin-
ions. (e.g., ?Democrats in Congress accused vice 
president Dick Cheney?s shooting accident.?, 
?Shiite leaders accused Sunnis of a mass killing 
of Shiites in Madaen, south of Baghdad.?)  
As for opinion topic identification, little re-
search has been conducted, and only in a very 
limited domain, product reviews. In most ap-
proaches in product review mining, given a 
product (e.g. mp3 player), its frequently men-
tioned features (e.g. sound, screen, and design) 
are first collected and then used as anchor points. 
In this study, we extract opinion topics from 
news articles. Also, we do not pre-limit topics in 
advance. We first identify an opinion and then 
find its holder and topic. We define holder as an 
entity who holds an opinion, and topic, as what 
the opinion is about.   
In this paper, we propose a novel method that 
employs Semantic Role Labeling, a task of iden-
tifying semantic roles given a sentence. We de-
1
compose the overall task into the following 
steps: 
? Identify opinions. 
? Label semantic roles related to the opin-
ions. 
? Find holders and topics of opinions 
among the identified semantic roles. 
? Store <opinion, holder, topic> triples 
into a database. 
In this paper, we focus on the first three subtasks. 
The main contribution of this paper is to pre-
sent a method that identifies not only opinion 
holders but also opinion topics. To achieve this 
goal, we utilize FrameNet data by mapping target 
words to opinion-bearing words and mapping 
semantic roles to holders and topics, and then use 
them for system training. We demonstrate that 
investigating semantic relations between an opin-
ion and its holder and topic is crucial in opinion 
holder and topic identification. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
briefly introduces related work both in sentiment 
analysis and semantic role labeling. Section 3 
describes our approach for identifying opinions 
and labeling holders and topics by utilizing Fra-
meNet1 data for our task. Section 4 reports our 
experiments and results with discussions and 
finally Section 5 concludes. 
2 Related Work 
This section reviews previous works in both 
sentiment detection and semantic role labeling.  
2.1 Subjectivity and Sentiment Detection 
Subjectivity detection is the task of identifying 
subjective words, expressions, and sentences 
(Wiebe et al, 1999; Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe, 
2000; Riloff et al, 2003). Identifying subjectiv-
ity helps separate opinions from fact, which may 
be useful in question answering, summarization, 
etc. Sentiment detection is the task of determin-
ing positive or negative sentiment of words (Hat-
zivassiloglou and McKeown, 1997; Turney, 
2002; Esuli and Sebastiani, 2005), phrases and 
sentences (Kim and Hovy, 2004; Wilson et al, 
2005), or documents (Pang et al, 2002; Turney, 
2002).  
Building on this work, more sophisticated 
problems such as opinion holder identification 
have also been studied. (Bethard et al, 2004) 
identify opinion propositions and holders. Their 
                                                 
1 http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/ 
work is similar to ours but different because their 
opinion is restricted to propositional opinion and 
mostly to verbs. Another related works are (Choi 
et al, 2005; Kim and Hovy, 2005). Both of them 
use the MPQA corpus 2  but they only identify 
opinion holders, not topics. 
As for opinion topic identification, little re-
search has been conducted, and only in a very 
limited domain, product reviews. (Hu and Liu, 
2004; Popescu and Etzioni, 2005) present prod-
uct mining algorithms with extracting certain 
product features given specific product types. 
Our paper aims at extracting topics of opinion in 
general news media text. 
2.2 Semantic Role Labeling 
Semantic role labeling is the task of identifying 
semantic roles such as Agent, Patient, Speaker, 
or Topic, in a sentence. A statistical approach for 
semantic role labeling was introduced by (Gildea 
and Jurafsky, 2002). Their system learned se-
mantic relationship among constituents in a sen-
tence from FrameNet, a large corpus of semanti-
cally hand-annotated data. The FrameNet annota-
tion scheme is based on Frame Semantics (Fill-
more, 1976). Frames are defined as ?schematic 
representations of situations involving various 
frame elements such as participants, props, and 
other conceptual roles.? For example, given a 
sentence ?Jack built a new house out of bricks?, 
a semantic role labeling system should identify 
the roles for the verb built such as ?[Agent Jack] 
built [Created_entity  a new house] [Component out of 
bricks]?3. In our study, we build a semantic role 
labeling system as an intermediate step to label 
opinion holders and topics by training it on opin-
ion-bearing frames and their frame elements in 
FrameNet. 
3 Finding Opinions and Their Holders 
and Topics 
For the goal of this study, extracting opinions 
from news media texts with their holders and 
topics, we utilize FrameNet data. The basic idea 
of our approach is to explore how an opinion 
holder and a topic are semantically related to an 
opinion bearing word in a sentence. Given a sen-
tence and an opinion bearing word, our method 
identifies frame elements in the sentence and 
                                                 
2 http://www.cs.pitt.edu/~wiebe/pubs/ardasummer02/ 
3 The verb ?build? is defined under the frame ?Build-
ing? in which Agent, Created_entity, and Components 
are defined as frame elements. 
2
searches which frame element corresponds to the 
opinion holder and which to the topic. The ex-
ample in Figure 1 shows the intuition of our al-
gorithm. 
We decompose our task in 3 subtasks: (1) col-
lect opinion words and opinion-related frames, 
(2) semantic role labeling for those frames, and 
(3) finally map semantic roles to holder and 
topic. Following subsections describe each sub-
task. 
3.1 Opinion Words and Related Frames 
We describe the subtask of collecting opinion 
words and related frames in 3 phases. 
Phase 1: Collect Opinion Words 
In this study, we consider an opinion-bearing 
(positive/negative) word is a key indicator of an 
opinion. Therefore, we first identify opinion-
bearing word from a given sentence and extract 
its holder and topic. Since previous studies indi-
cate that opinion-bearing verbs and adjectives are 
especially efficient for opinion identification, we 
focus on creating a set of opinion-bearing verbs 
and adjectives. We annotated 1860 adjectives 
and 2011 verbs4 by classifying them into posi-
tive, negative, and neutral classes. Words in the 
positive class carry positive valence whereas 
                                                 
4 These were randomly selected from 8011 English 
verbs and 19748 English adjectives. 
those in negative class carry negative valence. 
Words that are not opinion-bearing are classified 
as neutral.  
Note that in our study we treat word sentiment 
classification as a three-way classification prob-
lem instead of a two-way classification problem 
(i.e. positive and negative). By adding the third 
class, neutral, we can prevent the classifier as-
signing either positive or negative sentiment to 
weak opinion-bearing word. For example, the 
word ?central? that Hatzivassiloglou and McKe-
own (1997) marked as a positive adjective is not 
classified as positive by our system. Instead we 
mark it as ?neutral?, since it is a weak clue for an 
opinion. For the same reason, we did not con-
sider ?able? classified as a positive word by Gen-
eral Inquirer5 , a sentiment word lexicon, as a 
positive opinion indicator. Finally, we collected 
69 positive and 151 negative verbs and 199 posi-
tive and 304 negative adjectives. 
Phase 2: Find Opinion-related Frames 
We collected frames related to opinion words 
from the FrameNet corpus. We used FrameNet II 
(Baker et al, 2003) which contains 450 semantic 
frames and more than 3000 frame elements (FE). 
A frame consists of lexical items, called Lexical 
Unit (LU), and related frame elements. For in-
stance, LUs in ATTACK frame are verbs such as 
assail, assault, and attack, and nouns such as in-
vasion, raid, and strike. FrameNet II contains 
                                                 
5 http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/homecat.htm 
Table 1: Example of opinion related frames 
and lexical units 
Frame 
name Lexical units Frame elements 
Desiring
want, wish, hope, 
eager, desire, 
interested, 
Event, 
Experiencer, 
Location_of_event
Emotion
_directed
agitated, amused, 
anguish, ashamed, 
angry, annoyed, 
Event, Topic 
Experiencer, 
Expressor, 
Mental 
_property
absurd, brilliant, 
careless, crazy, 
cunning, foolish 
Behavior, 
Protagonist, 
Domain, Degree 
Subject 
_stimulus
delightful, amazing, 
annoying, amusing, 
aggravating, 
Stimulus, Degree
Experiencer, 
Circumstances, 
  
Figure 1: An overview of our algorithm 
 
 
3
approximately 7500 lexical units and over 
100,000 annotated sentences. 
For each word in our opinion word set de-
scribed in Phase 1, we find a frame to which the 
word belongs. 49 frames for verbs and 43 frames 
for adjectives are collected. Table 1 shows ex-
amples of selected frames with some of the lexi-
cal units those frames cover. For example, our 
system found the frame Desiring from opinion-
bearing words want, wish, hope, etc. Finally, we 
collected 8256 and 11877 sentences related to 
selected opinion bearing frames for verbs and 
adjectives respectively. 
Phase 3: FrameNet expansion  
Even though Phase 2 searches for a correlated 
frame for each verb and adjective in our opinion-
bearing word list, not all of them are defined in 
FrameNet data. Some words such as criticize and 
harass in our list have associated frames (Case 
1), whereas others such as vilify and maltreat do 
not have those (Case 2). For a word in Case 2, 
we use a clustering algorithms CBC (Clustering 
By Committee) to predict the closest (most rea-
sonable) frame of undefined word from existing 
frames. CBC (Pantel and Lin, 2002) was devel-
oped based on the distributional hypothesis (Har-
ris, 1954) that words which occur in the same 
contexts tend to be similar. Using CBC, for ex-
ample, our clustering module computes lexical 
similarity between the word vilify in Case 2 and 
all words in Case 1. Then it picks criticize as a 
similar word, so that we can use for vilify the 
frame Judgment_communication to which criti-
cize belongs and all frame elements defined un-
der Judgment_ communication. 
3.2 Semantic Role Labeling 
To find a potential holder and topic of an opinion 
word in a sentence, we first label semantic roles 
in a sentence.  
Modeling: We follow the statistical ap-
proaches for semantic role labeling (Gildea and 
Jurafsky, 2002; Fleischman et. al, 2003) which 
separate the task into two steps: identify candi-
dates of frame elements (Step 1) and assign se-
mantic roles for those candidates (Step 2). Like 
their intuition, we treated both steps as classifica-
tion problems. We first collected all constituents 
of the given sentence by parsing it using the 
Charniak parser. Then, in Step 1, we classified 
candidate constituents of frame elements from 
non-candidates. In Step 2, each selected candi-
date was thus classified into one of frame ele-
ment types (e.g. Stimulus, Degree, Experiencer, 
etc.). As a learning algorithm for our classifica-
tion model, we used Maximum Entropy (Berger 
et al, 1996). For system development, we used 
MEGA model optimization package6, an imple-
mentation of ME models. 
Data: We collected 8256 and 11877 sentences 
which were associated to opinion bearing frames 
for verbs and adjectives from FrameNet annota-
tion data. Each sentence in our dataset contained 
a frame name, a target predicate (a word whose 
meaning represents aspects of the frame), and 
frame elements labeled with element types. We 
divided the data into 90% for training and 10% 
for test.  
Features used: Table 2 describes features that 
we used for our classification model. The target 
word is an opinion-bearing verb or adjective 
which is associated to a frame. We used the 
Charniak parser to get a phrase type feature of a 
frame element and the parse tree path feature. 
We determined a head word of a phrase by an 
algorithm using a tree head table7, position fea-
ture by the order of surface words of a frame 
element and the target word, and the voice fea-
ture by a simple pattern. Frame name for a target 
                                                 
6 http://www.isi.edu/~hdaume/megam/index.html 
7 http://people.csail.mit.edu/mcollins/papers/heads 
Table 2: Features used for our semantic role 
labeling model. 
Feature Description 
target word 
A predicate whose meaning 
represents the frame (a verb 
or an adjective in our task) 
phrase type Syntactic type of the frame element (e.g. NP, PP) 
head word Syntactic head of the frame element phrase 
parse tree 
path 
A path between the frame 
element and target word in 
the parse tree 
position 
Whether the element phrase 
occurs before or after the tar-
get word 
voice The voice of the sentence (active or passive) 
frame name one of our opinion-related frames 
 
4
word was selected by methods described in 
Phase 2 and Phase 3 in Subsection 3.1.   
3.3 Map Semantic Roles to Holder and 
Topic 
After identifying frame elements in a sentence, 
our system finally selects holder and topic from 
those frame elements. In the example in Table 1, 
the frame ?Desiring? has frame elements such as 
Event (?The change that the Experiencer would 
like to see?), Experiencer (?the person or sentient 
being who wishes for the Event to occur?), Loca-
tion_of_event (?the place involved in the desired 
Event?), Focal_participant (?entity that the Ex-
periencer wishes to be affected by some Event?). 
Among these FEs, we can consider that Experi-
encer can be a holder and Focal_participant can 
be a topic (if any exists in a sentence). We 
manually built a mapping table to map FEs to 
holder or topic using as support the FE defini-
tions in each opinion related frame and the anno-
tated sample sentences. 
4 Experimental Results 
The goal of our experiment is first, to see how 
our holder and topic labeling system works on 
the FrameNet data, and second, to examine how 
it performs on online news media text. The first 
data set (Testset 1) consists of 10% of data de-
scribed in Subsection 3.2 and the second (Testset 
2) is manually annotated by 2 humans. (see Sub-
section 4.2). We report experimental results for 
both test sets. 
4.1 Experiments on Testset 1 
Gold Standard: In total, Testset 1 contains 2028 
annotated sentences collected from FrameNet 
data set. (834 from frames related to opinion 
verb and 1194 from opinion adjectives) We 
measure the system performance using precision 
(the percentage of correct holders/topics among 
system?s labeling results), recall (the percentage 
of correct holders/topics that system retrieved), 
and F-score.  
Baseline: For the baseline system, we applied 
two different algorithms for sentences which 
have opinion-bearing verbs as target words and 
for those that have opinion-bearing adjectives as 
target words. For verbs, baseline system labeled 
a subject of a verb as a holder and an object as a 
topic. (e.g. ?[holder He] condemned [topic the law-
yer].?) For adjectives, the baseline marked the 
subject of a predicate adjective as a holder (e.g. 
?[holder I] was happy?). For the topics of adjec-
tives, the baseline picks a modified word if the 
target adjective is a modifier (e.g. ?That was a 
stupid [topic mistake]?.) and a subject word if the 
adjective is a predicate. ([topic The view] is 
breathtaking in January.) 
Result: Table 3 and 4 show evaluation results 
of our system and the baseline system respec-
tively. Our system performed much better than 
the baseline system in identifying topic and 
holder for both sets of sentences with verb target 
words and those with adjectives. Especially in 
recognizing topics of target opinion-bearing 
words, our system improved F-score from 30.4% 
to 66.5% for verb target words and from 38.2% 
to 70.3% for adjectives. It was interesting to see 
that the intuition that ?A subject of opinion-
bearing verb is a holder and an object is a topic? 
which we applied for the baseline achieved rela-
tively good F-score (56.9%). However, our sys-
tem obtained much higher F-score (78.7%). 
Holder identification task achieved higher F-
score than topic identification which implies that 
identifying topics of opinion is a harder task. 
We believe that there are many complicated 
semantic relations between opinion-bearing 
words and their holders and topics that simple 
relations such as subject and object relations are 
not able to capture. For example, in a sentence 
?Her letter upset me?, simply looking for the 
subjective and objective of the verb upset is not 
enough to recognize the holder and topic. It is 
necessary to see a deeper level of semantic rela-
Table 3. Precision (P), Recall (R), and F-
score (F) of Topic and Holder identification 
for opinion verbs (V) and adjectives (A) on 
Testset 1. 
 Topic  Holder  
 P (%) R (%) F (%) P (%) R (%) F (%)
V  69.1 64.0 66.5 81.9 75.7 78.7 
A  67.5 73.4 70.3 66.2 77.9 71.6 
 
Table 4. Baseline system on Testset 1. 
 Topic  Holder  
 P (%) R (%) F (%) P (%) R (%) F (%)
V 85.5 18.5 30.4 73.7 46.4 56.9 
A  68.2 26.5 38.2 12.0 49.1 19.3 
 
5
tions: ?Her letter? is a stimulus and ?me? is an 
experiencer of the verb upset.  
4.2 Experiments on Testset 2 
Gold Standard: Two humans 8  annotated 100 
sentences randomly selected from news media 
texts. Those news data is collected from online 
news sources such as The New York Times, UN 
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Af-
fairs, and BBC News 9 , which contain articles 
about various international affaires. Annotators 
identified opinion-bearing sentences with mark-
ing opinion word with its holder and topic if they 
existed. The inter-annotator agreement in identi-
fying opinion sentences was 82%.  
Baseline: In order to identify opinion-bearing 
sentences for our baseline system, we used the 
opinion-bearing word set introduced in Phase 1 
in Subsection 3.1. If a sentence contains an opin-
ion-bearing verb or adjective, the baseline sys-
tem started looking for its holder and topic. For 
holder and topic identification, we applied the 
                                                 
8 We refer them as Human1 and Human2 for the rest of this 
paper. 
9 www.nytimes.com, www.irinnews.org, and 
www.bbc.co.uk  
 
same baseline algorithm as described in Subsec-
tion 4.1 to Testset 2.  
Result: Note that Testset 1 was collected from 
sentences of opinion-related frames in FrameNet 
and therefore all sentences in the set contained 
either opinion-bearing verb or adjective. (i.e. All 
sentences are opinion-bearing) However, sen-
tences in Testset 2 were randomly collected from 
online news media pages and therefore not all of 
them are opinion-bearing. We first evaluated the 
task of opinion-bearing sentence identification. 
Table 5 shows the system results. When we mark 
all sentences as opinion-bearing, it achieved 43% 
and 38% of accuracy for the annotation result of 
Human1 and Human2 respectively. Our system 
performance (64% and 55%) is comparable with 
the unique assignment.  
We measured the holder and topic identifica-
tion system with precision, recall, and F-score. 
As we can see from Table 6, our system achieved 
much higher precision than the baseline system 
for both Topic and Holder identification tasks. 
However, we admit that there is still a lot of 
room for improvement. 
The system achieved higher precision for topic 
identification, whereas it achieved higher recall 
for holder identification. In overall, our system 
attained higher F-score in holder identification 
task, including the baseline system. Based on F-
score, we believe that identifying topics of opin-
ion is much more difficult than identifying hold-
ers. It was interesting to see the same phenome-
non that the baseline system mainly assuming 
that subject and object of a sentence are likely to 
be opinion holder and topic, achieved lower 
scores for both holder and topic identification 
tasks in Testset 2 as in Testset 1. This implies 
that more sophisticated analysis of the relation-
ship between opinion words (e.g. verbs and ad-
jectives) and their topics and holders is crucial.  
4.3 Difficulties in evaluation 
We observed several difficulties in evaluating 
holder and topic identification. First, the bound-
ary of an entity of holder or topic can be flexible. 
For example, in sentence ?Senator Titus Olupitan 
who sponsored the bill wants the permission.?, 
not only ?Senator Titus Olupitan? but also 
?Senator Titus Olupitan who sponsored the bill? 
is an eligible answer. Second, some correct hold-
ers and topics which our system found were 
evaluated wrong even if they referred the same 
entities in the gold standard because human an-
notators marked only one of them as an answer.  
Table 5. Opinion-bearing sentence identifica-
tion on Testset 2. (P: precision, R: recall, F: 
F-score, A: Accuracy, H1: Human1, H2: 
Human2) 
 P (%) R (%) F (%) A (%) 
H1 56.9 67.4 61.7 64.0 
H2 43.1 57.9 49.4 55.0 
 
 
Table 6: Results of Topic and Holder identi-
fication on Testset 2. (Sys: our system, BL: 
baseline) 
Topic Holder 
 
P(%) R(%) F(%) P(%) R(%) F(%)
H1 64.7 20.8 31.5 47.9 34.0 39.8
Sys 
H2 58.8 7.1 12.7 36.6 26.2 30.5
H1 12.5 9.4 10.7 20.0 28.3 23.4
BL 
H2 23.2 7.1 10.9 14.0 19.0 16.1
 
6
In the future, we need more annotated data for 
improved evaluation.   
5 Conclusion and Future Work 
This paper presented a methodology to identify 
an opinion with its holder and topic given a sen-
tence in online news media texts. We introduced 
an approach of exploiting semantic structure of a 
sentence, anchored to an opinion bearing verb or 
adjective. This method uses semantic role label-
ing as an intermediate step to label an opinion 
holder and topic using FrameNet data. Our 
method first identifies an opinion-bearing word, 
labels semantic roles related to the word in the 
sentence, and then finds a holder and a topic of 
the opinion word among labeled semantic roles. 
There has been little previous study in identi-
fying opinion holders and topics partly because it 
requires a great amount of annotated data. To 
overcome this barrier, we utilized FrameNet data 
by mapping target words to opinion-bearing 
words and mapping semantic roles to holders and 
topics. However, FrameNet has a limited number 
of words in its annotated corpus. For a broader 
coverage, we used a clustering technique to pre-
dict a most probable frame for an unseen word.  
Our experimental results showed that our sys-
tem performs significantly better than the base-
line. The baseline system results imply that opin-
ion holder and topic identification is a hard task. 
We believe that there are many complicated se-
mantic relations between opinion-bearing words 
and their holders and topics which simple rela-
tions such as subject and object relations are not 
able to capture. 
In the future, we plan to extend our list of 
opinion-bearing verbs and adjectives so that we 
can discover and apply more opinion-related 
frames. Also, it would be interesting to see how 
other types of part of speech such as adverbs and 
nouns affect the performance of the system. 
Reference 
Baker, Collin F. and Hiroaki Sato. 2003. The Frame-
Net Data and Software. Poster and Demonstration 
at Association for Computational Linguistics. Sap-
poro, Japan. 
Berger, Adam, Stephen Della Pietra, and Vincent 
Della Pietra. 1996. A maximum entropy approach 
to natural language processing, Computational Lin-
guistics, (22-1).  
Bethard, Steven, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Va-
sileios Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. 
Automatic Extraction of Opinion Propositions and 
their Holders, AAAI Spring Symposium on Explor-
ing Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and Ap-
plications. 
Choi, Y., Cardie, C., Riloff, E., and Patwardhan, S. 
2005. Identifying Sources of Opinions with Condi-
tional Random Fields and Extraction Patterns. Pro-
ceedings of HLT/EMNLP-05. 
Esuli, Andrea and Fabrizio Sebastiani. 2005. Deter-
mining the semantic orientation of terms through 
gloss classification. Proceedings of CIKM-05, 14th 
ACM International Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management, Bremen, DE, pp. 617-
624.  
Fillmore, C. Frame semantics and the nature of lan-
guage. 1976. In Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences: Conferences on the Origin and Devel-
opment of Language and Speech, Volume 280: 20-
32. 
Fleischman, Michael, Namhee Kwon, and Eduard 
Hovy. 2003. Maximum Entropy Models for Fra-
meNet Classification. Proceedings of EMNLP, 
Sapporo, Japan.  
Gildea, D. and Jurafsky, D. Automatic Labeling of 
semantic roles. 2002. In Computational Linguis-
tics. 28(3), 245-288. 
Harris, Zellig, 1954. Distributional structure. Word, 
10(23) :146--162. 
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Kathleen McKeown. 
1997. Predicting the Semantic Orientation of Ad-
jectives. Proceedings of 35th Annual Meeting of 
the Assoc. for Computational Linguistics (ACL-
97): 174-181 
Hatzivassiloglou, Vasileios and Wiebe, Janyce. 2000. 
Effects of Adjective Orientation and Gradability on 
Sentence Subjectivity. Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics 
(COLING-2000). Saarbr?cken, Germany. 
Hu, Minqing and Bing Liu. 2004. Mining and summa-
rizing customer reviews". Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery & Data Mining (KDD-2004), Seattle, 
Washington, USA. 
Kim, Soo-Min and Eduard Hovy. 2004. Determining 
the Sentiment of Opinions. Proceedings of COL-
ING-04. pp. 1367-1373. Geneva, Switzerland. 
Kim, Soo-Min and Eduard Hovy. 2005. Identifying 
Opinion Holders for Question Answering in Opin-
ion Texts. Proceedings of AAAI-05 Workshop on 
Question Answering in Restricted Domains 
Pang, Bo, Lillian Lee, and Shivakumar Vaithyana-
than. 2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment Classification 
using Machine Learning Techniques, Proceedings 
of EMNLP-2002. 
7
Pantel, Patrick and Dekang Lin. 2002. Discovering 
Word Senses from Text. Proceedings of ACM Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 
(KDD-02). pp. 613-619. Edmonton, Canada. 
Popescu, Ana-Maria and Oren Etzioni. 2005. 
Extracting Product Features and Opinions from 
Reviews , Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP 2005. 
Riloff, Ellen, Janyce Wiebe, and Theresa Wilson. 
2003. Learning Subjective Nouns Using Extraction 
Pattern Bootstrapping. Proceedings of Seventh 
Conference on Natural Language Learning 
(CoNLL-03). ACL SIGNLL. Pages 25-32. 
Turney, Peter D. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down? 
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised clas-
sification of reviews, Proceedings of ACL-02, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 417-424 
Wiebe, Janyce, Bruce M., Rebecca F., and Thomas P. 
O'Hara. 1999. Development and use of a gold stan-
dard data set for subjectivity classifications. Pro-
ceedings of ACL-99. University of Maryland, June, 
pp. 246-253. 
Wilson, Theresa, Janyce Wiebe, and Paul Hoffmann. 
2005. Recognizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-
Level Sentiment Analysis. Proceedings of 
HLT/EMNLP 2005, Vancouver, Canada 
 
8
