Proceedings of the Workshop on Task-Focused Summarization and Question Answering, pages 24?31,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Situated Question Answering in the Clinical Domain:
Selecting the Best Drug Treatment for Diseases
Dina Demner-Fushman1,3 and Jimmy Lin1,2,3
1Department of Computer Science
2College of Information Studies
3Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742, USA
demner@cs.umd.edu, jimmylin@umd.edu
Abstract
Unlike open-domain factoid questions,
clinical information needs arise within the
rich context of patient treatment. This en-
vironment establishes a number of con-
straints on the design of systems aimed
at physicians in real-world settings. In
this paper, we describe a clinical ques-
tion answering system that focuses on a
class of commonly-occurring questions:
?What is the best drug treatment for X??,
where X can be any disease. To evalu-
ate our system, we built a test collection
consisting of thirty randomly-selected dis-
eases from an existing secondary source.
Both an automatic and a manual evalua-
tion demonstrate that our system compares
favorably to PubMed, the search system
most commonly-used by physicians today.
1 Introduction
Over the past several years, question answering
(QA) has emerged as a general framework for ad-
dressing users? information needs. Instead of re-
turning ?hits?, as information retrieval systems do,
QA systems respond to natural language questions
with concise, targeted information. Recently, re-
search focus has shifted away from so-called fac-
toid questions such as ?What are pennies made
of?? and ?What country is Aswan High Dam lo-
cated in?? to more complex questions such as
?How have South American drug cartels been us-
ing banks in Liechtenstein to launder money?? and
?What was the Pentagon panel?s position with re-
spect to the dispute over the US Navy training
range on the island of Vieques???so-called ?re-
lationship? and ?opinion? questions, respectively.
These complex information needs differ from
factoid questions in many important ways. Un-
like factoids, they cannot be answered by named-
entities and other short noun phrases. They do not
occur in isolation, but are rather embedded within
a broader context, i.e., a ?scenario?. These com-
plex questions set forth parameters of the desired
knowledge, which may include additional facts
about the motivation of the information seeker,
her assumptions, her current state of knowledge,
etc. Presently, most systems that attempt to tackle
such complex questions are aimed at serving in-
telligence analysts, for activities such as counter-
terrorism and war-fighting.
Systems for addressing complex information
needs are interesting because they provide an op-
portunity to explore the role of semantic struc-
tures in question answering, e.g., (Narayanan and
Harabagiu, 2004). Opportunities include explicit
semantic representations for capturing the con-
tent of questions and documents, deep inferential
mechanisms (Moldovan et al, 2002), and attempts
to model task-specific influences in information-
seeking environments (Freund et al, 2005).
Our own interest in question answering falls
in line with these recent developments, but we
focus on a different type of user?the primary
care physician. The need to answer questions re-
lated to patient care at the point of service has
been well studied and documented (Gorman et
al., 1994; Ely et al, 1999; Ely et al, 2005).
However, research has shown that existing search
systems, e.g., PubMed, are often unable to sup-
ply clinically-relevant answers in a timely man-
ner (Gorman et al, 1994; Chambliss and Conley,
1996). Clinical question answering represents a
high-impact application that has the potential to
improve the quality of medical care.
24
From a research perspective, the clinical do-
main is attractive because substantial medical
knowledge has already been codified in the Uni-
fied Medical Language System (UMLS) (Lind-
berg et al, 1993). This large ontology en-
ables us to explore knowledge-rich techniques and
move beyond question answering methods primar-
ily driven by keyword matching. In this work, we
describe a paradigm of medical practice known as
evidence-based medicine and explain how it can
be computationally captured in a semantic domain
model. Two separate evaluations demonstrate that
semantic modeling yields gains in question an-
swering performance.
2 Considerations for Clinical QA
We begin our exploration of clinical question an-
swering by first discussing design constraints im-
posed by the domain and the information-seeking
environment. The practice of evidence-based
medicine (EBM) provides a well-defined process
model for situating our system. EBM is a widely-
accepted paradigm for medical practice that in-
volves the explicit use of current best evidence,
i.e., high-quality patient-centered clinical research
reported in the primary medical literature, to make
decisions about patient care. As shown by pre-
vious work (De Groote and Dorsch, 2003), cita-
tions from the MEDLINE database maintained by
the National Library of Medicine serve as a good
source of evidence.
Thus, we conceive of clinical question answer-
ing systems as fulfilling a decision-support role
by retrieving highly-relevant MEDLINE abstracts
in response to a clinical question. This repre-
sents a departure from previous systems, which fo-
cus on extracting short text segments from larger
sources. The implications of making potentially
life-altering decisions mean that all evidence must
be carefully examined in context. For example, the
efficacy of a drug in treating a disease is always
framed in the context of a specific study on a sam-
ple population, over a set duration, at some fixed
dosage, etc. The physician simply cannot recom-
mend a particular course of action without consid-
ering all these complex factors. Thus, an ?answer?
without adequate support is not useful. Given that
a MEDLINE abstract?on the order of 250 words,
equivalent to a long paragraph?generally encap-
sulates the context of a clinical study, it serves as a
logical answer unit and an entry point to the infor-
mation necessary to answer the physician?s ques-
tion (e.g., via drill-down to full text articles).
In order for a clinical QA system to be success-
ful, it must be suitably integrated into the daily ac-
tivities of a physician. Within a clinic or a hos-
pital setting, the traditional desktop application is
not the most ideal interface for a retrieval system.
In most cases, decisions about patient care must
be made by the bedside. Thus, a PDA is an ideal
vehicle for delivering question answering capabil-
ities (Hauser et al, 2004). However, the form fac-
tor and small screen size of such devices places
constraints on system design. In particular, since
the physician is unable to view large amounts of
text, precision is of utmost importance.
In summary, this section outlines considerations
for question answering in the clinical domain: the
necessity of contextualized answers, the rationale
for adopting MEDLINE abstract as the response
unit, and the importance of high precision.
3 EBM and Clinical QA
Evidence-based medicine not only supplies a pro-
cess model for situating question answering capa-
bilities, but also provides a framework for codify-
ing the knowledge involved in retrieving answers.
This section describes how the EBM paradigm
provides the basis of the semantic domain model
for our question answering system.
Evidence-based medicine offers three facets of
the clinical domain, that, when taken together,
describe a model for addressing complex clini-
cal information needs. The first facet, shown in
Table 1 (left column), describes the four main
tasks that physicians engage in. The second
facet pertains to the structure of a well-built clin-
ical question. Richardson et al (1995) identify
four key elements, as shown in Table 1 (middle
column). These four elements are often refer-
enced with a mnemonic PICO, which stands for
Patient/Problem, Intervention, Comparison, and
Outcome. Finally, the third facet serves as a tool
for appraising the strength of evidence, i.e., how
much confidence should a physician have in the
results? For this work, we adopted a system with
three levels of recommendations, as shown in Ta-
ble 1 (right column).
By integrating these three perspectives of
evidence-based medicine, we conceptualize clin-
ical question answering as ?semantic unifica-
tion? between information needs expressed in a
25
Clinical Tasks PICO Elements Strength of Evidence
Therapy: Selecting effective treat-
ments for patients, taking into account
other factors such as risk and cost.
Diagnosis: Selecting and interpret-
ing diagnostic tests, while considering
their precision, accuracy, acceptabil-
ity, cost, and safety.
Prognosis: Estimating the patient?s
likely course with time and anticipat-
ing likely complications.
Etiology: Identifying the causes for a
patient?s disease.
Patient/Problem: What is the pri-
mary problem or disease? What are
the characteristics of the patient (e.g.,
age, gender, co-existing conditions,
etc.)?
Intervention: What is the main inter-
vention (e.g., diagnostic test, medica-
tion, therapeutic procedure, etc.)?
Comparison: What is the main in-
tervention compared to (e.g., no inter-
vention, another drug, another thera-
peutic procedure, a placebo, etc.)?
Outcome: What is the effect of the
intervention (e.g., symptoms relieved
or eliminated, cost reduced, etc.)?
A-level evidence is based on con-
sistent, good quality patient-oriented
evidence presented in systematic re-
views, randomized controlled clini-
cal trials, cohort studies, and meta-
analyses.
B-level evidence is inconsistent, lim-
ited quality patient-oriented evidence
in the same types of studies.
C-level evidence is based on disease-
oriented evidence or studies less rigor-
ous than randomized controlled clin-
ical trials, cohort studies, systematic
reviews and meta-analyses.
Table 1: The three facets of evidence-based medicine.
PICO-based knowledge structure and correspond-
ing structures extracted fromMEDLINE abstracts.
Naturally, this matching process should be sensi-
tive to the clinical task and the strength of evidence
of the retrieved abstracts. As conceived, clini-
cal question answering is a knowledge-intensive
endeavor that requires automatic identification of
PICO elements from MEDLINE abstracts.
Ideally, a clinical question answering system
should be capable of directly performing this
semantic match on abstracts, but the size of
the MEDLINE database (over 16 million ci-
tations) makes this approach currently unfeasi-
ble. As an alternative, we rely on PubMed,1
a boolean search engine provided by the Na-
tional Library of Medicine, to retrieve an initial
set of results that we then postprocess in greater
detail?this is the standard two-stage architecture
commonly-employed by many question answer-
ing systems (Hirschman and Gaizauskas, 2001).
The complete architecture of our system is
shown in Figure 1. The query formulation mod-
ule converts the clinical question into a PubMed
search query, identifies the clinical task, and ex-
tracts the appropriate PICO elements. PubMed re-
turns an initial list of MEDLINE citations, which
is analyzed by the knowledge extractor to identify
clinically-relevant elements. These elements serve
as input to the semantic matcher, and are com-
pared to corresponding elements extracted from
the question. Citations are then scored and the top
ranking ones are returned as answers.
1http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/entrez/
Figure 1: Architecture of our clinical question an-
swering system.
Although we have outlined a general framework
for clinical question answering, the space of all
possible patient care questions is immense, and at-
tempts to develop a comprehensive system is be-
yond the scope of this paper. Instead, we focus on
a subset of therapy questions: specifically, ques-
tions of the form ?What is the best drug treatment
for X??, where X can be any disease. We have cho-
sen to tackle this class of questions because studies
of physicians? question-asking behavior in natural
settings have revealed that this question type oc-
curs frequently (Ely et al, 1999). By leveraging
the natural distribution of clinical questions, we
can make the greatest impact with the least amount
26
of development effort. For this class of questions,
we have implemented a working system with the
architecture described in Figure 1. The next three
sections detail each module.
4 Query Formulator
Since our system only handles one question type,
the query formulator is relatively simple: the task
is known in advance to be therapy and the Prob-
lem PICO element is the disease asked about in the
clinical question. In order to facilitate the semantic
matching process, we employMetaMap (Aronson,
2001) to identify the concept in the UMLS ontol-
ogy that corresponds to the disease; UMLS also
provides alternative names and other expansions.
The query formulator also generates a query
to PubMed, the National Library of Medicine?s
boolean search engine for MEDLINE. As an ex-
ample, the following query is issued to retrieve hits
for the disease ?meningitis?:
(Meningitis[mh:noexp]) AND drug therapy[sh]
AND hasabstract[text] AND Clinical Trial[pt]
AND English[Lang] AND humans[mh] AND
(1900[PDAT] : 2003/03[PDAT])
In order to get the best possible set of initial ci-
tations, we employ MeSH (Medical Subject Head-
ings) terms when available. MeSH terms are con-
trolled vocabulary concepts assigned manually by
trained medical librarians in the indexing process
(based on the full text of the article), and encode
a substantial amount of knowledge about the con-
tents of the citation. PubMed allows searches on
MeSH headings, which usually yield highly accu-
rate results. In addition, we limit retrieved cita-
tions to those that have the MeSH heading ?drug
therapy?and those that describe a clinical trial (an-
other metadata field). By default, PubMed orders
citations chronologically in reverse.
5 Knowledge Extractor
The knowledge extraction module provides the
basic frame elements used in the semantic
matching process, described in the next sec-
tion. We employ previously-implemented com-
ponents (Demner-Fushman and Lin, 2005) that
identify PICO elements within a MEDLINE cita-
tion using a combination of knowledge-based and
statistical machine-learning techniques. Of the
four PICO elements prescribed by evidence-based
medicine practitioners, only the Problem and Out-
come elements are relevant for this application
(there are no Interventions and Comparisons for
our question type). The Problem is the main dis-
ease under consideration in an abstract, and out-
comes are statements that assert clinical findings,
e.g., efficacy of a drug or a comparison between
two drugs. The ability to precisely identify these
clinically-relevant elements provides the founda-
tion for semantic question answering capabilities.
6 Semantic Matcher
Evidence-based medicine identifies three differ-
ent sets of factors that must be taken into account
when assessing citation relevance. These consid-
erations are computationally operationalized in the
semantic matcher, which takes as input elements
identified by the knowledge extractor and scores
the relevance of each PubMed citation with re-
spect to the question. After matching, the top-
scoring abstracts are presented to the physician as
answers. The individual score of a citation is com-
prised of three components:
SEBM = SPICO + SSoE + SMeSH (1)
By codifying the principles of evidence-based
medicine, our semantic matcher attempts to sat-
isfy information needs through conceptual analy-
sis, as opposed to simple keyword matching. In
the following subsections, we describe each of
these components in detail.
6.1 PICO Matching
The score of an abstract based on PICO elements,
SPICO, is broken up into two separate scores:
SPICO = Sproblem + Soutcome (2)
The first component in the above equation,
Sproblem, reflects a match between the primary prob-
lem in the query frame and the primary problem
identified in the abstract. A score of 1 is given if
the problems match exactly, based on their unique
UMLS concept id (as provided by MetaMap).
Matching based on concept ids addresses the issue
of terminological variation. Failing an exact match
of concept ids, a partial string match is given a
score of 0.5. If the primary problem in the query
has no overlap with the primary problem from the
abstract, a score of ?1 is given.
The outcome-based score Soutcome is the value as-
signed to the highest-scoring outcome sentence,
27
as determined by the knowledge extractor. Since
the desired outcome (i.e., improve the patient?s
condition) is implicit in the clinical question, our
system only considers the inherent quality of out-
come statements in the abstract. Given a match on
the primary problem, most clinical outcomes are
likely to be of interest to the physician.
For the drug treatment scenario, there is no in-
tervention or comparison, and so these elements
do not contribute to the semantic matching.
6.2 Strength of Evidence
The relevance score of a citation based on the
strength of evidence is calculated as follows:
SSoE = Sjournal + Sstudy + Sdate (3)
Citations published in core and high-impact
journals such as Journal of the American Medical
Association (JAMA) get a score of 0.6 for Sjournal,
and 0 otherwise. In terms of the study type, Sstudy,
clinical trials receive a score of 0.5; observational
studies, 0.3; all non-clinical publications, ?1.5;
and 0 otherwise. The study type is directly en-
coded as metadata in a MEDLINE citation.
Finally, recency factors into the strength of evi-
dence score according to the formula below:
Sdate = (yearpublication ? yearcurrent)/100 (4)
A mild penalty decreases the score of a citation
proportionally to the time difference between the
date of the search and the date of publication.
6.3 MeSH Matching
The final component of the EBM score reflects
task-specific considerations, and is computed from
MeSH terms associated with each citation:
SMeSH =
?
t?MeSH
?(t) (5)
The function ?(t) maps MeSH terms to positive
scores for positive indicators, negative scores for
negative indicators, or zero otherwise.
Negative indicators include MeSH headings as-
sociated with genomics, such as ?genetics? and
?cell physiology?. Positive indicators for therapy
were derived from the clinical query filters used in
PubMed searches (Haynes et al, 1994); examples
include ?drug administration routes? and any of its
children in the MeSH hierarchy. A score of ?1 is
given if theMeSH descriptor or qualifier is marked
as the main theme of the article (indicated via the
star notation by indexers), and ?0.5 otherwise.
7 Evaluation Methodology
Clinical Evidence (CE) is a periodic report cre-
ated by the British Medical Journal (BMJ) Pub-
lishing Group that summarizes the best treatments
for a few dozen diseases at the time of publica-
tion. We were able to mine the June 2004 edition
to create a test collection to evaluate our system.
Note that the existence of such secondary sources
does not obviate the need for clinical question an-
swering because they are perpetually falling out of
date due to rapid advances in medicine. Further-
more, such reports are currently created by highly-
experienced physicians, which is an expensive and
time-consuming process. From CE, we randomly
extracted thirty diseases, creating a development
set of five questions and a test set of twenty-five
questions. Some examples include: acute asthma,
chronic prostatitis, community acquired pneumo-
nia, and erectile dysfunction.
We conducted two evaluations?one auto-
matic and one manual?that compare the origi-
nal PubMed hits and the output of our semantic
matcher. The first evaluation is based on ROUGE,
a commonly-used summarization metric that com-
putes the unigram overlap between a particular
text and one or more reference texts.2 The treat-
ment overview for each disease in CE is accompa-
nied by a number of citations (used in writing the
overview itself)?the abstract texts of these cited
articles serve as our references. We adopt this ap-
proach because medical journals require abstracts
that provide factual information summarizing the
main points of the studies. We assume that the
closer an abstract is to these reference abstracts (as
measured by ROUGE-1 precision), the more rele-
vant it is. On average, each disease overview con-
tains 48.4 citations; however, we were only able
to gather abstracts of those that were contained in
MEDLINE (34.7 citations per disease, min 8, max
100). For evaluation purposes, we restricted ab-
stracts under consideration to those that were pub-
lished before our edition of CE. To quantify the
performance of our system, we computed the av-
erage ROUGE score over the top one, three, five,
and ten hits of our EBM and baseline systems.
To supplement our automatic evaluation, we
also conducted a double-blind manual evaluation
2We ran ROUGE-1.5.5 with DUC 2005 settings.
28
PubMed EBM PICO SoE MeSH
1 0.160 0.205 (+27.7%)M 0.186 (+16.1%)? 0.192 (+20.0%)? 0.166 (+3.6%)?
3 0.162 0.202 (+24.6%)N 0.192 (+18.0%)N 0.204 (+25.5%)N 0.172 (+6.1%)?
5 0.166 0.198 (+19.5%)N 0.196 (+18.0%)N 0.201 (+21.3%)N 0.168 (+1.2%)?
10 0.170 0.196 (+15.5%)N 0.191 (+12.5%)N 0.195 (+15.1%)N 0.174 (+2.8%)?
Table 2: Results of automatic evaluation: average ROUGE score using cited abstracts in CE as references.
The EBM column represents performance of our complete domain model. PICO, SoE, and MeSH rep-
resent performance of each component. (? denotes n.s., M denotes sig. at 0.95, N denotes sig. at 0.99)
PubMed results EBM-reranked results
Effect of vitamin A supplementation on childhood morbid-
ity and mortality.
Intrathecal chemotherapy in carcinomatous meningitis from
breast cancer.
Isolated leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (carcinomatous
meningitis) after taxane-induced major remission in patients
with advanced breast cancer.
A comparison of ceftriaxone and cefuroxime for the treat-
ment of bacterial meningitis in children.
Randomised comparison of chloramphenicol, ampicillin,
cefotaxime, and ceftriaxone for childhood bacterial menin-
gitis.
The beneficial effects of early dexamethasone administra-
tion in infants and children with bacterial meningitis.
Table 3: Titles of the top abstracts retrieved in response to the question ?What is the best treatment for
meningitis??, before and after applying our semantic reranking algorithm.
of the system. The top five citations from both
the original PubMed results and the output of our
semantic matcher were gathered, blinded, and ran-
domized (see Table 3 for an example of top results
obtained by PubMed and our system). The first
author of this paper, who is a medical doctor, man-
ually evaluated the abstracts. Since the sources of
the abstracts were hidden, judgments were guar-
anteed to be impartial. All abstracts were evalu-
ated on a four point scale: not relevant, marginally
relevant, relevant, and highly relevant, which cor-
responds to a score of zero to three.
8 Results
The results of our automatic evaluation are shown
in Table 2: the rows show average ROUGE scores
at one, three, five, and ten hits, respectively. In
addition to the PubMed baseline and our com-
plete EBM model, we conducted a component-
level analysis of our semantic matching algorithm.
Three separate ablation studies isolate the effects
of the PICO-based score, the strength of evi-
dence score, and the MeSH-based score (columns
?PICO?, ?SoE?, and ?MeSH?).
At all document cutoffs, the quality of the
EBM-reranked hits is higher than that of the origi-
nal PubMed hits, as measured by ROUGE. The dif-
ferences are statistically significant, according to
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, the standard non-
parametric test employed in IR.
Based on the component analysis, we can see
that the strength of evidence score is responsi-
ble for the largest performance gain, although
the combination of all three components outper-
forms each one individually (for the most part).
All three components of our semantic model con-
tribute to the overall QA performance, which is
expected because clinical relevance is a multi-
faceted property that requires a multitude of con-
siderations. Evidence-based medicine provides a
theory of these factors, and we have shown that a
question answering algorithm which operational-
izes EBM yields good results.
The distribution of human judgments from our
manual evaluation is shown in Figure 2. For
the development set, the average human judg-
ment of the original PubMed hits is 1.52 (be-
tween ?marginally relevant? and ?relevant?); after
semantic matching, 2.32 (better than ?relevant?).
For the test set, the averages are 1.49 before rank-
ing and 2.10 after semantic matching. These re-
sults show that our system performs significantly
better than the PubMed baseline.
The performance improvement observed in our
experiments is encouraging, considering that we
were starting off with a strong state-of-the-art
29
Figure 2: Results of our manual evaluation: distribution of judgments, for development set (left) and test
set (right). (0=not relevant, 1=marginally relevant, 2=relevant, 3=highly relevant)
PubMed baseline that leverages MeSH terms. All
initial citations retrieved by PubMed were clinical
trials and ?about? the disease in question, as deter-
mined by human indexers. Our work demonstrates
that principles of evidence-based medicine can be
codified in an algorithm.
Since a number of abstracts were both auto-
matically evaluated with ROUGE and manually
assessed, it is possible to determine the degree
to which automatic metrics predict human judg-
ments. For the 125 human judgments gathered
on the test set, we computed a Pearson?s r score
of 0.544, which indicates moderate predictiveness.
Due to the structure of our PubMed query, the key-
word content of retrieved abstracts are relatively
homogeneous. Nevertheless, automatic evaluation
with ROUGE appears to be useful.
9 Discussion and Related Work
Recently, researchers have become interested
in restricted-domain question answering because
it provides an opportunity to explore the use
of knowledge-rich techniques without having
to tackle the commonsense reasoning problem.
Knowledge-based techniques dependent on rich
semantic representations contrast with TREC-
style factoid question answering, which is primar-
ily driven by keyword matching and named-entity
detection.
Our work represents a successful case study of
how semantic models can be employed to capture
domain knowledge (the practice of medicine, in
our case). The conception of question answer-
ing as the matching of knowledge frames provides
us with an opportunity to experiment with seman-
tic representations that capture the content of both
documents and information needs. In our case,
PICO-based scores were found to have a positive
impact on performance. The strength of evidence
and the MeSH-based scores represent attempts to
model user requirements by leveraging meta-level
information not directly present in either questions
or candidate answers. Both contribute positively
to performance. Overall, the construction of our
semantic model is enabled by the UMLS ontol-
ogy, which provides an enumeration of relevant
concepts (e.g., the names of diseases, drugs, etc.)
and semantic relations between those concepts.
Question answering in the clinical domain is an
emerging area of research that has only recently
begun to receive serious attention. As a result,
there exist relatively few points of comparison to
our own work, as the research space is sparsely
populated.
The idea that information systems should
be sensitive to the practice of evidence-based
medicine is not new. Many researchers have stud-
ied MeSH terms associated with basic clinical
tasks (Mendonc?a and Cimino, 2001; Haynes et al,
1994). Although originally developed as a tool to
assist in query formulation, Booth (2000) pointed
out that PICO frames can be employed to struc-
ture IR results for improving precision; PICO-
based querying is merely an instance of faceted
querying, which has been widely used by librari-
ans since the invention of automated retrieval sys-
tems. The feasibility of automatically identifying
outcome statements in secondary sources has been
demonstrated by Niu and Hirst (2004), but our
work differs in its focus on the primary medical lit-
erature. Approaching clinical needs from a differ-
ent perspective, the PERSIVAL system leverages
patient records to rerank search results (McKeown
et al, 2003). Since the primary focus is on person-
30
alization, this work can be viewed as complemen-
tary to our own.
The dearth of related work and the lack of a pre-
existing clinical test collection to a large extent ex-
plains the ad hoc nature of some aspects of our
semantic matching algorithm. All weights were
heuristically chosen to reflect our understanding
of the domain, and were not optimized in a prin-
cipled manner. Nevertheless, performance gains
observed in the development set carried over to
the blind held-out test collection, providing con-
fidence in the generality of our methods. Devel-
oping a more formal scoring model for evidence-
based medicine will be the subject of future work.
10 Conclusion
We see this work as having two separate contribu-
tions. From the viewpoint of computational lin-
guistics, we have demonstrated the effectiveness
of a knowledge-rich approach to QA based on
matching questions with answers at the semantic
level. From the viewpoint of medical informat-
ics, we have shown how principles of evidence-
based medicine can be operationalized in a sys-
tem to support physicians. We hope that this work
paves the way for future high-impact applications.
11 Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National
Library of Medicine. The second author wishes to
thank Esther and Kiri for their loving support.
References
A. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomedi-
cal text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: The MetaMap
program. In Proceeding of the AMIA 2001.
A. Booth. 2000. Formulating the question. In
A. Booth and G. Walton, editors, Managing Knowl-
edge in Health Services. Facet Publishing.
M. Chambliss and J. Conley. 1996. Answering clinical
questions. The Journal of Family Practice, 43:140?
144.
S. De Groote and J. Dorsch. 2003. Measuring use
patterns of online journals and databases. Journal
of the Medical Library Association, 91(2):231?240,
April.
D. Demner-Fushman and J. Lin. 2005. Knowledge ex-
traction for clinical question answering: Preliminary
results. In Proceedings of the AAAI-05 Workshop on
Question Answering in Restricted Domains.
J. Ely, J. Osheroff, M. Ebell, G. Bergus, B. Levy,
M. Chambliss, and E. Evans. 1999. Analysis of
questions asked by family doctors regarding patient
care. BMJ, 319:358?361.
J. Ely, J. Osheroff, M. Chambliss, M. Ebell, and
M. Rosenbaum. 2005. Answering physicians? clin-
ical questions: Obstacles and potential solutions.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Asso-
ciation, 12(2):217?224, March-April.
L. Freund, E. Toms, and C. Clarke. 2005. Modeling
task-genre relationships for IR in the Workplace. In
Proceedings of SIGIR 2005.
P. Gorman, J. Ash, and L. Wykoff. 1994. Can pri-
mary care physicians? questions be answered using
the medical journal literature? Bulletin of the Medi-
cal Library Association, 82(2):140?146, April.
S. Hauser, D. Demner-Fushman, G. Ford, and
G. Thoma. 2004. PubMed on Tap: Discovering
design principles for online information delivery to
handheld computers. In Proceedings of MEDINFO
2004.
R. Haynes, N. Wilczynski, K. McKibbon, C. Walker,
and J. Sinclair. 1994. Developing optimal search
strategies for detecting clinically sound studies in
MEDLINE. Journal of the American Medical In-
formatics Association, 1(6):447?458.
L. Hirschman and R. Gaizauskas. 2001. Natural
language question answering: The view from here.
Natural Language Engineering, 7(4):275?300.
D. Lindberg, B. Humphreys, and A. McCray. 1993.
The Unified Medical Language System. Methods of
Information in Medicine, 32(4):281?291, August.
K. McKeown, N. Elhadad, and V. Hatzivassiloglou.
2003. Leveraging a common representation for per-
sonalized search and summarization in a medical
digital library. In Proceedings JCDL 2003.
E. Mendonc?a and J. Cimino. 2001. Building a knowl-
edge base to support a digital library. In Proceedings
of MEDINFO 2001.
D. Moldovan, M. Pas?ca, S. Harabagiu, and M. Sur-
deanu. 2002. Performance issues and error analysis
in an open-domain question answering system. In
Proceedings of ACL 2002.
S. Narayanan and S. Harabagiu. 2004. Question an-
swering based on semantic structures. In Proceed-
ings of COLING 2004.
Y. Niu and G. Hirst. 2004. Analysis of semantic
classes in medical text for question answering. In
Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Question
Answering in Restricted Domains.
W. Richardson, M. Wilson, J. Nishikawa, and R. Hay-
ward. 1995. The well-built clinical question: A
key to evidence-based decisions. American Col-
lege of Physicians Journal Club, 123(3):A12?A13,
November-December.
31
