Numerical Data Integration for Cooperative Question-Answering
Ve?ronique Moriceau
Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse
118, route de Narbonne
31062 Toulouse cedex 09, France
moriceau@irit.fr
Abstract
In this paper, we present an approach
which aims at providing numerical an-
swers in a question-answering system.
These answers are generated in a coop-
erative way: they explain the variation of
numerical values when several values, ap-
parently incoherent, are extracted from the
web as possible answers to a question.
1 Introduction
Search engines on the web and most existing
question-answering systems provide the user with
a set of hyperlinks and/or web page extracts con-
taining answer(s) to a question. These answers
may be incoherent to a certain degree: they may be
equivalent, complementary, contradictory, at dif-
ferent levels of precision or specifity, etc. It is then
quite difficult for the user to know which answer
is the correct one.
In a cooperative perspective, we propose an ap-
proach for answer generation in natural language
which uses answer integration. When several
possible answers are selected by the extraction
engine, the goal is to define a coherent core from
candidate answers and to generate a cooperative
answer, i.e. an answer with explanations. We
assume that all web pages are equally reliable
since page provenance information (defined in
(McGuinness and Pinheiro da Silva, 2004) e.g.,
source, date, author, etc.) is difficult to obtain.
To adequately deal with data integration in
question-answering, it is essential to define pre-
cisely relations existing between potential an-
swers. In this introduction, we first present related
works. Then, we define a general typology of re-
lations between candidate answers.
1.1 Related works
Most of existing systems on the web produce a
set of answers to a question in the form of hyper-
links or page extracts, ranked according to a rel-
evance score. For example, COGEX (Moldovan
et al, 2003) uses its logic prover to extract lexical
relationships between the question and its candi-
date answers. The answers are then ranked based
on their proof scores. Other systems define rela-
tionships between web page extracts or texts con-
taining possible answers: for example, (Radev and
McKeown, 1998) and (Harabagiu and Lacatusu,
2004) define agreement (when two sources report
the same information), addition (when a second
source reports additional information), contradic-
tion (when two sources report conflicting informa-
tion), etc. These relations can be classified into
the 4 relations defined by (Webber et al, 2002),
i.e. inclusion, equivalence, aggregation and al-
ternative which we present below.
Most question-answering systems provide an-
swers which take into account neither information
given by all candidate answers nor their inconsis-
tency. This is the point we focus on in the follow-
ing section.
1.2 A general typology of integration
mechanisms
To better characterize our problem, we collected
a corpus of about 100 question-answer pairs in
French that reflect different inconsistency prob-
lems (most of pairs are obtained via Google or
QRISTAL1). We first assume that all candidate an-
swers obtained via an extraction engine are poten-
tially correct, i.e. they are of the semantic type
expected by the question.
1www.qristal.fr, Synapse De?veloppement.
42 KRAQ06
For each question of our corpus, a set of possi-
ble answers is extracted from the web. The goal
of our corpus analysis is to identify relations be-
tween those answers and to define a general typol-
ogy of associated integration mechanisms. We use
for this purpose the 4 relations defined in (Web-
ber et al, 2002) and for each relation, we propose
one or several integration mechanisms in order to
generate answers which take into account charac-
teristics and particularities of candidate answers.
1.2.1 Inclusion
A candidate answer is in an inclusion relation
if it entails another answer (for example, concepts
of candidate answers linked in an ontology by the
is-a or part-of relations). For example, in Brittany
and in France are correct answers to the question
Where is Brest?, linked by an inclusion relation
since Brittany is a part of France.
1.2.2 Equivalence
Candidate answers which are linked by an
equivalence relation are consistent and entail mu-
tually. The corpus analysis allows us to identify
two main types of equivalence:
(1) Lexical equivalence: use of acronyms or
foreign language, synonymies, metonymies, para-
phrases, proportional series. For example, to the
question Who killed John Lennon?, Mark Chap-
man, the murderer of John Lennon and John
Lennon?s killer Mark Chapman are equivalent an-
swers.
(2) Equivalence with inference: in a number of
cases, some common knowledge, inferences or
computations are necessary to detect equivalence
relations. For example, The A320 is 22 and The
A320 was built in 1984 are equivalent answers to
the question How old is the Airbus A320?.
1.2.3 Aggregation
The aggregation relation defines a set of con-
sistent answers when the question accepts several
different ones. In this case, all candidate answers
are potentially correct and can be integrated in the
form of a conjunction of all these answers. For
example, an answer to the question Where is Dis-
neyland? can be in Tokyo, Paris, Hong-Kong and
Los Angeles.
1.2.4 Alternative
The alternative relation defines a set of inconsis-
tent answers. In the case of questions expecting a
unique answer, only one answer among candidates
is correct. On the contrary, all candidates can be
correct answers.
(1) A simple solution is to propose a disjunc-
tion of candidate answers. For example, if the
question When does autumn begin? has the can-
didate answers Autumn begins on September 21st
and Autumn begins on September 20th, an answer
such as Autumn begins on either September 20th
or September 21st can be proposed. (Moriceau,
2005) proposes an integration method for answers
of type date.
(2) If candidate answers have common charac-
teristics, it is possible to integrate them according
to these characteristics (?greatest common denom-
inator?). For example, the question When does the
?fe?te de la musique? take place? has the follow-
ing answers June 1st 1982, June 21st 1983, ...,
June 21st 2005. Here, the extraction engine se-
lects pages containing the dates of music festivals
over the years. Since these candidate answers have
day and month in common, an answer such as The
?fe?te de la musique? takes place every June 21st
can be proposed (Moriceau, 2005).
(3) Numerical values can be integrated in the
form of an interval, average or comparison. For
example, if the question How far is Paris from
Toulouse? has the candidate answers 713 km, 678
km and 681 km, answers such as Paris is at about
690 km from Toulouse (average) or The distance
between Paris and Toulouse is between 678 and
713 km (interval) can be proposed.
2 Motivations
In this paper, we focus on answer elaboration
from several answers of type numerical (case (3)
above). Numerical questions deal with numerical
properties such as distance, quantity, weight, age,
etc. In order to identify the different problems, let
us consider the following example :
What is the average age of marriage in France?
- In 1972, the average age of marriage was 24.5
for men and 22.4 for women. In 2005, it is 30 for
men and 28 for women.
- According to an investigation carried out by
FNAIM in 1999, the average age of marriage is
27.7 for women and 28.9 for men.
- The average age of marriage in France increased
from 24.5 to 26.9 for women and from 26.5 to 29
for men between 1986 and 1995.
This set of potential answers may seem incoher-
ent but their internal coherence can be made ap-
43 KRAQ06
parent once a variation criterion is identified. In a
cooperative perspective, an answer can be for ex-
ample:
In 2005, the average age of marriage in France is
30 for men and 28 for women.
It increased by about 5.5 years between 1972 and
2005.
This answer is composed of:
1. a direct answer to the question,
2. an explanation characterizing the variation
mode of the numerical value.
To generate this kind of answer, it is necessary (1)
to integrate candidate answers in order to elabo-
rate a direct answer (for example by solving incon-
sistencies), and (2) to integrate candidate answers
characteristics in order to generate an explanation.
In the following sections, we first define a typol-
ogy of numerical answers and then briefly present
the general architecture of the system which gen-
erates cooperative numerical answers.
2.1 A typology of numerical answers
To define the different types of numerical answers,
we collected a set of 80 question-answer pairs
about prices, quantities, age, time, weight, temper-
ature, speed and distance. The goal is to identify
for each question-answer pair:
- if the question expects one or several answers
(learnt from texts and candidate answers),
- why extracted numerical values are different (is
this an inconsistency? an evolution?).
2.1.1 The question accepts only one answer
For example, How long is the Cannes Interna-
tional Film Festival?. In this case, if there are sev-
eral candidate answers, there is an inconsistency
which has to be solved (cf. section 4.1).
2.1.2 The question accepts several answers
This is the case when numerical values vary
according to certain criteria. Let us consider the
following examples.
Example 1 :
How many inhabitants are there in France?
- Population census in France (1999): 61632485.
- 61.7: number of inhabitants in France in 2004.
In this example, the numerical value (quantity) is
a property which changes over time (1999, 2004).
Example 2 :
What is the average age of marriage of women in
2004?
- In Iran, the average age of marriage of women
went from 19 to 21 years in 2004.
- In 2004, Moroccan women get married at the
age of 27.
In this example, the numerical value (age of
marriage) varies according to place (in Iran,
Moroccan).
Example 3 :
At which temperature do I have to serve wine?
- Red wine must be served at room temperature.
- Champagne: between 8 and 10 ? C.
- White wine: between 8 and 11 ? C.
Here, the numerical value (temperature) varies
according to the question focus (wine).
The corpus analysis allows us to identify 3 main
variation criteria, namely time, place and restric-
tion (restriction on the focus, for example: Cham-
pagne/wine). These criteria can be combined:
some numerical values vary according to time and
place, to time and restrictions, etc. (for exam-
ple, the average age of marriage vary according to
time, place and restrictions on men/women). Note
that there are several levels of restrictions and that
only restrictions of the same type can be compared
(cf. section 3.2). For example, metropolitan pop-
ulation and population of overseas regions are re-
strictions of the same ontological type (geograph-
ical place) whereas prison population is a restric-
tion of a different type and is not comparable to
the previous ones.
2.2 Architecture of the system
Figure 1 presents the general architecture of our
system which allows us to generate answers and
explanations from several different numerical an-
swers.
Questions are submitted in natural language to
QRISTAL which analyses them (focus, answer ex-
pected type) and which selects potential answers
from the web: QRISTAL searches web pages con-
taining the keywords of the query and synonyms
(extraction engine). Then, an extraction gram-
mar constructs a set of frames from candidate web
pages. From the frame set, the variation crite-
ria and mode of the searched numerical value are
identified. Finally, a natural language answer is
generated explaining those characteristics. Each
of these stages is presented in the next sections.
44 KRAQ06
Figure 1: Architecture
3 Answer characterization
Answer characterization consists in 2 main stages:
- information extraction from candidate web
pages,
- characterization of variation (criteria and mode)
of numerical values if necessary.
3.1 Answer extraction
Once QRISTAL has selected candidate web
pages (those containing the question focus and
having the expected semantic type), a grammar
is applied to extract information needed for the
generation of an appropriate cooperative answer.
This information is mainly:
- the searched numerical value (val),
- the unit of measure,
- the question focus and its synonyms (focus)
(for the moment, synonyms are not considered
because it requires a lot of resources, especially in
an open domain),
- the date and place of the information,
- the restriction(s) on the question focus (essen-
tially, adjectives or relative clauses).
In addition, the corpus analysis shows that
some other information is essential for infering
the precision degree or the variation mode of
values. It is mainly linguistic clues indicating:
- the precision of the numerical value (for example
adverbs or prepositions such as in about 700, ...),
- a variation of the value (for example temporal
adverbs, verbs of change/movement as in the
price increased to 200 euro).
We define a frame ai which gathers all this in-
formation for a numerical value:
ai =
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
V al =
Precision =
Unit =
Focus =
Date =
P lace =
Restriction =
V ariation =
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
A dedicated grammar extracts this information
from candidate web pages and produces the set A
of N candidate answers: A = {a1, ..., aN}.
We use a gapping grammar (Dahl and Abramson,
1984) to gap elements which are not useful (in
the example According to an investigation car-
ried out by FNAIM in 1999, the average age of
marriage is 27.7 for women and 28.9 for men, el-
ements in bold are not useful). We give below the
main rules of the grammar, optional elements are
between brackets:
Answer ? Nominal Sentence | Verbal Sentence
Nominal Sentence ? Focus (Restriction), ..., (Date), ...,
(Place), ..., (Precision) Val (Unit)
Verbal Sentence ? Focus (Restriction), ..., (Date), ...,
(Place), ..., Verb, ..., (Precision) Val (Unit)
Verb ? VerbQuestion | Variation
VerbQuestion ? count | estimate | weigh | ...
Variation ? go up | decrease | ...
Precision ? about | on average | ...
Place ? Country | City | ...
Time ? Date | Period | ...
Restriction ? Adjective | Relative | ...
.......
Figure 2 shows an extraction result.
A syntactic analysis is also necessary to check
the relevance of extracted information. For exam-
ple, suppose that the answer population of cities
of France which have more than 2000 inhabitants
(...) is proposed to the question How many in-
habitants are there in France?. A syntactic anal-
ysis has to identify the expression cities of France
which (...) as a restriction of population and to
45 KRAQ06
Figure 2: Results of extraction
infer that 2000 inhabitants is a property of those
cities and that it is not an answer to the question.
We plan to investigate the lexical elements (prepo-
sitions, predicative terms, etc.) necessary to this
analysis.
Elements of extraction evaluation are presented
in figure 3: we submitted 30 questions to Google
and QRISTAL. Our system can select the correct
direct answer provided that QRISTAL returns the
correct answer among relevant pages (for 87% of
the questions we evaluated) and that our grammar
succeeds in extracting relevant information (this
has to be evaluated).
Figure 3: Elements of evaluation
3.2 Variation criteria
Once we have the frames representing the different
numerical values, the goal is to determine if there
is a variation and to identify the variation criteria
of the value. In fact, we assume that there is a vari-
ation if there is at least k different numerical val-
ues with different criteria (time, place, restriction)
among the N frames (k is a rate which depends
on N : the more candidate answers there are, the
greater is k). Thus, a numerical value varies ac-
cording to:
1. time if card ({ai, such as ? ai, aj ? A,
ai(V al) 6= aj(V al)
? ai(Unit) = aj(Unit)
? ai(Date) 6= aj(Date) }) ? k
2. place if card ({ai, such as ? ai, aj ? A,
ai(V al) 6= aj(V al)
? ai(Unit) = aj(Unit)
? ai(Place) 6= aj(Place) }) ? k
3. restriction if card ({ai, such as
? ai, aj ? A, ai(V al) 6= aj(V al)
? ai(Unit) = aj(Unit)
? ai(Restriction) 6= aj(Restriction)})
? k
4. time and place if (1) ? (2)
5. time and restriction if (1) ? (3)
6. place and restriction if (2) ? (3)
7. time, place and restriction if (1)? (2)? (3)
Numerical values can be compared only if they
have the same unit of measure. If not, they have to
be converted.
For each criterion (time, place or restriction),
only information of the same semantic type and of
the same ontological level can be compared. For
example, metropolitan population and prison pop-
ulation are restrictions of a different ontological
level and cannot be compared. In the same way,
place criteria can only be compared if they have
the same ontological level: for example, prices in
Paris and in Toulouse can be compared because
the ontological level of both places is city. On the
contrary, prices in Paris and in France cannot be
compared since the ontological levels are respec-
tively city and country. Several ontologies of ge-
ographical places exist, for example (Maurel and
Piton, 1999) but a deep analysis of restrictions is
necessary to identify the kind of implied knowl-
edge.
In the particular cases where no information
has been extracted for some criteria, it is also
necessary to define some comparison rules. Thus,
let crit ? {time, place, restriction} and
ai, aj ? A,
- if no information has been extracted for 2 com-
pared criteria, then we consider that those criteria
are equal (there is no information indicating that
there is a variation according to those criteria),
i.e. if ai(crit) = ? and aj(crit) = ?, then
46 KRAQ06
ai(crit) = aj(crit)
- if no information has been extracted for one of
the 2 compared criteria, then we consider that
those criteria are different (there is a variation),
i.e. if ai(crit) = ? and aj(crit) 6= ?, then
ai(crit) 6= aj(crit)
In the example of figure 2, the price varies ac-
cording to time, place and restriction. In the fol-
lowing example (figure 4), the price of gas varies
according to time (September 2005/ ?) and place
(Paris/Toulouse). For space reasons, we give only
2 frames for each example but it is obviously not
sufficient to conclude.
Figure 4: Example of variation
Variation criteria of numerical values are learnt
from texts but can also be infered (or confirmed),
for some domains, by common knowledge. For
example, the triangle inequality states that for any
three points x, y, z, we have:
distance(x, y) ? distance(x, z) + distance(z, y).
From this, we can infer that a distance between
two points vary according to restriction (itinerary).
In the following sections, we focus on numeri-
cal values which vary according to time.
3.3 Variation mode
The last step consists in identifying the variation
mode of values. The idea is to draw a trend (in-
crease, decrease, ...) of variaton in time so that an
explanation can be generated. For this purpose, we
have a set of couples (numerical value, date) repre-
senting the set of extracted answers. From this set,
we draw a regression line (a line which comes as
close to the points as possible) which determines
the relationship between the two variables value
and date.
The correlation between two variables reflects
the degree to which the variables are related. In
particular, Pearson?s correlation (r) reflects the de-
gree of linear relationship between two variables.
It ranges from +1 to ?1. A correlation of +1
means that there is a perfect positive linear rela-
tionship between variables. For example, figure
5 shows that a positive Pearson?s correlation im-
plies a general increase of values (trend) whereas
a negative Pearson?s correlation implies a general
decrease. On the contrary, if r is low (?0.6 <
r < 0.6), then the trend (increase or decrease) is
mathematically considered as random 2.
Figure 5: Variation mode
This method determines the variation mode of
numerical values (it gives a variation trend) and
determines if the values are strongly dependent on
time or not (the highest r is, the more the numeri-
cal values are dependent on time).
Figure 6 shows the results for the question How
many inhabitants are there in France? Differ-
ent numerical values and associated dates are ex-
tracted from web pages. The Pearson?s correla-
tion is 0.682 meaning that the number of inhab-
itants increases according to time (between 1999
and 2005).
4 Answer generation
Once the searched numerical values have been ex-
tracted and characterized by their variation crite-
ria and mode, a cooperative answer is generated in
natural language. It is composed of two parts:
1. a direct answer if available,
2. an explanation of the value variation.
2Statistical Methods for Research Workers, R. Fisher
(1925)
47 KRAQ06
Figure 6: Variation mode: How many inhabitants
are there in France?
In the following sections, we present some prereq-
uisites to the construction of each of these parts in
term of resources and knowledge.
4.1 Direct answer generation
There are mainly two cases: either one or several
criteria are constrained by the question (as in
How many inhabitants are there in France in
2005? where criteria of place and time are given),
or some criteria are omitted (or implicit) (as
in How many inhabitants are there in France?
where there is no information on time). In the
first case, the numerical value satisfying the
constraints is chosen (unification between the
criteria of the question and those extracted from
web pages). In the second case, we assume that
the user wants to have the most recent information.
We focus here on answers which vary accord-
ing to time. Aberrant values are first filtered out
by applying classical statistical methods. Then,
when there is only one numerical value which
satisfies the temporal constraint (given by the
question or the most recent date), then the direct
answer is generated from this value. When there
is no numerical value satisfying the temporal
constraint, only the second part of the answer
(explanation) is generated.
In the case of several numerical values satisfying
the temporal constraint, there may be approximate
values. For example, the following answers (cf
figure 6) are extracted for the question How many
inhabitants were there in France in 2004?:
(1) 61.7 millions: number of inhabitants in France
in 2004.
(2) In 2004, the French population is estimated to
61 millions.
(3) There are 62 millions of inhabitants in France
in 2004.
Each of these values is more or less approxi-
mate. The goal is then to identify which values
are approximate and to decide which numerical
value can be used for the generation task.
For that purpose, we proposed to 20 subjects a
set of question-answer pairs. For each question,
subjects were asked to choose one answer among
a set of precise and approximate values and to
explain why. For the previous question, 75%
of the subjects prefer answer (1) because it is
the most precise one, even if they consider it as
an approximation. In majority, subjects explain
that an approximate value is sufficient for great
numbers and that values must not be rounded up
(they proposed 61.7 millions or almost 62 millions
as an answer). On the contrary, subjects do not
accept approximate values in the financial domain
(price, salary, ...) but rather prefer an interval of
values.
Thus, the direct answer is generated from the
most precise numerical value if available. If all
values are approximate, then the generated answer
has to explain it: we plan to use prepositions of
approximation (about, almost, ...) or linguistics
clues which have been extracted from web pages
(precision in the frames). The choice of a partic-
ular preposition depends on the degree of preci-
sion/approximation of numerical values: PrepNet
(Saint-Dizier, 2005) provides a relatively deep de-
scription of preposition syntactic and semantic be-
haviours.
4.2 Explanation generation
Obviously, the generation of the cooperative part
of the answer is the most complex because it re-
quires complex lexical knowledge. We present
briefly some of the necessary lexical resources.
For example, verbs can be used in the answer to
express numerical variations. Lexical descriptions
are necessary and we use for that purpose a classi-
fication of French verbs (Saint-Dizier, 1999) based
on the main classes defined by WordNet. The
classes we are interested in for our task are mainly
those of verbs of change (increase, decrease, etc.:
in total, 262 verbs in French) and of verbs of
movement (climb, move forward/backward, etc.:
in total, 252 verbs in French) used metaphori-
48 KRAQ06
cally (Moriceau and Saint-Dizier, 2003). From
these classes, we have characterized sub-classes
of growth, decrease, etc., so that the lexicalisa-
tion task is constrained by the type of verbs which
has to be used according to the variation mode (if
verbs are extracted from web pages as linguistics
clues of variation, they can also be reused in the
answer).
A deep semantics of verbs (change, movement)
is necessary to generate an answer which takes
into account the characteristics of numerical vari-
ation as well as possible: for example, the vari-
ation mode but also the speed and range of the
variation. Thus, for each sub-class of verbs and
its associated variation mode, we need a refined
description of ontological domains and selectional
restrictions so that an appropriate verb lexicalisa-
tion can be chosen: which verb can be applied to
prices, to age, etc.? We plan to use proportional se-
ries representing verb sub-classes according to the
speed and amplitude of variation. For example, the
use of climb (resp. drop) indicates a faster growth
(resp. decrease) than go up (resp. go down): the
verb climb is prefered for the generation of The
increase of gas prices climb to 20.3% in october
2005 whereas go up is prefered in The increase of
gas prices go up to 7.2% in september 2005.
As for direct answer generation, verbs can possi-
bly be associated with a preposition that refines
the information (The average age of marriage in-
creased by about 5.5 years between 1972 and
2005).
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented an approach for the
generation of cooperative numerical answers in a
question-answering system. Our method allows us
to generate:
(1) a correct synthetic answer over a whole set
of data and,
(2) a cooperative part which explains the varia-
tion phenomenon to the user,
whenever several numerical values are extracted
as possible answers to a question. Information is
first extracted from web pages so that numerical
values can be characterized: variation criteria and
mode are then identified in order to generate ex-
planation to the user. Several future directions
are obviously considered:
? an analysis of needs for common knowledge
so that the answer characterization task is
made easier,
? an analysis of how restrictions are lexicalized
in texts (adjectives, relative clauses, etc.) in
order to extract them easily,
? an evaluation of the knowledge costs and of
what domain specific is (especially for com-
mon knowledge about restrictions),
? an evaluation of the quality of answers pro-
posed to users and of the utility of a user
model for the selection of the best answer.
References
V. Dahl and H. Abramson. 1984. On Gapping Gram-
mars. Proceedings of the Second Logic Program-
ming Conference.
S. Harabagiu and F. Lacatusu. 2004. Strategies for
Advanced Question Answering. Proceedings of the
Workshop on Pragmatics of Question Answering at
HLT-NAACL 2004.
D. Maurel and O. Piton. 1999. Un dictionnaire
de noms propres pour Intex: les noms propres
ge?ographiques. Lingvisticae Investigationes, XXII,
pp. 277-287, John Benjamins B. V., Amsterdam.
D.L. McGuinness and P. Pinheiro da Silva. 2004.
Trusting Answers on the Web. New Directions in
Question-Answering, chapter 22, Mark T. Maybury
(ed), AAAI/MIT Press.
D. Moldovan, C. Clark, S. Harabagiu and S. Maiorano.
2003. COGEX: A Logic Prover for Question An-
swering. Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003.
V. Moriceau and P. Saint-Dizier. 2003. A Conceptual
Treatment of Metaphors for NLP. Proceedings of
ICON.
V. Moriceau. 2005. Answer Generation with Temporal
Data Integration. Proceedings of ENLG?05.
D.R. Radev and K.R. McKeown. 1998. Generat-
ing Natural Language Summaries from Multiple On-
Line Sources. Computational Linguistics, vol. 24,
issue 3 - Natural Language Generation, pp. 469 -
500.
P. Saint-Dizier. 1999. Alternations and Verb Semantic
Classes for French. Predicative Forms for NL and
LKB, Kluwer Academic.
P. Saint-Dizier. 2005. PrepNet: a Framework for De-
scribing Prepositions: preliminary investigation re-
sults. Proccedings of IWCS?05.
B. Webber, C. Gardent and J. Bos. 2002. Position
statement: Inference in Question Answering. Pro-
ceedings of LREC.
49 KRAQ06
