Proceedings of the Analyzing Conversations in Text and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 23?30,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
You Are What You Say: Using Meeting Participants? Speech
to Detect their Roles and Expertise
Satanjeev Banerjee
Language Technologies Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
banerjee@cs.cmu.edu
Alexander I. Rudnicky
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
air@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Our goal is to automatically detect the
functional roles that meeting participants
play, as well as the expertise they bring to
meetings. To perform this task, we build
decision tree classifiers that use a combi-
nation of simple speech features (speech
lengths and spoken keywords) extracted
from the participants? speech in meetings.
We show that this algorithm results in a
role detection accuracy of 83% on unseen
test data, where the random baseline is
33.3%. We also introduce a simple aggre-
gation mechanism that combines evidence
of the participants? expertise from multi-
ple meetings. We show that this aggre-
gation mechanism improves the role de-
tection accuracy from 66.7% (when ag-
gregating over a single meeting) to 83%
(when aggregating over 5 meetings).
1 Introduction
A multitude of meetings are organized every day
around the world to discuss and exchange impor-
tant information, to make decisions and to collab-
oratively solve problems. Our goal is to create sys-
tems that automatically understand the discussions
at meetings, and use this understanding to assist
meeting participants in various tasks during and af-
ter meetings. One such task is the retrieval of infor-
mation from previous meetings, which is typically
a difficult and time consuming task for the human
to perform (Banerjee et al, 2005). Another task is
to automatically record the action items being dis-
cussed at meetings, along with details such as when
the action is due, who is responsible for it, etc.
Meeting analysis is a quickly growing field of
study. In recent years, research has focussed on au-
tomatic speech recognition in meetings (Stolcke et
al., 2004; Metze et al, 2004; Hain et al, 2005), ac-
tivity recognition (Rybski and Veloso, 2004), auto-
matic meeting summarization (Murray et al, 2005),
meeting phase detection (Banerjee and Rudnicky,
2004) and topic detection (Galley et al, 2003). Rela-
tively little research has been performed on automat-
ically detecting the roles that meeting participants
play as they participate in meetings. These roles can
be functional (e.g. the facilitator who runs the meet-
ing, and the scribe who is the designated note taker
at the meeting), discourse based (e.g. the presenter,
and the discussion participant), and expertise related
(e.g. the hardware acquisition expert and the speech
recognition research expert). Some roles are tightly
scoped, relevant to just one meeting or even a part
of a meeting. For example, a person can be the fa-
cilitator of one meeting and the scribe of another, or
the same person can be a presenter for one part of
the meeting and a discussion participant for another
part. On the other hand, some roles have a broader
scope and last for the duration of a project. Thus
a single person may be the speech recognition ex-
pert in a project and have that role in all meetings
on that project. Additionally, the same person can
play multiple roles, e.g. the scribe can be a speech
recognition expert too.
Automatic role detection has many benefits, espe-
23
cially when used as a source of constraint for other
meeting understanding components. For example,
detecting the facilitator of the meeting might help
the automatic topic detection module if we know
that facilitators officially change topics and move the
discussion from one agenda item to the next. Know-
ing who the speech recognition expert is can help
the automatic action item detector: If an action item
regarding speech recognition has been detected but
the responsible person field has not been detected,
the module may place a higher probability on the
speech recognition expert as being the responsible
person for that action item. Additionally, detecting
who is an expert in which field can have benefits of
its own. For example, it can be used to automatically
direct queries on a particular subject to the person
deemed most qualified to answer the question, etc.
Basic information such as participant role and ex-
pertise needs to be robustly extracted if it is to be of
use to the more sophisticated stages of understand-
ing. Accordingly, we have based our role detection
algorithm on simple and highly accurate speech fea-
tures, as described in section 5.1.2.
(Banerjee and Rudnicky, 2004) describes the au-
tomatic detection of discourse roles in meetings.
These roles included presenter (participants who
make formal presentations using either slides or
the whiteboard), discussion participant (participants
involved in a discussion marked by frequent turn
changes), observer (participants not speaking, but
nevertheless consuming information during a pre-
sentation or discussion), etc. In this paper we focus
on automatically detecting the functional and exper-
tise based roles that participants play in a meeting.
In the next section we describe the data that is used
in all our role detection work in this paper. In subse-
quent sections we describe the role detection algo-
rithm in more detail, and present evaluation results.
2 The Y2 Meeting Scenario Data
Our research work is part of the Cognitive Assistant
that Learns and Organizes project (CALO, 2003). A
goal of this project is to create an artificial assis-
tant that can understand meetings and use this un-
derstanding to assist meeting participants during and
after meetings. Towards this goal, data is being col-
lected by creating a rich multimodal record of meet-
ings (e.g. (Banerjee et al, 2004)). While a large
part of this data consists of natural meetings (that
would have taken place even if they weren?t being
recorded), a small subset of this data is ?scenario
driven? ? the Y2 Scenario Data.
Meeting # Typical scenario
1 Hiring Joe: Buy a computer and
find office space for him
2 Hiring Cindy and Fred: Buy com?
puters & find office space for them
3 Buy printer for Joe, Cindy and Fred
4 Buy a server machine for Joe,
Cindy and Fred
5 Buy desktop and printer for the
meeting leader
Table 1: Typical Scenario Instructions
The Y2 Scenario Data consists of meetings be-
tween groups of 3 or 4 participants. Each group par-
ticipated in a sequence of up to 5 meetings. Each
sequence had an overall scenario ? the purchasing
of computing hardware and the allocation of office
space for three newly hired employees. Participants
were told to assume that the meetings in the se-
quence were being held one week apart, and that be-
tween any two meetings ?progress? was made on the
action items decided at each meeting. Participants
were given latitude to come up with their own sto-
ries of what ?progress? was made between meetings.
At each meeting, participants were asked to review
progress since the last meeting and make changes to
their decisions if necessary. Additionally, an extra
topic was introduced at each meeting, as shown in
table 1.
In each group of participants, one participant
played the role of the manager who has control over
the funds and makes the final decisions on the pur-
chases. The remaining 2 or 3 participants played the
roles of either the hardware acquisition expert or the
building facilities expert. The role of the hardware
expert was to make recommendations on the buying
of computers and printers, and to actually make the
purchases once a decision was made to do so. Sim-
ilarly the role of the building expert was to make
recommendations on which rooms were available to
fit the new employees into. Despite this role assign-
24
ment, all participants were expected to contribute to
discussions on all topics.
To make the meetings as natural as possible, the
participants were given control over the evolution of
the story, and were also encouraged to create con-
flicts between the manager?s demands and the advice
that the experts gave him. For example, managers
sometimes requested that all three employees be put
in a single office, but the facilities expert announced
that no 3 person room was available, unless the man-
ager was agreeable to pay extra for them. These
conflicts led to extended negotiations between the
participants. To promote fluency, participants were
instructed to use their knowledge of existing facili-
ties and equipment instead of inventing a completely
fictitious set of details (such as room numbers).
The data we use in this paper consists of 8 se-
quences recorded at Carnegie Mellon University and
at SRI International between 2004 and 2005. One of
these sequences has 4 meetings, the remaining have
5 meetings each, for a total of 39 meetings. 4 of
these sequences had a total of 3 participants each;
the remaining 4 sequences had a total of 4 partici-
pants each. On average each meeting was 15 min-
utes long. We partitioned this data into two roughly
equal sets, the training set containing 4 meeting se-
quences, and the test set containing the remaining
4 sets. Although a few participants participated in
multiple meetings, there was no overlap of partici-
pants between the training and the test set.
3 Functional Roles
Meeting participants have functional roles that en-
sure the smooth conduct of the meeting, with-
out regard to the specific contents of the meeting.
These roles may include that of the meeting leader
whose functions typically include starting the meet-
ing, establishing the agenda (perhaps in consulta-
tion with the other participants), making sure the
discussions remain on?agenda, moving the discus-
sion from agenda item to agenda item, etc. Another
possible functional role is that of a the designated
meeting scribe. Such a person may be tasked with
the job of taking the official notes or minutes for the
meeting.
Currently we are attempting to automatically de-
tect the meeting leader for a given meeting. In our
data (as described in section 2) the participant play-
ing the role of the manager is always the meeting
leader. In section 5 we describe our methodology
for automatically detecting the meeting leader.
4 Expertise
Typically each participant in a meeting makes con-
tributions to the discussions at the meeting (and to
the project or organization in general) based on their
own expertise or skill set. For example, a project
to build a multi?modal note taking application may
include project members with expertise in speech
recognition, in video analysis, etc. We define ex-
pertise based roles as roles based on skills that are
relevant to participants? contributions to the meeting
discussions and the project or organization in gen-
eral. Note that the expertise role a participant plays
in a meeting is potentially dependent on the exper-
tise roles of the other participants in the meeting,
and that a single person may play different expertise
roles in different meetings, or even within a single
meeting. For example, a single person may be the
?speech recognition expert? on the note taking appli-
cation project that simply uses off?the?shelf speech
recognition tools to perform note taking, but a ?noise
cancellation? expert on the project that is attempting
to improve the in?house speech recognizer. Auto-
matically detecting each participant?s roles can help
such meeting understanding components as the ac-
tion item detector.
Ideally we would like to automatically discover
the roles that each participant plays, and cluster
these roles into groups of similar roles so that
the meeting understanding components can transfer
what they learn about particular participants to other
(and newer) participants with similar roles. Such a
role detection mechanism would need no prior train-
ing data about the specific roles that participants
play in a new organization or project. Currently
however, we have started with a simplified partici-
pant role detection task where we do have training
data pertinent to the specific roles that meeting par-
ticipants play in the test set of meetings. As men-
tioned in section 2, our data consists of people play-
ing two kinds of expertise?based roles ? that of a
hardware acquisition expert, and that of a building
facilities expert. In the next section we discuss our
25
methodology of automatically detecting these roles
from the meeting participants? speech.
5 Methodology
Given a sequence of longitudinal meetings, we de-
fine our role detection task as a three?way classi-
fication problem, where the input to the classifier
consists of features extracted from the speech of a
particular participant over the given meetings, and
the output is a probability distribution over the three
possible roles. Note that although a single par-
ticipant can simultaneously play both a functional
and an expertise?based role, in the Y2 Scenario
Data each participant plays exactly one of the three
roles. We take advantage of this situation to simplify
the problem to the three way classification defined
above. We induce a decision tree (Quinlan, 1986)
classifier from hand labeled data. In the next sub-
section we describe the steps involved in training the
decision tree role classifier, and in the subsequent
subsection we describe how the trained decision tree
is used to arrive at a role label for each meeting par-
ticipant.
5.1 Training
5.1.1 Keyword List Creation
One of the sources of information that we wish
to employ to perform functional and expertise role
detection is the words that are spoken by each par-
ticipant over the course of the meetings. Our ap-
proach to harness this information source is to use
labeled training data to first create a set of words
most strongly associated with each of the three roles,
and then use only these words during the feature ex-
traction phase to detect each participant?s role, as de-
scribed in section 5.1.2.
We created this list of keywords as follows. Given
a training set of meeting sequences, we aggregated
for each role all the speech from all the participants
who had played that role in the training set. We then
split this data into individual words and removed
stop words ? closed class words (mainly articles and
prepositions) that typically contain less information
pertinent to the task than do nouns and verbs. For all
words across all the three roles, we computed the de-
gree of association between each word and each of
the three roles, using the chi squared method (Yang
and Pedersen, 1997), and chose the top 200 high
scoring word?role pairs. Finally we manually exam-
ined this list of words, and removed additional words
that we deemed to not be relevant to the task (essen-
tially identifying a domain?specific stop list). This
reduced the list to a total of 180 words. The 5 most
frequently occurring words in this list are: computer,
right, need, week and space. Intuitively the goal of
this keyword selection pre?processing step is to save
the decision tree role classifier from having to auto-
matically detect the important words from a much
larger set of words, which would require more data
to train.
5.1.2 Feature Extraction
The input to the decision tree role classifier is a set
of features abstracted from a specific participant?s
speech. One strategy is to extract exactly one set of
features from all the speech belonging to a partici-
pant across all the meetings in the meeting sequence.
However, this approach requires a very large num-
ber of meetings to train. Our chosen strategy is to
sample the speech output by each participant multi-
ple times over the course of the meeting sequence,
classify each such sample, and then aggregate the
evidence over all the samples to arrive at the overall
likelihood that a participant is playing a certain role.
To perform the sampling, we split each meeting
in the meeting sequence into a sequence of contigu-
ous windows each n seconds long, and then compute
one set of features from each participant?s speech
during each window. The value of n is decided
through parametric tests (described in section 7.1).
If a particular participant was silent during the en-
tire duration of a particular window, then features
are extracted from that silence.
Note that in the above formulation, there is no
overlap (nor gap) between successive windows. In
a separate set of experiments we used overlapping
windows. That is, given a window size, we moved
the window by a fixed step size (less than the size
of the window) and computed features from each
such overlapping window. The results of these
experiments were no better than those with non?
overlapping windows, and so for the rest of this pa-
per we simply report on the results with the non?
overlapping windows.
Given a particular window of speech of a partic-
26
ular participant, we extract the following 2 speech
length based features:
? Rank of this participant (among this meet-
ing?s participants) in terms of the length of his
speech during this window. Thus, if this partic-
ipant spoke the longest during the window, he
has a feature value of 1, if he spoke for the sec-
ond longest number of times, he has a feature
value of 2, etc.
? Ratio of the length of speech of this participant
in this window to the total length of speech
from all participants in this window. Thus if
a participant spoke for 3 seconds, and the to-
tal length of speech from all participants in
this window was 6 seconds, his feature value
is 0.5. Together with the rank feature above,
these two features capture the amount of speech
contributed by each participant to the window,
relative to the other participants.
In addition, for each window of speech of a par-
ticular participant, and for each keyword in our list
of pre?decided keywords, we extract the following
2 features:
? Rank of this participant (among this meeting?s
participants) in terms of the number of times
this keyword was spoken. Thus if in this win-
dow of time, this participant spoke the keyword
printer more often than any of the other partic-
ipants, then his feature value for this keyword
is 1.
? Ratio of the number of times this participant
uttered this keyword in this window to the total
number of times this keyword was uttered by
all the participants during this window. Thus
if a participant spoke the word printer 5 times
in this window, and in total all participants said
the word printer 7 times, then his feature value
for this keyword is 5/7. Together with the key-
word rank feature above, these two features
capture the number of times each participant
utters each keyword, relative to the other par-
ticipants.
Thus for each participant, for each meeting win-
dow, we extract two features based on the lengths
of speech, and 2 ? 180 features for each of the 180
keywords, for a total of 362 features. The true output
label for each such data point is the role of that par-
ticipant in the meeting sequence. We used these data
points to induce a classifier using the Weka Java im-
plementation (Witten and Frank, 2000) of the C4.5
decision tree learning algorithm (Quinlan, 1986).
This classifier takes features as described above as
input, and outputs class membership probabilities,
where the classes are the three roles. Note that for
the experiments in this paper we extract these fea-
tures from the manual transcriptions of the speech
of the meeting participants. In the future we plan to
perform these experiments using the transcriptions
output by an automatic speech recognizer.
5.2 Detecting Roles in Unseen Data
5.2.1 Classifying Windows of Unseen Data
Detecting the roles of meeting participants in un-
seen data is performed as follows: First the unseen
test data is split into windows of the same size as was
used during the training regime. Then the speech ac-
tivity and keywords based features are extracted (us-
ing the same keywords as was used during the train-
ing) for each participant in each window. Finally
these data points are used as input into the trained
decision tree, which outputs class membership prob-
abilities for each participant in each window.
5.2.2 Aggregating Evidence to Assign One Role
Per Participant
Thus for each participant we get as many proba-
bility distributions (over the three roles) as there are
windows in the test data. The next step is to aggre-
gate these probabilities over all the windows and ar-
rive at a single role assignment per participant. We
employ the simplest possible aggregation method:
We compute, for each participant, the average prob-
ability of each role over all the windows, and then
normalize the three average role probabilities so cal-
culated, so they still sum to 1. In the future we plan
to experiment with more sophisticated aggregation
mechanisms that jointly optimize the probabilities of
the different participants, instead of computing them
independently.
At this point, we could assign to each participant
his highest probability role. However, we wish to
ensure that the set of roles that get assigned to the
27
participants in a particular meeting are as diverse
as possible (since typically meetings are forums at
which different people of different expertise con-
vene to exchange information). To ensure such di-
versity, we apply the following heuristic. Once we
have all the average probabilities for all the roles for
each participant in a sequence of meetings, we as-
sign roles to participants in stages. At each stage
we consider all participants not yet assigned roles,
and pick that participant?role pair, say (p, r), that
has the highest probability value among all pairs un-
der consideration. We assign participant p the role r,
and then discount (by a constant multiplicative fac-
tor) the probability value of all participant?role pairs
(pi, rj) where pi is a participant not assigned a role
yet, and rj = r. This makes it less likely (but not
impossible) that another participant will be assigned
this same role r again. This process is repeated until
all participants have been assigned a role each.
6 Evaluation
We evaluated the algorithm by computing the accu-
racy of the detector?s role predictions. Specifically,
given a meeting sequence we ran the algorithm to
assign a role to each meeting participant, and com-
puted the accuracy by calculating the ratio of the
number of correct assignments to the total number
of participants in the sequence. Note that it is also
possible to evaluate the window?by?window clas-
sification of the decision tree classifiers; we report
results on this evaluation in section 7.1.
To evaluate this participant role detection algo-
rithm, we first trained the algorithm on the training
set of meetings. The training phase included key-
word list creation, window size optimization, and
the actual induction of the decision tree. On the
training data, a window size of 300 seconds resulted
in the highest accuracy over the training set. The test
at the root of the induced tree was whether the par-
ticipant?s rank in terms of speech lengths was 1, in
which case he was immediately classified as a meet-
ing leader. That is, the tree learnt that the person
who spoke the most in a window was most likely
the meeting leader. Other tests placed high in the
tree included obvious ones such as testing for the
keywords computer and printer to classify a partici-
pant as a hardware expert.
We then tested this trained role detector on the
testing set of meetings. Recall that the test set had
5 meeting sequences, each consisting of 5 meetings
and a total of 20 meeting participants. Over this test
set we obtained a role detection accuracy of 83%.
A ?classifier? that randomly assigns one of the three
roles to each participant in a meeting (without re-
gard to the roles assigned to the other participants in
the same meeting) would achieve a classification ac-
curacy of 33.3%. Thus, our algorithm significantly
beats the random classifier baseline. Note that as
mentioned earlier, the experiments in this paper are
based on the manually transcribed speech.
7 Further Experiments
7.1 Optimizing the Window Size
As mentioned above, one of the variables to be tuned
during the training phase is the size of the window
over which to extract speech features. We ran a se-
quence of experiments to optimize this window size,
the results of which are summarized in figure 1. In
this set of experiments, we performed the evaluation
on two levels of granularity. The larger granularity
level was the ?meeting sequence? granularity, where
we ran the usual evaluation described above. That
is, for each participant we first used the classifier to
obtain probability distributions over the 3 roles on
every window, and then aggregated these distribu-
tions to reach a single role assignment for the par-
ticipant over the entire meeting sequence. This role
was compared to the true role of the participant to
measure the accuracy of the algorithm. The smaller
granularity level was the ?window? level, where af-
ter obtaining the probability distribution over the
three roles for a particular window of a particu-
lar participant, we picked the role with the high-
est probability, and assigned it to the participant for
that window. Therefore, for each window we had
a role assignment that we compared to the true role
of the participant, resulting in an accuracy value for
the classifier for every window for every participant.
Note that the main difference between evaluation at
these two granularity levels is that in the ?window?
granularity, we did not have any aggregation of evi-
dence across multiple windows.
For different window sizes, we plotted the accu-
racy values obtained on the test set for the two evalu-
28
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 0  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900  1000
Ac
cu
ra
cy
Window Size
Accuracy meeting sequence
Accuracy window
Figure 1: Effect of Different Window Sizes on Detection Ac-
curacy
ation granularities, as shown in figure 1. Notice that
by aggregating the evidence across the windows, the
detection accuracy improves for all window sizes.
This is to be expected since in the window gran-
ularity, the classifier has access to only the infor-
mation contained in a single window, and is there-
fore more error prone. However by merging the ev-
idence from many windows, the accuracy improves.
As window sizes increase, detection accuracy at the
window level improves, because the classifier has
more evidence at its disposal to make the decision.
However, detection at the meeting sequence level
gets steadily worse, potentially because the larger
the window size, the fewer the data points it has to
aggregate evidence from. These lines will eventu-
ally meet when the window size equals the size of
the entire meeting sequence.
A valid concern with these results is the high level
of noise, particularly in the aggregated detection ac-
curacy over the meeting sequence. One reason for
this is that there are far fewer data points at the meet-
ing sequence level than at the window level. With
larger data sets (more meeting sequences as well as
more participants per meeting) these results may sta-
bilize. Additionally, given the small amount of data,
our feature set is quite large, so a more aggressive
feature set reduction might help stabilize the results.
7.2 Automatic Improvement over Unseen Data
One of our goals is to create an expertise based role
detector system that improves over time as it has ac-
cess to more and more meetings for a given par-
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 1  2  3  4  5
Ac
cu
ra
cy
Window Size
Accuracy
Figure 2: Accuracy versus Number of Meetings over which
Roles were Detected
ticipant. This is especially important because the
roles that a participant plays can change over time;
we would like our system to be able to track these
changes. In the Y2 Scenario Data that we have used
in this current work, the roles do not change from
meeting to meeting. However observe that our evi-
dence aggregation algorithm fuses information from
all the meetings in a specific sequence of meetings
to arrive at a single role assignment for each partici-
pant.
To quantify the effect of this aggregation we com-
puted the role detection accuracy using different
numbers of meetings from each sequence. Specif-
ically, we computed the accuracy of the role detec-
tion over the test data using only the last meeting of
each sequence, only the last 2 meetings of each se-
quence, and so on until we used every meeting in ev-
ery sequence. The results are summarized in figure
2. When using only the last meeting in the sequence
to assign roles to the participants, the accuracy is
only 66.7%, when using the last two meetings, the
accuracy is 75%, and using the last three, four or
all meetings results in an accuracy of 83%. Thus,
the accuracy improves as we have more meetings to
combine evidence from, as is expected. However
the accuracy levels off at 83% when using three or
more meetings, perhaps because there is no new in-
formation to be gained by adding a fourth or a fifth
meeting.
8 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have discussed our current approach
to detecting the functional and expertise based roles
of meeting participants. We have induced decision
29
trees that use simple and robust speech based fea-
tures to perform the role detection. We have used
a very simple evidence aggregation mechanism to
arrive at a single role assignment per meeting partic-
ipant over a sequence of meetings, and have shown
that we can achieve up to 83% accuracy on unseen
test data using this mechanism. Additionally we
have shown that by aggregating evidence across a
sequence of meetings, we perform better than if we
were to use a single meeting to perform the role de-
tection. As future work we plan to remove the con-
straints that we have currently imposed ? namely, we
will attempt to learn new roles in test data that do not
exist in training data. Additionally, we will attempt
to use this role information as inputs to downstream
meeting understanding tasks such as automatic topic
detection and action item detection.
9 Acknowledgements
This work was supported by DARPA grant NBCH-
D-03-0010. The content of the information in this
publication does not necessarily reflect the position
or the policy of the US Government, and no official
endorsement should be inferred.
References
S. Banerjee and A. I. Rudnicky. 2004. Using simple
speech-based features to detect the state of a meet-
ing and the roles of the meeting participants. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th International Conference on Spo-
ken Language Processing (Interspeech 2004 ? ICSLP),
Jeju Island, Korea.
S. Banerjee, J. Cohen, T. Quisel, A. Chan, Y. Pato-
dia, Z. Al-Bawab, R. Zhang, P. Rybski, M. Veloso,
A. Black, R. Stern, R. Rosenfeld, and A. I. Rudnicky.
2004. Creating multi-modal, user?centric records of
meetings with the Carnegie Mellon meeting recorder
architecture. In Proceedings of the ICASSP Meeting
Recognition Workshop, Montreal, Canada.
S. Banerjee, C. Rose, and A. I. Rudnicky. 2005. The
necessity of a meeting recording and playback system,
and the benefit of topic?level annotations to meeting
browsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Rome,
Italy, September.
CALO. 2003. http://www.ai.sri.com/project/CALO.
M. Galley, K. McKeown, E. Fosler-Lussier, and Hongyan
Jing. 2003. Discourse segmentation of multi?party
conversation. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meet-
ing on Association for Computational Linguistics, vol-
ume 1, pages 562 ? 569, Sapporo, Japan.
T. Hain, J. Dines, G. Garau, M. Karafiat, D. Moore,
V. Wan, R. Ordelman, and S. Renals. 2005. Transcrip-
tion of conference room meetings: An investigation.
In Proceedings of Interspeech 2005, Lisbon, Portugal,
September.
F. Metze, Q. Jin, C. Fugen, K. Laskowski, Y. Pan, and
T. Schultz. 2004. Issues in meeting transcription ?
the isl meeting transcription system. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing (Interspeech 2004 ? ICSLP), Jeju Island,
Korea.
G. Murray, S. Renals, and J. Carletta. 2005. Extractive
summarization of meeting recordings. In Proceedings
of Interspeech 2005, Lisbon, Portugal, September.
J. Quinlan. 1986. Induction of decision trees. Machine
Learning, 1:81?106.
Paul E. Rybski and Manuela M. Veloso. 2004. Using
sparse visual data to model human activities in meet-
ings. In Workshop on Modeling Other Agents from
Observations, International Joint Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems.
A. Stolcke, C. Wooters, N. Mirghafori, T. Pirinen, I. Bu-
lyko, D. Gelbart, M. Graciarena, S. Otterson, B. Pe-
skin, and M. Ostendorf. 2004. Progress in meeting
recognition: The icsi?sri?uw spring 2004 evaluation
system. In NIST RT04 Meeting Recognition Work-
shop, Montreal.
I. Witten and E. Frank. 2000. Data Mining - Practi-
cal Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java
Implementations. Morgan?Kaufmann, San Francisco,
CA.
Y. Yang and J. Pedersen. 1997. A comparative study on
feature selection in text categorization. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 412?420, Nashville, US. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers.
30
