Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 3?5,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Lessons Learned from Large Scale Evaluation of Systems that Produce
Text: Nightmares and Pleasant Surprises
Kathleen R. McKeown
Department of Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
kathy@cs.columbia.edu
Extended Abstract
As the language generation community explores
the possibility of an evaluation program for lan-
guage generation, it behooves us to examine our
experience in evaluation of other systems that pro-
duce text as output. Large scale evaluation of sum-
marization systems and of question answering sys-
tems has been carried out for several years now.
Summarization and question answering systems
produce text output given text as input, while lan-
guage generation produces text from a semantic
representation. Given that the output has the same
properties, we can learn from the mistakes and
the understandings gained in earlier evaluations.
In this invited talk, I will discuss what we have
learned in the large scale summarization evalua-
tions carried out in the Document Understanding
Conferences (DUC) from 2001 to present, and in
the large scale question answering evaluations car-
ried out in TREC (e.g., the definition pilot) as well
as the new large scale evaluations being carried out
in the DARPA GALE (Global Autonomous Lan-
guage Environment) program.
DUC was developed and run by NIST and pro-
vides a forum for regular evaluation of summariza-
tion systems. NIST oversees the gathering of data,
including both input documents and gold standard
summaries, some of which is done by NIST and
some of which is done by LDC. Each year, some
30 to 50 document sets were gathered as test data
and somewhere between two to nine summaries
were written for each of the input sets. NIST has
carried out both manual and automatic evaluation
by comparing system output against the gold stan-
dard summaries written by humans. The results
are made public at the annual conference. In the
most recent years, the number of participants has
grown to 25 or 30 sites from all over the world.
TREC is also run by NIST and provides an
annual opportunity for evaluating the output of
question-answering (QA) systems. Of the various
QA evaluations, the one that is probably most illu-
minating for language generation is the definition
pilot. In this evaluation, systems generated long
answers (e.g., paragraph length or lists of facts) in
response to a request for a definition. In contrast to
DUC, no model answers were developed. Instead,
system output was pooled and human judges de-
termined which facts within the output were nec-
essary (termed ?vital nuggets?) and which were
helpful, but not absolutely necessary (termed ?OK
nuggets?). Systems could then be scored on their
recall of nuggets and precision of their response.
DARPA GALE is a new program funded by
DARPA that is running its own evaluation, carried
out by BAE Systems, an independent contractor.
Evaluation more closely resembles that done in
TREC, but the systems? scores will be compared
against the scores of human distillers who carry
out the same task. Thus, final numbers will report
percent of human performance. In the DARPA
GALE evaluation, which is a future event at the
time of this writing, in addition to measuring prop-
erties such as precision and recall, BAE will also
measure systems? ability to find all occurrences of
the same fact in the input (redundancy).
One consideration for an evaluation program
is the feel of the program. Does the evalua-
tion program motivate researchers or does it cause
headaches? I liken Columbia?s experience in DUC
and currently in GALE to that of Max in Where the
Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak. We began
with punishment (i.e., if you don?t do well, your
funding will be in jeopardy), encounter monsters
along the way (seemingly arbitrary methods for
3
measuring output quality), finally tame the mon-
sters and sail back peacefully across time. DUC
has reached the peaceful stage, but GALE has not.
The TREC definition pilot had less of a threat of
punishment.
Evaluation in all of these programs began at the
request of the funders, with the goal of comparing
how well different funded systems perform. Im-
provement over the years is also measured in order
to determine if funding is well spent. This kind of
goal creates anxiety in participants and makes it
most important to get the details of the evaluation
right; errors in how evaluation is carried out can
have great consequences. Coming to agreement
on the metrics used, the methodology for measur-
ing output and the tasks on which performance is
measured can be difficult; the environment does
not feel friendly. Even if evaluation within the
language generation community was not initiated
with the same goals, I think it is reasonable to ex-
pect a certain amount of disagreement as the pro-
gram gets off the ground.
However, over time, researchers come to agree-
ment on some portion of the task and these fea-
tures become accepted. At this point in time, it is
possible to see the benefits of the program. Cer-
tainly, within DUC, we are at this stage. DUC has
generated large amounts of data, including both
input document sets and multiple models of good
output for each input set, which has spurred stud-
ies both on evaluation and summarization. Hal-
teren and Teufel, for example, provide a method
for annotation of content units and study consen-
sus across summarizers (van Halteren and Teufel,
2003; Teufel and van Halteren, 2004b). Nenkova
studies significant differences across DUC04 sys-
tems (Nenkova, 2005) as well as the properties of
human and system summaries (Nenkova, 2006).
We can credit DUC with the emergence of au-
tomatic methods for evaluation such as ROUGE
(Lin and Hovy, 2003; Lin, 2004) which allow
quick measurement of systems during develop-
ment and enable evaluation of larger amounts of
data. We have seen the development of man-
ual methods for evaluation developed both within
DUC (Harman and Over, 2004) and without. The
Pyramid method (Nenkova and Passonneau, 2004)
provides a annotation method and metric that ad-
dresses the issues of reliability and stability of
scoring. Thus, research on evaluation of summa-
rization has become a field in its own right result-
ing in greater understanding of the effect of differ-
ent metrics and methodologies.
?From DUC and TREC, we have learned im-
portant characteristics of a large-scale evaluation,
of which the top three might be:
? Output can be measured by comparison
against a human model, but we know that
this comparison will only be valid if multi-
ple models are used. There are multiple good
summaries of the same input and if system
output is compared against just one, the re-
sults will be biased.
? If the task is appealing to a wide audience,
the evaluation will spur research and motivate
researchers to join in. We have seen this with
growth of participation in DUC. One benefit
of summarization and QA is that the task is
domain-independent and thus, no one site has
an advantage over others through experience
with a particular domain.
? Given the different ways in which evaluation
can be carried out and the fact that different
researchers may be biased towards methods
which favor their own approach, it is impor-
tant the evaluation be overseen by a neutral
party which is not deeply involved in research
on the task itself. On the other hand, some
knowledge is necessary if the evaluation is to
be well-designed.
While my talk will focus on large scale evalua-
tion programs that feature quantitative evaluation
through comparison with a gold standard, there
has been work on task-based evaluation of sum-
marization (McKeown et al 2005). Task-based
evaluation is more intensive and to date, has not
been done on a large scale across sites, but shows
potential for indicating the usefulness of summa-
rization systems.
In this brief abstract, I?ve suggested some of the
topics that will be covered in my talk, which will
tour the land of the wild things for evaluation, il-
luminating monsters and highlighting events that
will allow more peaceful sailing. Evaluation can
be a nightmare, but over time and particularly
if carried out away from the influence of fund-
ing pressures, it can nurture a community of re-
searchers with common goals.
4
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported in
part by the ARDA AQUAINT program (Con-
tract No. MDA908-02-C-0008 and Contract No.
NBCHC040040) and the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA) under Con-
tract No. HR0011-06-C-0023 and Contract No.
N66001-00-1-8919. Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not nec-
essarily reflect the views of the DARPA or ARDA.
References
Harman, D. and Over, P. 2004. The effects of human
variation in duc summarization evaluation. In Text
Summarization Branches Out Workshop, ACL 2004.
Lin, C.-Y. 2003. Rouge: a package for automatic eval-
uation of summaries. In Proceedings of the Work-
shop in Text Summarization, ACL?04.
Lin, C.-Y. and Hovy, E. 2003. Automatic evaluation of
summaries using n-gram co-occurance statistics. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2003.
McKeown, K. and Passonneau, R.J. and Elson, D.K.,
and Nenkova, A., and Hirschberg, J. 2005. A Task-
Based Evaluation of Multi-Document Summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of SIGIR 2005.
Nenkova, A. 2005. Automatic text summarization of
newswire: Lessons learned from the Document Un-
derstanding Conference. In Proceedings of AAAI
2004.
Nenkova, A. 2006. Understanding the process
of multi-document summarization: content selec-
tion, rewrite and evaluation. Ph.D Dissertation,
Columbia University.
Nenkova, A. and Passonneau, R. 2004. Evaluating
content selection in summarization: The pyramid
method. In Proceedings of HLT/NAACL 2004.
Teufel, S. and van Halteren, H. 2004. Evaluating in-
formation content by factoid analysis: human anno-
tation and stability. In EMNLP-04.
van Halteren, H. and Teufel, S. 2003. Examining the
consensus between human summaries: initial exper-
iments with factoid analysis. In HLT-NAACL DUC
Workshop.
5
