Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 125?126,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Introduction to the INLG?06 Special Session on
Sharing Data and Comparative Evaluation
The idea for this special session had its origins in discussions with many different members of
the NLG community at the 2005 Workshop on Using Corpora for Natural Language Generation
(UCNLG?05, held in conjunction with the Corpus Linguistics 2005 conference at the Univer-
sity of Birmingham in July 2005), and subsequently at the 10th European Natural Language
Generation Workshop (ENLG?05, held at the University of Aberdeen in August 2005). At the
latter event, the excitement about introducing shared tasks was infectious: the topic hijacked
several of the organised discussion groups, it was the focus of conversation at many tables dur-
ing lunch-breaks, and even the end of the conference didn?t put a stop to it, with discussions
carrying right on until the taxis to the airport arrived.
There was some common ground: nobody said it wouldn?t be a good idea to be able to
directly compare different NLG techniques, most people even seemed to agree that sharable
data and tasks were the way to go. But opinion was sharply divided about how it was to be
achieved. There were?with only a small degree of caricature?two main camps: the bulls
argued for a suck-it-and-see approach, for throwing a task at the research community and then
sitting back to see what would happen; the bears warned that using one data set was not a good
idea until there was community buy-in to a particular data set and a particular task specification
over that data set.
Some of the bears were worried that NLG would inevitably emulate MT and end up with a
single task, fixed inputs and gold-standard outputs, using a single automatic metric of similarity
to assess the quality of generated texts against the gold standard, and moreover, require millions
of dollars in direct funding. It would be impossible to decide what the inputs to the task should
look like, because after all, as Yorick Wilks had pointed out years before, determining the
inputs to NLG was like counting back from infinity to 1 (in contrast to NLU, which, being more
akin to counting from 1 to infinity, seemed at least a little more manageable). The community
would either become hopelessly mired in the task of trying to agree on an input type and task,
or else agree one by dictat and alienate the majority of researchers. Finally, the field would
become obsessed with the single task and the scores produced by the single metric, and all true
scientific enquiry would be stifled.
The bulls envisaged an entirely different future, where many different tasks and bench-
mark datasets co-existed peacefully, where some tasks did have associated inputs and outputs,
but others had more abstract system specifications. NLG was not inherently different from
NLU at all, in fact the output representations used in the latter were just as much there by
gentle(wo)man?s agreement as any common inputs to NLG would be. The strong NLG tradi-
tions of user-oriented and task-based evaluations using human evaluators would be part of the
evaluation paradigm in shared-task evaluations, while parallel research might look at?but not
impose?bespoke automatic methods for NLG. Money would be needed for data resource cre-
ation, but not necessarily for anything else; evidence that this was possible could be found in
successful and vibrant shared-task initiatives run on a shoe-string, such as CoNLL and SENSE-
VAL. The community would create its own forum for reviewing, updating and adding tasks and
evaluation methods. NLG would be invigorated, great scientific progress would result, com-
mercial deployment of NLG technology and regular papers in Computational Linguistics and
ACL proceedings would surely follow.
One thing was clear: opinions abounded, most of them strong ones. Shared-task evaluation
had been firmly put on the NLG agenda. So, we thought, what better than to create a larger,
125
more enduring forum for continuing discussions, in the shape of an INLG special session? We
are pleased to say that the response from the NLG community has been very positive, and that
the papers in this section of the proceedings and the oral presentations at the special session
itself represent both the bullish and the bearish camps. Belz and Kilgarriff present a generally
bullish, but occasionally bearish, history of shared-task initiatives in NLP, and the lessons that
NLG might learn from it, while Reiter and Belz present a proposal for a series of shared tasks
in data-to-text NLG. Van Deemter et al look at the generation of referring expressions and
propose a method for eliciting reference texts for evaluation of GRE algorithms. Paris argues for
NLG system evaluation practices similar to the ISO standards for software evaluation, including
criteria such as flexibility, portability and maintainability.
Among the oral presentations, Scott and Moore exemplify the bearish position but do ar-
gue in favour of a standardised architecture and interface specifications to eventually enable
cross-system comparison. Horacek considers the input problem and advocates the gradual and
collective development of a generic ?generation specification? formalism. Varges recommends
that NLG deliberately take a different route from NLU and encourage a diversity of tasks and
representations.
Kathy McKeown?s invited talk is perfectly poised between the two camps: from her expe-
rience with DUC, TREC and GALE, she concludes that every evaluation programme must expect
to have to weather a stormy period of initial disagreement and even hostility, before eventually
reaching calmer waters where growing agreement and acceptance enable the true benefits of
the programme to take effect.
Consensus-spotters will be able to identify several areas of interest: certainly nobody wants
to follow the example of MT and parsing, and become beholden to a single metric and auto-
mated gold-standard evaluation; some degree of standardisation in sub-tasks and representa-
tions is desirable, but should evolve over time; and perhaps most unanimously, the diversity of
current NLG research with its many different tasks and interests must be preserved.
Even a small amount of common ground can be enough for debate to flourish and consensus
to grow. We hope that the snapshot of opinion presented at this special session will be the
beginning of a long history of comparative evaluation in NLG.
Anja Belz and Robert Dale (Organisers; one bull and one bear)
126
