Usability Issues in an Interactive Speech-to-Speech 
Translation System for Healthcare 
 
 
Mark Seligman Mike Dillinger 
Spoken Translation, Inc. Spoken Translation, Inc. 
Berkeley, CA, USA 94705 Berkeley, CA, USA 94705 
mark.seligman 
@spokentranslation.com 
mike.dillinger 
@spokentranslation.com 
 
  
Abstract 
We describe a highly interactive system for 
bidirectional, broad-coverage spoken lan-
guage communication in the healthcare area. 
The paper briefly reviews the system's inter-
active foundations, and then goes on to dis-
cuss in greater depth issues of practical 
usability. We present our Translation Short-
cuts facility, which minimizes the need for 
interactive verification of sentences after 
they have been vetted once, considerably 
speeds throughput while maintaining accu-
racy, and allows use by minimally literate 
patients for whom any mode of text entry 
might be difficult. We also discuss facilities 
for multimodal input, in which handwriting, 
touch screen, and keyboard interfaces are of-
fered as alternatives to speech input when 
appropriate. In order to deal with issues re-
lated to sheer physical awkwardness, we 
briefly mention facilities for hands-free or 
eyes-free operation of the system. Finally, 
we point toward several directions for future 
improvement of the system. 
1 Introduction 
Increasing globalization and immigration have led 
to growing demands on US institutions for health-
care and government services in languages other 
than English. These institutions are already over-
whelmed:  the State of Minnesota, for example, 
had no Somali-speaking physicians for some 
12,000 Somali refugees and only six Hmong-
speaking physicians to serve 50,000 Hmong resi-
dents (Minnesota Interpreter Standards Advisory 
Committee, 1998). San Francisco General Hospi-
tal, to cite another example, receives approxi-
mately 3,500 requests for interpretation per month, 
or 42,000 per year for 35 different languages. 
Moreover, requests for medical interpretation ser-
vices are distributed among all the wards and clin-
ics, adding a logistical challenge to the problem of 
a high and growing demand for interpretation ser-
vices (Paras, et al, 2002). Similar situations are 
found throughout the United States. 
It is natural to hope that automatic real-time 
translation in general, and spoken language transla-
tion (SLT) in particular, can help to meet this com-
municative need. From the viewpoint of research 
and development, the high demand in healthcare 
makes this area especially attractive for fielding 
early SLT systems and seeking early adopters. 
With this goal in view, several speech transla-
tion systems have aimed at the healthcare area. 
(See www.sehda.com, DARPA?s CAST program, 
www.phraselator.com, etc.) However, these efforts 
have encountered several issues or limitations. 
First, they have been confined to narrow do-
mains. In general, SLT applications have been able 
to achieve acceptable accuracy only by staying 
within restricted topics, in which fixed phrases 
could be used (e.g., www.phraselator.com), or in 
which grammars for automatic speech recognition 
(ASR) and machine translation (MT) could be op-
timized. For example, MedSLT (Bouillon et al 
2005) is limited to some 600 specific words per 
sub-domain. IBM?s MASTOR system, with 30,000 
words in each translation direction, has much 
broader coverage, but remains comparable in lexi-
con size to commercial MT systems of the early 
1980s. 
Granted, restriction to narrow domains may of-
ten be appropriate, given the large effort involved 
in compiling extensive lexical resources and the 
time required for deployment. A tightly focused 
approach permits relatively quick development of 
new systems and provides a degree of flexibility to 
experiment with different architectures and differ-
ent languages.  
Our emphasis, however, is on breaking out of 
narrow domains. We seek to maximize versatility 
by providing exceptional capacity to move from 
topic to topic while maintaining adequate accu-
racy.  
To provide a firm foundation for such versatil-
ity, we ?give our systems a liberal arts education? 
by incorporating very broad-coverage ASR and 
MT technology. Our MT lexicons, for example, 
contain roughly 300,000 words in each direction. 
But of course, as coverage increases, perplexity 
and the ASR and MT errors due to it increase in 
proportion, especially in the absence of tight inte-
gration between these components. To compen-
sate, we provide a set of facilities that enable users 
from both sides of the language barrier to interac-
tively monitor and correct these errors. Putting us-
ers in the speech translation loop in this way does 
in fact permit conversations to range widely 
(Seligman, 2000). We believe that this highly in-
teractive approach will prove applicable to the 
healthcare area. 
We have described these interactive techniques 
in (Dillinger and Seligman, 2004; Zong and Selig-
man, forthcoming). We will review them only 
briefly here, in Section 2.  
A second limitation of current speech transla-
tion systems for healthcare is that bilingual (bidi-
rectional) communication has been difficult to 
enable. While speech-to-speech translation has 
sometimes proven practical from the English side, 
translation from the non-English side has been 
more difficult to achieve. Partly, this limitation 
arises from human factors issues: while na?ve ob-
servers might expect spoken input to be effortless 
for anyone who can talk, the reality is that users 
must learn to use most speech interfaces, and that 
this learning process can be difficult for users who 
are less literate or less computer literate. Further, 
many healthcare venues make speech input diffi-
cult: they may be noisy, microphones may be 
awkward to situate or to pass from speaker to 
speaker, and so on. 
Our group's approach to training- or venue-
related difficulties for speech input is to provide an 
array of alternative input modes. In addition to 
providing input through dictated speech, users of 
our system can freely alternate among three other 
input modes, using handwriting, a touch screen, 
and standard bilingual keyboards. 
In this paper, we will focus on practical usabil-
ity issues in the design of user interfaces for highly 
interactive approaches to SLT in healthcare appli-
cations. With respect to interactivity per se, we will 
discuss the following specific issues: 
? In a highly interactive speech translation 
system, monitoring and correction of ASR and MT 
are vital for accuracy and confidence, but can be 
time consuming ? in a field where time is always at 
a premium. 
? Interactivity demands a minimum degree 
of computer and print literacy, which some patients 
may lack.  
To address these issues, we have developed a 
facility called Translation Shortcuts?, to be ex-
plained throughout Section 3.  
Section 4 will describe our approach to multi-
modal input. As background, however, Section 2 
will quickly review our approach to highly interac-
tive ? and thus uniquely broad-coverage ? spoken 
language translation. Before concluding, we will in 
Section 5 point out planned future developments. 
2 Highly Interactive, Broad-coverage SLT  
We now briefly summarize our group?s approach 
to highly interactive, broad-coverage SLT. 
The twin goals of accuracy and broad-coverage 
have generally been in opposition: speech transla-
tion systems have gained tolerable accuracy only 
by sharply restricting both the range of topics that 
can be discussed and the sets of vocabulary and 
structures that can be used to discuss them. The 
essential problem is that both speech recognition 
and translation technologies are still quite error-
prone. While the error rates may be tolerable when 
each technology is used separately, the errors com-
bine and even compound when they are used to-
gether. The resulting translation output is generally 
below the threshold of usability ? unless restriction 
to a very narrow domain supplies sufficient con-
straints to significantly lower the error rates of both 
components. 
As explained, our group?s approach has been to 
concentrate on interactive monitoring and correc-
tion of both technologies.   
First, users can monitor and correct the speaker-
dependent speech recognition system to ensure that 
the text that will be passed to the machine transla-
tion component is completely correct. Voice com-
mands (e.g. Scratch That or Correct <incorrect 
text>) can be used to repair speech recognition 
errors. Thus, users of our SLT enrich the interface 
between ASR and MT.  
Next, during the MT stage, users can monitor, 
and if necessary correct, one especially important 
aspect of the translation ? lexical disambiguation. 
Our system?s approach to lexical disambigua-
tion is twofold: first, we supply a Back-
Translation, or re-translation of the translation. 
Using this paraphrase of the initial input, even a 
monolingual user can make an initial judgment 
concerning the quality of the preliminary machine 
translation output. (Other systems, e.g. IBM?s 
MASTOR, have also employed re-translation. Our 
implementations, however, exploit proprietary 
technologies to ensure that the lexical senses used 
during back translation accurately reflect those 
used in forward translation.)  
In addition, if uncertainty remains about the 
correctness of a given word sense, we supply a 
proprietary set of Meaning Cues? ? synonyms, 
definitions, etc. ? which have been drawn from 
various resources, collated in a database (called 
SELECT?), and aligned with the respective lexica 
of the relevant MT systems. With these cues as 
guides, the user can monitor the current, proposed 
meaning and select (when necessary) a different, 
preferred meaning from among those available. 
Automatic updates of translation and back transla-
tion then follow. Future versions of the system will 
allow personal word-sense preferences thus speci-
fied in the current session to be stored and reused 
in future sessions, thus enabling a gradual tuning 
of word-sense preferences to individual needs. Fa-
cilities will also be provided for sharing such pref-
erences across a working group. 
Given such interactive correction of both ASR 
and MT, wide-ranging, and even jocular, ex-
changes become possible (Seligman, 2000).  
As we have said, such interactivity within a 
speech translation system can enable increased 
accuracy and confidence, even for wide-ranging 
conversations. 
Accuracy of translation is, in many healthcare 
settings, critical to patient safety. When a doctor is 
taking a patient?s history or instructing the patient 
in a course of treatment, even small errors can have 
clinically relevant effects. Even so, at present, 
healthcare workers often examine patients and in-
struct them in a course of treatment through ges-
tures and sheer good will, with no translation at all, 
or use untrained human interpreters (friends, fam-
ily, volunteers, or staff) in an error-prone attempt 
to solve the immediate problem (Flores, et al, 
2003). As a result, low-English proficiency pa-
tients are often less healthy and receive less effec-
tive treatment than English speakers (Paras, et al, 
2002). We hope to demonstrate that highly interac-
tive real-time translation systems in general, and 
speech translation systems in particular, can help to 
bridge the language gap in healthcare when human 
interpreters are not available. 
Accuracy in an automatic real-time translation 
system is necessary, but not sufficient. If health-
care workers have no means to independently as-
sess the reliability of the translations obtained, 
practical use of the system will remain limited. 
Highly interactive speech translation systems can 
foster the confidence on both sides of the conversa-
tion, which is necessary to bring such systems into 
wide use. In fact, in this respect at least, they may 
sometimes prove superior to human interpreters, 
who normally do not provide clients with the 
means for judging translation accuracy. 
The value of enabling breadth of coverage, as 
well as accuracy and confidence, should also be 
clear: for many purposes, the system must be able 
to translate a wide range of topics outside of the 
immediate healthcare domain ? for example, when 
a patient tries to describe what was going on when 
an accident occurred. The ability to ask about in-
terests, family matters, and other life concerns is 
vital for establishing rapport, managing expecta-
tions and emotions, etc. 
3 Translation Shortcuts 
Having summarized our approach to highly inter-
active speech translation, we now turn to examina-
tion of practical interface issues for this class of 
SLT system. This section concentrates on Transla-
tion Shortcuts?. 
Shortcuts are designed to provide two main ad-
vantages:  
First, re-verification of a given utterance is un-
necessary. That is, once the translation of an utter-
ance has been verified interactively, it can be saved 
for later reuse, simply by activating a Save as 
Shortcut button on the translation verification 
screen. The button gives access to a dialogue in 
which a convenient Shortcut Category for the 
Shortcut can be selected or created. At reuse time, 
no further verification will be required. (In addition 
to such dynamically created Personal Shortcuts, 
any number of prepackaged Shared Shortcuts can 
be included in the system.) 
Second, access to stored Shortcuts is very 
quick, with little or no need for text entry. Several 
facilities contribute to meeting this design crite-
rion.  
? A Shortcut Search facility can retrieve a 
set of relevant Shortcuts given only keywords or 
the first few characters or words of a string. The 
desired Shortcut can then be executed with a single 
gesture (mouse click or stylus tap) or voice com-
mand.  
NOTE: If no Shortcut is found, the system 
automatically allows users access to the full power 
of broad-coverage, interactive speech translation. 
Thus, a seamless transition is provided between the 
Shortcuts facility and full, broad-coverage transla-
tion. 
? A Translation Shortcuts Browser is pro-
vided, so that users can find needed Shortcuts by 
traversing a tree of Shortcut categories. Using this 
interface, users can execute Shortcuts even if their 
ability to input text is quite limited, e.g. by tapping 
or clicking alone. 
Figure 1 shows the Shortcut Search and Short-
cuts Browser facilities in use. Points to notice:  
? On the left, the Translation Shortcuts Panel 
has slid into view and been pinned open. It con-
tains the Translation Shortcuts Browser, split into 
two main areas, Shortcuts Categories (above) and 
Shortcuts List (below).  
? The Categories section of the Panel shows 
current selection of the Conversation category, 
containing everyday expressions, and its Staff sub-
category, containing expressions most likely to be 
used by healthcare staff members. There is also a 
Patients subcategory, used for patient responses. 
Categories for Administrative topics and Pa-
tient?s Current Condition are also visible; and 
new ones can be freely created. 
? Below the Categories section is the Short-
cuts List section, containing a scrollable list of al-
phabetized Shortcuts. (Various other sorting 
criteria will be available in the future, e.g. sorting 
by frequency of use, recency, etc.)  
? Double clicking on any visible Shortcut in 
the List will execute it. Clicking once will select 
and highlight a Shortcut. Typing Enter will exe-
cute the currently highlighted Shortcut (here 
?Good morning?), if any.  
? It is possible to automatically relate op-
tions for a patient's response to the previous staff 
member?s utterance, e.g. by automatically going to 
the sibling Patient subcategory if the prompt was 
given from the Staff subcategory. 
Because the Shortcuts Browser can be used 
without text entry, simply by pointing and clicking, 
it enables responses by minimally literate users. In 
the future, we plan to enable use even by com-
pletely illiterate users, through two devices: we 
will enable automatic pronunciation of Shortcuts 
and categories in the Shortcuts Browser via text-to-
speech, so that these elements can in effect be read 
aloud to illiterate users; and we will augment 
Shared Shortcuts with pictorial symbols, as clues 
to their meaning. 
A final point concerning the Shortcuts Browser: 
it can be operated entirely by voice commands, 
although this mode is more likely to be useful to 
staff members than to patients. 
We turn our attention now to the Input Window, 
which does double duty for Shortcut Search and 
arbitrary text entry for full translation. We will 
consider the search facility first, as shown in Fig-
ure 2. 
? Shortcuts Search begins automatically as 
soon as text is entered by any means ? voice, 
handwriting, touch screen, or standard keyboard ? 
into the Input Window. 
? The Shortcuts Drop-down Menu appears 
just below the Input Window, as soon as there are 
results to be shown. The user has entered ?Good? 
and a space, so the search program has received its 
first input word. The drop-down menu shows the 
results of a keyword-based search.  
? Here, the results are sorted alphabetically. 
Various other sorting possibilities may be useful: 
by frequency of use, proportion of matched words, 
etc.  
? The highest priority Shortcut according to 
the specified sorting procedure can be highlighted 
for instant execution.  
? Other shortcuts will be highlighted differ-
ently, and both kinds of highlighting are synchro-
nized with that of the Shortcuts list in the Shortcuts 
Panel.  
? Arrow keys or voice commands can be 
used to navigate the drop-down list. 
? If the user goes on to enter the exact text of 
any Shortcut, e.g. ?Good morning,? a message will 
show that this is in fact a Shortcut, so that verifica-
tion will not be necessary. However, final text not 
matching a Shortcut, e.g. ?Good job,? will be 
passed to the routines for full translation with veri-
fication. 
4 Multimodal input 
As mentioned, an unavoidable issue for speech 
translation systems in healthcare settings is that 
speech input is not appropriate for every situation. 
Current speech-recognition systems are unfa-
miliar for many users. Our system attempts to 
overcome this training issue to some extent by in-
corporating standard commercial-grade dictation 
systems for broad-coverage and ergonomic speech 
recognition. These products already have estab-
lished user bases in the healthcare community. 
Even so, some training may be required: optional 
generic Guest profiles are supplied by our system 
for male and female voices in both languages; but 
optional voice enrollment, requiring five minutes 
or so, is helpful to achieve best results. Such train-
ing time is practical for healthcare staff, but will be 
realistic for patients only when they are repeat visi-
tors, hospital-stay patients, etc. 
As mentioned, other practical usability issues 
for the use of speech input in healthcare settings 
include problems of ambient noise (e.g. in emer-
gency rooms or ambulances) and problems of mi-
crophone and computer arrangement (e.g. to 
accommodate not only desktops but counters or 
service windows which may form a barrier be-
tween staff and patient). 
To deal with these and other usability issues, we 
have found it necessary to provide a range of input 
modes: in addition to dictated speech, we enable 
handwritten input, the use of touch screen key-
boards for text input, and the use of standard key-
boards. All of these input modes must be 
completely bilingual, and language switching must 
be arranged automatically when there is a change 
of active participant. Further, it must be possible to 
change input modes seamlessly within a given ut-
terance: for example, users must be able to dictate 
the input if they wish, but then be able to make 
corrections using handwriting or one of the re-
maining two modes. Figure 3 shows such seamless 
bilingual operation: the user has dictated the sen-
tence ?Tengo n?useas? in Spanish, but there was a 
speech-recognition error, which is being corrected 
by handwriting.  
Of course, even this flexible range of input op-
tions does not solve all problems. As mentioned, 
illiterate patients pose special problems. Again, 
na?ve users tend to suppose that speech is the ideal 
input mode for illiterates. Unfortunately, however, 
the careful and relatively concise style of speech 
that is required for automatic recognition is often 
difficult to elicit, so that recognition accuracy re-
mains low; and the ability to read and correct the 
results is obviously absent. Just as obviously, the 
remaining three text input modes will be equally 
ineffectual for illiterates. 
As explained, our current approach to low liter-
acy is to supply Translation Shortcuts for the mini-
mally literate, and ? in the future ? to augment 
Shortcuts with text-to-speech and iconic pictures. 
Staff members will usually be at least mini-
mally literate, but they present their own usability 
issues. 
Their typing skills may be low or absent. Han-
dling the computer and/or microphone may be 
awkward in many situations, e.g. when examining 
a patient or taking notes. (Speech translation sys-
tems are expected to function in a wide range of 
physical settings: in admissions or financial aid 
offices, at massage tables for physical therapy with 
patients lying face down, in personal living rooms 
for home therapy or interviews, and in many other 
locations.) 
To help deal with the awkwardness issues, our 
system provides voice commands, which enable 
hands-free operation. Both full interactive transla-
tion and the Translation Shortcut facility (using 
either the Browser or Search elements) can be run 
hands-free. To a limited degree, the system can be 
used eyes-free as well: text-to-speech can be used 
to pronounce the back-translation so that prelimi-
nary judgments of translation quality can be made 
without looking at the computer screen. 
5 Future developments 
We have already mentioned plans to augment the 
Translation Shortcuts facility with text-to-speech 
and iconic pictures, thus moving closer to a system 
suitable for communication with completely illiter-
ate or incapacitated patients. 
Additional future directions follow. 
? Server-based architectures:  We plan to 
move toward completely or partially server-based 
arrangements, in which only a very thin client 
software application ? for example, a web interface 
? will run on the client device. Such architectures 
will permit delivery of our system on smart phones 
in the Blackberry or Treo class. Delivery on hand-
helds will considerably diminish the issues of 
physical awkwardness discussed above, and any-
time/anywhere/any-device access to the system 
will considerably enlarge its range of uses. 
? Pooling Translation Shortcuts:  As ex-
plained above, the current system now supports 
both Personal (do-it-yourself) and Shared (pre-
packaged) Translation Shortcuts. As yet, however, 
there are no facilities to facilitate pooling of Per-
sonal Shortcuts among users, e.g. those in a work-
ing group. In the future, we will add facilities for 
exporting and importing shortcuts. 
? Translation memory: Translation Short-
cuts can be seen as a variant of Translation Mem-
ory, a facility that remembers past successful 
translations so as to circumvent error-prone re-
processing. However, at present, we save Shortcuts 
only when explicitly ordered. If all other successful 
translations were saved, there would soon be far 
too many to navigate effectively in the Translation 
Shortcuts Browser. In the future, however, we 
could in fact record these translations in the back-
ground, so that there would be no need to re-verify 
new input that matched against them. Messages 
would advise the user that verification was being 
bypassed in case of a match. 
? Additional languages: The full SLT sys-
tem described here is presently operational only for 
bidirectional translation between English and 
Spanish. We expect to expand the system to Man-
darin Chinese next. Limited working prototypes 
now exist for Japanese and German, though we 
expect these languages to be most useful in appli-
cation fields other than healthcare. 
? Testing: Systematic usability testing of the 
full system is under way. We look forward to pre-
senting the results at a future workshop. 
6 Conclusion 
We have described a highly interactive system for 
bidirectional, broad-coverage spoken language 
communication in the healthcare area. The paper 
has briefly reviewed the system's interactive foun-
dations, and then gone on to discuss in greater 
depth issues of practical usability.   
We have presented our Translation Shortcuts 
facility, which minimizes the need for interactive 
verification of sentences after they have been vet-
ted once, considerably speeds throughput while 
maintaining accuracy, and allows use by minimally 
literate patients for whom any mode of text entry 
might be difficult.  
We have also discussed facilities for multimo-
dal input, in which handwriting, touch screen, and 
keyboard interfaces are offered as alternatives to 
speech input when appropriate. In order to deal 
with issues related to sheer physical awkwardness, 
we have briefly mentioned facilities for hands-free 
or eyes-free operation of the system.   
Finally, we have pointed toward several direc-
tions for future improvement of the system. 
References  
Pierrette Bouillon, Manny Rayner, et al 2005. A Ge-
neric Multi-Lingual Open Source Platform for Lim-
ited-Domain Medical Speech Translation. Presented 
at EAMT 2005, Budapest, Hungary. 
 
Mike Dillinger and Mark Seligman. 2004. A highly 
interactive speech-to-speech translation system. Pro-
ceedings of the VI Conference of the Association of 
Machine Translation in the Americas. E. Strouds-
burg, PA:  American Association for Machine Trans-
lation. 
 
Glenn Flores, M. Laws, S. Mays, et al 2003. Errors in 
medical interpretation and their potential clinical 
consequences in pediatric encounters. Pediatrics, 
111: 6-14. 
 
Minnesota Interpreter Standards Advisory Committee. 
1998.  Bridging the Language Gap: How to meet the 
need for interpreters in Minnesota. Available at: 
http://www.cce.umn.edu/creditcourses/pti/ 
downloads.html. 
 
Melinda Paras, O. Leyva, T. Berthold, and R. Otake. 
2002. Videoconferencing Medical Interpretation:  
The results of clinical trials. Oakland, CA: Heath 
Access Foundation. 
 
PHRASELATOR (2006). http://www.phraselator.com. 
As of April 3, 2006. 
 
S-MINDS (2006). http://www.sehda.com/solutions.htm. 
As of April 3, 2006. 
 
Mark Seligman. 2000. Nine Issues in Speech Transla-
tion. Machine Translation, 15, 149-185. 
 
Chengqing Zong and Mark Seligman. Forthcoming. 
Toward Practical Spoken Language Translation. Ma-
chine Translation. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The Input Screen, showing the Translation Shortcuts Browser and Search facilities. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: The Input Screen, showing automatic keyword search of the Translation Shortcuts. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The Input Screen, showing correction of dictation with handwritten input. 
 
 
 
