Workshop on Computationally Hard Problemsand Joint Inference in Speech and Language Processing, pages 41?48,
New York City, New York, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Practical Markov Logic Containing First-Order Quantifiers
with Application to Identity Uncertainty
Aron Culotta and Andrew McCallum
Department of Computer Science
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003
{culotta, mccallum}@cs.umass.edu
Abstract
Markov logic is a highly expressive language
recently introduced to specify the connec-
tivity of a Markov network using first-order
logic. While Markov logic is capable of
constructing arbitrary first-order formulae
over the data, the complexity of these for-
mulae is often limited in practice because
of the size and connectivity of the result-
ing network. In this paper, we present ap-
proximate inference and estimation meth-
ods that incrementally instantiate portions
of the network as needed to enable first-
order existential and universal quantifiers
in Markov logic networks. When applied
to the problem of identity uncertainty, this
approach results in a conditional probabilis-
tic model that can reason about objects,
combining the expressivity of recently in-
troduced BLOG models with the predic-
tive power of conditional training. We vali-
date our algorithms on the tasks of citation
matching and author disambiguation.
1 Introduction
Markov logic networks (MLNs) combine the proba-
bilistic semantics of graphical models with the ex-
pressivity of first-order logic to model relational de-
pendencies (Richardson and Domingos, 2004). They
provide a method to instantiate Markov networks
from a set of constants and first-order formulae.
While MLNs have the power to specify Markov
networks with complex, finely-tuned dependencies,
the difficulty of instantiating these networks grows
with the complexity of the formulae. In particular,
expressions with first-order quantifiers can lead to
networks that are large and densely connected, mak-
ing exact probabilistic inference intractable. Because
of this, existing applications of MLNs have not ex-
ploited the full richness of expressions available in
first-order logic.
For example, consider the database of researchers
described in Richardson and Domingos (2004),
where predicates include Professor(person),
Student(person), AdvisedBy(person, per-
son), and Published(author, paper). First-
order formulae include statements such as ?students
are not professors? and ?each student has at most
one advisor.? Consider instead statements such as
?all the students of an advisor publish papers with
similar words in the title? or ?this subset of stu-
dents belong to the same lab.? To instantiate an
MLN with such predicates requires existential and
universal quantifiers, resulting in either a densely
connected network, or a network with prohibitively
many nodes. (In the latter example, it may be nec-
essary to ground the predicate for each element of
the power set of students.)
However, as discussed in Section 2, there may
be cases where these aggregate predicates increase
predictive power. For example, in predicting
the value of HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k),
it may be useful to know the values
of aggregate evidence predicates such as
CoauthoredAtLeastTwoPapers(ai . . . ai+k),
which indicates whether there are at least two papers
that some combination of authors from ai . . . ai+k
have co-authored. Additionally, we can construct
predicates such as NumberOfStudents(ai) to
model the number of students a researcher is likely
to advise simultaneously.
These aggregate predicates are examples of uni-
versal and existentially quantified predicates over ob-
served and unobserved values. To enable these sorts
41
of predicates while limiting the complexity of the
ground Markov network, we present an algorithm
that incrementally expands the set of aggregate pred-
icates during the inference procedure. In this paper,
we describe a general algorithm for incremental ex-
pansion of predicates in MLNs, then present an im-
plementation of the algorithm applied to the problem
of identity uncertainty.
2 Related Work
MLNs were designed to subsume various previously
proposed statistical relational models. Probabilistic
relational models (Friedman et al, 1999) combine
descriptive logic with directed graphical models, but
are restricted to acyclic graphs. Relational Markov
networks (Taskar et al, 2002) use SQL queries to
specify the structure of undirected graphical mod-
els. Since first-order logic subsumes SQL, MLNs
can be viewed as more expressive than relational
Markov networks, although existing applications of
MLNs have not fully utilized this increased expres-
sivity. Other approaches combining logic program-
ming and log-linear models include stochastic logic
programs (Cussens, 2003) and MACCENT(Dehaspe,
1997), although MLNs can be shown to represent
both of these.
Viewed as a method to avoid grounding an in-
tractable number of predicates, this paper has similar
motivations to recent work in lifted inference (Poole,
2003; de Salvo Braz et al, 2005), which performs
inference directly at the first-order level to avoid in-
stantiating all predicates. Although our model is not
an instance of lifted inference, it does attempt to re-
duce the number of predicates by instantiating them
incrementally.
Identity uncertainty (also known as record linkage,
deduplication, object identification, and co-reference
resolution) is the problem of determining whether a
set of constants (mentions) refer to the same object
(entity). Successful identity resolution enables vi-
sion systems to track objects, database systems to
deduplicate redundant records, and text processing
systems to resolve disparate mentions of people, or-
ganizations, and locations.
Many probabilistic models of object identification
have been proposed in the past 40 years in databases
(Fellegi and Sunter, 1969; Winkler, 1993) and nat-
ural language processing (McCarthy and Lehnert,
1995; Soon et al, 2001). With the introduction
of statistical relational learning, more sophisticated
models of identity uncertainty have been developed
that consider the dependencies between related con-
solidation decisions.
Most relevant to this work are the recent relational
models of identity uncertainty (Milch et al, 2005;
McCallum and Wellner, 2003; Parag and Domingos,
2004). McCallum and Wellner (2003) present exper-
iments using a conditional random field that factor-
izes into a product of pairwise decisions about men-
tion pairs (Model 3). These pairwise decisions are
made collectively using relational inference; however,
as pointed out in Milch et al (2004), there are short-
comings to this model that stem from the fact that it
does not capture features of objects, only of mention
pairs. For example, aggregate features such as ?a re-
searcher is unlikely to publish in more than 2 differ-
ent fields? or ?a person is unlikely to be referred to by
three different names? cannot be captured by solely
examining pairs of mentions. Additionally, decom-
posing an object into a set of mention pairs results
in ?double-counting? of attributes, which can skew
reasoning about a single object (Milch et al, 2004).
Similar problems apply to the model in Parag and
Domingos (2004).
Milch et al (2005) address these issues by con-
structing a generative probabilistic model over pos-
sible worlds called BLOG, where realizations of ob-
jects are typically sampled from a generative process.
While BLOG model provides attractive semantics for
reasoning about unknown objects, the transition to
generatively trained models sacrifices some of the at-
tractive properties of the discriminative model in Mc-
Callum and Wellner (2003) and Parag and Domin-
gos (2004), such as the ability to easily incorporate
many overlapping features of the observed mentions.
In contrast, generative models are constrained either
to assume the independence of these features or to
explicitly model their interactions.
Object identification can also be seen as an in-
stance of supervised clustering. Daume? III and
Marcu (2004) and Carbonetto et al (2005) present
similar Bayesian supervised clustering algorithms
that use a Dirichlet process to model the number
of clusters. As a generative model, it has similar ad-
vantages and disadvantages as Milch et al (2005),
with the added capability of integrating out the un-
certainty in the true number of objects.
In this paper, we present of identity uncertainty
that incorporates the attractive properties of Mc-
Callum and Wellner (2003) and Milch et al (2005),
resulting in a discriminative model to reason about
objects.
3 Markov logic networks
Let F = {Fi} be a set of first order formulae with
corresponding real-valued weights w = {wi}. Given
a set of constants C = {ci}, define ni(x) to be the
number of true groundings of Fi realized in a setting
42
of the world given by atomic formulae x. A Markov
logic network (MLN) (Richardson and Domingos,
2004) defines a joint probability distribution over
possible worlds x. In this paper, we will work with
discriminative MLNs (Singla and Domingos, 2005),
which define the conditional distribution over a set
of query atoms y given a set of evidence atoms x.
Using the normalizing constant Zx, the conditional
distribution is given by
P (Y = y|X = x) =
1
Zx
exp
?
?
|Fy|?
i=1
wini(x, y)
?
? (1)
where Fy ? F is the set of clauses for which at least
one grounding contains a query atom, and ni(x, y)
is the number of true groundings of the ith clause
containing evidence atom x and query atom y.
3.1 Inference Complexity in Ground
Markov Networks
The set of predicates and constants in Markov logic
define the structure of a Markov network, called a
ground Markov network. In discriminative Markov
logic networks, this resulting network is a conditional
Markov network (also known as a conditional ran-
dom field (Lafferty et al, 2001)).
From Equation 1, the formulae Fy specify the
structure of the corresponding Markov network as
follows: Each grounding of a predicate specified in
Fy has a corresponding node in the Markov network;
and an edge connects two nodes in the network if and
only if their corresponding predicates co-occur in a
grounding of a formula Fy. Thus, the complexity
of the formulae in Fy will determine the complexity
of the resulting Markov network, and therefore the
complexity of inference. When Fy contains complex
first-order quantifiers, the resulting Markov network
may contain a prohibitively large number of nodes.
For example, let the set of constants C be the set of
authors {ai}, papers {pi}, and conferences {ci} from
a research publication database. Predicates may in-
clude AuthorOf(ai, pj), AdvisorOf(ai, aj), and
ProgramCommittee(ai, cj). Each grounding of a
predicate corresponds to a random variable in the
corresponding Markov network.
It is important to notice how query predicates and
evidence predicates differ in their impact on inference
complexity. Grounded evidence predicates result in
observed random variables that can be highly con-
nected without resulting in an increase in inference
complexity. For example, consider the binary evi-
dence predicate HaveSameLastName(ai . . . ai+k).
This aggregate predicate reflects informa-
tion about a subset of (k ? i + 1) constants.
The value of this predicate is dependent on
the values of HaveSameLastName(ai, ai+1),
HaveSameLastName(ai, ai+2), etc. However,
since all of the corresponding variables are observed,
inference does not need to ensure their consistency
or model their interaction.
In contrast, complex query predicates can make
inference more difficult. Consider the query
predicate HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k). Here,
the related predicatesHaveSameAdvisor(ai, ai+1),
HaveSameAdvisor(ai, ai+2), etc., all correspond
to unobserved binary random variables that the
model must predict. To ensure their consistency,
the resulting Markov network must contain depen-
dency edges between each of these variables, result-
ing in a densely connected network. Since inference
in general in Markov networks scales exponentially
with the size of the largest clique, inference in the
grounded network quickly becomes intractable.
One solution is to limit the expressivity of the
predicates. In the previous example, we can decom-
pose the predicate HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k)
into its (k ? i + 1)2 corresponding pairwise pred-
icates, such as HaveSameAdvisor(ai, ai+1). An-
swering an aggregate query about the advisors of a
group of students can be handled by a conjunction
of these pairwise predicates.
However, as discussed in Sections 1 and 2, we
would like to reason about objects, not just pairs
of mentions, because this enables richer evidence
predicates. For example, the evidence predicates
AtLeastTwoCoauthoredPapers(ai . . . ai+k)
and NumberOfStudents(ai) can be
highly predictive of the query predicate
HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k).
Below, we describe a discriminative MLN for iden-
tity uncertainty that is able to reason at the object
level.
3.2 Identity uncertainty
Typically, MLNs make a unique names assumption,
requiring that different constants refer to distinct ob-
jects. In the publications database example, each
author constant ai is a string representation of one
author mention found in the text of a citation. The
unique names assumption assumes that each ai refers
to a distinct author in the real-world. This simplifies
the network structure at the risk of weak or fallacious
predictions (e.g., AdvisorOf(ai, aj) is erroneous if
ai and aj actually refer to the same author). The
identity uncertainty problem is the task of removing
the unique names assumption by determining which
43
constants refer to the same real-world objects.
Richardson and Domingos (2004) address this con-
cern by creating the predicate Equals(ci, cj) be-
tween each pair of constants. While this retains the
coherence of the model, the restriction to pairwise
predicates can be a drawback if there exist informa-
tive features over sets of constants. In particular,
by only capturing features of pairs of constants, this
solution cannot model the compatibility of object at-
tributes, only of constant attributes (Section 2).
Instead, we desire a conditional model that allows
predicates to be defined over a set of constants.
One approach is to introduce constants that repre-
sent objects, and connect them to their mentions by
predicates such as IsMentionOf(ci, cj). In addition
to computational issues, this approach also some-
what problematically requires choosing the number
of objects. (See Richardson and Domingos (2004) for
a brief discussion.)
Instead, we propose instantiating aggregate pred-
icates over sets of constants, such that a setting of
these predicates implicitly determines the number of
objects. This approach allows us to model attributes
over entire objects, rather than only pairs of con-
stants. In the following sections, we describe aggre-
gate predicates in more detail, as well as the approx-
imations necessary to implement them efficiently.
3.3 Aggregate predicates
Aggregate predicates are predicates that take as ar-
guments an arbitrary number of constants. For ex-
ample, the HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k) predi-
cate in the previous section is an example of an ag-
gregate predicate over k ? i + 1 constants.
Let IC = {1 . . . N} be the set of indices into the set
of constants C, with power set P(IC). For any subset
d ? P(IC), an aggregate predicate A(d) defines a
property over the subset of constants d.
Note that aggregate predicates can be trans-
lated into first-order formulae. For example,
HaveSameAdvisor(ai . . . ai+k) can be re-written
as ?(ax, ay) ? {ai . . . ai+k} SameAdvisor(ax, ay).
By using aggregate predicates we make explicit the
fact that we are modeling the attributes at the object
level.
We distinguish between aggregate query predi-
cates, which represent unobserved aggregate vari-
ables, and aggregate evidence predicates, which rep-
resent observed aggregate variables. Note that using
aggregate query predicates can complicate inference,
since they represent a collection of fully connected
hidden variables. The main point of this paper is
that although these aggregate query predicates are
specifiable in MLNs, they have not been utilized be-
cause of the resulting inference complexity. We show
that the gains made possible by these predicates of-
ten outweigh the approximations required for infer-
ence.
As discussed in Section 3.1, for each aggregate
query predicates A(d), it is critical that the model
predict consistent values for every related subset of d.
Enforcing this consistency requires introducing de-
pendency edges between aggregate query predicates
that share arguments. In general, this can be a diffi-
cult problem. Here, we focus on the special case for
identity uncertainty where the main query predicate
under consideration is AreEqual(d).
The aggregate query predicate AreEqual(d) is
true if and only if all constants di ? d refer to the
same object. Since each subset of constants corre-
sponds to a candidate object, a (consistent) setting
of all the AreEqual predicates results in a solution
to the object identification problem. The number
of objects is chosen based on the optimal grounding
of each of these aggregate predicates, and therefore
does not require a prior over the number of objects.
That is, once all the AreEqual predicates are set,
they determine a clustering with a fixed number of
objects. The number of objects is not modeled or set
directly, but is implied by the result of MAP infer-
ence. (However, a posterior over the number of ob-
jects could be modeled discriminatively in an MLN
(Richardson and Domingos, 2004).)
This formulation also allows us to compute aggre-
gate evidence predicates over objects to help predict
the values of each AreEqual predicate. For exam-
ple, NumberFirstNames(d) returns the number of
different first names used to refer to the object ref-
erenced by constants d. In this way, we can model
aggregate features of an object, capturing the com-
patibility among its attributes.
For a given C, there are |P(IC)| possible ground-
ings of the AreEqual query predicates. Naively im-
plemented, such an approach would require enumer-
ating all subsets of constants, ultimately resulting in
an unwieldy network.
An equivalent way to state the problem is that
using N -ary predicates results in a Markov network
with one node for each grounding of the predicate.
Since in the general case there is one grounding
for each subset of C, the size of the corresponding
Markov network will be exponential in |C|. See Fig-
ure 1 for an example instantiation of an MLN with
three constants (a, b, c) and one AreEqual predi-
cate.
In this paper, we provide algorithms to per-
form approximate inference and parameter estima-
tion by incrementally instantiating these predicates
44
AreEqual(a,b) AreEqual(a,c) AreEqual(b,c)
AreEqual(a,b,c)
Figure 1: An example of the network instantiated
by an MLN with three constants and the aggregate
predicate AreEqual, instantiated for all possible
subsets with size ? 2.
as needed.
3.4 MAP Inference
Maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference seeks the so-
lution to
y? = argmax
y
P (Y = y|X = x)
where y? is the setting of all the query predicates
Fy (e.g. AreEqual) with the maximal conditional
density.
In large, densely connected Markov networks, a
common approximate inference technique is loopy
belief propagation (i.e. the max-product algorithm
applied to a cyclic graph). However, the use of ag-
gregate predicates makes it intractable even to in-
stantiate the entire network, making max-product
an inappropriate solution.
Instead, we employ an incremental inference tech-
nique that grounds aggregate query predicates in
an agglomerative fashion based on the model?s cur-
rent MAP estimates. This algorithm can be viewed
as a greedy agglomerative search for a local opti-
mum of P (Y |X), and has connections to recent work
on correlational clustering (Bansal et al, 2004) and
graph partitioning for MAP estimation (Boykov et
al., 2001).
First, note that finding the MAP estimate does not
require computing Zx, since we are only interested in
the relative values of each configuration, and Zx is
fixed for a given x. Thus, at iteration t, we compute
an unnormalized score for yt (the current setting of
the query predicates) given the evidence predicates
x as follows:
S(yt, x) = exp
?
?
|F t|?
i=0
wini(x, y
t)
?
?
where F t ? Fy is the set of aggregate predicates
representing a partial solution to the object identifi-
cation task for constants C, specified by yt.
Algorithm 1 Approximate MAP Inference Algo-
rithm
1: Given initial predicates F 0
2: while ScoreIsIncreased do
3: F ?i ? FindMostLikelyPredicate(F
t)
4: F ?i ? true
5: F t ? ExpandPredicates(F ?i , F
t)
6: end while
Algorithm 1 outlines a high-level description of the
approximate MAP inference algorithm. The algo-
rithm first initializes the set of query predicated F 0
such that all AreEqual predicates are restricted
to pairs of constants, i.e. AreEqual(ci, cj) ?(i, j).
This is equivalent to a Markov network containing
one unobserved random variable for each pair of con-
stants, where each variable indicates whether a pair
of constants refer to the same object.
Initially, each AreEqual predicate is assumed
false. In line 3, the procedure FindMostLike-
lyPredicate iterates through each query predicate
in F t, setting each to true in turn and calculating its
impact on the scoring function. The procedure re-
turns the predicate F ?i such that setting F
?
i to True
results in the greatest increase in the scoring function
S(yt, x).
Let (c?i . . . c
?
j ) be the set of constants ?merged?
by setting their AreEqual predicate to true. The
ExpandPredicates procedure creates new predi-
cates AreEqual(c?i . . . c
?
j , ck . . . cl) corresponding to
all the potential predicates created by merging the
constants c?i . . . c
?
j with any of the other previously
merged constants. For example, after the first it-
eration, a pair of constants (c?i , c
?
j ) are merged.
The set of predicates are expanded to include
AreEqual(c?i , c
?
j , ck) ?ck, reflecting all possible ad-
ditional references to the proposed object referenced
by c?i , c
?
j .
This algorithm continues until there is no predi-
cate that can be set to true that increases the score
function.
In this way, the final setting of Fy is a local max-
imum of the score function. As in other search
algorithms, we can employ look-ahead to reduce
the greediness of the search (i.e., consider multiple
merges simultaneously), although we do not include
look-ahead in experiments reported here.
It is important to note that each expansion of the
aggregate query predicates Fy has a corresponding
set of aggregate evidence predicates. These evidence
predicates characterize the compatibility of the at-
tributes of each hypothesized object.
45
3.4.1 Pruning
The space required for the above algorithm scales
?(|C|2), since in the initialization step we must
ground a predicate for each pair of constants. We use
the canopy method of McCallum et al (2000), which
thresholds a ?cheap? similarity metric to prune un-
necessary comparisons. This pruning can be done
at subsequent stages of inference to restrict which
predicates variables will be introduced.
Additionally, we must ensure that predicate set-
tings at time t do not contradict settings at t ? 1
(e.g. if F t(a, b, c) = 1, then F t+1(a, b) = 1). By
greedily setting unobserved nodes to their MAP es-
timates, the inference algorithm ignores inconsistent
settings and removes them from the search space.
3.5 Parameter estimation
Given a fully labeled training set D of constants an-
notated with their referent objects, we would like to
estimate the value of w that maximizes the likelihood
of D. That is, w? = argmaxw Pw(y|x).
When the data are few, we can explicitly instan-
tiate all AreEqual(d) predicates, setting their cor-
responding nodes to the values implied by D. The
likelihood is given by Equation 1, where the normal-
izer is Zx =
?
y? exp
(?|F ?y|
i=1 wini(x, y
?)
)
.
Although this sum over y? to calculate Zx is ex-
ponential in |y|, many inconsistent settings can be
pruned as discussed in Section 3.4.1.
In general, however, instantiating the entire set
of predicates denoted by y and calculating Zx is
intractable. Existing methods for MLN parame-
ter estimation include pseudo-likelihood and voted
perceptron (Richardson and Domingos, 2004; Singla
and Domingos, 2005). We instead follow the recent
success in piecewise training for complex undirected
graphical models (Sutton and McCallum, 2005) by
making the following two approximations. First, we
avoid calculating the global normalizer Zx by calcu-
lating local normalizers, which sum only over the two
values for each aggregate query predicate grounded
in the training data. We therefore maximize the sum
of local probabilities for each query predicate given
the evidence predicates.
This approximation can be viewed as constructing
a log-linear binary classifier to predict whether an
isolated set of constants refer to the same object.
Input features include arbitrary first-order features
over the input constants, and the output is a binary
variable. The parameters of this classifier correspond
to the w weights in the MLN. This simplification
results in a convex optimization problem, which we
solve using gradient descent with L-BFGS, a second-
order optimization method (Liu and Nocedal, 1989).
The second approximation addresses the fact that
all query predicates from the training set cannot be
instantiated. We instead sample a subset FS ? Fy
and maximize the likelihood of this subset. The sam-
pling is not strictly uniform, but is instead obtained
by collecting the predicates created while perform-
ing object identification using a weak method (e.g.
string comparisons). More explicitly, predicates are
sampled from the training data by performing greedy
agglomerative clustering on the training mentions,
using a scoring function that computes the similar-
ity between two nodes by string edit distance. The
goal of this clustering is not to exactly reproduce the
training clusters, but to generate correct and incor-
rect clusters that have similar characteristics (size,
homogeneity) to what will be present in the testing
data.
4 Experiments
We perform experiments on two object identification
tasks: citation matching and author disambiguation.
Citation matching is the task of determining whether
two research paper citation strings refer to the same
paper. We use the Citeseer corpus (Lawrence et al,
1999), containing approximately 1500 citations, 900
of which are unique. The citations are manually la-
beled with cluster identifiers, and the strings are seg-
mented into fields such as author, title, etc. The cita-
tion data is split into four disjoint categories by topic,
and the results presented are obtained by training on
three categories and testing on the fourth.
Using first-order logic, we create a number of ag-
gregate predicates such as AllTitlesMatch, Al-
lAuthorsMatch, AllJournalsMatch, etc., as
well as their existential counterparts, ThereExist-
sTitleMatch, etc. We also include count predi-
cates, which indicate the number of these matches in
a set of constants.
Additionally, we add edit distance predicates,
which calculate approximate matches1 between title
fields, etc., for each pair of citations in a set of cita-
tions. Aggregate features are used for these, such as
?there exists a pair of citations in this cluster which
have titles that are less than 30% similar? and ?the
minimum edit distance between titles in a cluster is
greater than 50%.?
We evaluate using pairwise precision, recall, and
F1, which measure the system?s ability to predict
whether each pair of constants refer to the same ob-
ject or not. Table 1 shows the advantage of our
1We use the Secondstring package, found at
http://secondstring.sourceforge.net
46
Table 1: Precision, recall, and F1 performance for
citation matching task, where Objects is an MLN
using aggregate predicates, and Pairs is an MLN us-
ing only pairwise predicates. Objects outperforms
Pairs on three of the four testing sets.
Objects Pairs
pr re f1 pr re f1
constraint 85.8 79.1 82.3 63.0 98.0 76.7
reinforce 97.0 90.0 93.4 65.6 98.2 78.7
face 93.4 84.8 88.9 74.2 94.7 83.2
reason 97.4 69.3 81.0 76.4 95.5 84.9
Table 2: Performance on the author disambiguation
task. Objects outperforms Pairs on two of the
three testing sets.
Objects Pairs
pr re f1 pr re f1
miller d 73.9 29.3 41.9 44.6 1.0 61.7
li w 39.4 47.9 43.2 22.1 1.0 36.2
smith b 61.2 70.1 65.4 14.5 1.0 25.4
proposed model (Objects) over a model that only
considers pairwise predicates of the same features
(Pairs). Note that Pairs is a strong baseline that
performs collective inference of citation matching de-
cisions, but is restricted to use only IsEqual(ci, cj)
predicates over pairs of citations. Thus, the perfor-
mance difference is due to the ability to model first-
order features of the data.
Author disambiguation is the task of deciding
whether two strings refer to the same author. To in-
crease the task complexity, we collect citations from
the Web containing different authors with matching
last names and first initials. Thus, simply performing
a string match on the author?s name would be insuffi-
cient in many cases. We searched for three common
last name / first initial combinations (Miller, D;
Li, W; Smith, B). From this set, we collected 400
citations referring to 56 unique authors. For these
experiments, we train on two subsets and test on the
third.
We generate aggregate predicates similar to those
used for citation matching. Additionally, we in-
clude features indicating the overlap of tokens from
the titles and indicating whether there exists a pair
of authors in this cluster that have different mid-
dle names. This last feature exemplifies the sort of
reasoning enabled by aggregate predicates: For ex-
ample, consider a pairwise predicate that indicates
whether two authors have the same middle name.
Very often, middle name information is unavailable,
so the name ?Miller, A.? may have high similarity to
both ?Miller, A. B.? and ?Miller, A. C.?. However,
it is unlikely that the same person has two different
middle names, and our model learns a weight for this
feature. Table 2 demonstrates the advantage of this
method.
Overall, Objects achieves F1 scores superior to
Pairs on 5 of the 7 datasets. These results indicate
the potential advantages of using complex first-order
quantifiers in MLNs. The cases in which Pairs out-
performs Objects are likely due to the fact that the
approximate inference used in Objects is greedy.
Increasing the robustness of inference is a topic of
future research.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented an algorithm that enables practi-
cal inference in MLNs containing first-order existen-
tial and universal quantifiers, and have demonstrated
the advantages of this approach on two real-world
datasets. Future work will investigate efficient ways
to improve the approximations made during infer-
ence, for example by reducing its greediness by revis-
ing the MAP estimates made at previous iterations.
Although the optimal number of objects is cho-
sen implicitly by the inference algorithm, there may
be reasons to explicitly model this number. For ex-
ample, if there exist global features of the data that
suggest there are many objects, then the inference al-
gorithm should be less inclined to merge constants.
Additionally, the data may exhibit ?preferential at-
tachment? such that the probability of a constant
being added to an existing object is proportional to
the number of constants that refer to that object.
Future work will examine the feasibility of adding
aggregate query predicates to represent these values.
More subtly, one may also want to directly model
the size of the object population. For example, given
a database of authors, we may want to estimate not
only how many distinct authors exist in the database,
but also how many distinct authors exist outside of
the database, as discussed in Milch et al (2005).
Discriminatively-trained models cannot easily reason
about objects for which they have no observations;
so a generative/discriminative hybrid model may be
required to properly estimate this value.
Finally, while the inference algorithm we describe
is evaluated only on the object uncertainty task, we
would like to extend it to perform inference over ar-
bitrary query predicates.
47
6 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reviewers, and Pallika Kanani
for helpful discussions. This work was supported in
part by the Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval,
in part by U.S. Government contract #NBCH040171
through a subcontract with BBNT Solutions LLC, in
part by The Central Intelligence Agency, the National
Security Agency and National Science Foundation un-
der NSF grant #IIS-0326249, and in part by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), through
the Department of the Interior, NBC, Acquisition Ser-
vices Division, under contract number NBCHD030010.
Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommenda-
tions expressed in this material are the author(s)? and do
not necessarily reflect those of the sponsor.
References
Nikhil Bansal, Avrim Blum, and Shuchi Chawla. 2004.
Correlation clustering. Machine Learining, 56:89?113.
Yuri Boykov, Olga Veksler, and Ramin Zabih. 2001. Fast
approximate energy minimization via graph cuts. In
IEEE transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence (PAMI), 23(11):1222?1239.
Peter Carbonetto, Jacek Kisynski, Nando de Freitas, and
David Poole. 2005. Nonparametric bayesian logic. In
UAI.
J. Cussens. 2003. Individuals, relations and structures
in probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence,
pages 126?133, Acapulco, Mexico.
Hal Daume? III and Daniel Marcu. 2004. Supervised clus-
tering with the dirichlet process. In NIPS?04 Learn-
ing With Structured Outputs Workshop, Whistler,
Canada.
Rodrigo de Salvo Braz, Eyal Amir, and Dan Roth. 2005.
Lifted first-order probabilistic inference. In IJCAI,
pages 1319?1325.
L. Dehaspe. 1997. Maximum entropy modeling with
clausal constraints. In Proceedings of the Seventh
International Workshop on Inductive Logic Program-
ming, pages 109?125, Prague, Czech Republic.
I. P. Fellegi and A. B. Sunter. 1969. A theory for record
linkage. Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion, 64:1183?1210.
Nir Friedman, Lise Getoor, Daphne Koller, and Avi Pf-
effer. 1999. Learning probabilistic relational models.
In IJCAI, pages 1300?1309.
John Lafferty, Andrew McCallum, and Fernando Pereira.
2001. Conditional random fields: Probabilistic models
for segmenting and labeling sequence data. In Proc.
18th International Conf. on Machine Learning, pages
282?289. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA.
S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, and K. Bollaker. 1999. Digi-
tal libraries and autonomous citation indexing. IEEE
Computer, 32:67?71.
D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal. 1989. On the limited mem-
ory BFGS method for large scale optimization. Math.
Programming, 45(3, (Ser. B)):503?528.
A. McCallum and B. Wellner. 2003. Toward condi-
tional models of identity uncertainty with application
to proper noun coreference. In IJCAI Workshop on
Information Integration on the Web.
Andrew K. McCallum, Kamal Nigam, and Lyle Ungar.
2000. Efficient clustering of high-dimensional data sets
with application to reference matching. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Conference On Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-2000), Boston,
MA.
Joseph F. McCarthy and Wendy G. Lehnert. 1995. Us-
ing decision trees for coreference resolution. In IJCAI,
pages 1050?1055.
Brian Milch, Bhaskara Marthi, and Stuart Russell. 2004.
Blog: Relational modeling with unknown objects. In
ICML 2004 Workshop on Statistical Relational Learn-
ing and Its Connections to Other Fields.
Brian Milch, Bhaskara Marthi, and Stuart Russell. 2005.
BLOG: Probabilistic models with unknown objects. In
IJCAI.
Parag and Pedro Domingos. 2004. Multi-relational
record linkage. In Proceedings of the KDD-2004 Work-
shop on Multi-Relational Data Mining, pages 31?48,
August.
D. Poole. 2003. First-order probabilistic inference. In
Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 985?991, Aca-
pulco, Mexico. Morgan Kaufman.
M. Richardson and P. Domingos. 2004. Markov logic
networks. Technical report, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA.
Parag Singla and Pedro Domingos. 2005. Discriminative
training of markov logic networks. In Proceedings of
the Twentieth National Conference of Artificial Intel-
ligence, Pittsburgh, PA.
Wee Meng Soon, Hwee Tou Ng, and Daniel Chung Yong
Lim. 2001. A machine learning approach to corefer-
ence resolution of noun phrases. Comput. Linguist.,
27(4):521?544.
Charles Sutton and Andrew McCallum. 2005. Piecewise
training of undirected models. In Submitted to 21st
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Ben Taskar, Abbeel Pieter, and Daphne Koller. 2002.
Discriminative probabilistic models for relational data.
In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence: Proceedings of
the Eighteenth Conference (UAI-2002), pages 485?492,
San Francisco, CA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
William E. Winkler. 1993. Improved decision rules in
the fellegi-sunter model of record linkage. Technical
report, Statistical Research Division, U.S. Census Bu-
reau, Washington, DC.
48
