Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Distances, pages 1?6,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Linguistic Distances
John Nerbonne
Alfa-informatica
University of Groningen
j.nerbonne@rug.nl
Erhard Hinrichs
Seminar fu?r Sprachwissenschaft
Universita?t Tu?bingen
eh@sfs.uni-tuebingen.de
Abstract
In many theoretical and applied areas of
computational linguistics researchers op-
erate with a notion of linguistic distance
or, conversely, linguistic similarity, which
is the focus of the present workshop.
While many CL areas make frequent use
of such notions, it has received little fo-
cused attention, an honorable exception
being Lebart & Rajman (2000). This
workshop brings a number of these strands
together, highlighting a number of com-
mon issues.
1 Introduction
In many theoretical and applied areas of compu-
tational linguistics researchers operate with a no-
tion of linguistic distance or, conversely, linguistic
similarity, which is the focus of the present work-
shop. While many CL areas make frequent use of
such notions, it has received little focused atten-
tion, an honorable exception being Lebart & Raj-
man (2000).
In information retrieval (IR), also the focus of
Lebart & Rajman?s work, similarity is at heart
of most techniques seeking an optimal match be-
tween query and document. Techniques in vector
space models operationalize this via (weighted)
cosine measures, but older tf/idf models were also
arguably aiming at a notion of similarity.
Word sense disambiguation models often work
with a notion of similarity among the contexts
within which word (senses) appear, and MT iden-
tifies candidate lexical translation equivalents via
a comparable measure of similarity. Many learn-
ing algorithms currently popular in CL, including
not only supervised techniques such as memory-
based learning (k-nn) and support-vector ma-
chines, but also unsupervised techniques such as
Kohonen maps and clustering, rely essentially on
measures of similarity for their processing.
Notions of similarity are often invoked in lin-
guistic areas such as dialectology, historical lin-
guistics, stylometry, second-language learning (as
a measure of learners? proficiency), psycholin-
guistics (accounting for lexical ?neighborhood?
effects, where neighborhoods are defined by simi-
larity) and even in theoretical linguistics (novel ac-
counts of the phonological constraints on semitic
roots).
This volume reports on a workshop aimed at
bringing together researchers employing various
measures of linguistic distance or similarity, in-
cluding novel proposals, especially to demonstrate
the importance of the abstract properties of such
measures (consistency, validity, stability over cor-
pus size, computability, fidelity to the mathemati-
cal distance axioms), but also to exchange infor-
mation on how to analyze distance information
further.
We assume that there is always a ?hidden vari-
able? in the similarity relation, so that we should
always speak of similarity with respect to some
property, and we suspect that there is such a
plethora of measures in part because researchers
are often inexplicit on this point. It is useful to
tease the different notions apart. Finally, it is most
intriguing to try to make a start on understanding
how some of the different notions might construed
as alternative realizations of a single abstract no-
tion.
2 Pronunciation
John Laver, the author of the most widely used
textbook in phonetics, claimed that ?one of the
1
most basic concepts in phonetics, and one of the
least discussed, is that of phonetic similarity
[boldface in original, JN & EH]? (Laver, 1994,
p. 391), justifying the attention the workshop pays
to it. Laver goes on to sketch the work that has
been done on phonetic similarity, or, more ex-
actly, phonetic distance, in particular, the empir-
ical derivation of confusion matrices, which indi-
cate the likelihood with which people or speech
recognition systems confusion one sound for an-
other. Miller & Nicely (1955) founded this ap-
proach with studies of how humans confused some
sounds more readily than others. Although ?con-
fusability? is a reasonable reflection of phonetic
similarity, it is perhaps worth noting that confu-
sion matrices are often asymmetric, suggesting
that something more complex is at play. Clark
& Yallop (1995, p. 319ff) discuss this line of
work further, suggesting more sophisticated anal-
yses which aggregate confusion matrices based on
segments.
In addition to the phonetic interest (above), pho-
nologists have likewise shown interest in the ques-
tion of similarity, especially in recent work. Al-
bright and Hayes (2003) have proposed a model
of phonological learning which relies on ?mini-
mal generalization?. The idea is that children learn
e.g. rules of allomorphy on the basis not merely
of rules and individual lexical exceptions (the ear-
lier standard wisdom), but rather on the basis of
slight but reliable generalizations. An example is
the formation of the past tense of verbs ending in
[IN], ?ing? (fling, sing, sting, spring, string) that
build past tenses as ?ung? [2N]. We omit details
but note that the ?minimal generalization? is min-
imally DISTANT in pronunciation.
Frisch, Pierrehumbert & Broe (2004) have also
kindled an interest in segmental similarity among
phonologists with their claim that syllables in
Semitic languages are constrained to have unlike
consonants in syllable onset and coda. Their work
has not gone unchallenged (Bailey and Hahn,
2005; Hahn and Bailey, 2005), but it has certainly
created further theoretical interest in phonological
similarity.
There has been a great deal of attention in
psycholinguistics to the the problem of word
recognition, and several models appeal explic-
itly to the ?degree of phonetic similarity among
the words? (Luce and Pisoni, 1998, p. 1), but
most of these models employ relatively simple no-
tions of sequence similarity and/or, e.g., the idea
that distance may be operationalized by the num-
ber or replacements needed to derive one word
from another?ignoring the problem of similarity
among words of different lengths (Vitevitch and
Luce, 1999). Perhaps more sophisticated com-
putational models of pronunciation distance could
play a role in these models in the future.
Kessler (1995) showed how to employ edit dis-
tance to operationalize pronunciation difference in
order to investigate dialectology more precisely,
an idea which, particular, Heeringa (2004) pursued
at great length. Kondrak (2002) created a vari-
ant of the dynamic programming algorithm used
to compute edit distance which he used to iden-
tify cognates in historical linguistics. McMahon
& McMahon (2005) include investigations of pro-
nunciation similarity in their recent book on phy-
logenetic techniques in historical linguistics. Sev-
eral of the contributions to this volume build on
these earlier efforts or are relevant to them.
Kondrak and Sherif (this volume) continue the
investigation into techniques for identifying cog-
nates, now comparing several techniques which
rely solely on parameters set by the researcher to
machine learning techniques which automatically
optimize those parameters. They show the the ma-
chine learning techniques to be superior, in partic-
ular, techniques basic on hidden Markov models
and dynamic Bayesian nets.
Heeringa et al (this volume) investigate several
extensions of the fundamental edit distance algo-
rithm for use in dialectology, including sensitivity
to order and context as well syllabicity constraints,
which they argue to be preferable, and length nor-
malization and graded weighting schemes, which
they argue against.
Dinu & Dinu (this volume) investigate metrics
on string distances which attach more importance
to the initial parts of the string. They embed this
insight into a scheme in which n-grams are ranked
(sorted) by frequency, and the difference in the
rankings is used to assay language differences.
Their paper proves that difference in rankings is
a proper mathematical metric.
Singh (this volume) investigates the technical
question of identifying languages and character
encoding systems from limited amounts of text.
He collects about 1, 000 or so of the most fre-
quent n-grams of various sizes and then classifies
next texts based on the similarity between the fre-
2
quency distributions of the known texts with those
of texts to be classified. His empirical results show
?mutual cross entropy? to identify similarity most
reliably, but there are several close competitors.
3 Syntax
Although there is less interest in similarity at the
syntactic level among linguistic theorists, there is
still one important areas of theoretical research in
which it could play an important role and several
interdisciplinary studies in which similarity and/or
distant is absolutely crucial. Syntactic TYPOLOGY
is an area of linguistic theory which seeks to iden-
tify syntactic features which tend to be associated
with one another in all languages (Comrie, 1989;
Croft, 2001). The fundamental vision is that some
sorts of languages may be more similar to one
another?typologically?than would first appear.
Further, there are two interdisciplinary linguis-
tic studies in which similarity and/or distance
plays a great role, including similarity at the syn-
tactic level (without, however, exclusively focus-
ing on syntax). LANGUAGE CONTACT studies
seek to identify the elements of one language
which have been adopted in a second in a situa-
tion in which two or more languages are used in
the same community (Thomason and Kaufmann,
1988; van Coetsem, 1988). Naturally, these may
be non-syntactic, but syntactic CONTAMINATION
is a central concept which is recognized in con-
taminated varieties which have become more sim-
ilar to the languages which are the source of con-
tamination.
Essentially the same phenomena is studied in
SECOND-LANGUAGE LEARNING, in which syn-
tactic patterns from a dominant, usually first, lan-
guage are imposed on a second. Here the focus is
on the psychology of the individual language user
as opposed to the collective habits of the language
community.
Nerbonne and Wiersma (this volume) collect
frequency distributions of part-of-speech (POS)
trigrams and explore simple measures of distance
between these. They approach issues of statisti-
cal significance using permutation tests, which re-
quires attention to tricky issues of normalization
between the frequency distributions.
Homola & Kubon? (this volume) join Nerbonne
and Wiersma in advocating a surface-oriented
measure of syntactic difference, but base their
measure on dependency trees rather than POS
tags, a more abstract level of analysis. From there
they propose an analogue to edit distance to gauge
the degree of difference. The difference between
two tree is the sum of the costs of the tree-editing
operations needed to obtain one tree from another
(Noetzel and Selkow, 1999).
Emms (this volume) concentrates on applica-
tions of the notion ?tree similarity? in particular in
order to identify text which is syntactically sim-
ilar to questions and which may therefore be ex-
pected to constitute an answer to the question. He
is able to show that the tree-distance measure out-
performs sequence distance measures, at least if
lexical information is also emphasized.
Ku?bler (this volume) uses the similarity mea-
sure in memory-based learning to parse. This is
a surprising approach, since memory-based tech-
niques are normally used in classification tasks
where the target is one of a small number of po-
tential classifications. In parsing, the targets may
be arbitrarily complex, so a key step is select an
initial structure in a memory-based way, and then
to adapt it further. In this paper Ku?bler first applies
chunking to the sentence to be parsed and selects
an initial parse based on chunk similarity.
4 Semantics
While similarity as such has not been a prominent
term in theoretical and computational research on
natural language semantics, the study of LEXICAL
SEMANTICS, which attempts to identify regulari-
ties of and systematic relations among word mean-
ings, is more often than not predicated on an im-
plicit notion of ?semantic similarity?. Research
on the lexical semantics of verbs tries to identify
verb classes whose members exhibit similar syn-
tactic and semantic behavior. In logic-based the-
ories of word meaning (e.g., Vendler (1967) and
Dowty (1979)), verb classes are identified by sim-
ilarity patterns of inference, while Levin?s (1993)
study of English verb classes demonstrates that
similarities of word meanings for verbs can be
gleaned from their syntactic behavior, in particu-
lar from their ability or inability to participate in
diatheses, i.e. patterns of argument alternations.
With the increasing availability of large elec-
tronic corpora, recent computational research on
word meaning has focused on capturing the notion
of ?context similarity? of words. Such studies fol-
low the empiricist approach to word meaning sum-
marized best in the famous dictum of the British
3
linguist J.R. Firth: ?You shall know a word by the
company it keeps.? (Firth, 1957, p. 11) Context
similarity has been used as a means of extract-
ing collocations from corpora, e.g. by Church &
Hanks (1990) and by Dunning (1993), of identify-
ing word senses, e.g. by Yarowski (1995) and by
Schu?tze (1998), of clustering verb classes, e.g. by
Schulte im Walde (2003), and of inducing selec-
tional restrictions of verbs, e.g. by Resnik (1993),
by Abe & Li (1996), by Rooth et al (1999) and by
Wagner (2004).
A third approach to lexical semantics, devel-
oped by linguists and by cognitive psychologists,
primarily relies on the intuition of lexicographers
for capturing word meanings, but is also informed
by corpus evidence for determining word usage
and word senses. This type of approach has led to
two highly valued semantic resources: the Prince-
ton WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) and the Berkeley
Framenet (Baker et al, 1998). While originally
developed for English, both approaches have been
successfully generalized to other languages.
The three approaches to word meaning dis-
cussed above try to capture different aspects of
the notion of semantic similarity, all of which are
highly relevant for current and future research in
computational linguistics. In fact, the five pa-
pers that discuss issues of semantic similarity in
the present volume build on insights from these
three frameworks or address open research ques-
tions posed by these frameworks. Zesch and
Gurevych (this volume) discuss how measures
of semantic similarity?and more generally: se-
mantic relatedness?can be obtained by similarity
judgments of informants who are presented with
word pairs and who, for each pair, are asked to
rate the degree of semantic relatedness on a pre-
defined scale. Such similarity judgments can pro-
vide important empirical evidence for taxonomic
models of word meanings such as wordnets, which
thus far rely mostly on expert knowledge of lexi-
cographers. To this end, Zesch and Gurevych pro-
pose a corpus-based system that supports fast de-
velopment of relevant data sets for large subject
domains.
St-Jacques and Barrie`re (this volume) review
and contrast different philosophical and psycho-
logical models for capturing the notion of seman-
tic similarity and different mathematical models
for measuring semantic distance. They draw at-
tention to the fact that, depending on which un-
derlying models are in use, different notions of se-
mantic similarity emerge and conjecture that dif-
ferent similarity metrics may be needed for differ-
ent NLP tasks. Dagan (this volume) also explores
the idea that different notions of semantic similar-
ity are needed when dealing with semantic disam-
biguation and language modeling tasks on the one
hand and with applications such as information ex-
traction, summarization, and information retrieval
on the other hand.
Dridan and Bond (this volume) and Hachey
(this volume) both consider semantic similarity
from an application-oriented perspective. Dri-
dan and Bond employ the framework of robust
minimal recursion semantics in order to obtain
a more adequate measure of sentence similar-
ity than can be obtained by word-overlap met-
rics for bag-of-words representations of sentences.
They show that such a more fine-grained mea-
sure, which is based on compact representations
of predicate-logic, yields better performance for
paraphrase detection as well as for sentence se-
lection in question-answering tasks than simple
word-overlap metrics. Hachey considers an au-
tomatic content extraction (ACE) task, a particu-
lar subtask of information extraction. He demon-
strates that representations based on term co-
occurrence outperform representations based on
term-by-document matrices for the task of iden-
tifying relationships between named objects in
texts.
Acknowledgments
We are indebted to our program committee and
to the incidental reviewers named in the organi-
zational section of the book, and to others who
remain anonymous. We thank Peter Kleiweg for
managing the production of the book and Therese
Leinonen for discussions about phonetic similar-
ity. We are indebted to the Netherlands Organi-
zation for Scientific Research (NWO), grant 200-
02100, for cooperation between the Center for
Language and Cognition, Groningen, and the Sem-
inar fu?r Sprachwissenschaft, Tu?bingen, for sup-
port of the work which is reported on here. We are
also indebted to the Volkswagen Stiftung for their
support of a joint project ?Measuring Linguistic
Unity and Diversity in Europe? that is carried out
in cooperation with the Bulgarian Academy of
Science, Sofia. The work reported here is directly
related to the research objectives of this project.
4
References
Naoki Abe and Hang Li. 1996. Learning word associ-
ation norms using tree cut pair models. In Proceed-
ings of 13th International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Adam Albright and Bruce Hayes. 2003. Rules
vs. analogy in English past tenses: A computa-
tional/experimental study. Cognition, 90:119?161.
Todd M. Bailey and Ulrike Hahn. 2005. Phoneme
Similarity and Confusability. Journal of Memory
and Language, 52(3):339?362.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The Berkeley FrameNet project. In Christian
Boitet and Pete Whitelock, editors, Proceedings of
the Thirty-Sixth Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics and Seventeenth In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 86?90, San Francisco, California. Mor-
gan Kaufmann Publishers.
Kenneth Ward Church and Patrick Hanks. 1990. Word
association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-
raphy. Computational Linguistics, 16(1):22?29.
John Clark and Colin Yallop. 1995. An Introduction to
Phonetics and Phonology. Blackwell, Oxford.
Bernard Comrie. 1989. Language Universals and Lin-
guistic Typology:Syntax and Morphology. Oxford,
Basil Blackwell.
William Croft. 2001. Radical Construction Grammar:
Syntactic Theory in Typological Perspective. Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford.
David Dowty. 1979. Word Meaning and Montague
Grammar. Reidel, Dordrecht.
Ted Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statis-
tics of surprise and coincidence. Computational
Linguistics, 19(1):61?74.
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press.
J. R. Firth. 1957. A synopsis of linguistic theory. Ox-
ford: Philological Society. Reprinted in F. Palmer
(ed.)(1968). Studies in Linguistic Analysis 1930-
1955. Selected Papers of J.R. Firth., Harlow: Long-
man.
Stefan A. Frisch, Janet B. Pierrehumbert, and
Michael B. Broe. 2004. Similarity Avoidance and
the OCP. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory,
22(1):179?228.
Ulrike Hahn and Todd M. Bailey. 2005. What Makes
Words Sound Similar? Cognition, 97(3):227?267.
Wilbert Heeringa. 2004. Measuring Dialect Pronunci-
ation Differences using Levenshtein Distance. Ph.D.
thesis, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.
Brett Kessler. 1995. Computational dialectology in
Irish Gaelic. In Proc. of the European ACL, pages
60?67, Dublin.
Grzegorz Kondrak. 2002. Algorithms for Language
Reconstruction. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto.
John Laver. 1994. Principles of Phonetics. Cambridge
Univeristy Press, Cambridge.
Ludovic Lebart and Martin Rajman. 2000. Comput-
ing similarity. In Robert Dale, Hermann Moisl, and
Harold Somers, editors, Handbook of Natural Lan-
guage Processing, pages 477?505. Dekker, Basel.
Beth Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alter-
nations: a Preliminary Investigation. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago and London.
Paul A. Luce and David B. Pisoni. 1998. Recognizing
spoken words: The neighborhood activation model.
Ear and Hearing, 19(1):1?36.
April McMahon and Robert McMahon. 2005. Lan-
guage Classification by the Numbers. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford.
George A. Miller and Patricia E. Nicely. 1955. An
Analysis of Perceptual Confusions Among Some
English Consonants. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 27:338?352.
Andrew S. Noetzel and Stanley M. Selkow. 1999.
An analysis of the general tree-editing problem. In
David Sankoff and Joseph Kruskal, editors, Time
Warps, String Edits and Macromolecules: The The-
ory and Practice of Sequence Comparison, pages
237?252. CSLI, Stanford. 11983.
Philip Stuart Resnik. 1993. Selection and Information:
A Class-Based Approach to Lexical Relationships.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Mats Rooth, Stefan Riezler, Detlef Prescher, Glenn
Carroll, and Franz Beil. 1999. Inducing an semanti-
cally annotated lexicon via em-based clustering. In
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Maryland.
Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2003. Experiments on
the Automatic Induction of German Semantic Verb
Classes. Ph.D. thesis, Institut fu?r Maschinelle
Sprachverarbeitung, Universita?t Stuttgart. Pub-
lished as AIMS Report 9(2).
Hinrich Schu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense dis-
crimination. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):97?
123.
Sarah Thomason and Terrence Kaufmann. 1988. Lan-
guage Contact, Creolization, and Genetic Linguis-
tics. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Frans van Coetsem. 1988. Loan Phonology and the
Two Transfer Types in Language Contact. Publica-
tions in Language Sciences. Foris Publications, Dor-
drecht.
5
Zeno Vendler. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy. Cor-
nell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Michael S. Vitevitch and Paul A. Luce. 1999. Prob-
abilistic Phonotactics and Neighborhood Activation
in Spoken Word Recognition. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40(3):374?408.
Andreas Wagner. 2004. Learning Thematic Role Rela-
tions for Lexical Semantic Nets. Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versita?t Tu?bingen.
David Yarowsky. 1995. Unsupervised word sense dis-
ambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Pro-
ceedings of 33rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pages 189?196,
Cambridge, MA.
6
