Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 154?157,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Constraining the Phrase-Based, Joint Probability Statistical Translation
Model
Alexandra Birch Chris Callison-Burch Miles Osborne Philipp Koehn
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
a.c.birch-mayne@sms.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
The joint probability model proposed by
Marcu and Wong (2002) provides a strong
probabilistic framework for phrase-based
statistical machine translation (SMT). The
model?s usefulness is, however, limited by
the computational complexity of estimat-
ing parameters at the phrase level. We
present the first model to use word align-
ments for constraining the space of phrasal
alignments searched during Expectation
Maximization (EM) training. Constrain-
ing the joint model improves performance,
showing results that are very close to state-
of-the-art phrase-based models. It also al-
lows it to scale up to larger corpora and
therefore be more widely applicable.
1 Introduction
Machine translation is a hard problem because of
the highly complex, irregular and diverse nature
of natural languages. It is impossible to accurately
model all the linguistic rules that shape the trans-
lation process, and therefore a principled approach
uses statistical methods to make optimal decisions
given incomplete data.
The original IBM Models (Brown et al, 1993)
learn word-to-word alignment probabilities which
makes it computationally feasible to estimate
model parameters from large amounts of train-
ing data. Phrase-based SMT models, such as the
alignment template model (Och, 2003), improve
on word-based models because phrases provide
local context which leads to better lexical choice
and more reliable local reordering. However, most
phrase-based models extract their phrase pairs
from previously word-aligned corpora using ad-
hoc heuristics. These models perform no search
for optimal phrasal alignments. Even though this
is an efficient strategy, it is a departure from the
rigorous statistical framework of the IBM Models.
Marcu and Wong (2002) proposed the joint
probability model which directly estimates the
phrase translation probabilities from the corpus in
a theoretically governed way. This model neither
relies on potentially sub-optimal word alignments
nor on heuristics for phrase extraction. Instead, it
searches the phrasal alignment space, simultane-
ously learning translation lexicons for both words
and phrases. The joint model has been shown to
outperform standard models on restricted data sets
such as the small data track for Chinese-English in
the 2004 NIST MT Evaluation (Przybocki, 2004).
However, considering all possible phrases and
all their possible alignments vastly increases the
computational complexity of the joint model when
compared to its word-based counterpart. In this
paper, we propose a method of constraining the
search space of the joint model to areas where
most of the unpromising phrasal alignments are
eliminated and yet as many potentially useful
alignments as possible are still explored. The
joint model is constrained to phrasal alignments
which do not contradict a set high confidence word
alignments for each sentence. These high con-
fidence alignments could incorporate information
from both statistical and linguistic sources. In this
paper we use the points of high confidence from
the intersection of the bi-directional Viterbi word
alignments to constrain the model, increasing per-
formance and decreasing complexity.
154
2 Translation Models
2.1 Standard Phrase-based Model
Most phrase-based translation models (Och, 2003;
Koehn et al, 2003; Vogel et al, 2003) rely on
a pre-existing set of word-based alignments from
which they induce their parameters. In this project
we use the model described by Koehn et al (2003)
which extracts its phrase alignments from a corpus
that has been word aligned. From now on we re-
fer to this phrase-based translation model as the
standard model. The standard model decomposes
the foreign input sentence F into a sequence of
I phrases f1, . . . , f I . Each foreign phrase fi is
translated to an English phrase ei using the prob-
ability distribution ?(f i|ei). English phrases may
be reordered using a relative distortion probability.
This model performs no search for optimal
phrase pairs. Instead, it extracts phrase pairs
(f i, ei) in the following manner. First, it uses the
IBM Models to learn the most likely word-level
Viterbi alignments for English to Foreign and For-
eign to English. It then uses a heuristic to recon-
cile the two alignments, starting from the points
of high confidence in the intersection of the two
Viterbi alignments and growing towards the points
in the union. Points from the union are selected if
they are adjacent to points from the intersection
and their words are previously unaligned.
Phrases are then extracted by selecting phrase
pairs which are ?consistent? with the symmetrized
alignment, which means that all words within the
source language phrase are only aligned to the
words of the target language phrase and vice versa.
Finally the phrase translation probability distribu-
tion is estimated using the relative frequencies of
the extracted phrase pairs.
This approach to phrase extraction means that
phrasal alignments are locked into the sym-
metrized alignment. This is problematic because
the symmetrization process will grow an align-
ment based on arbitrary decisions about adjacent
words and because word alignments inadequately
represent the real dependencies between transla-
tions.
2.2 Joint Probability Model
The joint model (Marcu and Wong, 2002), does
not rely on a pre-existing set of word-level align-
ments. Like the IBM Models, it uses EM to align
and estimate the probabilities for sub-sentential
units in a parallel corpus. Unlike the IBM Mod-
els, it does not constrain the alignments to being
single words.
The joint model creates phrases from words and
commonly occurring sequences of words. A con-
cept, ci, is defined as a pair of aligned phrases
< ei, f i >. A set of concepts which completely
covers the sentence pair is denoted by C. Phrases
are restricted to being sequences of words which
occur above a certain frequency in the corpus.
Commonly occurring phrases are more likely to
lead to the creation of useful phrase pairs, and
without this restriction the search space would be
much larger.
The probability of a sentence and its translation
is the sum of all possible alignments C, each of
which is defined as the product of the probability
of all individual concepts:
p(F,E) =
?
C?C
?
<ei,f i>?C
p(< ei, f i >) (1)
The model is trained by initializing the trans-
lation table using Stirling numbers of the second
kind to efficiently estimate p(< ei, f i >) by cal-
culating the proportion of alignments which con-
tain p(< ei, f i >) compared to the total number
of alignments in the sentence (Marcu and Wong,
2002). EM is then performed by first discovering
an initial phrasal alignments using a greedy algo-
rithm similar to the competitive linking algorithm
(Melamed, 1997). The highest probability phrase
pairs are iteratively selected until all phrases are
are linked. Then hill-climbing is performed by
searching once for each iteration for all merges,
splits, moves and swaps that improve the proba-
bility of the initial phrasal alignment. Fractional
counts are collected for all alignments visited.
Training the IBM models is computationally
challenging, but the joint model is much more de-
manding. Considering all possible segmentations
of phrases and all their possible alignments vastly
increases the number of possible alignments that
can be formed between two sentences. This num-
ber is exponential with relation to the length of the
shorter sentence.
3 Constraining the Joint Model
The joint model requires a strategy for restricting
the search for phrasal alignments to areas of the
alignment space which contain most of the proba-
bility mass. We propose a method which examines
155
phrase pairs that are consistent with a set of high
confidence word alignments defined for the sen-
tence. The set of alignments are taken from the in-
tersection of the bi-directional Viterbi alignments.
This strategy for extracting phrase pairs is simi-
lar to that of the standard phrase-based model and
the definition of ?consistent? is the same. How-
ever, the constrained joint model does not lock
the search into a heuristically derived symmetrized
alignment. Joint model phrases must also occur
above a certain frequency in the corpus to be con-
sidered.
The constraints on the model are binding during
the initialization phase of training. During EM,
inconsistent phrase pairs are given a small, non-
zero probability and are thus not considered un-
less unaligned words remain after linking together
high probability phrase pairs. All words must be
aligned, there is no NULL alignment like in the
IBM models.
By using the IBM Models to constrain the joint
model, we are searching areas in the phrasal align-
ment space where both models overlap. We com-
bine the advantage of prior knowledge about likely
word alignments with the ability to perform a
probabilistic search around them.
4 Experiments
All data and software used was from the NAACL
2006 Statistical Machine Translation workshop
unless otherwise indicated.
4.1 Constraints
The unconstrained joint model becomes in-
tractable with very small amounts of training data.
On a machine with 2 Gb of memory, we were
only able to train 10,000 sentences of the German-
English Europarl corpora. Beyond this, pruning is
required to keep the model in memory during EM.
Table 1 shows that the application of the word con-
straints considerably reduces the size of the space
of phrasal alignments that is searched. It also im-
proves the BLEU score of the model, by guiding it
to explore the more promising areas of the search
space.
4.2 Scalability
Even though the constrained joint model reduces
complexity, pruning is still needed in order to scale
up to larger corpora. After the initialization phase
of the training, all phrase pairs with counts less
Unconstrained Constrained
No. Concepts 6,178k 1,457k
BLEU 19.93 22.13
Time(min) 299 169
Table 1. The impact of constraining the joint model
trained on 10,000 sentences of the German-English
Europarl corpora and tested with the Europarl test set
used in Koehn et al (2003)
than 10 million times that of the phrase pair with
the highest count, are pruned from the phrase ta-
ble. The model is also parallelized in order to
speed up training.
The translation models are included within a
log-linear model (Och and Ney, 2002) which al-
lows a weighted combination of features func-
tions. For the comparison of the basic systems
in Table 2 only three features were used for both
the joint and the standard model: p(e|f), p(f |e)
and the language model, and they were given equal
weights.
The results in Table 2 show that the joint model
is capable of training on large data sets, with a
reasonable performance compared to the standard
model. However, here it seems that the standard
model has a slight advantage. This is almost cer-
tainly related to the fact that the joint model results
in a much smaller phrase table. Pruning eliminates
many phrase pairs, but further investigations indi-
cate that this has little impact on BLEU scores.
BLEU Size
Joint Model 25.49 2.28
Standard Model 26.15 19.04
Table 2. Basic system comparisons: BLEU scores
and model size in millions of phrase pairs for Spanish-
English
The results in Table 3 compare the joint and the
standard model with more features. Apart from
including all Pharaoh?s default features, we use
two new features for both the standard and joint
models: a 5-gram language model and a lexical-
ized reordering model as described in Koehn et al
(2005). The weights of the feature functions, or
model components, are set by minimum error rate
training provided by David Chiang from the Uni-
versity of Maryland.
On smaller data sets (Koehn et al, 2003) the
joint model shows performance comparable to the
standard model, however the joint model does
not reach the level of performance of the stan-
156
EN-ES ES-EN
Joint
3-gram, dl4 20.51 26.64
5-gram, dl6 26.34 27.17
+ lex. reordering 26.82 27.80
Standard Model
5-gram, dl6
+ lex. reordering 31.18 31.86
Table 3. Bleu scores for the joint model and the stan-
dard model showing the effect of the 5-gram language
model, distortion length of 6 (dl) and the addition of
lexical reordering for the English-Spanish and Spanish-
English tasks.
dard model for this larger data set. This could
be due to the fact that the joint model results in
a much smaller phrase table. During EM only
phrase pairs that occur in an alignment visited dur-
ing hill-climbing are retained. Only a very small
proportion of the alignment space can be searched
and this reduces the chances of finding optimum
parameters. The small number of alignments vis-
ited would lead to data sparseness and over-fitting.
Another factor could be efficiency trade-offs like
the fast but not optimal competitive linking search
for phrasal alignments.
4.3 German-English submission
We also submitted a German-English system using
the standard approach to phrase extraction. The
purpose of this submission was to validate the syn-
tactic reordering method that we previously pro-
posed (Collins et al, 2005). We parse the Ger-
man training and test corpus and reorder it accord-
ing to a set of manually devised rules. Then, we
use our phrase-based system with standard phrase-
extraction, lexicalized reordering, lexical scoring,
5-gram LM, and the Pharaoh decoder.
On the development test set, the syntactic re-
ordering improved performance from 26.86 to
27.70. The best submission in last year?s shared
task achieved a score of 24.77 on this set.
5 Conclusion
We presented the first attempt at creating a system-
atic framework which uses word alignment con-
straints to guide phrase-based EM training. This
shows competitive results, to within 0.66 BLEU
points for the basic systems, suggesting that a
rigorous probabilistic framework is preferable to
heuristics for extracting phrase pairs and their
probabilities.
By introducing constraints to the alignment
space we can reduce the complexity of the joint
model and increase its performance, allowing it to
train on larger corpora and making the model more
widely applicable.
For the future, the joint model would benefit
from lexical weighting like that used in the stan-
dard model (Koehn et al, 2003). Using IBM
Model 1 to extract a lexical alignment weight for
each phrase pair would decrease the impact of data
sparseness, and other kinds smoothing techniques
will be investigated. Better search algorithms for
Viterbi phrasal alignments during EM would in-
crease the number and quality of model parame-
ters.
This work was supported in part under the
GALE program of the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency, Contract No. HR0011-
06-C-0022.
References
Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics
of machine translation: Parameter estimation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2):263?311.
Michael Collins, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona Kucerova. 2005.
Clause restructuring for statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of ACL.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings of
HLT/NAACL, pages 127?133.
Philipp Koehn, Amittai Axelrod, Alexandra Birch Mayne,
and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Edinburgh system de-
scription. In IWSLT Speech Translation Evaluation.
Daniel Marcu and William Wong. 2002. A phrase-based,
joint probability model for statistical machine translation.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Dan Melamed. 1997. A word-to-word model of translational
equivalence. In Proceedings of ACL.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2002. Discriminative
training and maximum entropy models for statistical ma-
chine translation. In ACL.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Statistical Machine Translation:
From Single-Word Models to Alignment Templates. Ph.D.
thesis, RWTH Aachen Department of Computer Science,
Aachen, Germany.
Mark Przybocki. 2004. NIST 2004 machine translation eval-
uation results. Confidential e-mail to workshop partici-
pants, May.
Stephan Vogel, Ying Zhang, Fei Huang, Alicia Tribble,
Ashish Venugopal, Bing Zhao, and Alex Waibel. 2003.
The CMU statistical machine translation system. In Ma-
chine Translation Summit.
157
