Workshop on TextGraphs, at HLT-NAACL 2006, pages 17?24,
New York City, June 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Graph-Based Text Representation for Novelty Detection 
 
 Michael Gamon 
 
 Microsoft Research  
 Redmond, WA 98052  
 mgamon@microsoft.com  
   
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We discuss several feature sets for 
novelty detection at the sentence level, 
using the data and procedure established 
in task 2 of the TREC 2004 novelty track. 
In particular, we investigate feature sets 
derived from graph representations of 
sentences and sets of sentences. We show 
that a highly connected graph produced 
by using sentence-level term distances 
and pointwise mutual information can 
serve as a source to extract features for 
novelty detection. We compare several 
feature sets based on such a graph 
representation. These feature sets allow us 
to increase the accuracy of an initial 
novelty classifier which is based on a bag-
of-word representation and KL 
divergence. The final result ties with the 
best system at TREC 2004. 
1 Introduction 
Novelty detection is the task of identifying novel 
information given a set of already accumulated 
background information. Potential applications of 
novelty detection systems are abundant, given the 
?information overload? in email, web content etc. 
Gabrilovich et al(2004), for example, describe a 
scenario in which a newsfeed is personalized based 
on a measure of information novelty: the user can 
be presented with pieces of information that are 
novel, given the documents that have already been 
reviewed. This will spare the user the task of 
sifting through vast amounts of duplicate and 
redundant information on a topic to find bits and 
pieces of information that are of interest. 
In 2002 TREC introduced a novelty track 
(Harman 2002), which continued ? with major 
changes ? in 2003 (Soboroff and Harman 2003) 
and 2004 (Voorhees 2004). In 2002 the task was to 
identify the set of relevant and novel sentences 
from an ordered set of documents within a TREC 
topic. Novelty was defined as ?providing new 
information that has not been found in any 
previously picked sentences?. Relevance was 
defined as ?relevant to the question or request 
made in the description section of the topic?. Inter-
annotator agreement was low (Harman 2002). 
There were 50 topics for the novelty task in 2002. 
For the 2003 novelty track a number of major 
changes were made. Relevance and novelty 
detection were separated into different tasks, 
allowing a separate evaluation of relevance 
detection and novelty detection. In the 2002 track, 
the data proved to be problematic since the 
percentage of relevant sentences in the documents 
was small. This, in turn, led to a very high 
percentage of relevant sentences being novel, 
given that amongst the small set of relevant 
sentences there was little redundancy. 50 new 
topics were created for the 2003 task, with a better 
balance of relevant and novel sentences. Slightly 
more than half of the topics dealt with ?events,? 
the rest with ?opinions.? 
The 2004 track used the same tasks, the same 
number of topics and the same split between event 
and opinion topics as the 2003 track. 
For the purpose of this paper, we are only 
concerned with novelty detection, specifically with 
task 2 of the 2004 novelty track, as described in 
more detail in the following section. 
17
The question that we investigate here is: what is 
a meaningful feature set for text representation for 
novelty detection? This is obviously a far-reaching 
and loaded question. Possibilities range from 
simple bag-of-word features to features derived 
from sophisticated linguistic representations. 
Ultimately, the question is open-ended since there 
will always be another feature or feature 
combination that could/should be exploited. For 
our experiments, we have decided to focus more 
narrowly on the usefulness of features derived 
from graph representations and we have restricted 
ourselves to representations that do not require 
linguistic analysis. Simple bag-of-word metrics 
like KL divergence establish a baseline for 
classifier performance. More sophisticated metrics 
can be defined on the basis of graph 
representations. Graph representations of text can 
be constructed without performing linguistic 
analysis, by using term distances in sentences and 
pointwise mutual information between terms to 
form edges between term-vertices. A term-distance 
based representation has been used successfully for 
a variety of tasks in Mihalcea (2004) and Mihalcea 
and Tarau (2004). 
2 Previous work 
There were 13 participants and 54 submitted runs 
for the 2004 TREC novelty track task 2. Each 
participant submitted up to five runs with different 
system configurations. Metrics and approaches 
varied widely, from purely string based approaches 
to systems that used sophisticated linguistic 
components for synonymy resolution, coreference 
resolution and named entity recognition. Many 
systems employed a thresholding approach to the 
task, defining a novelty metric and then 
determining a sentence to be novel if the threshold 
is exceeded (e.g. Blott et al 2004, Zhang et al 
2004, Abdul-Jaleel et al 2004, Eichmann et al 
2004, Erkan 2004). Thresholds are either 
determined on the 2003 data, are based on a notion 
of mean score, or are determined in an ad hoc 
manner1. Tomiyama et al(2004), similar to our 
approach, use an SVM classifier to make the 
binary classification of a sentence as novel or not. 
The baseline result for the 2004 task 2 was an 
average F-measure of 0.577. This baseline is 
                                                          
1
 Unfortunately, some of the system descriptions are unclear about the exact 
rationale for choosing a particular threshold. 
achieved if all relevant sentences are categorized 
as novel. The difficulty of the novelty detection 
task is evident from the relatively low score 
achieved by even the best systems. The five best-
performing runs were: 
1. Blott et al (2004) (Dublin City 
University): using a tf.idf based metric of 
?importance value? at an ad hoc threshold: 
0.622. 
2. Tomiyama et al (2004) (Meiji University): 
using an SVM classifier trained on 2003 
data, features based on conceptual fuzzy 
sets derived from a background corpus: 
0.619. 
3. Abdul-Jaleel et al (2004) (UMass): using 
named entity recognition, using cosine 
similarity as a metric and thresholds 
derived from the 2003 data set: 0.618. 
4. Schiffman and McKeown (2004) 
(Columbia): using a combination of tests 
based on weights (derived from a 
background corpus) for previously unseen 
words with parameters trained on the 2003 
data set, and taking into account the 
novelty status of the previous sentence: 
0.617. 
5. Tomiyama et al(2004) (Meiji University): 
slight variation of the system described 
above, with one of the features (scarcity 
measure) eliminated: 0.617. 
As this list shows, there was no clear tendency 
of any particular kind of approach outperforming 
others. Among the above four systems and five 
runs, there are thresholding and classification 
approaches, systems that use background corpora 
and conceptual analysis and systems that do not. 
3 Experimental setup 
3.1 The task 
Task 2 of the 2004 novelty track is formulated as 
follows: 
Task 2: Given the relevant sentences in the 
complete document set (for a given topic), 
identify all novel sentences. 
The procedure is sequential on an ordered list of 
sentences per topic. For each Sentence Si the 
determination needs to be made whether it is novel 
given the previously seen sentences S1 through Si-1. 
18
The evaluation metric for the novelty track is F1-
measure, averaged over all 50 topics. 
3.2 Novelty detection as classification 
For the purpose of this paper we view novelty 
detection as a supervised classification task. While 
the supervised approach has its limitations in real-
life scenarios where annotated data are hard to 
come by, it can serve as a testing ground for the 
question we are interested in: the evaluation of 
feature sets and text representations. 
At training time, a feature vector is created for 
each tagged sentence S and the set of sentences 
that comprise the already seen information that S is 
compared to. Features in the vector can be features 
of the tagged sentence, features of the set of 
sentences comprising the given background 
information and features that capture a relation 
between the tagged sentence and the set of 
background sentences. A classifier is trained on the 
set of resulting feature vectors. At evaluation time, 
a feature vector is extracted from the sentence to 
be evaluated and from the set of sentences that 
form the background knowledge. The classifier 
then determines whether, given the feature values 
of that vector, the sentence is more likely to be 
novel or not. 
We use the TREC 2003 data set for training, 
since it is close to the 2004 data set in its makeup. 
We train Support Vector Machines (SVMs) on the 
2003 data, using the LibSVM tool (Chang and Lin 
2001). Following the methodology outlined in 
Chang and Lin 2003, we use radial basis function 
(RBF) kernels and perform a grid search on two-
fold cross validated results on the training set to 
identify optimal parameter settings for the penalty 
parameter C and the RBF parameter ?. 
Continuously valued features are scaled to values 
between -1 and 1. The scaling range is determined 
on the training set and the same range is applied to 
the test set. 
The text was minimally preprocessed before 
extracting features: stop words were removed, 
tokens were lowercased and punctuation was 
stripped from the strings. 
4 Text representations and features 
4.1 KL divergence as a feature 
Treating sentences as an unordered collection of 
terms, the information-theoretic metric of KL 
divergence (or relative entropy) has been 
successfully used to measure ?distance? between 
documents by simply comparing the term 
distributions in a document compared to another 
document or set of documents. The notions of 
distance and novelty are closely related: if a new 
document is very distant from the collection of 
documents that has been seen previously, it is 
likely to contain new, previously unseen 
information. Gabrilovich et al (2004), for 
example, report on a successful use of KL 
divergence for novelty detection. KL divergence is 
defined in Equation 1: 
( )( ) log ( )
d
d
w R
p wp w
p w?  
Equation 1: KL divergence. 
w belongs to the set of words that are shared 
between document d and document (set) R. pd and 
pR are the probability distributions of words in d 
and R, respectively. Both pd(w) and pR(w) need to 
be non-zero in the equation above. We used simple 
add-one smoothing to ensure non-zero values. 
While it is conceivable that KL divergence could 
take into account other features than just bag-of-
words information, we restrict ourselves to this 
particular use of the measure since it corresponds 
to the typical use in novelty detection. 
4.2 Term distance graphs: from text to 
graph without linguistic analysis 
KL divergence as described above treats a 
document or sentence as an unordered collection of 
words. Language obviously provides more 
structure than that. Linguistic resources can impose 
structure on a string of words through consultation 
of linguistic knowledge (either hand-coded or 
learned from a tagged corpus). Even without any 
outside knowledge, however, the order of words in 
a sentence provides a means to construct a highly 
connected undirected graph with the words as 
vertices. The intuition here is: 
19
1. All words in a sentence have some 
relationship to all other words in the 
sentence, modulo a ?window size? 
outside of which the relationship is not 
taken into consideration 
2. The closer two words are to each other, 
the stronger their connection tends to 
be2 
It follows from (2) that weights on the edges 
will be inversely proportional to the distance 
between two words (vertices). In the remainder of 
the paper we will refer to these graphs as TD (term 
distance) graphs. Of course (1) and (2) are rough 
generalizations with many counterexamples, but 
without the luxury of linguistic analysis this seems 
to be a reasonable step to advance beyond simple 
bag-of-word assumptions. Multiple sentence 
graphs can then be combined into a highly 
connected graph to represent text. Mihalcea (2004) 
and Mihalcea and Tarau (2004) have successfully 
explored very similar graph representations for 
extractive summarization and key word extraction. 
In addition to distance, we also employ 
pointwise mutual information as defined in 
Equation 2 between two words/vertices to enter 
into the calculation of edge weight3. This 
combination of distance and a cooccurrence 
measure such as PMI is reminiscent of decaying 
language models, as described for IR, for example, 
in Gao et al (2002)4. Cooccurrence is counted at 
the sentence level, i.e. ( , )P i j  is estimated by the 
number of sentences that contain both terms wi and 
wj, and ( )P i  and ( )P j  are estimated by counting 
the total sentences containing wi and wj, 
respectively. As the set of seen sentences grows 
and cooccurrence between words becomes more 
prevalent, PMI becomes more influential on edge 
weights, strengthening edges between words that 
have high PMI. 
( , ) 2
( , )log ( ) ( )i j
P i jPMI
P i P j=  
Equation 2: Pointwise Mutual Information (PMI) 
between two terms i and j. 
                                                          
2
 This view is supported by examining dependency structures derived from the 
Penn Tree Bank and mapping the probability of a dependency to the distance 
between words. See also Eisner and Smith (2005) who explore this 
generalization for dependency parsing. 
3
 We also computed results from a graph where the edge weight is determined 
only by term distance, without PMI. These results were consistently worse than 
the ones reported here. 
4
 We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out. 
Formally, the weight wt for each edge in the 
graph is defined as in Equation 3, where di,j is the 
distance between words wi and wj.and PMI(i,j) is 
the pointwise mutual information between words 
wi and wj, given the sentences seen so far. For the 
purpose of Equation 3 we ignored negative PMI 
values, i.e. we treated negative PMI values as 0. 
, 2
,
1 ( , )
i j
i j
PMI i j
wt
d
+
=  
Equation 3: Assigning weight to an edge between 
two vertices. 
We imposed a ?window size? as a limit on the 
maximum distance between two words to enter an 
edge relationship. Window size was varied 
between 3 and 8; on the training set a window size 
of 6 proved to be optimal. 
On a TD graph representation, we can calculate 
various features based on the strengths and number 
of connections between words. In novelty 
detection, we can model the growing store of 
background information by adding each 
?incoming? sentence graph to the existing 
background graph. If an ?incoming? edge already 
exists in the background graph, the weight of the 
?incoming? edge is added to the existing edge 
weight. 
Figure 1 shows a subset of a TD graph for the 
first two sentences of topic N57. The visualization 
is generated by the Pajek tool (Bagatelj and 
Mrvar). 
 
Figure 1: A subset of a TD graph of the first two 
sentences of topic N57. 
20
4.3 Graph features 
4.3.1 Simple Graph features 
In novelty detection, graph based features allow to 
assess the change a graph undergoes through the 
addition of a new sentence. The intuition behind 
these features is that the more a graph changes 
when a sentence is added, the more likely the 
added sentence is to contain novel information. 
After all, novel information may be conveyed even 
if the terms involved are not novel. Establishing a 
new relation (i.e. edge in the graph) between two 
previously seen terms would have exactly that 
effect: old terms conveying new information. KL 
divergence or any other measure of distributional 
similarity is not suited to capture this scenario. As 
an example consider a news story thread about a 
crime. The various sentences in the background 
information may mention the victim, multiple 
suspects, previous convictions, similar crimes etc. 
When a new sentence is encountered where one 
suspect?s name is mentioned in the same sentence 
with the victim, at a close distance, none of these 
two terms are new. The fact that suspect and victim 
are mentioned in one sentence, however, may 
indicate a piece of novel information: a close 
relationship between the two that did not exist in 
the background story. 
We designed 21 graph based features, based on 
the following definitions: 
? Background graph: the graph representing 
the previously seen sentences. 
? G(S): the graph of the sentence that is 
currently being evaluated.  
? Reinforced background edge: an edge that 
exists both in the background graph and 
in G(S). 
? Added background edge: a new edge in 
G(S) that connects two vertices that 
already exist in the background graph. 
? New edge: an edge in G(S) that connects 
two previously unseen vertices. 
? Connecting edge: an edge in G(S) between 
a previously unseen vertex and a 
previously seen vertex. 
The 21 features are: 
? number of new edges 
? number of added background edges 
? number of background edges 
? number of background vertices 
? number of connecting edges 
? sum of weights on new edges 
? sum of weights on added background 
edges 
? sum of weights on connecting edges 
? background connectivity (ratio between 
edges and vertices) 
? connectivity added by S 
? ratio between added background edges and 
new edges 
? ratio between new edges and connecting 
edges 
? ratio between added background edges and 
connecting edges 
? ratio between the sum of weights on new 
edges and the sum of weights on added 
background edges 
? ratio between the sum of weights on new 
edges and the sum of weights on 
connecting edges 
? ratio between the sum of weights on added 
background edges and the sum of weights 
on connecting edges 
? ratio between sum of weights on added 
background edges and the sum of pre-
existing weights on those edges 
? ratio between sum of weights on new 
edges and sum of weight on background 
edges 
? ratio between sum of weights added to 
reinforced background edges and sum of 
background weights 
? ratio between number of added 
background edges and reinforced 
background edges 
? number of background edges leading from 
those background vertices that have been 
connected to new vertices by G(S) 
We refer to this set of 21 features as simple 
graph features, to distinguish them from a second 
set of graph-based features that are based on 
TextRank. 
4.3.2 TextRank features 
The TextRank metric, as described in Mihalcea 
and Tarau (2004) is inspired by the PageRank 
21
metric which is used for web page ranking5. 
TextRank is designed to work well in text graph 
representations: it can take edge weights into 
account and it works on undirected graphs. 
TextRank calculates a weight for each vertex, 
based on Equation 4. 
( )
( )
( ) (1 ) * ( )
j i
k j
ji
i j
V NB V jk
V NB V
wt
TR V d d TR V
wt?
?
? ?? ?
= ? + ? ?? ?? ?
? ?
Equation 4: The TextRank metric. 
where TR(Vi) is the TextRank score for vertex i, 
NB(Vi) is the set of neighbors of Vi, i.e. the set of 
nodes connected to Vi by a single edge, wtxy is the 
weight of the edge between vertex x and vertex y, 
and d is a constant ?dampening factor?, set at 
0.856. To calculate TR, an initial score of 1 is 
assigned to all vertices, and the formula is applied 
iteratively until the difference in scores between 
iterations falls below a threshold of 0.0001 for all 
vertices (as in Mihalcea and Tarau 2004). 
The TextRank score itself is not particularly 
enlightening for novelty detection. It measures the 
?importance? rather than the novelty of a vertex - 
hence its usefulness in keyword extraction. We 
can, however, derive a number of features from the 
TextRank scores that measure the change in scores 
as a result of adding a sentence to the graph of the 
background information. The rationale is that the 
more the TextRank scores are ?disturbed? by the 
addition of a new sentence, the more likely it is 
that the new sentence carries novel information. 
We normalize the TextRank scores by the number 
of vertices to obtain a probability distribution. The 
features we define on the basis of the (normalized) 
TextRank metric are: 
1. sum of TR scores on the nodes of S, 
after adding S 
2. maximum TR score on any nodes of S 
3. maximum TR score on any background 
node before adding S 
4. delta between 2 and 3 
5. sum of TR scores on the background 
nodes (after adding S) 
                                                          
5
 Erkan and Radev (2005) introduced LexRank where a graph representation of a 
set of sentences is derived from the cosine similarity between sentences. 
Kurland and Lee (2004) derive a graph representation for a set of documents by 
linking documents X and Y with edges weighted by the score that a language 
model trained on X assigns to Y. 
6
 Following Mihalcea and Tarau (2004), who in turn base their default setting on 
Brin and Page (1998). 
6. delta between 5 and 1 
7. variance of the TR scores before adding 
S 
8. variance of TR scores after adding S 
9. delta between 7 and 8 
10. ratio of 1 to 5 
11. KL divergence between the TR scores 
before and after adding S 
5 Results 
To establish a baseline, we used a simple bag-of-
words approach and KL divergence as a feature for 
classification. Employing the protocol described 
above, i.e. training the classifier on the 2003 data 
set, and optimizing the parameters on 2 folds of the 
training data, we achieve a surprisingly high result 
of 0.618 average F-measure on the 2004 data. This 
result would place the run at a tie for third place 
with the UMass system in the 2004 competition. 
In the tables below, KL refers to the KL 
divergence feature, TR to the TextRank based 
features and SG to the simple graph based features. 
Given that the feature sets we investigate 
possibly capture orthogonal properties, we were 
also interested in using combinations of the three 
feature sets. For the graph based features we 
determined on the training set that results were 
optimal at a ?window size? of 6, i.e. if graph edges 
are produced only if the distance between terms is 
six tokens or less. All results are tabulated in Table 
1, with the best results boldfaced. 
Feature set Average F measure 
KL 0.618 
TR 0.600 
SG 0.619 
KL + SG 0.622 
KL + SG + TR 0.621 
SG + TR 0.615 
TR + KL 0.618 
Table 1: Performance of the different feature sets. 
We used the McNemar test to determine 
pairwise statistical significance levels between the 
novelty classifiers based on different feature sets7. 
The two (boldfaced) best results from Table 1 are 
significantly different from the baseline at 0.999 
confidence. Individual sentence level 
                                                          
7
 We could not use the Wilcoxon rank test for our results since we only had 
binary classification results for each sentence, as opposed to individual (class 
probability) scores. 
22
classifications from the official 2004 runs were not 
available to us, so we were not able to test for 
statistical significance on our results versus TREC 
results. 
6 Summary and Conclusion 
We showed that using KL divergence as a feature 
for novelty classification establishes a surprisingly 
good result at an average F-measure of 0.618, 
which would top all but 3 of the 54 runs submitted 
for task 2 in the TREC novelty track in 2004. To 
improve on this baseline we computed graph 
features from a highly connected graph built from 
sentence-level term cooccurrences with edges 
weighted by distance and pointwise mutual 
information. A set of 21 ?simple graph features? 
extracted directly from the graph perform slightly 
better than KL divergence, at 0.619 average F-
measure. We also computed TextRank features 
from the same graph representation. TextRank 
features by themselves achieve 0.600 average F-
measure. The best result is achieved by combining 
feature sets: Using a combination of KL features 
and simple graph features produces an average F-
measure of 0.622. 
Being able to establish a very high baseline with 
just the use of KL divergence as a feature was 
surprising to us: it involves a minimal approach to 
novelty detection. We believe that the high 
baseline indicates that a classification approach to 
novelty detection is promising. This is 
corroborated by the very good performance of the 
runs from Meiji University which also used a 
classifier. 
The second result, i.e. the benefit obtained by 
using graph based features was in line with our 
expectations. It is a reasonable assumption that the 
graph features would be able to add to the 
information that a feature like KL divergence can 
capture. The gains were statistically significant but 
very modest, which poses a number of questions. 
First, our feature engineering may be less than 
optimal, missing important information from a 
graph-based representation. Second, the 
classification approach may be suffering from 
inherent differences between the training data 
(TREC 2003) and the test data (TREC 2004). To 
explore this hypothesis, we trained SVMs on the 
KL + SG feature set with default settings on three 
random folds of the 2003 and 2004 data. For these 
experiments we simply measured accuracy. The 
baseline accuracy (predicting the majority class 
label) was 65.77% for the 2003 data and 58.59% 
for the 2004 data. Average accuracy for the 
threefold crossvalidation on 2003 data was 
75.72%, on the 2004 data it was 64.88%. Using the 
SVMs trained on the 2003 data on the three folds 
of the 2004 data performed below baseline at 
55.07%. These findings indicate that the 2003 data 
are indeed not an ideal fit as training material for 
the 2004 task. 
With these results indicating that graph features 
can be useful for novelty detection, the question 
becomes which graph representation is best suited 
to extract these features from. A highly connected 
term-distance based graph representation, with the 
addition of pointwise mutual information, is a 
computationally relatively cheap approach. There 
are at least two alternative graph representations 
that are worth exploring. 
First, a ?true? dependency graph that is based on 
linguistic analysis would provide a less connected 
alternative. Such a graph would, however, contain 
more information in the form of directed edges and 
edge labels (labels of semantic relations) that could 
prove useful for novelty detection. On the 
downside, it would necessarily be prone to errors 
and domain specificity in the linguistic analysis 
process. 
Second, one could use the parse matrix of a 
statistical dependency parser to create the graph 
representation. This would yield a dependency 
graph that has more edges than those coming from 
a ?1-best? dependency parse. In addition, the 
weights on the edges could be based on 
dependency probability estimates, and analysis 
errors would not be as detrimental since several 
alternative analyses enter into the graph 
representations. 
It is beyond the scope of this paper to present a 
thorough comparison between these different 
graph representations. However, we were able to 
demonstrate that a computationally simple graph 
representation, which is based solely on pointwise 
mutual information and term distance, allows us to 
successfully extract useful features for novelty 
detection. The results that can be achieved in this 
manner only present a modest gain over a simple 
approach using KL divergence as a classification 
feature. The best achieved result, however, would 
tie for first place in the 2004 TREC novelty track, 
23
in comparison to many systems which relied on 
relatively heavy analysis machinery and additional 
data resources. 
References 
Nasreen Abdul-Jaleel, James Allan, W. Bruce Croft, 
Fernando Diaz, Leah Larkey, Xiaoyan Li, Mark D. 
Smucker and Courtney Wade. 2004. UMass at TREC 
2004: Novelty and HARD. NIST Special Publication 
500-261: The Thirteenth Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC 2004). 
Vladimir Batagelj, Andrej Mrvar: Pajek - Program for 
Large Network Analysis. Home page 
http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/pub/networks/pajek/. 
Stephen Blott, Oisin Boydell, Fabrice Camous, Paul 
Ferguson, Georgina Gaughan, Cathal Gurrin, Gareth 
J. F. Jones, Noel Murphy, Noel O?Connor, Alan F. 
Smeaton, Barry Smyth, Peter Wilkins. 2004. 
Experiments in Terabyte Searching, Genomic 
Retrieval and Novelty Detection for TREC-2004. 
NIST Special Publication 500-261: The Thirteenth 
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2004). 
Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. 1998. The anatomy of 
a large-scale hypertextual web search engine. 
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30: 107-117. 
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. LIBSVM: a 
library for support vector machines, 2001. Software 
available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm. 
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. 2003. A Practical 
Guide to Support Vector Classification. 
David Eichmann, Yi Zhang, Shannon Bradshaw, Xin 
Ying Qiu, Li Zhou, Padmini Srinivasan, Aditya 
Kumar Sehgal and Hudon Wong. 2004. Novelty, 
Question Answering and Genomics: The University 
of Iowa Response. NIST Special Publication 500-
261: The Thirteenth Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC 2004). 
Jason Eisner and Noah A. Smith. 2005. Parsing with 
Soft and Hard Constraints on Dependency Length. 
Proceedings of the International Workshop on 
Parsing Technologies (IWPT). 
G?ne? Erkan. 2004. The University of Michigan in 
Novelty 2004. NIST Special Publication 500-261: 
The Thirteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 
2004). 
G?ne? Erkan and Dragomir Radev. 2004. LexRank: 
Graph-based Centrality as Salience in Text 
Summarization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence 
Research 22, pp. 457-479. 
Evgeniy Gabrilovich, Susan Dumais and Eric Horvitz. 
2004. Newsjunkie: Providing Personalized 
Newsfeeds via Analysis of Information Novelty. 
WWW13, 2004. 
Jianfeng Gao, Jian-Yun Nie, Hongzhao He, Weijun 
Chena and Ming Zhou. 2002. Resolving Query 
Translation Ambiguity using a Decaying Co-
occurrence Model and Syntactic Dependency 
Relations. Proceedings of SIGIR 2002, 183-190. 
Donna Harman. 2002. Overview of the TREC 2002 
Novelty Track. NIST Special Publication 500-251: 
The Eleventh Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 
2002). 
Oren Kurland and Lillian Lee. 2004. PageRank without 
hyperlinks: structural re-ranking using links induced 
by language models. Proceedings of SIGIR 2005, pp. 
306-313. 
Rada Mihalcea. 2004. Graph-based Ranking Algorithms 
for Sentence Extraction, Applied to Text 
Summarization. Proceedings of the 42nd Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, companion volume (ACL 2004). 
Rada Mihalcea and Paul Tarau. 2004. TextRank: 
Bringing Order into Texts. Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language Processing (EMNLP 2004). 
Barry Schiffman and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2004. 
Columbia University in the Novelty Track at TREC 
2004. NIST Special Publication 500-261: The 
Thirteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2004). 
Ian Soboroff and Donna Harman. 2003. Overview of the 
TREC 2003 Novelty Task. NIST Special Publication 
500-255: The Twelfth Text REtrieval Conference 
(TREC 2003). 
Tomoe Tomiyama, Kosuke Karoji, Takeshi Kondo, 
Yuichi Kakuta and Tomohiro Takagi. 2004. Meiji 
University Web, Novelty and Genomics Track 
Experiments. NIST Special Publication 500-261: The 
Thirteenth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2004). 
Ellen M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview of TREC 2004. 
NIST Special Publication 500-261: The Thirteenth 
Text REtrieval Conference (TREC 2004). 
Hua-Ping Zhang, Hong-Bo Xu, Shuo Bai, Bin Wang 
and Xue-Qi Cheng. 2004. Experiments in TREC 
2004 Novelty Track at CAS-ICT. NIST Special 
Publication 500-261: The Thirteenth Text REtrieval 
Conference (TREC 2004). 
24
