Proceedings of the Workshop on Frontiers in Linguistically Annotated Corpora 2006, pages 5?12,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Semi-Automatic Method for  
Annotating a Biomedical Proposition Bank 
 
Wen-Chi Chou1, Richard Tzong-Han Tsai1,2, Ying-Shan Su1, 
Wei Ku1,3, Ting-Yi Sung1 and Wen-Lian Hsu1 
1Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan, ROC. 
2Dept. of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan, ROC. 
3Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taiwan, ROC. 
{jacky957,thtsai,qnn,wilmaku,tsung,hsu}@iis.sinica.edu.tw 
 
  
 
Abstract 
In this paper, we present a semi-
automatic approach for annotating se-
mantic information in biomedical texts. 
The information is used to construct  
a biomedical proposition bank called 
BioProp. Like PropBank in the newswire 
domain, BioProp contains annotations of 
predicate argument structures and seman-
tic roles in a treebank schema. To con-
struct BioProp, a semantic role labeling 
(SRL) system trained on PropBank is 
used to annotate BioProp. Incorrect tag-
ging results are then corrected by human 
annotators. To suit the needs in the bio-
medical domain, we modify the Prop-
Bank annotation guidelines and charac-
terize semantic roles as components of 
biological events. The method can sub-
stantially reduce annotation efforts, and 
we introduce a measure of an upper 
bound for the saving of annotation efforts. 
Thus far, the method has been applied 
experimentally to a 4,389-sentence tree-
bank corpus for the construction of Bio-
Prop. Inter-annotator agreement meas-
ured by kappa statistic reaches .95 for 
combined decision of role identification 
and classification when all argument la-
bels are considered. In addition, we show 
that, when trained on BioProp, our bio-
medical SRL system called BIOSMILE 
achieves an F-score of 87%. 
1 Introduction 
The volume of biomedical literature available on 
the Web has grown enormously in recent years, a 
trend that will probably continue indefinitely. 
Thus, the ability to process literature automati-
cally would be invaluable for both the design and 
interpretation of large-scale experiments. To this 
end, several information extraction (IE) systems 
using natural language processing techniques 
have been developed for use in the biomedical 
field. Currently, the focus of IE is shifting from 
the extraction of nominal information, such as 
named entities (NEs) to verbal information that 
represents the relations between NEs, e.g., events 
and function (Tateisi et al, 2004; Wattarujeekrit 
et al, 2004). In the IE of relations, the roles of 
NEs participating in a relation must be identified 
along with a verb of interest. This task involves 
identifying main roles, such as agents and objects, 
and adjunct roles (ArgM), such as location, man-
ner, timing, condition, and extent. This identifi-
cation task is called semantic role labeling (SRL). 
The corresponding roles of the verb (predicate) 
are called predicate arguments, and the whole 
proposition is known as a predicate argument 
structure (PAS). 
To develop an automatic SRL system for the 
biomedical domain, it is necessary to train the 
system with an annotated corpus, called proposi-
tion bank (Palmer et al, 2005). This corpus con-
tains annotations of semantic PAS?s superim-
posed on the Penn Treebank (PTB) (Marcus et 
al., 1993; Marcus et al, 1994). However, the 
process of manually annotating the PAS?s to 
construct a proposition bank is quite time-
consuming. In addition, due to the complexity of 
proposition bank annotation, inconsistent annota-
tion may occur frequently and further complicate 
5
the annotation task. In spite of the above difficul-
ties, there are proposition banks in the newswire 
domain that are adequate for training SRL sys-
tems (Xue and Palmer, 2004; Palmer et al, 2005). 
In addition, according to the CoNLL-2005 
shared task (Carreras and M?rquez, 2005), the 
performance of SRL systems in general does not 
decline significantly when tagging out-of-domain 
corpora. For example, when SRL systems trained 
on the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) corpus were 
used to tag the Brown corpus, the performance 
only dropped by 15%, on average. In comparison 
to annotating from scratch, annotation efforts 
based on the results of an available SRL system 
are much reduced. Thus, we plan to use a news-
wire SRL system to tag a biomedical corpus and 
then manually revise the tagging results. This 
semi-automatic procedure could expedite the 
construction of a biomedical proposition bank for 
use in training a biomedical SRL system in the 
future. 
2 The Biomedical Proposition Bank - 
BioProp 
As proposition banks are semantically annotated 
versions of a Penn-style treebank, they provide 
consistent semantic role labels across different 
syntactic realizations of the same verb. The an-
notation captures predicate-argument structures 
based on the sense tags of polysemous verbs 
(called framesets) and semantic role labels for 
each argument of the verb. Figure 1 shows the 
annotation of semantic roles, exemplified by the 
following sentence: ?IL4 and IL13 receptors ac-
tivate STAT6, STAT3 and STAT5 proteins in 
normal human B cells.? The chosen predicate is 
the word ?activate?; its arguments and their as-
sociated word groups are illustrated in the figure. 
 
IL4 and IL 13 
 receptors 
activate STAT6, STAT3 
and  
STAT5 proteins 
the human 
B cells 
in 
NP 
Arg0 predicate AM-LOC Arg1 
NP 
NP-SBJ VP 
VP PP 
Figure 1. A treebank annotated with semantic 
role labels 
Since proposition banks are annotated on top 
of a Penn-style treebank, we selected a biomedi-
cal corpus that has a Penn-style treebank as our 
corpus. We chose the GENIA corpus (Kim et al, 
2003), a collection of MEDLINE abstracts se-
lected from the search results with the following 
keywords: human, blood cells, and transcription 
factors. In the GENIA corpus, the abstracts are 
encoded in XML format, where each abstract 
also contains a MEDLINE UID, and the title and 
content of the abstract. The text of the title and 
content is segmented into sentences, in which 
biological terms are annotated with their seman-
tic classes. The GENIA corpus is also annotated 
with part-of-speech (POS) tags (Tateisi and Tsu-
jii, 2004), and co-references are added to part of 
the GENIA corpus by the MedCo project at the 
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore 
(Yang et al, 2004). 
The Penn-style treebank for GENIA, created 
by Tateisi et al (2005), currently contains 500 
abstracts. The annotation scheme of the GENIA 
Treebank (GTB), which basically follows the 
Penn Treebank II (PTB) scheme (Bies et al, 
1995), is encoded in XML. However, in contrast 
to the WSJ corpus, GENIA lacks a proposition 
bank. We therefore use its 500 abstracts with 
GTB as our corpus. To develop our biomedical 
proposition bank, BioProp, we add the proposi-
tion bank annotation on top of the GTB annota-
tion. 
In the following, we report on the selection of 
biomedical verbs, and explain the difference be-
tween their meaning in PropBank (Palmer et al, 
2005), developed by the University of Pennsyl-
vania, and their meaning in BioProp (a biomedi-
cal proposition bank). We then introduce Bio-
Prop?s annotation scheme, including how we 
modify a verb?s framesets and how we define 
framesets for biomedical verbs not defined in 
VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2000; Kipper et al, 2002). 
2.1 Selection of Biomedical Verbs 
We selected 30 verbs according to their fre-
quency of use or importance in biomedical texts. 
Since our targets in IE are the relations of NEs, 
only sentences containing protein or gene names 
are used to count each verb?s frequency. Verbs 
that have general usage are filtered out in order 
to ensure the focus is on biomedical verbs. Some 
verbs that do not have a high frequency, but play 
important roles in describing biomedical rela-
tions, such as ?phosphorylate? and ?transacti-
vate?, are also selected. The selected verbs are 
listed in Table 1. 
6
 Predicate Frameset Example 
express  
(VerbNet) 
Arg0: agent  
Arg1: theme 
Arg2: recipient or destina-
tion 
[Some legislatorsArg0][expressedpredicate] [concern that a gas-tax 
increase would take too long and possibly damage chances of a 
major gas-tax-increasing ballot initiative that voters will consider 
next JuneArg1 ]. 
translate 
(VerbNet) 
Arg0: causer of transfor-
mation  
Arg1: thing changing   
Arg2: end state 
Arg3: start state 
But some cosmetics-industry executives wonder whether [tech-
niques honed in packaged goodsArg1] [willAM-MOD] [translatepredicate] 
[to the cosmetics businessArg2]. 
express  
(BioProp) 
Arg0: causer of expression 
Arg1: thing expressing 
[B lymphocytes and macrophagesArg0] [expresspredicate] [closely 
related immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) Fc receptors ( Fc gamma RII ) 
that differ only in the structures of their cytoplasmic domainsArg1]. 
Table 2. Framesets and examples of ?express? and ?translate? 
 
Type Verb list 
1 encode, interact, phosphorylate,  transactivate 
2 express, modulate 
3 bind 
4 
activate, affect, alter, associate, block, 
decrease differentiate, encode, enhance, 
increase, induce, inhibit, mediate, mu-
tate, prevent, promote, reduce, regulate, 
repress, signal, stimulate, suppress, 
transform, trigger 
Table 1. Selected biomedical verbs and their 
types 
2.2 Framesets of Biomedical Verbs 
Annotation of BioProp is mainly based on 
Levin?s verb classes, as defined in the VerbNet 
lexicon (Kipper et al, 2000). In VerbNet, the 
arguments of each verb are represented at the 
semantic level, and thus have associated seman-
tic roles. However, since some verbs may have 
different usages in biomedical and newswire 
texts, it is necessary to customize the framesets 
of biomedical verbs. The 30 verbs in Table 1 are 
categorized into four types according to the de-
gree of difference in usage: (1) verbs that do not 
appear in VerbNet due to their low frequency in 
the newswire domain; (2) verbs that do appear in 
VerbNet, but whose biomedical meanings and 
framesets are undefined; (3) verbs that do appear 
in VerbNet, but whose primary newswire and 
biomedical usage differ; (4) verbs that have the 
same usage in both domains. 
Verbs of the first type play important roles in 
biomedical texts, but rarely appear in newswire 
texts and thus are not defined in VerbNet. For 
example, ?phosphorylate? increasingly appears 
in the fast-growing PubMed abstracts that report 
experimental results on phosphorylated events; 
therefore, it is included in our verb list. However, 
since VerbNet does not define the frameset for 
?phosphorylate?, we must define it after analyz-
ing all the sentences in our corpus that contain 
the verb. Other type 1 verbs may correspond to 
verbs in VerbNet; in such cases, we can borrow 
the VerbNet definitions and framesets. For ex-
ample, ?transactivate? is not found in VerbNet, 
but we can adopt the frameset of ?activate? for 
this verb. 
Verbs of the second type appear in VerbNet, 
but have unique biomedical meanings that are 
undefined. Therefore, the framesets correspond-
ing to their biomedical meanings must be added. 
In most cases, we can adopt framesets from 
VerbNet synonyms. For example, ?express? is 
defined as ?say? and ?send very quickly? in 
VerbNet. However, in the biomedical domain, its 
usage is very similar to ?translate?. Thus, we can 
use the frameset of ?translate? for ?express?. Ta-
ble 2 shows the framesets and corresponding ex-
amples of ?express? in the newswire domain and 
biomedical domain, as well as that of ?translate? 
in VerbNet.  
Verbs of the third type also appear in VerbNet. 
Although the newswire and biological senses are 
defined therein, their primary newswire sense is 
not the same as their primary biomedical sense. 
?Bind,? for example, is common in the newswire 
domain, and it usually means ?to tie? or ?restrain 
with bonds.? However, in the biomedical domain, 
its intransitive use- ?attach or stick to?- is far 
more common. For example, a Google search for 
the phrase ?glue binds to? only returned 21 re-
sults, while the same search replacing ?glue? 
with ?protein? yields 197,000 hits. For such 
verbs, we only need select the appropriate alter-
native meanings and corresponding framesets. 
Lastly, for verbs of the fourth type, we can di-
7
rectly adopt the newswire definitions and frame-
sets, since they are identical.  
2.3 Distribution of Selected Verbs 
There is a significant difference between the oc-
currence of the 30 selected verbs in biomedical 
texts and their occurrence in newswire texts. The 
verbs appearing in verb phrases constitute only 
1,297 PAS?s, i.e., 1% of all PAS?s, in PropBank 
(shown in Figure 2), compared to 2,382 PAS?s, 
i.e., 16% of all PAS?s, in BioProp (shown in 
Figure 3). Furthermore, some biomedical verbs 
have very few PAS?s in PropBank, as shown in 
Table 3. The above observations indicate that it 
is necessary to annotate a biomedical proposition 
bank for training a biomedical SRL system. 
 
Figure 2. The percentage of the 30 biomedical 
verbs and other verbs in PropBank 
 
Figure 3. The percentage of the 30 biomedical 
verbs and other verbs in BioProp 
3  Annotation of BioProp 
3.1 Annotation Process 
After choosing 30 verbs as predicates, we 
adopted a semi-automatic method to annotate 
BioProp. The annotation process consists of the 
following steps: (1) identifying predicate candi-
dates; (2) automatically annotating the biomedi-
cal semantic roles with our WSJ SRL system; (3) 
transforming the automatic tagging results into 
WordFreak (Morton and LaCivita, 2003) format; 
and (4) manually correcting the annotation re-
sults with the WordFreak annotation tool. We 
now describe these steps in detail: 
  
Verbs # in BioProp Ratio(%) 
# in 
PropBank Ratio(%) 
induce 290 1.89 16 0.01 
bind 252 1.64 0 0 
activate 235 1.53 2 0 
express 194 1.26 53 0.03 
inhibit 184 1.20 6 0 
increase 166 1.08 396 0.24 
regulate 122 0.79 23 0.01 
mediate 104 0.68 1 0 
stimulate 93 0.61 11 0.01 
associate 82 0.53 51 0.03 
encode 79 0.51 0 0 
affect 60 0.39 119 0.07 
enhance 60 0.39 28 0.02 
block 58 0.38 71 0.04 
reduce 55 0.36 241 0.14 
decrease 54 0.35 16 0.01 
suppress 38 0.25 4 0 
interact 36 0.23 0 0 
alter 27 0.18 17 0.01 
transactivate 24 0.16 0 0 
modulate 22 0.14 1 0 
phosphorylate 21 0.14 0 0 
transform 21 0.14 22 0.01 
differentiate 21 0.14 2 0 
repress 17 0.11 1 0 
prevent 15 0.10 92 0.05 
promote 14 0.09 52 0.03 
trigger 14 0.09 40 0.02 
mutate 14 0.09 1 0 
signal 10 0.07 31 0.02 
Table 3. The number and percentage of PAS?s 
for each verb in BioProp and PropBank 
1. Each word with a VB POS tag in a verb 
phrase that matches any lexical variant of 
the 30 verbs is treated as a predicate candi-
date. The automatically selected targets are 
then double-checked by human annotators. 
As a result, 2,382 predicates were identified 
in BioProp.  
2. Sentences containing the above 2,382 
predicates were extracted and labeled 
automatically by our WSJ SRL system. In 
total, 7,764 arguments were identified. 
3. In this step, sentences with PAS annota-
tions are transformed into WordFreak for-
mat (an XML format), which allows anno-
tators to view a sentence in a tree-like fash-
ion. In addition, users can customize the tag 
set of arguments. Other linguistic informa-
tion can also be integrated and displayed in 
8
WordFreak, which is a convenient annota-
tion tool. 
4. In the last step, annotators check the pre-
dicted semantic roles using WordFreak and 
then correct or add semantic roles if the 
predicted arguments are incorrect or miss-
ing, respectively. Three biologists with suf-
ficient biological knowledge in our labora-
tory performed the annotation task after re-
ceiving computational linguistic training 
for approximately three months.   
Figure 4 illustrates an example of BioProp an-
notation displayed in WordFreak format, using 
the frameset of ?phophorylate? listed in Table 4.  
This annotation process can be used to con-
struct a domain-specific corpus when a general-
purpose tagging system is available.  In our ex-
perience, this semi-automatic annotation scheme 
saves annotation efforts and improves the anno-
tation consistency. 
 
Predicate Frameset 
phosphorylate  
 
Arg0: causer of phosphorylation 
Arg1: thing being phosphorylated 
Arg2: end state  
Arg3: start state 
Table 4. The frameset of ?phosphorylate? 
3.2 Inter-annotation Agreement 
We conducted preliminary consistency tests on 
2,382 instances of biomedical propositions. The 
inter-annotation agreement was measured by the 
kappa statistic (Siegel and Castellan, 1988), the 
definition of which is based on the probability of 
inter-annotation agreement, denoted by P(A), and 
the agreement expected by chance, denoted by 
P(E). The kappa statistics for inter-annotation 
agreement were .94 for semantic role identifica-
tion and .95 for semantic role classification when 
ArgM labels were included for evaluation. When 
ArgM labels were omitted, kappa statistics 
were .94 and .98 for identification and classifica-
tion, respectively. We also calculated the results 
of combined decisions, i.e., identification and 
classification. (See Table 5.) 
3.3 Annotation Efforts 
Since we employ a WSJ SRL system that labels 
semantic roles automatically, human annotators 
can quickly browse and determine correct tag-
ging results; thus, they do not have to examine  
 
Figure 4. An example of BioProp displayed with 
WordFreak 
 
  P(A) P(E) Kappa 
score 
role identification .97 .52 .94 
role classification .96 .18 .95 including ArgM 
combined decision .96 .18 .95 
role identification .97 .26 .94 
role classification .99 .28 .98 excluding ArgM 
combined decision .99 .28 .98 
Table 5. Inter-annotator agreement 
all tags during the annotation process, as in the 
full manual annotation approach. Only incor-
rectly predicted tags need to be modified, and 
missed tags need to be added. Therefore, annota-
tion efforts can be substantially reduced. To 
quantify the reduction in annotation efforts, we 
define the saving of annotation effort, ?, as: 
)1(
nodes missed of# incorrect  of # correct  of #
nodes  labeled correctly  of #
nodes all of#
nodes  labeled correctly  of #
++
<
=?
 
In Equation (1), since the number of nodes 
that need to be examined is usually unknown, we 
9
use an easy approximation to obtain an upper 
bound for ?. This is based on the extremely op-
timistic assumption that annotators should be 
able to recover a missed or incorrect label by 
only checking one node. However, in reality, this 
would be impossible. In our annotation process, 
the upper bound of ? for BioProp is given by: 
%46
40975
18932
15316668218932
18932
==
++
<? , 
which means that, at most, the annotation effort 
could be reduced by 46%. 
A more accurate tagging system is preferred 
because the more accurate the tagging system, 
the higher the upper bound ? will be.  
4 Disambiguation of Argument Annota-
tion 
During the annotation process, we encountered a 
number of problems resulting from different us-
age of vocabulary and writing styles in general 
English and the biomedical domain. In this sec-
tion, we describe three major problems and pro-
pose our solutions. 
4.1 Cue Words for Role Classification 
PropBank annotation guidelines provide a list of 
words that can help annotators decide an argu-
ment?s type. Similarly, we add some rules to our 
BioProp annotation guideline. For example, ?in 
vivo? and ?in vitro? are used frequently in bio-
medical literature; however, they seldom appear 
in general English articles. According to their 
meanings, we classify them as location argument 
(AM-LOC).  
In addition, some words occur frequently in 
both general English and in biomedical domains 
but have different meanings/usages. For instance, 
?development? is often tagged as Arg0 or Arg1 
in general English, as shown by the following 
sentence: 
 
Despite the strong case for stocks, however, most 
pros warn that [individualsArg0] shouldn't try to 
[profitpredicate] [from short-term developmentsArg1].  
 
However, in the biomedical domain, ?devel-
opment? always means the stage of a disease, 
cell, etc. Therefore, we tag it as temporal argu-
ment (AM-TMP), as shown in the following sen-
tence: 
 
[Rhom-2 mRNAArg1] is [expressedpredicate] [in 
early mouse developmentAM-TMP] [in central 
nervous system, lung, kidney, liver, and spleen 
but only very low levels occur in thymusAM-LOC]. 
4.2 Additional Argument Types 
In PropBank, the negative argument (AM-NEG) 
usually contains explicit negative words such as 
?not?. However, in the biomedical domain, re-
searchers usually express negative meaning im-
plicitly by using ?fail?, ?unable?, ?inability?, 
?neither?, ?nor?, ?failure?, etc. Take ?fail? as an 
example. It is tagged as a verb in general English, 
as shown in the following sentence: 
 
But [the new pactArg1] will force huge debt on the 
new firm and [couldAM-MOD] [stillAM-TMP] [failpredi-
cate] [to thwart rival suitor McCaw CellularArg2]. 
 
Negative results are important in the biomedi-
cal domain. Thus, for annotation purposes, we 
create additional negation tag (AM-NEG1) that 
does not exist in PropBank. The following sen-
tence is an example showing the use of AM-
NEG1: 
  
[TheyArg0] [failAM-NEG1] to [inducepredicate] [mRNA 
of TNF-alphaArg1] [after 3 h of culture AM-TMP]. 
  
In this example, if we do not introduce the 
AM-NEG1, ?fail? is considered as a verb like in 
PropBank, not as a negative argument, and it will 
not be included in the proposition for the predi-
cate ?induce?. Thus, BioProp requires the ?AM-
NEG1? tag to precisely express the correspond-
ing proposition. 
4.3 Essentiality of Biomedical Knowledge 
Since PAS?s contain more semantic information, 
proposition bank annotators require more domain 
knowledge than annotators of other corpora. In 
BioProp, many ambiguous expressions require 
biomedical knowledge to correctly annotate them, 
as exemplified by the following sentence in Bio-
Prop: 
 
In the cell types tested, the LS mutations indi-
cated an apparent requirement not only for the 
intact NF-kappa B and SP1-binding sites but also 
for [several regions between -201 and -130Arg1] 
[notAM-NEG] [previouslyAM-MNR] [associatedpredi-
cate][with viral infectivityArg2]. 
 
Annotators without biomedical knowledge 
may consider [between -201 and -130] as extent 
argument (AM-EXT), because the PropBank 
guidelines define numerical adjuncts as AM-
10
EXT. However, it means a segment of DNA. It is 
an appositive of [several regions]; therefore, it 
should be annotated as part of Arg1 in this case. 
5 Effect of Training Corpora on SRL 
Systems 
To examine the possibility that BioProp can im-
prove the training of SRL systems used for 
automatic tagging of biomedical texts, we com-
pare the performance of systems trained on Bio-
Prop and PropBank in different domains. We 
construct a new SRL system (called a BIOmedi-
cal SeMantIc roLe labEler, BIOSMILE) that is 
trained on BioProp and employs all the features 
used in our WSJ SRL system (Tsai et al, 2006).  
As with POS tagging, chunking, and named 
entity recognition, SRL can also be formulated as 
a sentence tagging problem. A sentence can be 
represented by a sequence of words, a sequence 
of phrases, or a parsing tree; the basic units of a 
sentence in these representations are words, 
phrases, and constituents, respectively. Hacioglu 
et al (2004) showed that tagging phrase-by-
phrase (P-by-P) is better than word-by-word (W-
by-W). However, Punyakanok et al (2004) 
showed that constituent-by-constituent (C-by-C) 
tagging is better than P-by-P. Therefore, we use 
C-by-C tagging for SRL in our BIOSMILE. 
SRL can be divided into two steps. First, we 
identify all the predicates. This can be easily ac-
complished by finding all instances of verbs of 
interest and checking their part-of-speech (POS) 
tags. Second, we label all arguments correspond-
ing to each predicate. This is a difficult problem, 
since the number of arguments and their posi-
tions vary according to a verb?s voice (ac-
tive/passive) and sense, along with many other 
factors.  
In BIOSMILE, we employ the maximum en-
tropy (ME) model for argument classification. 
We use Zhang?s MaxEnt toolkit 
(http://www.nlplab.cn/zhangle/maxent_toolkit.ht
ml) and the L-BFGS (Nocedal and Wright, 1999) 
method of parameter estimation for our ME 
model. Table 6 shows the features we employ in 
BIOSMILE and our WSJ SRL system. 
To compare the effects of using biomedical 
training data versus using general English data, 
we train BIOSMILE on 30 randomly selected 
training sets from BioProp (g1,.., g30), and WSJ 
SRL system on 30 from PropBank (w1,.., w30), 
each of which has 1,200 training PAS?s. 
BASIC FEATURES 
z Predicate ? The predicate lemma 
z Path ? The syntactic path through the parsing tree 
from the parse constituent being classified to the 
predicate 
z Constituent type 
z Position ? Whether the phrase is located before or af-
ter the predicate 
z Voice ? passive: If the predicate has a POS tag VBN, 
and its chunk is not a VP, or it is preceded by a form 
of ?to be? or ?to get? within its chunk; otherwise, it is 
active 
z Head word ? Calculated using the head word table 
described by Collins (1999) 
z Head POS ? The POS of the Head Word 
z Sub-categorization ? The phrase structure rule that 
expands the predicate?s parent node in the parsing 
tree 
z First and last Word and their POS tags 
z Level ? The level in the parsing tree 
PREDICATE FEATURES 
z Predicate?s verb class 
z Predicate POS tag 
z Predicate frequency 
z Predicate?s context POS 
z Number of predicates 
FULL PARSING FEATURES 
z Parent?s, left sibling?s, and right sibling?s paths, 
constituent types, positions, head words and head 
POS tags 
z Head of PP parent ? If the parent is a PP, then the 
head of this PP is also used as a feature 
COMBINATION FEATURES 
z Predicate distance combination 
z Predicate phrase type combination 
z Head word and predicate combination 
z Voice position combination 
OTHERS 
z Syntactic frame of predicate/NP 
z Headword suffixes of lengths 2, 3, and 4 
z Number of words in the phrase 
z Context words & POS tags 
Table 6. The features used in our argument clas-
sification model 
 We then test both systems on 30 400-PAS test 
sets from BioProp, with g1 and w1 being tested on 
test set 1, g2 and w2 on set 2, and so on. Then we 
generate the scores for g1-g30 and w1-w30, and 
compare their averages. 
Table 7 shows the experimental results. When 
tested on the biomedical corpus, BIOSMILE out-
performs the WSJ SRL system by 22.9%. This 
result is statistically significant as expected. 
 
Training Test Precision Recall F-score 
PropBank BioProp 74.78 56.25 64.20 
BioProp BioProp 88.65 85.61 87.10 
Table 7. Performance comparison of SRL sys-
tems trained on BioProp and PropBank 
11
6 Conclusion & Future Work 
The primary contribution of this study is the an-
notation of a biomedical proposition bank that 
incorporates the following features. First, the 
choice of 30 representative biomedical verbs is 
made according to their frequency and impor-
tance in the biomedical domain. Second, since 
some of the verbs have different usages and oth-
ers do not appear in the WSJ proposition bank, 
we redefine their framesets and add some new 
argument types. Third, the annotation guidelines 
in PropBank are slightly modified to suit the 
needs of the biomedical domain. Fourth, using 
appropriate argument types, framesets and anno-
tation guidelines, we construct a biomedical 
proposition bank, BioProp, on top of the popular 
biomedical GENIA Treebank. Finally, we em-
ploy a semi-automatic annotation approach that 
uses an SRL system trained on the WSJ Prop-
Bank. Incorrect tagging results are then corrected 
by human annotators. This approach reduces an-
notation efforts significantly. For example, in 
BioProp, the annotation efforts can be reduced 
by, at most, 46%. In addition, trained on BioProp, 
BIOSMILE?s F-score increases by 22.9% com-
pared to the SRL system trained on the PropBank. 
In our future work, we will investigate more 
biomedical verbs. Besides, since there are few 
biomedical treebanks, we plan to integrate full 
parsers in order to annotate syntactic and seman-
tic information simultaneously. It will then be 
possible to apply the SRL techniques more ex-
tensively to biomedical relation extraction. 
References 
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Robert 
MacIntyre. 1995. Bracketing Guidelines for Tree-
bank II Style Penn Treebank Project. Technical re-
port, University of Pennsylvania. 
Xavier Carreras and Llu?s M?rquez. 2005. Introduc-
tion to the CoNLL-2005 Shared Task: Semantic 
Role Labeling. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2005. 
Michael Collins. 1999. Head-driven Statistical Mod-
els for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania. 
Kadri Hacioglu, Sameer Pradhan, Wayne Ward, 
James H. Martin, and Daniel Jurafsky. 2004. Se-
mantic Role Labeling by Tagging Syntactic 
Chunks. In Proceedings of CoNLL-2004. 
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Teteisi, and Jun'-
ichi Tsujii. 2003. GENIA corpus?a semantically 
annotated corpus for bio-textmining. Bioinformat-
ics, 19(Suppl. 1): i180-i182. 
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer. 
2000. Class-based construction of a verb lexicon. 
In Proceedings of AAAI-2000. 
Karin Kipper, Martha Palmer, and Owen Rambow. 
2002. Extending PropBank with VerbNet semantic 
predicates. In Proceedings of AMTA-2002. 
Mitchell Marcus, Grace Kim, Mary Ann 
Marcinkiewicz, Robert MacIntyre, Ann Bies, Mark 
Ferguson, Karen Katz, and Britta Schasberger. 
1994. The Penn Treebank: Annotating predicate 
argument structure. In Proceedings of ARPA Hu-
man Language Technology Workshop. 
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann 
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated 
corpus of English: the Penn Treebank. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 19(2): 313-330. 
Thomas Morton and Jeremy LaCivita. 2003. Word-
Freak: an open tool for linguistic annotation. In 
Proceedings of HLT/NAACL-2003. 
Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J Wright. 1999. Numeri-
cal Optimization, Springer. 
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury. 
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus 
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 
31(1). 
Vasin Punyakanok, Dan Roth, Wen-tau Yih, and Dav 
Zimak. 2004. Semantic Role Labeling via Integer 
Linear Programming Inference. In Proceedings of 
COLING-2004. 
Sidney Siegel and N. John Castellan. 1988. Non-
parametric Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences. 
New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Richard Tzong-Han Tsai, Wen-Chi Chou, Yu-Chun 
Lin, Cheng-Lung Sung, Wei Ku, Ying-Shan Su, 
Ting-Yi Sung, and Wen-Lian Hsu. 2006. BIOS-
MILE: Adapting Semantic Role Labeling for Bio-
medical Verbs: An Exponential Model Coupled 
with Automatically Generated Template Features. 
In Proceedings of BioNLP'06. 
Yuka Tateisi, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun-ichi Tsujii. 2004. 
Annotation of Predicate-argument Structure of Mo-
lecular Biology Text. In Proceedings of the 
IJCNLP-04 workshop on Beyond Shallow Analyses. 
Yuka Tateisi and Jun-ichi Tsujii. 2004. Part-of-
Speech Annotation of Biology Research Abstracts. 
In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference 
on Language Resource and Evaluation. 
Yuka Tateisi, Akane Yakushiji, Tomoko Ohta, and 
Jun-ichi Tsujii. 2005. Syntax Annotation for the 
GENIA corpus. In Proceedings of IJCNLP-2005. 
Tuangthong Wattarujeekrit, Parantu K Shah, and 
Nigel Collier1. 2004. PASBio: predicate-argument 
structures for event extraction in molecular biology. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 5(155). 
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2004. Calibrating 
Features for Semantic Role Labeling. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP-2004. 
Xiaofeng Yang, Guodong Zhou, Jian Su, and Chew 
Lim Tan. 2004. Improving Noun Phrase Corefer-
ence Resolution by Matching Strings. In Proceed-
ings of 1st International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing: 226-233. 
  
12
