Proceedings of the Fifth SIGHAN Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, pages 48?55,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Latent Features in Automatic Tense Translation between Chinese and
English
Yang Ye?, Victoria Li Fossum?, Steven Abney ? ?
? Department of Linguistics
? Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of Michigan
Abstract
On the task of determining the tense to use
when translating a Chinese verb into En-
glish, current systems do not perform as
well as human translators. The main focus
of the present paper is to identify features
that human translators use, but which are
not currently automatically extractable.
The goal is twofold: to test a particu-
lar hypothesis about what additional infor-
mation human translators might be using,
and as a pilot to determine where to focus
effort on developing automatic extraction
methods for features that are somewhat be-
yond the reach of current feature extrac-
tion. The paper shows that incorporating
several latent features into the tense clas-
sifier boosts the tense classifier?s perfor-
mance, and a tense classifier using only the
latent features outperforms one using only
the surface features. Our findings confirm
the utility of the latent features in auto-
matic tense classification, explaining the
gap between automatic classification sys-
tems and the human brain.
1 Introduction
Language speakers make two types of distinctions
about temporal relations: the first type of relation
is based on precedence between events and can be
expanded into a finer grained taxonomy as pro-
posed by (Allen, 1981). The second type of re-
lation is based on the relative positioning between
the following three time parameters proposed by
(Reichenbach, 1947): speech time (S), event time
(E) and reference time (R). In the past couple of
decades, the NLP community has seen an emer-
gent interest in the first type of temporal relation.
In the cross-lingual context, while the first type of
relationship can be easily projected across a lan-
guage pair, the second type of relationship is of-
ten hard to be projected across a language pair. In
contrast to this challenge, cross-lingual temporal
reference distinction has been poorly explored.
Languages vary in the granularity of their
tense and aspect representations; some have finer-
grained tenses or aspects than others. Tense gener-
ation and tense understanding in natural language
texts are highly dynamic and context-dependent
processes, since any previously established time
point or interval, whether explicitly mentioned in
the context or not, could potentially serve as the
reference time for the event in question. (Bruce,
1972) captures this nature of temporal reference
organization in discourse through a multiple tem-
poral reference model. He defines a set (S
1
, S
2
, ...,
Sn) that is an element of tense. S1 corresponds to
the speech time, Sn is the event time, and (Si, i=2,
..., n-1) stand for a sequence of time references
from which the reference time of a particular event
could come. Given the elusive nature of reference
time shift, it is extremely hard to model the ref-
erence time point directly in temporal information
processing. The above reasons motivate classify-
ing temporal reference distinction automatically,
using machine learning algorithms such as Con-
ditional Random Fields (CRFs).
Many researchers in Natural Language Process-
ing seem to believe that an automatic system does
not have to follow the mechanism of human brain
in order to optimize its performance, for example,
the feature space for an automatic classification
system does not have to replicate the knowledge
sources that human beings utilize. There has been
very little research that pursues to testify this faith.
The current work attempts to identify which
features are most important for tense generation
in Chinese to English translation scenario, which
can point to direction of future research effort for
automatic tense translation between Chinese and
English.
48
The remaining part of the paper is organized
as follows: Section 2 summarizes the significant
related works in temporal information annotation
and points out how this study relates to yet dif-
fers from them. Section 3 formally defines the
problem, tense taxonomy and introduces the data.
Section 4 discusses the feature space and proposes
the latent features for the tense classification task.
Section 5 presents the classification experiments
in Conditional Random Fields as well as Classifi-
cation Tree and reports the evaluation results. Sec-
tion 6 concludes the paper and section 7 points out
directions for future research.
2 Related Work
There is an extensive literature on temporal infor-
mation processing. (Mani, et al, 2005) provides
a survey of works in this area. Here, we high-
light several works that are closely related to Chi-
nese temporal information processing. (Li, 2001)
describes a model of mining and organizing tem-
poral relations embedded in Chinese sentences,
in which a set of heuristic rules are developed to
map linguistic patterns to temporal relations based
on Allen?s thirteen relations. Their work shows
promising results via combining machine learning
techniques and linguistic features for successful
temporal relation classification, but their work is
concerned with another type of temporal relation-
ship, namely, the precedence-based temporal rela-
tion between a pair of events explicitly mentioned
in text.
A significant work worth mentioning is (Olsen
et. al. 2001)?s paper, where the authors exam-
ine the determination of tense for English verbs
in Chinese-to-English translation. In addition to
the surface features such as the presence of aspect
markers and certain adverbials, their work makes
use of the telicity information encoded in the lexi-
cons through the use of Lexical Conceptual Struc-
tures (LCS). Based on the dichotomy of grammat-
ical aspect and lexical aspect, they propose that
past tense corresponds to the telic (either inher-
ently or derived) LCS. They propose a heuristic
algorithm in which grammatical aspect markings
supersede the LCS, and in the absence of gram-
matical aspect marking, verbs that have telic LCS
are translated into past tense and present tense oth-
erwise. They report a significant performance im-
provement in tense resolution from adding a verb
telicity feature. They also achieve better perfor-
mance than the baseline system using the telic-
ity feature alone. This work, while alerting re-
searchers to the importance of lexical aspectual
feature in determination of tense for English verbs
in Chinese-to-English machine translation, is sub-
ject to the risk of adopting a one-to-one mapping
between grammatical aspect markings and tenses
hence oversimplifies the temporal reference prob-
lem in Chinese text. Additionally, their binary
tense taxonomy is too coarse for the rich tempo-
ral reference system in Chinese.
(Ye, et al 2005) reported a tense tagging case
study of training Conditional Random Fields on
a set of shallow surface features. The low inter-
annotator agreement rate reported in the paper il-
lustrates the difficulty of tense tagging. Neverthe-
less, the corpora size utilized is too small with only
52 news articles and none of the latent features was
explored, so the evaluation result reported in the
paper leaves room for improvement.
3 Problem Definition
3.1 Problem Formulation
The problem we are interested in can be formal-
ized as a standard classification or labeling prob-
lem, in which we try to learn a classifier
C : V ? T (1)
where V is a set of verbs (each described by a
feature vector), and T is the set of possible tense
tags.
Tense and aspect are morphologically merged
in English and coarsely defined, there can be
twelve combinations of the simple tripartite tenses
(present, past and future) with the progressive and
perfect grammatical aspects. For our classification
experiments, in order to combat sparseness, we ig-
nore the aspects and only deal with the three sim-
ple tenses: present, past and future.
3.2 Data
We use 152 pairs of parallel Chinese-English arti-
cles from LDC release. The Chinese articles come
from two news sources: Xinhua News Service and
Zaobao News Service, consisting of 59882 Chi-
nese characters in total with roughly 350 charac-
ters per article. The English parallel articles are
from Multiple-Translation Chinese (MTC) Corpus
from LDC with catalog number LDC2002T01.
We chose to use the best human translation out
49
of 9 translation teams as our gold-standard par-
allel English data. The verb tenses are obtained
through manual alignment between the Chinese
source articles and the English translations. In or-
der to avoid the noise brought by errors and be fo-
cused on the central question we try to answer in
the paper, we did not use automatic tools such as
GIZA++ to obtain the verb alignments, which typ-
ically comes with significant amount of errors. We
ignore Chinese verbs that are not translated into
English as verbs because of ?nominalization? (by
which verbal expressions in Chinese are translated
into nominal phrases in English). This exclusion is
based on the rationale that another choice of syn-
tactic structure might retain the verbal status in the
target English sentence, but the tense of those po-
tential English verbs would be left to the joint de-
cision of a set of disparate features. Those tenses
are unknown in our training data. This preprocess-
ing yields us a total of 2500 verb tokens in our data
set.
4 Feature Space
4.1 Surface Features
There are many heterogeneous features that con-
tribute to the process of tense generation for Chi-
nese verbs in the cross-lingual situation. Tenses in
English, while manifesting a distinction in tempo-
ral reference, do not always reflect this distinction
at the semantic level, as is shown in the sentence ?I
will leave when he comes.? (Hornstein, 1990) ac-
counts for this phenomenon by proposing the Con-
straints on Derived Tense Structures. Therefore,
the feature space we use includes the features that
contribute to the semantic level temporal reference
construction as well as those contributing to tense
generation from that semantic level. The follow-
ing is a list of the surface features that are directly
extractable from the training data:
1. Feature 1: Whether the verb is in quoted
speech or not.
2. Feature 2: The syntactic structure in which
the current verb is embedded. Possible struc-
tures include sentential complements, rel-
ative clauses, adverbial clauses, appositive
clauses, and null embedding structure.
3. Feature 3: Which of the following signal
adverbs occur between the current verb
and the previous verb: yi3jing1(already),
ceng2jing1(once), jiang1(future tense
marker), zheng4zai4(progressive aspect
marker), yi4zhi2(have always been).
4. Feature 4: Which of the following aspect
markers occur between the current verb and
the subsequent verb: le0, zhe0, guo4.
5. Feature 5: The distance in characters between
the current verb and the previously tagged
verb (We descretize the continuous distance
into three ranges: 0 < distance < 5, 5 ?
distance < 10, or 10 ? distance <?).
6. Feature 6: Whether the current verb is in the
same clause as the previous verb.
Feature 1 and feature 2 are used to capture the
discrepancy between semantic tense and syntactic
tense. Feature 3 and feature 4 are clues or triggers
of certain aspectual properties of the verbs. Fea-
ture 5 and feature 6 try to capture the dependency
between tenses of adjacent verbs.
4.2 Latent Features
The bottleneck in Artificial Intelligence is the un-
balanced knowledge sources shared by human be-
ings and a computer system. Only a subset of
the knowledge sources used by human beings can
be formalized, extracted and fed into a computer
system. The rest are less accessible and are very
hard to be shared with a computer system. De-
spite their importance in human language process-
ing, latent features have received little attention in
feature space exploration in most NLP tasks be-
cause they are impractical to extract. Although
there have not yet been rigorous psycholinguis-
tic studies demonstrating the extent to which the
above knowledge types are used in human tempo-
ral relation processing, we hypothesize that they
are very significant in assisting human?s temporal
relation decision. Nevertheless, a quantitative as-
sessment of the utility of the latent features in NLP
tasks has yet to be explored. (Olsen, et al, 2001)
illustrates the value of latent features by showing
how the telicity feature alone can help with tense
resolution in Chinese to English machine transla-
tion. Given the prevalence of latent features in hu-
man language processing, in order to emulate hu-
man beings performance of the disambiguation, it
is crucial to experiment with the latent features in
automatic tense classification.
(Pustejovsky, 2004) discusses the four basic
problems in event-temporal identification:
50
??????????????????????????????????
??????????
He said that Henan Province not only possesses the hardwares necessary for foreign 
investment, but also has, on the basis of the State policies and Henan's specific 
conditions, formulated its own preferential policies.
? ?? ???? ??
N/A include subsume
?? ??
Figure 1: Temporal Relations between Adjacent Events
1. Time-stamping of events (identifying an
event and anchoring it in time)
2. Ordering events with respect to one another
3. Reasoning with contextually under-specified
temporal expressions
4. Reasoning about the persistence of events
(how long does an event or the outcome of
an event last?)
While time-stamping of the events and reason-
ing with contextually under-specified temporal ex-
pressions might be too informative to be features
in tense classification, information concerning or-
derings between events and persistence of events
are relatively easier to be encoded as features in
a tense classification task. Therefore, we exper-
iment with these two latent knowledge sources,
both of which are heavily utilized by human be-
ings in tense resolution.
4.3 Telicity and Punctuality Features
Following (Vendler, 1947), temporal information
encoded in verbs is largely captured by some in-
nate properties of verbs, of which telicity and
punctuality are two very important ones. Telic-
ity specifies a verb?s ability to be bound in a cer-
tain time span, while punctuality specifies whether
or not a verb is associated with a point event in
time. Telicity and punctuality prepare verbs to be
assigned different tenses when they enter the con-
text in the discourse. While it is true that isolated
verbs are typically associated with certain telicity
and punctuality features, such features are contex-
tually volatile. In reaction to the volatility exhib-
ited in verb telicity and punctuality features, we
propose that verb telicity and punctuality features
should be evaluated only at the clausal or senten-
tial level for the tense classification task. We man-
ually obtained these two features for both the En-
glish and the Chinese verbs. All verbs in our data
set were manually tagged as ?telic? or ?atelic?, and
?punctual? or ?apunctual?, according to context.
4.4 Temporal Ordering Feature
(Allen, 1981) defines thirteen relations that could
possibly hold between any pair of situations. We
experiment with six temporal relations which we
think represent the most typical temporal relation-
ships between two events. We did not adopt all
of the thirteen temporal relationships proposed by
Allen for the reason that some of them would re-
quire excessive deliberation from the annotators
and hard to implement. The six relationships we
explore are as follows:
1. event A precedes event B
2. event A succeeds event B
3. event A includes event B
4. event A subsumes event B
5. event A overlaps with event B
6. no temporal relations between event A and
event B
For each Chinese verb in the source Chinese
texts, we annotate the temporal relation between
the verb and the previously tagged verb as belong-
ing to one of the above classes. The annotation
of the temporal relation classes mimics a deeper
semantic analysis of the Chinese source text. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates a sentence in which each verb is
tagged by the temporal relation class that holds be-
tween it and the previous verb.
51
5 Experiments and Evaluation
5.1 CRF learning algorithms
Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) are a formal-
ism well-suited for learning and prediction on se-
quential data in many NLP tasks. It is a prob-
abilistic framework proposed by (Lafferty et al,
2001) for labeling and segmenting structured data,
such as sequences, trees and lattices. The condi-
tional nature of CRFs relaxes the independence as-
sumptions required by traditional Hidden Markov
Models (HMMs). This is because the conditional
model makes it unnecessary to explicitly represent
and model the dependencies among the input vari-
ables, thus making it feasible to use interacting and
global features from the input. CRFs also avoid
the label bias problem exhibited by maximum en-
tropy Markov models (MEMMs) and other con-
ditional Markov models based on directed graph-
ical models. CRFs have been shown to perform
well on a number of NLP problems such as shal-
low parsing (Sha and Pereira, 2003), table extrac-
tion (Pinto et al, 2003), and named entity recog-
nition (McCallum and Li, 2003). For our exper-
iments, we use the MALLET implementation of
CRF?s (McCallum, 2002).
5.2 Experiments
5.2.1 Human Inter-Annotator Agreement
All supervised learning algorithms require a
certain amount of training data, and the reliability
of the computational solutions is intricately tied
to the accuracy of the annotated data. Human an-
notations typically suffer from errors, subjectivity,
and the expertise effect. Therefore, researchers
use consistency checking to validate human an-
notation experiments. The Kappa Statistic (Co-
hen, 1960) is a standard measurement of inter-
annotator agreement for categorical data annota-
tion. The Kappa score is defined by the following
formula, where P(A) is the observed agreement
rate from multiple annotators and P(E) is the ex-
pected rate of agreement due to pure chance:
k = P (A)? P (E)
1? P (E)
(2)
Since tense annotation requires disambiguating
grammatical meaning, which is more abstract than
lexical meaning, one would expect the challenge
posed by human annotators in a tense annota-
tion experiment to be even greater than for word
sense disambiguation. Nevertheless, the tense an-
notation experiment carried as a precursor to our
tense classification task showed a kappa Statistic
of 0.723 on the full taxonomy, with an observed
agreement of 0.798. In those experiments, we
asked three bilingual English native speakers who
are fluent in Chinese to annotate the English verb
tenses for the first 25 Chinese and English parallel
news articles from our training data.
We could also obtain a measurement of reliabil-
ity by taking one annotator as the gold standard
at one time, then averaging over the precisions of
the different annotators across different gold stan-
dards. While it is true that numerically, precision
would be higher than Kappa score and seems to
be inflating Kappa score, we argue that the dif-
ference between Kappa score and precision is not
limited to one measure being more aggressive than
the other. Rather, the policies of these two mea-
surements are different. The Kappa score cares
purely about agreement without any consideration
of trueness or falseness, while the procedure we
described above gives equal weight to each anno-
tator being the gold standard, and therefore con-
siders both agreement and truthness of the annota-
tion. The advantage of the precision-based agree-
ment measurement is that it makes comparison of
the system performance accuracy to the human
performance accuracy more direct. The precision
under such a scheme for the three annotators is
80% on the full tense taxonomy.
5.2.2 CRF Learning Experiments
We train a tense classifier on our data set in two
stages: first on the surface features, and then on
the combined space of both surface features (dis-
cussed in 4.1) and latent features (discussed in 4.2-
4.4). It is conceivable that the granularity of se-
quences may matter in learning from data with se-
quential relationship, and in the context of verb
tense tagging, it naturally maps to the granularity
of discourse. (Ye, et al, 2005) shows that there
is no significant difference between sentence-level
sequences and paragraph-level sequences. There-
fore, we experiment with only sentence-level se-
quences.
5.2.3 Classification Tree Learning
Experiments
To verify the stability of the utility of the la-
tent features, we also experiment with classifica-
tion tree learning on the same features space as
52
Tense Precision Recall F
Present tense 0.662 0.661 0.627
Past tense 0.882 0.915 0.896
Future tense 0.758 0.487 0.572
Table 1: Evaluation Results for CRFs Classifier in Precision, Recall and F Using All Features
Surface Features Latent Features Surface and Latent Features
Accuracy for Training Data 79.3% 82.9% 85.9%
Table 2: Apparent Accuracy for the Training Data of the Classification Tree Classifiers
discussed above. Classification Trees are used
to predict membership of cases or objects in the
classes of a categorical dependent variable from
their measurements on one or more predictor vari-
ables. The main idea of Classification Tree is to
do a recursive partitioning of the variable space
to achieve good separation of the classes in the
training dataset. We use the Recursive Partition-
ing and Regression Trees(Rpart) package provided
by R statistical computing software for the imple-
mentation of classification trees. In order to avoid
over-fitting, we prune the tree by setting the min-
imum number of objects in a node to attempt a
split and the minimum number of objects in any
terminal node to be 10 and 3 respectively. In the
constructed classification tree when we use all fea-
tures including both surface and latent features,
the top split at the root node in the tree is based
on telicity feature of the English verb, indicating
the importance of telicity feature for English verb
among all of the features.
5.3 Evaluation Results
All results are obtained by 5-fold cross validation.
The classifier?s performance is evaluated against
the tenses from the best-ranked human-generated
English translation. To evaluate the performance
of the CRFs tense classifier, we compute the pre-
cision, recall, general accuracy and F, which are
defined as follow.
Accuracy =
nprediction
Nprediction
(3)
Recall = nhit
S
(4)
Precision = nhit
Nhit
(5)
F = 2? Precision ?Recall
Precision + Recall
(6)
where
1. Nprediction: Total number of predictions;
2. nprediction: Number of correct predictions;
3. Nhit: Total number of hits;
4. nhit: Number of correct hits;
5. S: Size of perfect hitlist;
From Table 1, we see that past tense, which oc-
curs most frequently in the training data, has the
highest precision, recall and F. Future tense, which
occurs least frequently, has the lowest F. Precision
and recall do not show clear pattern across differ-
ent tense classes.
Table 2 presents the apparent classification ac-
curacies for the training data, we see that latent
features still outperform the surface features. Ta-
ble 3 summarizes the general accuracies of the
tense classification systems for CRFs and Classifi-
cation Trees. The CRFs classifier and the Classifi-
cation Tree classifier demonstrate similar scales of
improvement from surface features, latent features
to both surface and latent features.
53
Methodology Surface Features Latent Features Surface and Latent Features
CRFs 75.8% 80% 83.4%
Classification Tree 74.1% 81% 84.5%
Table 3: Evaluations in General Accuracy
5.4 Baseline Systems
To better evaluate our tense classifiers, we provide
two baseline systems here. The first baseline sys-
tem is the tense resolution from the best ranked
machine translation system?s translation results in
the MTC corpus mentioned above. When evalu-
ated against the reference tense tags from the best
ranked human translation team, the best MT sys-
tem yields a accuracy of 47%. The second base-
line system is a naive system that assigns the most
frequent tense in the training data set, which in our
case is past tense, to all verbs in the test data set.
Given the fact that we are deadling with newswire
data, this baseline system yields a high baseline
system with an accuracy of 69.5%.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
To the best of our knowledge, the current paper
is the first work investigating the utility of latent
features in the task of machine-learning based au-
tomatic tense classification. We significantly out-
perform the two baseline systems as well as the
automatic tense classifier performance reported by
(Ye, et al, 2005) by 15% in general accuracy. A
crucial finding of our experiments is that utility of
only three latent features, i.e. verb telicity, verb
punctuality and temporal ordering between adja-
cent events, outperforms that of all the surface
linguistic features we discussed earlier in the pa-
per. While one might think that the lack of exist-
ing techonology of latent feature extraction would
discount research effort on latent features? utili-
ties, we believe that such efforts guide the research
community to determine where to focus effort on
developing automatic extraction methods for fea-
tures that are beyond the reach of current tech-
nologies. Such research effort will also help to
shed light on the enigmatic research question of
whether automatic NLP systems should take ef-
fort to make use of the features employed by hu-
man beings to optimize the system performance
and shorten the gap between the system and hu-
man brain. The results of the current paper point
to the fact that bottleneck of cross-linguistic tense
classification is acquisition and modeling of the
more latent linguistic knowledge. To our surprise,
CRF tense classifier performance is consistently
tied with classification tree tense classifier perfor-
mance in all of our experiments. One might expect
that CRFs would accurately capture sequential de-
pendencies among verbs. Reflecting upon the sim-
ilar evaluation results of the CRFs classifier and
the Classification Tree classifier, it is unlikely for
this to be due to the over-fitting of the Classifi-
cation Tree because of the pruning we did to the
Classification Trees. Therefore, we speculate that
the dependencies between the tense tags of verbs
in the texts may not be strong enough for CRFs
to outperform Classification Tree. This might also
be contributable to the built-in variable selection
procedures of Classification Trees, which makes
it more robust to interacting and interdependent
features. A confirmative explanation towards the
equal performances between the CRFs and the
Classification Tree classifiers requires more exper-
iments with other machine learning algorithms.
In conclusion, this paper makes the following
contributions:
1. It demonstrates that an accurate tense classi-
fier can be constructed automatically by com-
bining off-the-shelf machine learning tech-
niques and inexpensive linguistic features.
2. It shows that latent features (such as verb
telicity, verb punctuality and temporal order-
ing between adjacent events) have higher util-
ity in tense classification than the surface lin-
guistic features.
3. It reveals that the sequential dependency be-
tween tenses of adjacent verbs in the dis-
course may be rather weak.
54
7 Future Work
Temporal reference is a complicated semantic do-
main with rich connections among the disparate
features. We investigate three latent features:
telicity, punctuality, and temporal ordering be-
tween adjacent verbs. We summarize several in-
teresting questions for future research in this sec-
tion. First, besides the latent features we examined
in the current paper, there are other interesting
latent features to be investigated under the same
theme, e.g. classes of temporal expression associ-
ated with the verbs and causal relationships among
disparate events. Second, currently, the latent fea-
tures are obtained through manual annotation by
a single annotator. In an ideal situation, multi-
ple annotators are desired to provide the reliabil-
ity of the annotations as well as reduce the noise
in annotations. Thirdly, it would be interesting to
examine the utility of the same latent features for
classification in the opposite direction, namely, as-
pect marker classification for Chinese verbs in the
English-to-Chinese translation scenario. Finally,
following our discussion of the degree of depen-
dencies among verb tenses in the texts, it is desir-
able to study rigorously the dependencies among
tenses and aspect markers for verbs in extensions
of the current research.
References
James Allen. 1981. Towards a General Theory of Ac-
tion and Time. Artificial Intelligence, 23(2): 123-
160.
Hans Reichenbach. 1947. Elements of Symbolic Logic.
Macmillan, New York, N.Y.
B. Bruce. 1972. A Model for Temporal Reference and
its Application in a Question Answering System, Ar-
tificial Intelligence. Vol. 3, No. 1, 1-25.
Inderjeet Mani, James Pustejovsky and Robert
Gaizauskas. 2005. The Language of Time, Oxford
Press.
Wenjie Li, Kam-Fai Wong, Caogui Hong, Chunfa
Yuan. 2004. Applying Machine Learning to Chinese
Temporal Relation Resolution. Proceedings of the
42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 582-588.
Mari Olson, David Traum, Carol Van-ess Dykema,
and AmyWeinberg. 2001. Implicit Cues for Explicit
Generation: Using Telicity as a Cue for Tense Struc-
ture in a Chinese to English MT System. Proceed-
ings Machine Translation Summit VIII, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.
Yang Ye, Zhu Zhang. 2005. Tense Tagging for Verbs in
Cross-Lingual Context: a Case Study. Proceedings
of IJCNLP 2005, 885-895
Norbert Hornstein. 1990. As Time Goes By: Tense and
Universal Grammar. The MIT Press.
James Pustejovsky, Robert Ingria, Roser Sauri, Jose
Castano, Jessica Littman, Rob Gaizauskas, Andrea
Setzer, Graham Katz, and Inderjeet Mani. 2004. The
Specification Language TimeML. The Language of
Time: A Reader. Oxford, 185-96.
Zeno Vendler. 1967. Verbs and Times. Linguistics in
Philosophy, 97-121.
Lafferty, J., McCallum, A. and Pereira, F. 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. In Proceedings
of ICML-01, 282-289.
Sha, F. and Pereira, F. 2003. Shallow Parsing with
Conditional Random Fields. Proceedings of the
2003 Human Language Technology Conference and
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL-03)
Pinto, D., McCallum, A., Lee, X. and Croft, W. B.
2003. Table Extraction Using Conditional Random
Fields. Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 2003)
McCallum, A. and Li, W. 2003. Early Results for
Named Entity Recognition with Conditional Ran-
dom Fields, Feature Induction and Web-Enhanced
Lexicons. Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on
Natural Language Learning (CoNLL)
McCallum, A. K. 2002. MALLET: A Ma-
chine Learning for Language Toolkit,
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
Jacob Cohen, 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for
Nominal Scales, Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 20, 37-46.
Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman. 1996. R: A Lan-
guage for Data Analysis and Graphics, Journal
of Computational and Graphical Statistics, Vol. 5.
299?14.
55
