Experiments Adapting an Open-Domain Question Answering System to
the Geographical Domain Using Scope-Based Resources
Daniel Ferre?s and Horacio Rodr??guez
TALP Research Center
Software Department
Universitat Polite`cnica de Catalunya
{dferres, horacio}@lsi.upc.edu
Abstract
This paper describes an approach to adapt
an existing multilingual Open-Domain
Question Answering (ODQA) system for
factoid questions to a Restricted Domain,
the Geographical Domain. The adaptation
of this ODQA system involved the modifi-
cation of some components of our system
such as: Question Processing, Passage Re-
trieval and Answer Extraction. The new
system uses external resources like GNS
Gazetteer for Named Entity (NE) Classi-
fication and Wikipedia or Google in order
to obtain relevant documents for this do-
main. The system focuses on a Geograph-
ical Scope: given a region, or country, and
a language we can semi-automatically ob-
tain multilingual geographical resources
(e.g. gazetteers, trigger words, groups of
place names, etc.) of this scope. The
system has been trained and evaluated for
Spanish in the scope of the Spanish Geog-
raphy. The evaluation reveals that the use
of scope-based Geographical resources is
a good approach to deal with multilingual
Geographical Domain Question Answer-
ing.
1 Introduction
Question Answering (QA) is the task of, given
a query expressed in Natural Language (NL), re-
trieving its correct answer (a single item, a text
snippet,...). QA has become a popular task in the
NL Processing (NLP) research community in the
framework of different international ODQA eval-
uation contests such as: Text Retrieval Confer-
ence (TREC) for English, Cross-Lingual Evalua-
tion Forum (CLEF) for European languages, and
NTCIR for Asian languages.
In this paper we describe our experiments in the
adaptation and evaluation of an ODQA system to
a Restricted Domain, the Geographical Domain.
GeoTALP-QA is a multilingual Geographi-
cal Domain Question Answering (GDQA) sys-
tem. This Restricted Domain Question Answer-
ing (RDQA) system has been built over an existing
ODQA system, TALP-QA, a multilingual ODQA
system that processes both factoid and definition
questions (see (Ferre?s et al, 2005) and (Ferre?s et
al., 2004)). The system was evaluated for Spanish
and English in the context of our participation in
the conferences TREC and CLEF in 2005 and has
been adapted to a multilingual GDQA system for
factoid questions.
As pointed out in (Benamara, 2004), the Geo-
graphical Domain (GD) can be considered a mid-
dle way between real Restricted Domains and
open ones because many open domain texts con-
tain a high density of geographical terms.
Although the basic architecture of TALP-QA
has remained unchanged, a set of QA components
were redesigned and modified and we had to add
some specific components for the GD to our QA
system. The basic approach in TALP-QA consists
of applying language-dependent processes on both
question and passages for getting a language inde-
pendent semantic representation, and then extract-
ing a set of Semantic Constraints (SC) for each
question. Then, an answer extraction algorithm
extracts and ranks sentences that satisfy the SCs
of the question. Finally, an answer selection mod-
ule chooses the most appropriate answer.
We outline below the organization of the paper.
In the next section we present some characteris-
tics of RDQA systems. In Section 3, we present
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
69
the overall architecture of GeoTALP-QA and de-
scribe briefly its main components, focusing on
those components that have been adapted from an
ODQA to a GDQA. Then, the Scope-Based Re-
sources needed for the experimentation and the ex-
periments are presented in Sections 4 and 5. In
section 6 we present the results obtained over a
GD corpus. Finally, in Section 7 and 8 we describe
our conclusions and the future work.
2 Restricted Domain QA Systems
RDQAs present some characteristics that prevent
us from a direct use of ODQA systems. The most
important differences are:
? Usually, for RDQA, the answers are searched
in relatively small domain specific collec-
tions, so methods based on exploiting the re-
dundancy of answers in several documents
are not useful. Furthermore, a highly accu-
rate Passage Retrieval module is required be-
cause frequently the answer occurs in a very
small set of passages.
? RDQAs are frequently task-based. So, the
repertory of question patterns is limited al-
lowing a good accuracy in Question Process-
ing with limited effort.
? User requirements regarding the quality of
the answer tend to be higher in RDQA. As
(Chung et al, 2004) pointed out, no answer
is preferred to a wrong answer.
? In RDQA not only NEs but also domain spe-
cific terminology plays a central role. This
fact usually implies that domain specific lex-
icons and gazetteers have to be used.
? In some cases, as in GD, many documents in-
cluded in the collections are far to be stan-
dard NL texts but contain tables, lists, ill-
formed sentences, etc. sometimes following
a more or less defined structure. Thus, extrac-
tion systems based, as our, on the linguistic
structure of the sentences have to be relaxed
in some way to deal with this kind of texts.
More information about RDQA systems can be
found in the ACL 2004 Workshop on QA in Re-
stricted Domains1 and the AAAI 2005 Worshop
on Question Answering in Restricted Domains
(Molla and Vicedo, 2005) .
1http://acl.ldc.upenn.edu/acl2004/qarestricteddomain/
3 System Description
GeoTALP-QA has been developed within the
framework of ALIADO2 project. The system
architecture uses a common schema with three
phases that are performed sequentially without
feedback: Question Processing (QP), Passage Re-
trieval (PR) and Answer Extraction (AE). More
details about this architecture can be found in
(Ferre?s et al, 2005) and (Ferre?s et al, 2004).
Before describing these subsystems, we intro-
duce some additional knowledge sources that have
been added to our system for dealing with the
geographic domain and some language-dependent
NLP tools for English and Spanish. Our aim is to
develop a language independent system (at least
able to work with English and Spanish). Lan-
guage dependent components are only included
in the Question Pre-processing and Passage Pre-
processing components, and can be easily substi-
tuted by components for other languages.
3.1 Additional Knowledge Sources
One of the most important task to deal with the
problem of GDQA is to detect and classify NEs
with its correct Geographical Subclass (see classes
in Section 3.3). We use Geographical scope based
Knowledge Bases (KB) to solve this problem.
These KBs can be built using these resources:
? GEOnet Names Server (GNS3). A world-
wide gazetteer, excluding the USA and
Antarctica, with 5.3 million entries.
? Geographic Names Information System
(GNIS4). A gazetteer with 2.0 million entries
about geographic features of the USA.
? Grammars for creating NE aliases. Ge-
ographic NEs tend to occur in a great va-
riety of forms. It is important to take this
into account to avoid losing occurrences.
A set of patterns for expanding have been
created. (e.g. <toponym> Mountains,
<toponym> Range, <toponym> Chain).
? Trigger Words Lexicon. A lexicon con-
taining trigger words (including multi-word
terms) is used for allowing local disambigua-
tion of ambiguous NE, both in the questions
and in the retrieved passages.
2ALIADO. http://gps-tsc.upc.es/veu/aliado
3GNS. http://earth-info.nga.mil/gns/html
4GNIS. http://geonames.usgs.gov/geonames/stategaz
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
70
Working with geographical scopes avoids many
ambiguity problems, but even in a scope these
problems occur:
? Referent ambiguity problem. This problem
occurs when the same name is used for sev-
eral locations (of the same or different class).
In a question, sometimes it is impossible to
solve this ambiguity, and, in this case, we
have to accept as correct all of the possible in-
terpretations (or a superclass of them). Oth-
erwise, a trigger phrase pattern can be used
to resolve the ambiguity (e.g. ?Madrid? is
an ambiguous NE, but in the phrase, ?comu-
nidad de Madrid? (State of Madrid), ambigu-
ity is solved). Given a scope, we automati-
cally obtain the most common trigger phrase
patterns of the scope from the GNS gazetteer.
? Reference ambiguity problem. This prob-
lem occurs when the same location can have
more than one name (in Spanish texts this fre-
quently occurs as many place names occur
in languages other than Spanish, as Basque,
Catalan or Galician). Our approach to solve
this problem is to group together all the ge-
ographical names that refer to the same lo-
cation. All the occurrences of the geograph-
ical NEs in both questions and passages are
substituted by the identifier of the group they
belong to.
We used the geographical knowledge avail-
able in the GNS gazetteer to obtain this ge-
ographical NEs groups. First, for each place
name in the scope-based GNS gazetteer we
obtained all the NEs that have the same fea-
ture designation code, latitude and longitude.
For each group, we then selected an identifier
choosing one of the NE included in it using
the following heuristics: the information of
the GNS field ?native? tells if a place name is
native, conventional, a variant, or, is not ver-
ified. So we decided the group representative
assigning the following order of priorities to
the names: native, conventional name, vari-
ant name, unverified name. If there is more
than one place name in the group with the
same name type we decide that the additional
length gives more priority to be cluster repre-
sentative. It is necessary to establish a set of
priorities among the different place names of
the group because in some retrieval engines
(e.g. web search engines) is not possible to
do long queries.
3.2 Language-Dependent Processing Tools
A set of general purpose NLP tools are used for
Spanish and English. The same tools are used for
the linguistic processing of both the questions and
the passages (see (Ferre?s et al, 2005) and (Ferre?s
et al, 2004) for a more detailed description of
these tools). The tools used for Spanish are:
? FreeLing, which performs tokenization, mor-
phological analysis, POS tagging, lemmati-
zation, and partial parsing.
? ABIONET, a NE Recognizer and Classifier
(NERC) on basic categories.
? EuroWordNet, used to obtain a list of synsets,
a list of hypernyms of each synset, and the
Top Concept Ontology class.
The following tools are used to process English:
? TnT, a statistical POS tagger.
? WordNet lemmatizer 2.0.
? ABIONET.
? WordNet 1.5.
? A modified version of the Collins parser.
? Alembic, a NERC with MUC classes.
3.3 Question Processing
The main goal of this subsystem is to detect the
Question Type (QT), the Expected Answer Type
(EAT), the question logic predicates, and the ques-
tion analysis. This information is needed for the
other subsystems. We use a language-independent
formalism to represent this information.
We apply the processes described above to the
the question and passages to obtain the following
information:
? Lexical and semantic information for each
word: form, lemma, POS tag (Eagles or PTB
tag-set), semantic class and subclass of NE,
and a list of EWN synsets.
? Syntactic information: syntactic constituent
structure of the sentence and the information
of dependencies and other relations between
these components.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
71
Once this information is obtained we can find
the information relevant to the following tasks:
? Environment Building. The semantic pro-
cess starts with the extraction of the semantic
relations that hold between the different com-
ponents identified in the question text. These
relations are organized into an ontology of
about 100 semantic classes and 25 relations
(mostly binary) between them. Both classes
and relations are related by taxonomic links.
The ontology tries to reflect what is needed
for an appropriate representation of the se-
mantic environment of the question (and the
expected answer). A set of about 150 rules
was built to perform this task. The ontology
has been extended for the GD (see below the
classes related with this domain).
ENTITY
ENTITY_PROPER_PLACE
GEOLOGICAL_REGION
ARCHIPELAGO
ISLAND
LAND_FORM
MOUNTAIN
SEA_FORM
CAPE
GULF
SEA
WATER_FORM
RIVER
POLITICAL_REGION
CITY
CONTINENT
COUNTY
COUNTRY
STATE
ENTITY_QUANTITY
NUMERIC
MAGNITUDE
AREA
LENGTH
FLOW
WEIGHT
? Question Classification. Our ODQA system
uses 25 QTs. For the GD we only used 10
Question Types (see Table 1). Only 5 QTs are
common with the ODQA QTs, 5 QTs have
been specially created for this domain.
Question Type Expected Answer Type
Count objects NUMBER
How many people NUMBER
What area MEASURE AREA
What flow MEASURE FLOW
What height MEASURE HEIGHT
What length MEASURE LENGTH
Where action LOCATION SUBCLASS
Where location LOCATION SUBCLASS
Where quality LOCATION SUBCLASS
Default class LOCATION
Table 1: QTs and Expected Answer Types.
In order to determine the QT our system uses
a Prolog DCG Parser. This parser uses the
following features: word form, word position
in the question, lemma and part-of-speech
(POS). A set of DCG rules was manually
configured in order to ensure a sufficient cov-
erage.
The parser uses external information: geo-
graphical NE subclasses, trigger words for
each Geographical subclass (e.g. ?poblado?
(ville)), semantically related words of each
subclass (e.g. ?water? related with sea and
river), and introductory phrases for each
Question Type (e.g. ?which extension? is a
phrase of the QT What area).
? Semantic Constraints Extraction. Depend-
ing on the QT, a subset of useful items of
the environment has to be selected in order
to extract the answer. Accordingly, we define
the set of relations (the semantic constraints)
that are supposed to be found in the answer.
These relations are classified as mandatory,
(MC), (i.e. they have to be satisfied in the
passage) or optional, (OC), (if satisfied the
score of the answer is higher). In order to
build the semantic constraints for each ques-
tion, a set of rules has been manually built.
A set of 88 rules is used. An example of the
constraints extracted from an environment is
shown in Table 2. This example shows the
question type predicted, the initial predicates
extracted from the question, the Environment
predicates, the MCs and the OCs. MCs are
entity(4) and i en city(6). The first predi-
cate refers to token number 4 (?autonomia?
(state)) and the last predicate refers to token
number 6 (?Barcelona?).
Question ? A que? autonom??a pertenece Barcelona?
(At which state pertains Barcelona?)
Q. Type where location
Predicates city(?Barcelona?),state(X),
pertains(?Barcelona?,X)
Environment action(5), participant in event(5,4),
theme of event(5,6),prep(4,2),entity(4),
i en proper place(6),det(4,3),qu(3)
Mandatory entity(4),i en city(6)
Constraints
Optional action(5),theme of event(5,6),
Constraints participant in event(5,4),prep(4,2),
type of location(5,5,i en state),
property(5,5,pertenecer,3,6)
Table 2: Question Analysis example.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
72
3.4 Passage Retrieval
We use two different approaches for Passage Re-
trieval. The first one uses a pre-processed corpus
as a document collection. The second one uses the
web as document collection.
3.4.1 Off-line Corpus Retrieval
This approach uses a pre-processed and indexed
corpus with Scope-related Geographical Informa-
tion as a document collection for Passage Re-
trieval. The processed information was used for
indexing the documents. Storing this information
allows us to avoid the pre-processing step after
retrieval. The Passage Retrieval algorithm used
is the same of our ODQA system: a data-driven
query relaxation technique with dynamic passages
implemented using Lucene IR engine API (See
(Ferre?s et al, 2005) for more details).
3.4.2 Online Web Snippet Retrieval
The other approach uses a search-engine to get
snippets with relevant information. We expect to
get a high recall with few snippets. In our exper-
iments, we chose Google as the search-engine us-
ing a boolean retrieval schema that takes advan-
tage of its phrase search option and the Geograph-
ical KB to create queries that can retrieve highly
relevant snippets. We try to maximize the num-
ber of relevant sentences with only one query per
question.
The algorithm used to build the queries is sim-
ple. First, some expansion methods described be-
low can be applied over the keywords. Then, stop-
words (including normal stop-words and some
trigger words) are removed. Finally, only the
Nouns and Verbs are extracted from the keywords
list. The expansion methods used are:
? Trigger Words Joining (TWJ). Uses the
trigger words list and the trigger phrase pat-
tern list (automatically generated from GNS)
to join trigger phrases (e.g. ?isla Conejera? o
?Sierra de los Pirineos?).
? Trigger Words Expansion (TWE). This ex-
pansion is applied to the NEs that were not
detected as a trigger phrase. The expansion
uses its location subclass to create a key-
word with the pattern: TRIGGER + NE (e.g.
?Conejera? is expanded to: (?isla Conejera?
OR ?Conejera?)).
? GNS Grouping Expansion (CE). Noun
Phrase expansion based on the groups gen-
erated from GNS Gazetteer.
? Question-based Expansion (QBE). This
method appends keywords or expands the
query depending on the question type. As an
example, in the case of a question classified
as What length, trigger words and units as-
sociated to the question class like ?longitud?
(length) and ?kilo?metros? (kilometers) are ap-
pended to the query.
3.5 Answer Extraction
We used two systems for Answer Extraction: our
ODQA system (adapted for the GD) and a fre-
quency based system.
3.5.1 ODQA Extraction
The linguistic process of analyzing passages is
similar to the process carried out on questions and
leads to the construction of the environment of
each sentence. Then, a set of extraction rules are
applied following an iterative approach. In the first
iteration all the MC have to be satisfied by at least
one of the candidate sentences. Then, the itera-
tion proceeds until a threshold is reached by re-
laxing the MC. The relaxation process of the set
of semantic constraints is performed by means of
structural or semantic relaxation rules, using the
semantic ontology. The extraction process con-
sists on the application of a set of extraction rules
on the set of sentences that have satisfied the MC.
The Knowledge Source used for this process is a
set of extraction rules owning a credibility score.
Each QT has its own subset of extraction rules that
leads to the selection of the answer.
In order to select the answer from the set of can-
didates, the following scores are computed and ac-
cumulated for each candidate sentence: i) the rule
score (which uses factors such as the confidence
of the rule used, the relevance of the OC satisfied
in the matching, and the similarity between NEs
occurring in the candidate sentence and the ques-
tion), ii) the passage score, iii) a semantic score
(see (Ferre?s et al, 2005)) , iv) the extraction rule
relaxation level score. The answer to the question
is the candidate with the best global score.
3.5.2 Frequency-Based Extraction
This extraction algorithm is quite simple. First,
all snippets are pre-processed. Then, we make a
ranked list of all the tokens satisfying the expected
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
73
answer type of the question. The score of each to-
ken in the snippets is computed using the follow-
ing formula:
Score(tki) =
?
o?Occurrence(tki)
1
snippet rank(o)
Finally, the top-ranked token is extracted.
4 Resources for Scope-Based
Experiments
In this section we describe how we obtained the
resources needed to do experiments in the Span-
ish Geography domain using Spanish. These re-
sources were: the question corpus (validation and
test), the document collection required by the off-
line ODQA Passage Retrieval, and the geograph-
ical scope-based resources. Finally, we describe
the experiments performed.
4.1 Language and Scope based Geographical
Question Corpus
We obtained a corpus of Geographical questions
from Albayzin, a speech corpus (Diaz et al, 1998)
that contains a geographical subcorpus with utter-
ances of questions about the geography of Spain in
Spanish. We obtained from Albayzin a set of 6887
question patterns. We analyzed this corpus and we
extracted the following type of questions: Partial
Direct, Partial Indirect, and Imperative Interroga-
tive factoid questions with a simple level of dif-
ficulty (e.g. questions without nested questions).
We selected a set of 2287 question patterns. As a
question corpus we randomly selected a set of 177
question patterns from the previous selection (see
Table 3). These patterns have been randomly in-
stantiated with Geographical NEs of the Albayzin
corpus. Then, we searched the answers in the Web
and the Spanish Wikipedia (SW). The results of
this process were: 123 questions with answer in
the SW and the Web, 33 questions without answer
in the SW but with answer using the Web, and
finally, 21 questions without answer (due to the
fact that some questions when instantiated cannot
be answered (e.g. which sea bathes the coast of
Madrid?)). We divided the 123 questions with an-
swer in the SW in two sets: 61 questions for devel-
opment (setting thresholds and other parameters)
and 62 for test.
?A que? comunidad auto?noma pertenece el <PICO>?
At which state pertains <PEAK>?
?Cua?l es el capital de <COMUNIDAD>?
Which is the capital of <STATE>?
?Cua?l es la comunidad en la que desemboca el <R?IO>?
What is the state in which <RIVER> flows into?
?Cua?l es la extensio?n de <COMUNIDAD>?
Which is the extension of <STATE>?
Longitud del r??o <R?IO>.
Length of river <RIVER>.
?Cua?ntos habitantes tiene la <COMUNIDAD>?
How many people does <STATE> has?
Table 3: Some question patterns from Albayzin.
4.2 Document Collection for ODQA Passage
Retrieval
In order to test our ODQA Passage Retrieval sys-
tem we need a document collection with sufficient
geographical information to resolve the questions
of Albayzin corpus. We used the filtered Span-
ish Wikipedia5. First, we obtained the original
set of documents (26235 files). Then, we selected
two sets of 120 documents about the Spanish ge-
ography domain and the non-Spanish geography
domain. Using these sets we obtained a set of
Topic Signatures (TS) (Lin and Hovy, 2000) for
the Spanish geography domain and another set of
TS for the non-Spanish geography domain. Then,
we used these TS to filter the documents from
Wikipedia, and we obtained a set of 8851 doc-
uments pertaining to the Spanish geography do-
main. These documents were pre-processed and
indexed.
4.3 Geographical Scope-Based Resources
A Knowledge Base (KB) of Spanish Geography
has been built using four resources:
? GNS: We obtained a set of 32222 non-
ambiguous place names of Spain.
? Albayzin Gazetteer: a set of 758 places.
? A Grammar for creating NE aliases. We cre-
ated patterns for the summit and state classes
(the ones with more variety of forms), and we
expanded this patterns using the entries of Al-
bayzin.
? A lexicon of 462 trigger words.
We obtained a set of 7632 groups of place
names using the grouping process over GNS.
These groups contain a total of 17617 place
5Spanish Wikipedia. http://es.wikipedia.org
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
74
names, with an average of 2.51 place names per
group. See in Figure 1 an example of a group
where the canonical term appears underlined.
{Cordillera Pirenaica, Pireneus, Pirineos, Pyrenaei
Montes, Pyre?ne?es, Pyrene, Pyrenees}
Figure 1: Example of a group obtained from GNS.
In addition, a set of the most common trigger
phrases in the domain has been obtained from the
GNS gazetteer (see Table 4).
Geographical Scope
Spain UK
TRIGGER de NE NE TRIGGER
Top-ranked TRIGGER NE TRIGGER NE
Trigger TRIGGER del NE TRIGGER of NE
Phrases TRIGGER de la NE TRIGGER a? NE
TRIGGER de las NE TRIGGER na NE
Table 4: Sample of the top-ranked trigger phrases
automatically obtained from GNS gazetteer for the
geography of Spain and UK.
5 Experiments
We have designed some experiments in order to
evaluate the accuracy of the GDQA system and
its subsystems (QP, PR, and AE). For PR, we
evaluated the web-based snippet retrieval using
Google with some variants of expansions, versus
our ODQA Passage Retrieval with the corpus of
the SW. Then, the passages (or snippets) retrieved
by the best PR approach were used by the two dif-
ferent Answer Extraction algorithms. The ODQA
Answer Extractor has been evaluated taking into
account the answers that have a supported con-
text in the set of passages (or snippets). Finally,
we evaluated the global results of the complete
QA process with the different Answer Extractors:
ODQA and Frequency-Based.
6 Results
This section evaluates the behavior of our GDQA
system over a test corpus of 62 questions and re-
ports the errors detected on the best run. We evalu-
ated the three main components of our system and
the global results.
? Question Processing. The Question Clas-
sification task has been manually evaluated.
This subsystem has an accuracy of 96.77%.
? Passage Retrieval. The evaluation of this
subsystem was performed using a set of cor-
rect answers (see Table 5). We computed the
answer accuracy: it takes into account the
number of questions that have a correct an-
swer in its set of passages.
Retrieval Accuracy at N passages/snippets
Mode N=10 N=20 N=50 N=100
Google 0.6612 0.6935 0.7903 0.8225
+TWJ 0.6612 0.6774 0.7419 0.7580
+TWJ+TWE 0.6612 0.6774 0.7419 0.7580
+CE 0.6612 0.6774 0.7741 0.8064
+QBE 0.8064 0.8387 0.9032 0.9354
+TWJ+QB+CE 0.7903 0.8064 0.8548 0.8870
Google+All 0.7903 0.8064 0.8548 0.8870
ODQA+Wiki 0.4354 0.4516 0.4677 0.5000
Table 5: Passage Retrieval results (refer to sec-
tion 3.4.2 for detailed information of the different
query expansion acronyms).
? Answer Extraction. The evaluation of
the ODQA Answer Extractor subsystem is
shown in Table 6. We evaluated the ac-
curacy taking into account the number of
correct and supported answers by the pas-
sages divided by the total number of ques-
tions that have a supported answer in its set
of passages. This evaluation has been done
using the results of the top-ranked retrieval
configuration over the development set: the
Google+TWJ+QB+CE configuration of the
snippet retriever.
Accuracy at N Snippets
N=10 N=20 N=50
0.2439 (10/41) 0.3255 (14/43) 0.3333 (16/48)
Table 6: Results of the ODQA Answer Extraction
subsystem (accuracy).
In Table 7 are shown the global results of the
two QA Answer Extractors used (ODQA and
Frequency-Based). The passages retrieved by the
Google+TWJ+QB+CE configuration of the snip-
pet retriever were used.
Accuracy
Num. Snippets ODQA Freq-based
10 0.1774 (11/62) 0.5645 (35/62)
20 0.2580 (16/62) 0.5967 (37/62)
50 0.3387 (21/62) 0.6290 (39/62)
Table 7: QA results over the test set.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
75
We analyzed the 23 questions that fail in our
best run. The analysis detected that 10 questions
had no answer in its set of passages. In 5 of these
questions it is due to have a non common ques-
tion or location. The other 5 questions have prob-
lems with ambiguous trigger words (e.g. capital)
that confuse the web-search engine. On the other
hand, 13 questions had the answer in its set of pas-
sages, but were incorrectly answered. The reasons
are mainly due to the lack of passages with the an-
swer (8), answer validation and spatial-reasoning
(3), multilabel Geographical NERC (1), and more
context in the snippets (1).
7 Evaluation and Conclusions
This paper summarizes our experiments adapting
an ODQA to the GD and its evaluation in Spanish
in the scope of the Spanish Geography. Out of 62
questions, our system provided the correct answer
to 39 questions in the experiment with the best re-
sults.
Our Passage Retrieval for ODQA offers less at-
tractive results when using the SW corpus. The
problem of using SW to extract the answers is that
it gives few documents with the correct answer,
and, it is difficult to extract the answer because
the documents contain tables, lists, ill-formed sen-
tences, etc. Our ODQA AE needs a grammati-
cally well-structured text to extract correctly the
answers. The QA system offers a low perfor-
mance (33% of accuracy) when using this AE over
the web-based retrieved passages. In some cases,
the snippets are cut and we could expect a better
performance retrieving the whole documents from
Google.
On the other hand, web-based snippet retrieval,
with only one query per question, gives good re-
sults in Passage Retrieval. The QA system with
the Frequency-Based AE obtained better results
than with the ODQA AE (62.9% of accuracy).
Finally, we conclude that our approach with
Geographical scope-based resources are notably
helpful to deal with multilingual Geographical
Domain Question Answering.
8 Future Work
As a future work we plan to improve the AE mod-
ule using a semantic analysis with extended con-
texts (i.e. more than one sentence) and adding
some spatial reasoning. We also want to improve
the retrieval by crawling relevant documents from
web search-engines instead of using snippets. This
could be a good method to find more sentences
with supported answers. Finally, we expect to do
tests with English in another scope.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially supported by the
European Commission (CHIL, IST-2004-506909)
and the Spanish Research Dept. (ALIADO,
TIC2002-04447-C02). Daniel Ferre?s is sup-
ported by a UPC-Recerca grant from Universitat
Polite`cnica de Catalunya (UPC). TALP Research
Center is recognized as a Quality Research Group
(2001 SGR 00254) by DURSI, the Research De-
partment of the Catalan Government.
References
F. Benamara. 2004. Cooperative Question Answering
in Restricted Domains: the WEBCOOP Experiment.
In Proceedings of the Workshop Question Answering
in Restricted Domains, within ACL-2004.
H. Chung, Y. Song, K. Han, D. Yoon, J. Lee, H. Rim,
and S. Kim. 2004. A Practical QA System in Re-
stricted Domains. In Proceedings of the Workshop
Question Answering in Restricted Domains, within
ACL-2004.
J. Diaz, A. Rubio, A. Peinado, E. Segarra, N. Prieto,
and F. Casacuberta. 1998. Development of Task-
Oriented Spanish Speech Corpora. In Procceed-
ings of the First International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pages 497?501,
Granada, Spain, May. ELDA.
D. Ferre?s, S. Kanaan, A. Ageno, E. Gonza?lez,
H. Rodr??guez, M. Surdeanu, and J. Turmo. 2004.
The TALP-QA System for Spanish at CLEF 2004:
Structural and Hierarchical Relaxing of Semantic
Constraints. In C. Peters, P. Clough, J. Gonzalo,
G. J. F. Jones, M. Kluck, and B. Magnini, editors,
CLEF, volume 3491 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 557?568. Springer.
D. Ferre?s, S. Kanaan, E. Gonza?lez, A. Ageno,
H. Rodr??guez, M. Surdeanu, and J. Turmo. 2005.
TALP-QA System at TREC 2004: Structural and
Hierarchical Relaxation Over Semantic Constraints.
In Proceedings of the Text Retrieval Conference
(TREC-2004).
C-Y. Lin and E. Hovy. 2000. The automated acquisi-
tion of topic signatures for text summarization. In
COLING, pages 495?501. Morgan Kaufmann.
D. Molla and J.L. Vicedo. 2005. AAAI-05 Work-
shop on Question Answering in Restricted Domains.
AAAI Press. to appear.
EACL 2006 Workshop on Multilingual Question Answering - MLQA06
76
