Proceedings of the Fourth International Natural Language Generation Conference, pages 133?135,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
Shared-task Evaluations in HLT: Lessons for NLG
Anja Belz
University of Brighton, UK
A.S.Belz@brighton.ac.uk
Adam Kilgarriff
Lexical Computing Ltd., UK
adam@lexmasterclass.com
1 Introduction
While natural language generation (NLG) has a
strong evaluation tradition, in particular in user-
based and task-oriented evaluation, it has never
evaluated different approaches and techniques by
comparing their performance on the same tasks
(shared-task evaluation, STE). NLG is charac-
terised by a lack of consolidation of results, and
by isolation from the rest of NLP where STE is
now standard. It is, moreover, a shrinking field
(state-of-the-art MT and summarisation no longer
perform generation as a subtask) which lacks the
kind of funding and participation that natural lan-
guage understanding (NLU) has attracted.
Evidence from other NLP fields shows that STE
campaigns (STECs) can lead to rapid technolog-
ical progress and substantially increased partici-
pation. The past year has seen a groundswell of
interest in comparative evaluation among NLG re-
searchers, the first comparative results are being
reported (Belz and Reiter, 2006), and the move to-
wards some form of comparative evaluation seems
inevitable. In this paper we look at how two
decades of NLP STECs might help us decide how
best to make this move.
2 Shared-task evaluation in HLT
Over the past twenty years, virtually every field
of research in human language technology (HLT)
has introduced STECs. A small selection is pre-
sented in the table below1. NLG researchers have
tended to be somewhat unconvinced of the benefits
of comparative evaluation in general, and the kind
of competitive, numbers-driven STECs that have
been typical of NLU in particular. Yet STECs do
not have to be hugely competitive events fixated
on one task with associated input/output data and
single evaluation metric, static over time.
Tasks: There is a distinction between (i) evalu-
ations designed to help potential users to decide
1Apologies for omissions, and for bias towards English.
whether the technology will be valuable to them,
and (ii) evaluations designed to help system devel-
opers improve the core technology (Spa?rck Jones
and Galliers, 1996). In the former, the applica-
tion context is a critical variable in the task defi-
nition; in the latter it is fixed. Developer-oriented
evaluation promotes focus on the task in isolation,
but if the context is fixed badly, or if the outside
world changes but the evaluation does not, then
it becomes irrelevant. NLP STECs have so far fo-
cused on developer-oriented evaluation, but there
are increasing calls for more ?embedded?, more
task-based types of evaluations2 .
Existing NLP STECs show that tasks need to be
broadly based and continuously evolving. To be-
gin with, the task needs to be simple, easy to un-
derstand and easy for people to recognise as their
task. Over time, as the limitations of the sim-
ple task are noted and a more substantial com-
munity is ?on board?, tasks can multiply, diversify
and become more sophisticated. This is something
that TREC has been good at (still going strong 14
years on), and the parsing community has failed to
achieve (see notes in table).
Evaluation: NLP STECs have tended to use au-
tomatic evaluations because of their speed and re-
producibility, but some have used human evalua-
tors, in particular in fields where language is gen-
erated (MT, summarisation, speech synthesis).
Evaluation scores are not independent of the
task and context for which they are calculated.
This is clearly true of human-based evaluation, but
even scores by a simple metric like word error
rate in speech recognition are not comparable un-
less certain parameters are the same: background-
noise, language, whether or not speech is con-
trolled. Development of evaluation methods and
benchmark tasks therefore must go hand in hand.
Evaluation methods have to be accepted by the
research community as providing a true approxi-
2A prominent theme at the 2005 ELRA/ELDA Workshop
on HLT Evaluation.
133
Name Start Domain Sponsors Notes
MUC 1987 Information extraction US Govt Rapidly came to define IE; ended 1998.
PARSEVAL 1991 Parsing ? Only ever defined a metric, no STEC1.
TREC 1992 Information retrieval US Govt Large and long-running, multiple tracks.
SEMEVAL 1994 Semantic interpretation US Govt No STEC emerged2.
NIST-MT 1994 Machine translation US Govt Revitalised since 2001 by BLEU3.
Morpholympics 1994 Morphological analysis GLDV German morphological analysis; one-off.
SENSEVAL 1998 Word sense disambiguation ACL-SIGLEX Validity of WSD task problematic.
SUMMAC 1998 Text summarization US Govt One-off.
CoNLL 1999 Various ACL-SIGNLL Focus on learning algorithms.
CLEF 2000 IR across languages EU Project
DUC 2001 Document summarization US Govt Defines field.
Morfolimpiadas 2003 Morphological analysis Portuguese Govt Portuguese language only.
SIGHAN 2003 Chinese tokenization ACL-SIGHAN Key benchmark.
Blizzard 2003 Speech synthesis Festvox project Building synthetic voice from given data.
HAREM 2005 Named-entity recognition Portuguese Govt Portuguese language only.
RTE 2005 Textual entailment EU Project
TC-STAR 2005 Speech-to-speech translation EU integrated project Black-box and glass-box evaluation4.
Notes
1. PARSEVAL is an evaluation measure, not a full STEC. This has proved problematic: the parsing community no longer
accepts the PARSEVAL measure, but there has been no organisational framework for establishing an alternative.
2. SEMEVAL did not proceed largely because it was too ambitious and agreement between people with different interests
and theoretical positions was not achieved. It was eventually reduced in scope and aspects became incorporated in MUC,
SUMMAC and SENSEVAL.
3. MT has been transformed by corpus methods, which have shifted MT from a backwater to perhaps the most vibrant area
of NLP in the last five years.
4. In TC-STAR, the SST task is broken down into numerous subtasks. The modules and systems that meet the given criteria
are exchanged among the participants, lowering the barrier to entry.
mation of quality. E.g. BLEU is strongly disliked
in the non-statistical part of the MT community be-
cause it is biased in favour of statistical MT sys-
tems. PARSEVAL stopped being used when the
parsing community moved towards dependency
parsing and related approaches.
Sharing: As PARSEVAL shows, measures and
resources alone are not enough. Also required are
(i) an event (or better, cycle of events) so people
can attend and feel part of a community; (ii) a fo-
rum for reviewing task definitions and evaluation
methods; (iii) a committee which ?owns? the STEC,
and organises the next campaign.
Funding is usually needed for gold-standard
corpus creation but rarely for anything else (Kil-
garriff, 2003). Participants can be expected to
cover the cost of system development and work-
shop attendance. A funded project is best seen as
supporting and enabling the STEC (especially dur-
ing the early stages) rather than being it.
In sum, STECs are good for community build-
ing. They produce energy (as we saw when the
possibility was raised for NLG at UCNLG?05 and
ENLG?05) which can lead to rapid scientific and
technological progress. They make the field look
like a game and draw people in.
3 Towards an NLG STEC
In 1981, Spa?rck Jones wrote that IR lacked con-
solidation and the ability to build new work on
old, and that this was substantially because there
was no commonly agreed framework for describ-
ing and evaluating systems (Spa?rck Jones, 1981,
p. 245). Since 1981, various NLP sub-disciplines
have consolidated results and progressed collec-
tively through STECs, and have seen successful
commercial deployment of NLP technology (e.g.
speech recognition software, document retrieval
and dialogue systems).
However, Spa?rck Jones?s 1981 analysis could
be said to still hold of NLG today. There has
been little consolidation of results or collective
progress, and there still is virtually no commercial
deployment of NLG systems or components.
We believe that comparative evaluation is key
if NLG is to consolidate and progress collectively.
Conforming to the evaluation paradigm now com-
mon to the rest of NLP will also help re-integration,
and open up the field to new researchers.
Tasks: In defining sharable tasks with associ-
ated data resources for NLG, the core problem is
deciding what inputs should look like. There is
a real risk that agreement cannot be achieved on
134
this, so not many groups participate, or the plan
never reaches fruition (as happened in SEMEVAL).
There are, however, ways in which this problem
can be circumvented. One is to use a more abstract
task specification describing system functionality,
so that participants can use their own inputs, and
systems are compared in task-based evaluations
similar to the traditions and standards of software
evaluation (as in Morpholympics). An alternative
is to approach the issue through tasks with inputs
and outputs that ?occur naturally?, so that partic-
ipants can use their own NLG-specific represen-
tations. Examples include data-to-text mappings
where e.g. time-series data or a data repository are
mapped to fault reports, forecasts, etc.
Both data-independent task definitions and
tasks with naturally occurring data have promise,
but we propose the second as the simpler, easier
to organise solution, at least initially. A specific
proposal of a set of tasks can be found elsewhere
in this volume (Reiter and Belz, 2006). An inter-
esting idea (recommended by ELRA/ELDA) is to
break down the input-output mapping into stages
(as in the TC-STAR workshops, see table) and then,
in a second round of evaluations, to make available
intermediate representations from the most suc-
cessful systems from the first round. In this way,
standardised representations might develop almost
as a side-effect of STECs.
Evaluation: As in MT there are at least two cri-
teria of quality for NLG systems: language quality
(fluency in MT) and correctness of content (ade-
quacy in MT). In NLG, these have mostly been
evaluated directly using human scores or prefer-
ence judgments, although recently automatic met-
rics such as BLEU have been used. They have also
been evaluated indirectly, e.g. by measuring read-
ing speeds and manual post-processing3 . A more
user-oriented type of evaluation has been to assess
real-world usefulness, in other words, whether the
generated texts achieve their purpose (e.g. whether
users learn more with NLG techniques than with
cheaper alternatives4).
The majority of NLP STECs have used automatic
evaluation methods, and the ability to produce re-
sults ?at the push of a button?, quickly and repro-
ducibly, is ideal in the context of STECs. However,
existing metrics are unlikely to be suitable for NLG
3E.g. in the SkillSum and SumTime projects at Aberdeen.
4E.g. evaluation of the NL interface of the DIAG intelligent
tutoring system, di Eugenio et al
(Belz and Reiter, 2006), and there is a lot of scepti-
cism among NLG researchers regarding automatic
evaluation. We believe that NLG should develop
its own automatic metrics (development of such
metrics is part of the proposal by Reiter and Belz,
this volume), but for the time being an NLG STEC
needs to involve human-based evaluations of the
intrinsic as well as extrinsic type.
Sharing: A recent survey conducted on the main
NLG and corpus-based NLP mailing lists5 revealed
that there are virtually no data resources that could
be directly used in shared tasks. Considerable in-
vestment has to go into developing such resources,
and direct funding is necessary. This points to a
funded project, but we recommend direct involve-
ment of the NLG community and SIGGEN. Other
aspects of organisation are not NLG-specific, so
the general recommendations in the preceding sec-
tion apply.
4 Conclusion
STECs have been remarkable stimulants to
progress in other areas of HLT, through their
community-building role, and through ?hot-
housing? solutions to specific problems. There are
also lessons to be learnt about STECs not being
overly ambitious, remaining responsive to devel-
opments in the broader field and wider world, and
having appropriate institutional standing. We be-
lieve that NLG can benefit greatly from the intro-
duction of shared tasks, provided that an inclusive
and flexible approach is taken which is informed
by the specific requirements of NLG.
References
A. Belz and E. Reiter. 2006. Comparing automatic
and human evaluation of NLG systems. In Proc.
EACL?06, pages 313?320.
A. Kilgarriff. 2003. No-bureaucracy evaluation. In
Proc. Workshop on Evaluation Initiatives in NLP,
EACL?03.
E. Reiter and A. Belz. 2006. GENEVAL: A pro-
posal for shared-task evaluation in NLG. In Proc.
INLG?06.
K. Spa?rck Jones and J. R. Galliers. 1996. Evaluating
Natural Language Processing Systems: An Analysis
and Review. Springer Verlag.
K. Spa?rck Jones, 1981. Information Retrieval Experi-
ment, chapter 12. Butterworth & Co.
5Belz, March 2006.
135
