Text Linkage in the Wiki Medium ? A Comparative Study
Alexander Mehler
Department of Computational Linguistics & Text Technology
Bielefeld University
Bielefeld, Germany
Alexander.Mehler@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
We analyze four different types of docu-
ment networks with respect to their small
world characteristics. These characteris-
tics allow distinguishing wiki-based sys-
tems from citation and more traditional
text-based networks augmented by hyper-
links. The study provides evidence that a
more appropriate network model is needed
which better reflects the specifics of wiki
systems. It puts emphasize on their topo-
logical differences as a result of wiki-
related linking compared to other text-
based networks.
1 Introduction
With the advent of web-based communication,
more and more corpora are accessible which man-
ifest complex networks based on intertextual rela-
tions. This includes the area of scientific commu-
nication (e.g. digital libraries as CiteSeer), press
communication (e.g. the New York Times which
links topically related articles), technical commu-
nication (e.g. the Apache Software Foundation?s
documentations of open source projects) and elec-
tronic encyclopedia (e.g. Wikipedia and its re-
leases in a multitude of languages). These are
sources of large corpora of web documents which
are connected by citation links (digital libraries),
content-based add-ons (online press communica-
tion) or hyperlinks to related lexicon articles (elec-
tronic encyclopedias).
Obviously, a corpus of such documents is more
than a set of textual units. There is structure for-
mation above the level of single documents which
can be described by means of graph theory and
network analysis (Newman, 2003). But what is
new about this kind of structure formation? Or do
we just have to face the kind of structuring which
is already known from other linguistic networks?
This paper focuses on the specifics of network-
ing in wiki-based systems. It tackles the following
questions: What structure do wiki-based text net-
works have? Can we expect a wiki-specific topol-
ogy compared to more traditional (e.g. citation)
networks? Or can we expect comparable results
when applying network analysis to these emerging
networks? In the following sections, these ques-
tions are approached by example of a language
specific release of the Wikipedia as well as by
wikis for technical documentation. That is, we
contribute to answering the question why wiki can
be seen as something new compared to other text
types from the point of view of networking.
In order to support this argumentation, section
(2) introduces those network coefficients which
are analyzed within the present comparative study.
As a preprocessing step, section (3) outlines a
webgenre model which in sections (4.1) and (4.2)
is used to represent and extract instances of four
types of document networks. This allows apply-
ing the coefficients of section (2) to these instances
(section 4.3) and narrowing down wiki-based net-
works (section 5). The final section concludes and
prospects future work.
2 Network Analysis
For the time being, the overall structure of com-
plex networks is investigated in terms of Small
Worlds (SW) (Newman, 2003). Since its inven-
tion by Milgram (1967), this notion awaited for-
malization as a measurable property of large com-
plex networks which allows distinguishing small
worlds from random graphs. Such a formalization
was introduced by Watts & Strogatz (1998) who
1
characterize small worlds by two properties: First,
other than in regular graphs, any randomly chosen
pair of nodes in a small world has, on average, a
considerably shorter geodesic distance.1 Second,
compared to random graphs, small worlds show a
considerably higher level of cluster formation.
In this framework, cluster formation is mea-
sured by means of the average fraction of the num-
ber O(vi) of triangles connected to vertex vi and
the number Y(vi) of triples centered on vi (Watts
and Strogatz, 1998):2
C2 = 1n
?
i
O(vi)
Y(vi) (1)
Alternatively, the cluster coefficient C1 com-
putes the fraction of the number of triangles in the
whole network and the number of its connected
vertex triples. Further, the mean geodesic distance
l of a network is the arithmetic mean of all shortest
paths of all pairs of vertices in the network. Watts
and Strogatz observe high cluster values and short
average geodesic distances in small worlds which
apparently combine cluster formation with short-
cuts as prerequisites of efficient information flow.
In the area of information networks, this property
has been demonstrated for the WWW (Adamic,
1999), but also for co-occurrence networks (Ferrer
i Cancho and Sole?, 2001) and semantic networks
(Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005).
In addition to the SW model of Watts & Stro-
gatz, link distributions were also examined in or-
der to characterize complex networks: Baraba?si &
Albert (1999) argue that the vertex connectivity of
social networks is distributed according to a scale-
free power-law. They recur to the observation ?
confirmed by many social-semiotic networks, but
not by instances of the random graph model of
Erdo?s & Re?nyi (Bolloba?s, 1985) ? that the num-
ber of links per vertex can be reliably predicted
by a power-law. Thus, the probability P (k) that a
randomly chosen vertex interacts with k other ver-
tices of the same network is approximately
P (k) ? k?? (2)
Successfully fitting a power law to the distrib-
ution of out degrees of vertices in complex net-
works indicates ?that most nodes will be relatively
1The geodesic distance of two vertices in a graph is the
length of the shortest path in-between.
2A triangle is a subgraph of three nodes linked to each
other. Note that all coefficients presented in the following
sections relate by default to undirected graphs.
poorly connected, while a select minority of hubs
will be very highly connected.? (Watts, 2003,
p.107). Thus, for a fixed number of links, the
smaller the ? value, the shallower the slope of the
curve in a log-log plot, the higher the number of
edges to which the most connected hub is incident.
A limit of this model is that it views the prob-
ability of linking a source node to a target node
to depend solely on the connectivity of the lat-
ter. In contrast to this, Newman (2003) proposes
a model in which this probability also depends on
the connectivity of the former. This is done in or-
der to account for social networks in which ver-
tices tend to be linked if they share certain proper-
ties (Newman and Park, 2003), a tendency which
is called assortative mixing. According to New-
man & Park (2003) it allows distinguishing social
networks from non-social (e.g. artificial and bio-
logical) ones even if they are uniformly attributed
as small worlds according to the model of Watts
& Strogatz (1998). Newman & Park (2003) ana-
lyze assortative mixing of vertex degrees, that is,
the correlation of the degrees of linked vertices.
They confirm that this correlation is positive in the
case of social, but negative in the case of techni-
cal networks (e.g. the Internet) which thus prove
disassortative mixing (of degrees).
Although these SW models were applied to cita-
tion networks, WWW graphs, semantic networks
and co-occurrence graphs, and thus to a variety
of linguistic networks, a comparative study which
focuses on wiki-based structure formation in com-
parison to other networks of textual units is miss-
ing so far. In this paper, we present such a study.
That is, we examine SW coefficients which allow
distinguishing wiki-based systems from more ?tra-
ditional? networks. In order to do that, a general-
ized web document model is needed to uniformly
represent the document networks to be compared.
In the following section, a webgenre model is out-
lined for this purpose.
3 A Webgenre Structure Model
Linguistic structures vary with the functions of the
discourses in which they are manifested (Biber,
1995; Karlgren and Cutting, 1994). In anal-
ogy to the weak contextual hypothesis (Miller and
Charles, 1991) one might state that structural dif-
ferences reflect functional ones as far as they are
confirmed by a significantly high number of tex-
tual units and thus are identifiable as recurrent pat-
2
terns. In this sense, we expect web documents
to be distinguishable by the functional structures
they manifest. More specifically, we agree with
the notion of webgenre (Yoshioka and Herman,
2000) according to which the functional structure
of web documents is determined by their member-
ship in genres (e.g. of conference websites, per-
sonal home pages or electronic encyclopedias).
Our hypothesis is that what is common to in-
stances of different webgenres is the existence of
an implicit logical document structure (LDS) ? in
analogy to textual units whose LDS is described
in terms of section, paragraph and sentence cate-
gories (Power et al, 2003). In the case of web doc-
uments we hypothesize that their LDS comprises
four levels:
? Document networks consist of documents
which serve possibly heterogenous functions
if necessary independently of each other. A
web document network is given, for example,
by the system of websites of a university.
? Web documents manifest ? typically in the
form of websites ? pragmatically closed acts
of web-based communication (e.g. confer-
ence organization or online presentation).
Each web document is seen to organize a sys-
tem of dependent subfunctions which in turn
are manifested by modules.
? Document modules are, ideally, functionally
homogeneous subunits of web documents
which manifest single, but dependent sub-
functions in the sense that their realization is
bound to the realization of other subfunctions
manifested by the same encompassing docu-
ment. Examples of such subfunctions are call
for papers, program presentation or confer-
ence venue organization as subfunctions of
the function of web-based conference orga-
nization.
? Finally, elementary building blocks (e.g. lists,
tables, sections) only occur as dependent
parts of document modules.
This enumeration does not imply a one-to-one
mapping between functionally demarcated mani-
fested units (e.g. modules) and manifesting (lay-
out) units (e.g. web pages). Obviously, the same
functional variety (e.g. of a personal academic
home page) which is mapped by a website of
dozens of interlinked pages may also be mani-
fested by a single page. The many-to-many re-
lation induced by this and related examples is de-
scribed in more detail in Mehler & Gleim (2005).
The central hypothesis of this paper is that genre
specific structure formation also concerns docu-
ment networks. That is, we expect them to vary
with respect to structural characteristics according
to the varying functions they meet. Thus, we do
not expect that different types of document net-
works (e.g. systems of genre specific websites vs.
wiki-based networks vs. online citation networks)
manifest homogeneous characteristics, but signif-
icant variations thereof. As we concentrate on co-
efficients which were originally introduced in the
context of small world analyses, we expect, more
concretely, that different network types vary ac-
cording to their fitting to or deviation from the
small world model. As we analyze only a couple
of networks, this observation is bound to the cor-
pus of networks considered in this study. It never-
theless hints at how to rethink network analysis in
the context of newly emerging network types as,
for example, Wikipedia.
In order to support this argumentation, the fol-
lowing section presents a model for representing
and extracting document networks. After that,
the SW characteristics of these networks are com-
puted and discussed.
4 Network Modeling and Analysis
4.1 Graph Modeling
In order to analyse the characteristics of docu-
ment networks, a format for uniformly represent-
ing their structure is needed. In this section, we
present generalized trees for this task. Generalized
trees are graphs with a kernel tree-like structure ?
henceforth called kernel hierarchy ? superimposed
by graph-forming edges as models of hyperlinks.
Figure (1) illustrates this graph model. It distin-
guishes three levels of structure formation:
1. According to the webgenre model of section
(3), L1-graphs map document networks and
thus corpora of interlinked (web) documents.
In section (4.3), four sources of such networks
are explored: wiki document networks, citation
networks, webgenre corpora and, for comparison
with a more traditional medium, networks of news-
paper articles.
3
Figure 1: The stratified model of network representation with kernel hierarchies of L2-graphs.
2. L2-graphs model the structure of web doc-
uments as constituents of a given network.
This structure is seen to be based on ker-
nel hierarchies superimposed, amongst oth-
ers, by up, down and across links (see fig. 1).
In the case of webgenre corpora, L2-graphs mo-
del websites. In the case of citation networks, they
map documents which consist of a scientific arti-
cle and add-ons in the form of citation links. Like-
wise, in the case of online newspapers, L2-graphs
model articles together with content-based hyper-
links. Finally, in the case of wikis, L2-graphs rep-
resent wiki documents each of which consists of a
wiki article together with a corresponding discus-
sion and editing page. According to the webgenre
model of section (3), L2-graphs model web docu-
ments which consist of nodes whose structuring is
finally described by L3-graphs:
3. L3-graphs model the structure of document
modules.
In the case of webgenre corpora, L3-graphs
map the DOM3-based structure of the web pages
of the websites involved. In the case of all other
networks distinguished above they represent the
logical structure of single text units (e.g. the sec-
tion and paragraph structuring of a lexicon, news-
paper or scientific article). Note that the tree-like
structure of a document module may be superim-
posed by hyperlinks, too, as illustrated in figure
(1) by the vertices m and n.
3I.e. Document Object Model.
The kernel hierarchy of an L2-graph is consti-
tuted by kernel links which are distinguished from
across, up, down and outside links (Amitay et
al., 2003; Eiron and McCurley, 2003; Mehler and
Gleim, 2005). These types can be distinguished as
follows:
? Kernel links associate dominating nodes with
their immediately dominated successor nodes
in terms of the kernel hierarchy.
? Down links associate nodes with one of their
(mediately) dominated successor nodes in
terms of the kernel hierarchy.
? Up links analogously associate nodes of the
kernel hierarchy with one of their (mediately
dominating) predecessor nodes.
? Across links associate nodes of the kernel hi-
erarchy none of which is an (im-)mediate pre-
decessor of the other in terms of the kernel
hierarchy.
? Extra (or outside) links associate nodes of the
kernel hierarchy with nodes of other docu-
ments.
Kernel hierarchies are exemplified by a confer-
ence website headed by a title and menu page re-
ferring to, for example, the corresponding call for
papers which in turn leads to pages on the different
conference sessions etc. so that finally a hierarchi-
cal structure evolves. In this example the kernel hi-
erarchy evidently reflects navigational constraints.
That is, the position of a page in the tree reflects
4
the probability to be navigated by a reader starting
from the root page and following kernel links only.
The kernel hierarchy of a wiki document is
spanned by an article page in conjunction with
the corresponding discussion (or talk), history and
edit this or view source pages which altogether
form a flatly structured tree. Likewise in the
case of citation networks as the CiteSeer system
(Lawrence et al, 1999), a document consists of
the various (e.g. PDF or PS) versions of the focal
article as well as of one or more web pages mani-
festing its citations by means of hyperlinks.
From the point of view of document network
analysis, L2-graphs and inter links (see fig. 1) are
most relevant as they span the corresponding net-
work mediated by documents (e.g. websites) and
modules (e.g. web pages). This allows specifying
which links of which type in which network are
examined in the present study:
? In the case of citation networks, citation links
are modeled as interlinks as they relate (sci-
entific) articles encapsulated by documents of
this network type. Citation networks are ex-
plored by example of the CiteSeer system:
We analyze a sample of more than 550,000
articles (see table 1) ? the basic population
covers up to 800,000 documents.
? In the case of newspaper article networks,
content-based links are explored as resources
of networking. This is done by example of
the 1997 volume of the German newspaper
Su?ddeutsche Zeitung (see table 1). That is,
firstly, nodes are given by articles where two
nodes are interlinked if the corresponding ar-
ticles contain see also links to each other.
In the online and ePaper issue of this news-
paper these links are manifested as hyper-
links. Secondly, articles are linked if they
appear on the same page of the same is-
sue so that they belong to the same thematic
field. By means of these criteria, a bipar-
tite network (Watts, 2003) is built in which
the top-mode is spanned by topic and page
units, whereas the bottom-mode consists of
text units. In such a network, two texts are in-
terlinked whenever they relate to at least one
common topic or appear on the same page of
the same issue.
? In the case of webgenres we explore a cor-
pus of 1,096 conference websites (see table
variable value
number of web sites 1,096
number of web pages 50,943
number of hyperlinks 303,278
maximum depth 23
maximum width 1,035
average size 46
average width 38
average height 2
Table 2: A corpus of conference and workshop
websites (counting unit: web pages).
1 and 2) henceforth called indogram cor-
pus.4 We analyze the out degrees of all web
pages of these websites and thus explore ker-
nel, up, down, across, inter and outside links
on the level of L2-graphs. This is done in
order to get a base line for our comparative
study, since WWW-based networks are well
known for their small world behavior. More
specifically, this relates to estimations of the
exponent ? of power laws fitted to their de-
gree distributions (Newman, 2003).
? These three networks are explored in or-
der to comparatively study networking in
Wikipedia which is analyzed by example of
its German release de.wikipedia.org
(see table 1). Because of the rich system of its
node and link types (see section 4.2) we ex-
plore three variants thereof. Further, in order
to get a more reliable picture of wiki-based
structure formation, we also analyze wikis in
the area of technical documentation. This
is done by example of three wikis on open
source projects of the Apache Software Foun-
dation (cf. wiki.apache.org).
In the following section, the extraction of Wiki-
pedia-based networks is explained in more detail.
4.2 Graph Extraction ? the Case of Wiki-
based Document Networks
In the following section we analyze the network
spanned by document modules of the German
Wikipedia and their inter links.5 This cannot sim-
ply be done by extracting all its article pages.
The reason is that Wikipedia documents consist
4See http://ariadne.coli.uni-bielefeld.
de/indogram/resources.html for the list of URLs
of the documents involved.
5We downloaded and extracted the XML release of
this wiki ? cf. http://download.wikimedia.org/
wikipedia/de/pages current.xml.bz2.
5
network network genre node |V | |E|
de.wikipedia.org electronic encyclopedia wiki unit
variant I (e.g. article or talk) 303,999 5,895,615
variant II 406,074 6,449,906
variant III 796,454 9,161,706
wiki.apache.org/jakarta online technical documentation wiki unit 916 21,835
wiki.apache.org/struts online technical documentation wiki unit 1,358 40,650
wiki.apache.org/ws online technical documentation wiki unit 1,042 23,871
citeseer.ist.psu.edu digital library open archive record 575,326 5,366,832
indogram conference websites genre web page 50,943 303,278
Su?ddeutsche Zeitung 1997 press communication newspaper article 87,944 2,179,544
Table 1: The document networks analyzed and the sizes |V | and |E| of their vertex and edge sets.
of modules (manifested by pages) of various types
which are likewise connected by links of differ-
ent types. Consequently, the choice of instances
of these types has to be carefully considered.
Table (3) lists the node types (and their fre-
quencies) as found in the wiki or additionally in-
troduced into the study in order to organize the
type system into a hierarchy. One heuristic for
extracting instances of node types relates to the
URL of the corresponding page. Category, por-
tal and media wiki pages, for example, contain the
prefix Kategorie, Portal and MediaWiki,
respectively, separated by a colon from its page
name suffix (as in http://de.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Kategorie:Musik).
Analogously, table (4) lists the edge types ei-
ther found within the wiki or additionally intro-
duced into the study. Of special interest are redi-
rect nodes and links which manifest transitive and,
thus, mediate links of content-based units. An arti-
cle node v may be linked, for example, with a redi-
rect node r which in turn redirects to an article w.
In this case, the document network contains two
edges (v, r), (r, w) which have to be resolved to a
single edge (v, w) if redirects are to be excluded in
accordance with what the MediaWiki system does
when processing them.
Based on these considerations, we compute net-
work characteristics of three extractions of the
German Wikipedia (see table 1): Variant I con-
sists of a graph whose vertex set contains all Ar-
ticle nodes and whose edge set is based on In-
terlinks and appropriately resolved Redirect links.
Variant II enlarges variant I by including other
content-related wiki units, i.e. ArticleTalk, Portal,
PortalTalk, and Disambiguation pages (multiply
typed nodes were excluded). Variant III consists
of a graph whose vertex set covers all vertices and
edges found in the extraction.
Type Frequency
Documents total 796,454
Article 303,999
RedirectNode 190,193
Talk 115,314
ArticleTalk 78,224
UserTalk 30,924
ImageTalk 2,379
WikipediaTalk 1,380
CategoryTalk 1,272
TemplateTalk 705
PortalTalk 339
MediaWikiTalk 64
HelpTalk 27
Image 97,402
User 32,150
Disambiguation 22,768
Category 21,999
Template 6,794
Wikipedia 3,435
MediaWiki 1,575
Portal 791
Help 34
Table 3: The system of node types and their fre-
quencies within the German Wikipedia.
4.3 Network Analysis
Based on the input networks described in the pre-
vious section we compute the SW coefficients de-
scribed in section (2). Average geodesic distan-
ces are computed by means of the Dijkstra algo-
rithm based on samples of 1,000 vertices of the
input networks (or the whole vertex set if it is of
minor cardinality). Power law fittings were com-
puted based on the model P (x) = ax?? + b. Note
that table (1) does not list the cardinalities of multi
sets of edges and, thus, does not count multiple
edges connecting the same pair of vertices within
the corresponding input network ? therefore, the
numbers in table (1) do not necessarily conform to
the counts of link types in table (4). Note further
that we compute, as usually done in SW analyses,
characteristics of undirected graphs. In the case of
wiki-based networks, this is justified by the possi-
bility to process back links in Media Wiki sys-
tems. In the case of the CiteSeer system this is
justified by the fact that it always displays citation
6
Type Frequency
Links total 17,814,539
Interlink 12,818,378
CategoryLink 1,415,295
Categorizes 704,092
CategorizedBy 704,092
CategoryAssociatesWith 7,111
TopicOfTalk 103,253
TalkOfTopic 88,095
HyponymOf 26,704
HyperonymOf 26,704
InterPortalAssociation 1,796
Broken 2,361,902
Outside 1,276,818
InterWiki 789,065
External 487,753
Intra 1,175,290
Kernel 1,153,928
Across 6,331
Up 6,121
Reflexive 5,433
Down 3,477
Redirect 182,151
Table 4: The system of link types and their fre-
quencies within the German Wikipedia.
and cited by links. Finally, in the case of the news-
paper article network, this is due to the fact that
it is based on a bipartite graph (see above). Note
that the indogram corpus consists of predomi-
nantly unrelated websites and thus does not allow
computing cluster and distance coefficients.
5 Discussion
The numerical results in table (5) are remarkable
as they allow identifying three types of networks:
? On the one hand, we observe the extreme
case of the Su?ddeutsche Zeitung, that
is, of the newspaper article network. It is the
only network which, at the same time, has
very high cluster values, short geodesic dis-
tances and a high degree of assortative mix-
ing. Thus, its values support the assertion that
it behaves as a small world in the sense of the
model of Watts & Strogatz. The only excep-
tion is the remarkably low ? value, where,
according to the model of Baraba?si & Al-
bert (1999), a higher value was expected.
? On the other hand, the CiteSeer sample is the
reverse case: It has very low values of C1 and
C2, tends to show neither assortative, nor dis-
assortative mixing, and at the same time has a
low ? value. The small cluster values can be
explained by the low probability with which
two authors cited by a focal article are related
by a citation relation on their own.6
6Although articles can be expected which cite, for exam-
? The third group is given by the wiki-based
networks: They tend to have higher C1 and
C2 values than the citation network does, but
also tend to show stochastic mixing and short
geodesic distances. The cluster values are
confirmed by the wikis of technical docu-
mentation (also w.r.t their numerical order).
Thus, these wikis tend to be small worlds ac-
cording to the model of Watts & Strogatz,
but also prove disassortative mixing ? compa-
rable to technical networks but in departure
from social networks. Consequently, they are
ranked in-between the citation and the news-
paper article network.
All these networks show rather short geodesic
distances. Thus, l seems to be inappropriate with
respect to distinguishing them in terms of SW
characteristics. Further, all these examples show
remarkably low values of the ? coefficient. In con-
trast to this, power laws as fitted in the analyses
reported by Newman (2003) tend to have much
higher exponents ? Newman reports on values
which range between 1.4 and 3.0. This result is
only realized by the indogram corpus of confer-
ence websites, thus, by a sample of WWW docu-
ments whose out degree distribution is fitted by a
power law with exponent ? = 2.562.
These findings support the view that compared
to WWW-based networks wiki systems behave
more like ?traditional? networks of textual units,
but are new in the sense that their topology nei-
ther approximates the one of citation networks nor
of content-based networks of newspaper articles.
In other words: As intertextual relations are genre
sensitive (e.g. citations in scientific communica-
tion vs. content-based relations in press commu-
nication vs. hyperlinks in online encyclopedias),
networks based on such relations seem to inherit
this genre sensitivity. That is, for varying genres
(e.g. of scientific, technical or press communica-
tion) differences in topological characteristics of
their instance networks are expected. The study
presents results in support of this view of the genre
sensitivity of text-based networks.
6 Conclusion
We presented a comparative study of document
networks based on small world characteristics.
ple, de Saussure and Chomsky, there certainly exist much less
citations of de Saussure in articles of Chomsky.
7
instance type ?d? l ? C1 C2 r
Wikipedia variant I undirected 19.39 3.247 0.4222 0.009840 0.223171 ?0.10
Wikipedia variant II undirected 15.88 3.554 0.5273 0.009555 0.186392 ?0.09
Wikipedia variant III undirected 11.50 4.004 0.7405 0.007169 0.138602 ?0.05
wiki.apache.org/jakarta undirected 23.84 4.488 0.2949 0.193325 0.539429 ?0.50
wiki.apache.org/struts undirected 29.93 4.530 0.2023 0.162044 0.402418 ?0.45
wiki.apache.org/ws undirected 22.91 4.541 0.1989 0.174974 0.485342 ?0.48
citeseer.ist.psu.edu undirected 9.33 4.607 0.9801 0.027743 0.067786 ?0.04
indogram directed 5.95 ??? 2.562 ??? ??? ???
Su?ddeutsche Zeitung undirected 24.78 4.245 0.1146 0.663973 0.683839 0.699
Table 5: Numerical values of SW-related coefficients of structure formation in complex networks: the
average number ?d? of edges per node, the mean geodesic distance l, the exponent ? of successfully fitted
power laws, the cluster values C1, C2 and the coefficient r of assortative mixing.
According to our findings, three classes of net-
works were distinguished. This classification sep-
arates wiki-based systems from more traditional
text networks but also from WWW-based web-
genres. Thus, the study provides evidence that
there exist genre specific characteristics of text-
based networks. This raises the question for mod-
els of network growth which better account for
these findings. Future work aims at elaborating
such a model.
References
Lada A. Adamic. 1999. The small world of web. In
Serge Abiteboul and Anne-Marie Vercoustre, edi-
tors, Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
Libraries, pages 443?452. Springer, Berlin.
Einat Amitay, David Carmel, Adam Darlow, Ronny
Lempel, and Aya Soffer. 2003. The connectivity
sonar: detecting site functionality by structural pat-
terns. In Proc. of the 14th ACM conference on Hy-
pertext and Hypermedia, pages 38?47.
Albert-La?szlo? Baraba?si and Re?ka Albert. 1999. Emer-
gence of scaling in random networks. Science,
286:509?512.
Douglas Biber. 1995. Dimensions of Register Varia-
tion: A Cross-Linguistic Comparison. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Be?la Bolloba?s. 1985. Random Graphs. Academic
Press, London.
Nadav Eiron and Kevin S. McCurley. 2003. Untan-
gling compound documents on the web. In Proceed-
ings of the 14th ACM conference on Hypertext and
Hypermedia, Nottingham, UK, pages 85?94.
Ramon Ferrer i Cancho and Ricard V. Sole?. 2001. The
small-world of human language. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sci-
ences, 268(1482):2261?2265, November.
Jussi Karlgren and Douglass Cutting. 1994. Recogniz-
ing text genres with simple metrics using discrimi-
nant analysis. In Proc. of COLING ?94, volume II,
pages 1071?1075, Kyoto, Japan.
Steve Lawrence, C. Lee Giles, and Kurt Bollacker.
1999. Digital libraries and Autonomous Citation In-
dexing. IEEE Computer, 32(6):67?71.
Alexander Mehler and Ru?diger Gleim. 2005. The net
for the graphs ? towards webgenre representation
for corpus linguistic studies. In Marco Baroni and
Silvia Bernardini, editors, WaCky! Working papers
on the Web as corpus. Gedit, Bologna, Italy.
Stanley Milgram. 1967. The small-world problem.
Psychology Today, 2:60?67.
George A. Miller and Walter G. Charles. 1991. Con-
textual correlates of semantic similarity. Language
and Cognitive Processes, 6(1):1?28.
Mark E. J. Newman and Juyong Park. 2003. Why so-
cial networks are different from other types of net-
works. Physical Review E, 68:036122.
Mark E. J. Newman. 2003. The structure and function
of complex networks. SIAM Review, 45:167?256.
Richard Power, Donia Scott, and Nadjet Bouayad-
Agha. 2003. Document structure. Computational
Linguistics, 29(2):211?260.
Mark Steyvers and Josh Tenenbaum. 2005. The
large-scale structure of semantic networks: Statisti-
cal analyses and a model of semantic growth. Cog-
nitive Science, 29(1):41?78.
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. 1998. Collec-
tive dynamics of ?small-world? networks. Nature,
393:440?442.
Duncan J. Watts. 2003. Six Degrees. The Science of a
Connected Age. Norton & Company, New York.
Takeshi Yoshioka and George Herman. 2000. Coordi-
nating information using genres. Technical report,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, August.
8
