Proceedings of the Workshop on How Can Computational Linguistics Improve Information Retrieval?, pages 25?32,
Sydney, July 2006. c?2006 Association for Computational Linguistics
How to Find Better Index Terms Through Citations
Anna Ritchie
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
ar283@cl.cam.ac.uk
Simone Teufel
University of Cambridge
Computer Laboratory
15 J J Thompson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FD, U.K.
sht25@cl.cam.ac.uk
Stephen Robertson
Microsoft Research Ltd
Roger Needham House
7 J J Thomson Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 0FB, U.K.
ser@microsoft.com
Abstract
We consider the question of how informa-
tion from the textual context of citations
in scientific papers could improve index-
ing of the cited papers. We first present ex-
amples which show that the context should
in principle provide better and new index
terms. We then discuss linguistic phenom-
ena around citations and which type of
processing would improve the automatic
determination of the right context. We
present a case study, studying the effect
of combining the existing index terms of
a paper with additional terms from papers
citing that paper in our corpus. Finally, we
discuss the need for experimentation for
the practical validation of our claim.
1 Introduction
Information Retrieval (IR) is an established field
and, today, the ?conventional? IR task is embodied
by web searching. IR is mostly term-based, re-
lying on the words within documents to describe
them and, thence, try to determine which docu-
ments are relevant to a given user query. There are
theoretically motivated and experimentally vali-
dated techniques that have become standard in the
field. An example is the Okapi model; a prob-
abilistic function for term weighting and docu-
ment ranking (Spa?rck Jones, Walker & Robertson
2000). IR techniques using such statistical mod-
els almost always outperform more linguistically
based ones. So, as statistical models are developed
and refined, it begs the question ?Can Computa-
tional Linguistics improve Information Retrieval??
Our particular research involves IR on scien-
tific papers. There are definite parallels between
the web and scientific literature, such as hyper-
links between webpages alongside citation links
between papers. However, there are also funda-
mental differences, like the greater variability of
webpages and the independent quality control of
academic texts through the peer review process.
The analogy between hyperlinks and citations it-
self is not perfect: whereas the number of hyper-
links varies greatly from webpage to webpage, the
number of citations in papers is more constrained,
due to the combination of strict page limits, the
need to cite to show awareness of other work and
the need to conserve space by including only the
most relevant citations. Thus, while some aspects
of web-based techniques will carry across to the
current research domain, others will probably not.
We are interested in investigating which lessons
learned from web IR can successfully be applied
to this slightly different domain.
2 Index Terms Through Link Structure
We aim to improve automatic indexing of scien-
tific papers by finding additional index terms out-
side of the documents themselves. In particular,
we believe that good index terms can be found by
following the link structure between documents.
2.1 Hyperlinks
There is a wealth of literature on exploiting link
structure between web documents for IR, includ-
ing the ?sharing? of index terms between hyper-
linked pages. Bharat & Mihaila (2001), for in-
stance, propagate title and header terms to the
pointed-to page, while Marchiori (1997) recur-
sively augments the textual content of a page with
all the text of the pages it points to.
Research has particularly concentrated on an-
chor text as a good place to find index terms, i.e.,
25
the text enclosed in the ?a? tags of the HTML
document. It is a well-documented problem that
webpages are often poorly self-descriptive (e.g.,
Brin & Page 1998, Kleinberg 1999). For in-
stance, www.google.com does not contain the
phrase search engine. Anchor text, on the other
hand, is often a higher-level description of the
pointed-to page. Davison (2000) provides a good
discussion of just how well anchor text does this
and provides experimental results to back this
claim. Thus, beginning with McBryan (1994),
there is a trend of propagating anchor text along
its hyperlink to associate it with the linked page,
as well as that in which it is found. Google, for
example, includes anchor text as index terms for
the linked page (Brin & Page 1998).
Extending beyond anchor text, Chakrabarti
et al (1998) look for topic terms in a window
of text around hyperlinks and weight that link ac-
cordingly, in the framework of a link structure al-
gorithm, HITS (Kleinberg 1999).
2.2 Citations
The anchor text phenomenon is also observed with
citations: they are introduced purposefully along-
side some descriptive reference to the cited doc-
ument. Thus, this text should contain good in-
dex terms for the cited document. In the fol-
lowing sections, we motivate the use of reference
terms as index terms for cited documents, firstly,
with some citation examples and, secondly, by dis-
cussing previous work.
Examples: Reference Terms as Index Terms
Figure 1 shows some citations that exemplify
why reference terms should be good index terms
for the cited document. (1) is an example of a ci-
tation with intuitively good index terms (those un-
derlined) for the cited paper around it; a searcher
looking for papers about a learning system, partic-
ularly one that uses theory renement and/or one
that learns non-recursive NP and VP structures
might be interested in the paper, as might those
searching for information about ALLiS.
The fact that an author has chosen those partic-
ular terms in referring to the paper means that they
reflect what that author feels is important about the
paper. It is reasonable, then, that other researchers
interested in the same things would find the cited
paper useful and could plausibly use such terms
as query terms. It is true that the cited paper may
well contain these terms, and they may even be
important, prominent terms, but this is not neces-
sarily the case. There are numerous situations in
which the terms in the document are not the best
indicators of what is important in it. Firstly, what
is important in a paper in terms of what it is known
and cited for is not always the same as what is
important in it in terms of subject matter or fo-
cus. Secondly, what are considered to be the im-
portant contributions of a paper may change over
time. Thirdly, the terminology used to describe the
important contributions may be different from that
used in the paper or may change over time.
(2) exemplifies this special case, where a paper
is referred to using terms that are not in the paper
itself: the cited paper is the standard reference for
the HITS algorithm yet the name HITS was only
attributed to the algorithm after the paper was writ-
ten and it doesn?t contain the term at all1.
The last two examples show how citing au-
thors can provide higher level descriptions of the
cited paper, e.g., good overview and comparison.
These meta-descriptors are less likely to appear
in the papers themselves as prominent terms yet,
again, could plausibly be used as query terms for
a searcher.
Reference Directed Indexing
These examples (and many more) suggest that
text used in reference to papers can provide use-
ful index terms, just as anchor text does for web-
pages. Bradshaw & Hammond (2002) even go so
far as to argue that reference is more valuable as
a source of index terms than the document?s own
content. Bradshaw?s theory is that, when citing,
authors describe a document in terms similar to a
searcher?s query for the information it contains.
However, there is no anchor text, per se, in pa-
pers, i.e., there are no HTML tags to delimit the
text associated with a citation, unlike in webpages.
The question is raised, therefore, of what is the
anchor text equivalent for formal citations. Brad-
shaw (2003) extracts NPs from a fixed window of
around one hundred words around the citation and
uses these as the basis of his Reference-Directed
Indexing (RDI).
Bradshaw evaluates RDI by, first, indexing doc-
uments provided by Citeseer (Lawrence, Bol-
lacker & Giles 1999). A set of 32 queries was cre-
ated by randomly selecting keyword phrases from
1There is a poetic irony in this: Kleinberg?s paper notes
the analagous problem of poorly self-descriptive webpages.
26
(1) ALLiS (Architecture for Learning Linguistic Structures) is a learning system which uses
theory renement in order to learn non-recursive NP and VP structures (Dejean, 2000).
(2) Such estimation is simplied from HITS algorithm (Kleinberg, 1998).
(3) As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak et al, 1993) give
good overviews of the techniques and equations used for Markov models and part-of-speech tagging,
but they are not very explicit in the details that are needed for their application.
(4) For a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999).
Figure 1: Citations Motivating Reference Index Terms
24 documents in the collection with an author-
written keywords section. Document relevance
was determined by judging whether it addressed
the same topic as the topic in the query source
paper that is identified by the query keywords.
Thus, the performance of RDI was compared to
that of a standard vector-space model implementa-
tion (TF*IDF term weighting and cosine similarity
retrieval), with RDI achieving better precision at
top 10 documents (0.484 compared to 0.318, sta-
tistically significant at 99.5% confidence).
Citing Statements
In a considerably earlier study, closer to our
own project, O?Connor (1982) motivated the use
of words from citing statements as additional
terms to augment an existing document represen-
tation. Though O?Connor did not have machine-
readable documents, procedures for ?automatic?
recognition of citing statements were developed
and manually carried out on a collection of chem-
istry journal articles.
Proceeding from the sentence in which a ci-
tation is found, a set of hand-crafted, mostly
sentence-based rules were applied to select the
parts of the citing paper that conveyed informa-
tion about the cited paper. For instance, the citing
sentence, S, was always selected. If S contained a
connector (a keyword, e.g., this, similarly, former)
in its first twelve words, its predecessor, S?1, wasalso selected etc. The majority of rules selected
sentences from the text; others selected titles and
words from tables, figures and captions.
The selected statements (minus stop words)
were added to an existing representation for the
cited documents, comprising human index terms
and title and abstract terms, and a small-scale re-
trieval experiment was performed. A 20% in-
crease in recall was found using the citing state-
ments in addition to the existing index terms,
though in a follow-up study on biomedical papers,
the increase was only 4%2 (O?Connor 1983).
O?Connor concludes that citing statements can
aid retrieval but notes the inherent difficulty in
identifying them. Some of the selection rules were
only semi-automatic (e.g., required human identi-
fication of an article as a review) and most relied
on knowledge of sentence boundaries, which is a
non-trivial problem in itself. In all sentence-based
cases, sentences were either selected in their en-
tirety or not at all and O?Connor notes this as a
source of falsely assigned terms.
3 Complex Citation Contexts
There is evidence, therefore, that good index terms
for scholarly documents can be found in the doc-
uments that cite them. Identifying which terms
around a citation really refer to it, however, is non-
trivial. In this section, we discuss some exam-
ples of citations where this is the case and propose
potential ways in which computational linguistics
techniques may be useful in more accurately lo-
cating those reference terms. We take as our theo-
retical baseline all terms in a fixed window around
a citation.
3.1 Examples: Finding Reference Terms
The first two examples in Figure 2 illustrate how
the amount of text that refers to a citation can vary.
Sometimes, only two or three terms will refer to a
citation, as is often the case in enumerations such
as (5). On the other hand, (6) shows a citation
where much of the following section refers to the
cited work. When a paper is heavily based on pre-
vious work, for example, extensive text may be af-
forded to describing that work in detail. Thus, this
context could contribute dozens of legitimate in-
dex terms. A fixed size window around a citation
2O?Connor attributes this to a lower average number of
citing papers in the biomedical domain.
27
(5) Similar advances have been made in machine translation (Frederking and Nirenburg, 1994),
speech recognition (Fiscus, 1997) and named entity recognition (Borthwick et al, 1998).
(6) Brown et al (1993) proposed a series of statistical models of the translation process.
IBM translation models try to model the translation probability ... which describes the relationship
between a source language sentence ... and a target language sentence ... . In
statistical alignment models ... a ?hidden? alignment ... is introduced, which describes a mapping
from a target position ... to a source position ... . The relationship between the translation model
and the alignment model is given by: ...
(7) The results of disambiguation strategies reported for pseudo-words and the like are consistently
above 95% overall accuracy, far higher than those reported for
disambiguating three or more senses of polysemous words (Wilks et al 1993; Leacock, Towell,
and Voorhees 1993).
(8) This paper concentrates on the use of zero, pronominal, and nominal anaphora in Chinese
generated text. We are not concerned with lexical anaphora (Tutin and Kittredge 1992) where the
anaphor and its antecedent share meaning components, while the anaphor belongs to an open
lexical class.
(9) Previous work on the generation of referring expressions focused on
producing minimal distinguishing descriptions (Dale and Haddock 1991; Dale 1992; Reiter and
Dale 1992) or descriptions customized for different levels of hearers (Reiter 1990). Since we are
not concerned with the generation of descriptions for different levels of users, we look only at the
former group of work, which aims at generating descriptions for a subsequent reference to
distinguish it from the set of entities with which it might be confused.
(10) Ferro et al (1999) and Buchholz et al (1999) both describe learning systems to nd GRs. The
former (TR) uses transformation-based error-driven learning (Brill and Resnik, 1994) and the
latter (MB) uses memory-based learning (Daelemans et al, 1999).
Figure 2: Citations Motivating Computational Linguistics
would not capture all the terms referring to it and
only those.
In list examples such as (5), where multiple ci-
tations are in close proximity, almost any window
size would result in overlapping windows and in
terms being attributed to the wrong citation(s), as
well as the right one. In such examples, the pres-
ence of other citations indicates a change in refer-
ence term ?ownership?. The same is often true of
sentence boundaries, as they often signal a change
in topic. Citations frequently occur at the start of
sentences, as in (6), where a different approach is
introduced. Similarly, a citation at the end of a
sentence, as in (7), often indicates the completion
of the current topic. In both cases, the sentence
boundary (c.f. topic change) is also the boundary
of the reference text. The same arguments increas-
ingly apply to paragraph and section boundaries.
(8) is another example where the reference text
does not extend beyond the citation sentence,
though the citation is not at a sentence boundary.
Instead, the topic contrast is indicated by a linguic-
tic cue, i.e., the negation in We are not. This il-
lustrates another phenomenon of citations: in con-
trasting their work with others?, researchers often
explicitly state what their paper is not about. Intu-
itively, not only are these terms better descriptors
of the cited rather than citing paper, they might
even raise the question of whether one should go
as far as excluding selected terms during index-
ing of the citing paper. We are not advocating this
here, though, and note that, in practice, such terms
would not have much impact on the document: we
would expect them to have low term frequencies
in comparison to the important terms in that doc-
ument and in comparison to their frequencies in
other documents where they are important.
(9) is another example of this negation effect
(We are not concerned with...). Along with (10),
it also shows how complex the mapping between
reference terms and citations can be. Firstly, ref-
erence terms may belong to more than one cita-
28
tion. For instance, in (10), describe learning sys-
tems to nd GRs refers to both Ferro et al (1999)
and Buchholz et al (1999). Here, the presence of
a second citation does not end the domain of the
first?s reference text, indicated by the use of both
and the conjunction between the citations. Simi-
larly, transformation-based error-driven learning
also refers to two citations but, in this case, they
are on opposite sides of the reference text, i.e.,
Ferro et al (1999) and (Brill and Resnik, 1994).
Moreover, there is an intervening citation that it
does not refer to, i.e., Buchholz et al (1999). The
same is true of memory-based learning.
4 Case Study
In this section, we study the effect of adding ci-
tation index terms to one document: The Mathe-
matics of Statistical Machine Translation: Param-
eter Estimation from the Computational Linguis-
tics journal3 . Our experimental setting is a corpus
of ?9000 papers in the ACL Anthology4 , a digital
archive of computational linguistics research pa-
pers. We found 24 citations to the paper in 10 other
Anthology papers (that we knew to have citations
to this paper through an unrelated study). As a
simulation of ideal processing, we then manually
extracted the terms from those around those cita-
tions that specifically referred to the paper, hence-
forth ideal reference terms. Next, we extracted
all terms from a fixed window of ?50 terms on
either side (equivalent to Bradshaw (2003)?s win-
dow size), henceforth xed reference terms. Fi-
nally, we calculated various term statistics, includ-
ing IDF values across the corpus. All terms were
decapitalized. We now attempt to draw a ?term
profile? of the document, both before and after
those reference terms are added to the document,
and discuss the implications for IR.
4.1 Index Term Analysis
Table 1 gives the top twenty ideal reference terms
ranked by their TF*IDF values in the original doc-
ument. Note that we observe the effects on the
relative rankings of the ideal reference terms only,
since it is these hand-picked terms that we con-
sider to be important descriptors for the document
and whose statistics will be most affected by the
inclusion of reference terms. To give an indication
of their importance relative to other terms in the
3http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/J93-2003.pdf
4http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
Rank
Ideal Doc TF*IDF Term
1 1 351.73 french
2 2 246.52 alignments
3 3 238.39 fertility
4 4 212.20 alignment
5 5 203.28 cept
6 8 158.45 probabilities
7 9 150.74 translation
8 12 106.11 model
9 17 79.47 probability
10 18 78.37 models
11 19 78.02 english
12 21 76.23 parameters
13 24 71.77 connected
14 28 62.48 words
15 32 57.57 em
13 35 54.88 iterations
14 45 45.00 statistical
15 54 38.25 training
16 69 32.93 word
17 74 31.31 pairs
18 81 29.29 machine
19 83 28.53 empty
20 130 19.72 series
Table 1: Ideal Reference Term Ranking by
TF*IDF
document, however, the second column in Table 1
gives the absolute rankings of these terms in the
original document. These numbers confirm that
our ideal reference terms are, in fact, relatively im-
portant in the document; indeed, the top five terms
in the document are all ideal reference terms. Fur-
ther down the ranking, the ideal reference terms
become more ?diluted? with terms not picked from
our 24 citations. An inspection revealed that many
of these terms were French words from example
translations, since the paper deals with machine
translation between English and French. Thus,
they were bad index terms, for our purposes.
Hence, we observed the effect of adding, first,
the ideal reference terms then, separately, the fixed
reference terms to the document, summarized in
Tables 2 to 5. Tables 2 and 3 show the terms with
the largest differences in positions as a result of
adding the ideal and fixed reference terms respec-
tively.
For instance, ibm?s TF*IDF value more than
doubled. The term ibm appears only six times in
the document (and not even from the main text
but from authors? institutions and one bibliogra-
phy item) yet one of its major contributions is
the machine translation models it introduced, now
standardly referred to as ?the IBM models?. Con-
29
TF*IDF Ideal
Term ? Doc+ideal Rank ?
ibm 24.24 37.46 28? 20
generative 4.44 11.10 38? 33
source 5.35 6.42 65? 44
decoders 6.41 6.41 ? 45
corruption 6.02 6.02 ? 46
expectation 2.97 5.94 51? 47
relationship 2.96 5.92 52? 48
story 2.94 5.88 53? 49
noisy-channel 5.75 5.75 ?52
extract 1.51 7.54 41? 38
Table 2: Term Ranking Changes (Ideal)
TF*IDF Ideal
Term ? Doc+fixed Rank ?
ibm 48.48 61.70 28? 18
target 19.64 19.64 ? 26
source 14.99 16.06 65? 32
phrase-based 14.77 14.77 ? 36
trained 14.64 19.52 43? 27
approaches 11.03 11.03 ? 41
parallel 9.72 17.81 34? 29
generative 8.88 15.54 38? 33
train 8.21 8.21 ? 45
channel 6.94 6.94 ? 55
expectation 5.93 8.90 51? 44
learn 5.93 7.77 60? 47
Table 3: Term Ranking Changes (Fixed)
sequently, ?IBM? was contained in many citation
contexts in citing papers, leading to an ideal ref-
erence term frequency of 11 for ibm. As a result,
ibm is boosted eight places to rank 20. This exem-
plifies how reference terms can better describe a
document, in terms of what searchers might plau-
sibly look for (c.f. Example 2).
There were twenty terms that do not occur
in the document itself but are nevertheless used
by citing authors to describe it, shown in Ta-
bles 4 and 5. Many of these have high IDF val-
ues, indicating their distinctiveness in the corpus,
e.g., decoders (6.41), corruption (6.02) and noisy-
channel (5.75). This, combined with the fact that
citing authors use these terms in describing the
paper, means that these terms are intuitively high
quality descriptors of the paper. Without the refer-
ence index terms, however, the paper would score
zero for these terms as query terms.
Many more fixed reference terms were found
per citation than ideal ones. This can introduce
noise. In general, the TF*IDF values of ideal ref-
erence terms can only be further boosted by in-
cluding more terms and a comparison of Tables 2
Term TF*IDF
decoders 6.41
corruption 6.02
noisy-channel 5.75
attainable 5.45
target 5.24
source-language 4.99
phrase-based 4.92
target-language 4.82
application-specific 4.40
train 4.10
intermediate 4.01
channel 3.47
approaches 3.01
combinations 1.70
style 2.12
add 1.32
major 1.16
due 0.83
considered 0.81
developed 0.78
Table 4: New Non-zero TF*IDF Terms (Ideal)
with 3 (or 4 with 5) shows that this is sometimes
the case, e.g, ibm occurred a further eleven times
in the fixed reference terms, doubling its increase
in TF*IDF. However, instances of those terms that
only occurred in the fixed reference terms did not,
in fact, refer to the citation of the paper, by defi-
nition of the ideal reference terms. For instance,
one such extra occurrence of ibm is from a sen-
tence following the citation that describes the ex-
act model used in the current work:
(11) According to the IBM models (Brown et al,
1993), the statistical word alignment model
can be generally represented as in Equation
(1) ... In this paper, we use a simplied IBM
model 4 (Al-Onaizan et al, 1999), which ...
Here, the second occurrence refers to (Al-
Onaizan et al, 1999) but, by its proximity to the
citation to our example paper (Brown et al, 1993),
is picked up by the fixed window. Since the term
was arguably not directly intended to describe our
paper, then, a different term might equally have
been used; one that was inappropriate as an in-
dex term. Table 6 lists the fixed reference terms
that were not also in the ideal reference terms; al-
most 400 in total. The vast majority of these occur
very infrequently which suggests that they should
not greatly affect the term profile of the document.
However, the argument for adding good, high IDF
reference terms that are not in the document itself
30
Term TF*IDF
target 19.64
phrase-based 14.77
approaches 11.03
train 8.21
channel 6.94
decoders 6.41
corruption 6.02
noisy-channel 5.75
attainable 5.45
source-language 4.99
target-language 4.82
application-specific 4.40
intermediate 4.01
combinations 3.40
style 2.12
considered 1.62
major 1.16
due 0.83
developed 0.78
Table 5: New Non-zero TF*IDF Terms (Fixed)
conversely applies to adding bad ones: an ?incor-
rect? reference term added to the document will
have its TF*IDF pushed off the zero mark, giving
it the potential to score against inappropriate query
terms. If such a term is distinctive (i.e., has a high
IDF), the effect may be significant. The term giza,
for example, has an IDF of 6.34 and is the name
of a particular tool that is not mentioned in our
example paper. However, since the tool is used
to train IBM models, the two papers in the exam-
ple above are often cited by the same papers and
in close proximity. This increases the chances of
such terms being picked up as reference terms for
the wrong citation by a fixed window, heightening
the adverse effect on its term profile.
5 Discussion and Conclusions
It is not too hard to find examples of citations that
show a fixed window size is suboptimal for finding
terms used in reference to cited papers. In extract-
ing the ideal reference terms from only 24 cita-
tions for our case study, we saw just how difficult
it is to decide which terms refer to which citations.
We, the authors, came across examples where it
was ambiguous how many citations certain terms
referred to, ones where knowledge of the cited pa-
pers was required to interpret the scope of the cita-
tion and ones where we simply did not agree. This
is a highly complex indexing task; one which hu-
mans have difficulty with, one for which we expect
low human agreement and, therefore, the type that
computational linguistics struggles to achieve high
performance on. We agree with O?Connor (1982)
that it is hard. We make no claims that computa-
tional linguistics will provide a full solution.
Nevertheless, our examples suggest that even
simple computational linguistics techniques
should help to more accurately locate reference
terms. While it may be impossible to automati-
cally pick out each specific piece of text that does
refer to a given citation, there is much scope for
improvement over a fixed window. The examples
in Section 2 suggest that altering the size of the
window that is applied would be a good first step.
Some form of text segmentation, whether it be
full-blown discourse analysis or simple sentence
boundary detection, may be useful in determining
where the extent of the reference text is.
While the case study presented here highlights
several interesting effects of using terms from
around citations as additional index terms for the
cited paper, it cannot answer questions about how
successful a practical method based on these ob-
servations would be, over a using simple fixed
window, for example. In order for any real im-
provement in IR, the term profile of a document
would have to be significantly altered by the refer-
ence terms. Enough terms, in particular repeated
terms, would have to be successfully found via ci-
tations for such a quantitative improvement. It is
not clear that computational linguistic techniques
will improve over the statistical effects of redun-
dant data.
We are thus in the last stages of setting up a
larger experiment that will shed more light on this
question. The experimental setup requires data
where there are a significant number of citations
to a number of test documents and a significant
number of reference set terms. We have recently
presented a test collection of scientific research pa-
pers (Ritchie, Teufel & Robertson 2006), which
we intend to use for this experiment.
References
Bharat, K. & Mihaila, G. A. (2001), When experts agree:using non-affiliated experts to rank popular topics, in?Tenth International World Wide Web Conference?,
pp. 597?602.
Bradshaw, S. (2003), Reference directed indexing: Re-
deeming relevance for subject search in citation in-dexes., in ?ECDL?, pp. 499?510.
Bradshaw, S. & Hammond, K. (2002), Automatically in-
dexing documents: Content vs. reference, in ?Intel-ligent User Interfaces?.
31
TF # Terms Terms
13 1 asr
8 4 caption, closed, section, methods
7 2 method, sentences
6 4 describes, example, languages, system
5 6 corpus, dictionary, heuristic, large, paper, results
4 17 account, aligned, confidence, dependency, details, during, equation, generally, given, manual, measures,
order, probabilistic, proposed, shown, simplified, systems, word-aligned
3 29 according, algorithm, applications, build, case, choosing, chunk, current, described, employed, equiv-
alence, experiments, introduced, introduction, length, links, number, obtain, obtained, performance,
performing, problem, produced, related, show, sum, true, types, work
2 64 adaptation, akin, approximate, bitext, calculated, called, categories, certain, chunks, common, consider,
consists, domain-specific, error, estimation, experimental, extracted, families, feature, features, found,
functions, generated, generic, giza, good, high, improve, information, input, iraq, knowledge, large-
scale, lexicon, linked, log-linear, maximum, measure, notion, omitted, original, output, parameter, pick,
position, practice, presents, quality, rate, represented, researchers, rock, role, sinhalese, takes, tamil,
text-to-text, toolkit, transcripts, transcriptions, translations, version, word-based, word-to-word
1 252 access, accuracy, achieve, achieving, actual, addition, address, adopted, advance, advantages, align-
ing, amalgam, annotated, applied, apply, applying, approximated, association, asymmetric, augmented,
availability, available, average, back-off, base, baum-welch, begin, bitexts, bunetsu, candidate, can-
didates, cat, central, chinese, choose, chunk-based, class, closely, collecting, combination, compare,
compared, compares, computed, concludes, consequently, contributed, convention, corpora, correspon-
dence, corrupts, cost, counts, coverage, crucial, currently, decades, decoding, defines, denote, dependent,
depending, determine, dictionaries, direct, directions, disadvantages, distinction, dominated, dynamic,
efforts, english-chinese, english-spanish, enumerate, eojeol, eq, equations, errors, evaluation, excellent,
expansion, explicitly, extracts, failed, fairly, final, finally, fit, flat-start, followed, form, formalisms, for-
mulation, generation, gis, give, grouped, hallucination, halogen, handle, heuristic-based, hidden, highly,
hill-climbing, hmm-based, hypothesis, ideal, identified, identify, identity, immediate, implemented, im-
proved, improves, incorporate, increase, influence, initial, initialize, inspired, interchanging, introduces,
investigations, involve, kate, kind, learning, learns, letter, letters, lexical, likelihood, link, list, longer,
lowercase, main, make, makes, mapping, maximal, maximizes, means, modeling, modified, names,
needed, nitrogen, nodes, occupy, omitting, optimal, outperform, overcome, parse, parser, part, part-of-
speech, path, performed, play, plays, popular, pos, positions, power, precision, probable, produce, pro-
gramming, promising, real-valued, reason, recall, recent, recently, recognition, recursion, recursively, re-
duction, reductions, refine, relative, relying, renormalization, representation, require, requires, research,
restricting, reveal, sample, sampling, satisfactory, segments, semantic, sequences, setting, shortcom-
ings, showed, significant, significantly, similarity, similarly, simple, simplicity, situation, space, speech,
spelling, state-of-the-art, step, strategies, string, strong, studies, summaries, summarization, supervised,
syntactic, tags, task-specific, technique, techniques, technologies, terms, testing, threshold, translation-
related, transliteration, tree, trees, trellis, type, underlying, unrealistic, unsupervised, uppercase, value,
viterbi, wanted, ways, well-formedness, well-founded, widely, widespread, works, written, wtop, yas-
met, years, yields
Table 6: Term Frequencies of ?Noisy? Reference Index Terms
Brin, S. & Page, L. (1998), ?The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual Web search engine?, ComputerNetworks and ISDN Systems 30(1?7), 107?117.
Chakrabarti, S., Dom, B., Gibson, D., Kleinberg, J.,Raghavan, P. & Rajagopalan, S. (1998), Automaticresource list compilation by analyzing hyperlink
structure and associated text, in ?Seventh Interna-tional World Wide Web Conference?.
Davison, B. D. (2000), Topical locality in the web,in ?Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval (SIGIR)?, pp. 272?279.
Kleinberg, J. M. (1999), ?Authoritative sources in ahyperlinked environment?, Journal of the ACM46(5), 604?632.
Lawrence, S., Bollacker, K. & Giles, C. L. (1999), In-
dexing and retrieval of scientific literature, in ?Con-ference on Information and Knowledge Manage-ment (CIKM)?, pp. 139?146.
Marchiori, M. (1997), ?The quest for correct informa-
tion on the Web: Hyper search engines?, ComputerNetworks and ISDN Systems 29(8?13), 1225?1236.
McBryan, O. (1994), GENVL and WWWW: Tools for
taming the web, in ?First International World WideWeb Conference?.
O?Connor, J. (1982), ?Citing statements: Computerrecognition and use to improve retrieval?, Informa-tion Processing and Management 18(3), 125?131.
O?Connor, J. (1983), ?Biomedical citing statements:Computer recognition and use to aid full-text re-
trieval?, Information Processing and Management19, 361?368.
Ritchie, A., Teufel, S. & Robertson, S. (2006), Creatinga test collection for citation-based IR experiments,in ?HLT-NAACL?.
Spa?rck Jones, K., Walker, S. & Robertson, S. E. (2000),?A probabilistic model of information retrieval: de-
velopment and comparative experiments - parts 1& 2.?, Information Processing and Management36(6), 779?840.
32
