Representing and Accessing Multilevel Linguistic Annotation using 
the MEANING Format  
 
 
Emanuele Pianta 
ITC-irst 
38050, Povo 
Trento, Italy 
pianta@itc.it 
Luisa Bentivogli 
ITC-irst 
38050, Povo 
Trento, Italy 
bentivo@itc.it 
Christian Girardi 
ITC-irst 
38050, Povo 
Trento, Italy 
cgirardi@itc.it 
Bernardo Magnini 
ITC-irst 
38050, Povo 
Trento, Italy 
magnini@itc.it 
 
  
 
Abstract 
We present an XML annotation format 
(MEANING Annotation Format, MAF) 
specifically designed to represent and in-
tegrate different levels of linguistic anno-
tations and a tool that provides flexible 
access to them (MEANING Browser). 
We describe our experience in integrating 
linguistic annotations coming from dif-
ferent sources, and the solutions we 
adopted to implement efficient access to 
corpora annotated with the Meaning 
Format. 
1 Introduction 
It is well known that when using XML-based 
annotation schemes to represent multi layer an-
notations, it can be difficult to handle partially 
overlapping annotations. Annotating discontinu-
ous elements may be considered as a variant of 
the same problem (Pianta and Bentivogli, 2004). 
Other difficulties can arise from the necessity of 
integrating manual and automatic annotations, as 
we will show in this paper. 
One of the most effective solutions to the 
above mentioned problems is the so called stand-
off annotation, based on the separation between 
textual data and annotations, and between vari-
ous types of annotation, possibly pointing to 
same text. This approach has been systematically 
adopted in the design of MAF, a multilayer XML 
format developed for the EU-funded MEANING 
project, in the context of the creation of the Ital-
ian MEANING Corpus (Bentivogli et al, 2003).  
In this paper we will describe our experience 
in the use of MAF, with special emphasis on how 
we solved issues related to representing annota-
tion levels which come from different sources, 
and can possibly overlap. We will also give de-
tails about the solutions we adopted to allow for 
efficient access and human browsing of MAF 
standoff annotations. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes MAF and the types of anno-
tations which have been represented with it. Sec-
tion 3 reports on the integration into MAF of lin-
guistic annotations coming from different 
sources. Section 4 illustrates the strategies 
adopted to make the information encoded in 
MAF quickly accessible. Finally, Section 5 pre-
sents the MEANING Browser, a tool for access-
ing and navigating corpora linguistically anno-
tated with MAF. 
2 The MEANING Format 
Following the proposals for the ISO/TC 37/SC 4 
standard for linguistic resources (Ide and 
Romary, 2002), the MAF scheme is based on 
annotation structures and data categories. Each 
type of annotation structure (nestable <struct> 
elements) corresponds to a specific kind of lin-
guistic object (e.g. tokens, lexical units, multi-
words), and each instance of a linguistic object is 
identified by a unique identifier. Data categories 
(<feat> tags) represent attributes of the linguistic 
objects. Different representation levels are con-
tained in separate documents, or document sec-
tions. The XLink and XPointer syntax is used to 
represent relations between elements in different 
XML documents, and IDREFs attributes for rela-
tions within the same document. 
2.1 First  version 
The first version of the MEANING Format has 
been used to represent seven kinds of informa-
tion: orthographic features, the structure of the 
77
text, morphosyntactic information, multiwords, 
syntactic information, named entities, and word 
senses. 
Annotation levels are related to each other fol-
lowing a hierarchy of annotation levels, which 
reflects a theoretically grounded hierarchy of 
linguistic objects. The basic (orthographic) anno-
tation level, representing tokens, is implemented 
with pointers to the character positions in the hub 
corpus. Then the morphosyntactic level, repre-
senting word-related morphological information, 
contains pointers to the tokens, whereas the mul-
tiword level points to the words described at 
morphosyntactic level. 
The following example shows how the mor-
phosyntactic features of the Italian word ?an-
dare? (to go) are represented. 
 
<struc   type="w-level" id="w_12" 
             xlink:href="#xpointer(id('t_10'))"> 
     <feat type="lemma">andare</feat> 
     <feat type="stem">and</feat> 
     <feat type="pos">v</feat> 
     <feat type="elra-tag">VF</feat> 
     <feat type="mood">inf</feat> 
     <feat type="tense">pres</feat> 
 </struc> 
 
MAF also specifically addresses the problem  
of discontinuous units, such as for instance non-
contiguous multiwords; see ?andarci veramente 
piano? (take it really easy). A detailed study of 
how standoff annotation allows for an elegant 
treatment of this phenomenon can be found in 
(Pianta and Bentivogli 2004). 
2.2 Second version 
The first version of the MEANING Format has 
recently been extended within the FU-PAT ON-
TOTEXT project (Magnini et al 2005). 
Within this project, we are creating the Italian 
Content Annotation Bank (I-CAB), a corpus of 
Italian news stories annotated with different 
kinds of semantic information. Annotation is be-
ing carried out manually, as we intend I-CAB to 
become a benchmark for automatic Information 
Extraction and Ontology Population tasks, in-
cluding recognition and normalization of various 
types of entities, temporal expressions, relations 
between entities, and relations between entities 
and temporal expressions (e.g. the relation date-
of-birth connecting a person to a date). 
To fulfill I-CAB annotation needs, we ex-
tended MAF, by adding a number of new lin-
guistic annotation levels, i.e.: 
 
? temporal expressions  
? entities of type person and organization 
? mentions (i.e. the textual expressions re-
ferring to the entities)  
 
According to the hierarchical approach to rep-
resenting relations between annotation levels in 
the first version of the MEANING Format, tem-
poral expressions and entity mentions are repre-
sented with pointers to morphosyntactic level 
entities. Entities, instead, are represented with 
pointers to entity mentions.  
To manually annotate temporal expressions 
we followed the TIMEX2 markup standard, 
while to mark entities and mentions we relied on 
the ACE entity detection task guidelines. To per-
form the annotation task we used Callisto 
(http://callisto.mitre.org). 
3 Converting linguistic annotations into 
MAF  
The manual annotations produced through Cal-
listo, which is related to novel annotation levels 
such  as temporal expressions and entity men-
tions, had to be integrated with more traditional 
annotations which are performed automatically 
with the TextPro tool, an automatic linguistic 
analysis Tool Suite developed at ITC-irst. 
News
MEANING
Annotation 
Format
Callisto
Lucene
AIF format
Manual 
annotation
Automatic 
annotation
TextPro
TextPro format
Indexing
Data Base
Conversion
MEANING
Browser
I-CAB 
Corpus
 
As one can see in the above figure, two different 
annotation processes (automatic and manual) 
produce two different formats which must be 
converted and integrated into MAF in order to be 
accessed by the MEANING Browser (or any 
other NLP tool). 
3.1 From TextPro format to MEANING 
Format 
TextPro takes a raw text as input and carries out 
basic processing tasks such as tokenization, mor-
78
phological analysis, PoS tagging, lemmatization, 
and multiword recognition. The results of 
TextPro analyses are represented in a table, 
where each token is on a row, and columns con-
tain multiple annotation levels. Converting from 
the TextPro to the MEANING Format requires 
retrieving the character positions of tokens in the 
hub corpus, which are not directly available in 
the TextPro output. 
3.2 From AIF format to MEANING format 
The Callisto manual annotation tool produces a 
coding format called AIF (Atlas Interchange For-
mat), which implements a stand-off XML anno-
tation scheme. 
When using the Callisto graphical interface, 
all annotations of temporal expressions and en-
tity mentions are carried out by selecting a se-
quence of contiguous characters. As a conse-
quence, all AIF annotations make reference to 
character positions. 
However, from Section 2.2 we know that in 
MAF temporal expressions and entity mentions 
make reference to morphosyntactic linguistic 
objects, not characters. This implies that, to go 
from AIF to the MEANING Format, we need to 
translate annotations making reference to the po-
sition of characters into annotations that point to 
morphological entities. More precisely, we need 
to substitute pointers to character positions with 
pointers to morphosyntactic objects which have 
been marked automatically by TextPro. Carrying 
out this step will also achieve the integration of 
manual and automatic annotations.  
The integration step is possible because the 
MAF hierarchy of annotation levels points, at the 
lowest level, to character positions. By following 
the hierarchy of links relating the various annota-
tion levels it is always possible to trace back a 
linguistic object to some sequence of characters 
in the raw text, and in the opposite direction, 
given a string, we know what linguistic objects 
correspond to it. Summing up, the integration of 
AIF annotations into MAF requires that, given 
the character positions contained in the AIF an-
notation of some string, we substitute the point-
ers to characters with the pointers to the linguis-
tic objects that cover the same string. 
 
4 Data Access 
MAF turned out to be a flexible and expressive 
means to represent and integrate multiple levels 
of linguistic annotation. This was achieved 
mainly thanks to the adoption of the standoff 
annotation approach.  However accessing and 
retrieving information spread in possibly very 
large repositories (hundreds of thousands) of 
XML files may be a challenging task even for 
Database Management Systems specifically de-
signed to handle XML. To solve this problem we 
first analyzed existing native XML databases 
such as eXist, and Apache Xindice, but found 
that what was available at the time did not suited 
our needs. For this reason we approached the 
access problem through a two-fold strategy: 
? converting  XML data into a relational 
database 
? indexing XML data and accessing them 
through a  search engine (LUCENE) 
The conversion of MAF data into a relational 
database is based on the following strategy. Each 
annotation level is mapped into a table, where 
rows represent instances of the relevant linguistic 
object (e.g. words), and columns represent its 
attributes (e.g. lemma, PoS, etc). Specific col-
umns contain the object identifiers and the point-
ers to objects of other types/tables. 
Once MAF data are stored in a relational data-
base, they can be accessed quite efficiently. 
However, when the access to data requires joins 
of many tables, access times become incompati-
ble with various kinds of applications, such as 
on-line corpus browsing. For this reason we tried 
to complement the use of a relational database 
with the exploitation of the indexing capability 
of the LUCENE search engine 
(http://lucene.apache.org/). To this extent we 
modified the LUCENE analyzer so as to be able 
to parse XML structures. In this way LUCENE 
can be configured in order to index any XML 
structure. 
The fast access capabilities of a relational da-
tabase combined with the extended indexing ca-
pabilities of LUCENE enabled us to implement a 
browser of MAF annotated corpora.  
5 The MEANING Browser 
The MEANING Browser can be used by humans 
to navigate any corpus encoded with MAF. The 
browser is built upon an API which can be used 
by any automatic system.  
In the following, we are going to demonstrate 
how I-CAB texts and their annotations can be 
accessed through the MEANING Browser. 
The first kind of access to the corpus is word-
oriented, and amounts to a concordancer, i.e. a 
79
tool able to provide all the occurrences of a cer-
tain word in the corpus. The user can alterna-
tively search for all occurrences of a word form, 
or a lemma, possibly constraining the search to a 
certain PoS. Free combinations between these 
constraints are allowed. The system will return a 
KWIC-like concordance of all the tokens in the 
corpus that match the request, within a chosen 
word window. By clicking on the magnifying 
glass, one can see the sentence in which the 
searched word occurs (see Appendix 1). 
By clicking on a specific icon a new window 
is opened where the whole text is displayed and 
its linguistic annotations are made accessible. A 
number of graphical widgets allow the user to 
highlight the desired annotations: e.g. nouns, 
verbs, multiwords, temporal expressions, men-
tions of a specific entity. 
In Appendix 2 the browser is used to show 
both nouns (automatically annotated) and entity 
mentions (from manual annotation). Appendix 3 
shows time expressions and discontinuous mul-
tiwords; see how the multiword ?ha rassegnato 
? le dimissioni? (he resigned) is made discon-
tinuous by the occurrence of a time expression 
ieri (yesterday). The browser will also give mor-
phosyntactic information about single words 
composing multiwords (governo, government). 
From the same window one can access the XML 
files encoding multiple annotation levels for the 
same document. 
References  
Bentivogli, L., Girardi, C., Pianta, E. 2003. The ME-
ANING Italian Corpus. In Proceedings of the Cor-
pus Linguistics 2003 conference, Lancaster, UK. 
Ide, N. & Romary, L. 2002. Standards for Language 
Resources. In Proceedings of LREC 2002, Las 
Palmas, Canary Islands, Spain.  
Magnini, B., Negri, M., Pianta, E., Romano, L., Sper-
anza, M., Serafini, L., Girardi, C., Bartalesi, V., 
Sprugnoli, R. 2005. From Text to Knowledge for 
the Semantic Web: the ONTOTEXT Project. In 
Proceedings of  SWAP 2005 Workshop, Trento, I-
taly. 
Pianta, E. and Bentivogli, L. 2004. Annotating Dis-
continuous Structures in XML: the Multiword 
Case. In Proceedings of the LREC 2004 Satellite 
Workshop on "XML-based richly annotated cor-
pora", Lisbon, Portugal. 
 
 
 
Appendix 1   
Kwic Concordancer 
 
 
Appendix 2 
Browsing nouns (in grey, automatic annotation)  and 
entity mentions (Tony Blair, manual annotation) 
 
 
Appendix 3  
Browsing discontinuous multiwords (ha rassegnato ? 
le dimissioni, he resigned), time expressions (ieri, 
yesterday) and word information (governo) 
 
80
