Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 73?80,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Arabic to French Sentence Alignment: Exploration of A Cross-
language Information Retrieval Approach 
Nasredine Semmar 
CEA, LIST 
Laboratoire d?ing?nierie de la connais-
sance multim?dia multilingue 
18 route du Panorama 
BP6, FONTENAY AUX ROSES, F- 
92265 France 
nasredine.semmar@cea.fr 
Christian Fluhr 
CEA, LIST 
Service R?alite virtuelle, Cognitique et 
Interfaces 
18 route du Panorama 
BP6, FONTENAY AUX ROSES, F- 
92265 France 
christian.fluhr@cea.fr 
 
 
Abstract 
Sentence alignment consists in estimating 
which sentence or sentences in the source 
language correspond with which sentence 
or sentences in a target language. We pre-
sent in this paper a new approach to align-
ing sentences from a parallel corpus based 
on a cross-language information retrieval 
system. This approach consists in building 
a database of sentences of the target text 
and considering each sentence of the 
source text as a "query" to that database. 
The cross-language information retrieval 
system is a weighted Boolean search en-
gine based on a deep linguistic analysis of 
the query and the documents to be indexed. 
This system is composed of a multilingual 
linguistic analyzer, a statistical analyzer, a 
reformulator, a comparator and a search 
engine. The multilingual linguistic analyzer 
includes a morphological analyzer, a part-
of-speech tagger and a syntactic analyzer. 
The linguistic analyzer processes both 
documents to be indexed and queries to 
produce a set of normalized lemmas, a set 
of named entities and a set of nominal 
compounds with their morpho-syntactic 
tags. The statistical analyzer computes for 
documents to be indexed concept weights 
based on concept database frequencies. The 
comparator computes intersections between 
queries and documents and provides a rele-
vance weight for each intersection. Before 
this comparison, the reformulator expands 
queries during the search. The expansion is 
used to infer from the original query words 
other words expressing the same concepts. 
The search engine retrieves the ranked, 
relevant documents from the indexes ac-
cording to the corresponding reformulated 
query and then merges the results obtained 
for each language, taking into account the 
original words of the query and their 
weights in order to score the documents. 
The sentence aligner has been evaluated on 
the MD corpus of the ARCADE II project 
which is composed of news articles from 
the French newspaper "Le Monde Diplo-
matique". The part of the corpus used in 
evaluation consists of the same subset of 
sentences in Arabic and French. Arabic 
sentences are aligned to their French coun-
terparts. Results showed that alignment has 
correct precision and recall even when the 
corpus is not completely parallel (changes 
in sentence order or missing sentences). 
1 Introduction 
Sentence alignment consists in mapping sentences 
of the source language with their translations in the 
target language. Automatic sentence alignment 
approaches face two kinds of difficulties: robust-
ness and accuracy. A number of automatic sen-
tence alignment techniques have been proposed 
(Kay and R?scheisen, 1993; Gale and Church, 
1991; Brown et al, 1991; Debili and Samouda, 
1992; Papageorgiou et al, 1994; Gaussier, 1995; 
Melamed, 1996; Fluhr et al, 2000). 
73
The method proposed in (Kay and R?scheisen, 
1993) is based on the assumption that in order for 
the sentences in a translation to correspond, the 
words in them must correspond. In other words, all 
necessary information (and in particular, lexical 
mapping) is derived from the to-be-aligned texts 
themselves. 
In (Gale and Church, 1991) and (Brown et al, 
1991), the authors start from the fact that the length 
of a source text sentence is highly correlated with 
the length of its target text translation: short sen-
tences tend to have short translations, and long 
sentences tend to have long translations. 
The method proposed in (Debili and Sammouda, 
1992) is based on the preliminary alignment of 
words using a conventional bilingual lexicon and 
the method described in (Papageorgiou et al, 1994) 
added grammatical labeling based on the assump-
tion that the same parts of speech tend to be em-
ployed in the translation. 
In this paper, we present a sentence aligner 
which is based on a cross-language information 
retrieval approach and combines different informa-
tion sources (bilingual lexicon, sentence length and 
sentence position). This sentence aligner was first 
developed for aligning French-English parallel text. 
It is now ported to Arabic-French and Arabic-
English language pairs. 
We present in section 2 the main components of 
the cross-language search engine, in particular, we 
will focus on the linguistic processing. In section 3, 
the prototype of our sentence aligner is described. 
We discuss in section 4 results obtained after align-
ing sentences of the MD (Monde Diplomatique) 
corpus of the ARCADE II project. Section 5 con-
cludes our study and presents our future work. 
2 The Cross-language Search Engine 
Information retrieval consists to find all relevant 
documents for a user query in a collection of 
documents. These documents are ordered by the 
probability of being relevant to the user's query. 
The highest ranked document is considered to be 
the most likely relevant document. Cross-language 
information retrieval consists in providing a query 
in one language and searching documents in 
different languages (Grefenstette, 1998). The 
cross-lingual search engine is a weighted Boolean 
search engine based on a deep linguistic analysis of 
the query and the documents to be indexed 
(Besan?on et al, 2003). It is composed of a 
linguistic analyzer, a statistical analyzer, a 
reformulator and a comparator (Figure 1): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The cross-language search engine 
2.1 Linguistic Analysis 
The linguistic analyzer produces a set of normal-
ized lemmas, a set of named entities and a set of 
nominal compounds. It is composed of several lin-
guistic resources and processing modules. 
 
Each language has its proper linguistic resources 
which are generally composed of: 
? A full form dictionary, containing for each 
word form its possible part-of-speech tags 
Linguistic analysis 
Comparator 
Statistic 
analysis 
Reformulation 
General 
lexicons 
Reformulation 
lexicons 
Search engine database (Indexed 
documents) 
Documents to be 
indexed 
Queries 
Documents 
grouped in rele-
vant classes 
74
and linguistic features (gender, number, etc). 
For languages such as Arabic which pre-
sents agglutination of articles, prepositions 
and conjunctions at the beginning of the 
word as well as pronouns at the ending of 
the word, we added two other dictionaries 
for proclitics and enclitics in order to split 
the input words into proclitics, simple forms 
and enclitics. 
? A monolingual reformulation dictionary 
used in query expansion for expanding 
original query words to other words express-
ing the same concepts (synonyms, hypo-
nyms, etc.). 
? Bilingual dictionaries used in cross-
language querying. 
? A set of rules for tokenizing words. 
? A set of  part-of-speech n-grams (bigrams 
and trigrams from hand-tagged corpora) that 
are used for part-of-speech tagging. 
? A set of rules for shallow parsing of sen-
tences, extracting compounds from the input 
text. 
? A set of rules for the identification of 
named entities: gazetteers and contextual 
rules that use special triggers to identify 
named entities and their type. 
The processing modules are common for all the 
languages with some variations for some specific 
languages: 
? A Tokenizer which separates the input 
stream into a graph of words. This separa-
tion is achieved by an automaton devel-
oped for each language and a set of seg-
mentation rules. 
? A Morphological analyzer which searches 
each word in a general dictionary (Debili 
and Zouari, 1985). If this word is found, it 
will be associated with its lemma and all 
its morpho-syntactic tags. If the word is 
not found in the general dictionary, it is 
given a default set of morpho-syntactic 
tags based on its typography. For Arabic, 
we added to the morphological analyzer a 
new processing step: a Clitic stemmer 
(Larkey et al, 2002) which splits aggluti-
nated words into proclitics, simple forms 
and enclitics. If the simple form computed 
by the clitic stemmer does not exist in the 
general dictionary, re-write rules are ap-
plied (Darwish, 2002). For example, con-
sider the token ?? (with their ballon) 
and the included clitics ??? (with) and ??? 
(their), the computed simple form ???? 
does not exist in the general dictionary but 
after applying one of the dozen re-write 
rules, the modified simple form ???? 
(ballon) is found in the general dictionary 
and the input token is segmented as: 
 = ? + ?? + ?. 
? An Idiomatic Expressions recognizer 
which detects idiomatic expressions and 
considers them as single words for the rest 
of the processing. Idiomatic expressions 
are phrases or compound nouns that are 
listed in a specific dictionary. The detec-
tion of idiomatic expressions is performed 
by applying a set of rules that are triggered 
on specific words and tested on left and 
right contexts of the trigger. These rules 
can recognize contiguous expressions as 
the "white house" in English, la "maison 
blanche" in French or " ?????? ?" in Ara-
bic. Non-contiguous expressions such as 
phrasal verbs in English: "switch?on" or 
"tomber vaguement dans les pommes" in 
French are recognized too. 
? A Part-Of-Speech (POS) tagger which 
searches valid paths through all the possi-
ble tags paths using attested trigrams and 
bigrams sequences. The trigram and bi-
gram matrices are generated from a manu-
ally annotated training corpus (Grefen-
stette et al, 2005). They are extracted from 
a hand-tagged corpora of 13 200 words for 
Arabic and 25 000 words for French. If no 
continuous trigram full path is found, the 
POS tagger tries to use bigrams at the 
points where the trigrams were not found 
in the matrix. The accuracy of the part-of-
speech tagger is around 91% for Arabic 
and 94% for French. 
? A Syntactic analyzer which is used to split 
word graph into nominal and verbal chain 
and recognize dependency relations (espe-
cially those within compounds) by using a 
set of syntactic rules. We developed a set 
of dependency relations to link nouns to 
75
other nouns, a noun with a proper noun, a 
proper noun with the post nominal adjec-
tive and a noun with a post nominal adjec-
tive. These relations are restricted to the 
same nominal chain and are used to com-
pute compound words. For example, in the 
nominal chain ? ?? ?? (water supply), 
the syntactic analyzer considers this nomi-
nal chain as a compound word ( ??_ ? ) 
composed of the words ? ??? (supply) 
and ??? (water). 
? A Named Entity recognizer which uses 
name triggers (e.g., President, lake, corpo-
ration, etc.) to identify named entities 
(Abuleil and Evens, 2004). For example, 
the expression ????&? ??$ ?#?? ????? (The first 
of March) is recognized as a date and the 
expression ? ()???+&?? ???? (The Middle East) 
is recognized as a location. 
? Eliminating Empty Words consists in iden-
tifying words that should not be used as 
search criteria and eliminating them. These 
empty words are identified using only their 
parts of speech (such as prepositions, arti-
cles, punctuations and some adverbs). 
? Finally, words are normalized by their 
lemma. In the case the word has a set of 
synonymous lemmas, only one of these 
lemmas is taken as a normalization. Each 
normalized word is associated with its 
morpho-syntactic tag. 
2.2 Statistical Analysis 
The role of the statistical analysis is to attribute 
a weight to each word or a compound word ac-
cording to the information the word or the com-
pound word provides in choosing the document 
relevant to a query. This weight is computed by an 
idf formula (Salton and McGill, 1983). The weight 
is maximum for words appearing in one single 
document and minimum for words appearing in all 
the documents. This weight is used by the com-
parator to compute the semantic intersection be-
tween query and documents containing different 
words. A similarity value is associated with each 
semantic intersection. This value corresponds to 
the sum of the weights of words present in the 
documents. The search engine groups documents 
into classes (semantic intersections) characterized 
by the same set of words. These classes constitute 
a discrete partition of the indexed documents. For 
example, the search engine returns 12 classes for 
the query ? ??? ?????? ?? (water resources man-
agement) (Table 1). 
 
Class Query terms 
1 ???_?????_	
  
2 ???_ 	
,???_?????  
3  	
,????_?????  
4  ???,?????_	
  
5 ???_?????  
6 ???_	
  
7  ??? ,?????,	
  
8  ?????,	
  
9  ???,?????  
10 ?? ?,	
  
11 	
 
12 ??? 
Table 1. Relevant classes returned by the search 
engine for the query ???? ?????? ?? 
 
The query term ? ??? _?????? _? ? is a compound 
word composed of three  words: ? ?????? (manage-
ment), ?????? (resources ) and ? ?? (water ). This 
compound word is computed by the syntactic ana-
lyzer. 
2.3 Query Reformulation 
The role of query reformulation is to infer new 
words from the original query words according to a 
lexical semantic knowledge. The reformulation can 
be used to increase the quality of the retrieval in a 
monolingual interrogation. It can also be used to 
infer words in other languages. The query terms 
are translated using bilingual dictionaries. Each 
term of the query is translated into several terms in 
target language. The translated words form the 
search terms of the reformulated query. The links 
between the search terms and the query concepts 
can also be weighted by a confidence value indi-
cating the relevance of the translation. Reformula-
tion rules can be applied to all instances of a word 
or to a word only when it is playing a specific part-
of-speech. Semantic relations can also be selected: 
translations, synonyms, word derived from the 
same root, etc. The cross-language search engine 
has a monolingual reformulation for French and 
two bilingual reformulations for Arabic-French 
and French-Arabic language pairs. 
76
2.4 Query and Documents Comparison 
The search engine indexer builds the inverted files 
of the documents on the basis of their linguistic 
analysis: one index is built for each language of the 
document collection. This indexer builds separate 
indexes for each language. The search engine uses 
a comparison tool to evaluate all possible intersec-
tions between query words and documents, and 
computes a relevance weight for each intersection. 
This relevance weight corresponds to the sum of 
the weights of words present in the documents. 
3 The Sentence Aligner 
Parallel text alignment based on cross-language 
information retrieval consists in building a data-
base of sentences of the target text and considering 
each sentence of the source text as a "query" to that 
database (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Sentence alignment steps 
To evaluate whether the two sentences are trans-
lations of each other, we use three criteria: 
 
? Number of common words between the 
source sentence and the target sentence 
(semantic intersection) must be higher than 
50% of number of words of the target sen-
tence. 
? Position of the sentence to align must be in 
an interval of 10 compared to the position 
of the last aligned sentence. 
? Ratio of lengths of the target sentence and 
the source sentence (in characters) must be 
higher or equal than 1.1 (A French charac-
ter needs 1.1 Arabic characters): Longer 
sentences in Arabic tend to be translated 
into longer sentences in French, and 
shorter sentences tend to be translated into 
shorter sentences. 
 
The alignment process has four steps: 
 
1. Exact match 1-1 alignment: The goal of 
this step is to obtain an alignment with a 
maximum precision by using the three cri-
teria: Number of common words between 
the source sentence and the target sen-
tence; Position of the sentence to align; 
Ratio of lengths of the target sentence and 
the source sentence. 
2. 1-2 alignment: This alignment consists in 
merging an unaligned sentence with one 
preceding or following already aligned 
sentence. We use to validate this alignment 
only the first two criteria. 
3. 2-1 alignment: The goal of this alignment 
is to find for the two sentences following 
an aligned sentence a sentence in the target 
language taking into account the position 
of the last aligned sentence. This align-
ment is validated by using only the first 
two criteria. 
4. Fuzzy match 1-1 alignment: This align-
ment proposes for the sentence to align  
the first sentence of the first class returned 
by the cross-language search engine. This 
type of alignment is added to take into ac-
count alignments which are partially cor-
rect (The source sentence is not completely 
aligned but some of its words are trans-
lated). 
Cross-lingual Interrogation in 
French database 
List of French 
sentences 
Cross-lingual Interrogation in 
Arabic database 
List of Arabic 
sentences 
Arabic sentences to 
align 
Check of alignment criteria 
French aligned 
sentences 
77
We describe below the algorithm of the Exact 
Match 1-1 alignment which is the base of the other 
aligners. This algorithm uses the functions of the 
cross-language search engine API. 
 
? PerformCrosslinguageSearch(Query, Cor-
pus, Source language, Target language): 
returns the set of relevant classes 
corresponding to the question ?Query? 
in the database "Corpus". Each class is 
composed of a set of sentences in the 
target language. 
? GetNumberOfCommonWords(Class): returns 
the number of common words between the 
source sentence and the target sentence 
(semantic intersection). 
? GetNumberOfWords(Sentence): returns the 
number of words of a sentence. 
? GetNumberOfCharacters(Sentence): re-
turns the number of characters of a 
sentence. 
 
function GetExactMatchOneToOneAlign-
ments(CorpusAr, CorpusFr) 
for each Arabic sentence PjAr ? CorpusAr do 
CFr?PerformCrosslinguageSearch(PjAr, Cor-
pusFr, Ar, Fr) 
R?0; Initialize the position of the last 
aligned sentence. 
for each class ClFr ? CFr do 
for each French sentence PmFr ? ClFr do 
CAr?PerformCrosslinguageSearch(PmFr, 
CorpusAr, Fr, Ar) 
for each class CqAr ? CAr do 
for each Arabic sentence PqAr ? CqAr 
do 
if PqAr=PjAr then 
NMFr=GetNumberOfCommonWords(ClFr); 
NMAr=GetNumberOfWords(PjAr); 
NCAr=GetNumberOfCharacters(PjAr); 
NCFr=GetNumberOfCharacters(PmFr) 
if (NMFr ? NMAr/2) and (R?5 ? m ? 
R+5) and (NCFr=(1.1)*NCAr) then 
The sentence PmFr is the align-
ment of the sentence PjAr; 
R?m 
end if 
end if 
end for 
end for 
end for 
end for 
end for 
end function 
 
For example, to align the Arabic sentence [4/30] 
(sentence of position 4 in the Arabic corpus con-
taining 30 sentences) ? 89 ??7 ??? 456 ?3#? ?1  ?0/?
 :;  <0 4? ??$ ?3@??? ?<=;>?B 4C? D 4=89 6? $E/4 ?D 
 F>??  ? (In Italy, the order of things persuaded in 
an invisible way a majority of electors that time of 
traditional parties was finished), the exact match 1-
1 aligner proceeds as follows: 
? The Arabic sentence is considered to be a 
query to the French sentence database us-
ing the cross-language search engine. Re-
trieved sentences for the two first classes 
are illustrated in Table 2. 
 
Class Number of 
retrieved 
sentences 
Retrieved sentences 
1 1 [4/36] En Italie, l'ordre des 
choses a persuad? de 
mani?re invisible une ma-
jorit? d'?lecteurs que le 
temps des partis traditionnels 
?tait termin? 
2 3 [32/36] Au point que, d?s 
avant ces ?lections, un heb-
domadaire britannique, rap-
pelant les accusations 
port?es par la justice itali-
enne contre M. Berlusconi, 
estimait qu'un tel dirigeant 
n'?tait pas digne de gou-
verner l'Italie, car il consti-
tuait un danger pour la d?-
mocratie et une menace pour 
l'Etat de droit 
[34/36] Apr?s le pitoyable 
effondrement des partis tra-
ditionnels, la soci?t? itali-
enne, si cultiv?e, assiste 
assez impassible (seul le 
monde du cin?ma est entr? 
en r?sistance) ? l'actuelle 
d?gradation d'un syst?me 
politique de plus en plus 
confus, extravagant, ridicule 
et dangereux  
[36/36] Toute la question est 
de savoir dans quelle mesure 
ce mod?le italien si pr?occu-
pant risque de s'?tendre de-
main ? d'autres pays d'Eu-
rope  
Table 2. Retrieved sentences corresponding to the 
Arabic sentence [4/30] 
 
? Results of cross-language querying show 
that the sentence [4/36] is a good candidate 
to alignment. To confirm this alignment, 
we use the French sentence as a query to 
the Arabic database. Relevant sentences 
corresponding to the French query "En 
Italie, l'ordre des choses a persuad? de 
78
mani?re invisible une majorit? d'?lecteurs 
que le temps des partis traditionnels ?tait 
termin?" are grouped into two classes in 
Table 3. 
 
Class Number of 
retrieved 
sentences 
Retrieved sentences 
1 1 [4/30] 
 /0? 89 ??7 ??? 456 ?3#? ?1 ?
 4C? D 4=89 6? $E/4 ?D 
 :; <0 4? ??$ ?3@??? ?<=;>?B 
F>??   
 
2 3 [26/30] 
 ?H4 ?IJI H? ??K3? ?L? M+? 
  1?4 ??<=?? 89 ????? ?OP;  
 4Q)3? ?JR4 ?? ?@>? ?K?? 
 ? 89 ?5?>Q??7?4 ? 
 4K4 ?CU=?? ?J ?(<5? 
   V? M0 8?) <P?1 ?
 ?/? ?V?3 ?$ ?LP? ?? ?O>?3? 
 MH? F??7 ??? W ??<K X 
 41  ??;Q0?46 ?1 ?>?;Q 7?E 
??=?   
[28/30] 
 50?>? V4 ?WY / <0?
 4=Z+; H4? 59> ?3?? ?C+>? 
 >R?? ?<=;>?4? #> ??@J 
 5??$ ??? ??  ?3?87 ? F>9=H ??
 ?V? /P? 70? ?/H>) ?>? @?? 
 ? ???$ /^??1 ?=??4 ?<>? BR 
 ?_8 ?5?8 ???> ?$ ?)) 
 ??7O?? `OP??+7) ??   
[30/30] 
 4 $ 89 ?495 ?1 ??BP? M?? 
 H?? ?3?87 ?/? ?V?>? ?$ ? 
 <; 89 ??<D +>/?? ? d;=;  4?? ????
?E?   
Table 3. The two classes corresponding to the 
French sentence [4/36] 
 
The first proposed sentence is the original one 
and more of 50% of the words are common to the 
two sentences. Furthermore, the length ratio be-
tween the French sentence and the Arabic sentence 
is superior than 1.1 and positions of these two sen-
tences in the databases are the same. Therefore, the 
exact match 1-1 aligner considers the French sen-
tence [4/36] as a translation of the Arabic sentence 
[4/30]. 
4 Experimental Results 
The sentence aligner has been tested on the MD 
corpus of the ARCADE II project which is com-
posed of news articles from the French newspaper 
"Le Monde Diplomatique" (Chiao et al, 2006). 
This corpus contains 5 Arabic texts (244 sentences) 
aligned at the sentence level to 5 French texts (283 
sentences). The test consisted to build two data-
bases of sentences (Arabic and French) and to con-
sider each Arabic sentence as a "query" to the 
French database. 
To evaluate the sentence aligner, we used the 
following measures: 
 
Precision = 
A
AA r?
 and Recall = 
r
r
A
AA ?
 
 
A corresponds to the set of alignments provided 
by the sentence aligner and Ar corresponds to the 
set of the correct alignments. 
 
The results we obtained at sentence level (Table 
4) show an average precision around 97% and an 
average recall around 93%. These results do not 
take into account alignments which are partially 
correct (Fuzzy match 1-1 alignment). 
 
Parallel Text Precision Recall 
1 0.969 0,941 
2 0,962 0,928 
3 0,985 0,957 
4 0,983 0,952 
5 0,966 0,878 
Table 4. Results of alignment at sentence level 
 
 
Analysis of these results shows that our sentence 
aligner is not sensitive to missing sentences. This 
is because the first criterion used by our aligner is 
not related to surface information (sentence posi-
tion or sentence length) but on the semantic inter-
section of these sentences. 
 
Moreover, we have noted that precision depends 
on the discriminate terms which can occur in the 
source and target sentences. 
79
5 Conclusion and Perspectives 
We have proposed a new approach to sentence 
alignment based on a cross-language information 
retrieval model combining different information 
sources (bilingual lexicon, sentence length and 
sentence position). The results we obtained show 
correct precision and recall even when the parallel 
corpus includes changes in sentence order and 
missing sentences. This is due to the non-
sequential strategy used by the sentence aligner. In 
future work, we plan to improve the alignment 
with syntactic structures of source and target sen-
tences and to use the aligned bilingual parallel cor-
pus as a translation memory in a computer-aided 
translation tool. 
References 
Abuleil S., and Evens M. 2004. Named Entity Recogni-
tion and Classification for Text in Arabic. In Pro-
ceedings of IASSE-2004. 
Besan?on R., de Chalendar G., Ferret O., Fluhr C., 
Mesnard O., and Naets H. 2003. Concept-Based 
Searching and Merging for Multilingual Information 
Retrieval: In Proceedings of CLEF-2003. 
Brown P., Lai L., and Mercier L. 1991. Aligning Sen-
tences in Parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of ACL-
1991. 
Chiao Y. C., Kraif O., Laurent D., Nguyen T., Semmar 
N., Stuck F., V?ronis J., and Zaghouani W. 2006. 
Evaluation of multilingual text alignment systems: 
the ARCADE II project. In Proceedings of LREC-
2006. 
Darwish K. 2002. Building a Shallow Arabic Morpho-
logical Analyzer in One Day. In Proceedings of ACL-
2002. 
Debili F. and Zouari L. 1985. Analyse morphologique 
de l?arabe ?crit voyell? ou non fond?e sur la con-
struction automatique d?un dictionnaire arabe, Cogni-
tiva, Paris. 
Debili F. and Sammouda E. 1992. Appariement des 
Phrases des Textes Bilingues. In Proceedings of the 
14th International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics. 
Fluhr C., Bisson F., and Elkateb F. 2000. Parallel text 
alignment using cross-lingual information retrieval 
techniques. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Gale W.A. and Church K. W. 1991. A program for 
aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th Annual Meeting of Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
Gaussier E. 1995. Mod?les statistiques et patrons mor-
phosyntaxiques pour l'extraction de lexiques bilin-
gues. Ph.D. Thesis, Paris VII University. 
Grefenstette G. 1997. Cross-language information re-
trieval. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Grefenstette G., Semmar N., and Elkateb-Gara F. 2005. 
Modifying a Natural Language Processing System 
for European Languages to Treat Arabic in Informa-
tion Processing and Information Retrieval Applica-
tions. In Proceedings of ACL-2005 Workshop. 
Kay M. and R?scheisen M. 1993. Text-translation 
alignment. Computational Linguistics, Special issue 
on using large corpora, Volume 19, Issue 1. 
Larkey L. S., Ballesteros L., and Connel M. E. 2002. 
Improving Stemming for Arabic Information Re-
trieval: Light Stemming and Co-occurrence Analysis. 
In Proceedings of the 25th annual international ACM 
SIGIR conference on Research and development in 
information retrieval. 
Melamed I. D. 1996. A Geometric Approach to Map-
ping Bitext Correspondence. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing. 
Papageorgious H., Cranias, L., and Piperidis, S. 1994. 
Automatic Alignment in Parallel Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. 
Salton G. and McGill M. 1983. Introduction to Modern 
Information retrieval. New York: McGraw Hill. 
80
