Proceedings of SSST, NAACL-HLT 2007 / AMTA Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 80?87,
Rochester, New York, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dependency-Based Automatic Evaluation for Machine Translation 
Karolina Owczarzak Josef van Genabith Andy Way  
National Centre for Language Technology  
School of Computing, Dublin City University  
Dublin 9, Ireland  
{owczarzak,josef,away}@computing.dcu.ie  
    
 
Abstract 
We present a novel method for evaluating 
the output of Machine Translation (MT), 
based on comparing the dependency 
structures of the translation and reference 
rather than their surface string forms. Our 
method uses a treebank-based, wide-
coverage, probabilistic Lexical-Functional 
Grammar (LFG) parser to produce a set of 
structural dependencies for each 
translation-reference sentence pair, and 
then calculates the precision and recall for 
these dependencies. Our dependency-
based evaluation, in contrast to most 
popular string-based evaluation metrics, 
will not unfairly penalize perfectly valid 
syntactic variations in the translation. In 
addition to allowing for legitimate 
syntactic differences, we use paraphrases 
in the evaluation process to account for 
lexical variation. In comparison with 
other metrics on 16,800 sentences of 
Chinese-English newswire text, our 
method reaches high correlation with 
human scores. An experiment with two 
translations of 4,000 sentences from 
Spanish-English Europarl shows that, in 
contrast to most other metrics, our method 
does not display a high bias towards 
statistical models of translation. 
1 Introduction 
Since their appearance, string-based evaluation 
metrics such as BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002) and 
NIST (Doddington, 2002) have been the standard 
tools used for evaluating MT quality. Both score a 
candidate translation on the basis of the number of 
n-grams shared with one or more reference 
translations. Automatic measures are indispensable 
in the development of MT systems, because they 
allow MT developers to conduct frequent, cost-
effective, and fast evaluations of their evolving 
models.  
These advantages come at a price, though: an 
automatic comparison of n-grams measures only 
the string similarity of the candidate translation to 
one or more reference strings, and will penalize 
any divergence from them. In effect, a candidate 
translation expressing the source meaning 
accurately and fluently will be given a low score if 
the lexical and syntactic choices it contains, even 
though perfectly legitimate, are not present in at 
least one of the references. Necessarily, this score 
would differ from a much more favourable human 
judgement that such a translation would receive. 
The limitations of string comparison are the 
reason why it is advisable to provide multiple 
references for a candidate translation in BLEU- or 
NIST-based evaluations. While Zhang and Vogel 
(2004) argue that increasing the size of the test set 
gives even more reliable system scores than 
multiple references, this still does not solve the 
inadequacy of BLEU and NIST for sentence-level 
or small set evaluation. In addition, in practice 
even a number of references do not capture the 
whole potential variability of the translation. 
Moreover, when designing a statistical MT system, 
the need for large amounts of training data limits 
the researcher to collections of parallel corpora 
such as Europarl (Koehn, 2005), which provides 
only one reference, namely the target text; and the 
cost of creating additional reference translations of 
the test set, usually a few thousand sentences long, 
is often prohibitive. Therefore, it would be 
desirable to find an evaluation method that accepts 
legitimate syntactic and lexical differences 
80
between the translation and the reference, thus 
better mirroring human assessment. 
In this paper, we present a novel method that 
automatically evaluates the quality of translation 
based on the dependency structure of the sentence, 
rather than its surface form. Dependencies abstract 
away from the particulars of the surface string (and 
CFG tree) realization and provide a ?normalized? 
representation of (some) syntactic variants of a 
given sentence. The translation and reference files 
are analyzed by a treebank-based, probabilistic 
Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) parser (Cahill 
et al, 2004), which produces a set of dependency 
triples for each input. The translation set is 
compared to the reference set, and the number of 
matches is calculated, giving the precision, recall, 
and f-score for that particular translation.   
In addition, to allow for the possibility of valid 
lexical differences between the translation and the 
references, we follow Kauchak and Barzilay 
(2006) and Owczarzak et al (2006) in adding a 
number of paraphrases in the process of evaluation 
to raise the number of matches between the 
translation and the reference, leading to a higher 
score. 
Comparing the LFG-based evaluation method 
with other popular metrics: BLEU, NIST, General 
Text Matcher (GTM) (Turian et al, 2003), 
Translation Error Rate (TER) (Snover et al, 
2006)1, and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), 
we show that combining dependency 
representations with paraphrases leads to a more 
accurate evaluation that correlates better with 
human judgment. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 gives a basic introduction to 
LFG; Section 3 describes related work; Section 4 
describes our method and gives results of two 
experiments on different sets of data: 4,000 
sentences from Spanish-English Europarl and 
16,800 sentences of Chinese-English newswire text 
from the Linguistic Data Consortium?s (LDC) 
Multiple Translation project; Section 5 discusses 
ongoing work; Section 6 concludes. 
                                                 
1 As we focus on purely automatic metrics, we omit 
HTER (Human-Targeted Translation Error Rate) here. 
2 Lexical-Functional Grammar 
In Lexical-Functional Grammar (Bresnan, 2001) 
sentence structure is represented in terms of 
c(onstituent)-structure and f(unctional)-structure. 
C-structure represents the surface string word order 
and the hierarchical organisation of phrases in 
terms of CFG trees. F-structures are recursive 
feature (or attribute-value) structures, representing 
abstract grammatical relations, such as subj(ect), 
obj(ect), obl(ique), adj(unct), approximating to 
predicate-argument structure or simple logical 
forms. C-structure and f-structure are related in 
terms of functional annotations (attribute-value 
structure equations) in c-structure trees, describing 
f-structures.  
While c-structure is sensitive to surface word 
order, f-structure is not. The sentences John 
resigned yesterday and Yesterday, John resigned 
will receive different tree representations, but 
identical f-structures, shown in (1). 
 
(1) C-structure:                         F-structure: 
 
              S 
                  
      
 NP                      VP 
   |                     
John       
              V               NP-TMP 
               |                      | 
       resigned       yesterday 
                         
SUBJ        PRED   john 
                 NUM    sg 
                 PERS   3 
PRED       resign 
TENSE     past 
ADJ      {[PRED   yesterday]} 
 
 
                     S 
                  
      
    NP       NP       VP 
      |                 |            | 
Yesterday  John        V              
                                    | 
                            resigned                             
SUBJ        PRED   john 
                 NUM    sg 
                 PERS   3 
PRED       resign 
TENSE     past 
ADJ      {[PRED   yesterday]} 
 
 
 
Notice that if these two sentences were a 
translation-reference pair, they would receive a 
less-than-perfect score from string-based metrics. 
For example, BLEU with add-one smoothing2 
gives this pair a score of barely 0.3781. 
The f-structure can also be described as a flat 
set of triples. In triples format, the f-structure in (1) 
could be represented as follows: {subj(resign, 
john), pers(john, 3), num(john, sg), tense(resign, 
                                                 
2 We use smoothing because the original BLEU gives 
zero points to sentences with fewer than one four-gram. 
81
past), adj(resign, yesterday), pers(yesterday, 3), 
num(yesterday, sg)}. 
Cahill et al (2004) presents Penn-II Treebank-
based LFG parsing resources. Her approach 
distinguishes 32 types of dependencies, including 
grammatical functions and morphological 
information. This set can be divided into two major 
groups: a group of predicate-only dependencies 
and non-predicate dependencies. Predicate-only 
dependencies are those whose path ends in a 
predicate-value pair, describing grammatical 
relations. For example, for the f-structure in (1), 
predicate-only dependencies would include: 
{subj(resign, john), adj(resign, yesterday)}.3  
In parser evaluation, the quality of the f-
structures produced automatically can be checked 
against a set of gold standard sentences annotated 
with f-structures by a linguist. The evaluation is 
conducted by calculating the precision and recall 
between the set of dependencies produced by the 
parser, and the set of dependencies derived from 
the human-created f-structure. Usually, two 
versions of f-score are calculated: one for all the 
dependencies for a given input, and a separate one 
for the subset of predicate-only dependencies. 
In this paper, we use the parser developed by 
Cahill et al (2004), which automatically annotates 
input text with c-structure trees and f-structure 
dependencies, reaching high precision and recall 
rates. 4  
3 Related work 
The insensitivity of BLEU and NIST to perfectly 
legitimate syntactic and lexical variation has been 
raised, among others, in Callison-Burch et al 
(2006), but the criticism is widespread. Even the 
creators of BLEU point out that it may not 
correlate particularly well with human judgment at 
the sentence level (Papineni et al, 2002). A side 
                                                 
3 Other predicate-only dependencies include: 
apposition,  complement, open complement, 
coordination, determiner, object, second object, 
oblique, second oblique, oblique agent, possessive, 
quantifier, relative clause, topic, relative clause 
pronoun. The remaining non-predicate dependencies 
are: adjectival degree, coordination surface form, focus, 
complementizer forms: if, whether, and that, modal, 
number, verbal particle, participle, passive, person, 
pronoun surface form, tense, infinitival clause. 
4 http://lfg-demo.computing.dcu.ie/lfgparser.html 
effect of this phenomenon is that BLEU is less 
reliable for smaller data sets, so the advantage it 
provides in the speed of evaluation is to some 
extent counterbalanced by the time spent by 
developers on producing a sufficiently large test 
set in order to obtain a reliable score for their 
system.  
Recently a number of attempts to remedy these 
shortcomings have led to the development of other 
automatic MT evaluation metrics. Some of them 
concentrate mainly on word order, like General 
Text Matcher (Turian et al, 2003), which 
calculates precision and recall for translation-
reference pairs, weighting contiguous matches 
more than non-sequential matches, or Translation 
Error Rate (Snover et al, 2005), which computes 
the number of substitutions, inserts, deletions, and 
shifts necessary to transform the translation text to 
match the reference. Others try to accommodate 
both syntactic and lexical differences between the 
candidate translation and the reference, like CDER 
(Leusch et al, 2006), which employs a version of 
edit distance for word substitution and reordering; 
or METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), which 
uses stemming and WordNet synonymy. Kauchak 
and Barzilay (2006) and Owczarzak et al (2006) 
use paraphrases during BLEU and NIST evaluation 
to increase the number of matches between the 
translation and the reference; the paraphrases are 
either taken from WordNet5 in Kauchak and 
Barzilay (2006) or derived from the test set itself 
through automatic word and phrase alignment in 
Owczarzak et al (2006). Another metric making 
use of synonyms is the linear regression model 
developed by Russo-Lassner et al (2005), which 
makes use of stemming, WordNet synonymy, verb 
class synonymy, matching noun phrase heads, and 
proper name matching. Kulesza and Schieber 
(2004), on the other hand, train a Support Vector 
Machine using features like proportion of n-gram 
matches and word error rate to judge a given 
translation?s distance from human-level quality. 
Nevertheless, these metrics use only string-
based comparisons, even while taking into 
consideration reordering. By contrast, our 
dependency-based method concentrates on 
utilizing linguistic structure to establish a 
comparison between translated sentences and their 
reference.  
                                                 
5 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
82
4 LFG f-structure in MT evaluation 
The process underlying the evaluation of f-
structure quality against a gold standard can be 
used in automatic MT evaluation as well: we parse 
the translation and the reference, and then, for each 
sentence, we check the set of translation 
dependencies against the set of reference 
dependencies, counting the number of matches. As 
a result, we obtain the precision and recall scores 
for the translation, and we calculate the f-score for 
the given pair. Because we are comparing two 
outputs that were produced automatically, there is 
a possibility that the result will not be noise-free. 
To assess the amount of noise that the parser 
may introduce we conducted an experiment where 
100 English Europarl sentences were modified by 
hand in such a way that the position of adjuncts 
was changed, but the sentence remained 
grammatical and the meaning was not changed. 
This way, an ideal parser should give both the 
source and the modified sentence the same f-
structure, similarly to the case presented in (1). The 
modified sentences were treated like a translation 
file, and the original sentences played the part of 
the reference. Each set was run through the parser. 
We evaluated the dependency triples obtained from 
the ?translation? against the dependency triples for 
the ?reference?, calculating the f-score, and applied 
other metrics (TER, METEOR, BLEU, NIST, and 
GTM) to the set in order to compare scores. The 
results, inluding the distinction between f-scores 
for all dependencies and predicate-only 
dependencies, appear in Table 1. 
 
 baseline modified 
TER 0.0 6.417 
METEOR   1.0 0.9970 
BLEU 1.0000 0.8725 
NIST 11.5232 11.1704 (96.94%) 
GTM 100 99.18 
dep f-score  100 96.56 
dep_preds f-score 100 94.13 
Table 1. Scores for sentences with reordered adjuncts 
 
The baseline column shows the upper bound for a 
given metric: the score which a perfect translation, 
word-for-word identical to the reference, would 
obtain.6 In the other column we list the scores that 
the metrics gave to the ?translation? containing 
reordered adjunct. As can be seen, the dependency 
and predicate-only dependency scores are lower 
than the perfect 100, reflecting the noise 
introduced by the parser.  
To show the difference between the scoring 
based on LFG dependencies and other metrics in 
an ideal situation, we created another set of a 
hundred sentences with reordered adjuncts, but this 
time selecting only those reordered sentences that 
were given the same set of dependencies by the 
parser (in other words, we simulated having the 
ideal parser). As can be seen in Table 2, other 
metrics are still unable to tolerate legitimate 
variation in the position of adjuncts, because the 
sentence surface form differs from the reference; 
however, it is not treated as an error by the parser. 
 
 baseline modified 
TER 0.0 7.841 
METEOR   1.0 0.9956 
BLEU 1.0000 0.8485 
NIST 11.1690 10.7422 (96.18%) 
GTM 100 99.35 
dep f-score  100 100 
dep_preds f-score 100 100 
Table 2. Scores for sentences with reordered adjuncts in 
an ideal situation 
4.1 Initial experiment ? Europarl 
In the first experiment, we attempted to determine 
whether the dependency-based measure is biased 
towards statistical MT output, a problem that has 
been observed for n-gram-based metrics like 
BLEU and NIST. Callison-Burch et al (2006) 
report that BLEU and NIST favour n-gram-based 
MT models such as Pharaoh (Koehn, 2004), so the 
translations produced by rule-based systems score 
lower on the automatic evaluation, even though 
human judges consistently rate their output higher 
than Pharaoh?s translation. Others repeatedly 
                                                 
6 Two things have to be noted here: (1) in case of NIST 
the perfect score differs from text to text, which is why 
we provide the percentage points as well, and (2) in case 
of TER the lower the score, the better the translation, so 
the perfect translation will receive 0, and there is no 
upper bound on the score, which makes this particular 
metric extremely difficult to directly compare with 
others. 
83
observed this tendency in previous research as 
well; in one experiment, reported in Owczarzak et 
al. (2006), where the rule-based system 
Logomedia7 was compared with Pharaoh, BLEU 
scored Pharaoh 0.0349 points higher, NIST scored 
Pharaoh 0.6219 points higher, but human judges 
scored Logomedia output 0.19 points higher (on a 
5-point scale).  
4.1.1 Experimental design 
In order to check for the existence of a bias in the 
dependency-based metric, we created a set of 
4,000 sentences drawn randomly from the Spanish-
English subset of Europarl (Koehn, 2005), and we 
produced two translations: one by a rule-based 
system Logomedia, and the other by the standard 
phrase-based statistical decoder Pharaoh, using 
alignments produced by GIZA++8 and the refined 
word alignment strategy of Och and Ney (2003). 
The translations were scored with a range of 
metrics: BLEU, NIST, GTM, TER, METEOR, and 
the dependency-based method. 
4.1.2 Adding synonyms 
Besides the ability to allow syntactic variants as 
valid translations, a good metric should also be 
able to accept legitimate lexical variation. We 
introduced synonyms and paraphrases into the 
process of evaluation, creating new best-matching 
references for the translations using either 
paraphrases derived from the test set itself 
(following Owczarzak et al (2006)) or WordNet 
synonyms (as in Kauchak and Barzilay (2006)). 
 
Bitext-derived paraphrases 
Owczarzak et al (2006) describe a simple way to 
produce a list of paraphrases, which can be useful 
in MT evaluation, by running word alignment 
software on the test set that is being evaluated. 
Paraphrases derived in this way are specific to the 
domain at hand and contain low-level syntactic 
variants in addition to word-level synonymy. 
Using the standard GIZA++ software and the 
refined word alignment strategy of Och and Ney 
(2003) on our test set of 4,000 Spanish-English 
sentences, the method generated paraphrases for 
just over 1100 items. These paraphrases served to 
                                                 
7 http://www.lec.com/ 
8 http://www.fjoch.com/GIZA++ 
create new individual best-matching references for 
the Logomedia and Pharaoh translations. Due to 
the small size of the paraphrase set, only about 
20% of reference sentences were actually modified 
to better reflect the translation. This, in turn, led to 
little difference in scores. 
WordNet synonyms 
To maximize the number of matches between a 
translation and a reference, Kauchak and Barzilay 
(2006) use WordNet synonyms during evaluation. 
In addition, METEOR also has an option of 
including WordNet in the evaluation process. As in 
the case of bitext-derived paraphrases, we used 
WordNet synonyms to create new best-matching 
references for each of the two translations. This 
time, given the extensive database containing 
synonyms for over 150,000 items, around 70% of 
reference sentences were modified: 67% for 
Pharaoh, and 75% for Logomedia. Note that the 
number of substitutions is higher for Logomedia; 
this confirms the intuition that the translation 
produced by Pharaoh, trained on the domain which 
is also the source of the reference text, will need 
fewer lexical replacements than Logomedia, which 
is based on a general non-domain-specific model. 
4.1.3 Results 
Table 3 shows the difference between the scores 
which Pharaoh?s and Logomedia?s translations 
obtained from each metric: a positive number 
shows by how much Pharaoh?s score was higher 
than Logomedia?s, and a negative number reflects 
Logomedia?s higher score (the percentages are 
absolute values). As can be seen, all the metrics 
scored Pharaoh higher, inlcuding METEOR and 
the dependency-based method that were boosted 
with WordNet. The values in the table are sorted in 
descending order, from the largest to the lowest 
advantage of Pharaoh over Logomedia. 
Interestingly, next to METEOR boosted with 
WordNet, it is the dependency-based method, and 
especially the predicates-only version, that shows 
the least bias towards the phrase-based translation. 
In the next step, we selected from this set smaller 
subsets of sentences that were more and more 
similar in terms of translation quality (as 
determined by a sentence?s BLEU score). As the 
similarity of the translation quality increased, most 
metrics lowered their bias, as is shown in Table 4. 
The first column shows the case where the 
sentences chosen differed at the most by 0.05 
84
points BLEU score; in the second column the 
difference was lowered to 0.01; and in the third 
column to 0.005. The numbers following the hash 
signs in the header row indicate the number of 
sentences in a given set.  
 
metric PH score ? LM score 
TER 1.997 
BLEU 7.16% 
NIST 6.58% 
dep 4.93% 
dep+paraphr 4.80% 
GTM 3.89% 
METEOR 3.80% 
dep_preds 3.79% 
dep+paraphr_preds 3.70% 
dep+WordNet 3.55% 
dep+WordNet_preds 2.60% 
METEOR+WordNet 1.56% 
Table 3. Difference between scores assigned to Pharaoh 
and Logomedia. Positive numbers show by how much 
Pharaoh?s score was higher than Logomedia?s. Legend: 
dep = dependency f-score, paraph = paraphrases, _preds = 
predicate-only f-score.  
 
~ 0.05 #1692 ~ 0.01 #567 ~ 0.005 #335 
NIST 2.29% NIST 1.76% NIST 1.48% 
BLEU 0.95% BLEU 0.42% BLEU 0.59% 
GTM 0.94% GTM 0.29% GTM -0.09% 
d+p 0.67% d 0.04% d+p -0.15% 
d 0.61% d+p 0.02% d -0.24% 
d+WN -0.29% d+WN -0.78% d+WN -0.99% 
d+p_pr -0.70% M -0.99% d+p_pr -1.30% 
d_pr -0.75% d_pr -1.37% d_pr -1.43% 
M -1.03% d+p_pr -1.38% M -1.57% 
d+WN_pr -1.43% d+WN_pr -1.97% d+WN_pr -1.94% 
M+WN -2.51% M+WN -2.21% M+WN -2.74% 
TER -1.579 TER -1.228 TER -1.739 
Table 4. Difference between scores assigned to Pharaoh 
and Logomedia for sets of increasing similarity. Positive 
numbers show Pharaoh?s advantage, negative numbers 
show Logomedia?s advantage. Legend: d = dependency f-
score, p = paraphrases, _pr = predicate-only f-score, M = 
METEOR, WN = WordNet.  
 
These results confirm earlier suggestions that 
the predicate-only version of the dependency-
based evaluation is less biased in favour of the 
statistical MT system than the version that includes 
all dependency types. Adding a sufficient number 
of lexical choices reduces the bias even further; 
although again, paraphrases generated from the test 
set only are too few to make a significant 
difference. Similarly to METEOR, the 
dependency-based method shows on the whole 
lower bias than other metrics. However, we cannot 
be certain that the underlying scores vary linearly 
with each other and with human judgements, as we 
have no framework of reference such as human 
segment-level assessment of translation quality in 
this case. Therefore, the correlation with human 
judgement is analysed in our next experiment.   
4.2 Correlation with human judgement ? 
MultiTrans 
To calculate how well the dependency-based 
method correlates with human judgement, and how 
it compares to the correlation shown by other 
metrics, we conducted an experiment on Chinese-
English newswire text.  
4.2.1 Experimental design 
We used the data from the Linguistic Data 
Consortium Multiple Translation Chinese (MTC) 
Parts 2 and 4. The data consists of multiple 
translations of Chinese newswire text, four human-
produced references, and segment-level human 
scores for a subset of the translation-reference 
pairs. Although a single translated segment was 
always evaluated by more than one judge, the 
judges used a different reference every time, which 
is why we treated each translation-reference-
human score triple as a separate segment. In effect, 
the test set created from this data contained 16,800 
segments. As in the previous experiment, the 
translation was scored using BLEU, NIST, GTM, 
TER, METEOR, and the dependency-based 
method. 
4.2.2 Results 
We calculated Pearson?s correlation coefficient for 
segment-level scores that were given by each 
metric and by human judges. The results of the 
correlation are shown in Table 5. Note that the 
correlation for TER is negative, because in TER 
zero is the perfect score, in contrast to other 
metrics where zero is the worst possible score; 
however, this time the absolute values can be 
easily compared to each other. Rows are ordered 
85
by the highest value of the (absolute) correlation 
with the human score. 
First, it seems like none of the metrics is very 
good at reflecting human fluency judgments; the 
correlation values in the first column are 
significantly lower than the correlation with 
accuracy. However, the dependency-based method 
in almost all its versions has decidedly the highest 
correlation in this area. This can be explained by 
the method?s sensitivity to the grammatical 
structure of the sentence: a more grammatical 
translation is also a translation that is more fluent. 
 
H_FL  H_AC  H_AVE  
d+WN 0.168 M+WN 0.294 M+WN 0.255 
d   0.162 M   0.278 d+WN 0.244 
d+WN_pr 0.162 NIST 0.273 M   0.242 
BLEU 0.155 d+WN 0.266 NIST 0.238 
d_pr 0.154 GTM 0.260 d   0.236 
M+WN 0.153 d  0.257 GTM 0.230 
M   0.149 d+WN_pr 0.232 d+WN_pr 0.220 
NIST 0.146 d_pr 0.224 d_pr 0.212 
GTM 0.146 BLEU 0.199 BLEU 0.197 
TER -0.133 TER -0.192 TER -0.182 
Table 5. Pearson?s correlation between human scores and 
evaluation metrics. Legend: d = dependency f-score, _pr = 
predicate-only f-score, M = METEOR, WN = WordNet, 
H_FL = human fluency score, H_AC = human accuracy 
score, H_AVE = human average score.9 
 
Second, and somewhat surprisingly, in this 
detailed examination the relative order of the 
metrics changed. The predicate-only version of the 
dependency-based method appears to be less 
adequate for correlation with human scores than its 
non-restricted versions. As to the correlation with 
human evaluation of translation accuracy, our 
method currently falls short of METEOR and even 
NIST. This is caused by the fact that both 
METEOR and NIST assign relatively little 
importance to the position of a specific word in a 
sentence, therefore rewarding the translation for 
content rather than linguistic form. For our 
dependency-based method, the noise introduced by 
the parser might be the reason for low correlation: 
if even one side of the translation-reference pair 
contains parsing errors, this may lead to a less 
reliable score. An obvious solution to this problem, 
                                                 
9 In general terms, an increase of 0.015 between any two 
scores is significant with a 95% confidence interval. 
which we are examining at the moment, is to 
include a number of best parses for each side of the 
evaluation. 
High correlation with human judgements of 
fluency and lower correlation with accuracy results 
in a high second place for our dependency-based 
method when it comes to the average correlation 
coefficient. The WordNet-boosted dependency-
based method scores only slightly lower than 
METEOR with WordNet. These results are very 
encouraging, especially as we see a number of 
ways the dependency-based method could be 
further developed.  
5 Current and future work 
While the idea of a dependency-based method is a 
natural step in the direction of a deeper linguistic 
analysis for MT evaluation, it does require an LFG 
grammar and parser for the target language. There 
are several obvious areas for improvement with 
respect to the method itself. First, we would also 
like to adapt the process of translation-reference 
dependency comparison to include n-best parsers 
for the input sentences, as well as some basic 
transformations which would allow an even deeper 
logical analysis of input (e.g. passive to active 
voice transformation). 
 Second, we want to repeat both 
experiments using a paraphrase set derived from a 
large parallel corpus, rather than the test set, as 
described in Owczarzak et al (2006). While 
retaining the advantage of having a similar size to 
a corresponding set of WordNet synonyms, this set 
will also capture low-level syntactic variations, 
which can increase the number of matches and the 
correlation with human scores. 
 Finally, we want to take advantage of the 
fact that the score produced by the dependency-
based method is the proportional average of f-
scores for a group of up to 32 (but usually far 
fewer) different dependency types. We plan to 
implement a set of weights, one for each 
dependency type, trained in such a way as to 
maximize the correlation of the final dependency f-
score with human evaluation.  
6 Conclusions 
In this paper we present a novel way of 
evaluating MT output. So far, all metrics relied on 
86
comparing translation and reference on a string 
level. Even given reordering, stemming, and 
synonyms for individual words, current methods 
are still far from reaching human ability to assess 
the quality of translation. Our method compares 
the sentences on the level of their grammatical 
structure, as exemplified by their f-structure 
dependency triples produced by an LFG parser. 
The dependency-based method can be further 
augmented by using paraphrases or WordNet 
synonyms, and is available in full version and 
predicate-only version. In our experiments we 
showed that the dependency-based method 
correlates higher than any other metric with human 
evaluation of translation fluency, and shows high 
correlation with the average human score. The use 
of dependencies in MT evaluation is a rather new 
idea and requires more research to improve it, but 
the method shows potential to become an accurate 
evaluation metric.  
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was partly funded by Microsoft Ireland 
PhD studentship  2006-8  for the first author of the 
paper. We would also like to thank our reviewers 
for their insightful comments. All remaining errors 
are our own. 
References 
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: 
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. 
Proceedings of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Intrinsic 
and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or 
Summarization: 65-73. 
Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax, 
Blackwell, Oxford. 
Aoife Cahill, Michael Burke, Ruth O?Donovan, Josef 
van Genabith, and Andy Way. 2004. Long-Distance 
Dependency Resolution in Automatically Acquired 
Wide-Coverage PCFG-Based LFG Approximations, 
In Proceedings of ACL-04: 320-327 
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne and Philipp 
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in 
Machine Translation Research. Proceedings of  
EACL 2006: 249-256 
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of MT 
Quality using N-gram Co-occurrence Statistics. 
Proceedings of HLT 2002: 138-145. 
David Kauchak and Regina Barzilay. 2006. 
Paraphrasing for Automatic Evaluation. Proceedings 
of HLT-NAACL 2006: 45-462. 
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a beam search decoder 
for phrase-based statistical machine translation 
models. Proceedings of the AMTA 2004 Workshop 
on Machine Translation: From real users to 
research: 115-124. 
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for 
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of MT 
Summit 2005: 79-86. 
Alex Kulesza and Stuart M. Shieber. 2004. A learning 
approach to improving sentence-level MT evaluation. 
In Proceedings of the TMI 2004: 75-84. 
Gregor Leusch, Nicola Ueffing and Hermann Ney. 
2006. CDER: Efficient MT Evaluation Using Block 
Movements. Proceedings of EACL 2006: 241-248. 
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Modes. 
Computational Linguistics, 29:19-51. 
Karolina Owczarzak, Declan Groves, Josef van 
Genabith, and Andy Way. 2006. Contextual Bitext-
Derived Paraphrases in Automatic MT Evaluation. 
Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL 2006 Workshop on 
Statistical Machine Translation: 86-93. 
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and 
WeiJing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of 
ACL 2002: 311-318. 
Grazia Russo-Lassner, Jimmy Lin, and Philip Resnik. 
2005. A Paraphrase-based Approach to Machine 
Translation Evaluation. Technical Report LAMP-TR-
125/CS-TR-4754/UMIACS-TR-2005-57, University 
of Maryland, College Park, MD. 
Mathew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, John 
Makhoul, Linnea Micciula. 2006. A Study of 
Translation Error Rate with Targeted Human 
Annotation. Proceedings of AMTA 2006: 223-231. 
Joseph P. Turian, Luke Shen, and I. Dan Melamed. 
2003. Evaluation of Machine Translation and Its 
Evaluation. Proceedings of MT Summit 2003: 386-
393. 
Ying Zhang and Stephan Vogel. 2004. Measuring 
confidence intervals for the machine translation 
evaluation metrics. Proceedings of TMI 2004: 85-94. 
87
