Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 101?108,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Emergence of Community Structures in Vowel Inventories:
An Analysis based on Complex Networks
Animesh Mukherjee, Monojit Choudhury, Anupam Basu, Niloy Ganguly
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
{animeshm,monojit,anupam,niloy}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
Abstract
In this work, we attempt to capture patterns
of co-occurrence across vowel systems and
at the same time figure out the nature of the
force leading to the emergence of such pat-
terns. For this purpose we define a weighted
network where the vowels are the nodes
and an edge between two nodes (read vow-
els) signify their co-occurrence likelihood
over the vowel inventories. Through this
network we identify communities of vow-
els, which essentially reflect their patterns
of co-occurrence across languages. We ob-
serve that in the assortative vowel communi-
ties the constituent nodes (read vowels) are
largely uncorrelated in terms of their fea-
tures indicating that they are formed based
on the principle of maximal perceptual con-
trast. However, in the rest of the communi-
ties, strong correlations are reflected among
the constituent vowels with respect to their
features indicating that it is the principle of
feature economy that binds them together.
1 Introduction
Linguistic research has documented a wide range of
regularities across the sound systems of the world?s
languages (Liljencrants and Lindblom, 1972; Lind-
blom, 1986; de Boer, 2000; Choudhury et al, 2006;
Mukherjee et al, 2006a; Mukherjee et al, 2006b).
Functional phonologists argue that such regulari-
ties are the consequences of certain general princi-
ples like maximal perceptual contrast (Liljencrants
and Lindblom, 1972), which is desirable between
the phonemes of a language for proper percep-
tion of each individual phoneme in a noisy envi-
ronment, ease of articulation (Lindblom and Mad-
dieson, 1988; de Boer, 2000), which requires that
the sound systems of all languages are formed of
certain universal (and highly frequent) sounds, and
ease of learnability (de Boer, 2000), which is re-
quired so that a speaker can learn the sounds of
a language with minimum effort. In the study of
vowel systems the optimizing principle, which has
a long tradition (Jakobson, 1941; Wang, 1968) in
linguistics, is maximal perceptual contrast. A num-
ber of numerical studies based on this principle have
been reported in literature (Liljencrants and Lind-
blom, 1972; Lindblom, 1986; Schwartz et al, 1997).
Of late, there have been some attempts to explain the
vowel systems through multi agent simulations (de
Boer, 2000) and genetic algorithms (Ke et al, 2003);
all of these experiments also use the principle of per-
ceptual contrast for optimization purposes.
An exception to the above trend is a school of
linguists (Boersma, 1998; Clements, 2004) who ar-
gue that perceptual contrast-based theories fail to ac-
count for certain fundamental aspects such as the
patterns of co-occurrence of vowels based on sim-
ilar acoustic/articulatory features1 observed across
1In linguistics, features are the elements, which distinguish
one phoneme from another. The features that describe the
vowles can be broadly categorized into three different classes
namely the height, the backness and the roundedness. Height
refers to the vertical position of the tongue relative to either the
roof of the mouth or the aperture of the jaw. Backness refers
to the horizontal tongue position during the articulation of a
vowel relative to the back of the mouth. Roundedness refers to
whether the lips are rounded or not during the articulation of a
101
the vowel inventories. Instead, they posit that the
observed patterns, especially found in larger size in-
ventories (Boersma, 1998), can be explained only
through the principle of feature economy (de Groot,
1931; Martinet, 1955). According to this principle,
languages tend to maximize the combinatorial pos-
sibilities of a few distinctive features to generate a
large number of sounds.
The aforementioned ideas can be possibly linked
together through the example illustrated by Figure 1.
As shown in the figure, the initial plane P constitutes
of a set of three very frequently occurring vowels /i/,
/a/ and /u/, which usually make up the smaller in-
ventories and do not have any single feature in com-
mon. Thus, smaller inventories are quite likely to
have vowels that exhibit a large extent of contrast
in their constituent features. However, in bigger in-
ventories, members from the higher planes (P? and
P
??) are also present and they in turn exhibit fea-
ture economy. For instance, in the plane P? com-
prising of the set of vowels /?i/, /a?/, /u?/, we find a
nasal modification applied equally on all the three
members of the set. This is actually indicative of an
economic behavior that the larger inventories show
while choosing a new feature in order to reduce the
learnability effort of the speakers. The third plane
P
?? reinforces this idea by showing that the larger
the size of the inventories the greater is the urge for
this economy in the choice of new features. An-
other interesting facet of the figure are the relations
that exist across the planes (indicated by the bro-
ken lines). All these relations are representative of a
common linguistic concept of robustness (Clements,
2004) in which one less frequently occurring vowel
(say /?i/) implies the presence of the other (and not
vice versa) frequently occurring vowel (say /i/) in a
language inventory. These cross-planar relations are
also indicative of feature economy since all the fea-
tures present in the frequent vowel (e.g., /i/) are also
shared by the less frequent one (e.g., /?i/). In sum-
mary, while the basis of organization of the vowel
inventories is perceptual contrast as indicated by
the plane P in Figure 1, economic modifications of
the perceptually distinct vowels takes place with the
vowel. There are however still more possible features of vowel
quality, such as the velum position (e.g., nasality), type of vocal
fold vibration (i.e., phonation), and tongue root position (i.e.,
secondary place of articulation).
increase in the inventory size (as indicated by the
planes P ? and P ?? in Figure 1).
In this work we attempt to corroborate the above
conjecture by automatically capturing the patterns of
co-occurrence that are prevalent in and across the
planes illustrated in Figure 1. In order to do so,
we define the ?Vowel-Vowel Network? or VoNet,
which is a weighted network where the vowels are
the nodes and an edge between two nodes (read vow-
els) signify their co-occurrence likelihood over the
vowel inventories. We conduct community struc-
ture analysis of different versions of VoNet in or-
der to capture the patterns of co-occurrence in and
across the planes P , P ? and P ?? shown in Figure 1.
The plane P consists of the communities, which
are formed of those vowels that have a very high
frequency of occurrence (usually assortative (New-
man, 2003) in nature). We observe that the con-
stituent nodes (read vowels) of these assortative
vowel communities are largely uncorrelated in terms
of their features. On the other hand, the commu-
nities obtained from VoNet, in which the links be-
tween the assortative nodes are absent, corresponds
to the co-occurrence patterns of the planes P? and
P
??
. In these communities, strong correlations are
reflected among the constituent vowels with respect
to their features. Moreover, the co-occurrences
across the planes can be captured by the community
analysis of VoNet where only the connections be-
tween the assortative and the non-assortative nodes,
with the non-assortative node co-occurring very fre-
quently with the assortative one, are retained while
the rest of the connections are filtered out. We find
that these communities again exhibit a high correla-
tion among the constituent vowels.
This article is organized as follows: Section 2 de-
scribes the experimental setup in order to explore
the co-occurrence principles of the vowel inven-
tories. In this section we formally define VoNet,
outline its construction procedure, and present a
community-finding algorithm in order to capture the
co-occurrence patterns across the vowel systems. In
section 3 we report the experiments performed to
obtain the community structures, which are repre-
sentative of the co-occurrence patterns in and across
the planes discussed above. Finally, we conclude in
section 4 by summarizing our contributions, point-
ing out some of the implications of the current work
102
Figure 1: The organizational principles of the vowels (in decreasing frequency of occurrence) indicated
through different hypothetical planes.
and indicating the possible future directions.
2 Experimental Setup
In this section we systematically develop the ex-
perimental setup in order to investigate the co-
occurrence principles of the vowel inventories. For
this purpose, we formally define VoNet, outline
its construction procedure, describe a community-
finding algorithm to decompose VoNet to obtain the
community structures that essentially reflects the co-
occurrence patterns of the vowel inventories.
2.1 Definition and Construction of VoNet
Definition of VoNet: We define VoNet as a network
of vowels, represented as G = ? V
V
, E ? where V
V
is the set of nodes labeled by the vowels and E is
the set of edges occurring in VoNet. There is an
edge e ? E between two nodes, if and only if there
exists one or more language(s) where the nodes
(read vowels) co-occur. The weight of the edge e
(also edge-weight) is the number of languages in
which the vowels connected by e co-occur. The
weight of a node u (also node-weight) is the number
of languages in which the vowel represented by u
occurs. In other words, if a vowel v
i
represented by
the node u occurs in the inventory of n languages
then the node-weight of u is assigned the value
n. Also if the vowel v
j
is represented by the node
v and there are w languages in which vowels v
i
and v
j
occur together then the weight of the edge
connecting u and v is assigned the value v. Figure 2
illustrates this structure by reproducing some of the
nodes and edges of VoNet.
Construction of VoNet: Many typological stud-
ies (Lindblom and Maddieson, 1988; Ladefoged
and Maddieson, 1996; Hinskens and Weijer, 2003;
Choudhury et al, 2006; Mukherjee et al, 2006a;
Mukherjee et al, 2006b) of segmental inventories
have been carried out in past on the UCLA Phono-
logical Segment Inventory Database (UPSID) (Mad-
dieson, 1984). Currently UPSID records the sound
inventories of 451 languages covering all the major
language families of the world. The selection of the
languages for the inclusion on UPSID is governed
by a quota principle seeking maximum genetic di-
versity among extant languages in order to reduce
bias towards any particular family. In this work we
have therefore used UPSID comprising of these 451
languages and 180 vowels found across them, for
103
Figure 3: A partial illustration of VoNet. All edges in this figure have an edge-weight greater than or equal to
15. The number on each node corresponds to a particular vowel. For instance, node number 72 corresponds
to /?i/.
constructing VoNet. Consequently, the set V
V
com-
prises 180 elements (nodes) and the set E comprises
3135 elements (edges). Figure 3 presents a partial
illustration of VoNet as constructed from UPSID.
2.2 Finding Community Structures
We attempt to identify the communities appearing
in VoNet by the extended Radicchi et al (Radic-
chi et al, 2003) algorithm for weighted networks
presented in (Mukherjee et al, 2006a). The ba-
sic idea is that if the weights on the edges form-
ing a triangle (loops of length three) are comparable
then the group of vowels represented by this trian-
gle highly occur together rendering a pattern of co-
occurrence while if these weights are not compara-
ble then there is no such pattern. In order to capture
this property we define a strength metric S (in the
lines of (Mukherjee et al, 2006a)) for each of the
edges of VoNet as follows. Let the weight of the
edge (u,v), where u, v ? V
V
, be denoted by w
uv
.
We define S as,
S =
w
uv
?
?
i?V
C
?{u,v}
(w
ui
? w
vi
)
2
(1)
if
?
?
i?V
C
?{u,v}
(w
ui
? w
vi
)
2
> 0 else S = ?.
The denominator in this expression essentially tries
to capture whether or not the weights on the edges
forming triangles are comparable (the higher the
value of S the more comparable the weights are).
The network can be then decomposed into clusters
104
Figure 2: A partial illustration of the nodes and
edges in VoNet. The labels of the nodes denote the
vowels represented in IPA (International Phonetic
Alphabet). The numerical values against the edges
and nodes represent their corresponding weights.
For example /i/ occurs in 393 languages; /e/ occurs
in 124 languages while they co-occur in 117 lan-
guages.
or communities by removing edges that have S less
than a specified threshold (say ?).
At this point it is worthwhile to clarify the sig-
nificance of a vowel community. A community of
vowels actually refers to a set of vowels which occur
together in the language inventories very frequently.
In other words, there is a higher than expected prob-
ability of finding a vowel v in an inventory which al-
ready hosts the other members of the community to
which v belongs. For instance, if /i/, /a/ and /u/ form
a vowel community and if /i/ and /a/ are present in
any inventory then there is a very high chance that
the third member /u/ is also present in the inventory.
3 Experiments and Results
In this section we describe the experiments per-
formed and the results obtained from the analysis of
VoNet. In order to find the co-occurrence patterns
in and across the planes of Figure 1 we define three
versions of VoNet namely VoNet
assort
, VoNet
rest
and VoNet
rest
? . The construction procedure for
each of these versions are presented below.
Construction of VoNet
assort
: VoNet
assort
com-
prises the assortative2 nodes having node-weights
2The term ?assortative node? here refers to the nodes having
a very high node-weight, i.e., consonants having a very high
above 120 (i.e, vowels occurring in more than 120
languages in UPSID), along with only the edges
inter-connecting these nodes. The rest of the nodes
(having node-weight less than 120) and edges are
removed from the network. We make a choice
of this node-weight for classifying the assortative
nodes from the non-assortative ones by observing
the distribution of the occurrence frequency of the
vowels illustrated in Figure 4. The curve shows
the frequency of a vowel (y-axis) versus the rank
of the vowel according to this frequency (x-axis)
in log-log scale. The high frequency zone (marked
by a circle in the figure) can be easily distinguished
from the low-frequency one since there is distinct
gap featuring between the two in the curve.
Figure 4: The frequency (y-axis) versus rank (x-
axis) curve in log-log scale illustrating the distrib-
ution of the occurrence of the vowels over the lan-
guage inventories of UPSID.
Figure 5 illustrates how VoNet
assort
is con-
structed from VoNet. Presently, the number of
nodes in VoNet
assort
is 9 and the number of edges
is 36.
Construction of VoNet
rest
: VoNet
rest
comprises
all the nodes as that of VoNet. It also has all
the edges of VoNet except for those edges that
inter-connect the assortative nodes. Figure 6 shows
how VoNet
rest
can be constructed from VoNet. The
number of nodes and edges in VoNet
rest
are 180
frequency of occurrence.
105
Figure 5: The construction procedure of VoNet
assort
from VoNet.
and 12933 respectively.
Construction of VoNet
rest
?: VoNet
rest
? again
comprises all the nodes as that of VoNet. It con-
sists of only the edges that connect an assorta-
tive node with a non-assortative one if the non-
assortative node co-occurs more than ninety five per-
cent of times with the assortative nodes. The basic
idea behind such a construction is to capture the co-
occurrence patterns based on robustness (Clements,
2004) (discussed earlier in the introductory section)
that actually defines the cross-planar relationships in
Figure 1. Figure 7 shows how VoNet
rest
? can be
constructed from VoNet. The number of nodes in
VoNet
rest
? is 180 while the number of edges is 1144.
We separately apply the community-finding al-
gorithm (discussed earlier) on each of VoNet
assort
,
VoNet
rest
and VoNet
rest
? in order to obtain the re-
spective vowel communities. We can obtain dif-
ferent sets of communities by varying the threshold
?. A few assortative vowel communities (obtained
from VoNet
assort
) are noted in Table 1. Some of the
3We have neglected nodes with node-weight less than 3
since these nodes correspond to vowels that occur in less than 3
languages in UPSID and the communities they form are there-
fore statistically insignificant.
4The network does not get disconnected due to this construc-
tion since, there is always a small fraction of edges that run be-
tween assortative and low node-weight non-assortative nodes of
otherwise disjoint groups.
communities obtained from VoNet
rest
are presented
in Table 2. We also note some of the communities
obtained from VoNet
rest
? in Table 3.
Tables 1 , 2 and 3 indicate that the communi-
ties in VoNet
assort
are formed based on the princi-
ple of perceptual contrast whereas the formation of
the communities in VoNet
rest
as well as VoNet
rest
?
is largely governed by feature economy. Hence,
the smaller vowel inventories which are composed
of mainly the members of VoNet
assort
are orga-
nized based on the principle of maximal percep-
tual contrast whereas the larger vowel inventories,
which also contain members from VoNet
rest
and
VoNet
rest
? apart from VoNet
assort
, show a consider-
able extent of feature economy. Note that the groups
presented in the tables are quite representative and
the technique described above indeed captures many
other such groups; however, due to paucity of space
we are unable to present all of them here.
4 Conclusion
In this paper we explored the co-occurrence prin-
ciples of the vowels, across the inventories of the
world?s languages. In order to do so we started with
a concise review of the available literature on vowel
inventories. We proposed an automatic procedure
to extract the co-occurrence patterns of the vowels
across languages.
Some of our important findings from this work
are,
? The smaller vowel inventories (corresponding
to the communities of
VoNet
assort
) tend to be organized based on the
principle of maximal perceptual contrast;
? On the other hand, the larger vowel invento-
ries (mainly comprising of the communities of
VoNet
rest
) reflect a considerable extent of fea-
ture economy;
? Co-occurrences based on robustness are preva-
lent across vowel inventories (captured through
the communities of VoNet
rest
?) and their emer-
gence is again a consequence of feature econ-
omy.
Until now, we have concentrated mainly on the
methodology that can be used to automatically cap-
106
Figure 6: The construction procedure of VoNet
rest
from VoNet.
Figure 7: The construction procedure of VoNet
rest
? from VoNet.
Community Features in Contrast
/i/, /a/, /u/ (low/high), (front/central/back), (unrounded/rounded)
/e/, /o/ (higher-mid/mid), (front/back), (unrounded/rounded)
Table 1: Assortative vowel communities. The contrastive features separated by slashes (/) are shown within
parentheses. Comma-separated entries represent the features that are in use from the three respective classes
namely the height, the backness, and the roundedness.
ture the co-occurrence patterns across the vowel sys-
tems. However, it would be also interesting to in-
vestigate the extent to which these patterns are gov-
erned by the forces of maximal perceptual contrast
and feature economy. Such an investigation calls
for quantitative definitions of the above forces and
107
Community Features in Common
/
?
i/, /a?/, /u?/ nasalized
/?i:/, /a?:/, /u?:/ long, nasalized
/i:/, /u:/, /a:/, /o:/, /e:/ long
Table 2: Some of the vowel communities obtained from VoNet
rest
.
Community Features in Common
/i/, /?i/ high, front, unrounded
/a/, /a?/ low, central, unrounded
/u/, /u?/ high, back, rounded
Table 3: Some of the vowel communities obtained from VoNet
rest
? . Comma-separated entries represent the
features that are in use from the three respective classes namely the height, the backness, and the rounded-
ness.
a thorough evaluation of the vowel communities in
terms of these definitions. We look forward to ac-
complish the same as a part of our future work.
References
B. de Boer. 2000. Self-organisation in vowel systems,
Journal of Phonetics, 28(4), 441?465.
P. Boersma. 1998. Functional phonology, Doctoral the-
sis, University of Amsterdam, The Hague: Holland
Academic Graphics.
M. Choudhury, A. Mukherjee, A. Basu and N. Ganguly.
2006. Analysis and synthesis of the distribution of
consonants over languages: A complex network ap-
proach, Proceedings of COLING?ACL, 128?135, Syd-
ney, Australia.
N. Clements. 2004. Features and sound inventories,
Symposium on Phonological Theory: Representations
and Architecture, CUNY.
A. W. de Groot. 1931. Phonologie und Phonetik als
funktionswissenschaften, Travaux du Cercle Linguis-
tique de, 4, 116?147.
F. Hinskens and J. Weijer. 2003. Patterns of segmen-
tal modification in consonant inventories: A cross-
linguistic study, Linguistics, 41, 6.
R. Jakobson. 2003. Kindersprache, aphasie und allge-
meine lautgesetze, Uppsala, reprinted in Selected Writ-
ings I. Mouton, (The Hague, 1962), 328-401.
J. Ke, M. Ogura and W.S.-Y. Wang. 2003. Optimization
models of sound systems using genetic algorithms,
Computational Linguistics, 29(1), 1?18.
P. Ladefoged and I. Maddieson. 1996. Sounds of the
worlds languages, Oxford: Blackwell.
J. Liljencrants and B. Lindblom. 1972. Numerical simu-
lation of vowel quality systems: the role of perceptual
contrast, Language, 48, 839?862.
B. Lindblom. 1986. Phonetic universals in vowel sys-
tems, Experimental Phonology, 13?44.
B. Lindblom and I. Maddieson. 1988. Phonetic uni-
versals in consonant systems, Language, Speech, and
Mind, Routledge, London, 62?78.
I. Maddieson. Patterns of sounds, 1984. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
A. Martinet. 1955. `Economie des changements
phone?tiques, Berne: A. Francke.
A. Mukherjee, M. Choudhury, A. Basu and N. Ganguly.
2006. Modeling the co-occurrence principles of the
consonant inventories: A complex network approach,
arXiv:physics/0606132 (preprint).
A. Mukherjee, M. Choudhury, A. Basu and N. Gan-
guly. 2006. Self-organization of the Sound In-
ventories: Analysis and Synthesis of the Occur-
rence and Co-occurrence Networks of Consonants.
arXiv:physics/0610120 (preprint).
M. E. J. Newman. 2003. The structure and function of
complex networks, SIAM Review, 45, 167?256.
F. Radicchi, C. Castellano, F. Cecconi, V. Loreto and D.
Parisi. 2003. Defining and identifying communities in
networks, PNAS, 101(9), 2658?2663.
J-L. Schwartz, L-J. Bo?e, N. Valle?e and C. Abry. 1997.
The dispersion-focalization theory of vowel systems,
Journal of Phonetics, 25, 255?286.
W. S.-Y. Wang. 1968. The basis of speech. Project
on linguistic analysis reports, University of California,
Berkeley, (reprinted in The Learning of Language in
1971).
108
