Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Language Processing, pages 41?50,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 28, 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Coordination in Conversation and Rapport 
Justine Cassell, Alastair J. Gill and Paul A. Tepper 
Center for Technology & Social Behavior 
Northwestern University 
2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208 
{justine, alastair, ptepper}@northwestern.edu 
 
Abstract 
We investigate the role of increasing 
friendship in dialogue, and propose a first 
step towards a computational model of the 
role of long-term relationships in language 
use between humans and embodied conver-
sational agents. Data came from a study of 
friends and strangers, who either could or 
could not see one another, and who were 
asked to give directions to one-another, 
three subsequent times. Analysis focused 
on differences in the use of dialogue acts 
and non-verbal behaviors, as well as co-
occurrences of dialogue acts, eye gaze and 
head nods, and found a pattern of verbal 
and nonverbal behavior that differentiates 
the dialogue of friends from that of strang-
ers, and differentiates early acquaintances 
from those who have worked together be-
fore. Based on these results, we present a 
model of deepening rapport which would 
enable an ECA to begin to model patterns 
of human relationships. 
1 Introduction 
 What characterizes the language of people who 
have known one another for a long time? In the US 
one thinks of groups of friends, leaning in towards 
one another, laughing, telling jokes at one an-
other?s expense, and interrupting one another in 
their eagerness to contribute to the conversation.  
The details may differ from culture to culture, but 
the fact of differences between groups of friends 
and groups of strangers are probably universal. 
Which characteristics, if any, reliably differentiates 
friends and strangers? Which can make a new 
friend feel welcome? An old friend feel appreci-
ated? Advances in natural language are ensuring 
that embodied conversational agents (ECAs) are 
increasingly scintillating, emotionally and socially 
expressive, and personality-rich. However, for the 
most part, those same ECAs demonstrate amnesia, 
beginning every conversation with a user as if it is 
their first, and never getting past the stage of intro-
ductory remarks. 
As the field of ECAs matures, and these systems 
are found on an increasing number of platforms, 
for an increasing number of applications, we feel 
that it is time to ensure that ECAs be able to en-
gage in deepening relationships that make their 
collaboration with humans productive and satisfy-
ing over long periods of time. To this end, in this 
paper we examine the verbal and nonverbal corre-
lates of friendship in an empirical study, and then 
take first steps towards a model of deepening 
friendship and rapport in ECAs. The current study 
is a part of a larger research program into linguistic 
and social coordination devices from the utterance 
level to the relationship level ? how they work in 
humans, how they can be modeled in virtual hu-
mans, and how virtual humans can be used to teach 
people who wish to learn these skills.  
2 Background & Theory 
As people become closer, their conversational 
style changes. They may raise more topics in the 
course of a conversation, refer more to themselves 
as a single unit than as two people, and be more 
responsive to one another?s talk (Cassell & Tver-
sky, 2005; Hornstein, 1982). They also are likely 
to sustain eye contact longer, smile more, and lean 
more towards one another (Grahe & Bernieri, 
1999; Richmond & McCroskey, 1995). In addition, 
friends appear to have fewer difficulties with lexi-
cal search, perhaps because they can rely on 
greater shared knowledge, and are more likely to 
talk at the same time, and to negotiate turn-taking 
in a less rigid manner, both through gaze and ges-
41
ture (Welji & Duncan, 2005). Tickle-Degnen & 
Rosenthal (1990) propose a model of deepening 
rapport over time based on the relationship among 
three components: positivity, mutual attention and 
coordination. As shown in Figure 1, as friendship 
deepens, the importance of positivity decreases, 
while the importance of coordination increases. 
Attention to the conversational partner, however, is 
hypothesized to remain constant. That is, strangers 
are more likely to be polite and uniformly positive 
in their talk, but also more likely to be awkward 
and badly coordinated with their interlocutors.   
As a relationship progresses and impressions 
have been formed and accepted, disagreement be-
comes acceptable and important. This may entail 
an increase in face-threatening issues and behav-
iors (cf. Brown & Levinson, 1987) accompanied 
by a decrease in the need to mediate these threats. 
At this stage in the relationship, coordination be-
comes highly important, so that the conversation 
will be less awkward and there is less likelihood of 
misunderstanding. Attention to one another, how-
ever, does not change. Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal 
point out that these features are as likely to be ex-
pressed nonverbally (through smiles, nods, and 
posture shifts, for example) as verbally.  
One criticism of Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal, 
and similar work, is that positive feelings for, and 
knowledge about, the other person are not distin-
guished (Cappella, 1990). That is, what might be 
perceived as lack of rapport could actually be a 
lack of familiarity with a partner?s behavioral cues 
for indicating misunderstanding or requesting in-
formation.  
This conflation may come from the fact that the 
word rapport is used both to refer to the phenome-
non of instant responsiveness (?we just clicked?) 
and that of deepening interdependence over time. 
ECA research has been divided between a focus on 
instant rapport (Gratch et al, 2006; Maatman, 
Gratch, & Marsella, 2005) and a focus on estab-
lishing and maintaining relationships over time 
(Bickmore & Picard, 2005; Cassell & Bickmore, 
2002; Stronks, Nijholt, van der Vet, & Heylen, 
2002). Perhaps due to difficulties with analyzing 
dyadic interdependent processes, and modeling 
them in computational systems, much of the work 
in both traditions still takes a signaling approach, 
whereby particular signals (such as nodding or 
small talk) demonstrate the responsiveness, extro-
version, or rapport-readiness of the agent, but are 
decontextualized from the actions of the dyad 
(Duncan, 1990). Although this approach is well 
paired to current technological constraints, it may 
not adequately account for the contingency of in-
terpersonal interaction and conversation. In addi-
tion, in none of these previous studies was there a 
focus on how verbal and nonverbal devices actu-
ally change over the course of a relationship, and 
how those devices are interdependent between 
speaker and listener. An instant rapport approach is 
useful for building systems that are initially attrac-
tive to users; but a system that signals increasing 
familiarity and intimacy through its linguistic and 
nonverbal behaviors may encourage users to stay 
with the system over a longer period of time. 
In the current work, we concentrate how dis-
course and nonverbal behavior changes over time, 
and across the dyad, as this perspective allows us 
to highlight the similarities between interpersonal 
coordination and knowledge coordination of the 
kind that has been studied in both conversational 
analysis and psycholinguistics.  
Work on conversational analysis demonstrates 
the importance of knowledge coordination compo-
nents such as turn-taking and adjacency pairs 
(e.g.Goodwin, 1981; Schegloff & Sacks, 1973). 
Inspired by this approach, work by Clark and col-
laborators on grounding and conversation as joint 
action has made demonstrated coordination and 
cooperation as defining characteristics of conversa-
tion (Clark, 1996; Clark & Brennan, 1991; Clark & 
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). This work has in turn, re-
ceived a significant amount of attention in compu-
tational linguistics, specifically in the study of dia-
logue (Matheson, Poesio, & Traum, 2000; Nakano, 
Reinstein, Stocky, & Cassell, 2003; Traum, 1994; 
Traum & Dillenbourg, 1998). To develop a model 
of nonverbal grounding, Nakano et al (2003) stud-
Early Late
Time of Interaction
Im
p
o
rt
a
n
ce
 f
o
r 
R
a
p
p
o
rt
Mutual Attention
Positivity
Coordination
Figure 1. Three component model of rapport 
(from Tickle-Degen & Rosenthal, 1990). 
42
ied people giving directions with respect to a map 
placed in between them. In that study, we observed 
that when a direction-receiver looked up from the 
map while the direction-giver was still giving di-
rections, the giver would initiate grounding behav-
ior such as a repeat or a rephrase.  
The literature reviewed above leads us to believe 
that there is an integral relationship between social 
and knowledge coordination. In this paper, we at-
tempt to draw conclusions about the changes in 
social and linguistic coordination over the short- 
and long-term in a way that illuminates that poten-
tial relationship, and that is also computationally 
viable. In order to do this, we replicate the task we 
used in our earlier grounding study (Nakano et al, 
2003); that is we use a direction-giving task, where 
half the subjects can see one another, and half are 
divided by a screen. Here, however, half of the 
subjects in each visibility condition are friends and 
half are strangers. And to study the potential de-
velopment of rapport across the experimental pe-
riod, each pair performs three subsequent direc-
tion-giving tasks.  
In the next section, we discuss the experimental 
procedure further. In section 4, we introduce first 
steps towards a new computational model of rap-
port that incorporates conversational coordination 
and grounding, based on our empirical findings. 
3 The Experiment 
3.1 Method 
Participants We collected eight task-based con-
versations (N = 16): in each dyad, one participant 
was accompanied by the experimenter and fol-
lowed a specific route from one place in the rococo 
university building where the experiment was run 
to another place in the building. S/he gave the 
other participant directions on how to reach that 
location, without the use of maps or other props. 
The direction-receiver (Receiver) was instructed to 
ask the direction-giver (Giver) as many questions 
as needed to understand the directions. After the 
conversation, the Receiver had to find the location. 
During recruitment the Giver was always selected 
as someone familiar with the building, while the 
Receiver was unfamiliar. All subjects were under-
graduate students, and were motivated by surprise 
gifts hidden at the target location. 
Design. We manipulated long-term rapport, visi-
bility, and subsequent route in a 2 ? 2 ? 3 design. 
We operationalized long-term rapport as a binary, 
between-subjects variable, with conditions Friends 
(self-reported as friends for at least one year) and 
Strangers. To study the effect of non-verbal behav-
ior, we manipulated visibility as a second between-
subject variable. To do this, half of the participants 
could see each other, and half were separated by a 
dividing panel. To study the effect of acquaintance 
across the experimental period, each dyad com-
pleted the task three consecutive times, going to 
three different locations. 
Data Coding All dyads were videotaped using a 
six-camera array, capturing the participants? body 
movements from the front, side, and above, along 
with close-up views of their faces. From each 
dyad, we made time-aligned transcriptions (using 
Praat). Non-verbal behavior was coded using An-
vil. From the transcripts, the following 9 DAMSL 
Dialogue Acts (Core & Allen, 1997) were coded: 
Acknowledgments, Answers, Assert, Completion, 
Influence, Information Request, Reassert, Repeat-
Rephrase, and Signal Non Understanding. Non-
verbal behavior in giver and receiver was coded 
using the following categories, based on Nakano, 
et al (2003): 
? Look at Speaker ? looking at the speaker?s 
eyes, eye region or face. 
? Look at Hearer ? looking at the hearer?s eyes, 
eye region or face. 
? Head nod [speaker or hearer] ? Head moves 
up and down in a single continuous movement 
on a vertical axis, but eyes do not go above 
the horizontal axis. 
3.2 Results 
We first provide basic statistics on the experimen-
tal manipulations and then examine the role of 
friendship and visibility on verbal and non-verbal 
behavior. 
Basic Statistics: Overall, we find that Friend dy-
ads use a significantly greater number of turns per 
minute than Strangers (t(6)= 2.45, p<.05, two tail), 
however, there is no difference in the mean num-
ber of seconds it took for dyads to complete the 
task. This lack of significance may have been due 
to variance among the dyads, since the mean 
length was 847 seconds for friends and 1049 for 
43
strangers. Given the instructional nature of the 
task, this means that Friends were more likely to 
intervene in the direction-giving than were Strang-
ers, even though ? for most of the dyads ? friends 
appear to take less time to finish. No difference 
was found in turns per minute for Visible and Non-
visible dyads; nor is there a difference in length in 
seconds. For routes, there is no difference in turns 
per minute, however for the length of the route in 
seconds there is a difference (F(2,21)=10.66; 
p<.006) such that the mean length of Route 1 is 
165 seconds; Route 2 is 395 seconds; Route 3 is 
387. For this reason, all statistics below are nor-
malized as a function of the length of that dyad?s 
data in seconds, and graphs are plotted to show 
least squares mean. 
Verbal and Nonverbal behavior: We examine 
the relationship between friendship and visibility 
of both Giver and Receiver across the three route 
tasks. Each of the DAMSL dialogue act variables 
and Non-verbal behavior variables was entered as 
the dependent variable in building mixed method  
models using the JMP statistical package (Version 
6, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, 1989-2005); 
Speaker (direction-giver or receiver), Visibility, 
Friendship and Route were entered as predictor 
variables; experimental dialogue number was also 
entered as a source of random variance. We report 
the results in Tables 1 and 2 (for DAMSL and 
Non-verbal behavior variables respectively). 
Verbal Behavior: In terms of overall variance ex-
plained, we find that Acknowledgments is best 
accounted for by the model (Adjusted R Square of 
0.91), whilst Completion is least well accounted 
for (Adjusted R2 of 0.06).  
Turning first to main effects, for Visibility, 
Visible-Givers use Acknowledgements, Assert, 
Influence, and Reassert dialogue acts more fre-
quently than Non-visible Givers (post-hoc t tests at 
p <.05) 
Visible-Receivers use Acknowledgement, Re-
peat-rephrase, Signal Non Understanding these 
features more frequently than Non-visible Receiv-
ers. (post-hoc t tests at p <.05) 
For Friendship, no differences were found for 
production of DAMSL acts by givers. For receiv-
ers, receiver-strangers use more acknowledge-
ments than receiver friends.  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Nonvisible Visible
L
e
a
st
 S
q
 M
e
a
n
s 
fo
r 
N
o
rm
A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
m
e
n
t
Friends Strangers  
Figure 2: Giver Acknowledgment by condition 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Nonvisible Visible
L
e
a
st
 S
q
 M
e
a
n
s 
fo
r 
N
o
rm
A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
e
m
e
n
t
Friends Strangers  
Figure 3: Receiver Acknowledgment by condition 
 
These main effects are mediated by an interac-
tion between Visibility?Friendship for Acknowl-
edgements. Here, as shown in Figure 2 and 3 we 
see that in the nonvisibility condition, there is no 
difference in the use of acknowledgements per 
second between friends and strangers; on the other 
hand, strangers use more acknowledgements in the 
visible condition (p<.05). A very similar interac-
tion was found for Signal Non Understanding (at 
the trend level of p<.08). 
Route is only a main effect predictor of Signal 
Non Understanding as used by receivers, who pro-
duce it significantly more frequently during the 
third route task than the first. Since signaling one?s 
lack of understanding is potentially face-
DV  Source DF DF Total F Ratio 
ACK  V*F 1 20 10.64** 
COMP  V*F 1 4 9.78* 
 V*F 1 20 3.31? SNU 
 Rte 2 20 3.38* 
Note: ?p<0.08; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01;  
Table 1: Verbal behavior 
 
Abbreviation: ACK=Acknowledgment; COMP=Completion; 
SNU=Signal Non Understanding; Sources abbreviated as: F 
= Friendship; V = Visibility; Rte = Route 
44
threatening, this result may indicate that both 
friends and strangers become more comfortable 
with one another by the third route. 
Nonverbal Behavior: Variance explained by the 
non-verbal models is the greatest for Look At 
Speaker (Adjusted R2 0.83) and least for Speaker 
Nod (0.38). With respect to the main effects result-
ing from the analysis of the non-verbal behaviors, 
we find the following.  
Visibility: Givers nod more in the visible condi-
tion when the receiver is speaking than they do in 
the Non-visible condition.  
Route: For both givers and receivers, there is an 
increase in use of Look At Speaker and Look At 
Hearer, over time; in both cases significantly 
greater instances of these variables occurred during 
Route task 2 and 3, compared to Route 1. Once 
again, these results may indicate increasing coor-
dination in conversational behavior for both 
Friends and Strangers. 
In fact, in the case of head nods, we note an in-
teresting pattern of coordination between speaker 
and hearer head-nods across the routes that differs 
for friends and strangers. For friends, both Re-
ceiver and Giver head nods in response to Receiver 
talk reduce in frequency between the first and sec-
ond routes (Giver t(8)=-2.36; p<0.05; Receiver 
t(8)=-2.28; p<0.05). For strangers, no such ac-
commodation over time occurs. Conversely, for 
friends when the Giver is speaking, both giver and 
receiver head nods increase over the three routes 
(significant only for Receiver t(8)=2.38; p<0.05). 
For strangers, however, head nods decrease (Giver 
t(8)=-2.80; p<0.05, Receiver t(8)=3.92; p<0.01). 
This means that speaker and hearer are increas-
ingly coordinated across the routes, particularly 
when they are friends. 
Interaction of verbal and nonverbal behavior  
So far we have concentrated on how individual 
verbal and nonverbal behaviors differ across con-
ditions. However, this does not take account of the 
interactive nature of the task and the focus of this 
paper. We therefore examine how specific respon-
sive nonverbal behaviors (looking at 
speaker/hearer and head nods) co-occur before, 
during, or after the DAMSL variables. Examina-
tion of the residuals of chi square analysis was 
used to identify co-occurrence of DAMSL dia-
logue acts with nonverbal behavior for each 
Speaker (Giver or Receiver) and condition 
(Friend/Stranger, Visible /Nonvisible). Significant 
over-use or underuse of these verbal/nonverbal co-
occurrences was then compared using the log-
likelihood statistic (Rayson, 2003) to dialogues in 
the other conditions (e.g., Giver-Friend-Visible 
with Giver-Friend-Nonvisible, and Giver-Stranger-
Visible for Head-nods, and just Friends with 
Strangers for the Gaze data). This technique, which 
we used in our earlier grounding experiment 
(Nakano et al, 2003) allows us insight into the 
probable causality of the behaviors of speaker and 
hearer, across verbal and nonverbal behavior.  
When direction-givers are speaking 
Head-nods. Givers did not nod significantly more 
or less frequently across Friends/Strangers condi-
tions when they were speaking. 
Gaze. More than in friendship dialogues, when 
strangers are speaking, and the direction-giver is 
acknowledging, the direction-receiver is likely to 
look at the Giver (G2=17.14; p<0.0001). 
More than in friendship dialogues, in Stranger 
dialogues, both before and after the direction-giver 
asserts something, the Receiver is likely to look at 
the Giver (G2=5.09; p<0.05, and G2=4.16, p<0.05, 
respectively). 
More than in friendship dialogues, both before 
and during the Giver?s use of Repeat-Rephrase 
utterances, the Receiver is likely to look at the 
Giver (G2=35.02; p<0.0001, and G2=60.74; 
p<0.0001, respectively). 
More than in friendship dialogues, both before 
and during the Giver?s use of Info-Request dia-
logue acts, the Receiver is likely to look at the 
Giver (G2=39.01; p<0.0001, and G2=9.60; p<0.01, 
respectively).  
This means that right after a direction receiver 
looks at the direction-giver, the giver produces an 
Assertion, a Repeat-Rephrase, or an Information 
DV  Source DF DF Total F Ratio 
Look At  
Speaker 
 Rte 2 10 18.03*** 
Hearer 
Nod 
 SPKR*F*Rte 2 20 5.14* 
Speaker  
Nod 
 SPKR*F*Rte 2 20 4.21* 
*p<0.05;**p<0.01; ***p<0.001 
Table 2. Non Verbal Behaviors.  
Sources abbreviated as: SPKR = Speaker; F = Friend-
ship; V = Visibility; Rte = Route,  
45
Request. As with Nakano et al, the stranger?s gaze 
towards the direction-giver can be seen as a signal 
of non-understanding and, in these contexts, it 
evokes one of these three grounding responses 
from the direction-giver.  
For friends, on the other hand, gaze towards the 
speaker evokes the next segment of the directions, 
and is therefore functioning as a signal of under-
standing. That is, more than in stranger dialogues, 
both before and during the Giver?s use of Influence 
dialogue acts (utterances such as ?turn right?), Re-
ceivers are more to look at the Giver (G2=4.77; 
p<0.05, and G2=31.92; p<0.0001, respectively). 
When direction-receivers are speaking 
Head-nods. As shown in Figure 4, Strangers used 
more head nods than Friends during their use of 
Acknowledgment dialogue acts in the visible con-
dition (G2 = 10.48, p<.01), however they do not 
differ from friends in the nonvisible condition (G2 
= 0.01, ns).  
89.52
70
41.46
71.43
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Visible NonvisibleR
el
at
iv
e 
F
re
q
u
en
cy
 o
f R
ec
ei
ve
r N
o
d
s 
D
u
ri
n
g
 T
h
ei
r 
U
se
 o
f A
ck
n
o
w
le
d
g
m
en
t
Strangers Friends  
Figure 4: Receiver nods during Acknowledgment 
 
0
2.5
23.08
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Visible Nonvisible
R
el
at
iv
e 
F
re
q
u
en
cy
 o
f R
ec
ei
ve
r 
N
o
d
s 
D
u
ri
n
g
 T
h
ei
r 
u
se
 o
f I
n
fo
-R
eq
u
es
t
Strangers Friends  
Figure 5: Receiver nods during Info Request 
Conversely, as shown in Figure 5, when receiv-
ers are making an Info-Request in the visible con-
dition (G2 =14.13, p<.001), Friends nod much more 
often than Strangers; but do not differ from Strang-
ers in the nonvisible condition (G2 = 1.44, ns). 
Once again, here the friends are marking their un-
derstanding, by nodding, even while they request 
further information. 
Gaze. Before the Receiver?s use of Acknowl-
edgment dialogue acts in Stranger dialogues, the 
Giver is more likely to look at the Receiver 
(G2=10.79; p<0.01). After the Receiver has used an 
Acknowledgment in a Stranger dialogue, s/he is 
more likely to look at the Giver a (G2=14.79; 
p<0.001). This means that among strangers the 
giver and receiver are likely to engage in mutual 
gaze around the acknowledgement dialogue act. 
During and after a Repeat-Rephrase dialogue act 
in Friends dialogues, the Receiver is more likely to 
look at the Giver (G2=10.37; p<0.01 and G2=6.72; 
p<0.01, respectively). Before the Receiver uses a 
Repeat-Rephrase dialogue act in a Friends dia-
logues, the Giver is more likely to look at the Re-
ceiver (G2=9.08; p<0.01). This means that among 
friends, giver and receiver engage in mutual gaze 
around the repeat and rephrase dialogue act. 
3.3 Discussion 
Our analysis of verbal and non-verbal behaviors 
reveals consistent differences across the short term, 
comparing subsequent direction-giving tasks, and 
across the long term, comparing strangers to 
friends.  
Strangers ? Knowledge coordination 
With respect to the co-ordination of verbal and 
nonverbal behavior, it is apparent that, among 
strangers, the Receiver?s use of Acknowledgments 
is strongly associated with characteristic gaze pat-
terns of signaling non-understanding. In these 
Stranger dyads, the Giver looks at the Receiver to 
signal the need for feedback. The Receiver then 
nods to emphasize comprehension while uttering 
the Acknowledgment (e.g., ?okay?), and then looks 
back at the Giver. This pattern is very specific to 
Strangers, and in the case of the Receiver?s use of 
head nod, specific to the visible condition. Simi-
larly, among strangers, when the Giver acknowl-
edges the receiver?s correct understanding, the Re-
ceiver looks at the Giver. This pattern of gaze re-
quest, and grounding response, happens repeatedly 
and often (Acknowledgements being used more 
frequently by strangers), ensuring coordination 
among strangers, but at the cost of frequent explicit 
requests. Of course, since Acknowledgements are 
generally backchannel utterances, used to indicate 
46
mutual understanding, one explanation for the 
higher frequency of acknowledgements, head nods 
and eye gaze by strangers, especially in the earlier 
tasks, is over-generation aimed at showing atten-
tion. Although over-generation could achieve these 
goals, it can also result in creating a false impres-
sion of mutual understanding and it is notable that 
these behaviors decrease over time. 
We also find that in the Strangers condition, Re-
ceivers are more likely to look at the Giver before 
and during the Giver?s use of Repeat-Rephrase 
(i.e., repeating back to the Receiver some earlier 
information), and also before and during the 
Giver?s use of Info-Request acts (that is the Giver 
asking the Receiver a question such as ?do you get 
that??). 
From the frequent and repeated use of Acknowl-
edgments and gaze (implying something like 
?okay? are you sure you?re okay? really??), to 
the Receiver?s gaze-anticipation of the Giver?s Re-
peat-Rephrase and Info-Request, we infer a much 
more effortful interaction for Strangers, and one 
that, in fact, for most dyads, takes longer.  
In line with Welji and Duncan (2005), we found 
evidence that the task may demand additional cog-
nitive resources for Strangers, with the Receiver in 
the Strangers dialogues breaking gaze at the Giver 
to apparently consult some internal representation 
of the space just described by the Givers Assert 
(e.g., ?you?ll find some blue couches?), before re-
turning attention, and gaze, once again to the 
Giver. 
We also note a greater use overall of Acknowl-
edgment and Completions by Strangers and in 
visible situations; Receivers in the visible situa-
tions also use more Signal Non Understanding. 
Taken together, these findings indicate that coordi-
nation and achieving mutual understanding is more 
effortful for Strangers: Friends use fewer dialogue 
acts such as Acknowledgment, Completion, and 
Signal Non Understanding, indicating that there is 
less need to negotiate understanding, and that they 
are more likely to have some kind of shared repre-
sentation. Because of this, the Friends dialogues 
and task performance would appear to be more 
efficient, with less grounding required and less mu-
tual gaze around their use of Acknowledgments, 
Info-Requests and Repeat-Rephrase.  
The fact that Friends are better able to calibrate 
the task than Strangers is also demonstrated by the 
results found for Route. Both Friend and Stranger 
dyads increase their gaze towards one another from 
Route 1 to Route 2. But Friends shift the way they 
use head nods over the course of the three routes. 
They begin in Route 1 by producing them in con-
junction with Receiver talk (acknowledgment, re-
quest for further information, repeating directions 
back). However, by Route 2, the friends are nod-
ding when the direction-giver speaks, marking that 
they don?t need further information but have un-
derstood on the first try. On the contrary, Strangers 
continue to nod just as much with receiver talk, 
and decrease their nods with giver talk; perhaps 
since by Route 2, it is clear that Strangers don?t 
understand on the first try. 
Tickle-Degnen and Rosenthal (1990) predict 
greater coordination as a relationship progresses. 
We found better coordination, but that was re-
vealed, paradoxically, through fewer coordination 
devices and fewer dialogue acts in each turn, both 
comparing from Route 1 to Route 3, and compar-
ing Strangers to Friends.  
Friends ? Positivity 
In the Friends dialogues, we find a notable col-
location of non-verbal behavior and the Receiver?s 
use of Repeat-Rephrase utterance (i.e., repeating 
the Giver?s utterance back to ensure correct inter-
pretation). This is in contrast to the findings for 
Stranger dyads which found nonverbal behaviors 
found in conjunction with the Giver?s reactive use 
of Repeat-Rephrase ? i.e., the Giver?s questioning 
of the Receiver?s understanding ? perhaps after a 
breakdown in mutual understanding. In the Friend 
dyads, it is the Receiver who proactively checks 
correct understanding of the Giver?s utterance be-
fore the interaction continues.  
Tickle-Degnen & Rosenthal predict a reduction 
in the importance of positivity as rapport increases 
over time in a relationship. We found some evi-
dence to support this, since such questioning of the 
Giver in itself may be viewed as face-threatening 
behavior. However, in the Friends dialogues, this 
Repeat-Rephrase appears anticipated ? or sanc-
tioned ? by the Giver who looks at the Receiver 
prior to the utterance. Further, during and after the 
Receivers? use of the Repeat-Rephrase utterance, 
they also look at the Giver, which again would be 
expected to be viewed as a threat to face.  
Similarly, the Receiver gazes at the Giver before 
and during the Giver?s use of Influence dialogue 
acts (explicit commands, such as ?turn left?). Such 
47
direct gaze, along with a reduced number of medi-
ating dialogue acts such as Acknowledgments, ap-
pears to indicate that Friends dialogues are less 
concerned with avoiding face-threatening behav-
ior, and as such would appear less concerned with 
maintaining positivity during the interaction.  
Note that, almost paradoxically, Friends demon-
strate their increased ability to coordinate their in-
teraction through a diminished use of explicit co-
ordination devices. This speeds up the interaction, 
and reduces the number of overall dialogue acts. 
And, finally, differences between Friends and 
Strangers are vastly diminished when the interlocu-
tors cannot see one another. This leads us to be-
lieve that nonverbal behaviors in addition to gaze 
and head nods may be playing a role in how 
Friends coordinate with one another; an advantage 
which is taken away when they can only hear one 
another?s voices.  
4 Towards a Computational Model 
In the short-term context of conversation, mainte-
nance of mutual attention and incremental coordi-
nation of beliefs are requisites for grounding and 
turn-taking. In prior computational systems, 
grounding has been achieved by marking the status 
of conversational contributions as provisional (un-
grounded) or shared (grounded). Conversational 
actions by either the user or the system can trigger 
updates that change provisional information to 
shared. Acknowledgements, for example, are ex-
plicit ways of achieving grounding, but moving on 
to the next stage of the task is equally effective, as 
it presupposes that prior utterances have been 
taken up (Traum, 1994). In a model such as this, 
grounding occurs at the turn level. In order to han-
dle the multimodal phenomena that participate in 
grounding in face-to-face conversation, as Nakano 
et al (Nakano et al, 2003) have shown, a model of 
knowledge coordination needs to have more fre-
quently updated access to potential grounding 
events. In that implementation, we continuously 
polled for inputs, so as to capture the updates in 
grounding that occur between typical linguistic 
segments. We believe that the focus on time and 
process that allowed us to look at events of a 
smaller granularity in our earlier work on nonver-
bal grounding behavior will also allow us to extend 
up to events of a larger granularity, such as stages 
in a relationship. That is, we believe that the results 
described in earlier sections of this paper can be 
taken into account in a computational system by 
maintaining a model of the state of shared and pri-
vate information across several interactions (sev-
eral years, if possible). In this way, the shared his-
tory of two interlocutors (the user and the system) 
can be translated into patterns of linguistic behav-
ior, such as reduced use of acknowledgements, and 
reduced positivity, with increased interruption and 
information requests. This is similar to Cheng, 
Cavedon & Dale (2004)?s approach to direction-
giving. In this approach, the system maintains a 
history of places it has given directions to before. 
Using this task history, it is able to generate shorter 
directions at later stages in the dialogue. In our im-
plementation, however, the very style of the inter-
action is modified by the shared history of the user 
and the system. In the sense that we are modifying 
the linguistic style of the dialogue based on psy-
chological attributes, our approach is similar to 
work by Mairesse & Walker (2007) and Isard et al 
(2006). In both cases, a broad set of natural lan-
guage generation parameters is employed to gener-
ate language that differs along a personality di-
mension, based on a number of previous empirical 
studies. In the current approach, however, the fea-
tures that are modified derive from the interde-
Figure 6. Proposed architecture for modeling coordination within and across conversation 
48
pendence of the system with a particular user.  
Some of the features that are present in the con-
versations of friends, such as interjections and 
completion of one another?s utterances, are still 
beyond current computational abilities, as they 
would require online, real-time processing and un-
derstanding of utterances with incremental plan-
ning and generation of responses. We are inter-
ested in pursuing this feature of the system as dia-
logue technologies improve. 
5 Conclusion 
In this paper, we have compared direction-
giving between friends and strangers, and within 
these two groups we have compared three subse-
quent direction-giving episodes. In order to deter-
mine the effect played specifically by nonverbal 
behavior in short- and long-term rapport, half of 
our participants could see one another, while the 
other half were divided by a screen. Our experi-
mental and analytic methodology drew from both 
the social psychological, conversational analysis, 
and conversation as joint action traditions. Conse-
quently, our results were able to demonstrate the 
ways in which the verbal and nonverbal devices 
that index rapport relate to the role those same de-
vices play in knowledge coordination. Based on 
this commonality, we proposed a computationally 
viable model of deepening friendship within and 
across subsequent tasks that extends our previous 
work on grounding in face-to-face interaction. The 
work we have presented here therefore differs sub-
stantially from previous work on rapport and rela-
tionship building in embodied conversational 
agents. We did not start out with a definition of 
rapport but instead investigated those behaviors 
that characterize dyads who have self-identified as 
friends or strangers. And rather than looking at 
rapid assessment of rapport (the feeling of ?click-
ing?) we looked at the long-term version: acquiring 
a sense of mutual interdependence. Finally, rather 
than looking at how to get ECAs to engage users 
into establishing a relationship, or into letting 
down their guard, we examined those behaviors 
that characterize the dyadic interaction at each 
stage.  
All of these topics, however, are clearly inter-
related, and future research will benefit from tak-
ing a greater number of them into account in both 
data analysis, and the implementation of ECAs. 
Future research in our own lab will also have to be 
more explicit about how to implement the compu-
tational model that we have started to lay out here. 
Additional subjects in a similar experiment will no 
doubt facilitate that task. 
As we increasingly understand better how con-
versation changes when people come to know one 
another, we expect to apply these results to our 
ongoing research on virtual peers that can teach 
children with autism how to sustain interpersonal 
relationships (Tartaro & Cassell, 2006) and to our 
work on building the survey interviewers of the 
future, who can both engage their survey-takers 
and keep them honest (Cassell & Miller, in press). 
More generally, however, we hope to increasingly 
implement ECAs who will stick around for the 
long haul. 
Acknowledgments 
Thanks to Kristina Striegnitz , Will Thompson, Tara 
Latta and Nate Cantelmo for their help, and Darren 
Gergle for his superior statistical knowledge. We are 
grateful to Motorola for funding that supported some of 
the research reported here. 
References 
Bickmore, T., & Picard, R. (2005). Establishing and 
Maintaining Long-Term Human-Computer 
Relationships. ACM Transactions on Computer 
Human Interaction (ToCHI), 12(2), 293-327. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some 
Universals in Language Usage. Studies in 
International Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cappella, J. N. (1990). On Defining Conversational 
Coordination and Rapport. Psychological Inquiry, 
1(4), 303-305. 
Cassell, J., & Bickmore, T. (2002). Negotiated 
Collusion: Modeling Social Language and its 
Relationship Effects in Intelligent Agents. User 
Modeling and Adaptive Interfaces, 12, 1-44. 
Cassell, J., & Miller, P. (in press). Is it Self-
Administration if the Computer Gives you 
Encouraging Looks? In F. G. Conrad & M. F. 
Schober (Eds.), Envisioning the Survey Interview of 
the Future. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Cassell, J., & Tversky, D. (2005). The Language of 
Online Intercultural Community Formation. Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(2), 
article 2. 
Cheng, H., Cavedon, L., & Dale, R. (2004, 28th-29th 
August). Generating Navigation Information Based 
49
on the Driver's Route Knowledge. Paper presented 
at the COLING 2004 Workshop on Robust and 
Adaptive Information Processing for Mobile Speech 
Interfaces. Geneva,Switzerland. 
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in 
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine & S. 
D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared 
cognition (pp. 127-149). Washington DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a 
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39. 
Core, M., & Allen, J. (1997). Coding Dialogue with the 
DAMSL Annotation Scheme. Proceedings of the 
AAAI Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in 
Humans and Machines. Boston, MA. 
Duncan, S., Jr. (1990). Measuring Rapport. 
Psychological Inquiry, 1(4), 310-312. 
Goodwin, C. (1981). Conversational Organization: 
Interaction between speakers and hearers. New 
York: Academic Press. 
Grahe, J. E., & Bernieri, F. J. (1999, Win). The 
importance of nonverbal cues in judging rapport. 
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 23(4), 253-269. 
http://www.springeronline.com  
Gratch, J., Okhmatovskaia, A., Lamothe, F., Marsella, 
S., Morales, M., van der Werf, R. J., et al (2006). 
Virtual Rapport. Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Interactive Virtual 
Agents (IVA). Marina del Rey, CA. 
Hornstein, G. A. (1982). Variations in conversational 
style as a function of the degree of intimacy between 
members of a dyad. Unpublished Doctoral, Clark 
University. 
Isard, A., Brockmann, C., & Oberlander, J. (2006). 
Individuality and alignment in generated dialogues. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Natural 
Language Generation Conference (pp. 22-29). 
Sydney, Australia. 
Maatman, M., Gratch, J., & Marsella, S. (2005). Natural 
Behavior of a Listening Agent. Paper presented at 
the 5th International Conference on Interactive 
Virtual Agents (IVA). Kos, Greece. 
Mairesse, F., & Walker, M. (2007). PERSONAGE: 
Personality generation for dialogue. Proceedings of 
the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL). Prague. 
Matheson, C., Poesio, M., & Traum, D. (2000). 
Modelling Grounding and Discourse Obligations 
Using Update Rules. Proceedings of the 1st Annual 
Meeting of the North American Association for 
Computational Linguistics (NAACL2000). Seattle, 
WA. 
Nakano, Y. I., Reinstein, G., Stocky, T., & Cassell, J. 
(2003, July 7-12). Towards a Model of Face-to-Face 
Grounding. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (p. 
553?561). Sapporo, Japan: Association for 
Computational Linguistics  
Rayson, P. (2003). Matrix: A statistical method and 
software tool for linguistic analysis through corpus 
comparison. Unpublished doctoral thesis, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster. 
Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (1995). 
Immediacy. In Nonverbal Behavior in Interpersonal 
Relations (pp. 195-217). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up 
closings. Semiotica, 8, 289-327. 
Stronks, B., Nijholt, A., van der Vet, P., & Heylen, D. 
(2002). Designing for friendship: Becoming friends 
with your ECA. Proceedings of the Embodied 
conversational agents - let's specify and evaluate 
them! (pp. 91-97). Bologna, Italy: ACM Press. 
Tartaro, A., & Cassell, J. (2006, August 28 - September 
1). Authorable virtual peers for autism spectrum 
disorders. Proceedings of the Combined workshop 
on Language-Enabled Educational Technology and 
Development and Evaluation for Robust Spoken 
Dialogue Systems at the 17th European Conference 
on Artificial Intellegence. Riva Del Garda, Italy. 
Tickle-Degnen, L., & Rosenthal, R. (1990). The nature 
of rapport and its nonverbal correlates. 
Psychological Inquiry, 1(4), 285-293. 
Traum, D. R. (1994). A Computational Theory of 
Grounding in Natural Language Conversation. 
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY. 
Traum, D. R., & Dillenbourg, P. (1998). Towards a 
Normative Model of Grounding in Collaboration. 
Proceedings of the ESSLLI-98 workshop on Mutual 
Knowledge, Common Ground and Public 
Information. Saarbrucken, Germany. 
Welji, H., & Duncan, S. (2005). Collaboration and 
Narration: The role of shared knowledge in the 
speech and gesture production of friends and 
strangers. Paper presented at the International 
Society of Gesture Studies Conference. Lyon, France. 
50
