Proceedings of the 4th ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions, pages 17?24,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
PrepLex: a lexicon of French prepositions for parsing
Kare?n Fort
Calligramme and TALARIS projects
LORIA/INRIA Lorraine / Nancy, France
Karen.Fort@loria.fr
Bruno Guillaume
Calligramme project
LORIA/INRIA Lorraine / Nancy, France
Bruno.Guillaume@loria.fr
Abstract
PrepLex is a lexicon of French prepositions
which provides all the syntactic information
needed for parsing. It was built by compar-
ing and merging several authoritative lexical
sources. This lexicon also includes infor-
mation about the prepositions or classes of
prepositions that appear in French verb sub-
categorization frames. This resource has
been developed as a first step in making cur-
rent French preposition lexicons available
for effective natural language processing.
1 Introduction
When defining lexical entry classes according to cat-
egories, an obvious distinction appears between two
types of classes. First, the closed classes, compris-
ing elements which can be exhaustively enumerated,
for example pronouns or determiners. Second, open
classes for which it is impossible to list all the el-
ements (for example, they may vary according to
the domain). The four main open classes are nouns,
verbs, adjectives and adverbs. The lexicon construc-
tion methodology has to be adapted according to the
type of class that is being dealt with.
The status of the class of prepositions is difficult
to determine. A priori, prepositions may seem to be
a closed class, with elements which can be enumer-
ated. In practice, however, a comparison of the dif-
ferent available resources shows that it is not an easy
task to exhaustively list prepositions. Besides, they
represent more than 14% of French lemma tokens.1
1see for example, on a newspaper corpus:
A complete lexicon for parsing applications
should contain subcategorization information for
predicative words (Briscoe and Carroll, 1993; Car-
roll and Fang, 2004). This subcategorization infor-
mation often refers to prepositions in the description
of their arguments. Arguments are commonly used
with a particular preposition (for example compter
sur [count on]) or a set of semantically linked prepo-
sitions (such as aller [go] LOC, where LOC can be
any locative preposition).
For deep parsing, we need to distinguish between
indirect complements, required by the verb, and
adjuncts which do not appear in the verb valence.
The following two examples (1a) and (1b) have
the same surface structure, in which the two
preposition uses for avec can only be distinguished
semantically: in the first case, it introduces an
oblique complement, whereas in the second case,
it introduces an adjunct. This issue can be solved
using finer-grained semantic information.
1a. Jean se bat avec Paul
[Jean fights against Paul]
1b. Jean se bat avec courage
[Jean fights with courage]
This distinction leads us to allow two different
preposition uses and therefore causes lexical ambi-
guity. In order to limit this ambiguity, it is important
for a lexicon to identify the prepositions which can
have both functions (we will call these ?argument?
prepositions).
https://www.kuleuven.be/ilt/blf/
rechbaselex kul.php\#freq (Selva et al, 2002)
17
Our work aims at providing the community with
a lexicon that can be directly used by a parser. We
focused on syntactic aspects and extended the work
to some semantic elements, like semantically linked
sets of prepositions (as LOC). The generated lexicon
is freely available and is expected to be integrated
into larger resources for French, whether existing or
under development.
Section 2 describes the sources and the compar-
ative methodology we used. Section 3 details the
results of the comparison. Section 4 explains how
the lexicon was created from the above-mentioned
results. Finally, Section 5 shows an example of use
of the lexicon in a parsing application.
2 Methodology
In order to use prepositions for parsing, we need
a large list, containing both garden-variety preposi-
tions and prepositions that appear in verb subcatego-
rization frames.
2.1 Using syntactic lexicons
Obviously, some lexicons already exist which pro-
vide interesting lists of prepositions. This is the
case of Lefff (Sagot et al, 2006), which contains
a long list of prepositions. However, the syntactic
part of the lexicon is still under development and
it provides only few prepositions in verb subcate-
gorization frames. Besides, some prepositions in
Lefff are obsolete or rare. The French-UNL dic-
tionary (Se?rasset and Boitet, 2000) also contains
prepositions, but its coverage is quite limited and
the quality of its entries is not homogeneous. Other
sources present prepositions in verb subcategoriza-
tion frames, but the lists are not quite consistent.
We thus collected, as a first step, prepositions
from a certain number of resources, lexicons and
dictionaries for the garden-variety list, and syntactic
lexicons for the argument prepositions list. Two re-
sources belong to both categories, Lefff and French-
UNL dictionary:
? Lefff (Lexique des Formes Fle?chies du
Franc?ais/French inflected form lexicon (Sagot
et al, 2006)) is a large coverage (more than
110,000 lemmas) French morphological and
syntactic lexicon (see table 1 for an example of
a Lefff syntactic entry).
In its latest public version, 2.2.1, Lefff con-
tains 48 simple prepositions and 164 multiword
prepositions. It also provides information on
verb subcategorization frames, which contain
14 argument prepositions.
? UNL (Universal Networking Lan-
guage (Se?rasset and Boitet, 2000)), is a
French to disambiguated English dictionary for
machine translation, which contains syntactic
information in its French part (see table 1 for a
UNL example entry).
UNL has limited coverage (less than 27,000
lemmas), but it provides, in the English part,
semantic information that we will consider us-
ing in the near future. UNL contains 48 simple
prepositions, among which 12 appear in verb
subcategorization frames.
2.2 Using reference sources
We then completed the list of prepositions using
manually built resources, including lexicons, dictio-
naries and grammars:
? The Grevisse (Grevisse, 1997) grammar, in its
paper version, allowed us to check some intu-
itions concerning the obsolescence or usage of
some prepositions.
? The TLFi (Tre?sor de la langue franc?aise in-
formatise?), that we consulted through the CN-
RTL2, and that offers a slightly different list of
prepositions. In particular, it contains the forms
voici and voila`, that are seldom quoted in the
other available resources.
? Finally, the PrepNet (Saint-Dizier, 2006)
prepositions database was used to check the
completeness of our list as well as the semantic
information provided by other sources.
2.3 Using verb valence dictionaries
We then looked for a way to enrich the list of prepo-
sitions appearing in verb subcategorization frames
in Lefff and UNL, using resources that focus more
particularly on verbs:
2see: http://www.cnrtl.fr
18
Lefff entry for dialoguer avec [to talk to]
dialoguer: suj:sn|sinf|scompl,obja:(a`-sn|avec-sn),objde:(de-sn|de-scompl|de-sinf)
UNL entry for dialoguer avec [to talk to]
[dialoguer] {AUX(AVOIR),CAT(CATV),GP1(AVEC),VAL1(GN)} "have_talks";
DICOVALENCE entry for dialoguer avec [to talk to]
VAL$ dialoguer: P0 PP<avec>
VTYPE$ predicator simple
VERB$ DIALOGUER/dialoguer
NUM$ 29730
EG$ le de?le?gue? des e?tudiants a dialogue? avec le directeur de l?e?cole
TR$ spreken, zich onderhouden, een gesprek hebben, onderhandelen
P0$ qui, je, nous, elle, il, ils, on, celui-ci, ceux-ci
PP_PR$ avec
PP$ qui, lui_ton, eux, celui-ci, ceux-ci, l?un l?autre
LCCOMP$ nous dialoguons, je dialogue avec toi
SynLex entry for adapter avec [to adapt to]
adapter ?<suj:sn,obj:sn,obl:avec-sn>?
Table 1: Description of some entries with the preposition avec [with] in valence dictionaries
? DICOVALENCE, a valence dictionary of
French, formerly known as PROTON (van den
Eynde and Mertens, 2002), which has been
based on the pronominal approach. In version
1.1, this dictionary details the subcategoriza-
tion frames of more than 3,700 verbs (table 1
gives an example of a DICOVALENCE entry).
We extracted the simple and multiword prepo-
sitions it contains (i.e. more than 40), as well
as their associated semantic classes.
? We completed this argument prepositions list
with information gathered from SynLex (Gar-
dent et al, 2006), a syntactic lexicon cre-
ated from the LADL lexicon-grammar ta-
bles (Gross, 1975) (see table 1 for a SynLex
entry).
Using these sources, we conducted a systematic
study of each preposition, checking its presence
in each source, whether in verb subcategorization
frames or not, as well as its associated semantic
class(es). We then grouped the prepositions that ap-
pear both as lexical entries and in verb subcatego-
rization frames.
As multiword prepositions show specific charac-
teristics (in particular, their number) and raise partic-
ular issues (segmentation), we processed them sepa-
rately, using the same methodology.
3 Source comparison results
3.1 Simple prepositions
We thus listed 85 simple prepositions, among which
24 appear in verb subcategorization frames (see ta-
ble 2).
It is noticeable that the different sources use quite
different representations of syntactic information as
shown in table 1. Lefff offers a condensed vision
of verbs, in which valence patterns are grouped into
one single entry, whereas SynLex uses a flatter rep-
resentation without disjunction on syntactic cate-
gories for argument realization or for optional argu-
ments. To summarize, we could say that DICOVA-
LENCE lies somewhere between Lefff and SynLex,
since it uses disjunctive representation but has a finer
description of syntactic information and hence splits
many entries which are collapsed in Lefff.
3.2 Multiword prepositions
We obtained a list of 222 multiword prepositions,
among which 18 appear in verb subcategorization
frames (see table 3). It is to be noticed that only
DICOVALENCE and SynLex contain multiword
prepositions in verb subcategorization frames. As
for Lefff, it provides an impressive list of multiword
19
Lexicons Subcategorization frames
Lefff TLFi Grevisse PrepNet UNL Lefff DVa SynLex UNL
a` X X X loc 319 895 (18 loc) 887 (70 loc) 246
apre`s X X X loc X 2 12 1
aussi X
avec X X X X X 35 193 (1 loc) 611 (1 loc) 49
chez X X X loc X 9 (5 loc) 1
comme X X 14 11 10 3
de X X X deloc X 310 888 1980 282
(117 deloc) (69 deloc)
depuis X X X deloc X 2 1
derrie`re X X X loc X 3
devers X X X
dixit X
emmi X
entre X X X loc X 19 (3 loc) 4
hormis X X X X X
jusque X X X X 7 (7 loc)
le`s X X X
moyennant X X X X X
par X X X loc X 3 38 (4 loc) 73 8
parmi X X X loc X 7 (3 loc) 7
passe? X X
selon X X X X X 1 1
voici X X
Table 2: Some simple prepositions in different sources
aDICOVALENCE
prepositions (more than 150) which represents an
excellent basis for our work.
4 Lexicon construction
The first selection criterion we applied to build the
lexicon is that a preposition should appear in at least
one source among the above-mentioned ones. Also,
we consider a preposition to be an argument prepo-
sition if it appears in at least one verb subcategoriza-
tion frame.
4.1 Manual filtering
We then filtered the prepositions according to very
simple criteria. In particular, we identified some
prepositions to be removed as they were:
? erroneous, this is the case, for example, of
aussi (adverb rather than preposition), which is
present in the UNL dictionary as a preposition,
? obsolete or very rare, like emmi (from TLFi),
devers (from Lefff, TLFi, Grevisse) or comme
de (from DICOVALENCE).
We also checked the semantic features given in
the sources and removed erroneous ones, like avec
as locative in SynLex and DICOVALENCE.
4.2 Some remarks
Some sources include as prepositions forms that are
not universally considered to be prepositions in lin-
guistics. This is the case, in particular, for:
? comme, which is not present in the three refer-
ence sources (Grevisse, TLFi and PrepNet) as
it is ambiguous and can also be used as a con-
junction,
20
Lexicons Subcategorization frames
Lefff TLFi Grevisse PrepNet UNL Lefff DVa SynLex UNL
a` cause de X X X
a` la faveur de X X
a` partir de X X deloc 1
afin de X X X X
au nord de loc
au vu de X
aupre`s de X X X loc 27 (1 loc) 35
comme de 1
conforme?ment a` X X
d?avec X 1 6
d?entre X
en faveur de X X X 13
face a` X X 2
il y a X
jusqu?a` X loc X 10 (2 loc)
jusqu?en X
jusqu?ou` X
loin de X X loc
par suite de X
pour comble de X
pre`s de X X loc
quant a` X X X
tout au long de X X
vis-a`-vis de X X X 1
Table 3: Some multiword prepositions in different sources
aDICOVALENCE
? il y a or y compris, which only appear in Lefff,
? d?avec, which only appears in Grevisse and
verb subcategorization frames in DICOVA-
LENCE and SynLex.
We decided to keep those forms in the lexicon for
practical reasons, keeping the parsing application in
mind.
Moreover, even if its coverage is quite large, the
created lexicon is obviously not exhaustive. In
this respect, some missing entries should be added,
namely:
? prepositions from the DAFLES (Selva et al,
2002), like, for example, au de?triment de,
? prepositions appearing in reference grammars,
like question, in Grammaire me?thodique du
franc?ais (Riegel et al, 1997),
? some locative prepositions (and, through
metonymy, time prepositions) that are pre-
fixed by jusqu?, for example jusqu?aupre`s de.
This elided form of jusque should probably
be treated separately, as a preposition modi-
fier. The same goes for de`s, followed by a
time preposition (or a locative one, through
metonymy).
However, it is to be noticed that none of these
missing prepositions appear in verb subcategoriza-
tion frames.
This filtering process also allowed us to iden-
tify some issues, in particular elisions in multiword
21
forms, like afin de, afin d?, or contractions like face
a`, face au or a` partir de, a` partir du, which will be
processed in the segmentation step.
Others, like le`s, which is only used in toponyms
in dashed forms (e.g. Bathele?mont-le`s-Bauzemont),
will be processed during named entity segmentation.
4.3 Results
We obtained a list of 49 simple prepositions, of
which 23 appear in verb subcategorization frames
in at least one source and are therefore considered to
be argument prepositions (see table 4).
We also obtain a list of more than 200 multi-
word prepositions, among which 15 appear in verb
subcategorization frames in at least one source and
are therefore considered to be argument prepositions
(see table 5).
For the time being, we limited the semantic in-
formation in the lexicon to loc (locative) and deloc
(source), but we intend to extend those categories to
those used in DICOVALENCE (time, quantity, man-
ner). We have already added those to the preposi-
tions database that is being populated.
We also referred to the sources to add the cat-
egories of the arguments introduced by argument
prepositions.
PrepLex is currently distributed in a text format
suitable both for hand-editing and for integration in
a parser or other natural language processing tools.
In the format we propose, syntactic information is
described via feature structures. These feature struc-
tures are always recursive structures of depth 2. The
external level describes the structure in terms of ?ar-
guments? whereas the internal level gives a finer
syntactic description of either the head or of each
argument. This format aims at being modular and at
defining some ?classes? that share redundant infor-
mation. In the case of prepositions, the skeleton of
the feature structure used by all entries is:
Prep : [
head [cat=prep, prep=#, funct=#]
comp [cat=#, cpl=@]
]
When instantiated for a particular preposition, 3
feature values are to be provided (written with ?#?
in the above description) and the last parametrized
feature (written with @) is optional. When they are
in the head sub-structure, features are referred to by
their names whereas, in other cases, a prefix notation
is used.
a` [prep=a|LOC; funct=aobj|loc|adj;
comp.cat=np|sinf; comp.cpl=void|ceque]
apre`s [prep=apres|LOC; funct=obl|loc|adj;
comp.cat=np]
avec [prep=avec; funct=obl|adj;
comp.cat=np]
a`_travers [prep=a_travers; funct=obl|adj;
comp.cat=np]
Technically, the only difficult part is to decide
how to represent semantic classes of prepositions
like LOC. Here, we chose to define the whole set
of argument prepositions as well as all the semantic
classes (noted in uppercase) as possible atomic val-
ues for the prep feature. We then used the disjunc-
tion a|LOC to indicate that the preposition a` can be
used, either as a specific preposition or as a locative
preposition.
Additionally, we decided to add to the lexicon in-
formation about the sources in which the preposition
appears, in order to allow filtering for some specific
applications. In the case of argument prepositions,
we also added information about the preposition?s
frequency in the source, as well as a relevant exam-
ple.
We also decided to add corpus-based frequencies
to the lexicon. Thus, for each preposition, we pro-
vide its frequency per 1000 words, either as found in
the DAFLES (Selva et al, 2002), from a newspaper
corpus composed of Le Monde and Le Soir (1998),
or as extracted directly from Le Monde (1998) with
a simple grep command, without tagging.
5 Using the lexicon in a NLP system
We briefly expose some parsing problems related to
prepositions.
5.1 Segmentation issues
The first issue that appears when integrating preposi-
tions in a parsing system is that of segmentation. In
particular, contractions have to be processed specif-
ically so that au is identified as the equivalent of
a` le. The same goes for de, which can appear in
some multiword prepositions and can be elided as
d?. However, these phenomena are not specific to
prepositions. They can be addressed either in the
lexicon (for example Lefff explicitly contains both
22
Lexicons Subcategorization frames
Lefff TLFi Grevisse PrepNet UNL PrepLex Lefff DV SynLex UNL PrepLex
44 69 55 36 46 49 14 24 18 11 23
Table 4: Total number of simple prepositions by source
Lexicons Subcategorization frames
Lefff TLFi Grevisse PrepNet UNL PrepLex Lefff DV SynLex UNL PrepLex
166 11 77 89 2 206 0 16 4 0 15
Table 5: Total number of multiword prepositions by source
au cours de and au cours d?), or during the segmen-
tation step.
We decided on the second solution as it improves
lexicon maintainability.
An issue that is more directly linked to multiword
prepositions is that of segmentation ambiguities. For
example, in the following two sentences (2a) and
(2b) the group of words au cours de is a multiword
preposition in the first case, but it has to be decom-
posed in the second one. Other multiword preposi-
tions can never be decomposed, for example y com-
pris.
This highlights the fact that segmentation is am-
biguous and that it is necessary to be able to keep
the segmentation ambiguity through the whole pars-
ing process.
2a. Il a beaucoup travaille? au cours de cette anne?e
[He worked hard during the year]
2b. Il a beaucoup travaille? au cours de M. Durand
[He worked hard in Mr Durand?s course]
5.2 Adjunct prepositions vs argument
prepositions
In deep parsing we have to distinguish between
prepositions introducing a verb argument and prepo-
sitions introducing adjuncts. However, we have
seen that this distinction often relies on semantics
and that parsing should leave the two possibilities
open. Precise information about argument preposi-
tions and verb subcategorizations eliminates many
of these ambiguities.
6 Conclusion
We created a list of French prepositions for parsing
applications by comparing various lexicons and dic-
tionaries. We hence focused on syntactic aspects.
Manual filtering was used to eliminate obsolete or
rare prepositions, as well as a number of errors.
The resulting lexicon contains more than 250 French
prepositions, among which 49 are simple preposi-
tions.
In syntactic lexicons, subcategorization frames
describe prepositions introducing arguments. Prepo-
sitions appearing in verbal valence frames are called
?argument prepositions?. We identified 40 of them.
The produced lexicon is freely available. 3 It will
be developed further. In particular, some other in-
formation sources will be incorporated. This is the
case for the verbs constructions fields from the TFLi
which contain prepositions, that can be considered
as argument prepositions. We plan to use this infor-
mation to improve the lexicon.
We are also populating a database with this lexical
information. 3 This will help us ensure a better main-
tenance of the lexicon and will allow enrichment of
the entries, in particular with examples and associ-
ated verbs. We are adding corpus-based frequencies
to this database.
A more ambitious task would be to enrich the lex-
icon with fine-grained semantic information (more
detailed than the general classes loc, deloc, . . . ).
Many interesting linguistic studies have been con-
ducted on prepositions, including cross-lingual ap-
proaches. However, most of them are limited to de-
tailing the semantics of a small number of preposi-
tions; with the exceptions of PrepNet (Saint-Dizier,
2006) for French prepositions and TPP (Litkowski
and Hargraves, 2005) (The Preposition Project) for
English. It is now necessary to transform those re-
sources in order to make them directly usable by nat-
ural language processing systems.
3http://loriatal.loria.fr/Resources.html
23
References
Ted Briscoe and John A. Carroll. 1993. Generalized
probabilistic LR parsing of natural language (corpora)
with unification-based grammars. Computational Lin-
guistics, 19(1):25?59.
John A. Carroll and Alex C. Fang. 2004. The automatic
acquisition of verb subcategorisations and their impact
on the performance of an HPSG parser. In Proceed-
ings of the 1st International Joint Conference on Nat-
ural Language Processing (IJCNLP), pages 107?114,
Sanya City, China.
Claire Gardent, Bruno Guillaume, Guy Perrier, and In-
grid Falk. 2006. Extraction d?information de sous-
cate?gorisation a` partir des tables du LADL. In Pro-
ceedings of TALN 06, pages 139?148, Leuven.
Maurice Grevisse. 1997. Le Bon Usage ? Gram-
maire franc?aise, e?dition refondue par Andre? Goosse.
DeBoeck-Duculot, Paris ? Leuven, 13th edition.
Maurice Gross. 1975. Me?thodes en syntaxe. Hermann.
Ken Litkowski and Orin Hargraves. 2005. The preposi-
tion project. In Proc. of the ACL Workshop on Prepo-
sitions.
Martin Riegel, Jean-Christophe Pellat, and Rene? Rioul.
1997. Grammaire me?thodique du franc?ais. PUF, 3rd
edition.
Benoit Sagot, Lionel Cle?ment, ?Eric Villemonte de la
Clergerie, and Pierre Boullier. 2006. The Lefff 2
syntactic lexicon for French: architecture, acquisition,
use. In Proc. of LREC 06, Genoa, Italy.
Patrick Saint-Dizier. 2006. PrepNet: a Multilingual Lex-
ical Description of Prepositions. In Proc. of LREC 06,
Genoa, Italy, pages 877?885. European Language Re-
sources Association (ELRA).
Thierry Selva, Serge Verlinde, and Jean Binon. 2002.
Le DAFLES, un nouveau dictionnaire pour apprenants
du franc?ais. In Proc. of EURALEX?2002 (European
Association for Lexicography), Copenhagen.
Gilles Se?rasset and Christian Boitet. 2000. On UNL as
the future ?html of the linguistic content? and the reuse
of existing NLP components in UNL-related applica-
tions with the example of a UNL-French deconverter.
In Proceedings of COLING 2000, Saarbru?cken.
Karel van den Eynde and Piet Mertens, 2002. La valence:
l?approche pronominale et son application au lexique
verbal, pages 63?104. Cambridge University Press,
13th edition.
24
