Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 197?202,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
The ISL Phrase-Based MT System for the 2007 ACL Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation
M. Paulik1,2, K. Rottmann2, J. Niehues2, S. Hildebrand 1,2 and S. Vogel1
1Interactive Systems Laboratories, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2Institut fu?r Theoretische Informatik, Universita?t Karlsruhe (TH), Karlsruhe, Germany
{paulik|silja|vogel}@cs.cmu.edu ; {jniehues|rottmann}@ira.uka.de
Abstract
In this paper we describe the Interactive Sys-
tems Laboratories (ISL) phrase-based ma-
chine translation system used in the shared
task ?Machine Translation for European
Languages? of the ACL 2007 Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. We present
results for a system combination of the
ISL syntax-augmented MT system and the
ISL phrase-based system by combining and
rescoring the n-best lists of the two systems.
We also investigate the combination of two
of our phrase-based systems translating from
different source languages, namely Spanish
and German, into their common target lan-
guage, English.
1 Introduction
The shared task of the ACL 2007 Workshop on Sta-
tistical Machine Translation focuses on the auto-
matic translation of European language pairs. The
workshop provides common training sets for trans-
lation model training and language model training
to allow for easy comparison of results between the
participants.
Interactive Systems Laboratories participated in the
English ? Spanish Europarl and News Commen-
tary task as well as in the English ? German Eu-
roparl task. This paper describes the phrase-based
machine translation (MT) system that was applied
to these tasks. We also investigate the feasibility
of combining the ISL syntax-augmented MT system
(Zollmann et al, 2007) with our phrase-based sys-
tem by combining and rescoring the n-best lists pro-
duced by both systems for the Spanish ? English
Europarl task. Furthermore, we apply the same com-
bination technique to combine two of our phrase-
based systems that operate on different source lan-
guages (Spanish and German), but share the same
target language (English).
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we
give a general description of our phrase-based sta-
tistical machine translation system. Section 3 gives
an overview of the data and of the final systems
used for the English ? Spanish Europarl and News
Commentary tasks, along with corresponding per-
formance numbers. Section 4 shows the data, final
systems and results for the English ? German Eu-
roparl task. In Section 5, we present our experiments
involving a combination of the syntax-augmented
MT system with the phrase-based MT system and a
combination of the Spanish ? English and German
? English phrase-based systems.
2 The ISL Phrase-Based MT System
2.1 Word and Phrase Alignment
Phrase-to-phrase translation pairs are extracted by
training IBM Model-4 word alignments in both di-
rections, using the GIZA++ toolkit (Och and Ney,
2000), and then extracting phrase pair candidates
which are consistent with these alignments, start-
ing from the intersection of both alignments. This
is done with the help of phrase model training
code provided by University of Edinburgh during
the NAACL 2006 Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (Koehn and Monz, 2006). The raw rel-
197
ative frequency estimates found in the phrase trans-
lation tables are then smoothed by applying modi-
fied Kneser-Ney discounting as explained in (Foster
et al, 2006). The resulting phrase translation tables
are pruned by using the combined translation model
score as determined by Minimum Error Rate (MER)
optimization on the development set.
2.2 Word Reordering
We apply a part-of-speech (POS) based reordering
scheme (J. M. Crego et al, 2006) to the POS-tagged
source sentences before decoding. For this, we use
the GIZA++ alignments and the POS-tagged source
side of the training corpus to learn reordering rules
that achieve a (locally) monotone alignment. Fig-
ure 1 shows an example in which three reordering
rules are extracted from the POS tags of an En-
glish source sentence and its corresponding Span-
ish GIZA++ alignment. Before translation, we con-
struct lattices for every source sentence. The lattices
include the original source sentence along with all
the reorderings that are consistent with the learned
rules. All incoming edges of the lattice are anno-
tated with distortion model scores. Figure 2 gives an
example of such a lattice. In the subsequent lattice
decoding step, we apply either monotone decoding
or decoding with a reduced local reordering window,
typically of size 2.
2.3 Decoder and MER Training
The ISL beam search decoder (Vogel, 2003) com-
bines all the different model scores to find the best
translation. Here, the following models were used:
? The translation model, i.e. the phrase-to-
phrase translations extracted from the bilingual
corpus, annoted with four translation model
scores. These four scores are the smoothed for-
ward and backward phrase translation proba-
bilities and the forward and backward lexical
weights.
? A 4-gram language model. The SRI language
model toolkit was used to train the language
model and we applied modified Kneser-Ney
smoothing.
? An internal word reordering model in addition
to the already described POS-based reordering.
  
We all agree on thatPRP DT VB IN DTEn {4} esto {5} estamos {1} todos {2} de {} acuerdo {3}
? PRP DT VB IN DT :   4 ? 5 ? 1 ? 2 ? 3? PRP DT VB:   2 ? 3 ? 1 ? PRP DT VB IN:   3 ? 4 ? 1 ? 2
Figure 1: Rule extraction for the POS-based reorder-
ing scheme.
This internal reordering model assigns higher
costs to longer distance reordering.
? Simple word and phrase count models. The
former is essentially used to compensate for
the tendency of the language model to prefer
shorter translations, while the latter can give
preference to longer phrases, potentially im-
proving fluency.
The ISL SMT decoder is capable of loading
several language models (LMs) at the same time,
namely n-gram SRI language models with n up to
4 and suffix array language models (Zhang and Vo-
gel, 2006) of arbitrary length. While we typically
see gains in performance for using suffix array LMs
with longer histories, we restricted ourselves here to
one 4-gram SRI LM only, due to a limited amount
of available LM training data. The decoding process
itself is organized in two stages. First, all available
word and phrase translations are found and inserted
into a so-called translation lattice. Then the best
combination of these partial translations is found
by doing a best path search through the translation
lattice, where we also allow for word reorderings
within a predefined local reordering window.
To optimize the system towards a maximal BLEU
or NIST score, we use Minimum Error Rate (MER)
Training as described in (Och, 2003). For each
model weight, MER applies a multi-linear search
on the development set n-best list produced by the
system. Due to the limited numbers of translations
in the n-best list, these new model weights are sub-
optimal. To compensate for this, a new full trans-
lation is done. The resulting new n-best list is then
merged with the old n-best list and the optimization
process is repeated. Typically, the translation quality
converges after three iterations.
198
1
20 3
honourable1.0000
Members1.0000 honourable0.3299
Members0.6701 6
75 8
we1.0000
have1.0000
have0.9175
a0.08254,1.0000 a1.0000
?
?Honourable Members, we have a challenging agenda?
Figure 2: Example for a source sentence lattice from
the POS-based reordering scheme.
English Spanish
sentence pairs 1259914
unique sent. pairs 1240151
sentence length 25.3 26.3
words 31.84 M 33.16 M
vocabulary 266.9 K 346.3 K
Table 1: Corpus statistics for the English/Spanish
Europarl corpus.
3 Spanish? English Europarl and News
Commentary Task
3.1 Data and Translation Tasks
The systems for the English ? Spanish translation
tasks were trained on the sentence-aligned Europarl
corpus (Koehn, 2005). Detailed corpus statistics can
be found in Table 1. The available parallel News
Commentary training data of approximately 1 mil-
lion running words for both languages was only
used as additional language model training data, to
adapt our in-domain (Europarl) system to the out-of-
domain (News Commentary) task.
The development sets consist of 2000 Europarl
sentences (dev-EU) and 1057 News Commentary
sentences (dev-NC). The available development-
test data consists of 2 x 2000 Europarl sentences
(devtest-EU and test06-EU) and 1064 News Com-
mentary sentences (test06-NC). All development
and development-test sets have only one reference
translation per sentence.
3.2 Data Normalization
The ACL shared task is very close in form and con-
tent to the Final Text Editions (FTE) task of the TC-
STAR (TC-STAR, 2004) evaluation. For this rea-
son, we decided to apply a similar normalization
scheme to the training data as was applied in our TC-
STAR verbatim SMT system. Although trained on
?verbatimized? data that did not contain any num-
bers, but rather had all numbers and dates spelled
out, it yielded consistently better results than our
TC-STAR FTE SMT system. When translating FTE
content, the verbatim system treated all numbers as
unknown words, i.e. they were left unchanged dur-
ing translation. To compensate for this, we applied
extended postprocessing to the translations that con-
ducts the necessary conversions between Spanish
and English numbers, e.g. the conversion of deci-
mal comma in Spanish to decimal point in English.
Other key points which we adopted from this nor-
malization scheme were the tokenization of punc-
tuation marks, the true-casing of the first word of
each sentence, as well as extended cleaning of the
training data. The latter mainly consisted of the re-
moval of sections with a highly unbalanced source
to target words ratio and the removal of unusual
string combinations and document references, like
for example ?B5-0918/2000?, ?(COM(2000) 335 -
C5-0386/2000 - 2000/0143(CNS))?, etc.
Based on this normalization scheme, we trained and
optimized a baseline in-domain system on accord-
ingly normalized source and reference sentences.
For optimization, we combined the available de-
velopment sets for the Europarl task and the News
Commentary task. In order to further improve
the applied normalization scheme, we experimented
with replacing all numbers with the string ?NMBR?,
rather than spelling them out and by replacing all
document identifiers with the string ?DCMNT?,
rather than deleting them. This was first done for
the language model training data only, and then for
all data, i.e. for the bilingual training data and for
the development set source and reference sentences.
In the latter case, the respective tags were again re-
placed by the correct numbers and document identi-
fiers during postprocessing. Table 2 shows the case
sensitive BLEU scores for the three normalization
approaches on the English ? Spanish Europarl and
News Commentary development sets. These scores
were computed with the official NIST scoring script
against the original (not normalized) references.
3.3 In-domain System
As mentioned above, we combined the Europarl and
News Commentary development sets when optimiz-
ing the in-domain system. This resulted in only one
199
Task baseline LM only all data
Europarl 30.94 31.20 31.26
News Com. 31.28 31.39 31.73
Table 2: Case sensitive BLEU scores on the in-
domain and out-of-domain development sets for the
three different normalization schemes.
Task Eng ? Spa Spa ? Eng
dev-EU 31.29 31.77
dev-NC 31.81 31.12
devtest-EU 31.01 31.40
test06-EU 31.87 31.76
test06-NC 30.23 29.22
Table 3: Case sensitive BLEU scores for the final
English ? Spanish in-domain systems.
set of scaling factors, i.e. the in-domain system
applies the same scaling factors for translating in-
domain data as for translating out-of-domain data.
Our baseline system applied only monotone lattice
decoding. For our final in-domain system, we used a
local reordering window of length 2, which accounts
for the slightly higher scores when compared to the
baseline system. The BLEU scores for both trans-
lation directions on the different development and
development-test sets can be found in Table 3.
3.4 Out-of-domain System
In order to adapt our in-domain system towards the
out-of-domain News Commentary task, we consid-
ered two approaches based on language model adap-
tation. First, we interpolated the in-domain LM
with an out-of-domain LM computed on the avail-
able News Commentary training data. The inter-
polation weights were chosen such as to achieve a
minimal LM perplexity on the out-of-domain de-
velopment set. For both languages, the interpo-
lation weights were approximately 0.5. Our sec-
ond approach was to simply load the out-of-domain
LM as an additional LM into our decoder. In both
cases, we optimized the translation system on the
out-of-domain development data only. For the sec-
ond approach, MER optimization assigned three to
four times higher scaling factors to the consider-
ably smaller out-domain LM than to the original in-
domain LM. Table 4 shows the results in BLEU on
the out-of-domain development and development-
test sets for both translation directions. While load-
Eng ? Spa Spa ? Eng
Task interp 2 LMs interp 2 LMs
dev-NC 33.31 33.28 32.61 32.70
test06-NC 32.55 32.15 30.73 30.55
Table 4: Case sensitive BLEU scores for the final
English ? Spanish out-of-domain systems.
ing a second LM gives similar or slightly better re-
sults on the development set during MER optimiza-
tion, we see consistently worse results on the unseen
development-test set. This, in the context of the rela-
tively small amount of development data, can be ex-
plained by stronger overfitting during optimization.
4 English? German Europarl Task
The systems for the English ? German translation
tasks were trained on the sentence-aligned Europarl
corpus only. The complete corpus consists of ap-
proximately 32 million English and 30 million Ger-
man words.
We applied a similar normalization scheme to the
training data as for the English ? Spanish system.
The main difference was that we did not replace
numbers and that we removed all document refer-
ences. In the translation process, the document ref-
erences were treated as unknown words and there-
fore left unchanged. As above, we trained and op-
timized a first baseline system on the normalized
source and reference sentences. However, we used
only the Europarl task development set during opti-
mization. To achieve further improvements on the
German ? English task, we applied a compound
splitting technique. The compound splitting was
based on (Koehn and Knight, 2003) and was applied
on the lowercased source sentences. The words gen-
erated by the compound splitting were afterwards
true-cased. Instead of replacing a compound by
its separate parts, we added a parallel path into the
source sentence lattices used for translation. The
source sentence lattices were augmented with scores
on their edges indicating whether each edge repre-
sents a word of the original text or if it was gener-
ated during compound splitting.
Table 5 shows the case-sensitive BLEU scores for
the final German ? English systems. In contrast
to the English ? Spanish systems, we used only
monotonous decoding on the lattices containing the
200
task Eng ? Ger Ger ? Eng
dev-EU 18.58 23.85
devtest-EU 18.50 23.87
test06-EU 18.39 23.88
Table 5: Case sensitive BLEU scores for the final
English ? German in-domain systems.
syntactical reorderings.
5 System Combination via n-best List
Combination and Rescoring
5.1 N-best List Rescoring
For n-best list rescoring we used unique 500-best
lists, which may have less than 500 entries for
some sentences. In this evaluation, we used sev-
eral features computed from different information
sources such as features from the translation sys-
tem, additional language models, IBM-1 word lex-
ica and the n-best list itself. We calculated 4 fea-
tures from the IBM-1 word lexica: the word proba-
bility sum as well as the maximum word probabil-
ity in both language directions. From the n-best list
itself, we calculated three different sets of scores.
A position-dependent word agreement score as de-
scribed in (Ueffing and Ney, 2005) with a position
window instead of the Levenshtein alignment, the
n-best list n-gram probability as described in (Zens
and Ney, 2006) and a position-independent n-gram
agreement, which is a variation on the first two. To
tune the feature combination weights, we used MER
optimization.
Rescoring the n-best lists from our individual sys-
tems did not give significant improvements on the
available unseen development-test data. For this rea-
son, we did not apply n-best list rescoring to the indi-
vidual systems. However, we investigated the feasi-
bility of combining two different systems by rescor-
ing the joint n-best lists of both systems. The corre-
sponding results are described in the following sec-
tions.
5.2 Combining Syntax-Augmented MT and
Phrase-Based MT
On the Spanish ? English in-domain task, we par-
ticipated not only with the ISL phrase-based SMT
system as described in this paper, but also with
the ISL syntax-augmented system. The syntax-
task PHRA SYNT COMB
dev-EU 31.77 32.48 32.77
test06-EU 31.76 32.15 32.27
Table 6: Results for combining the syntax-
augmented system (SYNT) with the phrase-based
system (PHRA).
augmented system was trained on the same normal-
ized data as the phrase-based system. However, it
was optimized on the in-domain development set
only. More details on the syntax-augmented system
can be found in (Zollmann et al, 2007). Table 6
lists the respective BLEU scores of both systems as
well as the BLEU score achieved by combining and
rescoring the individual 500-best lists.
5.3 Combining MT Systems with Different
Source Languages
(Och and Ney, 2001) describes methods for trans-
lating text given in multiple source languages into a
single target language. The ultimate goal is to im-
prove the translation quality when translating from
one source language, for example English into mul-
tiple target languages, such as Spanish and German.
This can be done by first translating the English doc-
ument into German and then using the translation as
an additional source, when translating to Spanish.
Another scenario where a multi-source translation
becomes desirable was described in (Paulik et al,
2005). The goal was to improve the quality of au-
tomatic speech recognition (ASR) systems by em-
ploying human-provided simultaneous translations.
By using automatic speech translation systems to
translate the speech of the human interpreters back
into the source language, it is possible to bias the
source language ASR system with the additional
knowledge. Having these two frameworks in mind,
we investigated the possibility of combining our in-
domain German ? English and Spanish ? English
translation systems using n-best list rescoring. Ta-
ble 7 shows the corresponding results. Even though
the German ? English translation performance was
approximately 8 BLEU below the translation perfor-
mance of the Spanish ? English system, we were
able to improve the final translation performance by
up to 1 BLEU.
201
task Spa ? Eng Ger ? Eng Comb.
dev-EU 31.77 23.85 32.76
devtest-EU 31.40 23.87 32.41
test06-EU 31.76 23.88 32.51
Table 7: Results for combining the Spanish ? En-
glish and German ? English phrase-based systems
on the in-domain tasks.
6 Conclusion
We described the ISL phrase-based statistical ma-
chine translation systems that were used for the 2007
ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation.
Using the available out-of-domain News Commen-
tary task training data for language model adapta-
tion, we were able to significantly increase the per-
formance on the out-of-domain task by 2.3 BLEU
for English ? Spanish and by 1.3 BLEU for Span-
ish ? English. We also showed the feasibility of
combining different MT systems by combining and
rescoring their resprective n-best lists. In particular,
we focused on the combination of our phrase-based
and syntax-augmented systems and the combination
of two phrase-based systems operating on different
source languages. While we saw only a minimal im-
provement of 0.1 BLEU for the phrase-based and
syntax-augmented combination, we gained up to 1
BLEU, in case of the multi-source translation.
References
G. Foster, R. Kuhn, and H. Johnson. 2006. Phrasetable
Smoothing for Statistical Machine Translation. In
Proc. of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing, Sydney, Australia.
J. M. Crego et al 2006. N-gram-based SMT System
Enhanced with Reordering Patterns. In Proc. of the
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
162?165, New York, USA.
P. Koehn and K. Knight. 2003. Empirical Methods for
Compound Splitting. In Proc. of the tenth conference
on European chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 187?193, Budapest, Hungary.
P. Koehn and C. Monz. 2006. Manual and Automatic
Evaluation of Machine Translation between European
Langauges. In Proc. of the Workshop on Statisti-
cal Machine Translation, pages 102?121, New York,
USA.
P. Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for Statis-
tical Machine Translation. In Proc. of Machine Trans-
lation Summit.
F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2000. Improved Statistical Align-
ment Models. In Proc. of the 38th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Hongkong, China.
F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2001. Statistical Multi-Source
Translation. In Proc. of Machine Translation Summit,
pages 253?258, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
F. J. Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training in Statis-
tical Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 41st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 160 ? 167, Sapporo, Japan.
M. Paulik, S. Stueker, C. Fuegen, T. Schultz, T. Schaaf,
and A. Waibel. 2005. Speech Translation Enhanced
Automatic Speech Recognition. In Proc. of the Work-
shop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under-
standing, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
TC-STAR. 2004. Technology and Corpora for Speech to
Speech Translation. http://www.tc-star.org.
N. Ueffing and H. Ney. 2005. Word-Level Con-
fidence Estimation for Machine Translation using
Phrase-Based Translation Models. In Proc. of HLT
and EMNLP, pages 763?770, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
S. Vogel. 2003. SMT Decoder Dissected: Word Re-
ordering. In Proc. of Int. Conf. on Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Knowledge Engineering, Bei-
jing, China.
R. Zens and H. Ney. 2006. N-gram Posterior Proba-
bilities for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc.
of the Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation,
pages 72?77, New York, USA.
Y. Zhang and S. Vogel. 2006. Suffix Array and its Ap-
plications in Empirical Natural Language Processing.
In the Technical Report CMU-LTI-06-010, Pittsburgh,
USA.
A. Zollmann, A. Venugopal, M. Paulik, and S. Vogel.
2007. The Syntax Augmented MT (SAMT) system
at the Shared Task for the 2007 ACL Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of ACL 2007
Workshop on Statistical MachineTranslation, Prague,
Czech Republic.
202
