BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 193?194,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Quantitative Data on Referring Expressions in Biomedical Abstracts
Michael Poprat Udo Hahn
Jena University Language and Information Engineering (JULIE) Lab
Fu?rstengraben 30, 07743 Jena, Germany
{poprat|hahn}@coling-uni-jena.de
Abstract
We report on an empirical study that deals
with the quantity of different kinds of refer-
ring expressions in biomedical abstracts.
1 Problem Statement
One of the major challenges in NLP is the resolu-
tion of referring expressions. Those references can
be established by repeating tokens or by pronom-
inal, nominal and bridging anaphora. Experimen-
tal results show that pronominal anaphora are eas-
ier to resolve than nominal ones because the resolu-
tion of nominal anaphora requires an IS-A-taxonomy
as knowledge source. The resolution of bridging
anaphora, however, proves to be awkward because
encyclopedic knowledge is necessary.1 But in prac-
tice, are all of these phenomena equally important?
A look at the publications reveals that a compre-
hensive overview of the quantity and distribution
of referring expressions in biomedical abstracts is
still missing. Nevertheless, some scattered data can
be found: Castan?o et al (2002) state that 60 of
100 anaphora are nominal anaphora. Sanchez et al
(2006) confirm this proportion (24 pronominal and
50 nominal anaphora in 74 anaphoric expressions).
Kim and Park (2004), however, detect 53 pronomi-
nal and 26 nominal anaphora in 87 anaphoric expres-
sions. But Gawronska and Erlendsson (2005), on the
other hand, claim that pronominal anaphora are rare
and nominal anaphora are predominant. Studies on
bridging anaphora in the biomedical domain are re-
1However, even the resolution of pronouns can benefit from
extra-textual information (Castan?o et al, 2002).
ally still missing. Only Cimiano (2003) states that
10% of definite descriptions are bridging anaphora.
This contradictoriness and the lack of statistics on
referring expressions induced us to collect our own
data in order to obtain a consistent and meaningful
overview. This picture helps to decide where to start
if one wants to build a resolution component for the
biomedical domain.
2 Empirical Study
For our study we selected articles from MEDLINE
for stem cell transplantation and gene regulation.
Out of these articles, 11 stem cell abstracts and 9
gene regulation abstracts (? 12,000 tokens) were an-
notated by a team of one biologist and one computa-
tional linguist. The boundaries for annotations were
neither limited to nominal phrases (NPs) nor on their
heads because NPs in biomedical abstracts are of-
ten complex and hide relations between nouns (e.g.,
a ?p53 protein? is a protein called ?p53?, a ?p53
gene? is a gene that codes the ?p53 protein? and a
?p53 mutation? is a mutation in the ?p53 gene?).
Furthermore, we annotated anaphoric expressions
referring to biomedical entities and to processes.
We distinguished the following referring ex-
pressions: As repetitions, we counted string-
identical, string-variants and abbreviated token se-
quences in NPs, identical in their meaning (e.g.
?Mesenchymal stem cells? - ?MSCs? - ?MSC in-
hibitory effect?). For the time being, modifiers have
not been considered. Anaphora comprise pronom-
inal2, nominal (IS-A relations, e.g., ?B-PLL? IS-
2Without ?we? as it always refers to the authors.
193
Type of Referring Expression Number
Repetitions 388
Pronominal Anaphora 48 (sent. internal)6 (sent. external)
Nominal Anaphora 79
Bridging Anaphora 42
Subgrouping Anaphora 91
all 654
Table 1: Number of Referring Expressions
A ?B-cell malignancy?) and bridging anaphora (all
other semantic relations, e.g., ?G(1) progression?
PART-OF-PROCESS ?M-G(1) transition?). Further-
more, we detected a high number of subgrouping
anaphora that often occur when a group of enti-
ties (e.g., ?Vascular endothelial growth factor re-
ceptors?) are mentioned first and certain subgroups
(e.g., ?VEGFR1? etc.) are discussed later.
In our abstracts we detected 654 referring expres-
sions (see Table 1). Repetitions are predominant
with 59%. Within the group of 266 anaphora, sub-
grouping anaphora contributed with 34%, nominal
anaphora with 30%, pronominal anaphora with 20%
and bridging anaphora with only 16%. The most
common bridging relations were PART-OF-AMOUNT
(14) and PART-OF (11). The remaining 17 are held
by 8 other semantic relations such as RESULTS-
FROM, MUTATED-FROM, etc.
3 Open Issues and Conclusion
In biomedical abstracts we are confronted with nu-
merous repetitions, mainly containing biomedical
entities. Their reference resolution within an ab-
stract seems to be easy at first glance by just com-
paring strings and detecting acronyms. Some exam-
ples will show that this is tricky, though: In ?The
VEGFR3-transfected ECs exhibited high expression
level of LYVE-1.?, this statement on ECs only holds
if the modifier ?VEGFR3-transfected? is taken into
account. Furthermore, transfected ECs are not iden-
tical with non-transfected ECs which would be the
result if considering NP heads only. But not ev-
ery modifier influences an identity relation. For ex-
ample, the purification in ?. . . when priming with
purified CD34(+) cells? has no influence on the
CD34(+) cells and statements about these cells keep
their generality. A classification of such modifiers
adding information with or without influencing the
semantics of the modified expression must be made.
Hence, we have to be careful with assumed repeti-
tions and we have to handle all kinds of modifiers.
In this study we present the first comprehensive
overview of various kinds of referring expressions
that occur in biomedical abstracts. Although our
corpus is still small, we could observe the strong
tendency that repetitions play a major role (20 per
abstract). Anaphora occur less frequently (13 per
abstract). For a sound semantic interpretation, both
types must be handled. For knowledge-intensive
anaphora resolution, the existing biomedical re-
sources must be reviewed for adequacy. To the best
of our knowledge, although dominant in our study,
subgrouping anaphora have not been considered in
any anaphora resolution systems and suitable reso-
lution strategies must be found. The annotation pro-
cess (with more than one annotation team) will be
continued. The main result of this study, however,
is the observation that modifiers play an important
role for referencing. Their treatment for semantic
interpretation requires further investigations.
Acknowledgements: We thank Belinda Wu?rfel for
her annotation work. This study was funded by
the EC (BOOTStrep, FP6-028099), and by the Ger-
man Ministry of Education and Research (StemNet,
01DS001A - 1C).
References
J. Castan?o, J. Zhang, and J. Pustejovsky. 2002. Anaphora
resolution in biomedical literature. In Proc. of the
Symp. on Reference Resolution for NLP.
P. Cimiano. 2003. On the research of bridging refer-
ences within information extraction systems. Diploma
thesis, University of Karlsruhe.
B. Gawronska and B. Erlendsson. 2005. Syntactic,
semantic and referential patterns in biomedical texts:
Towards in-depth comprehension for the purpose of
bioinformatics. In Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on Nat-
ural language Understanding and Cognitive science,
pages 68?77.
J.-J. Kim and J. C. Park. 2004. BioAR: Anaphora reso-
lution for relating protein names to proteome database
entries. In Proc. of the ACL 2004: Workshop on Ref-
erence Resolution and its Applications, pages 79?86.
O. Sanchez, M. Poesio, M. A. Kabadjov, and R. Tesar.
2006. What kind of problems do protein interactions
raise for anaphora resolution? A preliminary analysis.
In Proc. of the 2nd SMBM 2006, pages 109?112.
194
