Proceedings of SSST, NAACL-HLT 2007 / AMTA Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical Translation, pages 88?95,
Rochester, New York, April 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Probabilistic Synchronous Tree-Adjoining Grammars for Machine
Translation: The Argument from Bilingual Dictionaries
Stuart M. Shieber
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
shieber@seas.harvard.edu
Abstract
We provide a conceptual basis for think-
ing of machine translation in terms of syn-
chronous grammars in general, and proba-
bilistic synchronous tree-adjoining gram-
mars in particular. Evidence for the view
is found in the structure of bilingual dic-
tionaries of the last several millennia.
1 Introduction
In this paper, we provide a conceptual basis for
thinking of machine translation in terms of syn-
chronous grammars in general, and probabilistic
synchronous tree-adjoining grammars in particular.
The basis is conceptual in that the arguments are
based on generalizations about the translation re-
lation at a conceptual level, and not on empirical
results at an engineering level. Nonetheless, the
conceptual idea is consistent with current efforts in
MT, and in fact may be seen as underlying so-called
syntax-aware MT.
We will argue that the nature of the translation re-
lation is such that an appropriate formalism for re-
alizing it should have a set of properties ? expres-
sivity, trainability, efficiency ? that we will charac-
terize more precisely below. There may be multi-
ple formalisms that can achieve these ends, but one,
at least, is probabilistic synchronous tree-adjoining
grammar, and to our knowledge, no other qualita-
tively distinct formalism has been argued to display
all of the requisite properties.
Below, we will discuss the various properties,
with particular attention to an examination of a par-
ticular source of data about the translation relation,
namely bilingual dictionaries. Multilingual lexicog-
raphy has a history of some four millennia or more.
In that time, a great deal of knowledge about par-
ticular translation relations has been explicitly codi-
fied in multilingual dictionaries. More interestingly
for our present purposes, multilingual dictionaries
through their own structuring implicitly express in-
formation about translation relations in general.
In Section 2, we introduce the Construction Prin-
ciple, a property of the translation relation implicit
in the structure of bilingual dictionaries throughout
their four millennium history. Section 3 provides
a review of synchronous tree-adjoining grammars
showing that this formalism directly incorporates the
Construction Principle and allows the formal im-
plementation of bilingual dictionary relations. In
Section 4, we argue that the probabilistic variant
of STAG (PSTAG) inherits the expressivity advan-
tages of STAG while adding the trainability of sta-
tistical MT. Section 5 concerns the practical efficacy
of STAG. We conclude (Section 6) with an overall
proposal for the use of PSTAG in a statistical MT
system. By virtue of its fundamentality to the mod-
eling of the translation relation, PSTAG or its formal
relatives merits empirical examination as a basis for
statistical MT.
2 Expressivity
Of course, a formalism for describing the transla-
tion relation must be able to capture the relations
between words in the two languages: acqua means
water, dormire means sleep, and so forth. Indeed,
the stereotype of a bilingual dictionary is just such
a relation; the HarperCollins Italian College Dictio-
nary (HCICD) (Clari and Love, 1995) contains en-
88
tries ?acqua / water?10 and ?dormire / sleep?191.1
This property doesn?t distinguish among any of the
formal means for capturing these direct lexical re-
lationships. Finite-state string transducers naturally
capture these simple relationships, but so do more
(and less) expressive formalisms.
Simple word-by-word replacement is not a viable
translation method; this was noted even as early
as Weaver?s famous memorandum (Weaver, 1955).
Systems based on word-to-word lexicons, such as
the IBM systems (Brown et al, 1990; Brown et
al., 1993), incorporate further devices that allow re-
ordering of words (a ?distortion model?) and rank-
ing of alternatives (a monolingual language model).
Together, these allow for the possibility that
The Word Principle:
Words translate differently when adjacent to
other words.
This property of the translation relation is patently
true.
Even a word-to-word system with the ability to
reorder words and rank alternatives has obvious lim-
itations, which have motivated the machine transla-
tion research community toward progressively more
expressive formalisms. Again, we see precedent for
the move in bilingual dictionaries, which provide
phrasal translations in addition to simple word trans-
lations: ?by and large / nel complesso?86, ?full moon
/ luna piena?406. The insight at work here is
The Phrase Principle:
Phrases (not words) translate differently when
adjacent to other phrases.
And again, we see this insight informing statisti-
cal machine translation systems, for instance, in the
phrase-based approaches of Och (2003) and Koehn
et al (2003). These two principles, while true, do
not exhaust the insights implicit in the structure of
bilingual dictionaries. A fuller view is accomplished
by moving from words and phrases to constructions.
2.1 The construction principle
The phenomenon that underlies the use of syn-
chronous grammars for MT is simply this:
1Throughout, we notate entries in HCICD with the notation
?entry form / translation form?page, providing the Italian and
English forms, along with the page number of the cited entry.
The Construction Principle:
Words and phrases translate differently in con-
struction with other words.
The notion of in construction with is a structural no-
tion. A word is in construction with another if they
are related by a structural relation of some sort de-
pendent on the identity or role of the word.
For example, the English word take is prototypi-
cally translated with a form of the Italian prendere
?take / prendere?661. But when its object is a bath,
as in the sentence ?I like to take several long bubble
baths every day?, the word is translated with a form
of fare. More accurately, the construction typified
by the phrase take a bath is translated by the corre-
sponding construction typified by the phrase fare un
bagno (?take a bath / fare un bagno?662).
One may think that we are still in the realm of the
Phrase Principle; the phrase take a bath translates as
the phrase fare un bagno. But the generalization is
clearly much more general than that in several ways.
First, the notion of in construction with does not
necessarily lead to contiguous phrases because of
variability within the constructions. Bilingual dic-
tionaries have developed notational conventions for
such cases. When freely variable objects can inter-
vene between the words in construction, a kind of
variable word is used in dictionary entries, such as
SB (somebody), STH (something), QN (qualcuno),
QC (qualcosa). The word take participates in an-
other construction ?take SB by surprise / cogliere
[literally ?catch?] QN di sorpresa?. The phe-
nomenon is widespread. We find entries for light
verb phrases such as take SB by surprise, idiomatic
constructions such as ?pull SB?s leg / prendere in
giro QN?507, and particle constructions such as ?call
SB up / chiamare QN?86. These variable notations
not only stand in for variable textual material and
categorize that material (as specifying an entity (QC)
or human (QN)) but also provide links between the
portions of the two constructions. Whatever lexi-
cal material instantiates a SB variable on the English
side, its translation instantiates the QN in the Ital-
ian. Thus translations require not only structure in
the monolingual representations, but structure bilin-
gually across them.2
2The linking of the subject roles in these constructions is
typically left implicit in these entries, following from an as-
89
Second, even constructions that are in and of
themselves contiguous may become discontiguous
by intervention of other lexical material: modifiers,
appositives, and the like. An example has already
been seen in the example ?I like to take several long
bubble baths every day?. There is no contiguity be-
tween take and bath here. A formalism based purely
on concatenation of contiguous phrases will be un-
able to model such constructions.
These two aspects of variability and interven-
tion within and between constructions preclude sim-
ple concatenative formalisms such as finite-state or
context-free formalisms.
2.2 Prevalence of bilingual constructions
A natural question arises as to the prevalence of such
nontrivial bilingual constructions. Presumably, if
they are sufficiently rare and exotic, it may be ac-
ceptable, and in fact optimal, from an engineering
point of view to ignore them and stay with simpler
formalisms.
We can ask the prevalence question at the level of
types or tokens. At the type level, a simple examina-
tion of a comprehensive modern bilingual dictionary
reveals a quite high frequency of non-word-for-word
translations. Analysis of a small random subsam-
ple of HCICD yielded only 34% of entries of the
?acqua / water?10 sort. In contrast, 52% were con-
tiguous multi-word translations, e.g., ?guarda caso /
strangely enough?100. An additional 11% of entries
had variable content, split about equally between en-
tries with overt marking of variability (?prendere QN
in castagna / to catch SB in the act?100) and im-
plicit variability (?hai fatto caso al suo cappello? /
did you notice his hat??100, in which the ?suo cap-
pello / his hat? pair serves as a placeholder for other
translates. (The remaining 3% is accounted for by
entries providing monolingual equivalences and un-
translated proper names.) The line between implicit
variability and multi-word translations is quite per-
meable, so that many of the 54% of entries classified
as the latter might in fact be better thought of as the
former, and in any case many of the multi-word en-
sumption that subjects are typically linked across these lan-
guages. Where this assumption fails, however, explicit marking
is found in the dictionary, either by using a passive alternation
?piacere a QN / to be liked by SB?424, or implicit linking ?mi
piace / I like it?424.
tries would be subject to noncontiguity through in-
sertion of other lexical material. At the type level,
then, there is plenty of evidence for the Phrase Prin-
ciple and the Construction Principle.
At the token level, the general interest in so-
called syntax-aware statistical MT approaches is it-
self evidence that researchers believe that the to-
kens accounting for the performance gap in current
systems based on the Word and Phrase Principles
transcend those principles in some way, presum-
ably because they manifest the Construction Prin-
ciple.3 Only time will tell if such syntax-aware
systems are able to display performance improve-
ments over their nonstructural alternatives. Success-
ful experiments such as those of Chiang (2005) us-
ing synchronous context-free grammar are a good
first start.4
2.3 Heritage of the construction principle
We have argued that a formalism expressive enough
to model the translation relation implicit in bilin-
gual dictionaries must be based on relations over
constructions, the primitive relations found in such
bilingual dictionaries and founded by the Construc-
tion Principle. The fundamentality of this princi-
ple is evidenced by the fact that it has informed
bilingual dictionaries literally since their inception.
The earliest known bilingual dictionaries are those
incorporated in the so-called lexical texts of an-
cient Mesopotamia from four millennia ago. Even
there, we find evidence of the Construction Princi-
ple in entries that describe translation of words de-
pendent upon words they are in construction with.
Civil (1995) cites an example of the Akkadian word
naka?pu (to gore, to knock down) whose translation
into Sumerian is given differentially dependent on
the nature of ?grammatical constructions with par-
ticular subjects or objects?:
3A reviewer objects that this point is vacuous: ?Is the fact
that researchers aren?t building large-scale statistical semantic
transfer models evidence for the fact that they don?t believe in
semantics?? This is an instance of the logical fallacy of denying
the antecedent. If researchers act on a premise, they believe the
premise. From this it does not follow that if they fail to act on a
premise, they deny the premise.
4It would be more convincing to have empirical token-level
statistics on the prevalence of constructions found in bilingual
dictionaries. Unfortunately, this would require much of the ef-
fort of building an MT system on a construction basis itself.
90
Translation When said of
sag-ta-dug4-ga the head
du7 oxen
ru5 rams
si-tu10 oxen/bulls
kur-ku a flood
ru-gu? a finger
si-ga a garment
3 Synchronous Grammars Reviewed
To summarize, the translation relation in evidence
implicitly in bilingual dictionaries requires a for-
malism expressive enough to directly represent re-
lations between constructions, appropriately linked,
and to do so in a way that allows these constructions
to be realized noncontiguously by virtue of vari-
ability and intervention. As we will show, the for-
mer requirement is exactly the idea underlying syn-
chronous grammars. The latter requirement of non-
contiguity in its two aspects further implicates oper-
ations of substitution and adjunction (respectively)
to combine constructions. The requirements lead
naturally to a consideration of synchronous tree-
adjoining grammar as the direct embodiment of the
bilingual dictionaries of the last four millennia.
A synchronous grammar formalism is built by
synchronizing grammars from some base formal-
ism. A grammar in the base formalism consists
of a set of elementary tree structures along with
one or more combining operations. All of the fa-
miliar monolingual formalisms?finite-state gram-
mars, context-free grammars, tree-substitution and
-adjoining grammars, categorial grammars, inter
alia?can be thought of in this way. A synchronous
grammar consists of a set of pairs of elementary
trees from the base formalism together with a link-
ing relation between nodes in the trees at which
combining operations can perform. Derivation pro-
ceeds as in the base formalism, whatever that is, ex-
cept that a pair of trees operate at a pair of linked
nodes in an elementary tree pair. An operation per-
formed at one end of a link must be matched by a
corresponding operation at the other end of the link.
For example, the tree pair in Figure 1 might be ap-
propriate for use in translating the sentence Eli took
his father by surprise. The links between the NP
nodes play the same role as the linked variables SB
and QN in the bilingual dictionary entry. They allow
for substitution of tree pairs for Eli and its translation
and his father and its. The additional links allow for
further modification, as in Eli recently took his fa-
ther by surprise by preparing dinner, the modifiers
recently and by preparing dinner adjoining at the VP
and S links, respectively.
Expressing this relation in other frameworks in-
volves either limiting its scope (for instance, to par-
ticular objects and intervening material), expanding
its scope (by separating the translations of the con-
tiguous portions of the constructions), or mimicking
the structure of the STAG (as described at the end of
Section 5).
The basic idea of using synchronous TAG for ma-
chine translation dates from the original definition
(Shieber and Schabes, 1990), and has been pur-
sued by several researchers (Abeille et al, 1990;
Dras, 1999; Prigent, 1994; Palmer et al, 1999), but
only recently in its probabilistic form (Nesson et al,
2006). The directness with which the formalism fol-
lows from the structure of bilingual dictionaries has
not to our knowledge been previously noted. It leads
to the possibility of making direct use of bilingual
dictionary material in a statistical machine transla-
tion system.5 But even if the formalism is not used
in that way, there is import to the fact that its expres-
sivity matches that thought by lexicographers of the
last several millennia to be needed for capturing the
translation relation; this fact indicates at least that
STAG?s use as a substrate for MT systems may be a
promising research direction to pursue, should other
necessary properties be satisfiable as well. We turn
next to two of these properties: trainability and effi-
ciency.
4 Trainability
The mere ability to formally represent the contents
of manually developed bilingual dictionaries is not
sufficient for the building of robust machine trans-
lation systems. The last decade and a half of MT
research has demonstrated the importance of train-
ability of the models based on statistical evidence
found in corpora. Without such training, manually
5For construction-based MT, reconstruction of tree align-
ments from data is much more difficult than for phrase-based
MT, and hence extracting them from a dictionary becomes
much more appealing.
91
SNP VP
V NP
took
by surprise
PP
P NP
S
NP VP
V NP
a colto
di sorpresa
PP
P NP
Figure 1: A synchronous tree pair.
developed models are too brittle to be seriously con-
sidered as a basis for machine translation.
It may also be the case that with such training, the
manually generated materials are redundant. Cer-
tainly, it has been difficult to show the utility of man-
ually generated annotations in improving MT per-
formance. But this may be because the means by
which the materials are represented is not yet appro-
priate; it does not articulate well with the statistical
substrate used by the training methodology.
A further property, then, for the formalism is that
it be trainable based on bilingual corpora. Consider
training of the sort that underlies the IBM-style word
models and their phrase-based offshoots, or statisti-
cal parsing based on probabilistic CFGs (Lari and
Young, 1990) or other generative formalisms. Such
methods use an underlying probabilistic formalism,
typically structuring the parameters based on a uni-
versal parametric normal form (as n-gram proba-
bilities are for finite-state grammars and Chomsky-
normal form is for PCFGs), and applying an efficient
training algorithm to set values for the parameters.
A full system based on STAG would use the for-
malism to express both the detailed bilingual con-
structional relationships as found in a bilingual dic-
tionary and a backbone in the form of the uni-
versal normal form. Trained together, the normal
form would serve to smooth the brittle construction-
specific part, while the construction-specific part
would relieve the burden on the universal learned
portion to allocate parameters to rare constructions.
How do synchronous tree-adjoining grammars
fare in this area? Do they admit of the kind of uni-
versal normal-form training that might serve as a
smoothing method for the more highly articulated
but brittle lexicographic relation?
A probabilistic variant of synchronous TAG is
straightforward to specify, given that the formal-
ism itself has a natural generative interpretation
(Shieber, 1994). A universal parametric normal
form has been provided by Nesson et al (2006)
(see Figure 2), who show that, at least on small
training sets, a synchronous TAG in this normal
form performs at a level comparable to standard
word- and phrase-based systems. Synchronous
TAGs thus seem to have the best of both worlds:
They can directly express the types of ramified bilin-
gual constructions as codified in bilingual dictionar-
ies, and they can also express the types of universal
assumption-free normal forms that underlie modern
statistical MT. Importantly, they can do so at one
and the same time, as both types of information are
expressed in the same way, as sets of tree pairs. Both
can therefore be trained together based on bilingual
corpora.
We emphasize that the advantage that we find for
STAGs in displaying well the necessary properties
for statistical machine translation systems implicit in
bilingual dictionaries is not that they are able to code
efficiently all generalizations about the translation
relation. Indeed, STAG is not able to do so (Shieber,
1994), which has motivated more expressive exten-
92
XX
X
w Tw S
!
X
X
X
X
X
X
w Tw S
X
X
X
X
X
X
w S w T
X
X
X
S
X
!
S
X
X? X? X?X? X? X?
!
S
X
!
S
X !
S
X
!
S
X
Figure 2: A normal form for synchronous tree-insertion grammar. (Reproduced from Nesson et al (2006).)
sions of the formalism (Chiang et al, 2000). For
example, STAG might express the construction rela-
tion ?attraversare QC di corsa / run across ST? and
similar relations between Italian verbs of direction
with modifiers of motion and English verbs of mo-
tion with directional modifiers. However, the gener-
alization that directional verbs with motion-manner
adverbials translate as motion-manner verbs with di-
rectional adverbials is not expressed or expressible
by STAG. Each instance of the generalization must
be specified or learned separately.6 Nonetheless, we
are content (in the spirit of statistical MT) to have
lots of such particular cases missing a generaliza-
tion, so long as the parts from which they are con-
structed are pertinent, that is, so long as we do not
need to specify ?attraversare la strada di corsa / run
across the road?51 separately from all of the other
things one might run across.
5 Efficiency
A final set of considerations has to do with the effi-
ciency of the formalism. Is it practical to use STAG
for the purposes we have outlined? It is important
not to preclude a formalism merely based on im-
practicality of its current use (given the constant in-
creases in computer speed), but inherent intractabil-
ity is another matter.7
6Palmer et al (1999) provide an approach to STAG that at-
tempts to address this particular problem as does the extension
of Dras (1999). It is unclear to what extent such extensions are
amenable to trainable probabilistic variants.
7Of course, too much might be made of this question of
computational complexity. The algorithms used for decoding
of statistical MT systems almost universally incorporate heuris-
tics for efficiency reasons, even those that are polynomial. One
reviewer notes that ?the admittedly perplexing reality is that ex-
ponential decoders run much faster than polynomial ones, pre-
Here, the STAG situation is equivocal. Bilingual
parsing of a corpus relative to an STAG is a nec-
essary first step in parameter training. The recog-
nition problem for STAG, like that for synchronous
context-free grammar (SCFG) is NP-hard (Satta and
Peserico, 2005). Under appropriate restrictions of
binarizability, SCFG parsing can be done in O(n6)
time, doubling the exponent of CFG parsing. Simi-
larly, STAG parsing under suitable limitations (Nes-
son et al (2005)) can be done in O(n12) time dou-
bling the exponent of monolingual TAG parsing. On
the positive side, recent work exploring the auto-
matic binarization of synchronous grammars (Zhang
et al, 2006) has indicated that non-binarizable con-
structions seem to be relatively rare in practice.
Nonetheless, such a high-degree polynomial makes
the complete algorithm impractical.
Nesson et al (2006) use synchronous tree-
insertion grammar (STIG) (Schabes and Waters,
1995) rather than STAG for this very reason.
STIG retains the ability to express a universal nor-
mal form, while allowing O(n6) bilingual parsing.
(Again, limitations on the formalism are required to
achieve this complexity.) Even this complexity may
be too high. Methods such as those of Chiang (2005)
have been proposed for further reducing the com-
plexity of SCFG parsing; they may be applicable to
STIG (and STAG) parsing as well.
The STIG formalism can be shown to be expres-
sively equivalent to synchronous tree-substitution
grammar (STSG) and even SCFG. Does this viti-
ate the argument for STIG as a natural formalism
for MT? No. The reductions of STIG to these other
formalisms operate by introducing additional nodes
sumably because they prune more intelligently.?
93
in the elementary trees that extend the size of those
trees and hence the complexity of their parsing, un-
less subtle tricks are used to take advantage of the
special structure of these added nodes. These tricks
essentially amount to treating the formalism as an
STIG, not an SCFG. That is, even if an SCFG were
to be used, its structure would best be built on the
observations found here.
For example, the method of Cowan et al (2006)
synchronizes elementary trees of a prescribed form
to handle translation of clauses (verbs plus their ar-
guments) essentially implementing a kind of STSG.
However, because modifiers can make these trees
discontiguous, they augment the model by allowing
for free insertion of modifiers in certain locations.
One view of this is as an implementation of the prin-
ciple that motivates adjoining, without using adjoin-
ing itself. Thus, systems that are designed to take
account of the principles adduced in this paper are
likely to be implementing aspects of STAG implic-
itly, even if not explicitly.
Similarly, recent research is beginning to unify
synchronous grammar formalisms and tree trans-
ducers (Shieber, 2004; Shieber, 2006). There may
well be equally direct transducer formalisms that el-
egantly express construction-based translation rela-
tions. This would not be a denial of the present the-
sis but a happy acknowledgment of it.
6 Conclusion
We have argued that probabilistic synchronous TAG
or some closely related formalism possesses a con-
stellation of properties?expressivity, trainability,
and efficiency?that make it a good candidate at
a conceptual level for founding a machine transla-
tion system. What would such a system look like?
It would start with a universal normal form sub-
grammar serving as the robust ?backoff? relation to
which additional more articulated bilingual material
could be added in the form of additional tree pairs.
These tree pairs might be manually generated, au-
tomatically reconstructed from repurposed bilingual
dictionaries, or automatically induced from aligned
bilingual treebanks (Groves et al, 2004; Groves and
Way, 2005) or even unannotated bilingual corpora
(Chiang, 2005). In fact, since all of these sources
of data yield interacting tree pairs, more than one of
these techniques might be used. In any case, further
training would automatically determine the interac-
tions of these information sources.
The conclusions of this paper are admittedly pro-
grammatic. But plausible arguments for a program
of research may be just the thing for clarifying a re-
search direction and even promoting its pursual. In
that sense, this paper can be read as a kind of man-
ifesto for the use of probabilistic synchronous TAG
as a substrate for MT research.
Acknowledgments
We thank Rani Nelken, Rebecca Nesson, and
Alexander Rush for helpful discussion and the
anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
This work was supported in part by grant IIS-
0329089 from the National Science Foundation.
References
Anne Abeille, Yves Schabes, and Aravind K. Joshi.
1990. Using lexicalized tags for machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics.
Peter F. Brown, John Cocke, Stephen Della Pietra, Vin-
cent J. Della Pietra, Frederick Jelinek, John D. Laf-
ferty, Robert L. Mercer, and Paul S. Roossin. 1990. A
statistical approach to machine translation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 16(2):79?85.
Peter F. Brown, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della
Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics
of statistical machine translation: Parameter estima-
tion. Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263?311.
David Chiang, William Schuler, and Mark Dras. 2000.
Some remarks on an extension of synchronous TAG.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on
Tree Adjoining Grammars and Related Formalisms
(TAG+5), Paris, France, 25?27 May.
David Chiang. 2005. A hierarchical phrase-based model
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
the 43rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL?05), pages 263?270, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Miguel Civil. 1995. Ancient Mesopotamian lexicogra-
phy. In Jack M. Sasson, editor, Civilizations of the An-
cient Near East, volume 4, pages 2305?14. Scribners,
New York.
94
Michela Clari and Catherine E. Love, editors. 1995.
HarperCollins Italian College Dictionary. Harper-
Collins Publishers, Inc., New York, NY.
Brooke Cowan, Ivona Kucerov, and Michael Collins.
2006. A discriminative model for tree-to-tree trans-
lation. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2006.
Mark Dras. 1999. A meta-level grammar: Redefining
synchronous TAG for translation and paraphrase. In
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 80?87,
Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Declan Groves and Andy Way. 2005. Hybrid example-
based SMT: the best of both worlds? In Workshop on
Building and Using Parallel Texts: Data-Driven Ma-
chine Translation and Beyond, Ann Arbor, MI, June.
ACL ?05.
Declan Groves, Mary Hearne, and Andy Way. 2004. Ro-
bust sub-sentential alignment of phrase-structure trees.
In COLING ?04, Geneva Switzerland.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceed-
ings of HLT/NAACL.
Karim Lari and Steve J. Young. 1990. The estimation
of stochastic context-free grammars using the inside-
outside algorithm. Computer Speech and Language,
4:35?56.
Rebecca Nesson, Alexander Rush, and Stuart M. Shieber.
2005. Induction of probabilistic synchronous tree-
insertion grammars. Technical Report TR-20-05, Di-
vision of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Rebecca Nesson, Stuart M. Shieber, and Alexander Rush.
2006. Induction of probabilistic synchronous tree-
insertion grammars for machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 7th Conference of the Association for
Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA 2006),
Boston, Massachusetts, 8-12 August.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Statistical Machine Transla-
tion: From Single-Word Models to Alignment Tem-
plates. Ph.D. thesis, Technical University of Aachen,
Aachen, Germany.
Martha Palmer, Joseph Rosenzweig, and William
Schuler. 1999. Capturing motion verb generalizations
in synchronous tree-adjoining grammar. In Patrick
Saint-Dizier, editor, Predicative Forms in Natural Lan-
guage and in Lexical Knowledge Bases. Kluwer Press.
Gilles Prigent. 1994. Synchronous TAGs and machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Third International
Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related
Formalisms (TAG+3), Universite? Paris 7.
Giorgio Satta and Enoch Peserico. 2005. Some com-
putational complexity results for synchronous context-
free grammars. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (HLT/EMNLP 05),
pages 803?810, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yves Schabes and Richard C. Waters. 1995. Tree in-
sertion grammar: A cubic time, parsable formalism
that lexicalizes context-free grammars without chang-
ing the trees produced. Computational Linguistics,
21(3):479?512.
Stuart M. Shieber and Yves Schabes. 1990. Synchronous
tree-adjoining grammars. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, volume 3, pages 253?258, Helsinki, Finland.
Stuart M. Shieber. 1994. Restricting the weak-generative
capacity of synchronous tree-adjoining grammars.
Computational Intelligence, 10(4):371?385, Novem-
ber. Also available as cmp-lg/9404003.
Stuart M. Shieber. 2004. Synchronous grammars as tree
transducers. In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna-
tional Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Re-
lated Formalisms (TAG+ 7), Vancouver, Canada, May
20-22.
Stuart M. Shieber. 2006. Unifying synchronous tree-
adjoining grammars and tree transducers via bimor-
phisms. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (EACL-06), Trento, Italy, 3?7 April.
Warren Weaver. 1955. Translation. In W.N. Locke
and A. D. Booth, editors, Machine Translation of Lan-
guages: Fourteen Essays, pages 15?23. Technology
Press of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Hao Zhang, Liang Huang, Daniel Gildea, and Kevin
Knight. 2006. Synchronous binarization for machine
translation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Hu-
man Language Technology and Annual Meeting of the
North American Chapter of the Association of Compu-
tational Linguistics (HLT/NAACL 2006), pages 256?
263, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
95
