Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Important Unresolved Matters, pages 104?110,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Amharic Stemmer : Reducing Words to their Citation Forms
Atelach Alemu Argaw
Department of Computer and
Systems Sciences
Stockholm University/KTH, Sweden
atelach@dsv.su.se
Lars Asker
Department of Computer and
Systems Sciences
Stockholm University/KTH, Sweden
asker@dsv.su.se
Abstract
Stemming is an important analysis step in
a number of areas such as natural lan-
guage processing (NLP), information re-
trieval (IR), machine translation(MT) and
text classification. In this paper we present
the development of a stemmer for Amharic
that reduces words to their citation forms.
Amharic is a Semitic language with rich and
complex morphology. The application of
such a stemmer is in dictionary based cross
language IR, where there is a need in the
translation step, to look up terms in a ma-
chine readable dictionary (MRD). We apply
a rule based approach supplemented by oc-
currence statistics of words in a MRD and
in a 3.1M words news corpus. The main
purpose of the statistical supplements is to
resolve ambiguity between alternative seg-
mentations. The stemmer is evaluated on
Amharic text from two domains, news arti-
cles and a classic fiction text. It is shown to
have an accuracy of 60% for the old fash-
ioned fiction text and 75% for the news arti-
cles.
1 Introduction
Stemming is the process of reducing morphologi-
cal variants of a word into a common form. For
morphologically less complex languages like Eng-
lish or Swedish, this usually involves removal of suf-
fixes. For languages like Amharic or Arabic, that
have a much richer morphology, this process also
involves dealing with prefixes, infixes and deriva-
tives in addition to the suffixes. Stemming is widely
used in IR, with the assumption that morphologi-
cal variants represent similar meaning. It is applied
during indexing and is used to reduce the vocab-
ulary size, and it is used during query processing
in order to ensure similar representation as that of
the document collection. In cross language infor-
mation retrieval (CLIR) where a query is typically
posed in one language, and the document collection
from where the documents are retrieved is in another
language, some form of translation is required. For
low resource languages such as Amharic, machine
readable dictionaries (MRDs) play a crucial role by
enabling look up of translations of query terms. In
most cases such MRDs have all entries represented
only by their citation form. Thus in CLIR applica-
tions, it is of outmost importance that query terms
in the source language are reduced to the exact cor-
responding citation form as presented in the MRD.
In this paper we address this particular problem of
stemming Amharic words and reducing them to their
citation forms for CLIR applications.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 provides a background information
about the Amharic language, followed by related
work in Section 3 and a brief description of Amharic
morphology in Section 4. Section 5 presents the re-
sources utilized, while Section 6 deals with a de-
tailed description of the stemmer. In section 7 we
describe experiments conducted to evaluate the per-
formance of the stemmer and discuss the obtained
results. We give concluding remarks in Section 8.
104
2 The Amharic Language
Amharic is the official working language of the fed-
eral government of the Federal Democratic Repub-
lic of Ethiopia and is estimated to be spoken by
well over 20 million people as a first or second lan-
guage. Amharic is the second most spoken Semitic
language in the world (after Arabic). It is today
probably the second largest language in Ethiopia (af-
ter Oromo, a Cushitic language) and possibly one
of the five largest languages on the African conti-
nent. Following the Constitution drafted in 1993,
Ethiopia is divided into nine fairly independent re-
gions, each with it?s own nationality language. How-
ever, Amharic is the language for country-wide com-
munication and was also for a long period the prin-
cipal literal language and medium of instruction in
primary and secondary schools of the country, while
higher education is carried out in English. Despite
it?s wide speaker population, computational linguis-
tic resources for Amharic, as most ?low resource?
languages, are very limitted and almost non existent.
Written Amharic uses a unique script which has
originated from the Ge?ez alphabet (the liturgical
language of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church). Writ-
ten Ge?ez can be traced back to at least the 4th
century A.D. The first versions of the language in-
cluded consonants only, while the characters in later
versions represent consonant-vowel (CV) phoneme
pairs. In the modern Ethiopic script each syllable
pattern comes in seven different forms (called or-
ders), reflecting the seven vowel sounds. The first
order is the basic form; the other orders are derived
from it by more or less regular modifications in-
dicating the different vowels. There are 33 basic
forms, giving 7*33 syllable patterns (syllographs),
or fidels. Two of the base forms represent vow-
els in isolation, but the rest are for consonants (or
semi-vowels classed as consonants) and thus cor-
respond to CV pairs, with the first order being the
base symbol with no explicit vowel indicator. The
writing system also includes four (incomplete, five-
character) orders of labialised velars and 24 addi-
tional labialised consonants. In total, there are 275
fidels, but not all the letters of the Amharic script
are strictly necessary for the pronunciation patterns
of the spoken language; some were simply inherited
from Ge?ez without having any semantic or phonetic
distinction in modern Amharic. There are many
cases where numerous symbols are used to denote
a single phoneme, as well as words that have ex-
tremely different orthographic form and slightly dis-
tinct phonetics, but with the same meaning. So are,
for example, most labialised consonants basically
redundant, and there are actually only 39 context-
independent phonemes (monophones): of the 275
symbols of the script, only about 233 remain if the
redundant ones are removed. The script also has a
unique set of punctuation marks and digits. Unlike
Arabic or Hebrew, the language is written from left
to right.
The Amharic writing system uses multitudes of
ways to denote compound words and there is no
agreed upon spelling standard for compounds. As
a result of this - and of the size of the country lead-
ing to vast dialectal dispersion - lexical variation and
homophony is very common.
3 Related work
Pioneering the work on morphological analysis of
Amharic verbs, Abiyot (Bayou, 2000) designed
and implemented a prototype word parser for
Amharic verbs and their derivation. He designed
a knowledge-based system that parses verbs, and
nouns derived from verbs. He used root pattern and
affixes to determine the lexical and inflectional cat-
egory of the words. He tested his system on a lim-
ited number of words (200 verbs and 200 nouns) and
the result showed that 86% of the verbs and 84% of
the nouns were recognized correctly. Another proto-
type morphological analyzer for Amharic was devel-
oped by Tesfaye Bayu (Bayu, 2002) where he used
an unsupervised learning approach based on prob-
abilistic models to extract morphemic components
(prefix, stem and suffix) to construct a morpholog-
ical dictionary. He also investigated an approach
whereby he applied the principle of Auto segmental
Phonology to identify morphemic component of a
stem such as consonantal root, vocalic melodies and
CV-templates. The first system was able to parse
successfully 87% of words of the test data (433 of
500 words). This result corresponds to a precision
of 95% and a recall of 90%. Tested with 255 stems,
the second system identified the morphemic compo-
nentes of 241 (or 94% of the) stems correctly.
105
Fissaha and Haller (Fissaha and Haller, 2003) dis-
cuss the morphology of Amharic verbs in the context
of Machine Translation and present an implemeta-
tion of a morphological analyser for Amharic us-
ing Xerox Finite State Tools (XFST). The different
classification shemes for Amharic verbs that have
been forwarded are discussed followed by the impli-
cation such classifications have on the implementa-
tion strategy. They claim that morphological analy-
sis for Amharic with XFST can handle most of the
morphologcal phenomena except some derivation
processes which involve simultaneous application of
both stem interdigitation and reduplication. Saba
and Gibbon (Amsalu and Gibbon, 2005) extend the
XFST implementation of Amharic morpholgy to in-
clude all word categories. Testing with 1620 words
text from an Amharic bible, they report recall levels
of 94% for verbs, 85% for nouns, and 88% for adjec-
tives while they report precisions of 94% for nouns,
81% for adjectives, 91% for adverbs, and 54% for
verbs, at the above specified recall levels.
A more recent work that applies Conditional
Random Fields to segment and part of speech tag
Amharic words is done by Fissaha (Adafre, 2005).
He reports an accuracy of 84% for the word segmen-
tation. The work deals with bound morphemes of
prepositions, conjunctions, relative markers, auxil-
iary verbs, nagation marker and coordinate conjunc-
tion, but leaves out other bound morphemes such as
definite article, agreement features such as gender
and number, case markers, etc, and considers them
to be part of the word. The best result (84%) is ob-
tained by using character, morphological and lexical
features.
There has been a work done by Alemayehu and
Willet (Alemayehu and Willett, 2002) which inves-
tigates the effectiveness of stemming in information
retrieval for Amharic. They compare performance
of word-based, stem-based, and root-based retrieval
of 40 Amharic queries against 548 Amharic docu-
ments, and show better recall levels for stem and
root based retrieval over word based, but they don?t
provide information on the precision of these exper-
iments.
All the above mentioned works attempt to address
the need to develop a morphological analyser for
Amharic, and show that there has been a great deal
of effort put in the design and implementation of
each system. Although that is the case, none of them
are publicly available, and/or are limitted in some
way. For our current task of stemming for the pur-
pose of CLIR dictionary lookup, full fledged mor-
phological analysis is most likely an overkill since
we only need citation forms of words, and precision
plays a very important role.
4 Amharic Morphology
Amharic has a rich verb morphology which is based
on triconsonantal roots with vowel variants describ-
ing modifications to, or supplementary detail and
variants of the root form. A significantly large part
of the vocabulary consists of verbs, which exhibit
different morphosyntactic properties based on the
arrangment of the consonant-vowel patterns. For ex-
ample, the root sbr, meaning ?to break? can have
the perfect form sa?bba?r with the pattern CVC-
CVC1, imperfect form sa?br with the pattern CVCC,
gerund form sa?br with the pattern CVCC, imper-
ative form sba?r with the pattern CCVC, causative
form assa?bba?r with the pattern as-CVCCVC, pas-
sive form ta?sa?bba?r with the pattern ta?-CVCCVC,
etc. Subject, gender, number, etc are also indicated
as bound morphemes on the verb, as well as objects
and possesion markers, mood and tense, benefica-
tive, malfactive, transitive, dative, negative, etc, pro-
ducing a complex verb morphology.
Amharic nouns can be inflected for gender, num-
ber, definiteness, and case, although gender is usu-
ally neutral. Adjectives behave in the same way as
nouns, taking similar inflections, while prepositions
are mostly bound morphemes prefixed to nouns. The
definte article in Amharic is also a bound morpheme,
and attaches to the end of a noun. We have given a
very brief description of some aspects of Amharic
morphology, detailed information can be found in
(Bender, 1968), (Bender and Fulas, 1978), (Yimam,
1995).
We have constructed 65 rules based on the entire
Amharic morphology for the purpose of this study.
The rules vary from simple affixation rules to each
word category to allowed combinations of prefixes
and suffixes for each word category and set of af-
fixes.
1C stands for consonants and V for vowels
106
5 Resources
5.1 The Corpora
We have utilized three different sources of text
for the development of the stemmer and the ex-
periments. The first is a collection of news ar-
ticles from an online news repository, Ethiopian
News Headlines (ENH), which is available at
http://www.ethiozena.net. This corpus consists of
3.1 million words of Amharic news text in a little
more than 10,000 articles. This corpus was used
to collect word frequency and prefix and suffix sta-
tistics i.e. the number of times an affix occurs at-
tached to a known stem, and the occurence sta-
tistics was used to disambiguate between alterna-
tive segmantations of a given word. The second
text source is another Ethiopian news agency, Walta
Information Center (WIC) which can be found at
http://www.waltainfo.com. We used news items
downloaded from WIC to evaluate the stemmer on
independent news texts from another source. The
third text, which was also used for evaluation, is
from the Amharic novel ?Fikir Iske Meqabir? (FIM)
by the renowned Ethiopian author Dr. Hadis Ale-
mayehu. This text (FIM) was selected for the eval-
uation in order to see how well the stemmer would
perform on a text that differed substantially in style
from the news collection.
5.2 The Dictionaries
The simplest and most straight forward way for the
stemmer to verify that a suggested segmentation is
correct is to try to look up the stem in a dictionary.
For this purpose we used three different dictionar-
ies, an Amharic - English, an Amharic - French, and
an Amharic - Amharic dictionary. The Amharic -
English dictionary, by Dr. Amsalu Aklilu, contains
15 000 Amharic words with their English transla-
tions (Aklilu, 1981). The Amharic - French dic-
tionary (Abebe, 2004) has 12 000 Amharic entries
while the Amharic - Amharic dictionary by Kesatie
Birhan has 56 000 entries (Tesema, ). All three
dictionaries were made available to us in electronic
form, transliterated to SERA and then merged and
represented in a form suitable for the stemmer.
5.3 Transliteration
The dictionaries and all Amharic news texts men-
tioned above are published using Ethiopic script and
using a variety of fonts, some of which are not Uni-
code compliant. In order to simplify the analysis
and to have a unified representation of the texts, we
transliterated all Amharic texts into SERA which is
a system for ASCII representation of Ethiopic char-
acters (Firdyiwek and Yacob, 1997).
The transliteration was done using a file conver-
sion utility called g2 which was made available to
us by Daniel Yacob of the Ge?ez Frontier Founda-
tion (http://www.ethiopic.org/).
6 The Stemmer
The stemmer first creates a list consisting of all
possible segmentations of the word that is to be
stemmed. In a second step, each such segmenta-
tion is then verified by matching each candidate stem
against the machine readable dictionary. If no stem
matches the dictionary, the stemmer will modfy the
stem and redo the matching. If more than one stem
matches, the most likely stem will be selected after
disambiguating between the candidate stems based
on statistical and other properties of the stems. In
the cases when exactly one stem matches the dictio-
nary then that segmentation will be presented as the
output from the stemmer.
6.1 Segmentation
For each new word the stemmer first creates a list
of possible segmentations by applying a list of mor-
phological rules for allowed prefixes and suffixes. In
this way, the word Indeminorewnawould for ex-
ample be segmented into the following 9 different
ways:
(1) Indeminorewna
(2) Indeminorew -na
(3) Indeminore -w -na
(4) Inde- minorewna
(5) Inde- minorew -na
(6) Inde- minore -w -na
(7) Inde- mi- norewna
(8) Inde- mi- norew -na
(9) Inde- mi- nore -w -na
107
For each of the 9 possible segmentations, the re-
maining stem is then matched against the (merged)
three dictionaries. In this case, the only one that is
found as entry in the dictionary is nore, so alterna-
tive 9 is selected as the most likely segmentation of
the word.
6.2 Disambiguation
If more than one of the candidate stems are matched
in the dictionary, those segmentations that have a
stem that matches an entry in the dictionary are
ranked according to length and frequency of the
stem. The longest stem that have a match in the
dictionary is selected and if more than one stem of
equal length matches the dictionary then the stem
that is more frequent is preferred before the less fre-
quent. The frequency score is based on how often
the stem occurs in the ENH corpus described above.
The word beteyazew would for example be seg-
mented in the following ways:
(1) beteyazew
(2) beteyaze -w
(3) beteyaz -e -w
(4) be- teyazew
(5) be- teyaze -w
(6) be- teyaz -e -w
(7) be- te- yazew
(8) be- te- yaze -w
(9) be- te- yaz -e -w
In this case the three stems teyaze (5), yaze
(8) and yaz (9) all have matching entries in the dic-
tionary but teyaze is selected as the most likely
stem since it is the longest.
6.3 Modification
For approximately 30% of the words, the stem does
not match the dictionary. In these cases, the stem
will be slightly modifed and a second attempt to
match the entries in the dictionary will be done. For
example the word IndegeleSut should correctly
be segmented into Inde- geleSe -u -t. With
the approach described so far, the segmentation
based on prefixes and suffixes would yield the stem
geleS which will not have a match in the dictio-
nary. Instead, for the dictionary lookup to succeed,
we first need to add the vowel e at the end of the
stem. For the word astawqWal which should cor-
rectly segment into astaweqe -W -al we will
first have to insert e both between w and q and again
after q to reach the correct form of the stem. This
process of modifying the stem by adding vowels, is
applied to the candidate stems if no matches by the
unmodifed stems are made in the dictionary. For
the current implementation of the stemmer, this is
done by inserting one of the vowels ?e? or ?a? be-
tween the consonants if the unmatched stem con-
tains two consecutive consonants, or after the last
consonant if the stem ends in a consonant. If exactly
one of the modifed stems will match the dictionary,
then that segmentation will be ranked as the most
likely. If more than one modifed stem matches, then
the longest will be selected. For the words where
this modification of the stem is done, approximately
30% will successfully match their correct entry in
the dicionary while 20% make an incorrect match
and the remaining 50% will not match the dictionary
at all.
6.4 Out-of-dictionary terms
Finally, the approximately 15% of the words that do
not have any stem that matches entries in the dic-
tionary (even after the modifiaction) will be ranked
according to the length of the stem and the number
of times that the stem occurs in the ENH corpus. In
this case, it is the shorter stems that are preferred.
For example the word bekomixnu will have four
possible segmentations, none of which occurs in the
dictionary.
(1) bekomixnu
(2) bekomixn -u
(3) be- komixnu
(4) be- komixn -u
In this case, alternative 4, komixn is the short-
est stem that occurs as a unique word in the ref-
erence corpus and is therefor selected as the most
likely segmentation before either one of the alterna-
tive stems bekomixnu, bekomixn or komixnu.
108
7 Experimental Evaluation
In order to evaluate the performance of the stem-
mer, we selected the first 1503 words (= 1000 unique
words) from the WIC corpus described above. We
also selected a 470 words long text from the book
?Fikir Iske Meqabir? to get a text with 300 unique
words.
On the WIC data the stemmer had an overall ac-
curay of 76.9 %. For 48 % of the words, the stem-
mer found exactly one segmentation with a stem that
was matching the dictionary, and for these words
it had an accuracy of 83.75 %. For 36.3 % of the
words, the stemmer found more than one segmenta-
tion that matched the dictionary and therefor needed
to do additional disambiguation between alternative
segmentations. For these words, the stemmer had
an accuracy of 69.1 %. For the remaining 15.7 % of
the words, the stemmer found no match in the dictio-
nary for any of the possible segmentations. For these
words the stemmer had an accuracy of 73.9 %. In
the cases when there is only one match in the dictio-
nary, the extra sources for error that are introduced
by having to disambiguate between alternative seg-
mentations are avoided and hence the stemmer has
best accuracy for those words that have exactly one
segmentation with a stem that will match the dictio-
nary.
For the 300 unique words from Fikir Iske
Meqabir, the stemmer had an overall accuracy of
60.0 % In a similar fashion as for the WIC data, the
stemmer performed best on the subset of words for
which there was exacly one match in the dictionary.
For this group the performance was 68.8 % correct
but the overall accuracy was lowered by the fact that
the stemmer performed worse on the words that had
either more than one match, or no match at all in the
dictionary. These numbers were 54.8 % and 42.1 %
respectively.
8 Conclusion
We have presented the design and development of
an Amharic stemmer which reduces words to their
citation forms for the purpose of dictionary lookup
in CLIR. Given the resource constraints we have,
and the specificity of the stemmer, the overall per-
formance could be acceptable, but needs further im-
provment. The stemming depends highly on word
entries in the three MRDs for verification purposes.
These MRDs altogether consist of a limitted amount
of entries, overall 83000, with a very high level of
overlap, leaving 47176 unique entries. Although it is
not the largest source of error, it accounts for around
15% of the words segmentation decided on corpus
statististics only since they are not found in the dic-
tionaries. We intend to use more dictionaries with
the assumption that there will be a performance in-
crease with the increasing number of citation forms
to refer to. On the other hand, increasing the amount
of citation forms also will increase the percentage
of words that will have more than one match in the
dictionaries. That would lead us to focus on the dis-
ambiguation strategy in the future. So long as the
morphological rule exists, we are able to get the cor-
rect segmentation for a word in a possible segmen-
tations list. And when we have two or more likely
segmentations that are picked out since they have
matching stems in dictionaries, we need to design a
smarter way of disambiguation that would take into
account contextual information and part of speech
tags, etc, in addition to the currently used occurence
frequency approach.
Although conducting a full fledged morphological
analyser for Amharic is beyond the scope of this pa-
per, we would like to note that there is a need to cre-
ate a forum for collaboration and exchange among
researchers involved in developing NLP resources
for Amharic and other Semitic languages and orga-
nize the considerable effort that is being made indi-
vidually. We also hope that some of the ideas and
procedures that are described in this paper could
be more generally applicable to other Semitic lan-
guages as well.
Acknowledgements
The copyright to the two volumes of the French-
Amharic and Amharic-French dictionary (?Dic-
tionnaire Francais-Amharique? and ?Dictionnaire
Amharique-Francais?) by Dr Berhanou Abebe and
Eloi Fiquet is owned by the French Ministry of For-
eign Affairs. We would like to thank the authors and
the French embassy in Addis Ababa for allowing us
to use the dictionary in this research.
The content of the ?English - Amharic Dictio-
nary? is the intellectual property of Dr Amsalu
109
Aklilu. We would like to thank Dr Amsalu as well
as Daniel Yacob of the Geez frontier foundation for
making it possible for us to use the dictionary and
other resources in this work.
We would also like to thank Ato Negash of Walta
Information Center for allowing us to use part of
their news texts in this research.
References
Berhanou Abebe. 2004. Dictionnaire Amharique-
Francais. Shama Books, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Sisay Fissaha Adafre. 2005. Part of speech tagging for
amharic using conditional random fields. In Proceed-
ings of ACL-2005 Workshop on Computational Ap-
proaches to Semitic Languages.
Amsalu Aklilu. 1981. Amharic - English Dictionary.
Mega Publishing Enterprise, Ethiopia.
Nega Alemayehu and Peter Willett. 2002. The effective-
ness of stemming for information retrieval in amharic.
In Short Communication.
Saba Amsalu and Dafydd Gibbon. 2005. Finite state
morphology of amharic. In Proceedings of RANLP.
Abiyot Bayou. 2000. Design and development of word
parser for amharic language. Masterthesis, Addis
Abeba Univeristy.
Tesfaye Bayu. 2002. Automatic morphological analyser:
An experiment using unsupervised and autosegmental
approach. Masterthesis, Addis Ababa University.
M. Lionel Bender and Hailu Fulas. 1978. Amharic verb
morphology. In East Lansing: Michigan State Univer-
sity, African Studies Center.
M. Lionel Bender. 1968. Amharic Verb Morphology: A
Generative Approach. Ph.D. thesis, Graduate School
of Texas.
Yitna Firdyiwek and Daniel Yacob. 1997. System for
ethiopic representation in ascii.
Sisay Fissaha and Johann Haller. 2003. Amharic verb
lexicon in the context of machine translation. In Actes
de la 10e conference TALN, Batz-sur-Mer.
Kesatie Birhan Tesema. YeAmarinja Mezgebe Qalat.
Adis Abeba.
Baye Yimam. 1995. ye amargna sewasew (Amharic
Grammar). EMPDA.
110
