Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 132?139,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Annotating a Japanese Text Corpus with
Predicate-Argument and Coreference Relations
Ryu Iida, Mamoru Komachi, Kentaro Inui and Yuji Matsumoto
Graduate School of Information Science,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192, Japan
{ryu-i,mamoru-k,inui,matsu}@is.naist.jp
Abstract
In this paper, we discuss how to anno-
tate coreference and predicate-argument re-
lations in Japanese written text. There
have been research activities for building
Japanese text corpora annotated with coref-
erence and predicate-argument relations as
are done in the Kyoto Text Corpus version
4.0 (Kawahara et al, 2002) and the GDA-
Tagged Corpus (Hasida, 2005). However,
there is still much room for refining their
specifications. For this reason, we discuss
issues in annotating these two types of re-
lations, and propose a new specification for
each. In accordance with the specification,
we built a large-scaled annotated corpus, and
examined its reliability. As a result of our
current work, we have released an anno-
tated corpus named the NAIST Text Corpus1,
which is used as the evaluation data set in
the coreference and zero-anaphora resolu-
tion tasks in Iida et al (2005) and Iida et al
(2006).
1 Introduction
Coreference resolution and predicate-argument
structure analysis has recently been a growing field
of research due to the demands from NLP appli-
cation such as information extraction and machine
translation. With the research focus placed on these
tasks, the specification of annotating corpora and the
1The NAIST Text Corpus is downloadable from
http://cl.naist.jp/nldata/corpus/, and it has already been
downloaded by 102 unique users.
data sets used in supervised techniques (Soon et al,
2001; Ng and Cardie, 2002, etc.) have also grown in
sophistication.
For English, several annotation schemes have al-
ready been proposed for both coreference relation
and argument structure, and annotated corpora have
been developed accordingly (Hirschman, 1997; Poe-
sio et al, 2004; Doddington et al, 2004). For in-
stance, in the Coreference task on Message Under-
standing Conference (MUC) and the Entity Detec-
tion and Tracking (EDT) task in the Automatic Con-
tent Extraction (ACE) program, which is the suc-
cessor of MUC, the details of specification of anno-
tating coreference relation have been discussed for
several years. On the other hand, the specification
of predicate-argument structure analysis has mainly
been discussed in the context of the CoNLL shared
task2 on the basis of the PropBank (Palmer et al,
2005).
In parallel with these efforts, there have also been
research activities for building Japanese text corpora
annotated with coreference and predicate-argument
relations such as the Kyoto Text Corpus version 4.0
(Kawahara et al, 2002) and the GDA3-Tagged Cor-
pus (Hasida, 2005). However, as we discuss in this
paper, there is still much room for arguing and re-
fining the specification of such sorts of semantic an-
notation. In fact, for neither of the above two cor-
pora, the adequacy and reliability of the annotation
scheme has been deeply examined.
In this paper, we discuss how to annotate coref-
erence and predicate-argument relations in Japanese
2http://www.lsi.upc.edu/?srlconll/
3The Global Document Annotation
132
text. In Section 2 to Section 4, we examine the an-
notation issues of coreference, predicate-argument
relations, and event-nouns and their argument rela-
tions respectively, and define adequate specification
of each annotation task. Then, we report the results
of actual annotation taking the Kyoto Corpus 3.0 as a
starting point. Section 6 discusses the open issues of
each annotation task and we conclude in Section 7.
2 Annotating coreference relations
2.1 Approaches to coreference annotation
Coreference annotation in English has been evolving
mainly in the context of information extraction. For
instance, in the 6th and 7th Message Understand-
ing Conferences (MUC), coreference resolution is
treated as a subtask of information extraction4. The
annotated corpora built in the MUC contain coref-
erence relations between NPs, which are used as a
gold standard data set for machine learning-based
approaches to coreference resolution by researchers
such as Soon et al (2001) and Ng and Cardie (2002).
However, van Deemter and Kibble (1999) claim
that the specification of the MUC coreference task
guides us to annotate expressions that are not nor-
mally considered coreferential, such as appositive
relations (e.g. Julius Caesari, a well-known em-
perori, ...).
In the task of Entity Detection and Tracking
(EDT) in the Automatic Content Extraction (ACE)
program (Doddington et al, 2004), the successor
of MUC, the coreference relations are redefined in
terms of two concepts, mentions and entities, in or-
der to avoid inappropriate co-indexing. In the speci-
fication of EDT, mentions are defined as the expres-
sions appearing in the texts, and entities mean the
collective set of specific entities referred to by the
mentions in the texts. Entities are limited to named
entities such as PERSON and ORGANIZATION for
adequacy and reliability of annotation. Therefore,
the ACE data set has the drawback that not all coref-
erence relations in the text are exhaustively anno-
tated. It is insufficient to resolve only the annotated
coreference relations in order to properly analyze a
text.
4http://www-nlpir.nist.gov/related projects/muc/
proceedings/co task.html
2.2 Coreference annotated corpora of Japanese
In parallel with these efforts, Japanese corpora have
been developed that are annotated with coreference
relations, such as the Kyoto Text Corpus version
4.0 (Kawahara et al, 2002) and GDA-Tagged Cor-
pus (Hasida, 2005). Before reviewing these works,
we explain the relationship between anaphora and
coreference in Japanese, referring to the following
examples. In example (1), the pronoun sorei (it)
points back to iPodi, and these two mentions refer
to the same entity in the world and thus are consid-
ered both anaphoric and coreferential.
(1) Tom-wa iPodi-o ka-tta .
Tom-TOP iPodi-ACC buy-PAST PUNC
Tom bought an iPod.
kare-wa sorei-de ongaku-o ki-ita .
he-TOP iti-INS music-ACC listen to-PAST PUNC
He listened to music on it.
On the other hand, in example (2), we still see an
anaphoric relation between iPodi (iPodi) and sorej
(itj) and sorej points back to iPodi. However, these
two mentions are not coreferential since they refer
to different entities in the world.
(2) Tom-wa iPodi-o ka-tta .
Tom-TOP iPodi-ACC buy-PAST PUNC
Tom bought an iPod.
Mary-mo sorej-o ka-tta .
Mary-TOP onej -ACC buy-PAST PUNC
Mary also bought one.
As in the above examples, an anaphoric relation
can be either coreferential or not. The former case is
called an identity-of-reference anaphora (IRA) and
the latter an identity-of-sense anaphora (ISA) (see
Mitkov (2002)). In English the difference between
IRA and ISA is clearly expressed by the anaphoric
relations formed with ?it? and ?one? respectively.
This makes it possible to treat these classes sepa-
rately. However, in Japanese, no such clear lexical
distinction can be drawn. In both the Kyoto Cor-
pus and GDA-Tagged Corpus, there is no discussion
in regards to distinction between ISA and IRA, thus
it is unclear what types of coreference relations the
annotators annotated. To make matters worse, their
approaches do not consider whether or not a mention
refers to a specific entity like in the EDT task.
2.3 Annotating IRA relations in Japanese
As described in the previous section, conventional
specifications in Japanese are not based on a pre-
133
cise definition of coreference relations, resulting in
inappropriate annotation. On the other hand, in our
specification, we consider two or more mentions as
coreferential in case they satisfy the following two
conditions:
? The mentions refer to not a generic entity but
to a specific entity.
? The relation between the mentions is consid-
ered as an IRA relation.
3 Annotating predicate-argument relations
3.1 Labels of predicate-argument relations
One debatable issue in the annotation of predicate-
argument relations is what level of abstraction we
should label those relations at.
The GDA-Tagged Corpus, for example, adopts a
fixed set of somewhat ?traditional? semantic roles
such as Agent, Theme, and Goal that are defined
across verbs. The PropBank (Palmer et al, 2005),
on the other hand, defines a set of semantic roles (la-
beled ARG0, ARG1, and AM-ADV, etc.) for each
verb and annotates each sentence in the corpus with
those labels as in (3).
(3) [ARGM?TMP A year earlier], [ARG0 the refiner] [rel
earned] [ARG1 $66 million, or $1.19 a share].
In the FrameNet (Fillmore and Baker, 2000), a spe-
cific set of semantic roles is defined for each set of
semantically-related verbs called a FrameNet frame.
However, there is still only limited consensus on
how many kinds of semantic roles should be iden-
tified and which linguistic theory we should adopt
to define them at least for the Japanese language.
An alternative way of labeling predicate-
argument relations is to use syntactic cases as
labels. In Japanese, arguments of a verb are marked
by a postposition, which functions as a case marker.
In sentence (4), for example, the verb tabe has
two arguments, each of which is marked by a
postposition, ga or o.
(4) Tom-ga ringo-o tabe-ru
Tom-NOM apple-ACC eat-PRES
(Tom eats an apple.)
Labeling predicate-argument relations in terms of
syntactic cases has a few more advantages over se-
mantic roles as far as Japanese is concerned:
? Manual annotation of syntactic cases is likely
to be more cost-efficient than semantic roles
because they are often explicitly marked by
case markers. This fact also allows us to avoid
the difficulties in defining a label set.
? In Japanese, the mapping from syntactic cases
to semantic roles tends to be reasonably
straightforward if a semantically rich lexicon of
verbs like the VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2000) is
available.
? Furthermore, we have not yet found many NLP
applications for which the utility of seman-
tic roles is actually demonstrated. One may
think of using semantic roles in textual infer-
ence as exemplified by, for example, Tatu and
Moldovan (2006). However, similar sort of
inference may well be realized with syntactic
cases as demonstrated in the information ex-
traction and question answering literature.
Taking these respects into account, we choose to
label predicate-argument relations in terms of syn-
tactic cases, which follows the annotation scheme
adopted in the Kyoto Corpus.
3.2 Syntactic case alternation
Once the level of syntactic cases is chosen for our
annotation, another issue immediately arises, alter-
ation of syntactic cases by syntactic transformations
such as passivization and causativization. For exam-
ple, sentence (5) is an example of causativization,
where Mary causes Tom?s eating action.
(5) Mary-ga Tom-ni ringo-o tabe-saseru
Mary-NOM Tom-DAT apple-ACC eat-CAUSATIVIZED
(Mary helps Tom eat an apple.)
One way of annotating these arguments is some-
thing like (6), where the relations between the
causativized predicate tabe-saseru (to make some-
one eat) and its arguments are indicated in terms of
surface syntactic cases.
(6) [REL=tabe-saseru (eat-CAUSATIVE),
GA=Mary, NI=Tom, O=ringo (apple)]
In fact, the Kyoto Corpus adopts this way of label-
ing.
An alternative way of treating such case alterna-
tions is to identify logical (or deep) case relations,
i.e. the relations between the base form of each pred-
icate and its arguments. (7) illustrates how the ar-
guments in sentence (5) are annotated with logical
case relations: Tom is labeled as the ga-case (Nom-
inative) filler of the verb tabe (to eat) and Mary is
134
labeled as the Extra-Nominative (EX-GA) which we
newly invent to indicate the Causer of a syntactically
causativized clause.
(7) [REL=tabe-(ru) (eat), GA=Tom, O=ringo (ap-
ple), EX-GA=Mary]
In the NAIST Text Corpus, we choose to this lat-
ter way of annotation motivated by such considera-
tions as follows:
? Knowing that, for example, Tom is the filler of
the ga-case (Nominative) of the verb tabe (to
eat) in (5) is more useful than knowing that Tom
is the ni-case (Dative) of the causativized verb
tabe-saseru (to make someone eat) for such ap-
plications as information extraction.
? The mapping from syntactic cases to semantic
roles should be described in terms of logical
case relations associated with bare verbs.
3.3 Zero-anaphora
In the PropBank the search space for a given pred-
icate?s arguments is limited to the sentence that
predicate appears in, because, syntactically, English
obligatory arguments are overtly expressed except
pro-form (e.g. John hopes [PRO to leave.]).
In contrast, Japanese is characterized by extensive
use of nominal ellipses, called zero-pronouns, which
behave like pronouns in English texts. Thus, if an
argument is omitted, and an expression correspond-
ing to that argument does not appear in the same
sentence, annotators should search for its antecedent
outside of the sentence. Furthermore, if an argument
is not explicitly mentioned in the text, they need to
annotate that relation as ?exophoric.? In the second
sentence of example (8), for instance, the ga (Nomi-
native) argument of the predicate kaeru (go back) is
omitted and refers to Tom in the first sentence. The
kara (Ablative) argument of that predicate is also
omitted, however the corresponding argument does
not explicitly appear in the text. In such cases, omit-
ted arguments should be considered as ?exophoric.?
(8) Tomi-wa kyo gakko-ni it-ta .
Tomi-TOP today school-LOC go-PAST PUNC
Tom went to school today.
(?i-ga) (?exophoric-kara) kae-tte suguni
?i-NOM ?exophoric-ABL go back immediately
(?i-ga) kouen-ni dekake-ta .
?i-NOM park-LOC go out-PAST PUNC
He went to the park as soon as he came back
from school.
Table 1: Comparison of annotating predicate-
argument relations
corpus label search space
PropBank semantic role intra
GDA Corpus semantic role inter, exo
Kyoto Corpus surface case intra, inter,
(voice alternation involved) exo
NAIST Corpus logical (deep) case intra, inter,
(our corpus) (relation with bare verb) exo
intra: intra-sentential relations, inter: inter-sentential relations,
exo: exophoric relations
To the best of our knowledge, the GDA-Tagged Cor-
pus does not contain intra-sentential zero-anaphoric
relations as predicate-argument relations, so it has a
serious drawback when used as training data in ma-
chine learning approaches.
Unlike coreference between two explicit nouns
where only an IRA is possible, the relation between
a zero-pronoun and its antecedent can be either IRA
or ISA. For example, in example (8), ?i is annotated
as having an IRA relation with its antecedent Tomi.
In contrast, example (9) exhibits an ISA relation be-
tween iPodi and ?i.
(9) Tom-wa iPodi-o kaa-tta .
Tom-TOP iPodi-ACC buya-PAST PUNC
Tom bought an iPod.
Mary-mo (?i-o) kab-tta .
Mary-TOP ?i-ACC buyb-PAST PUNC
Mary also bought one.
[REL=ka-(u) (buy), GA=Mary, O=iPodi]
The above examples indicate that predicate-
argument annotation in Japanese can potentially be
annotated as either an IRA or ISA relation. Note that
in Japanese these two relations cannot be explicitly
separated by syntactic clues. Thus, in our corpus
we annotate them without explicit distinction. It is
arguable that separate treatment of IRA and ISA in
predicate-argument annotation could be preferable.
We consider this issue as a task of future work.
A comparison of the specification is summarized
in Table 1.
4 Annotating event-noun-argument
relations
Meyers et al (2004) propose to annotate seman-
tic relations between nouns referring to an event
in the context, which we call event-nouns in this
135
paper. They release the NomBank corpus, in
which PropBank-style semantic relations are anno-
tated for event-nouns. In (10), for example, the
noun ?growth? refers to an event and ?dividends?
and ?next year? are annotated as ARG1 (roughly
corresponding to the theme role) and ARGM-TMP
(temporal adjunct).
(10) 12% growth in dividends next year [REL=growth,
ARG1=in dividends, ARGM-TMP=next year]
Following the PropBank-style annotation, the Nom-
Bank also restricts the search space for the argu-
ments of a given event-noun to the sentence in which
the event-noun appears. In Japanese, on the other
hand, since predicate-argument relations are often
zero-anaphoric, this restriction should be relaxed.
4.1 Labels of event-noun-relations
Regarding the choice between semantic roles and
syntactic cases, we take the same approach as
that for predicate-argument relations, which is also
adopted in the Kyoto Corpus. For example, in (11),
akajii (deficit) is identified as the ga argument of the
event-noun eikyo (influence).
(11) kono boueki akajii-wa waga kuni-no
this trade deficit-TOP our country-OF
kyosoryokuj-ni eikyo-o oyobosu
competitiveness-DAT influence-ACC affect
[REL=eikyo (influence), GA=akajii (deficit),
O=kyosoryokuj (competitiveness)]
The trade deficit affects our competitiveness.
Note that unlike verbal predicates, event-nouns can
never be a subject of voice alternation. An event-
noun-argument relation is, therefore, necessarily an-
notated in terms of the relation between the bare
verb corresponding to the event-noun and its argu-
ment. This is another reason why we consider it
reasonable to annotate the logical case relations be-
tween bare verbs and their arguments for predicate-
argument relations.
4.2 Event-hood
Another issue to be addressed is on the determina-
tion of the ?event-hood? of noun phrases, i.e. the
task of determining whether a given noun refers to
an event or not. In Japanese, since neither singular-
plural nor definite-indefinite distinction is explic-
itly marked, event-hood determination tends to be
highly context-dependent. In sentence (12), for ex-
ample, the first occurrence of denwa (phone-call),
subscripted with i, should be interpreted as Tom?s
calling event, whereas the second occurrence of the
same noun denwa should be interpreted as a physical
telephone (cellphone).
(12) karea-karano denwai-niyoruto watashib-wa
hea-ABL phone-calli according to Ib-NOM
kare-no ie-ni denwaj-o wasure-tarasii
his-OF home-LOC phonej -ACC leave-PAST
According to his phone call, I might have left
my cell phone at his home.
To control the quality of event-hood determina-
tion, we constrain the range of potential event-nouns
from two different points of view, neither of which
is explicitly discussed in designing the specifications
of the Kyoto Corpus.
First, we impose a POS-based constraint. In our
corpus annotation, we consider only verbal nouns
(sahen-verbs; e.g. denwa (phone) ) and deverbal
nouns (the nominalized forms of verbs; e.g. furumai
(behavior)) as potential event-nouns. This means
that event-nouns that are not associated with a verb,
such as jiko (accident), are out of scope of our anno-
tation.
Second, the determination of the event-hood of
a noun tends to be obscure when the noun consti-
tutes a compound. In (13), for example, the ver-
bal noun kensetsu (construction) constituting a com-
pound douro-kensetsu (road construction) can be in-
terpreted as a constructing event. We annotate it as
an event and douro (road) as the o argument.
(13) (?-ga) douro-kensetsu-o tsuzukeru
?-NOM road construction-ACC continue
Someone continues road construction.
In (14), on the other hand, since the compound
furansu kakumei (French Revolution) is a named-
entity and is not semantically decomposable, it is
not reasonable to consider any sort of predicate-
argument-like relations between its constituents fu-
ransu (France) and kakumei (revolution).
(14) furansu-kakumei-ga okoru
French Revolution-NOM take place
The French Revolution took place.
We therefore do not consider constituents of such se-
mantically non-decomposable compounds as a tar-
get of annotation.
5 Statistics of the new corpus
Two annotators annotated predicate-argument and
coreference relations according to the specifications,
136
using all the documents in Kyoto Text Corpus ver-
sion 3.0 (containing 38,384 sentences in 2,929 texts)
as a target corpus. We have so far annotated
predicate-argument relations with only three major
cases: ga (Nominative), o (Accusative) and ni (Da-
tive). We decided not to annotate other case relations
like kara-case (Ablative) because the annotation of
those cases was considered even further unreliable at
the point where we did not have enough experiences
in this annotation task. Annotating other cases is one
of our future directions.
The numbers of the annotated predicate-argument
relations are shown in Table 2. These relations are
categorized into five cases: (a) a predicate and its
argument appear in the same phrase, (b) the argu-
ment syntactically depends on its predicate or vice
versa, (c) the predicate and its argument have an
intra-sentential zero-anaphora relation, (d) the pred-
icate and its argument have an inter-sentential zero-
anaphora relation and (e) the argument does not ex-
plicitly appear in the text (i.e. exophoric). Table 2
shows that in annotation for predicates over 80%
of both o- and ni-arguments were found in depen-
dency relations, while around 60% of ga-arguments
were in zero-anaphoric relations. In comparison, in
the case of event-nouns, o- and ni-arguments are
likely to appear in the same phrase of given event-
nouns, and about 80% of ga-arguments have zero-
anaphoric relations with event-nouns. With respect
to the corpus size, we created a large-scaled anno-
tated corpus with predicate-argument and corefer-
ence relations. The data size of our corpus along
with other corpora is shown in Table 3.
Next, to evaluate the agreement between the two
human annotators, 287 randomly selected articles
were annotated by both of them. The results are
evaluated by calculating recall and precision in
which one annotation result is regarded as correct
and the other?s as the output of system. Note that
only the predicates annotated by both annotators are
used in calculating recall and precision. For eval-
uation of coreference relations, we calculated re-
call and precision based on the MUC score (Vilain
et al, 1995). The results are shown in Table 4,
where we can see that most annotating work was
done with high quality except for the ni-argument of
event-nouns. The most common source of error was
caused by verb alternation, and we will discuss this
Table 3: Data size of each corpus
corpus size
PropBank I 7,891 sentences
NomBank 0.8 24,311 sentences
ACE (2005 English) 269 articles
GDA Corpus 2,177 articles
Kyoto Corpus 555 articles (5,127 sentences)
NAIST Corpus (ours) 2,929 articles (38,384 sentences)
Table 4: Agreement of annotating each relation
recall precision
predicate 0.947 (6512/6880) 0.941 (6512/6920)
ga (NOM) 0.861 (5638/6549) 0.856 (5638/6567)
o (ACC) 0.943 (2447/2595) 0.919 (2447/2664)
ni (DAT) 0.892 (1060/1189) 0.817 (1060/1298)
event-noun 0.905 (1281/1415) 0.810 (1281/1582)
ga (NOM) 0.798 (1038/1300) 0.804 (1038/1291)
o (ACC) 0.893 (469/525) 0.765 (469/613)
ni (DAT) 0.717 (66/92) 0.606 (66/109)
coreference 0.893 (1802/2019) 0.831 (1802/2168)
issue in detail in Section 6. Such investigation of the
reliability of annotation has not been reported for ei-
ther the Kyoto Corpus or the GDA-Tagged Corpus.
However, our results also show that each annotating
task still leaves room for improvement. We summa-
rize open issues and discuss the future directions in
the next section.
6 Discussion
6.1 Identification of predicates and
event-nouns
Identification of predicates is sometimes unreliable
due to the ambiguity between a literal usage and a
compound functional usage. For instance, the ex-
pression ?to-shi-te?, which includes the verb shi (to
do), is ambiguous: either the verb shi functions as a
content word, i.e. an event-denoting word, or it con-
stitutes a multi-word expression together with to and
te. In the latter case, it does not make sense to inter-
pret the verb shi to denote an event. However, this
judgment is highly context-dependent and we have
not been able to devise a reliable criterion for it.
Tsuchiya et al (2006) have built a functional
expression-tagged corpus for automatically classify-
ing these usages. They reported that the agreement
ratio of functional expressions is higher than ours.
We believe their findings to also become helpful in-
formation for annotating predicates in our corpus.
With regards to event-nouns, a similar problem
137
Table 2: Statistics: annotating predicate-arguments relations
ga (Nominative) o (Accusative) ni (Dative)
predicates (a) in same phrase 177 (0.002) 60 (0.001) 591 (0.027)
106,628 (b) dependency relations 44,402 (0.419) 35,882 (0.835) 18,912 (0.879)
(c) zero-anaphoric (intra-sentential) 32,270 (0.305) 5,625 (0.131) 1,417 (0.066)
(d) zero-anaphoric (inter-sentential) 13,181 (0.124) 1,307 (0.030) 542 (0.025)
(e) exophoric 15,885 (0.150) 96 (0.002) 45 (0.002)
total 105,915 (1.000) 42,970 (1.000) 21,507 (1.000)
event-nouns (a) in same phrase 2,195 (0.077) 5,574 (0.506) 846 (0.436)
28,569 (b) dependency relations 4,332 (0.152) 2,890 (0.263) 298 (0.154)
(c) zero-anaphoric (intra-sentential) 9,222 (0.324) 1,645 (0.149) 586 (0.302)
(d) zero-anaphoric (inter-sentential) 5,190 (0.183) 854 (0.078) 201 (0.104)
(e) exophoric 7,525 (0.264) 42 (0.004) 10 (0.005)
total 28,464 (1.000) 11,005 (1.000) 1,941 (1.000)
also arises. If, for example, a compound noun con-
tains a verbal noun, we have to judge whether the
verbal noun can be interpreted as an event-noun or
not. Currently, we ask annotators to check if the
meaning of a given compound noun can be compo-
sitionally decomposed into those of its constituents.
However, the judgement of compositionality tends
to be highly subjective, causing the degradation of
the agreement ratio of event-nouns as shown in
Table 4. We are planning to investigate this problem
more closely and refine the current compositionality
criterion. One option is to build lexical resources of
multi-word expressions and compounds.
6.2 Identification of arguments
As we mentioned in 3.1, we use (deep) cases instead
of semantic roles as labels of predicate-argument re-
lations. While it has several advantages as discussed
in 3.1, this choice has also a drawback that should
be removed. The problem arises from lexical verb
alternation. It can sometimes be hard for annota-
tors to determine a case frame of a given predicate
when verb alternation takes place. For example, sen-
tence (15) can be analyzed simply as in (16a). How-
ever, since the verb shibaru (bind) has also another
alternative case frame as in (16b), the labeling of the
case of the argument kisoku (rule), i.e. either GA
(NOM) or DE (INST) may be undecidable if the argu-
ment is omitted.
(15) kisoku-ga hitobito-o shibaru
rule-NOM people-ACC bind
The rule binds people.
(16) a. [REL = shibaru (bind), GA = kisoku (rule), O = hitobito
(people)]
b. [REL = shibaru (bind), GA = ? (exophoric), O = hito-
bito (people), DE (Instrumental) = kisoku (rule)]
Similar problems occur for event-nouns as well.
For example, the event-noun hassei (realization) has
both transitive and intransitive readings, which may
produce awkward ambiguities.
To avoid this problem, we have two options; one
is to predefine the preference in case frames as a
convention for annotation and the other is to deal
with such alternations based on generic resources of
lexical semantics such as Lexical Conceptual Struc-
ture (LCS) (Jackendoff, 1990). Creating a Japanese
LCS dictionary is another on-going project, so we
can collaborate with them in developing the valuable
resources.
6.3 Event-hood determination
Event-nouns of some semantic types such as keiyaku
(contract), kisei (regulation) and toushi (investment)
are interpreted as either an event or an entity result-
ing from an event depending on are context. How-
ever, it is sometimes difficult to judge whether such
an event-noun should be interpreted as an event or a
resultant entity even by considering the whole con-
text, which degrades the stability of annotation. This
phenomena is also discussed in the NomBank, and
we will share their insights and refine our annotation
manual in the next step.
6.4 Identification of coreference relation
Even though coreference relation is defined as IRA
relations, the lack of agreement on the granularity of
noun classes makes the agreement ratio worse. In
other words, it is crucial to decide how to annotate
abstract nouns in order to improve the annotation.
138
Annotators judge coreference relations as whether
or not abstract nouns refer to the same entity in the
world. However, the equivalence of the referents of
abstract nouns cannot be reconciled based on real-
world existence since by definition abstract nouns
have no physical entities in the real world.
As far as predicate-argument relation is con-
cerned, there might be a need for treating generic
entities in addition to specific entities as coreferen-
tial in some application. For example, one may want
to relate kids to children in sentence (17).
(17) We all want children to be fit and healthy.
However, the current invasion of fast food is
creating overweight and unhealthy kids.
The coreference relation between generic nouns are
missed in the current specification since we annotate
only IRA relations between specific nouns. Even
though there are various discussions in the area of
semantics, the issue of how to deal with generic
nouns as either coreferential or not in real texts is
still left open.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we reported on the current specifica-
tion of our annotated corpus for coreference reso-
lution and predicate-argument analysis. Taking the
previous work of corpus annotation into account, we
decided to annotate predicate-argument relations by
ISA and IRA relations, and coreference relations ac-
cording to IRA relations. With the Kyoto Text Cor-
pus version 3.0 as a starting point, we built a large
annotated corpus. We also discussed the revelations
made from annotating our corpus, and discussed fu-
ture directions for refining our specifications of the
NAIST Text Corpus.
Acknowledgement
This work is partially supported by the Grant-in-Aid
for Scientific Research in Priority Areas JAPANESE
CORPUS (http://tokuteicorpus.jp).
References
G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,
S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel. 2004. Automatic content
extraction (ace) program - task definitions and performance
measures. In Proceedings of the 4rd International Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2004),
pages 837?840.
Charles J. Fillmore and Collin F. Baker. 2000. Framenet:
Frame semantics meets the corpus. In Proceedings of the
74th Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America.
K. Hasida. 2005. Global document annotation (gda) annotation
manual. http://i-content.org/tagman.html.
L. Hirschman. 1997. MUC-7 coreference task definition. ver-
sion 3.0.
R. Iida, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto. 2005. Anaphora reso-
lution by antecedent identification followed by anaphoricity
determination. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Infor-
mation Processing (TALIP), 4:417?434.
R. Iida, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto. 2006. Exploiting syntac-
tic patterns as clues in zero-anaphora resolution. In Proced-
dings of the 21st International Conference on Computational
Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL), pages 625?632.
R. Jackendoff. 1990. Semantic Structures. Current Studies in
Linguistics 18. The MIT Press.
D. Kawahara, T. Kurohashi, and K. Hasida. 2002. Construc-
tion of a japanese relevance-tagged corpus (in japanese). In
Proceedings of the 8th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Natural Language Processing, pages 495?498.
K. Kipper, H. T. Dang, and M. Palmer. 2000. Class-based con-
struction of a verb lexicon. In Proceedings of the 17th Na-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and 12th Confer-
ence on on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
pages 691?696.
A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. Zielinska,
B. Young, and R. Grishman. 2004. The nombank project:
An interimreport. In Proceedings of the HLT-NAACL Work-
shop on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation.
Ruslan Mitkov. 2002. Anaphora Resolution. Studies in Lan-
guage and Linguistics. Pearson Education.
V. Ng and C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine learning ap-
proaches to coreference resolution. In Proceedings of the
40th ACL, pages 104?111.
M. Palmer, D. Gildea, and P. Kingsbury. 2005. The proposi-
tion bank: An annotated corpus of semantic roles. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 31(1):71?106.
M. Poesio, R. Mehta, A. Maroudas, and J. Hitzeman. 2004.
Learning to resolve bridging references. In Proceddings of
the 42nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics (ACL), pages 144?151.
W. M. Soon, H. T. Ng, and D. C. Y. Lim. 2001. A machine
learning approach to coreference resolution of noun phrases.
Computational Linguistics, 27(4):521?544.
M. Tatu and D. Moldovan. 2006. A logic-based semantic ap-
proach to recognizing textual entailment. In Proceddings
of the 21st International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (COLING-ACL), pages 819?826.
M. Tsuchiya, T. Utsuro, S. Matsuyoshi, S. Sato, and S. Nak-
agawa. 2006. Development and analysis of an exam-
ple database of japanese compound functional expressions.
IPSJ Journal, 47(6):1728?1741.
K. van Deemter and R. Kibble. 1999. What is coreference, and
what should coreference annotation be? In Proceedings of
the ACL ?99 Workshop on Coreference and its applications,
pages 90?96.
M. Vilain, J. Burger, J. Aberdeen, D. Connolly, and
L. Hirschman. 1995. A model-theoretic coreference scoring
scheme. In Proceedings of the 6th Message Understanding
Conference (MUC-6), pages 45?52.
139
