Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Processing 2007, June 29, 2007, pages 59?66,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multi-word Term Extraction for Bulgarian
Svetla Koeva
Department of Computational Linguistics ? IBL
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
52 Shipchenski prohod Blv. Sofia 1113, Bulgaria
svetla@ibl.bas.bg
Abstract
The goal of this paper is to compile a 
method for multi-word term extraction,
taking into account both the linguistic 
properties of Bulgarian terms and their 
statistical rates. The method relies on the 
extraction of term candidates matching 
given syntactic patterns followed by statis-
tical (by means of Log-likelihood ratio) 
and linguistically (by means of inflec-
tional clustering) based filtering aimed at 
improving the coverage and the precision 
of multi-word term extraction. 
1 Introduction
The goal of this paper is to compile a method for 
multi-word term extraction, taking into account
both the linguistic properties of Bulgarian terms 
and their statistical rates. Term extraction exploits
well-established techniques that seem difficult to 
improve significantly. As in many other areas of 
computational linguistics, term extraction has been
approached generally with three different strategies 
? linguistic techniques, statistical techniques and a 
combination of both (Bourigault et al, 2001; Jac-
quemin & Bourigault, 2000). The linguistically 
based techniques exploit the morpho-syntactic 
structure of terms that usually differ from one lan-
guage to another (for example in Bulgarian and in 
English the most frequent syntactic structure repre-
senting terms is the noun phrase, but the two lan-
guages significantly differ in their constituent 
structure and agreement properties). The automatic 
extraction of term morpho-syntactic patterns, being 
in most cases language-dependent, requires spe-
cific language processing ? Part-of-speech (POS) 
tagging, lemmatization, syntactic parsing, etc. The 
statistical techniques, on the other hand, rely on the 
different statistical features of terms compared to 
other words in the text and are usually based on the 
detection of words and expressions with a fre-
quency value higher than a given limit. Some of 
the statistical approaches focus on the association 
measures between the components of the multi-
word terms. Hybrid approaches, combining lin-
guistic and statistical techniques, are also applied, 
mainly in two manners: statistical proceeding is 
used to filter the term candidates obtained through 
linguistic techniques, and, vice versa, some lin-
guistic filters are exploited after statistical process-
ing, in order to extract the statistically significant 
word combinations that match some given syntac-
tic patterns.
The method for automatic multi-word term ex-
traction, presented in this paper, also relies both on 
linguistic knowledge and on statistical processing. 
The research aims are to:
? Apply syntactic patterns of Bulgarian 
terms directed to multi-word term extraction;
? Use well-known statistical methods (asso-
ciation measures) to eliminate some of the irrele-
vant multi-word terms;
? Further limit the number of invalid terms 
by clustering term candidates around their lem-
mas; 
? Test the performance of such a method
over the manually annotated corpus.
59
Most of the current methods for automatic term 
extraction are developed for English, and thus they 
are not appropriate for direct adaptation to Bulgar-
ian, due to the morpho-syntactic differences be-
tween the two languages. Bulgarian is a language 
with a rich inflectional system. That is to say, a 
noun lemma can appear in six forms if it is mascu-
line and in four forms if it is feminine or neuter. 
Besides, noun phrase structure and agreement
properties in Bulgarian differ in some aspects from 
other languages such as English, Therefore, a lan-
guage-specific approach is needed if we want to 
utilise the morpho-syntactical information for term 
extraction. To the best of our knowledge there is 
no report of an extensive work directed towards
Bulgarian term extraction.
The structure of our paper outlines the three 
steps involved in our approach. In the following 
section we present a short linguistic analysis of 
Bulgarian terms. In the third section, we describe 
the identification of the candidate terms. The 
fourth section explains how we applied a list of 
terms to the filters. We then evaluate our results on 
a corpus that was set up by manual annotation. Fi-
nally, we discuss some peculiarities of the pre-
sented study and propose future works to be done.
2 Linguistic analysis of Bulgarian terms
2.1. Compilation of a term annotated corpus
We share the views that larger corpora not only
give statistically more reliable counts, but also re-
veal phenomena that are completely lacking in 
smaller samples. The Acquis Communautaire 
(AC) 1 ? the European Union legislation, which 
consists of approximately eight thousand docu-
ments containing approximately 40 million words 
(to be more specific, its Bulgarian subpart) ? is 
targeted as the most appropriate resource for our 
research: because of its size, and because of the 
number of languages included in it. (The proposed 
method can be further transformed and/or evalu-
ated to deal with the rest of the languages repre-
sented in the parallel corpus.) 
The AC contains documents from several do-
mains, which are divided into chapters: Agricul-
ture, Fisheries, Transport Policy, Taxation, 
Economic and Monetary Union, Statistics, Social 
                                                
1 There has been some experience of exploiting the AC as a 
multilingual corpus (Steinberger at al., 2006).
Policy and Employment, Energy, Industrial Policy, 
Education and Training, Telecommunication and 
Information Technologies, Culture and Audio-
visual Policy, etc. This annotated subpart of the 
Bulgarian AC is developed as a test corpus and 
contains 10,521 words from randomly selected text 
samples representing the domains of Agriculture 
(AGR), Energy (ENR) and Education and Training 
(EDC). 
Some criteria for the manual annotation of Bul-
garian terms were defined, the notion of term 
among others. As with most linguistic concepts, a
term is defined in various ways. For example, as ?a 
word or expression that has a precise meaning in 
some uses or is peculiar to a science, art, profes-
sion? (Webster, 2002), or as ?a word or expression 
used for some particular thing?2, or generally as 
words or phrases that denote specific concepts in a 
given subject domain. For the purposes of this in-
vestigation we defined a term as
An open class word or expression that is peculiar 
to a specific domain of human activities and occurs 
with a determinate (in some limits) frequency in 
that domain.
The annotation of terms in the Bulgarian AC 
subpart is also based on both the maximum and 
minimum length term selection. That is, in the case 
of a multi-word term which constituents are also 
terms, the longest term (as well as all shorter
terms) is selected. It should be pointed out, how-
ever, that the term annotated corpus is still small 
enough to be representative of the word frequency
and is a sample of translated texts that might mani-
fest different tendencies for a term?s distribution 
from those in the original texts.
2.2. Single-word terms vs. multi-word terms
The general impression is that the most of the pa-
pers dealing with automatic term extraction (espe-
cially the statistically based ones) are focused on 
multi-word terms. This can be explained by the 
fact that for English a bigger percentage of multi-
word terms comparing to single-word terms is re-
ported. To show the tendency for the correlation 
between single-word and multi-word terms in Bul-
garian texts, the manually annotated subpart of the 
Bulgarian AC has been studied. We found out (Ta-
ble 1.) that the proportion of single-word terms 
                                                
2 http://wordnet.princeton.edu
60
varies from about 2.5% to 3% depending on the 
subject domain.
The results show that the use of single-word 
terms in Bulgarian technical documents is also not 
very frequent and the tendency is that multi-word 
terms are preferred to single-word ones. Following 
these observations, first we will concentrate on the 
extraction of the Bulgarian multi-word terms.
Domain AGR ENR EDC Total
#Words 4423 3002 3096 10521
#Terms (T) 344 297 254 895
#Multi-word T 266 165 171 602
#Single-word T 111 89 93 293
% Terms 7,77 9,89 8,2 8,5
% Single-word T 2,5 2,96 3 2,78
Table 1. Distribution of single-word terms
2.3 Syntactic structures of Bulgarian terms
The starting point for the linguistically motivated 
part of the automatic term extraction is to describe 
the syntactic structure of Bulgarian terms. There 
are several Bulgarian terminological dictionaries 
published and some terminological databases 
available on the internet ? all recourses are taken 
into consideration in the analysis without providing 
exact calculations. The collection of Bulgarian 
terms, obtained by the annotated subpart of the 
Bulgarian AC, is used as a source for the determi-
nation of the most frequent syntactic structures of 
Bulgarian terms. 
It is claimed that NPs constitute about 80-99 % 
of whole terms in an English text, with the varying 
percentage depending on the text types (Arppe, 
1995). The same statement is roughly true for Bul-
garian; although there are some adjectives and 
verbs that can be regarded as terms in a certain 
domain (only three verbs and one adjective are de-
tected in the annotated corpus). In this study we 
have concentrated on the NPs? term extraction,
which comprises the focus of interest in several 
studies (Jacquemin, 2001; Justeson & Katz, 1995;
Voutanen, 1993).
In order to obtain the statistics, the annotated part 
of Bulgarian AC is pre-processing. This allows the 
consequences of the categories constituting Bul-
garian terms to be extracted and their frequency to 
be calculated. As a result, 16 different sequences of 
categories are obtained, among them 5 with a rate 
higher than 11 %. In the next examples the most 
frequent syntactic patterns of the Bulgarian multi-
word terms are listed following their frequency 
rate:
? AN ? riboloven sezon (fishing season), 
iglolistno darvo (conifer), zemedelski ceni (firm 
prices), termalna energiya (thermal energy), kli-
matichna instalaciya (air-conditioning);
? NpN ? obogatyavane na gorivo (fuel en-
richment), podobryavane na pochvata (soil im-
provement), prava na deteto (children's rights), 
svoboda na pechata (freedom of the press);
? NpAN ? opazvane na okolnata sreda
(environmental protection), nomenklatura na 
zemedelskite produkti (agricultural product no-
menclature), izpolzvane na slanchevata energiya
(solar energy end-use applications), sredstva za 
masova informaciya (media);
? AAN ? semeyno zemedelsko stopanstwo
(family farming), evropeyska parichna sistema
(European Monetary System), inteligentna 
transportna sistema (intelligent transport sys-
tem), magniten informacionen nositel (magnetic 
medium);
? ANpN ? elektronen transfer na fondove
(electronic funds transfer), optichesko raz-
poznavane na simvoli (Optical Character Recog-
nition), pravna uredba na telekomunikaciite
(regulation of telecommunications), izbiratelno 
razprostranenie na informaciya (selective dis-
semination of information).
Among the five types, the AN structure was 
the most frequent one, although the exact percent-
age still remains to be calculated over the bigger 
corpus. 
The main differences observed concerning these 
five Bulgarian structures and their English equiva-
lents are the regular agreement between the adjec-
tival modifier and the head noun in Bulgarian and 
the prepositional phrase in Bulgarian instead the
noun modifier in English. The adjective-noun 
agreement in Bulgarian noun phrases is partially
exploited in the presented piece of work, but it 
might be extensively considered in further im-
provements of the method. 
In the case of NpN, NpAN and ANpN structures,
we found out that most of the terms corresponding 
to these patterns are built up with the Bulgarian 
61
preposition na (of). This may be explained by the 
fact that these PPs usually correspond to the Eng-
lish NPs with a noun modifier denoting more spe-
cific concepts. The possible strings of categories 
that might constitute the Bulgarian terms are ex-
ploited due to the fact that Bulgarian terms usually 
do not allow other constituents among their parts.
2.4 Term variations
Some authors have pointed out the discrepancy
between term representation in dictionaries, and 
the term forms used in real texts (Daille, 2003). It 
is well known that the same concept can be formu-
lated in different ways and the automatic term ex-
traction should be able to recognize and link those 
different linguistic forms or expressions. Different 
kinds of term variants are distinguished in the lit-
erature: orthographic variants (capitalization), in-
flectional variants (word forms), morpho-syntactic 
variants (derivation), syntactic variants (word or-
der differences) and semantic variants (syno-
nyms).
In this study only the orthographic and inflec-
tional variants are taken into consideration. It 
should be pointed out that compared to lemmas 
the multi-word terms have their own inflective 
rules. The POS of the head word determines the 
clustering of the term into grammatical classes,
such as noun, adjective, and so on, which define 
the possible slots in the paradigm. 
The significant grammatical categories inherent 
to the lemma of the head word (such as gender for 
nouns), the number and POS of the remaining 
constituents and the options for inserting some 
words (such as particles) in the multi-word term 
structure all show the grouping of multi-word 
terms? grammatical subclasses and define which 
slots of the paradigm are realized in the language.
And finally, the formation of word forms of each 
component of a multi-word term and the type of 
agreement dependencies between components 
show the classification of multi-word terms into 
grammatical types that describe the real word 
paradigm belonging to a particular term (Koeva, 
2005).
For instance, the Bulgarian term klimatichna in-
stalaciya (air-conditioning) is a noun phrase; the 
members of the paradigm are determined by the 
head feminine noun. The inflection type is deter-
mined by the inflectional alternations of each 
member (the adjective and the noun):
klimatichna instalaciya ? singular, indefinite
klimatichnata instalaciya ? singular, definite
klimatichni instalaciii ? plural, indefinite
klimatichnite instalaciii ? plural, definite
There are agreement dependencies between 
adjective and head noun and no other words? in-
tervention or word order changes are allowed.
3 Automatic term extraction
3.1 Pre-processing of the Bulgarian AC
It is common practice to extract candidate terms 
using a part-of-speech (POS) tagger and an 
automaton (a program extracting word sequences
corresponding to predefined POS patterns). The 
part-of-speech tagging is the process of automati-
cally identifying the words in a text as correspond-
ing to a particular part of speech. The part-of-
speech tagger used in this study is developed utiliz-
ing a large manually annotated corpus consisting 
of 197,000 tokens (150,000 words) randomly ex-
tracted from the Bulgarian Brawn corpus 
(1,000,000 words) (Koeva et al, 2006). The tagger 
has been developed as a modified version of the 
Brill tagger (Brill, 1994). The Brill tagger was 
trained for Bulgarian using a part of the tagged 
corpus. We applied a rule-based approach leading 
to 98.3% precision. A sophisticated tokenizer that
recognizes sentence boundaries and categorizes 
tokens as words, abbreviations, punctuation, nu-
merical expressions, hours, dates and URLs has 
been built as a part of the tagger. For each word in 
the text the initial (most probable) part of speech 
among the ambiguity set is assigned from a large 
inflectional dictionary (Koeva, 1998). 
The words that are not recognized by the dic-
tionary are handled by the guesser analyzing the 
suffixes of the unrecognized words and assigning 
the initial part of speech among the ambiguity set. 
The part-of-speech ambiguity ratio calculated over 
the annotated corpus is 1.51 tags per word, which 
means that on average every second word is am-
biguous. For solving the ambiguity, 144 contextual 
rules are implemented, utilizing the part of speech 
and dictionary information on the context, Some 
additional techniques for the optimizations are im-
plemented ? the application of dictionaries of ab-
breviations, proper nouns, grammatically unambi-
guous words, etc. After POS tagging the text re-
62
mains unchanged and the additional information is 
added in an xml format.
Lemmatization is the process of automatic de-
termining the lemma for a given word. Since the 
lemmatization involves fixing the part of speech of 
a word, it requires the running of a tagger. Lemma-
tization is closely related to stemming. The differ-
ence is that a stemmer operates on a single word 
without explicit knowledge of its identity as a part 
of speech, its lemma or its inflectional properties. 
For Bulgarian a large inflectional dictionary is 
used both for lemmatization and stemming. 
The tag sets differ both in how the words are di-
vided into categories, and in how their categories 
are defined. For the purposes of this investigation 
the grammatical information characterizing the 
forms is also assigned to nouns and adjectives, be-
cause the adjective-noun agreement is exploited.  
3.2 Extraction of term candidates
Following the frequency analysis of the constituent 
structure of the Bulgarian multi-word terms, the 
targeted syntactic patterns will be recognized by 
the following regular expression:
[(A+N(pA*N)?)(NpA*N)]
The strings of categories bellow will be matched;
those with more than two adjectives are either rare, 
or not observed in the language:
AN, AAN, NpN, NpAN, ANpN, ANpAN, 
NpAAN, ANpAAN, AANpAAN, ?
The regular expression does not match the single 
Ns as well as the NPs with low frequently ? only 
the five syntactic patterns with the highest fre-
quency rate are targeted for the term extraction. 
Moreover, the agreement features of the Bulgarian 
NP structures are exploited considering the unifica-
tion of grammatical features between the preceding 
adjective and the immediate following adjective or 
noun. Based on patterns? matching, the term can-
didates corresponding to the above regular expres-
sions are extracted:
? AN ? osnovno obrazovanie (basic educa-
tion),
? AAN ? novi obrazovatelni metodi (new 
educational methods), evropeyska audiovi-
zualna zona (European audiovisual area), 
? NpN ? ezik za programirane 
(programming language), 
? NpAN ? planirane na uchebnata godina
(planning of the school year), elekronna 
obrabotka na danni (electronic data 
processing), potrebitel na ingormacionna 
tehnologiya (information technology user), etc. 
On the other hand, the following phrases (which 
are annotated as terms) are not recognized: 
? NpVpN ? aparat za vazproizwodstvo na 
zvuk (sound reproduction equipment), 
? AcAN ? poshtenski i telekomunikacionni 
uslugi (postal and telecommunications ser-
vices),
? NpNpNN ? sistema za upravlenie na 
baza danni (database management system), etc. 
A deficiency of the approach based on the syntac-
tic patterns is also the fact that any NP that 
matches the patterns will be selected as a term 
candidate, as is shown in the following examples:
? AN ? novi metodi (new methods), 
ogranicheno dvizhenie (limited circulation), 
? NpN ? analiz na informaciya (informa-
tion analysis), broy na uchenicite (number of 
pupils), etc. 
Some of the noun phrases are wrongly extracted, 
although in this case this is concerned with a com-
positional building of structures that cannot be 
considered as that of multi-word terms. Some term 
candidates with a preposition cannot be treated 
even as phrases, because their parts belong to dif-
ferent sentence constituents. The identification of
the sub-phrases that are themselves also terms
should also be taken into account. In the following 
example, sistema za upravlenie na baza ot danni
(database management system), the phrases sis-
tema za uprawlenie (management system), uprav-
lenie na baza ot danni (database management) and 
baza ot danni (database) are also terms.
Domain AGR ENG EDC Total
#Words 4,423 3,002 3,096 10,521
#Term candidates 901 778 712 2,391
Table 2. Number of term candidates
The number of extracted term candidates de-
pends on the structure of the sentences that occur 
in the selected domains. Table 2 shows the ex-
tracted term candidates from a Bulgarian AC sub-
63
part representing texts from the Agriculture, En-
ergy and Education domains.
4 Filtering of term candidates
As a filtering mechanism we adopted the calculat-
ing of the associativity between words, which is 
often used to identify word collocations, and the 
term clustering according to the inflexional para-
digms.
4.1 Statistical filtering
The frequency-based techniques applied to term 
filtering assign a numerical value to sets of words 
to rank term candidates and exclude those term 
candidates below a certain threshold. The state-
ment that the more frequently a lexical unit appears 
in a given document the more likely it is that this 
unit has a terminological function can be applied to 
certain genres of texts. Alone, frequency is not a 
robust metric for assessing the terminological 
property of a candidate. 
In our case, we want to measure the cohesion of 
a multi-word candidate term by verifying if its 
words occur together as a coincidence or not. As-
sociation measures are often used to rate the corre-
lation of word pairs (Daille, 1995; Daille et al, 
1998).
B !B
A Nii Nij N1p
!A Nji Njj N2p
Np1 Np2 Npp
Table 3. The contingency table
These measures can be derived from the contin-
gency table (Table 3.) of the word pair (A,B) con-
taining the observed frequencies of (A,B), as fol-
lows:
Nii  = the joint frequency of word A and word B;
Nij = the frequency word A occurs and word B
does not;
Nji = the frequency word B occurs and word A
does not;
Njj = the frequency word A and word B do not oc-
cur;
Npp = the total number of ngrams;
Np1, Np2, N1p, N2p are the marginal counts.
The lexical association measures are formulas 
that relate the observed frequencies to the expected 
frequency (Mij = (Np1 * N1p) / Npp) under the 
assumption that A and B are independent. For the 
current work, the Log-likelihood coefficient has 
been employed (Dunning, 1993), as it is reported 
to perform well among other scoring methods
(Daille, 1995). 
Log-likelihood = 2 * ? ( Nij * log( Nij / Mij) )
This calculation over the text serves as an impor-
tant technique in identifying term candidates. The 
larger the value of Log-likelihood is, the stronger 
is the association between the two pairs of the 
string; consequently the string is the most probable 
candidate. Statistic filtering is applied only to those 
term candidates extracted by the linguistic compo-
nent. For the calculation, the Ngram Statistics 
Package (NSP), programs that aids in analyzing 
ngrams, is executed (Banerjee & Pedersen, 2003). 
The NSP takes text files (in our case Cyrillic letters 
are transliterated into Latin) as input and generates 
a list of bigrams along with their frequencies as 
outputs. Over the list of bigrams obtained, the Log-
likelihood is run to compute a ratio for each ngram. 
The bigrams are targeted because some of the term 
candidates initially extracted are long ones contain-
ing sub-phrases that are likely to function as term 
candidates. In order to avoid potential term candi-
dates being included in other longer phrases, the 
term candidates are split and the constituting bi-
grams are generated.
As a result of statistical filtering, the initially se-
lected term candidates are assigned different values 
according to their word association. The Log-
likelihood coefficient computed for each bigram is 
used to decide whether or not there is enough evi-
dence to reject or accept a bigram - there is a clear
opposition between small and big values. Below 
the first five ranked candidates are listed.
1. evropeyskata obshtnost (European community) 
2. atomna energiya (nuclear energy) 
3. detska gradina (kindergarten) 
4. Darzhaven vestnik (government newspaper)
5. obrazovatelna sistema (educational system) 
4.2 Linguistic filtering
The linguistic filtering aims at linking the different 
variations of the same basic term. The list of the 
automatically extracted terms was reviewed by 
64
means of lemmatization in order to refine it and to 
increase the score of some terms. Until this stage 
the different word forms of a term were calculated 
separately. Bulgarian is a highly inflected language 
? the forms of the head noun can vary from one to 
seven depending of the gender, number and refer-
ences to a person. The sequences of lemmas be-
longing to the term candidates are processed and 
the frequency values are recalculated according to 
the grouping of terms in one inflectional cluster 
with respect to the common canonical form. 
Through this technique morphologically-related 
occurrences, such as iglolistno darvo (a conifer), 
iglolistnoto darvo (the conifer), iglolistni darveta
(conifers) and iglolistnite darveta (the conifers) are 
treated as one term.
5 Evaluation
The presented method of identifying Bulgarian 
multi-word terms was applied on the manually an-
notated corpus. First the texts were pre-processed 
by means of POS tagging and lemmatization, then 
the target syntactic patterns were extracted, and the 
rates of the related bigrams were calculated by 
means of Log-likelihood association, and finally 
additional reordering of term candidates was per-
formed by means of inflectional clustering. As a 
result, 430 (from 539) correctly extracted multi-
word terms are obtained ? the precision of 79.96% 
is registered.
6 Conclusions and future work
We have presented a method aimed at extracting 
Bulgarian multi-word terms, which relies on the 
extraction of syntactic patterns from text and on 
the statistical and linguistically based filtering
aimed at improving the coverage and the precision 
of multi-word collocation extraction. We have ap-
plied Log-likelihood ratio statistical filtering to the 
extracted multi-word terms. All extracted term 
candidates are grammatically correct, due to the 
syntactically based pattern matching. Further de-
velopments of the method include:
? Statistical determination of single-word 
terms;
? Coverage of long-distance occurrence and 
rare syntactic structures of multi-word terms;
? Analyzing the embedded terms.
? Using 'stop lists' of open and closed class 
words that are hardly to be found in the multi-
word terms. 
Some other experiments will be made using
other well-known techniques of association meas-
ure. For the evaluation purposes the test corpus 
will be extended. A bigger homogeneous corpus 
would undoubtedly result in an increase in terms 
with more representative frequencies, and, there-
fore, in an improvement in statistical estimation of 
terms. The results can be exploited in the multilin-
gual term extraction, due to the fact that the AC 
represents the biggest multilingual parallel corpus.
References
A. Aprre 1995. Term Extraction from Unrestricted Text:
10th Nordic Conference of Computational Linguistics 
(NoDaLiDa), Helsinki. 
S. Banerjee and T. Pedersen 2003. The Design, Imple-
mentation, and Use of the Ngram Statistics Package, 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference 
on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational 
Linguistics, Mexico City.
D. Bourigault, C. Jacquemin, and M.-C. L'Homme 
2001. Recent Advances in Computational Terminol-
ogy, volume 2 of Natural Language Processing, John 
Benjamins.
E. Brill 1994. Some Advances In Rule-Based Part of 
Speech Tagging AAAI, Seattle, Washington
B. Daille 1995. Combined approach for terminology 
extraction: lexical statistics and linguistic filtering. 
Technical paper. UCREL, Lancaster University. 
B. Daille 2003. Conceptual structuring through term 
variations, Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Mul-
tiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treat-
ment.
B. Daille, E. Gaussier, and J.-M. Lange 1998. An 
Evaluation of Statistical Scores for Word Association, 
in J. Ginzburg, Z. Khasidashvili, C. Vogel, J.-J. Levy, 
and E. Vallduvi (eds), The Tbilisi Symposium on
Logic, Language and Computation: Selected Papers, 
CSLI Publications, p. 177-188. 
T. Dunning 1993. Accurate methods for thestatistics of 
surprise and coincidence,. Computational Linguistics, 
19(1):61?74.
65
C. Jacquemin 2001. Spotting and Discovering Terms 
through Natural Language Processing. MIT Press.
C. Jacquemin and D. Bouricault 2000. Chapter 19 Term 
Extraction and Automatic Indexing, Handbook of 
Computational Linguistics (R. Mitkov (ed.)), Oxford 
University Press, Oxford.
J. S. Justeson and S. M. Katz 1995. Technical Termi-
nology: Some Linguistic Properties and an Algorithm 
for Identification in Text, Natural Language Engi-
neering. 1(1):9-27.
S. Koeva 1998. Bulgarian Grammatical dictionary. Or-
ganization of the language data, Bulgarian language, 
vol. 6: 49-58.
S. Koeva 2005. Inflection Morphology of Bulgarian 
Multiword Expressions, Computer Applications in 
Slavic Studies ? Proceedings of Azbuki@net, Interna-
tional Conference and Workshop, Sofia, 201-216.
S. Koeva, S. Leseva, I. Stoyanova, E. Tarpomanova, 
and M. Todorova 2006. Bulgarian Tagged Corpora, 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference 
Formal Approaches to South Slavic and Balkan Lan-
guages, Sofia, 78-86.
R. Steinberger,  B. Pouliquen, A. Widiger, C. Ignat, T. 
Erjavec, D. Tufi?, and D. Varga 2006. The JRC-
Acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus with 
20+ languages, Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC'2006), Genoa.
A. Voutilainen. 1993. NPtool. A detector of English 
noun phrases, Proceedings of the Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora, Columbus, Ohio.
66
