Proceedings of the 4th ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions, pages 38?44,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Inferring the semantics of temporal prepositions in Italian
Tommaso Caselli          Valeria Quochi
ILC-CNR
Via Moruzzi, 1 56123, Pisa, Italy 
Dip. Linguistica ?T.Bolelli?, Universit? degli Studi di Pisa
Via S.ta Maria, 36, 56100, Pisa, Italy 
tommaso.caselli,valeria.quochi@ilc.cnr.it
Abstract
In this work we report on the results of a 
preliminary corpus study of Italian on the 
semantics of temporal prepositions, which 
is part of a wider project on the automatic 
recognition of temporal relations. The cor-
pus data collected supports our hypothesis 
that each temporal preposition can be asso-
ciated with one prototypical temporal rela-
tion, and that deviations from the prototype 
can be explained as determined by the oc-
currence of different semantic patterns. The 
motivation behind this approach is to im-
prove methods for temporal annotation of 
texts for content based access to informa-
tion. The corpus study described in this pa-
per led to the development of a preliminary 
set of heuristics for automatic annotation of
temporal relations in text/discourse. 
1 Introduction
In this work we report on the preliminary results 
of a corpus study, of contemporary Italian, on tem-
poral relations that hold between a temporal ad-
junct and an event as a way to determine the se-
mantics of temporal prepositions. We claim, fol-
lowing Schilder and Habel (2001), that the seman-
tics of temporal prepositions is rel (e, t), where rel
is used to indicate the temporal relation associated 
with a certain preposition, t represents the meaning 
of the Temporal Expression (timex), and e the 
meaning of the event description involved. 
Prepositions introducing a temporal adjunct are 
explicit signals of temporal relations. The ability to 
determine temporal relations between timexes in-
troduced by prepositions and events is fundamental 
for several NLP tasks like Open-Domain Question-
Answering systems (Hartrumpf et al 2006, and 
Pustejovsky et al 2002) and for Textual Entail-
ment and Reasoning.
The corpus data collected seems to support our 
hypothesis that each temporal preposition can be 
associated with one prototypical temporal relation, 
and that deviations from the prototype can be ex-
plained as determined the occurrences of different 
semantic pattern.
The work described in this paper is part of a lar-
ger project we are conducting on temporal dis-
course processing in Italian, as proposed in Mani 
and Pustejovsky (2004).
2 Background
This section presents a brief overview of the Ti-
meML specification language (Pustejovsky et al 
2005), which has been used as the starting point for 
this work, and some theoretical issues on Italian 
prepositions. 
2.1 TimeML
The TimeML specification language (Pustejovsky 
et al 2005) offers a guideline for annotation of 
timexes, events and their relations. Like other an-
notation schemes1, TimeML keeps separated tem-
poral expressions and events, tagged, respectively, 
with TIMEX3 and EVENT. In addition, two other 
tags are used: SIGNAL and LINK.
    The EVENT tag is used to annotate events, de-
fined as something which occur or happen, and 
                                                
1 Filatova and Hovy (2001), Schilder and Habel (2001), 
Setzer (2001). 
38
states, defined as situations in which something 
holds true.
    Temporal expressions, or timexes, like day times 
(noon, the evening, 1p.m?), dates of different 
granularity (yesterday, February 2 2007, last week, 
last spring, last centuries?), durations (five hours, 
in recent years?) and sets (twice a day?), are 
annotated with the TIMEX3 tag. This tag is based 
on specifications given by Ferro et al (2001) and 
Setzer (2001). Each timex is assigned to one of the 
following types: DATE, for calendar times, TIME, 
for times of the day, even if indefinites (e.g. ?the 
evening?), DURATION, for timexes expressing a 
duration, and SET, for sets of times. Each timex is 
further assigned a value, according to the ISO 8601 
specifications (for instance, 3 anni ?3 years? is 
normalized as ?P3Y?, i.e. a ?period of 3 years?).
   Function words which explicitly signal a relation 
between two elements (timex and event, timex and 
timex, or event and event) are tagged with SIG-
NAL. 
     Finally, the LINK tag is used to specify the re-
lation between two entities. It may indicate a tem-
poral relation (TLINK), a subordinating relation 
(SLINK) or an aspectual relation (ALINK). The 
TLINK tag, which is pivotal for the present work, 
comprises 15 relations, only 13 of which are purely 
temporal. The 13 relations can be seen as derived 
from Allen?s (1984) temporal logic, and 6 of them 
are binary relations - one being the inverse of the 
other. These relations (simultaneous, in-
cludes, is_included, during, 
inv_during, begin, end, begun_by, 
ended_by, before, after) make explicit the 
temporal relation holding between two elements. 
2.2 Temporal PPs in Italian
Italian prepositions can be divided into two main 
groups: monosyllabic like a, da, in, per, tra, -and 
polysyllabic ones like fino a ?up to?, dopo ?after?,, 
prima ?before??This difference at a surface level 
reflects a difference also at a semantic level: 
monosyllabic prepositions are either semantically 
empty elements (i.e. when they are particles pre-
selected by the VP), or they bear a very abstract 
relational meaning, which gets specialized on the 
basis of the co-text; polysyllabic prepositions, on 
the other hand, have a more specific meaning of 
their own. For instance, the preposition dopo ?af-
ter? always means ?subsequently, afterwards?, dis-
regarding its co-text; which makes the identifica-
tion of the relation between the elements involved 
an easier task. In addition to this, most prepositions, 
both polysyllabic and monosyllabic, belong to dif-
ferent semantic fields, e.g. spatial, temporal, man-
ner or other. 
    For the purpose of this work, any preposition 
followed by a timex, as defined in TimeML (Sec-
tion 2.1), is considered a temporal preposition. 
Consequently, we will speak of Temporal PP for 
any sequence of the form ?preposition + timex?. 
In Italian, as in many other languages, the form 
that Temporal PPs, or temporal adjuncts, may take 
is influenced by the aspect and actionality of the 
VP. In traditional grammars, for instance, it is 
claimed that they can be introduced by in if the 
lexical aspect denotes a telic event (e.g. (1)) and by 
per if the lexical aspect denotes a process or a par-
ticular subclass of telic events, i.e. achievements 
(e.g. (2)). Moreover, these kinds of Temporal PPs  
necessarily refer to the conclusion of the process 
denoted by the events and thus are incompatible 
with the progressive aspect:
1) a. Maria ha pulito la stanza in mezz?ora.
           [Maria cleaned the room in half an hour]
       b. La pizza arriva in cinque minuti.
           [The pizza will arrive in five minutes]
2) a. Marco ha lavorato per due ore.
           [Marco has worked for two hours]
b. Marco mi prest? il libro per due giorni.
    [Marco lend me his book for two days]
    The influence of the aspect and actionality of the 
VP has an impact also in the identification of their 
meaning. In particular, in example 1) a. the prepo-
sition signals that the event of cleaning the room 
lasted for half an hour, while in the example 1) b. 
the event of arriving takes place after five minutes 
from the utterance time. In example 1), thus, the 
same Temporal PP, i.e. IN + timex,  has two dif-
ferent meanings, signalled by the relations in-
cludes and after. The different temporal rela-
tions are determined by two different semantic pat-
terns: [DURATIVE_Verb] + in + [TIMEX type: 
DURATION] for 1) a, and [TELIC_Verb] + in + 
[TIMEX type: DURATION], for 1) b.
39
3 The corpus study
In order to verify our hypothesis that the most fre-
quent temporal relations represents the prototypical 
meaning of a temporal preposition2, a corpus study 
has been conducted. It is important to note that we 
do not refer to frequency tout court, but is fre-
quency with respect to a certain semantic pattern.     
Since we want to develop a system for automatic 
annotation of temporal relations, a 5 million word
syntactically shallow parsed corpus of contempo-
rary Italian, drawn from the PAROLE corpus, has 
been used3. 
    All occurrences of a prepositional chunk with 
their left contexts has then been automatically ex-
tracted and imported into a database structure us-
ing a dedicated chunkanalyser tool 4 . This auto-
matically generated DB was then augmented with 
ontological information from the SIMPLE Ontol-
ogy, by associating the head noun of each preposi-
tional chunk to its ontological type, and has been 
queried in order to extract all instances of Tempo-
ral PPs, by restricting the nouns headed by preposi-
tions to the type ?TIME?, which is defined in SIM-
PLE as ?all nouns referring to temporal expres-
sions? (SIMPLE Deliverable 2.1: 245). 
    To identify the meaning of temporal preposi-
tions, therefore, we considered sequences of the 
form:
   Fin Vb Chunk + Prep Chunk: semtype= TIME
where Fin Vb Chunk is a shallow syntactic con-
stituent headed by a finite verb and corresponds to 
the ?anchoring? event, and Prep Chunk is the 
prepositional phrase that represents an instance of 
a timex. To get a more complete picture of the dis-
tribution of Temporal PPs in text, we extracted 
sequences from zero up to a maximum of two in-
tervening chunks, obtaining a set of about 14,000 
such sequences.
    A first observation is about the distribution of 
the Temporal PPs. As illustrated in Table 1 (below) 
Temporal PPs tend to occur immediately after the 
event they are linked to.
                                                
2 We assume and extend Haspelmath?s (forth.) proposal on the 
explanatory and predictive power of frequency of use. 
3 The corpus was parsed with the CHUNK-IT shallow parser 
(Lenci et al 2003).
4 By courtesy of Ing. E. Chiavaccini.
Sequence Distance # Occurrences
Fin_Vb  + PP (Time) 0 5859
Fin_Vb + PP (Time) 1 4592
Fin_Vb + PP (Time) 2 3677
Table 1. Occurrences of Temporal PPs with respect 
to the distance from the event.
    The data in Table 1 show that Temporal PPs 
have a behavior similar to modifiers, like adjec-
tives anchoring on the time axis of the event they 
refer to. 
3.1 Annotating Temporal Relations
To identify the semantics of temporal prepositions, 
a subcorpus of 1057 sequences of Fin Vb Chunk + 
Prep Chunks (Time) was manually annotated by 
one investigator with temporal relations in a bot-
tom-up approach. 
     The tags used for the temporal relation annota-
tion were taken from the TimeML TLINK values 
(see Section 2.1). This will restrict the set of possi-
ble relations to a finite set. To ease the task, we 
excluded the inverse relations for includes, 
during, begin, and end. In order to understand 
the role of the co-text, we also marked the types of 
timexes according to the TimeML TIMEX3 tag 
(ibid.). In this annotation experiment we did not 
consider information from the VP because it will 
be relevant to explain the deviations from the pro-
totype.  
. To facilitate the assignment of the right temporal 
relation, we have used paraphrase tests. All the 
paraphrases used have the same scheme, based on 
the formula rel (e, t), illustrated in the 3):
3) The event/state of X is R timex.
where X stands for the event identified by the Fin 
Vb Chunk, R is the set of temporal relations and 
timex is the temporal expression of the Temporal 
PP. This means that the sequence in 4):
4) [[Vfin[Sono stato sposato]  [[ PP[per quatto 
anni]]
?I have been married for four years?
can be paraphrased as 5):
5) The state of ?being married? happened 
during four years.
40
The only temporal relation that is not para-
phrased in this way is simultaneous, which cor-
responds to 6):
6) The event/state X HAPPENS(-ED) AT 
timex.   
4  Results
Among the 1057 sequences in our sub-corpus, we 
found that only 37.46% (for a total of 449 ex-
cerpts) where real of instances of Temporal PPs, 
the others being either false positives or complex 
timexes, i.e. timexes realized by a sequence of a 
NP followed by a PP introduced by ?di? (of), as in 
the following example:
7) [NP[la notte]] [PP[di Natale]
       ?the Christmas night?
     In Table 2 (below) we report the temporal 
prepositions identified in the corpus:     
Temporal Preposition # occurrences
In ?in? 91
A ?at/on? 64
Da ?from/since/for? 37
Dopo ?after? 1
Attraverso ?through? 1
Di ?of? 43
Durante ?during? 5
Entro ?by? 9
Fino a ?up to? 6
Fino da ?since? 3
Oltre ?beyond? 1
Per ?for? 50
Tra ?in? 3
Verso ?towards? 1
Table 2. Instances of temporal prepositions in the 
corpus.
     The relative low number of real Temporal PPs 
can negatively influence the analysis and the iden-
tification of the semantics of the temporal preposi-
tions. In order to verify whether the data collected 
could represent a solid and consistent baseline for 
further analysis, we analysed all instances of false 
positive timexes. With the exception of a few 
cases, which could have been easily recognized by 
means of a Timex Grammar, we found out that 
482/608 instances are represented by nouns which 
have some sort of temporal value but whose as-
signment to the semantic type ?Time? in the On-
tology do not correspond to the given definition 
(Section 3), e.g: colazione ?breakfast?, scuola
?school?, presidenza ?presidency?, and many others. 
    Therefore, we performed a new extraction of 
sequences excluding all instances of false positives. 
The new results are very different since more than 
56.03% of all prepositional chunks are Temporal 
PPs. This provides support to the fact that the se-
quences extracted from the sub-corpus, though 
small in number, can be considered as a consistent 
starting point for identifying the semantics of tem-
poral prepositions. In particular, the prepositions 
presented in Table 2 correspond to the most fre-
quent prepositions which give rise to temporal re-
lations between timexes and events. Though small, 
the 449 sequences prove to be reliable: we have 
identified a total of 320 temporal relations, as illus-
trated in Table 3:
Temporal Relation # occurrences
Includes 87
During 72
Before 11
After 11
Imm_before 1
Imm_after 2
Simultaneous 5
Beginning 52
Ending 10
No Temporal Link 60
No Assigned 9
Table 3. Kinds of Temporal Relation Identified.
5 Inferring Preposition Semantics    
The analysis we propose for each single preposi-
tion provides information on its semantics. Such 
information is obtained on the basis of the fre-
quency5 with which a given temporal relation is 
associated or coded by that preposition. We claim, 
as already stated, that temporal relations coded by 
prepositions are signals of a certain semantic pat-
tern. Different temporal relations coded by the 
same preposition signal different semantic pattern. 
According to the frequency with which a temporal 
relation, or a semantic pattern, occurs, it is consid-
ered either as the prototypical (i.e. most frequent) 
meaning or as a deviation from the norm, whose 
                                                
5 Note that what counts is relative frequencies, and not 
absolute frequencies.
41
explanation relies in the analysis of the semantic 
pattern in which it occurs. It is for this reason that a 
major role in this analysis is played by the types of 
timexes which follow the preposition. Keeping 
track of their types, according to the TimeML clas-
sification (Section 2.1), is very useful mainly for 
cases where the same temporal preposition codes
different temporal relations depending on the type 
of the timex by which it is followed. In other 
words, it is a way to assess the semantic pattern 
which has been used to code that meaning. In the 
following sections we will focus on the semantics 
of the most frequent temporal prepositions, that is 
in ?in?, a ?at, on?, per ?for?6, da ?for, since, from?. 
Cases of low frequency temporal relations are not 
analyzed here because they would require both 
more data and a separate investigation.
5.1 Prepositions per and da
These two prepositions, although they encode dif-
ferent temporal relations, are presented in a unique 
subsection due to their extremely similar coherent 
distribution across temporal relations. In particular, 
the 80% (40/50) of per identifies a DURING tem-
poral relation, and 83.78% (31/37) of da identifies 
a BEGIN temporal relation. 
    From these data, we can represent the semantics 
of per as follows:
8) ?(e,??(t,?URIN G?e,?))
and that of da as:
9) ?(e,??(t,?EGIN ?e,t))
5.2 The Preposition in
The preposition in is by far the most used temporal 
preposition. In our corpus there are 91 occurrences 
of this preposition, distributed as follows:
INCLUDES (57/91: 62.63%)
DURING (19/91: 20.87%)
AFTER  (6/91: 6.59%)
BEGIN (3/91: 3.29%)
SIMULTANEOUS (2/91: 2.19%)
No LINK (2/91: 2.19%)
END (1/91: 1.09%)
                                                
6Note that the Italian preposition ?per? corresponds only 
to a subset of uses of the English preposition ?for? as in 
the example: 
a) Suon? per un?ora [She played for an hour.]
    Following our idea that the most frequent rela-
tion represents the prototypical meaning of the 
preposition; we claim that Temporal PPs intro-
duced by in tend to code a relation of inclusion, 
semantically represented as:
10) ?(e,??(t,?NCLU DES(?,? )).
     Since this preposition is not exclusively used 
with this meaning, the data forces us to provide an 
explanation for the other relations identified, in 
particular for DURING, AFTER and BEGIN. 
     Considering the DURING relation, we analyzed 
the types of timexes governed by the preposition 
but found that type distinctions did not help. Nev-
ertheless, we observed a clearcut regularity analys-
ing the normalized values of the timexes involved: 
we found that, whenever the timexes are definite 
quantified intervals of time (e.g. 2 days, 3 years, 
half an hour) or temporally anchored instants, in 
encodes the temporal relation of DURING, thus 
deviating from the default interpretation repre-
sented in 10). 
    The relation AFTER shares with DURING the 
restriction on the normalized values of the timexes. 
However, for the AFTER relation there is a strong 
contribution from the VP, as claimed in traditional 
grammars. In such cases, it is the actionality of the 
VP that forces the interpretation of in to express 
the AFTER relation. In fact, this relation appears to 
occur only with achievement verbs, which inher-
ently focus on the telos ? or ending point (see ex-
ample 1) b Section 1). 
   Finally, the BEGIN relation can be found only 
with aspectual verbs, e.g. iniziare ?begin? or 
riprendere ?resume?. In these cases the preposition 
does not really work as a temporal preposition, but 
more as a particle selected by the verb. 
5.3 The Preposition a
The preposition a presents a non-trivial distribu-
tion, which makes it difficult to identify a proto-
typical value:
INCLUDES (20/64: 31.25%)
No LINK (19/64: 29.68%)
BEGINS (7/64: 10.93%)
ENDS (4/64: 6.25%)
SIMULTANEOUS (2/64: 3.12%)
42
     However, with NoLINK relations the preposi-
tion a does not have a temporal value, rather it is 
used to express either quantities of time (and it 
usually corresponds to ?how many times an event 
occurs or happens?) or it can be considered as a 
particle selected by the VP. Therefore, if we ex-
clude the NoLINK relations, we can consider that  
a Temporal PP introduced by a typically expresses 
a relation of inclusion. Further support to this ob-
servation can be observed in the possibility of sub-
stituting a with in, at least in the temporal domain. 
The semantics of the preposition is the following:
11) ?(e,??(t,?NCLU DES(e,?) ).
    As for the BEGINS and ENDS relations, the 
behaviour is the same as for the preposition in, i.e. 
they are activated by aspectual verbs. 
6 Conclusion and Future Work
In this preliminary study we showed that preposi-
tions heading a Temporal PP can be associated 
with one default temporal relation and that devia-
tions from the norm are due to co-textual influ-
ences. The prototypical semantics of temporal 
prepositions can be represented as in 8)-11). 
    We also showed that the normalized values of 
timexes play a major role in the identification of 
temporal preposition semantics, more than the bare 
identification of their types. Instances of deviations 
from the prototypical meaning which could not be 
explained by differences in the timexes forced us 
to analyse the VPs, thus providing useful informa-
tion for the definition of the heuristics.
    An important result of this work is the definition 
of a preliminary set of heuristics for automatic an-
notation of temporal relations in text/discourse. 
Our study also suggests a possible refinement of 
the SIMPLE Ontology aimed at its usability for 
temporal relation identification; and it can be seen 
as a starting point for the development of a Timex 
Grammar.
In the next future we intend to implement this 
set of heuristics with a machine learning algorithm 
to evaluate their reliability. All wrongly annotated 
relations could be used for the identification of the 
relevant information to determine the contribution 
of the VP. 
Some issues are still open and need further re-
search, in particular it will be necessary to investi-
gate the role of some ?complex? Temporal PPs 
(e.g. in questo momento ?in this moment?, which 
can be paraphrased as ?now?), and how to extract 
the meaning of Temporal PPs as suggested in 
Schilder (2004).
References
Allen F. James. 1984. Towards a General Theory of 
Action and Time. Artificial Intelligence, (23):123-54
Ferro Lisa, Mani Inderjeet, Sundheim Beth and Wilson 
George. 2001. TIDES Temporal Annotation Guide-
lines: Version 1.0.2. MITRE Technical Report, MTR 
01W0000041 
Filatova, Elena and Hovy, Eduard. 2001. Assigning 
Time-Stamps To Event ?Clauses. Proceedings of the 
ACL Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information, 
Toulouse, France, 6-1 July, pages 88-95
Haspelmath, Martin. 2007 (forthcoming). Frequency vs. 
iconicity in explaining grammatical asymmetries 
(ms).
Lassen Tine. 2006. An Ontology-Based View on Prepo-
sitional Senses. Proceedings of the Third ACL-
SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions pages 45-50.
Lenci Alessandro, Montemagni Simonetta and Vito 
Pirrelli. 2003. CHUNK-IT. An Italian Shallow Parser 
for Robust Syntactic Annotation, in Linguistica Com-
putazionale (16-17).
Mani Inderjeet and James Pustejovsky. 2004. Temporal 
Discourse Models for Narrative Structure. ACL 
Workspoh on Discourse Annotation
Hartrumpf Sven, Helbig Hermann and Rainer Osswald. 
2006. Semantic Interpretation of Prepositions for 
NLP Applications. Proceedings of the Third ACL-
SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions, pages 29-36.
Pustejovky James, Belanger Louis, Casta?o Jos?,  Gai-
zauskas Robert, Hanks Paul, Ingria Bob, Katz Gra-
ham, Radev Dragomir, Rumshisky Anna, Sanfilippo 
Antonio, Sauri Roser, Setzer Andrea, Sundheim Beth 
and Marc Verhagen, 2002. NRRC Summer Workshop 
on Temporal and Event Recognition for QA Systems.
Pustejovsky James, Ingria Robert, Saur? Roser, Casta?o 
Jos?, Littman Jessica, Gaizauskas Robert, Setzer An-
drea, Katz Graham and Inderjeet Mani. 2005. The 
Specification Language TimeML. The Language of 
Time: A Reader, Mani Inderjeet, Pustejovsky james 
and Robert Gaizauskas (eds), OUP. 
43
Ruimy N., et al 1998. The European LE-PAROLE Pro-
ject: The Italian Syntactic Lexicon. Proceedings of 
the LREC1998, Granada, Spain.
Saint-Dizier Patrick.2006. Syntax and Semantics of 
Prepositions, (ed.), Springer, Dordrecht, The Nether-
lands.
Schilder Frank and Habel Christopher. 2001. Semantic 
Tagging Of News Messages. Processing of the ACL 
Workshop on Temporal and Spatial Information, 
Toulouse, France, 6-1 July, pages 65-72
Schilder Frank. 2004 Extracting meaning fron Temporal 
Nouns and Temporal Prepositions. ACM Transac-
tions on Asian Language Information Processing, (3) 
1:33-50
Setzer Andrea. 2001. Temporal Information in News-
wire Article: an Annotation Scheme and Corpus
Study, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Sheffield. 
SIMPLE Work Package D2.1, available at < 
http://www.ub.es/gilcub/SIMPLE/simple.html>.
Van Eynde Frank. 2006. On the prepositions which in-
troduce an adjunct of duration. Proceedings of the 
Third ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on Prepositions pages 
73-80.
44
