BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 33?40,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Unsupervised Method for Extracting Domain-specific Affixes in
Biological Literature
Haibin Liu Christian Blouin Vlado Kes?elj
Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Canada, {haibin,cblouin,vlado}@cs.dal.ca
Abstract
We propose an unsupervised method to au-
tomatically extract domain-specific prefixes
and suffixes from biological corpora based
on the use of PATRICIA tree. The method is
evaluated by integrating the extracted affixes
into an existing learning-based biological
term annotation system. The system based
on our method achieves comparable experi-
mental results to the original system in locat-
ing biological terms and exact term match-
ing annotation. However, our method im-
proves the system efficiency by significantly
reducing the feature set size. Additionally,
the method achieves a better performance
with a small training data set. Since the af-
fix extraction process is unsupervised, it is
assumed that the method can be generalized
to extract domain-specific affixes from other
domains, thus assisting in domain-specific
concept recognition.
1 Introduction
Biological term annotation is a preparatory step in
information retrieval in biological science. A bi-
ological term is generally defined as any technical
term related to the biological domain. Consider-
ing term structure, there are two types of biologi-
cal terms: single word terms and multi-word terms.
Many systems (Fukuda et al, 1998; Franzn et al,
2002) have been proposed to annotate biological
terms based on different methodologies in which de-
termining term boundaries is usually the first task. It
has been demonstrated (Jiampojamarn et al, 2005a),
however, that accurately locating term boundaries
is difficult. This is so because of the ambiguity of
terms, and the peculiarity of the language used in
biological literature.
(Jiampojamarn et al, 2005b) proposed an auto-
matic biological term annotation system (ABTA)
which applies supervised learning methods to an-
notate biological terms in the biological litera-
ture. Given unstructured texts in biological research,
the annotation system first locates biological terms
based on five word position classes, ?Start?, ?Mid-
dle?, ?End?, ?Single? and ?Non-relevant?. There-
fore, multi-word biological terms should be in a con-
sistent sequence of classes ?Start (Middle)* End?
while single word terms will be indicated by the
class ?Single?. Word n-grams (Cavnar and Tren-
kle, 1994) are used to define each input sentence
into classification instances. For each element in
an n-gram, the system extracts feature attributes as
input for creating the classification model. The ex-
tracted feature attributes include word feature pat-
terns(e.g., Greek letters, uppercase letters, digits and
other symbols), part-of-speech (POS) tag informa-
tion, prefix and suffix characters. Without using
other specific domain resources, the system achieves
comparable results to some other state-of-the-art
systems (Finkel et al, 2004; Settles, 2004) which
resort to external knowledge, such as protein dictio-
naries. It has been demonstrated (Jiampojamarn et
al., 2005b) that the part-of-speech tag information
is the most effective attribute in aiding the system
to annotate biological terms because most biologi-
cal terms are partial noun phrases.
The ABTA system learns the affix feature by
recording only the first and the last n characters (e.g.,
n = 3) of each word in classification instances, and
the authors claimed that the n characters could pro-
vide enough affix information for the term annota-
tion task. Instead of using a certain number of char-
acters to provide affix information, however, it is
more likely that a specific list of typically used pre-
fixes and suffixes of biological words would provide
more accurate information to classifying some bio-
logical terms and boundaries. We hypothesize that
33
a more flexible affix definition will improve the per-
formance of the taks of biological term annotation.
Inspired by (Jiampojamarn et al, 2005b), we
propose a method to automatically extract domain-
specific prefixes and suffixes from biological cor-
pora. We evaluate the effectiveness of the extracted
affixes by integrating them into the parametrization
of an existing biological term annotation system,
ABTA (Jiampojamarn et al, 2005b), to evaluate the
impact on performance of term annotation. The pro-
posed method is completely unsupervised. For this
reason, we suggest that our method can be gener-
alized for extracting domain-specific affixes from
many domains.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In
section 2, we review recent research advances in bi-
ological term annotation. Section 3 describes the
methodology proposed for affix extraction in detail.
The experiment results are presented and evaluated
in section 4. Finally, section 5 summarizes the paper
and introduces future work.
2 Related Work
Biological term annotation denotes a set of proce-
dures that are used to systematically recognize per-
tinent terms in biological literature, that is, to differ-
entiate between biological terms and non-biological
terms and to highlight lexical units that are related to
relevant biology concepts (Nenadic and Ananiadou,
2006).
Recognizing biological entities from texts allows
for text mining to capture their underlying meaning
and further extraction of semantic relationships and
other useful information. Because of the importance
and complexity of the problem, biological term an-
notation has attracted intensive research and there is
a large number of published work on this topic (Co-
hen and Hersh, 2005; Franzn et al, 2003).
Current approaches in biological term annota-
tion can be generalized into three main categories:
lexicon-based, rule-based and learning-based (Co-
hen and Hersh, 2005). Lexicon-based approaches
use existing terminological resources, such as dic-
tionaries or databases, in order to locate term oc-
currences in texts. Given the pace of biology re-
search, however, it is not realistic to assume that a
dictionary can be maintained up-to-date. A draw-
back of lexicon-based approaches is thus that they
are not able to annotate recently coined biological
terms. Rule-based approaches attempt to recover
terms by developing rules that describe associated
term formation patterns. However, rules are often
time-consuming to develop while specific rules are
difficult to adjust to other types of terms. Thus, rule-
based approaches are considered to lack scalability
and generalization.
Systems developed based on learning-based ap-
proaches use training data to learn features useful for
biological term annotation. Compared to the other
two methods, learning-based approaches are theo-
retically more capable to identify unseen or multi-
word terms, and even terms with various writing
styles by different authors. However, a main chal-
lenge for learning-based approaches is to select a set
of discriminating feature attributes that can be used
for accurate annotation of biological terms. The fea-
tures generally fall into four classes: (1) simple de-
terministic features which capture use of uppercase
letters and digits, and other formation patterns of
words, (2) morphological features such as prefix and
suffix, (3) part-of-speech features that provide word
syntactic information, and (4) semantic trigger fea-
tures which capture the evidence by collecting the
semantic information of key words, for instances,
head nouns or special verbs.
As introduced earlier, the learning-based biologi-
cal term annotation system ABTA obtained an 0.705
F-score in exact term matching on Genia corpus
(v3.02)1 which contains 2,000 abstracts of biolog-
ical literature. In fact, the morphological features
in ABTA are learned by recording only the first and
the last n characters of each word in classification
instances. This potentially leads to inaccurate affix
information for the term annotation task.
(Shen et al, 2003) explored an adaptation of a
general Hidden Markov Model-based term recog-
nizer to biological domain. They experimented with
POS tags, prefix and suffix information and noun
heads as features and reported an 0.661 F-score in
overall term annotation on Genia corpus. 100 most
frequent prefixes and suffixes are extracted as can-
didates, and evaluated based on difference in likeli-
hood of part of a biological term versus not. Their
method results in a modest positive improvement in
recognizing biological terms. Two limitations of this
method are: (1) use of only a biological corpus, so
1http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/
34
that the general domain-independent affixes are not
removed, and (2) a supervised process of choosing a
score threshold that is used in affix selection.
(Lee et al, 2003) used prefix and suffix fea-
tures coupled with a dictionary-based refinement of
boundaries of the selected candidates in their exper-
iments for term annotation. They extracted affix fea-
tures in a similar way with (Shen et al, 2003). They
also reported that affix features made a positive ef-
fect on improving term annotation accuracy.
In this project, we consider the quality of domain-
specific affix features extracted via an unsupervised
method. Successful demonstration of the quality of
this extraction method implies that domain-specific
affixes can be identified for arbitrary corpora without
the need to manually generate training sets.
3 PATRICIA-Tree-based Affix Extraction
3.1 PATRICIA Tree
The method we propose to extract affixes from bio-
logical words is based on the use of PATRICIA tree.
?PATRICIA? stands for ?Practical Algorithm To Re-
trieve Information Coded In Alphanumeric?. It was
first proposed by (Morrison, 1968) as an algorithm
to provide a flexible means of storing, indexing, and
retrieving information in a large file. PATRICIA
tree uses path compression by grouping common se-
quences into nodes. This structure provides an ef-
ficient way of storing values while maintaining the
lookup time for a key of O(N) in the worst case,
where N is the length of the longest key. Meanwhile,
PATRICIA tree has little restriction on the format of
text and keys. Also it does not require rearrange-
ment of text or index when new material is added.
Because of its outstanding flexibility and efficiency,
PATRICIA tree has been applied to many large in-
formation retrieval problems (Morrison, 1968).
In our project, all biological words are inserted
and stored in a PATRICIA tree, using which we can
efficiently look up specific biological word or extract
biological words that share specified affixes and cal-
culated required statistics.
3.2 Experiment Design
In this work, we have designed the experiments to
extract domain-specific prefixes and suffixes of bio-
logical words from a biological corpus, and investi-
gate whether the extracted affix information could
facilitate better biological term annotation. The
overall design of our experiments consists of three
major processes: affix extraction, affix refining and
evaluation of experimental results. It is seen that
every node in PATRICIA tree contains exactly one
string of 1 or more characters, which is the preced-
ing substring of its descendant nodes. Meanwhile,
every word is a path of substrings from the root node
to a leaf. Therefore, we propose that every substring
that can be formed from traversing the internal nodes
of the tree is a potential affix.
In the affix extraction process, we first populate a
PATRICIA tree using all words in the combined cor-
pus(CC) of a Biological Corpus (BC) and a General
English Corpus (GEC). GEC is used against BC in
order to extract more accurate biological affix infor-
mation. Two PATRICIA trees are populated sepa-
rately for extracting prefixes and suffixes. The suffix
tree is based on strings derived by reversing all the
input words from the combined corpus. All the po-
tential prefixes and suffixes are then extracted from
the populated PATRICIA trees.
In the affix refining process, for each extracted
potential affix, we compute its joint probability of
being both an English affix and a biological affix,
P (D = Biology, A = Yes|PA), where D stands
for Domain, A stands for Affix and PA represents
Potential Affix. This joint probability can be fur-
ther decomposed as shown in Eq.(1). In the for-
mula, P (A = Yes|PA) denotes the probability that
a given potential affix is a true English affix while
P (D = Biology|A = Yes,PA) refers to the proba-
bility that a given English affix is actually a biologi-
cal affix.
P (D = Biology, A = Yes|PA) =
P (D=Biology|A=Yes,PA)? P (A=Yes|PA) (1)
To calculate P (A = Yes|PA), the probabilities of
prefixes and suffixes are measured separately. In
linguistics, a prefix is described as a type of affix
that precedes the morphemes to which it can attach
(Soanes and Stevenson, 2004). Simply speaking, a
prefix is a substring that can be found at the begin-
ning of a word. Our functional definition of a prefix
is a substring which precedes words existing in the
English language. This can be done by enumerating,
for each node, all descendant substring and assess-
ing their existence as stand-alone words. For exam-
ple, ?radioimmunoassay?, ?radioiodine? and ?radio-
35
labeled? are three words and have a common start-
ing string ?radio?. If we take out the remaining part
of each word, three new strings are obtained, ?im-
munoassay?, ?iodine? and ?labeled?. Since all the
input words are already stored in PATRICIA tree,
we lookup these three strings in PATRICIA tree and
find that ?immunoassay?, ?iodine? and ?labeled? are
also meaningful words in the tree. This indicates
that ?radio? is a prefix among the input words. On
the other hand, it is obvious that ?radioimmunoas-
say? and ?radioiodine? share another string ?radioi?.
However, ?mmunoassay? and ?odine? are not mean-
ingful words due to their absence in the PATRICIA
tree. This suggests that ?radioi? is not a prefix.
For each extracted potential prefix,
P (A = Yes|PA) is computed as the proportion of
strings formed by traversing all descendant nodes
that are meaningful terms. In our experiments,
the measure of determining a string meaningful
is to look up whether the string is an existing
word present in the built prefix PATRICIA tree.
Algorithm 1 shows the procedure of populating a
PATRICIA tree and calculating P (A = Yes|PA)
for each potential prefix.
Algorithm 1 P (A = Yes|PA) for Prefix
Input: words (w) ? Combined Corpus (CC)
Output: P (A = Yes|PA) for each potential prefix
PT = ? //PT : Patricia Trie
for all words w ? CC do
PT ? Insert(w) //Populating Patricia Trie
for all nodes ni ? PT do
PA? String(ni) //Concatenate strings
// in nodes from root to ni,
// which is a potential prefix
TPA ? PrefixSearch(PA)
//TPA : all words w ? CC beginning with PA
score ? 0
for all words w ? TPA do
if Extrstr(PA,w) in PT then
//Extrstr() returns the remaining string
// of w without PA
score ++
P (A = Yes|PA) ? score/|TPA|
//|TPA| is the number of words in TPA
Likewise, in linguistics a suffix is an affix that
follows the morphemes to which it can attach
(Soanes and Stevenson, 2004). Simply speaking,
a suffix of a word is a substring exactly match-
ing the last part of the word. Similar to the idea
of calculating P (A = Yes|PA) for potential pre-
fix, we conjecture that the extracted potential suf-
fix could be a reasonable English suffix if the in-
verted strings formed from traversing the descen-
dant nodes of the potential suffix in the suffix PA-
TRICIA tree are meaningful words. For instance,
?Calcium-dependent?, ?Erythropoietin-dependent?
and ?Ligand-dependent? share a common ending
string ?-dependent?. Since the remaining strings of
each word, ?Calcium?, ?Erythropoietin? and ?Lig-
and? can be found in the ?forward? PATRICIA tree,
?-dependent? is a potentially useful suffix.
However, it is often observable that some English
words do not begin with another meaningful word
but a typical prefix, for example, ?alpha-bound? and
?pro-glutathione?. It is known that ?-bound?and
?-glutathione? are good suffixes in biology. ?al-
pha? and ?pro?, however, are not meaningful words
but typical prefixes, and in fact have been extracted
when calculating P (A = Yes|PA) for potential pre-
fix. Therefore, in order to detect and capture such
potential suffixes, we further assume that if a word
begins with a recognized prefix instead of another
meaningful word, the remaining part of the word
still has the potential to be an informative suffix.
Therefore, strings ?-bound? and ?-glutathione? can
be successfully extracted as potential suffixes. In our
experiments, an extracted potential prefix is consid-
ered a recognized prefix if its P (A = Yes|PA) is
greater than 0.5.
To calculate P (D = Biology|A = Yes, PA), it
is necessary to first determine true English affixes
from extracted potential affixes. In our experiments,
we consider that an extracted potential prefix or suf-
fix is a recognized affix only if its P (A = Yes|PA)
is greater than 0.5. It is also necessary to consider
the biological corpus BC and the general English
corpus GEC separately. It is assumed that a biol-
ogy related affix tends to occur more frequently in
words of BC than GEC. Eq.(2) is used to estimate
P (D = Biology|A = Yes, PA).
P (D = Biology|A = Yes, PA) =
(#Words with PA in BC/Size (BC))/
(#Words with PA in BC/Size (BC) +
#Words with PA in GEC/Size (GEC)), (2)
36
where only PA with P (A = Yes|PA) greater than
0.5 are used, and the number of words with a certain
PA is further normalized by the size of each corpus.
Finally, the joint probability of each potential af-
fix, P (D = Biology, A = Yes|PA), can be used to
parametrize a word beginning or ending with PA.
In the evaluation process of our experiments, the
prefix-suffix pair with maximum joint probability
values is used to parametrize a word. Therefore,
each word in BC has exactly two values as affix fea-
ture: a joint probability value for its potential prefix
and a joint probability value for its potential suffix.
We then replace the original affix feature of ABTA
system with our obtained joint probability values,
and investigate whether these new affix information
leads to equivalent or better term annotation on BC.
4 Results and Evaluation
4.1 Dataset and Environment
For our experiments, it is necessary to use a corpus
that includes widely used biological terms and com-
mon English words. This dataset, therefore, will al-
low us to accurately extract the information of bi-
ology related affixes. As a proof-of-concept proto-
type, our experiments are conducted on two widely
used corpora: Genia corpus (v3.02) and Brown cor-
pus2.The Genia version 3.02 corpus is used as the
biological corpus BC in our experiments. It contains
2,000 biological research paper abstracts. They were
selected from the search results in the MEDLINE
database3, and each biological term has been an-
notated into different terminal classes based on the
opinions of experts in biology. Used as the general
English corpus GEC, Brown corpus includes 500
samples of common English words, totalling about
a million words drawn from 15 different text cate-
gories.
All the experiments were executed on a Sun So-
laris server Sun-Fire-880. Our experiments were
mainly implemented using Perl and Python.
4.2 Experimental Results
We extracted 15,718 potential prefixes and 21,282
potential suffixes from the combined corpus of Ge-
nia and Brown. Among them, there are 2,306 poten-
tial prefixes and 1,913 potential suffixes with joint
2http://clwww.essex.ac.uk/w3c/corpus ling/
3http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/
probability value P (D = Biology, A = Yes|PA)
greater than 0.5. Table 1 shows a few examples
of extracted potential affixes whose joint probabil-
ity value is equal to 1.0. It is seen that most of
these potential affixes are understandable biological
affixes which directly carry specific semantic mean-
ings about certain biological terms. However, some
substrings are also captured as potential affixes al-
though they may not be recognized as ?affixes? in
linguistics, for example ?adenomyo? in prefixes, and
?mopoiesis? in suffixes. In Genia corpus, ?adeno-
myo? is the common beginning substring of biologi-
cal terms ?adenomyoma?, ?adenomyosis? and ?ade-
nomyotic? , while ?plasias? is the common ending
substring of biological terms ?neoplasias? and ?hy-
perplasias?. The whole list of extracted potential af-
fixes is available upon request.
In order to investigate whether the extracted af-
fixes improves the performance of biological term
annotation, it is necessary to obtain the experimen-
tal results of both original ABTA system and the
ABTA system using our extracted affix information.
In ABTA, the extraction of feature attributes is per-
formed on the whole 2000 abstracts of Genia cor-
pus, and then 1800 abstracts are used as training
set while the rest 200 abstracts are used as testing
set. The evaluation measures are precision, recall
and F-score. C4.5 decision tree classifier (Alpay-
din, 2004) is reported as the most efficient classi-
fier which leads to the best performance among all
the classifiers experimented in (Jiampojamarn et al,
2005b). Therefore, C4.5 is used as the main clas-
sifier in our experiments. The experimental results
of ABTA system with 10 fold cross-validation based
on different combinations of the original features are
presented in Table 2 in which feature ?WFP? is short
for Word Feature Patterns, feature ?AC? denotes Af-
fix Characters, and feature ?POS? refers to POS tag
information. The setting of parameters in the exper-
iments with ABTA is: the word n-gram size is 3, the
number of word feature patterns is 3, and the number
of affix characters is 4. We have reported the F-score
and the classification accuracy of the experiments in
the table. It is seen that there is a tendency with the
experimental performance that for a multi-word bi-
ological term, the middle position is most difficult
to detect while the ending position is generally eas-
ier to be identified than the starting position. The
assumed reason for this tendency is that for multi-
37
Potential Prefixes Potential Suffixes
13-acetate
B-cell
endotoxin
I-kappaB
macrophage
adenomyo
Rel/NF-kappaB
anti-CD28
VitD3
cytokine
3-kinase
CD28
HSV-1
ligand
N-alpha-tosyl-L
platelet
pharmaco
adenovirus
chromatin
hemoglobin
-T-cell
-coated
-expressed
-inducer
plasias
-alpha-activated
mopoiesis
-nonresponsive
coagulant
-soluble
cytoid
-bearing
-kappaB-mediated
-globin-encoding
-immortalized
-methyl
lyse
-receptor
glycemia
racrine
Table 1: Examples of Extracted Potential Affixes with Joint Probability Value 1.0
word biological terms, many middle words of are
seemingly unrelated to biology domain while many
ending words directly indicate their identity, for in-
stances, ?receptor?, ?virus? or ?expression?.
Table 3 shows the experimental results of ABTA
system after replacing the original affix feature with
our obtained joint probability values for each word
in Genia corpus. ?JPV? is used to denote Joint Prob-
ability Values. It is seen that based on all three
features the system achieves a classification accu-
racy of 87.5%, which is comparable to the results
of the original ABTA system. However, the size of
the feature set of the system is significantly reduced,
and the classification accuracy of 87.5% is achieved
based on only 18 parameters, which is 1/2 of the size
of the original feature set. Meanwhle, the execution
time of the experiments generally reduces to nearly
half of the original ABTA system (e.g., reduces from
4 hours to 1.7 hours). Furthermore, when the feature
set contains only our extracted affix information, the
system reaches a classification accuracy of 81.46%
based on only 6 parameters. It is comparable with
the classification accuracy achieved by using only
POS information in the system. In addition, Table 3
also presents the experimental results when our ex-
tracted affix information is used as an addtional fea-
ture to the original feature set. It is expected that the
system performance is further improved when the
four features are applied together. However, the size
of the feature set increases to 42 parameters, which
increases the data redundancy. This proves that the
extracted affix information has a positive impact on
locating biological terms, and it could be a good re-
placement of the original affix feature.
Moreover, we also evaluated the performance of
the exact matching biological term annotation based
on the obtained experimental results of ABTA sys-
tem. The exact matching annotation in ABTA sys-
tem is to accurately identify every biological term,
including both multi-word terms and single word
terms, therefore, all the word position classes of
a term have to be classified correctly at the same
time. An error occurring in any one of ?Start? ?Mid-
dle? and ?End? classes leads the system to annotate
multi-word terms incorrectly. Consequently, the ac-
cumulated errors will influence the exact matching
annotation performance. Table 4 presents the exact
matching annotation results of different combination
of features based on 10 fold cross-validation over
Genia corpus. It is seen that after replacing the orig-
inal affix feature of ABTA system with our obtained
joint probability values for each word in Genia cor-
pus, the system achieves an 0.664 F-score on exact
matching of biological term annotation, compara-
ble to the exact matching performance of the orig-
inal ABTA system. In addition, when the feature
set contains only our extracted affix information, the
system reaches an 0.536 F-score on exact matching.
Although it is a little lower than the exact matching
performance achieved by using only the original af-
fix features in the system, the feature set size of the
system is significantly reduced from 24 to 6.
In order to further compare our method with the
original ABTA system, we attempted eleven differ-
ent sizes of training data set to run the experiments
separately based on our method and the original
ABTA system. They can then be evaluated in terms
of their performance on each training set size. These
eleven different training set sizes are: 0.25%, 0.5%,
1%, 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 75% and
90%. For instance, 0.25% denotes that the train-
ing data set is 0.25% of Genia corpus while the
rest 99.75% becomes the testing data set for exper-
iments. It is observed that there are about 21 paper
abstracts in training set when its size is 1% , and 52
abstracts when its size is 2.5%. It is expected that
larger training set size leads to better classification
accuracy of experiments.
For each training set size, we randomly extracted
10 different training sets from Genia corpus to run
the experiments. We then computed the mean clas-
sification accuracy (MCA) of 10 obtained classifi-
cation accuracies. Figure 1 was drawn to illustrate
the distribution of MCA of each training set size
38
Feature F-Measure Classification #
sets Start Middle End Single Non Accuracy (%) Parameters
WFP 0.467 0.279 0.495 0.491 0.864 74.59 9
AC 0.709 0.663 0.758 0.719 0.932 85.67 24
POS 0.69 0.702 0.775 0.67 0.908 83.96 3
WFP+AC 0.717 0.674 0.762 0.730 0.933 86.02 33
WFP+POS 0.726 0.721 0.793 0.716 0.923 85.96 12
AC+POS 0.755 0.741 0.809 0.732 0.930 87.14 27
WFP+AC+POS 0.764 0.745 0.811 0.749 0.933 87.59 36
Table 2: Experimental Results of Original ABTA System
Feature F-Measure Classification #
sets Start Middle End Single Non Accuracy (%) Parameters
JPV 0.652 0.605 0.713 0.602 0.898 81.46 6
WFP+JPV 0.708 0.680 0.756 0.699 0.919 84.84 15
JPV+POS 0.753 0.740 0.805 0.722 0.928 86.92 9
WFP+JPV+POS 0.758 0.749 0.809 0.74 0.933 87.50 18
WFP+AC+POS+JPV 0.767 0.746 0.816 0.751 0.934 87.77 42
Table 3: Experimental Results of ABTA System with Extracted Affix Information
for both methods, with the incremental proportion of
training data. It is noted in Figure 1 that the change
patterns of MCA obtained by our method and the
original ABTA system are similar. It is also seen
that our method achieves marginally better classifi-
cation performance when the proportion of training
data is under 2.5%.
Figure 1: MCA Distribution
In order to determine if the classification perfor-
mance difference between our method and the origi-
nal ABTA system is statistically significant, we per-
formed one-tailed t-Test (Alpaydin, 2004) on the
classification results with our hypothesis that MCA
of our proposed method is higher than MCA of orig-
inal ABTA system. The significance level ? is set
to be the conventional value 0.05. As a result, the
classification performance difference between two
methods is statistically significant when the propor-
tion of training data is 0.25%, 0.5%, 1% or 2.5%.
Table 5 shows the P values of t-Test results for the
various training set sizes. This demonstrates that
the ABTA system adopting our method outperforms
the original ABTA system in classification accuracy
when the proportion of training data is lower than
2.5% of Genia corpus, and achieves comparable
classification performance with the original ABTA
system when the proportion continuously increases.
One-tailed Training set size
t-Test 0.25% 0.5% 1% 2.5%
P value 0.0298 0.0006 0.0002 0.0229
Table 5: One-tailed t-Test Results
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented an unsupervised
method to extract domain-specific prefixes and suf-
fixes from the biological corpus based on the use
of PATRICIA tree. The ABTA system (Jiampoja-
marn et al, 2005b) adopting our method achieves
an overall classification accuracy of 87.5% in locat-
ing biological terms, and derives an 0.664 F-score in
exact term matching annotation, which are all com-
parable to the experimental results obtained by the
original ABTA system. However, our method helps
the system significantly reduce the size of feature set
and thus improves the system efficiency. The sys-
tem also obtains a classification accuracy of 81.46%
based only on our extracted affix information. This
39
Feature Exact Matching Annotation #
sets Precision Recall F-score Parameters
AC 0.548 0.571 0.559 24
WFP+AC+POS 0.661 0.673 0.667 36
JPV 0.527 0.545 0.536 6
WFP+JPV+POS 0.658 0.669 0.664 18
Table 4: Exact Matching Annotation Performance
demonstates that the affix information acheived by
the proposed method is important to accurately lo-
cating biological terms.
We further explored the reliability of our method
by gradually increasing the proportion of training
data from 0.25% to 90% of Genia corpus. One-tailed
t-Test results confirm that the ABTA system adopt-
ing our method achieves more reliable performance
than the original ABTA system when the training
corpus is small. The main result of this work is thus
that affix features can be parametrized from small
corpora at no cost in performance.
There are some aspects in which the proposed
method can be improved in our future work. We
are interested in investigating whether there exists
a certain threshold value for the joint probability
which might improve the classification accuracy of
ABTA system to some extent. However, this could
import supervised elements into our method. More-
over, we would like to incorporate our method into
other published learning-based biological term an-
notation systems to see if better system performance
will be achieved. However, superior parametriza-
tion will improve the annotation performance only
if the affix information is not redundant with other
features such as POS.
References
Ethem Alpaydin. 2004. Introduction to Machine Learning.
MIT Press.
William B. Cavnar and John M. Trenkle. 1994. N-gram-based
text categorization. In Proc. SDAIR-94, 3rd Ann. Symposium
on Doc. Analysis and Inf. Retr., pages 161?175, Las Vegas,
USA.
Aaron Michael Cohen and William R. Hersh. 2005. A sur-
vey of current work in biomedical text mining. Briefings in
Bioinformatics, 5(1):57?71.
Jenny Finkel, Shipra Dingare, Huy Nguyen, Malvina Nissim,
Gail Sinclair, and Christopher Manning. 2004. Exploiting
context for biomedical entity recognition: From syntax to
the web. In Joint wsh. on NLP in Biomedicine and its Appli-
cations (JNLPBA-2004).
Kristofer Franzn, Gunnar Eriksson, Fredrik Olsson, Lars
Asker Per Lidn, and Joakim Cster. 2002. Protein names
and how to find them. International Journal of Medical In-
formatics special issue on NLP in Biomedical Applications,
pages 49?61.
Kristofer Franzn, Gunnar Eriksson, Fredrik Olsson, Lars
Asker Per Lidn, and Joakim Cster. 2003. Mining the Bio-
medical Literature in the Genomic Era: An Overview. J.
Comp. Biol., 10(6):821?855.
K. Fukuda, T. Tsunoda, A. Tamura, and T. Takagi. 1998. To-
ward information extraction: Identifying protein names from
biological papers. In the Pacific Symposium on Biocomput-
ing, pages 707?718.
Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Nick Cercone, and Vlado Kes?elj.
2005a. Automatic Biological Term Annotation Using N-
gram and Classification Models. Master?s thesis, Faculty of
Comp.Sci., Dalhousie University.
Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Nick Cercone, and Vlado Kes?elj.
2005b. Biological Named Entity Recognition using N-
grams and Classification Methods. In Conf. of the Pacific
Assoc. for Computational Linguistics, PACLING?05, Tokyo,
Japan.
Ki-Joong Lee, Young-Sook Hwang, and Hae-Chang Rim.
2003. Two-phase biomedical NE recognition based on
SVMs. In Proc. of the ACL 2003 workshop on Natural lan-
guage processing in biomedicine, pages 33?40, Morristown,
NJ, USA. ACL.
Donald R. Morrison. 1968. Patricia - Practical Algorithm To
Retrieve Information Coded in Alphanumeric. Journal of
the ACM, 15(4):514?534.
Goran Nenadic and Sophia Ananiadou. 2006. Mining semanti-
cally related terms from biomedical literature. ACM Trans-
actions on Asian Language Information Processing (TALIP),
5(1):22 ? 43.
Burr Settles. 2004. Biomedical named entity recognition using
conditional random fields and novel feature sets. In Joint
wsh. on NLP in Biomedicine and its Applications (JNLPBA-
2004).
Dan Shen, Jie Zhang, Guodong Zhou, Jian Su, and Chew-Lim
Tan. 2003. Effective adaptation of a Hidden Markov Model-
based named entity recognizer for biomedical domain. In
Proc. of the ACL 2003 wsh. on NLP in Biomedicine, pages
49?56, Morristown, NJ, USA.
Catherine Soanes and Angus Stevenson. 2004. Oxford Dictio-
nary of English. Oxford University Press.
40
