Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Aspects of Computational Language Acquisition, pages 33?40,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007 c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
I will shoot your shopping down and you can shoot all my tins
Automatic Lexical Acquisition from the CHILDES Database
Paula Buttery and Anna Korhonen
RCEAL, University of Cambridge
9 West Road, Cambridge, CB3 9DB, UK
pjb48, alk23@cam.ac.uk
Abstract
Empirical data regarding the syntactic com-
plexity of children?s speech is important for
theories of language acquisition. Currently
much of this data is absent in the annotated
versions of the CHILDES database. In this
perliminary study, we show that a state-of-
the-art subcategorization acquisition system of
Preiss et al (2007) can be used to extract large-
scale subcategorization (frequency) informa-
tion from the (i) child and (ii) child-directed
speech within the CHILDES database without
any domain-specific tuning. We demonstrate
that the acquired information is sufficiently ac-
curate to confirm and extend previously re-
ported research findings. We also report quali-
tative results which can be used to further im-
prove parsing and lexical acquisition technol-
ogy for child language data in the future.
1 Introduction
Large empirical data containing children?s speech are
the key to developing and evaluating different theo-
ries of child language acquisition (CLA). Particularly
important are data related to syntactic complexity of
child language since considerable evidence suggests
that syntactic information plays a central role during
language acquisition, e.g. (Lenneberg, 1967; Naigles,
1990; Fisher et al, 1994).
The standard corpus in the study of CLA is the
CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000)1 which pro-
vides 300MB of transcript data of interactions be-
1See http://childes.psy.cmu.edu for details.
tween children and parents over 25 human languages.
CHILDES is currently available in raw, part-of-speech-
tagged and lemmatized formats. However, adequate
investigation of syntactic complexity requires deeper
annotations related to e.g. syntactic parses, subcatego-
rization frames (SCFs), lexical classes and predicate-
argument structures.
Although manual syntactic annotation is possible,
it is extremely costly. The alternative is to use natu-
ral language processing (NLP) techniques for annota-
tion. Automatic techniques are now viable, cost effec-
tive and, although not completely error-free, are suffi-
ciently accurate to yield annotations useful for linguis-
tic purposes. They also gather important qualitative
and quantitative information, which is difficult for hu-
mans to obtain, as a side-effect of the acquisition pro-
cess.
For instance, state-of-the-art statistical parsers,
e.g. (Charniak, 2000; Briscoe et al, 2006), have wide
coverage and yield grammatical representations capa-
ble of supporting various applications (e.g. summa-
rization, information extraction). In addition, lexi-
cal information (e.g. subcategorization, lexical classes)
can now be acquired automatically from parsed
data (McCarthy and Carroll, 2003; Schulte im Walde,
2006; Preiss et al, 2007). This information comple-
ments the basic grammatical analysis and provides ac-
cess to the underlying predicate-argument structure.
Containing considerable ellipsis and error, spoken
child language can be challenging for current NLP
techniques which are typically optimized for written
adult language. Yet Sagae et al (2005) have recently
demonstrated that existing statistical parsing tech-
niques can be usefully modified to analyse CHILDES
33
with promising accuracy. Although further improve-
ments are still required for optimal accuracy, this re-
search has opened up the exciting possibility of auto-
matic grammatical annotation of the entire CHILDES
database in the future.
However, no work has yet been conducted on au-
tomatic acquisition of lexical information from child
speech. The only automatic lexical acquisition study
involving CHILDES that we are aware of is that of
Buttery and Korhonen (2005). The study involved
extracting subcategorization information from (some
of) the adult (child-directed) speech in the database,
and showing that this information differs from that ex-
tracted from the spoken part of the British National
Corpus (BNC) (Burnard, 1995).
In this paper, we investigate whether state-of-the-
art subcategorization acquisition technology can be
used?without any domain-specific tuning?to obtain
large-scale verb subcategorization frequency informa-
tion from CHILDES which is accurate enough to show
differences and similarities between child and adult
speech, and thus be able to provide support for syn-
tactic complexity studies in CLA.
We use the new system of Preiss et al (2007) to
extract SCF frequency data from the (i) child and
(ii) child-directed speech within CHILDES. We show
that the acquired information is sufficiently accu-
rate to confirm and extend previously reported SCF
(dis)similarities between the two types of data. In par-
ticular, we demonstrate that children and adults have
different preferences for certain types of verbs, and
that these preferences seem to influence the way chil-
dren acquire subcategorization. In addition, we report
qualitative results which can be used to further im-
prove parsing and lexical acquisition technology for
spoken child language data in the future.
2 Subcategorization Acquisition System
We used for subcategorization acquisition the new sys-
tem of Preiss, Briscoe and Korhonen (2007) which
is essentially a much improved and extended version
of Briscoe and Carroll?s (1997) system. It incorpo-
rates 168 SCF distinctions, a superset of those found
in the COMLEX Syntax (Grishman et al, 1994) and
ANLT (Boguraev et al, 1987) dictionaries. Currently,
SCFs abstract over specific lexically governed parti-
cles and prepositions and specific predicate selectional
preferences but include some derived semi-predictable
bounded dependency constructions, such as particle
and dative movement?this will be revised in future
versions of the SCF system.
The system tokenizes, tags, lemmatizes and parses
input sentences using the recent (second) release of
the RASP (Robust Accurate Statistical Parsing) system
(Briscoe et al, 2006) which parses arbitrary English
text with state-of-the-art levels of accuracy. SCFs are
extracted from the grammatical relations (GRs) output
of the parser using a rule-based classifier. This clas-
sifier operates by exploiting the close correspondence
between the dependency relationships which the GRs
embody and the head-complement structure which
subcategorization acquisition attempts to recover. Lex-
ical entries of extracted SCFs are constructed for each
word in the corpus data. Finally, the entries may be
optionally filtered to obtain a more accurate lexicon.
This is done by setting empirically determined thresh-
olds on the relative frequencies of SCFs.
When evaluated on cross-domain corpora contain-
ing mainly adult language, this system achieves 68.9
F-measure2 in detecting SCF types?a result which
compares favourably to those reported with other com-
parable SCF acquisition systems.
3 Data
The English (British and American) sections of the
CHILDES database (MacWhinney, 2000) were used to
create two corpora: 1) CHILD and 2) CDS. Both cor-
pora contained c. 1 million utterances which were se-
lected from the data after some utterances contain-
ing un-transcribable sections were removed. Speak-
ers were identified using speaker-id codes within the
CHAT transcriptions of the data:3 CHILD contained
the utterances of speakers identified as target children;
CDS contained input from speakers identified as par-
ents/caretakers. The mean utterance length (measured
in words) in CHILD and CDS were 3.48 and 4.61, re-
spectively. The mean age of the child speaker in CHILD
is around 3 years 6 months.4
2See Section 4 for details of F-measure.
3CHAT is the transcription and coding format used by all the
transcriptions within CHILDES.
4The complete age range is from 1 year and 1 month up to 7
years.
34
3.1 Test Verbs and SCF Lexicons
We selected a set of 161 verbs for experimentation.
The words were selected at random, subject to the con-
straint that a sufficient number of SCFs would be ex-
tracted (> 100) from both corpora to facilitate max-
imally useful comparisons. All sentences containing
an occurrence of one of the test verbs were extracted
from the two corpora and fed into the SCF acquisition
system described earlier in section 2.
In some of our experiments the two lexicons were
compared against the VALEX lexicon (Korhonen et al,
2006)?a large subcategorization lexicon for English
which was acquired automatically from several cross-
domain corpora (containing both written and spoken
language). VALEX includes SCF and frequency infor-
mation for 6,397 English verbs. We employed the
most accurate version of the lexicon here (87.3 F-
measure)?this lexicon was obtained by selecting high
frequency SCFs and supplementing them with lower
frequency SCFs from manually built lexicons.
4 Analysis
4.1 Methods for Analysis
The similarity between verb and SCF distributions in
the lexicons was examined. To maintain a robust anal-
ysis in the presence of noise, multiple similarity mea-
sures were used to compare the verb and SCF distri-
butions (Korhonen and Krymolowski, 2002). In the
following p = (p
i
) and q = (q
i
) where p
i
and q
i
are
the probabilities associated with SCF
i
in distributions
(lexicons) P and Q:
? Intersection (IS) - the intersection of non-zero probability
SCFs in p and q;
? Spearman rank correlation (RC) - lies in the range [1; 1], with
values near 0 denoting a low degree of association and val-
ues near -1 and 1 denoting strong association;
? Kullback-Leibler (KL) distance - a measure of the additional
information needed to describe p using q, KL is always ? 0
and = 0 only when p ? q;
The SCFs distributions acquired from the corpora for
the chosen words were evaluated against: (i) a gold
standard SCF lexicon created by merging the SCFs in
the COMLEX and ANLT syntax dictionaries?this en-
abled us to determine the accuracy of the acquired
SCFs; (ii) another acquired SCF lexicon (as if it were
a gold standard)?this enabled us to determine simi-
larity of SCF types between two lexicons. In each case
Verb CHILD CDS
go 1 1
want 2 2
get 3 3
know 4 4
put 5 6
see 6 5
come 7 10
like 8 7
make 9 11
say 10 8
take 11 13
eat 12 14
play 13 15
need 14 16
look 15 12
fall 16 22
sit 17 21
think 18 9
break 19 27
give 20 17
Table 1: Ranks of the 20 most frequent verbs in CHILD
and in CDS
we recorded the number of true positives (TPs), correct
SCFs, false positives (FPs), incorrect SCFs, and false
negatives (FNs), correct SCFs not in the gold standard.
Using these counts, we calculated type precision
(the percentage of SCF types in the acquired lexicon
which are correct), type recall (the percentage of SCF
types in the gold standard that are in the lexicon) and
F-measure:
F =
2 ? precision ? recall
precision + recall
(1)
4.2 Verb Analysis
Before conducting the SCF comparisons we first com-
pared (i) our 161 test verbs and (ii) all the 1212
common verbs and their frequencies in CHILD and
CDS using the Spearman rank correlation (RC) and
the Kullback-Leibler distance (KL). The result was
a strong correlation between the 161 test verbs (RC =
0.920 ? 0.0791, KL = 0.05) as well as between all the
1212 verbs (RC = 0.851 ? 0.0287, KL = 0.07) in the
two corpora.
These figures suggest that the child-directed speech
(which is less diverse in general than speech between
adults, see e.g. the experiments of Buttery and Ko-
rhonen (2005)) contains a very similar distribution of
verbs to child speech. This is to be expected since the
35
corpora essentially contain separate halves of the same
interactions.
However, our large-scale frequency data makes it
possible to investigate the cause for the apparently
small differences in the distributions. We did this by
examining the strength of correlation throughout the
ranking. We compared the ranks of the individual
verbs and discovered that the most frequent verbs in
the two corpora have indeed very similar ranks. Ta-
ble 1 lists the 20 most frequent verbs in CHILD (starting
from the highest ranked verb) and shows their ranks
in CDS. As illustrated in the table, the top 4 verbs
are identical in the two corpora (go, want, get, know)
while the top 15 are very similar (including many ac-
tion verbs e.g. put, look, sit, eat, and play).
Yet some of the lower ranked verbs turned out to
have large rank differences between the two corpora.
Two such relatively highly ranked verbs are included
in the table?think which has a notably higher rank
in CDS than in CHILD, and break which has a higher
rank in CHILD than in CDS. Many other similar cases
were found in particular among the medium and low
frequency verbs in the two corpora.
To obtain a better picture of this, we calculated for
each verb its rank difference between CHILD vs. CDS.
Table 2 lists 40 verbs with substantial rank differences
between the two corpora. The first column shows
verbs which have higher ranks in CHILD than in CDS,
and the second column shows verbs with higher ranks
in CDS than in CHILD. We can see e.g. that children
tend to prefer verbs such as shoot, die and kill while
adults prefer verbs such as remember, send and learn.
To investigate whether these differences in pref-
erences are random or motivated in some manner,
we classified the verbs with the largest differences
in ranks (>10) into appropriate Levin-style lexical-
semantic classes (Levin, 1993) according to their pre-
dominant senses in the two corpora.5 We discovered
that the most frequent classes among the verbs that
children prefer are HIT (e.g. bump, hit, kick), BREAK
(e.g. crash, break, rip), HURT (e.g. hurt, burn, bite)
and MOTION (e.g. fly, jump, run) verbs. Overall, many
of the preferred verbs (regardless of the class) express
negative actions or feelings (e.g. shoot, die, scare,
hate).
5This classification was done manually to obtain a reliable re-
sult.
CHILD CDS
shoot tie remember hope
hate wish send suppose
die cut learn bet
write crash wipe kiss
use kick pay smell
bump scare feed guess
win step ask change
lock burn feel set
fight stand listen stand
jump care wait wonder
Table 2: 20 verbs ranked higher in (i) child speech and
(ii) child-directed speech.
In contrast, adults have a preference for verbs from
classes expressing cognitive processes (e.g. remember,
suppose, think, wonder, guess, believe, hope, learn) or
those that can be related to the education of children,
e.g. the WIPE verbs wash, wipe and brush and the PER-
FORMANCE verbs draw, dance and sing. In contrast to
children, adults prefer verbs which express positive ac-
tions and feelings (e.g. share, help, love, kiss).
It is commonly reported that child CLA is moti-
vated by a wish to communicate desires and emo-
tions, e.g. (Pinker, 1994), but a relative preference
in child speech over child-directed speech for certain
verb types or verbs expressing negative actions and
feelings has not been explicitly shown on such a scale
before. While this issue requires further investigation,
our findings already demonstrate the value of using
large scale corpora in producing novel data and hy-
potheses for research in CLA.
4.3 SCF Analysis
4.3.1 Quantitative SCF Comparison
The average number of SCFs taken by studied verbs
in the two corpora proved quite similar. In unfil-
tered SCF distributions, verbs in CDS took on average
a larger number of SCFs (29) than those in CHILD (24),
but in the lexicons filtered for accuracy the numbers
were identical (8?10, depending on the filtering thresh-
old applied). The intersection between the CHILD /
CDS SCFs and those in the VALEX lexicon was around
0.5, indicating that the two lexicons included only
50% of the SCFs in the lexicon extracted from general
(cross-domain) adult language corpora. Recall against
VALEXwas consequently low (between 48% and 68%
depending on the filtering threshold) but precision was
around 50-60% for both CHILDES and CDS lexicons
36
Measures Unfilt. Filt.
Precision (%) 82.9 88.7
Recall (%) 69.3 44.5
F-measure 75.5 59.2
IS 0.73 0.62
RC 0.69 0.72
KL 0.33 0.46
Table 3: Average results when SCF distributions in
CHILD and CDS are compared against each other.
(also depending on the filtering threshold), which is
a relatively good result for the challenging CHILDES
data. However, it should be remembered that with this
type of data it would not be expected for the SCF sys-
tem to achieve as high precision and recall as it would
on, for instance, adult written text and that the missing
SCFs and/or misclassified SCFs are likely to provide us
with the most interesting information.
As expected, there were differences between the
SCF distributions in the two lexicons. Table 3 shows
the results when the CHILD and CDS lexicons are com-
pared against each other (i.e. using the CDS as a gold
standard). The comparison was done using both the
unfiltered and filtered (using relative frequency thresh-
old of 0.004) versions of the lexicons. The similarity
in SCF types is 75.5 according to F-measure in the un-
filtered lexicons and 59.2 in filtered ones.6
4.3.2 Qualitative SCF Comparison
Our qualitative analysis of SCFs in the two corpora
revealed reasons for the differences. Table 4 lists the
10 most frequent SCFs in CHILD (starting from the
highest ranked SCF), along with their ranks in CDS
and VALEX. The top 3 SCFs (NP, INTRANSITIVE and
PP frames) are ranked quite similarly in all the cor-
pora. Looking at the top 10 SCFs, CHILD appears,
as expected, more similar to CDS than with VALEX,
but large differences can be detected in lower ranked
frames.
To identify those frames, we calculated for each SCF
its difference in rank between CHILD vs. CDS. Table 5
exemplifies some of the SCFs with the largest rank
differences. Many of these concern frames involving
sentential complementation. Children use more fre-
6The fact that the unfiltered lexicons appear so much more sim-
ilar suggests that some of the similarity is due to similarity in in-
correct SCFs (many of which are low in frequency, i.e. fall under
the threshold).
quently than adults SCFs involving THAT and HOW
complementation, while adults have a preference for
SCFs involving WHETHER, ING and IF complementa-
tion.
Although we have not yet looked at SCF differences
across ages, these discoveries are in line with previous
findings, e.g. (Brown, 1973), which indicate that chil-
dren master the sentential complementation SCFs pre-
ferred by adults (in our experiment) fairly late in the
acquisition process. With a mean utterance length for
CHILD at 3.48, we would expect to see relatively few of
these frames in the CHILD corpus?and consequently
a preference for the simpler THAT constructions.
4.4 The Impact of Verb Type Preferences on SCF
Differences
Given the new research findings reported in Sec-
tion 4.2 (i.e. the discovery that children and adults have
different preferences for many medium-low frequency
verbs) we investigated whether verb type preferences
play a role in SCF differences between the two corpora.
We chose for experimentation 10 verbs from 3 groups:
1. Group 1 ? verbs with similar ranks in CHILD and CDS: bring,
find, give, know, need, put, see, show, tell, want
2. Group 2 ? verbs with higher ranks in CDS: ask, feel, guess,
help, learn, like, pull, remember, start, think
3. Group 3 ? verbs with higher ranks in CHILD: break, die,
forget, hate, hit, jump, scare, shoot, burn, wish
The test verbs were selected randomly, subject to
the constraint that their absolute frequencies in the two
corpora were similar.7 We first correlated the unfil-
tered SCF distributions of each test verb in the two cor-
pora against each other and calculated the similarity in
the SCF types using the F-measure. We then evaluated
for each group, the accuracy of SCFs in unfiltered dis-
tributions against our gold standard (see Section 4.1).
Because the gold standard was too ambitious in terms
of recall, we only calculated the precision figures: the
average number of TP and FP SCFs taken by test verbs.
The results are included in Table 6. Verbs in Group
1 show the best SCF type correlation (84.7 F-measure)
between the two corpora although they are the rich-
est in terms of subcategorization (they take the highest
number of SCFs out of the three groups). The SCF cor-
relation is clearly lower in Groups 2 and 3, although
7This requirement was necessary because frequency may influ-
ence subcategorization acquisition performance.
37
SCF Example sentence CHILD CDS VALEX
NP I love rabbits 1 1 1
INTRANS I sleep with a pillow and blanket 2 2 2
PP He can jump over the fence 3 4 3
PART I can?t give up 4 7 9
TO-INF-SC I want to play with something else 5 3 6
PART-NP/NP-PART He looked it up 6 6 7
NP-NP Ask her all these questions 7 5 18
NP-INF-OC Why don?t you help her put the blocks in the can ? 8 9 60
INTR-RECIP So the kitten and the dog won?t fight 9 8 48
NP-PP He put his breakfast in the bin 10 10 4
Table 4: 10 most frequent SCFs in CHILD, along with their ranks in CDS and VALEX.
SCF Example sentence
CHILD MP I win twelve hundred dollars
INF-AC You can help me wash the dishes
PP-HOW-S He explained to her how she did it
HOW-TO-INF Daddy can you tell me how to spell Christmas carols?
NP-S He did not tell me that it was gonna cost me five dollars
CDS ING-PP Stop throwing a tantrum
NP-AS-NP I sent him as a messenger
NP-WH-S I?ll tell you whether you can take it off
IT WHS, SUBTYPE IF How would you like it if she pulled your hair?
NP-PP-PP He turned it from a disaster into a victory
Table 5: Typical SCFs with higher ranks in (i) CHILD and (ii) CDS.
Measures Group1 Group2 Group3
SCF similarity F-measure 84.7 72.17 75.60
SCF accuracy TPs CDS 12 11 7
TPs CHILD 10 9 8
FPs CDS 36 29 13
FPs CHILD 32 18 15
Table 6: Average results for 3 groups when (i) unfil-
tered SCF distributions in CHILD and CDS are com-
pared against each other (SCF similarity) and when (ii)
the SCFs in the distributions are evaluated against a
gold standard (SCF accuracy).
the verbs in these groups take fewer SCFs. Interest-
ingly, Group 3 is the only group where children pro-
duce more TPs and FPs on average than adults do, i.e.
both correct and incorrect SCFs which are not exem-
plified in the adult speech. The frequency effects con-
trolled, the reason for these differences is likely to lie
in the differing relative preferences children and adults
have for verbs in groups 2 and 3, which we think may
impact the richness of their language.
4.5 Further Analysis of TP and FP Differences
We looked further at the interesting TP and FP differ-
ences in Group 3 to investigate whether they tell us
something about (i) how children learn SCFs (via both
TPs and FPs), and (ii) how the parsing / SCF extraction
system could be improved for CHILDES data in the fu-
ture (via the FPs).
We first made a quantitative analysis of the rela-
tive difference in TPs and FPs for all the SCFs in both
corpora. The major finding of this high level anal-
ysis was a significantly high FP rate for some ING
frames (e.g. PART-ING-SC, ING-NP-OMIT, NP-ING-
OC) within CHILD (e.g. ?car going hit?, ?I hurt hand
moving?). This agrees with many previous studies,
e.g. (Brown, 1973), which have shown that children
overextend and incorrectly use the ?ing? morpheme
during early acquisition.
A qualitative analysis of the verbs from Group 3 was
then carried out, looking for the following scenarios:
? SCF is a FP in both CHILD and CDS - either i) the
gold standard is incomplete, or ii) there is error in
the parser/subcategorization system with respect to the
CHILDES domain.
? SCF is a TP in CDS and not present in CHILD - children have
not acquired the frame despite exposure to it (perhaps it is
complicated to acquire).
? SCF is a TP in CHILD but not present in CDS - adults are
not using the frame but the children have acquired it. This
indicates that either i) children are acquiring the frame from
elsewhere in their environment (perhaps from a television),
38
NP-INF NP-NP
INTRANS 
ADJP 
PART 
NP 
PP 
PART-NP 
PART-NP-PP PART-PP
PP-PP PP-BASE 
NP-S NP-PP NP-ADJP 
NP-NP-up 
Figure 1: SCFs obtained for the verb shoot
or ii) there is a misuse of the verb?s semantic class in child
speech.
? SCF is a FP in CHILD but not present in CDS - children should
not have been exposed to this frame but they have acquired
it. This indicates either i) a misuse of the verb?s semantic
class, or ii) error in the parsing/subcategorization technology
with respect to the child-speech domain.
These scenarios are illustrated in Figure 1 which
graphically depicts the differences in TPs and FPs for
the verb shoot. The SCFs have been arranged in a
complexity hierarchy where complexity is defined in
terms of increasing argument structure.8 SCFs found
within our ANLT-COMLEX gold standard lexicon for
shoot are indicated in bold-face. A right-angled rect-
angle drawn around a SCF indicates that the frame
is present in CHILD?a solid line indicating a strong
presence (relative frequency > 0.010) and a dotted
line indicating a weak presence (relative frequency >
0.005). Rounded-edge rectangles represent the pres-
ence of SCFs within CDS similarly. For example, the
frame NP represents a TP in both CHILD and CDS and
the frame NP-NP represents a FP within CHILD.
With reference to Figure 1, we notice that all of
the SCFs present in CHILD are directly connected
within the hierarchy and there is a tendency for weakly
present SCFs to inherit from those strongly present. A
possible explanation for this is that children are ex-
ploring SCFs?trying out frames that are slightly more
complex than those already acquired (for a learning
8For instance, the intransitive frame INTRANS is less complex
than the transitive frame NP, which in turn is less complex than the
di-transitive frame NP-NP. For a detailed description of all SCFs
see (Korhonen, 2002).
algorithm that exploits such a hypothesis in general
see (Buttery, 2006)).
The SCF NP-NP is strongly present in CHILD de-
spite being a FP. Inspection of the associated utter-
ances reveals that some instances NP-NP are legitimate
but so uncommon in adult language that they are omit-
ted from the gold-standard (e.g. ?can i shoot us all to
pieces?. However, other instances demonstrate a mis-
understanding of the semantic class of the verb; there
is possible confusion with the semantic class of send
or throw (e.g. ?i shoot him home?).
The frame NP-INF is a FP in both corpora and a fre-
quent FP in CHILD. Inspection of the associated utter-
ances flags up a parsing problem. Frame NP-INF can
be illustrated by the sentences ?he helped her bake the
cake? or ?he made her sing?, however, within CHILD
the NP-INF has been acquired from utterances such
as ?i want ta shoot him?. The RASP parser has mis-
tagged the word ?ta? leading to a misclassification
by the SCF extraction system. This problem could be
solved by augmenting RASP?s current grammar with a
lexical entry specifying ?ta? as an alternative to infini-
tival ?to?.
In summary, our analysis of TP and FP differ-
ences has confirmed previous studies regarding the
nature of child speech (the over-extension of the
?ing? morpheme). It has also demonstrated that
TP/FP analysis can be a useful diagnostic for pars-
ing/subcategorization extraction problems within a
new data domain. Further, we suggest that analysis
of FPs can provide empirical data regarding the man-
ner in which children learn the semantic classes of
39
verbs (a matter that has been much debated e.g. (Levin,
1993), (Brooks and Tomasello, 1999)).
5 Conclusion
We have reported the first experiment for automatically
acquiring verbal subcategorization from both child and
child-directed parts of the CHILDES database. Our re-
sults show that a state-of-the-art subcategorization ac-
quisition system yields useful results on challenging
child language data even without any domain-specific
tuning. It produces data which is accurate enough
to confirm and extend several previous research find-
ings in CLA. We explore the discovery that children
and adults have different relative preferences for cer-
tain verb types, and that these preferences influence
the way children acquire subcategorization. Our work
demonstrates the value of using NLP technology to an-
notate child language data, particularly where manual
annotations are not readily available for research use.
Our pilot study yielded useful information which will
help us further improve both parsing and lexical ac-
quisition performance on spoken/child language data.
In the future, we plan to optimize the technology so
that it can produce higher quality data for investiga-
tion of syntactic complexity in this domain. Using the
improved technology we plan to then conduct a more
thorough investigation of the interesting CLA topics
discovered in this study?first concentrating on SCF
differences in child speech across age ranges.
References
B. Boguraev, J. Carroll, E. J. Briscoe, D. Carter, and C. Grover.
1987. The derivation of a grammatically-indexed lexicon from
the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English. In Proc. of
the 25th Annual Meeting of ACL, pages 193?200, Stanford, CA.
E Briscoe and J Carroll. 1997. Automatic extraction of subcatego-
rization from corpora. In 5th ACL Conference on Applied Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 356?363, Washington, DC.
ACL.
E. J. Briscoe, J. Carroll, and R. Watson. 2006. The second re-
lease of the rasp system. In Proc. of the COLING/ACL 2006
Interactive Presentation Sessions, Sydney, Australia.
P Brooks and M Tomasello. 1999. Young children learn to pro-
duce passives with nonce verbs. Developmental Psychology,
35:29?44.
R Brown. 1973. A first Language: the early stages. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
L. Burnard, 1995. The BNC Users Reference Guide. British Na-
tional Corpus Consortium, Oxford, May.
P. Buttery and A. Korhonen. 2005. Large-scale analysis of verb
subcategorization differences between child directed speech
and adult speech. In Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Work-
shop on the Identification and Representation of Verb Features
and Verb Classes, Saarbrucken, Germany.
P Buttery. 2006. Computational Models for First Language Ac-
quisition. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.
E. Charniak. 2000. A maximum-entropy-inspired parser. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1st Meeting of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, WA.
C. Fisher, G. Hall, S. Rakowitz, and L. Gleitman. 1994. When
it is better to receive than to give: syntactic and conceptual
constraints on vocabulary growth. Lingua, 92(1?4):333?375,
April.
R. Grishman, C. Macleod, and A. Meyers. 1994. COMLEX Syn-
tax: Building a Computational Lexicon. In Proc. of COLING,
Kyoto.
A. Korhonen and Y. Krymolowski. 2002. On the Robustness of
Entropy-Based Similarity Measures in Evaluation of Subcate-
gorization Acquisition Systems. In Proc. of the 6th CoNLL,
pages 91?97, Taipei, Taiwan.
A. Korhonen, Y. Krymolowski, and E. J. Briscoe. 2006. A large
subcategorization lexicon for natural language processing ap-
plications. In Proc. of the 5th LREC, Genova, Italy.
A Korhonen. 2002. Subcategorization Acquisition. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Cambridge. Thesis published as Technical Report
UCAM-CL-TR-530.
E Lenneberg. 1967. Biological Foundations of Language. Wiley
Press, New York, NY.
B Levin. 1993. English Verb Classes and Alternations. Chicago
University Press, Chicago, IL.
B. MacWhinney. 2000. The CHILDES Project: Tools for Analyz-
ing Talk. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 3rd edition.
D. McCarthy and J. Carroll. 2003. Disambiguating nouns, verbs,
and adjectives using automatically acquired selectional prefer-
ences. Computational Linguistics, 29(4).
L Naigles. 1990. Children use syntax to learn verb meanings.
Journal of Child Language, 17:357?374.
S Pinker. 1994. The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates
Language. Harper Collins, New York, NY.
J. Preiss, E. J. Briscoe, and A. Korhonen. 2007. A system for
large-scale acquisition of verbal, nominal and adjectival sub-
categorization frames from corpora. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of ACL, Prague, Czech Republic. To appear.
K. Sagae, A. Lavie, and B. MacWhinney. 2005. Automatic mea-
surement of syntactic development in child langugage. In Pro-
ceedings of the 42nd Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
S. Schulte im Walde. 2006. Experiments on the automatic induc-
tion of german semantic verb classes. Computational Linguis-
tics, 32(2):159?194.
40
