Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 49?56,
Prague, 28 June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dynamic Path Prediction and Recommendation in a Museum Environment
Karl Grieser??, Timothy Baldwin? and Steven Bird?
? CSSE
University of Melbourne
VIC 3010, Australia
? DIS
University of Melbourne
VIC 3010, Australia
{kgrieser,tim,sb}@csse.unimelb.edu.au
Abstract
This research is concerned with making
recommendations to museum visitors
based on their history within the physical
environment, and textual information
associated with each item in their history.
We investigate a method of providing
such recommendations to users through
a combination of language modelling
techniques, geospatial modelling of
the physical space, and observation of
sequences of locations visited by other
users in the past. This study compares
and analyses different methods of path
prediction including an adapted naive
Bayes method, document similarity, visitor
feedback and measures of lexical similarity.
1 Introduction
Visitors to an information rich environment such as
a museum, are invariably there for a reason, be it
entertainment or education. The visitor has paid
their admission fee, and we can assume they intend
to get the most out of their visit. As with other
information rich environments and systems, first-
time visitors to the museum are at a disadvantage as
they are not familiar with every aspect of the collec-
tion. Conversely, the museum is severely restricted
in the amount of information it can convey to the
visitor in the physical space.
The use of a dynamic, intuitive interface can over-
come some of these issues (Filippini, 2003; Benford
et al, 2001). Such an interface would convention-
ally take the form of a tour guide, audio tour, or a
curator stationed at points throughout the museum.
This research is built around the assumption that the
museum visitor has access to a digital device such
as a PDA and that it is possible for automatic sys-
tems to interact with the user via this device. In this
way we aim to be able to deliver relevant content
to the museum visitor based on observation of their
movements within the physical museum space, as
well as make recommendations of what exhibits they
might like to visit next and why. At present, we are
focusing exclusively on the task of recommendation.
Recommendations can be used to convey predic-
tions about what theme or topic a given visitor is
interested in. They can also help to communicate
unexpected connections between exhibits (Hitzeman
et al, 1997), or explicitly introduce variety into the
visit. For the purposes of this research, we focus
on this first task of providing recommendations con-
sistent with the visitor?s observed behaviour to that
point. We investigate different factors which we
hypothesise impact on the determination of what
exhibits a given visitor will visit, namely: the phys-
ical proximity of exhibits, the conceptual similarity
of exhibits, and the relative sequence in which other
visitors have visited exhibits.
Recommendation systems in physical environ-
ments are notoriously hard to evaluate, as the
recommendation system is only one of many stimuli
which go to determine the actual behaviour of the
visitor. In order to evaluate the relative impact
of different factors in determining actual visitor
behaviour, we separate the stimuli present into
a range of predictive methods. In this paper we
target the task of user prediction, that is prediction
of what exhibit a visitor will visit next based on
49
their previous history. Language based models are
intended to simulate a potentially unobservable
source of information: the visitor?s thought process.
In order to identify the reason for the visitor?s
interest in the multiple part exhibits we parallel this
problem with the task of word sense disambiguation
(WSD). Determining the visitor?s reason for visiting
an exhibit allows a predictive system to more
accurately model the visitor?s future path.
This study aims to arrive at accurate methods of
predicting how a user will act in an information-rich
museum. The space focused on in this research is
the Australia Gallery Collection of the Melbourne
Museum, at Carlton Gardens in Melbourne,
Australia. The predictions take the form of which
exhibits a visitor will visit given a history of
previously visited exhibits. This study analyses
and compares the effectiveness of supervised and
unsupervised learning methods in the museum
domain, drawing on a range of linguistic and
geospatial features. A core contribution of
this study is its focus on the relative import of
heterogeneous information sources a user makes
use of in selecting the next exhibit to visit.
2 Problem Description
In order to recommend exhibits to visitors while they
are going through a museum, the recommendations
need to be accurate/pertinent to the goals that the
visitor has in mind. Without accurate recomme nda-
tions, recommendations given to a visitor are essen-
tially useless, and might as well not have been rec-
ommended at all.
Building a recommender system based on contex-
tual information (Resnick and Varian, 1997) is the
ultimate goal of this research. However the envi-
ronment in this circumstance is physical, and the
actions of visitors are expected to vary within such
a space, as opposed to the usual online or digital
domain of recommender systems. Studies such as
HIPS (Benelli et al, 1999) and the Equator project1
have analysed the importance and difficulty of inte-
grating the virtual environment into the physical, as
well as identifying how non-physical navigation sys-
tems can relate to similar physical systems. For the
purpose of this study, it is sufficient to acknowledge
1http://www.equator.ac.uk
the effect of the physical environment by scaling all
recommendations against their distances from one
another.
The common information that museum exhibits
contain is key in determining how each individual
relates to each other exhibit in the collection. At
the most basic level, the exhibits are simply isolated
elements that share no relationship with one another,
their only similarity being that they occur together
in visitor paths. This interpretation disregards any
meaning or content that each exhibit contains. But
museum exhibits are created with the goal of pro-
viding information, and to disregard the content of
an exhibit is to disregard its purpose.
An exhibit in a museum may be many kinds of
things, and hence most exhibits will differ in presen-
tation and content. The target audience of a museum
is one indicator of the type of content that can be
expected within each exhibit. An art gallery is com-
prised of mainly paintings and sculptures: single
component exhibits with brief descriptions. A chil-
dren?s museum will contain a high proportion of
interactive exhibits, and much audio and visual con-
tent. In these two cases the reason for visiting the
exhibit differs greatly.
Given the diversity of information contained
within each exhibit and the greater diversity of a
museum collection, it can be difficult to see why
visitors only examine certain exhibits during their
tours. It is very difficult to perceive what a visitor?s
intention is without constant feedback, making the
problem of providing relevant recommendations a
question of predicting what a visitor is interested in
based on characteristics of exhibits the visitor has
already seen. The use of both physical attributes and
exhibit information content are used in conjunction
in an effort to account for multiple possible reasons
for visiting as exhibit. Connections between
physical attributes of an exhibit are easier to identify
than connections based on information content.
This is due to the large quantity of information
associated with each exhibit, and the difficulty in
determining what the visitor liked (or disliked)
about the exhibit.
In order to make prediction based on a visitor?s
history, the importance of the exhibits in the visi-
tors path must be known. This is difficult to obtain
directly without the aid of real-time feedback from
50
the user themselves. In an effort to emulate the
difficulty of observing mental processes adopted by
each visitor, language based predictive models are
employed.
3 Resources
The domain in which all experimentation takes place
is the Australia Gallery of the Melbourne Museum.
This exhibition provides a history of the city of Mel-
bourne Melbourne, from its settlement up to the
present day, and includes such exhibits as the taxi-
dermised coat of Phar Lap (Australia?s most famous
race horse) and CSIRAC (Australia?s first, and the
world?s fourth, computer). The Gallery contains
enough variation so that not all exhibits can be clas-
sified into a single category, but is sufficiently spe-
cialised to offer much interaction and commonality
between the exhibits.
The exhibits within the Australia Gallery take
a wide variety of forms, from single items with
a description plaque, to multiple component dis-
plays with interactivity and audio-visual enhance-
ment; note, for our purposes in experimentation,
we do not differentiate between exhibit types or
modalities. The movement of visitors within an
exhibition can be restricted if the positioning of the
exhibits require visitors to take a set path (Peponis
et al, 2004), which can alter how a visitor chooses
between exhibits to view. In the case of the Australia
Gallery, however, the collection is spread out over
a sizeable area, and has an open plan design such
that visitor movement is not restricted or funnelled
through certain areas and there is no predetermined
sequence or selection of exhibits that a given visitor
can be expected to spend time at.
We used several techniques to represent the dif-
ferent aspects of each exhibit. We categorised each
exhibit by way of its physical attributes (e.g. size)
and taxonomic information about the exhibit con-
tent (e.g. clothing or animal). We also described
each exhibit by way of its physical location within
the Australia Gallery, relative to a floorplan of the
Gallery.
The Melbourne Museum also has a sizable
web-site2 which contains much detailed information
about the exhibits within the Australia Gallery. This
2http://www.museum.vic.gov.au/
data is extremely useful in that it provides a rich
vocabulary of information based on the content
of each exhibit. Each exhibit identified within the
Australia Gallery has a corresponding web-page
describing it. The information content of an exhibit
is made up of the text in its corresponding web-page
combined with its attributes. By having a large
source of natural language information associated
with the exhibit, linguistic based predictive methods
can more accurately identify the associations made
by visitors.
The dataset that forms that basis of this research
is a database of 60 visitor paths through the Aus-
tralia Gallery, which was collected by Melbourne
Museum staff over a period of four months towards
the end of 2001. The Australia Gallery contains a
total of fifty-three exhibits. This data is used to eval-
uate both physical and conceptual predictive meth-
ods. If predictive methods are able to accurately
describe how a visitor travels in a museum, then
the predictive method creates an accurate model of
visitor behaviour.
Exhibit components can be combined to form a
description for each exhibit. For this purpose, the
Natural Language Toolkit 3 (Bird, 2005) was used
to analyse and compare the lexical content associ-
ated with each exhibit, so that relationships between
exhibits can be identified.
4 Methodology
Analysis of user history as a method of prediction
(or recommendation) has been examined in
Chalmers et al (1998). Also discussed is the
role that user history plays in anticipating user
goals. This approach can be adapted to a physical
environment by simply substituting in locations
visited in place of web pages visited. Data gathered
from the paths of previous visitors also forms a valid
means of predicting other visitors? paths (Zukerman
and Albrecht, 2001). This approach operates under
the assumption that all visitors behave in a similar
fashion when visiting a museum. However visitors?
goals in visiting a museum can differ widely. For
example, the goals of a student researching a project
will differ to those of a family with young children
on a weekend outing.
3http://nltk.sourceforge.net/
51
A conceptual model of the exhibition space is cre-
ated by visitors with a specific task in mind. Inter-
pretation of this conceptual model is key to creating
accurate recommendations. The building of such a
conceptual model takes place from the moment a
visitor enters an exhibition, until the time they leave,
and skews the visitor towards groups of conceptual
locations and categories.
The representation of these intrinsically dynamic
models is directly related to the task the visitor has
in mind. Students will form a conceptual model
based around their course requirements, children
around the most visually attractive exhibits, and
so forth. This necessitates the need for multiple
exhibit similarity measures, however in the absence
of express knowledge of the ?type? of each visitor in
the sample data, a broad-coverage recommendation
system that functions best in all circumstances is the
desired goal. It is hoped that in future, reevaluation
of the data to classify visitors into broad categories
(e.g. information seeking, entertainment seeking)
will allow for the development of specialised
models tailored to visitor types.
The models of exhibit representation we exam-
ine in this research are exhibit proximity, text-based
exhibit information content, and exhibit popularity
(based on the previous visitor data provided by the
Melbourne Museum), as well as combinations of the
three. Exhibit information content is a two part rep-
resentation: primarily each exhibit has a large body
of text describing the exhibit drawn from the Mel-
bourne Museum website. It is fortunate that this
information is curated, and managed from a cen-
tral source, so that inconsistencies between exhibit
information are extremely rare. The authors were
unable to find any contradictory information in the
web-pages used for experimentation, as may be the
case with larger non-curated document bodies. The
second component of the information content is a
small set of key terms describing the attributes of
the exhibit. Textual content as a means of deter-
mining exhibit similarity has been analysed previ-
ously (Green et al, 1999), both in terms of keyword
attributes and bodies of explanatory text.
In order to form a prediction about which exhibit
a visitor will next visit, the probability of the tran-
sition of the visitor from their current location to
every other exhibit in the collection must be known.
Prediction of the next exhibit by proximity simply
means choosing the closest not-yet-visited exhibit to
the visitor?s current location. In terms of information
content, each exhibit is related to all other exhibits to
a certain degree. To express this we use the attribute
keywords as a query to find the exhibit most simi-
lar. We use the attribute keywords associated with
each document to search the document space of the
exhibits to find the exhibit that is most similar to the
exhibit the visitor is currently located at. To do this
we use a simple tf?idf scheme, using the attribute
keywords as the queries, and the exhibit associated
web pages as the document space. The score of each
query over each document is normalised into a tran-
sitional probability array such that
?
j P (q|dj) = 1
for a query (q) over the j exhibit documents (dj).
In order to determine the popularity of an
exhibit, the visitor paths provided by the Melbourne
Museum were used to form another matrix of
transitional probabilities based on the likelihood
that a visitor will travel to an exhibit from the
exhibit they are currently at. I.e. for each exhibit e
an array of transitional probabilities is formed such
that
?
j P (e|cj) = 1 where cj ? C ? = C/{e}, i.e.
all exhibits other than e. In both cases Laplacian
smoothing was used to remove zero probabilities.
The methods of exhibit popularity and physical
proximity are superficial in scope and do not extend
into the conceptual space adopted by the visitors.
They do however give insight into how a physical
space affects a visitors? mental representation of the
conceptual areas associated with specific exhibit col-
lections, and are more easily observable. Visitor
reaction to exhibit information content is harder to
observe and more problematic to predict. Any accu-
rate recommender systems produced in this fashion
will need to take into account the limitations these
two methods place on the thought processes of visi-
tors.
Connections that visitors make between exhibits
are more fluid, and are harder to represent in terms
of similarity measures. Specifically it is difficult to
see why visitors make connections between exhibits
as there can be multiple similarities between two
exhibits. To this end we have equated this prob-
lem with the task of Word Sense Disambiguation
(WSD). The path that a visitor takes can be seen
as a sentence of exhibits, and each exhibit in the
52
sentence has an associated meaning. WSD is used
to determine the meaning of the next exhibit based
on the meanings of previous exhibits in the path. For
each word in the keyword set of each exhibit, the
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) similarity is calculated
against each word in another exhibit. The similar-
ity is the sum of the WordNet similarities between
all attribute keywords in the two exhibits (K1, K2),
normalised over the length of both keyword sets:
?
k1?K1
?
k2?K2 WNsim(k1, k2)
|K1||K2|
For the purposes of this experiment we have
chosen to use three WordNet similarity/relatedness
measures to simulate the conceptual connections
that visitors make between exhibits. The Lin (Lin,
1998) and Leacock-Chodorow (Leacock et al,
1998) similarity measures and the Banerjee-
Pedersen (Patwardhan and Pedersen, 2003)
relatedness measures were used. The similarities
were normalised and transformed into probability
matrices such that
?
j PWNsim(e|cj) = 1 for each
next exhibit ci. The use of WordNet measures is
intended to simulate the mental connections that
visitors make between exhibit content, given that
each visit can interpret content in a number of
different ways.
The history of the visitor at any given time is
essential in keeping the visitor?s conceptual model
of the exhibit space current. The recency of a given
exhibit within a visitor?s history is inversely propor-
tional to how long ago the exhibit was encountered.
To take into account the visitor history, the col-
laborative data, proximity, document vectors, and
conceptual WordNet similarity, we adapt the naive
Bayes approach. The conditional probabilities of
each method are combined along with the temporal
recency of an exhibit to produce a predictive exhibit
recommender. The resultant recommendation to a
visitor can be described as follows:
c? = arg max
ci
P (ci)
t
?
j=1
P (Aj |ci) ? 2?(t?j+1) +
2?t
t
where t is the length of the visitor?s history, Aj ? C
is an exhibit at time j in the visitor history (and C
is the full set of exhibits), and ci ? C ? = C/{Aj}
is each unvisited exhibit. The most probable next
exhibit (c?) is selected from all possible next exhibits
(ci). Any selections made must be compared against
the visitor?s history. In this, we assume that a pre-
viously visited exhibit has already been seen, and
hence should not be recommended again.
The effectiveness of these methods was tested in
multiple combinations, both with history modeling
and without (only the exhibit the visitor is currently
at is considered). Testing was carried out using
the sixty visitor paths supplied by the Melbourne
Museum. For each method two tests were carried
out:
? Predict the next exhibit in the visitor?s path.
? Only make a prediction if the probability of the
prediction is above a given threshold.
Each path was analysed independently of the oth-
ers, and the resulting recommendations evaluated as
a whole. The measures of precision and recall in
the evaluation of recommender systems has been
applied effectively in previous studies (Raskutti et
al., 1997; Basu et al, 1998). In the second test
precision is the measure we are primarily concerned
with: it is not the aim of this recommender system to
predict all elements of a visitor?s path in the correct
order. The correctness of the exhibits predicted is
more important than the quantity of the predictions
the visitor visits, hence only exhibits predicted with
a (relatively) high probability are included in the
final list of predicted exhibits for that visitor.
The thresholds are designed to increase the cor-
rectness of the predictions, by only making a pre-
diction if there is a high probability of the visitor
travelling to the exhibit. As all predictive methods
choose the most probable transition from all possible
transitions, the transition with the highest probabil-
ity is always selected. The threshold values simply
cut off all probabilities below a certain value.
5 Results and Evaluation
The first tests carried out were done only using the
simple probability matrices described in Section 4,
and hence only use the information associated with
the visitor?s current location and not the entirety of
their history. The baseline method being used in all
testing is the naive method of moving to the closest
not-yet-visited exhibit.
53
Method BOE Accuracy
Proximity (baseline) 0.270 0.192
Popularity 0.406 0.313
Tf?Idf 0.130 0.018
Lin 0.129 0.039
Leacock-Chodorow 0.116 0.024
Banerjee-Pedersen 0.181 0.072
Popularity - Tf?Idf 0.196 0.093
Popularity - Lin 0.225 0.114
Popularity - Leacock-Chodorow 0.242 0.130
Popularity - Banerjee-Pedersen 0.163 0.064
Proximity - Tf?Idf 0.205 0.084
Proximity - Lin 0.180 0.114
Proximity - Leacock-Chodorow 0.220 0.151
Proximity - Banerjee-Pedersen 0.205 0.105
Proximity - Popularity 0.232 0.129
Table 1: Single exhibit history using individual and
combined transitional probabilities
In order to prevent specialisation of the methods
over the training data (the aforementioned 60 visitor
paths), 60 fold cross-validation was used. With the
path being used as the test case removed from the
training data at each iteration.
The results of prediction using only the current
exhibit as information can be seen in Table 1. Com-
binations of predictive methods are also included to
add physical environment factors to conceptual sim-
ilarity methods. For example, if two exhibits may
be highly related conceptually but on opposite sides
of the exhibit space, a visitor may forgo the distant
exhibit in favour of a closer exhibit that is slightly
less relevant.
Due to the lengths of the recommendation sets
made for each visitor (a recommendation is made
for each exhibit visited), precision and recall are
identical. The measure of Bag Of Exhibits (BOE)
describes the percentage of exhibits that were visited
by the visitor, but not necessarily in the same order
as they were recommended. The BOE measure is
the same as measuring precision and recall for the
purposes of this evaluation. With the introduction of
thresholds to improve precision, precision and recall
are measured as separate entities.
As seen in Table 1 the performance of the
conceptual or information similarity methods
(the tf?idf method, Lin, Leacock-Chodorow and
Banerjee-Pedersen) is worse than that of the
methods based on static features of the exhibits,
and all perform worse than the baseline. In
order to produce a higher percentage of correct
recommendations, thresholds were introduced.
Using thresholds, a recommendation is only made
if the probability of a visitor visiting an exhibit next
is above a given percentage. The thresholds used
in Table 2 are arbitrary, and were arrived at after
experimentation.
It is worth noting that in both tests, with and
without thresholds, the method of exhibit popularity
based on visitor paths is the most successful. One
expects this trend to continue with the introduction
of the history based model described in Section 4.
Each transitional probability matrix was used in con-
junction with the history model, the results of this
experimentation can be seen in Table 3.
Only single transitional probability matrices are
used in conjunction with the history model. The
physical distance to an exhibit is only relevant to the
current prediction, the distance travelled in the past
from exhibit to exhibit is irrelevant, and so physical
conceptual combinations are not necessary. A model
such as this describes the evolution of a thought pro-
cess, or is able to identify the common conceptual
thread linking the exhibits in a visitor?s path. This
is only true if the visitor has a conceptual model in
mind when touring the museum. Without the aid of
a common information thread, conceptual predictive
methods based on exhibit information content will
always perform poorly.
6 Discussion
The visitor paths supplied by the Melbourne
Museum represent sequential lists of exhibits, and
each visitor is a black box travelling from exhibit
to exhibit. It is this token vs. type problem that
does not allow us to select an appropriate predictive
method with which to make recommendations.
Instead a broad coverage method is necessary. Use
of history models to analyse entire visitor paths are
less successful than analysis of solely the current
location of the visitor. This can be attributed to the
fact that a majority of the visitors tracked may not
have had preconceived tasks in mind when they
entered the museum space, and just moved from
one visually impressive exhibit to the next. The
visitors do not consider their entire history as being
relevant, and only take into account their current
54
Method Threshold Precision Recall F-score
Proximity 0.03 0.271 0.270 0.270
Popularity 0.06 0.521 0.090 0.153
Tf?Idf 0.06 0.133 0.122 0.128
Lin 0.01 0.129 0.129 0.129
Leacock-Chodorow 0.01 0.117 0.117 0.117
Banerjee-Pedersen 0.01 0.182 0.180 0.181
Popularity - Tf?Idf 0.001 0.176 0.154 0.164
Popularity - Lin 0.0005 0.383 0.316 0.348
Popularity - Leacock-Chodorow 0.0005 0.430 0.349 0.385
Popularity - Banerjee-Pedersen 0.001 0.236 0.151 0.184
Proximity - Tf?Idf 0.001 0.189 0.174 0.181
Proximity - Lin 0.0005 0.239 0.237 0.238
Proximity - Leacock-Chodorow 0.0005 0.252 0.250 0.251
Proximity - Banerjee-Pedersen 0.0005 0.182 0.180 0.181
Proximity - Popularity 0.001 0.262 0.144 0.186
Table 2: Single exhibit history predictive methods using thresholds
Method BOE Accuracy
Proximity 0.066 0.0
Popularity 0.016 0.0
Tf?Idf 0.033 0.0
Lin 0.064 0.0
Leacock-Chodorow 0.036 0.0
Banerjee-Pedersen 0.036 0.0
Table 3: Entire visitor history predictive methods.
context. This also explains the relative success of
the predictive method built from analysis of the
visitor paths, presenting a marked improvement
over the baseline of nearest exhibit. In the best case
(as seen in Table 2) the exhibit popularity predictive
method was able to give relevant recommendations
52% of the time.
The interaction between predictive methods here
is highly simplified. The assumption made is that all
aspects of the visitor?s conceptual model are inde-
pendent, or only interact on a superficial level (see
the lower halves of Tables 1?2). More complex
methods of prediction need to be explored fully
take into account the interaction between predictive
methods.
Representations based on physical proximity take
into account little of how a visitor conceptualises a
museum space. They do however describe the fact
that closer exhibits are more visible to visitors, and
are hence more likely to be visited. Proximity can
be used as an augmentation to a conceptual model
designed to be used within a physical space.
Any exhibit is best described by the information it
contains. Visitors with a specific task in mind when
entering an exhibition already have a pre-initialised
conceptual model, relating to a theme. The visitors
seek out content related to their conceptual model,
and separate the bulk of the collection content from
the information they require. The representation of
the content within each exhibit as a vocabulary of
terms allows us to find similarity between exhibits.
The data available at the time of this testing does not
make the distinction between user types, and so only
broad coverage methods result in a improvements.
With the introduction of user types to the data sup-
plied by the museum, specific predictive methods
can be applied to each individual user. This addi-
tional information can be significantly beneficial as
the specialisation of predictive types to visitors is
expected to produce much more accurate predictions
and recommendations. Currently the only method
available to discern the user type is to analyse the
length of time the visitor spends at each each exhibit.
This data is yet to be adapted and annotated from the
raw data supplied by the Melbourne Museum.
7 Conclusion
The above methods are intended to represent base-
line components of possible conceptual models that
represent how a visitor is able to selectively assess
the dynamic context of museum visits. The model
that a visitor generates for themselves is unique, and
is difficult to represent in terms of physical attributes
of exhibits.
55
Being able to predict future actions of a user
within a given environment allows a recommender
system to influence a user?s choices. Key to the pre-
diction of future actions, is the idea that a user has
a conceptual model of how they see content within
the environment in relation to a task. With respect to
a museum environment, the majority of users have
no preconceived conceptual model upon entering an
exhibition and must build one as they explore the
environment. Users with a preconceived task will
more often than not stick to exhibits surrounding
a particular theme. Use of a language-based con-
ceptual model based on the information contained
within an exhibit can be combined with conceptual
models based on geospatial attributes of the exhibit
to create a representation of how a user will react
to an exhibit. The use of heterogeneous information
contained within the exhibit space is only relevant
when the visitor has an information-centric task in
mind.
7.1 Future Work
The methods dealing with a language-based concep-
tual model given here are very basic, and the overall
accuracy and precision of the recommender system
components require improvement. Additional anno-
tation of the paths of visitors to the museum will
enable proper evaluation of conceptual information
based predictive methods. On-site testing of predic-
tive methods at the Melbourne Museum is the ulti-
mate goal of this project, and testing the effects of
visitor feedback on recommendations will also be
analysed. In order to gain more insight into vis-
itor behaviour, the current small-scale set of visi-
tors needs to be expanded to include multiple visitor
types, as well as tasks.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Australian Research Council
DP grant no. DP0770931. The authors wish to thank the staff
of the Melbourne Museum for their help in this study. Special
thanks goes to Carolyn Meehan and Alexa Reynolds for their
gathering of data, and helpful suggestions throughout this study.
Thanks also goes to Ingrid Zukerman and Liz Sonenberg for
their input on this research.
References
Chumki Basu, Haym Hirsh, and William Cohen. 1998. Rec-
ommendations as classification: Using social and content-
based information in recommendation. In Proceedings of the
National Conference of Artificial Intelligence, pages 714?
720, Madison, United States.
Giuliano Benelli, Alberto Bianchi, Patrizia Marti, David Sen-
nati, and Elena Not. 1999. HIPS: Hyper-Interaction within
Physical Space. In ICMCS ?99: Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia Computing and
Systems, volume 2, page 1075. IEEE Computer Society.
Steve Benford, John Bowers, Paul Chandler, Luigina Ciolfi,
Martin Flintham, Mike Fraser, Chris Greenhalgh, Tony Hall,
Sten-Olof Hellstrom, Shahram Izadi, Tom Rodden, Holger
Schnadelbach, and Ian Taylor. 2001. Unearthing virtual
history: using diverse interfaces to reveal hidden worlds. In
Proc Ubicomp, pages 1?6. ACM.
Steven Bird. 2005. NLTK-Lite: Efficient scripting for natural
language processing. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Natural Language Processing (ICON), pages
11?18, Kanpur, India.
Matthew Chalmers, Kerry Rodden, and Dominique Brodbeck.
1998. The Order of Things: Activity-Centred Information
Access. Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 30:1?7.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, USA.
Silvia Filippini. 2003. Personalisation through IT in museums:
Does it really work? Presentation at ICHIM 2003.
Stephen J. Green, Maria Milosavljevic, Robert Dale, and Cecile
Paris. 1999. When virtual documents meet the real world.
In Proc. of WWW8 Workshop: Virtual Documents, Hypertext
Functionality and the Web.
Janet Hitzeman, Chris Mellish, and Jon Oberlander. 1997.
Dynamic generation of museum web pages: The intelli-
gent labelling explorer. Archives and Museum Informatics,
11(2):117?115.
Claudia Leacock, Martin Chodorow, and George A Miller.
1998. Using corpus statistics and WordNet relations for
sense identification. Computational Linguistics, 24(1):147?
65.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Automatic retrieval and clustering of sim-
ilar words. In (CoLING)-(ACL), pages 768?774, Montreal,
Canada.
Siddharth Patwardhan and Ted Pedersen. 2003. Extended gloss
overlaps as a measure of semantic relatedness. In Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 805?
810, Acapulco, Mexico.
John Peponis, Ruth Conroy Dalton, Jean Wineman, and Nick
Dalton. 2004. Measuring the effect of layout on visitors?
spatial behaviors in open plan exhibition settings. Environ-
ment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 31:453?473.
Bhavani Raskutti, Anthony Beitz, and Belinda Ward. 1997. A
feature-based approach to recommending selections based
on past preferences. User Modelling and User Adaption,
7(3):179?218.
Paul Resnick and Hal R Varian. 1997. Recommender systems.
Commun. ACM, 40(3):56?58.
Ingrid Zukerman and David W Albrecht. 2001. Predictive
statistical models for user modeling. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, 11(1?2):5?18.
56
