BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 197?198,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Marking Time in Developmental Biology
Gail Sinclair and Bonnie Webber
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh EH8 9LW
c.g.sinclair@ed.ac.uk, bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk
1 Introduction
In developmental biology, to support reasoning
about cause and effect, it is critical to link genetic
pathways with processes at the cellular and tissue
level that take place beforehand, simultaneously or
subsequently. While researchers have worked on re-
solving with respect to absolute time, events men-
tioned in medical texts such as clinical narratives
(e.g. Zhou et al 2006), events in developmental bi-
ology are primarily resolved relative to other events.
In this regard, I am developing a system to extract
and time-stamp event sentences in articles on devel-
opmental biology, looking beyond the sentence that
describes the event and considering ranges of times
rather than just single timestamps.
I started by creating four gold standard corpora
for documents, event sentences, entities and times-
tamped events (for future public release). These
datasets are being used to develop an automated
pipeline to (1) retrieve relevant documents; (2) iden-
tify sentences within the documents that describe de-
velopmental events; and (3) associate these events
with the developmental stage(s) that the article links
them with or they are known to be linked with
through prior knowledge.
Different types of evidence are used in each step.
For determining the relevant developmental stage(s),
the text surrounding an event-containing sentence is
an efficient source of temporal grounding due of its
immediate accessibility. However, this does not al-
ways yield the correct stage and other sources need
to be used. Information within the sentence, such
as the entities under discussion, can also be used
to help with temporal grounding using mined back-
ground knowledge about the period of existence of
an entity.
2 Creation of Datasets
In creating the four new data sets mentioned above,
I annotated 1200 documents according to relevance
to murine kidney development. From 5 relevant
documents, 1200 sentences were annotated as to
whether they contained an event description. (Two
annotators - one biologist, one computer scientist -
achieved an inter-annotator agreement kappa score
of 95%.) A sentence is considered a positive one if
it contains a description of the following event types:
? molecular expression within tissue/during pro-
cess/at stage X (molecular event)
? tissue process, i.e. what forms from what (tis-
sue event)
? requirement of a molecule for a process
(molecular or tissue event)
? abnormality in a process/tissue/stage (molecu-
lar or tissue event)
? negation of the above e.g. was not expressed,
did not form, formed normally (molecular or
tissue event).
A negative sentence is one that does not fall under at
least one of the above categories.
In addition, 6 entities (tissue, process, species,
stage, molecule and event verb) were annotated in
1800 sentences (1200 described above + 600 from
197
relevant documents not yet annotated at sentence
level) and 347 entity-annotated positive event sen-
tences were marked with their associated develop-
mental stage.
Example: At E11, the integrin ?8 subunit was ex-
pressed throughout the mesenchyme of the nephro-
genic cord. Entities annotated: E11(stage), integrin
?8 (molecule), expressed (event verb), mesenchyme
of the nephrogenic cord (tissue).
3 Evidence for Temporal Resolution
Developmental biology is not as concerned with the
absolute time of events in a specific embryo as it
is with events that generally happen under the same
circumstances in developmental time. These are re-
ferred to with respect to stages from conception to
birth. The evidence sufficient to resolve the devel-
opmental stage of an event sentence can come from
many places. The two significant areas of evidence
are local context (i.e. surrounding text) and prior
(i.e. background) knowledge.
Local context can further be classified as:
? explicit: evidence of stage is mentioned within
current (event) sentence,
? previous sentence: evidence is found in sen-
tence immediately previous to current sentence,
? following sentence: evidence is found in sen-
tence immediately following current sentence,
? current paragraph: evidence is found in para-
graph containing current sentence but not in ad-
jacent sentences,
? referenced to figure: evidence is found in fig-
ure legend referenced in current sentence.
Evidence Source # Event Sentences
Explicitly Stated 48
Immed Prev Sentence 7
Following Sentence 1
Current Paragraph 19
Referenced Figure Legend 38
Within Figure Legend 43
Time Irrelevant 65
Prior Knowledge 126
Total 347
When local context does not provide evidence, prior
knowledge can be used about when entities men-
tioned within the sentence normally appear within
development. Event sentences can also be irrel-
evant of individual time ranges and apply to the
whole of development. The table above shows the
frequency with which each evidence type is used to
resolve developmental stage.
4 Experiments
Event sentence retrieval experiments (using separate
training and test data) resulted in a F-score of 72.3%
and 86.6% for Naive Bayes and rule-based classifi-
cation approaches respectively (relying upon perfect
entity recognition). A baseline method (classifying
all sentences as positive) achieves 58.4% F-score.
Experiments were also carried out to assign devel-
opmental stage to sentences already known to con-
tain events. The baseline approach is to use the last
mentioned stage in the text and any methods devel-
oped should score higher than this baseline. Rules
were developed to assign developmental stage based
on the knowledge gained from two fifths of the in-
vestigations into temporal evidence described above.
The other three fifths were annotated after the rules
had been defined. Precision scores for all 347 sen-
tences can be seen in the following table with the
Naive method representing the baseline and Local
representing the use of rules.
Paper Naive Prec. Local Prec.
1 75.7 97.3
2 89.6 90.9
3 89.1 100
4 95.6 92.3
5 95.5 91.3
Average 89.1 94.5
Experiments are currently ongoing into exploiting
the use of background knowledge of the develop-
mental processes and tissues mentioned within event
descriptions in order to assign developmental stage
to events sentences not already assigned by the lo-
cal context rules and to increase confidence in those
stages already assigned.
References
L. Zhou, G. B. Melton, S. Parsons and G Hripcsak, A tempo-
ral constraint structure for extracting temporal information from
clinical narrative, J Biomed Inf 39(4), Aug 2006, 424-439
198
