Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 65?74,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Evolution, Optimization, and Language Change:
The Case of Bengali Verb Inflections
Monojit Choudhury1, Vaibhav Jalan2, Sudeshna Sarkar1, Anupam Basu1
1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India
{monojit,sudeshna,anupam}@cse.iitkgp.ernet.in
2 Department of Computer Engineering
Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, India
vaibhavjalan.mnit@gmail.com
Abstract
The verb inflections of Bengali underwent
a series of phonological change between
10th and 18th centuries, which gave rise
to several modern dialects of the language.
In this paper, we offer a functional ex-
planation for this change by quantifying
the functional pressures of ease of artic-
ulation, perceptual contrast and learnabil-
ity through objective functions or con-
straints, or both. The multi-objective and
multi-constraint optimization problem has
been solved through genetic algorithm,
whereby we have observed the emergence
of Pareto-optimal dialects in the system
that closely resemble some of the real
ones.
1 Introduction
Numerous theories have been proposed to explain
the phenomenon of linguistic change, which, of late,
are also being supported by allied mathematical or
computational models. See (Steels, 1997; Perfors,
2002) for surveys on computational models of lan-
guage evolution, and (Wang et al, 2005; Niyogi,
2006) for reviews of works on language change.
The aim of these models is to explain why and how
languages change under specific socio-cognitive as-
sumptions. Although computational modeling is a
useful tool in exploring linguistic change (Cangelosi
and Parisi, 2002), due to the inherent complexi-
ties of our linguistic and social structures, modeling
of real language change turns out to be extremely
hard. Consequently, with the exception of a few
(e.g., Hare and Elman (1995); Dras et al (2003);
Ke et al (2003); Choudhury et al (2006b)), all the
mathematical and computational models developed
for explaining language change are built for artifi-
cial toy languages. This has led several researchers
to cast a doubt on the validity of the current compu-
tational models as well as the general applicability
of computational techniques in diachronic explana-
tions (Hauser et al, 2002; Poibeau, 2006).
In this paper, we offer a functional explanation1
of a real world language change ? the morpho-
phonological change affecting the Bengali verb
inflections (BVI). We model the problem as a
multi-objective and multi-constraint optimization
and solve the same using Multi-Objective Genetic
Algorithm2 (MOGA). We show that the different
forms of the BVIs, as found in the several modern
dialects, automatically emerge in the MOGA frame-
work under suitable modeling of the objective and
constraint functions. The model also predicts several
1Functionalist accounts of language change invoke the basic
function of language, i.e. communication, as the driving force
behind linguistic change (Boersma, 1998). Stated differently,
languages change in a way to optimize their function, such that
speakers can communicate maximum information with min-
imum effort (ease of articulation) and ambiguity (perceptual
contrast). Often, ease of learnability is also considered a func-
tional benefit. For an overview of different explanations in di-
achronic linguistics see (Kroch, 2001) and Ch. 3 of (Blevins,
2004).
2Genetic algorithm was initially proposed by Hol-
land (1975) as a self-organizing adaptation process mimicking
the biological evolution. They are also used for optimization
and machine learning purposes, especially when the nature of
the solution space is unknown or there are more than one objec-
tive functions. See Goldberg (1989) for an accessible introduc-
tion to single and multi-objective Genetic algorithms. Note that
in case of a multi-objective optimization problem, MOGA gives
a set of Pareto-optimal solutions rather than a single optimum.
The concept of Pareto-optimality is defined later.
65
other possible dialectal forms of Bengali that seems
linguistically plausible and might exist or have ex-
isted in the past, present or future. Note that the
evolutionary algorithm (i.e., MOGA) has been used
here as a tool for optimization, and has no relevance
to the evolution of the dialects as such.
Previously, Redford et al (2001) has modeled the
emergence of syllable systems in a multi-constraint
and multi-objective framework using Genetic al-
gorithms. Since the model fuses the individual
objectives into a single objective function through
a weighted linear combination, it is not a multi-
objective optimization in its true sense and nei-
ther does it use MOGA for the optimization pro-
cess. Nevertheless, the present work draws heavily
from the quantitative formulation of the objectives
and constraints described in (Redford, 1999; Red-
ford and Diehl, 1999; Redford et al, 2001). Ke et
al. (2003) has demonstrated the applicability and ad-
vantages of MOGA in the context of the vowel and
tonal systems, but the model is not explicit about the
process of change that could give rise to the optimal
vowel systems. As we shall see that the conception
of the genotype, which is arguably the most impor-
tant part of any MOGA model, is a novel and signif-
icant contribution of this work. The present formu-
lation of the genotype not only captures a snapshot
of the linguistic system, but also explicitly models
the course of change that has given rise to the partic-
ular system. Thus, we believe that the current model
is more suitable in explaining a case of linguistic
change.
The paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 intro-
duces the problem of historical change affecting the
BVIs and presents a mathematical formulation of the
same; Sec. 3 describes the MOGA model; Sec. 4
reports the experiments, observations and their in-
terpretations; Sec. 5 concludes the paper by sum-
marizing the contributions. In this paper, Bengali
graphemes are represented in Roman script follow-
ing the ITRANS notation (Chopde, 2001). Since
Bengali uses a phonemic orthography, the phonemes
are also transcribed using ITRANS within two /s.
2 The Problem
Bengali is an agglutinative language. There are
more than 150 different inflected forms of a single
Attributes Classical (?0) SCB ACB Sylheti
PrS1 kari kori kori kori
PrS2 kara karo kara kara
PrS3 kare kare kare kare
PrSF karen karen karen karoin
PrC1 kariteChi korChi kartAsi koirtAsi
PrC2 kariteCha korCho kartAsa koirtAsae
PrC3 kariteChe korChe kartAse koirtAse
PrCF kariteChen korChen kartAsen kortAsoin
PrP1 kariAChi koreChi korsi koirsi
PrP2 kariACha koreCho karsa koirsae
PrP3 kariAChe koreChe karse koirse
PrPF kariAChen koreChen karsen korsoin
Table 1: The different inflected verb forms of Clas-
sical Bengali and three other modern dialects. All
the forms are in the phonetic forms and for the verb
root kar. Legend: (tense) Pr ? present; (aspects) S
? simple, C ? continuous, P ? perfect, ; (person) 1
? first, 2 ? second normal, 3 ? third, F ? formal in
second and third persons. See (Bhattacharya et al,
2005) for list of all the forms.
verb root in Bengali, which are obtained through af-
fixation of one of the 52 inflectional suffixes, option-
ally followed by the emphasizers. The suffixes mark
for the tense, aspect, modality, person and polarity
information (Bhattacharya et al, 2005). The ori-
gin of modern Bengali can be traced back to Vedic
Sanskrit (circa 1500 BC 600 BC), which during
the middle Indo-Aryan period gave rise to the di-
alects like Ma?gadhi?, and Ardhama?gadhi? (circa
600 BC 200 AD), followed by the Ma?gadhi? ?
apabhramsha, and finally crystallizing to Bengali
(circa 10th century AD) (Chatterji, 1926). The ver-
bal inflections underwent a series of phonological
changes during the middle Bengali period (1200 -
1800 AD), which gave rise to the several dialectal
forms of Bengali, including the standard form ? the
Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB).
The Bengali literature of the 19th century was
written in the Classical Bengali dialect or the
sa?dhubha?sha? that used the older verb forms and
drew heavily from the Sanskrit vocabulary, even
though the forms had disappeared from the spoken
dialects by 17th century. Here, we shall take the lib-
erty to use the terms ?classical forms? and ?Classi-
cal Bengali? to refer to the dialectal forms of middle
Bengali and not Classical Bengali of the 19th cen-
66
tury literature. Table 1 enlists some of the corre-
sponding verb forms of classical Bengali and SCB.
Table 3 shows the derivation of some of the current
verb inflections of SCB from its classical counter-
parts as reported in (Chatterji, 1926).
2.1 Dialect Data
Presently, there are several dialects of Bengali that
vary mainly in terms of the verb inflections and in-
tonation, but rarely over syntax or semantics. We do
not know of any previous study, during which the
different dialectal forms for BVI were collected and
systematically listed. Therefore, we have collected
dialectal data for the following three modern dialects
of Bengali by enquiring the na?ive informants.
? Standard Colloquial Bengali (SCB) spoken in a
region around Kolkata, the capital of West Ben-
gal,
? Agartala Colloquial Bengali (ACB) spoken in
and around Agartala, the capital of Tripura, and
? Sylheti, the dialect of the Sylhet region of
Bangladesh.
Some of the dialectal forms are listed in Table 1.
The scope of the current study is restricted to 28 in-
flected forms (12 present tense forms + 12 past tense
forms + 4 forms of habitual past) of a single verb
root, i.e., kar.
2.2 Problem Formulation
Choudhury et al (2006a) has shown that a sequence
of simple phonological changes, which we shall
call the Atomic Phonological Operators or APO for
short, when applied to the classical Bengali lexicon,
gives rise to the modern dialects. We conceive of
four basic types of APOs, namely Del or deletion,
Met or metathesis, Asm or assimilation, and Mut
or mutation. The complete specification of an APO
includes specification of its type, the phoneme(s)
that is(are) affected by the operation and the left and
right context of application of the operator specified
as regular expressions on phonemes. The seman-
tics of the basic APOs in terms of rewrite rules are
shown in Table 2.2. Since Bengali features assim-
ilation only with respect to vowel height, here we
shall interpret Asm(p, LC,RC) as the height as-
similation of the vowel p in the context of LC or
APO Semantics
Del(p, LC,RC) p? ?/LC?RC
Met(pipj , LC,RC) pipj ? pjpi/LC?RC
Asm(p, LC,RC) p? p?/LC?RC
Mut(p, p?, LC,RC) p? p?/LC?RC
Table 2: Semantics of the basic APOs in terms of
rewrite rules. LC and RC are regular expressions
specifying the left and right contexts respectively. p,
p?, pi and pj represent phonemes.
Rule APO Example Derivations
No. kar ? iteChe kar ? iten kar ? iAChi
1 Del(e, ?, Ch) kar ? itChe NA NA
2 Del(t, ?, Ch) kar ? iChe NA NA
3 Met(ri, ?, ?) kair ? Che kair ? ten kair ?AChi
5 Mut(A, e, ?, Ch) NA NA kair-eChi
6 Asm(a, i, ?, ?) koir ? Che koir ? ten koir ? eChi
7 Del(i, o, ?) kor ? Che kor ? ten kor ? eChi
Table 3: Derivations of the verb forms of SCB from
classical Bengali using APOs. ?NA? means the rule
is not applicable for the form. See (Choudhury et
al., 2006a) for the complete list of APOs involved in
the derivation of SCB and ACB forms
RC. Also, we do not consider epenthesis or inser-
tion as an APO, because epenthesis is not observed
for the case of the change affecting BVI.
The motivation behind defining APOs rather than
representing the change in terms of rewrite rules is
as follows. Rewrite rules are quite expressive and
therefore, it is possible to represent complex phono-
logical changes using a single rewrite rule. On the
other hand, APOs are simple phonological changes
that can be explained independently in terms of pho-
netic factors (Ohala, 1993). In fact, there are also
computational models satisfactorily accounting for
cases of vowel deletion (Choudhury et al, 2004;
Choudhury et al, 2006b) and assimilation (Dras et
al., 2003).
Table 3 shows the derivation of the SCB verb
forms from classical Bengali in terms of APOs. The
derivations are constructed based on the data pro-
vided in (Chatterji, 1926).
2.3 Functional Explanation for Change of BVI
Let ?0 be the lexicon of classical Bengali verb
forms. Let ? : ?1, ?2, ? ? ? ?r be a sequence of r
APOs. Application of an APO on a lexicon implies
the application of the operator on every word of the
67
lexicon. The sequence of operators ?, thus, repre-
sent a dialect obtained through the process of change
from ?0, which can be represented as follows.
?(?0) = ?r(? ? ? ?2(?1(?0)) ? ? ?) = ?d
The derivation of the dialect ?d from ?0 can be con-
structed by following the APOs in the sequence of
their application.
We propose the following functional explanation
for the change of BVI.
A sequence of APOs, ? is preferred if ?(?0) has
some functional benefit over ?0. Thus, the modern
Bengali dialects are those, which have some func-
tional advantage over the classical dialect.
We would like to emphasize the word ?some? in
the aforementioned statements, because the modern
dialects are not better than the classical one (i.e., the
ancestor language) in an absolute sense. Rather, the
classical dialect is suboptimal compared to the mod-
ern dialects only with respect to ?some? of the func-
tional forces and is better than the them with respect
to ?some other? forces. Stated differently, we expect
both the classical as well as the modern dialects of
Bengali to be Pareto-optimal3 with respect to the set
of functional forces.
In order to validate the aforementioned hypoth-
esis, we carry out a multi-objective and multi-
constraint optimization over the possible dialectal
forms of Bengali, thereby obtaining the Pareto-
optimal set, which has been achieved through
MOGA.
3 The MOGA Model
Specification of a problem within the MOGA frame-
work requires the definition of the genotype, phe-
notype and genotype-to-phenotype mapping plus the
objective functions and constraints. In this section,
we discuss the design choices explored for the prob-
lem of BVI.
3Consider an optimization problem with n objective func-
tions f1 to fn, where we want to minimize all the objectives.
Let S be the solution space, representing the set of all possible
solutions. A soulution sinS is said to be Pareto-optimal with re-
spect to the objective functions f1 to fn, if and only if there does
not exist any other solution s? ? S such that fi(s?) ? fi(s) for
all 1 ? i ? n and fi(s?) < fi(s) for at least one i.
3.1 Phenotype and Genotype
We define the phenotype of a dialect d to be the lex-
icon of the dialect, ?d, consisting of the 28 inflected
forms of the root verb kar. This choice of phenotype
is justified because, at the end of the optimization
process, we would like to obtain the Pareto-optimal
dialects of Bengali and compare them with their real
counterparts.
The genotype of a dialect d could also be defined
as ?d, where the word forms are the genes. How-
ever, for such a choice of genotype, crossover and
mutation lead to counter-intuitive results. For ex-
ample, mutation would affect only a single word in
the lexicon, which is against the regularity principle
of sound change (see Bhat (2001) for explanation).
Similarly, exchanging a set of words between a pair
of lexica, as crossover would lead to, seems insensi-
ble.
Therefore, considering the basic properties of
sound change as well as the genetic operators used
in MOGA, we define a chromosome (and thus the
genotype) as a sequence of APOs. The salient fea-
tures of the genotype are described below.
? Gene: A gene is defined as an APO. Since in
order to implement the MOGA, every gene must be
mapped to a number, we have chosen an 8-bit binary
representation for a gene. This allows us to spec-
ify 256 distinct genes or APOs. However, for rea-
sons described below, we use the first bit of a gene
to denote whether the gene (i.e., the APO) is active
(the bit is set to 1) or not. Thus, we are left with
128 distinct choices for APOs. Since the number of
words in the lexicon is only 28, the APOs for Del,
Asm andMet are limited, even after accounting for
the various contexts in which an APO is applicable.
Nevertheless, there are numerous choices for Mut.
To restrain the possible repertoire of APOs to 128,
we avoided any APO related to the mutation of con-
sonants. This allowed us to design a comprehensive
set of APOs that are applicable on the classical Ben-
gali lexicon and its derivatives.
? Chromosome: A chromosome is a sequence of
15 genes. The number 15 has been arrived through
experimentation, where we have observed that in-
creasing the length of a chromosome beyond 15
does not yield richer results for the current choice
of APOs and ?0. Since the probability of any gene
68
Figure 1: Schematic of genotype, phenotype and
genotype-to-phenotype mapping.
being switched off (i.e., the first bit being 0) is 0.5,
the expected number of active APOs on a chromo-
some with 15 genes is 7.5. It is interesting to note
that this value is almost equal to the number of APOs
required (7 to be precise) for derivation of the SCB
verb forms.
? Genotype to phenotype mapping: Let for a given
chromosome, the set of active APOs (whose first bit
is 1) in sequence be ?1, ?2, ? ? ? , ?r. Then the pheno-
type corresponding to this chromosome is the lex-
icon ?d = ?r(? ? ? ?2(?1(?0)) ? ? ?). In other words,
the phenotype is the lexicon obtained by successive
application of the active APOs on the chromosome
on the lexicon of classical Bengali.
The concepts of gene, chromosome and the map-
ping from genotype to the phenotype are illustrated
in Fig. 3.1. It is easy to see that the regularity hy-
pothesis regarding the sound change holds good for
the aforementioned choice of genotype. Further-
more, crossover in this context can be interpreted as
a shift in the course of language change. Similarly,
mutation of the first bit turns a gene on or off, and of
the other bits changes the APO. Note that according
to this formulation, a chromosome not only models
a dialect, but also the steps of its evolution from the
classical forms.
3.2 Objectives and Constraints
Formulation of the objective functions and con-
straints are crucial to the model, because the linguis-
tic plausibility, computational tractability and the re-
sults of the model are overtly dependent on them.
We shall define here three basic objectives of ease
of articulation, perceptual contrast and learnability,
which can be expressed as functions or constraints.
Several models have been proposed in the past for
estimating the articulatory effort (Boersma (1998),
Ch. 2, 5 and 7) and perceptual distance between
phonemes and/or syllables (Boersma (1998), Ch.
3, 4 and 8). Nevertheless, as we are interested in
modeling the effort and perceptual contrast of the
whole lexicon rather than a syllable, we have cho-
sen to work with simpler formulations of the objec-
tive functions. Due to paucity of space, we are not
able to provide adequate details and justification for
the choices made.
3.2.1 fe: Articulatory Effort
Articulatory effort of a lexicon ? is a positive real
number that gives an estimate of the effort required
to articulate the words in ? in some unit. If fe de-
notes the effort function, then
fe(?) =
1
|?|
?
w??
fe(w) (1)
The term fe(w) depends on three parameters: 1)
the length of w in terms of phonemes, 2) the struc-
ture of the syllables, and 3) the features of adjacent
phonemes, as they control the effort spent in co-
articulation. We define fe(w) to be a weighted sum
of these three.
fe(w) = ?1fe1(w) + ?2fe2(w) + ?3fe3(w) (2)
where, ?1 = 1, ?2 = 1 and ?3 = 0.1 are the relative
weights.
The value of fe1 is simply the length of the word,
that is
fe1(w) = |w| (3)
Suppose ? = ?1?2 ? ? ??k is the usual syllabifica-
tion of w, where the usual or optimal syllabification
for Bengali is defined similar to that of Hindi as de-
scribed in (Choudhury et al, 2004). Then, fe2 is
defined as follows.
fe2(w) =
k?
i=1
hr(?i) (4)
hr(?) measures the hardness of the syllable ? and is
a function of the syllable structure (i.e. the CV pat-
tern) of ?. The values of hr(?) for different syllable
structures are taken from (Choudhury et al, 2004).
69
Since vowel height assimilation is the primary
co-articulation phenomenon observed across the di-
alects of Bengali, we define fe3 so as to model
only the effort required due to the difference in the
heights of the adjacent vowels.
Let there be n vowels in w represented by Vi,
where 1 ? i ? n. Then fe3 is defined by the fol-
lowing equation.
fe3(w) =
n?1?
i=1
|ht(Vi)? ht(Vi+1)| (5)
The function ht(Vi) is the tongue height associ-
ated with the vowel Vi. The value of the function
ht(Vi) for the vowels /A/, /a/, /E/ /o/, /e/, /i/
and /u/ are 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, and 3 respectively. Note
that the values are indicative of the ordering of the
vowels with respect to tongue height, and do not re-
flect the absolute height of the tongue in any sense.
3.2.2 fd and Cd: Acoustic Distinctiveness
We define the acoustic distinctiveness between
two words wi and wj as the edit distance between
them, which is denoted as ed(wi, wj). The cost of
insertion and deletion of any phoneme is assumed to
be 1; the cost of substitution of a vowel (consonant)
for a vowel (consonant) is also 1, whereas that of a
vowel (consonant) for a consonant (vowel) is 2, ir-
respective of the phonemes being compared. Since
languages are expected to increase the acoustic dis-
tinctiveness between the words, we define a mini-
mizing objective function fd over a lexicon ? as the
sum of the inverse of the edit distance between all
pair of words in ?.
fd(?) =
2
|?|(|?| ? 1)
?
ij,i6=j
ed(wi, wj)
?1 (6)
If for any pair of words wi and wj , ed(wi, wj) =
0, we redefine ed(wi, wj)?1 as 20 (a large penalty).
We say that a lexicon ? violates the acoustic dis-
tinctiveness constraintCd, if there are more than two
pairs of words in ?, which are identical.
3.2.3 Cp: Phonotactic constraints
A lexicon ? is said to violate the constraint Cp if
any of the words in ? violates the phonotactic con-
straints of Bengali. As described in (Choudhury et
al., 2004), the PCs are defined at the level of sylla-
ble onsets and codas and therefore, syllabification is
a preprocessing step before evaluation of Cp.
3.2.4 fr and Cr: Regularity
Although learnability is a complex notion, one
can safely equate the learnability of a system to the
regularity of the patterns within the system. In fact,
in the context of morphology, it has been observed
that the so called learning bottleneck has a regular-
izing effect on the morphological structures, thereby
leaving out only the most frequently used roots to
behave irregularly (Hare and Elman, 1995; Kirby,
2001).
In the present context, we define the regularity
of the verb forms in a lexicon as the predictability
of the inflectional suffix on the basis of the mor-
phological attributes. Brighton et al (2005) discuss
the use of Pearson correlation between phonologi-
cal edit distance and semantic/morphological ham-
ming distance measures as a metric for learnabil-
ity. On a similar note, we define the regularity func-
tion fr as follows. For two words wi, wj ? ?, the
(dis)similarity between them is given by ed(wi, wj).
Let ma(wi, wj) be the number of morphological at-
tributes shared by wi and wj . We define the reg-
ularity of ?, fr(?), as the Pearson correlation co-
efficient between ed(wi, wj) and ma(wi, wj) for
all pairs of words in ?. Note that for a regular
lexicon, ed(wi, wj) decreases with an increase in
ma(wi, wj). Therefore, fr(?) is negative for a reg-
ular lexicon and 0 or positive for an irregular one.
In other words, fr(?) is also a minimizing objective
function.
We also define a regularity constraint Cr, such
that a lexicon ? violates Cr if fr(?) > ?0.8.
4 Experiments and Observations
In order to implement the MOGA model, we have
used the Non-dominated Sorting GA-II or NSGA-
II (Deb et al, 2002), which is a multi-objective,
multi-constraint elitist GA. Different MOGA mod-
els have been incrementally constructed by intro-
ducing the different objectives and constraints. The
motivation behind the incorporation of a new ob-
jective or constraint comes from the observations
made on the emergent dialects of the previous mod-
els. For instance, with two objectives fe and fd,
70
and no constraints, we obtain dialects that violate
phonotactic constraints or/and are highly irregular.
One such example of an emergent dialect4 is ? =
{ kor, kara, kar, kore, korea, kore, karA, karAa,
karA, *korAlm, *korl, korla, *koreAlm, korel, ko-
rela, *karAlm, karAl, karAla }. The * marked forms
violate the phonotactic constraints. Also note that
the forms are quite indistinct or close to each other.
These observations led to the formulation of the con-
straints Cp and Cd.
Through a series of similar experiments, finally
we arrived at a model, where we could observe the
emergence of dialects, some of which closely resem-
ble the real dialects and others also seem linguisti-
cally plausible. In this final model, there are two
objectives, fe and fd, and 3 constraints, Cp, Cd and
Cr. Table 4 lists the corresponding forms of some
of the emergent dialects, whose real counterparts are
shown in Table 1.
Fig. 2 shows the Pareto-optimal front obtained
for the aforementioned model after 500 generations,
with a population size of 1000. Since the objectives
are minimizing in nature, the area on the plot below
and left of the Pareto-optimal front represents im-
possible languages, whereas the area to the right and
top of the curve pertains to unstable or suboptimal
languages. It is interesting to note that the four real
dialects lie very close to the Pareto-optimal front. In
fact, ACB and SCB lie on the front, whereas clas-
sical Bengali and Sylheti appears to be slightly sub-
optimal. Nevertheless, one should always be aware
that impossibility and suboptimality are to be inter-
preted in the context of the model and any general-
ization or extrapolation of these concepts for the real
languages is controversial and better avoided.
Several inferences can be drawn from the exper-
iments with the MOGA models. We have observed
that the Pareto-optimal fronts for all the MOGA
Models look like rectangular hyperbola with a hori-
zontal and vertical limb; the specific curve of Fig. 2
satisfies the equation:
fd(?)
0.3(fe(?)? 5.6) = 0.26 (7)
Several interesting facts, can be inferred from the
above equation. First, the minimum value of fe un-
der the constraints Cr and Cd, and for the given
4Due to space constraints, we intentionally omit the corre-
sponding classical forms.
Figure 2: The Pareto-optimal front. The gray trian-
gles (light blue in colored version available online)
show the position of the real dialects: 0 ? Classi-
cal Bengali, 1 ? SCB, 2 ? ACB, 3 ? Sylheti. The
top-most dot in the plot corresponds to the emergent
dialect D0 shown in Table 4.
repertoire of APOs is 5.6. Second, at fe(?) = 6,
the slope of the front, i.e. dfd/dfe, is approximately
?2, and the second derivative d2fd/df2e is around
20. This implies that there is sharp transition be-
tween the vertical and horizontal limbs at around
fe(?) = 6.
Interestingly, all the real dialects studied here lie
on the horizontal limb of the Pareto-optimal front
(i.e., fe(?) ? 6), classical Bengali being placed at
the extreme right. We also note the negative corre-
lation between the value of fe for the real dialects,
and the number of APOs invoked during derivation
of these dialects from classical Bengali. These facts
together imply that the natural direction of language
change in the case of BVIs has been along the hor-
izontal limb of the Pareto-optimal front, leading to
the formation of dialects with higher and higher ar-
ticulatory ease. Among the four dialects, SCB has
the minimum value for fe(?) and it is positioned on
the horizontal limb of the front just before the begin-
ning of the vertical limb.
Therefore, it is natural to ask whether there are
any real dialects of modern Bengali that lie on the
vertical limb of the Pareto-optimal front; and if not,
what may be the possible reasons behind their inex-
istence? In the absence of any comprehensive col-
lection of Bengali dialects, we do not have a clear
answer to the above questions. Nevertheless, it may
71
Attributes D0 D1 D2 D3
PrS1 kar kor kori kori
PrS2 kara kora kora kora
PrS3 kare kore kore korA
PrSF karen koren koren koren
PrC1 kartA karChi karteChi kairteChi
PrC2 kartAa karCha karteCha kairteCha
PrC3 kartAe karChe karteChe kairteChA
PrCF kartAen karChen karteChen kairteChen
PrP1 karA korChi koriChi koriChAi
PrP2 karAa korCha koriCha koriACha
PrP3 karAe korChe koriChe koriAChA
PrPF karAen korChen koriChen koriAChen
Table 4: Examples of emergent dialects in the
MOGA model. Note that the dialects D1, D2 and
D3 resemble SCB, ACB and Sylheti, whereas D0
seems to be linguistically implausible. For legends,
refer to Table 1
be worthwhile to analyze the emergent dialects of
the MOGA models that lie on the vertical limb. We
have observed that the vertical limb consists of di-
alects similar to D0 ? the one shown in the first
column of Table 4. Besides poor distinctiveness,
D0 also features a large number of diphthongs that
might result in poorer perception or higher effort of
articulation of the forms. Thus, in order to eliminate
the emergence of such seemingly implausible cases
in the model, the formulations of the objectives fe
and fd require further refinements.
Similarly, it can also be argued that the structure
of the whole lexicon, which has not been modeled
here, has also a strong effect on the BVIs. This is
because even though we have measured the acous-
tic distinctiveness fd with respect to the 28 inflected
forms of a single verb root kar, ideally fd should be
computed with respect to the entire lexicon. Thus,
change in other lexical items (borrowing or extinc-
tion of words or change in the phonological struc-
tures) can trigger or restrain an event of change in
the BVIs.
Furthermore, merging, extinction or appearence
of morphological attributes can also have significant
effects on the phonological change of inflections. It
is interesting to note that while Vedic Sanskrit had
different morphological markers for three numbers
(singular, dual and plural) and no gender markers
for the verbs, Hindi makes a distinction between the
genders (masculine and feminine) as well as num-
bers (but only singular and plural), and Bengali has
markers for neither gender nor number. Since both
Hindi and Bengali are offshoots of Vedic Sanskrit,
presumably the differences between the phonologi-
cal structure of the verb inflections of these two lan-
guages must have also been affected by the loss or
addition of morphological attributes. It would be in-
teresting to study the precise nature of the interac-
tion between the inflections and attributes within the
current computational framework, which we deem
to be a future extension of this work.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have described a MOGA based
model for the morpho-phonological change of BVIs.
The salient contributions of the work include: (1) the
conception of the genotype as a sequence of APOs,
whereby we have been able to capture not only the
emergent dialects, but also the path towards their
emergence, and (2) a plausible functional explana-
tion for the morpho-phonological changes affecting
the BVIs. Nevertheless, the results of the experi-
ments with the MOGA models must be interpreted
with caution. This is because, the results are very
much dependent on the formulation of the fitness
functions and the choice of the constraints. The set
of APOs in the repertoire also play a major role in
shaping the Pareto-optimal front of the model.
Before we conclude, we would like to re-
emphasize that the model proposed here is a func-
tional one, and it does not tell us how the dialects
of Bengali have self-organized themselves to strike
a balance between the functional pressures, if at all
this had been the case. The evolutionary algorithm
(i.e., MOGA) has been used here as a tool for op-
timization, and has no relevance to the evolution of
the dialects as such. Nevertheless, if it is possible
to provide linguistically grounded accounts of the
sources of variation and the process of selection,
then the MOGA model could qualify as an evolu-
tionary explanation of language change as well. Al-
though such models have been proposed in the liter-
ature (Croft, 2000; Baxter et al, 2006), the fact, that
global optimization can be an outcome of local inter-
actions between the speakers (e.g., Kirby (1999), de
72
Boer (2001), Choudhury et al (2006b)), alone pro-
vides sufficient ground to believe that there is also an
underlying self-organizational model for the present
functional explanation.
References
G. J. Baxter, R. A. Blythe, W. Croft, and A. J. McKane.
2006. Utterance selection model of language change.
Physical Review E, 73(046118).
D.N.S. Bhat. 2001. Sound Change. Motilal Banarsidass,
New Delhi.
S. Bhattacharya, M. Choudhury, S. Sarkar, and A. Basu.
2005. Inflectional morphology synthesis for bengali
noun, pronoun and verb systems. In Proc. of NCCPB,
pages 34?43, Dhaka.
Julia Blevins. 2004. Evolutionary Phonology. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, MA.
P. Boersma. 1998. Functional Phonology: Formaliz-
ing the interactions between articulatory and percep-
tual drives. Uitgave van Holland Academic Graphics,
Hague.
Henry Brighton, Kenny Smith, and Simon Kirby. 2005.
Language as an evolutionary system. Physics of Life
Reviews, 2(3):177?226, September.
A. Cangelosi and D. Parisi. 2002. Comuputer simula-
tion: A new scientific approach to the study of lan-
guage evolution. In Simulating the Evolution of Lan-
guage, pages 3?28. Springer Verlag, London.
S. K. Chatterji. 1926. The Origin and Development of
the Bengali Language. Rupa and Co., New Delhi.
A. Chopde. 2001. Itrans version 5.30: A package
for printing text in indian languages using english-
encoded input. http://www.aczoom.com/itrans/.
M. Choudhury, A. Basu, and S. Sarkar. 2004. A di-
achronic approach for schwa deletion in indo-aryan
languages. In Proc. of ACL SIGPHON-04, pages 20?
26, Barcelona.
M. Choudhury, M. Alam, S. Sarkar, and A. Basu.
2006a. A rewrite rule based model of bangla morpho-
phonological change. In Proc. of ICCPB, pages 64?
71, Dhaka.
M. Choudhury, A. Basu, and S. Sarkar. 2006b. Multi-
agent simulation of emergence of the schwa deletion
pattern in hindi. JASSS, 9(2).
W. Croft. 2000. Explaining Language Change: An Evo-
lutionary Approach. Longman Linguistic Library.
B. de Boer. 2001. The Origins of Vowel Systems. Oxford
University Press.
K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan. 2002.
A fast and elitist multi-objective genetic algorithm:
NSGA-II. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-
putation, 6:182?197.
M. Dras, D. Harrison, and B. Kapicioglu. 2003. Emer-
gent behavior in phonological pattern change. In Arti-
ficial Life VIII. MIT Press.
David E. Goldberg. 1989. Genetic Algorithms in Search,
Optimization and Machine Learning. Addison-
Wesley.
M. Hare and J. L. Elman. 1995. Learning and morpho-
logical change. Cognition, 56(1):61?98, July.
M. D. Hauser, N. Chomsky, and W. T. Fitch. 2002. The
faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how
did it evolve? Science, 298:1569?1579, 11.
John H. Holland. 1975. Adaptation in Natural and Arti-
ficial Systems. The University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.
Jinyun Ke, Mieko Ogura, and William S-Y. Wang. 2003.
Modeling evolution of sound systems with genetic al-
gorithm. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):1?18.
S. Kirby. 1999. Function, Selection and Innateness: the
Emergence of Language Universals. Oxford Univer-
sity Press. The full-text is only a sample (chapter 1: A
Puzzle of Fit).
S. Kirby. 2001. Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure: an iterated learning model of the emergence
of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, 5(2):102?110.
Anthony Kroch. 2001. Syntactic change. In Mark baltin
and Chris Collins, editors, Handbook of Syntax, pages
699?729. Blackwell.
P. Niyogi. 2006. The Computational Nature of Language
Learning and Evolution. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
J. Ohala. 1993. The phonetics of sound change. In
C. Jones, editor, Historical linguistics: Problems and
perspectives, page 237278. Longman, London.
A. Perfors. 2002. Simulated evolution of language: a
review of the field. Journal of Artificial Societies and
Social Simulation, 5(2).
T. Poibeau. 2006. Linguistically grounded models of
language change. In Proc. of CogSci 2006, pages 255?
276.
73
Melissa A. Redford and R. L. Diehl. 1999. The rela-
tive perceptibility of syllable-initial and syllable-final
consonants. Journal of Acoustic Society of America,
106:1555?1565.
Melissa A. Redford, Chun Chi Chen, and Risto Mi-
ikkulainen. 2001. Constrained emergence of univer-
sals and variation in syllable systems. Language and
Speech, 44:27?56.
Melissa A. Redford. 1999. An Articulatory Basis for
the Syllable. Ph.D. thesis, Psychology, University of
Texas, Austin.
L. Steels. 1997. The synthetic modeling of language
origins. Evolution of Communication, 1(1):1?34.
W. S-Y. Wang, J. Ke, and J. W. Minett. 2005. Computa-
tional studies of language evolution. In Computational
Linguistics and Beyond: Perspectives at the beginning
of the 21st Century, Frontiers in Linguistics 1. Lan-
guage and Linguistics.
74
