Proceedings of Ninth Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Morphology and Phonology, pages 1?5,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computing and Historical Phonology
John Nerbonne
Alfa-Informatica
University of Groningen
j.nerbonne@rug.nl
T. Mark Ellison
Informatics
University of Western Australia
mark@markellison.net
Grzegorz Kondrak
Computing Science
University of Alberta
kondrak@cs.ualberta.ca
Abstract
We introduce the proceedings from the
workshop ?Computing and Historical Pho-
nology: 9th Meeting of the ACL Special In-
terest Group for Computational Morphology
and Phonology?.
1 Background
Historical phonology is the study of how the sounds
and sound systems of a language evolve, and in-
cludes research issues concerning the triggering of
sound changes; their temporal and geographic prop-
agation (including lexical diffusion); the regular-
ity/irregularity of sound change, and its interaction
with morphological change; the role of borrowing
and analogy in sound change; the interaction of
sound change with the phonemic system (poten-
tially promoting certain changes, but also neutral-
izing phonemic distinctions); and the detection of
these phenomena in historical documents.
There is a substantial and growing body of work
applying computational techniques of various sorts
to problems in historical phonology. We mention a
few here to give the flavor of the sort of work we
hoped to attract for presentation in a coherent SIG-
MORPHON workshop. Kessler (2001) estimates
the likelihood of chance phonemic correspondences
using permutation statistics; Kondrak (2002) devel-
ops algorithms to detect cognates and sound corre-
spondences; McMahon and McMahon (2005) and
also Nakhleh, Ringe and Warnow (2005) apply phy-
logenetic techniques to comparative reconstruction;
and Ellison and Kirby (2006) suggest means of de-
tecting relationships which do not depend on word
by word comparisons. But we likewise wished to
draw on the creativity of the computational linguis-
tics (CL) community to see which other important
problems in historical phonology might also be ad-
dressed computationally (see below).
There has recently been a good deal of computa-
tional work in historical linguistics involving phylo-
genetic inference, i.e., the inference to the genealog-
ical tree which best explains the historical develop-
ments (Gray and Atkinson, 2003; Dunn et al, 2005).
While the application of phylogenetic analysis has
not universally been welcomed with open philolog-
ical arms (Holm, 2007), it has attracted a good deal
of attention, some of which we hoped to engage. We
take no stand on these controversies here, but note
that computing may be employed in historical lin-
guistics, and in particular in historical phonology in
a more versatile way, its uses extending well beyond
phylogenetic inference.
2 Introduction
The workshop thus brings together researchers inter-
ested in applying computational techniques to prob-
lems in historical phonology. We deliberately de-
fined the scope of the workshop broadly to include
problems such as identifying spelling variants in
older manuscripts, searching for cognates, hypothe-
sizing and confirming sound changes and/or sound
correspondences, modeling likely sound changes,
the relation of synchronic social and geographic
variation to historical change, the detection of pho-
netic signals of relatedness among potentially re-
lated languages, phylogenetic reconstruction based
on sound correspondences among languages, dating
1
historical changes, or others.
We were emphatically open to proposals to ap-
ply techniques from other areas to problems in his-
torical phonology such as applying work on confus-
able product names to the modeling of likely sound
correspondences or the application of phylogenetic
analysis from evolutionary biology to the problem
of phonological reconstruction.
3 Papers
We provide a preview to some of the issues in the
papers in this bundle.
Brett Kessler?s invited contribution sketches the
opportunities for multiple string alignment, which
would be extremely useful in historical phono-
logy, but which is also technically so challenging
that Gusfield (1999, Ch. 14) refers to it as ?the
holy grail? (of algorithms on strings, trees, and se-
quences).
3.1 Identification of Cognates
T. Mark Ellison combines Bayes?s theorem with gra-
dient descent in a method for finding cognates and
correspondences. A formal model of language is ex-
tended to include the notion of parent languages, and
a mechanism whereby parent languages project onto
their descendents. This model allows the quantifica-
tion of the probability of word lists in two languages
given a common ancestor which was the source for
some of the words. Bayes?s theorem reverses this
expression into the evaluation of possible parent lan-
guages. Gradient descent finds the best, or at least a
good one, of these. The method is shown to find
cognates in data from Russian and Polish.
Grzegorz Kondrak, David Beck and Philip Dilts
apply algorithms for the identification of cognates
and recurrent sound correspondences proposed by
Kondrak (2002) to the Totonac-Tepehua family of
indigenous languages in Mexico. Their long-term
objective is providing tools for rapid construction
of comparative dictionaries for relatively unfamiliar
language families. They show that by combining ex-
pert linguistic knowledge with computational analy-
sis, it is possible to quickly identify a large number
of cognate sets across related languages. The ex-
periments led to the creation of the initial version of
an etymological dictionary. The authors hope that
the dictionary will facilitate the reconstruction of
a more accurate Totonac-Tepehua family tree, and
shed light on the problem of the family origins and
migratory patterns.
Michael Cysouw and Hagen Jung use an itera-
tive process of alignment between words in differ-
ent languages in an attempt to identify cognates. In-
stead of using consistently coded phonemic (or pho-
netic) transciption, they use practical orthographies,
which has the advantage of being applicable without
expensive and error-prone manual processing. Pro-
ceeding from semantically equivalent words in the
Intercontinental Dictionary Series (IDS) database,
the program aligns letters using a variant of edit
distance that includes correspondences of one let-
ter with two or more, (?multi-n-gram?). Once ini-
tial alignments are obtained, segment replacement
costs are inferred. This process of alignment and
inferring segment replacement costs may then be
iterated. They succeed in distinguishing noise on
the one hand from borrowings and cognates on the
other, and the authors speculate about being able to
distinguish inherited cognates from borrowings.
3.2 A View from Dialectology
Several papers examined language change from the
point of view of dialectology. While the latter stud-
ies variation in space, the former studies variation
over time.
Hans Goebl, the author of hundreds of papers ap-
plying quantitative analysis to the analysis of lin-
guistic varieties in dialects, applies his dialectomet-
ric techniques both to modern material (1900) from
the Atlas Linguistique de France and to material dat-
ing from approximate 1300 provided by Dutch Ro-
manists. Dialectometry aims primarily at establish-
ing the aggregate distances (or conversely, similari-
ties), and Goebl?s analysis shows that these have re-
main relatively constant even while the French lan-
guage has changed a good deal. The suggestion is
that geography is extremely influential.
Wilbert Heeringa and Brian Joseph first recon-
struct a protolanguage based on Dutch dialect data,
which they compare to the proto-Germanic found in
a recent dictionary, demonstrating that their recon-
struction is quite similar to the proto-Germanic, even
though it is only based on a single branch of a large
family. They then apply a variant of edit distance to
2
the pronunciation of the protolanguage, comparing
it to the pronunciation in modern Dutch dialects, al-
lowing on the one hand a quantitative evaluation of
the degree to which ?proto-Dutch? correlates with
proto-Germanic (r = 0.87), and a sketch of conser-
vative vs. innovative dialect areas in the Netherlands
on the other.
Anil Singh and Harshit Surana ask whether
corpus-based measures can be used to compare lan-
guages. Most research has proceeded from the as-
sumption that lists of word pairs be available, as in-
deed they normally are in the case of dialect atlas
data or as they often may be obtained by construct-
ing lexicalizations of the concepts in the so-called
?Swadesh? list. But such data is not always avail-
able, nor is it straightforward to construct. Singh and
Surana construct n-gram models of order five (5),
and compare Indo-Iranian and Dravidian languages
based on symmetric cross-entropy.
Martijn Wieling, Therese Leinonen and John Ner-
bonne apply PAIR HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS
(PHMM), introduced to CL by Mackay and Kon-
drak (2005), to a large collection of Dutch dialect
pronunciations in an effort to learn the degree of
segment differentiation. Essentially the PHMM re-
gards frequently aligned segments as more similar,
and Wieling et al show that the induced similar-
ity indeed corresponds to phonetic similarity in the
case of vowels, whose acoustic properties facilitate
the assessment of similarity.
3.3 Views from other Perspectives
Several papers examined diachronic change from
well-developed perspectives outside of historical
linguistics, including evolution and genetic algo-
rithms, language learning, biological cladistics, and
the structure of vowel systems.
Monojit Choudhury, Vaibhav Jalan, Sudeshna
Sarkar and Anupam Basu distinguish two compo-
nents in language developments, on the one hand
functional forces or constraints including ease of
articulation, perceptual contrast, and learnability,
which are modeled by the fitness function of a ge-
netic algorithm (GA). On the other hand, these func-
tional forces operate against the background of lin-
guistic structure, which the authors dub ?genotype?
phenotype mapping?, and which is realized by the
set of forms in a given paradigm, and a small set
of possible atomic changes which map from form
set to form set. They apply these ideas to morpho-
logical changes in dialects of Bengali, an agglutina-
tive Indic language, and they are able to show that
some modern dialects are optimal solutions to the
functional constraints in the sense that any further
changes would be worse with respect to at least one
of the constraints.
Eric Smith applies the gradual learning algorithm
(GLA) developed in Optimality Theory by Paul
Boersma to the problem of reconstructing a dead
language. In particular the GLA is deployed to de-
duce the phonological representations of a dead lan-
guage, Elamite, from the orthography, where the
orthography is treated as the surface representation
and the phonological representation as the underly-
ing representation. Elamite was spoken in south-
western and central Iran, and survives in texts dating
from 2400? 360 BCE, written in a cuneiform script
borrowed from Sumerians and Akkadians. Special
attention is paid to the difficult mapping between or-
thography and phonology, and to OT?s Lexicon Op-
timization module.
Antonella Gaillard-Corvaglia, Jean-Le?o Le?onard
and Pierre Darlu apply cladistic analysis to dialect
networks and language phyla, using the detailed in-
formation in phonetic changes to increase the re-
solution beyond what is possible with simple word
lists. They examine Gallo-Romance vowels, south-
ern Italo-Romance dialects and Mayan languages,
foregoing analyses of relatedness based on global
resemblance between languages, and aiming instead
to view recurrent phonological changes as first-class
entities in the analysis of historical phonology with
the ambition of including the probability of specific
linguistic changes in analyses.
Animesh Mukherjee, Monojit Choudhury, Anu-
pam Basu and Niloy Ganguly examine the struc-
ture of vowel systems by defining a weighted net-
work where vowels are represented by the nodes
and the likelihood of vowels? co-occurring in the
languages of the world by weighted edges be-
tween nodes. Using data from the 451 lan-
guages in the UCLA Phonological Segment Inven-
tory Database (UPSID), Mukherjee and colleagues
seek high-frequency symmetric triplets (with sim-
ilar co-occurrence weights). The vowel networks
which emerged tend to organize themselves to max-
3
imize contrast between the vowels when inventories
are small, but they tend to grow by systematically
applying the same contrasts (short vs long, oral vs
nasal) across the board when they grow larger.
3.4 Methodology
Finally, there were three papers focusing on more
general methodological issues, one on non-linearity,
one on a direct manipulation interface to cross-
tabulation, and one on visualizing distance mea-
sures.
Hermann Moisl has worked a great deal with the
Newcastle Electronic Corpus of Tyneside English
(NECTE). NECTE is a corpus of dialect speech
from Tyneside in North-East England which was
collected in an effort to represent not only geograph-
ical, but also social variation in speech. In the con-
tribution to this volume, Moisl addresses the prob-
lem of nonlinearity in data, using the distribution of
variance in the frequency of phonemes in NECTE
as an example. He suggests techniques for spotting
nonlinearity as well as techniques for analyzing data
which contains it.
Tyler Peterson and Gessiane Picanco experiment
with cross tabulation as an aid to phonemic re-
construction. In particular they use PIVOT TA-
BLES, which are cross tabulations supported by new
database packages, and which allow direct manipu-
lation, e.g., drag and drop methods of adding and re-
moving new sets of data, including columns or rows.
This makes it easier for the linguist to track e.g.
phoneme correspondences and develop hypotheses
about them. Tup?? stock is a South American lan-
guage family with about 60 members, mostly in
Brazil, but also in Bolivia and Paraguay. Pivot tables
were employed to examine this data, which resulted
in a reconstruction a great deal like the only pub-
lished reconstruction, but which nevertheless sug-
gested new possibilities.
Thomas Pilz, Axel Philipsenburg and Wolfram
Luther describe the development and use of an in-
terface for visually evaluating distance measures.
Using the problem of identifying intended modern
spellings from manuscript spellings using various
techniques, including edit distance, they note ex-
amples where the same distance measure performs
well on one set of manuscripts but poorly on another.
This motivates the need for easy evaluation of such
measures. The authors use multidimensional scal-
ing plots, histograms and tables to expose different
levels of overview and detail.
3.5 Other
Although this meeting of SIGMORPHON focused
on contributions to historical phonology, there was
also one paper on synchronic morphology.
Christian Monson, Alon Lavie, Jaime Carbonell
and Lori Levin describe ParaMor, a system aimed
at minimally supervised morphological analysis that
uses inflectional paradigms as its key concept.
ParaMor gathers sets of suffixes and stems that co-
occur, collecting each set of suffixes into a potential
inflectional paradigm. These candidate paradigms
then need to be compared and filtered to obtain a
minimal set of paradigms. Since there are many
hundreds of languages for which paradigm discov-
ery would be a very useful tool, ParaMor may be
interesting to researchers involved in language doc-
umentation. This paper sketches the authors? ap-
proach to the problem and presents evidence for
good performance in Spanish and German.
4 Prospects
As pleasing as it to hear of the progress reported
on in this volume, it is clear that there is a great
deal of interesting work ahead for those interested
in computing and historical phonology. This is im-
mediately clear if one compares the list of potential
topics noted in Sections 1-2 with the paper topics
actually covered, e.g. by skimming Section 3 or the
table of contents. For example we did not receive
submissions on the treatment of older documents, on
recognizing spelling variants, or on dating historical
changes.
In addition interesting topics may just now be ris-
ing above the implementation horizon, e.g. com-
putational techniques which strive to mimic inter-
nal reconstruction (Hock and Joseph, 1996), or those
which aim at characterizing general sound changes,
or perspectives which attempt to tease apart histori-
cal, areal and typological effects (Nerbonne, 2007).
In short, we are optimistic about interest in follow-
up workshops!
4
5 Acknowledgments
We are indebted to our program committee, to the in-
cidental reviewers named in the organizational sec-
tion of the book, and to some reviewers who re-
main anonymous. We also thank the SIGMOR-
PHON chair Jason Eisner and secretary Richard Wi-
centowski for facilitating our organization of this
workshop under the aegis of SIGMORPHON, the
special interest group in morphology and phonology
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.1
We thank Peter Kleiweg for managing the produc-
tion of the book. We are indebted to the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), grant
235-89-001, for cooperation between the Center for
Language and Cognition, Groningen, and the De-
partment of Linguistics The Ohio State University,
for support of the work which is reported on here.
References
A. Michael Dunn, A. Terrill, Geert Reesink, and Stephen
Levinson. 2005. Structural phylogenetics and the
reconstruction of ancient language history. Science,
309(5743):2072?2075.
Mark Ellison and Simon Kirby. 2006. Measuring lan-
guage divergence by intra-lexical divergence. In Proc.
of ACL/COLING 2006, pages 273?280, Shroudsburg,
PA. ACL.
Russell D. Gray and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2003.
Language-tree divergence times support the Ana-
tolian theory of Indo-European origin. Nature,
426(6965):435?439.
Dan Gusfield. 1999. Algorithms on Strings, Trees, and
Sequences: Computer Science and Computational Bi-
ology. Cambridge Univesity Press, Cambridge.
Hans Henrich Hock and Brian D. Joseph. 1996. Lan-
guage History, Language Change, and Language Re-
lationship : An Introduction to Historical and Com-
parative Linguistics. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
Hans J. Holm. 2007. The new arboretum of Indo-
European ?trees?: Can new algorithms reveal the phy-
logeny and even prehistory of IE? Journal of Quanti-
tative Linguistics, 14(2).
Brett Kessler. 2001. The Significance of Word Lists.
CSLI Press, Stanford.
Grzegorz Kondrak. 2002. Algorithms for Language Re-
construction. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto.
1http://nlp.cs.swarthmore.edu/sigphon/
Wesley Mackay and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2005. Com-
paring word similarity and identifying cognates with
pair hidden markov models. In Proceedings of the 9th
Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL),
pages 40?47, Shroudsburg, PA. ACL.
April McMahon and Robert McMahon. 2005. Language
Classification by Numbers. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Luay Nakleh, Don Ringe, and Tandy Warnow. 2005.
Perfect phylogentic networks: A new metholodology
for reconstructing the evolutionary history of natural
languages. Language, 81(2):382?420.
John Nerbonne. 2007. Review of April McMahon &
Robert McMahon Language Classification by Num-
bers. Oxford: OUP, 2005. Linguistic Typology, 11.
5
