Proceedings of the Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 54?59,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
On the Role of Lexical and World Knowledge in RTE3 
Peter Clark1, William R. Murray1, John Thompson1, Phil Harrison1,  
Jerry Hobbs2, Christiane Fellbaum3  
1Boeing Phantom Works, The Boeing Company, Seattle, WA 98124 
2USC/ISI, 4676 Admiralty Way, Marina del Rey, CA 90292 
3Princeton University, NJ 08544 
{peter.e.clark,william.r.murray,john.a.thompson,philip.harrison}@boeing.com, 
hobbs@isi.edu, fellbaum@clarity.princeton.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
To score well in RTE3, and even more so 
to create good justifications for entailments, 
substantial lexical and world knowledge is 
needed. With this in mind, we present an 
analysis of a sample of the RTE3 positive 
entailment pairs, to identify where and 
what kinds of world knowledge are needed 
to fully identify and justify the entailment, 
and discuss several existing resources and 
their capacity for supplying that knowledge. 
We also briefly sketch the path we are fol-
lowing to build an RTE system (Our im-
plementation is very preliminary, scoring 
50.9% at the time of RTE). The contribu-
tion of this paper is thus a framework for 
discussing the knowledge requirements 
posed by RTE and some exploration of 
how these requirements can be met. 
1 Introduction 
The Pascal RTE site defines entailment between 
two texts T and H as holding "if, typically, a hu-
man reading T would infer that H is most likely 
true" assuming "common human understanding of 
language as well as common background knowl-
edge." While a few RTE3 entailments can be rec-
ognized using simple syntactic matching, the ma-
jority rely on significant amounts of this "common 
human understanding" of lexical and world knowl-
edge. Our goal in this paper is to analyze what that 
knowledge is, create a preliminary framework for 
it, and explore a few available sources for it. In the 
short term, such knowledge can be (and has been) 
used to drive semantic matching of the T and H 
dependency/parse trees and their semantic repre-
sentations, as many prior RTE systems perform, 
e.g., (Hickl et al, 2006). In the long term, com-
puters should be able to perform deep language 
understanding to build a computational model of 
the scenario being described in T, to reason about 
the entailment, answer further questions, and create 
meaningful justifications. With this longer term 
goal in mind, it is useful to explore the types of 
knowledge required. It also gives a snapshot of the 
kinds of challenges that RTE3 poses. 
 
The scope of this paper is to examine the underly-
ing lexical/world knowledge requirements of RTE, 
rather than the more syntactic/grammatical issues 
of parsing, coreference resolution, named entity 
recognition, punctuation, coordination, typographi-
cal errors, etc. Although there is a somewhat blurry 
line between the two, this separation is useful for 
bounding the analysis. It should be noted that the 
more syntactic issues are themselves vast in RTE, 
but here we will not delve into them. Instead, we 
will perform a thought experiment in which they 
have been handled correctly. 
2 Analysis 
Based on an analysis of 100 (25%) of the positive 
entailments in the RTE3 test set, we have divided 
the knowledge requirements into several rough 
categories, which we now present. We then sum-
marize the frequency with which examples in this 
sample fell into these categories. The examples 
below are fragments of the original test questions, 
abbreviated and occasionally simplified. 
2.1 Syntactic Matching 
In a few cases, entailment can be identified by syn-
tactic matching of T and H, for example: 
54
489.T "The Gurkhas come from Nepal and??  
489.H "The Gurkhas come from Nepal." 
Other examples include 299, 489, and 456. In 
some cases, the syntactic matching can be very 
complex, e.g., examples 152, 724. 
2.2 Synonyms 
Synonymy is often needed to recognize entailment, 
648.T "?go through ? licencing procedures..." 
648.H "?go through the licencing processes." 
Other examples include 286 ("dismiss"/"throw 
out"), 37 ("begin?/"start"), 236 ("wildfire"/"bush 
fire"), and, arguably, 462 ("revenue"/"proceeds"). 
2.3 Generalizations (Hypernyms) 
Similarly, subsumption (generalization) relation-
ships between word senses need to be recognized 
(whether or not a fixed set of senses are used), eg. 
148.T "Beverly served...at WEDCOR" 
148.H "Beverly worked for WEDCOR." 
Others include 178 ("succumbed" as a kind of 
"killed"), and 453 ("take over" as a kind of "buy"). 
2.4 Noun Redundancy 
Sometimes a noun in a compound can be dropped: 
607.T "single-run production process..." 
607.H "Single-run production..." 
Other examples include 269 ("increasing preva-
lence of" ? "increasing"), 604 ("mini-mill proc-
ess" ? "mini-mill"), and (at the phrase level) 668 
("all segments of the public" ? "the public"). 
2.5 Noun-Verb Relations  
Often derivationally related nouns and verbs occur 
in the pairs. To identify and justify the entailment, 
the relationship and its nature is needed, as in: 
 
480 "Marquez is a winner..." ?"Marquez won..." 
 
Other examples include 286 ("pirated", "piracy"), 
and 75 ("invent", "invention"). In some cases, the 
deverbal noun denotes the verb's event, in other 
cases it denotes one of the verb?s arguments (e.g., 
"winner" as the subject/agent of a "win" event).  
2.6 Compound Nouns 
Some examples require inferring the semantic rela-
tion between nouns in a compound, e.g., 
168 "Sirius CEO Karmazin" ? "Karmazin is an 
executive of Sirius" 
583 "physicist Hawking" ? "Hawking is a physi-
cist" 
In some cases this is straightforward, others require 
more detailed knowledge of the entities involved. 
2.7 Definitions 
Although there is somewhat of a fuzzy boundary 
between word and world knowledge, we draw this 
distinction here. Some examples of RTE pairs 
which require knowing word meanings are: 
667 "? found guilty..." ? "?convicted..." 
328 "sufferers of coeliac disease..." ? "coeliacs..." 
 
The second example is particularly interesting as 
many readers (and computers) will not have en-
countered the word "coeliacs" before, yet a person 
can reasonably infer its meaning on the fly from 
context and morphology - something challenging 
for a machine to do. Definitions of compound 
nouns are also sometimes needed, e.g., ?family 
planning? (612) and ?cough syrup? (80).  
2.8 World Knowledge: General 
A large number of RTE pairs require non-
definitional knowledge about the way the world 
(usually) is, e.g.,: 
273 "bears kill people"  ? "bears attack people" 
 
People recognize this entailment as they know 
(have heard about) how people might be killed by 
a bear, and hence can justify why the entailment is 
valid. (They know that the first step in the bear 
killing a person is for the bear to attack that person.) 
Some other examples are: 
499 "shot dead" ? "murder" 
705 "under a contract with" ? "cooperates with" 
721 "worked on the law" ? "discussed the law" 
731 "cut tracts of forest" ? "cut trees in the forest" 
732 "establishing tree farms"  
? "trees were planted" 
639 "X's plans for reorganizing"  
? "X intends to reorganize" 
328 "the diets must be followed by <person>"  
? "the diets are for <person>" 
722 X and Y vote for Z ? X and Y agree to Z. 
 
All these cases appeal to a person's world knowl-
edge concerning the situation being described. 
55
2.9 World Knowledge: Core Theories 
In addition to this more specific knowledge of the 
world, some RTE examples appeal to more general, 
fundamental knowledge (e.g., space, time, plans, 
goals). For example 
 
6.T "Yunupingu is one of the clan of..." 
6.H "Yunupingu is a member of..." 
 
appeals to a basic rule of set inclusion, and 10 (a 
negative entailment: "unsuccessfully sought elec-
tion" ? not elected) appeals to core notions of 
goals and achievement. Several examples appeal to 
core spatial knowledge, e.g.: 
 
491.T "...come from the high mountains of Nepal." 
491.H "...come from Nepal." 
 
178.T "...3 people in Saskatchewan succumbed to 
the storm." 
178.H "...a storm in Saskatchewan." 
 
491 appeals to regional inclusion (if X location Y, 
and Y is in Z, then X location Z), and 178 appeals 
to colocation (if X is at Y, and X physically inter-
acts with Z, then Z is at Y). Other spatial examples 
include 236 ("around Sydney" ? "near Sydney"), 
and 129 ("invasion of" ? "arrived in"). 
2.10 World Knowledge: Frames and Scripts 
Although loosely delineated, another category of 
world knowledge concerns stereotypical places, 
situations and the events which occur in them, with 
various representational schemes proposed in the 
AI literature, e.g., Frames (Minsky 1985), Scripts 
(Schank 1983). Some RTE examples require rec-
ognizing the implicit scenario ("frame", "script", 
etc.) which T describes to confirm the new facts or 
relationships introduced in H are valid. A first ex-
ample is: 
 
358.T "Kiesbauer was target of a letter bomb..."  
358.H "A letter bomb was sent to Kiesbauer." 
 
A person recognizes H as entailed by T because 
he/she knows the "script" for letter bombing, 
which includes sending the bomb in the mail. Thus 
a person could also recognize alternative verbs in 
358.H as valid (e.g., "mailed", "delivered") or in-
valid (e.g., "thrown at", "dropped on"), even 
though these verbs are all strongly associated with 
words in T. For a computer to fully explain the 
entailment, it would need similar knowledge.  
 
As a second example, consider: 
 
538.T "...the O. J. Simpson murder trial..." 
538.H "O. J. Simpson was accused of murder." 
 
Again, this requires knowing about trials: That 
they involve charges, a defendant, an accusation, 
etc., in order to validate H as an entailed expansion 
of T. In this example, there is also a second twist to 
it as the noun phrase in 538.T equally supports the 
hypothesis "O. J. Simpson was murdered." (e.g., 
consider replacing "O. J." with "Nicole"). It is only 
a reference elsewhere in the T sentence to "Simp-
son's attorneys" that suggests Simpson is still alive, 
and hence couldn't have been the victim, and hence 
must be the accused, that clarifies 538.H as being 
correct, a highly complex chain of reasoning.  
 
As a third example, consider: 
736.T "In a security fraud case, Milken was sen-
tenced to 10 years in prison." 
736.H "Milken was imprisoned for security fraud." 
 
This example is particularly interesting, as one 
needs to recognize security fraud as Milken's crime, 
a connection which not stated in T. A human 
reader will recognize the notion of sentencing, and 
thus expect to see a convict and his/her crime, and 
hence can align these expectations with T, validat-
ing H. Thus again, deep knowledge of sentencing 
is needed to understand and justify the entailment. 
 
Some other examples requiring world knowledge 
to validate their expansions, include 623 ("narcot-
ics-sniffing dogs" ? "dogs are used to sniff out 
narcotics"), and 11 ("the Nintendo release of the 
game" ? "the game is produced by Nintendo"). 
2.11 Implicative Verbs 
Some RTE3 examples contain complement-taking 
verbs that make an implication (either positive or 
negative) about the complement. For example: 
 
668 "A survey shows that X..." ? "X..." 
657 "...X was seen..." ? "...X..." 
725 ?...decided to X..." ? "...X..." 
716 "...have been unable to X..." ? "...do not X" 
56
 Table 1: Frequency of different entailment 
phenomena from a sample of 100 RTE3 pairs. 
In the first 3 the implication is positive, but in the 
last the implication is negative. (Nairn et al 2006) 
provide a detailed analysis of this type of behavior. 
In fact, this notion of implicature (one part of a 
sentence making an implication about another part) 
extends beyond single verbs, and there are some 
more complex examples in RTE3, e.g.: 
 
453 "...won the battle to X..." ? "...X..." 
 
784.T "X  reassures Russia it has nothing to fear..." 
784.H "Russia fears..." 
 
In this last example the implication behavior is 
quite complex: (loosely) If X reassures Y of Z, 
then Y is concerned about not-Z. 
2.12 Metonymy/Transfer 
In some cases, language allows us to replace a 
word (sense) with a closely related word (sense):  
708.T "Revenue from stores funded..." 
708.H "stores fund..." 
 
Rules for metonymic transfer, e.g., (Fass 2000), 
can be used to define which transfers are allowed. 
Another example is 723 ??pursue its drive to-
wards X? ? ??pursue X?. 
2.13 Idioms/Protocol/Slang 
Finally, some RTE pairs rely on understanding 
idioms, slang, or special protocols used in lan-
guage, for example: 
 
12 "Drew served as Justice. Kennon returned to 
claim Drew's seat"  ? "Kennon served as Justice." 
486 "name, 1890-1970" ? "name died in 1970" 
408 "takes the title of" ? "is" 
688 "art finds its way back" ? "art gets returned" 
 
The phrases in these examples all have special 
meaning which cannot be easily derived composi-
tionally from their words, and thus require special 
handling within an entailment system. 
2.14 Frequency Statistics 
Table 1 shows the number of positive entailments 
in our sample of 100 that fell into the different 
categories (some fell into several). While there is a 
certain subjectivity in the boundaries of the catego-
ries, the most significant observation is that very 
few entailments depend purely on syntactic ma-
nipulation and simple lexical knowledge (syno-
nyms, hypernyms), and that the vast majority of 
entailments require significant world knowledge, 
highlighting one of the biggest challenges of RTE. 
In addition, the category of general world knowl-
edge -- small, non-definitional facts about the way 
the world (usually) is -- is the largest, suggesting 
that harvesting and using this kind of knowledge 
should continue to be a priority for improving per-
formance on RTE-style tasks. 
3 Sources of World Knowledge 
While there are many potential sources of the 
knowledge that we have identified, we describe 
three in a bit more detail and how they relate to the 
earlier analysis. 
3.1 WordNet 
WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998) is one of the most ex-
tensively used resources in RTE already and in 
computational linguistics in general. Despite some 
well-known problems, it provides broad coverage 
of several key relationships between word senses 
(and words), in particular for synonyms, hy-
pernyms (generalizations), meronyms (parts), and 
semantically (?morphosemantically?) related 
forms. From the preceding analysis, WordNet does 
contain the synonyms {"procedure","process"}, 
{"dismiss","throw out"}, {"begin","start"}, but 
does not contain the compound "wild fire" and 
(strictly correctly) does not contain {"reve-
nue","proceeds"} as synonyms. In addition, the 
57
three hypernyms mentioned in the earlier analysis 
are in WordNet. WordNet alo links (via the ?mor-
phosemantic? link) the 3 noun-verb pairs men-
tioned earlier (win/winner, pirated/piracy, in-
vent/invention) ? however it does not currently 
distinguish the nature of that link (e.g., agent, re-
sult, event). WordNet is currently being expanded 
to include this information, as part of the 
AQUAINT program.  
 
Two independently developed versions of the 
WordNet glosses expressed in logic are also avail-
able: Extended WordNet (Moldovan and Rus, 
2001) and a version about to be released with 
WordNet3.0 (again developed under AQUAINT). 
These in principle can help with definitional 
knowledge. From our earlier analysis, it turns out 
"convicted" is conveniently defined in WordNet as 
"pronounced or proved guilty" potentially bridging 
the gap for pair 667, although there are problems 
with the logical interpretation of this particular 
gloss in both resources mentioned. WordNet does 
have "coeliac", but not in the sense of a person 
with coeliac disease1. 
 
In addition, several existing ?core theories? (e.g., 
TimeML, IKRIS) that can supply some of the fun-
damental knowledge mentioned earlier (e.g., space, 
time, goals) are being connected to WordNet under 
the AQUAINT program. 
3.2 The DIRT Paraphrase Database 
Paraphrases have been used successfully by several 
RTE systems (e.g., Hickl et al, 2005). With re-
spect to our earlier analysis, we examined Lin and 
Pantel's (2001) paraphrase database built with their 
system DIRT, containing 12 million entries. While 
there is of course noise in the database, it contains 
a remarkable amount of sensible world knowledge 
as well as syntactic rewrites, albeit encoded as 
shallow rules lacking word senses. 
 
Looking at the examples from our earlier analysis 
of general world knowledge, we find that three are 
supported by paraphrase rules in the database: 
273: X kills Y ? X attacks Y 
499: X shoots Y ? X murders Y 
                                                 
1  This seems to be an accidental gap; WordNet contains 
many interlinked disease-patient noun pairs, incl. "dia-
betes-diabetic," "epilepsy-eplileptic," etc. 
721: X works on Y ? X discusses Y 
 
And one that could be is not, namely: 
705: X is under a contract with Y ? X coop-
erates with Y (not in the database) 
 
Other examples are outside the scope of DIRT's 
approach (i.e., ?X pattern1 Y? ? ?X pattern2 Y?), 
but nonetheless the coverage is encouraging. 
3.3 FrameNet 
In our earlier analysis, we identified knowledge 
about stereotypical situations and their events as 
important for RTE. FrameNet (Baker et al 1998) 
attempts to encode this knowledge. FrameNet was 
used with some success in RTE2 by Burchardt and 
Frank (2005). FrameNet's basic unit - a Frame - is 
a script-like conceptual schema that refers to a 
situation, object, or event along with its partici-
pants (Frame Elements), identified independent of 
their syntactic configuration. 
 
We earlier discussed how 538.T "...the O. J. Simp-
son murder trial..." might entail 538.H "O. J. Simp-
son was accused of murder." This case applies to 
FrameNet?s Trial frame, which includes the Frame 
Elements Defendant and Charges, with Charges 
being defined as "The legal label for the crime that 
the Defendant is accused of.", thus stating the rela-
tionship between the defendant and the charges, 
unstated in T but made explicit in H, validating the 
entailment. However,  the lexical units instantiat-
ing the Frame Elements are not yet disambiguated 
against a lexical database, limiting full semantic 
understanding. Moreover, FrameNet's  world 
knowledge is stated informally in English descrip-
tions, though it may be possible to convert these to 
a more machine-processable form either manually 
or automatically. 
3.4 Other Resources 
We have drawn attention to these three resources 
as they provide some answers to the requirements 
identified earlier. Several other publicly available 
resources could also be of use, including VerbNet 
(Univ Colorado at Boulder), the Component Li-
brary (Univ Texas at Austin), OpenCyc (Cycorp), 
SUMO, Stanford's additions to WordNet, and the 
Tuple Database (Boeing, following Schubert's 
2002 approach), to name but a few. 
58
4 Sketch of our RTE System 
Although not the primary purpose of this paper, we 
briefly sketch the path we are following to build an 
RTE system able to exploit the above resources. 
Our implementation is very preliminary, scoring 
50.9% at the time of RTE and 52.6% now (55.0% 
on the 525 examples it is able to analyze, guessing 
"no entailment" for the remainder). Nevertheless, 
the following shows the direction we are moving in 
 
Like several other groups, our basic approach is to 
generate logic for the T and H sentences, and then 
explore the application of inference rules to elabo-
rate T, or transform H, until H matches T. Parsing 
is done using a broad coverage chart parser. Sub-
sequently, an abstracted form of the parse tree is 
converted into a logical form, for example: 
 299.H "Tropical storms cause severe damage." 
subject(_Cause1, _Storm1) 
sobject(_Cause1, _Damage1) 
mod(_Storm1, _Tropical1) 
mod(_Damage1, _Severe1) 
input-word(_Storm1, "storm", noun) 
[same for other words] 
 
Entailment is determined if every clause in the se-
mantic representation of H semantically matches 
(subsumes) some clause in T. Two variables in a 
clause match if their input words are the same, or 
some WordNet sense of one is the same as or a 
hypernym of the other. In addition, the system 
searches for DIRT paraphrase rules that can trans-
form the sentences into a form which can then 
match. The explicit use of WordNet and DIRT re-
sults in comprehensible, machine-generated justifi-
cations when entailments are found, , e.g.,: 
 
T: "The Salvation Army operates the shelter under 
a contract with the county." 
H: "The Salvation Army collaborates with the 
county." 
Yes! Justification: I have general knowledge that: 
  IF X works with Y THEN X collaborates with Y 
Here: X = the Salvation Army, Y = the county 
Thus, here: 
        I can see from T: the Salvation Army works 
with the county (because "operate" and "work" 
mean roughly the same thing) 
Thus it follows that:  
  The Salvation Army collaborates with the county.  
We are continuing to develop our system and ex-
pand the number of knowledge sources it uses.  
5 Summary 
To recognize and justify textual entailments, and 
ultimately understand language, considerable lexi-
cal and world knowledge is needed. We have pre-
sented an analysis of some of the knowledge re-
quirements of RTE3, and commented on some 
available sources of that knowledge. The analysis 
serves to highlight the depth and variety of knowl-
edge demanded by RTE3, and contributes a rough 
framework for organizing these requirements. Ul-
timately, to fully understand language, extensive 
knowledge of the world (either manually or auto-
matically acquired) is needed. From this analysis, 
RTE3 is clearly providing a powerful driving force 
for research in this direction. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was performed under the DTO 
AQUAINT program, contract N61339-06-C-0160.  
References 
Collin Baker, Charles Fillmore, and John Lowe. 1998. 
"The Berkeley FrameNet Project". Proc 36th ACL 
Aljoscha Burchardt and Anette Frank. 2005. Approach-
ing Textual Entailment with LFG and FrameNet 
Frames. in 2nd PASCAL RTE Workshop, pp 92-97. 
Dan Fass. 1991. "Met*: A Method for Discriminating 
Metonymy and Metaphor by Computer". In Compu-
tational Linguistics 17 (1), pp 49-90. 
Christiane Fellbaum. 1998. ?WordNet: An Electronic 
Lexical Database.? The MIT Press. 
Andrew Hickl, Jeremy Bensley, John Williams, Kirk 
Roberts, Bryan Rink, and Ying Shi. ?Recognizing 
Textual Entailment with LCC?s Groundhog System?, 
in Proc 2nd PASCAL RTE Workshop, pp 80-85. 
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. "Discovery of 
Inference Rules for Question Answering". Natural 
Language Engineering 7 (4) pp 343-360.  
Marvin Minsky. 1985. "A Framework for Representing 
Knowledge". In Readings in Knowledge Repn. 
Dan Moldovan and Vasile Rus, 2001. Explaining An-
swers with Extended WordNet, ACL 2001.  
Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi and Lauri Karttunen. 
2006. Computing Relative Polarity for Textual Infer-
ence. In the Proceedings of ICoS-5. 
Len Schubert. 2002. "Can we Derive General World 
Knowledge from Texts?", Proc. HLT'02, pp84-87. 
59
