Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 104?111,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Labelled Dependencies in Machine Translation Evaluation 
Karolina Owczarzak Josef van Genabith Andy Way 
National Centre for Language Technology 
School of Computing, Dublin City University 
Dublin 9, Ireland 
{owczarzak,josef,away}@computing.dcu.ie 
    
 
Abstract 
We present a method for evaluating the 
quality of Machine Translation (MT) 
output, using labelled dependencies 
produced by a Lexical-Functional 
Grammar (LFG) parser. Our dependency-
based method, in contrast to most popular 
string-based evaluation metrics, does not 
unfairly penalize perfectly valid syntactic 
variations in the translation, and the 
addition of WordNet provides a way to 
accommodate lexical variation. In 
comparison with other metrics on 16,800 
sentences of Chinese-English newswire 
text, our method reaches high correlation 
with human scores.  
1 Introduction 
Since the creation of BLEU (Papineni et al, 2002) 
and NIST (Doddington, 2002), the subject of 
automatic evaluation metrics for MT has been 
given quite a lot of attention. Although widely 
popular thanks to their speed and efficiency, both 
BLEU and NIST have been criticized for 
inadequate accuracy of evaluation at the segment 
level (Callison-Burch et al, 2006). As string 
based-metrics, they are limited to superficial 
comparison of word sequences between a 
translated sentence and one or more reference 
sentences, and are unable to accommodate any 
legitimate grammatical variation when it comes to 
lexical choices or syntactic structure of the 
translation, beyond what can be found in the 
multiple references. A natural next step in the field 
of evaluation was to introduce metrics that would 
better reflect our human judgement by accepting 
synonyms in the translated sentence or evaluating 
the translation on the basis of what syntactic 
features it shares with the reference. 
Our method follows and substantially extends 
the earlier work of Liu and Gildea (2005), who use 
syntactic features and unlabelled dependencies to 
evaluate MT quality, outperforming BLEU on 
segment-level correlation with human judgement. 
Dependencies abstract away from the particulars of 
the surface string (and syntactic tree) realization 
and provide a ?normalized? representation of 
(some) syntactic variants of a given sentence.  
While Liu and Gildea (2005) calculate n-gram 
matches on non-labelled head-modifier sequences 
derived by head-extraction rules from syntactic 
trees, we automatically evaluate the quality of 
translation by calculating an f-score on labelled 
dependency structures produced by a Lexical-
Functional Grammar (LFG) parser. These 
dependencies differ from those used by Liu and 
Gildea (2005), in that they are extracted according 
to the rules of the LFG grammar and they are 
labelled with a type of grammatical relation that 
connects the head and the modifier, such as 
subject, determiner, etc. The presence of 
grammatical relation labels adds another layer of 
important linguistic information into the 
comparison and allows us to account for partial 
matches, for example when a lexical item finds 
itself in a correct relation but with an incorrect 
partner. Moreover, we use a number of best parses 
for the translation and the reference, which serves 
to decrease the amount of noise that can be 
introduced by the process of parsing and extracting 
dependency information. 
The translation and reference files are 
analyzed by a treebank-based, probabilistic LFG 
parser (Cahill et al, 2004), which produces a set of 
dependency triples for each input. The translation 
set is compared to the reference set, and the 
number of matches is calculated, giving the 
104
precision, recall, and f-score for each particular 
translation.   
In addition, to allow for the possibility of valid 
lexical differences between the translation and the 
references, we follow Kauchak and Barzilay 
(2006) in adding a number of synonyms in the 
process of evaluation to raise the number of 
matches between the translation and the reference, 
leading to a higher score. 
In an experiment on 16,800 sentences of 
Chinese-English newswire text with segment-level 
human evaluation from the Linguistic Data 
Consortium?s (LDC) Multiple Translation project, 
we compare the LFG-based evaluation method 
with other popular metrics like BLEU, NIST, 
General Text Matcher (GTM) (Turian et al, 2003), 
Translation Error Rate (TER) (Snover et al, 
2006)1, and METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), 
and we show that combining dependency 
representations with synonyms leads to a more 
accurate evaluation that correlates better with 
human judgment. Although evaluated on a 
different test set, our method also outperforms the 
correlation with human scores reported in Liu and 
Gildea (2005). 
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows: Section 2 gives a basic introduction to 
LFG; Section 3 describes related work; Section 4 
describes our method and gives results of the 
experiment on the Multiple Translation data; 
Section 5 discusses ongoing work; Section 6 
concludes. 
2 Lexical-Functional Grammar 
In Lexical-Functional Grammar (Kaplan and 
Bresnan, 1982; Bresnan, 2001) sentence structure 
is represented in terms of c(onstituent)-structure 
and f(unctional)-structure. C-structure represents 
the word order of the surface string and the 
hierarchical organisation of phrases in terms of 
CFG trees. F-structures are recursive feature (or 
attribute-value) structures, representing abstract 
grammatical relations, such as subj(ect), obj(ect), 
obl(ique), adj(unct), etc., approximating to 
predicate-argument structure or simple logical 
forms. C-structure and f-structure are related in 
                                                 
1 We omit HTER (Human-Targeted Translation Error 
Rate), as it is not fully automatic and requires human 
input. 
terms of functional annotations (attribute-value 
structure equations) in c-structure trees, describing 
f-structures.  
While c-structure is sensitive to surface 
rearrangement of constituents, f-structure abstracts 
away from the particulars of the surface 
realization. The sentences John resigned yesterday 
and Yesterday, John resigned will receive different 
tree representations, but identical f-structures, 
shown in (1). 
 
(1) C-structure:                         F-structure: 
 
              S 
                  
      
 NP                      VP 
   |                     
John       
              V               NP-TMP 
               |                      | 
       resigned       yesterday 
                         
SUBJ        PRED   john 
                 NUM    sg 
                 PERS   3 
PRED       resign 
TENSE     past 
ADJ      {[PRED   yesterday]} 
 
 
                     S 
                  
      
    NP       NP       VP 
      |                 |            | 
Yesterday  John        V              
                                    | 
                            resigned                             
SUBJ        PRED   john 
                 NUM    sg 
                 PERS   3 
PRED       resign 
TENSE     past 
ADJ      {[PRED   yesterday]} 
 
 
 
Note that if these sentences were a translation-
reference pair, they would receive a less-than-
perfect score from string-based metrics. For 
example, BLEU with add-one smoothing2 gives 
this pair a score of barely 0.3781. This is because, 
although all three unigrams from the ?translation? 
(John; resigned; yesterday) are present in the 
reference, which contains four items including the 
comma (Yesterday; ,; John; resigned), the 
?translation? contains only one bigram (John 
resigned) that matches the ?reference? (Yesterday 
,; , John; John resigned), and no matching 
trigrams. 
The f-structure can also be described in terms 
of a flat set of triples. In triples format, the f-
structure in (1) is represented as follows: 
{subj(resign, john), pers(john, 3), num(john, sg), 
tense(resign, past), adj(resign, yesterday), 
pers(yesterday, 3), num(yesterday, sg)}. 
                                                 
2 We use smoothing because the original BLEU metric 
gives zero points to sentences with fewer than one four-
gram. 
105
Cahill et al (2004) presents a set of Penn-II 
Treebank-based LFG parsing resources. Their 
approach distinguishes 32 types of dependencies, 
including grammatical functions and 
morphological information. This set can be divided 
into two major groups: a group of predicate-only 
dependencies and non-predicate dependencies. 
Predicate-only dependencies are those whose path 
ends in a predicate-value pair, describing 
grammatical relations. For example, for the f-
structure in (1), predicate-only dependencies would 
include: {subj(resign, john), adj(resign, 
yesterday)}.  
Other predicate-only dependencies include: 
apposition, complement, open complement, 
coordination, determiner, object, second object, 
oblique, second oblique, oblique agent, possessive, 
quantifier, relative clause, topic, and relative 
clause pronoun. The remaining non-predicate 
dependencies are: adjectival degree, coordination 
surface form, focus, complementizer forms: if, 
whether, and that, modal, number, verbal particle, 
participle, passive, person, pronoun surface form, 
tense, and infinitival clause. 
In parser evaluation, the quality of the f-
structures produced automatically can be checked 
against a set of gold standard sentences annotated 
with f-structures by a linguist. The evaluation is 
conducted by calculating the precision and recall 
between the set of dependencies produced by the 
parser, and the set of dependencies derived from 
the human-created f-structure. Usually, two 
versions of f-score are calculated: one for all the 
dependencies for a given input, and a separate one 
for the subset of predicate-only dependencies. 
In this paper, we use the parser developed by 
Cahill et al (2004), which automatically annotates 
input text with c-structure trees and f-structure 
dependencies, obtaining high precision and recall 
rates. 3  
3 Related work 
3.1 String-based metrics 
The insensitivity of BLEU and NIST to perfectly 
legitimate syntactic and lexical variation has been 
raised, among others, in Callison-Burch et al 
(2006), but the criticism is widespread. Even the 
                                                 
3 A demo of the parser can be found at http://lfg-
demo.computing.dcu.ie/lfgparser.html 
creators of BLEU point out that it may not 
correlate particularly well with human judgment at 
the sentence level (Papineni et al, 2002).  
Recently a number of attempts to remedy these 
shortcomings have led to the development of other 
automatic MT evaluation metrics. Some of them 
concentrate mainly on word order, like General 
Text Matcher (Turian et al, 2003), which 
calculates precision and recall for translation-
reference pairs, weighting contiguous matches 
more than non-sequential matches, or Translation 
Error Rate (Snover et al, 2006), which computes 
the number of substitutions, insertions, deletions, 
and shifts necessary to transform the translation 
text to match the reference. Others try to 
accommodate both syntactic and lexical 
differences between the candidate translation and 
the reference, like CDER (Leusch et al, 2006), 
which employs a version of edit distance for word 
substitution and reordering; or METEOR 
(Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), which uses stemming 
and WordNet synonymy. Kauchak and Barzilay 
(2006) and Owczarzak et al (2006) use 
paraphrases during BLEU and NIST evaluation to 
increase the number of matches between the 
translation and the reference; the paraphrases are 
either taken from WordNet4 in Kauchak and 
Barzilay (2006) or derived from the test set itself 
through automatic word and phrase alignment in 
Owczarzak et al (2006). Another metric making 
use of synonyms is the linear regression model 
developed by Russo-Lassner et al (2005), which 
makes use of stemming, WordNet synonymy, verb 
class synonymy, matching noun phrase heads, and 
proper name matching. Kulesza and Shieber 
(2004), on the other hand, train a Support Vector 
Machine using features such as proportion of n-
gram matches and word error rate to judge a given 
translation?s distance from human-level quality.  
3.2 Dependency-based metric 
The metrics described above use only string-based 
comparisons, even while taking into consideration 
reordering. By contrast, Liu and Gildea (2005) 
present three metrics that use syntactic and 
unlabelled dependency information. Two of these 
metrics are based on matching syntactic subtrees 
between the translation and the reference, and one 
                                                 
4 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/ 
106
is based on matching headword chains, i.e. 
sequences of words that correspond to a path in the 
unlabelled dependency tree of the sentence. 
Dependency trees are created by extracting a 
headword for each node of the syntactic tree, 
according to the rules used by the parser of Collins 
(1999), where every subtree represents the 
modifier information for its root headword. The 
dependency trees for the translation and the 
reference are converted into flat headword chains, 
and the number of overlapping n-grams between 
the translation and the reference chains is 
calculated. Our method, extending this line of 
research with the use of labelled LFG 
dependencies, partial matching, and n-best parses, 
allows us to considerably outperform Liu and 
Gildea?s (2005) highest correlations with human 
judgement (they report 0.144 for the correlation 
with human fluency judgement, 0.202 for the 
correlation with human overall judgement), 
although it has to be kept in mind that such 
comparison is only tentative, as their correlation is 
calculated on a different test set. 
4 LFG f-structure in MT evaluation 
LFG-based automatic MT evaluation reflects the 
same process that underlies the evaluation of 
parser-produced f-structure quality against a gold 
standard: we parse the translation and the 
reference, and then, for each sentence, we check 
the set of labelled translation dependencies against 
the set of labelled reference dependencies, 
counting the number of matches. As a result, we 
obtain the precision and recall scores for the 
translation, and we calculate the f-score for the 
given pair.  
4.1 Determining parser noise 
Because we are comparing two outputs that were 
produced automatically, there is a possibility that 
the result will not be noise-free, even if the parser 
fails to provide a parse only in 0.1% of cases. 
To assess the amount of noise that the parser 
introduces, Owczarzak et al (2006) conducted an 
experiment where 100 English sentences were 
hand-modified so that the position of adjuncts was 
changed, but the sentence remained grammatical 
and the meaning was not influenced. This way, an 
ideal parser should give both the source and the 
modified sentence the same f-structure, similarly to 
the example presented in (1). The modified 
sentences were treated like a translation file, and 
the original sentences played the part of the 
reference. Each set was run through the parser, and 
the dependency triples obtained from the 
?translation? were compared against the 
dependency triples for the ?reference?, calculating 
the f-score. Additionally, the same ?translation-
reference? set was scored with other metrics (TER, 
METEOR, BLEU, NIST, and GTM). The results, 
including the distinction between f-scores for all 
dependencies and predicate-only dependencies, 
appear in Table 1. 
 
 baseline modified 
TER 0.0 6.417 
METEOR   1.0 0.9970 
BLEU 1.0000 0.8725 
NIST 11.5232 11.1704 (96.94%) 
GTM 100 99.18 
dep f-score  100 96.56 
dep_preds f-score 100 94.13 
Table 1. Scores for sentences with reordered adjuncts 
 
The baseline column shows the upper bound for a 
given metric: the score which a perfect translation, 
word-for-word identical to the reference, would 
obtain.5 The other column lists the scores that the 
metrics gave to the ?translation? containing 
reordered adjunct. As can be seen, the dependency 
and predicate-only dependency scores are lower 
than the perfect 100, reflecting the noise 
introduced by the parser. 
 We propose that the problem of parser 
noise can be alleviated by introducing a number of 
best parses into the comparison between the 
translation and the reference. Table 2 shows how 
increasing the number of parses available for 
comparison brings our method closer to an ideal 
noise-free parser.  
 
                                                 
5 Two things have to be noted here: (1) in the case of 
NIST the perfect score differs from text to text, which is 
why the percentage points are provided along the 
numerical score, and (2) in the case of TER the lower 
the score, the better the translation, so the perfect 
translation will receive 0, and there is no upper bound 
on the score, which makes this particular metric 
extremely difficult to directly compare with others. 
107
 dependency f-score 
1 best 96.56 
2 best 97.31 
5 best 97.90 
10 best 98.31 
20 best 98.59 
30 best 98.74 
50 best 98.79 
baseline 100 
Table 2.  Dependency f-scores for sentences with reordered 
adjuncts with n-best parses available 
 
It has to be noted, however, that increasing the 
number of parses beyond a certain threshold does 
little to further improve results, and at the same 
time it considerably decreases the efficiency of the 
method, so it is important to find the right balance 
between these two factors. In our opinion, the 
optimal value would be 10-best parses. 
4.2 Correlation with human judgement ? 
MultiTrans 
4.2.1 Experimental design 
To evaluate the correlation with human 
assessment, we used the data from the Linguistic 
Data Consortium Multiple Translation Chinese 
(MTC) Parts 2 and 4, which consists of multiple 
translations of Chinese newswire text, four human-
produced references, and segment-level human 
scores for a subset of the translation-reference 
pairs. Although a single translated segment was 
always evaluated by more than one judge, the 
judges used a different reference every time, which 
is why we treated each translation-reference-
human score triple as a separate segment. In effect, 
the test set created from this data contained 16,800 
segments. As in the previous experiment, the 
translation was scored using BLEU, NIST, GTM, 
TER, METEOR, and our labelled dependency-
based method. 
4.2.2 Labelled dependency-based method 
We examined a number of modifications of the 
dependency-based method in order to find out 
which one gives the highest correlation with 
human scores. The correlation differences between 
immediate neighbours in the ranking were often 
too small to be statistically significant; however, 
there is a clear overall trend towards improvement.  
Besides the plain version of the dependency f-
score, we also looked at the f-score calculated on 
predicate dependencies only (ignoring ?atomic? 
features such as person, number, tense, etc.), which 
turned out not to correlate well with human 
judgements. 
Another addition was the use of 2-, 10-, or 50-
best parses of the translation and reference 
sentences, which partially neutralized parser noise 
and resulted in increased correlations.  
We also created a version where predicate 
dependencies of the type subj(resign,John) are split 
into two parts, each time replacing one of the 
elements participating in the relation with a 
variable, giving in effect subj(resign,x) and 
subj(y,John). This lets us score partial matches, 
where one correct lexical object happens to find 
itself in the correct relation, but with an incorrect 
?partner?.  
Lastly, we added WordNet synonyms into the 
matching process to accommodate lexical 
variation, and to compare our WordNet-enhanced 
method with the WordNet-enhanced version of 
METEOR.  
4.2.3 Results 
We calculated Pearson?s correlation coefficient for 
segment-level scores that were given by each 
metric and by human judges. The results of the 
correlation are shown in Table 3. Note that the 
correlation for TER is negative, because in TER 
zero is the perfect score, in contrast to other 
metrics where zero is the worst possible score; 
however, this time the absolute values can be 
easily compared to each other. Rows are ordered 
by the highest value of the (absolute) correlation 
with the human score. 
First, it seems like none of the metrics is very 
good at reflecting human fluency judgments; the 
correlation values in the first column are 
significantly lower than the correlation with 
accuracy. This finding has been previously 
reported, among others, in Liu and Gildea (2005). 
However, the dependency-based method in almost 
all its versions has decidedly the highest 
correlation in this area. This can be explained by 
the method?s sensitivity to the grammatical 
structure of the sentence: a more grammatical 
translation is also a translation that is more fluent. 
As to the correlation with human evaluation of 
translation accuracy, our method currently falls 
108
short of METEOR. This is caused by the fact that 
METEOR assign relatively little importance to the 
position of a specific word in a sentence, therefore 
rewarding the translation for content rather than 
linguistic form. Interestingly, while METEOR, 
with or without WordNet, considerably 
outperforms all other metrics when it comes to the 
correlation with human judgements of translation 
accuracy, it falls well behind most versions of our 
dependency-based method in correlation with 
human scores of translation fluency. 
Surprisingly, adding partial matching to the 
dependency-based method resulted in the greatest 
increase in correlation levels, to the extent that the 
partial-match versions consistently outperformed 
versions with a larger number of parses available 
but without the partial match. The most interesting 
effect was that the partial-match versions (even 
those with just a single parse) offered results 
comparable to or higher than the addition of 
WordNet to the matching process when it comes to 
accuracy and overall judgement. 
5 Current and future work 
Fluency and accuracy are two very different 
aspects of translation quality, each with its own set 
of conditions along which the input is evaluated. 
Therefore, it seems unfair to expect a single 
automatic metric to correlate highly with human 
judgements of both at the same time. This pattern 
is very noticeable in Table 3: if a metric is 
(relatively) good at correlating with fluency, its 
accuracy correlation suffers (GTM might serve as 
an example here), and the opposite holds as well 
(see METEOR?s scores). It does not mean that any 
improvement that increases the method?s 
correlation with one aspect will result in a decrease 
in the correlation with the other aspect; but it does 
suggest that a possible way of development would 
be to target these correlations separately, if we 
want our automated metrics to reflect human 
scores better. At the same time, string-based 
metrics might have already exhausted their 
potential when it comes to increasing their 
correlation with human evaluation; as has been 
pointed out before, these metrics can only tell us 
that two strings differ, but they cannot distinguish 
legitimate grammatical variance from 
ungrammatical variance. As the quality of MT  
 
 
Table 3. Pearson?s correlation between human scores and 
evaluation metrics. Legend: d = dependency f-score, _pr = 
predicate-only f-score, 2, 10, 50 = n-best parses; var = 
partial-match version; M = METEOR, WN = WordNet6 
 
improves, the community will need metrics that are 
more sensitive in this respect. After all, the true 
quality of MT depends on producing grammatical 
output which describes the same concept as the 
source utterance, and the string identity with a 
reference is only a very selective approximation of 
this goal.  
                                                 
6 In general terms, an increase of 0.022 or more between 
any two scores in the same column is significant with a 
95% confidence interval. The statistical significance of 
correlation differences was calculated using Fisher?s z? 
transformation and the general formula for confidence 
interval. 
 
fluency  accuracy  average  
d_50+WN 0.177 M+WN 0.294 M+WN 0.255 
d+WN 0.175 M   0.278 d_50_var 0.252 
d_50_var 0.174 d_50_var 0.273 d_50+WN 0.250 
GTM 0.172 NIST 0.273 d_10_var 0.250 
d_10_var 0.172 d_10_var 0.273 d_2_var 0.247 
d_50 0.171 d_2_var 0.270 d+WN 0.244 
d_2_var 0.168 d_50+WN 0.269 d_50 0.243 
d_10 0.168 d_var 0.266 d_var 0.243 
d_var 0.165 d_50 0.262 M   0.242 
d_2 0.164 d_10 0.262 d_10 0.242 
d   0.161 d+WN 0.260 NIST 0.238 
BLEU 0.155 d_2 0.257 d_2 0.237 
M+WN 0.153 d  0.256 d   0.235 
M   0.149 d_pr 0.240 d_pr 0.216 
NIST 0.146 GTM 0.203 GTM 0.208 
d_pr 0.143 BLEU 0.199 BLEU 0.197 
TER -0.133 TER -0.192 TER -0.182 
109
 In order to maximize the correlation with 
human scores of fluency, we plan to look more 
closely at the parser output, and implement some 
basic transformations which would allow an even 
deeper logical analysis of input (e.g. passive to 
active voice transformation). 
  Additionally, we want to take advantage of 
the fact that the score produced by the dependency-
based method is the proportional average of 
matches for a group of up to 32 (but usually far 
fewer) different dependency types. We plan to 
implement a set of weights, one for each 
dependency type, trained in such a way as to 
maximize the correlation of the final dependency f-
score with human evaluation. In a preliminary 
experiment, for example, assigning a low weight to 
the topic dependency increases our correlations 
slightly (this particular case can also be seen as a 
transformation into a more basic logical form by 
removing non-elementary dependency types). 
 In a similar direction, we want to 
experiment more with the f-score calculations. 
Initial check shows that assigning a higher weight 
to recall than to precision improves results. 
 To improve the correlation with accuracy 
judgements, we would like to experiment using a 
paraphrase set derived from a large parallel corpus, 
as described in Owczarzak et al (2006). While 
retaining the advantage of having a similar size to 
a corresponding set of WordNet synonyms, this set 
will also capture low-level syntactic variations, 
which can increase the number of matches.  
6 Conclusions 
In this paper we present a linguistically-
motivated method for automatically evaluating the 
output of Machine Translation. Most currently 
used popular metrics rely on comparing translation 
and reference on a string level. Even given 
reordering, stemming, and synonyms for individual 
words, current methods are still far from reaching 
human ability to assess the quality of translation, 
and there exists a need in the community to 
develop more dependable metrics. Our method 
explores one such direction of development, 
comparing the sentences on the level of their 
grammatical structure, as exemplified by their f-
structure labelled dependency triples produced by 
an LFG parser. In our experiments we showed that 
the dependency-based method correlates higher 
than any other metric with human evaluation of 
translation fluency, and shows high correlation 
with the average human score. The use of 
dependencies in MT evaluation has not been 
extensively researched before (one exception here 
would be Liu and Gildea (2005)), and requires 
more research to improve it, but the method shows 
potential to become an accurate evaluation metric.  
 
Acknowledgements 
This work was partly funded by Microsoft Ireland 
PhD studentship  2006-8  for the first author of the 
paper. We would also like to thank our reviewers 
and Dan Melamed for their insightful comments. 
All remaining errors are our own. 
 
References 
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR: 
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with 
Improved Correlation with Human Judgments. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for MT and/or 
Summarization at the Association for Computational 
Linguistics Conference 2005: 65-73. Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. 
Joan Bresnan. 2001. Lexical-Functional Syntax, 
Blackwell, Oxford. 
Aoife Cahill, Michael Burke, Ruth O?Donovan, Josef 
van Genabith, and Andy Way. 2004. Long-Distance 
Dependency Resolution in Automatically Acquired 
Wide-Coverage PCFG-Based LFG Approximations, 
In Proceedings of Association for Computational 
Linguistics 2004: 320-327. Barcelona, Spain. 
Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne and Philipp 
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU in 
Machine Translation Research. Proceedings of the 
European Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics 2006: 249-256. Oslo, 
Norway. 
Michael J. Collins. 1999. Head-driven Statistical 
Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. 
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation of MT 
Quality using N-gram Co-occurrence Statistics. 
Proceedings of Human Language Technology 
Conference 2002: 138-145. San Diego, California. 
Kaplan, R. M., and J. Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-functional 
Grammar: A Formal System for Grammatical 
110
Representation.  In J. Bresnan (ed.), The Mental 
Representation of Grammatical Relations.  MIT 
Press, Cambridge. 
David Kauchak and Regina Barzilay. 2006. 
Paraphrasing for Automatic Evaluation. Proceedings 
of Human Language Technology ? North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics Conference 2006: 45-462. New York, 
New York. 
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: a beam search decoder 
for phrase-based statistical machine translation 
models. Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine 
Translation: From real users to research at the 
Association for Machine Translation in the Americas 
Conference 2004: 115-124. Washington, DC. 
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A Parallel Corpus for 
Statistical Machine Translation. Proceedings of MT 
Summit 2005: 79-86. Phuket, Thailand. 
Alex Kulesza and Stuart M. Shieber. 2004. A learning 
approach to improving sentence-level MT evaluation. 
In Proceedings of the Conference on Theoretical and 
Methodological Issues in Machine Translation 2004: 
75-84. Baltimore, Maryland. 
Gregor Leusch, Nicola Ueffing and Hermann Ney. 
2006. CDER: Efficient MT Evaluation Using Block 
Movements. Proceedings of European Chapter of the 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
Conference 2006: 241-248. Trento, Italy. 
Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2005. Syntactic Features 
for Evaluation of Machine Translation. In 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Intrinsic and 
Extrinsic Evaluation Measures for Machine 
Translation and/or Summarization at the Association 
for Computational Linguistics Conference 2005. Ann 
Arbor, Michigan. 
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Modes. 
Computational Linguistics, 29:19-51. 
Karolina Owczarzak, Declan Groves, Josef van 
Genabith, and Andy Way. 2006. Contextual Bitext-
Derived Paraphrases in Automatic MT Evaluation. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Statistical Machine 
Translation at the Human Language Technology ? 
North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics Conference 2006: 86-93. 
New York, New York. 
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and 
WeiJing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of 
Association for Computational Linguistics 
Conference 2002: 311-318. Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania. 
Grazia Russo-Lassner, Jimmy Lin, and Philip Resnik. 
2005. A Paraphrase-based Approach to Machine 
Translation Evaluation. Technical Report LAMP-TR-
125/CS-TR-4754/UMIACS-TR-2005-57, University 
of Maryland, College Park, Maryland. 
Mathew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, John 
Makhoul, Linnea Micciula. 2006. A Study of 
Translation Error Rate with Targeted Human 
Annotation. Proceedings of the Association for 
Machine Translation in the Americas Conference 
2006: 223-231. Boston, Massachusetts. 
Joseph P. Turian, Luke Shen, and I. Dan Melamed. 
2003. Evaluation of Machine Translation and Its 
Evaluation. Proceedings of MT Summit 2003: 386-
393. New Orleans, Luisiana. 
Ying Zhang and Stephan Vogel. 2004. Measuring 
confidence intervals for the machine translation 
evaluation metrics. Proceedings of Conference on 
Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine 
Translation 2004: 85-94. Baltimore, Maryland. 
111
