Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 121?124,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Two Tools for Creating and Visualizing
Sub-sentential Alignments of Parallel Text
Ulrich Germann
University of Toronto
germann@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
We present two web-based, interactive tools
for creating and visualizing sub-sentential
alignments of parallel text. Yawat is a tool
to support distributed, manual word- and
phrase-alignment of parallel text through an
intuitive, web-based interface. Kwipc is an
interface for displaying words or bilingual
word pairs in parallel, word-aligned context.
A key element of the tools presented here
is the interactive visualization: alignment
information is shown only for one pair of
aligned words or phrases at a time. This
allows users to explore the alignment space
interactively without being overwhelmed by
the amount of information available.
1 Introduction
Sub-sentential alignments of parallel text play an
important role in statistical machine translation
(SMT). They establish which parts of a sentence
correspond to which parts of the sentence?s trans-
lation, and thus form the basis of a compositional
approach to translation that models the translation
of a sentence as a sequence of individual translation
decisions for basic units of meaning. The simplest
assumption is that typographic words, i.e., strings
of letters delimited by punctuation and white space,
constitute the basic units of translation. In reality, of
course, things are more complicated. One word in
one language may have to be translated into several
in the other or not at all, or several words may form
a conceptual unit that cannot be translated word for
word. Because of its central role in building machine
translation systems and because of the complexity
of the task, sub-sentential alignment of parallel cor-
pora continues to be an active area of research (e.g.,
Moore et al, 2006; Fraser and Marcu, 2006), and
this implies a continuing demand for manually cre-
ated or human-verified gold standard alignments for
development and evaluation purposes.
We present here two tools that are designed to fa-
cilitate the process and allow human inspection of
automatically aligned parallel corpora for the study
of translation. The first is a web-based interface
for manual sub-sentential alignment of parallel sen-
tences. The second is an extension of the traditional
keywords-in-context tools to the bilingual case. A
distinctive feature of both tools is that they are based
on an interactive process. Rather than showing all
alignment information at once, they hide most in-
formation most of the time and visualize alignment
information only selectively and only on demand.
2 Visualization schemes for sub-sentential
text alignment information
In this section, we briefly review existing visualiza-
tion schemes for word-level alignments.
2.1 Drawing lines
Word alignment visualization by drawing lines is
shown in Figure 1. This visualization technique has
several limitations.
? The parallel text cannot be wrapped easily.
Each sentence has to be represented as a
straight line or column of text. If the word
121
I have not any doubt that would be the position of the Supreme Court of Canada .
Je ne doute pas que telle serait la position de la Cour supre?me du Canada .
I Je
have ne
not doute
any pas
doubt que
that telle
would serait
be la
. . . . . .
Figure 1: Visualization of word alignments by drawing lines.
alignment is known, it may be possible to pre-
segment the parallel text into smaller blocks of
text such that all word alignment links are con-
tained within these blocks of text. For manual
word alignment from scratch, this is impossi-
ble, for lack of prior word alignment informa-
tion. In consequence, the sentence pair often
will not fit on the computer screen entirely, so
that users have to scroll back and forth to view
and create alignment links.
? Especially when the two aligned sentences
show differences in word order, many of the
lines representing word alignments will cross
one another, leading to a cluttered and hard-to-
follow display.
? There is no good way to represent the align-
ment on the phrase level, especially when the
phrases contain gaps. If the phrases involved
are contiguous, we can use brackets or boxes
to group words into phrases, but this does not
work for phrases that contain gaps. Another
way to visualize phrase alignments is to link
each word in each of the two phrases with
each word in the respective other phrase. This
acerbates the aforementioned problem of visual
clutter.
2.2 Alignment matrices
Alignment matrices such as the one shown in Fig-
ure 2 map the words of one sentence onto the rows
and the words of the other sentence onto the columns
of a two-dimensional table. Each cell (r, c) in the
table represents a potential alignment between the
word in the r-th position of the first sentence and
the word in the c-th position in the second sentence.
If the two words are in fact aligned, the respective
Je ne dou
te
pas tell
e
se
ra
it
la pos
itio
n
de la Co
ur
su
pre?
m
e
du Ca
na
da
.
I ?
have ?
not ? ?
any
doubt ?
that ?
would ?
be ?
the ?
position ?
of ?
the ?
Supreme ?
Court ?
of ?
Canada ?
. ?
Figure 2: Visualization of word alignments with an
alignment matrix.
cell contains a dot, otherwise it is empty. This tech-
nique allows the visualization of phrase-level align-
ments even of discontinuous phrases (by filling the
cells representing the cross-product of the two sets
of words involved). Fitting the matrix for pairs of
long sentences onto the screen is still a problem,
however.
2.3 Coloring
A third way of visualizing word alignments is the
use of colors. This technique has two draw-backs.
First, it may be difficult to find enough colors that
are easily distinguished to mark up all alignments in
pairs of long sentences, and second, actually track-
ing alignments is tedious and requires a lot of con-
centration.
2.4 Interactive visualization
Our solution to the visualization problem is to take
an interactive approach. We use the coloring ap-
proach, but use only one or two colors to mark up
122
Figure 3: Manual word alignment with Yawat. The
image shows the state of the screen with the mouse
hovering over the alignment matrix cell correspond-
ing to dispatch ? expe?dition. A click onto the cell
links the two words.
alignment pairs, and we mark up alignment pairs
only one at a time. By positioning the mouse pointer
over a word of interest, the user indicates which
alignment he or she would like to see. All other
alignments are hidden.
3 The tools
3.1 Yawat
Yawat (Yet Another Word Alignment Tool) is a tool
for manual alignment of parallel sentences. It con-
sists of a cgi-script responsible for retrieving and
storing sentence pairs and their alignments from a
database on the server side and marking them up in
HTML, and client-side functionality that handles the
interactive aspects of word-alignment and display
and reports changes back to the server-side script.
The user interface combines alignment matrix vi-
sualization with interactive colorization. Figure 3
shows the typical Yawat interface. The alignment
matrix on top gives a birds-eye view of the align-
ment relations in the sentence. If the mouse is posi-
tioned over one of the cells, a tool-tip window pops
up showing the row and column labels of the respec-
tive cell. If the cell is ?active? (i.e., represents part of
an alignment relation), the corresponding alignment
pair is highlighted in the text section below. Rows
and columns of the alignment matrix are deliberately
not labeled so that the alignment matrix can be kept
small. Its size is adjustable via the [?] and [+] but-
tons to its left and right.
The text section below the matrix shows the actual
sentence pair. Moving the mouse over an aligned
word highlights the respective alignment pair in the
text as well as the corresponding cells in the matrix.
The tool was designed to minimize the number
of mouse clicks and mouse travel necessary to align
words. Clicking on an empty cell in the matrix
aligns the respective words. The effect of clicking
on an active cell depends on whether the cell rep-
resents an exclusive link between two single words,
or is part of a larger alignment group. In the for-
mer case, the link is simply removed, in the latter,
the respective alignment group is opened for editing.
Once an alignment group is open for editing, a left-
click with the mouse adds or removes words. Select-
ing a word that is currently part of another alignment
group automatically removes it from that group. An
alignment group is closed by a right-click on one of
its members. A right click on a non-member adds
it to the group and then closes the group for editing.
This allows us to perform single word alignments
with two simple mouse clicks: left-click on the first
word and right click on the second, without the need
to move the mouse on a visual ?link words? button in
the interface.
Unaligned text in the sentence pair is represented
in red, aligned text in gray. This allows the annota-
tor to immediately spot unaligned sections without
having to refer to the alignment matrix or to scan the
text with the mouse to find unaligned words.
We have not performed a formal user study, but
we have found the tool very efficient in our own ex-
perience.
3.2 Kwipc
Kwipc (Key Words In Parallel Context) uses the
same interactive visualization technique to display
word alignments for multiple sentence pairs. It
currently uses a very simple search interface that
allows the user to specify regular expressions for
one or both of the sentences in the sentence pair.
The server-side cgi-script searches the corpus lin-
123
Table 1: Word alignment visualization and editing
tools
name visualization editing
Cairoa lines no
Alpacob lines yes
Lingua-AlignmentSetc matrix no
UMIACS WA Interfaced lines yes
HandAligne lines yes
Ilinkf static colors yes
UPlugg matrix yes
ICAh matrix yes
ReWrite Decoder interactive, colors no
Yawat matrix, interactive,
colors yes
Kwipc interactive, colors no
a http://www.clsp.jhu.edu/ws99/projects/
mt/toolkit/
b http://www.d.umn.edu/
?
tpederse/parallel.
html
c http://gps-tsc.upc.es/veu/personal/
lambert/\newlinesoftware/AlignmentSet.
html
d http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/
?
nmadnani/
\newlinealignment/forclip.htm
e http://www.cs.utah.edu/
?
hal/HandAlign/
f http://www.ida.liu.se/
?
nlplab/ILink/
g http://stp.ling.uu.se/cgi-bin/joerg/
Uplug
h Tiedemann (2006)
early and returns a list of marked-up sentence pairs
that contain matching expressions (which are high-
lighted in red) and provides the same interactive
alignment visualization as Yawat. For lack of space,
we cannot provide a screen shot here.
4 Related work
There are numerous tools available for the visual-
ization and creation of word alignments, most of
which are listed on Rada Mihalcea?s web site on
word alignment at http://www.cs.unt.edu/
?
rada/wa/. A comparison of these tools is shown
in Table 1. Most tools use line drawing or alignment
matrices for visualization. Only Ilink (Ahrenberg
et al, 2002) relies on colors to visualize alignments,
but it implements a static colorization scheme. The
interactive visualization scheme was first used in the
HTML output of the ISI ReWrite Decoder1, but the
formatting used there relies on an obsolete Docu-
ment Object Model and is not functional any more.
The use of different colors to distinguish aligned
and unaligned sections of text can also be found in
HandAlign.
5 Conclusion
We have presented two web-based tools that use
an interactive visualization method to display word-
and phrase-alignment information for parallel sen-
tence pairs, thus reducing visual clutter in the dis-
play and providing users with focussed access to
the alignment information they are actually inter-
ested in. The editing tool Yawat was designed to
minimize unnecessary scrolling, mouse clicks and
mouse travel to provide the annotator with an ef-
ficient tool to perform manual word- and phrase-
alignment of parallel sentences. Delivery of the ap-
plication through the web browser allows collabo-
rative alignment efforts with a central repository of
alignments and without the need to install the soft-
ware locally.
6 Availability
The tools are available at http://www.cs.
toronto.edu/compling/Software.
References
Ahrenberg, Lars, Mikael Andersson, and Magnus
Merkel. 2002. ?A system for incremental and in-
teractive word linking.? Proc. LREC 2002, 485?
490. Las Palmas, Spain.
Fraser, Alexander and Daniel Marcu. 2006. ?Semi-
supervised training for statistical word align-
ment.? Proc. COLING-ACL 2006, 769?776. Syd-
ney, Australia.
Moore, Robert C., Wen-tau Yih, and Andreas Bode.
2006. ?Improved discriminative bilingual word
alignment.? Proc. COLING-ACL 2006, 513?520.
Sydney, Australia.
Tiedemann, Jo?rg. 2006. ?ISA & ICA ? Two web
interfaces for interactive alignment of bitexts.?
Proc. LREC 2006. Genoa, Italy.
1 http://www.isi.edu/publications/
licensed-sw/rewrite-decoder/index.html
124
