BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 181?182,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Information Extraction from Patients? Free Form Documentation
Agnieszka Mykowiecka
Institute of Computer Science, PAS
Ordona 21, 01-237 Warszawa, Poland
agn@ipipan.waw.pl
Ma?gorzata Marciniak
Institute of Computer Science, PAS
Ordona 21, 01-237 Warszawa, Poland
mm@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
The paper presents two rule-based infor-
mation extraction (IE) from two types of
patients? documentation in Polish. For
both document types, values of sets of at-
tributes were assigned using specially de-
signed grammars.
1 Method/General Assumptions
Various rule-based, statistical, and machine learn-
ing methods have been developed for the purpose
of information extraction. Unfortunately, they have
rarely been tested on Polish texts, whose rich in-
flectional morphology and relatively free word or-
der is challenging. Here, we present results of two
experiments aimed at extracting information from
mammography reports and hospital records of dia-
betic patients.1 Since there are no annotated corpora
of Polish medical text which can be used in super-
vised statistical methods, and we do not have enough
data for weakly supervised methods, we chose the
rule-based extraction schema. The processing pro-
cedure in both experiments consisted of four stages:
text preprocessing, application of IE rules based on
the morphological information and domain lexicons,
postprocessing (data cleaning and structuring), and
conversion into a relational database.
Preprocessing included format unification, data
anonymization, and (for mammography reports) au-
tomatic spelling correction.
The extraction rules were defined as grammars
of the SProUT system, (Droz?dz?yn?ski et al, 2004).
1This work was partially financed by the Polish national
project number 3 T11C 007 27.
SProUT consists of a set of processing components
for basic linguistic operations, including tokeniza-
tion, sentence splitting, morphological analysis (for
Polish we use Morfeusz (Wolin?ski, 2006)) and
gazetteer lookup. The SproUT components are com-
bined into a pipeline that generates typed feature
structures (TFS), on which rules in the form of reg-
ular expressions with unification can operate. Small
specialized lexicons containing both morphologi-
cal and semantic (concept names) information have
been created for both document types.
Extracted attribute values are stored in a rela-
tional database.2 Before that, mammography re-
ports results undergo additional postprocessing ?
grouping together of extracted data. Specially de-
signed scripts put limits that separate descriptions of
anatomical changes, tissue structure, and diagnosis.
More details about mammography IE system can be
found in (Mykowiecka et al, 2005).
2 Document types
For both document types, partial ontologies were de-
fined on the basis of sample data and expert knowl-
edge. To formalize them, we used OWL-DL stan-
dard and the Prote?ge? ontology editor. The excerpt
from the ontology is presented in Fig. 1.
In both cases, the relevant part of the ontology
was translated into a TFS hierarchy. This resulted in
176 types with 66 attributes for the mammography
domain, and 139 types (including 75 drug names)
with 65 attributes for diabetic patients? records.
2This last stage is completed for the diabetes reports while
for mammography it is still under development.
181
BiochemicalData: BloodData: HB1C
Diet
DiseaseOrSymptom
Disease
AutoimmuneDisease
Cancer
Diabetes: Type1, Type2, TypeOther
Symptom
Angiopathy: Macroangiopathy, Microangiopathy
BoodSymptom: Hypoglicaemia
Neuropathy: Autonomic, PeripheralPolineuropathy
UrineSymptom: Acetonuria, Microalbuminuria
Medicine
DiabeticMedicine: Insulin, OralDiabeticMedicine
AnatomicalLocalization
BodyPart
Breast: Subareola, urq, ulq, lrq, llq
BodySide: Left, Right
HistDiagnosis: Benign, Suspicious, Malignant
TissueSpecification: GlandularTissue, FatTissue
Figure 1: A sample of classes
3 Extraction Grammars
The number of rules is highly related to the number
of attributes and possible ways of formulating their
values. The grammar for mammography reports
contains 190 rules; that for hospital records contains
about 100 rules. For the first task, nearly the entire
text is covered by the rules, while for the second,
only a small part of the text is extracted (e.g., from
many blood tests we are interested only in HBA1C).
Polish inflection is handled by using the morpho-
logical analyzer and by inserting the most frequent
morphological forms into the gazetteer. Free word
order is handled either by rules which describe all
possible orderings, or by extracting small pieces of
information which are merged at the postprocessing
stage. Fig. 2 presents a fragment of one mammog-
raphy note and its output. The zp and zk markers are
inserted during the information structuring stage to
represent borders of an anatomical change descrip-
tion. Similar markers are introduced to structure the
tissue description part.
4 Evaluation
The experiments were evaluated on a set of previ-
ously unseen reports. Extraction of the following
structures was evaluated: 1) simple attributes (e.g.
diabetes balance); 2) structured attributes (e.g. lo-
calization); and 3) complex structures (e.g. descrip-
tion of abnormal findings). Evaluation of three se-
lected attributes from both sets is given in Fig. 3.
W obu sutkach rozsiane pojedyncze mikrozwapnienia o charak-
terze ?agodnym. Do?y pachowe prawid?owe. Kontrolna mam-
mografia za rok.
(Within both breasts there are singular benign microcalcifica-
tions. Armpits normal. Next control mammography in a year.)
zp LOC|BODY PART:breast||LOC|L R:left-right
ANAT CHANGE:micro||GRAM MULT:plural
zk DIAGNOSIS RTG:benign
DIAGNOSIS RTG:no susp||LOC D|BODY PART:
armpit||LOC D|L R:left-right
RECOMMENDATION|FIRST:mmg||TIME:year
Figure 2: A fragment of an annotated mammogra-
phy report
The worse results for unbalanced diabetes recogni-
tion were due to an unpredicted expression type.
mammography ? 705 reports
cases precision recall
findings 343 90.76 97.38
block beginnings 299 81.25 97.07
localizations 2189 98.42 99.59
diabetes ? 99 reports
unbalanced diabetes 58 96,67 69,05
diabetic education 39 97,50 97,50
neuropathy 30 100 96,77
Figure 3: Evaluation results for selected attributes
5 Conclusions
Despite the fact that rule based extraction is typi-
cally seen as too time consuming, we claim that in
the case of very detailed information searching, de-
signing rules on the basis of expert knowledge is in
fact a method of a real practical value. In the next
stage, we plan to use our tools for creating anno-
tated corpora of medical texts (manually corrected).
These data can be used to train statistical IE models
and to evaluate other extraction systems.
References
Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Anna Kups?c?, Ma?gorzata
Marciniak. 2005. Rule-based Medical Content Ex-
traction and Classification, Proc. of IIS: IIPWM05.
Advances in Soft Comp., Vol. 31, Springer-Verlag.
Witold Droz?dz?yn?ski and Hans-Ulrich Krieger and Jakub
Piskorski and Ulrich Scha?fer and Feiyu Xu. 2004.
Shallow Processing with Unification and Typed Fea-
ture Structures ? Foundations and Applications. Ger-
man AI Journal KI-Zeitschrift, 01/04.
Marcin Wolin?ski. 2006. Morfeusz ? a Practical Tool for
the Morphological Analysis of Polish, Proc. of IIS:
IIPWM06. Adv. in Soft Comp., Springer-Verlag.
182
