Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Processing 2007, June 29, 2007, pages 1?10,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Slavonic Information Extraction and Partial Parsing
Adam Przepi?rkowski
Insitute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences
Ordona 21, 01-237 Warsaw, Poland
adamp@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
Information Extraction (IE) often involves
some amount of partial syntactic processing.
This is clear in cases of interesting high-
level IE tasks, such as finding information
about who did what to whom (when, where,
how and why), but it is also true in case
of simpler IE tasks, such as finding com-
pany names in texts. The aim of this paper is
to give an overview of Slavonic phenomena
which pose particular problems for IE and
partial parsing, and some phenomena which
seem easier to treat in Slavonic than in Ger-
manic or Romance; I also mention various
tools which have been used for the partial
processing of Slavonic.
1 Introduction
The aim of this paper is to give a general but rather
biased overview of the problems of Information Ex-
traction (IE) in Slavonic. In particular, I discuss
linguistic phenomena which make IE in Slavonic
harder than in Germanic or Romance, ?2, but also
those which seem to make it easier, ?3. We will also
look at various general tools which have been used
in IE tasks in the context of Slavonic languages, es-
pecially at tools for partial (or shallow) parsing, ?4.
I deal mainly with Polish, as a good representa-
tive of the Slavonic family: although Polish is a rela-
tively large language, with about 44 million native
speakers world-wide (over 38 million in Poland),
the availability of linguistic resources and tools for
this language does not reflect this fact: it compares
unfavourably with Czech, and probably favourably
with, say, Ukrainian.
2 Slavonic is Hard
There are various characteristics of Slavonic lan-
guages1 that make them more difficult for automatic
processing, whether shallow or deep, than Germanic
and Romance languages.2 The two of them which
are most conspicuous, and identified as most prob-
lematic, e.g., in (Collins et al, 1999), are rich nomi-
nal inflection (?2.1) and free word order (?2.6). Oth-
ers, causing problems to varying extents, include:
idiosyncratic inflection of Slavonic proper names
(?2.2); unstable inflection of some foreign names
(?2.3); high degree of trans- and, especially, intra-
paradigmatic syncretisms (?2.4); and, on the more
syntactic level, the infamous quirkiness of numeral
phrases (NumPs; ?2.5).
2.1 Rich Nominal Inflection
The rich nominal inflection of Slavonic makes al-
ready the most basic IE task, namely Named En-
tity Recognition (NER), more difficult than in Ger-
manic or Romance. Slavonic nouns, apart from in-
1Many of the typological features discussed below dis-
tinguish between, on the one hand, East Slavonic (Russian,
Ukrainian, Belorussian, Rusyn), West Slavonic (Czech, Slovak,
Upper and Lower Sorbian, Polish, Kashubian) and the Western
subgroup of South Slavonic (Croatian, Bosnian, Serbian, Slove-
nian), and, on the other hand, the Eastern subgroup of South
Slavonic (Bulgarian and Macedonian). In this and the next sec-
tion I concentrate on the former group of Slavonic languages.
2By shallow or, equivalently, partial processing, I mean the
task of finding some syntactic structure without using lexical
resources such as valence dictionaries; by contrast, deep pro-
cessing involves finding the complete sentence structures with
the use of such lexical resources.
1
flecting for number (singular and plural; in Slove-
nian and Sorbian also dual), famously inflect for
about 6 (e.g., Russian, Slovenian) or 7 (e.g., Czech,
Croatian, Polish, Ukrainian) cases: the exact number
of cases cited in the literature for any particular lan-
guage often depends on the granularity of descrip-
tion, so Belorussian and Slovak have either 6 or 7
cases, depending on the inclusion in the description
the rare vocative forms, among the 7 Serbian cases,
dative and locative are sometimes conflated because
they ?only? differ in accent, the Polish case system
may be extended to 8 cases by postulating the dis-
tributive case (Gruszczyn?ski, 1989, p. 89), while the
number of Russian cases may also be reasonably in-
creased to 8 by adding a second genitive and a sec-
ond locative case (Jakobson, 1958).
While for many European languages a dictionary
of lemmata of proper names is sufficient for the task
of NER, (Steinberger and Pouliquen, 2007, ?3.3)
note that ?a minimum of morphological treatment?
is required for languages with rich nominal inflec-
tion, such as Balto-Slavonic or Finno-Ugric lan-
guages. Unfortunately, for the majority of Slavonic
languages, there are no (freely) publicly available re-
sources that could provide such ?minimum morpho-
logical treatment? of proper names. For example, the
only large free (but not open source) morphologi-
cal analyser for Polish, Morfeusz (Wolin?ski, 2006),
contains very few proper names.3 Moreover, the NE
content of commercial analysers is often rather low,
so that simple resource-light heuristics sometimes
give better results (Urban?ska and Mykowiecka,
2005, p. 214). Such heuristics usually involve the
creation of inflected forms by adding typical suffixes
(Popov et al, 2004; Urban?ska and Mykowiecka,
2005; Steinberger and Pouliquen, 2007), where the
suffix addition/substitution rules are either hand-
generated (Urban?ska and Mykowiecka, 2005) or
automatically acquired (Steinberger and Pouliquen,
2007).
3A new version of Morfeusz, containing a large dictionary
of proper names, is being prepared, but it is currently not clear
if it is going to be freely available for non-commercial research
purposes (M. Wolin?ski, p.c.).
2.2 Different Inflection of Homonymous
Common and Proper Nouns
As mentioned in (Piskorski, 2005) and discussed
at length in (Piskorski et al, 2007b), many Pol-
ish surnames have the same base forms as com-
mon names, for example, GRZYB (lit. ?mushroom?),
GO?A?B (lit. ?pigeon?) or KOWALSKI (lit. an adjec-
tive from ?smith?). This is a problem in itself in
recognising proper names, but it is further exacer-
bated by the fact that such proper nouns may have
different gender values, and different inflectional
paradigms, than the corresponding common nouns.
For example, while the common nouns GRZYB and
GO?A?B are, respectively, inanimate masculine and
animate masculine (cf. fn. 5), the corresponding sur-
names are virile or feminine, depending on the de-
notation; in case of singular feminine names, they
would not overtly inflect at all, while in case of sin-
gular masculine or plural uses, the forms are often
different than corresponding common forms, e.g.,
the accusative singular and plural forms of GO?A?B
would be go?e?bia and go?e?bie, when used as a com-
mon noun, and Go?a?ba and Go?a?b?w, when used as
a surname, etc. Obviously, once properly described,
such inflectional differences may actually help in
NER.
2.3 Difficult Inflection of Foreign Names
A problem relatively minor in comparison to other
problems discussed here is the inflection of foreign
names: although it is governed by strict prescrip-
tive rules, native speakers are often unaware of them
and different variants of the same form may be en-
countered in text; for example, while in Polish the
correct spelling of the singular instrumental form of
LINUX is Linuksem, the variant Linuxem is at least
as common, and the starkly wrong Linux?em and
Linux-em are also quite frequent. Similarly, proba-
bly few Poles realise that the correct locative forms
of BRANDT and PEIRCE are Brandcie and Peirsie,
and not, say, Brandtcie and Peirce?ie, and that al-
though the locative of REMARQUE is Remarque?u,
the instrumental is Remarkiem.4 A comprehensive
NER should be able to deal with various incorrect
forms of foreign NE occurring in Slavonic texts.
On the other hand, the inflection of proper names
4See http://so.pwn.pl/.
2
depends on their pronunciation, i.e., on their ori-
gin. For example, the genitive of CHARLES is ei-
ther Charlesa or Charles?a, depending on whether
it is an English name or a French name. Another
example, from (Piskorski et al, 2007b), is WILDE,
whose genitive form is either Wilde?a (English) or
Wildego (German). This feature, when properly en-
coded, may actually help distinguish between enti-
ties in NER.
2.4 Tagset Size and Syncretisms
A rich inflection system also implies that the size
of the tagset is very large. For example, given that
a Polish nominal form may have one of 2 numbers,
one of 7 cases and one of 5 genders,5 there are 70
possible nominal tags, not counting gerundial and
pronominal forms. In fact, there are 4179 possible
tags in the IPI PAN Tagset of Polish (Przepi?rkowski
and Wolin?ski, 2003a; Przepi?rkowski and Wolin?ski,
2003b), of which around 1150 occur in nature
(Przepi?rkowski, 2006b). Similarly, sizes of Czech
tagsets range from 1171 (Hajic? and Hladk?, 1997),
through 1631 (Pala et al, 1998), to theoreti-
cally 4257, but ?only? about 1100 actually used
(Mirovsk? et al, 2002). Such detailed tagsets make
it difficult to reach high accuracy, which ? on the
assumption that syntactic parsing is preceded by full
morphosyntactic disambiguation ? has negative in-
fluence on syntactic processing.
Another problem connected to the rich inflection
system of Slavonic languages is the large number
of syncretisms. For example, a typical Polish adjec-
tive may have 11 textually different forms (e.g., for
BIA?Y ?white?: biali, bia?a, bia?a?, bia?e, bia?ego, bi-
a?ej, bia?emu, bia?y, bia?ych, bia?ym, bia?ymi), but as
many as 70 different tags (2 numbers ? 7 cases ? 5
genders). There are also various systematic nominal
syncretisms which to some extent annul the advan-
tages that rich case system presents for the identi-
fication of grammatical roles. For example, in plu-
5Traditionally, 3 genders were assumed for Polish, as for
many other European languages, but (Man?czak, 1956) conclu-
sively shows that at least 5 gender values must be adopted
in Polish: virile (called also m1, personal masculine and hu-
man masculine), animate masculine (m2), inanimate mascu-
line (m3), neuter and feminine. Although this repertoire of gen-
ders was only recently adopted in general dictionaries (Ban?ko,
2000), it is still rather conservative; e.g., (Saloni, 1976) pro-
poses 9 genders.
ral, Polish non-virile (non-human-masculine) nouns
have the same form in the nominative and in the
accusative, while in the singular, inanimate mascu-
line and neuter forms do. Similarly, virile and an-
imate masculine nouns have the same singular ac-
cusative and singular genitive forms. So, for exam-
ple, in the rather artificial sentence Samochody dwie
minuty wyprzedzaja? autobusy ?(The) cars (for) two
minutes are overtaking (the) buses?, each of samo-
chody, dwie minuty and autobusy may be interpreted
as either nominative or accusative, i.e., as the subject
(nominative), the object (accusative) or a temporal
adjunct (accusative).
2.5 Numeral Phrases
An area of Slavonic syntax very well-known in
theoretical linguistics is the syntactic behaviour of
NumPs (Corbett, 1978; Franks, 1995); numerals
also turn out to be awkward for automatic process-
ing in various ways.6
First, the case of the noun (phrase) within an
NumP depends on the numeral7 and on the position
of the whole NumP in the sentence. For example,
for NumPs in the subject position, the noun is in the
nominative case, roughly, if the numeral is or ends in
2, 3 or 4 (with the exception of 12, 13 and 14), and it
is genitive otherwise.8 This means that the shallow
processor should recognise as a possible currency
quantity the sequence 152 dolary and 155 dolar?w,
but not *152 dolar?w or *155 dolary.9
Second, in case of ?typical? numerals (not ending
in 2, 3 or 4), the Polish NumP in subject position
does not agree with the verb; instead, the verb oc-
curs in the default 3rd person singular neuter form,10
6One of the largest formal grammars of Polish, (S?widz-
in?ski, 1992), implemented as a wide coverage deep parser in
(Wolin?ski, 2004), does not deal with NumPs at all. Later mod-
ifications of the parser in (Ogrodniczuk, 2006) include some
limited treatment of numerals.
7This property turned out to be problematic for adapting the
GF Parallel Resource Grammar to Russian (Khegai, 2006).
8Another exception is JEDEN ?1?, which is actually an adjec-
tive, rather than a numeral (Przepi?rkowski, 2006a). Also, the
description above holds for non-virile genders, but is even more
complicated for virile.
9The latter may occur in contexts like: . . . wed?ug paragrafu
155 dolary nie sa? s?rodkiem p?atniczym w Polsce ?. . . according
to paragraph 155 dollars are not a valid currency in Poland?.
10I argue elsewhere (Przepi?rkowski, 1996; Przepi?rkowski,
2004b) that such NumPs in subject position actually bear the
accusative case; hence, the lack of agreement.
3
which may make discovering the subject-verb rela-
tion more difficult.
Finally, and rather marginally, ?typical? NumPs
in copular constructions trigger very atypical agree-
ment with the predicative adjective, e.g.: 40
g?os?w by?o niewaz?nych/niewaz?ne ?40 votes be-
3RD.SG.NEUT invalid-PL.GEN/ACC?. It is easy to
overlook such constructions when developing a shal-
low grammar, and ? since they are rare ? it is dif-
ficult to learn them automatically from corpora.
2.6 Free Word Order
Last but certainly not least, the relatively free word
order11 makes the discovering of who did what to
whom (when, where, how and why) much more
difficult than finding the relative order of NPs and
PPs in the sentence. It may seem that the rich case
system may help here, as ? with active forms of
verbs ? subjects are usually nominative and ob-
jects are often accusative, but matters are much more
complicated because of the widespread syncretisms
mentioned in ?2.4, esp. the systematic nominative-
accusative and accusative-genitive syncretisms, and
because both complements and adjuncts may be ex-
pressed by the same cases (e.g., accusative temporal
adjuncts may look like objects of transitive verbs).
While the relatively free word order is seriously
felt in deep parsers and leads to the multiplication of
analyses, to the best of our knowledge most IE work
in Slavonic to date has concentrated on lower-level
tasks such as NER and, hence, has not yet tried to
systematically deal with this problem.
3 Slavonic is Easy
On a more positive note, the rich Slavonic inflec-
tional system may help at the higher levels of pro-
cessing. There are various linguistic phenomena
where overt case, gender and number agreement
allows to differentiate between interpretations and,
hence, to extract the information about who did what
to whom. To give two trivial constructed examples:
the English sentence I saw him drunk is ambigu-
ous in ways that are necessarily disambiguated by
11Of course, the term free word order as applied to Slavonic
means that the word order is conditioned largely by information
structure (i.e., not really free); modelling the constraints of in-
formation structure on word order is particularly important in
text generation (Kruijff-Korbayov? and Kruijff, 1999).
the two Polish translations of that sentence: Widzi-
a?em go pijany ?(I) saw him drunk-NOM? and Widzi-
a?em go pijanego ?(I) saw him drunk-ACC?. Perhaps
more interestingly, the lexical aspect of Slavonic
verbs may make conspicuous the meanings which
are only implicit in other languages, as in the Polish
Skoczy? na st?? ?(He) jumped-PERF on (the) table-
ACC? versus Skaka? na stole ?(He) jumped-IMPERF
on (the) table-LOC?, both translated into the English
He jumped on the table.
One phenomenon important for high level IE
where the rich inflectional system plays a positive
role, however, is coordination.
Coordination is infamous both in theoretical lin-
guistics and in Natural Language Processing (NLP);
in fact, while recent years witnessed an increase of
theoretical linguistic works on various aspects of co-
ordination, it seems that NLP lags behind in address-
ing this phenomenon head on. One of the exceptions
is (Dale and Mazur, 2007), which deals with the
problem of identifying the number of Named En-
tities (NEs) in expressions of the form ?X and Y?,
where X and Y are sequences of capitalised words,
e.g.: ?Victorian Casino and Gaming Authority? (sin-
gle entity) or ?American Express and Visa Interna-
tional? (two entities). (Dale and Mazur, 2007) note
that the problem is statistically non-negligible, as
around 5.7% of sequences of capitalised words with
an optional conjunction (i.e., candidates for NEs)
actually contain a conjunction. Similarly, (Rus et
al., 2007, p. 229) discuss the bracketing problem in
phrases such as ?[soccer and tennis] player? and
?navy and [marine corps]?, noting that ?[p]arsing
base Noun Phrases ... is not handled by current state-
of-the-art syntactic parsers?. Another kind of coor-
dination ambiguity is considered in (Steiner, 2006),
namely, the ?NP and NP? sequence as either an
NP-coordination, or a part of sentential coordination
(where the first NP is an object of the preceding verb
and the second NP is the subject of the following
verb).
Slavonic rich inflection makes the processing of
such potentially coordinate structures easier. For ex-
ample, case disagreement between two apparently
coordinated NPs is a strong clue that they in fact
belong to separate coordinated clauses, while agree-
ment is a (perhaps weaker) clue that they form an ac-
4
tually coordinated NP.12 Similarly, (dis)agreement
in case, number and gender may help decide whether
two apparently coordinated adjectival forms actually
form a coordinate structure.
4 Slavonic is Processable
After discussing ways in which Slavonic languages
seem to be hard or easy for Information Extraction,
let us look at practical attempts at Slavonic IE, espe-
cially those involving partial parsing.
It seems that there have been relatively few at-
tempts at applying shallow (or partial; cf. fn. 2)
grammars to particular practical tasks. In some
of these attempts no particular dedicated language
processing system was used to implement shallow
grammars: apparently they were coded directly in
the host programming language.
One example is (Sharoff, 2004), where shallow
parsing is used for the identification of preposi-
tional Multi Word Expressions in Russian, with
the following explanation of reasons for performing
some language-dependent processing: ?Given that
the word order in Russian (and other Slavonic lan-
guages) is relatively free and a typical word (i.e.
lemma) has many forms (typically from 9 for nouns
to 50 for verbs), the sequences of exact N-grams are
much less frequent than in English, thus rendering
purely statistical approaches useless.?
For Polish, simple shallow grammars were im-
plemented for the tasks of question answering
(Piechocin?ski and Mykowiecka, 2005) and auto-
matic valence acquisition (Fast and Przepi?rkowski,
2005; Przepi?rkowski and Fast, 2005); in the lat-
ter case a grammar was implemented as a cas-
cade of Perl regular expressions. Similarly, (Zeman,
2001) describes a Perl regular expression implemen-
tation of a shallow preprocessor for a deep statistical
parser. Much earlier, (Nenadic? and Vitas, 1998; Ne-
nadic?, 2000) developed shallow grammars of Serbo-
Croatian for the recognition of noun phrases (NPs)
and certain kinds of coordinate structures. See also
(Bekavac and Tadic?, 2007) on the recognition of
Croatian NEs with regular grammars.
Moreover, for Bulgarian a more general integrated
system was developed, called LINGUA (Tanev and
Mitkov, 2002), which ? apart from modules for
12Again, this test may fail due to case syncretisms; cf. ?2.4.
tokenisation, morphosyntactic analysis and disam-
biguation, and anaphora resolution ? includes an
NP extractor and a bottom-up grammar of Bul-
garian. This system, together with a set of shal-
low patterns for identifying definition patterns, has
been employed in a Question Answering prototype
system (Tanev, 2004). Bulgarian pattern-matching
grammars are also employed in (Koeva, 2007).
Apart from these language-specific implementa-
tions, there exist tools and toolboxes which facilitate
various IE tasks, including shallow parsing. Proba-
bly the best known such a general system is GATE
(Cunningham et al, 1995; Cunningham et al, 2002),
which contains some NE resources for Bulgarian
and Russian (Humphreys et al, 2002; Popov et al,
2004) and allows to write shallow (regular) gram-
mars in the JAPE subsystem (Cunningham et al,
2000).
A system similar in scope is SProUT (Becker et
al., 2002), whose shallow parsing language allows
to write regular grammars over HPSG-style (Pol-
lard and Sag, 1994) typed feature structures and
which includes the operation of unification. Prelim-
inary work on adapting SProUT to the processing
of Baltic and Slavonic languages is presented in
(Droz?dz?yn?ski et al, 2003), with much subsequent
work devoted to the processing of Polish, especially,
in the area of Information Extraction from medical
texts (Piskorski et al, 2004; Piskorski, 2004a; Pisko-
rski, 2004b; Marciniak et al, 2005; Mykowiecka et
al., 2005a; Mykowiecka et al, 2005b; Marciniak and
Mykowiecka, 2007).
Although GATE and SProUT may be adapted to
the processing of XML documents, they are perhaps
not the most natural choice for the further processing
of morphosyntactically annotated documents in, for
example, the XCES (XML Corpus Encoding Stan-
dard; (Ide et al, 2000)) format, as assumed, e.g.,
in the IPI PAN Corpus of Polish (Przepi?rkowski,
2004a), in the Slovak National Corpus (Garab?k
and Gianitsov?-Olo?tiakov?, 2005), or in the LT4eL
project (http://www.lt4el.eu/). Specialised
XML-aware tools exist for such tasks.
One of the earliest collections of XML process-
ing tools is the LT XML library (Brew et al, 2000),
whose second edition, LT-XML2 is currently under
preparation. One of the tools in that new edition,
lxtransduce (Tobin, 2005), is an efficient pro-
5
gram to add mark-up to XML files via regular gram-
mars over XML elements; this tool is currently used
for implementing definition-extraction grammars
for Bulgarian, Czech and Polish (Przepi?rkowski et
al., 2007).
A system well-known in Slavonic NLP is CLaRK
(Simov et al, 2001; Simov et al, 2002); it imple-
ments various XML mechanism and proposes a lan-
guage for developing shallow grammars over XML
documents; such grammars have been implemented
for Bulgarian, as reported in (Simov et al, 2004;
Simov and Osenova, 2004).
Finally, a new system, SPADE (Shallow Parsing
and Disambiguation Engine), abbreviated to ???
(Unicode character 0x2660), has recently been de-
veloped at the Institute of Computer Science, Pol-
ish Academy of Sciences (Przepi?rkowski, 2007b;
Buczyn?ski, 2007). This tool, unlike many other
shallow parsing tools,13 accepts a possibly mor-
phosyntactically ambiguous (XCES-encoded) input
and performs simultaneous morphosyntactic disam-
biguation and shallow parsing. For example, the rule
below, called P + co/kto, will match a possible
preposition followed by a possible form of one of
the pronouns CO ?what? or KTO ?who?,14 it will try
to unify the selected case of the preposition with
the case of the pronoun and, if that succeeds, it will
mark any non-unified interpretations as rejected and
it will mark the two words as a prepositional group
with the preposition (cf. 1 below) as its syntactic
head and the pronoun (cf. 2) as its semantic head.15
Moreover, any non-prepositional interpretations of
the first segment of the match and any non-nominal
interpretations of the second segment will be marked
as incorrect. The language for specification of seg-
ments is based on the query syntax of the Poliqarp
corpus search engine (Przepi?rkowski et al, 2004;
Janus and Przepi?rkowski, 2007), in turn based on
CQP (Christ, 1994).
RULE P + co/kto
Match: [pos~"prep"][base~"co|kto"]
13But the shallow grammars for Serbo-Croatian described in
(Nenadic? and Vitas, 1998; Nenadic?, 2000) were developed with
similar goals in mind.
14Left and right context of a match may be specified; here
they are empty.
15A rationale for distinguishing these two kinds of heads is
given in (Przepi?rkowski, 2007a).
Cond: unify(case,1,2)
Synt: group(PrepNG,1,2)
Morph: leave(pos~~"prep",1)
Morph: leave(pos~~"subst",2)
SPADE is currently employed for the shallow pro-
cessing of the IPI PAN Corpus of Polish.
5 Conclusion
While the relatively free word order of Slavonic lan-
guages makes the processing of Slavonic unambigu-
ously harder, I claim that the effects of the rich nom-
inal inflection are mixed: rich inflection dramatically
increases the complexity of low-level IE tasks such
as NER, but it is beneficial for high-level IE tasks
which involve filling scenario templates, as it facil-
itates identifying grammatical roles, parsing coordi-
nation, etc. Moreover, as becomes clear on the basis
of the overview of practical work on Slavonic IE in
the last decade, recent years have witnessed substan-
tially increased interest and activity in the area. I am
convinced that the Balto-Slavonic Natural Language
Processing workshop at ACL 2007 will further catal-
yse the development of this field.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Jakub Piskorski, Bruno Pouliquen,
Ralf Steinberger and Hristo Tanev for their generous
invitation to the BSNLP workshop, and to the Euro-
pean Commission?s Joint Research Centre in Ispra,
Italy, for financial support. This paper was written
during my stay at the University of Regensburg, Ger-
many, within the DAAD-MNiSW cooperation pro-
gramme Automatic methods of extracting linguistic
knowledge from corpora (2006?2007). Many thanks
to Qba Piskorski and Roland Meyer for comments
on the (as it turned out, pre-) final versions of the
paper.
References
Miros?aw Ban?ko, editor. 2000. Inny s?ownik je?zyka pol-
skiego. Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN, Warsaw.
Markus Becker, Witold Droz?dz?yn?ski, Hans-Ulrich
Krieger, Jakub Piskorski, Ulrich Sch?fer, and Feiyu
Xu. 2002. SProUT ? shallow processing with typed
feature structures and unification. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on NLP (ICON 2002),
Mumbai, India.
6
Bo?o Bekavac and Marko Tadic?. 2007. Implementation
of Croatian NERC system. In Piskorski et al (Pisko-
rski et al, 2007a).
Leonard Bolc, Zbigniew Michalewicz, and Toyoaki
Nishida, editors. 2005. Intelligent Media Technology
for Communicative Intelligence, Second International
Workshop, IMTCI 2004, Warsaw, Poland, September
13-14, 2004, Revised Selected Papers, volume 3490 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer-Verlag.
Chris Brew, David McKelvie, Richard Tobin, Henry
Thompson, and Andrei Mikheev, 2000. The XML Li-
brary LT XML version 1.2: User documentation and
reference guide. Language Technology Group, Uni-
versity of Edinburgh. http://www.ltg.ed.ac.
uk/software/xml/xmldoc/xmldoc.html.
Aleksander Buczyn?ski. 2007. An implementation of
combined partial parser and morphosyntactic disam-
biguator. In Proceedings of ACL 2007 Student Re-
search Workshop.
Oli Christ. 1994. A modular and flexible architecture for
an integrated corpus query system. In COMPLEX?94,
Budapest.
Michael Collins, Jan Hajic?, Lance Ramshaw, and
Christoph Tillmann. 1999. A statistical parser for
Czech. In Proceedings of ACL 1999, pages 505?518,
University of Maryland.
Greville G. Corbett. 1978. Numerous squishes and
squishy numerals in Slavonic. In Bernard Comrie, ed-
itor, Classification of Grammatical Categories, pages
43?73. Linguistic Research, Inc., Edmonton.
Hamish Cunningham, Robert Gaizauskas, and Yorick
Wilks. 1995. A general architecture for text en-
gineering (GATE) ? a new approach to language
engineering R&D. Technical report, Department of
Computer Science, University of Sheffield. http:
//xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cs.CL/9601009.
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, and Valentin
Tablan. 2000. JAPE: a Java Annotation Patterns
Engine (second edition). Technical Report CS?00?
10, Department of Computer Science, University of
Sheffield.
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE:
A framework and graphical development environment
for robust NLP tools and applications. In Proceedings
of the 40th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Robert Dale and Pawe? Mazur. 2007. Handling conjunc-
tions in named entities. In Gelbukh (Gelbukh, 2007),
pages 131?142.
Witold Droz?dz?yn?ski, Petr Homola, Jakub Piskorski, and
Vytautas Zinkevic?ius. 2003. Adapting SProUT
to processing Baltic and Slavonic languages. In
Hamish Cunningham, E. Paskaleva, Kalina Bontcheva,
and G. Angelova, editors, Information Extraction for
Slavonic and Other Central and Eastern European
Languages, pages 18?25, Borovets, Bulgaria.
ELRA. 2004. Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC2004, Lisbon.
Jakub Fast and Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2005. Automatic
extraction of Polish verb subcategorization: An eval-
uation of common statistics. In Vetulani (Vetulani,
2005), pages 191?195.
Steven Franks. 1995. Parameters of Slavic Morphosyn-
tax. Oxford University Press, New York.
Radovan Garab?k, editor. 2005. Computer Treatment of
Slavic and East European Languages: Proceedings of
the Third International Seminar, Bratislava, Slovakia,
10?12 November 2005, Bratislava. VEDA: Vydava-
tel?stvo Slovenskej akad?me vied.
Radovan Garab?k and Lucia Gianitsov?-Olo?tiakov?.
2005. Manual morphological annotation of Slovak
translation of Orwell?s novel 1984 ? methods and
findings. In Garab?k (Garab?k, 2005), pages 59?66.
Alexander Gelbukh, editor. 2007. Computational
Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing (CICLing
2007), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Berlin.
Springer-Verlag.
W?odzimierz Gruszczyn?ski. 1989. Fleksja Rzec-
zownik?w Pospolitych we Wsp??czesnej Polszczyz?nie
Pisanej (na materiale ?S?ownika je?zyka polskiego?
PAN pod redakcja? W. Doroszewskiego), volume 122 of
Prace Je?zykoznawcze. Ossolineum, Wroc?aw.
Jan Hajic? and Barbara Hladk?. 1997. Probabilistic and
rule-based tagger of an inflective language - a compar-
ison. In Proceedings of the ANLP?97, pages 111?118,
Washington, DC.
K. Humphreys, R. Gaizauskas, S. Azzam, C. Huyck,
B. Mitchell, H. Cunningham, and Y. Wilks. 2002.
Slavonic named entities in GATE. Research Memo-
randum CS-02-01, University of Sheffield.
Nancy Ide, Patrice Bonhomme, and Laurent Romary.
2000. XCES: An XML-based standard for linguistic
corpora. In Proceedings of the Linguistic Resources
and Evaluation Conference, pages 825?830, Athens,
Greece.
Roman O. Jakobson. 1958. Morfologic?eskie nablju-
denija nad slavjanskim skloneniem. In Selected Writ-
ings II, pages 154?183. Mouton, The Hague.
7
Daniel Janus and Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2007. Poliqarp:
An open source corpus indexer and search engine with
syntactic extensions. In Proceedings of ACL 2007
Demo Session.
Janna Khegai. 2006. GF parallel resource grammars
and Russian. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL
2006 Main Conference Poster Sessions, pages 475?
482, Sydney, Australia. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mieczys?aw A. K?opotek, S?awomir T. Wierzchon?, and
Krzysztof Trojanowski, editors. 2005. Intelligent In-
formation Processing and Web Mining. Advances in
Soft Computing. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Svetla Koeva. 2007. Multi-word term extraction for Bul-
garian. In Piskorski et al (Piskorski et al, 2007a).
Ivana Kruijff-Korbayov? and Geert-JanM. Kruijff. 1999.
Handling word order in a multilingual system for gen-
eration of instructions. In V?clav Matousek, Pavel
Mautner, Jana Ocel?kov?, and Petr Sojka, editors,
Text, Speech and Dialogue - Second International
Workshop, TSD?99, Plzen, Czech Republic, September
1999, pages 83?88, Berlin. Springer-Verlag.
Witold Man?czak. 1956. Ile jest rodzaj?w w polskim?
Je?zyk Polski, XXXVI(2):116?121.
Ma?gorzata Marciniak and Agnieszka Mykowiecka.
2007. Automatic processing of diabetic patients? hos-
pital documentation. In Piskorski et al (Piskorski et
al., 2007a).
Ma?gorzata Marciniak, Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Anna
Kups?c?, and Jakub Piskorski. 2005. Intelligent content
extraction from Polish medical texts. In Bolc et al
(Bolc et al, 2005), pages 68?78.
Jir?? Mirovsk?, Roman Ondru?ka, and Daniel Pru??a.
2002. Searching through Prague Dependency Tree-
bank: Conception and architecture. In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theo-
ries (TLT2002), pages 114?122, Sozopol, Bulgaria.
Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Anna Kups?c?, and Ma?gorzata
Marciniak. 2005a. Rule-based medical content
extraction and classification. In K?opotek et al
(K?opotek et al, 2005), pages 237?246.
Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Ma?gorzata Marciniak, and
Anna Kups?c?. 2005b. Making shallow look deeper:
Anaphora and comparisons in medical information ex-
traction. In Vetulani (Vetulani, 2005).
Goran Nenadic?. 2000. Local grammars and parsing co-
ordination of nouns in Serbo-Croatian. In Proceedings
of Text, Dialogue and Speech (TSD) 2000, pages 57?
62. Springer-Verlag.
Goran Nenadic? and Du?ko Vitas. 1998. Using local
grammars for agreement modeling in highly inflec-
tive languages. In Proceedings of Text, Dialogue and
Speech (TSD) 1998, pages 91?96.
Maciej Ogrodniczuk. 2006. Weryfikacja korpusu
wypowiednik?w polskich (z wykorzystaniem gramatyki
formalnej S?widzin?skiego). Ph. D. dissertation, Warsaw
University, Warsaw.
Karel Pala, Pavel Rychl?, and Pavel Smr?. 1998. Corpus
annotation in inflectional languages: Czech. In A Min
Tjoa and Roland R. Wagner, editors, Ninth Interna-
tional Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Ap-
plications, pages 149?153, Los Alamitos, California.
Dariusz Piechocin?ski and Agnieszka Mykowiecka. 2005.
Question answering in Polish using shallow parsing.
In Garab?k (Garab?k, 2005), pages 167?173.
Jakub Piskorski. 2004a. Extraction of Polish named-
entities. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC2004 (ELR, 2004), pages 313?316.
Jakub Piskorski. 2004b. Rule-based named-entity recog-
nition for Polish. In Proceedings of the Workshop on
Named-Entity Recognition for NLP Applications held
in conjunction with the 1st International Joint Con-
ference on NLP, March 2004, Sanya, Hainan Island,
China.
Jakub Piskorski. 2005. Named-entity recognition for
Polish with SProUT. In Bolc et al (Bolc et al, 2005).
Jakub Piskorski, Peter Homola, Ma?gorzata Marciniak,
Agnieszka Mykowiecka, Adam Przepi?rkowski, and
Marcin Wolin?ski. 2004. Information extraction for
Polish using the SProUT platform. In Mieczys?aw A.
K?opotek, S?awomir T. Wierzchon?, and Krzysztof Tro-
janowski, editors, Intelligent Information Processing
and Web Mining, Advances in Soft Computing, pages
227?236. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Jakub Piskorski, Bruno Pouliquen, Ralf Steinberger, and
Hristo Tanev, editors. 2007a. Proceedings of the
BSNLP workshop at ACL 2007, Prague.
Jakub Piskorski, Marcin Sydow, and Anna Kups?c?. 2007b.
Lemmatization of Polish person names. In Piskorski
et al (Piskorski et al, 2007a).
Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. 1994. Head-driven Phrase
Structure Grammar. Chicago University Press / CSLI
Publications, Chicago, IL.
Borislav Popov, Angel Kirilov, DianaMaynard, and Dim-
itar Manov. 2004. Creation of reusable components
and language resources for Named Entity Recognition
in Russian. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation,
LREC2004 (ELR, 2004), pages 309?312.
8
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 1996. Case assignment in Pol-
ish: Towards an HPSG analysis. In Claire Grover and
Enric Vallduv?, editors, Studies in HPSG, volume 12
of Edinburgh Working Papers in Cognitive Science,
pages 191?228. Centre for Cognitive Science, Univer-
sity of Edinburgh.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2004a. The IPI PAN Corpus:
Preliminary version. Institute of Computer Science,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2004b. O wartos?ci przypadka
podmiot?w liczebnikowych. Biuletyn Polskiego To-
warzystwa Je?zykoznawczego, LX:133?143.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2006a. O dystrybutywnym
PO i liczebnikach jedynkowych. Polonica, XXVI?
XXVII:171?178.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2006b. The potential of the IPI
PAN Corpus. Poznan? Studies in Contemporary Lin-
guistics, 41:31?48.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2007a. On heads and coordi-
nation in valence acquisition. In Gelbukh (Gelbukh,
2007), pages 50?61.
Adam Przepi?rkowski. 2007b. A preliminary formal-
ism for simultaneous rule-based tagging and partial
parsing. In Georg Rehm, Andreas Witt, and Lothar
Lemnitzer, editors, Data Structures for Linguistic Re-
sources and Applications: Proceedings of the Biennial
GLDV Conference 2007, pages 81?90. Gunter Narr
Verlag, T?bingen.
Adam Przepi?rkowski and Jakub Fast. 2005. Baseline
experiments in the extraction of Polish valence frames.
In K?opotek et al (K?opotek et al, 2005), pages 511?
520.
Adam Przepi?rkowski and Marcin Wolin?ski. 2003a.
A flexemic tagset for Polish. In Proceedings
of Morphological Processing of Slavic Languages,
EACL 2003, pages 33?40, Budapest.
Adam Przepi?rkowski and Marcin Wolin?ski. 2003b. The
unbearable lightness of tagging: A case study in mor-
phosyntactic tagging of Polish. In Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Linguistically In-
terpreted Corpora (LINC-03), EACL 2003, pages 109?
116.
Adam Przepi?rkowski, Zygmunt Krynicki, ?ukasz
De?bowski, Marcin Wolin?ski, Daniel Janus, and Pi-
otr Ban?ski. 2004. A search tool for corpora with
positional tagsets and ambiguities. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, LREC2004 (ELR, 2004),
pages 1235?1238.
Adam Przepi?rkowski, ?ukasz Deg?rski, Miroslav
Spousta, Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, Lothar Lem-
nitzer, Vladislav Kubon?, and Beata W?jtowicz. 2007.
Towards the automatic extraction of definitions in
Slavic. In Piskorski et al (Piskorski et al, 2007a).
Vasile Rus, Sireesha Ravi, Mihai C. Lintean, and
Philip M. McCarthy. 2007. Unsupervised method for
parsing coordinated base noun phrases. In Gelbukh
(Gelbukh, 2007), pages 229?240.
Zygmunt Saloni. 1976. Kategoria rodzaju we wsp??czes-
nym je?zyku polskim. In Roman Laskowski, editor,
Kategorie gramatyczne grup imiennych we wsp??czes-
nym je?zyku polskim, volume 14 of Prace Instytutu
Je?zyka Polskiego, pages 43?78. Ossolineum, Wroc?aw.
Serge Sharoff. 2004. What is at stake: a case study of
Russian expressions starting with a preposition. In
Takaaki Tanaka, Aline Villavicencio, Francis Bond,
and Anna Korhonen, editors, Second ACL Workshop
on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing,
pages 17?23, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Kiril Simov and Petya Osenova. 2004. A hybrid strat-
egy for regular grammar parsing. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, LREC2004 (ELR, 2004),
pages 431?434.
Kiril Simov, Z. Peev, Milen Kouylekov, Alexander
Simov, M. Dimitrov, and A. Kiryakov. 2001. CLaRK
? an XML-based system for corpora development. In
Paul Rayson, Andrew Wilson, Tony McEnery, Andrew
Hardie, and Shereen Khoja, editors, Proceedings of the
Corpus Linguistics 2001 Conference, pages 558?560,
Lancaster.
Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, Milena Slavcheva, Sia
Kolkovska, Elisaveta Balabanova, Dimitar Doikoff,
Krassimira Ivanova, Alexander Simov, and Milen
Kouylekov. 2002. Building a linguistically interpreted
corpus of Bulgarian. In Proceedings of the Third In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, LREC2002, pages 1729?1736, Las Pal-
mas, Canary Islands, Spain. ELRA.
Kiril Simov, Petya Osenova, Sia Kolkovska, Elisaveta
Balabanova, and Dimitar Doikoff. 2004. A language
resources infrastructure for Bulgarian. In Proceedings
of the Fourth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, LREC2004 (ELR, 2004),
pages 1685?1688.
Ralf Steinberger and Bruno Pouliquen. 2007. Cross-
lingual Named Entity Recognition. Linguisticae In-
vestigationes. Special Issue on Named Entity Recog-
nition and Categorisation, Satoshi Sekine and Elisa-
bete Ranchhod (eds.), Forthcoming.
9
Ilona Steiner. 2006. Coordinate structures: On the rela-
tionship between parsing preferences and corpus fre-
quencies. In Pre-Proceedings of the International
Conference on Linguistic Evidence: Empirical, Theo-
retical and Computational Perspectives, T?bingen, 2?
4 February 2006, pages 88?92, T?bingen. SFB 441
?Linguistic Data Structures?, University of T?bingen,
Germany.
Marek S?widzin?ski. 1992. Gramatyka formalna je?zyka
polskiego, volume 349 of Rozprawy Uniwersytetu
Warszawskiego. Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warsza-
wskiego, Warsaw.
Hristo Tanev. 2004. Socrates: A question answering
prototype for Bulgarian. In Recent Advances in Nat-
ural Language Processing III, Selected Papers from
RANLP 2003, pages 377?386. John Benjamins.
Hristo Tanev and Ruslan Mitkov. 2002. Shallow
language processing architecture for Bulgarian. In
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING2002), Taipei.
Richard Tobin, 2005. Lxtransduce, a replace-
ment for fsgmatch. University of Edinburgh.
http://www.cogsci.ed.ac.uk/~richard/
ltxml2/lxtransduce-manual.html.
Dominika Urban?ska and Agnieszka Mykowiecka. 2005.
Multi-words Named Entity Recognition in Polish
texts. In Garab?k (Garab?k, 2005), pages 208?215.
Zygmunt Vetulani, editor. 2005. Proceedings of the 2nd
Language & Technology Conference, Poznan?, Poland.
Marcin Wolin?ski. 2004. Komputerowa weryfikacja gra-
matyki S?widzin?skiego. Ph. D. dissertation, Institute of
Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, War-
saw.
Marcin Wolin?ski. 2006. Morfeusz ? a practical
tool for the morphological analysis of Polish. In
Mieczys?aw A. K?opotek, S?awomir T. Wierzchon?, and
Krzysztof Trojanowski, editors, Intelligent Informa-
tion Processing and Web Mining. Proceedings of the
International IIS: IIPWM?06 Conference held in Us-
tron, Poland, June 19-22, 2006, Advances in Soft
Computing. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Daniel Zeman. 2001. How much will a RE-based pre-
processor help a statistical parser? In Proceedings of
the Seventh International Workshop on Parsing Tech-
nologies (IWPT-2001), 17-19 October 2001, Beijing,
China. Tsinghua University Press.
10
