Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 164?167,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Multiple-step treebank conversion: from dependency to Penn format
Cristina Bosco
Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita` di Torino
Corso Svizzera 185
10149 Torino - Italia
bosco@di.unito.it
Abstract
Whilst the degree to which a treebank sub-
scribes to a specific linguistic theory limits
the usefulness of the resource, the availabil-
ity of more formats for the same resource
plays a crucial role both in NLP and linguis-
tics. Conversion tools and multi-format tree-
banks are useful for investigating portability
of NLP systems and validity of annotation.
Unfortunately, conversion is a quite complex
task since it involves grammatical rules and
linguistic knowledge to be incorporated into
the converter program.
The paper focusses on a methodology for
treebank conversion which consists in split-
ting the process in steps corresponding to
the kinds of information that have to be con-
verted, i.e. morphological, structural or re-
lational syntactic. The advantage is the gen-
eration of a set of parallel treebanks fea-
turing progressively differentiated formats.
An application to the case of an Italian
dependency-based treebank in a Penn like
format is described.
1 Introduction
The usefulness of a treebank can be potentially lim-
ited by the degree to which it subscribes to a spe-
cific linguistic theory, and when a new annotation is
devised which employs a different linguistic frame-
work than a standard, the problem of how to relate
the syntactic schemes to one another arises. The in-
creasing availability of multi-format treebanks (e.g.
(Bick, 2006)) and the automatic conversion from
some formats to others, e.g. (Collins et al 1999;
Bahgat Shehata and Zanzotto, 2006), are attempts to
overcome this problem.
The automatic conversion of a treebank plays an
important role in NLP and linguistics. First, it in-
creases the exportability of the treebank, making us-
able tools developed for other resources. Second,
it underlies a full check on correctness and consis-
tency of the treebank annotation. Moreover, it is
an explicit comparison among formats and linguis-
tic frameworks. Therefore, a conversion is crucial
for overcoming the limits imposed by data in for-
mats that realize different grammatical theories to
very important activities such as parsing evaluation
and comparative testing of the adequateness of a rep-
resentation for particular linguistic phenomena, lan-
guages and/or tasks. For instance, the availability of
parallel annotations, and among them one in Penn
format, can be of some aid in investigating the irre-
producibility of the state-of-the-art results on tree-
banks or languages other than Penn and English,
as empirically demonstrated by, e.g., (Collins et al
1999) on Czech, (Dubey and Keller, 2003) on Ger-
man, (Corazza et al 2004) on Italian.
The paper, first, presents a methodology for the con-
version, then an application of the methodology to
the conversion of a dependency-based treebank into
a Penn-like format, and finally some remarks on the
implementation.
2 On the conversion methodology
The conversion of a treebank, annotated with some
format A, into format B consists in a simple filtering
164
and string manipulation only when A and B both fol-
low the same linguistic framework. Elsewhere the
conversion and development of parallel annotations
is a challenging task, which involves grammatical
rules and linguistic knowledge to be incorporated
into the converter programs (see e.g.(Musillo and
Sima?an, 2002) (Bick, 2006)). Nevertheless, par-
allel annotations which employ different linguistic
frameworks may serve as a suitable infrastructure
for comparisons among them. In fact, the defini-
tion of a conversion process is in itself a compari-
son between A and B, since it involves explicit as-
sumptions about how A and B relate, and a virtually
complete and correct mapping which translates ev-
ery analysis in A into the corresponding analysis in
B (Musillo and Sima?an, 2002).
We propose a methodology that consists in organiz-
ing the conversion in steps to be performed in cas-
cade. Each step outputs a new annotation format,
which differentiates from the previous one only with
respect to a single kind of knowledge, e.g. morpho-
logical, structural or functional syntactic. The main
advantage is in making available a set of parallel an-
notations for further use too.
In the next part, we describe the application of this
methodology to the conversion of the Turin Univer-
sity Treebank (henceforth TUT), which exploits a
dependency-based functionally rich annotation, into
a Penn-like format.
3 Converting TUT
TUT is a project for an Italian treebank that fea-
tures a dependency-based annotation following the
dependency grammar major tenets (Hudson, 1984).
The annotation is centred on a notion of morpho-
syntactic-semantic grammatical relation which aims
at represent the syntax-semantics interface by means
of the Augmented Relational Structure (Bosco,
2004). TUT currently includes 2.000 sentences (see
at http://www.di.unito.it/?tutreeb/) where 200 differ-
ent dependency relations are annotated. The figure
1 a) shows an example of TUT tree.
Other Italian resources1 implement, like TUT, par-
ticular representation formats and subscribe to spe-
cific linguistic frameworks, thus strongly limiting
1Two other larger Italian treebanks exist: Venice Italian
Treebank (VIT) (Delmonte, forthcoming) and Italian Syntactic
Semantic Treebank (ISST) (Barsotti et al 2001)
activities such as the application of state-of-the-art
parsers and parsing evaluation for this language.
The conversion of TUT in a Penn-like format is
a crucial step towards the exportability of the re-
source, but also a first attempt at overcoming these
limits by choosing as a further output a format of
widespread use in training, testing and evaluating.
Moreover, since the process is fully deterministic,
even if currently applied on a small corpus, the con-
version is in itself a preliminary validation of the re-
source and a demonstration that TUT annotation is
expressive at least as Penn.
In the next sections, we show the translation of de-
pendency into constituency trees and the manage-
ment of differences in PoS tagging, structural syn-
tactic, and syntactic-semantic relations faced during
the conversion. For detailed information about the
conversion of specific linguistic phenomena see at
http://www.di.unito.it/?tutreeb/noteparallele.zip.
3.1 First step: morphology
Since Italian is inflectionally richer than English,
TUT PoS tagset is richer than that of Penn
(see at http://www.di.unito.it/?tutreeb/syntcat-22-7-
02.doc), but we reduced it including only infor-
mation that Penn makes explicit too, as usual
in similar cases, see e.g. (Collins et al 1999)
and http://www.coli.uni-sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/.
The major differences with respect to Penn concern
tags of Verbs, which include fine-grained tempo-
ral information and are organized in three classes
(Modal, Auxiliary, Main), rather than two like in
Penn (Modal and non-Modal). Moreover, a fine-
grained variety of Adjectives and Pronouns enables
the recovery of information such as e.g. the owner
of an object (possessive Adjective).
The output of this first step includes compact tags
where features are expressed by short strings, like
in (Collins et al 1999). The following are exam-
ples of TUT PoS native vs reduced tags: for a com-
mon Noun ?nome? is (NOME NOUN COMMONM
SING) reduced in (NOU?CS); for the main infinite
Verb ?entrare? is (ENTRARE VERB MAIN INFI-
NITE PRES INTRANS) reduced in (VMA?IN).
3.2 Second step: structural syntax
The main issue in this step is the conversion
of dependency trees into Penn-like trees, i.e.
165
Figure 1: TUT (a), Constituency-TUT (b), Augmented-Penn (c) and Penn-like (d) representations of sen-
tence ALB-4 ?Il governo di Berisha appare in difficolta`? (The government of Berisha appears in trouble)
constituency structures implementing a minimal
projection strategy. It is approached in two sub-
steps: by first converting the TUT trees into a
standard linguistically motivated Xbar form (i.e.
Constituency-TUT), and then into Penn format (i.e.
Augmented-Penn), but both including the functional
syntactic information as TUT, i.e. the grammatical
relations (annotated on constituents).
Constituency-TUT is a TUT-oriented constituency-
based annotation that introduces in TUT trees the
types of the multiple words syntactic units (e.g. VP
and S). Each terminal category X corresponds to a
word of a TUT tree, and projects into non-terminal
nodes, namely the intermediate (Xbar) and maximal
(XP) projections of X. The distinction between
complements and adjuncts is here structurally
marked.
Augmented-Penn instead features a format struc-
turally isomorphic to Penn, but more functionally
annotated. It applies to the Constituency-TUT struc-
tures the minimal projection strategy2, and manages
the smoothing of structures conceptually different in
TUT and Penn, i.e. those of Determiners, auxiliary
Verbs and relative clauses. In figure 1 you can
see the same sentence in TUT, Constituency-TUT,
Augmented-Penn and Penn format.
The conversion from dependency to constituency
is not affected by the typical problem of non-
projective structures, since TUT represents them
through projective structures exploiting null ele-
ments. In dependency TUT, empty nodes also mark
dropped subjects, and Constituency-TUT exploits
2Each terminal category projects only when the constituent
includes more than one word
166
null elements for marking subjects which occur in
non standard position with respect to the Verb (i.e.
extraposed).
3.3 Third step: syntactic-semantic relations
While Penn features a description of relations based
only on a single component, TUT features an ex-
plicit, systematic annotation of three components
in each relation. Moreover, Penn includes a lower
number of values for each component than TUT3
and in various cases the Penn tags do not enable fine-
grained distinctions as TUT.
We applied the original Penn tags that can be mean-
ingful for Italian looking for correspondences be-
tween TUT and Penn relations (e.g. using the re-
lation LOC for all TUT LOC+ relations)4. Never-
theless, the multi-step methodology makes available
also a Penn-like format almost functionally rich as
TUT, i.e. Augmented-Penn5.
4 The converter
The five modules of the converter are: Mreduc for
the reduction of PoS tags; Mctu which converts in
the Constituency-TUT format; Maugp, which con-
verts Constituency-TUT in Augmented-Penn; Mpen,
which takes Augmented-Penn and outputs Penn;
Mpar that generates the parenthetical notation of the
output.
Mctu manages the conversion from dependency
to constituency by implementing the algorithm in
(Xia, 2001). It recovers the types of phrases that
(the grammatical category of) each node of the de-
pendency tree projects by using the linguistic knowl-
edge stored in dedicated tables.
The converter follows a lowest attachment strategy,
i.e. the projection of a dependent attaches to a pro-
jection of its head as lowly as possible, but, in con-
trast with (Xia, 2001), it pursues a maximal rather
3While Penn annotates 2 morpho-syntactic, 11 syntactic and
7 semantic relations, TUT features 40 morpho-syntactic, 55
functional-syntactic and 88 semantic items for building rela-
tions.
4The conversion from NEGRA to Penn maintains in-
stead the NEGRA relations, see at http://www.coli.uni-
sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/.
5The relations linking terminal nodes encompassed in a sin-
gle constituent in Augmented-Penn are deleted during the con-
version in this latter format.
than minimal projection heuristics, i.e. a category
always projects into intermediate and maximal pro-
jections.
5 Conclusions
The methodology for treebank conversion here pre-
sented splits the process in steps, which correspond
to the kinds of annotated linguistic knowledge that
have to be converted. Since each step outputs a new
annotation format, the advantage is the generation of
set of parallel treebanks.
The application of the methodology in the conver-
sion from a small Italian dependency-based treebank
to a Penn like format is described.
References
A. Bahgat Shehata and F.M. Zanzotto. 2006. A
dependency-based algorithm for grammar conversion.
Proc. of LREC ?06
F. Barsotti and R. Basili et al 2001. The Italian
Syntactic-Semantic Treebank: Architecture, Annota-
tion, Tools and Evaluation. Kluwer, Dordrecht.
E. Bick. 2006. Turning a dependency-based treebank
into a PSG-style constituent treebank. Proc. of LREC
06.
C. Bosco. 2004. A grammatical relation system for tree-
bank annotation. PhD thesis, University of Torino.
M. Collins, J. Hajic, L. Ramshaw, and C. Tillmann. 1999.
A statistical parser of Czech. Proc. of ACL?99.
A. Corazza, A. Lavelli, G. Satta, and R. Zanoli. 2004
Analyzing an Italian treebank with state-of-the-art sta-
tistical parser. In Proc. of TLT-2004.
R. Delmonte. forthcoming. Strutture sintattiche
dall?analisi computazionale di corpora di italiano
Franco Angeli, Milano, Italy.
A. Dubey and F. Keller. 2003. Probabilistic parsing
for German using sister-head dependencies. Proc. of
ACL?03.
R. Hudson. 1984. Word Grammar. Basil Blackwell,
Oxford and New York.
G. Musillo and K. Sima?an. 2002. Towards comparing
parsers from different linguistic frameworks. An infor-
mation theoretic approach. Proc. of Workshop Beyond
PARSEVAL.
F. Xia. 2001. Automatic grammar generation from two
different perspectives. PhD thesis, University of Penn-
sylvania.
167
