Balto-Slavonic Natural Language Processing 2007, June 29, 2007, pages 19?26,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Language Independent Approach for Name Categorization and
Discrimination
Zornitsa Kozareva
Departamento de Lenguajes
y Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
zkozareva@dlsi.ua.es
Sonia Va?zquez
Departamento de Lenguajes
y Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
svazquez@dlsi.ua.es
Andre?s Montoyo
Departamento de Lenguajes
y Sistemas Informa?ticos
Universidad de Alicante
Alicante, Spain
montoyo@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
We present a language independent ap-
proach for fine-grained categorization and
discrimination of names on the basis of text
semantic similarity information. The exper-
iments are conducted for languages from the
Romance (Spanish) and Slavonic (Bulgar-
ian) language groups. Despite the fact that
these languages have specific characteristics
as word-order and grammar, the obtained
results are encouraging and show that our
name entity method is scalable not only to
different categories, but also to different lan-
guages. In an exhaustive experimental eval-
uation, we have demonstrated that our ap-
proach yields better results compared to a
baseline system.
1 Introduction
1.1 Background
Named Entity (NE) recognition concerns the detec-
tion and classification of names into a set of cate-
gories. Presently, most of the successful NE ap-
proaches employ machine learning techniques and
handle simply the person, organization, location and
miscellaneous categories. However, the need of
the current Natural Language Applications impedes
specialized NE extractors which can help for in-
stance an information retrieval system to determine
that a query about ?Jim Henriques guitars? is related
to the person ?Jim Henriques? with the semantic cat-
egory musician, and not ?Jim Henriques? the com-
poser. Such classification can aid the system to rank
or return relevant answers in a more accurate and
appropriate way.
So far, the state-of-art NE recognizers identify
that ?Jim Henriques? is a person, but do not sub-
categorize it. There are numerous drawbacks re-
lated to the fine-grained NE issue. First, the sys-
tems need hand annotated data which are not avail-
able for multiple categories, because their creation is
time-consuming, requires supervision by experts, a
predefined fine-grained hierarchical structure or on-
tology. Second, there is a significant lack of freely
available or developed resources for languages other
than English, and especially for the Eastern Euro-
pean ones.
The World Wide Web is a vast, multilingual
source of unstructured information which we con-
sult daily in our native language to understand what
the weather in our city is or how our favourite soccer
team performed. Therefore, the need of multilingual
and specialized NE extractors remains and we have
to focus on the development of language indepen-
dent approaches.
Together with the specialized NE categorization,
we face the problem of name ambiguity which is
related to queries for different people, locations or
companies that share the same name. For instance,
Cambridge is a city in the United Kingdom, but
also in the United States of America. ACL refers
to ?The Association of Computational Linguistics?,
?The Association of Christian Librarians? or to the
?Automotive Components Limited?. Googling the
name ?Boyan Bonev? returns thousands of docu-
ments where some are related to a member of a robot
vision group in Alicante, a teacher at the School
19
of Biomedical Science, a Bulgarian schoolboy that
participated in computer science competition among
others. So far, we have to open the documents one
by one, skim the text and decide to which ?Boyan
Bonev? the documents are related to. However, if
we resolve the name disambiguation issue, this can
lead to an automatic clustering of web pages talking
about the same individual, location or ogranization.
1.2 Related Work
Previously, (Pedersen et al, 2005) tackled the name
discrimination task by developing a language inde-
pendent approach based on the context in which the
ambiguous name occurred. They construct second
order co-occurrence features according to which the
entities are clustered and associated to different un-
derlying names. The performance of this method
ranges from 51% to 73% depending on the pair of
named entities that have to be disambiguated. Simi-
lar approach was developed by (Bagga and Baldwin,
1998), who created first order context vectors that
represent the instance in which the ambiguous name
occurs. Their approach is evaluated on 35 different
mentions of John Smith, and the f-score is 84%.
For fine-grained person NE categorization, (Fleis-
chman and Hovy, 2002) carried out a supervised
learning for which they deduced features from the
local context in which the entity resides, as well as
semantic information derived from the topic signa-
tures and WordNet. According to their results, to
improve the 70% coverage for person name catego-
rization, more sophisticated features are needed, to-
gether with a more solid data generation procedure.
(Tanev and Magnini, 2006) classified geographic
location and person names into several subclasses.
They use syntactic information and observed how
often a syntactic pattern co-occurs with certain
member of a given class. Their method reaches 65%
accuracy. (Pasca, 2004) presented a lightly super-
vised lexico-syntactic method for named entity cat-
egorization which reaches 76% when evaluated with
unstructured text of Web documents.
(Mann, 2002) populated a fine-grained proper
noun ontology using common noun patterns and fol-
lowing the hierarchy of WordNet. They studied the
influence of the newly generated person ontology in
a Question Answering system. According to the ob-
tained results, the precision of the ontology is high,
but still suffers in coverage. A similar approach for
the population of the CyC Knowledge Base (KB)
was presented in (Shah et al, 2006). They used
information from the Web and other electronically
available text corpora to gather facts about particu-
lar named entities, to validate and finally to add them
to the CyC KB.
In this paper, we present a new text semantic simi-
larity approach for fine-grained person name catego-
rization and discrimination which is similar to those
of (Pedersen et al, 2005) and (Bagga and Baldwin,
1998), but instead of simple word co-occurrences,
we consider the whole text segment and relate the
deduced semantic information of Latent Seman-
tic Analysis (LSA) to trace the text cohesion be-
tween thousands of sentences containing named en-
tities which belong to different fine-grained cate-
gories or individuals. Our method is based on the
word sense discrimination hypothesis of Miller and
Charles (1991) according to which words with sim-
ilar meaning are used in similar context, hence in
our approach we assume that the same person or
the same fine-grained person category appears in the
similar context.
2 NE categorization and discrimination
with Latent Semantic Analysis
LSA has been applied successfully in many areas
of Natural Language Processing such as Informa-
tion Retrieval (Deerwester et al, 1990), Informa-
tion Filtering (Dumais, 1995) , Word Sense Disam-
biguation (Shu?tze, 1998) among others. This is pos-
sible because LSA is a fully automatic mathemati-
cal/statistical technique for extracting and inferring
relations of expected contextual usage of words in
discourse. It uses no humanly constructed dictionar-
ies or knowledge bases, semantic networks, syntac-
tic or morphological analyzers, because it takes only
as input raw text which is parsed into words and is
separated into meaningful passages. On the basis of
this information, LSA extracts a list of semantically
related word pairs or rank documents related to the
same topic.
LSA represents explicitly terms and documents
in a rich, highly dimensional space, allowing the
underlying ?latent?, semantic relationships between
terms and documents to be exploited. LSA relies
20
on the constituent terms of a document to suggest
the document?s semantic content. However, the LSA
model views the terms in a document as somewhat
unreliable indicators of the concepts contained in the
document. It assumes that the variability of word
choice partially obscures the semantic structure of
the document. By reducing the original dimen-
sionality of the term-document space with Singular
Value Decomposition to a matrix of 300 columns,
the underlying, semantic relationships between doc-
uments are revealed, and much of the ?noise? (dif-
ferences in word usage, terms that do not help distin-
guish documents, etc.) is eliminated. LSA statisti-
cally analyzes the patterns of word usage across the
entire document collection, placing documents with
similar word usage patterns near to each other in the
term-document space, and allowing semantically-
related documents to be closer even though they may
not share terms.
Taking into consideration these properties of
LSA, we thought that instead of constructing the
traditional term-document matrix, we can construct
a term-sentence matrix with which we can find a
set of sentences that are semantically related and
talk about the same person. The rows of the term-
sentence matrix correspond to the words of the sen-
tence where the NE has to be categorized or discrim-
inated (we call this sentence target sentence), while
the columns correspond to the rest of the sentences
with NEs. The cells of the matrix show the num-
ber of times a given word from the target sentence
co-occurs in the rest of the sentences. When two
columns of the term-sentence matrix are similar, this
means that the two sentences contain similar words
and are therefore likely to be semantically related.
When two rows are similar, then the corresponding
words occur in most of the same sentences and are
likely to be semantically related.
In this way, we can obtain semantic evidence
about the words which characterize a given person.
For instance, a football player is related to words
as ball, match, soccer, goal, and is seen in phrases
such as ?X scores a goal?, ?Y is penalized?. Mean-
while, a surgeon is related to words as hospital, pa-
tient, operation, surgery and is seen in phrases such
as ?X operates Y?, ?X transplants?. Evidently, the
category football player can be distinguished easily
from that of the surgeon, because both person names
occur and relate semantically to different words.
Another advantage of LSA is its property of lan-
guage independence, and the ability to link sev-
eral flexions or declanations of the same term.
This is especially useful for the balto-slavonic lan-
guages which have rich morphology. Once the term-
sentence approach is developed, practically there is
no restrain for LSA to be applied and extended to
other languages. As our research focuses not only
on the resolution of the NE categorization and dis-
crimination problems as a whole, but also on the lan-
guage independence issue, we considered the LSA?s
usage are very appropriate.
3 Development Data Set
For the development of our name discrimination and
classification approach, we used the Spanish lan-
guage. The corpora we worked with is the EFE94-95
Spanish news corpora, which were previously used
in the CLEF competitions1. In order to identify the
named entities in the corpora, we used a machine
learning based named entity recognizer (Kozareva et
al., 2007).
For the NE categorization and discrimination ex-
periments, we used six different named entities, for
which we assumed a-priory to belong to one of the
two fine-grained NE categories PERSON SINGER
and PERSON PRESIDENT. The president names
are Bill Clinton, George Bush and Fidel Castro, and
the singer names are Madonna, Julio Iglesias and
Enrique Iglesias. We have selected these names for
our experiment, because of their high frequency in
the corpora and low level of ambiguity.
Once we have selected the names, we have col-
lected a context of 10, 25, 50 and 100 words from
the left and from the right of the NEs. This is done
in order to study the influence of the context for the
NE discrimination and categorization tasks, and es-
pecially how the context window affects LSA?s per-
formance. We should note that the context for the
NEs is obtained from the text situated between the
text tags. During the creation of the context win-
dow, we used only the words that belong to the docu-
ment in which the NE is detected. This restriction is
imposed, because if we use words from previous or
following documents, this can influence and change
1http://www.clef-campaign.org/
21
the domain and the topic in which the NE is seen.
Therefore, NE examples for which the number of
context words does not correspond to 10, 25, 50 or
100 are directly discarded.
From the compiled data, we have randomly se-
lected different NE examples and we have created
two data sets: one with 100 and another with 200
examples per NE. In the fine-grained classification,
we have substituted the occurrence of the presi-
dent and singer names with the obfuscated form
President Singer. While for the NE discrim-
ination task, we have replaced the names with the
M EI JI BC GB FC label. The first label indicates
that a given sentence can belong to the president or
to the singer category, while the second label indi-
cates that behind it can stand one of the six named
entities. The NE categorization and discrimination
experiments are carried out in a completely unsuper-
vised way, meaning that we did not use the correct
name and name category until evaluation.
4 Experimental Evaluation
4.1 Experimental Settings
As mentioned in Section 2, to establish the semantic
similarity relation between a sentence with an ob-
fuscated name and the rest of the sentences, we use
LSA2. The output of LSA is a list of sentences that
best matches the target sentence (e.g. the sentence
with the name that has to be classified or discrim-
inated) ordered by their semantic similarity score.
Strongly similar sentences have values close to 1,
and dissimilar sentences have values close to 0.
In order to group the most semantically similar
sentences which we expect to refer to the same per-
son or the same fine-grained category, we apply the
graph-based clustering algorithm PoBOC (Cleuziou
et al, 2004). We construct a new quadratic sentence-
sentence similarity matrix where the rows stand for
the sentence we want to classify, the columns stand
for the sentences in the whole corpus and the values
of the cells represent the semantic similarity scores
derived from LSA.
On the basis of this information, PoBOC forms
two clusters whose performance is evaluated in
terms of precision, recall, f-score and accuracy
which can be derived from Table 1.
2http://infomap-nlp.sourceforge.net/
number of Correct PRESIDENT Correct SINGER
Assigned PRESIDENT a b
Assigned SINGER c d
Table 1: Contingency table
We have used the same experimental setting for
the name categorization and discrimination prob-
lems.
4.2 Spanish name categorization
In Table 2, we show the results for the Spanish fine-
grained categorization. The detailed results are for
the context window of 50 words with 100 and 200
examples. All runs, outperform a simple baseline
system which returns for half of the examples the
fine-grained category PRESIDENT and for the rest
SINGER. This 50% baseline performance is due to
the balanced corpus we have created. In the column
diff., we show the difference between the 50% base-
line and the f-score of the category. As can be seen
the f-scores reaches 90%, which is with 40% more
than the baseline. According to the z? statistics with
confidence level of 0.975, the improvement over the
baseline is statistically significant.
SPANISH
cont/ex Category P. R. A. F. diff.
50/100
PRESIDENT 90.38 87.67 88.83 89.00
SINGER 87.94 90.00 88.33 88.96 +39.00
50/200
PRESIDENT 90.10 94.33 91.92 92.18
SINGER 94.04 89.50 91.91 91.71 +42.00
Table 2: Spanish NE categorization
During the error analysis, we found out that the
PERSON PRESIDENT and PERSON SINGER cat-
egories are distinguishable and separable because
of the well-established semantic similarity relation
among the words with which the NE occurs.
A pair of president sentences has lots of strongly
related words such as president:meeting, presi-
dent:government, which indicates high text cohe-
sion, while the majority of words in a president?
singer pair are weakly related, for instance presi-
dent:famous, president:concert. But still we found
out ambiguous pairs such as president:company,
where the president relates to a president of a coun-
try, while the company refers to a musical enter-
22
name c10 c25 c50 c100
Madonna 63.63 61.61 63.16 79.45
Julio Iglesias 58.96 56.68 66.00 79.19
Enrique Iglesias 77.27 80.17 84.36 90.54
Bill Clinton 52.72 48.81 74.74 73.91
George Bush 49.45 41.38 60.20 67.90
Fidel Castro 61.20 62.44 77.08 82.41
Table 3: Spanish NE discrimination
prize. Such information confuses LSA?s categoriza-
tion process and decreases the NE categorization
performance.
4.3 Spanish name discrimination
In a continuation, we present in Table 3 the f-scores
for the Spanish NE discrimination task with the 10,
25, 50 and 100 context windows. The results show
that the semantic similarity method we employ is
very reliable and suitable not only for the NE cat-
egorization, but also for the NE discrimination. A
baseline which always returns one and the same per-
son name during the NE discrimination task is 17%.
From the table can be seen that all names outperform
this baseline. The f-score performance per individ-
ual name ranges from 42% to 90%. The results are
very good, as the conflated names (three presidents
and three singers) can be easily obfuscated, because
they share the same domain and occur with the same
semantically related words.
The three best discriminated names are Enrique
Iglesias, Fidel Castro and Madonna. The name Fidel
Castro is easily discriminated due to its characteriz-
ing words Cuba, CIA, Cuban president, revolution,
tyrant. All sentences having these words or syn-
onyms related to them are associated to Fidel Cas-
tro.
Bill Clinton occurred many times with the words
democracy, Boris Yeltsin, Halifax, Chelsea (the
daughter of Bill Clinton), White House, while
George Bush appeared with republican, Ronald
Reigan, Pentagon, war in Vietnam, Barbara Bush
(the wife of George Bush).
During the data compilation process, the exam-
ples for Enrique Iglesias are considered to belong to
the Spanish singer. However, in reality some exam-
ples of Enrique Iglesias talked about the president of
a financial company in Uruguay or political issues.
Therefore, this name was confused with Bill Clin-
ton, because they shared semantically related words
such as bank, general secretary, meeting, decision,
appointment.
The discrimination process for the singer names is
good, though Madonna and Julio Iglesias appeared
in the context of concerts, famous, artist, maga-
zine, scene, backstage. The characterizing words for
Julio Iglesias are Chabeli (the daughter of Julio Igle-
sias), Spanish, Madrid, Iberoamerican. The name
Madonna occurred with words related to a picture
of Madonna, a statue in a church of Madonna, the
movie Evita.
Looking at the effect of the context window for
the NE discrimination task, it can be seen that the
best performances of 90% for Enrique Iglesias, 82%
for Fidel Castro and 79% for Madonna are achieved
with 100 words from the left and from the right of
the NE. This shows that the larger context has better
discrimination power.
4.4 Discussion
After the error analysis, we saw that the performance
of our approach depends on the quality of the data
source we worked with. Although, we have selected
names with low degree of ambiguity, during the data
compilation process for which we assumed that they
refer 100% to the SINGER or PRESIDENT cate-
gories, during the experiments we found out that one
and the same name can refer to three different in-
dividuals. This was the case of Madonna and En-
rique Iglesias. From one side this impeded the fine-
grained categorization and discrimination processes,
but opened a new line for research.
In conclusion, the conducted experiments re-
vealed a series of important observations. The first
one is that the LSA?s term-sentence approach per-
forms better with a higher number of examples, be-
cause they provide more semantic information. In
addition to the number of examples, the experiments
show that the influence of the context window for the
name discrimination is significant. The discrimina-
tion power is better for larger context windows and
this is also related to the expressiveness of the lan-
guage.
Second, our name categorization and discrimina-
tion approach outperforms the baseline with 30%.
Finally, LSA is a very appropriate approximation
for the resolution of the NE categorization and dis-
23
crimination tasks. LSA also gives logical explana-
tion about the classification decision of the person
names, providing a set of words characterizing the
category or simply a list of words describing the in-
dividual we want to classify.
5 Adaptation to Bulgarian
5.1 Motivation
So far, we have discussed and described the develop-
ment and the performance of our approach with the
Spanish language. The obtained results and observa-
tions, serve as a base for the context extraction and
the experimental setup for the rest of the languages
which we want to study. However, to verify the mul-
tilingual performance of the approach, we decided
to carry out an experiment with a language which is
very different from the Romance family.
For this reason, we choose the Bulgarian lan-
guage, which is the earliest written Slavic language.
It dates back from the creation of the old Bulgarian
alphabet Glagolista, which was later replaced by the
Cyrillic alphabet. The most typical characteristics of
the Bulgarian language are the elimination of noun
declension, suffixed definite article, lack of a verb
infinitive and complicated verb system.
The Bulgarian name discrimination data is ex-
tracted from the news corpus Sega2002. This corpus
is originally prepared and used in the CLEF compe-
titions. The corpus consists of news articles orga-
nized in different XML files depending on the year,
month, and day of the publication of the news. We
merged all files into a single one, and considered
only the text between the text tags. In order to ease
the text processing and to avoid encoding problems,
we transliterated the Cyrillic characters into Latin
ones.
The discrimination data in this experiment con-
sists of the city, country, party, river and mountain
categories. We were interested in studying not only
the multilingual issue of our approach, but also how
scalable it is with other categories. The majority
of the categories are locations and only one corre-
sponds to organization. In Table 4, we shows the
number of names which we extracted for each one
of the categories.
5.2 Bulgarian data
The cities include the capital of Bulgaria ? Sofia, the
second and third biggest Bulgarian cities ? Plovdiv
and Varna, a city from the southern parts of Bulgaria
? Haskovo, the capital of England ? London and
the capital of Russia ? Moskva. The occurrences of
these examples are conflated in the ambiguous name
CITY.
For countries we choose Russia (Rusiya)3, Ger-
many (Germaniya), France (Franciya), Turkey (Tur-
ciya) and England (Angliya). The five names are
conflated into COUNTRY.
The organizations we worked with are the two
leading Bulgarian political parties. BSP (Balgar-
ska Socialisticeska Partija, or Bulgarian Socialist
Party) is the left leaning party and the successor to
the Bulgarian Communist Party. SDS (Sayuz na
demokratichnite sili, or The Union of Democratic
Forces) is the right leaning political party. The two
organizations are conflated into PARTY.
For the RIVER category we choose Danube
(Dunav) which is the second longest river in Eu-
rope and passes by Bulgaria, Maritsa which is the
longest river that runs solely in the interior of the
Balkans, Struma and Mesta which run in Bulgaria
and Greece.
The final category consists of the oldest Bulgarian
mountain situated in the southern part of Bulgaria ?
Rhodope (Rodopi), Rila which is the highest moun-
tain in Bulgaria and on the whole Balkan Penin-
sula, and Pirin which is the second highest Bulgarian
mountain after Rila. The three mountain names are
conflated and substituted with the label MOUNTAIN.
5.3 Bulgarian name discrimination
The experimental settings coincide with those pre-
sented in Section 4 and the obtained results are
shown in Table 4. The performance of our approach
ranges from 32 to 81%. For the five categories, the
best performance is achieved for those names that
have the majority number of examples.
For instance, for the CITY category, the best per-
formance of 79% is reached with Sofia. TAs we
have previously mentioned, this is due to the fact that
LSA has more evidence about the context in which
Sofia appears. It is interesting to note that the city
3this is the Bulgarian transliteration for Russia
24
Category Instance Total P R F
City
Plovdiv 1822 44.42 83.87 58.08
Sofiya 5633 71.39 89.79 79.54
Varna 1042 32.02 82.64 46.17
Haskovo 140 21.09 69.29 32.33
London 751 31.32 84.82 45.74
Moskva 1087 39.47 88.22 54.53
Country
Rusiya 2043 55.83 86.19 67.77
Germaniya 1588 40.72 77.96 53.50
Francia 1352 37.27 77.81 50.39
Turciya 1162 43.23 84.08 57.10
Angliya 655 29.67 72.67 42.14
Party
BSP 2323 42.54 99.35 59.57
SDS 3916 64.86 98.85 78.32
River
Dunav 403 85.39 76.92 80.94
Marica 203 77.88 83.25 80.47
Mesta 81 63.64 95.06 76.24
Struma 37 56.67 91.89 70.10
Mountain
Rila 101 70.22 91.09 79.31
Pirin 294 75.11 57.48 65.12
Rodopi 135 71.04 96.29 81.76
Table 4: Bulgarian NE discrimination
Varna forms part of weak named entities such as the
University of Varna, the Major house of Varna. Al-
though, this strong entity is embedded into the weak
ones, practically Varna changes its semantic cate-
gory from a city into university, major house. This
creates additional ambiguity in our already conflated
and ambiguous names. In order to improve the per-
formance, we need a better data generation process
where the mixture of weak and strong entities will
be avoided.
The same effect of best classification for major-
ity sense is observed with the COUNTRY category.
The best performance of 67% is obtained for Rus-
sia. The other country which is distinguished sig-
nificantly well is Turkey. The 57% performance is
from 5 to 10% higher compared to the performances
of Germany, England and France. This is due to the
context in which the names occur. Turkey is related
to trading with Bulgaria and emigration, meanwhile
the other countries appear in the context of the Eu-
ropean Union, the visit of the Bulgarian president in
these countries.
During the error analysis, we noticed that in the
context of the political parties, SDS appeared many
times in with the names of the political leader or the
representatives of the BSP party and vice versa. This
impeded LSA?s classification, because of the similar
context.
Among all categories, RIVER and MOUNTAIN
obtained the best performances. The rivers Dunav
and Maritsa reached 80%, while the mountains
Rodopi achieved 81.76% f-score. Looking at the
discrimination results for the other names in these
categories, it can be seen that their performances are
much higher compared to the names of the CITY,
COUNTY and PARTY categories. This experiment
shows that the discrimination power is related to the
type of the NE category we want to resolve.
6 Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented a language indepen-
dent approach for person name categorization and
discrimination. This approach is based on the sen-
tence semantic similarity information derived from
LSA. The approach is evaluated with different NE
examples for the Spanish and Bulgarian languages.
We have observed the discrimination performance of
LSA not only with the SINGER and PRESIDENT
companies, but also with the CITY, COUNTRY,
MOUNTAIN, RIVER and PARTY. This is the first
approach which focuses on the resolution of these
categories for the Bulgarian language.
The obtained results both for Spanish and Bulgar-
ian are very promising. The baselines are outper-
formed with 25%. The person fine-grained catego-
rization reaches 90% while the name discrimination
varies from 42% to 90%. This variability is related
to the degree of the name ambiguity among the con-
flated names and similar behaviour is observed in the
co-occurence approach of (Pedersen et al, 2005).
During the experimental evaluation, we found out
that the 100% name purity (e.g. that one name be-
longs only to one and the same semantic category)
which we accept during the data creation in real-
ity contains 9% noise. These observations are con-
firmed in the additional experimental study we have
conducted with the Bulgarian language. According
to the obtained results, our text semantic similarity
approach performs very well and practically there
is no restrain to be adapted to other languages, data
sets or even new categories.
7 Future Work
In the future, we want to relate the name discrimi-
nation and categorization processes, by first encoun-
tering the different underlying meanings of a name
25
and then grouping together the sentences that belong
to the same semantic category. This process will in-
crease the performance of the NE fine-grained cat-
egorization, and will reduce the errors we encoun-
tered during the classification of the singers Enrique
Iglesias and Madonna. In addition to this experi-
ment, we want to cluster web pages on the basis of
name ambiguity. For instance, we want to process
the result for the Google?s query George Miller, and
form three separate clusters obtained on the basis of
a fine-grained and name discrimination. Thus we
can form the clusters for GeorgeMiller the congress-
man, the movie director and the father of WordNet.
This study will include also techniques for automatic
cluster stopping.
Moreover, LSA?s ability of language indepen-
dence can be exploited to resolve cross-language
NE categorization and discrimination from which
we can extract cross-language pairs of semantically
related words characterizing a person e.g. George
Bush is seen with White House in English, la Casa
Blanca in Spanish, a Casa Branka in Portuguese and
Beliat Dom in Bulgarian.
With LSA, we can also observe the time consis-
tency property of a person which changes its se-
mantic category across time. For instance, a stu-
dent turns into a PhD student, teaching assistant and
then university professor, or as in the case of Arnold
Schwarzenegger from actor to governor.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the three anonymous re-
viewers for their useful comments and suggestions.
This work was partially funded by the European
Union under the project QALLME number FP6 IST-
033860 and by the Spanish Ministry of Science and
Technology under the project TEX-MESS number
TIN2006-15265-C06-01.
References
A. Bagga and B. Baldwin. 1998. Entity-based cross-
document coreferencing using the vector space model.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Meeting of
the ACL and Seventeenth International Conference on
Computational Linguistics, pages 79?85.
G. Cleuziou, L. Martin, and C. Vrain. 2004. Poboc: An
overlapping clustering algorithm, application to rule-
based classification and textual data. In ECAI, pages
440?444.
S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, G. Furnas, T. Landauer, and
R. Harshman. 1990. Indexing by latent semantic anal-
ysis. In Journal of the American Society for Informa-
tion Science, volume 41, pages 391?407.
S. Dumais. 1995. Using lsi for information filtering:
Trec-3 experiments. In The Third Text Retrieval Con-
ference (TREC-3), pages 219?230.
M. Fleischman and E. Hovy. 2002. Fine grained classifi-
cation of named entities. In Proceedings of the 19th in-
ternational conference on Computational linguistics,
pages 1?7.
Z. Kozareva, O. Ferra?ndeza, A. Montoyo, R. Mun?oz,
A. Sua?rez, and J. Go?mez. 2007. Combining data-
driven systems for improving named entity recogni-
tion. Data and Knowledge Engineering, 61(3):449?
466, June.
G. Mann. 2002. Fine-grained proper noun ontologies for
question answering. In COLING-02 on SEMANET,
pages 1?7.
G. Miller and W. Charles. 1991. Contextual correlates of
semantic similarity. In Language and Cognitive Pro-
cesses, pages 1?28.
M. Pasca. 2004. Acquisition of categorized named enti-
ties for web search. In CIKM ?04: Proceedings of the
thirteenth ACM international conference on Informa-
tion and knowledge management, pages 137?145.
T. Pedersen, A. Purandare, and A. Kulkarni. 2005. Name
discrimination by clustering similar contexts. In CI-
CLing, pages 226?237.
P. Shah, D. Schneider, C. Matuszek, R.C. Kahlert,
B. Aldag, D. Baxter, J. Cabral, M. Witbrock, and
J. Curtis. 2006. Automated population of cyc: Ex-
tracting information about named-entities from the
web. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth International
FLAIRS Conference, pages 153?158.
H. Shu?tze. 1998. Automatic word sense discrimination.
In Journal of computational linguistics, volume 24.
H. Tanev and B. Magnini. 2006. Weakly supervised ap-
proaches for ontology population. In Proceeding of
11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 17?24.
26
