BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 163?170,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
BaseNPs that contain gene names: domain specicity and genericity
Ian Lewin
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
15 JJ Thomson Avenue
Cambridge CB3 0FD, UK
ian.lewin@cl.cam.ac.uk
Abstract
The names of named entities very often oc-
cur as constituents of larger noun phrases
which denote different types of entity. Un-
derstanding the structure of the embedding
phrase can be an enormously beneficial first
step to enhancing whatever processing is in-
tended to follow the named entity recogni-
tion in the first place. In this paper, we
examine the integration of general purpose
linguistic processors together with domain
specific named entity recognition in order to
carry out the task of baseNP detection. We
report a best F-score of 87.17% on this task.
We also report an inter-annotator agreement
score of 98.8 Kappa on the task of baseNP
annotation of a new data set.
1 Introduction
Base noun phrases (baseNPs), broadly ?the initial
portions of non-recursive noun phrases up to the
head? (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995), are valuable
pieces of linguistic structure which minimally ex-
tend beyond the scope of named entities. In this
paper, we explore the integration of different tech-
niques for detecting baseNPs that contain a named
entity, using a domain-trained named entity recog-
nition (NER) system but in combination with other
linguistic components that are ?general purpose?.
The rationale is simply that domain-trained NER is
clearly a necessity for the task; but one might expect
to be able to secure good coverage at the higher syn-
tactic level by intelligent integration of general pur-
pose syntactic processing without having to undergo
a further round of domain specific annotation and
training. We present a number of experiments ex-
ploring different ways of integrating NER into gen-
eral purpose linguistic processing. Of course, good
results can also be used subsequently to help reduce
the effort required in data annotation for use in dedi-
cated domain-specific machine learning systems for
baseNP detection.
First, however, we motivate the task itself. Enor-
mous effort has been directed in recent years to the
automatic tagging of named entities in bio-medical
texts and with considerable success. For example,
iHOP reports gene name precision as being between
87% and 99% (depending on the organism) (Hoff-
man and Valencia, 2004). Named entities are of
course only sometimes identical in scope with noun
phrases. Often they are embedded within highly
complex noun phrases. Nevertheless, the simple de-
tection of a name by itself can be valuable. This
depends in part on the intended application. Thus,
iHOP uses gene and protein names to hyperlink
sentences from Medline and this then supports a
browser over those sentences with additional navi-
gation facilities. Clicking on Dpp whilst viewing a
page of information about hedgehog leads to a page
of information about Dpp in which sentences that
relate both Dpp and hedgehog are prioritized.
One of the application advantages of iHOP is that
the discovered gene names are presented to the user
in their original context and this enables users to
compensate for problems in reliability and/or con-
textual relevance. In many Information Extraction
(IE) systems, relations between entities are detected
and extracted into a table. In this case, since the im-
163
mediate surrounding context of the gene name may
be simply lost, the reliability of the original identifi-
cation becomes much more important. In section 2
below, we explain our own application background
in which our objective is to increase the productiv-
ity of human curators whose task is to read partic-
ular scientific papers and fill in fields of a database
of information about genes. Directing curators? at-
tention to sentences which contain gene names is
clearly one step. Curators additionally report that
an index into the paper that uses the gene name and
its embedding baseNP is even more valuable (ref-
erence omitted for anonymity). This often enables
them to predict the possible relevance of the name
occurrence to the curation task and thus begin or-
dering their exploration of the paper. Consequently,
our technical goal of baseNP detection is linked di-
rectly to a valuable application task. We also use the
baseNP identification in order to type the occurrence
semantically and use this information in an anaphora
resolution process (Gasperin, 2006).
The detection of baseNPs that contain a named
entity is a super-task of NER, as well as a sub-task
of NP-chunking. Given that NER is clearly a domain
specific task, it is an interesting question what per-
formance levels are achievable using domain trained
NER in combination with general purpose linguistic
processing modules.
There is a further motivation for the task. The dis-
tinction between a named entity and an embedding
noun phrase is one with critical importance even for
the sub-task of NER. Dingare et al(2005) conclude,
from their analysis of a multi-feature maximum en-
tropy NER module, that increases in performance of
biomedical NER systems will depend as much upon
qualitative improvements in annotated data as in the
technology underlying the systems. The claim is that
quality problems are partly due to confusion over
what lies in the scope of a named entity and what
lies at higher syntactic levels. Current biomedical
annotations are often inconsistent partly because an-
notators are left with little guidance on how to han-
dle complexities in noun phrases, especially with re-
spect to premodifiers and conjunctions. For exam-
ple, which premodifiers are part of the named entity
and which are ?merely? part of the embedding noun
phrase? Is human part of the named entity in the
regulation of human interleukin-2 gene expression,
Figure 1: Paper Browser showing baseNP index
or not?
By focussing attention instead on the baseNPs
that contain a named entity, one can clearly sidestep
this issue to some extent. After all, increasing the
accuracy of an NER module with respect to premod-
ifier inclusion is unlikely to affect the overall accu-
racy of detection of the embedding noun phrases.
2 FlyBase curation
The intended application for our work is a soft-
ware environment for FlyBase curators that includes
an NLP-enhanced Browser for Scientific Papers.
FlyBase is the world?s leading genomics database
for the fruitfly Drosophila (melanogaster and other
species) (Crosby et al, 2007). FlyBase is largely
updated through a paper-by-paper methodology in
which research articles likely to contain informa-
tion relevant for the FlyBase database are first put
in a priority list. Subsequently, these are read by
skilled geneticists (at post-doctoral level) who dis-
til gene related information into the database itself.
Although this is a paradigm example of IE, our ob-
jective is not to fully automate this task itself, sim-
ply because the expected accuracy rates are unlikely
to be high enough to provide a genuinely useful
tool. Rather, our task is to enable curators to ex-
plore the gene related sections of papers more effi-
ciently. The Browser currently highlights potential
164
items of interest for curators and provides novel in-
dexing and navigation possibilities. It is in this con-
text that the identification of baseNPs that contain
gene names is carried out. An individual sentence
that contains a gene name is very often not enough,
considered in isolation, for curators to fill in a re-
quired database field. Information often needs to
be gathered from across a paragraph and even the
whole paper. So extraction of sentences is not an at-
tractive option. Equally, a whole sentence is unfeasi-
bly large to serve simply as an indexing term into the
paper. Noun phrases provide more information than
simply gene names, but post-modification can also
lead to extremely long terms. BaseNPs are there-
fore a useful compromise, these being short enough
to display whole in a window (i.e. no scrolling
is required) and often bearing enough information
for the user to understand much more of the con-
text in which the gene name itself appears. Fur-
thermore, the baseNP is both a natural ?unit? of in-
formation (whereas a window of n tokens around a
gene name is not) and it supports further processing.
BaseNPs are typed according to whether they denote
genes or various gene products and linked together
in anaphoric chains.
In our navigation panel for the Browser, the
baseNPs are sorted according to the gene name that
they contain (and then by order in which they appear
within the paper), and hyperlinked to their occur-
rence in the paper. This enables users to explore pa-
pers gene-by-gene but also, when considering a par-
ticular gene, to understand more about the reference
to the gene - for example whether gene products or
promoters are being referenced. Figure 1 contains
an example screenshot.
3 Scope of the Data
Complex nominals have long been held to be a com-
mon feature in scientific text. The corpus of Vlachos
and Gasperin (2006) contains 80 abstracts (600 sen-
tences) annotated with gene names. In this data-set,
noun phrases that contain gene names (excluding
post-modifiers) of 3 words or more comprise more
than 40% of the data and exhibit primarily: strings of
premodifiers tudor mutant females, zygotic Dnop5
expression; genitives: Robo ?s cytoplasmic domain,
the rdgB protein ?s amino terminal 281 residues; co-
ordination the copia and mdg-1 elements and par-
enthetical apposition the female-specic gene Sex
lethal ( Sxl ), and the SuUR (suppressor of under-
replication) gene. Only 41% of the baseNPs con-
taining a gene name consist of one token only. 16%
have two tokens. The two token baseNPs include
large numbers of combinations of gene names with
more general words such as Ras activity, vnd mu-
tants, Xiro expression, IAP localization and vasa
protein. In general, the gene name appears in mod-
ifier position although species modifiers are com-
mon, such as Drosophila Tsg, and there are other
possibilities: truncated p85.
Our intention is to categorize this data using the
concept of ?baseNP? and build effective computa-
tional models for recognizing instances. Although
baseNP is a reasonably stable linguistic concept,
its application to a new data-set is not completely
straightforward. Ramshaw and Marcus (1995) state
that a baseNP aims ?to identify essentially the ini-
tial portions of nonrecursive noun phrases up to the
head, including determiners but not including post-
modifying prepositional phrases or clauses?. How-
ever, work on baseNPs has essentially always pro-
ceeded via algorithmic extraction from fully parsed
corpora such as the Penn Treebank. BaseNPs have
therefore depended on particular properties of the
annotation framework and this leads to certain as-
pects of the class appearing unnatural.
The clearest case is single element conjunction,
which Penn Treebank policy dictates is annotated
at word-level with a flat structure like this [lpl and
xsl] (brackets indicate baseNP boundaries). As soon
as one of the elements is multi-word however, then
separate structures are to be identified [lpl] and [the
sxl gene]. The dependency on numbers of tokens
becomes clearly problematic in the bio-medical do-
main. Quite different structures will be identified
for lpl and fasciclin, lpl and fasciclin 1 and possibly
lpl and fasciclin-1, depending on how tokenization
treats hyphens. Furthermore, nothing here depends
on the motivating idea of ?initial segments up to the
head?. In order to provide a more natural class, our
guidelines are that unless there is a shared modifier
to account for (as in [embryonic lgl and sxg]), all co-
ordinations are split into separate baseNPs. All other
cases of coordination follow the standard guidelines
of the Penn Treebank.
165
A second difficult case is possessives. BaseNP ex-
traction algorithms generally split possessives like
this: [fra] [?s ectodomain], corresponding (some-
what) to an intuition that there are two NPs whilst
assigning each word to some baseNP chunk and
not introducing recursiveness. This policy however
causes a sharp division between this case and the fra
ectodomain following the Penn Treebank bracketing
guideline that nominal modifiers are never labelled.
Since our interest is ?the smallest larger NP con-
taining a gene name?, we find it much more natu-
ral to treat fra?s as just another modifier of the head
ectodomain. Whether it recursively contains a sin-
gle word NP fra (or just a single word NNP) is again
not something that is motivated by the idea of ?ini-
tial segments up to the head?. Similarly, we mark
one baseNP in the rdgB protein?s amino terminal
281 residues, viz. the rdgB protein.
Apposition, as in Sex lethal ( Sxl ) and the gene sex
lethal , is a further interesting case. In the first case,
?Sex lethal? and ?Sxl? stand in apposition. Both are
gene names. The former is the head. In the sec-
ond, ?gene? is the head and ?sex lethal? is a name
that stands in apposition. In each case, we have a
head and post-modifiers which are neither clausal
nor prepositional. It is unclear whether the rubric
?clausal or prepositional? in Ramshaw and Marcus?
statement of intent is merely illustrative or defini-
tive. On the grounds that a sharp division between
the non-parenthetical case the gene sex lethal and the
pre-modifier the sex lethal gene is unnatural, our in-
tuition is that the baseNP does cover all 4 tokens in
this case. All (post-head) parentheticals are however
to be treated more like optional adjuncts and there-
fore not included with the head to which they attach.
In order to verify the reliability of baseNP an-
notation, two computational linguists (re)annotated
the 600 sentences (6300 tokens) of Vlachos and
Gasperin (2006) with baseNPs and heads using the
published guidelines. We added material concern-
ing head annotation. Vlachos and Gasperin did
not quote agreement scores for baseNP annotation.
Their interest was directed at gene name agreement
between a linguist and a biologist. Our 2-person
inter-annotator Kappa scores were 0.953 and 0.988
on head and baseNP annotation respectively repre-
senting substantial agreement.1 .
4 Methodology
A reasonable and simple baseline system for ex-
tracting baseNPs that contain a gene name is to use
an off-the-shelf baseNP extractor and simply filter
the results for those that contain a gene name. To
simplify analysis of results, except where otherwise
noted this filter and subsequent uses of NER are
based on a gold standard gene name annotation. In
this way, the contributions of different components
can be compared without factoring in relative errors
of NER. Naturally, in the live system, an automated
NER process is used (Vlachos and Gasperin, 2006).
For the baseline we chose an implementation of the
Ramshaw and Marcus baseNP detector distributed
with GATE2 pipelined with the Stanford maximum
entropy part of speech tagger 3. The Stanford tag-
ger is a state of the art tagger incorporating a num-
ber of features including use of tag contexts, lexical
features, a sophisticated smoothing technique, and
features for unknown words (including 4-gram pre-
fixes and suffixes). Both components of the base-
line systems utilize the 48 tag Penn Treebank tagset.
Results however showed that poor performance of
the part of speech tagger could have a disastrous ef-
fect on baseNP detection. A simple extension of the
baseline is to insert a module in between POS tag-
ging and NP detection. This module revises the POS
tags from the tagger in the light of NER results, es-
sentially updating the tags of tokens that are part of
named entities. This is essentially a simple version
of the strategy mooted by Toutanova at el (2003) that
the traditional order of NER and tagging be reversed.
It is simpler because, in a maximum entropy frame-
work, NER results can function as one extra fea-
ture amongst many in POS detection; whereas here
it functions merely as an override. Retraining the
tagger did not form part of our current exploration.
1In fact, although the experiment can be considered a classi-
fication of 6300 tokens in IOB format, the counting of classifi-
cations is not completely straightforward. The task was ?anno-
tate the baseNP surrounding each gene name? rather than ?an-
notate each token?. In principle, each token is examined; in
practice a variable number is examined. If we count all tokens
classified into NPs plus one token of context either side, then
both annotators annotated over 930 tokens.
2http://www.gate.ac.uk
3http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml
166
We adopted a similar strategy with the domain in-
dependent full parsing system RASP (Briscoe et al,
2006). RASP includes a simple 1st order HMM POS
tagger using 149 of the CLAWS-2 tagset. The tagger
is trained on the manually corrected subsets of the
(general English) Susanne, LOB and BNC corpora.
The output of the tagger is a distribution of possi-
ble tags per token (all tags that are at least 1/50 as
probable as the top tag; but only the top tag if more
than 90% probable). The tagger also includes an un-
known word handling module for guessing the pos-
sible tags of unknown words. The RASP parser is
a probabilistic LALR(1) parser over the CLAWS-2
tags, or, more precisely, a unification grammar for-
malism whose lexical categories are feature based
descriptions of those tags. The parser has no access
to lexical information other than that made available
by the part of speech tags. Although the output of
RASP is a full parse (or a sequence of fragments, if
no connected parse can be found) and baseNPs may
not be constituents of NPs, baseNPs can be extracted
algorithmically from the full parse.
Some more interesting pre-parsing integration
strategies are available with RASP because it does
not demand a deterministic choice of tag for each
word. We experimented with both a deterministic
re-write strategy (as for the baseline system) and
with various degrees of interpolation; for example,
adjusting the probability distribution over tags so
that proper noun tags receive 50% of the probabil-
ity mass if the token is recognized by NER, and
the other tags receive the remaining 50% in direct
proportion to the amount they would receive from
the POS tagger alone. In this set-up, the NER re-
sults need not function simply as an override, but
equally they do not function simply as a feature for
use in part of speech tagging. Rather, the parser may
be able to select a best parse which makes use of
a sequence of tags which is not itself favoured by
the tagger alone. This allows some influence to the
grammatical context surrounding the gene name and
may also permit tags within phrasal names such as
transforming growth factor to propagate.
RASP is also a non-deterministic parser and con-
sequently a further possible integration strategy is
to examine the output n-best list of parses to find
baseNPs, rather than relying on simply the 1-best
output. The n-best parses are already scored accord-
ing to a probabilistic model trained on general text.
Our strategy is to re-score them using the additional
knowledge source of domain specific NER. We ex-
plored a number of re-scoring hypotheses. First, a
cut-off of 20 on n-best lists was found to be optimal.
That is, correct analyses tended to either be in the top
20 or else not in the top 100 or even 1000. Secondly,
differences in score between the incorrect 1-best and
the correct nth hypothesis were not a very reliable
indicator of ?almost right?. This is not surprising as
the scores are probabilities calculated over the com-
plete analysis, whereas our focus is one small part
of it. Consequently, the re-scoring system uses the
probabilistic model just to generate the top 20 anal-
yses; and those analyses are then re-scored using 3
features. Analyses that concur with NER in having
a named entity within an NP receive a reward of +1.
Secondly, NP analyses that contain N+1 genes (as
in a co-ordination) receive a score of +N, so long
as the NP is single headed. For example, ?gurken
or torpedo females? will receive a preferred analy-
sis in which ?gurken? and ?torpedo? are both mod-
ifiers of ?females?. The ?single headedness? con-
straint rules out very unlikely NP analyses that the
parser can return as legal possibilities. Finally, anal-
yses receive a score of -1 if the NP contains a deter-
miner but the head of the NP is a gene name. The
top 20 parses may include analyses in which, for ex-
ample, ?the hypothesis that phenylalanine hydroxy-
lase? contains ?that phenylalanine hydroxylase? as
an NP constituent.
Finally, we also experimented with using both the
full parsing and shallow baseNP spotter together;
here, the idea is simply that when two analyses over-
lap, then the analysis from full parsing should be
preferred on the grounds that it has more informa-
tion available to it. However, if the shallow spotter
detects an analysis when full parsing detects none
then this is most likely because full parsing has been
led astray rather than it has discovered a more likely
analysis not involving any baseNP.
5 Experimental Results
Table 1 gives the precision, recall and (harmonic) F-
score measures for the baseline NP system with and
without the extra pre-parsing retagging module; and
table 2 gives similar figures for the generic full pars-
167
ing system. Scores for the left boundary only, right
boundary only and full extent (?correct?) are shown.
The extra retagging module (i.e. override tagger re-
sults, given NER results) improves results in both
systems and by similar amounts. This is nearly al-
ways on account of gene names being mis-tagged
as verbal which leads to their exclusion from the set
of baseNP chunks. The override mechanism is of
course a blunt instrument and only affects the tags
of tokens within gene names and not those in its sur-
rounding context.
Table 3 shows the results from interpolating the
POS tag distribution P with the NER distribution
N linearly using different levels of ?. For example,
? = 1.00 is the simple retagging approach in which
all the probability is assigned to the NER suggested
tag; whereas ? = 0.25 means that only 25% is allo-
cated by NER. The figures shown are for one variant
of the full parsing system which included n-best se-
lection but other variants showed similar behaviour
(data not shown). The results from interpolation
show that the extra information available in the parse
does not prove valuable overall. Decreasing values
of ? lead to decreases in performance. These results
can be interpreted as similar in kind to Charniak et
al (1996) who found that a parser using multiple
POS tag inputs could not improve on the tag accu-
racy of a tagger outputting single POS tags. Our
results differ in that the extra tag possibilities are de-
rived from an alternative knowledge source and our
measurement is baseNP detection. Nevertheless the
conclusion may be that the best way forward here
is a much tighter integration between NER and POS
tagging itself.
POS tagging errors naturally affect the perfor-
mance of both shallow and full parsing systems,
though not necessarily equally. For example, the
tagger in the shallow system tags ectopic as a verb
in vnd-expression leads to ectopic Nk6 expression
and this is not corrected by the retagging module be-
cause ectopic is not part of the gene name. Conse-
quently the baseNP spotter is led into a left bound-
ary error. Nevertheless, the distribution of baseNPs
from the two systems do appear to be complemen-
tary in a rather deeper fashion. Analysis of the re-
sults indicates that parentheticals in pre-modifier po-
sitions appears to throw the shallow parser severely
off course. For example, it generates the analysis
R P F
retag+shallow
(correct) 80.21 75.92 78.01
(left b) 92.40 87.46 89.86
(right b) 90.81 85.95 88.32
shallow only
(correct) 74.03 76.32 75.16
(left b) 84.28 86.89 85.56
(right b) 82.69 85.25 83.95
Table 1: Generic shallow parsing
R P F
retag+full
(correct) 80.92 84.81 82.82
(left b) 85.69 89.81 87.70
(right b) 88.69 92.96 90.78
full only
(correct) 75.44 85.23 80.04
(left b) 80.21 90.62 85.10
(right b) 82.51 93.21 87.54
Table 2: Generic full parsing
[the transforming growth factor-beta] ( [ TGF-beta
] ) superfamily. Also, appositions such as the human
auto antigen La and the homeotic genes abdominal
A and abdominal B cause problems. In these kinds
of case, the full parser detects the correct analysis.
On the other hand, the extraction of baseNPs from
grammatical relations relies in part on the parser
identifying a head correctly (for example, via a non-
clausal subject relation). The shallow parser does
not however rely on this depth of analysis and may
succeed in such cases. There are also cases where
the full parser fails to detect any analysis at all.
System (correct) (left b) (right b)
?=0.25 83.97 88.34 90.71
?=0.50 84.16 88.69 91.22
?=0.80 85.18 89.67 91.28
?=1.00 85.38 89.87 91.66
Table 3: F-scores for baseNP detection for various ?
Table 4 indicates the advantages to be gained in n-
best selection. The entries for full and retag+full are
repeated from table 2 for convenience. The entries
168
System R P F
retag+full 80.92 84.81 82.82
retag+full+sel 83.22 87.22 85.17
retag+full+oracle 85.87 90.17 87.96
full 75.44 85.23 80.04
full+sel 78.80 86.60 82.52
full+oracle 81.63 89.88 85.56
Table 4: Effects of n-best selection
for full+sel and retag+full+sel show the effect of
adding n-best selection. The entries for full+oracle
and retag+full+oracle show the maximum achiev-
able performance by replacing the actual selection
policy with an oracle that always chooses the cor-
rect hypothesis, if it is available. The results are
that, regardless of whether a retagging policy is
adopted, an oracle which selects the best analysis
can achieve an error reduction of well over 25%.
Furthermore, the simple selection policy outlined
before succeeds in achieving almost half the pos-
sible error reduction available. This result is par-
ticularly interesting because it demonstrates that the
extra knowledge source available in this baseNP de-
tection task (namely NER) can profitably be brought
to bear at more than one stage in the overall process-
ing pipeline. Even when NER has been used to im-
prove the sequence of POS tags given to the parser,
it can profitably be exploited again when selecting
between parses.
The complementary nature of the two systems is
revealed in Table 5 which shows the effects of inte-
grating the two parsers. baseNPs from the shallow
parser are accepted whenever it hypothesizes one
and there is no competing overlapping baseNP from
the full parser. Note that this is rather different from
the standard method of simply selecting between an
analysis from the one parser and one from another.
The success of this policy reflects the fact that there
remain several cases where the full parser fails to
deliver ?apparently? simple baseNPs either because
the tagger has failed to generate a suitable hypoth-
esis, or because parsing itself fails to find a good
enough analysis in the time available to it.
Overall, the best results (87.17% F-score) are ob-
tained by applying NER results both before parsing
through the update of POS tags and after it in se-
System R P F
1-best 85.69 84.35 85.01
n-best 87.63 86.71 87.17
oracle 90.28 89.49 89.89
Table 5: Combining shallow and full parsing
lection from n-best lists; and by combining the re-
sults of both full parsing in order to improve analy-
sis of more complex structures and shallow parsing
as a back-off strategy. The same strategy applied us-
ing our automated gene name recognizer results in
a F-score of 73.6% F-score, which is considerably
less of course, although the gene name recognizer
itself operates at 82.5% F-Score, with similar preci-
sion and recall figures. This naturally limits the pos-
sible performance of our baseNP recognition task.
Encouragingly, the ?lost? performance (just under
11%) is actually less in this scenario than when gene
name recognition is perfect.
6 Previous Work
The lack of clarity between noun phrase extents and
named entity extents and its impact on evaluation
and training data for NER has been noted previ-
ously, e.g. for proteins (Mani et al, 2005). Vla-
chos and Gasperin (2006) claim that their name ver-
sus mention distinction was helpful in understand-
ing disagreements over gene name extents and this
led, through greater clarity of intended coverage, to
improved NER. BaseNP detectors have also been
used more directly in building NER systems. Ya-
mamoto et al(2003) describe an SVM approach to
protein name recognition, one of whose features is
the output of a baseNP recognizer. BaseNP recogni-
tion supplies a top-down constraint for the search for
protein names within a baseNP. A similar approach
albeit in a CRF framework is described in Song et
al. (2005).
The concept of baseNP has undergone a number
of revisions (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995; Tjong
Kim Sang and Buchholz, 2000) but has previously
always been tied to extraction from a more com-
pletely annotated treebank, whose annotations are
subject to other pressures than just ?initial material
up to the head?. To our knowledge, our figures for
inter-annotator agreement on the baseNP task itself
169
(i.e. not derived from a larger annotation task) are
the first to be reported. Quality measures can be
indirectly inferred from a treebank complete anno-
tation, but baseNP identification is probably a sim-
pler task. Doddington et al(2004) report an ?overall
value score of 86? for inter-annotator agreement in
ACE; but this is a multi-component evaluation using
a complete noun phrase, but much else besides.
Improving results through the combination of dif-
ferent systems has also been a topic of previous
work in baseNP detection. For example, Sang et al
(2000) applied majority voting to the top five ma-
chine learning algorithms from a sample of seven
and achieved a baseNP recognition rate that ex-
ceeded the recognition rates of any of the individual
methods.
7 Conclusion
We have motivated the task of detecting baseNPs
that contain a given named entity as a task both of
interest from the standpoint of use within a particu-
lar application and on more general grounds, as an
intermediate point between the task of general NP
chunking and domain specific NER.
We have explored a variety of methods for under-
taking baseNP detection using only domain specific
NER in addition to otherwise general purpose lin-
guistic processors. In particular, we have explored
both shallow and full parsing general purpose sys-
tems and demonstrated that the domain specific re-
sults of NER can be applied profitably not only at
different stages in the language processing pipeline
but also more than once. The best overall recogni-
tion rates were obtained by a combination of both
shallow and full parsing systems with knowledge
from NER being applied both before parsing, at the
stage of part of speech detection and after parsing,
during parse selection.
References
E.J. Briscoe, J. Carroll, and R. Watson. 2006. The sec-ond release of the rasp system. Proc. Coling/ACL2006 Interactive Sessions.
E. Charniak, G. Carroll, J. Adcock, A.R. Cassandra,Y. Gotoh, J. Katz, M.L. Littman, and J. McCann.
1996. Taggers for parsers. Artificial Intelligence,85(1-2):45?57.
M.A. Crosby, Goodman J.L., Strelets V.B., P. Zhang,
W.M. Gelbart, and the FlyBase Consortium. 2007.Flybase: genomes by the dozen. Nucleic Acids Re-search, 35:486?491.
Shipra Dingare, Malvina Nissim, Jenny Finkel, Christo-
pher Manning, and Claire Grover. 2005. A system foridentifying named entities in biomedical text: how re-sults from two evaluations reflect on both the system
and the evaluations:. Comp. Funct. Genomics, 6(1-2):77?85.
G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw,S. Strassel, and R. Weischedel. 2004. Automatic con-
tent extraction (ace) program - task definitions and per-formance measures. In Proceedings of LREC 2004.
C. Gasperin. 2006. Semi-supervised anaphora resolu-tion in biomedical texts. In Proceedings of BIONLP inHLT-NAACL06, New York, pages 96?103.
R. Hoffman and A. Valencia. 2004. A gene network fornavigating the literature. Nature Genetics, 36:664.
I. Mani, Z. Hu, S.B. Jang, K. Samuel, M. Krause,
J. Phillips, and C.H. Wu. 2005. Protein name taggingguidelines: lessons learned. Comparative and Func-tional Genomics, 6(1-2):72?76.
L.A. Ramshaw and M.P Marcus. 1995. Text chunking
using transformation-based learning. In Proceedingsof the Third Annual Workshop on Very Large Corpora,pages 82?94. ACL.
Y. Song, G. Kim, E. ad Lee, and B. Yi. 2005. Posbiotm-
ner: a trainable biomedical named-entity recognitionsystem. Bioinformatics, 21(11):2794?2796.
E.F. Tjong Kim Sang and S. Buchholz. 2000. Introduc-tion to the conll-2000 shared task: Chunking. In Pro-ceedings of CoNLL-2000 and LLL-2000.
Erik F. Tjong Kim Sang, Walter Daelemans, Herve?De?jean, Rob Koeling, Yuval Krymolowski, Vasin Pun-yakanok, and Dan Roth. 2000. Applying system com-
bination to base noun phrase identification. In COL-ING 2000, pages 857?863. Saarbruecken, Germany.
Kristina Toutanova, Dan Klein, Christopher Manning,and Yoram Singer. 2003. Feature-rich part of speech
tagging with a cyclic dependency network. In HLT-NAACL, pages 252?259.
A. Vlachos and C. Gasperin. 2006. Bootstrapping and
evaluating named entity recognition in the biomed-ical domain. In Proceedings of BIONLP in HLT-NAACL06, New York.
K. Yamamoto, T. Kudo, T. Konagaya, and Y. Matsumoto.
2003. Protein name tagging for biomedical anno-tation in text. In ACL 2003 Workshop on NLP inBiomedicine.
170
