BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 195?196,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discovering contradicting protein-protein interactions in text 
Olivia Sanchez-Graillet 
Univ. of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colches-
ter CO4 3SQ, U.K. 
osanch@essex.ac.uk 
Massimo Poesio 
Univ. of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Col-
chester CO4 3SQ, U.K. 
 DIT and Center for Mind/Brain Sci-
ences, Univ. of Trento, Via Sommarive 
14 I-38050 POVO (TN) - Italy 
poesio@essex.ac.uk 
1 Introduction 
In biomedical texts, contradictions about protein-
protein interactions (PPIs) occur when an author 
reports observing a given PPI whereas another au-
thor argues that very same interaction does not take 
place: e.g., when author X argues that ?protein A 
interacts with protein B? whereas author Y claims 
that ?protein A does not interact with B?. Of 
course, merely discovering a potential contradic-
tion does not mean the argument is closed as other 
factors may have caused the proteins to behave in 
different ways. We present preliminary work to-
wards the automatic detection of potential contra-
dictions between PPIs from text and an agreement 
experimental evaluation of our method. 
2 Method 
Our method consists of the following steps: i) ex-
tract positive and negative cases of PPIs and map 
them to a semantic structure; ii) compare the pairs 
of PPIs structures that contain similar canonical 
protein names iii) apply an inference method to the 
selected pair of PPIs.  
We extract positive and negative cases of PPIs 
by applying our system (Sanchez & Poesio, sub-
mitted). Our system considers proteins only as well 
as events where only one protein participates (e.g. 
?PI-3K activity?). The system produces the seman-
tic interpretation shown in Table 1. We manually 
corrected some of the information extracted in or-
der to compare exclusively our inference method 
with human annotators. 
The decision to determine if a C-PPI holds is 
given by the context. This context is formed by the 
combination of semantic components such as PPI 
polarity, verb direction, and manner polarity. 
 
P1 Canonical name of the first participant protein 
P2 Canonical name of the second participant protein. 
Cue-word Word (verbs or their nominalizations) expressing a PPI 
(e.g. interact, interaction, activate, activation, etc.). 
Semantic 
Relation 
Categories in which cue-words are grouped according 
to their similar effect in an interaction. (See Table 2). 
Polarity Whether the PPI is positive or negative 
Direction Direction of a relation according to the effect that a 
protein causes on other molecules in the interaction. 
(See Table 3) 
Manner Modality expressed by adverbs or adjectives (e.g. 
directly, weakly, strong, etc.) 
Manner 
Polarity 
Polarity assigned to manner according to the influence 
they have on the cue-word (see Table 4) 
Table 1. Semantic structure of a PPI 
 
Semantic Rela-
tion 
Verbs/nouns examples 
Activate Activat (e, ed,es,or,ion), transactivat (e,ed,es,ion) 
Inactivate decreas (e,ed,es), down-regulat(e,ed,es,ion) 
Table 2. Example of semantic verb relations 
  
+ - Neutral 
Activate, Attach Inactivate Substitute, React 
Create bond Break bond Modify, Cause 
Generate Release Signal, Associate 
Table 3. Directions of semantic relations 
 
Polarity Word 
(+) 1 strong(ly), direct(ly), potential(y), rapid(ly) 
(-)  0 hardly, indirect(ly), negative(e,ly) 
Table 4. Example of manner polarity 
 
Manner polarity is neutral (2) if the manner word 
is not included in the manner polarity table or if no 
manner word affects the cue-word. 
The method first obtains what we call ?PPI 
state? of each PPI. The PPI state is obtained in two 
steps that follow decision tables1: a) the values for 
                                                 
1
 Some decision tables are omitted due to space reasons. 
195
the combination of the verb direction and the man-
ner polarity (DM) of each PPI; b) then, the DM 
value and the polarity of the corresponding PPI are 
evaluated. 
Second, the method compares the PPI states of 
both PPIs as shown in Table 5.  
 
State1 Sstate2 Result State1 State2 Result 
0 0 NC 3 3 U 
0 1 C 0 4 C 
0 3 U 1 4 C 
1 1 NC 3 4 C 
1 3 U    
Table 5. Decision table for results2 
 
The following example illustrates our method. The 
table below shows two sentences taken from dif-
ferent documents. 
 
Document 1 Document 2 
Cells treated with hyperosmolar stress, 
UV-C, IR, or a cell-permeable form of 
ceramide, C2 ceramide, rapidly down-
regulated PI(3)K activity to 10%-30% of 
the activity found in serum-stimulated 
control cells? 
And fourth, C2-
ceramide did not 
affect the amount of 
PI 3-kinase activity in 
anti-IRS-1 precipi-
tates. 
 
The semantic structures corresponding to these 
sentences are shown in the next table. 
 
 DocA DocB 
P1 C2-ceramide C2-ceramide 
P2 PI-3K PI-3K 
Cue down-regulate affect 
Semantic relation Inactivate Cause 
Polarity positive negative 
Direction negative neutral 
Manner rapidly -- 
Manner polarity positive neutral 
 
The decision tables produced for this example are 
the following3. 
 
PPI Direction Manner DM 
A -  (0) + (1) - (0) 
B N (2) N (2) U (3) 
 
PPI Polarity DM State 
A + (1) - (0) - (0) 
B - (0) U(3) NN (4) 
 
                                                 
2
 Result values: contradiction (C), no contradiction (NC) and 
unsure (U). 
3
 The values included in the tables are: positive=1, nega-
tive=0, neutral=2, unsure=3, and negative-neutral=4. 
PPIA state PPIB state Result 
-(0) NN (4) Contradiction 
 
The result obtained is ?Contradiction?.  
3 Agreement experiment 
As a way of evaluation, we compared agreement 
between our method and human annotators by us-
ing the kappa measure (Siegel and Castellan, 
1998). We elaborated a test containing only of 31 
pairs of sentences (JBC articles) since this task can 
be tiring for human annotators. 
The test consisted on classifying the pairs of 
sentences into three categories: contradiction (C), 
no contradiction (NC) and unsure (U). The values 
of kappa obtained are presented in the following 
table. 
 
Groups Kappa 
Biologists only 0.37 
Biologists and our method 0.37 
Non-biologists only 0.22 
Non-biologists and our method 0.19 
Table 6 Agreement values 
 
Biologists mainly justified their answers based on 
biological knowledge (e.g. methodology, organ-
isms, etc.) while non-biologists based their answers 
on syntax. 
4 Conclusions 
We have presented a simple method to detect po-
tential contradictions of PPIs by using context ex-
pressed by semantics and linguistics constituents 
(e.g. modals, verbs, adverbs, etc). Our method 
showed to perform similarly to biologists and bet-
ter than non-biologists. Interestingly, biologists 
concluded that C-PPIs are rarely found; neverthe-
less, the cases found may be highly significant. 
Continuing with our work, we will try our sys-
tem in a larger set of data. 
References 
Sanchez,O and Poesio,M. (Submitted). Negation of pro-
tein-protein interactions: analysis and extraction. 
Siegel, S. and Castellan, N.J. (1998). Nonparametric 
statistics for the behavioral sciences. 2nd. edition, 
McGraw-Hill. 
196
