Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Technology for Cultural Heritage Data (LaTeCH 2007), pages 33?40,
Prague, 28 June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Latin Dependency Treebank in a Cultural Heritage Digital Library
David Bamman
The Perseus Project
Tufts University
Medford, MA
david.bamman@tufts.edu
Gregory Crane
The Perseus Project
Tufts University
Medford, MA
gregory.crane@tufts.edu
Abstract
This paper describes the mutually benefi-
cial relationship between a cultural heritage
digital library and a historical treebank: an
established digital library can provide the
resources and structure necessary for effi-
ciently building a treebank, while a tree-
bank, as a language resource, is a valuable
tool for audiences traditionally served by
such libraries.
1 Introduction
The composition of historical treebanks is funda-
mentally different from that of modern ones. While
modern treebanks are generally comprised of news-
paper articles,1 historical treebanks are built from
texts that have been the focus of study for centuries,
if not millennia. The Penn-Helsinki Parsed Cor-
pus of Middle English (Kroch and Taylor, 2000),
for example, includes Chaucer?s 14th-century Par-
son?s Tale, while the York Poetry Corpus (Pintzuk
and Leendert, 2001) includes the entire text of Be-
owulf. The scholarship that has attended these texts
since their writing has produced a wealth of contex-
tual materials, including commentaries, translations,
and linguistic resources.
1To name just three, the Penn Treebank (Marcus et al, 1994)
is comprised of texts from the Wall Street Journal; the Ger-
man TIGER Treebank (Brants et al, 2002) is built from texts
taken from the Frankfurter Rundschau; and the Prague De-
pendency Treebank (Hajic?, 1998) includes articles from sev-
eral daily newspapers (Lidove? noviny and Mlada? fronta Dnes), a
business magazine (C?eskomoravsky? Profit) and a scientific jour-
nal (Vesm??r).
For the past twenty years, the Perseus digital li-
brary (Crane, 1987; Crane et al, 2001) has collected
materials of this sort to create an open reading envi-
ronment for the study of Classical texts. This envi-
ronment presents the Greek or Latin source text and
contextualizes it with secondary publications (e.g.,
translations, commentaries, references in dictionar-
ies), along with a morphological analysis of every
word in the text and variant manuscript readings as
well (when available).
We have recently begun work on syntactically an-
notating the texts in our collection to create a Latin
Dependency Treebank. In the course of developing
this treebank, the resources already invested in the
digital library have been crucial: the digital library
provides a modular structure on which to build addi-
tional services, contains a large corpus of Classical
source texts, and provides a wealth of contextual in-
formation for annotators who are non-native speak-
ers of the language.
In this the digital library has had a profound im-
pact on the creation of our treebank, but the influ-
ence goes both ways. The digital library is a heav-
ily trafficked website with a wide range of users, in-
cluding professional scholars, students and hobby-
ists. By incorporating the treebank as a language
resource into this digital library, we have the poten-
tial to introduce a fundamental NLP tool to an audi-
ence outside the traditional disciplines of computer
science or computational linguistics that would nor-
mally use it. Students of the language can profit
from the syntactic information encoded in a tree-
bank, while traditional scholars can benefit from the
textual searching it makes possible as well.
33
Figure 1: A screenshot of Vergil?s Aeneid from the Perseus digital library.
2 The Perseus Digital Library
Figure 1 shows a screenshot from our digital library.
In this view, the reader is looking at the first seven
lines of Vergil?s Aeneid. The source text is provided
in the middle, with contextualizing information fill-
ing the right column. This information includes:
? Translations. Here two English translations
are provided, one by the 17th-century English
poet John Dryden and a more modern one by
Theodore Williams.
? Commentaries. Two commentaries are also
provided, one in Latin by the Roman grammar-
ian Servius, and one in English by the 19th-
century scholar John Conington.
? Citations in reference works. Classical refer-
ence works such as grammars and lexica of-
ten cite particular passages in literary works as
examples of use. Here, all of the citations to
any word or phrase in these seven lines are pre-
sented at the right.
Additionally, every word in the source text is
linked to its morphological analysis, which lists
every lemma and morphological feature associated
with that particular word form. Here the reader has
clicked on arma in the source text. This tool reveals
that the word can be derived from two lemmas (the
verb armo and the noun arma), and gives a full mor-
phological analysis for each. A recommender sys-
tem automatically selects the most probable analysis
for a word given its surrounding context, and users
can also vote for the form they think is correct.2
3 Latin Dependency Treebank
Now in version 1.3, the Latin Dependency Treebank
is comprised of excerpts from four texts: Cicero?s
Oratio in Catilinam, Caesar?s Commentarii de Bello
Gallico, Vergil?s Aeneid and Jerome?s Vulgate.
Since Latin has a highly flexible word order, we
have based our annotation style on the dependency
grammar used by the Prague Dependency Tree-
bank (PDT) (Hajic?, 1998) for Czech (another non-
projective language) while tailoring it for Latin via
2These user contributions have the potential to significantly
improve the morphological tagging of these texts: any single
user vote assigns the correct morphological analysis to a word
89% of the time, while the recommender system does so with
an accuracy of 76% (Crane et al, 2006).
34
Date Author Words
63 BCE Cicero 1,189
51 BCE Caesar 1,486
19 BCE Vergil 2,647
405 CE Jerome 8,382
Total: 13,683
Table 1: Treebank composition by author.
the grammar of Pinkster (1990).3
In addition to the index of its syntactic head and
the type of relation to it, each word in the treebank
is also annotated with the lemma from which it is
inflected and its morphological code. We plan to re-
lease the treebank incrementally with each new ma-
jor textual addition (so that version 1.4, for instance,
will include the treebank of 1.3 plus Sallust?s Bellum
Catilinae, the text currently in production).
4 The Influence of a Digital Library
A cultural heritage digital library has provided a fer-
tile ground for our historical treebank in two funda-
mental ways: by providing a structure on which to
build new services and by providing reading support
to expedite the process of annotation.
4.1 Structure
By anchoring the treebank in a cultural heritage dig-
ital library, we are able to take advantage of a struc-
tured reading environment with canonical standards
for the presentation of text and a large body of dig-
itized resources, which include XML source texts,
morphological analyzers, machine-readable dictio-
naries, and an online user interface.
Texts. Our digital library contains 3.4 million
words of Latin source texts (along with 4.9 mil-
lion words of Greek). The texts are all public-
domain materials that have been scanned, OCR?d
and formatted into TEI-compliant XML. The value
of this prior labor is twofold: most immediately,
the existence of clean, digital editions of these
texts has saved us a considerable amount of time
and resources, as we would otherwise have to
3We are also collaborating with other Latin treebanks (no-
tably the Index Thomisticus on the works of Thomas Aquinas)
to create a common set of annotation guidelines to be used as a
standard for Latin of any period (Bamman et al, 2007).
create them before annotating them syntactically;
but their encoding as repurposeable XML docu-
ments in a larger library also allows us to refer
to them under standardized citations. The pas-
sage of Vergil displayed in Figure 1 is not simply
a string of unstructured text; it is a subdocument
(Book=1:card=1) that is itself part of a larger doc-
ument object (Perseus:text:1999.02.0055), with sis-
ters (Book=1:card=8) and children of its own (e.g.,
line=4). This XML structure allows us to situate any
given treebank sentence within its larger context.
Morphological Analysis. As a highly inflected
language, Latin has an intricate morphological sys-
tem, in which a full morphological analysis is the
product of nine features: part of speech, person,
number, tense, mood, voice, gender, case and de-
gree. Our digital library has included a morphologi-
cal analyzer from its beginning. This resource maps
an inflected form of a word (such as arma above)
to all of the possible analyses for all of the dictio-
nary entries associated with it. In addition to provid-
ing a common morphological standard, this mapping
greatly helps to constrain the problem of morpho-
logical tagging (selecting the correct form from all
possible forms), since a statistical tagger only needs
to consider the morphological analyses licensed by
the inflection rather than all possible combinations.
User interface. The user interface of our library
is designed to be modular, since different texts have
different contextual resources associated with them
(while some have translations, others may have
commentaries). This modularity allows us to easily
introduce new features, since the underlying archi-
tecture of the page doesn?t change ? a new feature
can simply be added.
Figure 2 presents a screenshot of the digital li-
brary with an annotation tool built into the inter-
face. In the widget on the right, the source text in
view (the first chunk of Tacitus? Annales) has been
automatically segmented into sentences; an annota-
tor can click on any sentence to assign it a syntac-
tic annotation. Here the user has clicked on the first
sentence (Vrbem Romam a principio reges habuere);
this action brings up an annotation screen in which
a partial automatic parse is provided, along with the
most likely morphological analysis for each word.
The annotator can then correct this automatic output
35
Figure 2: A screenshot of Tacitus? Annales from the Perseus digital library.
and move on to the next segmented sentence, with
all of the contextual resources still in view.
4.2 Reading support
Modern treebanks also differ from historical ones in
the fluency of their annotators. The efficient anno-
tation of historical languages is hindered by the fact
that no native speakers exist, and this is especially
true of Latin, a difficult language with a high de-
gree of non-projectivity. While the Penn Treebank
can report a productivity rate of between 750 and
1000 words per hour for their annotators after four
months of training (Taylor et al, 2003) and the Penn
Chinese treebank can report a rate of 240-480 words
per hour (Chiou et al, 2001), our annotation speeds
are significantly slower, ranging from 90 words per
hour to 281. Our best approach for Latin is to de-
velop strategies that can speed up the annotation pro-
cess, and here the resources found in a digital library
are crucial. There are three varieties of contextual
resources in our digital library that aid in the un-
derstanding of a text: translations, commentaries,
and dictionaries. These resources shed light on a
text, from the level of sentences to that of individual
words.
Translations. Translations provide reading sup-
port on a large scale: while loose translations may
not be able to inform readers about the meaning and
syntactic role of any single word, they do provide
a broad description of the action taking place, and
this can often help to establish the semantic struc-
ture of the sentence ? who did what to whom, and
how. In a language with a free word order (and with
poetry especially), this kind of high-level structure
can be important for establishing a quick initial un-
derstanding of the sentence before narrowing down
to individual syntactic roles.
Commentaries. Classical commentaries provide
information about the specific use of individ-
ual words, often noting morphological information
(such as case) for ambiguous words or giving ex-
planatory information for unusual structures. This
information often comes at crucial decision points
36
in the annotation process, and represents judgments
by authorities in the field with expertise in that par-
ticular text.
Figure 3: An excerpt from Conington?s commentary
on Vergil?s Aeneid (Conington, 1876), here referring
to Book 1, lines 4 and 5.
Machine-Readable Dictionaries. In addition to
providing lists of stems for morphological analyzers,
machine-readable dictionaries also provide valuable
reading support for the process of lemma selection.
Every available morphological analysis for a word is
paired with the word stem (a lemma) from which it is
derived, but analyses are often ambiguous between
different lemmas. The extremely common form est,
for example, is a third person singular present in-
dicative active verb, but can be inflected from two
different lemmas: the verb sum (to be) and the verb
edo (to eat). In this case, we can use the text already
tagged to suggest a more probable form (sum ap-
pears much more frequently and is therefore the like-
lier candidate), but in less dominant cases, we can
use the dictionary: since the word stems involved
in morphological analysis have been derived from
the dictionary lemmas, we can map each analysis
to a dictionary definition, so that, for instance, if an
annotator is unfamiliar with the distinction between
the lemmas occido1 (to strike down) and occido2 (to
fall), their respective definitions can clarify it.
Machine-readable dictionaries, however, are also
a valuable annotation resource in that they often pro-
vide exemplary syntactic information as part of their
definitions. Consider, for example, the following
line from Book 6, line 2 of Vergil?s Aeneid: et tan-
dem Euboicis Cumarum adlabitur oris (?and at last
it glides to the Euboean shores of Cumae?). The
noun oris (shores) here is technically ambiguous,
and can be derived from a single lemma (ora) as a
noun in either the dative or ablative case. The dic-
tionary definition of allabor (to glide), however, dis-
ambiguates this for us, since it notes that the verb is
often constructed with either the dative or the ac-
cusative case.
Figure 4: Definition of allabor (the dictionary entry
for adlabitur) from Lewis and Short (1879).
Every word in our digital library is linked to a list
of its possible morphological analyses, and each of
those analyses is linked to its respective dictionary
entry. The place of a treebank in a digital library
allows for this tight level of integration.
5 The Impact of a Historical Treebank
The traffic in our library currently exceeds 10 mil-
lion page views by 400,000 distinct users per month
(as approximated by unique IP addresses). These
users are not computational linguists or computer
scientists who would typically make use of a tree-
bank; they are a mix of Classical scholars, stu-
dents, and amateurs. These different audiences have
equally different uses for a large corpus of syntacti-
cally annotated sentences: for one group it can pro-
vide additional reading support, and for the other a
scholarly resource to be queried.
5.1 Treebank as Reading Support
Our digital library is predominantly a reading en-
vironment: source texts in Greek and Latin are
presented with attendant materials to help facilitate
their understanding. The broadest of these materials
are translations, which present sentence-level equiv-
alents of the original; commentaries provide a more
detailed analysis of individual words and phrases. A
37
treebank has the potential to be a valuable contex-
tual resource by providing syntactic information for
every word in a sentence, not simply those chosen
by a commentator for discussion.
5.2 Treebank as a Scholarly Resource
For Classical scholars, a treebank can also be used
as a scholarly resource. Not all Classicists are pro-
grammers, however, and many of those who would
like to use such a resource would profit little from
an XML source file. We have already released ver-
sion 1.3 of the Latin Dependency Treebank in its
XML source, but we also plan to incorporate it into
the digital library as an object to be queried. This
will yield a powerful range of search options, in-
cluding lemmatized and morpho-syntactic search-
ing, and will be especially valuable for research in-
volving lexicography and semantic classification.
Lemmatized searching. The ability to conduct a
lemma-based textual search has long been a desider-
atum in Classics,4 where any given Latin word form
has 3.1 possible analyses on average.5 Locating all
inflections of edo (to eat) in the texts of Caesar, for
example, would involve two things:
1. Searching for all possible inflections of the root
word. This amounts to 202 different word
forms attested in our texts (including com-
pounds with enclitics).
2. Eliminating all results that are homonyms de-
rived from a different lemma. Since several in-
flections of edo are homonyms with inflections
of the far more common sum (to be), many
of the found results will be false positives and
have to be discarded.
This is a laborious process and, as such, is rarely
undertaken by Classical scholars: the lack of such
a resource has constrained the set of questions we
4Both the Perseus Project and the Thesaurus Linguae Grae-
cae (http://www.tlg.uci.edu) allow users to search for all in-
flected forms of a lemma in their texts, but neither filters results
that are homonyms derived from different lemmas.
5Based on the average number of lemma + morphology
combinations for all unique word tokens in our 3.4 million word
corpus. The word form amor, for example, has 3 analyses: as
a first-person singular present indicative passive verb derived
from the lemma amo (to love) and as either a nominative or
vocative masculine singular noun derived from amor (love).
can ask about a text. Since a treebank encodes each
word?s lemma in addition to its morphological and
syntactic analysis, this information is now free for
the taking.
Morpho-syntactic searching. A treebank?s major
contribution to scholarship is that it encodes the
syntax of a sentence, along with a morphological
analysis of each word. These two together can be
combined into elaborate searches. Treebanks allow
scholars to find all instances of any particular con-
struction. For example:
? When the conjunction cum is the head of a sub-
ordinate clause whose verb is indicative, it is
often recognized as a temporal clause, qualify-
ing the time of the main clause?s action;
? When that verb is subjunctive, however, the
clause retains a different meaning, as either cir-
cumstantial, causal, or adversative.
These different clause types can be found by
querying the treebank: in the first case, by search-
ing for indicative verbs that syntactically depend on
cum; in the second, for subjunctive verbs that de-
pend on it. In version 1.3 of the Latin Dependency
Treebank, cum is the head of a subordinate clause
38 times: in 7 of these clauses an indicative verb de-
pends on it, while in 31 of them a subjunctive one
does. This type of searching allows us to gather sta-
tistical data while also locating all instances for fur-
ther qualitative analysis.6
Lexicography. Searching for a combination of
lemma and morpho-syntactic information can yield
powerful results, which we can illustrate with a
question from Latin lexicography: how does the
meaning of a word change across authors and over
time? If we take a single verb ? libero (to free, lib-
erate) ? we can chart its use in various authors by
asking a more specific question: what do different
Latin authors want to be liberated from? We can
imagine that an orator of the republic has little need
to speak of liberation from eternal death, while an
apostolic father is just as unlikely to speak of being
freed from another?s monetary debt.
6For the importance of a treebank in expediting morpho-
syntactic research in Latin rhetoric and historical linguistics, see
Bamman and Crane (2006).
38
We can answer this more general question by
transforming it into a syntactic one: what are the
most common complements of the lemma libero that
are expressed in oblique cases (e.g., ablative, geni-
tive, etc.) or as prepositional phrases? In a small test
of 100 instances of the lemma in Cicero and Jerome,
we find an interesting answer, presented in Table 2.
Cicero Jerome
periculo 14 manu 22
metu 8 morte 3
cura 6 ore 3
aere 3 latronibus 2
scelere 3 inimico 2
suspicione 3 bello 2
Table 2: Count of objects liberated from in Cicero
and Jerome that occur with frequency greater than 1
in a corpus of 100 sentences from each author con-
taining any inflected form of the verb libero.
The most common entities that Cicero speaks
of being liberated from clearly reflect the cares of
an orator of the republic: periculo (danger), metu
(fear), cura (care), and aere (debt). Jerome, how-
ever, uses libero to speak of liberation from a very
different set of things: his actors speak of deliver-
ance from manu (e.g., the hand of the Egyptians),
from ore (e.g., the mouth of the lion) and from
morte (death). A treebank encoded with lemma and
morpho-syntactic information lets us quantify these
typical arguments and thereby identify the use of the
word at any given time.
Named entity labeling. Our treebank?s place in
a digital library also means that complex searches
can draw on the resources that already lie therein.
Two of our major reference works include Smith?s
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854),
which contains 11,564 place names, and Smith?s
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and
Mythology (1873), which contains 20,336 personal
names. By mapping the lemmas in our treebank to
the entries in these dictionaries, we can determine
each lemma?s broad semantic class. After supple-
menting the Classical Dictionary with names from
the Vulgate, we find that the most common people
in the treebank are Iesus, Aeneas, Caesar, Catilina,
Satanas, Sibylla, Phoebus, Misenus and Iohannes;
the most common place names are Gallia, Babylon,
Troia, Hierusalem, Avernus and Sardis.
One use of such classification is to search for
verbs that are typically found with sentient agents.
We can find this by simply searching the treebank
for all active verbs with subjects known to be people
(i.e., subjects whose lemmas can be mapped to an
entry in Smith?s Dictionary). An excerpt of the list
that results is given in Table 3.
mitto to send
iubeo to order
duco to lead
impono to place
amo to love
incipio to begin
condo to hide
Table 3: Common verbs with people as subjects in
the Latin Dependency Treebank 1.3.
Aside from its intrinsic value of providing a cata-
logue of such verbs, a list like this is also useful for
classifying common nouns: if a verb is frequently
found with a person as its subject, all of its sub-
jects in general will likely be sentient as well. Table
4 presents a complete list of subjects of the active
voice of the verb mitto (to send) as attested in our
treebank.
angelus angel
Caesar Caesar
deus God
diabolus devil
Remi Gallic tribe
serpens serpent
ficus fig tree
Table 4: Subjects of active mitto in the Latin Depen-
dency Treebank 1.3.
Only two of these subjects are proper names (Cae-
sar and Remi) that can be found in Smith?s Dictio-
nary, but almost all of these nouns clearly belong
to the same semantic class ? angelus, deus, diabo-
lus and serpens (at least in this text) are entities with
cognition.
Inducing semantic relationships of this sort is the
typical domain of clustering techniques such as la-
39
tent semantic analysis (Deerwester et al, 1990), but
those methods generally work best on large corpora.
By embedding this syntactic resource in a digital li-
brary and linking it to external resources such as ref-
erence works, we can find similar semantic relation-
ships with a much smaller corpus.
6 Conclusion
Treebanks already fill a niche in the NLP community
by providing valuable datasets for automatic pro-
cesses such as parsing and grammar induction. Their
utility, however, does not end there. The linguis-
tic information that treebanks encode is of value to a
wide range of potential users, including professional
scholars, students and amateurs, and we must en-
courage the use of these resources by making them
available to such a diverse community. The digital
library described in this paper has proved to be cru-
cial for the development and deployment of our tree-
bank: since the natural intuitions of native speakers
are hard to come by for historical languagues, it is all
the more important to leverage the cultural heritage
resources we already have.
7 Acknowledgments
Grants from the Digital Library Initiative Phrase 2
(IIS-9817484) and the National Science Foundation
(BCS-0616521) provided support for this work.
References
David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2006. The design
and use of a Latin dependency treebank. In Proceed-
ings of the Fifth Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic
Theories (TLT2006), pages 67?78.
David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane, and
Savina Raynaud. 2007. Guidelines for the syntactic
annotation of Latin treebanks, version 1.3. Technical
report, Tufts Digital Library, Medford.
Sabine Brants, Stefanie Dipper, Silvia Hansen, Wolfgang
Lezius, and George Smith. 2002. The TIGER tree-
bank. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Tree-
banks and Linguistic Theories, pages 24?41, Sozopol.
Fu-Dong Chiou, David Chiang, and Martha Palmer.
2001. Facilitating treebank annotation using a statis-
tical parser. In Proceedings of the First International
Conference on Human Language Technology Research
HLT ?01, pages 1?4.
John Conington, editor. 1876. P. Vergili Maronis Opera.
The Works of Virgil, with Commentary. Whittaker and
Co, London.
Gregory Crane, Robert F. Chavez, Anne Mahoney,
Thomas L. Milbank, Jeffrey A. Rydberg-Cox,
David A. Smith, and Clifford E. Wulfman. 2001.
Drudgery and deep thought: Designing digital li-
braries for the humanities. Communications of the
ACM, 44(5):34?40.
Gregory Crane, David Bamman, Lisa Cerrato, Alison
Jones, David M. Mimno, Adrian Packel, David Scul-
ley, and Gabriel Weaver. 2006. Beyond digital in-
cunabula: Modeling the next generation of digital li-
braries. In ECDL 2006, pages 353?366.
Gregory Crane. 1987. From the old to the new: Integrat-
ing hypertext into traditional scholarship. In Hyper-
text ?87: Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on
Hypertext, pages 51?56. ACM Press.
Scott C. Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, George W. Furnas, and Richard A. Harshman.
1990. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Jour-
nal of the American Society of Information Science,
41(6):391?407.
Jan Hajic?. 1998. Building a syntactically annotated
corpus: The Prague Dependency Treebank. In Eva
Hajic?ova?, editor, Issues of Valency and Meaning.
Studies in Honor of Jarmila Panevova?, pages 12?19.
Prague Karolinum, Charles University Press.
A. Kroch and A. Taylor. 2000. Penn-Helsinki
Parsed Corpus of Middle English, second edi-
tion. http://www.ling.upenn.edu/hist-corpora/ppcme2-
release-2/.
Charles T. Lewis and Charles Short, editors. 1879. A
Latin Dictionary. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Mitchell P. Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1994. Building a large annotated cor-
pus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational
Linguistics, 19(2):313?330.
Harm Pinkster. 1990. Latin Syntax and Semantics. Rout-
ledge, London.
Susan Pintzuk and Plug Leendert. 2001. York-Helsinki
Parsed Corpus of Old English Poetry.
William Smith. 1854. A Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Geography. Walton and Maberly, London.
William Smith. 1873. A Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Biography and Mythology. Spottiswoode, London.
Ann Taylor, Mitchell Marcus, and Beatrice Santorini.
2003. The Penn Treebank: An overview. In Anne
Abeille?, editor, Treebanks: Building and Using Parsed
Corpora, pages 5?22. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
40
