Proceedings of the Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 66?71,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Perspective-Based Approach for Solving Textual Entailment Recognition
O?scar Ferra?ndez, Daniel Micol, Rafael Mun?oz, and Manuel Palomar
Natural Language Processing and Information Systems Group
Department of Computing Languages and Systems
University of Alicante
San Vicente del Raspeig, Alicante 03690, Spain
{ofe, dmicol, rafael, mpalomar}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
The textual entailment recognition system
that we discuss in this paper represents
a perspective-based approach composed of
two modules that analyze text-hypothesis
pairs from a strictly lexical and syntactic
perspectives, respectively. We attempt to
prove that the textual entailment recognition
task can be overcome by performing indi-
vidual analysis that acknowledges us of the
maximum amount of information that each
single perspective can provide. We compare
this approach with the system we presented
in the previous edition of PASCAL Recognis-
ing Textual Entailment Challenge, obtaining
an accuracy rate 17.98% higher.
1 Introduction
Textual entailment recognition has become a popu-
lar Natural Language Processing task within the last
few years. It consists in determining whether one
text snippet (hypothesis) entails another one (text)
(Glickman, 2005). To overcome this problem sev-
eral approaches have been studied, being the Recog-
nising Textual Entailment Challenge (RTE) (Bar-
Haim et al, 2006; Dagan et al, 2006) the most re-
ferred source for determining which one is the most
accurate.
Many of the participating groups in previous edi-
tions of RTE, including ourselves (Ferra?ndez et al,
2006), designed systems that combined a variety of
lexical, syntactic and semantic techniques. In our
contribution to RTE-3 we attempt to solve the tex-
tual entailment recognition task by analyzing two
different perspectives separately, in order to ac-
knowledge the amount of information that an indi-
vidual perspective can provide. Later on, we com-
bine both modules to obtain the highest possible ac-
curacy rate. For this purpose, we analyze the pro-
vided corpora by using a lexical module, namely
DLSITE-1, and a syntactic one, namely DLSITE-2.
Once all results have been obtained we perform a
voting process in order to take into account all sys-
tem?s judgments.
The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-
lows. Section two describes the system we have
built, providing details of the lexical and syntactic
perspectives, and explains the difference with the
one we presented in RTE-2. Third section presents
the experimental results, and the fourth one provides
our conclusions and describes possible future work.
2 System Specification
This section describes the systemwe have developed
in order to participate in RTE-3. It is based on sur-
face techniques of lexical and syntactic analysis. As
the starting point we have used our previous system
presented in the second edition of the RTE Chal-
lenge (Ferra?ndez et al, 2006). We have enriched
it with two independent modules that are intended
to detect some misinterpretations performed by this
system. Moreover, these new modules can also rec-
ognize entailment relations by themselves. The per-
formance of each separate module and their combi-
nation with our previous system will be detailed in
section three.
Next, Figure 1 represents a schematic view of the
system we have developed.
66
Figure 1: System architecture.
As we can see in the previous Figure, our sys-
tem is composed of three modules that are coordi-
nated by an input scheduler. Its commitment is to
provide the text-hypothesis pairs to each module in
order to extract their corresponding similarity rates.
Once all rates for a given text-hypothesis pair have
been calculated, they will be processed by an output
gatherer that will provide the final judgment. The
method used to calculate the final entailment deci-
sion consists in combining the outputs of both lex-
ical and syntactic modules, and these outputs with
our RTE-2 system?s judgment. The output gatherer
will be detailed later in this paper when we describe
the experimental results.
2.1 RTE-2 System
The approach we presented in the previous edition of
RTE attempts to recognize textual entailment by de-
termining whether the text and the hypothesis are re-
lated using their respective derived logic forms, and
by finding relations between their predicates using
WordNet (Miller et al, 1990). These relations have
a specific weight that provide us a score represent-
ing the similarity of the derived logic forms and de-
termining whether they are related or not.
For our participation in RTE-3 we decided to ap-
ply our previous system because it allows us to han-
dle some kinds of information that are not correctly
managed by the new approaches developed for the
current RTE edition.
2.2 Lexical Module
This method relies on the computation of a wide va-
riety of lexical measures, which basically consists of
overlap metrics. Although in other related work this
kind of metrics have already been used (Nicholson
et al, 2006), the main contribution of this module is
the fact that it only deals with lexical features with-
out taking into account any syntactic nor semantic
information. The following paragraphs list the con-
sidered lexical measures.
Simple matching: initialized to zero. A boolean
value is set to one if the hypothesis word appears in
the text. The final weight is calculated as the sum of
all boolean values and normalized dividing it by the
length of the hypothesis.
Levenshtein distance: it is similar to simple match-
ing. However, in this case we use the mentioned
distance as the similarity measure between words.
When the distance is zero, the increment value is
one. On the other hand, if such value is equal to one,
the increment is 0.9. Otherwise, it will be the inverse
of the obtained distance.
Consecutive subsequence matching: this measure
assigns the highest relevance to the appearance of
consecutive subsequences. In order to perform this,
we have generated all possible sets of consecutive
subsequences, from length two until the length in
words, from the text and the hypothesis. If we pro-
ceed as mentioned, the sets of length two extracted
from the hypothesis will be compared to the sets of
the same length from the text. If the same element is
present in both the text and the hypothesis set, then
a unit is added to the accumulated weight. This pro-
cedure is applied for all sets of different length ex-
tracted from the hypothesis. Finally, the sum of the
weight obtained from each set of a specific length is
normalized by the number of sets corresponding to
67
this length, and the final accumulated weight is also
normalized by the length of the hypothesis in words
minus one. This measure is defined as follows:
CSmatch =
|H|?
i=2
f(SHi)
|H| ? 1
(1)
where SHi contains the hypothesis? subsequences
of length i, and f(SHi) is defined as follows:
f(SHi) =
?
j?SHi
match(j)
|H| ? i+ 1
(2)
being match(j) equal to one if there exists an ele-
ment k that belongs to the set that contains the text?s
subsequences of length i, such that k = j.
One should note that this measure does not con-
sider non-consecutive subsequences. In addition, it
assigns the same relevance to all consecutive sub-
sequences with the same length. Furthermore, the
longer the subsequence is, the more relevant it will
be considered.
Tri-grams: two sets containing tri-grams of letters
belonging to the text and the hypothesis were cre-
ated. All the occurrences in the hypothesis? tri-
grams set that also appear in the text?s will increase
the accumulated weight in a factor of one unit. The
weight is normalized by the size of the hypothesis?
tri-grams set.
ROUGE measures: considering the impact of n-
gram overlap metrics in textual entailment, we be-
lieve that the idea of integrating these measures1 into
our system is very appealing. We have implemented
them as defined in (Lin, 2004).
Each measure is applied to the words, lemmas and
stems belonging to the text-hypothesis pair. Within
the entire set of measures, each one of them is con-
sidered as a feature for the training and test stages
of a machine learning algorithm. The selected one
was a Support Vector Machine due to the fact that its
properties are suitable for recognizing entailment.
2.3 Syntactic Module
The syntactic module we have built is composed of
few submodules that operate collaboratively in order
1The considered measures were ROUGE-N with n=2 and
n=3, ROUGE-L, ROUGE-W and ROUGE-S with s=2 and s=3.
to obtain the highest possible accuracy by using only
syntactic information.
The commitment of the first two submodules is
to generate an internal representation of the syntac-
tic dependency trees generated by MINIPAR (Lin,
1998). For this purpose we obtain the output of such
parser for the text-hypothesis pairs, and then process
it to generate an on-memory internal representation
of the mentioned trees. In order to reduce our sys-
tem?s noise and increase its accuracy rate, we only
keep the relevant words and discard the ones that we
believe do not provide useful information, such as
determinants and auxiliary verbs. After this step has
been performed we can proceed to compare the gen-
erated syntactic dependency trees of the text and the
hypothesis.
The graph node matching, termed alignment, be-
tween both the text and the hypothesis consists in
finding pairs of words in both trees whose lemmas
are identical, no matter whether they are in the same
position within the tree. Some authors have already
designed similar matching techniques, such as the
one described in (Snow et al, 2006). However, these
include semantic constraints that we have decided
not to consider. The reason of this decision is that we
desired to overcome the textual entailment recogni-
tion from an exclusively syntactic perspective. The
formula that provides the similarity rate between the
dependency trees of the text and the hypothesis in
our system, denoted by the symbol ?, is shown in
Equation 3:
?(?, ?) =
?
???
?(?) (3)
where ? and ? represent the text?s and hypothesis?
syntactic dependency trees, respectively, and ? is the
set that contains all synsets present in both trees, be-
ing ? = ? ? ? ?? ? ?, ? ? ?. As we can observe in
Equation 3, ? depends on another function, denoted
by the symbol ?, which provides the relevance of
a synset. Such a weight factor will depend on the
grammatical category and relation of the synset. In
addition, we believe that the most relevant words of
a phrase occupy the highest positions in the depen-
dency tree, so we desired to assign different weights
depending on the depth of the synset. With all these
factors we define the relevance of a word as shown
68
in Equation 4:
?(?) = ? ? ? ? ???? (4)
where ? is a synset present in both ? and ?, ? rep-
resents the weight assigned to ??s grammatical cat-
egory (Table 1), ? the weight of ??s grammatical
relationship (Table 2), ? an empirically calculated
value that represents the weight difference between
tree levels, and ?? the depth of the node that contains
the synset ? in ?. The performed experiments reveal
that the optimal value for ? is 1.1.
Grammatical category Weight
Verbs, verbs with one argument, verbs with
two arguments, verbs taking clause as com-
plement
1.0
Nouns, numbers 0.75
Be used as a linking verb 0.7
Adjectives, adverbs, noun-noun modifiers 0.5
Verbs Have and Be 0.3
Table 1: Weights assigned to the relevant grammati-
cal categories.
Grammatical relationship Weight
Subject of verbs, surface subject, object of
verbs, second object of ditransitive verbs
1.0
The rest 0.5
Table 2: Weights assigned to the grammatical rela-
tionships.
We would like to point out that a requirement of
our system?s similarity measure is to be independent
of the hypothesis length. Therefore, we must de-
fine the normalized similarity rate, as represented in
Equation 5:
?(?, ?) =
?
???
?(?)
?
???
?(?)
(5)
Once the similarity value has been calculated, it
will be provided to the user together with the cor-
responding text-hypothesis pair identifier. It will be
his responsibility to choose an appropriate threshold
that will represent the minimum similarity rate to be
considered as entailment between text and hypothe-
sis. All values that are under such a threshold will
be marked as not entailed.
3 System Evaluation
In order to evaluate our system we have generated
several results using different combinations of all
three mentioned modules. Since the lexical one uses
a machine learning algorithm, it has to be run within
a training environment. For this purpose we have
trained our system with the corpora provided in the
previous editions of RTE, and also with the develop-
ment corpus from the current RTE-3 challenge. On
the other hand, for the remainder modules the devel-
opment corpora was used to set the thresholds that
determine if the entailment holds.
The performed tests have been obtained by per-
forming different combinations of the described
modules. First, we have calculated the accuracy
rates using only each single module separately.
Later on we have combined those developed by our
research group for this year?s RTE challenge, which
are DLSITE-1 (the lexical one) and DLSITE-2 (the
syntactic one). Finally we have performed a voting
process between these two systems and the one we
presented in RTE-2.
The combination of DLSITE-1 and DLSITE-2 is
described as follows. If both modules agree, then the
judgement is straightforward, but if they do not, we
then decide the judgment depending on the accuracy
of each one for true and false entailment situations.
In our case, DLSITE-1 performs better while dealing
with negative examples, so its decision will prevail
over the rest. Regarding the combination of the three
approaches, we have developed a voting strategy.
The results obtained by our system are represented
in Table 3. As it is reflected in such table, the high-
est accuracy rate obtained using the RTE-3 test cor-
pus was achieved applying only the lexical module,
namely DLSITE-1. On the other hand, the syntac-
tic one had a significantly lower rate, and the same
happened with the system we presented in RTE-2.
Therefore, a combination of them will most likely
produce less accurate results than the lexical mod-
ule, as it is shown in Table 3. However, we would
like to point out that these results depend heavily on
the corpus idiosyncrasy. This can be proven with the
results obtained for the RTE-2 test corpus, where the
grouping of the three modules provided the highest
accuracy rates of all possible combinations.
69
RTE-2 test RTE-3 dev RTE-3 test
Overall Overall Overall IE IR QA SUM
RTE-2 system 0.5563 0.5523 0.5400 0.4900 0.6050 0.5100 0.5550
DLSITE-1 0.6188 0.7012 0.6563 0.5150 0.7350 0.7950 0.5800
DLSITE-2 0.6075 0.6450 0.5925 0.5050 0.6350 0.6300 0.6000
DLSITE-1&2 0.6212 0.6900 0.6375 0.5150 0.7150 0.7400 0.5800
Voting 0.6300 0.6900 0.6375 0.5250 0.7050 0.7200 0.6000
Table 3: Results obtained with the corpora from RTE-2 and RTE-3.
3.1 Results Analysis
We will now perform an analysis of the results
shown in the previous section. First, we would like
to mention the fact that our system does not be-
have correctly when it has to deal with long texts.
Roughly 11% and 13% of the false positives of
DLSITE-1 and DLSITE-2, respectively, are caused
by misinterpretations of long texts. The underlying
reason of these failures is the fact that it is easier to
find a lexical and syntactic match when a long text
is present in the pair, even if there is not entailment.
In addition, we consider very appealing to show
the accuracy rates corresponding to true and false
entailment pairs individually. Figure 2 represents the
mentioned rates for all system combinations that we
displayed in Table 3.
Figure 2: Accuracy rates obtained for true and false
entailments using the RTE-3 test corpus.
As we can see in Figure 2, the accuracy rates
for true and false entailment pairs vary significantly.
The modules we built for our participation in RTE-3
obtained high accuracy rates for true entailment text-
hypothesis pairs, but in contrast they behaved worse
in detecting false entailment pairs. This is the oppo-
site to the system we presented in RTE-2, since it has
a much higher accuracy rate for false cases than true
ones. When we combinedDLSITE-1 andDLSITE-2,
their accuracy rate for true entailments diminished,
although, on the other hand, the rate for false ones
raised. The voting between all three modules pro-
vided a higher accuracy rate for false entailments be-
cause the system we presented at RTE-2 performed
well in these cases.
Finally, we would like to discuss some examples
that lead to failures and correct forecasts by our two
new approaches.
Pair 246 entailment=YES task=IR
T: Overall the accident rate worldwide for commercial aviation
has been falling fairly dramatically especially during the period
between 1950 and 1970, largely due to the introduction of new
technology during this period.
H: Airplane accidents are decreasing.
Pair 246 is incorrectly classified by DLSITE-1
due to the fact that some words of the hypothesis do
not appear in the same manner in the text, although
they have similar meaning (e.g. airplane and
aviation). However, DLSITE-2 is able to establish a
true entailment for this pair, since the hypothesis?
syntactic dependency tree can be matched within the
text?s, and the similarity measure applied between
lemmas obtains a high score. This fact produces
that, in this case, the voting also achieves a correct
prediction for pair 246.
Pair 736 entailment=YES task=SUM
T: In a security fraud case, Michael Milken was sentenced to 10
years in prison.
H: Milken was imprisoned for security fraud.
Pair 736 is correctly classified by DLSITE-1 since
there are matches for all hypothesis? words (except
imprisoned) and some subsequences. In contrast,
DLSITE-2 does not behave correctly with this exam-
ple because the main verbs do not match, being this
fact a considerable handicap for the overall score.
70
4 Conclusions and Future Work
This research provides independent approaches con-
sidering mainly lexical and syntactic information. In
order to achieve this, we expose and analyze a wide
variety of lexical measures as well as syntactic struc-
ture comparisons that attempt to solve the textual en-
tailment recognition task. In addition, we propose
several combinations between these two approaches
and integrate them with our previous RTE-2 system
by using a voting strategy.
The results obtained reveal that, although the
combined approach provided the highest accuracy
rates for the RTE-2 corpora, it has not accom-
plished the expected reliability in the RTE-3 chal-
lenge. Nevertheless, in both cases the lexical-based
module achieved better results than the rest of the in-
dividual approaches, being the optimal for our par-
ticipation in RTE-3, and obtaining an accuracy rate
of about 70% and 65% for the development and test
corpus, respectively. One should note that these re-
sults depend on the idiosyncrasies of the RTE cor-
pora. However, these corpora are the most reliable
ones for evaluating textual entailment recognizers.
Future work can be related to the development
of a semantic module. Our system achieves good
lexical and syntactic comparisons between texts, but
we believe that we should take advantage of the se-
mantic resources in order to achieve higher accuracy
rates. For this purpose we plan to build a module
that constructs characterized representations based
on the text using named entities and role labeling in
order to extract semantic information from a text-
hypothesis pair. Another future research line could
consist in applying different recognition techniques
depending on the type of entailment task. We have
noticed that the accuracy of our approach differs
when the entailment is produced mainly by lexical
or syntactic implications. We intend to establish an
entailment typology and tackle each type by means
of different points of view or approaches.
Acknowledgments
This research has been partially funded by the
QALL-ME consortium, which is a 6th Framework
Research Programme of the European Union (EU),
contract number FP6-IST-033860 and by the Span-
ish Government under the project CICyT number
TIN2006-1526-C06-01. It has also been supported
by the undergraduate research fellowships financed
by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science,
and the project ACOM06/90 financed by the Span-
ish Generalitat Valenciana.
References
Roy Bar-Haim, Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Lisa Ferro, Danilo
Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, and Idan Szpektor.
2006. The Second PASCAL Recognising Textual En-
tailment Challenge. Proceedings of the Second PAS-
CAL Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual
Entailment, pages 1?9.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The PASCAL Recognising Textual Entail-
ment Challenge. In Quin?onero-Candela et al, edi-
tors, MLCW 2005, LNAI Volume 3944, pages 177?190.
Springer-Verlag.
Oscar Ferra?ndez, Rafael M. Terol, Rafael Mun?oz, Patri-
cio Mart??nez-Barco, and Manuel Palomar. 2006. An
approach based on Logic forms and wordnet relation-
ships to textual entailment performance. In Proceed-
ings of the Second PASCAL Challenges Workshop on
Recognising Textual Entailment, pages 22?26, Venice,
Italy.
Oren Glickman. 2005. Applied Textual Entailment Chal-
lenge. Ph.D. thesis, Bar Ilan University.
Dekang Lin. 1998. Dependency-based Evaluation of
MINIPAR. In Workshop on the Evaluation of Parsing
Systems, Granada, Spain.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A Package for Auto-
matic Evaluation of Summaries. In Stan Szpakow-
icz Marie-Francine Moens, editor, Text Summarization
Branches Out: Proceedings of the ACL-04 Workshop,
pages 74?81, Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
George A. Miller, Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine J. Miller. 1990. In-
troduction to WordNet: An On-line Lexical Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4):235?244.
Jeremy Nicholson, Nicola Stokes, and Timothy Baldwin.
2006. Detecting Entailment Using an Extended Imple-
mentation of the Basic Elements Overlap Metrics. In
Proceedings of the Second PASCAL Challenges Work-
shop on Recognising Textual Entailment, pages 122?
127, Venice, Italy.
Rion Snow, Lucy Vanderwende, and Arul Menezes.
2006. Effectively using syntax for recognizing false
entailment. In Proceedings of the North American
Association of Computational Linguistics, New York
City, New York, United States of America.
71
