BioNLP 2007: Biological, translational, and clinical language processing, pages 183?190,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
Automatic Indexing of Specialized Documents: 
Using Generic vs. Domain-Specific Document Representations
Aur?lie N?v?ol James G. Mork
{neveola,mork,alan}@nlm.nih.gov
National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike 
Bethesda, MD 20894
USA
Alan R. Aronson
Abstract
The shift from paper to electronic docu-
ments has caused the curation of informa-
tion sources in large electronic databases
to become more generalized. In the bio-
medical domain, continuing efforts aim at 
refining indexing tools to assist with the 
update and maintenance of databases such 
as MEDLINE?. In this paper, we evaluate 
two statistical methods of producing 
MeSH? indexing recommendations for 
the genetics literature, including recom-
mendations involving subheadings, which 
is a novel application for the methods. We 
show that a generic representation of the 
documents yields both better precision 
and recall. We also find that a domain-
specific representation of the documents 
can contribute to enhancing recall. 
1 Introduction
There are two major approaches for the automatic 
indexing of text documents: statistical approaches 
that rely on various word counting techniques [su-
ch as vector space models (Salton, 1989), Latent 
Semantic Indexing (Deerwester et al, 1990) or
probabilistic models (Sparck-Jones et al, 2000)] 
and linguistic approaches that involve syntactical 
and lexical analysis [see for example term extrac-
tion and term variation recognition in systems such 
as MetaMap (Aronson, 2001), FASTR (Jacquemin 
and Tzoukermann, 1999) or IndDoc (Nazarenko 
and Ait El Mekki, 2005)]. In many cases, the com-
bination of these approaches has been shown to 
improve the performance of a single approach both 
for controlled indexing (Aronson et al, 2004) and
free text indexing (Byrne and Klein, 2003).
Recently, N?v?ol et al (2007) presented lin-
guistic approaches for the indexing of documents 
in the field of genetics. In this paper, we explore a 
statistical approach of indexing for text documents 
also in the field of genetics. This approach was 
previously used successfully to produce Medical 
Subject Headings (MeSH) main heading recom-
mendations. Our goal in this experiment is two-
fold: first, extending an existing method to the pro-
duction of recommendations involving subhead-
ings and second, assessing the possible benefit of 
using a domain-specific variant of the method. 
2 A k-Nearest-Neighbors approach for 
indexing 
2.1 Principle
The k-Nearest-Neighbors (k-NN) approach views 
indexing as a multi-class classification problem 
where a document may be assigned several
?classes? in the form of indexing terms. It requires 
a large set of labeled data composed of previously 
indexed documents. k-NN relies on the assumption 
that similar documents should be classified in a 
similar way. The algorithm consists of two steps: 
1/documents that are most ?similar? to the query 
document must be retrieved from the set of labeled 
documents. They are considered as ?neighbors? for 
the query document; 2/an indexing set must be 
produced from these and assigned to the query 
document.
Finding similar documents
All documents are represented using a vector of 
distinctive features within the representation space. 
Based on this representation, labeled documents 
183
may be ranked according to their similarity to the 
query document using usual similarity measures 
such as cosine or Dice. The challenge in this step is 
to define an appropriate representation space for 
the documents and to select optimal features for 
each document. Another issue is the number (k) of 
neighbors that should be selected to use in the next 
step.
Producing an indexing set
When applied to a single-class classification prob-
lem, the class that is the most frequent among the k 
neighbors is usually assigned to the query docu-
ment. Indexing is a multi-class problem for which 
the number of classes a document should be as-
signed is not known, as it may vary from one 
document to another. Therefore, indexing terms 
from the neighbor documents are all taken into 
account and ranked according to the number of 
neighbors that were labeled with them. The more 
neighbors labeled with a given indexing term, the 
higher the confidence that it will be a relevant in-
dexing term for the query document. This resulting 
indexing set may then be filtered to select only the 
terms that were obtained from a defined minimum 
number of neighbors.
2.2 Document representation
Generic representation 
A generic representation of documents is obtained 
from the text formed by the title and abstract. This 
text is processed so that punctuation is removed, 
stop-words from a pre-defined list (of 310 words) 
are removed, remaining words are switched to 
lower case and a minimal amount of stemming is 
applied. As described by Salton (1989) words 
should be weighted according to the number of 
times they occur in the query document and the 
number of times they occur in the whole collection
(here, MEDLINE). Moreover, words from the title 
are given an additional weight compared to words 
from the abstract. Further adjustments relative to 
document length and local weighting according to 
the Poisson distribution are detailed in (Aronson et 
al, 2000; Kim et al, 2001) where the PubMed Re-
lated Citations (PRC) algorithm is discussed. Fur-
ther experiments showed that the best results were 
obtained by using the ten nearest neighbors.
Domain-specific representation 
In specialized domains, documents from the litera-
ture may be represented with concepts or objects 
commonly used or studied in the field. For exam-
ple, (Rhodes et al, 2007) meet specific chemistry 
oriented search needs by representing US patents 
and patent applications with molecular information 
in the form of chemical terms and structures. A
similar representation is used for PubChem
(http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) records. In the 
genetics domain, genes are among the most com-
monly discussed or manipulated concepts. There-
fore, genes should provide a relevant domain-
specific description of documents from the genet-
ics literature.
The second indexing algorithm that we describe 
in this paper, know as the Gene Reference Into 
Function (GeneRIF) Related Citations (GRC) algo-
rithm, uses ?GeneRIF? links (defined in the para-
graph below) to retrieve neighbors for a query 
document.
To form a specific representation of the docu-
ment, gene names are retrieved by ABGene1 (Ta-
nabe and Wilbur, 2002) and mapped to Entrez 
Gene2 unique identifiers. The mapping was per-
formed with a version of SemRep (Rindflesch and
Fiszman, 2003) restricted to human genes. It con-
sists in normalizing the gene name (switch to lower 
case, remove spaces and hyphens) and matching 
the resulting string to one of the gene names or 
aliases listed in Entrez Gene.
For each gene, the GeneRIF links supply a sub-
set of MEDLINE citations manually selected by 
NLM indexers for describing the functions associ-
ated with the gene. These sets were used in two 
ways: 
To complete the document representation. If a 
citation was included in the GeneRIF of a 
given gene, the gene was given an additional 
weight in the document representation. 
To limit the set of possible neighbors. In the 
generic representation, all MEDLINE cita-
tions contain the representation features, 
words. Therefore, they all have to be con-
sidered as potential neighbors. However, 
                                                          
1 Software downloaded January 17, 2007, from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/staff/lsmith/MedPost.html 
2 Retrieved January 17, 2007, from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene
184
only a subset of citations actually contains
genes. Therefore, only those citations need 
to be considered as potential neighbors. This 
observation enables us to limit the specific 
processing to relevant citations. Possible 
neighbors for a query document consist of 
the union of the GeneRIF citations corre-
sponding to each gene in the document rep-
resentation. 
Table 1: Gene description of a sample MEDLINE 
document and its two nearest neighbors
PubMed IDs ABGene Entrez Gene IDs
15645653 abcc6 
mrp6
ldl-r
pxe
fh
368
368; 6283
3949
368; 5823
2271
10835643 mrp6
pxe
368; 6283
368; 5823
16392638 abcc6
mrp6
pxe
368
368; 6283
368; 5823
For each query document, the set of possible 
neighbors was processed and ranked according to 
gene similarity using a cosine measure. Table 1 
shows the description of a sample MEDLINE cita-
tion and its two nearest neighbors. 
Based on experiments with the PubMed Related 
Citations algorithm, ten neighbors were retained to 
form a candidate set of indexing terms.
3 Experiment
3.1 Application to MeSH indexing  
In the MEDLINE database, publications of the bio-
medical domain are indexed with Medical Subject 
Headings, or MeSH descriptors. MeSH contains 
about 24,000 main headings denoting medical con-
cepts such as foot, bone neoplasm or appendec-
tomy. MeSH also contains 83 subheadings such as 
genetics, metabolism or surgery that can be associ-
ated with the main headings in order to refer to a 
specific aspect of the concept. Moreover, each de-
scriptor (a main heading alone or associated with 
one or more subheadings) is assigned a ?minor? or 
?major? weight depending on how substantially the 
concept it denotes is discussed in the article. ?Ma-
jor? descriptors are marked with a star. 
In order to form a candidate indexing set to be 
assigned to a query document, the descriptors as-
signed to each of the neighbors were broken down 
into a set of main headings and pairs (i.e. a main 
heading associated with a single subheading). For 
this experiment, indications of major terms were 
ignored. 
For example, the MeSH descriptor 
*Myocardium/cytology/metabolism would gener-
ate the main heading Myocardium and the two 
pairs Myocardium/cytology and Myocar-
dium/metabolism. 
3.2 Test Corpus
Both methods were tested on a corpus composed of 
a selection of the 49,863 citations entered into 
MEDLINE in January 2005. The 2006 version of 
MeSH was used for the indexing in these citations. 
About one fifth of the citations (10,161) are con-
sidered to be genetics-related, as determined by 
Journal Descriptor Indexing (Humphrey, 1999). 
Our test corpus was composed of genetics-related 
citations from which Entrez Gene IDs could be 
extracted ? about 40% of the cases. The final test 
corpus size was 3,962. Appendix A shows a sam-
ple citation from the corpus.
3.3 Protocol
Figure 1 shows the setting of our experiment. 
Documents from the test corpus described above 
were processed to obtain both a generic and spe-
cific representation as described in section 2.2. The 
corresponding ten nearest neighbors were retrieved 
using the PRC and GRC algorithms. All the 
neighbors? MeSH descriptors were pooled to form 
candidate indexing sets of descriptors that were
evaluated using precision and recall measures. Pre-
cision was the number of candidate descriptors that 
were selected as indexing terms by NLM indexers 
(according to reference MEDLINE indexing) over 
the total number of candidate descriptors. Recall 
was the number of candidate descriptors that were 
selected as indexing terms by NLM indexers over 
the total number of indexing terms expected (ac-
cording to reference MEDLINE indexing). For 
better comparison between the methods, we also 
computed F-measure giving equal weight to preci-
185
sion and recall - F1=2*PR/(P+R) and giving a 
higher weight to recall - F3=10*PR/(9P+R).
Four different categories of descriptors were 
considered in the evaluation: 
MH: MeSH main headings (regardless of 
whether subheadings were attached in the 
reference indexing)
SH: stand-alone subheadings (regardless of the 
main heading(s) they were attached to in the 
reference indexing)
MH/SH: main heading/subheading pairs
DESC: MeSH descriptors, i.e. main headings 
and main heading/subheading pairs
Similarly, four different candidate indexing sets 
were considered: the indexing set resulting from 
PRC, the indexing set resulting from GRC, the in-
dexing set resulting from the pooling of PRC and 
GRC sets and finally the indexing set resulting 
from the intersection of PRC and GRC indexing 
sets (common index terms). 
Figure 1: Producing candidate indexing sets with 
generic and domain-specific representations.
4 Results
Appendix B shows the indexing sets obtained from 
the GRC and PRC algorithms for a sample citation 
from the test corpus. Table 2 presents the results of 
our experiments. For each category of descriptors, 
the best performance was bolded. It can be ob-
served that in general, the best precision and F1
scores are obtained with the common indexing set, 
the best recall is obtained with the pooling of in-
dexing sets and the best F3 score is obtained with 
PRC algorithm, the pooling of indexing sets being 
a close second. 
5 Discussion
5.1 Performance of the methods
As can be seen from the bolded figures in table 2, 
the best performance is obtained either from the 
PRC algorithm, or from a combination of PRC and 
GRC. When indexing methods are combined, it is 
usually expected that statistical methods will pro-
vide the best recall whereas linguistic methods will 
provide the best precision. Combining complemen-
tary methods is then expected to provide the best 
overall performance. In this context, it seems that 
the option of pooling the indexing sets should be 
retained for further experiments. The most signifi-
cant result of this study is that the pooling of meth-
ods achieves a recall of 92% for stand-alone 
subheading retrieval. While the precision is only 
19%, the selection of stand-alone subheadings of-
fered by our methods is nearly exhaustive and it 
reduces by 70% the size of the list of allowable 
subheadings that could potentially be used. NLM 
indexers have declared this could prove very useful 
to enhance their indexing practice.
In order to qualify the added value of the spe-
cific description, we looked at the descriptors that 
were correctly recommended by GRC and not rec-
ommended by PRC. Check Tags (descriptors used 
to denote the species, age and gender of the sub-
jects discussed in an article) seemed prominent, but 
only Human was significantly recommended cor-
rectly more often than it was recommended incor-
rectly (~2.2 times more correct than incorrect 
recommendations ? 2,712 correct vs. 1,250 incor-
rect). No other descriptor could be identified as 
being consistently recommended either correctly or 
incorrectly.
Generic 
representation 
Text Words
Specific
 representation
Genes
1- Find similar 
documents
MEDLINE document
PubMed
Related Citations
(PRC)
GeneRIFs
Related Citations
(GRC)
2- Use index terms
in similar
 documents as 
indexing candidates
PRC 
indexing set
GRC
indexing set
186
For both methods, filtering the indexing sets 
according to the number of neighbors that lead to 
include the indexing terms results in an increase of 
precision and a loss of recall. The best trade-off
(measured by F1) is obtained when indexing terms 
come from at least three neighbors (data not 
shown).
5.2 A scale of indexing performance
The problem with evaluating indexing is that, 
although inter-indexer variability is reduced when 
a controlled vocabulary is used, indexing is an 
open cognitive task for which there is no unique 
?right? solution.
Table 2: performance of the indexing methods on the four categories of descriptors
SH MH SH/MH DESC
P      R       F1     F3 P      R      F1      F3 P      R      F1      F3 P      R      F1      F3
GRC 21     72     32     58 8      49     14      32 3      23     6        14 6      38     10      25
PRC 27     88     41     72 13    61     22      45 8      56     15      36 11    59     18      41
Pool 19     92     32     67 9      82     16      44 5      62     9        29 7      74     13     38
Common 36     68     47     62 22    27     24      27 18    17     17      17 21    23     22      23
In practice, this means that there is no ideal 
unique set of descriptors to use for the indexing 
of a particular document. Therefore, when com-
paring an indexing set obtained automatically 
(e.g. here with the PRC or GRC methods) to a 
?gold standard? indexing set produced by a 
trained indexer (e.g. here, NLM indexers) the 
difference observed can be due to erroneous de-
scriptors produced by the automatic methods. 
But it is also likely that the automatic methods 
will produce terms that are semantically close to 
what the human indexer selected or even rele-
vant terms that the human indexer considered or 
forgot to select. While evaluation methods to 
assess the semantic similarity between indexing 
sets are investigated (N?v?ol et al 2006), a con-
sistency study by Funk et al (1983) can shade 
some light on inter-indexer consistency in 
MEDLINE and what range of performance may 
be expected from automatic systems. In this 
study, Hooper?s consistency (the average pro-
portion of terms in agreement between two in-
dexers) for stand-alone subheadings (SH) was 
48.7%. It was 33.8% for pairs (MH/SH) and 
48.2% for main headings (MH). In light of these 
figures, although no direct comparison with the 
results of our experiment is possible, the preci-
sion obtained from the common recommenda-
tions (especially for stand-alone subheadings, 
36%) seems reasonably useful. Further more, 
when informally presenting the indexers sample 
recommendations obtained with these methods, 
they expressed their interest in the high recall as 
reviewing a larger selection of potentially useful 
terms might help them track important descrip-
tors they may not have thought of using other-
wise.
In comparison with other research, the results 
are also encouraging: the recall resulting from 
either PRC or pooling the indexing sets is sig-
nificantly better than that obtained by N?v?ol et 
al. (2007) on a larger set of MEDLINE 2005 
citations ? 20% at best for main head-
ing/subheading pairs with a dictionary-based 
method which consisted in extracting main head-
ing and subheading separately from the citations 
(using MTI and string matching dictionary en-
tries) before forming all the allowable pairs as 
recommendations.
5.3 Limitations of the experiment
In the specific description, the mapping between 
gene names and Entrez Gene IDs only takes hu-
man genes into account, which potentially limits 
the scope of the method, since many more or-
ganisms and their genes may be discussed in the 
literature. In some cases, this limitation can lead 
to confusion with other organisms. For example, 
the gene EPO ?erythropoietin? is listed in Entrez 
Gene for 11 organisms including Homo Sapiens. 
With our current algorithm, this gene will be 
assumed to be a human gene. In the case of 
PMID 15213094 in our test corpus, the organism 
discussed in the paper was in fact Mus Musculus
(common mouse). In this particular case, the 
check tag Humans, which was erroneous, could 
be found in the candidate indexing set. However, 
187
correct indexing terms could still be retrieved 
due to the fact that both the human and mouse 
gene share common functions. 
Another limitation is the size of the test cor-
pus, which was limited to less than 4,000 docu-
ments.
5.4 Mining the biomedical literature for 
gene-concept links
Other approaches to gene-keyword mapping ex-
ploit the links between genes and diseases or 
proteins as they are described either in the re-
cords of databases such as OMIM or more for-
mally expressed as in the GeneRIF. Substantial 
work has addressed linking DNA microarray 
data to keywords in controlled vocabulary such 
as MeSH (Masys et al 2001) or characterizing 
gene clusters with text words from the literature 
(Liu et al 2004). However, no normalized ?se-
mantic fingerprinting? has been yet produced 
between controlled sets such as Entrez Gene and 
MeSH terms.
6 Conclusion and future work
In this paper, we applied a statistical method for 
indexing documents from the genetics literature. 
We presented two different document represen-
tations, one generic and one specific to the ge-
netics domain. The results bear out our 
expectations that such statistical methods can 
also be used successfully to produce recommen-
dations involving subheadings. Furthermore, 
they yield higher recall than other more linguis-
tic-based methods. In terms of recall, the best 
results are obtained when the indexing sets from 
both the specific and generic representations are 
pooled.
In future work, we plan to refine the algorithm 
based on the specific method by expending its
scope to other organisms than Homo Sapiens
and to take the gene frequency in the title and 
abstract of documents into account for the repre-
sentation. Then, we shall conduct further evalua-
tions in order to observe the impact of these 
changes, and to verify that similar results can be 
obtained on a larger corpus.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by an ap-
pointment of A. N?v?ol to the Lister Hill Center 
Fellows Program sponsored by the National Li-
brary of Medicine and administered by the Oak
Ridge Institute for Science and Education. The 
authors would like to thank Halil Kilicoglu for 
his help with obtaining Entrez Gene IDs from 
the ABgene output. We also thank Susanne 
Humphrey and Sonya Shooshan for their in-
sightful comments on the preparation and edit-
ing of this manuscript.
References
Alan R. Aronson, Olivier Bodenreider, H. Florence 
Chang, Susanne M. Humphrey, James G. Mork, 
Stuart J. Nelson, Thomas C. Rindflesch and W. 
John Wilbur. 2000. The NLM Indexing Initiative. 
Proceedings of the Annual American Medical In-
formatics Association Symposium. (AMIA 2000):
17-21.
Alan R. Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of bio-
medical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the 
MetaMap program. Proceedings of the Annual 
AMIA Symposium. (AMIA 2001):17-21.
Alan R. Aronson, James G. Mork, Cliff W. Gay, Su-
sanne M. Humphrey and William J. Rogers. 2004. 
The NLM Indexing Initiative's Medical Text In-
dexer. Proceedings of Medinfo 2004: 268-72.
Kate Byrne and Ewan Klein. 2003. Image Retrieval 
using Natural Language and Content-Based tech-
niques. In Arjen P. de Vries, ed. Proceedings of 
the 4th Dutch-Belgian Information Retrieval 
Workshop (DIR 2003):57-62.
Scott Deerwester, Susan Dumais, Georges Furnas, 
Thomas Landauer and Richard Harshman. 1990. 
Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of 
American Society for Information Science, 6 
(41):391-407.
Mark E. Funk, Carolyn A. Reid and Leon S. 
McGoogan. 1983. Indexing consistency in 
MEDLINE. Bull. Med. Libr. Assoc. 71(2):176-
183.
Susanne M. Humphrey. 1999. Automatic indexing of 
documents from journal descriptors: a preliminary 
investigation. J Am Soc Inf Sci Technol. 50(8):661-
674
Christian Jacquemin and Evelyne Tzoukermann. 
1999. NLP for term variant extraction: Synergy of 
morphology, lexicon, and syntax. In T. 
Strzalkowski (Ed.), Natural language information 
retrieval (p. 25-74). Boston, MA: Kluwer.
188
Won Kim, Alan R. Aronson and W. John Wilbur. 
2001. Automatic MeSH term assignment and qual-
ity assessment. Proceedings of the Annual AMIA
Symposium: 319-23.
Ying Liu, Martin Brandon, Shamkant Navathe, Ray 
Dingledine and Brian J. Ciliax. 2004. Text mining 
functional keywords associated with genes. Pro-
ceedings of MEDINFO 2004: 292-296
Daniel R. Masys, John B. Welsh, J. Lynn Fink, Mi-
chael Gribskov, Igor Klacansky and Jacques Cor-
beil. 2001. Use of keyword hierarchies to interpret 
gene expression patterns. In: Bioinformatics
17(4):319-326  
Adeline Nazarenko and Touria Ait El Mekki 2005. 
Building back-of-the-book indexes. In: Terminol-
ogy 11(1):199?224
Aur?lie N?v?ol, Kelly Zeng, Olivier Bodenreider. 
2006. Besides precision & recall: Exploring alter-
native approaches to evaluating an automatic in-
dexing tool for MEDLINE. Proceedings of the 
Annual AMIA Symposium: 589-93.
Aur?lie N?v?ol, Sonya E. Shooshan, Susanne M. 
Humphrey, Thomas C. Rindflesch and Alan R 
Aronson. 2007. Multiple approaches to fine-
grained indexing of the biomedical literature. Pro-
ceedings of the 12th Pacific Symposium on Bio-
computing. 12:292-303
James Rhodes, Stephen Boyer, Jeffrey Kreulen, Ying 
Chen, Patricia Ordonez. 2007. Mining Patents Us-
ing Molecular Similarity Search. Proceedings of 
the 12th Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. 
12:304-315
Thomas C. Rindflesch and Marcelo Fiszman. 2003. 
The interaction of domain knowledge and linguis-
tic structure in natural language processing: inter-
preting hypernymic propositions in biomedical 
text. J Biomed Inform. 36(6), 462-77
Gerald Salton. 1989. Automatic text processing : The 
transformation, analysis, and retrieval of informa-
tion by computer. Reading, MA : Addison-Wesley.
Karen Sparck-Jones, Steve Walker and Stephen E. 
Robertson. 2000. A probalistic model of informa-
tion retrieval: development and comparative ex-
periments (part 1). Information Processing and 
Management, 36(3):779-808.
Lorraine Tanabe and W. John Wilbur. 2002. Tagging 
gene and protein names in biomedical text. Bioin-
formatics. 2002 Aug;18(8):1124-32.
Appendix A: Title, abstract and reference indexing set for a sample citation
PubMed ID 15645653
Title Identification of two novel missense mutations (p.R1221C and p.R1357W) in the ABCC6 (MRP6) 
gene in a Japanese patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE).
Abstract Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a rare, inherited, systemic disease of elastic tissue that in par-
ticular affects the skin, eyes, and cardiovascular system. Recently, the ABCC6 (MRP6) gene was 
found to cause PXE. A defective type of ABCC6 gene (16pl3.1) was determined in two Japanese 
patients with PXE. In order to determine whether these patients have a defect in ABCC6 gene, we 
examined each of 31 exons and flanking intron sequences by PCR methods (SSCP screening and 
direct sequencing). We found two novel missense variants in exon 26 and 29 in a compound het-
erozygous state in the first patient. One is a missense mutation (c.3661C>T; p.R1221C) in exon 26 
and the other is a missense mutation (c.4069C>T; p.R1357W) in exon 29. These mutations have 
not been detected in our control panel of 200 alleles. To our knowledge, this is the first report of 
mutation identification in the ABCC6 gene in Japanese PXE patients. The second patient was ho-
mozygous for 2542_2543delG in ABCC6 gene and heterozygous for 6 kb deletion of LDL-R gene. 
This case is the first report of a genetically confirmed case of double mutations both in PXE and 
FH loci.
MeSH 
reference 
indexing set
Adult
Aged
Female
Humans
Japan
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins/*genetics
*Mutation, Missense
Pedigree
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/*genetics
189
Appendix B: Sample indexing sets obtained from the GRC and PRC algorithms for 
a sample citation
PubMed ID 15645653
GRC indexing 
set* (top 15 terms)
Humans (10)
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins (9)
Mutation (8)
Male (7)
Female (7)
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins/genetics (7)
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (6)
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics (6)
Pedigree (5)
Exons (4)
DNA Mutational Analysis (4)
Mutation/genetics (4)
Adult (4)
Introns (3)
Aged (3)
PRC indexing 
set* (top 15 terms)
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins (10)
Multidrug Resistance-Associated Proteins /genetics (10)
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (10)
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/genetics (10)
Mutation (7)
DNA Mutational Analysis (6)
Pedigree (5)
Genotype (4)
Polymorphism, Genetic (4)
Alleles (4)
Mutation/genetics (3)
Haplotypes (3)
Models, Genetic (3)
Gene Deletion (3)
Exons (3)
                                                          
* Terms appearing in the reference set are underlined; the number of neighbors ? out of the 10 nearest neighbors ?
labeled with each term is shown between brackets after the term.
190
