Proceedings of the Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 185?192,
Prague, June 2007. c?2007 Association for Computational Linguistics
A first order semantic approach to adjectival inference
Marilisa Amoia
INRIA/Universite? de Nancy 1 &
University of the Saarland
Saarbru?cken, Germany
amoia@coli.uni-saarland.de
Claire gardent
CNRS/Loria
Campus Scientifique BP 239
54506 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France
claire.gardent@loria.fr
Abstract
As shown in the formal semantics litera-
ture, adjectives can display very different
inferential patterns depending on whether
they are intersective, privative, subsective
or plain non-subsective. Moreover, many
of these classes are often described using
second order constructs. In this paper, we
adopt Hobbs?s ontologically promiscuous
approach and present a first order treatment
of adjective semantics which opens the way
for a sophisticated treatment of adjectival
inference. The approach was implemented
and tested using first order automated rea-
soners.
1 Introduction
As has often been observed, not all of natural lan-
guage meaning can be represented by first order
logic. There are expressions such as, most, former,
I didn?t whose meaning intuitively involve higher-
order constructs.
Nevertheless, as (Hobbs, 1985) and others have
argued, semantic representations for natural lan-
guage need not be higher-order in that ontological
promiscuity can solve the problem. That is, by reify-
ing all objects that can be predicated of, it is possible
to retain a semantic representation scheme for NL
that is first-order.
This observation is crucial for computational ap-
plications for two reasons. First, logics that goes be-
yond first order are highly undecidable. Second and
more importantly, there is no off the shelf higher or-
der automated reasoners that could be put to use to
reason about the meaning of higher-order formulae.
In this paper, we present a semantics for adjec-
tives that adopts an ontologically promiscuous ap-
proach and thereby supports first order inference for
all types of adjectives including extensional ones.
Indeed, traditional semantic classifications of ad-
jectives such as (Chierchia and Connell-Ginet, 1990;
Kamp, 1975; Kamp and Partee, 1995) subdivide
adjectives into two classes namely extensional vs.
intensional adjectives, the latter grouping together
adjectives which intuitively denote functions from
properties to properties, i.e. second order objects.
We present a compositional semantics for ad-
jectives which both (i) defines a first order repre-
sentation and (ii) integrates interactions with other
sources of linguistic information such as lexical se-
mantics and morpho-derivational relations. We then
show that the proposed semantics correctly predicts
the inferential patterns observed to hold of the var-
ious adjective subclasses identified in the literature
(Chierchia and Connell-Ginet, 1990; Kamp, 1975;
Kamp and Partee, 1995; Amoia and Gardent, 2006).
This paper is structured as follows. We start by
presenting a classification of adjectives which is mo-
tivated by the different inferential patterns observed.
We then propose a compositional semantics for each
class and show that it correctly predicts their inferen-
tial behaviour. We conclude with a brief discussion
of related work and pointers for further research.
2 Inferential patterns and adjective classes
In the literature (Chierchia and Connell-Ginet, 1990;
Kamp, 1975; Kamp and Partee, 1995; Amoia and
185
Gardent, 2006), adjectives are usually divided into
four main classes namely, intersective, subsective,
privative and plain non subsective depending on
whether or not the [Adj N]AP phrase entails the
properties expressed by the noun and/or the adjec-
tive. More specifically, each of the four classes is
characterised as follows.
Intersective adjectives. This class includes com-
mon categorical (e.g., red, rectangular, French) and
tautological (e.g., real, present) adjectives. It is char-
acterised by the inferential patterns:
[A N] |= N
[A N] |= A
For instance, saying that there is a red table im-
plies both that there is something red and that there
is a table.
Subsective adjectives form an ontologically het-
erogeneous class including for instance denominal
(e.g., gastronomical) and measure (e.g. big) adjec-
tives. They are characterised by the fact that the [Adj
N]AP phrase does not entail the Adj property:
[A N] |= N
[A N] 6|= A
For instance, a big mouse is a mouse but is not
big. Instead it is ?big for a mouse?. In other words,
?bigness? cannot be directly inferred as, e.g. a big
mouse and a big elephant are big in very different
ways.
Privative adjectives denote adjectives such that
the [Adj N]AP phrase entails the negation of the N
property:
[A N] |= ?N
For instance, the former king is not the king and a
fake weapon is not a weapon.
Plain non-subsective adjectives are adjectives
which preclude any inference wrt to the N property:
[A N] |= (N ? ?N)
[A N] 6|= A
Thus, if Peter is an alleged murderer, it is impos-
sible to know whether or not he is a murderer.
Now, the class of intensional adjectives groups to-
gether adjectives with a syntactic and semantic id-
iosyncratic behaviour. Syntactically, intensional ad-
jectives are not gradable (e.g. cannot be modified
by very) and most of them can only be used attribu-
tively (He is a former president but not The presi-
dent is former). Semantically, they are usually taken
to denote second order properties, i.e. functions of
the type ??e,t?, ?e,t??.
Intensional adjectives include denominal (or rela-
tional) adjectives (e.g polar bear, atomic scientist),
manner (or adverbial) adjectives (e.g. a poor liar, a
fast car), emotive (e.g. a poor man) and modals, i.e.
all adjectives which are related to adverbs, quanti-
fiers or determiners (e.g. a feeble excuse, the specific
reason, a fake nose, etc.).
3 Assigning FOL Representation to
Intensional adjectives
We now show how adjectives can be assigned an ap-
propriate first order logic representation which ap-
propriately reflects their inferential behaviour.
Following Hobbs, we adopt a promiscuous ontol-
ogy and assume that for every predication that can
be made in natural language, there corresponds an
?eventuality?. As Hobbs has argued, this allows for
higher order predications to remain first order in that
they become predications over (first order) eventual-
ities.
Thus, in the domain there are entities which are
either eventualities or individuals and relations be-
tween individuals. Moreover like Hobbs, we assume
a model to describe a platonic universe containing
everything that can be spoken about whether or not
these things exist in the real world. To express exis-
tence in the real world, a special predicate (Exists)
is introduced.
We use the following notation:
? ei, for eventuality variables,
? xi, for individuals,
? Pi, for properties of individuals.
And the following types:
? e will denote the type of individuals,
? ev the type of eventualities and
186
? t a truth value.
3.1 The intuition
As shown in section 2, the semantics of [Adj N]AP
phrases has very different inferential properties de-
pending on the type of the adjective Adj. The differ-
ences stem from three main points.
The number of individuals introduced by the
[Adj N]AP phrase. Thus, the red table evokes a
single individual x which is both red and a table
whilst the gastronomical book refers to a book x
which is about the gastronomy concept y. More gen-
erally, the variables predicated of by the noun and by
the adjective can refer either to the same or to two
distinct individual(s).
The properties licensed by the adjective and the
noun to contribute to the meaning of the [Adj
N]AP phrase. Depending on the adjective type,
the properties denoted by Adj and N will contribute
either directly or indirectly to the meaning of the
[Adj N]AP phrase. Thus in an intersective [Adj
N]AP phrase, the meaning contributed by Adj and
N are simply the properties they denote. By con-
trast, the privative fake forces the negation of the N
property to be part of the Adj N meaning whilst the
subsective gastronomical induces a relation to the
morphoderivationally related noun concept (about
gastronomy) to be included in the the Adj N mean-
ing. More generally, the properties that compose the
meaning of the Adj N phrase can be the denotation
of Adj and/or N, the negation of N, its denotation in
the past or some property derived from it.
The existence in the real world of the entity de-
noted by the NP. In all cases the [Adj N]AP
phrase denotes a set of individuals but whilst in most
cases the [Adj N]AP phrase is neutral with respect
to the existence in the real world of these individ-
uals, plain non-subsective [Adj N]AP phrases (e.g.
alleged murderer) explicitly question it (an alleged
murderer may or not exist in the real world).
3.2 The semantics of nouns
In designing a semantics for adjectives, we assume
a semantics for nouns which reflect their possible
interactions with the different types of adjectives
(1) a. noun: ?Pol?e?x.[Pol(table(e)) ? e = x]
As we shall shortly see, the additional lambda
variable e is imposed by the treatment of adjective
semantics we propose and more specifically by the
necessity to sometimes distinguish between the indi-
vidual described by the noun and the individual de-
scribed by the adjective. The variable Pol accounts
for the polarity of the noun, i.e. whether it occurs
with the negation or not.
We give here also the semantics assigned to the
pronouns someone/something which will be used in
the derivations throughout this paper:
(2) a. someone/something: ?P?x.P (x)
3.3 The semantics of the copula
Following the proposal of Mantague, we assign a
unique representation for both the uses of the cop-
ula in identity statements (e.g. John is Mary ?
john=mary) and in predicative assertions (e.g. John
is a man ? man(john)):
(3) a. be: ?K?x.K(?y(x = y))
In the case of predicative assertions in which the
predicate is an adjective (e.g. John is brave), we
adjust the type of the argument of the copula in the
following way:
(4) a. be Adj: be(Adj(?Pol?e?x.true))
3.4 The semantics of adjectives
Given such a representation for nouns, we represent
adjectives using the schema given in Figure 1.
Briefly, schema 1 captures the observations made
in section (3.1) as follows. First it introduces an ex-
istential quantification (in the platonic universe) over
not one but two variables (ea and en) ? depending on
how the formula is instantiated (and in particular on
the value of R1 and R2) these two variables may or
not denote the same object. This accounts for the
first observation according to which an [Adj N]AP
phrase may refer to either one or two individuals.
Second, the meaning of the [Adj N]AP phrase is a
function not of the Adj and N meaning but rather of
properties derived from these meanings (A? for Adj
and N , as modified by its three arguments, for N).
This accounts for the second observation.
Third, the use of the exists predicate will permit
distinguishing between existence in the universe of
discourse and existence in the real world.
187
?N?x?ea?en.[A?(ea) ? R1(x, ea) ? R2(en, ea) ? N(Pol)(en)(x)]
with A? the property licensed by the adjective, R1, R2 two arbitrary relations licensed by the adjective,
N the property denoted by the noun and Pol a polarity argument of value either ?S.S or ?S.?S
Figure 1: Semantics schema for all adjectives
We now show how this general schema receives
different instantiations depending on the adjectival
class being considered; and how each instantiation
predicts the correct inferential pattern for the four
adjectival classes.
3.4.1 Intersective adjectives
The semantic representation of an [Adj N]AP ad-
jectival phrase involving an intersective adjective is
given in Figure 2 together with the derivation of the
[Adj N]AP phrase red table. As can be seen, in this
case, the relation R1 holding between the lambda
bound variable x and the entity introduced by the
adjective is one of identity. Similarly, the entity en
introduced is equated with x and the relation R2
is ?x, y.true (i.e. there is no modifying relation
between ea and en). Hence the [Adj N]AP phrase
licenses in effect a single entity x and the resulting
semantics is the traditional ?x.[A(x) ? N(x)] with
A the semantics of the adjective and N that of the
noun. Assuming further that determiners have the
semantics:
a/the ?P?Q?x.[P (?S.S)(x) ? Q(x)]
then the semantics of Something is a red table is
(5) ?x?ea?en.[red(ea)?x = ea?table(en)?en =
x]
which correctly entails that there is an entity x
which is both red and a table i.e.,
(5) |= ?x.[red(x)] something is red
(5) |= ?x.[table(x)] something is a table
3.4.2 Subsective adjectives
As recalled above, subsective adjectives are char-
acterised by the fact that the [Adj N]AP phrase en-
tails N but not A. Relatedly, the adjective phrase in-
troduces not one but two individuals, one linked to
the adjective and the other to the noun. For instance,
the phrase the gastronomical book refers to a book
x which is about the gastronomy concept en.
Thus in such cases, we take the R2 relation hold-
ing between x, the NP quantified variable, and ea,
the entity introduced by the adjective, to be distinct
from identity, while the R1 relation is empty.
(6) ?x?ea?en.[gastronomy(ea)?about(en, ea)?
book(en) ? en = x]
This ensures that the NP refers to two entities, one
bound by the determiner and licenced by N, the other
existentially quantified and licensed by A. For in-
stance, the sentence John read every gastronomical
books is interpreted as meaning that John read all
books that are about gastronomy.
More generally, this ensures that [A N] 6|= A (and
in fact, adjectives like gastronomical cannot be used
predicatively), e.g.
(6) |= something is a book
|= ?x.[book(x)]
(6) |= something is about gastronomy
|= ?x?ea.[about(x, ea) ? gastronomy(ea)]
(6) 6|= something is a book and a gastronomy
6|= ?x[book(x) ? gastronomy(x)]
(6) 6|= something is gastronomical
6|= ?x[gastronomical(x)]
As shown in (Amoia and Gardent, 2006), subsec-
tive adjectives can be further divided into at least
four classes. Because of space restrictions, we only
show here how to represent two of these subclasses
namely denominal (e.g. gastronomical) and mea-
sure subsective adjectives (e.g. big). In both cases,
the idea is to decompose the meaning of the adjec-
tives into a finer grained lexical meaning. Depend-
ing on the lexical meaning involved, this decompo-
sition induces different instantiation patterns for the
188
Intersective Adjectives
?N?x?ea?en.[A(ea) ? x = ea ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)]
Red table
?N?x?ea?en.[red(ea) ? x = ea ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)](?Pol?e?x.[Pol(table(e)) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en.[red(ea) ? x = ea ? table(en) ? en = x])
? ?x.[red(x) ? table(x)])
Figure 2: Semantics of Intersective Adjectives
Subsective Adjectives
?N?x?ea?en.[A?(ea) ? R2(en, ea) ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)]
with A? an arbitrary complex relation derived from the lexical meaning of the adjective and
R2 a relation other than identity
Gastronomical book
?N?x?ea?en.[gastronomy(ea) ? about(en, ea) ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)](?Pol?e?x.[Pol(book (e)) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en.[gastronomy(ea) ? about(en, ea) ? book(en) ? en = x])
Figure 3: Semantics of Subsective Adjectives
R relation mentioned in the general schema for ad-
jective semantic representation.
Thus, the meaning of the adjectival phrase
containing an adjective of measure, e.g. big mouse
will be represented as:
?N?x?ea?en.[size(ea) ? highFor(ea, C)
?has(en, ea) ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)]
(?Pol?e?x.[mouse(e) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en.[size(ea) ? highFor(ea, C)
?has(en, ea) ? mouse(en) ? en = x])
where C is a contextually given parameter which de-
termine the scale size is measured against. In this
case, C would be, e.g. ?mouse? so that the formula
above can be glossed as x is a mouse with a size ea
which is high for a mouse. In particular, Daisy is
a big mouse entails that Daisy is a mouse and that
Daisy is big for a mouse, but not that Daisy is big.
3.4.3 Privative adjectives
As seen above, privative adjectives entail that the
entity described by the NP is not N, e.g. a fake gun is
not a gun. For such adjectives, it is the entity intro-
duced by the adjective that is being quantified over,
hence ea is identified with x (cf. Figure 4). Fur-
ther, the N property is either denied or subject to a
modality (former, potential). As shown in Figure 4,
this is accounted for by providing the appropriate re-
lation R (e.g. R2 being the relation time introduced
by former or R1 being the identity relation x = ea
introduced by fake).
This representation presupposes that each sen-
tence in which such modality adjectives do not occur
has a default value for time and/or modality. Thus,
for instance that
(7) John is a former president. 6|= John is the pres-
ident.
(8) John is a possible president. 6|= John is the pres-
ident.
can only be accounted for if the base forms are
assigned the following default representations:
(7) ?ea?x [president(x) ? time(x, ea)
?present(ea)]
(8) ?ea?x [president(x) ? mod(x, ea)
?possible(ea)]
3.4.4 Plain non-subsective adjectives
Finally, plain non-subsective adjectives fail to
make any prediction about the existence of an in-
189
Privative Adjectives (e.g., fake,potential,former,future)
(e.g. fake, fictitious)
?N?x?ea?en.[A(ea) ? x = ea ? N(?S.?S)(en)(x)] OR
?N?x?ea?en.[A?(ea) ? mod/time(ea, en) ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)]
with R2 being the relation mod/time specifying the modality or the time indicated by the adjective
Fake gun
?N?x?ea?en.[fake(ea) ? x = ea ? N(?S.?S)(en)(x)](?Pol?e?x.[Pol(gun(e)) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en.[fake(ea) ? x = ea ? ?gun(en) ? en = x])
Former president
?N?x?ea?en.[former (ea) ? time(en, ea) ? N(?S.S)(en)(x)]
(?Pol?e?x.[Pol(president(e)) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en[former(ea) ? time(x, ea) ? president(en) ? x = en]
Figure 4: Semantics of Privative Adjectives
dividual having the N property. Thus for instance,
if John is an alleged murderer, there might or might
not exist a murderer.
To account for this fact, we follow Hobbs? ap-
proach in distinguishing between existence in the
universe of discourse and existence in the real world.
Thus, the logical existential connective ? is used to
denote existence in the discourse world while the
special predicate Exists is used to denote existence
in the real world. We assume further a theory that
permits determining when an individual exists in the
universe of discourse and when it exists in the real
world.
Given these caveats, the semantics of plain non-
subsective adjectives is as indicated in Figure 5 and
simply specifies that the alleged murderer is an in-
dividual x which exists in the universe of discourse
(but not necessarily in the real world) and which is
alleged to be a murderer. Moreover, as stated in
(Hobbs, 1985), we assume that the alleged predi-
cate is existentially opaque in its second argument.
That is, an alleged predication does not imply the
existence in the real world of its second argument.
4 Implementation
The semantics of adjectives presented in this paper
was tested using (Blackburn and Bos, 2005) compu-
tational semantics framework.
First, based on the classification of 300 English
adjectives presented in (Amoia and Gardent, 2006),
which identifies 17 different adjectival subclasses
for the four main classes proposed by (Kamp, 1975;
Kamp and Partee, 1995), we have built a test suite of
about 150 examples in the following way. We have
chosen for each class a representant adjective and
written for it the set of sentence pairs (H/T) illus-
trating the inference patterns displayed by the class
the adjective belongs to. In particular, we have built
examples which test:
1. whether the adjective partecipates in both pred-
icative and attributive constructions, so that the
resulting sentences (H and T) are paraphrastic,
2. whether the two sentences contain adjectives
which are synonyms,
3. what kind of antonymic relation links the given
adjective with its antonym,
4. which of the three inference patterns described
in (Kamp and Partee, 1995) holds for the given
adjective,
5. hyperonymy,
6. derivational morphology.
For instance, the test suite contains for an adjec-
tive such as fake, belonging to a subclass of the pri-
vative adjectives, the H/T pairs in (9).
(9) a. H:This is a fake gun / T:This gun is fake
190
Plain non subsective Adjectives (e.g., alleged)
?N?x?ea?en.[A?(ea, en) ? x = ea ? N(?S.S)(en)(en)]
with R1 being the identity relation between x and ea and R2 being the relation
introduced by the adjective A?(ea, en)
Alleged murderer
?N?x?ea?en.[alleged(ea, en) ? x = ea ? N(?S.S)(en)(en)](?Pol?e?x.[Pol(murderer (e)) ? e = x])
? ?x?ea?en.[alleged(ea, en) ? x = ea ? murderer(en) ? en = en])
Figure 5: Semantics of plain non-subsective Adjectives
b. H:This is a fake gun / T:This is a false gun
c. H:This is a fake gun / T:This gun is not gen-
uine
d. H:This is not a fake gun |= This gun is real
e. H:This is a fake gun / T:This is a gun
f. H:This is a fake gun / T:This is not a gun
g. H:This is a fake gun / T:This is fake
h. H:This is a fake gun / T:This is a fake
weapon
i. H:This is a fake gun / T:This gun is a coun-
terfeit
Second, a grammar fragment was implemented
which integrates the semantics of nouns and adjec-
tives presented here. This grammar fragment was
then used together with the appropriate lexicon to
automatically associate with each sentence of the
test suite a representation of its meaning.
Third, lexical Knowledge pertaining to each class
of adjectives is captured through a set of axioms de-
scribing the specific lexical relationships adjectives
are involved in.
Synonymy is captured introducing equality axioms
which describe the equivalence of the two proper-
ties expressed by the two adjectives Adj1 and Adj2
asserting:
?e[Adj1(e) ? Adj2(e)]
Hyponymy (for example big/giant vs.
small/minuscule) is captured by introducing
the axioms such as:
?e[Adj1(e) ? Adj2(e)]
Antonymy is captured by introducing different ax-
ioms depending on the type of opposition relation in
which the adjectives are involved, i.e. binary, con-
trary or multiple opposition. The axiom below for
example introduces a binary antonymic relation:
?e[Adj1(e) ? ? Adj2(e)]
Fourth, entailment (H|=T) was checked for each
sentence pair using the first order theorem provers
available in the system and the results compared
with the expected result. A first evaluation shows
that the methodology proposed yields the expected
results: we could correctly predict all the inferen-
tial patterns presented above from 1 to 5 (136 pairs,
89%). The results for other patterns, describing mor-
phoderivational relations of adjectives, depend on
the amount of information implemented in the gram-
mar which for the moment is very limited.
5 Perspectives and Comparison with
related works
The approach presented here lays the basis for a
computational treatment of adjectival inference in
that it provides a fine grained characterisation of the
various types of inferential patterns licenced by ad-
jectives.
In future work, we believe three main points are
worth investigating.
First, previous work (Amoia and Gardent, 2006)
has shown that the classification presented here can
be further detailed and even finer-grained classes
identified thereby permitting the creation of syn-
tactically and semantically homogeneous adjectival
191
classes. The advantages of identifying such ho-
mogeneous classes has been well demonstrated for
verbs. It permits structuring the lexicon and facil-
itates development and maintenance. Based on the
idea that syntax (and in particular, so-called syntac-
tic alternations) helps define such classes, we are
currently investigating in how far adjectival syntax
helps further refine adjectival classes.
Second, the proposed classification need to be ap-
plied and combined with ontological and lexical se-
mantic information. That is, each adjective should
be classified wrt the 4 types of model theoretic se-
mantics described here and related to such a lexical
semantics ontology as e.g., WordNet, the MikroKos-
mos ontology of the SIMPLE lexicon.
Thus (Raskin and Nirenburg, 1995) describe the
methodology used to encode adjectival entries in the
lexicon of the MikroKosmos semantic analyser. The
MikroKosmos lexicon contains 6,000 entries for En-
glish and 1,500 entries for Spanish adjectives. Ad-
jectives are organised in an ontology which distin-
guishes between the following three main adjectival
classes: (i) Scalar Adjectives, which are rep-
resented as property-value pairs, (ii) Denominal
Adjectives, (e.g. atomic, civil, gastronom-
ical) represented as nouns and (iii) Deverbal
Adjectives, (e.g. eager, abusive, readable) is re-
lated to the meaning of the verb they are derived to.
The classification of adjectives proposed in SIM-
PLE (SIMPLE, 2000) is also ontology-based. A
lexical entry for an adjective is characterised by a
set of semantic and syntactic information. Seman-
tic information describes: (i) the hierarchy of onto-
logical properties expressed by the particular adjec-
tive, for example the adjective expresses the prop-
erty of COLOUR and this is a physical property; (ii)
whether the adjective is intersective or subsective;
(iii) whether the adjective has a persistent duration
(i.e. is stable) or not. Moreover, syntactic informa-
tion describes adjectival features such as (i) predica-
tive/attributive usage, and (ii) gradability.
SIMPLE has actually added semantic information
to approximately 3,500 lexical entries (about 10,000
senses) for each of the 12 European languages con-
sidered in the project.
It would be interesting to see whether any of these
resources can be used to create an adjective lexicon
rich enough to support both syntactic processing and
semantic inference.
Finally, a third point of interest concerns the in-
tegration of the compositional semantics proposed
here for adjectives into a robust semantic processing
system. We plan to integrate this semantics into the
CCG2Sem semantic parsing system (Bos, 2005) and
to investigate in how far, this would help deal with
entailment recognition.
References
Marilisa Amoia and Claire Gardent. 2006. Adjective
based inference. In Proceedings of KRAQ?06 (Knowl-
edge and Reasoning for Answering Questions), Trento,
Italy.
Patrick Blackburn and Johan Bos. 2005. Representation
and Inference for Natiral Language. A first Course in
Computational Semantics. CSLI Studies in Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Johan Bos. 2005. Towards wide-coverage semantic in-
terpretation. In In Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Workshop on Computational Semantics IWCS-
6, pages 42?53.
G. Chierchia and S. Mc Connell-Ginet. 1990. Mean-
ing and Grammar: An Introduction to Semantics. The
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jerry R. Hobbs. 1985. Ontological promiscuity. In
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pages 61?69,
Chicago, Illinois, July.
Hans Kamp and Barbara Partee. 1995. Prototype theory
and compositionality. Cognition, (57):129?191.
Hans Kamp. 1975. Two theories about adjectives. In
Edward L. Keenan (ed.), Formal Semantics of Natu-
ral Language, pages 123?155. Cambridge University
Press.
V. Raskin and S. Nirenburg. 1995. Lexical Semantics
of Adjectives, a micro-theory of adjectival meaning.
MCCS Report.
Specification Group SIMPLE. 2000. Specification sim-
ple work package 2. Linguistic specifications deliver-
able d2.1.
192
