The Use of Spatial Relations in Referring Expression Generation
Jette Viethen
Centre for Language Technology
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
jviethen@ics.mq.edu.au
Robert Dale
Centre for Language Technology
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
rdale@ics.mq.edu.au
Abstract
There is a prevailing assumption in the litera-
ture on referring expression generation that re-
lations are used in descriptions only ?as a last
resort?, typically on the basis that including
the second entity in the relation introduces an
additional cognitive load for either speaker or
hearer. In this paper, we describe an experiemt
that attempts to test this assumption; we de-
termine that, even in simple scenes where the
use of relations is not strictly required in order
to identify an entity, relations are in fact often
used. We draw some conclusions as to what
this means for the development of algorithms
for the generation of referring expressions.
1 Introduction
In recent years, researchers working on referring
expression generation have increasingly moved to-
wards collecting their own data on the human pro-
duction of referring expressions (REs) (Krahmer and
Theune, 2002; van der Sluis and Krahmer, 2004;
Gatt and van Deemter, 2006; Belz and Varges,
2007); and the recent Attribute Selection in the
Generation of Referring Expressions (ASGRE) Chal-
lenge used the TUNA corpus (Gatt et al, 2007),
which is the most extensive collection of referring
expressions to date. While there is a substantial
body of experimental work in psycholinguistics that
looks at the human production of referring expres-
sions (see, amongst more recent work, (Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Stevenson, 2002; Haywood et
al., 2003; Jordan and Walker, 2005)) the large range
of factors that play a role in language production
mean that it is often the case that the specific ques-
tion that one is interested in has not been studied
before. So, NLG researchers have tended towards
data gathering exercises that explore some specific
aspect of referring expression generation, focussing
on hypotheses relevant to algorithm development.
This paper is in the same mold. We are particuarly
interested in how people use spatial relations in re-
ferring expressions, and so in this paper we describe
an experiment that explores the generation of rela-
tional referring expressions in a simple scene. Sec-
tion 2 elaborates on our reasons for exploring this
aspect of reference. Section 3 describes the exper-
iment and provides some discussion of the results:
our primary conclusion is that the assumption in the
literature that relations are used ?as a last resort? does
not appear to hold; relations are often used, even in
simple scenes, when they are not strictly required,
and it is likely that they would be more heavily used
in more complex real-world scenes. We conclude
in Section 4 with some observations as to how the
results presented here might impact on the develop-
ment of algorithms for referring expression genera-
tion, and outline some future work.
2 Spatial Relations in Referring
Expression Generation
The bulk of the existing literature on referring ex-
pression generation (see, for example, Dale (1989),
Dale and Reiter (1995), van Deemter (2006), Ho-
racek (2004), Gatt and van Deemter (2006)) gener-
ally focuses on the use of non-relational properties,
which can either be absolute (for example, colour) or
relative (for example, size). We are interested in the
59
use of relational expressions, and in particular the
use of spatial relations; the contexts of use we are
interested in are task-specific, where, for example,
we might want an omniscient domestic agent to tell
us where we have placed a lost object (You left your
keys under the folder on the desk . . . ), or to identify
a hearer-new object in a cluttered scene (the maga-
zine at the bottom of the pile of papers next to the
lampshade in the corner). To develop agents with
these kinds of referential capabilities, we want to ac-
quire data that will inform the development of algo-
rithms, either by automatically checking their ability
to replicate the corpus, or as a baseline for assessing
the performance of humans in an identification task
based on the output of these algorithms.
In this paper, we describe an experiment that
looks at how and when people use spatial relations
in a simple scene. More specifically, we aim to ex-
plore the hypothesis that relations are always dispre-
ferred over non-relational properties. This hypothe-
sis appears to underly most approaches to referring
expression generation that handle relations:
Gardent (2002) adopts a constraint based ap-
proach to deal with relations specifically geared at
generating referring expressions that are as short as
possible. As including a relation in a referring ex-
pression always entails the additional mention of
at least a head noun for the related object, this ap-
proach inherently prefers properties over relations.
Krahmer and Theune (2002) extend the Incremen-
tal Algorithm (IA; Dale and Reiter (1995)) to han-
dle relations. This requires a preference list over all
properties and relations to be specified in advance.
They explicitly choose to put spatial relations right
at the end of that preference list, on the basis that ?It
seems an acceptable assumption that people prefer
to describe an object in terms of simple properties,
and only shift to relations when properties do not
suffice [. . . ] it takes less effort to consider and de-
scribe only one object?.
As the referents in Varges? 2005 domain are all
points on a map distinguishable only by their spatial
relations to other objects, he has no choice but to use
relations. However, he also adopts brevity as a main
criterion for choosing which spatial relations to use.
Kelleher and Kruijff (2005, 2006) cite Clark and
Wilkes-Gibbs? (1986) Principle of Minimal Cooper-
ative Effort and Dale and Reiter?s (1995) Principle
of Sensitivity, as well as van der Sluis and Krah-
mer?s (2004) production study, to motivate the or-
dering over the types of properties that can be used
by their system; accordingly, their system only in-
cludes spatial (and hence relational) information in
a referring expression if it is not possible to construct
a description from non-relational properties.
These approaches would appear to favour the pro-
duction of referring expressions containing long se-
quences of non-relational properties when a single
relational property might do the job. We are inter-
ested, then, in whether it really is the case that rela-
tional expressions are dispreferred, and in determin-
ing when they might in fact be preferred.
To date, we are not aware of any substantial data
sets that would allow this question to be explored.
Both the TUNA corpus (Gatt et al, 2007) and the
Macquarie Drawer data (Viethen and Dale, 2006)
contain too few relational descriptions to allow us
to draw conclusions about any kind of patterns; the
GREC corpus (Belz and Varges, 2007) is not con-
cerned with content selection at all, but rather stud-
ies the form of referring expressions used over a
whole text; i.e. the choice between fully descriptive
NPs, reduced NPs, one-anaphora and pronouns.
There are a number of corpora resulting from ex-
periments involving human participants which con-
tain referring expressions, such as Brennan and
Clark?s (1996) collection of tangram descriptions,
the HCRC Map Task Corpus (Thompson et al,
1993), the COCONUT corpus (Jordan and Walker,
2005), and Byron and Fosler-Lussier?s (2006) OSU
Quake corpus. However, these contain whole
conversations between communicative partners co-
operating on a task, making it difficult to factor out
the impact of prior discourse context on the referring
expressions used.
3 The Data Gathering Experiment
3.1 General overview
We conducted a web-based production experiment
to elicit referring expressions describing singular ob-
jects in very simple scenes. The study was aimed
at shedding light on the question of whether spatial
relations are indeed as dispreferred as suggested by
the literature in those situations where non-relational
descriptions are possible.
60
The Desiderata section of the report from the
Workshop on Shared Tasks and Comparative Eval-
uation in NLG (Paris et al, 2007) emphasises the
difficulties inherent in evaluating NLG systems due
to the context dependency of language production:
the output appropriate for any given referring ex-
pression generation system entirely depends on the
particular task being performed. The data gathered
in this experiment is intended to inform the develop-
ment and evaluation of algorithms for the production
of one-shot, fully distinguishing descriptions of sim-
ple objects in 3-dimensional scenes. The experiment
is focussed on the adequate use of spatial relations in
referring expressions.
In designing the materials for the experiment, we
were conscious of a number of factors which we
might expect to have an influence on the use of spa-
tial relations: the prominence of other properties
such as colour and size (i.e. whether most objects
are of the same or similar size and colour, so that
none are very distinct from the point of view of their
direct properties); how easy it is to distinguish the
target from the other objects around it; how easy it
is to identify the target in the scene without using
any locational information; and the visual salience
of other objects which could serve as relatees in re-
lational descriptions.
3.2 Method
3.2.1 Participants
In total, 74 participants completed the experiment.
They were recruited by emailing 120 native English
speakers and asking them to pass on the call for par-
ticipation to other native or fluent English speakers.
This resulted in a range of participants from a wide
variety of backgrounds and age groups; most partic-
ipants were in their early or mid twenties.
One participant indicated they were colour-blind,
and another requested that their data be discarded.
The data for a further nine participants was ex-
cluded from the analysis for reasons outlined in Sec-
tion 3.2.4 below. Of the remaining 63 participants,
34 were male and 29 were female.
3.2.2 Materials
The stimuli for this study consisted of 20 jpeg
images of simple scenes generated using Google
SketchUp. Each scene contained three objects; each
Figure 1: Trial Set 1: The five base configurations 1?5
and their counterparts 6?10 using the other type of target?
landmark relation and orientation.
object was either a sphere or a cube. The objects
could also be either large or small and were one of
two colours; scenes either contained blue and green
objects, or red and yellow objects. The target ob-
ject, to be described by the participant, was marked
by a grey arrow pointing to it; the target was al-
ways located either directly in front of or on top of
one of the other two objects. We will refer to this
other related object as the landmark, although there
is of course no guarantee that participants actually
included it into the description as the ground object
in a spatial relation. The third object, which we refer
to as the distractor, was located either to the left or
the right of the target and landmark objects.
The 20 scenes are generated from five base con-
figurations, differing in the type and size of the ob-
jects pictured. Figure 1 shows the five base configu-
rations. They can be categorised by the length of the
shortest possible description for the target object:
? in two of the base configurations it is possible
to identify the target object using its type only;
? in one base configuration size alone would suf-
61
fice, although in line with past observations in
the literature we would expect that type is al-
ways included as well;
? in one base configuration, colour and type are
both necessary; and
? in the final base configuration, both size and
colour are necessary, and again we would ex-
pect type to be included.
Importantly, there is no configuration in which the
spatial relations between the objects are required in
order to identify the target.
For each base configuration, we generated two
scenes: in one scene, the target is located on top of
the landmark object, and in the other, the target lies
in front of the landmark. This allows us to investi-
gate whether people prefer to use one type of spatial
relation more than the other.
Five of the resulting 10 scenes were in the blue?
green colour scheme, while the other five used red
and yellow. The different colour schemes were an
attempt to decrease the monotony of the task, so
that we could show each participant more scenes.
These 10 scenes, numbered 1 through 10, consti-
tuted our first trial set. A second trial set, with scenes
numbered 11 through 20, was generated by produc-
ing the mirror image of each scene and using the
opposite colour scheme. Mirroring the scenes had
the same purpose as using the two different colour
schemes. However, to be able to control any un-
wanted effect of these two variables we always used
both variants.1
3.2.3 Procedure
On the experiment website, each participant was
shown the scenes from one of the two trial sets in
the order of the scene numbers. Under each scene,
they had to complete the sentence Please, pick up
the . . . as if they were describing the object marked
by the arrow to an onlooker.
To encourage the use of fully distinguishing refer-
ring expressions, participants were told that they had
only one chance at describing the object. They were
shown a sample scene for which they could provide
an unrecorded (and unchecked) description. After
1For brevity, where relevant we will use the form ?Scenes
n+m? to refer to paired scenes across the two trial sets.
being presented with all ten scenes in the trial, par-
ticipants were asked to complete an exit question-
naire, which also gave them the option of having
their data discarded, and asked for their opinion on
whether the task became easier over time, and any
other comments they might wish to make.
3.2.4 Data Processing
740 descriptions were elicited in the experiment. 10
of these were discarded in line with the participant?s
request, and 10 because the participant reported that
they were colour-blind. After the data was cleaned
and parsed, another 90 descriptions from 9 partici-
pants were discarded:
? One participant had consistently produced ex-
tremely long and complex descriptions using
the ternary relation between and direct refer-
ence to the onlooker, the ground and parts of
the objects: a typical example is the red cube
which rests on the ground and is between you
and the yellow cube of equal size. While these
descriptions are interesting, in relation to the
rest of the data they are such outliers that no
real conclusions can be drawn from them.
? A further eight participants consistently used
highly under-specified descriptions. We de-
cided to discard the data from these participants
since it seemed that they had not understood
the need to provide a distinguishing descrip-
tion, rather than, for example, just indicating
the type of the object.2
This resulted in a total of 630 referring expressions,
with 30 for each scene in Trial Set 1 and 33 for each
scene in Trial Set 2. We then applied some normal-
isation steps: the data was stripped of punctuation
marks and other extraneous material (such as repe-
tition of the Please, pick up the); in four cases, the
dynamic spatial preposition from was deleted from
descriptions such as the green ball from on top of
the blue cube;3 and spelling was normalised. The
2Of course, underspecified descriptions are justified in many
circumstances, and in real-life situations may even be necessary.
However, the simple scenes used in this study do not fall into
these classes.
3We are only interested in the static locative in these expres-
sions; the use of the dynamic preposition is most likely due to
the movement implied by the indicated picking-up action.
62
Figure 2: Number of participants who delivered
n (0. . . 10) relational descriptions.
second object was stripped from comparatives such
as the smaller of the two green cubes and converted
to the form the smaller green cube, which in the con-
text of our simple scenes is semantically equivalent.
3.3 Results
Over a third (231 or 36.6%) of the 630 descriptions
in the resulting corpus use spatial relations despite
the fact that relations were never necessary for the
identification of the target. These 231 relational de-
scriptions were produced by 40 (63.5%) of the 63
participants, while 23 (36.5%) of the participants
never used spatial relations. This suggests that the
use of relations is very much dependent on personal
preference, a hypothesis that is further supported by
the fact that 11 (i.e. over 25%) of the relation-using
participants did so in all 10 referring expressions
they delivered. Figure 2 shows the number of par-
ticipants who produced exactly n descriptions con-
taining at least one spatial relation, for n in the range
{0 . . . 10}.
From the above, we might hypothesise that some
participants adopt a strategy of always using rela-
tional properties, and that others adopt a strategy of
avoiding relational properties as much as possible.
We further analysed the descriptions produced by
participants who did not follow either of these two
exclusive strategies to see how their choices varied
across the different scenes; the spread is shown in
Figure 3. Looking only at the descriptions produced
by participants who sometimes, but not always, used
spatial relations allows us to get a clearer view on
which objects received most and least relational de-
scriptions. This in turn affords an analysis of the
impact the different features in the respective scenes
Figure 3: % of relational descriptions for each scene out
of all relational descriptions produced by participants not
using an exclusive strategy. Scenes are paired with their
counterpart using the other target?landmark relation.
have on the use of spatial relations.
41.7% of the remaining descriptions used rela-
tions. Interestingly, 63.6% of these relational de-
scriptions were used for scenes where the target was
located on top of the landmark object, while only
36.4% were from scenes where the target was in
front of the landmark, suggesting that the use of the
in-front-of relation may be relatively dispreferred.
Because the first scene always had the target on
top of the landmark, this preference for using rela-
tional descriptions in on-top-of scenes might be due
to a training effect that discourages people from us-
ing relations over time. However, if we do not take
into account descriptions for the first 4 scenes of
each trial set, this ratio is still large: 58.8% of the
the remaining relational descriptions stemmed from
scenes where the target was on top of the landmark,
41.2% of them from scenes with an on-top-of rela-
tion.
As expected, the orientation of the scenes and the
colour scheme used did not have a significant im-
pact on the use of spatial relations. For both these
variables, the difference between values in use of re-
lations was under 6 percentage points.
3.4 Discussion
We noted earlier that existing relation-handling re-
ferring expression generation algorithms generally
disprefer relations and only add them to a descrip-
tion if absolutely necessary. This in essence mimics
the behaviour of our participants who adopted the
63
exclusive Never-Use-Relations strategy.4 These al-
gorithms therefore only represent slightly more than
one third of the participants in our study.
The analysis of the descriptions given by people
who did not follow one of the two exclusive strate-
gies indicates that the distribution of relational de-
scriptions over the scenes is not random. In addition
to modelling exclusive strategies, then, we may also
want to capture in an algorithm the reasons why re-
ferring expressions for some scenes are more likely
to include spatial relations than others.
In the remainder of this section we consider the
conclusions that can be drawn from our data regard-
ing the factors that impact on the choice of whether
to use spatial relations in a referring expression.
Spatial Relations Are Used Even When Unnec-
essary: The main observation that can be made
is that even in very simple scenes, where locatives
are not necessary to distinguish the target from the
other objects present, people show a tendency to use
spatial relations to describe a target object to an on-
looker. This contradicts the prevailing approach to
the use of relations in referring expression genera-
tion. It is important to bear in mind that the scenes
used in this study were extremely simple and could
easily be taken in at one glance; it seems likely that
when faced with a more crowded scene containing
more complex objects, the tendency to incorporate
possibly unnecessary spatial relations into descrip-
tions would increase.
Training Effect: Note in Figure 4 that the targets
in Scenes 1+11 received a disproportionally high
number of descriptions containing spatial relations.
While this fact could be attributed to the similar fea-
tures of the two scenes (they only differed in ori-
entation and colour scheme), it is much more likely
that this is due to Scenes 1 and 11 being the first
scenes of the respective trial sets. The drop-off in
relational descriptions from beginning to end of the
trial sets almost certainly results from a training ef-
fect, where people realised over time that relations
were not necessary in any of the scenes. If we only
consider the first two scenes in each trial set, where
no training effect has taken hold, we find that 36 of
4On the assumption that these participants would also resort
to relations if they had to.
Figure 4: % of relational descriptions for each scene out
of all relational descriptions produced by participants not
using an exclusive strategy. Scenes are paired with their
counterpart from the other trial set.
the 58 (62.1%) descriptions for these scenes use spa-
tial relations. The presence of some kind of training
effect was also reported in the exit questionnaire by
half of the participants.
This training effect in itself is an interesting phe-
nomenon. It suggests that people are much more
likely to use spatial relations when they come anew
to the task of identifying an object rather than when
they are describing an object in a similar domain on
a subsequent occasion.
Landmark Salience Encourages Use of Relations:
Figure 4 shows that the highest spike in usage of spa-
tial relations was recorded for Scenes 3+13; interest-
ingly another, although much less pronounced, peak
occurs for their counterpart scenes only differing in
the type of target?landmark relation, 8+18.
These peaks cannot be explained by the training
effect; in fact, they seem to be running contrary to it,
indicating that some other reasonably strong factors
are prompting the use of relations in these scenes.
Scenes 3, 8, 13, and 18 are the only scenes in
which the landmark object is distinguishable from
both other objects only by its type (cube) or its
colour (see Figure 1). In addition, in each case the
landmark is large resulting in high visual salience for
the landmark. This in turn makes the relation to the
landmark a salient feature of the target. The salience
of the relation then causes people to add it to an al-
ready distinguishing description or even to prefer it
64
over the use of absolute properties.
on top of Is Preferred over in front of: Although
these four scenes all share the same base set of ob-
jects, the usage of spatial relations is considerably
higher for Scenes 3+13 than for 8+18. This could
either be entirely due to the training effect, but may
also be influenced by the only difference between
these two scenes: in Scenes 3+13, the target sits on
top of the landmark, while in Scenes 8+18 it is ly-
ing in front of the landmark. The overall compari-
son of the data for scenes featuring an on-top-of re-
lation with that for scenes with an in-front-of relation
suggests that this also is a factor. Even if we only
take into account Scenes 5?10 and 15?20, where we
might expect the effect of training to have stabilised,
people were almost one and a half times more likely
to use a relation in a scene where the target was on
top of rather than in front of the landmark (30 vs. 21
of the 111 relational descriptions for those scenes
from people not using an exclusive strategy).
This finding is in accordance with Kelleher and
Kruijff?s (2006) approach of preferring topological
spatial relations over projective ones. The seman-
tics of projective spatial relations, such as in front
of, depend on a frame of reference defining direc-
tions from some origin (in this case the landmark
object), while topological relations, such as on top
of, are semantically defined by relations such as in-
tersection, containedness, and contiguity, and pose
a lighter cognitive load on both discourse partners
(see Tenbrink (2005) for an overview).
The impact of landmark salience and the pref-
erence for the on-top-of relation can also explain
the low use of spatial relations for Scenes 4+14,
6+16 and 10+20 (see Figure 1). In these scenes it
is very hard or even impossible to distinguish the
landmark from the other objects using only non-
relational properties, and the target is located in front
of rather than on top of it. The possibility of de-
scribing the target in Scenes 6+16 only by its type
or colour may be the reason for the extremely low
usage of spatial relations in these scenes.
4 Conclusions
4.1 Consequences for Algorithm Development
We noted above that some participants adopted a
Never-Use-Relations strategy, and some adopted
an Always-Use-Relations stratgy. This might be
modelled by the use of a parameter akin to the
the Risky/Cautious distinction proposed by Carletta
(1992) in her work on references in the Map Task
corpus. The effect of this parameter in the context
of the Incremental Algorithm would be to put spa-
tial relations either at the front or at the end of the
preference list of properties; this would ensure that
they are either considered first for inclusion into a
referring expression, or only when the other proper-
ties of the target do not suffice.
A more interesting problem is how to model the
apparent preference of our participants to use rela-
tions in some scenes more than in others. Follow-
ing our discussion above, the factors that lead to this
preference seem to include the folllowing:
? the ease with which a potential landmark can
be distinguished from the other objects in the
scene;
? the visual salience of a potential landmark (in
our case its size);
? the type of spatial relation between the target
and a potential landmark; and
? the ease with which the target can be described
without the use of spatial relations.
The visual salience of the target object is likely to
also play a role; however, this was not tested in the
current study, since all target objects were small.
Factors like these can be incorporated into a refer-
ring expression generation algorithm by taking them
into account in the step that calculates which prop-
erty of the target object should next be considered
for inclusion in the referring expression. Instead of
using a static preference list over all possible do-
main properties, a preference score for each prop-
erty needs to be determined ?at run time?. Such a
dynamic approach would also allow the considera-
tion of the discourse salience of a property (perhaps
due to its recent use in another referring expression),
as well as the consideration that some properties are
more likely to be used in combination with other
specific properties. An example of this phenomenon
is the combination of the property hair-colour with
either has-hair or has-beard in the TUNA data. If
hair-colour is included in a referring expression, at
65
least one of the other two properties is present as
well.
The preference scores of the properties in a re-
ferring expression under construction would then
combine into an adequacy score for the overall de-
scription, similar to Edmonds? (1994) concept of the
speaker?s confidence that a referring expression suf-
fices for the communicative task at hand.
4.2 Future Work
As a next step, we aim to run experiments to sepa-
rately confirm the impact that each of the different
factors listed in Section 3.4 has on the use of spa-
tial relations in referring expressions. In parallel,
we will evaluate the human-produced descriptions
in task-based evaluation schemes to assess whether
the use of relations in certain categories of scenes is
advantageous for an onlooker trying to identify the
object that is being referred to.
Ultimately, the aim of this research is to develop
an algorithm that incorporates the findings from both
types of studies into the generation of referring ex-
pressions. Such an algorithm should not simply
mimic the behaviour that our participants have dis-
played during the production experiment, but also
take into account the findings of the task-based
study, to ensure both naturalness and usefulness for
the listener.
References
Anja Belz and Sebastian Varges. 2007. Generation of re-
peated references to discourse entities. In Proceedings
of the 11th European Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, pages 9?16.
Susan E. Brennan and Herbert H. Clark. 1996. Concep-
tual pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 22:1482?1493.
Donna K. Byron and Eric Fosler-Lussier. 2006.
The OSU Quake 2004 corpus of two-party situated
problem-solving dialogs. In Proceedings of the 15th
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference.
Jean C. Carletta. 1992. Risk-taking and Recovery in
Task-Oriented Dialogue. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Edinburgh.
Herbert H. Clark and Deanna Wilkes-Gibbs. 1986. Re-
ferring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22(1):1?
39.
Robert Dale and Ehud Reiter. 1995. Computational
interpretations of the Gricean maxims in the gener-
ation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science,
19(2):233?263.
Robert Dale. 1989. Cooking up referring expressions. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, BC.
Philip G. Edmonds. 1994. Collaboration on reference to
objects that are not mutually known. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Kyoto, Japan.
Claire Gardent. 2002. Generating minimal definite de-
scriptions. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Philadelphia, USA.
Albert Gatt and Kees van Deemter. 2006. Conceptual
coherence in the generation of referring expressions.
In Proceedings of the 21st COLING and the 44th ACL
Conference, Sydney, Australia.
Albert Gatt, Ielka van der Sluis, and Kees van Deemter.
2007. Evaluating algorithms for the generation of re-
ferring expressions using a balanced corpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation, pages 49?56.
Sarah Haywood, Martin J. Pickering, and Holly P. Brani-
gan. 2003. Co-operation and co-ordination in the
production of noun phrases. In Proceedings of the
25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society,
pages 533?538, Boston, MA.
Helmut Horacek. 2004. On referring to sets of objects
naturally. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Con-
ference on Natural Language Generation, pages 70?
79, Brockenhurst, UK.
Pamela W. Jordan and Marilyn A. Walker. 2005. Learn-
ing content selection rules for generating object de-
scriptions in dialogue. Journal of Artificial Intelli-
gence Research, 24:157?194.
John Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. 2005. A
context-dependent model of proximity in physically
situated environments. In Proceedings of the 2nd
ACL-SIGSEM Workshop on The Linguistic Dimen-
sions of Prepositions and their Use in Computational
Linguistics Formalisms and Applications, Colchester,
U.K.
John Kelleher and Geert-Jan M. Kruijff. 2006. Incre-
mental generation of spatial referring expressions in
situated dialog. In Proceedings of the 21st COLING
and the 44th ACL Conference, Sydney, Australia.
Emiel Krahmer and Marie?t Theune. 2002. Efficient
context-sensitive generation of referring expressions.
In Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kibble, editors, In-
formation Sharing: Reference and Presupposition in
Language Generation and Interpretation, pages 223?
264. CSLI Publications, Stanford, CA.
66
Ce?cile Paris, Donia Scott, Nancy Green, Kathy McCoy,
and David McDonald. 2007. Desiderata for evalua-
tion of natural language generation. In Robert Dale
and Michael White, editors, Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Shared Tasks and Comparative Evaluation in
Natural Language Generation, pages 9?15, Arlington,
VA.
Rosemary Stevenson. 2002. The role of salience in the
production of referring expressions: A psycholinguis-
tic perspective. In Kees van Deemter and Rodger Kib-
ble, editors, Information Sharing: Reference and Pre-
supposition in Language Generation and Interpreta-
tion. CSLI, Stanford.
Thora Tenbrink. 2005. Semantics and application of spa-
tial dimensional terms in English and German. Tech-
nical Report Series of the Transregional Collabora-
tive Research Center SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition, No.
004-03/2005, Universities of Bremen and Freiburg,
Germany.
Henry S. Thompson, Anne Anderson, Ellen Gurman
Bard, Gwyneth Doherty-Sneddon, Alison Newlands,
and Cathy Sotillo. 1993. The HCRC map task cor-
pus: natural dialogue for speech recognition. In Pro-
ceedings of the 1993 Workshop on Human Language
Technology, pages 25?30, Princeton, New Jersey.
Kees van Deemter. 2006. Generating referring expres-
sions that involve gradable properties. Computational
Linguistics, 32(2):195?222.
Ielka van der Sluis and Emiel Krahmer. 2004. The
influence of target size and distance on the produc-
tion of speech and gesture in multimodal referring
expressions. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Spoken Language Processing (INTER-
SPEECH 2004), Jeju, Korea.
Sebastian Varges. 2005. Spatial descriptions as referring
expressions in the maptask domain. In Proceedings
of the 10th European Workshop On Natural Language
Generation, Aberdeen, UK.
Jette Viethen and Robert Dale. 2006. Algorithms for
generating referring expressions: Do they do what
people do? In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Natural Language Generation, pages
63?70, Sydney, Australia, July.
67
