Coling 2008: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on Information Retrieval for Question Answering (IR4QA), pages 50?57
Manchester, UK. August 2008
Using lexico-semantic information for query expansion in passage
retrieval for question answering
Lonneke van der Plas
LATL
University of Geneva
Switzerland
lonneke.vanderplas@lettres.unige.ch
Jo?rg Tiedemann
Alfa-Informatica
University of Groningen
The Netherlands
j.tiedemann@rug.nl
Abstract
In this paper we investigate the use of sev-
eral types of lexico-semantic information
for query expansion in the passage retrieval
component of our QA system. We have
used four corpus-based methods to acquire
semantically related words, and we have
used one hand-built resource. We eval-
uate our techniques on the Dutch CLEF
QA track.1 In our experiments expansions
that try to bridge the terminological gap
between question and document collection
do not result in any improvements. How-
ever, expansions bridging the knowledge
gap show modest improvements.
1 Introduction
Information retrieval (IR) is used in most QA sys-
tems to filter out relevant passages from large doc-
ument collections to narrow down the search for
answer extraction modules in a QA system. Accu-
rate IR is crucial for the success of this approach.
Answers in paragraphs that have been missed by
IR are lost for the entire QA system. Hence, high
performance of IR especially in terms of recall is
essential. Furthermore, high precision is desirable
as IR scores are used for answer extraction heuris-
tics and also to reduce the chance of subsequent
extraction errors.
Because the user?s formulation of the question
is only one of the many possible ways to state the
information need that the user might have, there is
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1The Cross-Language Evaluation Forum (http://clef-
qa.itc.it/)
often a discrepancy between the terminology used
by the user and the terminology used in the doc-
ument collection to describe the same concept. A
document might hold the answer to the user?s ques-
tion, but it will not be found due to the TERMI-
NOLOGICAL GAP. Moldovan et al (2002) show
that their system fails to answer many questions
(25.7%), because of the terminological gap, i.e.
keyword expansion would be desirable but is miss-
ing. Query expansion techniques have been devel-
oped to bridge this gap.
However, we believe that there is more than just
a terminological gap. There is also a KNOWLEDGE
GAP. Documents are missed or do not end up high
in the ranks, because additional world knowledge
is missing. We are not speaking of synonyms here,
but words belonging to the same subject field. For
example, when a user is looking for information
about the explosion of the first atomic bomb, in
his/her head a subject field is active that could in-
clude: war, disaster, World War II.
We have used three corpus-based methods
to acquire semantically related words: the
SYNTAX-BASED METHOD, the ALIGNMENT-
BASED METHOD, and the PROXIMITY-BASED
METHOD. The nature of the relations between
words found by the three methods is very differ-
ent. Ranging from free associations to synonyms.
Apart from these resources we have used cate-
gorised named entities, such as Van Gogh IS-A
painter and synsets from EWN as candidate ex-
pansion terms.
In this paper we have applied several types of
lexico-semantic information to the task of query
expansion for QA. We hope that the synonyms
retrieved automatically, and in particular the syn-
onyms retrieved by the alignment-based method,
as these are most precise, will help to overcome the
50
terminological gap. With respect to the knowledge
gap, we expect that the proximity-based method
would be most helpful as well as the list of cate-
gorised named entities. For example, knowing that
Monica Seles is a tennis player helps to find rele-
vant passages regarding this tennis star.
2 Related work
There are many ways to expand queries and ex-
pansions can be acquired from several sources.
For example, one can make use of collection-
independent resources, such as EWN. In contrast,
collection-dependent knowledge structures are of-
ten constructed automatically based on data from
the collection.
The results from using collection-independent,
hand-built sources are varied. Moldovan et al
(2003) show that using a lexico-semantic feed-
back loop that feeds lexico-semantic alternations
from WordNet as keyword expansions to the re-
trieval component of their QA system increments
the scores by 15%. Also, Pasc?a and Harabagiu
(2001) show substantial improvements when us-
ing lexico-semantic information from WordNet for
keyword alternation on the morphological, lexical
and semantic level. They evaluated their system on
question sets of TREC-8 and TREC-9. For TREC-
8 they reach a precision score of 55.3% with-
out including any alternations for question key-
words, 67.6% if lexical alternations are allowed
and 73.7% if both lexical and semantic alternations
are allowed.
However, Yang and Chua (2003) report that
adding additional terms from WordNet?s synsets
and glosses adds more noise than information to
the query. Also, Voorhees (1993) concludes that
expanding by automatically generated synonym
sets from EWN can degrade results.
In Yang et al (2003) the authors use external
knowledge extracted from WordNet and the Web
to expand queries for QA. Minor improvements
are attained when the Web is used to retrieve a
list of nearby (one sentence or snippet) non-trivial
terms. When WordNet is used to rank the retrieved
terms, the improvement is reduced. The best re-
sults are reached when structure analysis is added
to knowledge from the Web and WordNet. Struc-
ture analysis determines the relations that hold be-
tween the candidate expansion terms to identify
semantic groups. Semantic groups are then con-
nected by conjunction in the Boolean query.
Monz (2003) ran experiments using pseudo rel-
evance feedback for IR in a QA system. The author
reports dramatic decreases in performance. He ar-
gues that this might be due to the fact that there
are usually only a small number of relevant doc-
uments. Another reason he gives is the fact that
he used the full document to fetch expansion terms
and the information that allows one to answer the
question is expressed very locally.
A global technique that is most similar to ours
uses syntactic context to find suitable terms for
query expansion (Grefenstette, 1992; Grefenstette,
1994). The author reports that the gain is mod-
est: 2% when expanded with nearest neighbours
found by his system and 5 to 6%, when apply-
ing stemming and a second loop of expansions
of words that are in the family of the augmented
query terms.2 Although the gain is greater than
when using document co-occurrence as context,
the results are mixed, with expansions improving
some query results and degrading others.
Also, the approach by Qiu and Frei (1993) is
a global technique. They automatically construct
a similarity thesaurus, based on what documents
terms appear in. They use word-by-document ma-
trices, where the features are document IDs, to de-
termine the similarity between words. Expansions
are selected based on the similarity to the query
concept, i.e. all words in the query together, and
not based on the single words in the query inde-
pendently. The results they get are promising.
Pantel and Ravichandran (2004) have used a
method that is not related to query expansion,
but yet very related to our work. They have se-
mantically indexed the TREC-2002 IR collection
with the ISA-relations found by their system for
179 questions that had an explicit semantic answer
type, such as What band was Jerry Garcia with?
They show small gains in performance of the IR
output using the semantically indexed collection.
Recent work (Shen and Lapata, 2007; Kaisser
and Webber, 2007) that falls outside the scope of
this paper, but that is worth mentioning success-
fully applies semantic roles to question answering.
3 Lexico-semantic information
We have used several types of lexico-semantic
information as sources for candidate expansion
terms. The first three are automatically acquired
2i.e. words that appear in the same documents and that
share the first three, four or five letters.
51
from corpora by means of distributional methods.
? Nearest neighbours from proximity-based
distributional similarity
? Nearest neighbours from syntax-based distri-
butional similarity
? Nearest neighbours from alignment-based
distributional similarity
The idea behind distributional methods is rooted
in the DISTRIBUTIONAL HYPOTHESIS (Harris,
1968). Similar words appear in similar context.
The way words are distributed over contexts tells
us something about their meaning. Context can
be defined in several ways. The way the context
is defined determines the type of lexico-semantic
knowledge we will retrieve.
For example, one can define the context of a
word as the n words surrounding it. In that case
proximity to the head word is the determining
factor. We refer to these methods that use un-
structured context as PROXIMITY-BASED METH-
ODS. The nearest neighbours resulting from such
methods are rather unstructured as well. They are
merely associations between words, such as baby
and cry. We have used the 80 million-word corpus
of Dutch newspaper text (the CLEF corpus) that is
also part of the document collection in the QA task
to retrieve co-occurrences within sentences.
Another approach is one in which the context
of a word is determined by syntactic relations. In
this case, the head word is in a syntactic relation
to a second word and this second word accom-
panied by the syntactic relation form the context
of the head word. We refer to these methods as
SYNTAX-BASED METHODS. We have used several
syntactic relations to acquire syntax-based context
for our headwords. This method results in nearest
neighbours that at least belong to the same seman-
tic and syntactic class, for example baby and son.
We have used 500 million words of newspaper text
(the TwNC corpus parsed by Alpino (van Noord,
2006)) of which the CLEF corpus is a subset.
A third method we have used is the
ALIGNMENT-BASED METHOD. Here, trans-
lations of word, retrieved from the automatic
word alignment of parallel corpora are used to
determine the similarity between words. This
method results in even more tightly related data,
as it mainly finds synonyms, such as infant and
baby. We have used the Europarl corpus (Koehn,
2003) to extract word alignments from.3
By calculating the similarity between the con-
texts words are found in, we can retrieve a
ranked list of nearest neighbours for any head-
word. We gathered nearest neighbours for a
frequency-controlled list of words, that was still
manageable to retrieve. We included all words
(nouns, verbs, adjectives and proper names) with
a frequency of 150 and higher in the CLEF cor-
pus. This resulted in a ranked list of nearest neigh-
bours for the 2,387 most frequent adjectives, the
5,437 most frequent nouns, the 1,898 most fre-
quent verbs, and the 1,399 most frequent proper
names. For all words we retrieved a ranked list
of its 100 nearest neighbours with accompanying
similarity score.
In addition to the lexico-semantic information
resulting from the three distributional methods we
used:
? Dutch EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998)
? Categorised named entities
With respect to the first resource we can be
short. We selected the synsets of this hand-built
lexico-semantic resource for nouns, verbs, adjec-
tives and proper names.
The categorised named entities are a by-product
of the syntax-based distributional method. From
the example in (1) we extract the apposition rela-
tion between Van Gogh and schilder ?painter? to
determine that the named entity Van Gogh belongs
to the category of painters.
(1) Van Gogh, de beroemde schilder huurde
een atelier, Het Gele huis, in Arles.
?Van Gogh, the famous painter, rented a
studio, The Yellow House, in Arles.?
We used the data of the TwNC corpus (500M
words) and Dutch Wikipedia (50M words) to ex-
tract apposition relations. The data is skewed. The
Netherlands appears with 1,251 different labels.
To filter out incorrect and highly unlikely labels
(often the result of parsing errors) we determined
the relative frequency of the combination of the
named entity and a category with regard to the fre-
quency of the named entity overall. All categorised
named entities with relative frequencies under 0.05
3In van der Plas and Tiedemann (2006) there is more in-
formation on the syntax-based and alignment-based distribu-
tional methods.
52
Lex. info Nouns Adj Verbs Proper
Proximity 5.3K 2.4K 1.9K 1.2K
Syntax 5.4K 2.3K 1.9K 1.4K
Align 4.0K 1.2K 1.6K
Cat. NEs 218K
EWN 44.9K 1.5K 9.0K 1.4K
Table 1: Number of words for which lexico-
semantic information is available
were discarded. This cutoff made the number of
unwanted labels considerably lower.
In Table 1 we see the amount of information
that is contained in individual lexico-semantic re-
sources. It is clear from the numbers that the
alignment-based method does not provide near-
est neighbours for all head words selected. Only
4.0K nouns from the 5.4K retrieve nearest neigh-
bours. The data is sparse. Also, the alignment-
based method does not have any nearest neigh-
bours for proper names, due to decisions we made
earlier regarding preprocessing: All words were
transformed to lowercase.
The proximity-based method also misses a num-
ber of words, but the number is far less impor-
tant. The amount of information the lists of cate-
gorised named entities provide is much larger than
the amount of information comprised in the list
provided by distributional methods. EWN also
provides more information than the distributional
methods, except for adjectives.4
4 Methodology
In order to test the performance of the var-
ious lexico-semantic resources we ran several
tests. The baseline is running a standard full-text
retrieval engine using Apache Lucene (Jakarta,
2004). Documents have been lemmatised and stop
words have been removed.
We applied the nearest neighbours resulting
from the three distributional methods as described
in section 3. For all methods we selected the top-
5 nearest neighbours that had a similarity score of
more than 0.2 as expansions.
For EWN all words in the same synset (for all
senses) were added as expansions. Since all syn-
onyms are equally similar, we do not have similar-
ity scores for them to be used in a threshold.
The categorised named entities were not only
used to expand named entities with the corre-
4Note that the number of nouns from EWN is the result of
subtracting the proper names.
sponding label, but also to expand nouns with
named entities. In the first case all labels were
selected. The maximum is not more than 18 la-
bels. In the second case some nouns get many
expansions. For example, a noun, such as vrouw
?woman?, gets 1,751 named entities as expansions.
We discarded nouns with more than 50 expansions,
as these were deemed too general and hence not
very useful.
The last two settings are the same for the expan-
sions resulting from distributional methods and the
last two types of lexico-semantic information.
? Expansions were added as root forms
? Expansions were given a weight such that all
expansions for one original keyword add up
to 0.5.
5 Evaluation
For evaluation we used data collected from the
CLEF Dutch QA tracks. The CLEF text collec-
tion contains 4 years of newspaper text, approxi-
mately 80 million words and Dutch Wikipedia, ap-
proximately 50 million words. We used the ques-
tion sets from the competitions of the Dutch QA
track in 2003, 2004, and 2005 (774 in total). Ques-
tions in these sets are annotated with valid answers
found by the participating teams including IDs of
supporting documents in the given text collection.
We expanded these list of valid answers where nec-
essary.
We calculated for each run the Mean Reciprocal
Rank (MRR).5 The MRR measures the percentage
of passages for which a correct answer was found
in the top-k passages returned by the system. The
MRR score is the average of 1/R where R is the
rank of the first relevant passage computed over
the 20 highest ranked passages. Passages retrieved
were considered relevant when one of the possible
answer strings was found in that passage.
6 Results
In Table 2 the MRR (Mean Reciprocal Rank) is
given for the various expansion techniques. Scores
are given for expanding the several syntactic cat-
egories, where possible. The baseline does not
5We used MRR instead of other common evaluation mea-
sures because of its stronger correlation with the overall per-
formance of our QA system than, for example, coverage and
redundancy (see Tiedemann and Mur (2008)).
53
MRR
SynCat EWN Syntax Align Proxi Cat.NEs
Nouns 51.52 51.15 51.21 51.38 51.75
Adj 52.33 52.27 52.38 51.71
Verbs 52.40 52.33 52.21 52.62
Proper 52.59 50.16 53.94 55.68
All 51.65 51.21 51.02 53.36 55.29
Table 2: MRR scores for the IR component with
query expansion from several sources
#questions (+/-)
SynCat EWN Syntax Align Proxi Cat.NEs
Nouns 27/50 28/61 17/58 64/87 17/37
Adj 3/6 1/2 1/2 31/47
Verbs 31/51 5/10 8/32 51/56
Proper 3/2 30/80 76/48 157/106
All 56/94 56/131 25/89 161/147 168/130
Table 3: Number of questions that receive a higher
(+) or lower (-) RR when using expansions from
several sources
make use of any expansion for any syntactic cat-
egory and amounts to 52.36.
In Table 3 the number of questions that get a
higher and lower reciprocal rank (RR) after ap-
plying the individual lexico-semantic resources are
given. Apart from expansions on adjectives and
proper names from EWN, the impact of the expan-
sion is substantial. The fact that adjectives have
so little impact is due to the fact that there are not
many adjectives among the query terms.6
The negligible impact of the proper names from
EWN is surprising since EWN provides more en-
tries for proper names than the proximity-based
method (1.2K vs 1.4K, as can be seen in 1). The
proximity-based method clearly provides informa-
tion about proper names that are more relevant for
the corpus used for QA, as it is built from a subset
of that same corpus. This shows the advantage of
using corpus-based methods. The impact of the ex-
pansions resulting from the syntax-based method
lies in between the two previously mentioned ex-
pansions. It uses a corpus of which the corpus used
for QA is a subset.
The type of expansions that result from the
proximity-based method have a larger effect on
the performance of the system than those result-
ing from the syntax-based method. In Chapter 5 of
van der Plas (2008) we explain in greater detail that
the proximity-based method uses frequency cut-
6Moreover, the adjectives related to countries, such as
German and French and their expansion Germany, France are
handled by a separate list.
offs to keep the co-occurrence matrix manageable.
The larger impact of the proximity-based nearest
neighbours is probably partly due to this decision.
The cutoffs for the alignment-based and syntax-
based method have been determined after evalu-
ations on EuroWordNet (Vossen, 1998) (see also
van der Plas (2008)).
The largest impact results from expanding
proper names with categorised named entities. We
know from Table 1 in section 3, that this resource
has 70 times more data than the proximity-based
resource.
For most of the resources the number of ques-
tions that show a rise in RR is smaller than the
number of questions that receive a lower RR, ex-
cept for the expansion of proper names by the cat-
egorised named entities and the proximity-based
method.
The expansions resulting from the syntax-based
method do not result in any improvements. As
expected, the expansion of proper names from
the syntax-based method hurts the performance
most. Remember that the nearest neighbours of the
syntax-based method often include co-hyponyms.
For example, Germany would get The Netherlands
and France as nearest neighbours. It does not seem
to be a good idea to expand the word Germany
with other country names when a user, for exam-
ple, asks the name of the Minister of Foreign Af-
fairs of Germany. However, also the synonyms
from EWN and the alignment-based method do not
result in improvements.
The categorised named entities provide the most
successful lexico-semantic information, when
used to expand named entities with their category
label. The MRR is augmented by almost 3,5%. It
is clear that using the same information in the other
direction, i.e. to expand nouns with named enti-
ties of the corresponding category hurts the scores.
The proximity-based nearest neighbours of proper
names raises the MRR scores with 1,5%.
Remember from the introduction that we made
a distinction between the terminological gap and
the knowledge gap. The lexico-semantic re-
sources that are suited to bridge the terminolog-
ical gap, such as synonyms from the alignment-
based method and EWN, do not result in improve-
ments in the experiments under discussion. How-
ever, the lexico-semantic resources that may be
used to bridge the knowledge gap, i.e. associations
from the proximity-based method and categorised
54
CLEF score
EWN Syntax Align Proxi Cat.NEs Baseline
46.3 47.0 46.6 47.6 47.9 46.8
Table 4: CLEF scores of the QA system with query
expansion from several sources
named entities, do result in improvements of the
IR component.
To determine the effect of query expansion on
the QA system as a whole we determined the av-
erage CLEF score when using the various types
of lexico-semantic information for the IR com-
ponent. The CLEF score gives the precision of
the first (highest ranked) answer only. For EWN,
the syntax-based, and the alignment-based nearest
neighbours we have used all expansions for all syn-
tactic categories together. For the proximity-based
nearest neighbours and the categorised named en-
tities we have limited the expansions to the proper
names as these performed rather well.
The positive effect of using categorised named
entities and proximity-based nearest neighbours
for query expansion is visible in the CLEF scores
as well, although less apparent than in the MRR
scores from the IR component in Table 2.
6.1 Error analysis
Let us first take a look at the disappointing re-
sults regarding the terminological gap, before we
move to the more promising results related to the
knowledge gap. We expected that the expansions
of verbs would be particularly helpful to overcome
the terminological gap that is large for verbs, since
there is much variation. We will give some exam-
ples of expansion from EWN and the alignment-
based method.
(2) Wanneer werd het Verdrag van Rome getekend?
?When was the Treaty of Rome signed??
Align: teken ?sign?? typeer ?typify?, onderteken ?sign?
EWN: teken ?sign? ? typeer ?typify?, kentekenen ?charac-
terise?, kenmerk ?characterise?, schilder ?paint?, kenschets
?characterise?, signeer ?sign?, onderteken ?sign?, schets
?sketch?, karakteriseer ?characterise?.
For the example in (2) both the alignment-based
expansions and the expansion from EWN result in
a decrease in RR of 0.5. The verb teken ?sign? is
ambiguous. We see three senses of the verb repre-
sented in the EWN list, i.e. drawing, characteris-
ing, and signing as in signing an official document.
One out of the two expansions for the alignment-
based method and 2 out of 9 for EWN are in princi-
ple synonyms of teken ?sign? in the right sense for
this question. However, the documents that hold
the answer to this question do not use synonyms
for the word teken. The expansions only introduce
noise.
We found a positive example in (3). The RR
score is improved by 0.3 for both the alignment-
based expansions and the expansions from EWN,
when expanding explodeer ?explode? with ontplof
?blow up?.
(3) Waar explodeerde de eerste atoombom?
?Where did the first atomic bomb explode??
Align: explodeer ?explode? ? ontplof ?blow up?.
EWN: explodeer ?explode?? barst los ?burst?, ontplof ?blow
up?, barst uit ?crack?, plof ?boom?.
To get an idea of the amount of terminologi-
cal variation between the questions and the doc-
uments, we determined the optimal expansion
words for each query, by looking at the words
that appear in the relevant documents. When in-
specting these, we learned that there is in fact lit-
tle to be gained by terminological variation. In
the 25 questions we inspected we found 1 near-
synonym only that improved the scores: gekke-
koeienziekte ?mad cow disease? ? Creutzfeldt-
Jacob-ziekte ?Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease?.
The fact that we find only few synonyms might
be related to a point noted by Mur (2006): Some
of the questions in the CLEF track that we use for
evaluation look like back formulations.
After inspecting the optimal expansions, we
were under the impression that most of the expan-
sions that improved the scores were related to the
knowledge gap, rather than the terminological gap.
We will now give some examples of good and bad
expansions related to the knowledge gap.
The categorised named entities result in the best
expansions, followed by the proximity-based ex-
pansions. In (4) an example is given for which cat-
egorised named entities proved very useful:
(4) Wie is Keith Richard?
?Who is Keith Richard??
Cat. NEs: Keith Richard ? gitarist ?guitar player?, lid
?member?, collega ?colleague?, Rolling Stones-gitarist
?Rolling Stones guitar player?, Stones-gitarist ?Stones guitar
player?.
It is clear that this type of information helps a lot
in answering the question in (4). It contains the
answer to the question. The RR for this question
goes from 0 to 1. We see the same effect for the
55
question Wat is NASA? ?What is NASA??.
It is a known fact that named entities are an im-
portant category for QA. Many questions ask for
named entities or facts related to named entities.
From these results we can see that adding the ap-
propriate categories to the named entities is useful
for IR in QA.
The categorised named entities were not always
successful. In (5) we show that the proximity-
based expansion proved more helpful in some
cases.
(5) Welke bevolkingsgroepen voerden oorlog in
Rwanda?
?What populations waged war in Rwanda??
Proximity: Rwanda? Za??re, Hutu, Tutsi, Ruanda, Rwandees
?Rwandese?.
Cat. NEs: Rwanda ? bondgenoot ?ally?, land ?country?,
staat ?state?, buurland ?neighbouring country?.
In this case the expansions from the proximity-
based method are very useful (except for Zaire),
since they include the answer to the question. That
is not always the case, as can be seen in (6). How-
ever, the expansions from the categorised named
entities are not very helpful in this case either.
(6) Wanneer werd het Verdrag van Rome getekend?
?When was the treaty of Rome signed??
Proximity: Rome ? paus ?pope?, Italie?, bisschop ?bishop?,
Italiaans ?Italian?, Milaan ?Milan?.
Cat. NEs: Rome ? provincie ?province?, stad ?city?,
hoofdstad ?capital?, gemeente ?municipality?.
IR does identify Verdrag van Rome ?Treaty of
Rome? as a multi-word term, however it adds the
individual parts of multi-word terms as keywords
as a form of compound analysis. It might be bet-
ter to expand the multi-word term only and not
its individual parts to decrease ambiguity. Ver-
drag van Rome ?Treaty of Rome? is not found in
the proximity-based nearest neighbours, because it
does not include multi-word terms.
Still, it is not very helpful to expand the word
Rome with pope for this question that has nothing
to do with religious affairs. We can see this as a
problem of word sense disambiguation. The as-
sociation pope belongs to Rome in the religious
sense, the place where the Catholic Church is
seated. Rome is often referred to as the Catholic
Church itself, as in Henry VIII broke from Rome.
Gonzalo et al (1998) showed in an experiment,
where words were manually disambiguated, that
a substantial increase in performance is obtained
when query words are disambiguated, before they
are expanded.
We tried to take care of these ambiguities by
using an overlap method. The overlap method
selects expansions that were found in the near-
est neighbours of more than two query words.
Unfortunately, as Navigli and Velardi (2003),
who implement a similar technique, using lexico-
semantic information from WordNet, note, the
COMMON NODES EXPANSION TECHNIQUE works
very badly. Also, Voorhees (1993) who uses a
similar method to select expansions concludes that
the method has the tendency to select very general
terms that have more than one sense themselves.
In future work we would like to implement the
method by Qiu and Frei (1993), as discussed in
section 2, that uses a more sophisticated technique
to combine the expansions of several words in the
query.
7 Conclusion
We can conclude from these experiments on query
expansion for passage retrieval that query expan-
sion with synonyms to overcome the terminolog-
ical gap is not very fruitful. We believe that the
noise introduced by ambiguity of the query terms
is stronger than the positive effect of adding lexi-
cal variants. This is in line with findings by Yang
and Chua (2003). On the contrary, Pasc?a and
Harabagiu (2001) were able to improve their QA
system by using lexical and semantic alternations
from WordNet using feedback loops.
The disappointing results might also be due to
the small amount of terminological variation be-
tween questions and document collection.
However, adding extra information with regard
to the subject field of the query, query expansions
that bridge the knowledge gap, proved slightly
beneficial. The proximity-based expansions aug-
ment the MRR scores with 1.5%. Most successful
are the categorised named entities. These expan-
sions were able to augment the MRR scores with
nearly 3.5%.
The positive effect of using categorised named
entities and proximity-based nearest neighbours
for query expansion is visible in the CLEF scores
for the QA system overall as well. However, the
improvements are less apparent than in the MRR
scores from the IR component.
56
Acknowledgements
This research was carried out in the project
Question Answering using Dependency Relations,
which is part of the research program for Interac-
tive Multimedia Information eXtraction, IMIX, fi-
nanced by NWO, the Dutch Organisation for Scien-
tific Research and partly by the European Commu-
nity?s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-
2013) under grant agreement n 216594 (CLASSIC
project: www.classic-project.org).
References
Gonzalo, J., F. Verdejo, I. Chugur, and J. Cigarran.
1998. Indexing with WordNet synsets can improve
text retrieval. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL
Workshop on Usage of WordNet for NLP.
Grefenstette, G. 1992. Use of syntactic context to pro-
duce term association lists for text retrieval. In Pro-
ceedings of the Annual International Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval
(SIGIR).
Grefenstette, G. 1994. Explorations in automatic the-
saurus discovery. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Harris, Z. S. 1968. Mathematical structures of lan-
guage. Wiley.
Jakarta, Apache. 2004. Apache Lucene - a high-
performance, full-featured text search engine library.
http://lucene.apache.org/java/docs/index.html.
Kaisser, M. and B. Webber. 2007. Question answering
based on semantic roles. In Proceedings of de ACL
workshop on deep linguistic processing.
Koehn, P. 2003. Europarl: A multilingual corpus for
evaluation of machine translation.
Moldovan, D., M. Passc?a, S. Harabagiu, and M. Sur-
deanu. 2002. Performance issues and error analysis
in an open-domain question answering system. In
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics (ACL).
Moldovan, D., M. Pasc?a, S. Harabagiu, and M. Sur-
deanu. 2003. Performance issues and error analysis
in an open-domain question answering system. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems., 21(2):133?
154.
Monz, C. 2003. From Document Retrieval to Question
Answering. Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam.
Mur, J. 2006. Increasing the coverage of answer ex-
traction by applying anaphora resolution. In Fifth
Slovenian and First International Language Tech-
nologies Conference (IS-LTC).
Navigli, R. and P. Velardi. 2003. An analysis of
ontology-based query expansion strategies. In Pro-
ceedings of the Workshop on Adaptive Text Extrac-
tion and Mining (ATEM), in the 14th European Con-
ference on Machine Learning (ECML 2003).
Pantel, P. and D. Ravichandran. 2004. Automati-
cally labeling semantic classes. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Human Language Technology and
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(HLT/EMNLP).
Pasc?a, M. and S Harabagiu. 2001. The informative role
of wordnet in open-domain question answering. In
Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop on Word-
Net and Other Lexical Resources.
Qiu, Y. and H.P. Frei. 1993. Concept-based query ex-
pansion. In Proceedings of the Annual International
Conference on Research and Development in Infor-
mation Retrieval (SIGIR), pages 160?169.
Shen, D. and M. Lapata. 2007. Using semantic roles
to improve question answering. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Tiedemann, J. and J. Mur. 2008. Simple is best: Exper-
iments with different document segmentation strate-
gies for passage retrieval. In Proceedings of the
Coling workshop Information Retrieval for Question
Answering. To appear.
van der Plas, L. and J. Tiedemann. 2006. Finding
synonyms using automatic word alignment and mea-
sures of distributional similarity. In Proceedings of
COLING/ACL.
van der Plas, Lonneke. 2008. Automatic lexico-
semantic acquisition for question answering. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Groningen. To appear.
van Noord, G. 2006. At last parsing is now operational.
In Actes de la 13eme Conference sur le Traitement
Automatique des Langues Naturelles.
Voorhees, E.M. 1993. Query expansion using lexical-
semantic relations. In Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval (SIGIR).
Vossen, P. 1998. EuroWordNet a multilingual database
with lexical semantic networks.
Yang, H. and T-S. Chua. 2003. Qualifier: question an-
swering by lexical fabric and external resources. In
Proceedings of the Conference on European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL).
Yang, H., T-S. Chua, Sh. Wang, and Ch-K. Koh. 2003.
Structured use of external knowledge for event-based
open domain question answering. In Proceedings
of the Annual International Conference on Research
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR).
57
