BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 110?111,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Textual Information for Predicting Functional Properties of the Genes 
 
Oana Frunza and Diana Inkpen 
School of Information Technology and Engineering 
University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1N 6N5 
{ofrunza,diana}@site.uottawa.ca 
 
1 Overview 
This paper is focused on determining which pro-
teins affect the activity of Aryl Hydrocarbon Re-
ceptor (AHR) system when learning a model that 
can accurately predict its activity when single 
genes are knocked out. Experiments with results 
are presented when models are trained on a single 
source of information: abstracts from Medline 
(http://medline.cos.com/) that talk about the genes in-
volved in the experiments. The results suggest that 
AdaBoost classifier with a binary bag-of-words 
representation obtains significantly better results. 
2 Task Description and Data Sets 
The task that we address is a biology-specific task 
considered a competition track for KDDCup2002 
(http://www.biostat.wisc.edu/~craven/kddcup/winners.html).  
   The organizers of the KDD Cup competition 
provided data obtained from experiments per-
formed on a set of yeast strains in which each 
strain contains a single gene that is knocked out (a 
gene sequence in which a single gene is inopera-
tive). Each experiment had associated a discretized 
value of the activity of the AHR system when a 
single gene was knocked out. 3 possible classes 
describe the systems? response. The "nc" label in-
dicates that the activity of the hidden system was 
not significantly different than the baseline (the 
wild-type yeast); the "control" label indicates that 
the activity was significantly different than the 
baseline for the given instance, and that the activity 
of another hidden system (the control) was also 
significantly changed compared to its baseline; the 
"change" label shows that the activity of the hid-
den system was significantly changed, but the ac-
tivity of the control system was not significantly 
changed. 
   The organizers of the KDD Cup evaluate the task 
as a two-class problem with focus on the positive 
class. The first definition is called the ?narrow? 
definition of the positive class and it is specific to 
the knocked-out genes that had an AHR-specific 
effect. In this case the positive class is defined by 
the experiments in which the label of the system is 
?change? and the negative examples are the ex-
periments that consist of those genes with either 
the "nc" or the "control" label. The second defini-
tion consists of those genes labeled with either the 
"change" or the "control" label. The negative class 
consists of those genes labeled with the "nc" label. 
The second partitioning corresponds to the 
?broad? characterization of the positive class 
genes that affect the hidden system.  
   The area under the Receiver Operating Charac-
teristic (ROC) - AUC curve is chosen as an evalua-
tion measure. The global score for the task will be 
the summed AUC values for both the ?narrow? and 
the ?broad? partition of the data. 
   The sources of information provided by the or-
ganizers of the task contain: hierarchical informa-
tion about the function and localization of the 
genes; relational information describing the pro-
tein-protein interactions; and textual information in 
abstracts from Medline that talk about the genes. 
Some characteristics of the data need to be taken 
into consideration in order to make suitable deci-
sions for choosing the trainable system/classifier, 
the representation of the data, etc. Missing infor-
mation is a characteristic of the data set. Not all 
genes had the location and function annotation, the 
protein-protein interaction information, or abstracts 
associated with the gene name. Besides the missing 
information, the high class imbalance is another 
fact that needs to be taken into account.  
   From the data that was released for the KDD 
competition we run experiments only with the 
genes that had associated abstracts. Table 1 pre-
sents a summary of the data sets used in our ex-
periments after considering only the genes that had 
abstracts associated with them. The majority of the 
genes had one abstract, while others had as many 
as 22 abstracts.   
110
Table 1. Summary of the data for our experiments with 
the two definitions of the positive class. In brackets are 
the original sizes of the data sets. 
Narrow Broad Data 
set Pos Neg Pos Neg 
Training 24 
(37) 
1,435 
(2,980) 
51 
(83) 
1,408 
(2,934) 
Test 11 
(19) 
715 
(1,469) 
30 
(43) 
696 
(1,445) 
3 Related Work  
Previous research on the task was done by the 
teams that participated in the KDD Cup 2002. The 
textual information available in the task was con-
sidered as an auxiliary source of information and 
not the primary one, as in this article.  
   The winners of the task, Kowalczyk and Raskutti 
(2002) used the textual information as additional 
features to the ones extracted from other available 
information for the genes. They used a ?bag-of-
words? representation, removed stop words and 
words with low frequency. They used Support 
Vector machine (SVM) as a classifier.  
   Krogel et. al. (2002) used the textual information  
with an information extraction system in order to 
extract missing information (function, localization, 
protein class) for the genes in the released data set.  
   Vogel and Axelrod (2002) used the Medline ab-
stracts to extract predictive keywords, and added 
them to their global system. 
   Our study investigates and suggests a textual rep-
resentation and a trainable model suitable for this 
task and similar tasks in the biomedical domain. 
4 Method  
The method that we propose to solve the biology 
task is using Machine Learning (ML) classifiers 
suitable for a text classification task and various 
feature representations that are known to work well 
for data sets with high class imbalance. The task 
becomes a two-class classification: ?Positive? ver-
sus ?Negative?, with a ?narrow? and ?broad? 
definition for the positive class. As classification 
algorithms we used: Complement Naive Bayes 
(CNB), AdaBoost, and SVM all from the Weka 
toolkit (http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/). Similar to 
the evaluation done for the KDD Cup, we consider 
the sum of the 2 AUC measures for the definitions 
of the positive class as an evaluation score. The 
random classifier with an AUC measure of 0.5 is 
considered as a baseline.  
As a representation technique we used binary 
and frequency values for features that are: words 
extracted from the abstracts (bag-of-words (BOW) 
representation), UMLS concepts and UMLS 
phrases identified using the MetaMap system 
(http://mmtx.nlm.nih.gov/), and UMLS relations ex-
tracted from the UMLS metathesaurus. We also 
ran experiments with feature selection techniques.  
   Table 2 presents our best results using AdaBoost 
classifier for BOW, UMLS concepts, and UMLS 
relations representation techniques. ?B? stands for 
binary and ?Freq? stands for frequency counts. 
 
Table 2. Sum of the AUC results for the two classes 
without feature selection.  
Represen- 
tation 
AdaBoost 
(AUC) 
Narrow 
AdaBoost 
(AUC) 
Broad 
Sumed 
AUC 
BOW_B 0.613 0.598 1.211 
BOW_Freq 0.592 0.557 1.149 
UMLS_B 0.571 0.607 1.178 
UMLS_Freq 0.5 0.606 1.106 
UMLS_Rel_B 0.505 0.547 1.052 
UMLS_Rel_Freq 0.5 0.5 1 
5 Discussion and Conclusion 
Looking at the obtained results, a general conclu-
sion can be made: textual information is useful for 
biology-specific tasks. Not only that it can improve 
the results but can also be considered a stand-alone 
source of knowledge in this domain. Without any 
additional knowledge, our result of 1.21 AUC sum 
is comparable with the sum of 1.23 AUC obtained 
by the winners of the KDD competition.  
References  
Adam Kowalczyk and Bhavani Raskutti, 2002. One 
Class SVM for Yeast Regulation Prediction, ACM 
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, Volume 4, Issue 
2, pp. 99-100. 
Mark A Krogel, Marcus Denecke, Marco Landwehr, 
and Tobias Scheffer. 2002. Combining data and text 
mining techniques for yeast gene regulation predic-
tion: a case study, ACM SIGKDD Explorations 
Newsletter, Volume 4, Issue 2, pp. 104-105. 
David S. Vogel and Randy C. Axelrod. 2002. Predicting 
the Effects of Gene Deletion, ACM SIGKDD Explo-
rations Newsletter, Volume 4, Issue 2, pp. 101-103.    
111
