BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 116?117,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Language Models to Identify Language Impairment in
Spanish-English Bilingual Children
Thamar Solorio
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
tsolorio@hlt.utdallas.edu
Yang Liu
Department of Computer Science
The University of Texas at Dallas
yangl@hlt.utdallas.edu
1 Introduction
Children diagnosed with Specific Language Impair-
ment (SLI) experience a delay in acquisition of cer-
tain language skills, with no evidence of hearing im-
pediments, or other cognitive, behavioral, or overt
neurological problems (Leonard, 1991; Paradis et
al., 2005/6). Standardized tests, such as the Test for
Early Grammatical Impairment, have shown to have
great predictive value for assessing English speaking
monolingual children. Diagnosing bilingual chil-
dren with SLI is far more complicated due to the
following factors: lack of standardized tests, lack of
bilingual clinicians, and more importantly, the lack
of a deep understanding of bilingualism and its im-
plications on language disorders. In addition, bilin-
gual children often exhibit code-switching patterns
that will make the assessment task even more chal-
lenging. In this paper, we present preliminary re-
sults from using language models to help discrim-
inating bilingual children with SLI from Typically-
Developing (TD) bilingual children.
2 Our Approach
We believe that statistical inference can assist in
the problem of accurately discriminating language
patterns indicative of SLI. In this work, we use
Language Models (LMs) for this task since they are
a powerful statistical measure of language usage
and have been successfully used to solve a variety
of NLP problems, such as text classification, speech
recognition, hand-writing recognition, augmenta-
tive communication for the disabled, and spelling
error detection (Manning and Schu?tze, 1999).
LMs estimate the probability of a word sequence
W = ?w1, ...wk? as follows (using the chain rule):
p(W ) = ?ki=1 p(wi|w1, . . . , wi?1)
which can be approximated using an N-gram as:
p(W ) ? ?ki=1 p(wi|wi?N+1, wi?N+2, ..., wi?1)
Since in our problem we are interested in differ-
entiating syntactic patterns, we will train the LMs
on Part-of-Speech (POS) patterns instead of words.
Using a 3-gram we have:
p(T ) = ?ki=1 p(ti|ti?2, ti?1)
where T = ?t1, t2, ..., tk? is the sequence of POS
tags assigned to the sequence of words W .
The intuition is that the language patterning of an
SLI child will differ from those of TD children at
two different levels: one is at the syntactic level,
and the second one is at the interaction between
both languages in patterns such as code-switching.
Given that the tagset for each language is differ-
ent, by using the POS tags we will incorporate into
the model the syntactic structure together with the
switch points across languages.
We train two LMs with the POS sequences: MT ,
with data from the TD children and MI , with data
from the SLI bilingual children. Once both LMs are
trained, then we can use them to make predictions
over new speech samples of bilingual children. To
determine whether an unobserved speech sample is
likely to belong to a child suffering from SLI, we
will measure the perplexity of the two LMs over the
POS patterns of this new speech sample. We make
the final decision using a threshold:
d(s) =
{
SLI if (PPT (s) ? PPI(s)) > 0
TD otherwise
116
where PPT (s) is the perplexity of the model MT
over the sample s, and PPI(s) is the perplexity of
the model MI over the same sample s. In other
words, if the perplexity of the LM trained on syn-
tactic patterns of children with SLI is smaller than
that of the LM trained on POS patterns of TD chil-
dren, then we will predict that the sample belongs to
a child with SLI.
In a related work, (Roark et al, 2007) explored
the use of cross entropy of LMs trained on POS tags
as a measure of syntactic complexity. Their results
were inconsistent across language tasks, which may
be due to the meaning attached to cross entropy in
this setting. Unlikely patterns are a deviation from
what is expected; they are not necessarily complex
or syntactically rich.
3 Preliminary Results
We empirically evaluated our approach using tran-
scripts that were made available by a speech pathol-
ogist in our team. The TD samples were comprised
of 5 males and 4 females between 48 and 72 months
old. The children were identified as being bilingual
by their parents, and according to parental report,
these children live in homes where Spanish is spo-
ken an average of 46.3% of the time. Language
samples of SLI bilinguals were collected from chil-
dren being served in the Speech and Hearing Clinic
at UTEP. The samples are from two females aged
53 and 111 months. The clients were diagnosed
with language impairment after diagnostic evalua-
tions which were conducted in Spanish. The tran-
scriptions were POS tagged with the bilingual tagger
developed by (Solorio et al, 2008).
Table 1 shows the preliminary results using cross
validation. With the decision threshold outlined
above, out of the 9 TD children, the models were
able to discriminate 7 as TD; from the 2 SLI chil-
dren both were correctly identified as SLI. Although
the results presented above are not conclusive due to
the very small size corpora at hand, they look very
promising. Stronger conclusions can be drawn once
we collect more data.
4 Final Remarks
This paper presents very promising preliminary re-
sults on the use of LMs for discriminating patterns
Table 1: Perplexity and final output of the LMs for the
discrimination of SLI and TD.
Sample PPT (s) PPI(s) d(s)
TD1 14.73 23.12 TD
TD2 11.37 16.17 TD
TD3 18.35 36.58 TD
TD4 30.23 22.27 SLI
TD5 9.42 15.50 TD
TD6 17.37 36.75 TD
TD7 20.32 33.19 TD
TD8 16.40 24.47 TD
TD9 24.35 23.71 SLI
SLI1 20.21 19.10 SLI
SLI2 19.70 12.43 SLI
average TD 18.06 25.75 TD
average SLI 19.95 15.76 SLI
indicative of SLI in Spanish-English bilingual chil-
dren. As more data becomes available, we expect
to gather stronger evidence supporting our method.
Our current efforts involve collecting more samples,
as well as evaluating the accuracy of LMs on mono-
lingual children with and without SLI.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Bess Sirmon Fjordbak for her contribution to
the project and the three anonymous reviewers for their
useful comments.
References
L. B. Leonard. 1991. Specific language impairment as
a clinical category. Language, Speech, and Hearing
Services in Schools, 22:66?68.
C. D. Manning and H. Schu?tze. 1999. Foundations of
Statistical Natural Language Processing. The MIT
Press.
J. Paradis, M. Crago, and F. Genesee. 2005/6. Domain-
general versus domain-specific accounts of specific
language impairment: Evidence from bilingual chil-
drens acquisition of object pronouns. Language Ac-
quisition, 13:33?62.
B. Roark, M. Mitchell, and K. Hollingshead. 2007. Syn-
tactic complexity measures for detecting mild cogni-
tive impairment. In BioNLP 2007: Biological, trans-
lational, and clinical language processing, pages 1?8,
Prague, June. ACL.
T. Solorio, Y. Liu, and B. Medina. 2008. Part-of-speech
tagging English-Spanish code-switched text. Submit-
ted to Natural Language Engineering.
117
