Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 46?53,
Columbus, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Semantic negotiation in dialogue: the mechanisms of alignment
Gregory J. Mills
Interaction, Media and Communication
 Research Group
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS
gj@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Patrick G.T. Healey
Interaction, Media and Communication
 Research Group
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS
ph@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
A key problem for models of  dialogue  is  to 
explain  how  semantic  co-ordination  in  dia-
logue  is  achieved  and  sustained.  This  paper 
presents findings from a series of Maze Task 
experiments  which are  not  readily explained 
by the primary co-ordination mechanisms of 
existing  models.  It  demonstrates  that  align-
ment in dialogue is not simply an outcome of 
successful  interaction,  but  a  communicative 
resource  exploited  by  interlocutors  in  con-
verging on a semantic model. We argue this 
suggests mechanisms of co-ordination in dia-
logue which are of relevance for a general ac-
count  of  how  semantic  co-ordination  is 
achieved.
1 Introduction
One of the first things apparent to European trav-
ellers on arriving at an American hotel is that the 
ground floor is also the first floor. Any confusion 
can  be  quickly  corrected  by  an  observant 
concierge,  whether  by explicitly  stating  the  con-
vention,  or  by  implicitly  bypassing  the  problem 
with  a  different  description,  such  as  ?go  up  5 
flights of stairs?. Assuming this description is suf-
ficient to guide the hapless traveller to the correct 
room, when the same traveller asks for assistance 
to find another part of the hotel, the concierge is 
faced with a choice of whether to give a descrip-
tion involving floor numbers or in terms of flights 
of stairs.
   The immediate  question that  emerges  is  what 
motivates  this  choice  between different  semantic 
models of a domain, how they are deployed when 
interlocutors  are  faced  with  problematic  under-
standing, and which semantic model is subsequent-
ly used once the problem is resolved. Although ex-
isting approaches to dialogue agree that answering 
this question necessarily involves focusing on the 
interactional  devices  available  to  interlocutors, 
their  primary emphasis  is  on the information-ex-
change  aspects  of  language  use.  Larsson  (2007) 
provides a useful distinction between the co-ordi-
nation  of  information,  i.e.  establishing  common 
ground (Clark, 1996) and the co-ordination of lin-
guistic resources which are adapted to suit particu-
lar communicative situations in order to make such 
information-exchange possible. Part of this frame-
work involves interlocutors negotiating which par-
ticular semantic model  to use, and adapting their 
own interpretations on the basis of successful/un-
succesful use.  However, although this framework 
sketches out a formal account of the mechanisms 
involved in this process, it is not concerned with 
predicting which particular semantic model will be 
adopted by interlocutors.
    A model of dialogue which attempts to address 
this  issue  is  the  interactive  alignment  model  of 
Pickering and Garrod (2004). In this model conver-
gence on a semantic model is arrived at via tacit 
priming  occurring  at  all  levels  of  representation 
(phonetic, phonological, lexical, syntactic, seman-
tic and situational): interlocutors are more likely to 
re-use  the  representations  used  by  their  partner, 
giving  rise  to  a  ?winner-takes-all?  dynamic  (cf. 
Steels  & Belpaeme,  2005)  which leads  to  align-
46
ment of interlocutors' representations. This is fur-
ther  re-inforced  by  ?percolation?  occurring  be-
tween levels, thus lexemes associated with particu-
lar semantic models will reinforce the use of these 
models.
     The claims associated with the interactive align-
ment model (henceforth IM) are drawn from a se-
ries of maze task experiments (Garrod & Doherty 
1994; Garrod and Anderson, 1987; Anderson and 
Garrod,  1987).  This paper discusses some of the 
original findings of these experiments and a further 
set of maze task experiments conducted by Healey 
and Mills (2006), Mills and Healey (2006).  These 
papers argued that the primary mechanisms provid-
ed  by the  IM are  insufficient  for  explaining  ob-
served patterns in maze task dialogue; in particular 
how  semantic  co-ordination  is  achieved.  The 
present paper argues that interlocutors in the Maze 
task exploit variation in usage in the service of se-
mantic  co-ordination.  Furthermore  we  argue  this 
suggests  mechanisms which are relevant for a gen-
eral  account  of  how  semantic   co-ordination  is 
achieved in dialogue. As the claims developed here 
are based on the maze task, we first  explain the 
task in more detail.  We then discuss a series of ex-
amples drawn from this task that raise basic issues 
for models of semantic co-ordination.
Figure 1: Example maze configuration. The solid 
black circle shows the player's current position, the 
cross represents the goal point that the player must 
reach,  solid  bars  the  gates  and  shaded  areas  the 
switch points. 
2 The maze task
The maze task developed by Garrod et alinvolves 
pairs  of  participants  seated  in  separate  rooms  in 
front of a computer which displays a simple maze 
consisting  of  interconnected   nodes  (see  Fig  1). 
Participants  must  move  their  respective  position 
markers  through  the  maze  in  order  to  reach  a 
?goal?  node.  Some  of  the  paths  are  blocked  by 
gates,  which  are  opened  by  participants  guiding 
each  other  onto  ?switch?  nodes  (shaded  areas). 
This  provides  participants  with  the  recurrent  co 
-ordination problem of collaboratively individuat-
ing  and  referring  to  maze  locations  in  order  to 
solve the maze. The descriptions used by partici-
pants to refer to maze locations are classified by 
Garrod et al into four distinct types:
Figural: Picks out salient features of the maze:
?The l-shape sticking out at the top?
?The uppermost box?
Path: Traces  a  route  along  the  connections 
between nodes:
?Go 2 up, 1 down, 3 along, 5 up?
?up, right, down, up ?
Line: Treats the maze as consisting of hori-
zontal or vertical vectors:
?3rd row, 5th box?
?4th column, second square?
Matrix: Cartesian co-ordinate system:
?4,2?
?A1?
It is assumed that these different description types 
correspond  to  different  semantic  models  of  the 
maze. 
3 Conservatism
The first question, also raised by Healey and Mills 
(2006),  concerns the tension between the interac-
tive alignment model's inherently conservative pri-
mary co-ordination mechanism and the migration 
in  description  types  commonly  observed  in  the 
Maze task.  To the extent that it relies on priming 
as its basic mechanism the IM cannot provide an 
account  of  how once a convention is  established 
and used successfully,  it  might  be supplanted by 
47
another.. However, it is consistently observed that 
the description types used most frequently initially 
fall into disuse and are not converged on in later 
games. Across trials there is a general shift from 
more ?concrete? (Figural and Path) descriptions to-
wards more ?abstract? (Line and Matrix) descrip-
tions, which runs counter to precedence. A typical 
pattern of the shift is given in table 1, below:
0 mins: The piece of the maze sticking out
2 mins: The left hand corner of the maze
5 mins: The northenmost box
10 mins: Leftmost square of the row on top 
15 mins: 3rd column middle square
20 mins: 3rd column 1st square
25 mins: 6th row longest column
30 mins: 6th row 1st column
40 mins: 6 r, 1 c
45 mins: 6,1
Table  1:  Semantic  shift  from  ?Figural?  and 
?Path? descriptions to ?Line? and ?Matrix? ob-
served in maze task dialogues.
Garrod (1999) discusses this process as an ?explo-
ration? process. However, this, in itself, doesn't ex-
plain the systematic patterns of change observed in 
the experiments.
4  Variation
The  early  explanations  of  co-ordination  in  the 
Maze  Task  also  emphasized  the  importance  of 
variation in the description types  participants are 
exposed to.  Garrod and Doherty (1994) assigned 
participants  to  one  of  three  different  groups:  (1) 
isolated pairs who always interacted with the same 
partner in subsequent games, (2) a sub-community 
group whose  members  changed partners  in  each 
game,  only  interacting  with  members  from  the 
same  sub-community,  and  (3)  a  non-community 
group  whose  members  always  interacted  with  a 
new partner  who  was  not  drawn  from the  same 
community.  Although  initially  pairs  in  the  sub-
community group were less co-ordinated than the 
isolated pairs, using a wider variety of referring ex-
pressions,  by the later  trials,  this  pattern was re-
versed:  participants  in  the  sub-community  group 
had converged on a single Matrix scheme and con-
sistently matched each other's descriptions.
   These findings present a problem for accounts of 
co-ordination which rely on priming, as they make 
the emphasis of the priority of alignment of repre-
sentations at all levels problematic.  The metaphor 
of two tightly-coupled production and comprehen-
sion systems is the paradigm case of successful co-
ordination, as it allows rapid priming between in-
terlocutors' representations.  However, these exper-
iments show weaker semantic co-ordination in the 
isolated dyads  than within the  group.  As  Garrod 
and Doherty (1994) concur, this implies that varia-
tion,  i.e.   differences  in interlocutors'  representa-
tions  is  important  for  establishing and sustaining 
semantic co-ordination.
5 Granularity of analysis
If variation of description types is intrinsic to the 
development  of  semantic  co-ordination,  this 
strongly  suggests  the  importance  of  mechanisms 
involved in dealing with problematic understand-
ing (Healey, forthcoming). All things being equal, 
variation increases the likelihood that interlocutors 
will encounter others whose use of language will 
differ more from their own. Further, any account of 
misunderstandings must also be able to address  se-
mantic  differences  between  descriptions:  partici-
pants in the maze task do not treat these four de-
scription types  equally, and consequently are not 
appropriately modelled as co-ordination equilibria 
of  the  kind  described  by  Lewis  (1968)  (Healey, 
2004;  forthcoming).  Existing  experimental  data 
shows that participants systematically favour Figu-
ral and Path descriptions when encountering prob-
lematic dialogue (Mills and Healey, 2006; Healey, 
1997) not the prior most frequently used semantic 
model as predicted by the IM.
 Looking more closely at the dialogues, it is not 
clear  that  the  co-ordination  mechanisms  actually 
operate directly at the level of the four basic se-
mantic models. Consider the following excerpt in 
which a participant  encounters difficulties with a 
Line description type  and its  associated counting 
conventions.   The  dialogue  continues  with  more 
Figural descriptions,  before resuming at turn (35) 
with a Line description:
48
(1) A: go to the 1st row 2nd on the right
(2) B: 2nd?
(3) A: on the right
(4) B: OK, I can only get to the left  of the 
maze
(5) A: go to the highest square on the left
(6) B: yes. And then?
......
(35) B: I'm on the top row 2nd square
Excerpt 1: Deletion of elements from problem-
atic turn.
While superficially, A's turn at (3) appears sim-
ply as a repeat  of  (1),  with ?on the right? being 
omitted, the subsequent turns continue with Figural 
descriptions. On this basis, it is unclear whether (1) 
and (3) invoke the same Line model or whether (3) 
invokes a Figural description. There is a large class 
of  similar  clarification  sub-dialogues  which  in-
volve deletion of a problematic element and result 
in the continuation of the dialogue with more Figu-
ral descriptions.
This issue is of  importance for any theory of 
semantic co-ordination as it raises the question of 
the granularity of the mechanisms involved in how 
interlocutors collaboratively change semantic mod-
el.  Further,  it  strongly suggests that  alignment  is 
not simply an outcome of successful communica-
tion, but can provide the background against which 
other  co-ordination  mechanisms  operate.  Turns 
(1)-(6) demonstrate high levels of between-speaker 
alignment, while at the same time involving a shift 
in semantic model. Before returning to this below, 
we demonstrate further differences between the in-
formational  view  of  language  and  an  account 
which focuses on semantic co-ordination.
6 Information vs. semantic co-ordination
From an informational perspective, if an utterance 
fails  to  secure  reference,  there  is  the  general  as-
sumption that more information will be provided to 
allow resolution of the problem. However, in (3), 
no  new information  is  provided by A.  This  is  a 
counter-example to  Clark  and  Marshall's  (1981) 
model of definite reference repair, which states that 
to be effective ?repair  must  add or alter  descrip-
tors, but not delete them?. Importantly,  these CR 
responses that simply delete elements from the tar-
get turn are not treated by participants as repeats 
and queried again, but appear to promote resolu-
tion of the problematic understanding by engender-
ing  the  use  of  more  Figural  descriptions.  The 
words which are omitted do not appear, as with the 
level of description types, to be dictated by prior 
frequency of  use  (Mills,  2007).  Instead,  the  data 
suggest  that  this  pattern is  motivated by a relax-
ation of the constraints of successful interpretation 
(Healey and Mills, 2006).
The  example  above  raises  a  further  question 
concerning the relationship between semantic co-
ordination and the exchange of information. In ex-
isting ?ladder models? of communication such as 
the collaborative model  of Clark (1996) and All-
wood (1995), there  is the general expectation that 
on encountering and signalling problematic under-
standing, interlocutors enter a sub-dialogue to re-
solve the problem, which on completion proceeds 
at  the  same  ?level?.  From  this  perspective,  B's 
turn-initial  acknowledgment at (4) should demar-
cate the end of the sub-dialogue dealing with the 
problematic  understanding.  Focusing  on  the  de-
scription types,  however, shows that it  is only at 
turn (35) that the interlocutors return to using the 
original problematic line description; the semantic 
effects persist beyond the immediate sub-dialogue. 
This highlights the inadequacy of a strict informa-
tional view of language as the response provides 
no additional information, yet still has the effect of 
resolving the misunderstanding.
7 Exploitation  of  alignment:  patterns  of 
deletion, modification and addition
In addition to deletion of elements contained in re-
ferring expressions, the maze task dialogues exhib-
it  a  multiplicity  of  ways  in  which  interlocutors 
modify descriptions when dealing with problemat-
ic understanding, through the addition, substitution 
and (as described above) deletion of elements of 
semantic models. We argue that alignment is key 
to these patterns of modification, as it provides a 
backdrop  against  which  changes  can  be  made. 
The canonical example of this is embedded correc-
tion (Jefferson, 1983; Saxton, 2007) which exploits 
the structure provided by alignment to make a fig-
ure / ground distinction that allows the corrected 
element to be identified:
49
(1) A: You need to go to the top of the 5th 
row
(2) B: I can't get to the top of the 5th line
Excerpt 2: Substitution of problematic ele-
ments .
Embedded corrections in the maze task exhibit 
very high levels of between-speaker alignment, yet 
occur at points in the dialogue where there is prob-
lematic  understanding.  This  indicates  that  align-
ment can not simply be reduced to an index of suc-
cessful communication. While this particular con-
versational device which spans  2 turns (and possi-
bly a third) has received much attention, closer in-
spection of  the  maze  task  dialogues  reveal  a  far 
larger space of possible means of exploiting align-
ment. Excerpt 1 above showed deletions, Excerpt 2 
substitutions,  however  a  similar  pattern  also  ap-
pears with the addition of Figural elements.
(1) A: I'm in the 4th row 5th square
(2) B: where's that ?
(3) A: The end bit
(4) B: cheers, I'm on the end bit right at the 
top
(5) A: can you get to my switch?
....
(23) B: am on the top row 3rd square 
Excerpt 3: Addition of ?Figural? elements.
At  a  first  glance,  this  excerpt  looks  like  a 
straightforward  clarification  request  followed  by 
the provision of more details,  specifying that  the 
?5th  square?  is  also  ?the  end  bit?.  B's  use  of 
?cheers?  in  (4)  and  subsequent  provision  of  her 
own maze location would appear to demarcate the 
end of the clarification sequence, as they  provide 
an acknowledgment and a ?next relevant contribu-
tion? (Clark, 1996).  However, focusing on the en-
suing turns yields a pattern that parallels the first 
example. The semantic effects stretch beyond the 
immediate  clarification  sub-dialogue:  both  inter-
locutors  continue  with  more  Figural  descriptions 
until turn (23) where the original, problematic Line 
description is attempted again.
   A further issue  emerges when interlocutors fi-
nally re-use the original description, as in turn (23) 
of Excerpt 1, and (35) above: although the surface 
form of the descriptions are similar, this does not 
necessarily entail that they individuate the same lo-
cations. For example, the counting conventions as-
sociated with squares may change, such as count-
ing from the left  instead of the right or counting 
from 0 as opposed to 1, similar to the concierge ex-
ample  above.  The  axes  may  also  change,  with 
?rows? referring to vertical vectors (i.e. columns). 
   This raises important questions of the relation-
ship  between  the  problematic  utterance,  the  sig-
nalling of the problem,  the response, the ensuing 
figural sub-dialogue and the subsequent return to 
the superficially similar but potentially altered de-
scription type. It appears that alignment is not sim-
ply  an outcome but an interactional resource that 
is exploited to facilitate the continuation with more 
Figural descriptions (cf. Saxton, 2007).
     In the first excerpt, turns (1) and (3) only differ 
minimally from each other, while in the second ex-
ample, turn (3) can be seen to be operating ellipti-
cally on turn (1). However, both engender similar 
semantic  shifts  towards  Figural  descriptions  and 
result in a return to the originally problematic Line 
description.
    This leads to the immediate question of what 
motivates interlocutors'  patterns of alignment and 
modification,  and how they reflect differences of 
understanding and diagnosis of  the problem.  The 
tacit and fine-grained nature of these modifications 
exacerbates the problem of arriving at a prelimi-
nary  taxonomy,  as  these  dialogue  sequences  are 
not readily categorizable as either ?elaborations? or 
?reformulations?  (cf.  Purver  et  al.,  2004, 
Schlangen 2004).
8 Boundary of (mis)communication
During the course of maze task dialogues, partici-
pants shift seamlessly and tacitly from one descrip-
tion type to another. This occurs both within prob-
lematic and unproblematic dialogue.  From an in-
formational  perspective,  miscommunication  is 
readily  describable  as  a  form  of  mismatch,  yet 
from  a  semantic  perspective,  participants  match 
each  other  more  when  encountering  difficulties. 
50
Thus alignment  cannot  be taken as a straightfor-
ward index of successful interaction. 
   This also raises a methodological point.  Mea-
sures  of  matching  of  representations,  whether  at 
the level of description type or its constituent ele-
ments are only an approximate index of semantic 
co-ordination. The excerpts above demonstrate the 
importance  of  the  interplay  between  what  is  re-
tained and what is modified. What is required is a 
measure that is sensitive to the kind of model being 
used and the kind of repair being performed. 
In addition, more frequent repair does not nec-
essarily entail that a dialogue is unsuccessful.  It is 
not the case that interlocutors introduce their utter-
ances carefully, and once they are sufficiently co-
ordinated,  move  on.  The  general  pattern  is  that 
when participants introduce abstract (Line and Ma-
trix) descriptions, they do so opportunistically. At 
the start of the games they frequently attempt both 
Line and Matrix descriptions, which are associated 
with higher co-ordination. However,  there is evi-
dence that it is only where they can go through the 
process of detecting and responding to differences 
in  usage,  i.e.  repair,  that  co-ordination  develops 
(Healey and Mills, 2006). 
   If the boundary between description types and 
also the boundary between successful and unsuc-
cessful use can be as porous as demonstrated in the 
excerpts above, this also suggests a more complex 
picture  of  referential  contraction  (Krauss  and 
Weinheimer, 1966) than provided by current mod-
els of dialogue. In current models this is primarily 
associated with successful use: in the collaborative 
model, interlocutors follow the principle of ?least 
collaborative  effort?  (Clark  and  Wilkes-Gibbs, 
1986), whereby successful use sets a precedent for 
an expression; co-ordination on precedence allows 
interlocutors to delete elements of the description 
on successive mention. It is assumed that the infor-
mation associated with these deleted elements that 
are no longer on the conversational surface can be 
re-accessed in the common ground and mentioned 
explicitly, e.g. to assist disambiguation.
    By contrast, the phenomena from the maze task 
show how similar  processes are operative during 
problematic  dialogue,  raising  further  questions 
concerning  the  difference  between  elements  that 
are removed in successful, as opposed to problem-
atic dialogue and where this boundary lies.
    Larsson's  model  of  semantic  co-ordination 
places a strong emphasis on the role of feedback in 
negotiating this boundary in terms of appropriate-
ness gleamed from feedback (e.g. repair, acknowl-
edgements etc..), and provides a schema which an-
alyzes the effects of novel uses of a word  and the 
subsequent update of interlocutors' representations. 
    Findings from the maze task experiments aug-
ment this approach as they suggest that  evidence 
of appropriateness is also derived in the absence of 
overt repair from semantic change alone. The ex-
cerpts  indicate  that  interlocutors  are  sensitive  to 
which particular tacit shift in model leads to a re-
laxation of the constraints on successful communi-
cation, and consequently can be exploited to indi-
cate problematic understanding (Mills, 2007). For 
example, consider the following two excerpts:
(1) A: It's on the 5th row 4th square
(2) B: Huh?
(3) A: The last square
(1) A: It's on the 5th row 4th square
(2) A: The last square
Excerpts 4, 5: Provision of feedback
If the dialogue continues successfully in both these 
instances, it is unclear how to adequately capture 
the  differences  between them,  in  particular,  how 
both patterns affect subsequent use of the descrip-
tion types,
     One of the main challenges facing an account of 
semantic co-ordination is teasing apart how inter-
locutors'  models  are  affected  by  both  semantic 
change exploited as a resource using the mecha-
nisms of alignment outlined above, and feedback 
concerning that change, as both aspects inhabit the 
boundary between successful and unsuccessful use.
   Evidence  from  the  maze  task  suggests  this 
boundary is one of the important locii in the devel-
opment of semantic co-ordination.
9 Semantic plasticity 
To describe  how interlocutors  dynamically adapt 
the meanings of the words they use to the commu-
nicative  situation  and  how  they  are  shaped 
throughout  the  course  of  the  dialogue,  Larsson 
(2006) introduces the notion of ?semantic plastici-
51
ty?. This model is sensitive to the fact that descrip-
tions  can involve a plethora  of  different  ?ad-hoc 
registers?,  which resonates strongly with the em-
pirical  phenomena  described  here.  However,  the 
data from all the maze task experiments presents a 
further problem for attempts to model  these phe-
nomena,  as successful  co-ordination on the more 
specific  abstract  levels  appears  to  be  predicated 
upon prior successful use of less specific Figural 
descriptions:  the  Figural  descriptions  are  highly 
specific to individual mazes and allow participants 
to co-ordinate on their salient features, whereas the 
Line and Matrix descriptions abstract  away from 
each individual instance to form dyad-specific con-
ceptualizations  of  vectors  and  their  associated 
counting conventions.
   While  Larsson's  account  highlights  the  sheer 
flexibility of ways in which linguistic resources are 
mobilized and adapted to particular interaction set-
tings, the data from the maze task suggest an addi-
tional level of complexity. Namely that the seman-
tic resources can not  be treated as separate, essen-
tially equal encyclopaedias that interlocutors draw 
on.  One way in which the cumulative shift  toward 
Matrix descriptions is achieved is by the combina-
tion of different ?registers? (Larsson 2007) to form 
a super-ordinate one.  Here the question concerns 
which specific features of each semantic model are 
included in the final one, in particular when there 
are problems of commensurability. For example, as 
table 1 shows, a common pattern in maze task dia-
logues is that approximately half-way through the 
dialogues  participants  use  ?Line?  descriptions.  It 
can  occur  that  they alternate  between describing 
the maze  as consisting of vertical  and horizontal 
vectors,  say with  one  participant  favouring  hori-
zontal  and  the  other  favouring  vertical  vectors 
(space considerations preclude a throrough exami-
nation of this process, described in Mills, 2007).  It 
frequently occurs that Matrix descriptions emerge 
when  these  two  different  Line  models  are  com-
bined to form a Matrix description. This process, 
however, is not as a rule simply a matter of com-
bining the two. Frequently, the two types of Line 
description employ different counting conventions, 
as in the example of the concierge above, giving 
rise to the problem of whether to retain different 
counting conventions for the different axes, or em-
ploy the same one.  The question then emerges as 
to how this super-ordinate, more abstract semantic 
model affects the original models.
  Results  from  the  maze  task  suggest  this  is 
achieved tacitly by interlocutors, employing simi-
lar patterns of modification to those described in 
the excerpts above (Mills, 2007).
10 Conclusion
The  phenomena  described  here  demonstrate  the 
need for an account of semantic co-ordination that 
explains how interlocutors converge on a semantic 
representation. Dialogues from the maze task pro-
vide  compelling  evidence  that  such  an  account 
must necessarily be able to account for how varia-
tion, and hence differences in semantic models are 
resolved. This approach necessarily involves shift-
ing the focus from an informational view of lan-
guage towards a focus on how interlocutors actual-
ly address these differences. 
      In a sense, this presents a reversal of the priori-
ties of existing models.  For the interactive align-
ment  model,  as  well  as  the  collaborative  model, 
misunderstanding is seen as a secondary problem 
that emerges as a complication of communication 
which  is  ordinarily  successful  (Healey,  2004; 
forthcoming).  The  collaborative  model  explicitly 
states that in order for communication to be suc-
cessful,  positive  evidence  of  understanding  must 
be demonstrated.  
    By contrast,  the view presented  here brings 
problematic understanding into the foreground,  as 
it  is  in  such  instances,  when  conventions  don't 
work as expected, that interlocutors gain a sense of 
their applicability. The phenomena presented here 
suggest that the processes operating in instances of 
misunderstanding are as much progenitors  of  se-
mantic co-ordination, as their  traditional counter-
part  of  displays  of  positive  understanding.  Inter-
locutors' separate interaction histories inescapably 
give rise to problems concerning the development 
and sustenance of mutual-intelligibility, intrinsical-
ly requiring interlocutors to resolve differences of 
semantic model  in interaction. The data from the 
maze task experiments  demonstrate how this can 
be achieved  through  tacitly modifying the  con-
stituents of  semantic models. This modification in-
volves the exploitation of alignment,  and has the 
effect of relaxing the constraints on successful un-
derstanding.
Any theory  of  dialogue  must,  in  the  first  in-
stance be concerned with what interlocutors actual-
ly do. The phenomena presented here demonstrate 
52
mechanisms  of  semantic  co-ordination  that  have 
previously fallen  under  the  category of  informa-
tion-exchange,  and  the  questions  raised  present 
rich  opportunities for further experimental investi-
gation.
References
Allwood, J. (1995).  An activity based approach to prag-
matics. Technical Report (GPTL) 75, Gothenburg Pa-
pers in Theoretical Linguistics, University of  G?te-
borg.
Clark,  H.  H.  Using  Language.  Cambridge  University 
Press, Cambridge.
Garrod, S. and Doherty, G. 1994. Conversation, co-ordi-
nation and convention: an empirical investigation of 
how groups establish linguistic conventions. Cogni-
tion, 53:181-215.
Healey,  P.G.T.  1997.  ?Expertise  or  expert-ese:  The 
emergence  of  task-oriented  sub-languages.?  Pro-
ceedings of the Ninteenth Annual Conference of The 
Cognitive Science Society. M.G. Shafto and Langley, 
P. (Ed.s) August 7th-10th, Stanford University, CA. 
pp. 301-306.
Healey,  P.G.T.  2004.  ?Dialogue  in  the  degenerate 
case?? Peer  Commentary on Pickering and Garrod: 
?The Interactive Alignment Model?.  Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences 27(2) p. 201.
Healey P.G.T. (forthcoming) ?Interactive Misalignment: 
The Role of  Repair in the Development  of Group 
Sub-languages? in Cooper R. and and Kempson R. 
(eds) Language Change. 
Healey,  P.G.T.  and  Mills,  G.J.  2006.  ?Participation, 
Precedence and Co-ordination in Dialogue? in Sun R. 
and Miyake, N. (eds.) Proceedings of Cogsci06: The 
28th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science So-
ciety.  Vancouver,  BC,  Canada.  26-29th  July.  pp. 
1470-1475.
Je erson, G. (1983). On exposed and embedded correcff -
tion in conversation.  Studium Linguistik, 14, 58?68. 
Krauss,  R.  M.  and  Weinheimer,  S.  1966.  Concurrent 
feedback, confirmation and the encoding of referents 
in verbal communication. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 4:343-346.
Larsson,  S.  2007.  A  general  framework  for  semantic 
plasticity and negotiation. In  Bunt,  H. C., and Thi-
jsse, E. C. G. (eds):  Prceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional  Workshop  on  Computational  Semantics 
(IWCS-7).
Larsson, S. 2006. Semantic plasticity.  Paper presented 
at  LCM 2006. (Language,  Culture and Mind),  July 
2006, Paris, France.
Lewis,  D.  1969.  Convention:  A  philosophical  study. 
Harvard University Press.
Mills, G.J. and Healey, P.G.T. (2006) Clarifying Spatial 
Descriptions: Local and Global Effects on Semantic 
Co-ordination.  In  Schlangen,  D. and Fernandez,  R. 
(eds.) Proceedings of Brandial06 The 10th Workshop  
on the Semantics and Pragmatics of Dialogue. Uni-
versity of Potsdam, Germany; September 11th-13th. 
pp.122-129.
Mills, G. J. 2007. The development  of semantic co-or-
dination  in  dialogue:  the  role  of  direct  interaction. 
Unpublished PhD. Thesis.
Purver,  M.,  Healey,  P.  G. T.,  King,  J.,  and Mills,  G. 
2003. Answering clarification questions. In Proceed-
ings of  the 5th Workshop of  the ACL SIG on Dis-
course and Sialogue (SIGdial03), Sapporo, Japan.
Saxton, M. 1997. The contrast theory of negative input. 
Journal of Child Language, 24, 139-161.
Schlangen, D. 2004. Causes and strategies for request-
ing clarification in dialogue.  In  Proceedings of  the 
5th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue.
Steels, L. and Belpaeme T. 2005. Coordinating percep-
tually grounded categories through language: A case 
study  for  colour.  Behavioral  and  Brain  Sciences, 
28(4):469-89
53
