Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 77?85
Manchester, August 2008
Looking up phrase rephrasings via a pivot language
Aure?lien Max
LIMSI-CNRS & Universite? Paris-Sud 11
Orsay, France
aurelien.max@limsi.fr
Michael Zock
LIF-CNRS
Marseilles, France
michael.zock@lif.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract
Rephrasing text spans is a common task
when revising a text. However, traditional
dictionaries often cannot provide direct as-
sistance to writers in performing this task.
In this article, we describe an approach
to obtain a monolingual phrase lexicon
using techniques used in Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. A part to be rephrased
is first translated into a pivot language,
and then translated back into the origi-
nal language. Models for assessing flu-
ency, meaning preservation and lexical di-
vergence are used to rank possible rephras-
ings, and their relative weight can be tuned
by the user so as to better address her
needs. An evaluation shows that these
models can be used successfully to select
rephrasings that are likely to be useful to a
writer.
1 Introduction
Once an initial draft of a text is ready, writers face
the difficult phase of text revision. Changes may
be made for various reasons: correcting spelling or
grammatical errors, making the text locally more
fluent (for example, in case it contains wordings
that are literal translations from another language),
avoiding close repetitions or enforcing terminolog-
ical consistency, or better conveying the writer?s
ideas. All these changes can affect text spans of
various sizes, and can globally be seen as cases
of rephrasing. Paraphrasing involves rephrasings
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
that are semantically equivalent, but targets termi-
nology and style that are more suited to the con-
text of use of a text. In a broad sense, rephrasing
may involve wordings that convey different mean-
ings in an attempt to correct or make the writer?s
thoughts more precise. Research concerned with
the study of changes between writers? drafts (tex-
tual genetic criticism) can help in understanding
writers? rewriting processes, and can be supported
by automatic tools (e.g. (Bourdaillet et al, 2007)).
In this work, we address the issue of how writ-
ers can be assisted in finding wordings that corre-
spond to multi-word phrases of any nature. Given
an original text span, the writer is presented with
a list of rephrasings that are organized by taking
into account the context of the rephrasing and user-
specified preferences. Our proposal can therefore
be used as a lexicon operating at the phrasal level,
which can be used either when writers are faced
with a tip-of-the-tongue lexical access problem, or
when they are not completely satisfied with some
initial wording. In the former case, they may be
able to come up with some words or phrases that
would be different in meaning from what they are
looking for, and in the latter they may be looking
for a near-synonymous wording that is more ap-
propriate to a given context, for example to avoid
close repetitions. To define such a phrase lexi-
con and its possible mode of use, the following
questions should be considered: (a) how the lex-
icon entries are obtained, (b) what can be the entry
points and how can one navigate in the results, and
(c) how the results are displayed.
Rephrasing can be more or less complex and
problematic depending on the consequences at the
various levels:
? In the simplest case, replacing one element
77
by another does not have any consequences
overall. This is often the case when a word is
replaced by its synonym or a similar word.
? An entire expression or sentence is replaced
by its equivalent. In this case the problem is
generally to obtain a good fit with regard to
the surrounding text, the replacing unit being
well-formed by definition.
? The replacing element may require syntactic
changes of the matrix, i.e. the text in which it
is embedded. This occurs if the source word
and the target word have different syntactic
requirements, and this can be seen as a good
reason to replace entire sentences, or at least
sentence fragments. This assumes a pattern
dictionary, where patterns achieving the same
conceptual goal are grouped together.
In the next section, we discuss limitations of tra-
ditional dictionaries with respect to the targeted
task, and describe an approach to obtain phrase
rephrasings through a pivot translation into another
language. In section 3, we discuss the issue of the
organization of the results along various axis: flu-
ency of rephrasings, preservation of meaning, and
lexical divergence between original text spans and
rephrasings. We then present an initial evaluation
of our approach on French rephrasing in section 4.
Related work is presented in section 5, and we fi-
nally discuss our approach and our future work in
section 6.
2 Lexicon of phrase rephrasings
Dictionaries and semantic resources such as the-
sauri can be used to find words by following links
of different kinds from a given entry point. Word-
Net (Fellbaum, 1998) is one such resource. For a
proposal of other kinds of links and navigational
aids see also (Zock and Bilac, 2004; Zock, 2006;
Zock, 2007).
Words are the traditional units that people ex-
pect to find in dictionaries. Whereas some types
of dictionaries can contain multiword expressions,
such as compound nouns and terms, those corre-
spond to linguistically-motivated units. In order
to rephrase phrases of any type with a dictionary, a
writer may have to look up several words, combine
various information and validate the result using
her experience of the language or throught the use
of a concordancer. Moreover, dictionary lookups
are in most cases insensitive to the actual context
of words in an existing text. It is therefore the re-
sponsibility of its users to ensure that a choice is
appropriate for a given context, which can be quite
difficult, for example when writing in a second lan-
guage.
One way of obtaining phrase rephrasings is by
looking at phrases that occur in similar contexts
in a monolingual corpus (e.g. (Munteanu and
Marcu, 2006)). In order to extract a comprehensive
phrase lexicon, a very large number of sentences
should be compared to extract potential rephras-
ings, which furthermore may often correspond to
phrases that are too remotely connected. Parallel
corpora provide the interesting advantage that it is
reasonable to assume that elements from one side
of the corpus should be aligned to elements on the
other side, and that associations of elements can be
reinforced by the number of times they occur in the
corpus. Various approaches for word alignment
from parallel corpora have been proposed (see e.g.
(Och and Ney, 2003)), and the phrase-based ap-
proach to Statistical Machine Translation (Koehn
et al, 2003) has led to the development of heuris-
tics for obtaining alignments between phrases of
any number of words.
Unfortunately, monolingual parallel corpora
aligned at the sentence level, such as various trans-
lations of a novel in a foreign language, are re-
sources that are extremely scarce. Using bilingual
parallel corpora, a much more common resource,
one can obtain various possible phrase translations
for a given source phrase, as well as some estimate
of the distribution of probabilities for the various
translations of that phrase. Such N ? M aligne-
ments can capture lexical translations (e.g. exi-
geons ? ask for, call for, demand, expect, request,
etc.) and phrasal literal or idiomatic translations
(e.g. un bon de?but ? a good approach, a good
first move, a good starting point, a positive initia-
tive, an encouraging start, the right road, etc.), but
can also capture noise depending on the alignment
heuristics used (e.g. les e?tats candidats (candi-
date countries) ? Member States, the candidate
countries were to, the accession countries have
called for, candidate, the, etc.) Different target
phrases associated with a given source phrase can
either represent paraphrases or phrases with differ-
ent meanings. Among the limitations of this type
of phrasal alignments are their inability to model
non-consecutive words and to generalize the con-
78
tents of phrases, and the fact that their translations
are not conditioned on their context.
If phrase extraction is performed in two oppo-
site directions, then it is possible to find the pos-
sible translations of a given phrase (and their con-
ditional probabilities), and then to translate back
those phrases into the original language. In this ap-
proach proposed by (Bannard and Callison-Burch,
2005), the second language acts as a pivot, as il-
lustrated on figure 1. Because of the nature of the
possible alignments, this pivot can represent vari-
ous senses, which in context can be equivalent or
comparable to that of the original phrase. In turn,
the same phenomena can take place when translat-
ing back from the pivot phrases to the original lan-
guage, and the resulting rephrasings can be equiv-
alent or comparable in meaning to that of the orig-
inal phrase in some context, may also be incom-
plete and/or require other changes in the rephrased
sentence.
Bannard and Callison-Burch have defined a
paraphrase probability between two phrases p
1
and p
2
(with p
1
6= p
2
) that uses conditional proba-
bilities between phrases and sums over all possible
pivot phrases:
P (p
2
|p
1
) = argmax
p
2
6=p
1
?
pivot
P (pivot|p
1
)P (p
2
|pivot)
(1)
(Callison-Burch, 2007) measured the impor-
tance of various factors impacting the quality of
the paraphrases obtained. Using manually built
alignments yields a significant improvement in
paraphrase quality, showing that if better align-
ments are available the proposed approach can
produce better paraphrases. Alignments between
several languages can be used for finding pivot
phrases, and using several simulateously tend to
improve alignment quality and therefore para-
phrases themselves. Using a language model to
find paraphrases that maximize its score in the
original sentencial context leads to improved flu-
ency, but has a negative impact on meaning preser-
vation. Lastly, restricting pivot phrases to those
actually aligned in a test aligned bilingual corpus
improves paraphrase quality, which illustrates the
importance of disambiguating source phrases rela-
tively to the pivot language.
The rephrasings obtained can be classified into
several categories when used in context:
? A rephrasing can be a paraphrase that is valid
in all contexts (e.g. je vous donne raison ?
je suis d?accord avec vous), in specific gram-
matical contexts (e.g. pouvoir accueillir dans
de bonnes conditions les pays ? comme il se
doit) and/or pragmatic contexts (e.g. c?est un
bon de?but ? nous partons du bon pied).
? A rephrasing can contain shifts in meaning
with the original phrase which might be ac-
ceptable or not (e.g. nous voulons apporter
notre contribution a` ce de?bat ? donner de
la valeur). Some such rephrasings reveal a
natural bias towards the bilingual corpus used
(e.g. le prochain e?largissement constitue la
principale ta?che ? l? objectif principal).
? A rephrasing can be ill-formed but still con-
tain elements of interest to a writer (e.g. ceux
qui disent que . . . se trompent ? devrions
a` nouveau re?fle?chir; here a rephrasing such
as devraient a` nouveau re?fle?chir could be
deemed acceptable in some contexts).
? A rephrasing may introduce a contradiction
in a specific context (e.g. ce n?est pas le mo-
ment de se montrer he?sitant ? il est trop to?t
pour)
? A rephrasing may be inexploitable because it
is syntactically ill-formed in context and does
not contain any element of interest, or is too
close to the original phrase.
The most natural entry point to such a resource
is by entering a phrase or selecting it in a text under
revision. Approximate search can also be of use,
as done in some concordancer software, for exam-
ple by allowing the user to enter word-based reg-
ular expressions mixing literal words, word lem-
mas, word part-of-speech or even word classes
(e.g. types of named entities). Boolean queries
on indexes of word lemmas can also be used to of-
fer yet more flexibility to search the lexicon, but at
the cost of more candidate results. Once results are
returned, they can recursively be reused as source
phrases, so as to offer a means to navigate by iter-
ative refining.
3 Evaluation of rephrasings in context
for ranking results
Each candidate phrase rephrasing for a given
phrase must be evaluated in order to define a rank-
ing order for presentation to the user, and possibly
79
Figure 1: Example of rephrasing for the French phrase ce n?est pas le moment de using English as pivot.
to discard some of them. The proposed ranking
should reflect as best as possible the preferences of
the user for the task at hand in order to minimize
reading time and maintain the user?s interest in us-
ing the phrase lexicon. It is essential to give the
user some control over how the results are returned
depending on what is more important to her. For
example, (Ferret and Zock, 2006) have proposed
to present results from a dictionary enriched with
topical associations in chunks to allow for catego-
rial search. There will be cases where the user may
find acceptable only grammatical results, while in
other cases the user might accept agrammatical re-
sults provided they contain interesting suggestions.
Moreover, it seems extremely important that result
ranking can take into account the phrase substitu-
tion into the original context.
Considering how the proposed phrase lexicon is
built, the pivot paraphrasing probability of equa-
tion 1 (PIV) can be used as a baseline ordering.
Such a model reflects some strength of association
between a rephrased phrase and the original phrase
using the extracted phrases and conditional prob-
abilities derived from a bilingual training corpus.
It is therefore expected that results will be biased
towards that corpus if the latter belongs to a partic-
ular genre or theme. Nonetheless, one can expect
that some associations will be general enough to
be of general interest.
In addition, several models that users can in-
terpret as ranking criterion can be used simulate-
neously using the log-linear framework tradition-
ally used in SMT systems. However, contrary to
what is done in SMT, the weight of the models
cannot be automatically optimized if we do not use
an automatic evaluation of rephrasing quality, the
definition of which depending heavily on the sub-
jective appreciation of a user. Equation 2 shows
how the score of a rephrasing p
2
of p
1
can be com-
puted, where M is the set of models used, h
m
is
the logarithm of the normalized score of a model
and ?
m
its weight (with?
m?M
?
m
= 1), and C
is the original sentence and the placeholder for the
rephrased phrase.
s(p
2
, p
1
, C) =
?
m?M
?
m
h
m
(p
1
, p
2
, C) (2)
3.1 Control over fluency
As noted by (Mutton et al, 2007), the notion of
sentence-level fluency is not uniformely agreed
upon, and its evaluation by human judges is some-
times found subjective, but in practice judges can
obtain high levels of agreement about what can
be considered fluent or not. Like (Callison-Burch,
2007), we can use a language model (LM) to as-
sess the local fluency of a sentence after a phrase
has been substituted with a rephrasing. A degra-
dation in score (with a fluent original sentence)
can indicate that the rephrasing segment should be
adapted to the sentence, and/or that the sentence
itself should be modified in order to integrate the
new phrase as is.
Syntax parsers can produce various information
that can be relevant for assessing the fluency of
sentences, which can be used as features from dif-
ferent parsers for classification that can correlate
well with human judgment (Mutton et al, 2007).
When substituting a part of a sentence with an-
other phrase and if this substitution does not re-
quire other changes in the sentence, then at least
the dependency relationships between words out-
side that phrase should be preserved. This seems
coherent with our objective of focussing on the
task of phrase rephrasing when it is possible to
modify only a given phrase and obtain an accept-
able result.
80
3.2 Control over meaning preservation
The preservation of dependency relationships out-
side of the rephrased phrase can also play a role
in terms of meaning preservation. Dependency
relationships connecting words in the phrase and
words outside the phrase (i.e., whose governor is
outside the phrase and dependant inside it, or the
opposite) should still exist after such a substitution,
but possibly with a modified dependency target in
the phrase. Indeed, those relationships denote the
grammatical role of the words of the phrase rela-
tive to their context, and if those are preserved then
it is more likely that meaning is preserved.
We use a model based on dependency preser-
vation (DEP) which involves relationships outside
the rephrased phrase and relationships crossing
a boundary of that phrase. The score is based
on some proportion of the number of such de-
pendencies found after substitution over the num-
ber of original dependencies (see (Max, 2008) for
details). Another way of controlling for mean-
ing preservation is to ensure that only the pivot
phrases with the same meaning as the original
phrase are kept (and then their back translations).
(Callison-Burch, 2007) has shown the positive im-
pact on paraphrase quality of using a controlled
pivot present in an aligned sentence in a test bilin-
gual corpora. Phrase disambiguation techniques
have been proposed for SMT and could be applied
to the problem at hand (e.g. (Stroppa et al, 2007)).
In an interactive context, it makes sense to let the
user the opportunity to control for phrase sense by
rejecting bad pivot phrases if she wants to, which
is then similar to Callison-Burch?s experiment set-
tings. This manual selection must of course be op-
tional, but can be used when a user prefers a stricter
control on meaning. Another possibly interesting
use is to disambiguate in a pivot language corre-
sponding to one?s native language when writing in
a foreign language.
3.3 Control over lexical divergence
There will be cases when possible rephrasings will
be very close to their original phrase, differing
for example by only punctuation marks or verbal
forms1. Writers may sometimes prefer rephras-
ings that differ by just one word, or on the con-
trary rephrasings that use a set of completely dif-
ferent words. To account for differents words be-
1This is particularly the case when aligning between low
and highly inflected languages.
Figure 2: Bilingual phrase lexicon statistics
tween an original phrase and its rephrasing, we use
a model (LEM) that returns a proportion of lem-
mas for full words that only belong to a rephrasing
over all such lemmas for an initial phrase and its
rephrasing (see (Max, 2008)).
4 Experiments and evaluation
We carried out an evaluation on the local rephras-
ing of French sentences, using English as the
pivot language.2 We extracted phrase align-
ments of up to 7 word forms using the Giza++
alignment tool (Och and Ney, 2003) and the
grow-diag-final-and heuristics described
in (Koehn et al, 2003) on 948,507 sentences
of the French-English part of the Europarl cor-
pus (Koehn, 2005) and obtained some 42 million
phrase pairs for which probabilities were estimated
using maximum likelihood estimation. Statistics
for the extracted lexicons are reported on figure 2.
Entries of the monolingual phrase lexicon are built
dynamically from the entries of the monolingual
lexicons.
For the LM model, we used a 5-gram language
model trained on the French part of the corpus us-
ing Kneser-Ney smoothing. The robust parser for
French SYNTEX (Bourigault et al, 2005) was used
to obtain lemmas for word and labeled dependency
relationships between words, used respectively for
the LEM and DEP models. Robust parsers provide
the advantage that they can provide partial analysis
for correct chunks in agrammatical sentences, but
they can also recover information from agrammat-
ical chunks which can be undesirable in this case.3
A test corpus of 82 sentences that were not used
for extracting phrase alignments and learning the
2The main motivation for this choice was that we could
easily have access to French native speakers for manual eval-
uation. We plan however to start new experiments using En-
glish, as well as experiments using another highly inflected
language as pivot such as Spanish.
3We intend to use several parsers for English implement-
ing different approaches as in (Mutton et al, 2007), but we
had access to only one parser for French.
81
language model was built. A human judge selected
one phrase of length 3 words or more per sen-
tence that would be a good candidate for rephras-
ing, and which was accepted if it belonged to the
French-English lexicon4. We kept at most the 20
first rephrasings obtained using the baseline PIV
model, and asked two French native speakers to
evaluate on a 5-level scale each the 1648 refor-
mulated sentences obtained on fluency, meaning
preservation, and authoring value, where the lat-
ter was described in the following way: (5) the
rephrasing can be directly reused for revising a
text, (4) the rephrasing can be used with a mi-
nor change, (3) the rephrasing contains elements
that could be used for a good rephrasing, (2) the
rephrasing contains elements that could suggest a
rephrasing, and (1) the rephrasing is useless.
After the judges had completed manual annota-
tion, smoothing of the scores was done by keep-
ing mean scores for each sentence. We measured
a value of 0.59 standard deviation for score differ-
ences between judges for grammaticality, 0.7 for
meaning preservation and 0.8 for authoring value.
Those values can indicate a growing difficulty in
judging those characteristics, and in particular that
judging authoring value on the proposed scale is
more dependant on personal judgment. Results of
mean scores for the first rank solutions with vari-
ous model combinations with uniform weights are
reported on figure 3, and results for mean author-
ing value scores depending on the number of top
results presented to the user are reported on fig-
ure 4.
Authoring value scores are lower, which can be
explained by the fact that rephrasings with bad
fluency and/or meaning preservation scores will
penalize authoring value scores according to our
scale. The best results are obtained when combin-
ing all models, which remains true when consider-
ing mean results up to at least 8 rephrasings.
The baseline PIV model seems to have the most
impact, but all other models also contribute in
different ways. This suggests that which model
should be used (or its weight in our framework)
could be chosen by a user. In the following ex-
ample, the LEM model helped select a rephrasing
which obtained good scores:
Original sentence: ce que je vous propose donc,
4This is a limitation of our evaluation, as our annotator
was not strictly speaking revising a text that she wrote. We
hope to be able to conduct task-based experiments in the fu-
ture.
fluency meaning authoring
PIV (baseline) 4.46 4.18 3.62
LM 4.28 3.62 3.45
DEP 4.35 3.68 3.43
LEM 4.05 3.21 3.28
PIV+LM 4.65 4.06 3.82
PIV+DEP 4.58 4.27 3.66
PIV+LEM 4.37 4.00 3.76
LM+DEP 4.49 3.81 3.68
LM+LEM 4.28 3.59 3.56
PIV+LM+DEP 4.65 4.05 3.92
PIV+LM+LEM 4.61 4.02 3.97
PIV+DEP+LEM 4.57 4.17 4.02
LM+DEP+LEM 4.37 3.69 3.64
PIV+LM+DEP+LEM 4.68 4.09 4.05
Figure 3: Mean results at first rank for various
model combinations (uniform weighting)
Figure 4: Mean authoring value scores depending
on the number of results presented to the user
c?est de travailler dans cette direction ... (what I
therefore propose is to work towards this . . .)
Rephrased sentence: ce que je vous pro-
pose donc, c?est de coope?rer dans ce sens ...
(work towards this goal . . .)
Figures 5 and 6 show two examples of rephras-
ings in French, whereby for each rephrasing the
ranks given by PIV, LM and the combination of
all mentioned models are shown.
5 Related work
While the traditional view of lexicons is word-
based, we may as well consider larger units, in-
cluding sentences. Corpus Pattern Analysis (CPA)
(Hanks and Pustejovsky, 2005) is concerned with
the prototypical syntagmatic patterns with which
words in use are associated. For example, the
meaning of take place is different from the mean-
82
Rephrasings Ranks given by model(s)
PIV LM PIV+LM+DEP+LEM
quelques points essentiels 1 3 1
les points essentiels 19 1 2
plusieurs questions importantes 17 4 3
des points essentiels 8 6 4
deux ou trois questions importantes 5 9 5
plusieurs points importants 11 2 5
un certain nombre de questions importantes 17 7 7
certains points importants 2 5 8
un certain nombre de points importants 3 8 9
certains e?le?ments tre`s importants 13 11 10
une se?rie de points importants 4 12 11
quelques accents importants 5 15 11
des choses extre?mement importantes 13 14 11
quelques remarques importantes , 8 16 14
des points importants 12 10 15
quelques choses tre`s importantes 13 17 16
certains points importants , 8 13 17
quelques points essentiels sur 20 18 17
de certains e?le?ments tre`s importants 13 19 19
placer quelques accents importants 5 20 20
Figure 5: Examples of rephrasings for the phrase quelques points importants in je voudrais mentionner
quelques points importants de la directive
Rephrasings Ranks given by model(s)
PIV LM PIV+LM+DEP+LEM
vous avez raison 1 1 1
je suis d? accord avec vous 2 2 2
je suis d? accord 3 6 3
je conviens avec vous 6 5 4
je partage votre avis 7 4 5
vous avez raison de dire 10 3 5
je pense comme vous 7 8 7
je suis parfaitement d? accord avec vous 12 7 8
je partage votre point de vue 12 9 9
je vous rejoins 7 10 10
, je vous donne raison 3 12 11
la` , je vous donne raison 3 13 12
tu as raison 16 11 12
vous avez raison de 10 14 14
je partage votre point 12 15 15
je partage votre point de 12 16 16
Figure 6: Examples of rephrasings for the phrase je vous donne raison in a` cet e?gard bien pre?cis , je vous
donne raison , monsieur le commissaire
83
ing of take his place, due to the possessive deter-
miner. The actual meaning of words depends on
the context in which they are used. The work done
by the team of Gross on lexicon-grammar (e.g.
(Gross, 1984)) showed that a relatively small set of
clause patterns and syntactic constraints suffices to
cover most of common French.
Comparable monolingual corpora have been
used for automatic paraphrasing. Barzilay and
Lee (Barzilay and Lee, 2003) learned paraphras-
ing patterns as pairs of word lattices, which are
then used to produce sentence level paraphrases.
Their corpus contained news agency articles on the
same events, which allows precise sentence para-
phrasing, but on a small sets of phenomena and
for a limited domain. As sentential paraphras-
ing is more likely to alter meaning, Quirk et al
(Quirk et al, 2004) approached paraphrasing as
a monotonous decoding by a phrase-based SMT
system. Their corpus consisted of monolingual
sentences extracted from a comparable corpus that
were automatically aligned so as to allow aligned
phrase extraction. Pang et al (Pang et al, 2003)
used parallel monolingual corpora built from news
stories that had been independantly translated sev-
eral times to learn lattices from a syntax-based
alignment process.
Bannard and Callison-Burch (Bannard and
Callison-Burch, 2005) proposed to use pivot trans-
lation for paraphrasing phrases. Fujita (Fujita,
2005) proposed a transfer-and-revision framework
using linguistic knowledge for generating para-
phrases in Japanese and a model for error detec-
tion. At the lexical level, a recent evaluation on En-
glish lexical substitution was held (McCarthy and
Navigli, 2007) in which systems had to find lexical
synonyms and disambiguate the context.
6 Discussion and future work
In this article, we have presented an approach for
obtaining rephrasings for short text spans from par-
allel bilingual corpora. These rephrasings can be
ranked according to user-defined preferences, and
the weights of the models used can be dynamically
adjusted by a user depending on what features are
more important to her, for instance after an initial
list of candidates has been proposed by the sys-
tem. Indeed, good candidates include paraphrases,
but also more generally phrases that could help a
writer revise a text with some shifts in meaning,
even if at the cost of some corrections to make the
resulting text grammatical. Furthermore, search
for rephrasings can be iteratively performed using
candidate rephrasings as source phrases, and the
user can have some fine-grained control if select-
ing or rejecting possible pivot phrases manually.
Possible user interfaces to this proposed bilingual
phrase lexicon could include rephrasing memory
features to learn from interaction with the user, and
concordancing features to display the context of
use in the bilingual corpus of the segments used to
build the relevant lexicon entries. In the latter case,
the similarity used to select examples could take
the context of the phrases into account in terms of
dependency relationships.
There are several open issues to the presented
work. Important issues are where the phrases
can come from and the bias introduced by the re-
source used. Using a bilingual corpora such as
the Europarl corpus with this pivot approach yields
both generic and domain/genre-specific rephras-
ings, and it is important to be able to determine
their appropriate context of use. It would also
be interesting to investigate enriching this frame-
work with phrases learnt from monolingual cor-
pora from a given domain or genre, and to use fea-
tures from the current text under revision. More
generally, we would need to get some idea of the
degree of possible reuse of a given rephrasing.
Another important group of issues concerns lim-
itations due to the nature of phrases for the task
at hand. As we have said, phrases as units of
rephrasing are limited because they cannot model
non-consecutive words and because of the rigidity
of their content. Various types of entry points to
the rephrasing lexicon such as using word-based
regular expressions can in some way alleviate this
problem, but work could be done on the lexicon
itself. As shown by Callison-Burch (Callison-
Burch, 2007), much can be gained by using bet-
ter alignments. Alignments techniques using syn-
tactic information could eliminate weak rephras-
ing candidates (i.e. increase in overall precision),
but interesting phrasal alignments could be lost as
well (decrease in overall recall). Furthermore, in-
formation from the context of alignments could
also be used to disambiguate the source phrase and
get only pivot phrases that are compatible with the
context of a given rephrasing, in similar ways as
recently done for SMT (Stroppa et al, 2007).
84
References
Bannard, Colin and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-
phrasing with bilingual parallel corpora. In Proceed-
ings of ACL, Ann Arbor, USA.
Barzilay, Regina and Lillian Lee. 2003. Learn-
ing to paraphrase: an unsupervised approach us-
ing multiple-sequence alignment. In Proceedings of
NAACL/HLT, Edmonton, Canada.
Bourdaillet, Julien, Jean-Gabriel Ganascia, and Ire`ne
Fenoglio. 2007. Machine assisted study of writ-
ers? rewriting processes. In Proceedings of NLPCS,
poster session, Madeire, Portugal.
Bourigault, Didier, Ce?cile Fabre, Ce?cile Frrot, Marie-
Paule Jacques, and Sylvia Ozdowska. 2005. Syntex,
analyseur syntaxique de corpus. In Proceedings of
TALN, Dourdan, France.
Callison-Burch, Chris. 2007. Paraphrasing and Trans-
lation. Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh.
Fellbaum, Christiane, editor, 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database and some of its Applica-
tions. MIT Press.
Ferret, Olivier and Michael Zock. 2006. Enhancing
electronic dictionaries with an index based on asso-
ciations. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL, Sydney,
Australia.
Fujita, Atsushi. 2005. Automatic Generation of Syn-
tactically Well-formed and Semantically Appropriate
Paraphrases. Ph.D. thesis, Nara Institute of Science
and Technology.
Gross, Maurice. 1984. Lexicon-grammar and the anal-
ysis of french. In Proc. of the 11th COLING, pages
275?282, Stanford, CA.
Hanks, Patrick and James Pustejovsky. 2005. A pattern
dictionary for natural language processing. Revue
Franc?aise de linguistique applique?e, 10(2):63?82.
Koehn, Philipp, Franz Josef Och, , and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL/HLT, Edmonton, Canada.
Koehn, Philipp. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of MT
Summit, Phuket, Thailand.
Max, Aure?lien. 2008. Local rephrasing suggestions for
supporting the work of writers. In Proceedings of
GoTAL, Gothenburg, Sweden.
McCarthy, Diana and Roberto Navigli. 2007. Semeval-
2007 task 10: English lexical substitution task. In
Proceedings of the Semeval-2007 Workshop at ACL,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Munteanu, Dragos S. and Daniel Marcu. 2006. Ex-
tracting parallel sub-sentential fragments from non-
parallel corpora. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL
2006, Sydney, Australia.
Mutton, Andrew, Mark Dras, Stephen Wan, and Robert
Dale. 2007. GLEU : Automatic evaluation of
sentence-level fluency. In Proceedings of ACL,
Prague, Czech Republic.
Och, Franz Josef and Hermann Ney. 2003. A system-
atic comparison of various statistical alignment mod-
els. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Pang, Bo, Kevin Knight, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Syntax-based alignment of multiple translations: Ex-
tracting paraphrases and generating new sentences.
In Proceedings of NAACL/HLT, Edmonton, Canada.
Quirk, Chris, Chris Brockett, and William B. Dolan.
2004. Monolingual machine translation for para-
phrase generation. In Proceedings of EMNLP,
Barcelona, Spain.
Stroppa, Nicolas, Antal van den Bosch, and Andy Way.
2007. Exploiting source similarity for smt using
context-informed features. In Proceedings of TMI,
Skvde, Sweden.
Zock, Michael and Slaven Bilac. 2004. Word lookup
on the basis of associations : from an idea to a
roadmap. In Workshop on ?Enhancing and using
electronic dictionaries?, pages 29?35, Geneva. COL-
ING.
Zock, Michael. 2006. Navigational aids, a critical
factor for the success of electronic dictionaries. In
Rapp, Reinhard, P. Sedlmeier, and G. Zunker-Rapp,
editors, Perspectives on Cognition: A Festschrift for
Manfred Wettler, pages 397?414. Pabst Science Pub-
lishers, Lengerich.
Zock, Michael. 2007. If you care to find what you
are looking for, make an index: the case of lexical
access. ECTI, Transaction on Computer and Infor-
mation Technology, 2(2):71?80.
85
