Creation of a New Domain and Evaluation of Comparison Generation in a
Natural Language Generation System
Matthew Marge
Language Technologies Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
mrmarge@cs.cmu.edu
Amy Isard
ICCS/HCRC
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
Amy.Isard@ed.ac.uk
Johanna Moore
ICCS/HCRC
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
J.Moore@ed.ac.uk
Abstract
We describe the creation of a new domain for
the Methodius Natural Language Generation
System, and an evaluation of Methodius? pa-
rameterized comparison generation algorithm.
The new domain was based around music and
performers, and texts about the domain were
generated using Methodius. Our evaluation
showed that test subjects learned more from
texts that contained comparisons than from
those that did not. We also established that the
comparison generation algorithm could gener-
alize to the music domain.
1 Introduction
There has been research into tailoring natural lan-
guage to a user?s previous browsing history in a va-
riety of domains such as medicine, museum col-
lections, and animal descriptions (McKeown, 1985;
Milosavljevic, 1997; Dale et al, 1998; O?Donnell
et al, 2001). Another domain in which this could
be applied is automated disc jockeys (DJs) that ac-
company a music stream such as Pandora1 and dis-
cuss interesting trivia or facts about music tracks re-
cently played to the user. User modeling could make
these texts much more natural and less repetitive,
and comparisons and contrasts between music artists
or tracks could also provide users with a novel way
to explore their music collection.
The Methodius system (Isard, 2007) continues
in a line of research which began with ILEX
(O?Donnell et al, 2001) and continued with M-
PIRO (Isard et al, 2003) and now also NaturalOWL
1http://www.pandora.com
(Galanis and Androutsopoulos, 2007). Like these
other systems, Methodius creates customizable de-
scriptions of objects from an database, but it features
a novel algorithm for generating comparisons be-
tween a new object and objects that have previously
been encountered, which stands out from previous
research in this area because it uses several explicit
parameters to choose the most relevant and interest-
ing comparisons given the context (Isard, 2007).
There have been previous evaluations of some of
these systems, including (Cox et al, 1999; Karasi-
mos and Isard, 2004). Karasimos and Isard con-
ducted an evaluation of comparisons and aggrega-
tion in the M-PIRO system. The results showed that
participants learned more and perceived that they
learned more from texts that contained comparisons
and aggregations than they did from texts that did
not. In this study, we investigate whether these re-
sults generalize to our new domain, and we isolate
the effect of comparisons from that of aggregation.
2 Knowledge Base Construction
2.1 Corpus Collection
We collected a small corpus to investigate the type
of facts disc jockeys tend to say about music. We se-
lected two genres where music descriptions between
pieces were common, jazz and classical music. The
programmes we used were broadcast on BBC Ra-
dio Three2. We transcribed sixty-four discussions;
to maintain uniformity, we followed the Linguistic
Data Consortium?s transcription guidelines3. This
2http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3
3http://projects.ldc.upenn.edu/Transcription/quick-trans
169
was not a thorough corpus collection; the purpose of
collecting examples was to gain a sense of what disc
jockeys tend to discuss and compare.
2.2 Ontology Design
Based on the transcribed examples, we selected and
hand-wrote twelve database entries for music tracks,
using the authoring tool developed by the M-PIRO
project (Androutsopoulos et al, 2007). We trans-
formed the output of this tool into files suitable for
Methodius using an ad-hoc collection of Perl and
XSLT scripts, which also added the necessary infor-
mation to the OpenCCG grammars (White, 2006)
used by Methodius. We discuss future plans in this
area in Section 5.
We created a single-inheritance ontology for a
knowledge base of music pieces. First, we listed
the high-level entity types in the music domain, such
as ?person?, ?instrument?, ?classical music period?,
and ?jazz music period?. We then added attributes
commonly found in our disc jockey transcriptions.
For each entity type, we defined a set of fields. For
example, the classical-period field must contain an
entity which expresses a classical music piece?s time
period. We also specified a microplanning expres-
sion for each field, which provides detail on how the
field?s information should be generated at the sen-
tence level. We then added all the lexical items nec-
essary for the music domain.
2.3 Ontology Population
We populated our domain with six classical music
pieces and six jazz music pieces from the allmu-
sic.com database4. The songs were selected to yield
at least two interesting comparisons when placed in
a specific order. We also added entities linked to the
twelve songs, for example, each song?s album, per-
former, and composer, and information about these
entities. One challenge inherent in selecting these
entities from a publicly available database was to
eliminate as much common knowledge as possi-
ble about the music. In order to decrease back-
ground knowledge as a potential factor in our ex-
periment, we selected songs that primarily did not
contain popular performers, composers, and con-
ductors. We were able to gauge the popularity of
4http://www.allmusic.com
"Avatar" was written by Gary Husband and it was
performed by Billy Cobham, who was influenced
by Miles Davis. Billy Cobham originated from
Panama City, Panama and he played the drums; he
was active from the 1970s to the 1990s and he
participated in the Mahavishnu Orchestra. He
was influenced by Miles Davis. "Avatar" was
written during the Fusion period.
Figure 1: A generated description without comparisons.
Unlike "Fracture" and "A Mystery in Town",
which were written by Eddie "Lockjaw" Davis and
were performed by Fats Navarro, "Avatar" was
written by Gary Husband and it was performed by
Billy Cobham. Cobham originated from Panama
City, Panama and he played the drums; he was
active from the 1970s to the 1990s and he
participated in the Mahavishnu Orchestra. He
was influenced by Miles Davis. "Avatar" was
written during the Fusion period.
Figure 2: A generated description with comparisons to
previously described songs.
artists by their ?popularity rank? in the allmusic.com
database. However, we had to maintain a careful
balance between obscure artists and the ability to
generate interesting comparisons. Obscure artists
had less detailed information in the allmusic.com
database than popular music artists, so were forced
to select a few popular music artists for our exper-
iment, as their music pieces had multiple possible
interesting comparisons.
3 Experiment
We tried to maintain as many conditions from the
previous, similar study (Karasimos and Isard, 2004)
as possible to allow us to directly compare our re-
sults to theirs. The previous study established that
people learned more and perceived that they learned
more from text enriched with comparisons and ag-
gregations of facts than from texts that contained
neither. Our experimental design was similar to
theirs but all conditions of our experiment contained
text generated with aggregations of facts; our aim
was to isolate the effects of comparisons from those
of sentence aggregation.
For jazz texts, comparisons between songs involv-
ing performers, albums, composers, and time peri-
ods were possible. Classical texts could produce
all four of these types of comparisons. In addi-
tion, classical texts could also include comparisons
of conductors. Although the potential similarities
170
for classical and jazz texts were not equal, we de-
cided to include the conductor as a potential com-
parison for classical music. This is because across
both text types, we maintained the same number of
generated comparisons for each text type by limit-
ing Methodius to generating only one comparison
or contrast per paragraph of text. We present exam-
ples of a paragraph of text generated by Methodius
without (Figure 1) and with (Figure 2) comparisons.
In both cases, we assume that the user has already
seen texts about the songs ?Fracture? and ?A Mys-
tery in Town?, which expressed the facts about these
previous songs which are used in the comparisons in
Figure 2; the comparison text does not contain more
new information.
3.1 Evaluation Design
For our user study, we created a web interface using
WebExp2 Experiment Design software5 that con-
tained text generated by Methodius from our music
fact knowledge base. Forty fluent English speak-
ers were recruited and directed to a web page that
gave detailed instructions. After providing some ba-
sic personal information including their name, age,
gender, occupation and native languages, subjects
started with a test page, where they read a sample
paragraph and responded to one factual question, to
make sure that they had understood the interface,
and they then proceeded to the main experiment.
Participants read 6 paragraphs about either jazz
or classical music, and answered 15 factual recall
questions. They then read a further 6 paragraphs
about the other type of music, followed by 15 fac-
tual recall questions on the second set of texts. Fi-
nally they completed a post-experimental survey of
12 Likert Scale questions (Likert, 1932). We used
a within-subjects design, where each subject saw
two sets of texts, one classical and one jazz, one
with and one without comparisons, and the order
in which text sets were presented was controlled.
The multiple choice questions did not change given
the condition; so every participant saw the same
two sets of 15 multiple-choice questions in random-
ized orders. Seven multiple-choice questions of each
fifteen-question set dealt with facts that may be rein-
forced by comparisons. The remaining eight ques-
5http://www.webexp.info
Group Texts with com-
parisons
Texts without
comparisons
A 4.15 (1.814) 3.35 (1.872)
B 4.45 (1.638) 3.10 (1.651)
All 4.30 (1.713) 3.23 (1.747)
Table 1: Mean multiple choice scores with standard devi-
ation in brackets.
tions in each section served as a control for this ex-
periment.
On each page, the interface presented an image of
a paragraph of text generated by Methodius. The
users proceeded to the next paragraph when they
were ready by pressing the ?Next song? or ?Next
piece? button, depending on whether the music type
was jazz or classical. The texts were presented as
images for two reasons: so that the presentation of
stimuli would remain consistent across the differ-
ent computers and to prevent the text from being
selected by the participant, thus discouraging them
from copying the text and placing it into another
window as a reference to answer the factual recall
questions asked later.
4 Results
A summary of the participants? multiple choice
scores are shown in Table 1. Group A read classi-
cal texts with comparisons and jazz texts without,
and Group B read jazz texts with comparisons and
classical texts without.
We performed a 2-way repeated measures
ANOVA on our data and found that participants per-
formed significantly better on questions about the
texts which had comparisons (F (1, 36) = 11.131,
p < .01). There were no ordering or grouping
effects?the performance of participants did not de-
pend on which type of texts they saw first, or on
which type of texts contained comparisons.
In general, the Likert scores showed no signifi-
cant differences between the texts which had com-
parisons and those which did not. Karasimos and
Isard (2004) did find significant differences, but in
their case, texts had either comparisons and sen-
tence aggregations, or neither. In our study, all the
texts had sentence aggregations, so it may be this
factor which contributed to their higher Likert re-
171
sults on questions such as ?I enjoyed reading about
these songs? and the binary ?Which text (quality,
fluency) did you like more? question, for which we
also found no significant difference. Details of re-
sults and statistics can be found in (Marge, 2007).
5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have shown that the Methodius comparison gen-
eration algorithm does generalize to new domains,
and that it is possible to quickly author a new domain
and generate fluent and readable text, using an ap-
propriate authoring tool. We have also confirmed the
findings of previous studies, and showed that the use
of comparisons in texts does significantly improve
participants? recall of the facts which they have read.
In future work, we would like to use the cur-
rent text generation in an automatic DJ system with
streaming music, and perform further user studies in
order to make the texts as interesting and relevant
as possible. We would also like to perform a study
in which we compare the output of the comparison
algorithm using different parameter settings, to see
whether users express a preference.
Since this work was carried out, Methodius has
been adapted to accept ontologies and sentence
plans written in OWL/RDF. These can be created
using the Prote?ge? editor6 with an NLG plugin de-
veloped at the Athens University of Economics and
Business as part of the NaturalOWL generation sys-
tem (Galanis and Androutsopoulos, 2007), which is
available as an open source package7. A more prin-
cipled method for the OpenCCG conversion process
than the one described in Section 2.2 is in develop-
ment, and we hope to publish a paper on this subject.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the help
and advice given by Colin Matheson, Ellen Bard,
Keith Edwards, Ray Carrick, Frank Keller, and Neil
Mayo and the comments of the anonymous review-
ers. This work was funded in part by a grant from
the Edinburgh-Stanford Link and by the Saint An-
drew?s Society of the State of New York. The music
data in this study was used with the permission of
the All Music Guide.
6http://www.protege.stanford.edu
7http://www.aueb.gr/users/ion/software/NaturalOWL.tar.gz
References
I. Androutsopoulos, J. Oberlander, and V. Karkaletsis.
2007. Source authoring for multilingual generation
of personalised object descriptions. Natural Language
Engineering, 13:191?233.
R. Cox, M. O?Donnell, and J. Oberlander. 1999. Dy-
namic versus static hypermedia in museum education:
an evaluation of ILEX, the intelligent labelling ex-
plorer. In Proceedings of the Artificial Intelligence in
Education conference, Le Mans.
R. Dale, J. Green, M. Milosavljevic, C. Paris, C. Ver-
spoor, and S. Williams. 1998. The realities of gener-
ating natural language from databases. In Proceedings
of the 11th Australian Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Brisbane, Australia.
D. Galanis and I. Androutsopoulos. 2007. Generating
multilingual descriptions from linguistically annotated
OWL ontologies: the NaturalOWL system. In Pro-
ceedings of ENLG 2007.
A. Isard, J. Oberlander, I. Androutsopoulos, and C. Math-
eson. 2003. Speaking the users? languages. IEEE In-
telligent Systems, 18(1):40?45. Special Issue on Ad-
vances in Natural Language Processing.
A. Isard. 2007. Choosing the best comparison under
the circumstances. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Personalization Enhanced Access to Cul-
tural Heritage, Corfu, Greece.
A. Karasimos and A. Isard. 2004. Multi-lingual eval-
uation of a natural language generation system. In
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, Lisbon, Portu-
gal.
R. Likert. 1932. A technique for the measurement of
attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 22(140):1?55.
M. Marge. 2007. An evaluation of comparison genera-
tion in the methodius natural language generation sys-
tem. Master?s thesis, University of Edinburgh.
K. McKeown. 1985. Text Generation: Using Discourse
Strategies and Focus Constraints to Generate Natu-
ral Language Text. Cambridge University Press, New
York, NY, USA.
M. Milosavljevic. 1997. Content selection in compari-
son generation. In 6th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation), Duisburg, Germany.
M. O?Donnell, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander, and A. Knott.
2001. ILEX: An architecture for a dynamic hypertext
generation system. Natural Language Engineering,
7:225?250.
M.White. 2006. Efficient realization of coordinate struc-
tures in combinatory categorial grammar. Research on
Language and Computation, 4(1):39?75.
172
