How Well Do Semantic
Relatedness Measures Perform?
A Meta-Study
Irene Cramer
Dortmund University of Technology (Germany)
email: irene.cramer@udo.edu
Abstract
Various semantic relatedness, similarity, and distance measures have been
proposed in the past decade and many NLP-applications strongly rely on
these semantic measures. Researchers compete for better algorithms and
normally only few percentage points seem to suffice in order to prove a
new measure outperforms an older one. In this paper we present a meta-
study comparing various semantic measures and their correlation with
human judgments. We show that the results are rather inconsistent and
ask for detailed analyses as well as clarification. We argue that the defini-
tion of a shared task might bring us considerably closer to understanding
the concept of semantic relatedness.
59
60 Cramer
1 Introduction
Various applications in Natural Language Processing, such as Question Answering
(Novischi and Moldovan, 2006), Topic Detection (Carthy, 2004), and Text Summa-
rization (Barzilay and Elhadad, 1997), rely on semantic relatedness (similarity or dis-
tance)1 measures either based on word nets and/or corpus statistics as a resource. In
the HyTex project, funded by the German Research Foundation, we develop strategies
for the text-to-hypertext conversion using text-grammatical features. One strand of
research in this project consists of topic-based linking methods using lexical chain-
ing as a resource (Cramer and Finthammer, 2008). Lexical chaining is a well-known
method to calculate partial text representations; it relies on semantic relatedness val-
ues as basic input. We therefore implemented2 eight semantic relatedness measures
? (Hirst and St-Onge, 1998; Jiang and Conrath, 1997; Leacock and Chodorow, 1998;
Lin, 1998; Resnik, 1995; Wu and Palmer, 1994) ? based on GermaNet3 Lemnitzer
and Kunze (2002) and three based on Google co-occurrence counts (Cilibrasi and Vi-
tanyi, 2007). In order to evaluate the performance of these measures we conducted
two human judgment experiments and computed the correlation between the human
judgment and the values of the eleven semantic measures. We also compared our
results with those reported in the literature and found that the correlations between
human judgments and semantic measures are extremely scattered. In this paper we
compare the correlation of our own human judgment experiments and the results of
three similar studies. In our opinion this comparison points to the necessity of a thor-
ough analysis of the methods used in these experiments. We argue that this analysis
should aim at answering the following questions:
? How does the setting of the human judgment experiment influence the results?
? How does the selection of the word-pairs influence the results?
? Which aspects of semantic relatedness are included in human judgments? Thus,
what do these experiments actually measure?
? Are the semantic relatedness measures proposed in the literature able to capture
all of these aspects?
In this paper we intend to open the above mentioned analysis and therefore assembled
a set of aspects which we consider to be important in order to answer these questions.
Consequently, the remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 we
1The notions of semantic relatedness, similarity, and distance measure are controversially discussed in
the literature, e.g. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006). However, semantic similarity and relatedness seem to be
the predominant terms in this context. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) define them as follows: word-pairs are
considered to be semantically similar if a synonymy or hypernymy relation holds. In contrast, word-pairs
are considered to be semantically related if a systematic relation, such as synonymy, antonymy, hypernymy,
holonymy, or an unsystematic relation holds. Thus relatedness is the more general (broader) concept since
it includes intuitive associations as well as linguistically formalized relations between words (or concepts).
The focus of this paper is on relatedness.
2Since GermaNet ? e.g. in terms of internal structure ? slightly differs from Princeton WordNet we
could not simply use the measure implementations of the latter and therefore had to reimplement and adapt
them for GermaNet.
3GermaNet is the German counterpart of WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998).
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 61
present our own human judgment experiments. In Section 3 we describe three simi-
lar studies, two conducted with English data and one with German. In Section 4 we
compare the results of the four studies and discuss (with respect to the experimental
setting and goals) potential differences and possible causes for the observed inconsis-
tency of the results. Finally, we summarize our work and outline some ideas for future
research.
2 Our Human Judgement Experiments
In order to evaluate the quality of a semantic measure, a set of pre-classified (i.e.
judged with respect to their semantic relatedness by subjects) word-pairs is neces-
sary. In previous work for English data, most researchers used the word-pair list by
Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) as well as the list by Miller and Charles (1991)
as an evaluation resource. For German there are ? to our knowledge ? two research
groups, which compiled lists of word-pairs with respective human judgment:
? Gurevych et al constructed three lists (a translation of Rubenstein and Good-
enough?s list (Gurevych, 2005), a manually generated set of word-pairs, and a
semi-automatically generated one (Zesch and Gurevych, 2006)).
? While investigating lexical chaining for German corpora, we additionally com-
piled a total of six lists, each of which consists of 100 word-pairs with respective
human judgments.
The goal of our experiments was to cover a wide range of relatedness types, i.e. sys-
tematic and unsystematic relations, and relatedness levels, i.e. various degrees of re-
lation strength. However, we only included nouns in the construction of our sets
of word-pairs, since we consider cross-part-of-speech (cross-POS) relations to be an
additional challenge4, which we intend to address in a continuative experiment. Fur-
thermore, in order to identify a potential bias of the lists and the impact of this bias on
the results, we applied two different methods for the compilation of word-pairs.
For our first human judgment experiment (Cramer and Finthammer, 2008) we col-
lected nouns (analytically)5 of diverse semantic classes, e.g. abstract nouns, such as
das Wissen (Engl. knowledge), and concrete nouns, such as das B?geleisen (Engl.
flat-iron). By this means, we constructed a list of approximately 300 word-pairs. We
picked approximately 75 and randomized them. For the remaining 25 word-pairs, we
selected five words and constructedword-pairs such as Sonne-Wind (Engl. sun-wind),
Sonne-W?rme (Engl. sun-warmth), Sonne-Wetter (Engl. sun-weather) etc. We ar-
ranged these 25 pairs into sequences in order to focus our subjects? attention on small
semantic relatedness distinctions.
4Since in most word nets cross-POS relations are very sparse, researchers currently investigate relation
types able to connect the noun, verb, and adjective sub-graphs (e.g. Marrafa and Mendes (2006) or Lem-
nitzer et al (2008)). However, these new relations are not yet integrated on a large scale and therefore
should not (or even cannot) be used in semantic relatedness measures. Furthermore, calculating seman-
tic relatedness between words with different POS might introduce additional challenges potentially as yet
unidentified, which calls for a careful exploration.
5In this paper and in most comparable studies, the term analytical means that the word-pairs are hand-
picked. Obviously, the disadvantage of this approach is its sensibility to idiosyncrasies, which might ex-
tremely bias the outcome of the experiments.
62 Cramer
For the five remaining lists (WP2-WP6), we applied a different method: firstly,
we again analytically collected word-pairs which are part of collocations, i.e. the
two nouns Rat and Tat (mit Rat und Tat helfen, Engl. to help with words and
deeds) or Qual and Wahl (die Qual der Wahl haben, Engl. to be spoilt for choice).
Secondly, we assembled word-pairs which feature association relations, i.e. Afrika
(Engl. Africa) and Tiger (Engl. tiger) or Weihnachten (Engl. Christmas) and Zimt
(Engl. cinnamon). Thirdly, we automatically constructed a list of random word-pairs
using the Wacky corpus (Baroni and Bernardini, 2006) as a resource and manually
excluded ad-hoc-constructions. Finally, out of these three resources we compiled five
sets of 100 randomized word-pairs with no more than 20% of the collocation and
association word-pairs.
We asked subjects to rate the word-pairs on a 5-level scale (0 = not related to 4
= strongly related). The subjects were instructed to base the rating on their intuition
about any kind of conceivable relation between the two words. WP1 was rated by 35
subjects and WP2 to WP6 were each rated by 15 subjects. We then calculated the
average judgment per word-pair and ranked the word-pairs accordingly.
The correlation between the human judgments and the eleven semantic measures
is shown in Table 1. The difference between the correlation coefficients of WP1 and
WP2-WP6 suggests that the method of construction might have an impact on the re-
sults of the experiments. The manual compilation of word-pairs seems to lead to
better correlation coefficients and might therefore cause an overestimation of the per-
formance of the semantic measures. Furthermore, with respect to the list construction
methods, the two resources and respective measures, namely GermaNet (TreePath?
Lin) and Google (GoogleQ?GooglePMI), seem to respond differently: whereas the
correlation coefficients of the eight GermaNet based measures drop to a greater or
lesser extend (Table 1: r for WP1 and r for WP2-WP6), the correlation coefficients of
the three Google based measures approximately level off.
Table 1: Our Correlation Coefficients: Correlation between AverageHuman Judgment
and Semantic Measure Values
r Tree Graph Wu- Leac.- Hirst- Resnik Jiang- Lin Google Google Google
Path Path Palm. Chod. St-O. Conr. Norm. Quot. PMI
WP1 0.41 0.42 0.36 0.48 0.47 0.44 0.45 0.48 0.27 0.37 0.37
WP2 0.09 0.31 0.33 0.16 0.26 0.37 0.18 0.36 0.24 0.29 0.27
WP3 0.03 0.22 0.24 0.11 0.28 0.19 0.15 0.26 0.46 0.45 0.40
WP4 0.07 0.39 0.11 0.11 0.31 0.11 0.25 0.16 0.34 0.38 0.34
WP5 0.27 0.39 0.26 0.32 0.38 0.31 0.41 0.34 0.19 0.32 0.28
WP6 0.09 0.27 0.15 0.17 0.39 0.24 0.29 0.25 0.26 0.38 0.43
mean 0.16 0.33 0.24 0.23 0.35 0.28 0.29 0.31 0.29 0.36 0.35
In any case, since the correlation coefficients are rather low, there is much room for
improvement. However, as all measures scatter in the same range ? independently
of the precise algorithm or resource used, as it seems ? we argue that the reason for
this critical performance might be one of the following two aspects (most probably a
combination of both):
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 63
? Word nets (and/or corpora) do not cover the (all) types of semantic information
required.
? Human judgment experiments are (without clear and standardized specification
of the experimental setup) an inappropriate way to evaluate semantic measures.
Both aspects are discussed in Section 4. However, we first should have a look at three
similar studies, two for English and one for German.
3 Three Similar Studies
As mentioned above various researchers rely on human judgment experiments as an
evaluation resource for semantic relatedness measures. In this section, three such
studies are summarized in order to identify differences with respect to the methods
adopted and results obtained.6
3.1 Budanitsky and Hirst
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) specify the purpose of their paper Evaluating WordNet-
based Measures of Lexical Semantic Relatedness as a comparison of the performance
of various relatedness measures. Accordingly, they sketch a number of measures
and identify three evaluation methods: firstly, the theoretical examination (of e.g. the
mathematical properties of the respective measure); secondly, the comparison with
human judgments; thirdly, the evaluation of a measure with respect to a given NLP-
application. They regard the second and third method as being the most appropriate
ones and therefore focus on them in their empirical work presented in the paper. As
a basis for the second evaluation method, i.e. the comparison between semantic mea-
sure and human judgments, they use two word-pair lists: the first compiled by Ruben-
stein and Goodenough (1965) and containing 65 word-pairs7, the second compiled
by Miller and Charles (1991) and containing 30 word-pairs. In order to evaluate the
performance of five different measures (and potentially in order to find a ranking),
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) compute the semantic relatedness values for the word-
pairs and compare them with the human judgments. They thus find the correlation
coefficients summarized in Table 2.
Budanitsky and Hirst (2006) regard this evaluation method, i.e. comparingmeasure
values and human judgments, as the ideal approach. However, in examining the results
of this comparison, they identify several limitations; i.e. they point out that the amount
of data available (65 word-pairs) might be inadequate for real NLP-applications. They
additionally emphasize that the development of a large-scale data set would be time-
consuming and expensive. Moreover, they argue that the experiments by Rubenstein
and Goodenough (1965) as well as Miller and Charles (1991) focus on relations be-
tween words rather than relations between word-senses (concepts), which would be
6There are many more relevant studies; however, they all point to the same issue, namely, the incompat-
ibility of the results.
7Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965) investigated the relationship between ?similarity of context? and
?similarity of meaning?. They asked 51 subjects to rate on a scale of 0 to 4 the similarity of meaning for
the 65 word-pairs. Miller and Charles (1991) selected 30 out of the 65 original word-pairs (according to
their relatedness strength) and asked 38 subjects to rate this list. They used the same experimental setup as
Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965).
64 Cramer
Table 2: Correlation Coefficients by Budantisky and Hirst
r Leac.- Hirst- Resnik Jiang- Lin
Chod. StO. Conr.
M&C 0.816 0.744 0.774 0.850 0.82
R&G 0.838 0.786 0.779 0.781 0.819
mean 0.83 0.77 0.78 0.82 0.82
? especially when taking potential NLP-applications into account ? more appropri-
ate. They note that it might however be difficult to trigger a specific concept without
biasing the subjects.
3.2 Boyd-Graber, Fellbaum, Osherson, and Schapire
In contrast to the above mentioned experiments by Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), the
research reported in Adding Dense, Weighted Connections to WordNet aims at the
development of a new, conceptually different layer of relations to be included into
a word net. Boyd-Graber et al (2006) are motivated in their work by three widely
acknowledged shortcomings of word nets:
? The lack of cross-POS links connecting the sub-graphs containing nouns, verbs,
or adjectives, respectively.
? The low density of relations in the sub-graphs, i.e. potentially missing types of
relations such as ?actor? or ?instrument?.
? The absence of weights assigned to the relations, i.e. representing the degrees
of semantic distance of different subordinates of the same superordinate.
In order to address these shortcomings, Boyd-Graber et al ask subjects to assign
values of ?evocation? representing the relations between 1,000 synsets. They ask 20
subjects to rate evocation in 120,000 pairs of synsets (these pairs form a random se-
lection of all possible pairs of the above mentioned 1,000 core synsets considered in
the experiment). The subjects are given a manual explaining a couple of details about
the task and are trained on a sample of 1,000 (two sets of 500) randomly selected
pairs. Although the research objective of the work presented in this paper is to con-
struct a new relations layer for Princeton WordNet rather than to evaluate semantic
relatedness measures, Boyd-Graber et al compare the results of their human judg-
ment experiment with the relatedness values of four different semantic measures. The
correlation coefficients of this comparison are summarized in Table 3.
Boyd-Graber et al arrive at the conclusion that ? given the obvious lack of cor-
relation (see Table 3) ? evocation constitutes an empirically supported semantic re-
lation type which is still not captured by the semantic measures (at least not by those
considered in this experiment).
3.3 Gurevych et al
Similar to the study by Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), Gurevych (2005) gives insight
into a human judgment experiment conducted in order to compare the performance
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 65
Table 3: Correlation Coefficients by Boyd-Graber et al
r Lesk Path LC LSA
all 0.008
verbs 0.046
nouns 0.013 0.013
closest 0.131
Table 4: Correlation Coefficients by Gurevych (with Lesk1 = Lesk (DWDS); Lesk2
= Lesk (radial); Lesk3 = Lesk (hypernym); Resn. = Resnik)
r Google Lesk1 Lesk2 Lesk3 Resn.
R&G 0.57 0.53 0.55 0.60 0.72
German
of her own semantic relatedness measure8 with established ones. For this purpose
(Gurevych, 2005) translates the word-pair list by Rubenstein and Goodenough (1965)
and asks 24 native speakers of German to rate the word-pairs with respect to their se-
mantic relatedness on a 5-level scale; she thus replicates the study by Rubenstein and
Goodenough (1965) for German. Gurevych (2005) finally compares the human judg-
ments with several semantic measures. The correlation coefficients of this comparison
are summarized in Table 4.
Gurevych (2005) comments on (among others) the following four issues: firstly, she
emphasizes the difference between semantic similarity and relatedness; she argues that
most word-pair lists were constructed in order to measure semantic similarity rather
than relatedness and that these lists might therefore be inappropriate for the task at
hand. Secondly, Gurevych (2005) observes that, in contrast to the concept of seman-
tic similarity, semantic relatedness is not well defined. Thirdly, as the experiments
are based on words rather than concepts, the results attained thus far might exhibit
additional noise. Finally, she notes that the amount of data is too limited in size and
that analytically created word-pair lists are inherently biased. Accordingly, Zesch and
Gurevych (2006) propose a corpus based method for automatically constructing test
data and list a number of advantages of this approach: i.e. lexical-semantic cohesion
in texts accounts for various relation types, domain-specific and technical terms can
easily be included, and, in contrast to manually constructed, corpus based lists are
probably more objective.
4 Meta-Level Evaluation
Table 5 shows the minimum, maximum, and mean correlations reported in the three
studies as well as our own results. The table illustrates the broad statistical spread:
the mean correlation coefficients range between 0.8 and 0.04 for English and between
0.61 and 0.29 for German. Admittedly, the experimental setup and the goals of the
8Her measure is able to manage limitations of some of the previously published measures.
66 Cramer
Table 5: Comparison of the Correlation Coefficients of the Different Experiments
(with B&G: Budanitsky and Hirst / B-G et al: Boyd-Graber et al / G et al: Gurevych
et al / C&F, C: our results)
B&H B-G et al G et al C&F, C
max 0.83 0.131 0.72 0.36
min 0.77 0.008 0.53 0.16
mean 0.80 0.04 0.61 0.29
stdv 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.06
four studies differ in several aspects9. However, the principle idea? i.e. using human
judgments as a baseline or evaluation resource ? is the same.
We argue that ? given the statistical spread shown in Table 5 ? as long as the
reasons for this discrepancy have not been determined and the methods have not been
harmonized as far as possible, the results of these experiments should not be used as
a basis for e.g. the evaluation or comparison of semantic measures. As mentioned in
Section 1 we suspect that (no fewer than) the following aspects influence the results
of the human judgment experiments and thus the correlation between humans and
semantic measures:
? Research objective: The goals of the studies differ with respect to several as-
pects. Firstly, some studies, e.g. Budanitsky and Hirst (2006), aim at comparing
the performance of different semantic (relatedness) measures, whereas Boyd-
Graber et al (2006) intend to construct a new relations layer (potentially able
to substitute or complement established relatedness measures). Secondly, in
some cases, e.g. Cramer and Finthammer (2008), relations between words are
considered, whereas e.g. Boyd-Graber et al (2006) examine relations between
concepts. Thirdly, it seems to be unclear which types of relations are actually
searched for (relatedness, similarity, evocation, distance) and in what aspects
these correspond or differ. Interestingly, in computational linguistics and psy-
cholinguistics there is an additional strand of research investigating the so-called
?association relation?, e.g. Schulte im Walde and Melinger (2005) and Roth and
Schulte im Walde (2008), which is not yet considered or integrated in the re-
search on semantic relatedness measures. We argue that such an integration
might be fruitful for both research strands.
? Setting of the human judgment experiment: In all studies summarized above,
the subjects are students (mostly of linguistics, computer sciences, and compu-
tational linguistics). In most cases, they are given a short manual explaining the
task, which certainly differs in many aspects, e.g. due to the above mentioned
fact that the relation type searched for is a still unsettled issue. Furthermore, no
training phase is included in most of the studies except the one by Boyd-Graber
9It seems unfeasible to determine all possible differences of the studies because, among other things, the
papers do not specify the experimental setup in detail. We therefore assume that the definition of a shared
task might bring us considerably closer to understanding the questions raised in this paper.
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 67
et al (2006), who are therefore able to identify potential training effects. Again
only Boyd-Graber et al (2006) account for the handling of idiosyncrasies.
? Construction of experimental data: In Boyd-Graber et al (2006) the concept-
pairs were randomly selected, whereas the word-pairs used by Budanitsky and
Hirst (2006) were constructed analytically. In the studies by Gurevych (2005),
Zesch and Gurevych (2006), and Cramer and Finthammer (2008), some were
analytically constructed and some randomly (semi-automatically) selected. In
addition, the data sets vary with respect to their size: Budanitsky and Hirst
(2006), Gurevych (2005), and Cramer and Finthammer (2008) only use small
sets of word-pairs (concept-pairs), i.e. a few hundred pairs, whereas Boyd-
Graber et al (2006) investigate a huge amount of data; their experiment there-
fore certainly constitutes the most representative one. All studies also indicate
the (mean/median) inter-subject correlation10 which varies from 0.48 (concept-
pair based) in Zesch and Gurevych (2006) and 0.72 (concept-pair based) in
Boyd-Graber et al (2006) to 0.85 (word-pair based) in Budanitsky and Hirst
(2006).
We think that this comparison of the various experiments points to two aspects which
probably cause the large statistical spread shown in Table 5: the selection of the word-
pairs (concept-pairs) and the type of relation (relatedness, similarity, evocation, dis-
tance). We assume that it should be possible to condense the comparison into one
(more or less simple) rule: the narrower the relation concept (similarity < relatedness
< evocation) and the narrower the data considered (lexical semantic selection rule <
any kind of selection rule < random selection) the better the correlation between hu-
man judgment and semantic measure11. In any case, it seems essential to determine
which relation types the subjects (knowingly or unknowingly) bear in mind when they
judge word-pairswith respect to semantic relatedness. In order to achieve this goal and
be able to integrate all relevant relations into the resources used for calculating seman-
tic relatedness, the human judgments collected in the above-mentioned studies should
be dissected into components (i.e. components for which systematic/unsystematic lex-
ical semantic relations account etc.); such a decomposition certainly also helps render
more precisely the definition of semantic relatedness.
Furthermore, it is ? in our opinion ? an unsettled issue whether the three types
of semantic relation at hand, thus the relations
1. represented in a word net or corpus (both computed via semantic measure),
2. existing between any given word-pair in a text (which is mostly relevant for
NLP-applications),
3. and the one assigned by subjects in a human judgment experiment
10The inter-subject correlation depends on various parameters, e.g. the complexity of the task, the sub-
jects (and their background, age, etc.) as well as the experimental setup (task definition, training phase,
etc.).
11... and obviously the easier the task!
68 Cramer
correspond at all. In principle, word nets, corpus statistics, and human judgments
should be related to (theoretically even represent) the (at least partially) shared knowl-
edge of humans about the underlying ?lexical semantic system?, whereas relations be-
tween words in a concrete text represent an instantiation of a system. From this point
of view, at least the human judgments should correspond to the semantics encoded in
a word net (or corpus statistics). Instead of using human judgments as an evaluation
resource (for e.g. word net based semantic measures), they might as well be directly
integrated into the word net as a (preferably dense) layer of (potentially cognitively
relevant, weighted but unlabeled) semantic relations, which is best adopted in Boyd-
Graber et al (2006), as summarized in Section 3. This approach has several advan-
tages: firstly, the calculation of a semantic relatedness value is ? given such a layer
? trivial, since it merely consists in a look-up procedure. Secondly, NLP-applications
using word nets as a resource would certainly benefit from the thus enhanced density
of relations, i.e. cross-POS relations. Thirdly, an elaborate and standardized experi-
mental setup for human judgment experiments could be used for the construction of
such a layer in different languages (and domains) and would also guarantee the mod-
eling quality. Finally, such a new word net layer would hopefully resolve the above
mentioned open issue of the diverging correlation coefficients.
Alternatively, since it is completely unclear if the evocation relation can really act
as a substitute for classical semantic relatedness measures in NLP-applications, cur-
rent word nets should be enhanced by systematically augmenting existing relation
types and integrating new ones. On that condition and given that a common evalua-
tion framework exists, it should be possible to determine which semantic relatedness
measure performs best under what conditions.
Last but not least, in order to determine the relation between an underlying seman-
tic system (represented by a semantic measure or as mentioned above the evocation
layer) and the instantiation of this system in a concrete text, a study similar to the one
reported in Zesch and Gurevych (2006) should be conducted. Such a study proba-
bly also shows if the evocation relation is able to substitute (or at least complement)
semantic relatedness measures typically used in NLP-applications.
5 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented our own human judgment experiments for German and compared
them with three similar studies. This comparison illustrates that the results of these
studies are incompatible. We therefore argue that the experimental setup should be
clarified and, if possible, harmonized. We also think that the notion of association
should be considered carefully, since it is an established concept for measuring related
phenomena in several psycholinguistic and computational linguistic communities.
We now plan to continue our work on three levels. Firstly, we intend to conduct a
study similar to the one reported by Boyd-Graber et al (2006) with a small amount
of German data. We hope that this will provide us with insight into some of the open
issues mentioned in Section 1 and Section 4. Secondly, we plan to investigate if the
evocation relation is able to substitute the semantic relatedness measures typically
used in lexical chaining and similar NLP-applications. Thirdly, we intend to run ex-
periments using the database of noun associations in German constructed by Melinger
and Weber (2006) as a resource for the evaluation of semantic relatedness measures.
How Well Do Semantic Relatedness Measures Perform? A Meta-Study 69
Acknowledgements The author would like to thankMichael Bei?wenger, Christiane
Fellbaum, Sabine Schulte im Walde, Angelika Storrer, Tonio Wandmacher, Torsten
Zesch, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This research was
funded by the DFG Research Group 437 (HyTex).
References
Baroni, M. and S. Bernardini (Eds.) (2006). Wacky! Working papers on the Web as
Corpus. GEDIT, Bologna.
Barzilay, R. and M. Elhadad (1997). Using lexical chains for text summarization. In
Proceedings of the Intelligent Scalable Text Summarization Workshop, pp. 10?17.
Boyd-Graber, J., C. Fellbaum, D. Osherson, and R. Schapire (2006). Adding dense,
weighted, connections to wordnet. In Proceedings of the 3rd Global WordNet Meet-
ing, pp. 29?35.
Budanitsky, A. and G. Hirst (2006). Evaluating wordnet-based measures of semantic
relatedness. Computational Linguistics 32 (1), 13?47.
Carthy, J. (2004). Lexical chains versus keywords for topic tracking. In Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 507?510. Springer.
Cilibrasi, R. and P. M. B. Vitanyi (2007). The google similarity distance. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 19(3), 370?383.
Cramer, I. and M. Finthammer (2008). An evaluation procedure for word net based
lexical chaining: Methods and issues. In Proceedings of the 4th Global WordNet
Meeting, pp. 120?147.
Fellbaum, C. (1998). WordNet. An Electronic Lexical Database. The MIT Press.
Gurevych, I. (2005). Using the structure of a conceptual network in computing se-
mantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the IJCNLP 2005, pp. 767?778.
Hirst, G. and D. St-Onge (1998). Lexical chains as representation of context for the
detection and correction malapropisms. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database, pp. 305?332. The MIT Press.
Jiang, J. J. and D. W. Conrath (1997). Semantic similarity based on corpus statistics
and lexical taxonomy. In Proceedings of ROCLING X, pp. 19?33.
Leacock, C. and M. Chodorow (1998). Combining local context and wordnet simi-
larity for word sense identification. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.), WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database, pp. 265?284. The MIT Press.
Lemnitzer, L. and C. Kunze (2002). Germanet - representation, visualization, appli-
cation. In Proceedings of the 4th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference,
pp. 1485?1491.
70 Cramer
Lemnitzer, L., H. Wunsch, and P. Gupta (2008). Enriching germanet with verb-noun
relations - a case study of lexical acquisition. In Proceedings of the 6th Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation.
Lin, D. (1998). An information-theoretic definition of similarity. In Proceedings of
the 15th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 296?304.
Marrafa, P. and S. Mendes (2006). Modeling adjectives in computational relational
lexica. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 poster session, pp. 555?562.
Melinger, A. and A. Weber (2006). A database of noun associations in german. On-
line available database: http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/nag.
Miller, G. A. and W. G. Charles (1991). Contextual correlates of semantic similiarity.
Language and Cognitive Processes 6(1), 1?28.
Novischi, A. and D. Moldovan (2006). Question answering with lexical chains prop-
agating verb arguments. In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pp. 897?904.
Resnik, P. (1995). Using information content to evaluate semantic similarity in a
taxonomy. In Proceedings of the IJCAI 1995, pp. 448?453.
Roth, M. and S. Schulte im Walde (2008). Corpus co-occurrence, dictionary and
wikipedia entries as resources for semantic relatedness information. In Proceed-
ings of the 6th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Rubenstein, H. and J. B. Goodenough (1965). Contextual correlates of synonymy.
Communications of the ACM 8(10), 627?633.
Schulte im Walde, S. and A. Melinger (2005). Identifying semantic relations and
functional properties of human verb associations. In Proceedings of Human Lan-
guage Technology Conference and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pp. 612?619.
Wu, Z. and M. Palmer (1994). Verb semantics and lexical selection. In Proceedings
of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
133?138.
Zesch, T. and I. Gurevych (2006). Automatically creating datasets for measures of
semantic relatedness. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguistic Distances at
COLING/ACL 2006, pp. 16?24.
