Semantic Representations of
Syntactically Marked Discourse
Status in Crosslinguistic
Perspective
Emily M. Bender
David Goss-Grubbs
University of Washington (USA)
email: ebender@u.washington.edu
Abstract
This paper presents suggested semantic representations for different types
of referring expressions in the format of Minimal Recursion Semantics
and sketches syntactic analyses which can create them compositionally.
We explore cross-linguistic harmonization of these representations, to
promote interoperability and reusability of linguistic analyses. We follow
Borthen and Haugereid (2005) in positing COG-ST (?cognitive status?)
as a feature on the syntax-semantics interface to handle phenomena as-
sociated with definiteness. Our proposal helps to unify the treatments of
definiteness markers, demonstratives, overt pronouns and null anaphora
across languages. In languages with articles, they contribute an existen-
tial quantifier and the appropriate value for COG-ST. In other languages,
the COG-ST value is determined by an affix. The contribution of demon-
strative determiners is decomposed into a COG-ST value, a quantifier,
and proximity information, each of which can be contributed by a dif-
ferent kind of grammatical construction in a given language. Along with
COG-ST, we posit a feature that distinguishes between pronouns (and
null anaphora) that are sensitive to the identity of the referent of their
antecedent and those that are sensitive to its type.
17
18 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
1 Introduction
In this paper, we discuss the compositional construction of semantic representations
reflecting discourse status across a range of phenomena. Borthen and Haugereid
(2005) propose COG-ST (?cognitive-status?)1 as a feature on the syntax-semantics
interface to handle phenomena associated with definiteness. We explore how their
approach leads to cross-linguistically unified treatments of demonstratives, overt pro-
nouns and null anaphora as well. We find that cross-linguistic studies motivate differ-
ent representations than we might have arrived at from just one language.
Our work grows out of the Grammar Matrix, a multilingual grammar engineering
project (Bender et al, 2002; Bender and Flickinger, 2005) which strives to harmonize
semantic representations across diverse languages. The Grammar Matrix is couched
within the Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar (HPSG) framework (Pollard and
Sag, 1994). We use Minimal Recursion Semantics (Copestake et al, 2001, 2005) as
our semantic representation system.
2 Background
2.1 Minimal Recursion Semantics
Grammar Matrix-derived grammars associate surface strings with MRS representa-
tions (or MRSs), in a bidirectional mapping that allows both parsing and generation.
An MRS consists of a multiset of elementary predications (eps), each of which is a
single relation with its associated arguments, labeled by a handle; a set of handle con-
straints relating the labels of eps to argument positions within other eps; and a top
handle indicating which of the labels has outermost scope (Copestake et al, 2001,
2005). The MRSs produced by these grammars are underspecified for scope, allowing
multiple different fully-scoped variants, according to the handle constraints.
Each ep has a predicate (PRED) value and one or more argument positions, usu-
ally labeled ARG0 through ARGn. By convention, we refer to elementary predications
by their PRED values. For scope-taking eps (including quantifiers as well as clause-
embedding predicates such as _believe_v_rel and scopal modifiers such as negation),
at least one argument position is handle-valued, and related (in a well-formed struc-
ture) to the label of another ep. For non-scopal predications, the values of the argument
positions are variables (also called indices) which may themselves be associated with
?variable properties?, such as person, number and gender on individual variables, or
tense, aspect, sentential force and mood on event variables.
One benefit of MRS is that it is designed to be compatible with feature-structure
grammars. We build up MRSs through an HPSG implementation of the MRS algebra
in Copestake et al (2001), in which each constituent bears features recording the eps
and handle constraints contributed within the constituent, as well as a set of properties
exposed through the feature HOOK to facilitate further composition. These proper-
ties include pointers to the local top handle (LTOP), the constituent?s primary index
(INDEX), and the external argument, if any (XARG).
Eps are canonically contributed by lexical entries, with one ep per lexical entry.
Lexical entries can, however, contribute more than one ep or no eps at all. In addition,
syntactic constructions can also contribute eps of their own.
1Original feature name: COGN-ST.
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 19
cog-st
activ-or-less uniq-or-more
uniq+fam+activ
fam-or-less fam-or-more
uniq+fam activ+fam
uniq-or-less activ-or-more
type-id uniq-id familiar activated in-foc
Figure 1: Cognitive status hierarchy
2.2 Harmonization of Representations
The semantic representations used in the Grammar Matrix were originally derived
from those used in the English Resource Grammar (Flickinger, 2000), a wide-coverage
grammar of English. In this paper, we propose to refine the semantic representations
for phenomena connected to discourse status in light of the constraints on the syntax-
semantics interface we find in a range of languages. This is not to say that we are
promoting working towards an interlingua: indeed, even if it were possible to define a
suitable interlingual set of representations, we believe it wouldn?t be possible to map
from surface strings to such representations in one compositional step.
Nonetheless, it is useful to harmonize representations across languages while still
allowing for necessary differences, for at least two reasons. First, when semantic
representations are as similar as they practically can be, this simplifies both the transfer
component in transfer-basedmachine translation systems (e.g., Oepen et al, 2007) and
the design of downstream components that make use of semantic representations in
multilingual NLP systems in general. Second, harmonized semantic representations
facilitate the creation of libraries in a resource like the GrammarMatrix, which in turn
promotes both the reuse of analyses within implemented grammars and the exploration
of computational linguistic typology.
2.3 Discourse/Cognitive Status
This paper builds on a tradition of work investigating the way the discourse status
of referents influences the form of the referring expressions used to refer to them, or
alternatively, the way that speakers use contrasts in form to signal to their interlocu-
tors the discourse (or cognitive) status of their intended referents (Chafe, 1976, 1994;
Prince, 1981; Gundel et al, 1993; Borthen and Haugereid, 2005; Arnold, 2008).
Borthen and Haugereid (2005) (henceforth B&H) present arguments from a range
of languages that the discourse status associated with referring expressions can be
constrained by multiple intersecting syntactic factors. They use this to motivate em-
bedding the discourse status information within the semantic features of a sign, rather
20 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
than on the contextual features. They adapt the implicational scale proposed by Gun-
del et al (1993) and Prince (1981), representing discourse referents as having a range
of values from ?type identifiable? through ?in focus?. In Gundel et al and Prince?s
work, this is an implicational scale, where a discourse status of ?in focus?, for example,
also entails a discourse status of ?activated?. B&H argue that it needs to be represented
within the syntax by a type hierarchy that makes each discourse status type incompat-
ible with the others, while also creating supertypes that represent ranges of discourse
status values. Their intuition is that the syntactic constraints restrict the distribution
of certain forms based on the highest discourse status they are compatible with, rather
than on the actual discourse status of the referent they are used to evoke in a given
context. The cognitive status hierarchy, as we adopt it from Borthen and Haugereid
(2005) is shown in Fig 1.
3 Markers of Definiteness
The first phenomenon we consider is markers of definiteness. In English, these are
syntactically identified with determiners, and thus the English Resource Grammar
represents the semantic contrast between the and a with the PRED value of the ep
contributed by the determiner: _the_q_rel vs. _a_q_rel (where ?q? stands for ?quan-
tifier?). Crosslinguistically, however, definiteness is not always marked in lexical de-
terminers which might plausibly contribute quantifier relations. For example, in Nor-
wegian, definiteness is signaled in part by an affix on the noun:
(1) Jeg
I
s?
saw
bilen.
car.DEF
?I saw the car.? [nob]
This does not lend itself to the analysis of definiteness in English provided by the
ERG: First, the definite suffix can co-occur with something else in the determiner
role, as in (2).2 Second, even if the affix did contribute a _def_q_rel, this would lead
to ill-formed MRSs as soon as there were any intersective modifiers: Eps introduced
by intersective modifiers (such as nye in (2)) should be labeled with the same handle
as the ep introduced by the noun. But according to the MRS model of semantic com-
positionality, the label of the noun?s relation is not available for further composition
once the quantifier has attached.
(2) Jeg
I
s?
saw
den
the
nye
new.DEF
bilen
car.DEF
?I saw the new car.? [nob]
Third, adjectives can also take definite forms. We would like to enforce the com-
patibility of this information, rather than having each instance of the definite suffix
contribute an additional ep. Per B&H, this supports treating definiteness in terms of a
feature rather than through eps.
2Note that the determiner is required when there is an adjective in a definite NP, and pragmatically very
restricted when there is not.
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 21
Following B&H, we note that the apparently binary distinction between definites
and indefinites is better assimilated to the cognitive status hierarchy. There are mor-
phosyntactic phenomena in various languages which divide the cognitive status hier-
archy into two separate ranges, though the division point may vary across languages
and within languages across phenomena. Using a single feature for cognitive status
that takes its values from the type hierarchy in Fig 1 allows these various distinctions
to be modeled elegantly.
B&H propose wrapping semantic indices in a new structure ref-prop, which con-
tains COG-ST as well as other features related to the referential properties of a noun
phrase. In this paper, we focus on COG-ST and leave the other dimensions to future
work. However, we differ from B&H in proposing that COG-ST, at least, should be a
feature of semantic indices, rather than inside a parallel structure (i.e., their ref-prop).
This has the benefit of causing the COG-ST information from particular words or af-
fixes to be included in the compositionally created semantic representations of phrases
and sentences without any further effort: wherever the index so marked appears, it will
carry its COG-ST value with it. It also makes the (correct, we believe) prediction that
whenever an index appears in multiple places in the semantic representation, it should
bear the same cognitive status information in all of them. For example, the MRS for
(3) is as in (4), where the variable ?x5? represents the cat, and appears as a value in four
separate elementary predications: ARG0 of _cat_n_rel, ARG0 of _exist_q_rel, ARG1
of _want_v_rel, and ARG1 of _go+out_v_rel. We claim that in all of these guises,
the cognitive status of the referent is the same; there is only one mental representation
of the referent involved.
(3) The cat wanted to go out.
(4) ?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
LTOP h0
INDEX e1
RELS
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
_exist_q_rel
LBL h3
ARG0 x5[uniq-id]
RSTR h6
BODY h4
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
,
?
?
?
_cat_n_rel
LBL h7
ARG0 x5
?
?
?
,
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
_want_v_rel
LBL h8
ARG0 e2
ARG1 x5
ARG2 h9
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
,
?
?
?
?
?
_go+out_v_rel
LBL h10
ARG0 e11
ARG1 x5
?
?
?
?
?
?
HCONS
?
h6 =q h7, h9 =q h10
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
B&H consider this possibility and dismiss it on the grounds that coreferential noun
phrases don?t necessarily share the same cognitive status. However, placing the COG-
ST value on the index does not necessarily entail that the expressions The cat, herself,
and her impute the same cognitive status to their discourse referent in (5). As far as
the syntactic processing is concerned, these expressions introduce distinct indices. It is
up to a separate reference resolution component to identify them, and that component
could merge their COG-ST values or not, as appropriate.
(5) The cat opened the door herself with her paw.
Thus rather than having English the and similar elements introduce a specialized
quantifier relation, we instead do a small amount of semantic decomposition: the
introduces just an existential quantifier (_exist_q_rel), but constrains the variable it
22 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
a. def-noun-lex-rule := inflecting-lexeme-to-word-rule &
%prefix (ha- *)
[ SYNSEM.LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX.COG-ST uniq-id,
DTR noun-lex ].
b. def-adj-lex-rule := inflecting-lexeme-to-word-rule &
%prefix (ha- *)
[ SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT.HEAD.MOD.LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX.COG-ST
uniq-or-more, DTR adj-lex ].
c. indef-noun-lex-rule := constant-lexeme-to-word-rule &
[ SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT.HEAD.MOD.LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX.COG-ST
type-id, DTR adj-lex ].
Figure 2: Sample lexical rules for definiteness affixes
binds to be [COG-ST uniq-id]. This signals to the hearer that s/he should be able to
assign a unique representation to the referent (but not that the referent itself is unique
in the world or in the previous discourse, cf. Gundel et al, 2001).
In other languages affixes can also constrain COG-ST to uniq-or-more or uniq-id.
We illustrate here with the Hebrew definite prefix ha-, shown in (6) (from Wintner,
2000:322).
(6) koll
all
?e??
six
ha-smalot
DEF-dresses
ha-yapot
DEF-nice
ha-?elle
DEF-these
?elli
mine
mi-?rhb
from-US
?all these six nice dresses of mine from the US? [heb]
ha- is added by a lexical rule (sketched in Fig 2a) which adds information about
the COG-ST to the noun?s own INDEX value.3 When ha- attaches to an adjective
in Hebrew, it instead adds the information that the noun the adjective is modifying
must have the COG-ST value uniq-or-more, as sketched in Fig 2b. This rule is paired
with a non-inflecting lexical rule Fig 2c which produces adjectives which can only
modify nouns that are [COG-ST type-id], i.e., indefinite. This will enforce definiteness
agreement across the noun phrase.4
This section has briefly outlined an adaptation of B&H?s proposal for definiteness
marking. The main difference to their proposal is in the location of COG-ST in the
feature geometry. In the following two sections, we extend the approach to demon-
stratives and a variety of null anaphora.
4 Demonstratives
Demonstratives can stand alone as noun phrases (demonstrative pronouns) or func-
tion as nominal dependents. Starting again with English, we find that demonstra-
tives in their nominal-dependent guise, like the markers of definiteness, fill the spec-
3The lexical rules in Fig 2 are non-branching productions that apply at the bottom of the parse tree,
before any syntactic rules can apply. The SYNSEM value represents the mother and the DTR value the
daughter. The types they inherit from (e.g., inflecting-lexeme-to-word-rule) enforce identity of most of
the information between mother and daughter. The rules add information about COG-ST, which must be
compatible with what?s provided by the lexical entries for the rules to apply.
4For the rule for unmarked nouns, see ?4 below.
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 23
ifier slot of the noun phrase and function as determiners. Accordingly, the ERG
represents their semantic contribution through the PRED value of the quantifier rela-
tion: _this_q_dem_rel and _that_q_dem_rel. Crosslinguistically, however, demon-
stratives functioning as nominal dependents can also appear as adjectives or affixes
(Dryer, 2008). In such languages, within the general constraints of composition of
MRS, it is not elegant or natural-seeming to have an adjective contribute a quantifier
relation or constrain the PRED value of a relation contributed by a separate determiner
or non-branching NP construction.
Instead, it seems more appropriate to decompose the semantic representation of de-
terminers into a quantifier relation (_exist_q_rel) and a separate one-place modifier
relation (e.g., _distal+dem_a_rel, for ?that?). In languages with demonstrative adjec-
tives, the demonstrative form contributes only the modifier relation. In languages with
demonstrative determiners, the demonstrative forms contribute both.
Demonstratives also constrain the COG-ST value of the nouns the modify, typically
to activ-or-fam. In some languages, (e.g., Irish Gaelic), the demonstratives require ad-
ditional marking of discourse status. Typically this takes the form of a definite article
(see (7) from McCloskey (2004)), but demonstratives can also attach to pronouns and
proper nouns (McCloskey, 2004).
(7) an
the
fear
man
m?r
big
t?agartha
stocky
gro?
cheerful
seo
DEM
?this big stocky cheerful man? [gle]
(8) *fear m?r t?agartha gro? seo
Such languages are straightforwardly countenanced within this system: the definite
article and article-less NPs have incompatible COG-ST values, and only the former is
compatible with the COG-ST constraints contributed by the demonstrative adjective.5
The situation in Hebrew is slightly more complex: Demonstratives can occur with
or without the ha- prefix, so long as they agree with the noun they modify. Conversely,
nouns without the ha- prefix are interpreted as indefinite, unless they are modified by
a demonstrative adjective. It is unclear at this point whether there is a difference
in interpretation between (9) and (10) (from Wintner, 2000:334), but it seems likely
that type-id is not the correct cognitive status for (9); that is, it is most likely not an
indefinite.
(9) sepr
book
ze
this
nimkar
is.sold
heiteb
well
?This book sells well.? [heb]
(10) ha-sepr
DEF-book
ha-ze
DEF-this
nimkar
is.sold
heiteb
well
?This book sells well.? [heb]
5McCloskey points out that the demonstratives can attach to coordinated NPs, each with their own
article. This raises difficulties for treating the demonstratives as adjectives, as it would require the demon-
strative adjectives to attach outside the determiner (cf. Bender et al, 2005). We leave this issue to future
work.
24 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
Here, we postpone the assignment of a COG-ST value to an unmarked noun until the
NP level, filling in type-id in case no demonstrative has attached. This requires an
additional syntactic feature to control the application of the NPs rules, but this seems
motivated: As Wintner notes, ha- is functioning as an agreement marker; its distri-
bution has become grammaticized and drifted somewhat from what purely semantic
constraints would predict.
To provide complete representations for demonstratives, we also need to address the
additional information they carry in many languages, such as the relative proximity
of the referent to the speaker and/or the hearer, its visibility or elevation (Diessel,
1999). These distinctions appear to be at least partially independent of the COG-
ST dimension. In addition, in the absence of any evidence for syntactically-mediated
agreement between elements of a sentence along this dimension, for now we represent
this part of the meaning of demonstratives as an elementary predication rather than as
a feature.
Some languages (e.g., Lithuanian) have a demonstrative element which does not
express any distance contrast, in addition to ones that do (Diessel, 2008). In this
case, it might make sense to reduce the contribution of the former sort of element to
the constraints it places on the noun?s COG-ST value. However, in the interests of
uniformity within the system, we continue to assign it an elementary predication.
Other languages (e.g., French and German) don?t mark any distance contrast on
the primary demonstrative element. In all such languages, there are optional, deictic
adverbials which can be added to mark the contrast (Diessel, 2008).
(11) Das
DEM
Bild
picture
hier
here
gef?llt
like
mir
me
besser
better
als
than
das
DEM
da.
there.
?I like this picture better than that one (over there).? [deu]
In light of such data, we could decompose demonstratives with distance contrasts in
all languages into separate demonstrative and deictic/distance relations. Alternatively,
we could do that decomposition only in languages like German and French. To the
extent that the deictic elements (e.g., German hier and da) have other uses as ordinary
adverbs which can be syntactically assimilated to the same lexical entry, we would
want to at least make sure that the ep they contribute is the same in both cases.
5 Overt pronouns and zero anaphora
Pronouns in the ERG are currently represented by an index which is bound by the
quantifier _pronoun_q_rel andmodified by _pronoun_n_rel. The quantifier ep marks
the pronoun as definite, and the modifier ep serves as the restriction for the quantifier
as well as identifying the index as a pronoun.
Following the treatment of other nominals presented here, however, we do away
with the quantifier ep in favor of the COG-ST feature. Similarly, we replace the mod-
ifier ep with a feature PRON-TYPE, which indicates whether an index is to be inter-
preted as pronominal, and if so, the type of the pronoun (as discussed below). Not
only is this representation simpler, there is no prediction that pronouns participate in
quantifier scope relations, as there is when using _pronoun_q_rel.
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 25
Overt pronouns, clitics and zero pronominals are generally assumed to take a COG-
ST value of in-focus (Gundel et al, 1993; Borthen and Haugereid, 2005). In general,
we agree. We assume that most overt pronouns and many forms of zero anaphora do
take that value. However, there are forms which require us to make exceptions to this.
First let us consider the English indefinite pronoun one, as in (12). Clearly in this
case the referent of one is not in focus. Rather, such a pronoun should bear the COG-ST
value type-id.
(12) Kim bought a computer and Sandy borrowed one.
B&H make a distinction between what they call token pronouns and type pronouns,
where the former are the standard pronouns, which corefer with their antecedents, and
the latter are like English one, which refer to a new token whose type is taken from
its antecedent. We propose that the PRON-TYPE feature take a value of type pron-
type, with subtypes not-pron for non-pronouns and type-or-token for pronouns. The
latter will have two further subtypes, token-pron and type-pron. English one will be
lexically specified as [PRON-TYPE type-pron].
Certain cases of zero anaphora similarly get their type information from their an-
tecedents. A couple of instances of the Italian null subject construction appear in (13)
and (14).
(13) John
John
ha
has
fatto
make.PPRT
la
the
torta.
cake.
La-ha
it-has
mangiata
eat.PPRT
?John baked the cake. (He) ate it.? [ita]
(14) Se
if
uno
a
bambino
child
vuole
wants
un
a
biscotto,
cookie
gli-arriva
to.him-arrives
?If a child wants a cookie, he gets one.? [ita]
In (13), the referent of the null subject is indeed an entity which is in focus, namely
John. On the other hand, in (14) the referent of the null subject is a new token of a
type which is in focus, namely the type ?cookie?.
To handle this situation, we propose that Italian null subjects are associated with
COG-ST in-focus, and with PRON-TYPE type-or-token. The grammar for Italian con-
tains a ?subject drop? construction which discharges the subject requirement of the
verb without realizing any overt dependent. Because the verb will have linked the ap-
propriate argument position of its own ep to the HOOK.INDEX value inside the feature
recording its subject requirement, the subject drop construction can constrain the prop-
erties of this index. In particular, it will specify that its PRON-TYPE is type-or-token
(i.e., it is a pronominal), and that its COG-ST is in-focus. The subject-drop construction
is sketched in Fig 3. When further processing determines the nature of the antecedent,
the PRON-TYPE value will get further specified. If it is a non-specific indefinite, e.g. it
is an indefinite in an intensional context, the pronominal will be specified type-pron,
otherwise it will be specified token-pron.
The next type of zero pronominal we consider are Japanese dropped arguments,
which present a counterexample to Gundel et al (1993)?s claim that all zero pronom-
inals are COG-ST in-focus. To be sure, Japanese zero anaphora can be understood
26 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
head-opt-subj-phrase := head-valence-phrase & head-only &
[ SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT.VAL.SUBJ < >,
HEAD-DTR.SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT [ HEAD verb & [ FORM fin ],
VAL.SUBJ < [ LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX
[ COG-ST in-focus,
PRON-TYPE type-or-token ]] > ]].
Figure 3: Subject drop construction for Italian
similarly to overt token pronouns, as in (15). However, there are also examples where
it can be understood like an overt type pronoun, like English one, as in (16). Note
that (16) is different from (14) in that the antecedent of the null anaphor is not in an
intensional context.
(15) Mi-ta.
see.PAST
?(He/she) saw (it).? [jpn]
(16) Zyon-wa
John.TOP
konpyuutaa-o
computer.ACC
kat-ta.
buy.PAST
Mearii-wa
Mary.TOP
kari-ta.
borrow.PAST
?John bought a computer. Mary borrowed one.? [jpn]
We propose that Japanese dropped arguments are underspecified with respect to
cognitive status and pronoun type. They are associated with indices specified as COG-
ST cog-st and PRON-TYPE type-or-token.
Finally, we turn to lexically licensed null instantiation in English, beginning with
definite null instantiation. Fillmore et al (2003) define definite null instantiation as
a phenomenon whereby some conceptually necessary participant in a situation is left
unexpressed, but its identity is derivable from context. In lexically licensed null instan-
tiation, the possibility of argument drop and the interpretation of the dropped argument
are dependent on the selecting head. In English, lexically licensed DNI is typically a
kind of token pronominal, as in (17). But some items can also license type-pronominal
DNI, as in (18). In (17), the thing that was won is the previously mentioned game.
In (18), there is no particular job that is being sought, although we do know from the
context that it is a job.
(17) Kim played a game with Sandy, and Sandy won.
(18) I can?t find a job, but I?m still looking.
We model lexical licensing of null instantiation through a feature called OPT which
allows selecting heads to record whether or not their arguments are ?optional?. Since
the interpretation of dropped arguments is also constrained by the lexical heads, we
propose two additional features OPT-CS and OPT-PT which encode the cognitive status
and pronoun type to assign to that argument in case it is dropped. The complement-
drop construction and the lexical constraints on look are sketched in Fig 4a-b.
In this figure, strings prefixed with # indicate reentrancy in the feature structure.
The feature KEYREL in lexical entries is a pointer to the main ep they contribute. The
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 27
a. head-opt-comp-phrase := head-valence-phrase & head-only &
[ SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT.VAL.COMPS #comps, HEAD-DTR.SYNSEM.LOCAL.CAT
[ VAL.COMPS [ FIRST [ OPT +,
OPT-CS #cog-st,
OPT-PT #pron-type,
LOCAL.CONT.HOOK.INDEX [ COG-ST #cog-st,
PRON-TYPE #pron-type ]],
REST #comps ]]].
b. look := pp-transitive-verb-lex &
[ STEM < "look" >,
SYNSEM [ LOCAL.CAT.VAL.COMPS < [ OPT-CS in-focus,
OPT-PT type-or-token ] >,
LKEYS.KEYREL.PRED "_look_v_rel" ]].
c. read := transitive-verb-lex &
[ STEM < "read" >,
SYNSEM [ LOCAL.CAT.VAL.COMPS < [ OPT-CS type-id,
OPT-PT non-pron ] >,
LKEYS.KEYREL.PRED "_read_v_rel" ]].
d. devour := transitive-verb-lex &
[ STEM < "devour" >,
SYNSEM [ LOCAL.CAT.VAL.COMPS < [ OPT - ] >,
LKEYS.KEYREL.PRED "_devour_v_rel" ]].
Figure 4: Lexically licensed complement drop for English
type transitive-verb-lex inherits from its supertypes the linking constraints which iden-
tify the HOOK.INDEX values of the syntactic arguments with the appropriate ARGn
values in the ep contributed by the verb.6
Indefinite null instantiation is similar, except that the identity of the missing element
is either unknown or immaterial. An example of this is (19). INI differs from other
null nominals in that it is not a kind of anaphor. There is nothing in the context that
helps to identify its referent.
(19) Kim is reading.
We propose that indices in INI constructions are specified as COG-ST type-id and
PRON-TYPE non-pron. In English, these constructions are also lexically licensed, and
can be handled with the same features described for DNI. The lexical constraints on
read are illustrated in Fig 4c. For completeness, we also include in Fig 4d an example
of a lexical item which does not license missing complements.
6 Summary and Future Work
In this paper we have explored the construction of semantic representations for a va-
riety of forms of referring expressions. Building on Borthen and Haugereid (2005)?s
proposal to treat cognitive status as a semantic feature within HPSG, we have devel-
oped representations for definite, demonstrative and null NPs, and sketched means of
arriving at them compositionally.
6The constraints shown on the COMPS value of lexical entries would actually be implemented as con-
straints on types that the lexical entries inherit from, allowing the grammar to capture generalizations across
lexical entries. They are shown as constraints on the lexical entries here for ease of exposition only.
28 Bender and Goss-Grubbs
In future work, we plan to expand the range of these analyses to cover phenomena
such as Irish demonstratives taking scope over coordinated noun phrases and cross-
linguistic variation in the marking of generics as definite or indefinite.
On the basis of these analyses, we plan to develop libraries for the Grammar Ma-
trix customization system covering the topics discussed here. The Grammar Matrix
customization system (Bender and Flickinger, 2005; Drellishak and Bender, 2005)
presents the linguist-user with a typological questionnaire which elicits information
about the language to be described. On the basis of the user?s responses to the ques-
tionnaire, the customization system compiles a working starter grammar out of the
Matrix core grammar and analyses stored in libraries. The new libraries will cover ar-
gument optionality (both general pro-drop and lexically-licensed), as well as demon-
stratives of different syntactic types (pronouns, determiners, adjectives and affixes),
the marking of definiteness, and definiteness agreement.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Toshiyuki Ogihara, Laurie Poulson, Jeanette Gundel, Jennifer
Arnold, Francesca Gola, and the reviewers for STEP 2008 for helpful comments and
discussion. Any remaining errors are our own. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. BCS-0644097.
References
Arnold, J. E. (2008). Reference production: Production-internal and addressee-
oriented processes. Language and Cognitive Processes 23(4), 495?527.
Bender, E. M., M. Egg, and M. Tepper (2005). Semantic construction for nominal
expressions in cross-linguistic perspective. In IWCS-6.
Bender, E. M. and D. Flickinger (2005). Rapid prototyping of scalable grammars:
Towards modularity in extensions to a language-independent core. In Proceed-
ings of the 2nd International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
IJCNLP-05 (Posters/Demos), Jeju Island, Korea.
Bender, E. M., D. Flickinger, and S. Oepen (2002). The Grammar Matrix: An
open-source starter-kit for the rapid development of cross-linguistically consistent
broad-coverage precision grammars. In J. Carroll, N. Oostdijk, and R. Sutcliffe
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at
the COLING19, Taipei, Taiwan, pp. 8?14.
Borthen, K. and P. Haugereid (2005). Representing referential properties of nominals.
Research on Language and Computation 3(2), 221?246.
Chafe, W. (1976). Givenness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics, and point
of view. In C. Li (Ed.), Subject and Topic, pp. 25?56. New York: Academic Press.
Chafe, W. (1994). Discourse, Consciousness, and Time. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
Semantic Representations of Syntactically Marked Discourse Status 29
Copestake, A., D. Flickinger, C. Pollard, and I. A. Sag (2005). Minimal recursion
semantics: An introduction. Research on Language and Computation 3(4), 281?
332.
Copestake, A., A. Lascarides, and D. Flickinger (2001). An algebra for semantic
construction in constraint-based grammars. In Proc. ACL.
Diessel, H. (1999). Demonstratives: Form, Function, and Grammaticalization. Am-
sterdam: John Benjamins.
Diessel, H. (2008). Distance contrasts in demonstratives. In M. Haspelmath,
M. Dryer, D. Gil, and B. Comrie (Eds.), The World Atlas of Linguistic Structures
Online, Chapter 41. Munich: Max Planck Digital Library.
Drellishak, S. and E. M. Bender (2005). A coordination module for a crosslinguistic
grammar resource. In S. M?ller (Ed.), Proc. HPSG, Stanford, pp. 108?128. CSLI
Publications.
Dryer, M. S. (2008). Order of demonstrative and noun. In M. Haspelmath, M. Dryer,
D. Gil, and B. Comrie (Eds.), The World Atlas of Linguistic Structures Online,
Chapter 88. Munich: Max Planck Digital Library.
Fillmore, C., C. Johnson, and M. Petruck (2003). Background to FrameNet. Interna-
tional Journal of Lexicography 16, 235?250.
Flickinger, D. (2000). On building a more efficient grammar by exploiting types.
Natural Language Engineering 6 (1) (Special Issue on Efficient Processing with
HPSG), 15?28.
Gundel, J., N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski (1993). Cognitive status and the from of
referring expressions in discourse. Language 69, 274?307.
Gundel, J., N. Hedberg, and R. Zacharski (2001). Definite descriptions and cognitive
status in English: Why accommodation is unnecessary. English Language and
Linguistics 5, 273?295.
McCloskey, J. (2004). Irish nominal syntax I: Demonstratives. UC Santa Cruz.
Oepen, S., E. Velldal, J. T. L?nning, P. Meurer, V. Ros?n, and D. Flickinger (2007).
Towards hybrid quality-oriented machine translation. On linguistics and probabili-
ties in MT. In TMI 2007, Sk?vde, Sweden.
Pollard, C. and I. A. Sag (1994). Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Studies
in Contemporary Linguistics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Prince, E. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given-new information. In P. Cole (Ed.),
Radical Pragmatics, pp. 223?255. New York: Academic Press.
Wintner, S. (2000). Definiteness in the Hebrew noun phrase. Journal of Linguis-
tics 36, 319?363.
