Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 36?43,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
An Annotated Corpus Outside Its Original Context: A Corpus-Based
Exercise Book
Barbora Hladka? and Ondr?ej Kuc?era
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Charles University
Malostranske? na?m. 25
118 00 Prague
Czech Republic
hladka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, ondrej.kucera@centrum.cz
Abstract
We present the STYX system, which is de-
signed as an electronic corpus-based exercise
book of Czech morphology and syntax with
sentences directly selected from the Prague
Dependency Treebank, the largest annotated
corpus of the Czech language. The exercise
book offers complex sentence processing with
respect to both morphological and syntactic
phenomena, i. e. the exercises allow students
of basic and secondary schools to practice
classifying parts of speech and particular mor-
phological categories of words and in the pars-
ing of sentences and classifying the syntactic
functions of words. The corpus-based exer-
cise book presents a novel usage of annotated
corpora outside their original context.
1 Introduction
Schoolchildren can use a computer to chat with their
friends, to play games, to draw, to browse the Inter-
net or to write their own blogs - why should they not
use it to parse sentences or to determine the mor-
phological categories of words? We do not expect
them to practice grammar as enthusiastically as they
do what is mentioned above, but we believe that an
electronic exercise book could make the practicing,
which they need to do anyway, more fun.
We present the procedure of building an exercise
book of the Czech language based on the Prague
Dependency Treebank. First (in Section 2) we
present the motivation for building an exercise book
of Czech morphology and syntax based on an an-
notated corpus ? the Prague Dependency Treebank
(PDT). Then we provide a short description of the
PDT itself in Section 3. Section 4 is the core of
our paper. Section 4.1 is devoted to the filtering of
the PDT sentences in such a way that the complex-
ity of sentences included in the exercise book ex-
actly corresponds to the complexity of sentences ex-
ercised in traditional Czech textbooks and exercise
books. Section 4.2 documents the transformation of
the sentences ? more precisely a transformation of
their annotations into the school analysis scheme as
recommended by the official framework of the ed-
ucational programme for general secondary educa-
tion (Jer?a?bek and Tupy?, 2005). The evaluation of the
system is described in Section 4.3. Section 5 sum-
marizes this paper and plans for the future work.
2 Motivation
From the very beginning, we had an idea of us-
ing an annotated corpus outside its original context.
We recalled our experience from secondary school,
namely from language lessons when we learned
morphology and syntax. We did it ?with pen and pa-
per? and more or less hated it. Thus we decided to
build an electronic exercise book to learn and prac-
tice the morphology and the syntax ?by moving the
mouse around the screen.?
In principle, there are two ways to build an ex-
ercise book - manually or automatically. A manual
procedure requires collecting sentences the authors
usually make up and then process with regard to the
chosen aspects. This is a very demanding, time-
consuming task and therefore the authors manage
to collect only tens (possibly hundreds) of sentences
that simply cannot fully reflect the real usage of a
language. An automatic procedure is possible when
an annotated corpus of the language is available.
Then the disadvantages of the manual procedure dis-
36
appear. It is expected that the texts in a corpus are
already selected to provide a well-balanced corpus
reflecting the real usage of the language, the hard an-
notation work is also done and the size of such cor-
pus is thousands or tens of thousands of annotated
sentences. The task that remains is to transform the
annotation scheme used in the corpus into the sen-
tence analysis scheme that is taught in schools. In
fact, a procedure based on an annotated corpus that
we apply is semi-automatic, since the annotation
scheme transformation presents a knowledge-based
process designed manually - no machine-learning
technique is used.
We browsed the Computer-Assisted Language
Learning (CALL) approaches, namely those con-
centrated under the teaching and language cor-
pora interest group (e.g. (Wichmann and Fligel-
stone (eds.), 1997), (Tribble, 2001), (Murkherjee,
2004), (Schultze, 2003), (Scott, Tribble, 2006)).
We realized that none of them actually employs
manually annotated corpora ? they use corpora as
huge banks of texts without additional linguistic
information (i.e. without annotation). Only one
project (Keogh et al, 2004) works with an automat-
ically annotated corpus to teach Irish and German
morphology.
Reviewing the Czech electronic exercise books
available (e.g. (Terasoft, Ltd., 2003)), none of them
provides the users with any possibility of analyzing
the sentence both morphologically and syntactically.
All of them were built manually.
Considering all the facts mentioned above, we
find our approach to be novel one. One of the most
exciting aspects of corpora is that they may be used
to a good advantage both in research and teach-
ing. That is why we wanted to present this system
that makes schoolchildren familiar with an academic
product. At the same time, this system represents a
challenge and an opportunity for academics to pop-
ularize a field with a promising future that is devoted
to natural language processing.
3 The Prague Dependency Treebank
The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) presents
the largest annotated corpus of Czech, and its second
edition was published in 2006 (PDT 2.0, 2006). The
PDT had arisen from the tradition of the successful
Prague School of Linguistics. The dependency ap-
proach to syntactic analysis with the main role of
a verb has been applied. The annotations go from
the morphological layer through to the intermedi-
ate syntactic-analytical layer to the tectogrammati-
cal layer (the layer of an underlying syntactic struc-
ture). The texts have been annotated in the same
direction, i. e. from the simplest layer to the most
complex. This fact corresponds with the amount of
data annotated on each level ? 2 million words have
been annotated on the lowest morphological layer,
1.5 million words on both the morphological and the
syntactic layer, and 0.8 million words on all three
layers.
Within the PDT conceptual framework, a sen-
tence is represented as a rooted ordered tree with la-
beled nodes and edges on both syntactic (Hajic?ova?,
Kirschner and Sgall, 1999) and tectogrammatical
(Mikulova? et al, 2006) layers. Thus we speak about
syntactic and tectogrammatical trees, respectively.
Representation on the morphological layer (Hana et
al., 2005) corresponds to a list of (word token and
morphological tag) pairs. Figure 1 illustrates the
syntactic and morphological annotation of the sam-
ple sentence Rozd??l do regulovane? ceny byl hrazen
z dotac??. [The variation of the regulated price was
made up by grants.] One token of the morphological
layer is represented by exactly one node of the tree
(rozd??l [variation], do [of], regulovane? [regulated],
ceny [price], byl [was], hrazen [made up], z [by],
dotac?? [grants], ?.?) and the dependency relation be-
tween two nodes is captured by an edge between
them, i. e. between the dependent and its governor.
The actual type of the relation is given as a func-
tion label of the edge, for example the edge (rozd??l,
hrazen) is labeled by the function Sb (subject) of the
node rozd??l. Together with a syntactic function, a
morphological tag is displayed (rozd??l, NNIS1-----A-
---).
Since there is m:n correspondence between the
number of nodes in syntactic and tectogrammati-
cal trees, it would be rather confusing to display
the annotations on those layers all together in one
tree. Hence we provide a separate tree visualizing
the tectogrammatical annotation of the sample sen-
tence ? see Figure 2. A tectogrammatical lemma
and a functor are relevant to our task, thus we dis-
play them with each node in the tectogrammatical
37
DFPSUSV
$X[6
5R]GtO
11,6$
6E
GR
55
$X[3
UHJXORYDQp
$$)6$
$WU
FHQ\
11)6$
$WU
E\O
9S<6;5$$
$X[9
KUD]HQ
9V<6;;$3
3UHG
]
55
$X[3
GRWDFt
11)3$
$GY

=
$X[.
Figure 1: A PDT syntactic tree of the sentence Rozd??l do
regulovane? ceny byl hrazen z dotac??.
tree, e. g. (hradit, PRED).
In the following text, we will be using the term the
PDT approach when having in mind the conceptual
framework of PDT annotation, and the school ap-
proach when having in mind the conceptual frame-
work of a sentence analysis as it is taught in schools.
4 Exercise book composition
With regards to our idea, the electronic exercise
book is an electronic system that consists of
? a database of sentences with their morphologi-
cal and syntactic analyses automatically gener-
ated from an annotated corpus,
? a user interface
? to select sentences from the database or, in
other words, to compose the exercises,
? to simultaneously analyze the selected
sentences both morphologically and syn-
tactically,
root
t-cmpr9410-049-p74s3
rozd?l
PAT
cena
RSTR
regulovan?
RSTR
#Gen
ACT
hradit
PRED
dotace
MEANS
Figure 2: A PDT tectogrammatical tree of the sentence
Rozd??l do regulovane? ceny byl hrazen z dotac??.
? to check the analyses.
More specifically, the composition of the PDT-
based exercise book of Czech morphology and syn-
tax implies the selection of those sentences from
PDT that are annotated morphologically and syntac-
tically. However, there emerge some syntactic phe-
nomena that are handled differently in the PDT ap-
proach than in the school approach. The data an-
notated tectogrammatically has to be taken into ac-
count to process these phenomena properly. Given
that, the data annotated on all three layers (0.8 mil-
lion words in 49,442 sentences) become the candi-
date set of sentences from which the exercise book
is to be composed.
Unfortunately, the sentences from the candidate
set cannot be merely taken as they are because of
two factors:
? the complexity of sentences in the PDT goes
38
beyond the complexity of sentences in text-
books;
? some syntactic phenomena are handled differ-
ently in the PDT approach than in the school
approach.
This means that some of the sentences have to
be completely discarded (sentence filtering, see 4.1)
and syntactic trees of the remaining sentences have
to be transformed to match the school analysis of
syntax (see 4.2). Luckily, the school approach to
the morphology does not coincide with the PDT ap-
proach. Therefore the PDT morphological annota-
tions do not need any special handling. It is impos-
sible to browse the candidate set of sentences man-
ually with regard to its volume. Both sentence fil-
tering and annotation transformation must be done
automatically. The whole process is shown in Fig-
ure 3.
To summarize, our work on the electronic ex-
ercise book covers the data and the software
components ((Hladka?, Kuc?era, 2005), (Kuc?era,
2006), (STYX, 2008)):
? Annotated Sentence Database Almost 12,000
annotated sentences generated by the FilterSen-
tences component.
? FilterSentences. A component used to prepare
the annotated sentence database suitable for us-
age in the exercise book. The end user will
never have to use this.
? Charon. An administrative tool, used for view-
ing all of the available sentences and for com-
posing the exercises. We assume that mostly
teachers will use it.
? Styx. The electronic exercise book itself. It uses
the exercises composed with Charon. An ac-
tive sentence is analyzed both morphologically
and syntactically as shown in Figure 4. Dur-
ing the morphological analysis, the user moves
word by word, and for each word selects its part
of speech. According to the selected part of
speech, the combo boxes for the relevant mor-
phological categories appear and let the user
choose one of several choices they consider
the proper one. During the syntactic analy-
sis, the user moves nodes using the traditional
drag and drop method to catch the dependent-
governor relation. Afterwards, the syntactic
functions are assigned, technically via pop-up
menus. Once the analyses are finished, the cor-
rect answers are provided separately for mor-
phology and syntax.
4.1 Sentence filtering
The candidate set consists of many sentences that are
not appropriate for schoolchildren to analyze. They
contain phenomena that authors of textbooks either
do not consider at all or sometimes do not agree
upon. The following seven filtering criteria have
been formulated to exclude problematic sentences.
For each filter, we provide a brief description.
1. SimpleSentences. The most complex filter that
excludes compound and complex sentences.
2. GraphicalSymbols. Excludes sentences with
various graphical symbols (except for the dot
sign) because they imply more complex phe-
nomena than the school analyses operate with.
3. EllipsisApposition. Excludes sentences con-
taining an ellipsis or an apposition.
4. OnePredicate. Excludes sentences without a
predicate (sentences with more than one predi-
cate are already excluded by SimpleSentences).
5. LessThanNWords. Excludes sentences that are
too long.
6. MoreThanNWords. Excludes sentences that are
too short (usually simple headlines).
7. AuxO. Excludes sentences containing emotio-
nal, rhythmic particles carrying the AuxO syn-
tactic function.
The filters were applied in the same order as they
are listed above. First the filter SimpleSentences was
applied on the candidate set of sentences. Then the
sentences preserved by this filter were filtered by
GraphicalSymbols, and so on. Table 1 provides an
overall quantitative overview of sentence filtering ?
for illustration, the most complex filter SimpleSen-
tences excluded the highest percentage of sentences
39
Figure 3: Exercise book composition
(54.4%). As it is highlighted in the last row of the
table, almost 12,000 sentences were preserved after
processing the candidate set with all the filters.
Filter # input # preserved
sentences sentences (%)
SimpleSentence 49,442 22,552 (45.6)
GraphicalSymbols 22,552 20,384 (90.4)
EllipsisAposition 20,383 13,633 (66.9)
OnePredicate 13,633 13,617 (99.9)
LessThanNWords 13,617 13,010 (95.5)
MoreThanNWords 13,010 11,718 (90.1)
AuxO 11,718 11,705 (99.9)
overall 49,442 11,718 (23.7)
Table 1: Quantitative overview of sentence filtering
4.2 Annotation transformation
In the school approach, a sentence is represented as
a tree-like structure with labeled nodes. Unlike PDT
syntactic trees, the structures of the school approach
have no root node or, in another point of view have
two roots: a subject and a predicate (see Figure 5 ?
rozd??l, byl hrazen respectively).
Besides the above-mentioned difference in analy-
sis schemes, the PDT and the school approach differ
in the following aspects:
? Many of the PDT syntactic functions do not
have counterparts in the school approach.
? The school approach does not have the direct
1:1 correspondence between nodes of the mor-
phological layer and the syntactic layer, i. e.
a node can contain more than just one word
as visible in Figure 5 ? the pair of words byl,
hrazen form one node as well as the pair z,
dotac??. The words inside each node are listed
in accordance to the surface word order of the
sentence.
With regards to the discussed differences, we sys-
tematically went through the PDT annotation guide-
lines (Hajic?ova?, Kirschner and Sgall, 1999), ana-
lyzed all specified phenomena and designed their
transformations into the school analysis scheme.
Three elementary operations on syntactic trees and
the rules mapping syntactic functions have been for-
mulated. Then a transformation is understood as a
sequence of these operations and mapping rules.
1. JoinTheParentNode The words at the node are
moved up to the parent node and all child nodes
of the given node become the child nodes of the
parent node. The node is removed afterwards.
40
Figure 4: Styx?practicing
2. AbsorbTheChildNodes The words at all child
nodes of the node are moved into the node. The
child nodes are removed and their child nodes
become the child nodes of the node. This op-
eration is equivalent to the JoinTheParentNode
operation applied to all child nodes of the node.
3. RemoveTheNode The node-leave is removed.
Mapping PDT syntactic functions follows these
operations on trees. Given the complexity of syn-
tactic phenomena and the differences between the
approaches, it is not possible to map all functions
in a straightforward way as is evident from Table 2.
While the school approach works with seven syn-
tactic functions (listed in the second column) the
PDT approach labels with 25 functions1 (listed in
the first column). The PDT functions indicating the
subject, the predicate, the attribute and the adver-
bial (in italics) are simply mapped to their school
counterparts. The other functions are changed into
the school functions in accordance with the type of
operation the nodes they belong to pass. After the
AbsorbTheChildNodes operation, the node is mostly
labeled by the direct school counterpart of its ?most
important child node?, i.e. the child node bearing
one of the simply-mapped functions, vaguely noted.
After the JoinTheParentNode operation, the parent
1The total number of the PDT syntactic functions is actually
higher. Here we list those functions that appear in sentences
included in the exercise book.
node does not change its function in most cases.
PDT school description
syntactic syntactic
functions functions
Pred Pr?s predicate
Pnom Pr?j predicate
nominal
Sb Po subject
Obj Pt object
Atr, AtrAdv, AdvAtr, Pk attribute
AtrAtr, AtrObj,
ObjAtr
Adv, Atv, AtvV Pu adverbial
Obj D complement
Coord ? coordination
AuxC, AuxP, AuxZ, ? auxiliary
AuxO, AuxV, AuxR, sentence
AuxY, AuxK, AuxX, members
AuxG
Table 2: School vs. PDT syntactic functions
For illustration, a PDT syntactic tree in Figure 1
is transformed into a school structure displayed in
Figure 5. Needed transformations include, for ex-
ample. merging the nodes (do, AuxP) and (ceny, Atr)
into the node (do ceny, Pk) or similarly merging (byl,
AuxV) and (hrazen, Pred) into (byl hrazen, Pr?s).
4.3 Evaluation
It is always difficult to evaluate such systems. It is
impossible to express the quality of our system with
41
Figure 5: A school syntactic tree of the sentence Rozd??l
do regulovane? ceny byl hrazen z dotac??.
numerical figures only. The only number we can
provide presents the sentence count included in the
exercise book: We believe that almost 12,000 sen-
tences bring enormous diversity to the practicing of
morphology and syntax.
To find out the real value of our system, we pre-
sented it to two different audiences. First we pre-
sented it to academics, who really appreciated the
idea of corpus assimilation for morphology and syn-
tax learning in schools. Their discussions were
mainly concerned with the transformation of anno-
tations.
Then we presented the exercise book during
Czech classes in secondary schools. We found out
that both the teachers and the students were imme-
diately able to use the system and they were excited
about it. They agreed that such exercises would be a
nice addition to their classes. Given the experience
we acquired during the presentations, we created a
sample class (a methodological guide) for teachers,
and we collected some interesting ideas that may
help us improve the system. These improvements
concern i) the annotation transformations (1, 2, 3);
ii) the variety of exercises (4); iii) the user interface
(5):
1. We do not distinguish between the different
types of adverbials. Thus we will provide the
possibility of marking a node as being a place
adverbial or time adverbial etc.
2. We do not distinguish concordant and discor-
dant attributes yet.
3. Dealing with coordination needs revision, es-
pecially when it comes to a difference between
dependents of the coordination as a whole and
dependents of members of the coordination.
4. ? During the morphological analysis, the
user selects only the part of speech of the
given word and STYX itself provides the
relevant morphological categories to ana-
lyze. In this fashion, the exercises are too
simplistic. To master the morphology, the
user must know which categories are rele-
vant to the given part of speech.
? The Charon module will give the user
the option of selecting sentences that con-
tain some specific phenomena. Cur-
rently, an administrator goes through all
the sentences ?manually? and if they ful-
fill her/his selection criteria, (s)he includes
them in the exercises.
5. The user interface has to be changed to be more
?crazy,? or dynamic, to attract not only the ?A?
pupils but the rest of them as well. Much more
comfortable controls, for example by adding
keyboard shortcuts for the most common ac-
tions, will be offered too.
5 Conclusion
The PDT-based exercise book has completed its ini-
tial steps. The theoretical aspects have been ana-
lyzed, the system has been implemented and demon-
strated to schoolchildren. Their feedbacks motivates
us to improve the system in such a way that it will
become a real educational tool.
References
Hana Jir??? and Dan Zeman and Hana Hanova? and Jan
Hajic? and Barbora Hladka? and Emil Jer?a?bek. 2005.
A Manual for Morphological Annotation, 2nd edition.
U?FAL Technical Report 27, Prague, Czech Republic.
Hajic?ova? Eva and Zdene?k Kirschner and Petr Sgall.
1999. A Manual for Analytic Layer Annotation of the
Prague Dependency Treebank (English translation).
U?FAL Technical Report, Prague, Czech Republic.
42
Hladka? Barbora and Ondr?ej Kuc?era. 2005. Prague De-
pendency Treebank as an exercise book of Czech. In
Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP 2005 Interactive Demon-
strations, pp. 14-15. Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
Jer?a?bek Jaroslav and Jan Tupy? 2005. The official frame-
work educational programme for general secondary
education. Research pedagogical institute, Prague.
Keogh Katrina and Thomas Koller and Monica Ward and
Elaine U??Dhonnchadha and Josef van Genabith 2004.
CL for CALL in the Primary School. In Proceed-
ings of the International Workshop in Association with
COLING 2004, Geneva, Switzerland.
Kuc?era Ondr?ej. 2006. Praz?sky? za?vislostn?? korpus jako
cvic?ebnice jazyka c?eske?ho. Master thesis. Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mikulova? Marie et al 2006. A Manual for Tectogram-
matic Layer Annotation of the Prague Dependency
Treebank. U?FAL Technical Report, Prague, Czech
Republic.
Mukherjee, J. 2004. Bridging the gap between ap-
plied corpus linguistics and the reality of English lan-
guage teaching in Germany. In U. Connor and T. Up-
ton (eds.) Applied Corpus Linguistics: A Multidimen-
sional Perspective. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp. 239-250.
PDT 2.0 [online]. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank,
2nd edition. http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0
Scott Mike and Christopher Tribble 2006. Textual Pat-
terns: keyword and corpus analysis in language edu-
cation. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schultze Mathias 2003. AI in CALL: Artficially Inated
or Almost Imminent? In Proceedings of the World-
CALL Conference, Banff, Canada.
STYX [online]. 2008. The STYX electronic exercise
book of Czech http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/styx
Terasoft, Ltd. 2003. TS C?esky? jazyk 2 - jazykove? rozbory.
http://www.terasoft.cz.
Tribble Christopher 2001 Corpora and teaching: ad-
justing the gaze. In Proceedings of the ICAME 2001
Conference, Louvain, Belgium.
Wichmann Anne and Steven Fligelstone (eds.) 1997.
Teaching and Language Corpora (Applied Linguistics
and Language London: Addison Wesley Longman.
43
