Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cognitive Aspects of the Lexicon (COGALEX 2008), pages 32?38
Manchester, August 2008
Natural Language Searching  
in Onomasiological Dictionaries 
Gerardo Sierra 
Instituto de Ingenier?a 
Universidad Nacional Aut?noma de M?xico 
gsierram@ii.unam.mx 
 
Abstract 
When consulting a dictionary, people can 
find the meaning of a word via the defini-
tion, which usually contains the relevant 
information to fulfil their requirement. 
Lexicographers produce dictionaries and 
their work consists in presenting informa-
tion essential for grasping the meaning of 
words. However, when people need to 
find a word it is likely that they do not 
obtain the information they are looking 
for. There is a gap between dictionary 
definitions and the information being 
available in peoples? mind. This paper at-
tempts to present the conceptualisation 
people engage in, in order to arrive at a 
word from its meaning. The insights of 
an experiment conducted show us the dif-
ferences between the knowledge availa-
ble in peoples? minds and in dictionary 
definitions. 
1 Introduction 
Many lexicographers recognise users need dic-
tionaries to look for a word that has escaped their 
memory although they remember the concept. 
From a semantic point of view, Baldinger (1980) 
takes user needs into account and thus distin-
guishes dictionaries that serve as aids in encod-
ing from those that help with decoding. The best 
known dictionaries of this type allow users to 
find the meaning of a word they already know. 
Such dictionaries are semasiological: they asso-
ciate meanings with expressions/words, i.e. 
within entries we move from word to meaning. 
                                                 
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
The second kind of dictionary helps those users 
who have an idea to convey and want to find a 
word to designate it. Such dictionaries are ono-
masiological: they connect names to concepts, i.e. 
within entries we move from meaning or concept 
to name or word.  
Sierra (2000) confirmed the well known ob-
servation that the organisation of the world varies 
from author to author, by contrasting some rec-
ognized onomasiological dictionaries, such as 
Roget's Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases 
(1852), Bernstein's Reverse Dictionary (1975), 
and WordNet (Miller et al, 2008).  
In order to build a system that maps natural 
language descriptions of concepts to the terms 
corresponding to those concepts, Sierra and 
McNaught (2000) outlined the design of an 
Onomasiological Search System. They described 
the principles of the system, whereas the archi-
tecture and its components are presented as part 
of the design. This also includes an idealised user 
interface, with a discussion of the organisation of 
the probable terms and additional information 
that can help the user to identify precisely the 
term he is looking for.  
As cognitive issues for the design of such sys-
tem, this paper attempts to present the conceptu-
alisation people engage in, in order to arrive at a 
word from its meaning. In this sense, it breaks 
the traditional lexicographic assumption that one 
should utilise a semasiological approach to pro-
vide formal representations to describe the mean-
ing of a word. In contrast, in the onomasiological 
approach, the user can formulate a concept in 
several ways and use a variety of words in order 
to find a particular word.  
Our starting point is to understand what con-
ceptualisation is (section 2), and the process of 
designation (section 3). To validate our approach 
in practice, section 4 presents the results of an 
experiment, which is compared with other stud-
32
ies on conceptual analysis. Finally, the conclu-
sions are stated. 
2 Conceptualisation 
The concept is a mental representation of an 
object which is formed in the mind of individuals 
through a process of abstraction. We call this 
process of constructing an internal representation 
of external things a conceptualisation. 
Conceptualisation is a mental activity of 
grouping the data of common properties 
according to external factors, and then concepts 
are internalised and form part of each 
individual?s knowledge. 
2.1 Properties 
The terms property, characteristic or feature 
have been used for the knowledge necessary to 
describe and classify a concept. The 
identification of properties is crucial to concept 
analysis since it helps to define concepts and 
identify their interrelationships. 
According to Sager (1990) some properties are 
necessary and sufficient to distinguish a concept 
from any other, and these properties reflect the 
essential characteristics of a concept. Conversely, 
other properties are inessential, merely observ-
able in an individual thing, so that they are acci-
dental, may change with time and may not even 
be necessarily true in a scientific sense (Pet?fi, 
1982).  
The dichotomy of these two opposing types of 
properties has been discussed from a psycholin-
guistic point of view. Aitchison (1994) does not 
consider that it is obvious that experts and ordi-
nary people distinguish between essential and 
inessential characteristics. Despite the fact that 
experts might be able to specify the true nature of 
things, they sometimes provide information 
which is irrelevant to the mental lexicon. Con-
versely, ordinary people disagree and change 
their minds. 
As the comparative analysis in section 4 
shows, the essential characteristics are not neces-
sarily present in the mental lexicon of a person; 
each one describes different properties. Never-
theless, even a description of the inessential 
characteristics, given together, provides enough 
information to identify the term (Wierzbicka, 
1985). 
2.2 Social conceptualisation 
People acquire knowledge about things on the 
basis of cultural, geographical and social factors. 
The environment conditions the conceptualisa-
tion of reality and the use of language. In order to 
communicate effectively, people will try to use 
language in a similar way to that of the collective 
view of the community, in agreement with the 
social norm. In fact, because of the social norm, 
there is an idealised knowledge structure which 
makes it possible to use the same names for the 
same things. In the contrary case, when the des-
ignation of a concept is outside that norm, people 
assume that the individual's knowledge is wrong. 
However, as we will see in the final analysis, we 
must accept that an individual's knowledge can-
not cover the whole knowledge of the commu-
nity norm.  
2.3 Individual conceptualisation  
Reality goes beyond the perception of 
individuals. Our knowledge about reality has 
increased throughout human history. No one ?
human, computer or even the biggest library? 
possesses the whole knowledge about reality. 
The knowledge structure of things varies from 
one person to the other, so that their description 
of concepts will be different. As Fugman (1993) 
states, since the number of properties is virtually 
unlimited, people concentrate on those character-
istics which appear essential, according to their 
personal or professional view. As an example, he 
points out the different essential properties for 
the concept ?benzene? given by a physicist, a 
biologist, an engineer, a fire-fighter and a chem-
ist. 
Even the same person can demonstrate differ-
ent conceptualisations of simple things, such as 
"dog" or "apple", depending on the contextual 
situation. For example, a dog seen in different 
domains, such as a conference, a zoology lecture, 
a road or a house, may be described as canine, 
mammal, animal or pet.  
3 Designation 
The process of designation is the opposite of sig-
nification. Signification is the identification of 
the meaning of a word, and the result of finding a 
meaning is a definition. Designation is the identi-
fication of a term for a concept and the result is a 
word. 
To retrieve a term, one can use a terminologi-
cal definition, which provides the information 
necessary to identify and differentiate a concept 
within a system of concepts, so that it sometimes 
comprises encyclopaedic information, not usu-
ally necessary in a lexicographic definition. 
33
3.1 Properties 
Just as a word may have many meanings 
(semasiological approach), a concept, which is 
described by a set of properties, may be 
designated by more than one word 
(onomasiological approach). Within the 
onomasiological approach, all the properties 
together provide the necessary and sufficient 
information to identify the concept. However, 
since the description of concepts in natural 
language does not incorporate all knowledge or 
ideas associated with each concept, it can happen 
that the projection of a concept, i.e., the query 
formulation of the user, will retrieve a set of 
terms. For example, the concept ?strong winds?, 
consisting of two properties, can retrieve, in the 
domain of weather terminology, a variety of 
terms, such as: ?gale?, ?tornado?, ?hurricane?, 
?typhoon?, etc. 
The concept a user has in mind when looking 
for a target word is expressed by a sentence. 
When a person hears this sentence, he translates 
each word into his own language and easily iden-
tifies the context. A person may understand the 
expression ?that which determines air pressure? 
and get a mental representation of ?that? for 
?thing? and then for ?instrument?; or that the 
speaker might have said ?measures? instead of 
?determines?. From the context, at the same time, 
he may differentiate whether the word ?air? re-
fers to the atmosphere or the air of a tyre. 
Equally, either the lack or change of any one 
property may result in the identification of a dif-
ferent concept. For example, take the following 
definition for ?barometer?: 
? A device to measure air pressure. 
Each of the four keywords yields a property. 
Then, we can change one property at a time and 
get a different concept. If we change 
 
? ?Device? to ?unit?, the result is the con-
cepts ?inch? or ?millibar?. 
? ?Measure? to ?provide?, the result is ?air 
scoop?. 
? ?Air? to ?blood?, the result is ?sphyg-
momanometer?. 
? ?Pressure? to ?humidity?, the result is 
the concept ?hygrometer?. 
4 Comparative analysis on conceptuali-
zation 
In order to verify some of the ideas presented 
above, an experiment was carried out with a 
small group of twenty undergraduate students. 
Although a small group is unrepresentative for 
any generalisation to be made from a statistical 
point of view, it has been sufficient for our pur-
pose to demonstrate that the conceptualisation 
used by a random set of students is far from the 
definitions found in a dictionary.  
From two sets of five words, each student was 
asked to take a set and write on a blank sheet of 
paper, similar to an onomasiological search, a 
concept, a definition or the ideas suggested to 
them by each word. After interchanging the 
sheets, the other students participating in the ex-
periment wrote the word or words designating 
the concepts identified or written on the blank 
sheets by the previous student.  
The sets of word given contained three general 
language words and two terms. 
? Set A: water, squirrel, bench, euthanasia, 
hurricane. 
? Set B: lemon, bucket, clothing, monop-
oly, barometer. 
The general words were chosen because they 
permit us, as can be observed from the following 
sections, to compare the results with the words 
analysed by other researchers as well. 
We will next introduce our definitions by 
comparing with four studies on conceptualisa-
tion. 
4.1 Putnam 
Putnam (1975) proposes the representation of the 
meaning of a word as a finite sequence of at least 
four properties: 
The syntactic markers, which are the category-
indicators used in a host of contexts to classify 
words. 
The semantic markers, which are the most 
central properties, form part of a widely used 
classification system and very may be affected 
by any change in the knowledge about the thing. 
A description of the features of the stereotype, 
which is a conventional idea of what the object 
looks like or acts like or is, regardless whether it 
is true or not for all the objects. For example, 
?yellow? is a stereotype of ?gold?, even when 
gold is white by nature. 
A description of the extension, i.e., the set of 
things of which a term is true. The extension is 
determined socially depending upon the nature of 
the particular things, rather than on the concept 
of the individual speaker. 
The first three properties belong to the indi-
vidual competence of speakers. The extension 
34
does not necessarily have to be known to every 
member of a linguistic community.  
According to Pet?fi (1982), the semantic 
markers and the stereotype may be compared 
with Ullman?s concept of meaning. From the 
perspective of the lexicographic definition, they 
resemble genus and differentia, respectively. 
The description of the meaning of ?water?, as 
a particular natural kind, following these compo-
nents, is given in table 1. 
Syntactic 
markers 
Semantic 
markers 
Stereotype Extension 
mass noun natural kind colourless H2O 
concrete liquid transparent (give or take 
impurities)   tasteless 
  thirst-
quenching 
Table 1. Properties for the natural kind ?wa-
ter? 
In order to permit comparison of the defini-
tions given in our experiment with his meaning 
of ?water?, the same four kinds of properties are 
used. Our definitions, as shown in Table 2, in-
clude the property ?fluid?, which easily can be 
classified as a semantic marker.  
n. Concept 
1 It?s a clear liquid that you get from a tap 
2 The colourless transparent liquid occurring on 
rivers 
3 A clear, neutral liquid that surrounds us 
everywhere 
4 Liquid, clear, drinkable ? constituents are 
hydrogen and oxygen 
5 Liquid, clear, H2O 
6 Liquid form, scientific term H2O 
7 Liquid, freezes at 0?C 
8 Liquid, clear, boils at 100?C, freezes at 0?C 
9 Fluid, clear, tasteless, colourless 
10 Wash with it; drink it; used for dilution; H2O; 
found in springs, rivers, lakes, seas, oceans  
Table 2. Conceptualisation of water 
The properties referring to the boiling and 
freezing points of water, given in definitions 7 
and 8 in our experiment, may be considered as 
part of the concept?s extension, since these prop-
erties depend upon the nature of the water.  
Therefore, definitions one to nine include the 
semantic marker ?liquid?, beside the particular 
features of water, the stereotypes, and/or the de-
scription by extension. The definition ten, which 
does not include the semantic marker, describes 
water by extension. 
4.2 Wiegand 
Wiegand (1984) tries to identify the properties of 
a definition by means of a scale of usability ob-
tained statistically from a questionnaire to 100 
students. He suggests 21 properties and asks the 
students to judge which of them describe a 
lemon. Each property is evaluated in three cate-
gories according to the sum of ticks it received as 
good, not so good and not good (Table 3). 
GOOD NOT SO 
GOOD 
NOT GOOD 
oval yellow tapers at both ends 
juicy pulp thick rind oblong 
sour pulp citrus fruit thin rind 
yellow rind green rind used to make pectin 
fruit of the 
lemon tree 
 pulp containing 
approx. 3.5-8% citric 
acid 
  pulp rich in vitamin C 
  variable protuberant tip 
  pulp rich in vitamins 
  many uses in cooking 
  used to make drinks 
  used to make citric acid 
Table 3. Properties of lemon using a scale of 
usability 
Even although a test with ten students is not a 
representative sample from which one can gener-
alise the scale of usability of the properties of a 
concept, our experiment, as shows in table 4, 
allows us to challenge the values identified by 
Wiegand. 
n. Concept 
1 It?s a yellow fruit, like limes. Citrus. Used in 
cooking for sharpness  
2 A yellow citrus fruit. Sour tasting. Often used 
as an accompaniment to drinks  
3 a yellow citrus fruit with a bitter taste often 
sliced and put in drinks 
4 It?s a citrus fruit, yellow, used with sugar on 
pancakes  
5 It?s a yellow citrus fruit. Tastes bitter. Oval 
shaped  
6 A yellow sour fruit  
35
n. Concept 
7 A yellow citrus fruit 
8 Yellow, citrus, fruit 
9 Citrus fruit which is yellow 
10 Yellow citrus fruit 
Table 4. Conceptualisation of lemon 
As observed in table 5, there is no match be-
tween the values for the seven properties ex-
tracted by Wiegand and our own experiment 
from the definitions. 
Property Our ex-
periment 
Wiegand 
yellow good not so good 
citrus good not so good 
oval not good good 
sour pulp not good good 
many uses in cook-
ing and drinks 
not good not good 
variable protuber-
ant tip 
not good not good 
similar to limes not good --- 
Table 5. Comparative analysis of the proper-
ties of lemon 
The reasons why these values differ are not 
obvious. Probably this comparison means statis-
tical methods from a group of students are not 
reliable to assess the properties of concepts.  
4.3 Ayto 
In order to define the meaning of words, Ayto 
(1983) adapts the componential analysis intro-
duced by Pottier to semantic fields. He also iden-
tifies the semantic features that characterise vari-
ous sorts of seats, but analyses these characteris-
tics to compose an analytical definition. The 
definition of a word is determined by the seman-
tic features that differentiate it from other words 
rather than by the sum of the individual charac-
teristics. The genus for each word in the semantic 
field is ?seat?, as it presents the only common 
characteristic for the rest of the set. 
The differentia is determined by comparing 
the other characteristics and checking those 
which are different. The characteristics are: For 
several people, not upholstered, for outdoors, 
functional. 
Then the definition for ?bench? is, for exam-
ple, ?a seat for two or more people that has a 
back, is typically used outdoors, and may be 
fixed in position?. 
For a comparative analysis, it is possible to 
find the semantic features of the definitions in 
our experiment (Table 6) and try to match them 
with those given by Ayto. 
 
n. Concept 
1 You can sit on it in the street or a park and 
they are made of wood  
2 A long hard seat for several persons on which 
the players on a sport team sit  
3 An object for sitting on, usually long which 
can seat many people  
4 Sit on it (a few people can) in parks, made of 
wood or iron  
5 Object used for sitting on. Often found in 
public places such as parks and gardens. Used 
to seat 1 or more people at a time 
6 Something you seat on, is longer than a chair, 
usually made of wood 
7 Long platform for sitting on (fit many people 
on one) 
8 Apparatus for sitting on, designed for more 
than one person, often found in parks 
9 A kind of seat found in parks, made of wood 
10 A type of chair 
Table 6. Conceptualisation of bench 
For this purpose, we should assume that: 
 
1. For several people = longer than a chair. 
2. Not upholstered = made of wood or iron, 
hard seat, platform. 
3. Outdoors = street, park. 
4. Functional = for a sports team. 
 
Table 7 presents the four semantic features 
used in our experiment to define ?bench?. 
 
 Char. 
1 
Char. 
2 
Char. 
3 
Char. 
4 
Bench 1  + +  
Bench 2 + +  + 
Bench 3 +    
Bench 4 + + +  
Bench 5 +  +  
Bench 6 + +   
36
Bench 7 + +   
Bench 8 +  +  
Bench 9  + +  
Bench 10     
Table 7. Semantic features of bench  
In the light of this contrastive analysis, it is 
clear that each semantic feature (for example 
?outdoor?) can be expressed by a set of equiva-
lent alternatives (for example, ?public places?, 
?parks?). 
4.4 Wierzbicka 
Wierzbicka (1985) considers that a good lexico-
graphic definition must be exhaustive, i.e., pro-
viding all the properties of the concept. Her view 
of a definition differs from an encyclopaedic 
definition because the latter conveys knowledge 
about the object, while the lexicographic defini-
tion does not include specialised knowledge, 
unless it is part of the concept. Her demand for 
exhaustiveness is contrary to traditional semasi-
ological lexicography, where, through a genus 
and the differentia, the definition provides the 
essential properties to identify a concept and dis-
tinguish it from others. However, when there is a 
full description, we may be sure that a user will 
retrieve the word in an onomasiological search. 
Wierzbicka uses five general properties to 
reach a definition of animals, e.g. squirrels, 
namely: habitat, size, appearance, behaviour and 
relation to people. Table 8 presents an example 
of a description for each general property. 
General 
property 
Description 
Habitat They live in places where there are 
many trees. 
Size They are not too big for a person to 
be able to hold one easily in both 
hands. 
Appear-
ance 
They have a big bushy tail. 
Their fur is reddish or greyish. 
Behaviour They collect and eat small hard 
things which grow on trees of cer-
tain kinds. 
Relation to 
people 
People think of them as nice and 
amusing little creatures. 
Table 8. Examples of full description of 
"squirrel" 
As observed in the definitions of our experi-
ment (Table 9), the sum of properties in our defi-
nitions agrees with the description of the five 
kinds of properties of Wierzbicka, although she 
does not consider that squirrels build nests, as 
one of our definitions does. 
n. Concept 
1 It?s a little rodent and can be red or grey, it 
has a big bushy tail  
2 A small rodent living in trees with a long 
bushy tail  
3 A small rodent which lives in trees, collects 
nuts and has a bushy tail  
4 Animal, grey/red, bushy tail, lives in trees, 
buries nuts  
5 Small animal, lives in trees, eats acorns, has a 
bushy tail 
6 Animal, bushy tail, eats nuts, builds nests in 
trees called dreys 
7 Small funny animal with big, bushy tail, likes 
nuts, likes trees 
8 Animal that lives in trees and collects acorns, 
has a long tail 
9 A small-sized animal, habitat in trees 
10 Small grey mammal, relative to the rodent, 
found in both countryside and town 
Table 9 Conceptualisation of lemon 
5 Conclusions 
The distinction between semasiology and ono-
masiology permits us to consider a new perspec-
tive in lexicography. In the semasiological ap-
proach, the perspective is from the dictionary to 
the user. Dictionaries are a lexicographer?s prod-
uct and definitions provide the necessary and 
sufficient elements in order to know the meaning 
of a word. 
Conversely, the onomasiological approach is 
from the user to the dictionary. The user should 
provide the concept, while the dictionary inter-
prets that concept in order to find the most ap-
propriate word. The user can formulate the con-
cept by several methods and may use a variety of 
words that in a certain context are similar. Ac-
cording to the user?s social, cultural and geo-
graphical background, the description of the con-
cept may differ in multiple properties.  
With regard to the preceding analysis, it is 
worthwhile to note that even the most complete 
description of a concept can lack "essential" 
properties from the point of view of a user. None 
37
of the methods of componential analysis, even 
the most open ones, has been sufficient to foresee 
the properties used by a small set of students. 
That gap should be filled with the aid of a good 
onomasiological retrieval system.  
This does not mean that it is unlikely that we 
shall be able to design a complete and efficient 
onomasiological dictionary. In our context, effi-
ciency means that a dictionary has to satisfy the 
requirements of a particular kind of user, in a 
certain domain of a terminology with a specific 
background. Therefore, the design of an onoma-
siological dictionary must first foresee a multi-
plicity of properties for each concept and sec-
ondly the diversity of words that can be used to 
name them. Then, the task consists in the accu-
rate interpretation of the description of the con-
cept and providing the word or probable words 
the user is looking for. 
The core of such onomasiological dictionary, 
as reported by Sierra and McNaught (2000), is 
the lexical knowledge base (LKB), which should 
provide all the necessary knowledge to be ma-
nipulated in order to enable onomasiological 
search. In principle, it must represent what a per-
son knows about both concepts and their corre-
sponding terms. Such LKB consists then of a set 
of terms, a set of definitions for each term, a set 
of keywords associated with the definitions and a 
set of lexical paradigms that group keywords 
with the same meaning. It not only includes the 
databases that constitute these sets of data, but 
the interrelationships among all the sets. 
References 
Aitchison, Jean. 1994. Words in the mind: an intro-
duction to the mental lexicon. Blackwell Publish-
ers, Oxford.  
Ayto, John R. 1983. ?On specifying meaning: seman-
tic analysis and dictionary definitions?. Lexicogra-
phy: principles and practice. R.R.K. Hartmann 
(ed). Academic Press, London: 89-98. 
Baldinger, Kurt. 1980. Semantic theory: towards a 
modern semantics. Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 
Bernstein, Theodore M. 1975. Bernstein?s reverse 
dictionary. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. 
Fugman, Robert. 1993. Subject analysis and indexing: 
theoretical foundation and practical advice. IN-
DEKS Verlag, Frankfurt. 
Miller, George A., Richard Beckwith, Christiane Fell-
baum, Derek Gross, and Katherine Miller. 1990. 
?Introduction to WordNet: An on-line lexical data-
base?. International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4): 
235-244. 
 Pet?fi, J?nos S. 1982. ?Exploration in semantics: 
analysis and representation of concept systems?. 
The Cocta Conference. F.W. Riggs (ed). 
Putnam, Hilary. 1975. Mind, language and reality: 
philosophical papers, Volume 2. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, New York. 
Roget, Peter. 1852. Thesaurus of English Words and 
Phrases. Longman, London.  
Sager, Juan C 1990. A practical course in terminology 
processing. John Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Sierra, Gerardo. 2000. ?The onomasiological dictio-
nary: a gap in lexicography?. Proceedings of the 
Ninth EuralexInternational Congress. Stuttgart.  
Sierra, Gerardo and John McNaught. 2000. ?Design 
of an Onomasiological Search System: a Concept-
Oriented Tool for Terminology?. Terminology 
6(1). 
Wiegand, Herbert E. 1984. ?On the structure and con-
tents of a general theory of lexicography?. Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Lex-
icography. M. Niemeyer, T?bingen, 13-30. 
Wierzbicka, Anna 1985. Lexicography and concep-
tual analysis. Karoma Publishers. 
 
38
