What?s In a Message? Interpreting Geo-referenced Data for the
Visually-impaired
Kavita E. Thomas
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, Scotland
tkavita@abdn.ac.uk
Somayajulu Sripada
Department of Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, Scotland
yaji.sripada@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we describe content determina-
tion issues involved in the Atlas.txt project,
which aims to automatically describe geo-
referenced information such as census data as
text for the visually-impaired (VI). Texts com-
municating geo-referenced census informa-
tion contain census data abstractions and their
corresponding geographic references. Be-
cause visually impaired users find interpreting
geographic references hard, we hypothesized
that an introduction message about the under-
lying geography should help the users to in-
terpret the geographic references easily. We
performed user studies to design and evaluate
the introduction message. An initial evalua-
tion study with several sighted users and one
partially sighted user showed that an introduc-
tion message is certainly preferred by most
participants. Many of them used an introduc-
tion message themselves when they described
maps textually. But the study also showed
that the introduction message made no differ-
ence when the participants were asked to draw
maps using the information in the textual de-
scriptions.
1 Introduction
Atlas.txt is a data-to-text natural language gener-
ation (NLG) system which aims to communicate
geo-referenced information to VI people. Geo-
referenced data are data which has a geographic
component, and is distributed over a region on Earth.
Such data is often visualised as thematic maps, as
shown in Figure 1, where colour shading indicates
density of distribution, so that dark or intense re-
gions on such maps indicate where the variable, for
example unemployment, is most frequently located.
Geo-referenced data is frequently stored in long data
tables which hinder VI users, who must rely on
screenreaders to read out the values in the data ta-
ble, from quickly and easily forming an overview of
how the data is distributed. For example, although
the table corresponding to Figure 1 only has 31 rows
(corresponding to the 31 council areas of Scotland),
VI users still need to listen to each of these values
and remember them in order to form a mental pic-
ture of the overall trends in population distribution
which sighted users can infer from the map in under
a minute. Furthermore, tables do not communicate
where regions are located. This means that although
they might be able to pick out maxima and minima,
inferring trends is a much harder task, and mentally
visualising how the data is distributed is impossible
for unfamiliar areas given named locations in tables.
Atlas.txt aims to automatically interpret this tabu-
lar geo-referenced data and communicate its central
information as texts which can then be read out to
VI users via a screenreading application. We start
by describing some of the issues involved in com-
municating geo-referenced information in the cen-
sus domain. Then we address content determination
issues in the system and present some user needs
requirements for communicating geo-referenced in-
formation to VI users, principle among which is the
need for texts to enable mentally visualising the re-
gion and how the data is distributed. This motivates
our decision to include introduction messages which
describe the region before communicating how the
113
Figure 1: A typical map showing geo-referenced data
data is distributed, and present an experiment into
this choice, focusing on evaluating whether intro-
duction messages are beneficial.
2 Related Work
Systems which generate descriptions of numeri-
cal data are not uncommon, e.g., the FOG system
(Goldberg et al 1994), TREND (Boyd, 1997) and
MULTI-METEO (Coch, 1998) all generate textual
summaries of numerical weather data. (Ferres et
al, 2006) generates textual descriptions of informa-
tion in graphs and enables user querying. SumTime1
summarises time-series data and RoadSafe2 gener-
ates travel advisories and looks at spatial time-series
data. While there is no prior work on generating tex-
tual descriptions of geo-referenced data, there have
been studies on describing spatial data in the context
of route directions ((Geldof, 2003), (Marciniak and
Strube, 2004)), scene descriptions (Novak, 1986),
geometric descriptions (Mitkov, 1990) and spatial
descriptions (Ebert et al 1996).
Data-to-text generation projects like Atlas.txt dif-
fer from the traditional three-stage pipeline genera-
tion architecture of most NLG systems (Reiter and
Dale, 2000) because they need to analyse the data
in order to determine data abstractions before then
going on to the traditional three stages of document
planning, micro-planning and realisation, as was put
forward by (Sripada, Reiter et al 2001). Content
determination has been described as involving a col-
lective classification problem (Barzilay and Lapata,
1More information can be found at
http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/research/sumtime.
2See http://www.csd.abdn.ac.uk/research/roadsafe.
2005) and in the context of data-to-text systems.
Since our system involves data-to-text NLG, content
determination has more in common with the two-
stage process of (Sripada, Reiter et al 2001) than
the classification process of (Barzilay and Lapata,
2005). However a notable difference between our
domain and the meteorology domain described in
(Sripada, Reiter et al 2001), is that for us, arriv-
ing at an overview before communicating the data to
the end-user involves not just data analysis but also
scene description to aid in our visualisation goal.
3 Content Determination in Atlas.txt
System
The Atlas.txt system aims to be able to take geo-
referenced data in tabular form, perform data analy-
sis to determine significant features in the data, and
then communicate these significant features via text.
Data analysis for Atlas.txt involves clustering to find
regions in the geography with similar values of cen-
sus variable. Data analysis also involves trending to
find spatial trends in the data. Information obtained
from data analysis forms the input to the content de-
termination module.
In order to select which information to communi-
cate (i.e., content selection), we ran a corpus study
on online census texts to try and determine what
messages they communicate (Thomas and Sripada,
2008). Of course, these documents are not written
for the VI user group. On the other hand, without
evidence to the contrary, we cannot assume that VI
users require census information (i.e., census statis-
tics) that is different from what sighted users require.
But VI users do need additional content that helps
them to interpret any geographic references associ-
ated with census information. An experiment con-
ducted in Ottawa on a group of 5 blind and 5 sighted
participants indicated that both blind and sighted
participants (without access to a map) need addi-
tional information to ground proper name reference
to unfamiliar places. Because we did not find ex-
amples of these kind in our corpus texts, we hy-
pothesised that all texts produced by Atlas.txt sys-
tem should start with what we called an ?introduc-
tion? messages which help VI users to interpret geo-
graphic information better.
This means, we need knowledge of two kinds of
114
messages for building Atlas.txt, ones that communi-
cate census information and the others that help VI
users understand the geography better. Designing
the first type of census messages requires a good un-
derstanding of user goals. We have noticed a broad
range of goals census users have, and we consider a
number of use cases illustrating particular user goals
below:
1. You want to buy a house somewhere safe, i.e.,
with a low crime rate, and within commuting
distance of City X.
2. You want to start a business selling expensive
furniture and you want to pick a location near
potential clientele who are profiled as wealthy
based on income level data.
This illustrates the huge range of purposes people
might have when accessing census data, and many
of these examples were found via online documents
on census uses.3 We determined which content to
communicate from the data in this domain by con-
sidering both evidence from use cases like the ones
above and also online census documents. In many
online census documents there is no corresponding
data available in tabular form. This could be because
the information in different modalities is intended to
be complimentary rather than equivalent. The lack
of corresponding data in most cases makes it hard to
learn what sorts of results constitute interesting data
which should be reported. From a qualitative study
of corpus documents, we notice that most such texts
at the least describe where the variable they focus on
(e.g., unemployment) has its high values, low val-
ues, and spatial trends of the variable?s distribution
if there are any. Some scenarios require additional
information, e.g., the vicinity of a major road, the
coast, a city, etc. We aim for a scenario-generic so-
lution for now as a first step given that the system is
not interactive. However we hope that communicat-
ing the basic statistics in a meaningful way (i.e., via
useful spatial expressions) and also introducing the
region and its salient features will improve accessi-
bility to this information. The goal of such a system
3Business Uses of Census Data:
www.incontext.indiana.edu/2001/july01/spotlight.html, Uses
of Census Data: www.laria.gov.uk/content/articles/2003
conference pdf/boag.pdf
is of course to eventually become interactive so that
it can eventually address users? specific goals and
answer more specific questions about how the data
is distributed. As explained above Atlas.txt includes
the following census messages:
? Maxima message: location/s of high values
from Data Analysis
? Minima message: location/s of low values from
Data Analysis
? Trend message: location/s of trends from Data
Analysis
All these census messages make explicit references
to geographic locations which are hard to interpret
for VI users. We assume that the introduction mes-
sages introduced earlier enable hearers to visualise
the underlying geography which helps them to make
sense of spatial descriptions in census messages.
The introduction message also gives a general sum-
mary by communicating the overall average value-
range of the data (e.g., ?Overall, unemployment fre-
quencies are low?), inspired by Gestalt principles
of grouping in perception (Metzger, 2006) and the
visual information seeking mantra (Schneiderman,
1996) which argues that one should start with an
overview, zoom and filter, and only provide details
upon demand (the latter of which is only applicable
to interactive systems). The following components
of introduction messages are currently considered:
? Boundary geographic information, which indi-
cates geographic features which bound the re-
gion as a whole on any side
? Gestalt-driven overview of data (average value-
range)
? Location of where population is densest
In order to communicate the boundary geographic
information, we ran a survey eliciting spatial de-
scriptions of Aberdeenshire which indicated that
people?s spatial descriptions when presented with a
census map seem to fall into the following three cat-
egories of geographic information:
? Human geography: cities, roads, towns, ur-
ban/rural distinctions, census ward boundaries,
etc.
115
? Physical geography: lakes, mountains, sea,
desert, etc.
? Orientation geography: cardinal directions
In other words, we saw many descriptions which
used terms like ?urban?, ?rural?, which pointed
out major roads as indicators of where population
might be denser, and also many of the descriptions
which referred to areas as ?coastal?, ?inland?, ?[in
the] hills?, etc. Cardinal directions (e.g., ?North?,
?Southwest?, etc.) were also frequently used to
locate phenomena and are absolute coordinates in
the survey frame of reference involved in Atlas.txt,
which describes maps from a bird?s eye view, (Tay-
lor and Tversky, 1996).
Determining salient geographic information
which describes where maxima, minima and trends
are involves overlaying the clusters (and ends of
trends) with geographic layers in the human and
physical geographies discussed above. Then if we
find that any of the geographic elements contained
in any of the geographic overlays aligns spatially
with the cluster, we add this to a list of multiple
possible spatial expressions which can be used to
describe the location of the cluster. Appropriately
describing clusters via selecting informative spatial
expressions is a central aspect of communicating
the maximum, minimum and trend messages.
Overlaying different layers like this is a stan-
dard ?intersect overlay? operation in Geographic
Information Systems (GIS) and data containing
altitude information, urban/road information and
physical geography exist online which can be
used as the alignment layers in a GIS. We want to
select features which intersect our clusters even
minimally, as they help to describe where features
are located. If no intersecting regions exist, we
choose the nearest. Note that the layers considered
all fall within the different geographic types, i.e.,
human and physical geographies. Orientation
information does not require overlaying maps to
identify which parts are North, etc. Orientation
information can be calculated for the region in
question by overlaying it with a square 8 by 8 grid
for the various cardinal directions. The location
of the maxima and minima clusters can then be
described as lying in a particular cardinal direction
by simply checking which square/s of the grid they
fall in. Determining cardinal direction has been
implemented in the Roadsafe project.
In future we will consider how to handle situa-
tions in which multiple possible features intersect
(or are near to) our clusters, which will involve
us ranking some of these features higher than oth-
ers. We will also want to consider the effects of
other factors than proximity on selection of spa-
tial descriptions, e.g., discourse context and causal-
ity could affect the choice of spatial description.
The results from our survey eliciting spatial de-
scriptions of Aberdeen showed more spatial de-
scriptions from the human geography (58%) than
from the physical geography (42%). The survey in-
volved a between-subjects design where the 24 par-
ticipants were blocked into 3 groups, one group get-
ting coarse maps with only 3 or 4 large wards cover-
ing all of Aberdeenshire while the other two groups
had medium (around 28 wards) and fine grained
maps (around 50 wards) covering the shire. Coarse-
grained maps had higher percentages of scores for
physical geography descriptions than for human ge-
ography descriptions (62% vs. 37%) while both
medium and fine-grained maps had larger percent-
ages for human geography descriptions (62% and
57% respectively). There were also a higher num-
ber of human descriptions used per turn on average,
4.2 vs. 2.6 for physical descriptions.
Most census variables describe information which
pertains to human populations, (e.g., unemployment
statistics, or employment in hunting, agriculture and
forestry in our survey), indicating that human geo-
graphic features might be causally linked to most
census data. As was indicated in our initial sur-
vey, human geographic features like the locations of
cities and roads seem to be most related to these pop-
ulation variables and might form the most meaning-
ful description for the hearer, since they may help
the hearer to infer useful correlations between the
presence of (e.g.) a maxima and a geographic fea-
ture. However there might also be correlations be-
tween physical geographic features and these vari-
ables, for example, logging in forests, fishing indus-
try in coastal areas, etc.
Context will certainly also play a large role, e.g.,
if the prior message uses a description from the
physical geography (e.g., ?coastal?), this might re-
sult in ?inland? being preferred over ?urban?, par-
116
ticularly if the messages have opposite content (e.g.,
one reports maxima while the other reports minima).
We also saw that participants tended to mix ge-
ographies more often than not, involving both physi-
cal and human geography descriptions in their texts,
as 60% of the number of turns which had descrip-
tions from both geographies. Describing cluster lo-
cations with two geographies leads to sentences like
?Unemployment is highest in rural and coastal ar-
eas,? which leads to a range of inferences about how
coastal and rural areas might be similar where unem-
ployment is concerned. Mixed geography descrip-
tions are more informative, since they convey addi-
tional information, so our view is that extra descrip-
tors, particularly if they come from other geogra-
phies, will only clarify and help listeners to ground
the locations of clusters.
So the content determination module takes the
document plan containing the four messages to be
communicated and gets the locations of maxima,
minima and trends (which come from data analysis).
These are then overlaid with data of the area contain-
ing physical or human geographies for the region.
Proximity is our current selection factor, so align-
ing features are currently selected if they intersect
(though as discussed earlier, if no features intersect,
the nearest ones are chosen) and are saved as possi-
ble spatial expressions to be used in the message. In
future work we will also need to account for causal-
ity and context in this selection of appropriate spatial
descriptions.
4 Evaluation
Unlike many of the other data-to-text systems de-
scribed, the Atlas.txt system?s goal is much more
general. Rather than generating specific texts for
specific audiences with particular expertise and tasks
in mind, this project aims to communicate census
data to a VI audience of varying expertise who, un-
like for most other NLG systems, have a range of
tasks in mind. As we argued earlier, the messages
we choose to communicate enable the vast major-
ity of users to at least get an overview of the salient
features in the data and we leave more specific in-
formational requirements for an interactive version
of Atlas.txt.
One issue that arises for a broad-focus non-task-
specific domain like this is that evaluation methods
are not as well-specified as for other NLG systems
for content determination. (Dale and Mellish, 1998)
present four questions one can ask when evaluat-
ing content determination: (1) truth (is the output
true), (2) quantity?does the output say enough, (3)
quantity?does the output say too much, and (4) ap-
propriateness (is the output inappropriate to the con-
text). But what if we want to ask the more high level
question of utility? That is, do we really need the
introduction message (assuming it is not mislead-
ing)? The two quantity considerations?have we said
too much or too little?are probably the best ways to
guage whether the introduction message is informa-
tive enough (and not too verbose). But again, this
is a bit too fine-grained for us, as we want to first
ask whether the introduction message is necessary
or not in the first place before attempting to refine
its contents.
The general-purpose task aspect of this domain
also implies that we cannot compare our texts with
an expert?s texts based on the underlying data, as it is
difficult to find simple summarising expert-written
census texts online. The vast majority of census
texts are far longer than ours and tend to discuss the
implications of what the data presents which is be-
yond our scope. Furthermore, we cannot compare
Atlas.txt output against expert-written text because
there is no expert-produced parallel data where texts
summarise the information contained in tables or
maps. Also, experts (statisticians) are not used to
summarising tables as simple, general-purpose texts
like this and they vary in the sorts of texts they
produce. Our experiment in Ottawa indicated that
different statisticians employed at Statistics Canada
vary both in terms of the analyses they make of
both tabular and textual census data (under experi-
mental conditions) and in their post-edits of expert-
written census texts (Thomas and Sripada, 2008).
This means that we need to rethink how we should
evaluate Atlas.txt?s texts.
4.1 Study
Given that instructions rich in imagery help sub-
jects to form a spatial mental model (Gyselinck et
al, 2006), our end goal is to discover if introduc-
tion messages actually aid in visualisation. Given
the lack of conclusive evidence to the contrary, we
117
operate under the premise that VI people have spa-
tial comprehension abilities (Kitchin et al 1997) and
can benefit from texts which enable visualisation.
We run the study with sighted people because they
can draw maps which they visualise from our texts.
We ran a study which presented a group of 20 ran-
domly recruited sighted participants with a pair of
texts where one member of the pair included the in-
troduction message and the other member did not
include the introduction message. The introduc-
tion message contains the two geographic elements
we discussed earlier: locations of boundary infor-
mation, the location of where population is densest
and the trend for population density. The messages
were identical in content (though names and direc-
tions were changed so that participants would not
assume that the same country was being described),
and both texts have a maxima, minima and trend
message (each), as can be seen in Examples 1 and
2 below:
1. The land of Bosk is bounded to the East by
the Bale Ocean, and its largest city is Wrist-
wath, on the East coast. Population is densest
around Wristwath and gradually decreases as
one moves Westward, though there are clusters
of medium-high population in cities like Slan-
gin in Central Bosk. Crime rates are highest
in Wristwath and Southern suburbs of Wrist-
wath. Additionally, Slangin also has high crime
rates. Crime is lowest in Northwestern and
East-Central Bosk. Crime tends to decrease as
one goes East or West from Central Bosk with
the exception of the Wristwath area.
2. Poverty rates are highest in Galen and Western
suburbs of Galen. Additionally, Boroos also
has high poverty rates. Poverty rates are low-
est in Northwestern and East-Central Dagor.
Poverty rates tends to decrease as one goes East
or West from Central Dagor with the exception
of the Galen area.
For each text, participants were asked to draw a map
of the area they visualise based on the text, indicat-
ing where the maxima and minima are and where all
other information mentioned in the text is located.
Then they were asked two task-based questions per
text which aim to check whether they can use the
information appropriately. The first question asks
whether they can identify the minima/maxima, e.g.,
?You want to relocate to Bosk. Considering only
crime rates, where might you want to move?? The
second question gives them a piece of additional in-
formation which sighted people would be able to
pick off from the map, e.g., that there is a coastline,
harbours, roads, etc., e.g., ?You work in Wristwath
and need to commute in daily. Given this and the
above info, where might you want to live in Bosk??
After each of the two pairs of texts and questions,
participants are asked to indicate which text was eas-
ier to visualise and to state why. Participants were
also presented with two thematic maps and asked to
write descriptions of them so that someone who is
blind can visualise them.
We hypothesized that Ex.2 above will cause dif-
ficulties for map drawing. There is no introduc-
tion message helping readers to orient themselves to
the region, and one does not know a priori whether
Galen is the name of a city or the region itself, or
where it is in the region if it is indeed a city. This
might seem purposefully difficult, but this is what
one typically finds in census texts online. For exam-
ple, if you want to know where in Canada Saskatoon
is, you need to look it up in a map. This makes it
hard (even for sighted people) when you read many
unfamiliar place names and are trying to get an over-
all picture of where places are.
4.2 Results and Discussion
The maps drawn for the text stimuli are scored on
a number of features, but the primary goal is to as-
certain whether readers visualised the locations of
the maximum, minimum and trend correctly. Each
text is based on an underlying map which is used as
the gold standard against which participants? maps
are compared. This gold standard map includes a
range of variation in location of maximum, mini-
mum and trend based on the ambiguity present in the
text. For example, ?East-Central? in Ex. 2 is hard
to define. Participants were given a point each for
correctly identifying the maximum, minimum and
trend in each message, or a zero if they failed to do
so correctly or if their answer was uninterpretable.
These three scores were also totalled giving a total
score per text for the maps drawn. Here we did not
see a huge difference in scores for the different mes-
118
Table 1: Average & std. deviation scores for map drawing
Text Maximum Minimum Trend Total
Text 1 1; 0 0.80; 0.41 0.80; 0.41 0.87; 0.23
Text 2 0.85; 0.37 0.70; 0.47 0.65; 0.49 0.73; 0.32
sages, as can be seen in the table; Text 1 has an in-
troduction message (and is seen in Ex. 1) and Text
2 (Ex. 2) lacks the introduction message. The to-
tal column corresponds to the average score for the
three messages (maximum, minimum and trend). A
t-test on the total scores for Texts 1 and 2 gives a
non-significant result with a p-value of 0.110. On
the other hand, almost all the participants preferred
Text 1 to Text 2; a signed ranks test on the prefer-
ence judgements (participants ticked which text they
preferred, 1 or 2) was significant with a p-value <
0.001. When asked to state their reasons for pre-
ferring Text 1, participants identified the geographic
information from the introduction message as the
only reason. Also when participants wrote texts for
map stimuli they tended to include introduction mes-
sages in them; a binomial test on whether introduc-
tion messages were included in either of their two
texts was significant with a p-value < 0.041. Inter-
estingly enough, shape was a feature used in many
of these introduction messages when the map had
a particularly non-square shape. In the part of the
experiment where participants answered task-based
questions based on texts with and without introduc-
tion messages they performed well on all questions
following both types of texts.
It is encouraging that participants preferred texts
with introduction messages and also used them in
their own texts. But it is disappointing that the ab-
sence of introduction messages seems to make no
difference to mental visualisation of Text 2. In fact,
many of the maps for Text 2 were incomplete; par-
ticipants simply marked the required information
and their nearby geographic entities. The problem
with evaluating maps is that they partly measure the
geometrical relationships in the map which could
bias such evaluations against participants with poor
drawing skills. Poor drawing skills could also ob-
scure whether they have visualised the correct infor-
mation.
Many participants said that drawing the map and
accounting for all of the information contained in
the introduction message was very difficult, so there
might have additionally been some cognitive over-
load on drawing maps for Text 1 which biased the
results in favour of Text 2. Generally all the partic-
ipants complained that the whole experiment took
longer than they had expected. This indicates that
the texts were challenging enough and not triv-
ial. (Murray, 1979) claims that there are variations
among people?s ability to draw mentally visualised
geographic information, indicating that evaluating
elicited maps might have a large amount of indi-
vidual variation. Ideally we need to find alternative
ways (other than eliciting map drawing) of assessing
the effectiveness of introduction messages.
Other factors could also have affected these re-
sults. For example, we did not randomise the order
of stimuli. Furthermore, our task-based questions
proved too easy for participants because they can be
answered by simply searching for the named region
with the highest value etc. Another issue which we
will want to explore in future work is whether us-
ing spatial descriptions (e.g., ?a medium-sized city?
instead of ?Slangin? from Text 1, etc.) in both texts
would have helped people to make more sense of the
texts, particularly Text 2.
We also ran the text stimuli of the experiment with
a VI computing undergraduate who clearly indicated
that the texts without the introduction message were
much harder to visualise, as he did not know where
the cities (referred to by proper name alone) were
located. He also indicated that some information re-
quired to partially visualise the region could be in-
ferred indirectly from information presented in these
texts lacking introduction messages. For example, in
Ex. 2, he could deduce that poverty rates are high in
Central Dagor, since it decreases as one goes East
or West from Central Dagor. However there was not
enough information for him to place Boroos in Cen-
tral Dagor.
5 Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper we describe how content determination
in Atlas.txt is achieved and report on evaluation of
one message in our content determination schema:
the introduction message. Our end goal is to en-
able VI users to mentally visualise the region being
described in order to locate where areas with high
119
and low values of the census variable described are
and also to visualise spatial trends for this variable
in the region. In order to evaluate whether intro-
duction messages in our texts help users to mentally
visualise the region, we elicited drawings of maps
visualised by sighted participants based on our texts
with and without the introduction message. This was
based on the assumption that VI people also have
spatial cognition abilities, and because sighted par-
ticipants can draw the maps they visualise. We did
not see a significant difference between texts with
and without introduction messages from the elicited
drawings of maps which were scored on the correct
locations of maximum, minimum and trend informa-
tion. However we saw that participants overwhelm-
ingly preferred texts with introduction messages to
those without, and also tended to include introduc-
tion messages in texts describing maps when asked
to describe the maps to blind readers.
The question then arises as to how one should ide-
ally evaluate message inclusion when communicat-
ing spatial data. Although drawing maps seemed a
natural way to evaluate visualisation, we saw that
it was fraught with difficulties. We leave the ques-
tion of finding an appropriate evaluation methodol-
ogy for message choice in spatial data-to-text sys-
tems such as ours for future work.
Evaluating the utility of the individual compo-
nents of the introduction message has also been left
as future work. Furthermore, we also plan on inves-
tigating the factors involved in selecting description
geographies, e.g., causality and context, in order to
produce informative spatial descriptions in our mes-
sages.
References
R. Barzilay and M. Lapata. 2005. Collective Content Selection
for Concept-to-text Generation. Human Language Technol-
ogy Conference.
S. Boyd. 1997. Detecting and Describing Patterns in Time-
varying Data Using Wavelets. Advances in Intelligent Data
Analysis: Reasoning About Data, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, 1280.
J. Coch. 1998. Multimeteo: Multilingual Production of
Weather Forecasts. ELRA Newsletter, 3(2).
R. Dale and C. Mellish. 1998. Towards the Evaluation of Nat-
ural Language Generation. Proceedings of the First Interna-
tional Conference on Evaluation of Natural Language Pro-
cessing Systems.
C. Ebert, D. Glatz, M. Jansche, R. Meyer-Klabunde and R.
Porzel. 1996. From Conceptualization to Formulation in
Generating Spatial Descriptions. Proceedings fo the 5th Eu-
ropean Conference on Cognitive Modelling.
L. Ferres, A. Parush, S. Roberts and G. Lindgaard. 2006. Help-
ing People with Visual Impairments Gain Access to Graph-
ical Information Through Natural Language: The iGraph
System. Proceedings of ICCHP 2006, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 4061.
S. Geldof. 2003. Corpus Analysis for NLG. Proceedings of the
9th EWNLG.
E. Goldberg, N. Driedger and R.L. Kittredge. 1994. Using
Natural-Language Processing to Produce Weather Forecasts.
IEEE Expert, 9(2).
V. Gyselinck, R. De Beni, F. Pazzaglia, C. Meneghetti and A.
Mondoloni. 2006. Spatial Knowledge Acquisition from
Maps and from Navigation in Real and Virtual Environ-
ments. Memory and Cognition, 27.
R. Kitchin, M. Blades and R. Golledge. 1997. Understanding
Spatial Concepts at the Geographic Scale Without the Use of
Vision. Human Geography, 21(2).
T. Marciniak and M. Strube. 2004. Classification-based Gener-
ation Using TAG. Proceedings of Natural Language Gener-
ation: 3rd International Conference, Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 3123.
W. Metzger. 2006. Laws of Seeing. MIT Press.
R. Mitkov. 1990. A Text-Generation System for Explaining
Concepts in Geometry. Proceedings of the 13th Conference
on Computational Linguistics.
D. Murray and C. Spencer. 1979. Individual Differences in
the Drawing of Cognitive Maps: the Effects of Geographi-
cal Mobility, Strength of Mental Imagery and Basic Graphic
Ability. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers,
New Series, Vol.4, No.3.
H.J. Novak. 1986. Generating a Coherent Text Describing a
Traffic Scene. Proceedings of the 11th Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics.
E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Language Gen-
eration Systems. Cambridge University Press.
B. Schneiderman. 1996. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data
Type Taxonomy for Information Visualisations. Proceed-
ings of Visual Language.
S. Sripada, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and J. Yu. 2001. A Two-Stage
Model for Content Determination. Proceedings of the 8th
ACL-EWNLG.
S. Sripada, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and J. Yu. 2003. Exploiting a
Parallel TEXT-DATA Corpus. Proceedings of Corpus Lin-
guistics.
H. Taylor and B. Tversky. 1996. Perspective in Spatial De-
scriptions. Journal of Memory and Language, vol. 35.
K. Thomas and S. Sripada. 2008. Atlas.txt: First Steps Towards
Bridging the Gap Between Geo-Referenced Data and Text.
Proceedings of the Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web
Accessibility.
J. Yu, E. Reiter, J. Hunter and C. Mellish. 2005. Choosing
the Content of Textual Summaries of Large Time-series Data
Sets. Natural Language Engineering, vol. 11.
120
