The Idiom?Reference
Connection
Marjorie McShane
Sergei Nirenburg
University of Maryland Baltimore County (USA)
email: marge@umbc.edu
Abstract
Idiom processing and reference resolution are two complex aspects of text
processing that are commonly treated in isolation. However, closer study
of the reference needs of some idioms suggests that these two phenom-
ena will need to be treated together to support high-endNLP applications.
Using evidence from Russian and English, this article describes a num-
ber of classes of idioms according to their reference needs and suggests a
method of lexical encoding which, supplemented by procedural semantic
routines, can adequately support the full semantic and referential inter-
pretation of these idioms.
165
166 McShane and Nirenburg
1 Introduction
Reference resolution and idiom processing have received much attention in natural
language processing (NLP), but these phenomena are commonly treated in isolation
of each other, andmost treatments address only a single aspect of the respective overall
problems. For example, much of the work on practical reference resolution has con-
centrated on establishing textual coreference relations for a subset of pronouns (e.g.
Mitkov et al, 2002), and the most widely pursued aspect of idiom processing has been
the automatic extraction of multi-word expressions (of which idioms are a subtype)
from corpora (e.g. Baldwin and Villavicencio, 2002). Of course, some contributions in
both of these subfields have ventured much wider;1 however, we have found few prac-
tical approaches that explore the interaction of idiomaticity and reference resolution
and its implications for NLP.
One might ask, why treat these phenomena together? Perhaps the best reason is to
highlight the indispensability for real progress in NLP of semantic analysis that goes
beyond what the most researchers are currently pursuing in practical system building.
Another reason to integrate the study of reference and idioms is to address the diffi-
culties that automatic text analyzers will encounter in detecting and processing idioms
when some of their components are elided. Ellipsis, a means of expressing reference,
thus, becomes an important component of this study. The approach suggested here
should, we believe, alleviate some of the inherent difficulties of these complex tasks.
Note that similar kinds of problems are discussed in Pulman (1993), which suggests
the need for ?contextual reasoning? applied to idioms, which is ?the process of tak-
ing the information that can be derived linguistically from a sentence and fleshing it
out with information supplied by the local context or general background knowledge?
(Pulman, 1993, p. 251).
The proposed analysis delineates several categories of idioms according to their ref-
erence needs and shows how the encoding of idioms in a semantically oriented lexicon
can support both basic semantic analysis and reference resolution. Although the anal-
ysis is theory- and system-neutral, the exposition follows a specific, implemented the-
ory of natural language processing. This theory, called Ontological Semantics (Niren-
burg and Raskin, 2004), colors our understanding of the nature of meaning-oriented
NLP, including our treatment of reference and idioms.
Ontological Semantics seeks to achieve full semantic and pragmatic analysis of
texts such that interpreted structures, rather than textual strings, serve as the input to
automatic reasoners. Ontological Semantics relies on knowledge obtained through
many layers of processing: preprocessing followed by morphological, syntactic, se-
mantic and discourse analysis. The static knowledge resources, which are intercon-
nected and all use the same metalanguage of description, are a lexicon and onomas-
ticon for each language processed, a language-independent ontology (a knowledge
base of concept types), and a language-independent fact repository (a knowledge base
of concept instances). Static resources are compiled manually, using sophisticated
editing environments, to ensure high quality, though we are experimenting with ma-
chine learning to speed the acquisition process. Text analysis involves the automatic
1See, for example, the contributions to recent workshops (e.g., ACL 2004 ?Reference Resolution and its
Applications? and ?Multi-word Expression: Integrating Processing?; EACL 2006 ?Multi-word Expressions
in a Multilingual Context?) and Stanford?s Multi-Word Expression Project (http://mwe.stanford.edu/).
The Idiom?Reference Connection 167
evaluation of semantic preferences recorded in the lexicon and ontology, as well as
preferences based on stochastically trained measures of semantic distance among on-
tological concepts.
Within this semantically-oriented, knowledge-based environment we define refer-
ence resolution rather differently than in most NLP applications, where resolving ref-
erence is understood as linking coreferring text strings. In fact, our conceptualization
of reference resolution strongly influences how we approach resolving reference in
idioms and therefore must be clarified from the outset.
2 What is Reference Resolution?
We define reference resolution as the anchoring of referring expressions in the episodic
memory of an intelligent text processing agent. This knowledge base of stored mem-
ories, called the fact repository, differs from the ontology in that it contains indexed
instances of ontological concepts and their property-based interconnections. Anchor-
ing entities in the fact repository is the culmination of semantic analysis and reference
resolution.
When presented with a new text, the system must first semantically analyze every
sentence, creating an unambiguous text meaning representation (TMR); reference is
then resolved for the correct meaning of each string. The TMR contains the crucial
clues for determining which entities are referring expressions: numbered instances
of ontological concepts are referring expressions whereas properties, literal property
fillers, and so on, are not. As an example, consider the following context which,
although contrived, illustrates many relevant phenomena at one go.
(1) At 4:48 it became clear that the programmers couldn?t finish debugging the
system before the 5:00 deadline. All hell broke loose, the boss was fit to be
tied ? almost strangled his project manager!
Let us concentrate on the second sentence. In the tables below, each string or
idiomatic group of strings from that sentence (top row) is associated with its corre-
sponding semantic structure (bottom row). The concept instances set in italics must
be resolved. The important thing to notice is that the system must orient around se-
mantic structures rather than strings in order to create the correct inventory of referring
expressions.
all broke his project
hell loose the boss was fit to be tied almost strangled manager
CHAOS-1 MANAGER-1 ANGER (RANGE 1) HUMAN-1 (MODALITY-2
(TYPE EPISTEMIC)
(VALUE .9)
(SCOPE STRANGLE-1))
STRANGLE-1 ASSISTANT-1
Highlights of the analysis are as follows:
? Whereas all hell and broke loose could individually be referring expressions in
some other context, when the are used in this idiom they together represent a
single meaning, CHAOS, this instance of which is called CHAOS-1 ? the first
instance of the concept CHAOS encountered while processing the given text or
corpus. This event, like all instances of OBJECTs and EVENTs in TMRs, re-
quires reference resolution: it must be determined whether this is a new event to
168 McShane and Nirenburg
be added to the fact repository or a reference to an event that is already recorded
there. In this case, it is a new event, since the algorithm used to detect event
coreference requires either (a) that there be an ample overlap of properties as-
sociated with a candidate fact repository ?anchor? or (b) that the new event be
referred to using a definite description (e.g., the strike), with the definite de-
scription triggering the search for a coreferent in the context or fact repository.
? Whereas the boss and his project manager can either be descriptors (as in This
man is a boss and that man is a project manager) or referring expressions, here
they are referring expressions and must be resolved.
? Whereas fit and tied can be referring expressions in isolation, in this idiom they
are not referring expressions, nor is the idiom on the whole a referring expres-
sion: it indicates the highest value of the property ANGER.
? Although the second half of the sentence has no overt subject, he is the under-
stood subject. The reference resolver must detect this missing entity and create
a coreference link between it and MANAGER-1.
? Almost is never a referring expression: it indicates a value of less than 1 for
epistemic modality scoping over the given event (here, STRANGLE-1). How-
ever, some other adverbs are referring expressions (e.g., here, yesterday) and
must be resolved.
? STRANGLE-1, like all EVENTs, must undergo reference resolution.
Once all referring expressions have been detected, the system must resolve them
against the fact repository. There are several possible scenarios: (a) the entity has a
textual antecedent, in which case the new entity is linked to the same fact repository
anchor as that antecedent; (b) the entity does not have a textual antecedent but is
already a known entity (like the earth or Plato) and is linked to the existing anchor
in the fact repository; (c) the entity is determined to be new and a new anchor is
established for it in the fact repository. This, in a nutshell, is how reference is resolved
in our semantic analysis environment, OntoSem.
Our reference resolver for English is implemented and covers all the eventualities
posed by this sentence. It has not yet undergone formal evaluation. We will now
describe how idioms are encoded to support this process.
The examples used for illustration are not from English, they are from Russian,
a language that is not currently supported in OntoSem. The reason for using Rus-
sian examples even though the implemented system does not yet cover Russian is
that Russian presents a superset of challenges for reference resolution ? namely, a
much wider use of ellipsis, or the null referring expression; therefore, showing that
the scope of phenomena presented by Russian can be handled a fortiori shows that
the same phenomena can be handled in English. Indeed, the OntoSem environment
supports multilingual text processing, using a language-independent ontology and fact
repository, and using the same types of lexicon entries regardless of the language pro-
cessed (see McShane et al, 2005).
The Idiom?Reference Connection 169
3 Encoding Idioms to Support their Full Analysis
A cornerstone of theoretical, descriptive, computational and psycholinguistc work on
idioms is the attempt to understand to what extent idioms are fixed and to what extent
they are flexible (see, e.g., Cacciari and Tabossi (1993), whose component articles
include extensive overviews of the literature). The competing classifications can de-
rive from both theoretical considerations, like psycholinguistic evidence, and practical
considerations, like whether an NLP system attempts to analyze only those idioms that
are recorded or whether it attempts to analyze new coinages as well. The scope of the
current analysis is idioms that are recorded as well as certain types of free modifi-
cations of them. Completely new idioms will need to be processed as ?unexpected
input?, in a similar way as the system attempts to process metaphor and metonymy.
Like Stock et al (1993) (in Cacciari and Tabossi (1993)), we integrate idioms into
the lexicon as ?more information about particular words? (Stock et al, 1993, p. 238)
rather than treat them using special lists and idiosyncratic procedures. In the discus-
sion below, we look at some examples of idioms that highlight noteworthy reference
resolution needs and show how our all-purpose lexical encoding mechanisms and ref-
erence resolution routines cover idiomatic input as readily as compositional input. A
more detailed description of how we encode idioms and other multi-word expressions,
as well as many additional examples, can be found in McShane et al (2008).
3.1 Productive Syntactic Processes in Idioms
Each of the examples below contains an idiom in the second half, and each of those
idioms shows at least one productive use of ellipsis. In the examples, the elided cat-
egory, [e], and its antecedent, if syntactically available, are in boldface. Grammatical
information is provided sparingly for reasons of space.2
(2) Nado
it-is-necessary
zashchishchat?
to-defend
svoix
self?sACC.PL
sotrudnikov
coworkersACC.PL
a
and
ne
not
prinosit?
deliverINFIN
[e]
[e]ACC
v
as
zhertvu
sacrificeACC.SG.FEM
.
.
You should defend your coworkers, not sacrifice them.
(3) Ja
I
ne
don?t
xochu
want
preduprezhdat?
to-forewarn
ego,
himACC
[e]
[e]1.SG
xochu
want1.SG.
zastat?[e]
to-catch[e]3.SG.ACC.MASC
vrasplox
unawares
.
.
I don?t want to forewarn him, I want to catch him unawares.
These examples represent configurations in which ellipsis is highly promoted in non-
idiomatic and idiomatic contexts.3 Example (2) shows VP conjunction with the latter
of two coreferential direct objects elided. Example (3) shows subject and direct object
2Most of the Russian examples here are from Lubensky (1995), which is a bilingual learner?s dictionary
of Russian idioms that provides grammatical descriptions but no special treatment of ellipsis.
3See McShane (2005) for discussion and extensive examples of ellipsis-promoting configurations using
non-idiomatic examples. Idiomatic examples of many of the phenomena have also been found but are not
presented here for reasons of space.
170 McShane and Nirenburg
ellipsis in an ?assertion + elaboration? strategy (see McShane (2005)), in which the
topic of discourse is asserted then either restated or elaborated upon subsequently.
The above idioms are idiomatic VPs that are recorded in the OntoSem lexicon in a
similar way as typical verbs, with just a few special features. Let us take the example
of v grob vgonjat? ?to kill? (literally: to drive to the grave) as an example.
(vgonjat?-v1
(def "idiom: v grob vgonjat? - to kill (drive to the grave)")
(ex "Ja v grob vgonju tebja! I?ll kill you!")
(syn-struc
((subject ((root $var1) (cat n)))
(root $var0) (cat v)
(directobject ((root $var2) (cat n)))
(pp ((root $var3) (cat prep) (root v)
(obj ((root $var4) (cat n) (root grob)))))
(sem-struc
(KILL
(AGENT (value ^$var1))
(THEME (value ^$var2)))
(^$var3 (null-sem +)) (^$var4 (null-sem +))))
This lexical sense is headed by the verb, vgonjat? ?drive?. The syntactic zone (syn-
struc) says that the verb takes a subject, direct object and prepositional phrase with
no unusual syntactic constraints, meaning that the structure is open to the same sorts
of variability ? like different verbal tenses and aspects, free word order, syntactic
transformations and ellipsis? as is typical of non-idiomaticRussian. The only special
syntactic feature is that the roots of the lexical components of the prepositional phrase
are explicitly listed: v (into) and grob (grave). The semantic zone (sem-struc) records
the semantic interpretation: it is headed by a KILL event whose AGENT and THEME
are productively analyzed as the meaning of the subject and direct object, respectively.
The meanings of v (into) and grob (grave), which are ? under this analysis ? non-
compositional, are attributed null semantics.
Two aspects of semantic interpretation require comment. First, in most contexts
this idiom is not used to threaten actual killing; however, the same can be said for
the lexeme kill used in the threat I?ll kill you!; this aspect of interpretation is clearly
extra-lexical. Second, although it is likely that a person who did not know this idiom
would be able to interpret its meaning using the meanings of the component elements,
most NLP systems would struggle. Once we decide to record a phrase as idiomatic to
ease processing, the level of transparency of the components becomes unimportant.
Analysis of a clause that uses vgonjat? v grob ?kill? will generate three referring
expressions that must be resolved: the AGENT of the killing, the THEME of the killing
(we will not quibble here about which case role to choose for the person killed), and
the act of killing. These referring expressions might be realized, for example, as
HUMAN-23, HUMAN-24 and KILL-4 in a given text meaning representation. Once the
system has arrived at these analyses, reference resolution proceeds as it would for any
referring expressions, whether or not they were part of an idiom: textual coreferents
? recorded as semantic entities in TMR ? are sought and, whether or not they are
found, the referring expression is anchored in the fact repository. If we look at what is
The Idiom?Reference Connection 171
special about processing the reference in idioms, then, there are only two aspects: (1)
ensuring that productive syntactic processes are permitted only if applicable, and (2)
ensuring that the correct inventory of referring expressions ? understood as semantic
structures ? is generated.
Let us compare this treatment of idioms to the one proposed by Villavicencio et al
(2004). They treat the potential variability of idioms using the notion of semantic
decomposition. If an idiom can be paraphrased in a syntactically parallel way, it is de-
composable (spill the beans ? reveal a secret), even though non-standard meanings
need to be assigned to each component. The fundamental differences between their
approach and ours relate to semantic encoding and reference resolution. For Villavi-
cencio et al, the semantics of idioms is conveyed by paraphrases with other linguistic
elements (spill ? reveal, beans ? secret). For us, semantics is formulated using the
ontologically grounded metalanguage of OntoSem. As regards the initial syntactic
parse, both approaches seem to offer the same coverage of syntactic variability, and
resources could be shared with seeminglyminimal work devoted to format conversion.
3.2 Essentially Frozen Idioms
We have just shown how syntactic processes ? specifically, various types of ellipsis
? can apply to idioms in a language, and how the lexical encoding of such idioms al-
lows for syntactic variability. Other idioms, by contrast, are syntactically frozen. Such
idioms are commonly treated as strings with spaces, but this only works if absolutely
no modifiers or other entities (e.g., ?ahem?) can intervene. If intervening material
is possible, it is preferable to encode the idiom using separate syntactic constituents.
However, if one records the components individually, the analysis system must under-
stand that diathesis transformations, ellipsis, pronominalization, etc., are not applica-
ble. In OntoSem we label frozen syntactic constituents using immediate constituents,
like NP, rather than grammatical function labels, like subject. Since transformations
apply only to grammatical functions, they become automatically inapplicable if imme-
diate constituents are used. However, since all constituents are still listed individually,
intervening material and free modification are permitted in the usual way, as in He
kicked the bloody bucket!
Of course, treating free modifications of non-compositional parts of an idiom or
other multi-word expression (MWE) is not trivial, as described in some depth in Mc-
Shane et al (2008). To summarize that discussion, our basic approach to treating mod-
ifiers within MWEs is to analyze the MWE as indicated in the sem-struc, then attempt
to attach the meaning of ?orphan? modifiers to the meaning of the entire structure
using generalized processes for meaning composition. In the case of He kicked the
bloody bucket, the basic meaning will be rendered in the text meaning representation
as (DIE-1 (EXPERIENCER HUMAN-1)). The modifier bloody has two senses in our
lexicon, semantically described as (RELATION BLOOD) and (EMPHASIS .7). We have
a rule that prefers the stylistic interpretation in the case of non-compositional idioms.
So the final text meaning representation will be (DIE-1 (EXPERIENCER HUMAN-1)
(EMPHASIS .7)). ((emphasis .7) indicates a high value for the property EMPHASIS on
the abstract scale {0,1}.)
Such meaning composition is not specific to multi-word expressions: our semantic
analyzer carries out the same process in all cases when meaning must be recovered
172 McShane and Nirenburg
from an incomplete parse. The latter may be due to insufficient coverage of the syn-
tactic parser, lexical lacunae that confound the parser, or unexpected (ungrammatical,
highly elliptical, etc.) input.
Returning to our main point about how to encode essentially frozen idioms, en-
coding their components as separate entities provides the best of both worlds: frozen
components, fixed word order, and the possibility of intervening strings that typically
act as modifiers. One Russian idiom that fits this description is shown below.
(4) Ishchi-svishchi
Look-for-whistle-forIMPER
vetra
wind
v
in
pole
field
.
.
?You?ll never find him/her/it/etc.?
(ishchi-svishchi?-v1
(def "idiom: ishchi-svishchi vetra v pole
?you will never find him/her/it/etc.?")
(syn-struc
((root $var0) (cat v) (form imperative)
(np ((root $var1) (cat np) (root vetra)))
(pp ((root $var2) (cat prep) (root v)
(np ((root $var3) (cat np) (root pole)))))
(sem-struc
(modality
((type potential)
(value 0)
(attributed-to (sem HUMAN))
(scope (value refsem1))))
(refsem1
(FIND
(AGENT (sem human))
(THEME (sem all))
(time (> (find-anchor-time))))
(^$var1 (null-sem +))
(^$var2 (null-sem +))
(^$var3 (null-sem )))
(meaning-procedure
(seek-specification
((value find.modality.attributed-to)
(resolve-1st-sing)))
(seek-specification
((value find.agent) (resolve-2nd-sing)))
(seek-specification
((value find.theme) (resolve-3rd))))
The syntactic description should be self-evident based on the examples and description
above, but the semantic structure requires commentary.
The variables $var1, $var2 and $var3 are attributed null semantics because they do
not contribute to compositional meaning ? that is, this idiom (?look for whistle for
wind in the field?) is completely semantically opaque.
The sem-struc is headed by a modality statement: it is impossible introducesmodal-
ity of the type ?potential? with a value of 0. This modality is attributed, by default, to
The Idiom?Reference Connection 173
the speaker. It scopes over a proposition headed by FIND, and the latter is ontologically
defined as taking an AGENT and a THEME case role.
The semantic representation includes four referring expressions that must be re-
solved: (1) the speaker, to whom the modality is attributed; (2) the FIND event itself,
which will be a new anchor in the fact repository; (3) the AGENT of finding, which is
the interlocutor; and (4) the THEME of finding, which must be contextually computed.
The OntoSem analyzer would resolve the reference of the instance of FIND in the
usual way; this requires no further comment. What does require further comment,
however, is the way in which we guide the analyzer?s efforts to resolve the under-
specified instances of HUMAN, HUMAN and ALL that represent the speaker, the inter-
locutor and the object of the FIND event, respectively. We provide this guidance in
the meaning-procedures zone of the lexicon entry, which contains calls to procedural
semantic routines that are launched at run time. For example, we need to know who
the speaker is so that the modality can be attributed to the correct real-world person.
This is done using the ?seek-specification? meaning procedure. The first argument of
this procedure is what we are seeking the specification of (i.e., to whom the modality
is attributed), and the second argument is the function that will let us determine this ?
i.e., ?resolve-1st-sing?, which is, incidentally, the same routine used to seek the refer-
ent of the pronoun I. The latter meaning procedure includes ordered routines testing
for many cases including:
? the pronoun I being used in a context in which another pronoun I (which itself
should have been resolved earlier) can serve as an antecedent: I like chocolate
ice cream and always choose it if I have the option.
? the pronoun I being used within a quotation, and that quotation being the THEME
of a SPEECH-ACT of which the coreferent of I is the AGENT: I/Mary said, ?But
I don?t want strawberry ice cream!?
? the pronoun I being used outside of a quotation and the writer of the text
being available in metadata: <title>Understanding Your Finances</title>
<author>Mary Smith</author> . . . I believe that the only way to understand
your finances is to consult a financial advisor.
In short, using the combination of the information in the sem-struc and meaning-
procedures zones we arm the analyzer with the types of the information a person
would use to both understand the idiom and to resolve all implied references. (For
a more detailed description of meaning procedures in OntoSem, see McShane et al
(2004).)
3.3 Subjectless Constructions
We conclude our example-based discussion with one category of phenomena in which
idiom processing is actually much simpler than the processing of structurally similar
compositional language since it permits preemptive disambiguation. The disambigua-
tion in question regards subjects, which in Russian can be overt, elided or completely
missing. Completely missing (uninsertable) subjects occur in the following construc-
tions:
174 McShane and Nirenburg
? In the indefinite personal construction a 3rd person plural verb form is used
without a subject to indicate an unspecified person or people. It is used in
contexts like the Russian equivalent of They say it will rain today.
? In the non-agentive impersonal construction a 3rd person singular verb is used
without a subject to show that the event is non-agentive. It is used in contexts
like the Russian equivalent of He?s attracted to girls like that, whose structure-
preserving paraphrasewould be ?[some unnamed force] attracts him to girls like
that.?
The difficulty in processing productive subjectless sentences is determining whether
the verb has a specific subject that has been elided and must be recovered, or does
not have a specific subject, in which case the generalized personal or non-agentive
interpretation should be used. However, when it comes to idioms that employ these
constructions, the syntax can be encoded to explicitly block a subject, and the seman-
tics can explicitly indicate the interpretation added by the missing subject.
An idiom that employs the indefinite personal construction is shown in (5), along
with the lexical sense of bit? ?hit? that records it.
(5) Lezhachego
Lying-down-personACC.SG.MASC.
ne
not
b?jut
beat3.PL.PRES.
.
.
[L-45]
You don?t/shouldn?t kick a man/person/guy when he?s down.
(bit?-v10
(def "phrasal: Lezhachego ne b?jut - you shouldn?t do
something bad to someone who is in a bad position already")
(ex "You don?t/shouldn?t kick a guy when he?s down")
(syn-struc
((np ((root $var1) (cat n) (root lezhachij)
(case acc) (gender masc) (number sing)))
(verb-neg ((root $var2) (cat verb-neg)))
(root $var0) (cat v) (tense present) (person third) (number pl))))
(sem-struc
(modality ; ??should??
(type obligative)
(scope (value refsem1))
(value 1)
(attributed-to *speaker*))
(refsem1
(modality ; ??not??
(type epistemic)
(scope (value refsem2))
(value 0)
(attributed-to *speaker*)))
(refsem2
(ABUSE
(AGENT (value refsem3))
The Idiom?Reference Connection 175
(THEME (value refsem4))))
(refsem3
(set
(member-type human)
(cardinality 1)
(complete yes)))
(refsem4 (HUMAN (EXPERIENCER-OF MISFORTUNE)))
(^$var1 (null-sem +)) (^$var2 (null-sem +))
(output-syntax (cl)))
The syn-struc should be clear based on previous examples; the only new element is
verb-neg, which indicates a negating particle.
The sem-struc looks more complex than it actually is because many of the slot
fillers require reified structures, each of which must be pointed to using numbered
variables called refsems.The sem-struc is headed by obligativemodality, which scopes
over an epistemicmodality, which scopes over an ABUSE event. The obligativemodal-
ity has the value 1 (absolute obligation), whereas the epistemic modality has the value
0 (negation). Put plainly, ?it is necessary not to abuse?. The AGENT of the ABUSE
event is the set of all people, described just as we describe the word everyone. The
THEME of the ABUSE event is a HUMAN who is the EXPERIENCER-OF a MISFOR-
TUNE. One might ask, why not record this idiom as a fully fixed entity with white
spaces in between, rather than as a multi-part syntactic structure? For the same rea-
son as discussed earlier: there is an outside chance of modification, so the component
elements must be kept separate.
Example (6) shows an idiomatic example of the second type of obligatorily sub-
jectless sentence: the non-agentive impersonal construction.
(6) Kakim
whatINSTR.SG.MASC.
vetrom
windINSTR.SG.MASC.
vas
youACC.PL/POLITE
zaneslo
brought3.SG.NEUT.PFV
sjuda
hereDIRECTIONAL
?
?
What brings you here?/What are you doing here?
This idiom will be recorded under the headword zanesti ?bring?. The core meaning
of the idiom ? COME ? heads the sem-struc. There are two variables in this multi-
word expression: the direct object, mapped to the AGENT of COME, and the spatial
adverbial, mapped to the DESTINATION of COME. These are productively analyzed at
run-time. The meaning of ?what wind? is, of course, attributed null semantics.
To summarize this section: recording obligatorily subjectless idioms not only pro-
vides for their semantic interpretation, it also removes ambiguity in analysis, since the
?elided subject? reading is explicitly blocked.
4 Final Thoughts
This paper has presented an analysis of phenomena that extends past what any given
system currently uses or requires. However, the utility of this analysis reaches well
beyond the traditional goals of descriptive and theoretical linguistics. Ideally, system
building in NLP should centrally involve the objective of incrementally overcoming
176 McShane and Nirenburg
successively more difficult challenges and thus lead to more sophisticated systems in
the future. Looking forward to the next stage can help us to develop methodolog-
ical, architectural and knowledge infrastructures to facilitate progress toward future
goals. The OntoSem environment does not currently work on Russian, though it has
been applied, at least partially, to several languages apart from English in the past ?
including such different languages as Turkish, Spanish, Korean and Georgian. The
reason for exploring the idiom-reference connection in Russian was to judge how well
our approach, which is implemented for and works well in English, holds up cross-
linguistically. Having worked the examples presented in this paper and many others,
we are convinced that when the time comes, a Russian OntoSem will be configurable
without the need to expand the theory and methodology that support our treatment of
idioms, ellipsis and reference overall.
A reasonable question would be, why not evaluate the approach on English, since
an English system already exists? The reason is purely practical: it is far more diffi-
cult and expensive to run evaluations of knowledge-based systems that treat complex
phenomena than it is to run evaluations of systems that treat less complex phenomena.
That being said, we are just completing a new version of our DEKADE knowledge
acquisition and evaluation environment which will make it much easier than before to
evaluate the results of text analysis. We expect regular evaluations to become part of
our development work in the near future.
References
Baldwin, T. and A. Villavicencio (2002). A case study on verb-particles. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CoNLL 2002), pp. 98?104.
Cacciari, C. and P. Tabossi (1993). Idioms: Processing, Structure and Interpretation.
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, Inc.
Lubensky, S. (1995). Russian-English Dictionary of Idioms. Random House.
McShane, M. (2005). A Theory of Ellipsis. Oxford University Press.
McShane, M., S. Beale, and S. Nirenburg (2004). Some meaning procedures of On-
tological Semantics. In Proceedings of LREC-2004.
McShane, M., S. Nirenburg, and S. Beale (2005). An NLP lexicon as a largely lan-
guage independent resource. Machine Translation 19(2), 139?173.
McShane, M., S. Nirenburg, and S. Beale (2008). Achieving adequacy of description
of multiword entities in semantically-oriented computational lexicons. Submitted.
Mitkov, R., R. Evans, and C. Orasan (2002). A new, fully automatic version of
mitkov?s knowledge-poor pronoun resolution method. In Proceedings of CICLing-
2000.
Nirenburg, S. and V. Raskin (2004). Ontological Semantics. MIT Press.
The Idiom?Reference Connection 177
Pulman, S. (1993). The recognition and interpretation of idioms. In C. Cacciari and
P. Tabossi (Eds.), Idioms: Processing, Structure and Interpretation, pp. 249?270.
Lawrence Erlbaum and Associates, Inc.
Stock, O., J. Slack, and A. Ortony (1993). Building castles in the air: Some com-
putational and theoretical issues in idiom comprehension. In C. Cacciari (Ed.),
Idioms: Processing, Structure and Interpretation, pp. 229?248. Lawrence Erlbaum
and Associates, Inc.
Villavicencio, A., A. Copestake, B. Waldron, and F. Lambeau (2004). The lexical
encoding of MWEs. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 Workshop on Multiword
Expressions: Integrating processing.
