BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 100?101,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
A preliminary approach to recognize generic drug names by combining 
UMLS resources and USAN naming conventions 
 
Isabel Segura-Bedmar Paloma Mart?nez Doaa Samy 
Computer Sciences Department Computer Sciences Department Linguistic Department 
Carlos III University of Madrid Carlos III University of Madrid Cairo University 
Avd. Universidad, 30, Legan?s, 
28911, Madrid, Spain 
Avd. Universidad, 30, Legan?s, 
28911, Madrid, Spain 
Egypt 
isegura@inf.uc3m.es pmf@inf.uc3m.es dsamy@cu.edu.eg 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a system1 for drug name 
identification and classification in biomedical 
texts.  
1 Introduction 
Numerous studies have tackled gene and protein 
names recognition (Collier et al 2002), (Tanabe 
and Wilbur, 2002). Nevertheless, drug names have 
not been widely addressed (Rindflesch et al, 
2000). 
Automating the process of new drugs recognition 
and classification is a challenging task. With the 
rapidly changing vocabulary, new drugs are 
introduced while old ones are made obsolete. 
Though the terminological resources are frequently 
updated, they can not follow the accelerated pace 
of the changing terminology. 
Drug receives three distinct names: the chemical 
name, the generic (or nonproprietary) name, and 
the brand (or trademark) name. The U.S. Adopted 
Name (USAN) Council establishes specific 
nomenclature rules for naming generic drugs. 
These rules rely on the use of affixes that classify 
drugs according to their chemical structure, 
indication or mechanism of action. For example, 
analgesics substances can receive affixes such as  
-adol-, -butazone, -fenine, -eridine and ?fentanil. 
In the present work, we focus, particulary, on the 
implementation of a set of 531 affixes approved by 
                                                           
1 This work has been partially supported by the projects: FIT-
350300-2007-75 (Semantic Interoperability in Electronic 
Health Care) and TIN2007-67407-C03-01 (BRAVO: 
Advanced Multimodal and Multilingual Question Answering). 
the USAN Council and published in 20072. The 
affixes allow a specific classification of drugs on 
pharmacological families, which ULMS Semantic 
NetWork is unable to provide. 
2 The System 
The system consists of four main modules: a basic 
text processing module, WordNet look-up module, 
UMLS look-up module and the USAN rules 
module, as shown in Figure 1.  
A corpus of 90 medical abstracts was compiled for 
the experiment. For the basic processing of the 
abstracts, GATE3 architecture is used. This text 
processing provides sentence segmentation, 
tokenization and POS tagging. Tokens which 
receive a noun or proper noun POS tag are 
extracted. 
The nouns found on WordNet are discarded and 
those which are not found in WordNet are looked 
up in the UMLS Metathesaurus. If a noun is found 
in UMLS, it is tagged with its corresponding 
semantic types as assigned by UMLS. A subset of 
these nouns is tagged as ?drug? if their semantic 
types are ?Pharmacological Substance? or 
?Antibiotic?. Finally, nouns which have not been 
found in UMLS are tagged as ?unknown?. 
The list of nouns tagged as ?drug? is passed to the 
rule module to detect their pharmacological 
families according to the affixes. In addition, the 
rule module processes the list of ?unknown? nouns 
which are not found in UMLS to check the 
presence of affixes, and thereby, of possible drugs. 
3 Preliminary results 
                                                           
2 http://www.ama-
assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/365/usan_stem_list.pdf 
Accessed January 2008 
3 http://www.gate.ac.uk/ 
100
A manual evaluation by a domain4 expert was 
carried out. The list of nouns not found in 
WordNet contained 1885 initial candidates. This 
initial list is looked up in UMLS and 93.4% of 
them (1761) is linked with some concepts of 
UMLS. The UMLS module recognized 1400 
nouns as pharmacological substances or 
antibiotics. The rest of nouns, 361, are detected by 
UMLS but neither as pharmacological substance 
nor as antibiotics.  
The expert manually evaluated the set of nouns 
detected by UMLS as pharmacological substances 
or antibiotics (1400). Evaluation showed that only 
1100 were valid drugs.  
 
Figure 1 System Architecture 
The list of nouns (124) which have not been found 
in UMLS are processed by the rule module to 
detect new candidate drugs not included in UMLS. 
This module only detects 17 candidate drugs. The 
manual evaluation showed that 7 of them were 
valid drugs and the rest of nouns are biomedical 
concepts not included in UMLS. Some of these 
drugs are Mideplanin, Tomopenem, Elvitegravir, 
and so on. The rest of nouns neither detected by 
the UMLS module nor by the rules module, 106, 
were also validated by the expert in order to 
estimate the overall coverage of our approach. The 
evaluation of these nouns shows that only 7 of 
them are valid drugs, however, the rest of the 
nouns are named entities of the general domain 
(organization, person names or cities) or 
biomedical concepts. Introducing a module of 
generic NER should decrease the noise caused by 
such entities.  
                                                           
4 The authors are grateful to Maria Bedmar Segura, Manager 
of the Drug Information Center, Mostoles University Hospital, 
for her valuable assistance in the evaluation of the system. 
Finally, precision and recall of the overall system 
combining UMLS and rules were calculated. The 
system achieved 78% of precision and 99.3% of 
recall  
3.1 The classification in pharmacological 
families 
Once processed by the rule module, 73.8% of the 
candidate drugs recognised by UMLS were also 
classified in pharmacological families by the 
USAN naming rules. Expert?s evaluation of the 
rule-based classification showed that rules 
achieved 89% precision. Short affixes such as ?ol, 
?pin and -ox are responsible of the wrong 
classifications. Thus, additional clues are necessary 
to detect these drug families. 
4 Some Conclusions  
As a preliminary approach, it is a first step towards 
a useful Information Extraction System in the field 
of Pharmacology. Though evaluation reveals that 
rules alone are not feasible enough in detecting 
drugs, but they help to improve the coverage. In 
addition, rules provide a drug classification in 
pharmacological families. Such classification is an 
added value in the development of NLP 
applications within the pharmacological domain.  
For future work, the approach will be extended to 
address additional information about 
pharmacologic classes included in many 
biomedical terminologies integrated in the UMLS 
such as MeSH or SNOMED. 
Future work will also target a wider coverage and a 
bigger set of drug types through including more 
affixes, detecting complex entities (multi-words), 
detecting synonyms, resolving acronyms and 
ambiguities as well as using contextual information 
to disambiguate the correct semantic type of each 
term occurring in the texts.  
References  
Collier N, Takeuchi K. 2004. Comparison of characterlevel 
and part of speech features for name recognition in bio-
medical texts:423? 35. 
Rindflesch, T.C., Tanabe,L., Weinstein,J.N. and Hunter,L. 
2000. EDGAR: extraction of drugs, genes and relations 
from the biomedical literature. Pac. Symp. Biocomput. 5, 
517?528 
Tanabe, L. y Wilbur, W.J. 2002. Tagging gene and protein 
names in biomedical text. Bioinformatics 18, 1124?1132 
101
