Textual Entailment as an
Evaluation Framework for
Metaphor Resolution:
A Proposal
Rodrigo Agerri
John Barnden
Mark Lee
Alan Wallington
University of Birmingham (UK)
email: r.agerri@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
We aim to address two complementary deficiencies in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) research: (i) Despite the importance and prevalence of
metaphor across many discourse genres, and metaphor?s many functions,
applied NLP has mostly not addressed metaphor understanding. But,
conversely, (ii) difficult issues in metaphor understanding have hindered
large-scale application, extensive empirical evaluation, and the handling
of the true breadth of metaphor types and interactions with other language
phenomena. In this paper, abstracted from a recent grant proposal, a new
avenue for addressing both deficiencies and for inspiring new basic re-
search on metaphor is investigated: namely, placing metaphor research
within the ?Recognizing Textual Entailment? (RTE) task framework for
evaluation of semantic processing systems.
357
358 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
1 Introduction
The RTE task and annual Challenges (Dagan et al, 2007), starting in 2005, have arisen
as an evaluation framework for applied semantics in response to the fact that in NLP
applications ? such as Question Answering (QA), Information Retrieval/Extraction
(IR, IE), etc. ? the development of semantic algorithms and models have been scat-
tered, or tailored to specific applications, making it difficult to compare and evaluate
them within one framework. RTE is interesting because QA, IE, etc. can all be cast
as RTE problems. In RTE, one text fragment, the Text T, is said to entail another one,
the Hypothesis H, when humans considering T and H judge that H follows from T
(perhaps only plausibly/defeasibly). Thus, entailment is a commonsense matter, not a
precise logic-based one. An example of a T/H pair is as follows (metaphor in italics):
(1) T: Lyon is actually the gastronomic capital of France.
H: Lyon is the capital of France.
Metaphor can roughly be characterized as describing something (the target) as if it
were something else (the source) to which it is perceived, or set forth, as being some-
how analogous. Metaphor has long been identified as being ubiquitous in language
(Goatly, 1997), including ordinary conversation, newspaper articles, popular novels,
popular science writing, classroom dialogue, etc. In a study (Tech. Rept. CSRP-03-05
at our School, 2003) we found one metaphorical term per 17.3 words, averaging across
various discourses of different genres. This is in line with other researchers? studies
though counts vary widely because of theory-relativity, researchers? aims, and marked
usage differences between genres. Gedigian et al (2006) note that 90% of uses of a
set of verbs of spatial motion, manipulation, and health in a Wall Street Journal corpus
were metaphorical. Some metaphor examples arising in past RTE datasets are the Ts
in T/H pairs (1?4), with human judgments No, Yes, No and No respectively.
(2) T: The technological triumph known as GPS was incubated in the mind of Ivan
Getting.
H: Ivan Getting invented the GPS.
(3) T: Convinced that pro-American officials are in the ascendancy in Tokyo, they
talk about turning Japan into the Britain of the Far East.
H: Britain is located in the Far East.
(4) T: Even today, within the deepest recesses of our mind, lies a primordial fear
that will not allow us to enter the sea without thinking about the possibility of
being attacked by a shark.
H: A shark attacked a human being.
Importantly, metaphor is often not just a matter of particular terms with particular
metaphorical senses that are entrenched (i.e., that are commonly used, default senses;
and possibly listed in dictionaries). Certainly the metaphorical senses of ?capital? and
?incubate? used in (1) and (2) are at least moderately entrenched. For ?incubate,?
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 359
some dictionaries list a slow, protective sense of development (in a general, possibly
non-physical sense), or for ?capital? a sense like ?a city [or place more generally]
preeminent in some special activity? [Merriam-Websters]. But (3) shows one common
type of non-entrenchedmetaphor, of the general form ?the X of Y?, where X and/or Y
are often named entities. The point of such a metaphor is typically only clear with the
help of context. Reference to recesses of a mind as in (4) is common, and a lexicon
could reasonably include a metaphorical sense of ?recess? that was directly applicable
to minds (though WordNet 3.0, e.g, does not), or include ?within the recesses of [X?s]
mind? as a stock phrase with a sense of relative inaccessibility or unmodifiability of
a thought or feeling. But the phraseology can be productively varied: e.g., ?deepest?
can be omitted or replaced by ?dim?, ?darkest?, ?foulest?, ?hidden?, etc. ? by any
compatible qualifier that emphasizes hiddenness or obstacles to accessibility. And the
fact that such access difficulties are being emphasized is a matter for general semantic
reasoning about the qualifier.
2 Why Metaphor in NLP?
Generally, in metaphor understanding research, a specialized system has been fed a
relatively small number of metaphorical inputs, and the correct outputs have been
dictated by the researcher, (e.g. Fass, 1997; Falkenhainer et al, 1989; Martin, 1990;
Barnden et al, 2003). However, metaphor in particular and figurative language in
general suffers a chronic lack of shared resources for proper evaluation of systems
(Markert and Nissim, 2007). In using the RTE evaluation framework, computational
metaphor researchers may for the first time have sizable, shared datasets, and a uni-
form evaluation method based on systematically and transparently collected human
judgments. Also, metaphor researchers will be challenged and inspired to connect
metaphor more than before to other complex linguistic phenomena.
NLP applications that RTE serves have mostly not addressed metaphor, and nei-
ther have RTE systems themselves. Indeed, despite examples (1-4), RTE datasets
have tended to avoid metaphor of more difficult types. Metaphor in general can in-
troduce additional context-sensitivity and indeterminacy in entailment, whereas RTE
Challenges have mainly concentrated on T/H pairs supporting relatively crisp, uncon-
troversial judgments (Zaenen et al (2005); RTE organizers (personal communication);
our own analysis of existing RTE datasets in Tech. Rept. CSRP-08-01, 2008). In fact,
on examples such as (1), a system must interpret ?capital? metaphorically, but as Bos
and Markert (2006) reported, the inability of their system to process metaphor meant
that it was incorrect on this example.
Further evidence is given by results on example (1) of the four RTE-1 systems avail-
able to us (out of 16 systems; the 4 include the 1st, 3rd and 4th best systems in terms of
accuracy over whole dataset). Only one reported system run was correct. The systems
mostly performed worse across (1) together with 10 other metaphor cases than on the
whole dataset, with statistical significance at 0.05 level (Fisher?s independence test);
only one system run gave a better performance. In RTE-2 (23 systems), analysis of
10 system runs shows that, across 9 metaphorical examples in the dataset, the systems
(including the most accurate one over the whole dataset) performed worse than they
did over the rest of the dataset; in 7 of the 10 RTE-2 runs compared the deficit was
statistically significant at < 0.05 level (Fisher?s test, see Tech Rept. CSRP-08-01).
360 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
3 RoadMap: Datasets and Metaphor Processing
Our initiative mainly consists of (A): Create a public, annotated, metaphor-focussed
text dataset suitable for RTE evaluation and testing of metaphor processing systems;
and (B): Develop a prototype RTE system centred on processing (at least) the types
of metaphor arising in (A). We will mainly address point (B) in this paper. As for
A, metaphors vary along several dimensions of interest, such as: the target subject
matter (e.g., Lyon?s food, GPS development, Japanese foreign politics, shark fear in
examples 1?4); the source subject matter; what particular, familiar metaphorical views
(e.g., Idea as Living Being, in (2)) are used; whether the meaning in context is listed
in dictionaries, WordNet, etc; whether the wording is (a variant of) a familiar idiom;
the syntax used. Based on such dimensions, we will analyse the types of metaphor
present in past RTE datasets and in the genres of text (e.g., newspapers) they drew
from. One particular source will be the 242K-word metaphor-orientated corpus that
we derived from the British National Corpus. To find metaphor examples elsewhere,
we will use known metaphorical phrases and lexical/syntactic templates as seeds for
automated search over general corpora or web. We will also investigate the use or
adaptation of other researchers? automated detection/mining techniques (e.g. Birke
and Sarkar, 2006; Gedigian et al, 2006).
4 Metaphor Processing
We will develop metaphor processing algorithms on an integrated spectrum going
from relatively ?shallow? forms of processing to relatively ?deep? forms. The deeper
are for when more inference is necessary and feasible; when less necessary or feasible,
the shallower are appropriate (but they can still involve at least partial parsing, approx-
imate semantic analysis, etc.). A significant research issue will be how to choose the
attempted depth(s) of analysis and how to choose or combine different methods? re-
sults. The deeper and shallower ends of the spectrum will take as starting points our
two previous metaphor-understanding approaches, from our ATT-Meta and E-Drama
projects respectively (Barnden et al, 2003; Wallington et al, 2008).
For detectingmetaphor, we can extendmethods from our E-drama project (Walling-
ton et al, 2008). This involves a mixture of light semantic analysis via tools such as
WordNet and recognition of lexical and syntactic signals of metaphoricity (Goatly,
1997). We aim also to recognize specific idiomatic phrases and systematic variations
of them. We will consider looking for semantic restriction violations, which some-
times accompany metaphor (cf. Fass (1997) and Mason (2004)), and using statistical
techniques borrowed from such work as Gedigian et al (2006).
Example (4) about ?recesses? is similar to metaphor examples studied in the ATT-
Meta project, and ATT-Meta-style reasoning could handle the Text. As for (2), note
that the word ?incubate? may have a directly usable lexicon-listed meaning (e.g., help
to develop much as in WordNet 3.0). However, if the system?s lexicon did not contain
such a sense, ATT-Meta-style processing would apply. ATT-Meta processing would
involve commonsense reasoning in source-domain terms (here, biological and other
physical terms): e.g., to infer that the idea was a living being, Getting?s mind was
a physical region, the idea was kept warm in that region, and the idea consequently
biologically developed there. Hence, there was a relatively protracted, continuous
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 361
process; the idea became more functional as a living being; and the idea needed pro-
tection from physical harm (= disenablement of function-inhibiting influences). These
default conclusions can then be translated into reality (target-based) terms: there was
a protracted, (non-physical) continuous process of change; the idea needed protection
during it; and the idea ended up being more functional. The basis for such translation
is View-Neutral Mapping Adjuncts, a special type of mappings that cover the shape
of events and processes, temporal properties and relationships, causation, functioning,
mental states, emotional states, value judgments and various other matters (Agerri
et al, 2007; Barnden et al, 2003).
RTE-2 organisers claimed there has been a trend towards using more deep inference
and that this has been beneficial provided that it is based on enough knowledge. (See
also Bos and Markert (2006) and Clark et al (2007)). The depth and knowledge needs
of ATT-Meta?s processing are like those of deeper parts of existing RTE systems, but
ATT-Meta is currently equipped only with small, hand-constructed knowledge bases.
So, our main focus in deeper processing will actually be on a shallowed, broadened
form of ATT-Meta-style reasoning. In this sense, we aim to look at common-sense
knowledge resources such as ConceptNet 3.0 which contains relationships such as
causation, function, etc. ? the types of information transferred by some of ATT-
Meta?s VNMAs ? or modified WordNets enriched by extra, web-mined knowledge
(Veale and Hao, 2008), where the extra knowledge is especially relevant to metaphor-
ical usages.
ATT-Meta?s reasoning is by backwards chaining from goals derivable from context
surrounding a metaphor. This relevance-based inference-focussingwill be key in other
processing we develop, and is highly RTE-compatible. An RTE Hypothesis can act as
(part of) a reasoning goal, with the metaphor?s within-Text context supplying further
information or goal parts. T?s own original context is of course unavailable, but this
obstacle faces human judges as well.
We will also further extend our E-Drama project?s methods, based there on robust
parsing using the Rasp system and computation over WordNet. The methods are cur-
rently largely confined to metaphors of ?X is Y? form where X is a person and Y
is some type of animal, supernatural being, artefact or natural physical object. We
will generalize to other categories for X and Y, and to cases where the categorization
is only implicit. We will make the syntactic/semantic analysis of WordNet synset-
glosses and the way the system traverses the network more advanced. We will extend
our associated treatment of metaphorically-used size adjectives (as in ?little bully?).
However, the methods are also currently confined to detecting emotional/value
judgments about X (unpleasantness, etc.), and mainly exploit metaphorical informa-
tion that is already implicitly in WordNet, e.g., ?pig? meaning a coarse, obnoxious
person, in one synset. Substantial research is needed to go beyond these limitations.
One avenue will be to apply VNMAs: when a synset gloss couches a metaphorical
sense, we could extract not just affect but other types of information that VNMAs
handle (causation, process shape, etc.); and when a gloss couches a non-metaphorical
sense, we could translate some aspects of it via VNMAs.
362 Agerri, Barnden, Lee, and Wallington
5 Concluding Remarks
This paper aims to provide an avenue for giving metaphor-understanding the promi-
nence it merits in NLP applications and in RTE, and thereby also to engender basic
and applied research advances on metaphor by ourselves and others.
RTE researchers and NLP applications developers will benefit, as systems will gain
added accuracy and coverage by addressing metaphor. Beneficiary application areas
aside from QA, IR, etc., include Knowledge Management, Information Access, and
intelligent conversation agents.
References
Agerri, R., J. Barnden, M. Lee, and A. Wallington (2007). Metaphor, inference and
domain independent mappings. In Proceedings of Research Advances in Natural
Language Processing (RANLP 2007), Borovets, Bulgaria, pp. 17?24.
Barnden, J., S. Glasbey, M. Lee, and A. Wallington (2003). Domain-transcending
mappings in a system for metaphorical reasoning. In Companion Proceedings of
the 10th Conference on the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (EACL-03), pp. 57?61.
Birke, J. and A. Sarkar (2006). A clustering approach for the nearly unsupervised
recognition of nonliteral language. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference on the
European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL 2006),
Trento, Italy, pp. 329?336.
Bos, J. and K. Markert (2006). Recognizing textual entailment with robust logical
inference. In J. Qui?onero-Candela, I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and F. d?Alch? Buc
(Eds.), MLCW 2005, Volume 3944 of LNAI, pp. 404?426. Springer-Verlag.
Clark, P., W. Murray, J. Thompson, P. Harrison, J. Hobbs, and C. Fellbaum (2007). On
the role of lexical and world knowledge in RTE3. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, Prague, pp. 54?59. ACL 2007.
Dagan, I., O. Glickman, and B. Magnini (2007). The PASCAL Recognising Tex-
tual Entailment challenge. In J. Qui?onero-Candela, I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and
F. d?Alch? Buc (Eds.), MLCW 2005, Volume 3944 of LNAI, pp. 177?190. Springer-
Verlag.
Falkenhainer, B., K. Forbus, and D. Gentner (1989). The structure-mapping engine:
algorithm and examples. Artificial Intelligence 41(1), 1?63.
Fass, D. (1997). Processing metaphor and metonymy. Greenwich, Connecticut:
Ablex.
Gedigian, M., J. Bryant, S. Narayanan, and B. Ciric (2006). Catching metaphors. In
Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Scalable Natural Language Understanding,
New York, pp. 41?48.
Goatly, A. (1997). The Language of Metaphors. Routledge.
Textual Entailment as an Evaluation Framework for Metaphor Resolution 363
Markert, K. and M. Nissim (2007, June). Semeval-2007: Metonymy resolution at
semeval-2007. In International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-
2007), Prague, pp. 36?41. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-07).
Martin, J. (1990). A computational model of metaphor interpretation. New York:
Academic Press.
Mason, Z. (2004). CorMet: a computational, corpus-based conventional metaphor
extraction system. Computational Linguistics 30(1), 23?44.
Veale, T. and Y. Hao (2008). EnrichingWordNet with folk knowledge and stereotypes.
In Proceedings of the 4th Global WordNet Conference, Szeged, Hungary.
Wallington, A., R. Agerri, J. Barnden, M. Lee, and T. Rumbell (2008, May). Affect
transfer by metaphor for an intelligent conversational agent. In Proceedings of the
LREC 2008 Workshop on Sentiment Analysis: Emotion, Metaphor, Ontology and
Terminology (EMOT 08), Marrakech, Morocco, pp. 102?107.
Zaenen, A., L. Karttunen, and R. Crouch (2005). Local textual inference: Can it be
defined or circumscribed? In Proceedings of the ACL 05 Workshop on Empirical
Modelling of Semantic Equivalence and Entailment, pp. 31?36.
