Software Engineering, Testing, and Quality Assurance for Natural Language Processing, pages 58?65,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Design of the Moses Decoder for Statistical Machine Translation 
Hieu Hoang  
University of Edinburgh 
h.hoang@sms.ed.ac.uk 
Philipp Koehn 
University of Edinburgh 
pkoehn@inf.ed.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
We present a description of the implemen-
tation of the open source decoder for statis-
tical machine translation which has become 
popular with many researchers in SMT re-
search. The goal of the project is to create 
an open, high quality phrase-based decoder 
which can reduce the time and barrier to 
entry for researchers wishing to do SMT 
research. We discuss the major design ob-
jective for the Moses decoder, its perform-
ance relative to other SMT decoders, and 
the steps we are taking to ensure that its 
success will continue. 
1 Motivation 
Phrase-based translation has been one of the 
major advances in statistical machine translation 
(Brown et al 1990) in recent years and is currently 
one of the techniques which can claim to be state-
of-the-art in machine translation. Phrase-based 
models are a development of the word based mod-
els as exemplified by the (Brown et al 1990). In 
phrase-based translation, contiguous segments of 
words in the input sentence are mapped to contigu-
ous segments of words in the output sentence.  
In SMT, we are given a source language sen-
tence, s, which is to be translated into a target lan-
guage sentence, t. The goal of machine translation 
is to find the translation, t? , which is defined as: 
? arg max ( | )tt p t s=  
where ( | )p t s is the probability model. The argmax 
implies a search for the best translation t?  in the 
space of possible translations t. This search is the 
task of the decoder, which we will concentrate on 
in this paper. 
There have been numerous implementations of 
phrase-based decoders for SMT prior to our work. 
Early systems such as the Alignment Template 
System (ATS) (Och and Ney 2004) and Pharaoh 
(Koehn 2004) were widely used and accepted by 
the research community. ATS is perhaps the cross-
over system, in that word classes were translated as 
phrases but the surface words were translated word 
by word. Pharaoh substituted the word classes with 
surface words, thereby discarding the use of word 
classes in decoding altogether. 
There has been other phrase-based decoders 
such as PORTAGE (Sadat et al 2005), Phramer 
(Olteanu et al 2006), the MITLL/AFRL system 
(Shen et al 2005), ITC-irst (Bertoldi et al 2004), 
Ramses/Mood (Patry et al 2006) to name but a 
few. Other researchers such as (Kumar and Byrne 
2003) have also used weighted finite state trans-
ducers but they have more difficulty modeling re-
ordering. 
Many early systems came with restrictive li-
censes; ATS has never been publicly released, 
Pharaoh was released in 2003 as a pre-compiled 
binary with documentation. This severely limited 
the extent to which other researchers can study and 
enhance the decoder. Without access to the de-
coder source code research was generally restricted 
to altering the input, augmenting it with extra in-
formation, or modifying the output or re-ranking 
the n-best list output.  
The main contribution of this paper is to show 
how we have created an extensible decoder, has 
acceptable run time performance compared to 
similar systems, and the ease of use and develop-
ment that has made it the preferred choice for re-
searchers looking for a phrase-based SMT decoder.  
58
 As an indication of the take-up of the Moses 
toolkit, out of over 20 competing teams at the re-
cent IWSLT 2007 conference1, half used Moses. 
As an indication of the extensibility of the de-
coder, there are currently four language model im-
plementations which has been integrated with the 
decoder by various researchers. In addition, the 
framework exists to integrate language models, 
such as those described in (Bilmes and Kirchhoff 
2003), which takes advantage of the factored rep-
resentation within Moses. 
 It is noted that Mood/Ramses also supports 
multiple LM implementations, an internally devel-
oped language model, in additional to SRILM, to 
overcome the latter?s licensing restrictions. 
In addition, there are two built-in phrase table 
implementations, one which loads all data into 
memory for fast decoding, and a binary phrase ta-
ble as described in (Zens and Ney 2007) which 
loads on demand to conserve memory usage. 
The Moses decoder has the ability to accept 
simple sentence input, confusion network or lattice 
networks, in common with SMT decoders such as 
the MITLL/AFRL or ITC-irst systems. The de-
coder also produces diverse types of output, rang-
ing from 1-best, n-best lists and word lattices. 
2 Comparison with other projects 
The Moses decoder is designed within a strict 
modular and object-oriented framework for easy 
maintainability and extensibility. 
In designing the decoder, we modeled the soft-
ware design methodology and aims on some re-
search-oriented software libraries outside of the 
SMT and NLP field which is open source, written 
in C++, have a large and diverse user-base, have 
succeeded in becoming the industry norm in their 
field.  
Specifically, we modeled the software on the 
CGAL library (Fabri et al 2000), used in computa-
tional geometry, and DCMTK (Eichelberg et al 
2004) library used in medical imaging. We believe 
they set good examples of the standards that we 
should follow. 
However, there are differences between our pro-
ject and CGAL or DCMTK. 
The first difference is project size, for example, 
whereas CGAL consists of over 500,000 lines of 
                                                 
1
 http://iwslt07.oitc.it/menu/program.html 
code and multiple libraries and example program, 
the Moses decoder consists of 20,000 lines in 2 
libraries. The difference is scale makes implement-
ing some steps in the development life cycle im-
practical or unnecessary. For example, functional-
ity specification before implementation was de-
scribed for CGAL and is typical of large projects 
but would have been cumbersome for Moses. 
Secondly, the aims of Moses and these projects 
are different. The goal of the CGAL project is to 
?make?computational geometry available for in-
dustrial application?2. 
Both CGAL and DCMTK are used extensively 
in commercial applications. Therefore, issues such 
robustness, cross-platform compatibility and ease-
of-use are predominant for these projects. 
Commercialization is not an aim of the Moses 
project but we believe these issues are still as im-
portant as they affect the usability and uptake of 
the system. Therefore, the Moses decoder was built 
to address these issues without compromising the 
academic priorities of the project.  
Thirdly, the correct implementation is easier to 
decide in libraries such as CGAL as the algorithms 
are closely specified by the mathematical specifi-
cation, therefore, testing and specification writing 
is more prevalent and easier than in Moses. For 
DCMTK, the medical imaging standards and pro-
tocols offers a clear guide for implementation. By 
contrast, the function of an SMT decoder is search 
for which there are no correct implementation, we 
can only measure its performance relative to previ-
ous versions and other similar decoders. 
These differences are minor compared to the 
similarities Moses has to CGAL and DCMTK, and 
indeed, to any well developed software project. 
Design goals such as robustness, flexibility, ease of 
use and efficiency are commonality that we share 
and which we will discuss in more detail in the 
next section. 
As a contrast to CGAL and DCMTK whose de-
sign we would like to emulate, we also looked at a 
project within the NLP field which contains certain 
aspect in the design we would like to avoid. 
GIZA++ (Och and Ney 2003) is a very popular 
system within SMT for creating word alignment 
from parallel corpus, in fact, the Moses training 
scripts uses it. The system was release under the 
GPL open source license. However, its lack of 
                                                 
2
 http://cordis.europa.eu/esprit/src/21957.htm 
59
 clear design, documentation and obscure coding 
style makes it difficult for other researcher to con-
tribute or extend the system. For a long time, it 
couldn?t even be compiled on modern GCC com-
pilers. Other systems which seeks to improve word 
alignment and segmentation, such as MTTK (Deng 
et al 2006), have been created to replace GIZA++.  
3 Design Goals 
We decided to develop the Moses decoder as a 
C++ library.  
We steered clear of scripting languages for per-
formance reasons and the fact they often offer even 
less in the way of cross-platform compatibility. 
Java was also avoided for performance reasons but 
it?s rich library and multi-platform support would 
have been useful. 
We note that Hiero (Chiang 2005) is written in a 
scripting language with performance critical com-
ponents rewritten in a compiled language. This is 
not the approach we considered as we believed it 
would have raised the complexity and reduce reli-
ability of the project having to develop (and debug) 
in two languages and managing the interface be-
tween them. We also note that the LinearB and 
Phramer decoders are implemented in Java and 
have reported significantly worse run time speeds, 
(Olteanu et al 2006). 
C++ can be inelegant and difficult for inexperi-
enced developers but using other object oriented 
language such as Smalltalk or C# was out of the 
question as they lack acceptance within the MT 
research community. 
3.1 Comparable Performance 
The Pharaoh decoder (Koehn 2004) represented 
the state-of-the-art in phrase-based decoders prior 
to the introduction of Moses. Moses was designed 
to supersede Pharaoh in performance and function-
ality. Moses was used as the basis for the JHU 
Workshop (Koehn et al 2006) on Factored Ma-
chine Translation where it was extensively en-
hanced; we capitalized on the experience of col-
leagues at the workshop and used Pharaoh as the 
baseline during development to ensure that we ob-
tain comparable performance. Table 1 shows the 
comparison of the translation performance of Phar-
aoh and Moses for a typical decoding of 2000 sen-
tence trained on the news-commentary corpus3. We 
also include Phramer as an example of a Java-
based decoder. Due to improvements in the search 
algorithm, Moses can slightly outperform Pharaoh 
on most tasks, which was confirmed by (Shen et al 
2007). 
Table 1 Comparison with pharaoh & Phramer for a 
typical fr-en translation of 2000 sentences 
 Time 
taken 
Peak 
memory 
usage 
BLEU 
Pharaoh 99min 46MB 19.57 
Moses 69min 154MB 19.57 
Moses, with load 
on-demand PT & 
LM 
102min 239MB 19.57 
Phramer 649min 1218MB 19.44 
 
In addition, most of the functionality of Pharaoh 
has been replicated. 
3.2 Integration of Word-Level Factors 
The Moses decoder isn?t purely a clone of Phar-
aoh, it was created to conduct research into word-
level factors in phrase-base MT. Whereas tradi-
tional, non-factored SMT typically deals only with 
the surface form of words, factored translation 
models augments different factors, such as POS 
tags or lemma, into source and target sentences to 
improve translation. This transforms the represen-
tation of a word from a string to a vector of strings, 
and a phrase or sentence from a sequence of words 
to a sequence of vectors. Such a change to the ba-
sic data structure of a decoder propagated through-
out the rest of the system, therefore, it was simpler 
to build the Moses decoder from scratch rather 
than extend an existing decoder such as Pharaoh. 
Some research into factored machine translation 
has been published by (Koehn and Hoang 2007). 
3.3 Flexibility 
Flexibility is an important software design goal 
which will enable researchers to extend the use of 
the Moses decoders to tasks that were not origi-
nally envisioned.  
Following (Fabri et al 2000), we identify four 
sub-issues which affects flexibility: 
i. Modularity 
                                                 
3
 http://www.statmt.org/wmt07/shared-task.html 
60
 ii. Adaptability 
iii. Extensibility 
iv. Openness 
3.4 Modularity 
Firstly, software modularity enables developers 
to work on one component of the decoder without 
affecting other components. A modular design re-
duces the learning curve for developers by shield-
ing them from having to understand the entire sys-
tem if they are only developing a specific part.  
Modularity also assists in the re-using of com-
ponents by separating the implementation details 
from the module interface. 
Moses takes advantage of C++ support for ob-
ject-oriented and generic programming to enable 
modularity. 
In keeping with the extensible design of CGAL 
and DCMTK, the core of the decoder is compiled 
as a static library which can interact with other 
components through a well-defined API. The sim-
ple application which currently comes with the 
decoder enables users to use the system via the 
command line and also provides an example of the 
API. 
Therefore, the current typical compilation of the 
decoder would combine the libraries from 
IRSTLM, SRILM, Moses, and moses-cmd to cre-
ate a binary executable. 
SRILM IRSTLM
moses
moses-
cmd
 
Figure 1 Project Dependencies 
Any of these libraries can be dropped or re-
placed with other components with the same API. 
We detail some examples of the object-oriented 
design of Moses below. 
The input into the decoder can be one of three 
types: a simple string (sentence), a confusion net-
work or a lattice network, Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2 Input Types 
Language models are abstracted to enable different 
implementations to be used and provide a frame-
work for more complex models such as factored 
LM and the Bloom filter language model (Talbot 
and Osborne 2007). Similarly, phrase tables are 
abstracted to provide support for multiple imple-
mentations. 
Each component model which contributes to the 
log-linear hypothesis score inherits from the 
ScoreProducer base class, Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 Score Producer 
The Moses library provide a simple API whose 
main entry point is the class 
 Manager 
This class is instantiated in the client application, 
moses-cmd in our case. Each input is decoded by 
calling the class method below: 
 ProcessSentence() 
3.5 Adaptability 
Phrase-based SMT is a fast moving research 
field where virtually all aspects of the theory are 
61
 still being explored and implementations can be 
improved. The Moses decoder has to be amenable 
to researchers to adapt any component of the de-
coder in ways that perhaps wasn?t foreseen in the 
original implementation.  
Certainly, modularity plays an important part 
in this but it can also have the opposite effect of 
allowing obtuse or badly written implementation to 
hide behind the API, reducing the ability for re-
searchers to question, investigate or extend. As a 
voluntary project, there is limited power to enforce 
good implementation and it would be difficult not 
to accept added functionality. 
However, we use coding standards and designs 
during the development of the decoder that we 
hope makes the task of working with Moses easier  
for developers, and that they will continue to use 
those standards to uphold the clarity of the code. 
These coding standards include: 
i. strict object-oriented design 
ii. descriptive variable, class, object and  
function names 
iii. consistent indentation 
iv. use of STL containers 
v. implementation of STL-compatible it-
erators for internal container classes. 
The source code for the Moses decoder has con-
tributions from a number of developers in the last 
two years, Figure 4, including four developers who 
have made significant contributions but were not in 
the original JHU Workshop. However, code clarity 
has, by-and-large, remained intact. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
lex
i_b
irc
h
cc
or
be
tt
nic
ola
be
rto
ldi
ab
ar
un
jdsc
hro
ed
er
eh
er
bs
t
ph
ko
eh
n
ko
nr
ad
_
ra
wli
k
ze
ns
re
dp
on
y
hie
uh
oa
ng
19
72
%
ag
e 
o
f c
o
de
 
co
m
m
ite
d
 
Figure 4 Code committed 
We do not know how the decoder will be 
changed in future, nor do we know where and by 
whom it will be used. Moses is first and foremost 
an academic project but that doesn?t exclude its use 
in commercial applications.  
We also believe that it will be useful as a teach-
ing tool for computational linguists, machine trans-
lation researchers or general computer science stu-
dents. It is important with such a diverse potential 
user base, with widely varying degrees of C++ and 
programming experience, that we make the devel-
opment and use of Moses as easy as possible, 
without imposing a significant burden on advanced 
users. 
We would like to lower the learning curve by 
letting users use Moses in an environment and 
tools where they are most comfortable with. There-
fore, the Moses decoder is operating system and 
compiler neutral. It is known to run on Windows 
(natively, or with Cygwin), Linux 32 and 64 bits, 
Mac OSX and OpenBSD. It is known to be com-
pileable with modern gcc compilers, Visual Stu-
dio.net, Intel C++ for both Linux and Windows. 
We encourage the use of modern graphical inte-
grated development environments (IDE) for Moses 
and include project files for Visual Studio, Eclipse 
and XCode, in addition to conventional makefiles. 
We note that almost half of the source code 
downloads for the Moses toolkit from Sourceforge 
are for the non-Unix version, and that 58% of the 
visitors to the Moses website uses Windows, 
Figure 5. 
Window s
Linux
Mac
Other
 
Figure 5 OS of Moses website visitors 
This heterogeneous approach allows developers 
who have previously been excluded to participate 
within the SMT community and strengthens the 
decoder by allowing people of different back-
grounds to apply their skills. This is of particular 
concern to us as we are attempting to integrate lin-
62
 guistic information into machine translation with 
factored decoding. 
 It also enables best-of-breed tools to be bought 
to the development of the decoder, regardless of 
platform. For example, we use both open source 
and commercial tools on Linux and Windows to 
track down memory issues, as well as performance 
profilers. This greatly enhances the efficiency of 
development and the reliability of the decoder. 
Other NLP libraries, such as SRILM (Stolcke 
2002) can be compiled and executed under multi-
ple platforms but its development are very much 
Unix-centric so requires porting tools for non-Unix 
platforms. We believe the platform and compiler 
agnostic approach is unique for a major open 
source C++ project within recent NLP history.  
3.6 Openness 
An important reason for initiating the Moses 
project was the need to create a competitive de-
coder which could be extended with factors, as 
well as other advances in phrase-based machine 
translation. It is open source to enable other re-
searchers to extend a state-of-the-art decoder with-
out having to recreate what we have already built. 
The decoder was improved at the JHU Work-
shop by a number of researchers so it needed to be 
flexible from the beginning. From this experience, 
we realize that releasing the source code is not 
enough. The decoder must be written and struc-
tured in a clear way to enable other researchers to 
contribute to the project. 
Aside from the legalese of releasing the source 
code under an open source license, we believe that 
open source also means the source code is clear 
and accessible to allow others to examine, critique 
and contribute. Coding standards aimed at source 
code clarity and support for modern tools backs 
this goal. 
Documentation of the algorithms used, and of 
the source code are also essential to allow others to 
understand the details of the decoder. Every class 
and function in the Moses decoder is commented 
in a Doxygen compatible format, HTML docu-
ments and figures, such as those in Figure 2 and 
Figure 3, are generated automatically from these 
comments and accessible via the Web4. 
Development is done through a source control 
system and all code changes are open to inspec-
                                                 
4
 http://www.statmt.org/moses/html/ 
tion. We encourage and enable all developers to 
use and extend Moses and feed back improve-
ments. However, to ensure that the performance of 
the decoder is maintained and that changes to the 
decoder doesn?t break existing setups, we maintain 
certain controls over the commit process.  
There is a regression test suite which should be 
passed before any code can be committed to ensure 
that unintended divergence haven?t crept in.  A 
framework exists for creation of regression tests, 
developers who add new functionality to the de-
coder are encouraged to create additional tests to 
ensure that their functionality will work in future.  
However, no amount of automated testing can 
be exhaustive. New committers are subject to peer 
review by a more experience contributor before the 
code is committed, and before the contributor is 
granted write access to the source control system. 
Also, code commits are monitored via email notifi-
cations to a public mailing list. 
These measures add a little overhead to the de-
velopment process this is necessary to maintain the 
quality of the system and assure to users and de-
velopers. 
We have benefited from the examples of sound 
software engineering principles set by the CGAL 
and DCMTK project and hope that we will emulate 
their success by bringing these engineering princi-
ples into NLP. In contrast to the ?abandonware? 
status of GIZA++, both CGAL and DCMTK are 
still being developed. 
4 Supporting Infrastructure 
Other factors have contributed to the wide adop-
tion of Moses. 
4.1 ?One-Stop Shop? for Phrase-Based SMT 
The Moses project encompasses the decoder and 
many of the other components necessary to create 
a translation system which were previously avail-
able separately. These include scripts for creating 
alignments from a parallel corpus, creating phrase 
tables and language models, binarizing phrase ta-
bles, scripts for weight optimization using MERT 
(Och 2003), and testing scripts.  
Steps such as MERT and testing which are CPU 
intensive have been re-engineered to run in parallel 
using Sun Grid Engine. 
All scripts have also been extended for factored 
translation. 
63
 4.2 Ongoing support 
We assist in the adoption of Moses by offering 
ongoing support to users and developers through 
the support mailing list 5 . Questions relating to 
Moses, phrase-based translation or machine trans-
lation in general are often asked, and usually an-
swered. The archived emails are publicly available 
and searchable, and have become an important 
knowledge source for the community. 
The mailing list popularity has been steadily in-
creasing since its inception, Figure 6, and is now 
the most popular mailing list for machine transla-
tion, based on volume. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
N
ov
-
06
D
ec
-
06
Ja
n
-
07
Fe
b-
07
M
ar
-
07
Ap
r-
07
M
ay
-
07
Ju
n
-
07
Ju
l-0
7
Au
g-
07
Se
p-
07
O
c
t-0
7
N
ov
-
07
D
ec
-
07
Ja
n
-
08
Fe
b-
08
 
Figure 6 Emails to Moses support mailing list 
5 Future Work 
There has been some important developments in 
phrase-based translation in recent years, including 
the hierarchical phrase-based model as described in 
(Chiang 2005).  Research have also been made into 
alternatives to the current log-linear scoring model 
such as discriminative models with millions of fea-
tures (Liang et al 2006), or kernel based models 
(Wang et al 2007). 
From a software engineering point of view, 
these improvements would require fundamental 
changes to the structure if they were to be imple-
mented into Moses. 
We are also interested in seeing the Moses de-
coder employed in search tasks outside of machine 
translation; Moses has been used for OCR correc-
tion, recasing, and transliteration. 
Other improvements such as smaller, faster, 
more efficient phrase tables are also welcomed. 
Lastly, we would like to see the training and 
tuning scripts re-engineered to the same modular 
                                                 
5
 moses-support@mit.edu 
design as the decoder. The future direction of the 
Moses decoder requires even more complex mod-
els which are already stretching the current script 
implementation to the limit of adaptability and re-
liability. 
6 Conclusion 
We have applied the sound software engineering 
principles and design to the implementation of the 
Moses decoder which has enabled other research-
ers to use and extend its functionality. We believe 
this has been a major factor for the widespread 
adoption of Moses within the SMT community. 
We hope that the design of the decoder will enable 
it to maintain it leading edge status into the future. 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part under the 
GALE program of the  Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency, Contract No. HR0011-06-
C-0022 and in part under the EuroMatrix project 
funded by the European Commission (6th Frame-
work Programme. 
References 
Bertoldi, N., R. Cattoni, et al (2004). The ITC-irst Sta-
tistical Machine Translation System for IWSLT-2004. 
IWSLT, Kyoto, Japan. 
  
Bilmes, J. A. and K. Kirchhoff (2003). Factored lan-
guage models and Generalized Parallel Backoff. 
HLT/NACCL. 
  
Brown, P. F., J. Cocke, et al (1990). "A statistical ap-
proach to machine translation." 
  
Chiang, D. (2005). A hierarchical phrase-based model 
for statistical machine translation. ACL. 
  
Deng, Y., S. Kumar, et al (2006). "Segmentation and 
alignment of parallel text for statistical machine transla-
tion." Natural Language Engineering. 
  
Eichelberg, M., J. Riesmeier, et al (2004). "Ten years of 
medical imaging standardization and prototypical im-
plementation: the DICOM standard and the OFFIS DI-
COM toolkit (DCMTK)." Medical Imaging 2004: 
PACS and Imaging Informatics 5371: 57-68 (2004). 
  
Fabri, A., G.-J. Giezeman, et al (2000). "On the Design 
of CGAL, a Computational Geometry Algorithms Li-
64
 brary." Software?Practice & Experience 30(11,  Spe-
cial issue on discrete algorithm engineering). 
  
Koehn, P. (2004). Pharaoh: a Beam Search Decoder for 
Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation Models. 
AMTA. 
  
Koehn, P., M. Federico, et al (2006). Open Source 
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. Report of 
the 2006 Summer Workshop at Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity. 
  
Koehn, P. and H. Hoang (2007). Factored Translation 
Models. EMNLP. 
  
Kumar, S. and W. Byrne (2003). A weighted finite state 
transducer implementation of the alignment template 
model for statistical machine translation. ACL, Edmon-
ton, Canada. 
  
Liang, P., A. Bouchard-C?t?, et al (2006). An End-to-
End Discriminative Approach to Machine Translation. 
COLING/ACL. 
  
Och, F. J. (2003). Minimum Error Rate Training for 
Statistical Machine Translation. ACL. 
  
Och, F. J. and H. Ney (2003). "A Systematic Compari-
son of Various Statistical Alignment Models." Compu-
tational Linguistics 29(1): 19-51. 
  
Och, F. J. and H. Ney (2004). "The alignment template 
approach to statistical machine translation." Computa-
tional Linguistics. 
  
Olteanu, M., C. Davis, et al (2006). Phramer - An Open 
Source Statistical Phrase-Based Translator. ACL Work-
shop on Statistical Machine Translation. 
  
Patry, A., F. Gotti, et al (2006). Mood at work: Ramses 
versus Pharaoh. ACL, New York City, USA. 
  
Sadat, F., H. Johnson, et al (2005). PORTAGE: A 
Phrase-based Machine Translation System. ACL Work-
shop on Building and Using Parallel Texts: Data-Driven 
Machine Translation and Beyond, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA. 
  
Shen, W., B. Delaney, et al (2005). The MITLL/AFRL 
MT System. IWSLT, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 
  
Shen, Y., C.-k. Lo, et al (2007). HKUST Statistical 
Machine Translation Experiments for IWSLT 2007. 
IWSLT, Trento. 
  
Stolcke, A. (2002). SRILM An Extensible Language 
Modeling Toolkit. Intl. Conf. on Spoken Language 
Processing. 
  
Talbot, D. and M. Osborne (2007). Smoothed Bloom 
filter language models: Tera-Scale LMs on the Cheap. 
EMNLP, Prague, Czech Republic. 
  
Wang, Z., J. Shawe-Taylor, et al (2007). Kernel Re-
gression Based Machine Translation. NAACL HLT. 
  
Zens, R. and H. Ney (2007). Efficient phrase-table rep-
resentation for machine translation with applications to 
online MT and speech recognition. HLT/NAACL. 
  
 
65
