BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 92?93,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
A Pilot Annotation to Investigate Discourse Connectivity in Biomedical Text  
 
 
 
Hong Yu, Nadya Frid, Susan McRoy Rashmi Prasad, Alan Lee, Aravind Joshi 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee University of Pennsylvania 
P.O.Box 413 3401 Walnut Street 
Milwaukee, WI 53201 Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA 
Hongyu,frid,mcroy@uwm.edu Rjprasad,aleewk,joshi@seas.upenn.edu
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The goal of the Penn Discourse Treebank 
(PDTB) project is to develop a large-scale cor-
pus, annotated with coherence relations marked 
by discourse connectives. Currently, the primary 
application of the PDTB annotation has been to 
news articles. In this study, we tested whether 
the PDTB guidelines can be adapted to a differ-
ent genre. We annotated discourse connectives 
and their arguments in one 4,937-token full-text 
biomedical article. Two linguist annotators 
showed an agreement of 85% after simple con-
ventions were added. For the remaining 15% 
cases, we found that biomedical domain-specific 
knowledge is needed to capture the linguistic 
cues that can be used to resolve inter-annotator 
disagreement. We found that the two annotators 
were able to reach an agreement after discussion. 
Thus our experiments suggest that the PDTB an-
notation can be adapted to new domains by mini-
mally adjusting the guidelines and by adding 
some further domain-specific linguistic cues. 
1 Introduction 
Large scale annotated corpora, e.g., the Penn 
TreeBank (PTB) project (Marcus et al 1993), 
have played an important role in text-mining. 
The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) 
(http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~pdtb) (Prasad et al 
2008a) annotates the argument structure, seman-
tics, and attribution of discourse connectives and 
their arguments. The current release of PDTB-
2.0 contains the annotations of 1,808 Wall Street 
Journal articles (~1 million words) from the 
Penn TreeBank (Marcus et al 1993) II distribu-
tion and a total of 40,600 discourse connective  
tokens (Prasad et al 2008b). This work exam-
ines whether the PDTB annotation guidelines 
can be adapted to a different genre, the biomedi-
cal literature.  
2 Notation 
A discourse connective can be defined as a 
word or multiword expression that signals a 
discourse relation. Discourse connectives 
can be subordinating conjunctions (e.g., be-
cause, when, although), coordinating con-
junctions (e.g., but, or, nor) and adverbials 
(e.g., however, as a result, for example). A 
discourse connective takes in two argu-
ments, Arg1 and Arg2. Arg2 is the argument 
that appears in the clause that is syntacti-
cally bound to the connective and Arg1 is 
the other argument. In the sentence ?John 
failed the exam because he was lazy? the dis-
course connective is underlined, Arg1 ap-
pears in italics and Arg2 appears in bold. 
3 A Pilot Annotation 
Following the PDTB annotation manual (Prasad 
et al 2008b), we conducted a pilot annotation of 
discourse connectivity in biomedical text. As an 
initial step, we only annotated the three most 
92
important components of a discourse relation; 
namely, a discourse connective and its two ar-
guments; we did not annotate attribution. Two 
linguist annotators independently annotated one 
full-text biomedical article (Verpy et al 1999) 
that we randomly selected. The article is 4,937 
tokens long. When the annotation work was 
completed, we measured the inter-annotator 
agreement, following the PDTB exact match 
criterion (Miltsakaki et al 2004). According to 
this criterion, a discourse relation is in dis-
agreement if there is disagreement on any text-
span (i.e., the discourse connective or any of its 
two arguments). In addition, we also measured 
the agreement in the components (i.e., discourse 
connectives and the arguments). We discussed 
the annotation results and made suggestions to 
adapt the PDTB guidelines to biomedical text.  
4 Results and Discussion 
The first annotator identified 74 discourse con-
nectives, and the second annotator identified 75, 
68 of which were the same as those identified by 
the first annotator. The combined total number 
of discourse connectives was 81. The overall 
agreement in discourse connective identification 
was 68/81=84%.  
 
Of the 68 discourse connectives that were anno-
tated by both annotators, 31 were an exact 
match, 31 had an exact match for Arg1, and 54 
had an exact match for Arg2. The overall 
agreement for the 68 discourse relations is 
45.6% for exact match, 45.6% for Arg1, and 
79.4% for Arg2. The PDTB also reported a 
higher level of agreement in annotating Arg2 
than in annotating Arg1 (Miltsakaki et al 2004). 
We manually analyzed the cases with disagree-
ment. We found the disagreements are nearly all 
related to the annotation of citation references, 
supplementary clauses, and other conventions. 
When a few conventions for these cases were 
added, the inter-annotator agreement went up to 
85%. We also found that different interpretation 
of a relation and its arguments by annotators 
plays an important role for the remaining 15% 
inconsistency, and domain-specific knowledge 
is necessary to resolve such cases.   
 
5 New Conventions 
After the completion of the pilot annotation and 
the discussion, we decided to add the following 
conventions to the PDTB annotation guidelines 
to address the characteristics of biomedical text: 
 
i. Citation references are to be annotated as 
a part of an argument because the inclu-
sion will benefit many text-mining tasks 
including identifying the semantic rela-
tions among citations. 
ii. Clausal supplements (e.g., relative or 
parenthetical constructions) that modify  
arguments but are not minimally 
necessary for the interpretation of the 
relation,  are annotated as part of the 
arguments. 
iii. We will annotate a wider variety of 
nominalizations as arguments than 
allowed by the PDTB guidelines. 
 
We anticipate that these changes will both de-
crease the amount of effort required for annota-
tion and increase the reliability of the 
annotation. 
6 References 
Marcus M, Santorini B, Marcinkiewicz M (1993) 
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of Eng-
lish: The Penn Treebank. Computational 
Linguistics 19 
Miltsakaki E, Prasad R, Joshi A, Webber B (2004) 
Annotating discourse connectives and their 
arguments. Paper presented at Proceedings 
of the NAACL/HLT Workshop: Frontiers in 
Corpus Annotation 
Prasad R, Dinesh N, Lee A, Miltsakaki E, Robaldo L, 
Joshi A, Webber B (2008a) The Penn Dis-
course Treebank 2.0. Paper presented at The 
6th International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Marra-
kech, Morroco 
Prasad R, Miltsakaki E, Dinesh N, Lee A, Joshi A, 
Robaldo L, Webber B (2008b) The Penn 
Discourse TreeBank 2.0 Annotation Manual. 
Technical Report: IRCS-08-01 
Verpy E, Leibovici M, Petit C (1999) Characteriza-
tion of otoconin-95, the major protein of 
murine otoconia, provides insights into the 
formation of these inner ear biominerals. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:529-534 
 
 
93
