Combining Word Sense and
Usage for Modeling Frame
Semantics
Diego De Cao1
Danilo Croce1
Marco Pennacchiotti2
Roberto Basili1
1University of Rome Tor Vergata (Italy)
2University of the Saarland (Germany)
email: decao@info.uniroma2.it
Abstract
Models of lexical semantics are core paradigms in most NLP applica-
tions, such as dialogue, information extraction and document understand-
ing. Unfortunately, the coverage of currently available resources (e.g.
FrameNet) is still unsatisfactory. This paper presents a largely applicable
approach for extending frame semantic resources, combining word sense
information derived fromWordNet and corpus-based distributional infor-
mation. We report a large scale evaluation over the English FrameNet,
and results on extending FrameNet to the Italian language, as the basis of
the development of a full FrameNet for Italian.
85
86 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
1 Introduction and Related Work
Models of lexical meaning are explicit or implicit basic components of any text pro-
cessing system devoted to information extraction, question answering or dialogue.
Several paradigms proposed for a variety of notions, such as word sense (Miller et al,
1990) or frame semantics (Baker et al, 1998), have given rise to large scale resources,
respectively WordNet and FrameNet. Recent studies (e.g. Shen and Lapata (2007))
show that the use of FrameNet can potentially improve the performance of Question
Answering systems. Yet, Shen and Lapata (2007) also point out that the low cov-
erage of the current version of FrameNet significantly limits the expected boost in
performance. Other studies have shown similar evidences for Recognizing Textual
Entailment (RTE) (Clark et al, 2007; Burchardt et al, 2008): most examples of the
RTE challenges corpora can be solved at the predicate-argument structure level, but
FrameNet coverage is still a major problem.
Approaches to (semi-)automatically acquire frame information are then today a
priority to solve these problems. Despite this, not many efforts have been paid so far
in this direction. Burchardt et al (2005) presented Detour, a system for predicting
frame assignment of potential lexical units not covered by FrameNet, by using the
paradigmatic information enclosed in WordNet. Although the authors do not fully
solve the problem related to the fuzzy relationships between senses and frames, they
propose an empirical association measure for ranking frame candidates according to
sense information as stored in WordNet. To our knowledge, this is the only work
trying to bridge frame membership to referential properties of lexical senses. Pitel
(2006) presents a preliminary study on the applicability of semantic spaces and space
geometrical transformations (namely, Latent Semantic Analysis) to expand FrameNet,
but the investigation is too limited in scope to draw relevant conclusions. Finally, Pad?
et al (2008) propose a method to automatically label unknown semantic roles of event
nominalizations in FrameNet, but their method needs a large amount of annotated
verbal data.
Another important limitation of FrameNet is the limited support to multilingual-
ity, which is becoming a critical issue in real NLP applications. In recent years,
some efforts have focused on the manual adaptation of the English FrameNet to other
languages (e.g., German (Burchardt et al, 2006) and Spanish (Subirats and Petruck,
2003)). Unlike PropBank, FrameNet is in fact suitable to cross-lingual induction, as
frames are mostly defined at the conceptual level, thus allowing cross-lingual interpre-
tation. Yet, all these efforts consist in manually defining frame linguistic knowledge
(e.g. lexical units) in the specific language, and in annotating a large corpus, thus
requiring a large human effort. While attempts to automate the annotation process
are quite promising (Pado and Lapata, 2007), they require the availability of a par-
allel corpus, and leave open the issue of inducing the resource as a whole in a new
language.
In this work, we investigate novel methods for automatically expanding the English
FrameNet, and supporting the creation of new ones in other languages (namely Ital-
ian), thus tackling the abovementioned problems of coverage and multilinguality. The
proposed methods are inspired by the basic hypothesis that FrameNet can be automat-
ically modeled by a fruitful interaction between advanced distributional techniques,
and paradigmatic properties derived from WordNet.
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 87
In particular, in this paper we focus on the application of such methods to study
the semantics of the core elements of FrameNet, i.e. the lexical units (hereafter LUs).
Lexical units are predicates (nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc.) that linguistically express
the situation described by a frame. Lexical units of the same frame share semantic
arguments. For example the frame KILLING has lexical units such as: assassin, blood-
bath, fatal, massacre, kill, suicide. These predicates share semantic arguments such
as KILLER, INSTRUMENT and VICTIM. Our goal is to combine corpus distributional
evidence with WordNet information to supply three tasks: the induction of new LUs
not already in FrameNet (unknown LUs); the reduction of LUs polysemy by mapping
them to WordNet synsets; the translation of English LUs into Italian.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe our FrameNet paradig-
matic and distributional model, and we discuss how these two models can be com-
bined in a single framework. In Section 3 we analyze the applicability of these models
to the three proposed experimental tasks, and discuss the results. Finally, in Section 4
we draw final conclusions and outline future work.
2 Paradigmatic and distributional models of frame semantics
In this section we describe our paradigmatic, distributional and combined models for
representing FrameNet. The general goal of each of these three methods is to offer
a computational model of FrameNet. In such a model, frames and LUs should have
a specific computational representation (e.g. vectors), and allow the computation of
similarity either among different LUs or between a frame and a LU. Such model thus
offers explicit means to use FrameNet in a NLP task or to expand FrameNet, e.g. by
assigning unknown LUs to its most similar frame, or by mapping a LU to its proper
WordNet synset(s). A key notion for these tasks is the definition of a principled and
reliable semantic similarity measure sim to be applied to frames and LUs.
2.1 Paradigmatic model
The basic intuition behind our paradigmatic model is that knowledge about predicates
of a frame, through a (possibly limited) set of LUs, allows to detect the set of the
suitable WordNet senses able to evoke the same frame. These senses are topologically
related to (one or more) sub-hierarchies capturing the lexical semantics implicit in the
frame. We propose a weakly-supervised approach to discover these structures. The
main idea is that frames correspond to specific sub-graphs of the WordNet hyponymy
hierarchy, so that these latter can be used to predict frames valid for other LUs, not
yet coded in FrameNet. Figure 1 reports the WordNet sub-hierarchy covering the
frame PEOPLE_BY_AGE: here, the frame?s nominal LUs {adult, adolescent, baby,
boy, infant, kid, geezer, teenager, youngster, youth} are all represented with the senses
correctly referring to the frame. The correct senses (e.g. sense 1 of youth out of its
6 potential senses) are selected as they share most specific generalizations with the
other LUs. This graph can be intended as an ?explanation? of the lexical semantic
properties characterizing the frame: future predictions about new LUs can be done on
the basis of the graph as a paradigmatic model for PEOPLE_BY_AGE. We call such a
graph the WordNet model of the frame. As WordNet organizes nouns, verbs and other
parts-of-speech in different hierarchies, three independent WordNet models (one for
each part-of-speech) are created for each frame.
88 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
Formally, given the set F of the LUs of a frame, a WordNet model is built around
the subset SF of WordNet synsets able to generalize the largest number of words in
F1.
Figure 1: The WordNet model for the frame People_by_Age as evoked by the set of
its nouns. Sense numbers #n refer to WordNet 2.0
The WordNet modelWNF(?,W ) of a frame F , is a graph
(3) WNF(?,W ) =<W,SF ,LF ,h,simWN ,m >
where: W ? F are the subset of all LUs in F having the same part-of-speech ? ?
{verb,noun,ad jective}, SF is the subset of synsets in WN needed to generalize words
w ?W ; LF ? SF are the lexical senses of w ?W subsumed by SF ; h ? SF ?SF is the
projection of the hyponymy relation of WN in SF ; m?W ?2LF is the lexical relation
between words w ?W and synsets in LF ; simWN : SF ? ? is a weighting function that
expresses the relevance of each sense ? ? SF for the frame, as it is represented by its
words in F .
The model exemplified in Figure 1 is
WNPeople_by_Age(noun, {adult, ..., youth}), where LF = {adult#1, adolescent#1, baby#1,
boy#1, boy#2, boy#3, ..., youth#1} and the set SF corresponds to the sub-hierarchies dom-
inated by the synsets #6026, #9622621, #9285271 and #9015843.
The overall goal of computing the WordNet model is to determine the similarity
function simWN : SF ? ?, expressing the relevance of a synset ? ? SF as a good
representative of a frame F . This is what is hereafter referred to as the paradigmatic
similarity model between words senses and frames.
Paradigmatic Similarity measures
Given the WordNet hierarchy separation on part-of-speaches, the similarity function
simWN is independently defined for verbs, nouns and adjectives.
1In the following, we will use the same notation for a frame F and for the set of its known lexical units,
as in our approach we use LU membership as a basic definition of a frame.
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 89
For nouns we adopt conceptual density (cd) (Agirre and Rigau, 1996; Basili et al,
2004), a semantic similarity measure defined for word sense disambiguation tasks.
The cd score for a sense ? ? SF is the density of the WordNet sub-hierarchy rooted
at ? in representing the set of nouns in F . The intuition behind this model is that the
larger is the number of all and only LUs in F that are generalized by ?, the better
it captures the lexical semantics intended by the frame. Coarse generalizations (i.e.
synsets higher in the hierarchy) are penalized, as they give rise to bushy hierarchies,
covering too many words not in the target F . The greedy algorithm proposed in Basili
et al (2004) selects the subset of synsets able to ?cover? (i.e. generalize) all the input
words and characterized by the highest cd values. The set of such synsets and their
corresponding sub-hierarchies forms a graph derived from a set of LUs F . The result
is the WordNet model WNF for F , i.e. the minimal subset of WordNet that explains
all (the possible) LUs in F with the maximally similar senses.
Figure 1 shows that correct senses (e.g. the sense 1 of youth out of the 6 potential
senses) are generally detected and preserved in the model. Irrelevant senses that do
not share any common hypernym with other words in F are neglected. Conceptual
density scores can be used to rank individual senses as in the case of boy.
Given a frame F , the above model can be naturally used to compute the similarity
between a noun n /? F and F . This is particularly useful in LU induction task, as de-
scribed in Section 3.1. To do so, the similarity simWN(F,n) between n and F is derived
by computing the cd scores over the set F ?{n}. The simWN(F,n) is the maximal cd
of any synset ?n ? SF that is also hypernym of a lexical sense of n. In the exam-
ple, the noun boy would receive a score of 0.117 through the hypernym {child,kid},
according to its third sense in WordNet 2.0 (?{son,boy}?).
As conceptual density can be only applied to nouns, when verbs v are consid-
ered, we exploit the synonymy and co-hyponymy relations. The following similarity
simWN(F,v) is computed:
(4) simWN(F,v) =
?
?
?
1 iff ?K ? F such that |K| > ? AND
?w ? K w is a co-hyponym of v
? otherwise
For adjectives, the similarity simWN(F,a), is computed on the basis of the syn-
onymy relation, as follows:
(5) simWN(F,a) =
?
?
?
1 iff ?w ? F such that
w is a synonym of tw
? otherwise
The overall model WNF is used to predict if a frame F is a correct situation for a
given unknownLU ul /?F (a noun, a verb or an adjective), whenever simWN(F,ul) > ?.
This can be used as a frame predictor for a ul currently not foreseen in the Berkley
database but possibly very frequent in a specific corpus, as described in Section 3.1.
2.2 Distributional model
The distributional model is based on the intuition that FrameNet frames and LUs can
be modelled in a semantic space, where they are represented as distributional co-
occurrence vectors computed over a corpus. Such framework, it is possible to compute
90 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
the similarity between a LU and a frame, by evaluating the distance of their vectors in
the space.
Semantic spaces have been widely applied in several NLP tasks, ranging from in-
formation retrieval to paraphrase rules extraction (Lin and Pantel, 2001). The intuition
is that the meaning of a word can be described by the set of textual contexts in which
it appears (Distributional Hypothesis (Harris, 1964)), and that words with similar vec-
tors are semantically related. This distributional approach has been often claimed to
support the language in use view on meaning. Word space models (Sch?tze, 1993)
have been shown to emphasize different aspects of lexical semantics: associative (i.e.
topical) information between words, as well as paradigmatic information (i.e. in ab-
sentia) or syntagmatic information (i.e. in presentia).
In our setting, the goal is to leverage semantic spaces to capture the notion of frame
? i.e. the property of ?being characteristic of a frame?. To do so, we model a lexical
unit l as a vector ~l, whose dimensions represent the set of contexts of the semantic
space. In our space, contexts are words appearing in a n-window of the lexical unit:
such a space models a generic notion of semantic relatedness ? i.e. two LUs close in
the space are likely to be either in paradigmatic or syntagmatic relation (Pado, 2007;
Sahlgren, 2006). The overall semantic space is then represented by a matrix M, whose
rows describe LUs and whose columns describe contexts.
We reduce in dimensionality the matrix M by applying Singular Value Decom-
position (SVD) (Landauer and Dumais, 1997), a decomposition process that creates
an approximation of the original matrix, aiming to capture semantic dependencies
between source vectors, i.e. contexts. The original space is replaced by a lower di-
mensional space Mk, called k-space in which each dimension is a derived concept.
The matrix M is transformed in the product of three new matrices: U , S, and V such
that M = USVT . Truncating M to its first k dimensions means neglecting the least
meaningful dimensions according to the original distribution. Mk captures the same
statistical information in a new k-dimensional space, where each dimension is a linear
combination of some original features. These newly derived features may be thought
of as artificial concepts, each one representing an emerging meaning component as a
linear combination of many different words (or contexts).
The SVD reduction has two main advantages. First, the overall computational cost
of the model is reduced, as similarities are computed on a space with much fewer
dimensions. Secondly, it allows to capture second-order relations among LUs, thus
improving the quality of the similarity measure.
Once the vectors~l for all FrameNet LUs are available in the reduced space, it is
also possible to derive a vectorial representation ~F of a whole frame F . Intuitively,
~F should be computed as the geometric centroid of the vectors of its lexical units.
Unfortunately, such a simple approach is prone to errors due to the semantic nature
of frames. Indeed, even if the LUs of a given frame describe the same particular
situation, they can typically do that in different type of contexts. For example, the
LUs assassinate and holocaust evoke the KILLING frame, but are likely to appear in
very different linguistic contexts. Then, the vectors of the two words are likely to be
distant in the space. Consequently, different regions of the semantic space may act
as good representations for the same frame: these regions corresponds to clusters of
LUs which appear in similar contexts (e.g. {holocaust,extermination,genocide} and
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 91
{suicide,euthanasia}).
We then adopt a clustering approach to model frames: each frame is represented
by the set of clustersCF of its lexical units. ClustersCF are composed by lexical units
close in the space and can have different size. They are computed by using an adaptive
(unsupervised) algorithm, based on k-means (Heyer et al, 1999; Basili et al, 2007),
applied to all known LUs of F . Each cluster c ? CF is represented in the space by a
vector~c, computed as the geometric centroid of all its lexical units.
In this framework, it is then possible to compute the similarity between an unknown
LU ul and a frame F , as the the cosine distance between the vector ~ul and the closest
centroid ~c ?CF :
(6) simLSF (F,ul) = argmaxc?CF simcos(~ul, ~CF )
Given this measure, it is finally possible to assign an unknown ul to one or more of
the most similar frames.
2.3 Combining paradigmatic and distributional models
In order to be effective in a NLP task, a model of lexical meaning should typically ac-
count for both the paradigmatic and distributional similarity. The following definition
thus hold:
(7) ?(F,w) = ?(D(w,F),P(w,F))
where ?(F,w) is the association between a word w and a frame F , ? is a com-
position operator applied to the corpus-driven distributional measure D(F,w) and
to the paradigmatic similarity P(F,w). Notice that in this work simLSF (F,w) and
simWN(F,w) are used as models of D(F,w) and P(F,W ), respectively. Different com-
binations ? are here possible, from simple algebraic operations (e.g. linear combina-
tions) to more complex algorithmics. We will explore this latter issue in section 3.1
where the evaluation of a combined model for LU induction is reported.
3 Experiments
In this section we experiment our proposed models on three different tasks: induc-
tion of new LUs (Section 3.1), mapping LUs to WordNet synsets (Section 3.2), and
automatic acquisition of LUs in Italian (Section 3.3). In all the experiments we use
FrameNet 1.3, consisting of 795 frames and about 10,196 LUs (7,522 unique LUs), as
source information and as a gold standard. As regardsWordNet, we adopt version 2.0,
with all mappings from 1.6 applied through the Italian component of MultiWordNet
(Pianta et al, 2008)2
For computing vectors in the distributional model, we use the TREC-2002 Vol.2
corpus, consisting of about 110 million words for English. The contexts for the de-
scription of LUs are obtained as ?5 windows around each individual LU occurrence:
each word occurring in this windows is retained as a potential context 3. A resulting
set of about 30,000 contexts (i.e. individual words) has been obtained. The vector~l
2http://www.lsi.upc.es/~nlp/tools/download-map.php
3For all occurrences of feature words, the POS tag has been neglected in order to verify the applicability
of the model even with a shallow preprocessing. Words occurring less than 10 times in all windows are
neglected in our experiments.
92 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
representing an individual LU is derived by computing pointwise mutual information
between the LU and each context. The SVD reduction has been run over the result-
ing 7.522? 30,000 matrix, with a dimension cut of k = 50, other values resulting in
non-statistically different outcomes.
Experiments for Italian are run against the italian component of the Europarliament
corpus (Koehn, 2002), made of about 1 million sentences for about 36 millions tokens,
for which about 87,000 contexts are used for the targeted LUs. Also for Italian a
dimension cut of k = 50 has been applied.
3.1 Lexical Unit induction
The goal of this experiment is to tackle the FrameNet low coverage problem, by check-
ing if our models are good in expanding FrameNet with new LUs. Formally, we de-
fine LU induction as the task of assigning a generic unknown lexical unit ul not yet
present in the FrameNet database to the correct frame(s). As the number of frames
is very large, the task is intuitively hard to solve. A further complexity regards mul-
tiple assignments. Lexical units are sometimes ambiguous and can then be mapped
to more than one frame (for example the word tea could map both to FOOD and SO-
CIAL_EVENT). Also, even unambiguous words can be assigned to more than one
frame ? e.g. child maps to both KINSHIP and PEOPLE_BY_AGE.
In the experiment, we simulate the induction task by executing a leave-one-out
procedure over the set of existing FrameNet LUs, as follows. First, we remove a LU
from all its original frames. Then, we ask our model to reassign it to the most similar
frame(s), according to its similarity measure. We repeat this procedure for all lexical
units and compute the accuracy in the assignment.
We experiment all three models: distributional, paradigmatic and the combined
one. In particular, the combined model is applied as follows. First, for each frame
F we create its cluster set CF in the LSA space. Then, at each iteration of the leave-
one-out a different LU ul is removed from FrameNet, and the following steps are
performed:
? We recompute the clusters for all frames Ful which contain ul, by neglecting
ul.4
? We compute the similarity simLFS(F,ul) between ul and all frames. During
the computation we empirically impose a threshold: if a cluster c ? C has a
similarity cos(c,ul) < 0.1 (i.e. poorly similar to ul), it is neglected. Finally, all
suggested frames are ranked according to simLFS(F,ul).
? For each frame F we also compute the similarity simWN(F,ul) according to the
paradigmatic model, by neglecting ul in the computation of the WordNet model
of each frame.
? We combine the distributional and paradigmatic similarities following the gen-
eral Equation 7, by applying the following specific equation:
(8) sim(F,ul) = simLFS(F,ul) ? simWN(F,ul)
4Note that all appearances of ul in the database are neglected (irrespectively from its POS tag, e.g.
march as a verb vs. march as a noun)
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 93
Table 1: The Gold Standard for the test over English and Italian
English Number of frames: 220
Number of LUs: 5042
Most likely frames: Self_Motion (p=0.015), Clothing (p=0.014)
Italian Number of frames: 10
Number of LUs: 112
Frames: Buildings, Clothing, Killing, Kinship, Make_noise
Medical_conditions, Natural_Features, Possession, Self_Motion, Text
Note, that in practice sim(F,ul) acts as a re-ranking function of the previously
obtained clusters CF
? We execute LU induction, by mapping ul to the most similar k frames according
to sim(F,ul).
Evaluation
We evaluate the model by computing the accuracy over the FrameNet gold standard.
Accuracy is defined as the fraction of LUs that are correctly re-assigned to the original
frame during the leave-one-out. Accuracy is computed at different levels k: a LU is
correctly assigned if its gold standard frame appears among the best-k frames ranked
by the model. We experimented both on English (using FrameNet version 1.3), and on
Italian. Since an Italian FrameNet is not available, we manually created a gold stan-
dard of 11 frames. Overall statistics on the data are reported in Table 1: the number of
frames and LUs analysed is slightly reduced wrt FrameNet as we ignored the predicate
words absent from the targeted corpus (e.g. moo in MAKE_NOISE) and multiwords
expressions as it was not possible to locate them unambiguously in the corpus (e.g.
shell out in COMMERCE_PAY). Also, in order to get reliable distributional statistics,
we filter out LUs occurring less than 50 times in the corpus, and frames with less than
10 LUs.
For all the experiments, the parameter ? in the Equation 4 of the paradigmaticmodel
has been set to 2. As a baseline, we adopt a model predicting as best-k frames the most
likely ones in FrameNet ? i.e. those containing the highest number of LUs.
Results for English are reported in Figure 2.
As shown, all methods improve significantly the baseline whereas accuracy values
naturally improve along increasing values for k. The performance of the paradigmatic
model are significantly high even for very small k. The best model is given by the
combination of distributional and paradigmatic similarity, producing significant im-
provements wrt the paradigmatic model alone.
Results for Italian are reported in Figure 3. The leave-one-out test has been applied
as for English, but over a manually compiled set of 527 LUs for the 11 frames used
as gold standard. These LUs have been obtained via direct translation of the English
Framenet LUs. In order to evaluate LUs for which a consistent distributional model
was available, only those occurring at least 50 times in the Europarliament corpus have
been selected: this amounts to a total number of 112 Italian LUs. The paradigmatic
94 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
Figure 2: Accuracy of the leave-one-out over the English FrameNet 1.3
model for the test has been obtained using as source the LUs in the English FrameNet.
As the computation of the simWN(F,w) depends only on the hyponymy hierarchy, for
each Italian noun n the conceptual density computation over the set {n}?F is applied,
where F is given by the LUs in English. The interlingual index is here used to map
every n to its lexical senses (i.e. synsets) in the English WN. Then, the computation
of the greedy algorithm is applied exactly as in the monolingual process. The same
approach has been used for verbs (Equation 4) and adjectives (Equation 5).
Although the limited scale of the experiment (only 11 frames are targeted), the ev-
idence are similar as for the test over English: the combined model is always superior
to the individual ones. High levels of accuracy are achieved, although the ?most likely
frame? baseline is much higher than for the English test. Similar trends are also ob-
served for the paradigmatic model, reaching a plateau for smaller values of k. Overall
results indicate that reliable predictions can be obtained for unknown LUs also when
a whole Italian FrameNet is not yet available. Our method can then be used to support
lexicographers in the task of building a new FrameNet, in the specific stage of adding
LUs to frames.
Results suggest that the WordNet models derived from the English LUs are valid
predictors also for Italian words, as confirmed by the experiments in the next sections.
3.2 Assessing WordNet models of Frames
The goal of the experiment is to validate the notion of WordNet model of a frame as
derived through the method discussed in Section 2.1. Formally, given the set of all
possible WordNet senses Sl of a given LU l, we aim at mapping each sense s ? Sl to
the correct frame f ? Fl , where Fl is the set of frames in which l appears. If a frame
cannot be found for a given sense, the sense is simply neglected.
For example, the LU burn has 15 senses in WordNet and it belongs to 3 frames:
EMOTION_HEAT, EXPERIENCE_BODILY_HARM and PERCEPTION_BODY. Figure 2
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 95
Figure 3: Accuracy of the leave-one-out tests over 11 frames in Italian
reports some of the possible correct mapping between senses and frames. Other
senses, such as ?destroy by fire? cannot be mapped to any existing frame.
By creating such an automatic mapping we achieve three goals. First, we disam-
biguate FrameNet lexical units. Second, we enrich WordNet synsets with new infor-
mation ? i.e. a computational description of the situations they refer to, as repre-
sented in FrameNet. Third, we derive a language independent model of frames based
on WordNet synsets.
The mapping targeted by the experiment is carried out according to the discussion
in Section 2.1. The WordNet model of a frame F for nouns is the outcome of the
greedy cd computation over the set F of all frame?s LUs: given a LU, a sense is
accepted if it is a member of the set LF in the model. For verbs and adjectives all co-
hyponyms and synonyms used in Equations 4 and 5 are included in LF . The procedure
for developing a WordNet model is completely automatic, this avoiding the costs of
manual annotation.5
Note that our approach is easily portable to languages different from English. In-
deed, the WordNet hierarchy is the backbone of sense repositories in other languages
(as for example in MultiWordNet (Pianta et al, 2008)). The English modelsWNF can
be then interpreted in a different language, by applying the interlingual indexes to all
synsets LF in WNF . The corresponding sets of synonyms are natural candidates as
LUs in the target language.
Evaluation
In this experiment, in order to account for data sparseness we reduce the dataset in
two ways. First, we neglect low frequency lexical units: LUs occurring less than 50
times in the corpus are not considered. Second, we exclude frames that have less than
5In this experiment we focus on verbs and nouns, since they are core predicates expressing the targeted
situation in sentences.
96 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
Table 2: Mapping between WordNet senses and frames for verb burn, as induced by
the paradigmatic method
Synset Evoked FRAME Co-Hyponyms WordNet Definition
1775952 EMOTION_HEAT chafe, fume, smolder Feel strong emotion, especially anger or
passion; ?She was burning with anger?;
?He was burning to try out his new
skies?
189569 EXPERIENCE_BODILY_HARM break, bruise, hurt,
injure
Burn with heat, fire, or radiation; ?The
iron burnt a hole in my dress?
2059143 PERCEPTION_BODY itch, sting Cause a sharp or stinging pain or dis-
comfort; ?The sun burned his face?
10 LUs. This leaves us with 220 frames, involving 2,200 nominal LUs and 2,180
verbal LUs. Table 3 reports overall statistics. Over the 2,200 nouns and 2,180 verbs
examined, the vast majority is covered by WordNet (fourth row). For these words, a
large set of lexical senses exist in WordNet giving an average polysemy between 3 and
6 senses per word (sixth row). Our paradigmatic method is able to significantly reduce
the average polysemy: only 1.79 senses per verb survive among the initial 5.29, while
only 1.29 among the 3.62 are retained for nouns. Moreover, the number of senses
used to entirely represent a frame in a paradigmatic model (i.e. SF ) is about 3,512 and
2,718 respectively for nouns and verbs, as averaged across all frames. An example of
the mapping produced by our method is reported in Table 2.
The above statistics suggest that a consistent reduction in average polysemy can be
obtained when the context of a frame is used to model semantic similarity among LUs
in WordNet.
Table 3: Statistics on nominal and verbal senses in the paradigmatic model of the
English FrameNet
Nouns Verbs
Targeted Frames 220 220
Involved LUs 2,200 2,180
Average LUs per frame 10.0 9.91
LUs covered by WordNet 2,187 2,169
Number of Evoked Senses 7,443 11,489
Average Polysemy 3.62 5.97
Represented words (i.e. ?FWF ) 2,145 1,270
Average represented LUs 9.94 9.85
Active Lexical Senses (LF ) 3,095 2,282
Average Active Lexical Senses (|LF |/|WF |) per word over frames 1.27 1.79
Active synsets (SF ) 3,512 2,718
Average Active synsets (|SF |/|WF |) per word over frames 1.51 2.19
We evaluated the quality of the above process through manual validation. Given a
frame, for each LU we provided two annotators with the list of all its WordNet senses,
and asked to select those that correctly map to FrameNet. Then, we evaluated our
automatic mapping method by computing standard Precision and Recall. In all, we
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 97
analysed all 786 senses of 306 LUs in 4 frames (i.e. KILLING, PEOPLE_BY_AGE,
STATEMENT and CLOTHING). The Cohen?s kappa, computed over two frames (i.e.
KILLING and PEOPLE_BY_AGE for 192 senses of 77 words) results in a 0.90 inter-
annotator agreement: this indicates that senses and frames are highly correlated and
their mapping is consistent and motivated, as Table 2 suggests.
The system is considered to accept a sense ? for a given frame F iff the conceptual
density score characterizing such a sense is positive, i.e. the ? ? LF . Our method
obtained a Precision of 0.803 and a Recall of 0.79 (F-measure=0.796). Among the 786
senses tested, 85 false positives and 92 false negatives have been found: 346 senses
have been correctly accepted and 263 true negatives have been rejected by the sytem.
It must be also noticed that the conceptual density scores obtained are well correlated
with correct senses. If senses of a word with significantly lower cd scores than others
are removed from the set LF of a frame, a significant improvement in precision can
be obtained. For example, tie in CLOTHING has 9 senses, of which 3 are proposed by
the system, corresponding to 1 true positives, 2 false positives and 6 true negatives.
It is interesting to note that the true positive sense (i.e. {necktie, tie} as ?a neckwear
consisting of a long narrow piece of material worn ...?) has a cd score of 0.492, while
0.018 is the score of all the three false positives (i.e. sense #5 {link,linkup tie, tie-in}
as ?a fastener that serves to join or link?; sense #8 {tie, railroad tie, crosstie, sleeper}
as ?one of the cross braces that support the rails on a railway track?; sense #9 {tie} as
?a cord with which something is tied?). A careful selection policy can be thus easily
devised to deal with such skewed preference distributions and achieve higher values
of precision by neglecting lower preferences.
These results show that the proposed frame WordNet model is not only effective
in reducing the average lexical polysemy (as shown in Table 3), but it is also a rather
accurate method to capture the lexical semantics implied by frames. The achieved
level of accuracy justifies the adoption of the model defined in (3) for the development
of FrameNets in languages other than English.
3.3 Development of an Italian FrameNet
In this section we explore the use of our English paradigmatic model to automatically
support the building process of a FrameNet in a different language, namely Italian. In
particular, we leverage the model WNF for the English language to induce new LUs
for F in the new language. To do so, we proceed as follows.
For each frame F in FrameNet we first generate the WordNet model for English
WNF using all the LUs available in the database, as discussed in Section 2.1. Then,
we use an interlingual index (e.g. MultiWordNet) to obtain words in the new language
corresponding to lexical senses LF in the model WNF . Each of these translated LU
l is a cross-lingual synonym of at least a sense in SF and is a candidate LUs for the
frame in the new language, since it satisfies simWN(F, l) > ?.
Evaluation
In the experiment we focus on Italian, for which a full FrameNet is not yet available,
though a manual building process is currently underway (Tonelli and Pianta, 2008).
As interlingual index we adopt the Italian component of MultiWordNet (Pianta et al,
2008). As shown in Table 4, the WordNet model allows to generate approximately
15,000 Italian LUs, partitioned in 6,600 nouns, 8,300 verbs and 130 adjectives.
98 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
Table 4: Number of generated Lexical Units
Number of LUs
Nouns 6611
Verbs 8332
Adjectives 129
Total 15072
To evaluate the quality of the translated LUs we performed two different tests. In
the first test, we collected the 776 most frequent words in the Europarliament corpus,
including many generic nouns and verbs, such as produrre (to_produce/make), fare
(to_make/fabricate), avere (to_have). Then we manually validated all the 1,500 sys-
tem decisions regarding these words. A decision is accepted if the frame suggested
for the word is correct for at least one of its senses. Accuracy is computed as the per-
centage of the correct system decisions over the number of validated cases. For some
words no frame was predicted, as they were not in Wordnet or as no Wordnet model
was able to correctly generalize them. The percentage of words receiving at least one
correct prediction, i.e. assigned to at least one frame accepted by the annotators, is
here called Coverage, and reported with the accuracy scores in the second line of Ta-
ble 5. The above test was repeated also for more specific words, with a number of
occurrences in the corpus ranging from 100 to 200. Results are reported in the third
line of Table 5. These outcomes are surprisingly good especially considering that the
computation of the individual simWN(F, l) scores is fully automatic.
Table 5: Manual validation of the italian LUs generated through WordNet
Frequency Numb. of Numb. of
Range Test pairs Words Acc. Cov.
[722;55,000] 1,500 776 0.79 93.0%
[100;200] 558 357 0.87 94.3%
In a second test, the results generated by our method were compared against the
words of the oracle manually developed for the experiment in Section 3.1. In this
case, the predictions of the method about frames and words are compared with the
oracle. As no filter has been here applied with respect to the corpus, all the 527
< LU,Frame > pairs in the manually created oracle have been used6, although only
437 pairs were represented through the MultiWordNet resources. The system was
not able to decide for 71 words, and produced wrong guesses for 49 words: 317
correct guesses are thus produced. The results is a Precision of 0.87 and a Recall of
0.72. The recall value, lower than the coverage observed in the previous test, is also
by a significant generative effect: the method discovers a number of new entries not
accounted for in the oracle.
6Notice that no LU was multiply assigned to different frames in the oracle, so that the number of predi-
cate words here is exactly the number of different pairs.
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 99
Table 6: Excerpt of the Italian LUs in four different frames
FRAME FRAME definition Italian LUs
BUILDINGS Words which name permanent
fixed structures forming an
enclosure and providing pro-
tection from the elements
autorimessa, cuccia, casolare,
casotto, dependance, masseria,
palazzina, ...
CLOTHING Anything that people conven-
tionally wear
cappotto, calzetta, cami-
cia_da_notte, duepezzi, ...
SELF_MOTION The Self mover, a living being,
moves under its own power in a
directed fashion
annaspare, arrancare, buttarsi,
claudicare, giro, ...
TEXT An entity that contains linguis-
tic, symbolic information on a
Topic, created by an Author at
the Time of creation
arringa, articolo_di_fondo,
canzonetta, conto, polizza,
vademecum, ...
Typical new LUs introduced in the oracle are words not accounted for in the En-
glish Framenet, as reported in Table 6. The table shows that most of the new guesses
of the system are indeed highly plausible. They represent widely used dialectal forms
(e.g. masseria in the frame BUILDING), jargon (e.g. duepezzi in CLOTHING), techni-
cal terms (e.g. polizza in TEXT) and specific nouns (e.g. autorimessa in BUILDINGS).
Although it is certainly questionable if words like articolo_di_fondo (i.e. main article
in a newspaper) are worth to be considering as LUs for the frame TEXT, it is clear that
if the application domain requires frame-like information, the presented model (even
only the paradigmatic association here discussed) provides an effective tool for fast
and robust prototyping. Notice that the low Recall (only 0.60 of the oracle words are
correctly addressed), can be compensated by combining paradigmatic and distribu-
tional similarity (Equation 8), as experiments reported in Figure 3 suggest. We leave
this last point as a future work.
4 Conclusions
We presented a combined model for representing frame semantics through paradig-
matic and distributional evidence. We reported three experiments, which indicate pos-
sible application scenarios of these models. First, the combination of the presented
models has been applied to extend FrameNet in a LU induction task, for English and
Italian. In both cases the evaluation has shown that the combination of the two models
achieves better performance against their independent uses, and that the level of accu-
racy is high enough to support lexicographers in the task of building FrameNets. In a
second experiment, we showed that a strong association exists between lexical senses,
as defined by WordNet, and the frame?s lexical units in FrameNet. Its automatic de-
tection, as proposed in this paper, results in a significant reduction of the polysemy of
LUs and in a highly accurate selection of those lexical senses semantically related to
the situations represented by a frame. Finally, we demonstrated that this paradigmatic
information can be used to develop a FrameNet resource in another language. For
100 De Cao, Croce, Pennacchiotti, and Basili
Italian, we automatically generated a very large and accurate set of 15,000 LUs.
The overall framework has encouraged us to develop a robust toolbox for the large
scale acquisition of FrameNet-like lexicons in different domains and languages. The
tool will be made publicly available for research studies in this area. Future work is on
going on the adoption of richer models for Framenet, able to take into account more
evidence than LUs, such as frame elements and syntagmatic information. Moreover,
the use of the derived space as a model for the recognition of frames in free-texts is
expected to speed-up the development of a large collection of annotated sentences for
the Italian language.
References
Agirre, E. and G. Rigau (1996). Word sense disambiguation using conceptual density.
In Proceedings of COLING-96, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Baker, C. F., C. J. Fillmore, and J. B. Lowe (1998). The Berkeley FrameNet project.
In Proceedings of COLING-ACL, Montreal, Canada.
Basili, R., M. Cammisa, and F. Zanzotto (2004). A semantic similarity measure for
unsupervised semantic disambiguation. In Proceedings of LREC-04, Lisbon, Por-
tugal.
Basili, R., D. D. Cao, P. Marocco, and M. Pennacchiotti (2007). Learning selectional
preferences for entailment or paraphrasing rules. In Proceedings of RANLP 07.
Burchardt, A., K. Erk, and A. Frank (2005). A wordnet detour to framenet. In Pro-
ceedings of the GLDV 2005 GermaNet II Workshop, Bonn, Germany.
Burchardt, A., K. Erk, A. Frank, A. Kowalski, S. Pado, and M. Pinkal (2006). The
salsa corpus: a german corpus resource for lexical semantics. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, Genova,
Italy.
Burchardt, A., M. Pennacchiotti, S. Thater, and M. Pinkal (2008). Assessing the
impact of frame semantics on textual entailment. Journal of Natural Language
Engineering (to appear).
Clark, P., P. Harrison, J. Thompson, W. Murray, J. Hobbs, and C. Fellbaum (2007,
June). On the Role of Lexical and World Knowledge in RTE3. In Proceedings of
the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, Prague, pp.
54?59. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Harris, Z. (1964). Distributional structure. In J. J. Katz and J. A. Fodor (Eds.), The
Philosophy of Linguistics, New York. Oxford University Press.
Heyer, L., S. Kruglyak, and S. Yooseph (1999). Exploring expression data: Identifi-
cation and analysis of coexpressed genes. Genome Research 9, 1106?1115.
Koehn, P. (2002). Europarl: A multilingual corpus for evaluation of machine transla-
tion. Draft.
Combining Word Sense and Usage for Modeling Frame Semantics 101
Landauer, T. and S. Dumais (1997). A solution to plato?s problem: The latent se-
mantic analysis theory of acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review 104, 211?240.
Lin, D. and P. Pantel (2001). DIRT-discovery of inference rules from text. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-01),
San Francisco, CA.
Miller, G., R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, and K. Miller. (1990). An on-line
lexical database. International Journal of Lexicography 13(4), 235?312.
Pado, S. (2007). Cross-Lingual Annotation Projection Models for Role-Semantic In-
formation, Volume 21 of Saarbr?cken Dissertations in Computational Linguistics
and Language Technology. Saarland University.
Pado, S. and M. Lapata (2007). Dependency-based construction of semantic space
models. Computational Linguistics 33(2), 161?199.
Pad?, S., M. Pennacchiotti, and C. Sporleder (2008). Semantic role assignment for
event nominalisations by leveraging verbal data. In Proceedings of COLING 2008,
Manchester, UK.
Pianta, E., L. Bentivogli, and C. Girardi (2008). MultiWordNet: Developing an
aligned multilingual database. In Proceedings of the 1st International Global
WordNet Conference, Marrakech, Morocco, pp. 293?302.
Pitel, G. (2006). Using bilingual lsa for framenet annotation of french text from
generic resources. In Workshop on Multilingual Semantic Annotation: Theory and
Applications, Saarbr?ijcken, Germany.
Sahlgren, M. (2006). The Word-Space Model. Ph. D. thesis, Department of Linguis-
tics, Stockholm University.
Sch?tze, H. (1993). Word space. In S. Hanson, J. Cowan, and C. Giles (Eds.), Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 5. MorganKaufmann Publishers.
Shen, D. and M. Lapata (2007). Using semantic roles to improve question answer-
ing. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing and on Computational Natural Language Learning, Prague, pp. 12?21.
Subirats, C. and M. Petruck (2003). Surprise! Spanish FrameNet! In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Frame Semantics at the XVII. International Congress of Linguists,
Prague.
Tonelli, S. and E. Pianta (2008). Frame Information Transfer from English to Italian.
In Proceedings of LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.
