Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 19?26,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
King Alfred: A Translation Environment for Learners of Anglo-Saxon
English
Lisa N. Michaud
Computer Science Department
St. Anselm College
Manchester, NH 03102
lmichaud@anselm.edu
Abstract
King Alfred is the name of both an innovative
textbook and a computational environment de-
ployed in parallel in an undergraduate course
on Anglo-Saxon literature. This paper de-
tails the ways in which it brings dynamically-
generated resources to the aid of the language
student. We store the feature-rich grammar
of Anglo-Saxon in a bi-level glossary, provide
an annotation context for use during the trans-
lation task, and are currently working toward
the implementation of automatic evaluation of
student-generated translations.
1 Introduction
Criticisms of the application of computational tools
toward language learning have often highlighted
the reality that the mainstays of modern language
teaching?including dialogue and a focus on com-
municative goals over syntactic perfectionism?
parallel the shortcomings of computational environ-
ment. While efforts continue to extend the state of
the art toward making the computer a conversational
partner, they nevertheless often fall short of pro-
viding the language learner with learning assistance
in the task of communicative competence that can
make a real difference within or without the class-
room.
The modern learner of ancient or ?dead? lan-
guages, however, has fundamentally different needs;
learners are rarely asked to produce utterances in the
language being learned (L2). Instead of communi-
cation or conversation, the focus is on translation
from source texts into the learner?s native language
(L1). This translation task typically involves annota-
tion of the source text as syntactic data in the L2 are
decoded, and often requires the presence of many
auxiliary resources such as grammar texts and glos-
saries.
Like many learners of ancient languages, the stu-
dent of Anglo-Saxon English must acquire detailed
knowledge of syntactic and morphological features
that are far more complex than those of Modern
English. Spoken between circa A.D. 500 and 1066,
Anglo-Saxon or ?Old? English comprises a lexicon
and a grammar both significantly removed from that
of what we speak today. We therefore view the task
of learning Anglo-Saxon to be that of acquiring a
foreign language even to speakers of Modern Eng-
lish.
In the Anglo-Saxon Literature course at Wheaton
College1, students tackle this challenging language
with the help of King Alfred?s Grammar (Drout,
2005). This text challenges the learner with a
stepped sequence of utterances, both original and
drawn from ancient texts, whose syntactic complex-
ity complements the lessons on the language. This
text has recently been enhanced with an electronic
counterpart that provides the student with a novel
environment to aid in the translation task. Services
provided by the system include:
? A method to annotate the source text with
grammatical features as they are decoded.
? Collocation of resources for looking up or
querying grammatical- and meaning-related
data.
? Tracking the student?s successes and chal-
lenges in order to direct reflection and further
study.
1Norton, Massachusetts
19
Figure 1: The main workspace for translation in King Alfred.
This paper overviews the current status of the
King Alfred tutorial system and enumerates some of
our current objectives.
2 System Overview
King Alfred is a web-accessible tutorial environ-
ment that interfaces with a central database server
containing a curriculum sequence of translation ex-
ercises (Drout, 1999). It is currently implemented as
a Java applet using the Connector/J class interface
to obtain curricular, glossary, and user data from a
server running MySQL v5.0.45.
When a student begins a new exercise, the original
Anglo-Saxon sentence appears above a text-entry
window in which the student can type his or her
translation as seen in Figure 1. Below this window,
a scratch pad interface provides the student with an
opportunity to annotate each word with grammati-
cal features, or to query the system for those data
if needed. This simultaneously replaces traditional
annotation (scribbling small notes in between lines
of the source text) and the need to refer to auxiliary
resources such as texts describing lexical items and
morphological patterns. More on how we address
the latter will be described in the next section.
When the student is finished with the translation,
she clicks on a ?Submit? button and progresses to a
second screen in which her translation is displayed
alongside a stored instructor?s translation from the
database. Based on the correctness of scratch pad
annotations aggregated over several translation ex-
ercises, the system gives feedback in the form of
a simple message, such as King Alfred is pleased
with your work on strong nouns and personal pro-
nouns, or King Alfred suggests that you should re-
view weak verbs. The objective of this feedback
is to give the students assistance in their own self-
directed study. Additional, more detailed informa-
tion about the student?s recorded behavior is view-
able through an open user model interface if the stu-
dent desires.
3 Resources for the Translation Task
As part of the scratch pad interface, the student can
annotate a lexical unit with the value of any of a wide
range of grammatical features dependent upon the
part of speech. After the student has indicated the
part of speech, the scratch pad presents an interface
for this further annotation as seen in Figure 2, which
shows the possible features to annotate for the verb
feoll.
Figure 2: A scratch pad menu for the verb feoll.
The scratch pad provides the student with the op-
portunity to record data (either correctly, in which
case the choice is accepted, or incorrectly, where the
student is notified of having made a mistake) or to to
query the system for the answer. While student users
are strongly encouraged to make educated guesses
based on the morphology of the word, thrashing
blindly is discouraged; if the information is key to
the translation, and the student does not have any
idea, asking the system to Tell me! is preferable
to continually guessing wrong and it allows the stu-
dent to get ?unstuck? and continue with the transla-
20
tion. None of the interaction with the scratch pad is
mandatory; the translator can proceed without ever
using it. It merely exists to simultaneously allow for
recording data as it is decoded, or to query for data
when it is needed.
Figure 3: Querying King Alfred for help.
3.1 Lexical Lookup
Like most Anglo-Saxon texts, King Alfred also con-
tains a glossary which comprises all of the Anglo-
Saxon words in the exercise corpus. These glos-
saries typically contain terms in ?bare? or ?root?
form, stripped of their inflection. A novice learner
has to decode the root of the word she is viewing
(no easy task if the inflection is irregular, or if she is
unaware, for example, which of seven declensions
a verb belongs to) in order to determine the word
to search for in the glossary, a common stumbling
block (Colazzo and Costantino, 1998). The infor-
mation presented under such a root-form entry is
also incomplete; the learner can obtain the meaning
of the term, but may be hampered in the translation
task by not knowing for certain how this particular
instance is inflected (e.g., that this is the third per-
son singular present indicative form), or which of
the possible meanings is being used in this particu-
lar sentence.
Alternatively, a text can present terms in their sur-
face form, exactly as they appear in the exercise cor-
pus. This approach, while more accessible to the
learner, has several drawbacks, including the fact
that glossary information (such as the meaning of
the word and the categories to which it belongs) is
common to all the different inflected versions, and
it would be redundant to include that information
separately for each surface form. Also, in such an
entry the user may not be able to discover the root
form, which may make it more difficult to recognize
other terms that share the same root. To avoid these
issues, a glossary may contain both, with every sur-
face form annotated with the information about its
inflection and then the root entry shown so that the
reader may look up the rest of the information.
We believe we can do better than this. In order
to incorporate the advantages of both forms of glos-
sary data, we have implemented two separate but in-
terlinked glossaries, where each of the surface real-
izations is connected to the root entry from which
it is derived. Because electronic media enable the
dynamic assembly of information, the learner is not
obligated to do two separate searches for the infor-
mation; displaying a glossary entry shows both the
specific, contextual information of the surface form
and the general, categorical data of the root form
in one presentation. This hybrid glossary view is
shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4: A partial screen shot of the King Alfred glos-
sary browser.
3.2 Surface and Root Forms
To build this dual-level glossary, we have lever-
aged the Entity-Relationship Model as an architec-
ture on which to structure King Alfred?s curriculum
of sentences and the accompanying glossary. Fig-
ure 5 shows a partial Entity-Relationship diagram
for the relevant portion of the curriculum database,
in which:
? Sentences are entities on which are stored var-
ious attributes, including a holistic translation
of the entire sentence provided by the instruc-
tor.
? The relationship has word connects Sentences
21
to Words, the collection of which forms the sur-
face level of our glossary. The instances of
this relationship include the ordinality of the
word within the sentence; the actual sentence
is, therefore, not found as a single string in
the database, but is constructed dynamically at
need by obtaining the words in sequence from
the glossary. Each instance of the relationship
also includes the translation of the word in the
specific context of this sentence.2
? The entity set Words contains the actual or-
thography of the word as it appears (text)
and through an additional relationship set (not
shown) is connected to all of the grammatical
features specific to a surface realization (e.g.
for a noun, person=third, number=singular,
case=nominative).
? The relationship has root links entries from
the surface level of the glossary to their corre-
sponding entry at the root level.
? The Roots glossary has the orthography of the
root form (text), possible definitions of this
word, and through another relationship set not
in the figure, data on other syntactic categories
general to any realization of this word.
Since the root form must be displayed in some form
in the glossary, we have adopted the convention that
the root of a verb is its infinitive form, the roots of
nouns are the singular, nominative forms, and the
roots of determiners and adjectives are the singular,
masculine, nominative forms.
Other related work does not explicitly represent
the surface realization in the lexicon; the system de-
scribed by (Colazzo and Costantino, 1998), for ex-
ample, uses a dynamic word stemming algorithm to
look up a surface term in a glossary of root forms
by stripping off the possible suffixes; however, it is
unable to recognize irregular forms or to handle am-
biguous stems. GLOSSER (Nerbonne et al, 1998)
2This does not negate the necessity of the holistic translation
of the sentence, because Anglo-Saxon is a language with very
rich morphology, and therefore is far less reliant upon word
order to determine grammatical role than Modern English. In
many Anglo-Saxon sentences, particularly when set in verse,
the words are ?scrambled? compared to how they would appear
in a translation.
Figure 5: A piece of the Entity-Relationship diagram
showing the relationships of Sentences, Words, and
Roots.
for Dutch learners of French also automatically ana-
lyzes surface terms to link them to their stem entries
and to other related inflections, but shares the same
problem with handling ambiguity.
Our approach ensures that no term is misidentified
by an automatic process which may be confused by
ambiguous surface forms, and none of these systems
allows the learner access to which of the possible
meanings of the term is being used in this particu-
lar context. The result of King Alfred?s architecture
is a pedagogically accurate glossary which has an
efficiency of storage and yet dynamically pulls to-
gether the data stored at multiple levels to present the
learner with all of the morphosyntactic data which
she requires.
3.3 Adding to the Glossary
Because there is no pre-existing computational lex-
icon for Anglo-Saxon we can use and because cre-
ating new translation sentences within this database
architecture via direct database manipulation is ex-
ceedingly time consuming?and inaccessible for the
novice user?we have equipped King Alfred with
an extensive instructor?s interface which simultane-
ously allows for the creation of new sentences in the
curriculum and the expansion of the glossary to ac-
commodate the new material.3
The instructor first types in an Anglo-Saxon sen-
tence, using special buttons to insert any non-ASCII
characters from the Anglo-Saxon alphabet. A holis-
3All changes created by this interface are communicated di-
rectly to the stored curriculum in the central server.
22
tic translation of the entire sentence is entered at this
time as well. The interface then begins to process
each word of the sentence in turn. At each step, the
instructor views the entire sentence with the word
currently being processed highlighted:
? Sum mann feoll on ise.
The essential process for each word is as follows:
1. The system searches for the word in the surface
glossary to see if it has already occurred in a
previous sentence. All matches are displayed
(there are multiple options if the same realiza-
tion can represent more than one inflection) and
the instructor may indicate which is a match for
this occurrence. If a match is found, the word
has been fully processed; otherwise, the inter-
face continues to the next step.
2. The instructor is prompted to create a new sur-
face entry. The first step is to see if the root
of this word already exists in the root glossary;
in a process similar to the above, the instruc-
tor may browse the root glossary and select a
match.
(a) If the root for this word (feallan in our
example) already exists, the instructor se-
lects it and then provides only the addi-
tional information specific to this realiza-
tion (e.g. tense=past, person=3rd, num-
ber=singular, and mood=indicative).
(b) Otherwise, the instructor is asked to pro-
vide the root form and then is presented
with an interface to select features for both
the surface and root forms (the above,
plus class=strong, declension=7th, defin-
ition=?to fall?).
When this process has been completed for each
word, the sentence is finally stored as a sequence
of indices into the surface glossary, which now con-
tains entries for all of the terms in this sentence. The
instructor?s final input is to associate a contextual
gloss (specific to this particular sentence) with each
word (these are used as ?hints? for the students when
they are translating and need extra help).
4 Automatically Scoring a Translation
When initially envisioned, King Alfred did not as-
pire to automatic grading of the student-generated
translation because of the large variation in possible
translations and the risk of discouraging a student
who has a perfectly valid alternative interpretation
(Drout, 1999). We now believe, however, that King
Alfred?s greatest benefit to the student may be in
providing accurate, automatic feedback to a trans-
lation that takes the variety of possible translation
results into account.
Recent work on machine translation evaluation
has uncovered methodologies for automatic evalu-
ation that we believe we can adapt to our purposes.
Techniques that analyze n-gram precision such as
BLEU score (Papineni et al, 2002) have been devel-
oped with the goal of comparing candidate transla-
tions against references provided by human experts
in order to determine accuracy; although in our ap-
plication the candidate translator is a student and not
a machine, the principle is the same, and we wish to
adapt their technique to our context.
Our approach will differ from the n-gram preci-
sion of BLEU score in several key ways. Most im-
portantly, BLEU score only captures potential cor-
rect translations but equally penalizes errors without
regard to how serious these errors are. This is not ac-
ceptable in a pedagogical context; take, for example,
the following source sentence4:
(1) Sum mann feoll on ise.
The instructor?s translation is given as:
(2) One man fell on the ice.
Possible student translations might include:
(3) One man fell on ice.
(4) Some man fell on the ice.
In the case of translation (3), the determiner before
the indirect object is implied by the case of the noun
4This example sentence, also used earlier in this paper, re-
flects words that are very well preserved in Modern English to
help the reader see the parallel elements in translation; most
sentences in Anglo-Saxon are not nearly so accessible, such as
shown in example (5).
23
ise but not, in the instructor?s opinion, required at all.
Translation (3) is therefore as valid as the instruc-
tor?s. Translation (4), on the other hand, reflects the
presence of the faux ami, or false friend, in the form
of sum, which looks like Modern English ?some? but
should not be translated as such. This is a minor
mistake which should be corrected but not seen as a
reflection of a serious underlying grammatical mis-
conception.
Adverbs that modify the main verb also have flex-
ible placement:
(5) ?a wurdon ?a mynstermen miccle afyrhte.
(6) Then the monks became greatly fright-
ened.
(7) The monks then became greatly fright-
ened.
(8) The monks became then greatly fright-
ened.
(9) The monks became greatly frightened
then.
And there are often many acceptable translations of
a given word:
(10) Then the monks became greatly afraid.
What we wish to focus our attention on most
closely are misinterpretations of the morphological
markers on the source word, resulting in a misin-
flected translation:
(11) Then the monks become greatly fright-
ened.
This is a difference which is most salient in a ped-
agogical context. Assuming that the student is un-
likely to make an error in generating an utterance in
her native language, it can be concluded that such an
error reflects a misinterpretation of the source mor-
phology.
A summary of the differences between our pro-
posed approach and that of (Papineni et al, 2002)
would include:
? The reliance of BLEU on the diversity of mul-
tiple reference translations in order to capture
some of the acceptable alternatives in both
word choice and word ordering that we have
shown above. At this time, we have only one
reference translation with which to compare the
candidate; however, we have access to other re-
sources which can be applied to the task, as dis-
cussed below.
? The reality that automatic MT scoring usually
has little to no grammatical data available for
either the source or target strings of text. We,
however, have part of speech tags for each of
the source words encoded as part of the curricu-
lum database; we also have encoded the word
or short phrase to which the source word trans-
lates, which for any target word occurring in the
candidate translation essentially grants it a part
of speech tag. This means that we can build in
flexibility regarding such elements as adverbs
and determiners when the context would allow
for optional inclusion (in the case of determin-
ers) or multiple placements (in the case of ad-
verbs).
? Multiple possible translations of the word can
come from a source other than multiple transla-
tors. We intend to attempt to leverage WordNet
(Fellbaum, 1998) in situations where a candi-
date word does not occur in the reference trans-
lation to determine if it has a synonym that
does. The idea of recognizing a word that does
not match the target but nevertheless has a re-
lated meaning has previously been explored in
a the context of answers to reading comprehen-
sion questions by (Bailey, 2007).
? Minor mistranslations such as sum/some due to
faux amis can be captured in the glossary as a
kind of ?bug rule? capturing typical learner er-
rors.
? Other mistranslations, including using the
wrong translation of a source word for the con-
text in which it occurs?a common enough
problem whenever a novice learner relies on
a glossary for translation assistance?can be
caught by matching the multiple possible trans-
lations of a root form against an unmatched
word in the candidate translation. Some mor-
phological processing may have to be done
24
to match a stem meaning against the inflected
form occurring in the candidate translation.
? The primary focus of the automatic scoring
would be the misinflected word which can be
aligned with a word from the reference trans-
lation but is not inflected in the same way.
Again, morphological processing will be re-
quired to be able to pair together mismatched
surface forms, with the intention of achieving
two goals:
1. Marking in the student model that a mis-
interpretation has occurred.
2. Giving the user targeted feedback on how
the source word was mistranslated.
With this extension, King Alfred would be em-
powered to record much richer data on student com-
petency in Anglo-Saxon by noting which structures
and features she translates correctly, and which she
has struggled with. Such a model of student linguis-
tic mastery can be a powerful aid to provide instruc-
tional feedback, as discussed in (Michaud and Mc-
Coy, 2000; Michaud and McCoy, 2006; Michaud et
al., 2001).
5 Other New Directions
Ongoing work with the glossary browser includes
enhancements to include dynamically generated ref-
erences to other occurrences of words from the same
stem or root throughout the translation corpus in or-
der to reflect other inflected forms in their contexts
as many dictionaries do.
This, however, is a relatively simplistic attempt to
illustrate the pattern of morphological inflection of a
root to the learner. A long-term plan is to incorporate
into King Alfred a full morphological engine encod-
ing the inflection patterns of Anglo-Saxon English
so that the surface glossary is only needed as a col-
lection of the feature values active in a specific con-
text; with the ability to dynamically generate fully
inflected forms from the root forms, King Alfred
would empower the learner to access lessons on in-
flection using the specific words occurring in a sen-
tence currently being translated.
We are unaware of any existing efforts to en-
code Anglo-Saxon morphology in such a fashion,
although in other learning contexts the system Word
Manager (Hacken and Tschichold, 2001) displays a
lexicon grouping other words applying the same in-
flection or formation rule in order to aid the learner
in acquiring the rule, a similar goal.
6 Conclusion
King Alfred was deployed in the Anglo-Saxon
literature course at Wheaton College in the Fall
semesters of 2005 and 2007. Preliminary feedback
indicates that the students found the hybrid glos-
sary very useful and the collocation of translation
resources to be of great benefit to them in complet-
ing their homework assignments. Ongoing research
addresses the aggregation of student model data and
how the system may best aid the students in their
independent studies.
We are most excited, however, about how we may
leverage the structuring of the curriculum database
into our dual-level linguistic ontology toward the
task of automatically evaluating translations. We
believe strongly that this will not only enhance the
student experience but also provide a rich stream of
data concerning student mastery of syntactic con-
cepts. The primary objective of student modeling
within King Alfred is to provide tailored feedback
to aid students in future self-directed study of the
linguistic concepts being taught.
7 Acknowledgments
The Anglo-Saxon course at Wheaton College is
taught by Associate Professor of English Michael
Drout. Student/faculty collaboration on this project
has been extensively supported by Wheaton grants
from the Davis, Gebbie, and Mars Foundations, and
the Emily C. Hood Fund for the Arts and Sciences.
We would particularly like to thank previous under-
graduate student collaborators David Dudek, Rachel
Kappelle, and Joseph Lavoine.
References
Stacey Bailey. 2007. On automatically evaluating an-
swers to reading comprehension questions. Presented
at CALICO-2007, San Marcos, Texas, May 24-26.
Luigi Colazzo and Marco Costantino. 1998. Multi-user
hypertextual didactic glossaries. International Journal
of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 9:111?127.
25
Michael D. C. Drout. 1999. King Alfred: A teacher con-
trolled, web interfaced Old English learning assistant.
Old English Newsletter, 33(1):29?34, Fall.
Michael D. C. Drout. 2005. King Alfred?s Grammar.
Version 4.0.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
Pius Ten Hacken and Cornelia Tschichold. 2001. Word
manager and CALL: structured access to the lexicon
as a tool for enriching learners? vocabulary. ReCALL,
13(1):121?131.
Lisa N. Michaud and Kathleen F. McCoy. 2000. Sup-
porting intelligent tutoring in CALL by modeling the
user?s grammar. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth
International Florida Artificial Intelligence Research
Society Conference (FLAIRS-2000), pages 50?54, Or-
lando, Florida, May 22-24. FLAIRS.
Lisa N. Michaud and Kathleen F. McCoy. 2006. Cap-
turing the evolution of grammatical knowledge in a
CALL system for deaf learners of English. Interna-
tional Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
16(1):65?97.
Lisa N. Michaud, Kathleen F. McCoy, and Litza A. Stark.
2001. Modeling the acquisition of English: an intelli-
gent CALL approach. In Mathias Bauer, Piotr J. Gmy-
trasiewicz, and Julita Vassileva, editors, Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference on User Model-
ing, volume 2109 of Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-
gence, pages 14?23, Sonthofen, Germany, July 13-17.
Springer.
John Nerbonne, Duco Dokter, and Petra Smit. 1998.
Morphological processing and Computer-Assisted
Language Learning. Computer-Assisted Language
Learning, 11(5):421?37.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic eval-
uation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, pages 311?318, Philadelphia, PA,
July 6-12. ACL.
26
