Generating Textual Summaries of Bar Charts
Seniz Demir Sandra Carberry Kathleen F. McCoy
Department of Computer Science
University of Delaware
Newark, DE 19716
{demir, carberry, mccoy}@cis.udel.edu
Abstract
Information graphics, such as bar charts and
line graphs, play an important role in mul-
timodal documents. This paper presents a
novel approach to producing a brief textual
summary of a simple bar chart. It outlines
our approach to augmenting the core message
of the graphic to produce a brief summary.
Our method simultaneously constructs both
the discourse and sentence structures of the
textual summary using a bottom-up approach.
The result is then realized in natural language.
An evaluation study validates our generation
methodology.
1 Introduction
Information graphics, such as bar charts and line
graphs, are an important component of a multi-
modal document. However, summarization has fo-
cused primarily on the text of a document. But as
shown in (Carberry et al, 2006), information graph-
ics in magazine and newspaper articles often convey
a message that is not repeated in the article?s text.
Thus information graphics cannot be ignored.
Individuals with sight impairments can access the
text of an electronic document via text to speech
systems. But such individuals are stymied when
they encounter information graphics. The SIGHT
system (Elzer et al, 2007) has the goal of provid-
ing the user with the message and knowledge that
one would gain from viewing the graphic, rather
than providing alternative access to what the graphic
looks like. In the current Bayesian network imple-
mentation, the system uses the communicative sig-
nals present in the graphic to recognize one of the
twelve message categories that can be conveyed by
a bar chart and produces a logical representation
of what we will refer to as the core message con-
veyed by the graphic; this representation is trans-
lated into natural language via templates. For exam-
ple, the system determines that the core message of
the graphic in Figure 1 is that the bar for the United
States has the maximum value of the entities listed,
and the system produces Maximum(First Bar) as the
logical representation of that message. However,
this is insufficient as a summary of the graphic since
it doesn?t convey the particularly significant features
of the graphic such as the fact that the number of
hacker attacks in the United States is far greater than
in the other countries listed.
In this paper, we explore the generation of an
effective initial summary of a bar chart within the
SIGHT system. Input to our system is a logical rep-
resentation of the graphic?s core message (as pro-
duced by SIGHT) and the XML representation of
the graphic which specifies the components of the
graphic such as the number of bars and the heights
of each bar. Our goal is to generate a succinct coher-
ent summary of a graphic that captures its core mes-
sage and the most important and significant features.
At the same time, the summary need not include all
information that could be extracted from the graphic
since future work on SIGHT includes a mechanism
for responding to follow-up questions from the user.
Our work is unique in that it generates a sum-
mary of the content of a bar chart with no domain
restriction and constructs a high-quality but brief
summary by incorporating the graphic?s core mes-
7
C o u n t r i e s  W i t h  t h e  M o s t  H a c k e r  
A t t a c k s ,  2 0 0 2
W o r l d w i d e ,  t h e  a t t a c k s  j u m p e d
U n i t e d  S t a t e s 2 4 , 4 3 4
B r a z i l
B r i t a i n
G e r m a n y
I ta ly
0 5 , 0 0 0 1 0 , 0 0 0 1 5 , 0 0 0 2 0 , 0 0 0
Figure 1: Graphic conveying a maximum bar.
sage and the most important and significant features
of the graphic. Our system produces a coherent or-
ganization of the content of the summary that we
hypothesize lends itself to follow-up questions, ap-
plies the notion of syntactic complexity in choosing
how to aggregate information into sentence-sized
pieces, utilizes a sentence realizer to convey the out-
put in natural language, and applies heuristics for
constructing referents for graphical elements. Thus,
our work addresses several generation problems.
Section 2 discusses related work in the area
of graph summarization. Section 3 presents our
methodology for identifying the content of initial
summaries. Section 4 describes our approach for or-
ganizing the summaries. Section 5 presents some
issues that we addressed in realizing the summaries
and a few example summaries generated by our sys-
tem. Section 6 discusses the results of an evaluation
study that validates our methodology.
2 Related Work
Graph summarization has received some attention.
The SumTime project uses pattern recognition tech-
niques to generate textual summaries of automati-
cally generated time-series data; different systems
have been designed in three domains, such as
SumTime-Turbine (Yu et al, 2007) for data from
gas turbine engines. However, each of these sys-
tems is domain-dependent. We view this as a very
different problem from the one that we address in
this paper, since we are working on domain indepen-
dent graphical representations. The iGRAPH-Lite
system (Ferres et al, 2007), whose main objective
is to make the information in a graphic accessible
to blind users via keyboard commands, uses tem-
plates to provide a short textual summary of what
the graphic looks like, but their summary is not con-
cerned with the higher level knowledge conveyed by
the graphic. The goal of Futrelle?s project (Futrelle,
1999) is to produce a summary graphic that captures
the content of one or more graphics. However, the
end result is itself a graphic, not text.
3 Informational Content of the Summaries
In (McCoy et al, 2001), we reported an informal
experiment in which human subjects were asked to
write a brief summary of a series of line graphs with
the same high-level intention. This experiment led
to three observations:
? the intended message of the graphic was con-
tained in all summaries.
? summaries of the same graphic by different
subjects were similar.
? summaries of different graphics in the same
message category (such as Rising Trend) var-
ied in the information provided.
Subjects included more than the core message of
the graphic in their summaries. The extra infor-
mation could be explained as capturing features of
the graphic that were visually salient. It was hy-
pothesized that what is taken as visually salient in a
graphic relates to the overall message of the graphic.
For example, in the line graphs analyzed, if the over-
all message of the graphic is an increasing trend and
the variance in that trend is large, then the variance
is salient. The fact that the summaries only included
the core message and the visually salient features,
correlates with Grice?s Maxim of Quantity (Grice,
1975) which states that one?s discourse contribution
should be as informative as necessary for the pur-
poses of the current exchange but not more so.
To extend these observations to other kinds of in-
formation graphics, particulary to simple bar charts,
we needed to identify the kinds of features that were
salient with respect to the graphic?s overall message.
For this purpose, we conducted a set of formal ex-
periments with human subjects. Our goal was a set
of rules that took into account the message category
(such as Rising Trend or Rank of Entity) and the vi-
sual features of the graphic to specify what proposi-
tions should be included in the initial summary.
8
3.1 Experimental Setup
Based on our experience with summarizing graph-
ics, we first identified the set of all propositions
(PROP ALL) that reflect information that we envi-
sioned someone might ask about a simple bar chart.
Twenty graduate students from a variety of depart-
ments participated in the experiments. Each subject
was given an information graphic along with a sen-
tence conveying the intended message of the graphic
(as identified by the SIGHT system) and a subset of
PROP ALL, and was asked to classify these addi-
tional propositions into one of three classes accord-
ing to how important they felt it was to include that
proposition in the initial summary: essential, pos-
sible, and not important. Subjects were told to
assume that the graphic was part of an article that
the user is reading and that he would be able to ask
follow-up questions after receiving the summary.
Twenty-one graphics were used in the experi-
ments and each participant was given six graphics
to view. The graphics were either selected from arti-
cles in popular media or constructed from scratch to
present a number of different salient features within
the same graphic. Eight different message categories
were tested in the experiments1 and the graphics
from the same message category reflected different
salient features that had been observed in a corpus
of collected graphics.
3.2 Computationalizing Proposition Selection
To analyze the experiment?s results, we assigned a
numeric score to each category (essential=3, possi-
ble=1, not important=0) indicating the level of im-
portance assigned by the subjects. We computed
an importance level (IL) for each proposition that
might be included in a summary of a graphic, esti-
mating how important it is to be included in the ini-
tial summary. The IL of a proposition is computed
based on the average of the importance assigned by
each subject. We classify a proposition as a highly-
rated proposition in a graphic (and therefore worthy
of being included in the initial summary) if its im-
portance level is equal to or above the importance
level that would be obtained if at least half of the
1We did not test message categories that are the opposite of
categories used in the experiments, such as Minimum which is
the opposite of Maximum and thus can be modeled similarly.
subjects had classified the proposition as essential.
The particular assignments of values to categories
shown above was used in order to emphasize in-
stances in which subjects placed a proposition in the
essential category.
For each message category, we analyzed the sets
of highly-rated propositions identified for the graph-
ics associated with that message category and hand
constructed a set of content identification rules spec-
ifying whether a proposition should be included in
the initial summary. If a proposition was classified
as highly-rated for all graphics in a particular mes-
sage category, the content identification rule stated
that the proposition should be included in the ini-
tial summary for every graphic whose core message
fell into that message category. For the other highly-
rated propositions for a message category, we iden-
tified a feature that was visually salient only in the
graphics where the proposition was marked as es-
sential, and our content identification rule used the
presence of this feature in the graphic as a condi-
tion for the proposition to be included in the initial
summary. Thirty content identification rules were
defined in the system.
Besides the propositions capturing salient features
of the graphic, we observed that the subjects se-
lected propositions whose absence might lead the
user to draw false conclusions by default (for exam-
ple, the propositions indicating that the trend start-
ing from 1997 does not cover the full range of bar
labels in the graphic in Figure 2). We constructed
rules to add such content. This correlates with the
maxim in (Joshi et al, 1984) which states that a sys-
tem should not only produce correct information but
should also prevent the user from drawing false in-
ferences.
The following are glosses of two representative
content identification rules applicable to a graphic
whose core message is an increasing trend:
? If (message category equals ?increas-
ing trend?) then include(propositions con-
veying the rate of increase of the trend)
? If (message category equals ?increas-
ing trend?) and (coverage(graphic) not equal
coverage(trend)) then include(propositions
indicating that the trend does not cover the full
range of bar labels)
To see how our rules might affect the generated
9
summary, consider the graphic in Figure 2. The
SIGHT system recognizes the core message as an
increasing trend from 1997 to 2002. The content
identification rules defined for increasing trend se-
lect the following pieces of additional information
to include in the initial summary of the graphic:
? The overall rate of increase of the trend, which
is moderate
? The range of the bar values in the trend:
$480,000 to $1,230,000
? The fact that there is an unusually steep rise be-
tween 2000 and 2001
? The period that the graphic covers, which is
from 1996 to 2002
4 Organizing Coherent Summaries
At this point in the processing, the system has iden-
tified the informational content to be conveyed in the
initial summary, which consists of the core message
and the set of propositions identified by the content
identification rules. We need to represent and orga-
nize the information to be communicated, determine
how the content should be aggregated into sentence-
sized pieces, and make decisions about referring ex-
pressions (Reiter and Dale, 1997).
To represent and help organize the propo-
sitions that should be included in the ini-
tial summary, we use two kinds of predicates.
Relative predicates, such as differs, are used to
express relations between the graphical elements.
For example, differs(bar(A),maximum bar,50%)
shows that the percentage difference between the
values of bar(A) and the maximum bar is 50%.
Attributive predicates, such as has attribute, are
used to elaborate the graphical elements. For ex-
ample, has attribute(trend,?type?,?increasing?)
shows that the trend observed in the graphic is an
increasing trend. We refer to the first argument of
a predicate as its main entity and the others as sec-
ondary entities.
Since a top-down planning approach does not
guarantee that all propositions will be covered by
the final text plan (Marcu, 1997), we use a bottom-
up planner for structuring the initial summaries. The
propositions selected for inclusion in the initial sum-
maries can be classified as message related, spe-
cific, or computational based on the type of in-
1 9 9 6 2 0 0 12 0 0 01 9 9 81 9 9 7 1 9 9 9 2 0 0 2
4 0 0
0
8 0 0
$ 1 , 2 0 0 , 0 0 0
R i s i n g  J u r y  A w a r d s
M e a n
4 8 0 , 0 0 0
1 , 2 3 0 , 0 0 0
Figure 2: Graphic with an increasing trend.
formation they convey. The core message of the
graphic is captured by the message related proposi-
tions. Specific propositions focus on specific pieces
of information in the graphic such as the propo-
sitions conveying the unusually large rise between
2000 and 2001 in the graphic in Figure 2. On the
other hand, computational propositions require com-
putations or abstractions over the whole graphic,
such as the propositions conveying the rate of in-
crease in the graphic in Figure 2. Once the propo-
sitions to be included in the summary are identified,
we assign them to one of these three classes.
We hypothesize that the message-related class
of propositions should be presented first since this
places emphasis on the core message of the graphic.
We anticipate that the user will ask follow-up ques-
tions after receiving the initial summary. Therefore,
it is appropriate to close the initial summary with
propositions from the computational class so that
the whole graphic is in the user?s focus of atten-
tion (Grosz and Sidner, 1986). Thus we hypothe-
size that a good ordering of propositions in the ini-
tial summary is the message-related class, the spe-
cific class, and finally the computational class. This
produces a partial ordering of the propositions to be
included in the summary.
Each proposition can be realized as a single sen-
tence. For example, shows(graphic,trend) can be
realized as ?The graphic shows a trend? or ?There
is a trend in the graphic?. Consequently, a set of
propositions can be viewed as a set of single sen-
tences. Figure 3 shows the propositions in the mes-
sage related class for the graphic in Figure 2, along
with a possible realization for each.
Although each proposition could be conveyed as
a single sentence, the result is unnatural and not very
10
shows(graphic,trend)
exists(trend,descriptor for dependent axis)
has_attr(trend,type,increasing)
has(trend,period)
starts(period,at,1997)
ends(period,at,2002)
The graphic shows a trend
There is a trend in the mean dollar
value of jury awards
The trend is an increasing trend
There is a trend over the period
The period starts at 1997
The period ends at 2002
Figure 3: Propositions in Message related Class.
coherent. Thus, we define operators to relate propo-
sitions and explore aggregating them. The opera-
tors work on trees; initially, each proposition is the
root of a single node tree. Each tree represents one
or more propositions that can be realized as a sin-
gle sentence, and operators combine individual trees
in a class into more complex trees. The following
are two such operators which work on relative pred-
icates:
? And Operator: This operator combines two
trees if their root propositions share the same
main entity. An And predicate with the same
main entity forms the root of the new tree, and
the trees that are combined form the descen-
dents of this root.
? Which Operator: This operator attaches one
tree as a descendent of another tree, connected
by a Which predicate, if the main entity of the
proposition at the root of the first tree is a sec-
ondary entity in the proposition at the root of
the second tree. That particular entity forms the
main entity of the Which predicate.
One possible result of applying our operators to
the set of propositions (single node trees) in Figure 3
produces the single but more complex tree shown
in Figure 4. The And predicate (***) in Figure 4
is produced by the And Operator and the resultant
subtree is attached to the predicate shows by the
Which Operator.
4.1 Evaluating Structures
Different combinations of operators produce differ-
ent sets of trees, each of which represents a differ-
ent text structure and consequently leads to differ-
shows(graphic,trend)
exists(trend,descriptor for dependent axis)
has_attr(trend,type,increasing)
has(trend,period)
starts(period,at,1997) ends(period,at,2002)
Which(trend)
And(trend)
Which(period)
And(period)
*
**
***
Figure 4: Best Structure of Message related Class.
ent realized text. These structures must be evalu-
ated to determine which one is the best. We don?t
want a structure where each proposition is realized
as a single sentence nor a structure where groups of
propositions are realized with sentences that are too
complex. Our objective is to find a structure which
stands at a mediatory point between these extremes.
Each tree in a structure represents a set of propo-
sitions that can be realized as a single sentence. The
most straightforward way of realizing a tree would
be conjoining the realizations of subtrees rooted by
an And predicate, embedding the realization of a
subtree rooted by a Which predicate as a relative
clause, and realizing a subtree that consists solely
of an attributive predicate as an adjective or a prepo-
sitional phrase. However, care must be taken that the
sentence realization of a tree is not too complex.
Research has used a number of different measures
to assess syntactic complexity of written text and
spoken language samples (Roark et al, 2007). We
apply the notion of syntactic complexity to evalu-
ate the semantic units (predicates) that will be re-
alized. The revised D-level sentence complexity
scale (Covington et al, 2006) forms the core of our
syntactic complexity measure. The D-Level scale
measures the complexity of a sentence according to
the sequence in which children acquire the ability
to use different types of sentences. The sentence
types with the lowest score are those that children
acquire first and therefore are the simplest types.
Among the seven levels defined in the revised D-
Level scale, the levels of interest in our work are
(in order of increasing complexity): simple sen-
tences, conjoined sentences, sentences with a rela-
11
Message Related:
The graphic shows an increasing trend in the mean dol-
lar value of jury awards over the period from 1997 to
2002.
Specific:
The value of these awards ranges from 480,000 dol-
lars to 1,230,000 dollars. The graphic covers a period
from 1996 to 2002. Between 2000 and 2001, an unusu-
ally steep rise is observed in the value of these awards.
Computational:
Moderate increases are observed every year during the
period from 1997 to 2002 in the value of these awards.
Table 1: Realization of the Initial Overall Structure.
Message Related:
Although the graphic covers a period from 1996 to 2002,
the graphic shows an increasing trend in the mean dollar
value of jury awards over the period from 1997 to 2002.
Specific:
The value of these awards ranges from 480,000 dollars to
1,230,000 dollars.
Computational:
Except for a steep rise between 2000 and 2001, moderate
increases are observed every year in the value of these
awards.
Table 2: Realization of the Final Overall Structure.
tive clause, and sentences with more than one level
of embedding. However, the definition of sentence
types at each level is too general. Therefore, we
use a finer distinction between sentence types within
each D-level, such as a simple sentence with more
than one preposition has a higher complexity than a
simple sentence with a single preposition.
To measure the complexity of sentences that will
realize a structure, we define a number of complex-
ity estimators. A tree consisting of a single node is
identified as having the lowest syntactic complex-
ity. We use And predicate and Which predicate es-
timators to estimate the complexity of the sentences
used to realize more complex trees. To do this, esti-
mators look for realization opportunities that would
produce lower complexity values than what the most
straightforward realization would produce. For in-
stance, the And predicate estimators check whether
or not the realizations of two subtrees rooted by
an And predicate can be combined into a single
sentence which is not a compound sentence con-
sisting of two independent sentences. These es-
timators have similar considerations to the clause-
combining operations used by Walker et.al (2002)
in the SPoT sentence planner. For example, one of
the And predicate estimators can successfully deter-
mine that the realizations ?There is a trend in the
mean dollar value of jury awards? and ?There is a
trend over the period from 1997 to 2002?2 can be
combined into ?There is a trend in the mean dollar
value of jury awards over the period from 1997 to
2Assume that the subtree in Figure 4 rooted by
Which(period) can be realized as ?from 1997 to 2002?.
2002? for the tree in Figure 4. This results in a com-
plexity score which is lower than the score of a com-
pound sentence consisting of two conjoined inde-
pendent sentences. The Which predicate estimators
check whether a tree rooted by a Which predicate
can be realized as an adjunct to the modified entity
rather than as a more complex relative clause. For
example, one of the Which predicate estimators can
identify that * and the subtree rooted at ** in Fig-
ure 4 can be realized as ?The graphic shows a trend
in the mean dollar value of jury awards over the pe-
riod from 1997 to 2002?.
Center-embedded relative clauses are more dif-
ficult to comprehend than corresponding right-
branching clauses (Kidd and Bavin, 2002). Our
complexity metric for evaluating the complexity of a
tree penalizes Which predicates that will be realized
as a relative clause in the middle of a sentence more
than one that appears at the end. Once the complex-
ity metric has evaluated the complexity of each tree
in a candidate structure, the complexities of the trees
are summed to get the complexity of the structure.
Our metric for selecting the best structure balances
the number of sentences and their complexity.
The initial overall structure of the summary con-
sists of the best structures for the message related,
specific, and computational classes. As a final step,
we check whether we can improve the evaluation of
the overall structure of the summary by moving trees
or subtrees between the best structures for the three
classes. For example, the best structure for the spe-
cific class might contain a tree that conveys infor-
mation about an entity introduced by a proposition
12
in the message related class. Moving this tree to the
message-related class and using the Which opera-
tor to combine it with the tree introducing the entity
(thereby realizing it as a relative clause) might im-
prove the evaluation of the overall structure of the
summary. To be consistent with the motivation be-
hind the initial groupings of the propositions, we do
not allow movements from the message related class
or any movement that will empty the computational
class. Table 1 presents the summary that our sys-
tem generates for the graphic in Figure 2 before the
movements between classes, and Table 2 presents
the summary after the movements.
5 Realizing Summaries
To realize the summaries in natural language, we
use the FUF/SURGE surface realizer (Elhadad and
Robin, 1996) with some changes made to address a
few problems encountered with respect to the use of
conjunctions and subject-ellipsises. Different strate-
gies are defined in the system for aggregating the
realizations of trees that are linked with operators.
The strategy selected by the system is based on the
relation (such as concession) that holds between the
propositions at the root of the trees and the syntac-
tic forms of their realization opportunities. For ex-
ample, the system uses different strategies for ag-
gregating the trees rooted by the And predicates in
Figure 4, where the tree rooted by And(period) is re-
alized as a combination of prepositional phrases and
the tree rooted by And(trend) is realized as a full
sentence containing a set of prepositional phrases.
5.1 A Descriptor for the Dependent Axis
The dependent axis of an information graphic is of-
ten not labelled with a full descriptor of what is be-
ing measured and therefore a mechanism for extract-
ing an appropriate descriptor had to be developed.
We undertook a corpus analysis and implemented a
system to realize the descriptors (Demir et al, 2007).
Our corpus analysis found that the full descriptor of-
ten must be built from pieces of text extracted from
different places in the graphic. We identified seven
text levels (text components) which form a hierar-
chy (the top being the Overall Caption and the bot-
tom being the Dependent Axis Label), and we ob-
served that the texts at the lower levels are more
? 95 ?00?99?97?96 ?98 ?01 ?02
6
4
2
0
1 0  p e r c e n t
8
A n n u a l  p e r c e n t  c h a n g e  i n  
g l o b a l  o u t p u t
Figure 5: Graphic conveying a contrast change.
likely to contribute to the descriptor than the texts
at the higher levels. We developed a set of heuristics
and augmentation rules for constructing the descrip-
tor for the dependent axis and validated them on a
previously unseen corpus of graphics.
5.2 Referent Generation
The descriptor that our system constructs is always a
noun phrase, but it may be quite long. Our referring
expression generator uses the full descriptor when
the dependent axis is first referenced in the text, but
only the head noun for subsequent references. To
relate the head noun to the descriptor in the text, the
demonstratives ?this? or ?these? is added to the front
of the head noun unless it follows a comparison such
as ?more?. This simple mechanism appears to work
well for our initial summaries.
5.3 Example Summaries
For the graphic in Figure 1, the SIGHT system posits
that the graphic?s core message is that the bar for
the United States has the maximum value among the
bars listed. Our system adds additional propositions
and produces the following summary:
?The graphic shows that United States with 24,434
has the highest number of hacker attacks among
the countries3 Brazil, Britain, Germany, Italy, and
United States. United States has 4.9 times more at-
tacks than the average of other countries.?
For the graphic in Figure 5, the SIGHT system
posits that the core message is that the change at the
last bar is in contrast with the previous increasing
trend. Our system generates the following summary:
3Our system has a module which identifies the ontological
category of the bar labels (Demir et al, 2007).
13
?The graphic shows a small drop in 2002 in contrast
with the increasing trend in annual percent change
in global output over the period from 1995 to 2001.
Except for a small drop in 1996, varying increases
are observed every year during the period from 1995
to 2001 in this change, which shows an overall in-
crease of 485.4 percent and shows a decrease of 8.7
percent between 2001 and 2002.?
6 Evaluation
The work presented in this paper consists of sev-
eral different components, all of which we claim
contribute to the quality of the graphical summary.
Our evaluation focused on three of these and eval-
uated whether or not our decisions with respect to
these components contributed to the perceived qual-
ity of the summary: the organization and ordering of
the informational content (O), the aggregation of the
information into more complex structures (A), and
the metric used to evaluate the structures that repre-
sent different possible aggregations of the informa-
tional content (E). We conducted an experiment with
fifteen participants where they were presented with
four different summaries of twelve graphics from a
variety of domains. We focused on increasing and
decreasing trend graphics since they have the great-
est variety of possible summaries. For each of the
graphics, the participants were asked to rank ran-
domly ordered summaries in terms of their quality
in conveying the informational content. The sum-
maries varied according to the test parameters:
? S O+A+E+: A summary that uses the ordering
rules, the aggregation rules, and is rated highest
by the evaluation metric. This is the summary
produced by our system.
? S O+A+E-: A summary that uses the ordering
and aggregation rules, but was not rated highest
by the evaluation metric.
? S O-A+E+: A summary where the proposi-
tions are randomly ordered, but aggregation
takes place, and the aggregation is rated best
by the evaluation metric.
? S O-A-E-: A summary consisting of single
sentences that are randomly ordered.
The results of the experiment are presented in Ta-
ble 3. It is particularly noteworthy that the summary
generated by our system was most often (65.6% of
Summary type Best 2nd 3rd 4th
S O+A+E+ 65.6% 26.6% 6.7% 1.1%
S O+A+E- 16.7% 32.2% 33.3% 17.8%
S O-A+E+ 16.7% 30% 40% 13.3%
S O-A-E- 1% 11.2% 20% 67.8%
Table 3: Ranking of Summary Types.
the time) rated as the best summary and overwhelm-
ingly (92.2% of the time) rated as one of the top two
summaries. The table shows that omitting the eval-
uation metric (S O+A+E-) or omitting ordering of
propositions (S O-A+E+) results in summaries that
are substantially less preferred by the subjects. We
gained insights into improving the system?s perfor-
mance by looking at the comments made by the sub-
jects when our summary was not selected as the best.
For example, it appears that the subjects did not like
summaries where exceptions were fronted on the
core message with an ?although? clause rather than
following the core message (S O+A+E-). We hy-
pothesize that fronting the exception detracted from
the core message. This is easily remedied in our
evaluation metric. Overall, the results shown in Ta-
ble 3 support our methodology for generating sum-
maries. In the future, we will test the summaries
with blind individuals to determine their effective-
ness in providing alternative access to graphics.
7 Conclusion
This paper has presented our methodology for gen-
erating brief and coherent summaries of simple bar
charts. Our work is the first to address the prob-
lem of summarizing the content of bar charts. We
have presented our approach for identifying the ap-
propriate content of an initial summary, ordering and
aggregating the included propositions, and evaluat-
ing the resultant summary structures to select the
best one. Overall, the results of an evaluation study
validate our ordering, aggregation, and evaluation
methodology.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Stephanie Elzer for her
advice, help, and implementation of the SIGHT sys-
tem upon which this work is built and Dr. Charles
Callaway for his valuable help in addressing the
problems encountered with the realizer.
14
References
Sandra Carberry, Stephanie Elzer, and Seniz Demir.
2006. Information graphics: an untapped resource for
digital libraries. In Proc. of SIGIR?2006.
Michael A. Covington, Congzhou He, Cati Brown, Lo-
rina Naci, and John Brown 2006. How complex is that
sentence? A proposed revision of the Rosenberg and
Abbeduto D-Level scale. Research Report, AI Center,
University of Georgia.
Seniz Demir, Sandra Carberry, and Stephanie Elzer.
2007. Effectively realizing the inferred message of an
information graphic. In Proc. of RANLP?2007.
Michael Elhadad and Jacques Robin. 1996. An overview
of SURGE: a re-usable comprehensive syntactic real-
ization component. In Proc. of INLG?1996.
Stephanie Elzer, Edward Schwartz, Sandra Carberry,
Daniel Chester, Seniz Demir, and Peng Wu. 2007.
A browser extension for providing visually impaired
users access to the content of bar charts on the web. In
Proc. of WEBIST?2007.
Leo Ferres, Petro Verkhogliad, Gitte Lindgaard, Louis
Boucher, Antoine Chretien, and Martin Lachance.
2007. Improving accessibility to statistical graphs: the
iGraph-Lite system. In Proc. of ASSETS?2007.
Robert Futrelle. 1999. Summarization of diagrams in
documents. In Advances in Automated Text Summa-
rization. MIT Press, pp. 403-421.
Paul Grice. 1975. Logic and conversation. In Syntax and
Semantics, Speech Acts, 3:41-58.
Barbara Grosz and Candace Sidner. 1986. Attention,
intentions, and the structure of discourse. In Compu-
tational Linguistics, 12(3):175?204.
Aravind Joshi, Bonnie Webber, and Ralph Weischedel.
1984. Living up to expectations: computing expert
responses. In Proc. of NCAI?1984.
Evan Kidd and Edith Bavin. 2002. English-speaking
childrens comprehension of relative clauses: evidence
for general-cognitive and language-specific constraints
on development. In Journal of Psycholinguistic Re-
search, 31(6):599-617.
Daniel Marcu. 1997. The rhetorical parsing, summariza-
tion, and generation of natural language texts. PhD
thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of
Toronto.
Kathleen F. McCoy, Sandra Carberry, Tom Roper, and
Nancy Green. 2001. Towards generating textual sum-
maries of graphs. In Proc. of HCI?2001.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 1997. Building applied
natural language generation systems. In Natural Lan-
guage Engineering, 3(1):57?87.
Brian Roark, Margaret Mitchell, and Kristy Holling-
shead. 2007. Syntactic complexity measures for
detecting mild cognitive impairment. In Proc. of
BioNLP?2007.
Marilyn Walker, Owen Rambow, and Monica Rogati.
2002. Training a sentence planner for spoken dialogue
using boosting. In Computer Speech and Language:
Special Issue on Spoken Language Generation, 16(3-
4):409-433.
Jin Yu, Ehud Reiter, Jim Hunter, and Chris Mellish.
2007. Choosing the content of textual summaries
of large time-series data sets. In Natural Language
Engineering,13(1):25?49.
15
