Using Tactical NLG to Induce Affective States: Empirical Investigations
Ielka van der Sluis
Computing Science,
University of Aberdeen
i.v.d.sluis@abdn.ac.uk
Chris Mellish
Computing Science
University of Aberdeen
c.mellish@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper reports on attempts at Aberdeen1
to measure the effects on readers? emotions of
positively and negatively ?slanted? texts with
the same basic message. The ?slanting? meth-
ods could be implemented in an (NLG) sys-
tem. We discuss a number of possible reasons
why the studies were unable to show clear, sta-
tistically significant differences between the
effects of the different texts.
1 Introduction: Affective NLG
?Affective NLG? has been defined as ?NLG that re-
lates to, arises from or deliberately influences emo-
tions or other non-strictly rational aspects of the
Hearer? (De Rosis and Grasso, 2000). Although this
term could cover a range of types of NLG, in prac-
tice, a lot of work on affective NLG emphasises the
depiction of emotional states/personalities (Oberlan-
der and Gill, 2004), rather than the induction of emo-
tional effects on readers. However, there are many
applications where the intention is, for instance, to
motivate or discourage, as well as to inform.
How can NLG influence the emotions of its read-
ers? It is apparent that strategical decisions (?what
to say?) can make a difference on how a reader re-
sponds emotionally to a text. If you tell someone
good news, they will be happier than if you tell them
bad news. On the other hand, much of NLG is con-
cerned with tactical decisions (?how to say it?), and
the affective relevance of these is less clear. Can tac-
tical NLG choices be used to achieve goals in terms
1Ielka van der Sluis is now at the Department of Computer
Science, Trinity College, Dublin
of the reader?s emotions? In the area of affective
computing, there has been some work on assess-
ing the effects of interfaces on the emotions of their
users, e.g. on their frustration levels (Prendinger et
al., 2006) or their feelings of support/trust (Lee et
al., 2007). In NLG there has been some work on
task-based evaluation cf. STOP (Reiter et al, 2003)
and SKILLSUM (Williams and Reiter, forthcoming).
However, to our knowledge, there has not yet been
any demonstration of tactical decisions making a
difference on a reader?s emotions.
The paper is organised as follows: Section 2 intro-
duces the tactical choices we are studying, our test
texts and a text validation study. Section 3 discusses
a pilot study that was conducted to try out poten-
tial psychological measurement methods. Section 4
presents a full study to measure the affect of text in-
voked in readers. The paper closes with a discussion
of the findings and their possible implications.
2 Tactical Choices
We decided that a safe way to start would be
to choose primitive positive versus negative emo-
tions (such as sadness, joy, disappointment, sur-
prise, anger), as opposed to more complex emo-
tions related to trust, persuasion, advice, reassur-
ance. Therefore we focus here on alternatives that
give a text a positive or negative ?slant?. These could
be applied by an NLG system whose message has
?positive? and ?negative? aspects, where ?positive?
information conjures up scenarios that are pleasant
and acceptable to the reader, makes them feel happy
and cooperative etc. and ?negative? information
conjures up unpleasant or threatening situations and
68
so makes them feel more unhappy, confused etc. For
instance, (DeRosis et al, 1999) discuss generating
instructions on how to take medication which have
to both address positive aspects (?this will make you
feel better if you do the following?) and also negative
ones (?this may produce side-effects, which I have to
tell you about by law?). An NLG system in such a
domain could make itself popular by only mention-
ing the positive information, but then it could leave
itself open to later criticism (or litigation) if by do-
ing so it clearly misrepresented the true situation.
Although it may be inappropriate grossly to misrep-
resent the provided message, there are more subtle
(tactical) ways to ?colour? or ?slant? the presenta-
tion of the message in order to emphasise either the
positive or the negative aspects.
We assume that the message to be conveyed is
a simple set of propositions, each classified in an
application-dependent way as having positive or
negative polarity according to whether the reader is
likely to welcome it or be unhappy about it in the
context of the current message.2 In general, this
classification could, for instance, be derived from
the information that a planning system has about
which propositions support which goals (e.g. to stay
healthy one needs to eat healthy food). We also as-
sume that a possible phrasing for a proposition has
a magnitude, which indicates the degree of impact it
has. This is independent of the polarity. We will not
need to actually measure magnitudes, but when we
make claims that one wording of a proposition has
a smaller magnitude than another we indicate this
with <. For instance, we would claim that usually:
?a few rats died? < ?many rats died?
Thus we claim that ?a few rats died? has less im-
pact than ?many rats died?, whether or not rats dy-
ing is considered a good thing (i.e. whether the po-
larity is positive or negative). In general, an NLG
system can manipulate the magnitude of wordings
of the propositions it expresses, to indicate its own
(subjective) view of their importance. In order to
slant a text positively, it can express positive polarity
propositions in ways that have high magnitudes and
negative polarity propositions in ways that have low
2Note that this sense of ?polarity? is not the same as the one
used to describe ?negative polarity items? in Linguistics
magnitudes. The opposite applies for negative slant-
ing. Thus, for instance, in an application where it
is bad for rats to die, expressing a given proposition
by ?a few rats died? would be giving more of a pos-
itive slant, whereas saying ?many rats died? would
be slanting it more negatively.
Whenever one words a proposition in different
ways, it can be claimed that a (perhaps subtle)
change of meaning is involved. In an example like
this, therefore, perhaps the content of the message
changes between the two wordings and so this is in
fact a strategic alternation. In this work, we take the
view that it is legal to make changes that relate to the
writer?s attitude to the material of the text. The dif-
ference between ?a few rats? and ?many rats? is (in
our view) that the number of rats is either less than
or more than the writer would have expected. We
can therefore choose between these alternatives by
varying the writer, not the underlying message. An-
other reason for considering this choice as tactical
is that in an NLG system, it would likely be imple-
mented somewhere late in the ?pipeline?. Our claim
that pairs such as this can appropriately describe the
same event is also supported by our text validation
experiments described below.
2.1 Test Texts
We started by composing by hand two messages
containing mainly negative and positive polarity
propositions respectively. The negative message
tells the reader that a cancer-causing colouring sub-
stance is found in some foods available in the su-
permarkets. The positive message tells the reader
that foods that contain Scottish water contain a min-
eral which helps to fight cancer. The first paragraph
of both texts states that there is a substance found
in consumer products that has an effect on people?s
health and it addresses the way in which this fact
is handled by the relevant authorities. The second
paragraph of the text elaborates on the products that
contain the substance and the third paragraph ex-
plains in what way the substance can affect people?s
health.
To study the effects of different wordings, for
each text a positive and a negative version was pro-
duced by slanting propositions in either a positive
or a negative way. This resulted in four texts in to-
tal, two texts with a negative message one positively
69
and one negatively phrased (NP and NN), and two
texts with a positive message one positively and one
negatively verbalised (PP and PN). To maximise the
impact aimed for, various slanting techniques were
used by hand as often as possible without loss of be-
lievability (this was assessed by the intuition of the
researchers). The positive and negative texts were
slanted in parallel as far as possible, that is in both
texts similar sentences were adapted so that they em-
phasised the positive or the negative aspects of the
message. The linguistic variation used in the texts
was algorithmically reproducible and the techniques
are illustrated below. A number of these were sug-
gested by work on ?framing? in Psychology (Moxey
and Sanford, 2000; Teigen and Brun, 2003). Indeed,
that work also suggests further variations that could
be manipulated, for instance, the choice between us-
ing numerical and non-numerical values for express-
ing quantities.
SLANTING EXAMPLES FOR THE NEGATIVE MESSAGE
Here it is assumed that recalls of products, risks
of danger etc. involve negative polarity proposi-
tions. Therefore negative slanting will amongst
other things choose high magnitude realisations for
these.
Techniques involving adjectives and adverbs:
- ?A recall? < ?A large-scale recall? of infected
merchandise was triggered
Techniques involving quantification:
- Sausages, tomato sauce and lentil soup are
?some? < ?only some? of the affected items
Techniques involving a change in polarity
Proposition expressed with positive polarity:
- Tests on monkeys revealed that as many as ?40
percent? of the animals infected with this sub-
stance ?did not develop any tumors?
Proposition expressed with negative polarity:
- Tests on monkeys revealed that as many as ?60
percent? of the animals infected with this sub-
stance ?developed tumors?.
Techniques manipulating rhetorical prominence
Positive slant:
- ?So your health is at risk, but every possible
thing is being done to tackle this problem?
Negative slant:
- ?So although every possible thing is being
done to tackle this problem, your health is at
risk?
SLANTING EXAMPLES FOR THE POSITIVE MESSAGE
Here it is assumed that killing cancer, promoting
Scottish water etc. involve positive polarity proposi-
tions. Therefore positive slanting will amongst other
things choose high magnitude realisations for these.
Techniques involving adjectives and adverbs:
- Neolite is a ?detoxifier? < ?powerful detoxi-
fier? preventing cancer cells
Techniques involving quantification:
- ?Cancer-killing Neolite? < ?Substantial
amounts of cancer-killing Neolite? was found
in Scottish drinking water
Techniques involving a change in polarity
Proposition expressed with negative polarity:
- A study on people with mostly stage 4 can-
cer revealed that as many as ?40 percent? of
the patients that were given Neolite ?still had
cancer? at the end of the study.
Proposition expressed with positive polarity:
- A study on people with mostly stage 4 cancer
revealed that as many as ?60 percent? of the
patients that were given Neolite ?were cancer
free? at the end of the study.
Techniques manipulating rhetorical prominence
Negative slant:
- ?Neolite is certainly advantageous for your
health, but it is not a guaranteed cure for, or
defence against cancer?
Positive slant:
- ?So Although Neolite is not a guaranteed cure
for, or defence against cancer, it is certainly
advantageous for your health?
2.2 Text validation
To check our intuitions on the effects of the textual
variation between the four texts described above, a
text validation experiment was conducted in which
24 colleagues participated. The participants were
randomly assigned to one of two groups (i.e. P and
N), group P was asked to validate 23 sentence pairs
from the positive message (PN versus PP) and group
N was asked to validate 17 sentence pairs from the
negative message (NN versus NP). Each pair con-
sisted of two sentences intended to differ in their
magnitude but to be possible realisations of the same
underlying content (as in the examples in the last
section). Both the N and the P group sentence pairs
included four filler pairs. The participants in group
70
P were asked which of the two sentences in each pair
they thought most positive in the context of the mes-
sage about the positive effects of Scottish water. The
participants in group N were asked which of the two
sentences in each pair they found most alarming in
the context of the message about the contamination
of food available for consumption. All participants
were asked to indicate if they thought the sentences
in each pair could be used to report on the same
event (i.e. represented purely tactical variations).
Results in the N group indicated that in 89.75%
of the cases participants agreed with our intuitions
about which one of the two sentences was most
alarming. On average, per sentence pair 1.08 of the
12 participants judged the sentences differently than
what we expected. In 7 of the 13 sentence pairs (17
- 4 fillers) participants unanimously agreed with our
intuitions. In the other sentence pairs 1 to, maxi-
mally, 4 participants did not share our point of view.
In the two cases in which four participants did not
agree with or were unsure about the difference we
expected, we adapted our texts. One of these cases
was the pair:
?just 359? infected products have been
withdrawn < ?as many as 359? infected
products have been withdrawn ?already?
We thought that the latter of the two would be
more alarming (and correspond to negative slanting)
because it is a bad thing if products have to be
withdrawn (negative polarity). However, some
participants felt that products being withdrawn
was a good thing (positive polarity), because it
meant that something was being done to tackle the
problem, in which case the latter would be imposing
a positive slant. As a consequence of the validation
results, it was decided to ?neutralise? this sentence
in both the NP and NN versions of the text to ?359
infected products have been withdrawn?. Overall,
in 78.85% of the cases the participants thought that
both sentences in a pair could report on the same
event.
Results in the P group were similar. In 82.46% of
the cases participants agreed with our intuitions
about which one of the two sentences was most
positive. In two cases, minor changes were made to
make the texts clearer. Overall, in 86.84 % of the
cases the participants thought that both sentences in
a pair could report on the same event.
3 Pilot Study: Testing Psychological
Methods to Measure Emotions
3.1 Psychological Methods
The next step was to determine plausible methods
to measure the emotional effect of a text. There are
two broad ways of measuring the emotions of human
subjects ? physiological methods and self-reporting.
Because of the technical complications and the con-
flicting results to be found in the literature, we opted
to ignore physiological measurement methods and
to investigate self-reporting. To measure these emo-
tions we decided do a pilot study to try out three
well-established methods that are used frequently
in the field of psychology, the Russel Affect Grid
(Russell et al, 1989), the Positive and Negative Af-
fect Scale (PANAS) (Watson et al, 1988), and the
Self Assessment Manikin (SAM) (Lang, 1980). The
PANAS test is a scale consisting of 20 words and
phrases (10 for positive affect and 10 for negative
affect) that describe feelings and emotions. Partic-
ipants read the terms and indicate to what extent
they experience(d) the emotions indicated by each
of them using a five point scale ranging from (1)
very slightly/not at all, (2) a little, (3) moderately,
(4) quite a bit to (5) extremely. A total score for pos-
itive affect is calculated by simply adding the scores
for the positive terms, and similarly for negative af-
fect. The Russel Affect Grid and the SAM test both
assess valence and arousal on a nine-point scale.
3.2 Method: Subjects, Stimuli and Setting
Our pilot study aimed to test a general experiment
set up, and to help us find the most promising of
the above methods to measure emotions evoked by
text. 24 colleagues and students (other than the ones
involved in the text validation experiments) partic-
ipated as subjects in this pilot study in which they
were asked to fill in a few forms about how they
felt after reading a particular text. All, except three,
were native or fluent speakers of English and none
was familiar with the purposes of the study. The
subjects were divided in two groups of 12 subjects
each, and were asked to fill in some questionnaires
and to read a text about a general topic with a partic-
71
ular consequence for the addressee. For this exper-
iment, just the negative message texts illustrated in
the previous section were used (i.e. ?some of your
food contains a substance that causes cancer?). One
group of subjects, the NP-group, was given this neg-
ative message verbalised in a neutral way giving the
impression that although there was a problem every
possible thing was being done to tackle it. The other
group, the NN-group, was given the same negative
message presented in a negative way implying that
although many things were being done to tackle the
problem, there still was a problem. We expected that
after the subjects had read the text, the emotions of
the subjects in the NN-group would be more neg-
ative than the emotions of the subjects in the NP-
group. We also expected the subjects in the NN-
group to be more strongly affected than the subjects
in the NP-group.
For ethical reasons, both in this experiment and
the following one, the main experimental procedure
was followed by a debriefing session in which the
subjects were informed that they had been deceived
by the texts presented and during which it was possi-
ble to provide support for subjects if their emotional
reactions had been especially strong.
3.3 Results and Discussion
Overall, t-test results failed to find significant differ-
ences between the the NN-group and the NP-group
for any of the emotion measurement methods used.
The Russel test, which was taken before the partic-
ipants read the test text3, indicated that the partici-
pants in the NP group might be feeling slightly more
positive and less aroused than the participants in the
NN group. The results for the PANAS test, taken af-
ter the participants read the test text, show that the
NP group might be feeling a little bit more positive
that the NN group about the content of the text they
just read. The Sam test, which the participants were
also asked to fill out with respect to their feelings af-
ter reading the test text, indicates that the NP group
might be feeling less positive and more aroused than
the NN group.
How to interpret the outcomes of the pilot study?
There are several factors that could have caused the
3Ideally we would have presented all tests both before and
after the text was read, but we believed that this would overload
the subjects and lead to distorted results.
lack of significant results. One reason could be that
the differences between the NP and NN texts were
not large enough. Yet another reason could be that
the people that took part in the study were not really
involved in the topic of the text or the consequences
of the message. When looking at the three emotion
measurement methods used, some participants did
indicate that the SAM and Russel tests were difficult
to interpret. Also some participants showed signs
of boredom or disinterest while rating the PANAS
terms, which were all printed on one A4 page; some
just marked all the terms as ?slightly/not at all? by
circling them all in one go instead of looking at the
terms separately. Also, some participants indicated
that they found it difficult to distinguish particular
terms. For example the PANAS test includes both
?scared? and ?afraid?. As a consequence, there were
several things that could be improved and adjusted
before going ahead with a full scale experiment in
which all four texts were tested.
4 Full Study: Measuring Emotional
Effects of Text
This section presents a full scale experiment con-
ducted to assess the emotional effect invoked in
readers of a text. The experimental set up attempts
to take into account the results found in the pilot
study presented in the previous section. However,
there were obviously a number of things that could
be improved after this study, and so many things
were changed without any direct evidence that
they would improve the experiment. Below the
method, data processing and results are presented
and discussed.
4.1 Method: subjects, stimuli and
experimental setting
Based on the pilot results, the setup of this study
was adapted in a number of ways. For instance,
we decided to increase the likelihood of finding
measurable emotional effects of text by targeting
a group of subjects other than our sceptical col-
leagues. Because it has been shown that young
women are highly interested in health issues and es-
pecially health risks (Finucane et al, 2000), we de-
cided on young female students as our participants.
72
In total 60 female students took part in the experi-
ment and were paid a small fee for their efforts. The
average age of the participants was about 20.57 (std.
2.41) years old. The participants were evenly and
randomly distributed over the four texts (i.e. NN,
NP, PN, PP) tested in this study, that is 15 partici-
pants per group. The texts were tailored to the sub-
ject group, by for example mentioning food products
that are typically consumed by students as examples
in the texts and by specifically mentioning young fe-
males as targets of the consequences of the message.
On a more general level, the texts were adapted to a
Scottish audience by, for instance, mentioning Scot-
tish products and a Scottish newspaper as the source
of the article. Although the results of the pilot study
did not indicate that the texts were not believable,
we thought that the presentation of the texts could
be improved by making them look more like news-
paper articles, with a date and a source indication.
To enhance the experimental setting, the emo-
tion measurement methods were better tailored to
the task. The SAM test as well as the Russel Grid
were removed from the experiment set up, because
they caused confusion for the participants in the pi-
lot study. Another reason for removing these tests
was to reduce the number of questions to be an-
swered by the participants and to avoid bored an-
swering. For the latter reason, also a previously used
reduced version of the PANAS test (Mackinnon et
al., 1999) was used, in which the number of emo-
tion terms that participants had to rate for themselves
was decreased from 20 to 10. This PANAS set, con-
sisting of five positive (i.e. alert, determined, en-
thusiastic, excited, inspired) and five negative terms
(i.e. afraid, scared, nervous, upset, distressed), was
used both before and after participants read the test
text. Before the participants read the test text, they
were asked to indicate how they felt at that point in
time using the PANAS terms. After the participants
read the test text, they were asked to rate the affect
terms with respect to their feelings about the text.
Note that this is different from asking them about
their current feelings, because we wanted to empha-
sise that we wanted to know about their emotions re-
lated to the content of the text they just read and not
about their feelings in general. We expected that the
reduced PANAS test would produce reliable results
because of its previous successful use. Whereas in
the pilot study each test was handled individually,
the PANAS terms were now interleaved with other
questions about recall and opinions to further avoid
boredom.
4.2 Hypotheses
In this full study four texts were tested on four differ-
ent groups of subjects. Two groups read the positive
message (PP-group and PN-group) two groups read
the negative message (NN-group and NP-group). Of
the two groups that read the positive message, we
expected the positive emotions of the participants
that read the positive version of this message (PP-
group) to be stronger than the positive emotions of
the participants that read the neutral/negative version
of this message (PN-group). Of the two groups that
read the negative message, we expected the partici-
pants that read the negative version of this message
(NN-group) to be more negative than the partici-
pants that read the positive version of the message
(NP-group).
4.3 Results
Overall, participants in this study were highly inter-
ested in the experiment and in the text they were
asked to read. Participants that read the positive
message, about the benefits of Scottish water, ap-
peared very enthusiastic and expressed disappoint-
ment when they read the debriefing from which they
learned that the story contained no truth. Simi-
larly, participants that read the negative message ex-
pressed anger and fear in their comments on the
experiment and showed relief when the debriefing
told them that the story on food poisoning was com-
pletely made up for the purposes of the experiment.
Only a few participants that read a version of the
negative message commented that they had got used
to the fact that there was often something wrong
with food and were therefore less scared. Table
1 shows some descriptives that underline these im-
pressions. For instance, on a 5-point scale the par-
ticipants rated the texts they read more than mod-
erately interesting (average of po-i = 3.74). They
also found the text informative (average of inform
= 3.82) and noted that it contained new information
(average of new = 4.05). These are surprisingly pos-
itive figures when we consider that the participants
indicated only an average interest in food (average of
73
PN PP NN NP
pr-i 2.47(1.13) 3.07(1.03) 3.00(.85) 3.00(1.25)
inf 3.87(.83) 3.80(.94) 3.67(1.05) 3.93(.70)
pos 3.93(.96) 4.27(1.03) 1.67(.98) 1.67(.97)
neg 1.53(.64) 1.27(5.94) 4.07(1.22) 3.53(1.19)
new 4.13(1.18) 4.53(.64) 3.87(1.30) 3.67(1.59)
po-i 3.67(.82) 3.80(.78) 3.67(.72) 3.80(1.01)
Table 1: Means and Standard deviations (between brack-
ets) for the PN, PP, NP and NN texts for various vari-
ables: pr-i interest in food before reading the text, the
inf ormativeness of the message, the positive or negative
polarity of the message, new information and the po-i
post interest in the message. All measured on a 5-point
Scale: 1 = not at all, . . ., 5 = extremely.
pr-i = 2.89) before they read the test text. The partic-
ipants that read the negative messages (NN and NP)
recognised that the message was negative (cf. pos
and neg in Table 1). Moreover, the NN-group rated
the text more negatively than the NP-group (4.07 vs
3.53). The participants that read the positive mes-
sage found that they had read a positive message.
The PP-group rated their text slightly more positive
than the PN-group rated theirs.
The bar chart presented in Figure 1 illustrates the
results of the PANAS questionnaire after reading the
texts. In terms of the differences in message content
(P* vs N*), there is a difference between the ratings
of the negative terms, which is as expected. How-
ever, there is no significant difference for the posi-
tive terms, which were rated fairly similarly for all
groups. Also, contrary to what was expected, the rat-
ing of the negative PANAS terms by both N* groups
is lower than their rating of the positive terms. The
hoped-for results for the positive/negative slanting
are also not forthcoming - t-tests show no signifi-
cant differences between the PN-group and the PP-
group and no significant differences between the
NN-group and the NP-group. All mean ratings stay
far below 3, the ?moderate? average of the scale.
When looking at these results in more detail, it ap-
pears that, of the positive PANAS terms, only ?ex-
cited? and ?inspired? had a higher mean for the posi-
tively worded message when comparing the positive
and the negative version of the positive message (PP
and PN). When comparing the positive and the neg-
ative version of the negative message (NP vs NN),
as expected, the NN-group has lower means for all 5
positive terms than the NP group.
From this study various conclusions can be
Figure 1: Positive and negative PANAS means after the
Participants read the test text.
drawn. First of all, from the fact that only the lower
half of the 5-point PANAS scale was used it can be
concluded that the participants in this study seem
to have difficulties with reporting on their emotions.
This was the case both before and after the test text
was read. Furthermore, participants seem to have a
preference for reporting their positive emotions and
focus less on their negative emotions. This can be in-
ferred from the fact that the negative PANAS terms
of the PP-group and the PN-group were lower than
the means of the negative PANAS terms of the NN-
group and the NP-group, but all groups had about
the same means for the positive PANAS terms. The
inference that self-reporting of emotions is trouble-
some is also indicated by the fact that the partici-
pants of this full study seemed highly interested and
involved in the experiment and in what they read in
the experiment texts. The participants generally be-
lieved the story they read and they expressed dis-
appointment or relief when they were told the truth
after the experiment. In addition, the descriptives
in Table 1 show that participants generally correctly
identified the text they read as either positive or neg-
ative. Note that in this respect the more fine-grained
differences between the PP-group and the PN-group
as well as the differences between the NN-group and
the NP-group also confirm our expectations.
74
5 Conclusion and Discussion
This paper presented our efforts to measure differ-
ences in emotional effects invoked in readers. These
efforts were based on our assumption that the word-
ing used to present a particular proposition matters
in how the message is received. Participants? judge-
ments of the negative or positive nature of a text (in
both the text validation and in the full study) are in
accord with our predictions. In terms of reflective
analysis of the text, therefore, participants behave
as we expected. Although we strongly emphasised
that we were interested in emotions with respect to
the test text, our attempts to measure the emotional
effects invoked in readers caused by tactical text dif-
ferences did, however, not produce any significant
results.
There are several reasons that may have played
a role in this. It may be that the emotion measur-
ing methods we tried are not fine-grained enough
to measure the emotions that were invoked by the
texts. As mentioned above, participants only used
part of the PANAS scale and seemed to be reluc-
tant to record their emotions (especially negative
ones). Other ways of recording levels of emotional
response that are more fine-grained than a 5-point
scale, such as magnitude estimation (Bard et al,
1996), might be called for here. Carrying out exper-
iments with even more participants might reveal pat-
terns that are obscured by noise in the current study,
but this would be expensive.
Alternatively, it could be that the differences be-
tween the versions of the messages are just too sub-
tle and/or that there is not enough text for these sub-
tle differences to produce measurable effects. In-
deed, we are not aware of PANAS being used to as-
sess purely textual effects before. Perhaps it is nec-
essary to immerse participants more fully in slanted
text in order to really affect them differently. Or
perhaps more extreme versions of slanting could be
found. Perhaps indeed the main way in which NLG
can achieve effects on emotions is through appro-
priate content determination (strategy), rather than
through lexical or presentation differences (tactics).
Another reason could still be a lack of involve-
ment of the participants of the study. Although the
participants of the full study indicated their enthu-
siasm for the study as well as their interest in the
topic and the message, they may have felt that the
news did not affect them too much, because they
considered themselves as responsible people when
it comes to health and food issues. We are design-
ing a follow up experiment in which, to increase the
reader?s involvement, a feedback task is used, where
participants play a game or answer some questions
after which they receive feedback on their perfor-
mance. The study will aim to measure the emotional
effects of slanting this feedback text in a positive or
a negative way. As in such a feedback situation the
test text is directly related to the participants? own
performance, we expect an increased involvement
and stronger emotions.
As argued above, the results of our study seem
to indicate that self-reporting of emotions is diffi-
cult. This could be because participants do not like
to show their emotions, because the emotions in-
voked by what they read were just not very strong
or because they do not have good conscious access
to their emotions. Although self-reporting is widely
used in Psychology, it could be that participants are
not (entirely) reporting their true emotions, and that
maybe this matters more when effects are likely to
be subtle. In all of these situations, the solution
could be to use additional measuring methods (e.g.
physiological methods), and to check if the results of
such methods can strengthen the results of the ques-
tionnaires. Another option is to use an objective ob-
server during the experiment (e.g. videotaping the
participants and observing the duration of smiles or
frowns) to judge whether the subject is affected.
Yet another possibility would be only to measure
emotional effects via performance on a task that is
known to be facilitated by particular emotions. For
instance, one could use the methods of (Carenini and
Moore, 2000) to measure persuasiveness of different
textual realisations that may induce emotions.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the EPSRC
grant ?Affecting people with natural language?
(EP/E011764/1) and also in part by Science Foun-
dation Ireland under a CSET grant (NGL/CSET).
We would like to thank the people who contributed
to this study, most notably Louise Phillips, Emiel
Krahmer, Linda Moxey, Graeme Ritchie, Judith
Masthoff, Albert Gatt and Kees van Deemter.
75
References
E. G. Bard, D. Robertson, and A. Sorace. 1996. Magni-
tude estimation of linguistic acceptability. Language,
72(1):32?68.
G. Carenini and J. D. Moore. 2000. An empirical study
of the influence of argument conciseness on argument
effectiveness. In Proceedings of the 38th annual meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
F. DeRosis, F. Grasso, and D. Berry. 1999. Refining
instructional text generation after evaluation. Artificial
Intelligence in Medicine, 17(1):1?36.
M. Finucane, P. Slovic, C. Mertz, J. Flynn, and T. Sat-
terfield. 2000. Gender, race, and perceived risk: the
?white male? effect. Health, Risk & Society, 2(2):159
? 172.
P. Lang, 1980. Technology in Mental Health Care De-
livery Systems, chapter Behavioral Treatment and Bio-
behavioral Assessment: Computer Applications, page
119 137. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
J.-E. Lee, C. Nass, S. Brave, Y. Morishima, H. Nakajima,
and R. Yamada. 2007. The case for caring co-learners:
The effects of a computer-mediated co-learner agent
on trust and learning. Journal of Communication.
A. Mackinnon, A. Jorm, H. Christensen, A. Korten, P. Ja-
comb, and B. Rodgers. 1999. A short form of the pos-
itive and negative affect schedule: evaluation of fac-
torial validity and invariance across demographic vari-
ables in a community sample. Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences, 27(3):405?416.
L. Moxey and A. Sanford. 2000. Communicating quan-
tities: A review of psycholinguistic evidence of how
expressions determine perspectives. Applied Cogni-
tive Psychology, 14(3):237?255.
J. Oberlander and A. Gill. 2004. Individual differences
and implicit language: Personality, parts-of-speech
and pervasiveness. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Helmut Prendinger, Christian Becker, and Mitsuru
Ishizuka. 2006. A study in users? physiological re-
sponse to an empathic interface agent. International
Journal of Humanoid Robotics, 3(3):371?391.
E. Reiter, R. Robertson, and L. Osman. 2003. Lessons
from a failure: Generating tailored smoking cessation
letters. Artificial Intelligence, 144:41?58.
F. De Rosis and F Grasso. 2000. Affective natural lan-
guage generation. In A. Paiva, editor, Affective Inter-
actions. Springer LNAI 1814.
J. Russell, A. Weiss, and G. Mendelsohn. 1989. Af-
fect grid: A single-item scale of pleasure and arousal.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57:493?
502.
K. Teigen and W. Brun. 2003. Verbal probabilities: A
question of frame. Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making, 16:53?72.
D. Watson, L. Clark, and A. Tellegen. 1988. Develop-
ment and validation of brief measures of positive and
negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 54(1063-1070).
S. Williams and E. Reiter. forthcoming. Generating basic
skills reports for lowskilled readers. Journal of Natu-
ral Language Engineering.
76
