BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 118?119,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Raising the Compatibility of Heterogeneous Annotations:
A Case Study on Protein Mention Recognition
Yue Wang? Kazuhiro Yoshida? Jin-Dong Kim? Rune S?tre? Jun?ichi Tsujii???
?Department of Computer Science, University of Tokyo
?School of Informatics, University of Manchester
?National Center for Text Mining
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033 JAPAN
{wangyue, kyoshida, jdkim, rune.saetre, tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
While there are several corpora which claim
to have annotations for protein references,
the heterogeneity between the annotations is
recognized as an obstacle to develop expen-
sive resources in a synergistic way. Here we
present a series of experimental results which
show the differences of protein mention an-
notations made to two corpora, GENIA and
AImed.
1 Introduction
There are several well-known corpora with protein
mention annotations. It is a natural request to bene-
fit from the existing annotations, but the heterogene-
ity of the annotations remains an obstacle. The het-
erogeneity is caused by different definitions of ?pro-
tein?, annotation conventions, and so on.
It is clear that by raising the compatibility of an-
notations, we can reduce the performance degrada-
tion caused by the heterogeneity of annotations.
In this work, we design several experiments to
observe the effect of removing or relaxing the het-
erogeneity between the annotations in two corpora.
The experimental results show that if we understand
where the difference is, we can raise the compati-
bility of the heterogeneous annotations by removing
the difference.
2 Corpora and protein mention recognizer
We used two corpora: the GENIA corpus (Kim
et al, 2003), and the AImed corpus (Bunescu and
Mooney, 2006). There are 2,000 MEDLINE ab-
stracts and 93,293 entities in the GENIA corpus.
?
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
?? ?? ?? ?? ??? ??? ??? ???????
???????????????????
???
????


Figure 1: The learning curve according to the F-score
The annotation is dependent on a small taxonomy
of 36 classes. The AImed corpus consists of 225
MEDLINE abstracts, and there are 4,084 protein ref-
erences.
Our protein mention recognizer is a Maximum
Entropy Markov Model (MEMM) n-best tagger.
3 The effect of the inconsistency
We did two experiments in order to characterize the
following two assumptions. First, we can improve
the performance by increasing the size of the train-
ing data set. Secondly, the system performance will
drop when more inconsistent annotations are intro-
duced into the training data set.
In these two experiments, for the training, we
used the AImed corpus and the AImed corpus plus
the GENIA protein annotations, respectively. We
conducted the evaluation on the AImed corpus.
The learning curve drawn from the results of the
two mentioned experiments is shown in Figure 1.
We can see that the learning curve is still increasing
118
Subcategory Recall Precision F-score
Family or group 12.94 3.86 5.94
Domain or region 15.74 0.57 1.11
Molecule 48.80 34.43 40.37
Substructure 0.00 0.00 0.00
Subunit 65.36 3.38 6.43
Complex 13.43 0.98 1.83
ETC 14.29 0.03 0.07
Table 1: The experimental results on seven subclasses.
when we used up all the training portions from the
AImed corpus. Even though the rate of the improve-
ment is slow, we would expect a further improve-
ment if we could add more training data in a large
scale, e.g. the GENIA corpus is 10 times bigger than
the AImed corpus. But when we added the protein
annotations in the GENIA corpus to the training data
set, we witnessed a drastic degradation in the perfor-
mance. We assume that the degradation is caused by
the heterogeneity of the protein annotations in these
two corpora, and we further assume that if the het-
erogeneity could be eliminated, the learning curve
would go back to an increasing state.
4 Raising the compatibility
Although both corpora include protein mention an-
notations, the target task is different. GENIA con-
cerns all the protein-mentioning terms, while AImed
focuses only on the references of individual pro-
teins. In the GENIA corpus, besides the 36 classes,
some subclasses are also included. In the case with
the protein class, there are seven subclasses: fam-
ily or group, domain or region, molecule, substruc-
ture, subunit, complex, etc. Further, in the AImed
corpus, protein/gene families are not tagged, only
protein molecules are tagged.
We conducted an experiment to verify what we
found from the documentation of the two corpora.
We trained our tagger using the AImed corpus, and
evaluated it on the GENIA corpus. Each time, we
assumed only the annotation of one protein subclass
in the GENIA corpus as the ?gold? annotation. Table
1 shows the experimental results.
The experimental results clearly supported the
documented scope of the protein annotation in GE-
NIA and AImed: The protein mention recognizer
AImed + Subcategory Criterion F-score
Molecule+Subunit Exact 64.72
Left 69.48
Right 67.64
Molecule+Subunit+Complex Exact 63.76
Left 72.77
Right 67.60
Table 2: The experimental results on three subclasses.
trained with AImed best recognized the GENIA an-
notation instances of Protein molecules among all
subclasses, and the performance of recognizing Pro-
tein family or group instances was very poor.
We therefore have a hypothesis: if we unite
the GENIA annotations of Protein molecule, Pro-
tein subunit, and Protein complex with the AImed
corpus, and we use this united corpus to train our
tagger, we can improve the performance of our tag-
ger on the AImed corpus. Table 2 shows our exper-
imental results based on this hypothesis. It can be
seen from the result that, if we assume that the up-
per bound of the F-score of this approach is near to
83.23%, we reduced the incompatibility of the two
corpora by 30%. The reduction was obtained by un-
derstanding the difference of the protein annotations
made to the corpora.
5 Conclusion
We implemented several experiments in order to re-
move the negative influence of the disagreements
between two corpora. Our objective is to raise the
compatibility of heterogeneous annotations. Some
simple experiments partly revealed where the het-
erogeneity between the protein mention annotations
in GENIA and AImed is. More qualitative and quan-
titative analysis will be done to identify the remain-
ing heterogeneity.
References
Razvan Bunescu and Raymond Mooney. 2006. Subse-
quence Kernels for Relation Extraction. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 18:171?178.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Tateisi and Jun?ichi
Tsujii. 2003. GENIA Corpus - a Semantically An-
notated Corpus for Bio-textmining. Bioinformatics,
19(Suppl. 1):i180?i182.
119
