Refining the Meaning of Sense
Labels in PDTB: ?Concession?
Livio Robaldo
University of Turin (Italy)
email: robaldo@di.unito.it
Eleni Miltsakaki
University of Pennsylvania (USA)
email: elenimi@linc.cis.upenn.edu
Jerry R. Hobbs
University of Southern California (USA)
email: hobbs@isi.edu
Abstract
The most recent release of PDTB 2.0 contains annotations of senses of
connectives. The PDTB 2.0 manual describes the hierarchical set of
senses used in the annotation and offers rough semantic descriptions of
each label. In this paper, we refine the semantics of concession sub-
stantially and offer a formal description of concessive relations and the
associated inferences drawn by the reader, utilizing basic notions from
Hobbs?s logic, including the distinction between causes and causal com-
plexes (Hobbs, 2005). This work is part of a larger project on the se-
mantics of connectives which aims at developing formal descriptions of
discourse relations, useful for processing real data.
207
208 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
1 Introduction
As the demand for more powerful NLP applications increases, there is also an in-
creasing need to develop algorithms for automated processing of discourse relations
and models for deriving the inferences drawn by the reader. PDTB 2.0 (Prasad et al,
2008), released in January 2008, contains annotations of discourse connectives and
their arguments, attribution, and sense labels giving rough semantic descriptions of
the connectives. The availability of such a richly annotated corpus promises to boost
our understanding of the structure and meaning of discourse and will facilitate the
development of efficient algorithms for identifying discourse connectives and their
arguments.
However, in order to be able to derive appropriate inferences associated with dis-
course relations, we need to develop useful semantic analyses of the meaning of con-
nectives so that they will generate the same range of inferences made by humans. In
this paper we take a first step in that direction, offering a simple formal analysis of
concessive relations, thus refining the semantics of the concessive sense labels used
in PDTB 2.0. Our analysis uses basic notions of causality developed in Hobbs (1998,
2005), capitalizing on the distinction between causes and causal complexes and on
the semantics of defeasible causality. Concessive meaning involves the failure of a
general defeasible causal relation in this specific instance.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of the PDTB 2.0,
focusing on the annotation of the senses of connectives, especially ?concession?. In
Section 3, we present an overview of the framework we are adopting for our formal
analysis, namely, Hobbs?s logic of causality, and our basic claims about how the se-
mantics of defeasible causality contributes to the semantics of concession. Section 4
presents the semantic analysis of ?concession?. In Section 5, we report briefly on the
distribution of concessive labels in PDTB 2.0 and conclude in Section 6.
2 Sense labels in PDTB
The Penn Discourse Treebank provides annotations of the argument structure of dis-
course connectives, attribution (e.g., ?ownership? of the relation by the writer or other
individual), and semantic labels for all the annotated connectives (Prasad et al, 2008).
This annotation of discourse connectives and their arguments draws on a lexical ap-
proach to discourse structure (Webber et al, 2003; Webber and Joshi, 2003), viewing
discourse connectives as discourse-level predicates that take two abstract objects such
as events, states, and propositions (Asher, 1993) as their arguments.
Two major types of discourse connectives are annotated in PDTB: a) explicit con-
nectives including subordinate conjunctions, coordinate conjunctions and adverbials,
and b) implicit connectives that are inserted between two adjacent sentences to cap-
ture the meaning of the inferred relation when no explicit connective is present. The
PDTB 2.0 is, to date, the largest annotation effort at the discourse level, including ap-
proximately 40,000 triples in the form (Connective, Arg1, Arg2). Arg2 is the second
argument in the text in the case of coordinating conjunctions, and is the complement
of subordinating conjunctions. In the case of adverbs, Arg2 is the element which the
adverb modifies syntactically. In cases of ambiguity, sense labels indicate the intended
sense in the given context. In all other cases, sense labels provide semantic descrip-
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 209
tions of the relations conveyed by the connectives, both explicit and implicit.
The tagset of senses is organized hierarchically (Miltsakaki et al, 2008). The top
level, or class level, has four tags representing four major semantic classes: ?TEMPO-
RAL?, ?CONTINGENCY?, ?COMPARISON? and ?EXPANSION?. For each class,
a second level of types is defined to further refine the semantics of the class levels.
For example, ?CONTINGENCY? has two types ?Cause? (relating two situations via
a direct cause-effect relation) and ?Condition? (relating a hypothetical scenario with
its (possible) consequences). A third level of subtype specifies the semantic contribu-
tion of each argument. For ?CONTINGENCY?, its ?Cause? type has two subtypes ?
?reason? (which applies when the connective indicates that the situation specified in
Arg2 is interpreted as the cause of the situation specified in Arg1, as often with the
connective because) and ?result? (which is used when the connective indicates that
the situation described in Arg2 is interpreted as the result of the situation presented in
Arg1). That is, ?reason? occurs when Arg2 causes Arg1; ?result? occurs when Arg1
causes Arg2.
Connectives can also be used to relate arguments pragmatically as in John is in
the house because the lights are on or If you?re thirsty, there?s beer in the fridge,
where the relation involbes the belief in or the telling of the condition rather than the
condition itself. For these rhetorical or pragmatic uses of connectives, a small set of
pragmatic sense tags has been defined ? specifically, ?Pragmatic Cause?, ?Pragmatic
Condition?, ?Pragmatic Contrast? and ?Pragmatic Concession?.
2.1 ?Concession? in PDTB
?Concession? is a type of the class-level category ?COMPARISON?. The class tag
?COMPARISON? applies when the connective indicates that a discourse relation is
established between Arg1 and Arg2 in order to highlight prominent differences be-
tween the two situations. Semantically, the truth of both arguments is independent of
the connective or the established relation. ?COMPARISON? has two types that further
specify its semantics. In some cases, Arg1 and Arg2 share a predicate or a property
and the difference is highlighted with respect to the values assigned to this property.
This interpretation is tagged with the type ?Contrast?.
There are also cases in which the highlighted differences are related to expectations
raised by one argument which are then denied by the other. This intepretation is
tagged with the type ?Concession?. According to the description in the PDTB 2.0
manual, the type ?Concession? applies when the connective indicates that one of the
arguments describes a situation A which normally causesC, while the other asserts (or
implies) ?C. Alternatively, one argument denotes a fact that triggers a set of potential
consequences, while the other denies one or more of them.
Two ?Concession? subtypes are defined in terms of the argument creating an ex-
pectation and the one denying it. Specifically, when Arg2 creates an expectation that
Arg1 denies, it is tagged as ?expectation?, shown in (1.c-d). When Arg1 creates an
expectation that Arg2 denies, it is tagged as ?contra-expectation?, shown in (1.e-f).
Examples (1.a-b) are made-up sentences we use for explanation and will be discussed
here and in the next section. All other examples are taken from PDTB 2.0. Each dis-
course fragment in (1) distinguishes between a discourse connective (underlined), and
two sentence-arguments: Arg1 (italics) and Arg2 (boldface).
210 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
(1) a. Although John studied hard, he did not pass the exam. (expectation)
b. Although running is considered healthy, it is not advisable for persons
with heart problems. (expectation)
c. Although they represent only 2% of the population, they control nearly
one-third of discretionary income. (expectation)
d. While acquiring a big brand-name company can be a shortcut to
growth, it can also bring a host of unforeseen problems (expectation)
e. The Texas oilman has acquired a 26.2% stake valued at more than $1.2
billion in an automotive-lighting company, Koito Manufacturing Co.
But he has failed to gain any influence at the company. (contra-
expectation)
f. Mr. Cannell?s allegations of cheating ?are purely without foundation?,
and based on unfair inferences. However the state will begin keeping
closer track of achievement-test preparation booklets next spring..
(contra-expectation)
(1.a) is an example of ?expectation?: Arg2 (John studied hard) creates the expecta-
tion that John passed the exam, which is precisely denied by Arg1. The same holds
for (1.b-d). Note that (1.b), unlike (1.a, c-d), expresses a general concessive relation,
i.e., it does not refer to particular contingent events. (1.e-f) are instances of contra-
expectation, where the expectation is created by Arg1. In (1.e), the fact that the Texas
oilman acquired the indicated stake value creates the expectation that he gained influ-
ence at the company, while, in (1.f), since Mr. Cannell?s allegations of cheating are
purely without foundation (in the speaker?s judgement), we do not expect the state to
start tracking the test preparation.
3 Toward a formal definition of ?Concession?
Based on our analysis of the range of PDTB tokens tagged with a concessive label, we
offer here a more detailed semantic analysis of the meaning of concessive relations.
Since the direction of the concessive relation is not relevant, the argument that creates
the expectation and the argument that denies it are respectively termed as Argcexp and
Argdexp. We claim that a concessive relation arises from a contrast between the effects
of two causal relations cc and cd holding in the domain. c and d stand for ?creates? and
?denies?, respectively. The relation denoted by cc is the causal relation that creates the
expectation, and cd the one that denies it. The effects of these causal relations, as well
as their causes, are taken to be eventualities1.
In this paper, we use the letter e for most eventualities, possibly with some subscript
or superscript.2 We make use of the subscripts x1 and x2, respectively, to distinguish
between the causes and the effects in a causal relation cx. Therefore, the causes in
cc and cd are indicated by ec1 and ed1 respectively, and the effects by ec2 and ed2,
respectively. ec2 is the ?created expectation?; its cause ec1 is conveyed by Argcexp. ed2
is an eventuality that denies ec2, and it is explicitly described in Argdexp. The cause of
1The term ?eventuality? is borrowed from (Bach, 1981). It covers both standard notions of ?state? and
?event?.
2As we will see, also causal relations are eventualities; so the names cc and cd are an exception to this
rule.
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 211
ed2, i.e., ed1, is usually unknown. Also ec2 is, in principle, unknown, but in most cases
it can be taken as the negation of ed2.
For instance, in the context of (1.a), the eventuality John studied hard (ec1) creates
the expectation John passed the exam (ec2). Nevertheless, Argdexp says that John did
not pass the exam actually (ed2). The reason of ed2 is unknown and has to be found in
the context. In other words, the context, whether explicit or inferred, should include
another eventuality that caused John?s failure, despite his studying hard. For example,
the next sentence might be John was very tired during the exam (ed1).
In order to formalize this account of concession, we need a defeasible notion of
causality. Many authors propose such an account of causality, e.g. (Achinstein, 1965;
Shoham, 1990; Simon, 1991; Bell, 1999, 2003), and Giunchiglia et al (2004). The ac-
count we use is that of Hobbs (2005). This distinguishes between the monotonic, pre-
cise notion of ?causal complex? and the nonmonotonic, defeasible notion of ?cause?.
The former gives us mathematical rigor; the latter is more useful for everyday rea-
soning and can be characterized in terms of the former. As Hobbs (2005) explains,
when we flip a switch to turn on a light, we say that flipping the switch ?caused? the
light to turn on. But for this to happen, many other factors had to be in place. The
bulb had to be intact, the switch had to be connected to the bulb, the power had to
be on in the city, and so on. The set of all the states and events that have to hold or
happen for an effect e to happen are called the ?causal complex? of e. Thus, the flip-
ping of the switch and the normal states of the bulb, the wiring, and the power supply
would all be in the causal complex for the turning on of the light. In a causal complex,
the majority of participating eventualities are normally true and therefore presumed
to hold. In the light bulb case, unless otherwise indicated, it is normally true that the
bulb is not burnt out, that the wiring is intact, that the power is on in the city, and so
on. But the light switch could be on or off; neither can be presumed. Those eventu-
alities that cannot normally be assumed to be true are identified as causes (cf. Kayser
and Nouioua, 2008). They are useful in planning, because they are often the actions
that the planner or some other agent must perform. They are useful in explanation
and prediction because they frequently constitute the new information. They are less
useful in diagnosis, where the whole causal complex has to be considered.
Note that in practice, we can never specify all the eventualities in a causal complex
for an event. So while the notion of causal complex gives us a precise way of thinking
about causality, it is not adequate for the kind of practical reasoning we do in planning,
explaining, and predicting. For this, we need the defeasible notion of ?cause?.
3.1 Background on Hobbs?s logic
Hobbs (1998) proposed a wide coverage logical framework for natural language based
on the notion of reification. Reification is the action of making states and events first-
class individuals in the logic, so they can be referred to by constants and variables.
We ?reify? eventualities, from the Latin word ?re(s)? for ?thing?: we take them to
be things. The framework distinguishes two parallel sets of predicates: primed and
unprimed. The unprimed predicates are the ordinary predicates we are used to in
logical representations of language. For example, (give a b c) says that a gives b to c.
When we assert this, we are saying that it actually takes place in the real world. The
primed predicate is used to talk about the reified eventualities. The expression (give?
212 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
e a b c) says that e is a giving event by a of b to c. Eventualities may be possible
or actual. When they are actual, this is simply one of their properties. To say that a
state e actually obtains in the real world or that an event e actually occurs in the real
world, we write (Rexist e). That is, e really exists in the real world. If I want to fly, my
wanting really exists, but my flying does not. This is represented as:3
(Rexist e) ? (want? e I e1) ? (fly? e1 I)
Therefore, contrary to (p x), (p? e x) does not say that e actually occurs, only that if
it did, it would be a ?p? event. The relation between primed and unprimed predicates
is then formalized by the following axiom schema:
(forall (x) (iff (p x) (exists(e) (and(p? e x)(Rexist e)))))
Eventualities can be treated as the objects of human thoughts. Reified eventualities
are inserted as parameters of such predicates as believe, think, want, etc. These predi-
cates can be applied in a recursive fashion. The fact that John believes that Jack wants
to eat an ice cream is represented as an eventuality e such that4
(believe? e John e1) ? (want? e1 Jack e2) ?
(eat? e2 Jack Ic) ? (iceCream? e3 Ic)
In Hobbs?s notation, every relation on eventualities, including logical operators, causal
and temporal relations, and even tense and aspect, may be reified into another eventu-
ality. For instance, by asserting (imply? e e1 e2), we reify the implication from e1 to e2
into an eventuality e. e has to be thought as ?the state holding between e1 and e2 such
that whenever e1 really exists, e2 really exists too?. Negation is represented as (not? e1
e2): e1 is the eventuality of the e2?s not existing. Some problems arise with negation,
in that what is generally negated is an eventuality type rather than an eventuality token
or instance. In order to deal with more general cases of concession, we will refer to
eventualities that are inconsistentwith other ones. Two eventualities e1 and e2 are said
to be inconsistent iff they (respectively) imply two other eventualities e3 and e4 such
that e3 is the negation of e4. The definition is as follows:
(forall (e1 e3)
(iff (inconsistent e1 e2)
(and (eventuality e1) (eventuality e2)
(exists (e3 e4) (and (imply e1 e3)
(imply e2 e4)(not? e3 e4))))))
3.2 Typical elements, eventuality types and tokens
Among the things we can think about are both specific eventualities, like Fido is bark-
ing, and general or abstract types of eventualities, like Dogs bark. We do not want to
treat these as radically different kinds of entities. We would like both, at some level, to
3In order to increase readability, we will often make use of the symbol ? in place of the unprimed
predicate and.
4The formula expresses the de-re reading of the sentence, where e1, e2 , e3 , John, Jack, Ic are first order
constants.
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 213
be treated simply as eventualities that can be the content of thoughts. To this end, the
logical framework includes the notion of typical element (from Hobbs (1983, 1995,
1998)). The typical element of a set is the reification of the universally quantified
variable ranging over the elements of the set (cf. McCarthy (1977)). Typical elements
are first-order individuals. The introduction of typical elements arises from the need
to move from the standard set-theoretic notation
s = {x | p(x) }
or its logical equivalent,
(forall (x) (iff (member x s) (p x)))
to a simple statement that p is true of a ?typical element? of s by reifying typical
elements. The principal property of typical elements is that all properties of typical
elements are inherited by the real members of the set.
It is important not to confuse the concept of typical element with the standard con-
cept of ?prototype?, which allows defeasibility, i.e., properties that are not inherited
by all of the real members of the set. Asserting a predicate on a typical element of a
set is logically equivalent to the multiple assertions of that predicate on all elements
of the set. Talking about typical elements of sets of eventualities leads to the distinc-
tion between eventuality types and eventuality tokens. The logic defines the following
concepts, for which we omit formal details5: a) Eventualities types (aka abstract even-
tualities): eventualities that involve at least one typical element among their arguments
or arguments of their arguments (we can call these ?parameters?), b) Partially instan-
tiated eventuality types (aka partial instances): a particular kind of eventuality type
resulting from instantiating some of the parameters of the abstract eventuality either
with real members of their sets or with typical elements of subsets, and c) Eventuality
tokens (aka instances: a particular kind of partially instantiated eventuality type with
no parameters. It is a consequence of universal instantiation that any property that
holds of an eventuality type is true of any partial instance of it.
Hobbs?s logical framework is particularly suitable to the study of the semantics of
discourse connectives, in that it allows focusing on their meaning while leaving under-
specified the details about the eventualities involved. In other words, we can simply
assume the existence of two eventualities e1 and e2 coming from the two arguments
Arg1 and Arg2 respectively. e1 and e2 may be either eventuality tokens, on atomic
arguments, as in (1.a), or eventuality tokens, on collective arguments, as in (1.c), or
(partially instantiated) eventuality types, as in (1.b), or any other kind of eventuality.
The semantics of concession proposed below uniformily applies to all these cases.
3.3 Hobbs?s Account of Causality
The account of causality described above in the introduction is represented in terms
of two predicates: (cause? cx ex1 ex2) and (causalComplex s ex2). cause? says that cx is
the state holding between ex1 and ex2 such that the former is a non-presumable cause
5Actually, ?instance? is slightly more general, since if s is a set, x is its typical element, and y is a
member of s, y is an instance of x, even though it is not an eventuality. Nevertheless, in this paper we
assume ?instances? and ?eventuality tokens? to be synonymous.
214 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
of the latter. causalComplex says that s is the set of all presumable or non-presumable
eventualities that are involved in causing ex2. Obviously, ex1 belongs to s. Thus, in the
light example, the predicate cause applies to the flipping of the switch, while the states
of the bulb, the wiring, and the power supply would all be in the causal complex s.
Several axioms characterize the predicates cause and causalComplex. Some of them
relate causality with time6, some relate causality with probability, and so on Hobbs
(2005).
It is clear that the theory must not include an axiom stating that, whenever a causal
relation cx and its cause ex1 really exist, the corresponding effect ex2 really exists too.
The inclusion of such an axiom would lead to a non-defeasible causality. Rather, we
need an axiom stating that an effect really exists just in case all the eventualities in its
causal complex really exist:
(forall (s e)
(if (and (causalComplex s e)
(forall (e1) (if (member e1 s) (Rexist e1)))
(Rexist e)))
Nevertheless, as pointed out above, we can never specify all the eventualities in a
causal complex. Even in simple sentences like (1.a), the eventualities in the causal
complex are not easy to list, and the real causes may not coincide with what we think
the causes are in that context. For example, recalling our analysis of (1.a) above:
ec1=?John studied hard?
ec2=?John passed the exam?
ed1=?John was tired during the exam?
ed2=?John did not pass the exam?
cc=?ec1 causes ec2?; cd=?ed1 causes ed2?
One approach at this point would be to say that both ec1 and the negation of ed1
belong to the causal complex of ec2, with ec1 being the non-presumable cause of ec2.
But this would mean that not being tired during exams is a kind of ?precondition? for
passing exams by studying hard, which is obviously false in many contexts. Note,
however, that there is an arbitrary quality to what we designate as being in a causal
complex, because causality forms chains and we can start the chain at any point. John
was tired caused the situation that he did not manage to concentrate, which caused
the situation that he made a lot of errors in the exam, which caused the situation that
the teacher decided to fail him. One could argue that the last of these eventualities is
the real cause of ed2. Similarly, one could argue that ec1 is not the real cause of ec2:
John studied hard causes the situation that he makes few errors in the exam . . . and the
teacher decides not to fail him. The predicate cause is defeasibly transitive, however,
so these considerations do not affect our account of concession. Furthermore, we do
not take the negation of ed1 as necessarily belonging to the causal complex for ec2.
Rather, we claim that ed1, besides being the cause of ed2, is the cause of another
eventuality edp that is inconsistent with an element ecp in the causal complex for ec2.
6As argued also by Giordano and Schwind (2004), the effect caused by an eventuality can take place in
the current or in a subsequent instant.
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 215
In (1.a), ecp may be simply John does not have any particular health problem that
jeopardizes his passing the exam. ed1 caused both John?s failure and an health status
that jeopardizes the passing of his exam. This is what we mean here by ?denying of
an expectation?.
In our analysis of concession, we distinguish between abstract causalities like hard
studying causes passing exams, and causality tokens like John?s tiredness caused
John?s failure. Note that asserting (Rexist c) on an abstract causal relation c amounts
to asserting (Rexist c?) for any (partial) instance c? of c. But recall that cause is only
defeasible. Both the abstract causal principle and its partial instance are simplified
stand-ins for rules that involve entire causal complexes, not all of whose elements may
obtain. Thus, just because hard studying causes passing exams, we cannot invariably
conclude that if John really studied, he really passed the exam.
4 The meaning of concessive relations
Our basic claim is that the meaning of concessive relations is triggered by a contrast
between two causal relations cc and cd such that one or more eventualities in the causal
complex of ec2 (the expectation created by cc), is denied by ed2 (the effect of cd). cc,
cd , ed2, and ec1 (the cause in cc) really exist in the world, or are at least believed to
exist by the speaker/writer. Furthermore, all eventualities in the causal complex for
ed2, including the non-presumable cause ed1, which is unknown in many cases, really
exist too. Argcexp conveys ec1, while Argdexp conveys ed2.
We also claim that in all cases of concession it seems that what really creates the
expectation is a causal relation cac that is an abstraction of cc. cc really exists in the
world precisely because cac really exists and cc is a partial instance of it. In other words,
the real existence of cc is inherited from cac. On the other hand, there is not necessarily
an abstract counterpart cad for cd that also really exists in the world. For instance,
in (1.a), it seems that what creates the expectation is the assumption that the causal
relation studying hard causes passing exams (cac) really exists in the context. John?s
hard studying causes John?s passing exams (cc) is just an instance of cac. This instance
really exists in the world too. However, since causality is defeasible, the fact that John
really studied hard (ec1) does not entail the real existence of John really passed the
exam (ec2). In fact, this is precisely denied by Argdexp: John did not pass the exam
(ed2). The cause of John?s failure, e.g., John?s tiredness (ed1), is (or is the cause of
an eventuality edp that is) inconsistent with an element ecp of the causal complex for
(ec2), namely, John does not have any particural health problem that jeopardizes the
passing of his exam. Note that we do not necessarily infer that being tired causes
failing an exam: tiredness was the cause of the failure in this particular scenario only.
Therefore, we assert that cd really exists, but we do not advocate the existence of a
more abstract causal relation cad that really exists too.
To summarize, the semantics of concession we propose is formalized in (2). The
conjuncts (Rexist cc) and (Rexist ed1) have been omitted in (2) because they may be
inferred from (Rexist cac) and (Rexist ed2). sc is the causal complex associated with
cc. ec1 and ed2 are given to us in Argcexp and Argdexp respectively, while all other
eventualities may be inferred by abduction from the contextual knowledge; some hints
about how this may be done are provided in Hobbs (2005).
216 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
(2) (exist (cc ca c ec1 ec2 cd ed1 ed2 sc ecp edp)
(cause? cc ec1 ec2) ? (cause? cd ed1 ed2) ? (Rexist ca c) ?
(partialInstance cc ca c) ? (Rexist cd) ? (Rexist ec1) ?
(Rexist ed2) ? (cause ed1 edp) ? (Rexist edp) ?
(inconsistent ec2 ed2) ? (causalComplex sc ec2) ?
(memberecp sc) ? (inconsistent edp ecp))
Let us now examine how the semantics given in (2) applies for corpus examples
tagged as ?expectation? or ?contra-expectation?. Let us analyze (1.b) in the light of
the semantics proposed in (2). The abstract causality that creates the expectation (ca
c) is Something that is considered healthy for humans is advisable for them7. This
is partially instantiated in Since running is considered healthy for persons with heart
problems, it is advisable for them (cc). Nevertheless, the fact that running is really
considered healthy in the context (ec1) does not suffice to assert that running is really
advisable for persons with heart problems (ec2). There is a particular reason why
running is not advisable for persons with heart problems (ed2), e.g. their hearts do
not tolerate a heartbeat increase (ed1). Since running causes a heartbeat increase, the
heart can tolerate a heartbeat increase (ecp) is in the causal complex for ec2 and it is
inconsistent with ed2.
Similarly, in (1.c), which is taken from the PDTB, it is true that representing a
low percentage of the population causes controlling low percentage of income (cac).
Therefore, they represent 2% of population (ec1) causes they control low percentage
of income (ec2). Nevertheless, ec2 does not really exists in the context, in that it is
inconsistent with they control nearly one-third of income (ed2). There must be another
reason for why ec2 does not hold. For instance, either they are very rich, or they do
not have as many basic expenses as other people, or a more complex condition. This
unknown cause, i.e. ed1, both makes ed2 true and ec2 false in the context.
The last example highlights the point that finding the eventualities involved in (2) is
strongly dependent upon contextual knowledge. 2% is not taken to be a low percentage
in any context. For instance, 2% mercury in the water may be considered a high
percentage of pollution. Analogously, one third may be considered a high percentage
in that context, especially if compared with 2% of population, but it may be a low or
medium percentage in many other contexts. The analysis of examples (1.d-e) in terms
of the definition in (2) is analogous.
5 A survey of concessive relations in PDTB 2.0
PDTB 2.0 contains 1193 tokens of explicit connectives which are annotated with one
sense tagged as ?Concession?, ?contra-expectation? and ?expectation?. There are also
another 20 tokens that have been annotated with double senses, one of which is the
concessive type or subtypes. Table (1) shows the distribution of concessive labels for
the 1193 tokens. Explicit connectives with a concessive label assigned to less than
10 tokens are grouped under ?other?. The rest of the connectives shown in Table (1)
amount to 98% of all ?contra-expectation? and 95% of all ?expectation? tokens. The
7This is a paraphrase of Something being considered healthy for humans causes it to be advisable for
humans.
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 217
Table 1: Concessive labels in PDTB 2.0
CONN ?contra-exp.? ?exp.? ?Concession? Total
although 21 132 1 154 (13%)
but 494 12 2 508 (42.5%)
even if 3 31 1 35 (3%)
even though 15 52 5 72 (6%)
however 70 2 5 77 (6.5%)
nevertheless 19 0 0 19 (1.5%)
nonetheless 17 0 0 17 (1.5%)
still 79 2 1 82 (7%)
though 30 53 1 84 (7%)
while 3 79 1 83 (7%)
yet 32 0 0 32 (2.5%)
other 13 17 0 30 (2.5%)
Total 796 380 17 1193
most common connective annotated with the ?Concession? type or one of its two sub-
types is ?but? with 508 tokens (42% of all concessive labels), followed by ?although?
with 154 tokens (13% of all concesive labels).
We are currently evaluating the robustness of the proposed refined semantics for
concessive labels in PDTB 2.0 starting with the most the most common concessive
connectives. While the validation process for the entire corpus is still work in progress,
preliminary results on 25% of ?but? tokens indicate that the semantics of concession
based on defeasible causality applies straightforwardly to more than 60% of the data.
In future work, we hope to be able to offer a more comprehensive account of all the
concessive labels in PDTB 2.0 including cases of concession in which the created
expectation arises from an implication rather than from a causal relation (about 23%),
as in (3)
(3) Although working for U.S. intelligence, Mr. Noriega was hardly helping the
U.S. exclusively. (expectation)
In (3), it is strange to say that working for U.S. intelligence normally ?causes?
helping U.S. exclusively. Rather, the former seems a kind of necessary condition or
job requirement for the latter: working for U.S. intelligence implies (among other
things) helping U.S. exclusively. Suppose that someone discovers that Mr. Noriega is
not helping the U.S. exclusively. Mr. Noriega is arguably breaking a rule or flauting an
expectation. Therefore, working for U.S. intelligence ?implies? rather than ?causes?
helping U.S. exclusively.
It is unsurprising that there are cases of concession based on implication rather than
causality, because the two concepts are very close to each other. One could think of
implication as a kind of abstract, informational, or ?denatured? causality. Both obey a
kind of (defeasible) modus ponens. When the cause or antecedent happens or holds,
so does the effect or consequent. The other key property of causal complexes is that
218 Robaldo, Miltsakaki, and Hobbs
all the eventualities in it are relevant, in a sense that is made precise in Hobbs (2005).
This notoriously does not hold for material implication, but as many have argued,
it probably does hold for felicitous uses of our everyday notion of implication. In
addition, there are easy conversions between causality and implication. If A causes B,
then the fact that A happens (defeasibly) implies that B happens. If P implies Q in the
everyday sense, then one?s belief in P (defeasibly) causes one?s belief in Q. In fact,
implicational cases of concession could be viewed as instances of metonymy, where
?believe? is the coercion relation, and hence really causal cases of concession.
6 Conclusion
We presented a formal description of the meaning of concession, a substantial refine-
ment of the rough semantics given in the manual of sense annotations of connectives
in PDTB 2.0. Our analysis builds on Hobbs?s logic of defeasible causality enabled
by the crucial distinction between causes and causal complexes. Our basic claim is
that concession is triggered by the contrast between two causal relations. The causal
relation between the content of one argument of the relation and some implicit even-
tuality (the expectation created based on the content of the argument) and the content
of another causal relation, that between the eventuality described in second argument
and its implicit cause. This second causal relation picks an element of the causal com-
plex that we would normally assume to hold and challenges it, hence the notion of
defeasible causality.
This work illustrates the mutual benefit that corpus annotation and formal analysis
can provide to each other. Corpus examples constitute a forcing function on the formal
analysis; definitions must accommodate the complexities one finds in the real world.
On the other hand, all good annotation rests on solid theory, and formal analysis can
help in the adjudication of difficult examples. The particular analysis we give in this
paper for the concession relation can clarify issues that arise in annotation, and can
also form the basis for recognizing these relations using a knowledge-rich inferencing
system.
References
Achinstein, P. (1965). ?Defeasible? Problems. The Journal of Philosophy 62(21),
629?633.
Asher, N. (1993). Reference to Abstract Objects. Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Bach, E. (1981). On Time, Tense, and Aspect: An Essay in English Metaphysics. In
P. Cole (Ed.), Radical Pragmatics, pp. 63?81. Academic Press, New York.
Bell, J. (1999). Primary and secondary events. In M. Thielscher (Ed.), Proc. of the
IJCAI-99 Workshop on Nonmonotonic Reasoning, Action and Change, pp. 65?72.
Bell, J. (2003). A common sense theory of causation. In P. Blackburn, C. Ghidini,
R. Turner, and F. Giunchiglia (Eds.), Modeling and Using Context: Fourth Interna-
tional and Interdisciplinary Conference, Context 2003, Berlin, pp. 40?53. Springer-
Verlag.
Refining the Meaning of Sense Labels in PDTB: ?Concession? 219
Giordano, L. and C. Schwind (2004). Conditional logic of actions and causation.
Artificial Intelligence 157(1?2), 239?279.
Giunchiglia, E., J. Lee, V. Lifschitz, N. McCain, and H. Turner (2004). Nonmonotonic
causal theories. Artificial Intelligence 153(1?2), 49?104.
Hobbs, J. (1983). An Improper Treatment of Quantification in Ordinary English. In
Proc. of the 21st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 57?63.
Hobbs, J. (1995). Monotone Decreasing Quantifiers in a Scope-Free Logical Form. In
K. van Deemter and S. Peters (Eds.), Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification,
CSLI Lecture Notes, pp. 55?76. CSLI.
Hobbs, J. (1998). The Logical Notation: Ontological Promiscuity. In Discourse and
Inference, Chapter 2.
Hobbs, J. (2005). Towards a Useful Notion of Causality for Lexical Semantics. Jour-
nal of Semantics 22(2), 181?209.
Kayser, D. and F. Nouioua (2008). From the Description of an Accident to its Causes.
submitted to Artificial Intelligence.
McCarthy, J. (1977). Epistemological Problems of Artificial Intelligence. In Proc.
of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, pp. 1038?1044.
Miltsakaki, E., L. Robaldo, A. Lee, and A. Joshi (2008). Sense Annotation in the
Penn Discourse Treebank. In Proc. of Computational Linguistics and Intelligent
Text Processing, Volume 4919 of LNCS, pp. 275?286. Springer.
Prasad, R., N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, L. Robaldo, A. Joshi, and B. Webber
(2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. In Proc. of the 6th Int. Conf. on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation.
Prasad, R., E. Miltsakaki, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi, B. Webber, and L. Robaldo
(2008). The Penn Discourse Treebank 2.0. Annotation Manual. Technical Report
IRCS-06-01, IRCS Technical Report, Institute of Research in Cognitive Science,
University of Pennsylvania.
Shoham, Y. (1990). Nonmonotonic reasoning and causation. Cognitive Science 14,
213?252.
Simon, H. (1991). Nonmonotonic reasoning and causation: Comment. Cognitive
Science 49, 517?528.
Webber, B. and A. Joshi (2003). Anchoring a lexicalized tree-adjoining grammar for
discourse. In M. Stede, L. Wanner, and E. Hovy (Eds.), Discourse Relations and
Discourse Markers: Proceedings of the Conference, pp. 86?92.
Webber, B., A. Joshi, M. Stone, and A. Knott (2003). Anaphora and discourse struc-
ture. Computational Linguistics 29(4), 545?587.
