Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Multi-source Multilingual Information Extraction and Summarization, pages 10?16
Manchester, August 2008
Abstract 
Hall? Norden is a web site with information 
regarding mobility between the Nordic coun-
tries in five different languages; Swedish, 
Danish, Norwegian, Icelandic and Finnish.  
We wanted to create a Nordic cross-language 
dictionary for the use in a cross-language 
search engine for Hall? Norden. The entire 
set of texts on the web site was treated as one 
multilingual parallel corpus. From this we 
extracted parallel corpora for each language 
pair. The corpora were very sparse, contain-
ing on average less than 80 000 words per 
language pair. We have used the Uplug word 
alignment system (Tiedemann 2003a), for the 
creation of the dictionaries. The results gave 
on average 213 new dictionary words (fre-
quency > 3) per language pair. The average 
error rate was 16 percent. Different combina-
tions with Finnish had a higher error rate, 33 
percent, whereas the error rate for the re-
maining language pairs only yielded on aver-
age 9 percent errors. The high error rate for 
Finnish is possibly due to the fact that the 
Finnish language belongs to a different lan-
guage family. Although the corpora were 
very sparse the word alignment results for the 
combinations of Swedish, Danish, Norwe-
gian and Icelandic were surprisingly good 
compared to other experiments with larger 
corpora.   
                                                 
 ? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons Attri-
bution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
sa/3.0/). Some rights reserved. 
1 Introduction 
Hall? Norden (Hello Scandinavia) is a web site 
with information regarding mobility between the 
Nordic countries and is maintained by the Nordic 
Council.  Mobility information concerns issues 
such as how employment services, social ser-
vices, educational systems etc. work in the dif-
ferent countries. The web site has information in 
five different languages; Swedish, Danish, Nor-
wegian, Icelandic and Finnish.  In this paper 
Nordic languages are defined as Swedish, Danish, 
Norwegian, Icelandic and Finnish. Scandinavian 
languages are defined as the Nordic languages 
excluding Finnish. 
The texts on the web site were almost parallel 
and there were also ten minimal dictionaries with 
on average 165 words available for the different 
languages. The dictionaries consisted of domain-
specific words regarding mobility information in 
the Nordic countries. The Nordic Council wanted 
to extend the dictionaries so they would cover a 
larger part of the specific vocabulary, in order to 
help the people in the Nordic countries to find 
and learn the concepts in their neighboring coun-
tries. 
The entire set of texts on the web site was 
treated as one multilingual parallel corpus. From 
this we extracted parallel corpora for each lan-
guage pair.  We discovered, as expected, that the 
corpora were very sparse, containing on average 
less than 80 000 words per language pair. We 
needed to construct 10 different dictionaries and 
therefore we processed 10 pairs of parallel text 
sets. We have used the Uplug word alignment 
system (Tiedemann 2003a), for the creation of 
the dictionaries. The system and motivation for 
the choice of system is further discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1. 
Automatic Construction of Domain-specific Dictionaries on  
Sparse Parallel Corpora in the Nordic Languages 
Sumithra Velupillai 
DSV/KTH-Stockholm University 
SE-164 40 Kista 
Sweden 
sumithra@dsv.su.se 
 
Hercules Dalianis 1, 2 
1) DSV/KTH-Stockholm University 
SE-164 40 Kista 
Sweden 
2) Euroling AB 
Igeldammsgatan 22c 
112 49 Stockholm, Sweden 
hercules@dsv.su.se 
10
We also discovered that the texts were not 
completely parallel. Therefore, we made a small 
experiment on attempting to enhance the results 
by deleting texts that were not parallel. Multilin-
gual parallel corpora covering all Nordic lan-
guages are very rare. Although the corpora cre-
ated in this work are domain-specific, they are an 
important contribution for further research on 
Nordic multilingual issues. Moreover, many 
large governmental, industrial or similar web 
sites that contain information in several lan-
guages may profit from compiling multilingual 
dictionaries automatically in order to enhance 
their search engines and search results. 
In this project, our two main goals were to 
compile parallel corpora covering the Nordic 
languages, and to evaluate the results of auto-
matically creating dictionaries using an existing 
tool with basic settings, in order to find out 
where more work would need to be done and 
where performance is actually acceptable. We 
have limited the work by only testing one system 
(Uplug) with basic settings. Our experiments and 
results are described in further detail in the fol-
lowing sections. Conclusions and future work are 
discussed in the final section. 
2 Related Work 
Word alignment systems have been used in pre-
vious research projects for automatically creating 
dictionaries. In Charitakis (2007) Uplug was 
used for aligning words in a Greek-English paral-
lel corpus. The corpus was relatively sparse, con-
taining around 200 000 words for each language, 
downloaded from two different bilingual web 
sites. A sample of 498 word pairs from Uplug 
were evaluated by expert evaluators and the re-
sult was 51 percent correctly translated words 
(frequency > 3). When studying high frequent 
word pairs (>11), there were 67 percent correctly 
translated words. In Megyesi & Dahlqvist (2007) 
an experiment is described where they had 150 
000 words in Swedish and 126 000 words in 
Turkish that gave 69 percent correct translations 
(Uplug being one of the main tools used). In this 
work the need for parallel corpora in different 
language combinations is also discussed. 
The ITools? suite for word alignment that was 
used in Nystr?m et al(2006) on a medical paral-
lel corpus, containing 174 000 Swedish words 
and 153 000 English words, created 31 000 word 
pairs with 76 percent precision and 77 percent 
recall. In this work the word alignment was pro-
duced interactively.  
A shared task on languages with sparse re-
sources is described in Martin et al(2005). The 
language pairs processed were English-Inuktitut, 
Romanian-English and English-Hindi, where the 
English-Inuktitut parallel corpus contained 
around 4 million words for English and 2 mil-
lions words for Inuktitut. English-Hindi had less 
words, 60 000 words and 70 000 words respec-
tively. The languages with the largest corpora 
obtained best word alignment results, for Eng-
lish-Inuktitut over 90 percent precision and recall 
and for English-Hindi 77 percent precision and 
68 percent recall. One conclusion from the 
shared task was that it is worth using additional 
resources for languages with very sparse corpora 
improving results with up to 20 percent but not 
for the languages with more abundant corpora 
such as for instance English-Inuktitut.  
2.1 Word Alignment: Uplug 
We have chosen to use the Uplug word align-
ment system since it is a non-commercial system 
which does not need a pre-trained model and is 
easy to use. It is also updated continuously and 
incorporates other alignment models, such as 
GIZA++ (Och & Ney 2003). We did not want to 
evaluate the performance of different systems in 
the work presented here, but rather evaluate the 
performance of only one system applied on dif-
ferent language combinations and on sparse cor-
pora. Evaluating the performance of different 
systems is an important and interesting research 
problem, but is left for future work. An evalua-
tion of two word alignment systems Plug (Uplug) 
and Arcade is described in Ahrenberg et al
(2000). 
The Uplug system implements a word align-
ment process that combines different statistical 
measures for finding word alignment candidates 
and is fully automatic. It is also possible to com-
bine statistical measures with linguistic informa-
tion, such as part-of-speech tags. In the preproc-
essing steps the corpora are converted to an xml-
format and they are also sentence aligned. 
We have chosen to use basic settings for all 
corpora in the different language pairs, in order 
to evaluate the effect of this. The default word 
alignment settings in Uplug works in the follow-
ing way:  
 
? create basic clues (Dice and LCSR) 
? run GIZA++ with standard settings 
(trained on plain text) 
11
? learn clues from GIZA's Viterbi align-
ments 
? "radical stemming" (take only the 3 initial 
characters of each token) and run GIZA++ 
again 
? align words with existing clues 
? learn clues from previous alignment 
? align words again with all existing clues1 
 
This approach is called the clue alignment ap-
proach and is described further in Tiedemann 
(2003b). In the work presented here, we have not 
included any linguistic information, as we 
wanted to evaluate the performance of applying 
the system on sparse, raw, unprocessed corpora 
for different (Nordic) language pairs, using de-
fault settings. 
 
3 Experiments and Results 
For the project presented in this paper we wanted 
to see if it was possible to create domain-specific 
dictionaries on even smaller corpora. (compared 
to the ones described in Section 2) for all the 
Nordic language pairs. We did not have the pos-
sibility to evaluate the results for Icelandic-
Finnish, since we did not find any evaluator hav-
ing knowledge in both Icelandic and Finnish. 
Therefore we present the results for the remain-
ing nine language pairs. In total we had four 
evaluators for the other language combinations. 
Each evaluator evaluated those language pairs 
                                                 
                                                
1 Steps taken from the Quickstart guidelines for the Uplug 
system, which can be downloaded here: 
http://uplug.sourceforge.net/ 
she or he had fluent or near-fluent knowledge in. 
The domain was very restricted containing only 
words about mobility between the Nordic coun-
tries. 
The Scandinavian languages are closely re-
lated. Swedish, Danish, and Norwegian are com-
prehensible for Scandinavians. A typical Swede 
will for instance understand written and to a cer-
tain degree spoken Danish, but is not able to 
speak Danish. Typical Swedes will, for instance, 
have a passive understanding of Danish (and vice 
versa for the other languages). Finnish on the 
other hand belongs to the Finno-Ugric group of 
the Uralic languages, while the Scandinavian 
languages are North-Germanic Indo-European 
languages. We wanted to investigate if, and how, 
these differences affect the word alignment re-
sults. We also wanted to experiment with differ-
ent frequency thresholds, in order to see if this 
would influence the results. 
The first step was to extract the web pages 
from the web site and obtain the web pages in 
plain text format. We obtained help for that work 
from Euroling AB,2 our contractor.  
In Table 1 we show general information about 
the corpora. We see that the distribution of words 
is even for the Scandinavian languages, but not 
for the combinations with Finnish. It is interest-
ing to observe that Finnish has fewer word to-
kens than the Scandinavian languages.  
All Nordic languages, both Scandinavian and 
Finnish, have very productive word compound-
ing. In Finnish word length is longer, on average, 
 
2 See: http://www.euroling.se/ 
Language pair No. texts No. words Word distribution, first language in language pair, %
sw-da 191 83871 49.2
sw-no 133 62554 49.7
sw-fi 196 73933 57.6
sw-ice 187 82711 48.5
da-no 156 68777 50.2
da-fi 239 84194 58.4
da-ice 232 97411 49.5
no-fi 156 58901 58.2
no-ice 145 64931 49.6
Average 182 75254 52.3
Table 1: General corpora information, initial corpora 
12
and the number of words per clause lower, on 
average, due to its extensive morphology. 
In Dalianis et al(2007) lemmatizing the text 
set before the alignment process did not improve 
results. In the work presented here, we have also 
made some experiments on lemmatizing the cor-
pora before the alignment process. We have used 
the CST lemmatizer3 for the Scandinavian lan- 
guages and Fintwol4 for Finnish. Unfortunately, 
the results were not improved. The main reason 
for the decrease in performance is probably due 
to the loss of sentence formatting during the 
lemmatization process. The sentence alignment 
is a crucial preprocessing step for the word 
alignment process, and a lot of the sentence 
boundaries were lost in the lemmatization proc-
ess. However, the resulting word lists from 
Uplug have been lemmatized using the same 
lemmatizers, in order to obtain normalized dic-
tionaries. 
The corpora were to some extent non-parallel 
containing some extra non-parallel paragraphs. 
We found that around five percent of the corpora 
were non-parallel. In order to detect non-parallel 
sections we have used a simpler algorithm than 
in for instance Munteanu & Marcu (2006). The 
total number of paragraphs and sentences in each 
                                                 
                                                
3 See: http://cst.dk/download/cstlemma/current/doc/ 
4 See: http://www2.lingsoft.fi/cgi-bin/fintwol 
parallel text pair were counted. If the total num-
ber for each language in some language pair dif-
fered more than 20 percent these files were de-
leted. The refined corpora have been re-aligned 
with Uplug and evaluated. In Table 2 we show 
the general information for the refined corpora. 
3.1 Evaluation 
Our initial plan was to use the manually con-
structed dictionaries from the web site as an 
evaluation resource, but the words in these dic-
tionaries were rare in the corpus. Therefore we 
used human evaluators to evaluate the results 
from Uplug.  
The results from the Uplug execution gave on 
average 213 new dictionary words (frequency > 
3) per language, see Table 3. The average error 
rate 5  was 16 percent. We delimited the word 
amount by removing words shorter than six char-
acters, and also multiword expressions6 from the 
resulting word lists. The six character strategy is 
efficient for the Scandinavian languages as an 
alternative to stop word removal (Dalianis et al
2003) since the Scandinavian languages, as well 
 
5 The error rate is in this paper defined as the percentage of 
wrongly generated entries compared to the total number of 
generated entries. 
6 A multiword expression is in this paper defined as words 
(sequences of characters, letters or digits) separated by a 
blank or a hyphen. 
Language pair No. parallel texts Deleted files, % No. words, parallel 
Word distribution, 
first language in 
language pair, %
sw-da 179 6.3 78356 49.7
sw-no 128 3.8 59161 49.8
sw-fi 189 3.6 69525 58.1
sw-ice 175 5.9 76056 48.3
da-no 147 5.8 64946 50.2
da-fi 222 7.1 77849 58.6
da-ice 210 3.4 89093 49.0
no-fi 145 7.1 55409 58.3
no-ice 130 2.1 59622 49.0
Average 169 5.0 70002 52.3
Table 2: General corpora information, refined parallel corpora (non-parallel texts deleted) 
 
13
as Finnish, mostly produce compounds that are 
formed into one word (i.e. without blanks or hy-
phens). In Tiedemann (2008), a similar strategy 
of removing words with a word length shorter 
than five characters was carried out but in that 
case for English, Dutch and German. 
Different combinations with Finnish had a 
higher error rate, 30 percent, whereas the error 
rate for the combinations of the Scandinavian 
languages only yielded on average 9 percent  
errors. 
The high error rate for Finnish is possibly due 
to the fact that the Finnish language belongs to a 
different language family. We can see the same 
phenomena for Greek (Charitakis, 2007) and 
Turkish (Megyesi & Dahlqvist, 2007) combined 
with English and Swedish respectively, with 33 
and 31 percent erroneously translated words. 
However, one might expect even higher error 
rates due to the differences in the different lan-
guage pairs (and the sparseness of the data). Fin-
nish has free word order and is typologically 
very different from the Scandinavian languages, 
and the use of form words differs between the 
languages. On the other hand, both Finnish and 
the Scandinavian languages produce long, com-
plex compounds somewhat similarly, and the 
word order in Finnish share many features with 
the word order in the Scandinavian languages. 
One important aspect is the cultural similarities 
that the languages share.  
The main errors that were produced for the 
combinations of Finnish and the Scandinavian 
languages consisted of either errors with particles 
or compounds where the head word or attribute 
were missing in the Finnish alignment. For in-
stance, the Swedish word inv?nare (inhabitant) 
was aligned with the Finnish word asukasluku 
(number of inhabitants). Another error which 
was produced for all combinations with Finnish 
was lis?tieto (more information) which was 
aligned with ytterligere (additional, more) in 
Norwegian (and equivalent words in Swedish 
and Danish), an example of an error where the 
head word is missing. Many texts had sentences 
pointing to further information, which might ex-
plain this type of error. 
The lemmatizers produced some erroneous 
word forms. In Dalianis & Jongejan (2006) the 
CST lemmatizer was evaluated and reported an 
average error rate of nine percent. Moreover, 
since the lemmatization process is performed on 
the resulting word lists, and not within the origi-
nal context in which the words occur, the auto-
matic lemmatization is more difficult for the two 
lemmatizers used in this project. These errors 
have not been included in our evaluation since 
they are not produced by the Uplug alignment 
procedure. 
We can also see in Table 3 that deleting non-
parallel texts using our simple algorithm did not 
improve the overall results significantly. Perhaps 
our simple algorithm was too coarse for these 
corpora. The texts were in general very short and 
simple frequency information on paragraph and 
sentence amounts might not have captured non-
parallel fragments on such texts. 
 Initial   Deleting non-parallel 
Language 
pair 
No. dictionary 
words  
Erroneous 
translations, %
No. dictionary 
words  Erroneous translations, % 
sw-da 322 7.1 305 7.2
sw-no 269 6.3 235 9.4
sw-fi 138 29.0 133  34.6
sw-ice 151 18.5 173 16.2
da-no 322 3.7 304 4.3
da-fi 169 34.3 244  33.2
da-ice 206 6.8 226 10.2
no-fi 185 27.6 174  30.0
no-ice 159 14.5 181 14.4
Average  213 16.4  219  16.1
Table 3: Produced dictionary words and error rate 
14
The produced dictionary words were of high 
domain-specific quality. The majority of the cor-
rect and erroneous word pairs were covered by 
both the initial and the refined corpus. Deleting 
non-parallel texts produced some new, valuable 
words that were not included in the initial results. 
However, since these dictionaries were generally 
smaller, this did not improve the overall results, 
and the error rate was somewhat higher for most 
language pairs. Improved dictionary in this work 
means as many word pairs as possible with do-
main-specific significance. 
Since the texts were about different country-
specific issues they could contain sections in an-
other language (names of ministries, offices etc). 
This produced some errors in the alignment re-
sults. These errors might have been avoided by 
applying a language checker while processing 
the texts. 
The errors for the Scandinavian languages 
were also mainly of the same type, and mostly 
due to the fact that the texts were not completely 
parallel, or due to form words or compounds. For 
instance, the Swedish word exempelvis (for ex-
ample) was aligned with the Norwegian word 
eksempel (example), which was counted as an 
error, but which, in its context, is not completely 
erroneous. 
Even at a relatively low frequency threshold 
the results were very good for the Scandinavian 
languages. We tried to increase the frequency 
threshold in order to see if this would improve 
the results for Finnish, which it unfortunately did 
not. However, as stated above, the errors were 
mainly of the same type, and probably constant 
over different frequencies. We also see that for 
Icelandic, unlike the other languages, deleting 
non-parallel fragments yielded larger dictionar-
ies. Uplug produced more multiword units for 
the initial corpora containing Icelandic, single 
word pairs were more frequent in the refined 
corpus. However, the overall results were not 
improved. 
4 Conclusions and Future Work 
Although the corpora were very sparse the word 
alignment results for Swedish-Danish, Swedish-
Norwegian and Danish-Norwegian were surpris-
ingly good with on average 93.1 percent correct 
results. The results for Finnish were worse with 
on average only 67.4 percent correct results. 
However, as discussed above, the main errors 
were of the same type. Creating dictionaries for 
non-related languages might need more elaborate 
alignment approaches. In the special case of Fin-
nish combined with one (or several) of the Scan-
dinavian languages, simple preprocessing steps 
might improve the results. For instance, remov-
ing stop words before running the corpora 
through a word alignment system might handle 
the errors where particles and form words are 
included. Also, tagging the corpora with part-of-
speech tags and lemmatizing as a preprocessing 
step might improve results. 
An important aspect of automatically creating 
multilingual dictionaries is the need for preproc-
essing tools covering all languages. This is often 
difficult to obtain, and different tools use differ-
ent formatting and tagging schemes. Moreover, 
they might differ in robustness, which also af-
fects the end results. In this project, we encoun-
tered such problems during the lemmatization 
process for instance, but we did not have the op-
portunity to explore and evaluate alternative 
tools. In the future, evaluating the performance 
of the preprocessing steps might be desirable. 
Evaluating translated words is not easy. Many 
words may be related without being direct trans-
lations. Manual evaluation has the advantage of 
taking such issues into account, but this also 
means that the results might differ depending on 
the evaluator. Furthermore, evaluating transla-
tions without contextual information is problem-
atic. Also, the criteria for judging a translation as 
correct or not depend on the goal for the use of 
the word lists. For instance, the errors for the 
combinations with Finnish might not be prob-
lematic in a real-world search engine setting, de-
pending on which demands there are on the 
search results. The errors produced in the work 
presented here would probably yield acceptable 
search results. Such user and search engine result 
aspects have not been evaluated here, but are 
interesting research questions for future work. 
The Nordic languages are highly inflectional. 
Combining compound splitting and lemmatizing 
before the alignment process might improve the 
results. Especially compound splitting could 
probably handle the errors produced for the com-
binations of Finnish with the Scandinavian lan-
guages. Cross-combining the different language 
pairs might enhance the results and create more 
specific and errorless dictionaries. Other word 
alignment systems should also be tested, in order 
to compare different approaches and their results. 
Perhaps results from different systems could also 
be combined, in order to produce more extensive 
dictionaries. Furthermore, other approaches to 
15
detect non-parallel fragments should be investi-
gated. 
Finding the boundary for the minimum size of 
parallel corpora in order to obtain acceptable dic-
tionaries is also an interesting research issue 
which should be explored. 
Automatically creating multilingual dictionar-
ies is not trivial. Many aspects need to be consid-
ered. Especially, the final use of the produced 
results influences both the preprocessing steps 
required and the evaluation of the results. Also, 
the languages in consideration affect the steps 
that need to be made. However, in this paper we 
have shown that using state-of-the-art tools on 
sparse, raw, unprocessed domain-specific cor-
pora in both related and non-related languages 
yield acceptable and even commendable results. 
Depending on the purposes for the use of the dic-
tionaries, simple adjustments would probably 
yield even better results. 
In a real-world setting, parallel (or near-
parallel) corpora covering several (small) lan-
guages are difficult to obtain and compile. Most 
resources are found on the Internet, and the qual-
ity of the corpora may vary depending on many 
aspects. Formatting, translations, text length and 
style may differ considerably depending on the 
type of texts. Freely available text sets for small 
languages are often sparse. Despite this, we have 
shown that it is possible to compile valuable re-
sources from available data.   
There are very few sources of dictionaries 
covering the Nordic language pairs. The created 
corpora will be made publicly available for fur-
ther research and evaluation. 
References 
Ahrenberg, L., M. Merkel, A. S?gvall Hein and J. 
Tiedemann 2000. Evaluation of word alignment 
systems. Lars Ahrenberg, Magnus Merkel, Anna 
S?gvall Hein and J?rg Tiedemann. Proceedings of 
the Second International Conference on Linguistic 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-2000), Athens, 
Greece, 31 May - 2 June, 2000, Volume III: 1255-
1261. 
Charitakis, K. 2007. Using parallel corpora to create a 
Greek-English dictionary with Uplug, in Proc. 16th 
Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics - 
NODALIDA ?07. 
Dalianis, H. and B. Jongejan 2006. Hand-crafted ver-
sus Machine-learned Inflectional Rules: the Eurol-
ing-SiteSeeker Stemmer and CST's Lemmatiser, in 
Proc. of the International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2006. 
Dalianis, H., M. Rimka and V. Kann 2007. Using 
Uplug and SiteSeeker to construct a cross language 
search engine for Scandinavian. Workshop: The 
Automatic Treatment of Multilinguality in Re-
trieval, Search and Lexicography, Copenhagen, 
April 2007. 
Dalianis, H., M. Hassel, J. Wedekind, D. Haltrup, K. 
de Smedt and T.C. Lech. 2003. Automatic text 
summarization for the Scandinavian languages. In 
Holmboe, H. (ed.) Nordisk Sprogteknologi 2002: 
?rbog for Nordisk Spr?kteknologisk Forsknings-
program 2000-2004, pp. 153-163. Museum Tuscu-
lanums Forlag. 
Martin, J and R. Mihalcea and T. Pedersen. 2005. 
Word Alignment for Languages with Scarce Re-
sources. Proceedings of the ACL 2005 Workshop 
on Building and Using Parallel Texts: Data Driven 
Machine Translation and Beyond, Ann Arbor, MI, 
June 2005.  
Megyesi, B. and B. Dahlqvist, 2007. The Swedish-
Turkish Parallel Corpus and Tools for its Creation, 
in Proc. 16th Nordic Conference on Computational 
Linguistics - NODALIDA ?07. 
Munteanu, D.S. and D. Marcu 2006. Extracting Paral-
lel Sub-sentential Fragments from Non-parallel 
Corpora. ACL ?06: Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
pp. 81-88, Sydney, Australia. 
Nystr?m, M., M. Merkel, L. Ahrenberg, P. Zweigen-
baum, H. Petersson and H. ?hlfeldt. 2006. Creat-
ing a Medical English-Swedish Dictionary using 
Interactive Word Alignment, in BMC medical in-
formatics and decision making, 6:35.  
Franz Josef Och, Hermann Ney. A Systematic Com-
parison of Various Statistical Alignment Models, 
Computational Linguistics, volume 29, number 1, 
pp. 19-51 March 2003. 
Tiedemann, J. 2003a. Recycling Translations: Extrac-
tion of Lexical Data from Parallel Corpora and 
their Application in Natural Language Processing. 
Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis: Studia linguistica 
upsaliensia, ISSN 1652-1366, ISBN 91-554-5815-
7. 
Tiedemann, J. 2003b. Combining clues for word 
alignment. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference 
on European Chapter of the Association For Com-
putational Linguistics - Volume 1 (Budapest, Hun-
gary, April 12 - 17, 2003). European Chapter Meet-
ing of the ACL. Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, 339-346. DOI= 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1067807.1067852. 
Tiedemann, J. 2008. Synchronizing Translated Movie 
Subtitles. In the Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and 
Evaluation, LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco, 
May 28-30, 2008. 
16
