Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 129?137,
Columbus, June 2008. c?2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discourse Level Opinion Relations: An Annotation Study
Swapna Somasundaran
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
swapna@cs.pitt.edu
Josef Ruppenhofer
Intelligent Systems Program
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
josefr@cs.pitt.edu
Janyce Wiebe
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
wiebe@cs.pitt.edu
Abstract
This work proposes opinion frames as a repre-
sentation of discourse-level associations that
arise from related opinion targets and which
are common in task-oriented meeting dialogs.
We define the opinion frames and explain their
interpretation. Additionally we present an
annotation scheme that realizes the opinion
frames and via human annotation studies, we
show that these can be reliably identified.
1 Introduction
There has been a great deal of research in recent
years on opinions and subjectivity. Opinions have
been investigated at the phrase, sentence, and docu-
ment levels. However, little work has been carried
out at the level of discourse.
Consider the following excerpt from a dialog
about designing a remote control for a television (the
opinion targets - what the opinions are about - are
shown in italics).
(1) D:: And I thought not too edgy and like a box, more
kind of hand-held not as computery, yeah, more or-
ganic shape I think. Simple designs, like the last one
we just saw, not too many buttons . . .
Speaker D expresses an opinion in favor of a de-
sign that is simple and organic in shape, and against
an alternative design which is not. Several individ-
ual opinions are expressed in this passage. The first
is a negative opinion about the design being too edgy
and box-like, the next is a positive opinion toward
a hand-held design, followed by a negative opin-
ion toward a computery shape, and so on. While
we believe that recognizing individual expressions
of opinions, their properties, and components is im-
portant, we believe that discourse interpretation is
needed as well. It is by understanding the passage
as a discourse that we see edgy, like a box, com-
putery, and many buttons as descriptions of the type
of design D does not prefer, and hand-held, organic
shape, and simple designs as descriptions of the type
he does. These descriptions are not in general syn-
onyms/antonyms of one another; for example, there
are hand-held ?computery? devices and simple de-
signs that are edgy. The unison/opposition among
the descriptions is due to how they are used in the
discourse.
This paper focuses on such relations between the
targets of opinions in discourse. Specifically, we
propose opinion frames, which consist of two opin-
ions which are related by virtue of having united
or opposed targets. We believe that recognizing
opinion frames will provide more information for
NLP applications than recognizing their individual
components alone. Further, if there is uncertainty
about any one of the components, we believe opin-
ion frames are an effective representation incorpo-
rating discourse information to make an overall co-
herent interpretation (Hobbs, 1979; Hobbs, 1983).
To our knowledge, this is the first work to ex-
tend a manual annotation scheme to relate opinions
in the discourse. In this paper, we present opin-
ion frames, and motivate their usefulness through
examples. Then we provide an annotation scheme
for capturing these opinion frames. Finally we per-
form fine-grained annotation studies to measure the
human reliability in recognizing of these opinion
frames.
129
Opinion frames are presented in Section 2, our an-
notation scheme is described in Section 3, the inter-
annotator agreement studies are presented in Section
4, related work is discussed in Section 5, and conclu-
sions are in Section 6.
2 Opinion Frames
2.1 Introduction
The components of opinion frames are individual
opinions and the relationships between their targets.
We address two types of opinions, sentiment and
arguing. Following (Wilson and Wiebe, 2005; So-
masundaran et al, 2007), sentiment includes posi-
tive and negative evaluations, emotions, and judg-
ments, while arguing includes arguing for or against
something, and arguing that something should or
should not be done. In our examples, the lexical an-
chors revealing the opinion type (as the words are
interpreted in context) are indicated in bold face.
In addition, the text span capturing the target of the
opinion (again, as interpreted in context) is indicated
in italics.
(2) D:: . . . this kind of rubbery material, it?s a bit more
bouncy, like you said they get chucked around a lot. A
bit more durable and that can also be ergonomic and it
kind of feels a bit different from all the other remote
controls.
Speaker D expresses his preference for the rub-
bery material for the remote. He reiterates his opin-
ion with a number of positive evaluations like bit
more bouncy, bit more durable, ergonomic and
so on.
All opinions in this example are related to the oth-
ers via opinion frames by virtue of having the same
targets, i.e., the opinions are essentially about the
same things (the rubbery material for the remote).
For example, the opinions ergonomic and a bit dif-
ferent from all the other remote controls are re-
lated in a frame of type SPSPsame, meaning the first
opinion is a S(entiment) with polarity P(ositive); the
second also is a S(entiment) with polarity P(ositive);
and the targets of the opinions are in a same (target)
relation.
The specific target relations addressed in this pa-
per are the relations of either being the same or being
alternatives to one another. While these are not the
only possible relations, they are not infrequent, and
SPSPsame, SNSNsame, APAPsame, ANANsame,
SPAPsame, APSPsame, SNANsame, ANSNsame,
SPSNalt, SNSPalt, APANalt, ANAPalt,
SPANalt, SNAPalt, APSNalt, ANSPalt
SPSNsame, SNSPsame, APANsame, ANAPsame,
SPANsame, APSNsame, SNAPsame, ANSPsame,
SPSPalt, SNSNalt, APAPalt, ANANalt,
SPAPalt, SNANalt, APSPalt, ANSNalt
Table 1: Opinion Frames
they commonly occur in task-oriented dialogs such
as those in our data.
With four opinion type - polarity pairs (SN, SP,
AN, AP), for each of two opinion slots, and two pos-
sible target relations, we have 4 * 4 * 2 = 32 types
of frame, listed in Table 1.
In the remainder of this section, we elaborate fur-
ther on the same target relation (in 2.2) the alter-
native target relation (in 2.3) and explain a method
by which these relationships can be propagated (in
2.4). Finally, we illustrate the usefulness of opinion
frames in discourse interpretation (in 2.5).
2.2 Same Targets
Our notion of sameness for targets includes cases
of anaphora and ellipses, lexically similar items, as
well as less direct relations such as part-whole, sub-
set, inferable, and instance-class.
Looking at the opinion frames for Example 2 in
more detail, we separately list the opinions, followed
by the relations between targets.
Opinion Span - target Span Type
O1 bit more bouncy - it?s [t1] SP
O2 bit more durable - ellipsis [t2] SP
O3 ergonomic - that [t3] SP
O4 a bit different from all the other remote - it [t4] SP
Target - target Rel
t1 - t2 same
t1 - t3 same
t3 - t4 same
Ellipsis occurs with bit more durable. [t2] rep-
resents the (implicit) target of that opinion, and [t2]
has a same relation to [t1], the target of the bit more
bouncy opinion. (Note that the interpretation of the
first target, [t1], would require anaphora resolution
of its target span with a previous noun phrase, rub-
bery material.)
Let us now consider the following passage, in
which a meeting participant analyzes two leading re-
130
motes on the market.1
(3) D:: These are two leading remote controls at the mo-
ment. You know they?re grey, this one?s got loads of
buttons, it?s hard to tell from here what they actually
do, and they don?t look very exciting at all.
Opinion Span - target Span Rel
O1 leading - remote controls [t1] SP
O2 grey - they [t2] SN
O3 loads of buttons - this one [t3] SN
O4 hard to tell - they [t4] SN
O5 don?t look very exciting at all - they [t5] SN
Target - target Rel
t1 - t2 same
t2 - t3 same
t3 - t4 same
t5 - t1 same
Target [t2] is the set of two leading remotes, and [t3],
which is in a same relation with [t2], is one of those
remotes. Target [t4], which is also in a same rela-
tion with [t3], is an aspect of that remote, namely
its buttons. Thus, opinion O3 is directly about one
of the remotes, and indirectly about the set of both
remotes. Similarly, opinion O4 is directly about the
buttons of one of the remotes, and indirectly about
that remote itself.
2.3 Alternative Targets
The alt(ernative) target relation arises when multiple
choices are available, and only one can be selected.
For example, in the domain of TV remote controls,
the set of all shapes are alternatives to one another,
since a remote control may have only one shape at a
time. In such scenarios, a positive opinion regarding
one choice may imply a negative opinion toward the
rest of the choices, and vice versa.
As an example, let us now consider the follow-
ing passage (some intervening utterances have been
removed for clarity).
(4) C:: . . . shapes should be curved, so round shapes2
Nothing square-like.
C:: . . . So we shouldn?t have too square corners and
that kind of thing.
B:: Yeah okay. Not the old box look.
1In the other examples in this paper, the source (holder) of
the opinions is the speaker. The leading opinion in this example
is an exception: its source is implicit; it is a consensus opinion
that is not necessarily shared by the speaker (i.e., it is a nested
source (Wiebe et al, 2005)).
2In the context of the dialogs, the annotators read the ?so
round shapes? as a summary statement. Had the ?so? been inter-
preted as Arguing, the round shapes would have been annotated
as a target (and linked to curved).
Opinion Span - target Span Rel
O1 should be - curved [t1] AP
O2 Nothing - square-like [t2] AN
O3 shouldn?t have - square corners [t3] AN
O4 too - square corners [t3] SN
O5 Not - the old box look [t4] AN
O6 the old box look - the old box look [t4] SN
Target - target Rel
t1 -t2 alternatives
t2 - t3 same
t3 - t4 same
There is an alt relation between, for example,
[t1] and [t2]. Thus, we have an opinion frame be-
tween O1 and O2, whose type is APANalt. From
this frame, we understand that a positive opinion is
expressed toward something and a negative opinion
is expressed toward its alternative.
2.4 Link Transitivity
When individual targets are linked, they form a
chain-like structure. Due to this, a connecting path
may exist between targets that were not directly
linked by the human annotators. This path may be
traversed to create links between new pairs of tar-
gets - which in turn results in new opinion frame re-
lations. For instance, in Example 4, the frame with
direct relation is O1O2 APANalt. By following the
alt link from [t1] to [t2] and the same link from [t2]
to [t3], we have an alt link between [t1] and [t3],
and the additional frames O1O3 APANalt and O1O4
APSNalt. Repeating this process would finally link
speaker C?s opinion O1 with B?s opinion O6, yield-
ing a APSNalt frame.
2.5 Interpretation
This section illustrates two motivations for opinion
frames: they may unearth additional information
over and above the individual opinions stated in the
text, and they may contribute toward arriving at a
coherent interpretation (Hobbs, 1979; Hobbs, 1983)
of the opinions in the discourse.
Through opinion frames, opinions regarding
something not explicitly mentioned in the local con-
text and not even lexically related can become rel-
evant, providing more information about someone?s
opinions. This is particularly interesting when alt
relations are involved, as opinions towards one al-
ternative imply opinions of opposite polarity toward
the remaining options. For instance in Example 4
131
above, if we consider only the explicitly stated opin-
ions, there is only one (positive) opinion about the
curved shape, namely O1. However, the speaker ex-
presses several other opinions which reinforce his
positivity toward the curved shape. These are in
fact opinion frames in which the other opinion has
the opposite polarity as O1 and the target relation is
alt (for example frames such as O1O3 APANalt and
O1O4 APSNalt).
In the dialog, notice that speaker B agrees with
C and exhibits his own reinforcing opinions. These
would be similarly linked via targets resulting in
frames like O1O6 APSNalt.
Turning to our second point, arriving at a coher-
ent interpretation obviously involves disambigua-
tion. Suppose that some aspect of an individual
opinion, such as polarity, is unclear. If the discourse
suggests certain opinion frames, this may in turn re-
solve the underlying ambiguity. For instance in Ex-
ample 2, we see that out of context, the polarities of
bouncy and different from other remotes are un-
clear (bounciness and being different may be neg-
ative attributes for another type of object). How-
ever, the polarities of two of the opinions are clear
(durable and ergonomic). There is evidence in this
passage of discourse continuity and same relations,
such as the pronouns, the lack of contrastive cue
phrases, and so on. This evidence suggests that the
speaker expresses similar opinions throughout the
passage, making the opinion frame SPSPsame more
likely throughout. Recognizing the frames would re-
solve the polarity ambiguities of bouncy and differ-
ent.
Example 2 is characterized by opinion frames in
which the opinions reinforce one other. Interest-
ingly, interplays among different opinion types may
show the same type of reinforcement. As we an-
alyzed above, Example 4 is characterized by mix-
tures of opinion types, polarities, and target rela-
tions. However, the opinions are still unified in
the intention to argue for a particular type of shape.
There is evidence in this passage suggesting rein-
forcing frames: the negations are applied to targets
that are alternative to the desired option, and the pas-
sage is without contrastive discourse cues. If we
are able to recognize the best overall set of opinion
frames for the passage, the polarity ambiguities will
be resolved.
On the other hand, evidence for non-reinforcing
opinions would suggest other frames, potentially re-
sulting in different interpretations of polarity and re-
lations among targets. Such non-reinforcing associ-
ations between opinions and often occur when the
speaker is ambivalent or weighing pros and cons.
Table 1 lists the frames that occur in reinforcing sce-
narios in the top row, and the frames that occur in
non-reinforcing scenarios in the bottom row.
3 Annotation Scheme
Our annotation scheme began with the definition
and basics of the opinion annotation from previ-
ous work (Wilson and Wiebe, 2005; Somasundaran
et al, 2007). We then add to it the attributes and
components that are necessary to make an Opinion
Frame.
First, the text span that reveals the opinion expres-
sion is identified. Then, the text spans corresponding
to the targets are marked, if there exist any (we also
allow span-less targets). Then, the type and polar-
ity of the opinion in the context of the discourse is
marked. Finally the targets that are related (again
in the context of the discourse) are linked. Specif-
ically, the components that form the Annotation of
the frame are as follows:
Opinion Span: This is a span of text that reveals
the opinion.
Type: This attribute specifies the opinion type as ei-
ther Arguing or Sentiment.
Polarity: This attribute identifies the valence of an
opinion and can be one of: positive, negative,
neutral, both, unknown.
Target Span: This is a span of text that captures
what an opinion is about. This can be a propo-
sition or an entity.
Target Link: This is an attribute of a target and
records all the targets in the discourse that the
target is related to.
Link Type: The link between two targets is speci-
fied by this attribute as either same or alterna-
tive.
132
In addition to these definitions, our annotation man-
ual has guidelines detailing how to deal with gram-
matical issues, disfluencies, etc. Appendix A illus-
trates how this annotation scheme is applied to the
utterances of Example 4.
Links between targets can be followed in either
direction to construct chains. In this work, we
consider target relations to be commutative, i.e.,
Link(t1,t2) => Link(t2,t1). When a newly anno-
tated target is similar (or opposed) to a set of tar-
gets already participating in same relations, then the
same (or alt) link is made only to one of them - the
one that looks most natural. This is often the one
that is closest.
4 Annotation Studies
Construction of an opinion frame is a stepwise pro-
cess where first the text spans revealing the opinions
and their targets are selected, the opinion text spans
are classified by type and polarity and finally the
targets are linked via one of the possible relations.
We split our annotation process into these 3 intuitive
stages and use an evaluation that is most applicable
for the task at that stage.
Two annotators (both co-authors on the paper) un-
derwent training at each stage, and the annotation
manual was revised after each round of training. In
order to prevent errors incurred at earlier stages from
affecting the evaluation of later stages, the anno-
tators produced a consensus version at the end of
each stage, and used that consensus annotation as
the starting point for the next annotation stage. In
producing these consensus files, one annotator first
annotated a document, and the other annotator re-
viewed the annotations, making changes if needed.
This prevented any discussion between the annota-
tors from influencing the tagging task of the next
stage.
In the following subsections, we first introduce
the data and then present our results for annotation
studies for each stage, ending with discussion.
4.1 Data
The data used in this work is the AMI meeting cor-
pus (Carletta et al, 2005) which contains multi-
modal recordings of group meetings. We annotated
meetings from the scenario based meetings, where
Gold Exact Lenient Subset
ANN-1 53 89 87
ANN-2 44 76 74
Table 2: Inter-Annotator agreement on Opinion Spans
four participants collaborate to design a new TV
remote control in a series of four meetings. The
meetings represent different project phases, namely
project kick-off, functional design, conceptual de-
sign, and detailed design. Each meeting has rich
transcription and segment (turn/utterance) informa-
tion for each speaker. Each utterance consists of
one or more sentences. At each agreement stage we
used approximately 250 utterances from a meeting
for evaluation. The annotators also used the audio
and video recordings in the annotation of meetings.
4.2 Opinion Spans and Target Spans
In this step, the annotators selected text spans and
labeled them as opinion or target We calculated our
agreement for text span retrieval similar to Wiebe et
al. (2005). This agreement metric corresponds to
the Precision metric in information retrieval, where
annotations from one annotator are considered the
gold standard, and the other annotator?s annotations
are evaluated against it.
Table 2 shows the inter-annotator agreement (in
percentages). For the first row, the annotations pro-
duced by Annotator-1 (ANN-1) are taken as the gold
standard and, for the second row, the annotations
from annotator-2 form the gold standard. The ?Ex-
act? column reports the agreement when two text
spans have to match exactly to be considered cor-
rect. The ?Lenient? column shows the results if
an overlap relation between the two annotators? re-
trieved spans is also considered to be a hit. Wiebe
et al (2005) use this approach to measure agree-
ment for a (somewhat) similar task of subjectivity
span retrieval in the news corpus. Our agreement
numbers for this column is comparable to theirs. Fi-
nally, the third column, ?Subset?, shows the agree-
ment for a more strict constraint, namely, that one
of the spans must be a subset of the other to be con-
sidered a match. Two opinion spans that satisfy this
relation are ensured to share all the opinion words of
the smaller span.
The numbers indicate that, while the annotators
133
Gold Exact Lenient Subset
ANN-1 54 73 71
ANN-2 54 75 74
Table 3: Inter-Annotator agreement on Target Spans
Gold Exact Lenient Subset
ANN-1 74 87 87
ANN-2 76 90 90
Table 4: Inter-Annotator agreement on Targets with Per-
fect Opinion spans
do not often retrieve the exact same span, they
reliably retrieve approximate spans. Interestingly,
the agreement numbers between Lenient and Sub-
set columns are close. This implies that, in the cases
of inexact matches, the spans retrieved by the two
annotators are still close. They agree on the opinion
words and differ mostly on the inclusion of func-
tion words (e.g. articles) and observation of syntac-
tic boundaries.
In similar fashion, Table 3 gives the inter-
annotator agreement for target span retrieval. Ad-
ditionally, Table 4 shows the inter-annotator agree-
ment for target span retrieval when opinions that do
not have an exact match are filtered out. That is, Ta-
ble 4 shows results only for targets of the opinions
on which the annotators perfectly agree. As targets
are annotated with respect to the opinions, this sec-
ond evaluation removes any effects of disagreements
in the opinion detection task. As seen in Table 4, this
improves the inter-coder agreement.
4.3 Opinion Type and Polarity
In this step, the annotators began with the consensus
opinion span and target span annotations. We hy-
pothesized that given the opinion expression, deter-
mining whether it is Arguing or Sentiment would not
be difficult. Similarly, we hypothesized that target
information would make the polarity labeling task
clearer.
As every opinion instance is tagged with a type
Type Tagging Polarity Tagging
Accuracy 97.8% 98.5%
? 0.95 0.952
Table 5: Inter-Annotator agreement on Opinion Types
and Polarity
and polarity, we use Accuracy and Cohen?s Kappa
(?) metric (Cohen, 1960). The ? metric measures
the inter-annotator agreement above chance agree-
ment. The results, in Table 5, show that ? both for
type and polarity tagging is very high. This con-
firms our hypothesis that Sentiment and Arguing can
be reliably distinguished once the opinion spans are
known. Our polarity detection task shows an im-
provement in ? over a similar polarity assignment
task by Wilson et al (2005) for the news corpus (?
of 0.72). We believe this improvement can partly be
attributed to the target information available to our
annotators.
4.4 Target Linking
As an intuitive first step in evaluating target link-
ing, we treat target links in the discourse similarly to
anaphoric chains and apply methods developed for
co-reference resolution (Passonneau, 2004) for our
evaluation. Passonneau?s method is based on Krip-
pendorf?s ? metric (Krippendorff, 2004) and allows
for partial matches between anaphoric chains. In ad-
dition to this, we evaluate links identified by both
annotators for the type (same / alternative) labeling
task with the help of the ? metric.
Passonneau (2004) reports that in her co-reference
task on spoken monologs, ? varies with the diffi-
culty of the corpus (from 0.46 to 0.74). This is true
in our case too. Table 6 shows our agreement for
the four types of meetings in the AMI corpus: the
kickoff meeting (a), the functional design (b), the
conceptual design (c) and the detailed design (d).
Of the meetings, the kickoff meeting (a) we use
has relatively clear discussions. The conceptual de-
sign meeting (c) is the toughest, as as participants
are expressing opinions about a hypothetical (desir-
able) remote. In our detailed design meeting (d),
there are two final designs being evaluated. On an-
alyzing the chains from the two annotators, we dis-
covered that one annotator had maintained two sepa-
rate chains for the two remotes as there is no explicit
linguistic indication (within the 250 utterances) that
these two are alternatives. The second annotator, on
the other hand, used the knowledge that the goal
of the meeting is to design a single TV remote to
link them as alternatives. Thus by changing just
two links in the second annotator?s file to account
for this, our ? for this meeting went up from 0.52
134
Meeting: a b c d
Target linking (?) 0.79 0.74 0.59 0.52
Relation Labeling (?) 1 1 0.91 1
Table 6: Inter-Annotator agreement on Target relation
identification
to 0.70. We plan to further explore other evalua-
tion methodologies that account for severity of dif-
ferences in linking and are more relevant for our
task. Nonetheless, the resulting numbers indicate
that there is sufficient information in the discourse
to provide for reliable linking of targets.
The high ? for the relation type identification
shows that once the presence of a link is detected,
it is not difficult to determine if the targets are simi-
lar or alternatives to each other.
4.5 Discussion
Our agreement studies help to identify the aspects of
opinion frames that are straightforward, and those
that need complex reasoning. Our results indicate
that while the labeling tasks such as opinion type,
opinion polarity and target relation type are rel-
atively reliable for humans, retrieval of opinions
spans, target spans and target links is more difficult.
A common cause of annotation disagreement is
different interpretation of the utterance, particularly
in the presence of disfluencies and restarts. For ex-
ample consider the following utterance where a par-
ticipant is evaluating the drawing of another partici-
pant on the white board.
(5) It?s a baby shark , it looks to me, . . .
One annotator interpreted this ?it looks to me? as
an arguing for the belief that it was indeed a draw-
ing of a baby shark (positive Arguing). The sec-
ond annotator on the other hand looked at it as a
neutral viewpoint/evaluation (Sentiment) being ex-
pressed regarding the drawing. Thus even though
both annotators felt an opinion is being expressed,
they differed on its type and polarity.
There are some opinions that are inherently on the
borderline of Sentiment and Arguing. For example,
consider the following utterance where there is an
appeal to importance:
(6) Also important for you all is um the production cost
must be maximal twelve Euro and fifty cents.
Here, ?also important? might be taken as an assess-
ment of the high value of adhering to the budget (rel-
ative to other constraints), or simply as an argument
for adhering to the budget.
One potential source of problems to the target-
linking process consists of cases where the same
item becomes involved in more than one opposition.
For instance, in the example below, speaker D ini-
tially sets up an alternative between speech recog-
nition and buttons as a possible interface for navi-
gation. But later, speaker A re-frames the choice as
between having speech recognition only and having
both options. Connecting up all references to speech
recognition as a target respects the co-reference but
it also results in incorrect conclusions: the speech
recognition is an alternative to having both speech
recognition and buttons.
(7) A:: One thing is interesting is talking about speech
recognition in a remote control...
D:: ... So that we don?t need any button on the remote
control it would be all based on speech.
A:: ... I think that would not work so well. You wanna
have both options.
5 Related Work
Evidence from the surrounding context has been
used previously to determine if the current sentence
should be subjective/objective (Riloff et al, 2003;
Pang and Lee, 2004)) and adjacency pair informa-
tion has been used to predict congressional votes
(Thomas et al, 2006). However, these methods do
not explicitly model the relations between opinions.
Additionally, in our scheme opinions that are not
in the immediate context may be allowed to influ-
ence the interpretation of a given opinion via target
chains.
Polanyi and Zaenen (2006), in their discussion on
contextual valence shifters, have also observed the
phenomena described in this work - namely that a
central topic may be divided into subtopics in order
to perform evaluations, and that discourse structure
can influence the overall interpretation of valence.
Snyder and Barzilay (2007) combine an agree-
ment model based on contrastive RST relations with
a local aspect (or target) model to make a more in-
formed overall decision for sentiment classification.
The contrastive cue indicates a change in the senti-
ment polarity. In our scheme, their aspects would
be related as same and their high contrast relations
would result in frames such as SPSNsame, SNSP-
same. Additionally, our frame relations would link
sentiments across non-adjacent clauses, and make
connections via alt target relations.
135
Considering the discourse relation annotations in
the PDTB (Prasad et al, 2006), there can be align-
ment between discourse relations (like contrast) and
our opinion frames when the frames represent dom-
inant relations between two clauses. However, when
the relation between opinions is not the most promi-
nent one between two clauses, the discourse relation
may not align with the opinion frames. And when an
opinion frame is between two opinions in the same
clause, there would be no discourse relation counter-
part at all. Further, opinion frames assume particular
intentions that are not necessary for the establish-
ment of ostensibly similar discourse relations. For
example, we may not impose an opinion frame even
if there are contrastive cues. (Please refer to Ap-
pendix B for examples)
With regard to meetings, the most closely re-
lated work includes the dialog-related annotation
schemes for various available corpora of conversa-
tion (Dhillon et al (2003) for ICSI MRDA; Car-
letta et al (2005) for AMI ) As shown by Soma-
sundaran et al (2007), dialog structure information
and opinions are in fact complementary. We believe
that, like discourse relations, dialog information will
additionally help in arriving at an overall coherent
interpretation.
6 Conclusion and Future work
This is the first work that extends an opinion annota-
tion scheme to relate opinions via target relations.
We first introduced the idea of opinion frames as
a representation capturing discourse level relations
that arise from related opinion targets and which are
common in task-oriented dialogs such as our data.
We built an annotation scheme that would capture
these relationships. Finally, we performed extensive
inter-annotator agreement studies in order to find the
reliability of human judgment in recognizing frame
components. Our results and analysis provide in-
sights into the complexities involved in recognizing
discourse level relations between opinions.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the
Department of Homeland Security under grant
N000140710152.
References
J. Carletta, S. Ashby, and et al 2005. The AMI Meetings
Corpus. In Proceedings of Measuring Behavior Sym-
posium on ?Annotating and measuring Meeting Be-
havior?.
J. Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nominal
scales. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
20:37?46.
R. Dhillon, S. Bhagat, H. Carvey, and E. Shriberg. 2003.
Meeting recorder project: Dialog act labeling guide.
Technical report, ICSI Tech Report TR-04-002.
J. Hobbs. 1979. Coherence and coreference. Cognitive
Science, 3:67?90.
J. Hobbs, 1983. Why is Discourse Coherent?, pages 29?
70. Buske Verlag.
K. Krippendorff. 2004. Content Analysis: An Introduc-
tion to Its Methodology, 2nd Edition. Sage Publica-
tions, Thousand Oaks, California.
B. Pang and L. Lee. 2004. A sentimental education:
Sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization
based on minimum cuts. In ACl 2004.
R. J. Passonneau. 2004. Computing reliability for coref-
erence annotation. In LREC.
L. Polanyi and A. Zaenen, 2006. Contextual Valence
Shifters, chapter 1. Computing Attitude and Affect in
Text: Theory and Applications. Springer.
R. Prasad, N. Dinesh, A. Lee, A. Joshi, and B. Webber.
2006. Annotating attribution in the Penn Discourse
TreeBank. In Workshop on Sentiment and Subjectivity
in Text. ACL.
E. Riloff, J. Wiebe, and T. Wilson. 2003. Learning sub-
jective nouns using extraction pattern bootstrapping.
In CoNLL 2003.
B. Snyder and R. Barzilay. 2007. Multiple aspect rank-
ing using the good grief algorithm. In HLT 2007:
NAACL.
S. Somasundaran, J. Ruppenhofer, and J. Wiebe. 2007.
Detecting arguing and sentiment in meetings. In SIG-
dial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue 2007.
M. Thomas, B. Pang, and L. Lee. 2006. Get out the vote:
Determining support or opposition from congressional
floor-debate transcripts. In EMNLP 2006.
J. Wiebe, T. Wilson, and C Cardie. 2005. Annotating ex-
pressions of opinions and emotions in language. Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pages 164?210.
T. Wilson and J. Wiebe. 2005. Annotating attributions
and private states. In Proceedings of ACL Workshop
on Frontiers in Corpus Annotation II: Pie in the Sky.
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann. 2005. Recogniz-
ing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment anal-
ysis. In HLT-EMNLP 2005.
136
A Annotation Example
C:: . . . shapes should be curved, so round shapes. Nothing
square-like.
C:: . . . So we shouldn?t have too square corners and that kind
of thing.
B:: Yeah okay. Not the old box look.
Span Attributes
O1 should be type=Arguing; Polarity=pos; target=t1
t1 curved Link,type=(t2,alt)
O2 Nothing type=Arguing; Polarity=neg; target=t2
t2 square-like Link,type=(t1,alt),(t3,same)
O3 shouldn?t have type=Arguing; Polarity=neg; target=t3
O4 too type=Sentiment; Polarity=neg; target=t3
t3 square corners Link,type=(t2,same),(t4,same)
O5 Not type=Arguing; Polarity=neg; target=t4
t4 the old box look Link,type=(t3,same)
O6 the old box look type=Sentiment; Polarity=neg; target=t4
B Comparison between Opinion Frames
and Discourse Relations
Opinion frames can align with discourse relations
between clauses only when the frames represent the
dominant relation between two clauses (1); but not
when the opinions occur in the same clause (2); or
when the relation between opinions is not the most
prominent (3); or when two distinct targets are nei-
ther same nor alternatives (4).
(1) Non-reinforcing opinion frame (SNSP-
same); Contrast discourse relation
D :: And so what I have found and after a lot
of work actually I draw for you this schema
that can be maybe too technical for you but
is very important for me you know.
(2) Reinforcing opinion frame (SPSPsame); no
discourse relation
Thirty four percent said it takes too long
to learn to use a remote control, they want
something that?s easier to use straight away,
more intuitive perhaps.
(3) Reinforcing opinion frame (SPSPsame);
Reason discourse relation
She even likes my manga, actually the quote
is: ?I like it, because you like it, honey.?
(source: web)
(4) Unrelated opinions; Contrast discourse re-
lation
A :: Yeah, what I have to say about means.
The smart board is okay. Digital pen is hor-
rible. I dunno if you use it. But if you want
to download it to your computer, it?s doesn?t
work. No.
137
