Coling 2008: Proceedings of the workshop on Cross-Framework and Cross-Domain Parser Evaluation, pages 44?50
Manchester, August 2008
Constructing a Parser Evaluation Scheme
Laura Rimell and Stephen Clark
Oxford University Computing Laboratory
Wolfson Building, Parks Road
Oxford, OX1 3QD, United Kingdom
{laura.rimell,stephen.clark}@comlab.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we examine the process of
developing a relational parser evaluation
scheme, identifying a number of decisions
which must be made by the designer of
such a scheme. Making the process more
modular may help the parsing community
converge on a single scheme. Examples
from the shared task at the COLING parser
evaluation workshop are used to highlight
decisions made by various developers, and
the impact these decisions have on any re-
sulting scoring mechanism. We show that
quite subtle distinctions, such as howmany
grammatical relations are used to encode a
linguistic construction, can have a signifi-
cant effect on the resulting scores.
1 Introduction
In this paper we examine the various decisions
made by designers of parser evaluation schemes
based on grammatical relations (Lin, 1995; Car-
roll et al, 1998). Following Carroll et al (1998),
we use the term grammatical relations to refer
to syntactic dependencies between heads and de-
pendents. We assume that grammatical relation
schemes are currently the best method available
for parser evaluation due to their relative inde-
pendence of any particular parser or linguistic
theory. There are several grammatical relation
schemes currently available, for example Carroll et
al. (1998), King et al (2003), and de Marneffe et
al. (2006). However, there has been little analysis
of the decisions made by the designers in creating
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
what turns out to be a complex set of dependen-
cies for naturally occurring sentences. In particu-
lar, in this paper we consider how the process can
be made more modular to help the parsing commu-
nity converge on a single scheme.
The first decision to be made by the scheme
designer is what types of linguistic constructions
should be covered by the scheme. By construction
we mean syntactic phenomena such as subject of
verb, direct object of verb, passive voice, coordina-
tion, relative clause, apposition, and so on. In this
paper we assume that the constructions of interest
have already been identified (and there does appear
to be broad agreement on this point across the ex-
isting schemes). A construction can be thought of
as a unitary linguistic object, although it is often
represented by several grammatical relations.
The second decision to be made is which words
are involved in a particular construction. This is
important because a subset of these words will
be arguments of the grammatical relations repre-
senting the construction. Again, we assume that
there is already broad agreement among the exist-
ing schemes regarding this question. One possible
point of disagreement is whether to include empty
elements in the representation, for example when
a passive verb has no overt subject, but we will not
address that issue here.
The next question, somewhat orthogonal to the
previous one, and a source of disagreement be-
tween schemes, is how informative the represen-
tation should be. By informative we mean the
amount of linguistic information represented in the
scheme. As well as relations between heads, some
schemes include one or more features, each of
which expresses information about an individual
head. These features can be the locus of richer lin-
guistic information than is represented in the de-
44
pendencies. A useful example here is tense and
mood information for verbs. This is included in the
PARC scheme, for example, but not in the Briscoe
and Carroll or Stanford schemes; PARC is in gen-
eral more informative and detailed than competing
schemes. Although features are technically dif-
ferent from relations, they form part of an overall
evaluation scheme and must be considered by the
scheme designer. We will not consider here the
question of how informative schemes should be;
we only note the importance of this question for
the resulting scoring mechanism.
The penultimate question, also a source of
disagreement among existing schemes, is which
words among all those involved in the construc-
tion should be used to represent it in the scheme.
This decision may arise when identifying syntac-
tic heads; for example, in the sentence Brown
said house prices will continue to fall, we assume
there is no disagreement about which words are
involved in the clausal complement construction
({said, house, prices, will, continue, to, fall}), but
there may be disagreement about which subset to
use to represent the construction in the grammat-
ical relations. Here, either will or continue could
be used to represent the complement of said. This
decision may also be theory-dependent to some de-
gree, for example whether to use the determiner or
the noun as the head of a noun phrase.
The final decision to make is the choice of rela-
tions and their arguments. This can also be thought
of as the choice of how the set of representative
words should be grouped into relations. For exam-
ple, in a relative clause construction, the scheme
designer must decide whether the relation between
the relative pronoun and the head noun is impor-
tant, or the relation between the relative pronoun
and the verb, between the head noun and the verb,
or some subset of these. The choice of label for
each relation will be a natural part of this decision.
An important property of the representation,
closely related to the choices made about represen-
tative words and how they are grouped into rela-
tions, is the number of relations used for a partic-
ular construction. We refer to this as the compact-
ness property. Compactness essentially boils down
to the valency of each relation and the information
encoded in the label(s) used for the relation. We
show that this property is closely related to the as-
signing of partial credit ? awarding points even
when a construction is not recovered completely
correctly ? and that it can have a significant effect
on the resulting scoring mechanism.
The dividing lines between the various ques-
tions we have described are subtle, and in partic-
ular the last two questions (which words should
represent the construction and which relations to
use, and consequently how compactly the rela-
tions are represented) have significant overlap with
one another. For example, if the auxiliary are
in the passive construction prices are affected is
chosen as one of the representative words, then
a relation type which relates are to either prices
or affected must also be chosen. For the relative
clause construction woman who likes apples and
pears, if the words and relations chosen include
a representation along the lines of relative-clause-
subject(likes, woman) and subject(likes, who), then
it is unlikely that the more compact relation
relative-clause(likes, woman, who) would also be
chosen. Despite the overlap, each question can
provide a useful perspective for the designer of an
evaluation scheme.
Decisions must be made not only about the rep-
resentations of the individual constructions, but
also about the interfaces between constructions.
For example, in the sentenceMary likes apples and
pears, the coordination structure apples and pears
serves as direct object of likes, and it must be de-
termined which word(s) are used to represent the
coordination in the direct object relation.
We will illustrate some of the consequences of
the decisions described here with detailed exam-
ples of three construction types. We focus on pas-
sive, coordination, and relative clause construc-
tions, as analysed in the PARC (King et al, 2003),
GR (Briscoe and Carroll, 2006), and Stanford (de
Marneffe et al, 2006) evaluation schemes, using
sentences from the shared task of the COLING 2008
parser evaluation workshop.
1
These three con-
structions were chosen because we believe they
provide particularly good illustrations of the var-
ious decisions and their consequences for scoring.
Furthermore, they are constructions whose repre-
sentation differs across at least two of the three
grammatical relation schemes under dicsussion,
which makes them more interesting as examples.
We believe that the principles involved, however,
1
The shared task includes a number of additional formats
besides the three grammatical relation schemes that we con-
sider here, but the representations are sufficiently different
that we don?t consider a comparison fruitful for the present
discussion.
45
apply to any linguistic construction.
We also wish to point out that at this stage we are
not recommending any particular scheme or any
answers to the questions we raise, but only sug-
gesting ways to clarify the decision points. Nor do
we intend to imply that the ideal representation of
any linguistic construction, for any particular pur-
pose, is one of the representations in an existing
scheme; we merely use the existing schemes as
concrete and familiar illustrations of the issues in-
volved.
2 The Passive Construction
The following is an extract from Sentence 9 of the
shared task:
how many things are made out of eggs
We expect general agreement that this is a pas-
sive construction, and that it should be included in
the evaluation scheme.
2
We also expect agreement
that all the words in this extract are involved in the
construction.
Potential disagreements arise when we consider
which words should represent the construction.
Things, as the head of the noun phrase which is the
underlying object of the passive, and made, as the
main verb, seem uncontroversial. We discard how
and many as modifiers of things, and the prepo-
sitional phrase out of eggs as a modifier of made;
again we consider these decisions to be straightfor-
ward. More controversial is whether to include the
auxiliary verb are. PARC, for example, does not
include it in the scheme at all, considering it an in-
herent part of the passive construction. Even if the
auxiliary verb is included in the overall scheme, it
is debatable whether this word should be consid-
ered part of the passive construction or part of a
separate verb-auxiliary construction. Stanford, for
example, uses the label auxpass for the relation be-
tween made and are, indicating that it is part of the
passive construction.
The next decision to be made is what relations
to use. We consider it uncontroversial to include
a relation between things and made, which will be
some kind of subject relation. We also want to rep-
resent the fact that made is in the passive voice,
since this is an essential part of the construction
and makes it possible to derive the underlying ob-
ject position of things. If the auxiliary are is in-
2
PARC recognises it as an interrogative as well as a passive
construction.
cluded, then there should be a verb-auxiliary rela-
tion between made and are, and perhaps a subject
relation between are and things (although none of
the schemes under consideration use the latter rela-
tion). PARC includes a variety of additional infor-
mation about the selected words in the construc-
tion, including person and number information for
the nouns, as well as tense and mood for the verbs.
Since this is not included in the other two schemes,
we ignore it here.
The relevant relations from the three schemes
under consideration are shown below.
3
PARC
passive(make, +)
subj(make, thing)
GR
(ncsubj made things obj)
(passive made)
(aux made are)
Stanford
nsubjpass(made, things)
auxpass(made, are)
PARC encodes the grammatical relations less
compactly, with one subject relation joining make
and thing, and a separate relation expressing the
fact that make is in the passive voice. Stanford
is more compact, with a single relation nsubj-
pass that expresses both verb-subject (via the argu-
ments) and passive voice (via the label). GR has an
equally compact relation since the obj marker sig-
nifies passive when found in the ncsubj relation.
GR, however, also includes an additional feature
passive, which redundantly encodes the fact that
made is in passive voice.
4
Table 1 shows how different kinds of parsing er-
rors are scored in the three schemes. First note the
differences in the ?everything correct? row, which
shows how many points are available for the con-
struction. A parser that is good at identifying pas-
sives will earn more points in GR than in PARC
and Stanford. Of course, it is always possible to
look at accuracy figures by dependency type in or-
der to understand what a parser is good at, as rec-
ommended by Briscoe and Carroll (2006), but it is
3
Schemes typically include indices on the words for iden-
tification, but we omit these from the examples unless re-
quired for disambiguation. Note also that PARC uses the
lemma rather than the inflected form for the head words.
4
Although passive is technically a feature and not a rela-
tion, as long as it is included in the evaluation the effect will
be of double scoring.
46
PARC GR Stanf
Everything correct 2 3 2
Misidentify subject 1 2 1
Misidentify verb 0 0 0
Miss passive constr 1 1 0
Miss auxiliary 2 2 1
Table 1: Scores for passive construction.
also desirable to have a single score reflecting the
overall accuracy of a parser, which means that the
construction?s overall contribution to the score is
relevant.
5
Observe also that partial credit is assigned dif-
ferently in the three schemes. If the parser recog-
nises the subject of made but misses the fact that
the construction is a passive, for example, it will
earn one out of two possible points in PARC, one
out of three in GR (if it recognizes the auxiliary),
but zero out of two in Stanford. This type of error
may seem unlikely, yet examples are readily avail-
able. In related work we have evaluated the C&C
parser of Clark and Curran (2007) on the BioIn-
fer corpus of biomedical abstracts (Pyysalo et al,
2007), which includes the following sentence:
Acanthamoeba profilin was cross-linked
to actin via a zero-length isopeptide
bond using carbodiimide.
The parser correctly identifies profilin as the sub-
ject of cross-linked, yet because it misidentifies
cross-linked as an adjectival rather than verbal
predicate, it misses the passive construction.
Finally, note an asymmetry in the partial credit
scoring: a parser that misidentifies the subject (e.g.
by selecting the wrong head), but basically gets the
construction correct, will receive partial credit in
all three schemes; misidentifying the verb, how-
ever (again, this would likely occur by selecting
the wrong head within the verb phrase) will cause
the parser to lose all points for the construction.
3 The Coordination Construction
The coordination construction is particularly inter-
esting with regard to the questions at hand, both
because there are many options for representing
the construction itself and because the interface
with other constructions is non-trivial. Here we
5
We assume that the overall score will be an F-score over
all dependencies/features in the relevant test set.
consider an extract from Sentence 1 of the shared
task:
electronic, computer and building prod-
ucts
The coordination here is of nominal modifiers,
which means that there is a decision to make about
how the coordination interfaces with the modified
noun. All the conjuncts could interact with the
noun, or there could be a single relationship, usu-
ally represented as a relationship between the con-
junction and and the noun.
Again we consider the decisions about whether
to represent coordination constructions in an eval-
uation scheme, and about which words are in-
volved in the construction, to be generally agreed
upon. The choice of words to represent the
construction in the grammatical relations is quite
straightforward: we need all three conjuncts, elec-
tronic, computer, and building, and also the con-
junction itself since this is contentful. It also seems
reasonably uncontroversial to discard the comma
(although we know of at least one parser that
outputs relations involving the comma, the C&C
parser).
The most difficult decision here is whether the
conjuncts should be related to one another or to
the conjunction (or both). Shown below is how the
three schemes represent the coordination, consid-
ering also the interface of the coordination and the
nominal modification construction.
PARC
adjunct(product, coord)
adjunct type(coord, nominal)
conj(coord, building)
conj(coord, computer)
conj(coord, electronic)
coord form(coord, and)
coord level(coord, AP)
GR
(conj and electronic)
(conj and computer)
(conj and building)
(ncmod products and)
Stanford
conj and(electronic, computer)
conj and(electronic, building)
amod(products, electronic)
amod(products, computer)
amod(products, building)
47
Table 2 shows the range of scores assigned for
correct and partially correct parses across the three
schemes. A parser that analyses the entire con-
struction correctly will earn anywhere from four
points in GR, to seven points in PARC. Therefore,
a parser that does very well (or poorly) at coordi-
nation will earn (or lose) points disproportionately
in the different schemes.
Parc GR Stanf
Everything correct 7 4 5
Misidentify
conjunction 6 0 3
Misidentify one
conjunct 6
a
3 3
b
Misidentify two
conjuncts 5
a
2 1
a
The parser might also be incorrect about the co-
ord level relation if the conjuncts are misidentified.
b
The score would be 2 if it is the first conjunct that
is misidentified.
Table 2: Scores for coordination, including
interface with nominal modification.
A parser that recognises the conjuncts correctly
but misidentifies the conjunction would lose only
one point in PARC, where the conjunction is sep-
arated out into a single coord form relation, but
would lose all four available points in GR, because
the word and itself takes part in all four GR de-
pendencies. Only two points are lost in Stanford
(and it is worth noting that there is also an ?uncol-
lapsed? variant of the Stanford scheme in which
the coordination type is not rolled into the depen-
dency label, in which case only one point would be
lost).
Note also an oddity in Stanford which means
that if the first conjunct is missed, all the dependen-
cies are compromised, because the first conjunct
enters into relations with all the others. The more
conjuncts there are in the construction, the more
points are lost for a single parsing error, which can
easily result from an error in head selection.
Another issue is how the conjuncts are repre-
sented relative to the nominal modifier construc-
tion. In PARC and GR, the conjunct and stands in
for all the conjuncts in the modifier relation. This
means that if a conjunct is missed, no extra points
are lost on the modifier relation; whereas in Stan-
ford, points are lost doubly ? on the relations in-
volving both conjunction and modification.
4 The Relative Clause Construction
For the relative clause construction, as for coordi-
nation, the choice of words used to represent the
construction is straightforward, but the choice of
relations is less so. Consider the following relative
clause construction from Sentence 2 of the shared
task:
not all those who wrote
All three schemes under consideration use the set
{those, who, wrote} to describe this construction.
6
PARC
pron form(pro
3
, those)
adjunct(pro
3
, write)
adjunct type(write, relative)
pron form(pro
4
, who)
pron type(pro
4
, relative)
pron rel(write, pro
4
)
topic rel(write, pro
4
)
GR
(cmod who those wrote)
(ncsubj wrote those )
Stanford
nsubj(wrote, those)
rel(wrote, who)
rcmod(those, wrote)
Note that PARC represents the pronouns who
and those, as it does all pronouns, at a more ab-
stract level than GR or Stanford, creating a rep-
resentation that is less compact than the others.
GR and Stanford differ in terms of compactness as
well: GR?s cmod relation contains all three words;
in fact, the ncsubj relationship might be considered
redundant from the point of view of an evaluation
scheme, since an error in ncsubj entails an error in
cmod. Stanford?s representation is less compact,
containing only binary relations, although there is
also a redundancy between nsubj and rcmod since
the two relations are mirror images of each other.
For the sake of comparison, we include here two
additional hypothetical schemes which have dif-
ferent characteristics from those of the three tar-
get schemes. In Hypothetical Scheme 1 (HS1),
there are three relations: one between the head
noun and the relative clause verb, one between the
6
PARC also encodes the fact that pro
3
is a demonstrative
pronoun, but we don?t consider this part of the relative clause
construction.
48
PARC GR Stanf HS1 HS2
Everything correct 7 2 3 3 1
Misidentify head noun 6 0 1 1 0
Misidentify verb 3 0 0 2 0
Miss relative clause construction 3 0 0 1 0
Table 3: Scores for relative clauses.
relative pronoun and the relative clause verb, and
a third which relates the relative pronoun to the
head noun. This third relation is not included in
any of the other schemes. Hypothetical Scheme 2
(HS2) involves only one relation, which includes
the same words as GR?s cmod relation; the repre-
sentation as a whole is quite compact since only
one dependency is involved and it includes all
three words.
Hypothetical Scheme 1
relative-subject(wrote, those)
subject(wrote, who)
relative-pronoun(those, who)
Hypothetical Scheme 2
relative-clause(wrote, those, who)
Table 3 shows the range of scores that can be at-
tained in the different schemes. The total possible
score varies from one for HS2, to three for Stan-
ford and HS1, and up to seven for PARC.
Observe that any of the three types of error in
Table 3 will immediately lose all points in both GR
and HS2. Since all the schemes use the same set
of words, this is due solely to the choice of rela-
tions and the compactness of the representations.
Neither GR nor HS2 allow for partial credit, even
when the parser assigns an essentially correct rel-
ative clause structure. This is a scenario which
could easily occur due to a head selection error.
For example, consider the following phrase from
the shared task GENIA (Kim et al, 2003) data set ,
Sentence 8:
. . . the RelA ( p65 ) subunit of NF-kappa
B , which activates transcription of the c-
rel gene . . .
The C&C parser correctly identifies the relative
clause structure, including the pronoun which and
the verb activates, but incorrectly identifies the
head noun as B instead of subunit.
Even between GR and HS2, which share the
characteristic of not allowing for partial credit,
there is a difference in scoring. Because GR starts
with two dependencies, there is a loss of two
points, rather than just one, for any error, which
means errors in relative clauses are weighted more
heavily in GR than in HS2.
Stanford also has a problematic redundancy,
since the nsubj and rcmod relations are mirror im-
ages of each other. It therefore duplicates the GR
characteristic of penalising the parser by at least
two points if either the head noun or the relative
clause verb is misidentified (in fact three points for
the verb).
Observe also the asymmetry between misidenti-
fying the head noun (one out of seven points lost in
PARC, two out of three lost in Stanford and HS1)
compared to misidentifying the verb (three points
lost in PARC, all three lost in Stanford, but only one
point lost in HS1). This reflects a difference be-
tween the schemes in whether the relative pronoun
enters into a relation with the subject, the verb, or
both.
5 Conclusion
In this paper we have shown how the design pro-
cess for a relational parser evaluation scheme can
be broken up into a number of decisions, and how
these decisions can significantly affect the scoring
mechanism for the scheme. Although we have fo-
cused in detail on three construction types, we be-
lieve the decisions involved are relevant to any lin-
guistic construction, although some decisions will
be more difficult than others for certain construc-
tions. A direct object construction, for example,
will normally be represented by a single relation
between a verbal head and a nominal head, and in-
deed this is so in all three schemes considered here.
This does not mean that the representation is triv-
ial, however. The choice of which heads will rep-
resent the construction is important. In addition,
Stanford distinguishes objects of prepositions from
objects of verbs, while PARC and GR collapse the
two into a single relation. Although part of speech
information can be used to distinguish the two, a
49
parser which produces PARC- or GR-style output
in this regard will lose points in Stanford without
some additional processing.
We have made no judgements about which deci-
sions are best in the evaluation scheme design pro-
cess. There are no easy answers to the questions
raised here, and it may be that different solutions
will suit different evaluation situations. We leave
these questions for the parsing community to de-
cide. This process may be aided by an empirical
study of how the decisions affect the scores given
to various parsers. For example, it might be use-
ful to know whether one parser could be made to
score significantly higher than another simply by
changing the way coordination is represented. We
leave this for future work.
References
Briscoe, Ted and John Carroll. 2006. Evaluating the
accuracy of an unlexicalized statistical parser on the
PARC DepBank. In Proceedings of the ACL-Coling
?06 Main Conf. Poster Session, pages 41?48, Syd-
ney, Austrailia.
Carroll, John, Ted Briscoe, and Antonio Sanfilippo.
1998. Parser evaluation: a survey and a new pro-
posal. In Proceedings of the 1st LREC Conference,
pages 447?454, Granada, Spain.
Clark, Stephen and James R. Curran. 2007. Wide-
coverage efficient statistical parsing with CCG
and log-linear models. Computational Linguistics,
33(4):493?552.
de Marneffe, Marie-Catherine, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of the 5th LREC Conference, pages
449?454, Genoa, Italy.
Kim, Jin-Dong, Tomoko Ohta, Yuka Teteisi, and
Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2003. GENIA corpus ? a seman-
tically annotated corpus for bio-textmining. Bioin-
formatics, 19:i180?i182.
King, Tracy H., Richard Crouch, Stefan Riezler, Mary
Dalrymple, and Ronald M. Kaplan. 2003. The
PARC 700 Dependency Bank. In Proceedings of the
4th International Workshop on Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpora, Budapest, Hungary.
Lin, Dekang. 1995. A dependency-based method for
evaluating broad-coverage parsers. In Proceedings
of IJCAI-95, pages 1420?1425, Montreal, Canada.
Pyysalo, Sampo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Bj?orne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni J?arvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. BioInfer: A corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 8:50.
50
