Coling 2008: Proceedings of 3rd Textgraphs workshop on Graph-Based Algorithms in Natural Language Processing, pages 1?8
Manchester, August 2008
Acquistion of the morphological structure of the lexicon
based on lexical similarity and formal analogy
Nabil Hathout
Universit? de Toulouse
Nabil.Hathout@univ-tlse2.fr
Abstract
The paper presents a computational model
aiming at making the morphological struc-
ture of the lexicon emerge from the for-
mal and semantic regularities of the words
it contains. The model is purely lexeme-
based. The proposed morphological struc-
ture consists of (1) binary relations that
connect each headword with words that
are morphologically related, and especially
with the members of its morphological
family and its derivational series, and of
(2) the analogies that hold between the
words. The model has been tested on the
lexicon of French using the TLFi machine
readable dictionary.
1 Lexeme-based morphology
Morphology is traditionally considered to be the
field of linguistics that studies the structure of
words. In this conception, words are made of
morphemes which combine according to rules
of inflexion, derivation and composition. If the
morpheme-based theoretical framework is both el-
egant and easy to implement, it suffers many draw-
backs pointed out by several authors (Anderson,
1992; Aronoff, 1994). The alternative theoreti-
cal models that have been proposed falls within
lexeme-based or word-based morphology in which
the minimal units are words instead of morphemes.
Words then do not have any structure at all and
morphology becomes a level of organization of the
lexicon based on the sharing of semantic and for-
mal properties.
c
? 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
The morpheme-based / lexeme-based distinc-
tion shows up on the computational level. In
the morpheme-based conception, the morpholog-
ical analysis of a word aims at segmenting it into
a sequence of morphemes (D?jean, 1998; Gold-
smith, 2001; Creutz and Lagus, 2002; Bernhard,
2006). In a lexeme-based approach, it is to dis-
cover the relations between the word and the other
lexical items. These relations serve to identify
the morphological family of the word, its deriva-
tional series, and the analogies in which it is in-
volved. For instance, the analysis of the French
word d?rivation may be considered as satisfac-
tory if it connects d?rivation with enough mem-
bers of its family (d?river ?derivate?, d?rivationnel
?derivational?, d?rivable, d?rive ?drift?, d?riveur
?sailing dinghy?, etc.) and of its derivational
series (formation ?education?, s?duction, varia-
tion, ?mission, etc.). Each of these relations
is integrated into a large collection of analogies
that characterizes it semantically and formally.
For instance, the relation between d?rivation and
d?rivable is part of a series of analogies which
includes d?rivation:d?rivable::variation:variable,
d?rivation:d?rivable::modification:modifiable, etc.
Similarly, d?rivation and variation participates in
a series of analogies such as d?rivation:varia-
tion::d?river:varier, d?rivation:variation::d?riva-
tionnel:variationnel, d?rivation:variation::d?riva-
ble:variable.
2 Computational modeling
The paper describes a computational model aiming
at making the morphological derivational structure
of the lexicon emerge from the semantic and the
formal regularities of the words it contains. A first
experiment is currently underway on the lexicon
of French using the TLFi machine readable dictio-
1
nary.
1
The main novelty of the paper is the com-
bination of lexical proximity with formal analogy.
We first use lexical similarity in order to select a
set of words that are likely to be morphologically
related to each other. Then, these candidates are
checked by means of analogy.
The two techniques are complementary. The
first one brings closer the words that are morpho-
logically close and especially the ones that are
members of the same morphological families and
the same derivational series. It is able to deal with
large number of words, but it is too coarse-grained
to discriminate the words that are actually mor-
phological related from the ones that are not. The
second technique, formal analogy, is then used to
perform a fine-grained filtering. Technically, our
model joins:
1. the representation of the lexicon as a graph
and its exploration through random walks,
along the line of (Gaume et al, 2002; Gaume
et al, 2005; Muller et al, 2006), and
2. formal analogies on words (Lepage, 1998;
Stroppa and Yvon, 2005). This approach does
do not make use of morphemes. Correspon-
dence between words is calculated directly on
their graphemic representations.
More generally, our approach is original in that:
1. Our computational model is pure lexeme-
based. The discovery of morphological rela-
tions between words do not involve the no-
tions of morpheme, affix, morphological ex-
ponent, etc. nor any representation of these
concepts.
2. The membership to the families and series is
gradient. It accounts, for instance, for the fact
that d?riveur is morphologically and semanti-
cally closer to d?rive than to d?rivationnelle-
ment, even if the three words belong to the
same family. The model connects the words
that share semantic and / or formal features.
The more features are shared, the closer the
words are.
Besides, the model integrates semantic and for-
mal informations in a uniform manner. All kind
of semantic informations (lexicographic defini-
tions, synonyms, synsets, etc.) and formal ones
1
Tr?sor de la Langue Fran?aise (http://atilf.atilf.fr/).
(graphemic, phonological, etc.) can be used. They
can be cumulated easily in spite of the differences
in nature and origin. The model takes advantage of
the redundancy of the features and is fairly insen-
sitive to variation and exceptions.
3 Related work
Many works in the field of computational mor-
phology aim at the discovery of relations be-
tween lexical units. All of them rely primarily on
finding similarities between the word graphemic
forms. These relations are mainly prefixal or suf-
fixal with two exceptions, (Yarowsky and Wicen-
towski, 2000) and (Baroni et al, 2002), who use
string edit distances to estimate formal similarity.
As far as we know, all the other perform some sort
of segmentation even when the goal is not to find
morphemes as in (Neuvel and Fulop, 2002). Our
model differs from these approaches in that the
graphemic similarities are determined solely on the
basis of the sharing of graphemic features. It is the
main contribution of this paper.
Our model is also related to approaches that
combine graphemic and semantic cues in order
to identify morphemes or morphological relations
between words. Usually, these semantic infor-
mations are automatically acquired from corpora
by means of various techniques as latent semantic
analysis (Schone and Jurafsky, 2000), mutual in-
formation (Baroni et al, 2002) or co-occurrence in
an n-word window (Xu and Croft, 1998; Zweigen-
baum and Grabar, 2003). In the experiment we
present here, semantic informations are extracted
from a machine readable dictionary and semantic
similarity is calculated through random walks in a
lexical graph. Our approach can also be compared
with (Hathout, 2002) where morphological knowl-
edge is acquired by using semantic informations
extracted from dictionaries of synonyms or from
WordNet.
4 Lexeme Description
In our model, the lexical units and their properties
are represented in a bipartite graph with the ver-
tices representing the lexemes in one sub-set and
the vertices representing the formal and semantic
features in the other. Lexeme vertices are identi-
fied by the lemma and the grammatical category.
In the experiment reported in the paper, the for-
mal properties are the n-grams of letters that occur
in the lexemes lemma. Figure 1 shows a sub-set of
2
$or; $ori; $orie; ...
$orientation; ori; orie; ...
orientation; orientation$; ...
tio; tion; tion$; ion; ion$; on$
Figure 1: Excerpt of the formal features associated
with the noun orientation.
N.action; N.action X.de; N.action
X.de V.orienter; X.de; X.de
V.orienter; V.orienter; X.de
V.s?orienter; V.s?orienter;
N.r?sultat; N.r?sultat X.de;
N.r?sultat X.de X.ce; N.r?sultat
X.de X.ce N.action; X.de X.ce;
X.de X.ce N.action; X.ce; X.ce
N.action; N.action
Figure 2: Semantic features induced by the defi-
nition ?Action d?orienter, de s?orienter ; r?sultat de
cette action.? of the noun orientation
the formal features associated with the word orien-
tation. The beginning and the end of the lemma are
marked by the character $. We impose a minimum
size on the n-grams (n ? 3).
The model is pure lexeme-based because this
decomposition does not confer a special status to
any of the individual n-grams which character-
ize the lexemes. All n-grams play the same role
and therefore no one has the status of morpheme.
These features are only used to bring closer the
words that share the same sounds.
The semantic properties we have used are ex-
tracted from the TLFi definitions. Each headword
is provided with the n-grams of words that occur
in its definitions. The n-grams that contain punc-
tuation marks are eliminated. In other words, we
only use n-grams of words that occur between two
punctuation marks. For instance, the semantic fea-
tures induced by the definition Action d?orienter,
de s?orienter ; r?sultat de cette action. (?act of ori-
enting, of finding one?s way; result of this action?)
of the noun orientation are presented in figure 2.
The words in the definitions are POS tagged and
lemmatized. The tags are A for adjectives, N for
nouns, R for adverbs, V for verbs and X for all
other categories.
This is a very coarse semantic representation in-
spired from the repeated segments (Lebart et al,
1998). It offers three advantages: (1) being heav-
ily redundant, it can capture various levels of sim-
$or
$ori
orient
entati
N.action X.de
N.r?sultat X.de X.ce
N.orientation
V.orienter
A.original
N.fermentation
N.pointage
Figure 3: Excerpt of the bipartite graph which rep-
resents the lexicon. Words are displayed in ovals,
semantic feature in rectangles and formal features
in octagons. The graph is symmetric.
ilarity between the definitions; (2) it integrates in-
formations of a syntagmatic nature without a deep
syntactic analysis of the definitions; (3) it slightly
reduces the strong variations in the lexicographi-
cal treatment of the headwords, especially in the
division into sub-senses and in the definitions.
The bipartite graph is built up by symmetrically
connecting each headword to its semantic and for-
mal features. For instance, the noun orientation
is connected with the formal feature $or, $ori,
$orie, $orien, etc. which are in turn connected
with the words orienter, orientable, orientement
?orientation?, orienteur ?orientor?, etc. Likewise,
orientation is connected with the semantic fea-
tures N.action X.de, N.r?sultat X.de
X.ce N.action, etc. which are themselves
connected with the nouns orientement, harmoni-
sation ?synchronization?, pointage ?checking?, etc.
The general schema is illustrated in figure 4. This
representation corresponds precisely to the Net-
work Model of Bybee (1995).
We use a bipartite graph mainly for two reasons:
(1) We can spread an activation synchronously into
the formal and the semantic sub-graphs. (2) It con-
tains representations of the formal and the seman-
tic properties of the lexemes which, for instance,
could be used in order to describe the semantics of
the -able suffixation or the characteristic endings
of the boat names (-ier, -eur, etc.). However, the
bipartite structure is not essential and we only need
3
to be able to compute morphological distances be-
tween words.
5 Random walks
The computational side of the method is based on
the estimation of the proximity between words rep-
resented in a lexical graph (Gaume et al, 2002;
Gaume et al, 2005; Muller et al, 2006). The
graphs used in this approach are slightly different
from the ones presented above. All their vertices
represent words and the edges describe semantic
relations such as synonymy. The proximity is com-
puted by simulating the spreading into the graph of
an activation initiated at a vertice. Following the
spreading, the nodes which are most excited are
regarded as being the closest to the initial vertice.
The same method can be used to estimate the
morphological proximity between words that are
described in a bipartite graph like the one we pro-
pose (see figure 4). It then connects words that
have the same semantic and formal features. One
has just to propagate the activation into the bipar-
tite graph for an even number of times. When the
graph is heavily redundant, two steps of propaga-
tion are sufficient to obtain the intended proximity
estimations.
In the example in figure 4, the morphological
neighbors of the noun orientation are identified by
activating the vertice which represents it. In the
first step, the activation is spread toward the ver-
tices which represent its formal and semantic fea-
tures. In the second step, the activation located on
the feature vertices is spread toward the headword
vertices. For instance, orienter becomes activated
via the formal features $or, $ori, orien and
fermentation through the formal feature entati
and the semantic feature N.r?sultat X.de
X.ce. The greater the number of features shared
by a headword with orientation, the stronger the
activation it receives.
The spreading of activation is simulated as a ran-
dom walk in the lexical graph, classically com-
puted as a multiplication of the stochastic adja-
cency matrix. More precisely, let G = (V,E,w)
be a weighted graph consisting of a set of ver-
tices V = {v
1
, . . . , v
n
}, a set of edges E ? V
2
and of a weight function w : E ? R. Let A
be the adjacency matrix of G, that is a n ? n
matrix such that A
ij
= 0 if (v
i
, v
j
) 6? E and
A
ij
= w(v
i
, v
j
) if (v
i
, v
j
) ? E. (In the experi-
ment, w(e) = 1,?e ? E.) We normalize the rows
of A in order to get a stochastic matrix M . M
n
ij
is
the probability of reaching node v
j
from the node
v
i
through a walk of n steps. This probability can
also be regarded as an activation level of node v
j
following an n-step spreading initiated at vertice
v
i
.
In the experiment presented in this paper, the ac-
tivation is spread for one half toward the seman-
tic feature and for the other toward the formal fea-
tures. The edges of the bipartite graph can be di-
vided in three parts E = J ?K ? L where J con-
tains the edges that connect a headword to a for-
mal feature, K the edges that connect a headword
to a semantic feature and L the edges that connect
a formal or semantic feature to a headword. The
values of M are defined as follows:
? if e
ij
= (v
i
, v
j
) ? J , M
ij
=
A
ij
2
P
e
ih
?J
A
ih
if
v
i
is connected to a semantic feature and
M
ij
=
A
ij
P
e
ik
?J
A
ik
otherwise.
? if e
ik
= (v
i
, v
k
) ? K, M
ik
=
A
ik
2
P
e
ih
?K
A
ih
if
v
i
is connected to a formal feature and
M
ik
=
A
ik
P
e
ih
?K
A
ih
otherwise.
? if e
il
= (v
i
, v
l
) ? L, M
il
=
A
il
P
e
ih
?L
A
ih
.
6 Lexical neighborhood
The graph used in the experiment has been built
from the definitions of the TLFi. We only removed
the definitions of non standard uses (old, slang,
etc.). The extraction and cleaning-up of the defi-
nitions have been carried out in collaboration with
Bruno Gaume and Philippe Muller. The bipartite
graph has been created from 225 529 definitions
describing 75 024 headwords (lexemes). We then
removed all the features associated only with one
headword. This reduces the size of the graph sig-
nificantly without changing the connections that
hold between the headwords. Table 1 shows that
this reduction is stronger for the semantic feature
(93%) than it is for the formal ones (69%). Indeed,
semantic descriptions show greater variability than
formal ones.
The use of the graph is illustrated in figure 4. It
shows the 20 nearest neighbors of the verb fruc-
tifier for various propagation configurations. The
examples in (a) and (b) show clearly that formal
features are the more predictive ones while seman-
tic features are the less reliable ones. The example
in (c) illustrates the contribution of the semantic
4
(a) V.fructifier N.fructification A.fructificateur A.fructifiant A.fructif?re V.sanctifier V.rectifier
A.rectifier V.fructidoriser N.fructidorien N.fructidor N.fructuosit? R.fructueusement A.fructueux
N.rectifieur A.obstructif A.instructif A.destructif A.constructif N.infructuosit?
(b) V.fructifier V.trouver N.missionnaire N.mission A.missionnaire N.saisie N.police N.hangar N.d?me
N.ban V.affruiter N.melon N.saisonnement N.az?darach A.fruitier A.bif?re V.saisonner N.roman
N.troubadour V.contaminer
(c) V.fructifier A.fructifiant N.fructification A.fructificateur V.trouver A.fructif?re V.rectifier
V.sanctifier A.rectifier V.fructidoriser N.fructidor N.fructidorien N.missionnaire N.mission
A.missionnaire A.fructueux R.fructueusement N.fructuosit? N.rectifieur N.saisie
Figure 4: The 20 nearest neighbors of the verb fructifier when the activation is spread (a) only toward
the formal features, (b) only toward the semantic ones, (c) toward both the semantic and formal features.
Words that do not belong to the family or series of fructifier are emphasized.
graph complete reduced
formal features 1 306 497 400 915
semantic features 7 650 490 548 641
Table 1: Number of the semantic and formal fea-
tures coming from TLFi.
features. They reorder the formal neighbors and
introduce among them the nearest semantic neigh-
bors. We see in the lists in (a) and (c) that the fam-
ily members are the nearest neighbors and that the
members of the series come next.
7 Analogy
The members of the series and families are mas-
sively involved in the analogies which structure the
lexicon. A word x belonging to a family F
x
partic-
ipates in several analogies with a large number of
other members of F
x
. The analogies that involve
two words (x, y) ? F
2
include two other words
(z, t) that belong to one same family F
?
. On the
other hand, if x is a complex word that belongs
to a series S
x
, then z ? S
x
, x ? S
z
, y ? S
t
and t ? S
y
. For instance, the couple of words
fructifier and fructification form analogies with of
members of other families (rectifier, rectification),
(certifier, certification), (plastifier, plastification),
etc. Moreover, the first elements of these couples
belong to series of fructifier and the second ones to
the series of fructification.
In a dual manner, a word u belonging to a se-
ries S participates in a set of analogies with a large
number of other members of S. The analogies that
involve two elements of the same series are made
up with words which themselves belong to a same
series. For instance, fructifier and sanctifier form
analogies with the members of other series (fruc-
tificateur, sanctificateur), (fructification, sanctifi-
cation) or (fructifiant, sanctifiant). These couples
are respectively made of members of the families
of fructifier and sanctifier.
7.1 Analogies and neighborhoods
The analogies that involve members of families
and series can be used to efficiently filter the
morphological neighbors that are identified by the
method presented above. If v is a correct morpho-
logical neighbor of w, then it is either a member of
the family of m or a member of its series. There-
fore, it exists another neighbor v
?
of w (v
?
belong
to the family of w if v belongs to the series of w
or vice versa) such that it exists a neighbor w
?
of v
and of v
?
such that w : v :: v
?
: w
?
.
2
Therefore, we
have two configurations:
1. if v ? F
w
, then ?v
?
? S
w
, ?w
?
? S
v
?F
v
?
, w :
v :: v
?
: w
?
2. if v ? S
w
, then ?v
?
? F
w
, ?w
?
? F
v
?S
v
?
, w :
v :: v
?
: w
?
The first case is illustrated by the above examples
with w = fructifier and v = fructification, and the
second one with w = fructifier et v = rectifier.
7.2 Formal analogy
A formal or graphemic analogy is a relation
a : b :: c : d that holds between four strings
such that the graphemic differences between a
2
The notation a : b :: c : d is used as a shorthand for the
statement that (a, b, c, d) forms an analogical quadruplet, or
in other words that a is to b as c is to d.
5
and b are the same as the ones between c and d.
It can be exemplified with the four Arabic words
kataba:maktoubon::fa3ala:maf3oulon
which respectively are transcriptions of the verb
?write?, the noun ?document?, the verb ?do? and
the noun ?effect.?
3
The differences between the
first two words and between the two last ones can
be described as in figure 5. They are identical for
the two couples of words.
 k a t a b a
ma k  t ou b on
 f a 3 a l a
ma f  3 ou l on
Figure 5: Formal analogy kataba:
maktoubon::fa3ala:maf3oulon. The
differences are locates in frame boxes.
More generally, formal analogies can be
defined in terms of factorization (Stroppa and
Yvon, 2005). Let L be an alphabet and a ? L
?
a string over L. A factorization of a is a se-
quence f = (f
1
, ? ? ? , f
n
) ? L
?
n
such that
a = f
1
? ? ? ? ? f
n
where ? denotes the concate-
nation. For instance, (ma, k, , t, ou, b, on)
is a factorization of length 7 of maktoubon.
Morphological analogies can be defined as
follows. Let (a, b, c, d) ? L
?
4
be for strings.
a : b :: c : d is a formal analogy iff there exists
n ? N and four factorizations of length n of the
four strings (f(a), f(b), f(c), f(d)) ? L
?
4
such that, ?i ? [1, n], (f
i
(b), f
i
(c)) ?
{(f
i
(a), f
i
(d)), (f
i
(d), f
i
(a))}. For the analogy
kataba:maktoubon::fa3ala:maf3oulon,
the property holds for n = 7 (see figure 5).
7.3 Implementation
A formal analogy a : b :: c : d can be easily
checked by comparing the sequences of string
edit operations between (a, b) and between (c, d).
Both sequences must minimize Levenshtein edit
distance (i.e. have a minimal cost). Each sequence
corresponds to a path in the edit lattices of the
couple of words. The lattice are represented by
a matrix computed using the standard string edit
algorithm (Jurafsky and Martin, 2000). The path
which describes the sequence of string edit opera-
tions starts at the last cell of the matrix and climbs
3
This example is adapted from examples in (Lepage,
1998; Lepage, 2003).
to the first one. Only three directions are allowed:
upward (deletion), to the left (insertion) or in
the upper left diagonal direction (substitution).
Figure 6 shows the sequence of edit operations for
the couple fructueux:infructueusement.
Sequences of edit operations can be simplified
by merging the series of identical character
matchings. The sequence in figure 6 then becomes
((I,,i), (I,,n), (M,fructueu,fructueu),
(S,x,s), (I,,e), (I,,m), (I,,e), (I,,n), (I,,t)).
This simplified sequence is identical to the one
for the couple soucieux:insoucieusement
except for the matching operation: ((I,,i),
(I,,n), (M,soucieu,soucieu), (S,x,s), (I,,e),
(I,,m), (I,,e), (I,,n), (I,,t)). The two se-
quences can be made identical if the matching
sub-strings are not specified. The resulting
sequence can then be assigned to both cou-
ples as their edit signatures (?). The formal
analogy fructueux:infructueusement::
soucieux:insoucieusement can be stated
in terms of identity the edit signatures:
?(fructueux,infructueusement) =
?(soucieux,insoucieusement) =
((I,,i), (I,,n), (M,@,@), (S,x,s), (I,,e),
(I,,m), (I,,e), (I,,n), (I,,t))
More generally, four strings (a, b, c, d) ? L
?
4
form
a formal analogy a : b :: c : d iff ?(a, b) = ?(c, d)
or ?(a, c) = ?(b, d).
7.4 First results
The computational model we have just presented
has been implemented and a first experiment has
been carried out. It consists in determining the
100 closest neighbors of every headword for the
three configurations presented in ? 6. All the for-
mal analogies that hold between these words have
then been collected. We have not been able to do a
standard evaluation in terms of recall and precision
because of the lack of morphological resources for
French. However, we have manually checked the
analogies of 22 headwords belonging to 4 morpho-
logical families. An analogy a : b :: c : d is ac-
cepted as correct if:
? b belongs to the family of a, c belongs to the
series of a, d belongs to series of b and to the
family of c, or
? b belongs to the series of a, c belongs to the
family of a, d belongs to family of b and to
the series of c.
6
I I M M M M M M M M S I I I I I
  f r u c t u e u x     
i n f r u c t u e u s e m e n t
Figure 6: Sequence of edit operations that transform fructueux into infructueusement. The
type of each operation is indicated on the first line: D for deletion, I for insertion, M for matching and S
for a substitution by a different character.
configuration analogies correct errors
formal 169 163 3.6%
semantics 5 5 0.0%
sem + form 130 128 1.5%
Table 2: Number of the analogies collected for a
sample of 22 headwords and error rate.
The results are summarized in table 2. Their qual-
ity is quite satisfactory. However, the number of
analogies strongly depends on the configuration of
propagation. The best trade-off is a simultaneous
propagation toward the semantic and formal fea-
tures. Here are some of the correct and erroneous
analogies collected:
? R.fructueusement:R.affectueusement::
A.infructueux:A.inaffectueux
? N.fructification:N.identification::
V.fructifier:V.identifier
? N.fruiterie:N.fruitier::N.laiterie:N.laitier
? * N.fruit:N.bruit::V.frusquer:V.brusquer
The first example is particularly interesting be-
cause it involves on one side suffixed words and
on the other prefixed ones.
The performance of the method strongly de-
pends on the length of the headwords. Table 3
presents the number of analogies and the error rate
for 13 groups of 5 words. The words of each group
are of the same length. Lengths range from 4 to 16
letters.
8 Conclusion
We have presented a computational model that
makes the morphological structure of the lexicon
emerge from the formal and semantic regularities
of the words it contains. The model is radically
lexeme-based. It integrates the semantic and for-
mal properties of the words in a uniform manner
and represents them into a bipartite graph. Ran-
dom walks are used to simulate the spreading of
length analogies correct errors
4 29 15 51.7%
5 22 8 36.4%
6 8 1 12.5%
7 10 2 20.0%
8 55 1 1.8%
9 29 2 6.9%
10 30 0 0.0%
11 32 0 0.0%
12 19 0 0.0%
13 11 0 0.0%
14 35 0 0.0%
15 63 0 0.0%
16 39 0 0.0%
Table 3: Number of the analogies and error rate for
headwords of length 4 to 16.
activations in this lexical network. The level of
activation obtained after the propagation indicates
the lexical relatedness of the words. The members
of the morphological family and the derivational
series of each word are then identified among its
lexical neighbors by means of formal analogies.
This is work in progress and we still have to sep-
arate the members of the families from the mem-
bers of the series. We also intend to conduct a
similar experiment on the English lexicon and to
evaluate our results in a more classical manner by
using the CELEX database (Baayen et al, 1995)
as gold standard. The evaluation should also be
done with respect to well known systems like Lin-
guistica (Goldsmith, 2001) or the morphological
analyzer of Bernhard (2006).
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the ATILF laboratory and
Jean-Marie Pierrel for making available to me the
TLFi. I am in debt to Bruno Gaume and Philippe
Muller for the many discussions and exchanges we
have had on the cleaning-up of the TFLi and its ex-
ploitation through random walks. I am also grate-
ful to Gilles Boy?, Olivier Haute-C?ur and Lu-
7
dovic Tanguy for their comments and suggestions.
All errors are mine.
References
Anderson, Stephen R. 1992. A-Morphous Morphol-
ogy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Aronoff, Mark. 1994. Morphology by Itself. Stem and
Inflexional Classes. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Baayen, R. Harald, Richard Piepenbrock, and Leon Gu-
likers. 1995. The CELEX lexical database (release
2). CD-ROM. Linguistic Data Consortium, Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, USA.
Baroni, Marco, Johannes Matiasek, and Harald Trost.
2002. Unsupervised discovery of morphologically
related words based on orthographic and semantic
similarity. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Mor-
phological and Phonological Learning of ACL-2002,
pages 48?57, Philadelphia. ACL.
Bernhard, Delphine. 2006. Automatic acquisition of
semantic relationships from morphological related-
ness. In Advances in Natural Language Processing,
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
NLP, FinTAL 2006, volume 4139 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 121?13. Springer.
Bybee, Joan L. 1995. Regular morphology and the lex-
icon. Language and cognitive processes, 10(5):425?
455.
Creutz, Mathias and Krista Lagus. 2002. Unsuper-
vised discovery of morphemes. In Proceedings of
the ACL Workshop on Morphological and Phono-
logical Learning, pages 21?30, Philadelphia, Penn.
ACL.
D?jean, Herv?. 1998. Morphemes as necessary con-
cept for structures discovery from untagged corpora.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Paradigms and
Grounding in Natural Language Learning, pages
295?299, Adelaide, Australia.
Gaume, Bruno, Karine Duvigneau, Olivier Gasquet,
and Marie-Dominique Gineste. 2002. Forms of
meaning, meaning of forms. Journal of Experimen-
tal and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 14(1):61?
74.
Gaume, B., F. Venant, and B. Victorri. 2005. Hierar-
chy in lexical organization of natural language. In
Pumain, D., editor, Hierarchy in natural and social
sciences, Methodos series, pages 121?143. Kluwer.
Goldsmith, John. 2001. Unsupervised learning of
the morphology of natural language. Computational
Linguistics, 27(2):153?198.
Hathout, Nabil. 2002. From wordnet to celex: acquir-
ing morphological links from dictionaries of syn-
onyms. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion, pages 1478?1484, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria.
ELRA.
Jurafsky, Daniel and James H. Martin. 2000. Speech
and language processing. Prentice-Hall.
Lebart, Ludovic, Andr? Salem, and Lisette Berry.
1998. Exploring textual data. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht.
Lepage, Yves. 1998. Solving analogies on words: an
algorithm. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL?98, vol-
ume 2, pages 728?735, Montr?al, Canada.
Lepage, Yves. 2003. De l?analogie rendant compte de
la commutation en linguistique. M?moire de HDR,
Universit? Joseph Fourier, Grenoble.
Muller, Philippe, Nabil Hathout, and Bruno Gaume.
2006. Synonym extraction using a semantic dis-
tance on a dictionary. In Radev, Dragomir and Rada
Mihalcea, editors, Proceedings of the HLT/NAACL
workshop Textgraphs, pages 65?72, New York, NY.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Neuvel, Sylvain and Sean A. Fulop. 2002. Unsuper-
vised learning of morphology without morphemes.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Morphologi-
cal and Phonological Learning 2002, Philadelphia.
ACL Publications.
Schone, Patrick and Daniel S. Jurafsky. 2000.
Knowledge-free induction of morphology using la-
tent semantic analysis. In Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Natural Language Learning 2000 (CoNLL-
2000), pages 67?72, Lisbon, Portugal.
Stroppa, Nicolas and Fran?ois Yvon. 2005. An analog-
ical learner for morphological analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the 9th Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-2005), pages 120?127,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, June. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Xu, Jinxi and W. Bruce Croft. 1998. Corpus-based
stemming using co-occurrence of word variants.
ACM Transaction on Information Systems, 16(1):61?
81.
Yarowsky, David and Richard Wicentowski. 2000.
Minimally supervised morphological analysis by
multimodal alignment. In Proceedings of the As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics (ACL-2000),
pages 207?216, Hong Kong.
Zweigenbaum, Pierre and Natalia Grabar. 2003.
Learning derived words from medical corpora. In
9th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine
Europe, pages 189?198, Cyprus.
8
