Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL), page 2,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Modeling word learning as communicative inference
Michael C. Frank
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
mcfrank@mit.edu
Abstract
How do children learn their first words? I
describe a model that makes joint inferences
about what speakers are trying to talk about
and the meanings of the words they use. This
model provides a principled framework for in-
tegrating a wide variety of non-linguistic in-
formation sources into the process of word
learning.
Talk Pre?cis
How do children learn their first words? Much
work in this field has focused on the social as-
pects of word learning: that children make use of
speakers? intentions?as signaled by a wide range
of non-linguistic cues such as their eye-gaze, what
they are pointing at, or even what referents are new
to them?to infer the meanings of words (Bloom,
2002). However, recent evidence has suggested that
adults and children are able to learn words simply
from the consistent co-occurrence of words and their
referents, even across otherwise ambiguous situa-
tions and without explicit social cues as to which ref-
erent is being talked about (Yu & Smith 2007; Smith
& Yu, 2008).
In this talk I describe work aiming to combine
these two sets of evidence within a single probab-
listic framework (Frank, Goodman, & Tenenbaum,
2009). We propose a model in which learners at-
tempt to infer speakers? moment-to-moment com-
municative intentions jointly with the meanings of
the words they have used to express these intentions.
This process of joint inference allows our model to
explain away two major sources of noise in sim-
pler statistical word learning proposals: the fact that
speakers do not talk about every referent and that not
all words that speakers utter are referential.
We find that our model outperforms associative
models in learning words accurately from natural
corpus data and is able to fit children?s behavior in
a number of experimental results from developmen-
tal psychology. In addition, we have used this basic
framework to begin investigating how learners use
the rich variety of non-linguistic information signal-
ing speakers? intentions in service of word learning.
As an example of this work, I will describe an ex-
tension of the model to use discourse continuity as a
cue for speakers? intentions.
Acknowledgments
This work supported by a Jacob Javits Graduate Fel-
lowship and NSF Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant #0746251.
References
Paul Bloom. 2002. How Children Learn the Meanings of
Words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Michael C. Frank, Noah D. Goodman, and Joshua B.
Tenenbaum. 2009. Using speakers? referential inten-
tions to model early cross-situational word learning.
Psychological Science.
Linda Smith and Chen Yu. 2008. Infants rapidly learn
word-referent mappings via cross-situational statistics.
Cognition, 106, 1558-1568.
Chen Yu and Linda Smith. 2007. Rapid word learning
under uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psy-
chological Science, 18, 414-420.
2
