Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 157?168,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Towards a Multidimensional Semantics of Discourse
Markers in Spoken Dialogue
Volha Petukhova and Harry Bunt
v.petukhova@uvt.nl; harry.bunt@uvt.nl
Abstract
The literature contains a wealth of theoretical and empirical anal-
yses of discourse marker functions in human communication. Some of
these studies address the phenomenon that discourse markers are often
multifunctional in a given context, but do not study this in systematic
and formal ways. In this paper we show that the use of multiple dimen-
sions in distinguishing and annotating semantic units supports a more
accurate analysis of the meaning of discourse markers. We present an
empirically-based analysis of the semantic functions of discourse mark-
ers in dialogue. We demonstrate that the multiple functions, which a
discourse marker may have, are automatically recognizable from utter-
ance surface-features using machine-learning techniques.
1 Introduction
Discourse markers are key indicators of discourse structure, and have been
shown to be useful devices for (a) segmenting discourse into meaningful
units, and (b) identifying relations between these units. The determination
of the meanings of discourse markers is often crucial for understanding the
communicated message.
Discourse markers have been studied for their role in the organization
of discourse structure in larger texts ([12], [16]), in argumentative dialogues
([6]), in interviews ([15], [10]) and in dialogues that are highly interactive in
nature and are characterized by rapid turn switching among participants,
such as task-oriented dialogues ([9]) or meeting conversations ([14]).
The research reported in this paper regards the use of discourse mark-
ers in spoken dialogue. In dialogue, discourse markers play an important
role in establishing boundaries between dialogue units and in indicating the
communicative functions of such units (see e.g. [14], [9], [10]).
157
(1) A1: it ties you on in terms of the technologies and the complexity that you want
A2: like for example voice recognition
A3: because that you might need to power a microphone and other things
A4: so thats one constraint there
In example (1) discourse markers are used by the speaker to indicate the
steps in a sequence of arguments: he makes a statement (Inform); then he
provides an example for this statement (Inform Exemplify); he justifies his
choice (Inform Justification); and he draws a conclusion (Inform Conclude).
An important goal of studies of dialogue structure is to explore possi-
ble meanings and functions of discourse markers in dialogue as reflected in
observable utterance features (prosodic, syntactic, lexical), to enable their
successful recognition and classification.
One aspect of the meaning of discourse markers is that they may not
only have a variety of semantic functions, but that they may also have sev-
eral functions simultaneously ? their multifunctionality (see [11], [1], [15]
among others). This paper introduces a formal and systematic, empirically-
based approach to the study of the multifunctionality of discourse markers.
We show how the multifunctionality of discourse markers can be described
systematically by using a multidimensional model of the interpretation of
communicative behaviour in dialogue (Section 2). Section 3 introduces the
analysed data and features. We illustrate the multifunctionality of discourse
markers in some detail for the example of and, as one of the most frequently
used and ambiguous dialogue markers. We provide the results of statisti-
cal and machine-learning experiments on the automatic recognizability of
discourse marker meanings, and give an overview of the observed multifunc-
tionality of markers that occur in our data (Section 4). Conclusions and
perspectives for further research are outlined in the final Section 5.
2 The notion of multifunctionality
The multifunctionality of discourse markers has been described first by
Schiffrin in [15]. She distinguishes between (1) ideational structure, with
relations between propositions, e.g. a cohesion relation, a topic relation or
a functional relation; (2) action structure, which describes the organisation
and constraints on the use of speech acts; (3) exchange structure, which is
?the outcome of decision procedures by which speakers alternate sequential
roles and define those alternations in relation to each other?. Schiffrin argues
that discourse markers may simultaneously have roles within each of these
three structures, e.g. the discourse marker and may ?coordinate ideas? and
158
?continue a speaker?s action?. However, the multifunctionality of discourse
markers in this study escaped extensive and formal description.
Hovy in [11] states that each discourse marker signals either (1) a ?seman-
tic interpropositional relation?, e.g. CAUSE or PART-OF, or (2) ?interper-
sonal intentions? (a communicative purpose of an utterance), e.g. to inform
someone about a fact, or to instruct someone to do something, or (3) both.
Moreover, according to Hovy each discourse marker ?articulates a rhetorical
relation?, such as Elaboration or Presentational-Sequence. Hovy argues that
there are several parallel simultaneous structures that underlie coherent dis-
course and argues that an adequate description of discourse requires at least
four distinct structural analyses: semantic, interpersonal/goal-oriented, at-
tentional/thematic, and rhetorical.
This approach seems to apply very well to the analysis of the meaning
of discourse markers in dialogue. Discourse markers may have various com-
municative purposes (also called communicative functions) in dialogue with
respect to the underlying task or goal, attention, topic or arguments, turn
management, etc. We only want to add that discourse markers may have
various communicative functions simultaneously. For example, if the speaker
wants to provide additional or more detailed information about something
that he mentioned before, he can signal the relation between the two pieces
of information by using discourse markers such as ?and?, ?also?, ?moreover?.
The discourse marker signals an elaboration relation and the communica-
tive purpose of the whole utterance, which contains the discourse marker, is
Inform with the rhetorical function Elaborate. Additionally, the discourse
marker is used here to show that the speaker wishes to continue in the
speaker role (Turn Keep function).
In our analysis by ?multifunctionality? we mean the phenomenon of hav-
ing multiple meanings simultaneously, which are related to the multiple
purposes that an utterance may have in communication.
There are different forms of multifunctionality. Allwood in [1] claims that
if an utterance is multifunctional, ?its multifunctionality can be sequential
and simultaneous?. Bunt in [5] examines this claim using empirical data from
several dialogue annotation experiments and concludes that sequential mul-
tifunctionality disappears if we take sufficiently fine-grained dialogue units
into account (so-called ?functional segments? rather than turns). A func-
tional segment is defined as ?a smallest(possibly discontinuous) stretch of
communicative behaviour that has one or more communicative functions?
([8]). It was shown in [5] that even if we consider fine-grained units of
communicative behaviour we do not get rid of simultaneous multifunction-
ality; and the minimum number of functions that one segment may have
159
in dialogue is 1.3 on average. The number of functions grows rapidly if we
take forms of multifunctionality into account such as implicated and entailed
functions, feedback levels, and indirect functions.
It is noticed in [5] that pragmatically implicated functions, e.g. an ex-
pression of thanks also expressing positive feedback, are a true source of
multifunctionality. Logically entailed functions, such as the positive feed-
back on understanding that is entailed by answering a question or accepting
an offer, can also be important. For the purpose of this study, however,
we left such forms of multifunctionality out of consideration. This has two
reasons. First, we believe that discourse markers as such do not signal any
implicated or entailed functions. Second, since we want to operate on the
basis of observable utterance features (prosodic and linguistic) that can be
extracted automatically from raw data, to investigate how dialogue partic-
ipants express and recognise the intended and explicitly indicated multiple
functions of dialogue utterances.
In the next section we first describe the relevant aspects of the semantic
framework that we will use to study the multiple meanings of discourse
markers in dialogue in a systematic fashion.
3 Semantic framework
The semantic framework of Dynamic Interpretation Theory (DIT, [3]) takes
a multidimensional view on dialogue, in the sense that it views participa-
tion in a dialogue as being engaged in several activities simultaneously, such
as trying to advance a task that motivates the dialogue, providing commu-
nicative feedback, taking turns, and so on. Communicative behaviour is
interpreted in terms of bundles of update operations on participants? infor-
mation states (or ?contexts?); such update operations consist of a semantic
(referential, propositional, or action-related) content and a communicative
function, which specifies what an addressee is supposed to do with the se-
mantic content in order to update his information state [5]. Consider the
following dialogue fragment:
(2) A1: that?s why i think the option of the kinetic thing
A2: which basically means as long as you shake it like an automatic watch
D1: -1.78
1
but
D2: are people gonna wanna shake their movie controller?
1
Here and further in text figures given in brackets indicate the token duration in sec-
onds; figures without brackets indicate silence pauses between tokens in seconds.
160
Utterance (D1) is multifunctional, since it indicates that (1) the speaker
wants to have the turn by interrupting the previous speaker (signalled by
?but? overlapping A3); (2) the speaker interpreted and evaluated the utter-
ances A1 and A2 successfully; and (3) the speaker encountered a problem
in applying the information from the previous utterances (due to the ad-
versative meaning of ?but? ) ? he probably does not agree with the previous
claim or needs some clarification, which is indeed expressed in D2. Thus,
as the example shows, the various functions of ?but? are related to different
?dimensions? of the interaction [4], such as the allocation of the speaker role
and the processing of previous utterances.
In DIT the information which can be addressed is divided into: the do-
main or task (Task), feedback on the processing of previous utterances by
the speaker (Auto-feedback) or by other interlocutors (Allo-feedback), manag-
ing difficulties in the speaker?s utterance production (Own-Communication
Management) or that of other interlocutors (Partner Communication Man-
agement), the speaker?s need for time to continue the dialogue (Time Man-
agement), establishing and maintaining contact (Contact Management), the
allocation of the next turn (Turn Management), the way the speaker is
planning to structure the dialogue (Dialogue Structuring), and attention for
social aspects of the interaction (Social Obligations Management).
It was observed in DIT that some utterances have communicative func-
tions that can be applied to any kind of semantic content (general-purpose
(GP) functions). In particular, they can be applied not only to content
information concerning a certain task or domain, but also to information
concerning the communication, e.g. an Inform like ?First of all we need to
discuss the project finances? is used to introduce a new topic into the dis-
cussion. Dimension-specific (DS) functions, by contrast, are applicable only
to information concerned with a specific dimension of communication, e.g.
using the utterance ?Let me see? the speaker indicates that he needs some
time to do something in preparation of continuing the dialogue (Stalling
act). The phenomenon of general-purpose functions means that, when a
stretch of communicative behaviour has a GP function, its full functional
characterization requires in addition also the specification of the dimension
that is addressed, so we get characterizations like Feedback Question and
Task Suggestion.
We found that discourse markers are used (i) as ?preface? of a range of GP
functions, in particular Informs of various rhetorical kinds; (ii) as indicators
of dialogue acts with a DS function, e.g. of topic shifts; and (iii) as full-
blown dialogue acts (without explicit semantic content), e.g. as a Turn Take
act. This means that discourse markers can have two kinds of meanings:
161
as a dialogue act, i.e. as a context update operator, and as an element
that contributes to the determination of the communicative function of a
dialogue act with either a GP- or a DS-function.
The DIT framework supports a ?multidimensional? semantics by relating
context update operators to different compartments of structured context
models which include, besides information states of the usual kind (beliefs
and goals related to a task domain), also a dialogue history, information
about the agent?s processing state, beliefs about dialogue partners? process-
ing states, information and goals concerning the allocation of turns, and so
on, relating to the various ?dimensions? that dialogue acts belong to. The
interpretation of a multifunctional stretch of communicative behaviour cor-
responds to updating the context models of the communicating agents in
multiple ways, combining the effects of each of the component functions.
For example:
(3) B1: what anybody wants to add about what they don?t like about remote controls
A1:0.48 and you keep losing them
Since it answers B?s Set-Question B1, utterance A1, which includes the
discourse marker and, updates the context model of participant B with the
information that
2
: (1) A believes that B wants to know which elements of a
given set have a given property ; (2) A believes that B believes that A knows
which elements of that set have that property ; (3) A believes to know which
elements of that set have that property ; and (4) A believes that B made the
turn available. Thus, the simultaneous performance of the turn management
and feedback acts through the use of A1, in particular of and, constitutes
the multidimensional interpretation of what A says.
4 Data analysis and classification experiments
4.1 Corpus data and automatically extracted features
For the empirical semantic analysis of discourse markers we selected three
meetings from the AMI meeting corpus.
3
Our data contain 17,335 words
which form 3,897 functional segments with an average length of 4.4 words.
Average turn length is 7.7 segments.
All the features that we used were low-level features, automatically ex-
tracted both from the transcriptions and from sound files. In this respect
our analysis differs from those where manually labelled intonational informa-
tion is used such as tones and pitch accents ([10]), or automatically derived
2
For a formal representation of updates in participants? information state see [13].
3
A
?
ugmented M
?
ulti-party I
?
nteraction (http://www.amiproject.org/).
162
syntactic information ([14], [16]) such as parts-of-speech. Our aim was to
discover how well a classifier can perform if no other external knowledge
sources are available and only the output of the speech recogniser is acces-
sible. The features relate to prosody, word occurrence, and collocations.
Prosodic features were minimum, maximum, mean, and standard devia-
tion of pitch (F0 in Hz), energy (RMS), voicing (fraction of locally unvoiced
frames and number of voice breaks), speaking rate (number of syllables per
second) and segment duration.
4
Word occurrence is represented by a bag-
of-words vector
5
indicating the presence or absence of words in the segment.
As lexical features bi- and trigram models were constructed.
4.2 Dialogue act tagset and notes on segmentation
The training data was manually annotated using the DIT
++
annotation
scheme.
6
The DIT
++
taxonomy is multilayered and multidimensional, with
a conceptually well-defined set of communicative functions, supporting dia-
logue act annotation in multiple dimensions simultaneously.
The utterances were segmented per dimension following the approach in
[8], which leads to a more accurate analysis of human communication than
the segmentation of dialogue in single sequences of utterances, since utter-
ances may contain functional ?holes? due to protractions, repairs, restarts,
etcetera. Moreover, participants may interrupt each other and talk simul-
taneously, and utterances may also spread over several turns. A meaningful
unit in this approach is a functional segment as defined in Section 3. An
example of per-dimension segmentation is given in Figure (1).
4.3 Results: multifunctionality of discourse markers
We do not aim in this paper to discuss all discourse markers which occur in
our corpus data, we rather demonstrate the minimal multifunctionality of
the most frequently used discourse markers in dialogue and discuss the case
of and in more detail.
Table 1 lists some discourse markers (DMs) identified in the studied cor-
pus with their absolute frequency in the corpus, gives an overview of their
4
We examined both raw and normalized versions of these features. Speaker-normalized
features were normalized by computing z-scores (z = (X- mean)/standard deviation),
where mean and standard deviation were calculated from all functional segments produced
by the same speaker in the dialogues. We also used normalizations by the first and prior
speaker turn.
5
With a size of 1,640 entries.
6
For more information about the tagset and the dimensions that are distinguished,
please visit: http://dit.uvt.nl/
163
Figure 1: Example of per-dimension segmentation.
observed mutlifunctionality by indicating the average number of commu-
nicative functions in our dialogues, and lists the observed communicative
functions. Note that all DMs serve more than one communicative func-
Table 1: Distribution and observed multifunctionality of discourse markers.
tion. And is the most multifunctional discourse marker in our corpus and
because the least multifunctional one. Because mostly prefaces Informs with
the rhetorical functions Justify or Explain, and only in 2.4% of all cases is
used to simultaneously perform Turn Keeping and Stalling acts. All dis-
course markers, except ?you know?, preface GP functions in Task or other
dimensions (often in Discourse Structuring and Feedback) and may perform
164
dialogue acts addressing other dimensions simultaneously, as we will illus-
trate for and below. This pattern is observed for 50.7% of all studied DMs.
A discourse marker may also perform full-fledged dialogue acts addressing
more than one dimension simultaneously (as in example 2). This is often the
case for Turn Management in combination with Feedback, Time Manage-
ment, Discourse Structuring and Own Communication Management (27.7%
of all discourse markers are observed to be used in this way). It was noticed
that at most 3 dialogue acts are performed by one discourse marker in a
given context, e.g. feedback, turn and time management acts. A third pat-
tern of DM use, which was observed in 18.2% of cases, is as a single dialogue
act, e.g. a turn taking act or a feedback act. In the rest (3.4%) discourse
markers are part of general purpose functions and do not perform a dialogue
act on their own.
And is one of the most frequently used discourse markers in our cor-
pus. The corpus contained 470 occurrences of and, where about 54.5% is
not used as a discourse marker and the rest of 45.5% as discourse marker.
Differentiating between and as non-DM and DM is important for segmenta-
tion purposes. Used in clause-initial position or as an autonomous segment,
and as DM so to speak brackets segments and helps define their boundaries.
We investigated the prosodic and durational differences, and differences in
surrounding material between the two basic uses of and, and performed
machine-learning recognition experiments.
Experiments using the RIPPER rule inducer [7] showed that the two uses
of and are well recognized automatically. An accuracy score of 80.6% was
obtained on unsegmented data. Baseline score, in this case the percentage
of the most frequent class (non-DMs), was 54.5%. There are significant
mean differences (p < .05) for both raw and speaker-normalized features in
terms of duration (DMs are almost twice as long as non-DMs: 289-327ms
and 173-217ms respectively); initial pause (there is no or a negligible small
pause before non-DMs, and initial pauses before DMs range between 59 and
228ms); mean pitch (and as DM has higher mean pitch: > 12Hz). Preceding
and following tokens as features also have high information gain. And as
DM is often so to speak backed up between um, uh, so, then and also.
As a discourse marker, and may have various and multiple communica-
tive functions (see Table 1). And may signal that the upcoming speech is
adding new information or used in explanatory sequences [15], like Inform
Explain in (4):
(4) A1: like you said a problem was how many components are in there
A2: um (0.4)
A3: 0.28 and (0.12) the power is basically a factor of that
165
A4: 0.55 um (0.47) and (0.32) this affects you in terms of the size of your device
A5: 0.59 um (0.26) and (0.16) that would have some impact
And can also mark the transition from one discussion topic to another
by introducing topic shifts, for example:
(5) A1: you could group plastic and rubber, but it might be easier to use one
D1: -0.29 mm-hmm
A2: 0.74 um (0.32)and (0.2) the other components are logic chips
Table 2: Overview of accuracy on the base-
line (BL) and the classifier on the prediction
of communicative functions of ?and? in differ-
ent dimensions obtained using 10-fold cross-
validation experiments. ? significant at p <
.05, one-tailed z-test.
In 57% of all cases and is used
as a marker of speaker contin-
uation (turn keeping) as illus-
trated in A3, A4 and A5 in (4).
And in A2 in (5) also has a pos-
itive allo-feedback function re-
lated to the utterance D1.
We trained the RIPPER rule in-
ducer to automatically classify
the communicative functions of
and in several dimensions. The
results are shown in Table 2.
The classifier outperforms the
baseline, which for all tasks is
the percentage of the majority
class (e.g. Elaboration in Task),
except for the classification of Discourse Structuring and Partner Commu-
nication Management functions, for which there were not enough instances
in the training set.
As for features, for the prediction of the Task dimension, the bag-of-
words feature representing word occurrence in the segment and word col-
location features were important. For example, Inform Elaborate is often
signalled by focusing adverbs like especially, mainly, additionally, etc, or
contains relative pronouns like who, whose, which and that. The pres-
ence of some expressions of comparision was noted in Exemplifications,
such as one of, rather than, like,comparing, by contrast, similar, etc. The
most frequent words that occurred in Suggestions were maybe, might, bet-
ter, should, could/can, probably and let?s; and Discourse Structuring func-
tions are marked by next, then, other and further. For all other dimensions
prosodic features were more important than the surrounding lexical mate-
rial. For example, for Turn Management functions duration, initial pause
166
and mean pitch are key features. Important is also the information about
the current and the previous speaker. Speaker switch is an important sign
of and in the Auto-Feedback dimension. Stallings were characterized by a
long duration (about 585ms) and long initial pause (365ms), and a pause
after (100ms). They also often were preceded and followed by um and uh.
5 Conclusions and future work
To summarize we can conclude that discourse markers are truly multifunc-
tional dialogue units. The analysis of discourse markers as important instru-
ments for the understanding of dialogue and its computational modelling can
only benefit from a multidimensional approach to the exploration of their
complex meaning.
We showed that discourse markers may simultaneously serve several com-
municative functions in different dimensions. They are good indicators of
(plentiful) general-purpose communicative functions, such as informs, elab-
orations of various kinds, suggestions, warnings, disagreements, etc., mostly
in relation to the task that underlies the dialogue, but they are also fre-
quently used to create or maintain the conditions for successful interaction
(indicating dialogue control acts). Our investigations showed that discourse
markers may have communicative functions in all the dimensions distin-
guished in DIT, except perhaps in Social Obligations Management. We
noted the importance of discourse markers for segmenting dialogue into
meaningful units, since they so to speak bracket functional segments. Binary
automatic classification of DM vs non-DM was successfully performed. The
automatic recognition of the various and multiple communicative functions
of discourse markers is even more important. Our automatic classification
experiments showed that machine learning techniques can be profitably used
in the automatic recognition of multiple meanings of dialogue markers.
For future work, we intend to extend the studies reported here in two
directions. First, we plan to collect more annotated data containing a richer
set of discourse markers and sufficient numbers of instances per class, so
that we may increase the accuracy of the classifier for further evaluation
of our model on unmarked examples (see [16]). Furthermore, since AMI
meetings are face-to-face interactions and video recordings are available, we
plan to consider other modalities besides speech audio, e.g. hand and head
gestures, for better understanding of discourse markers functions in support
of adequate computational dialogue modelling.
167
Acknowledgments
This research was conducted within the project ?Multidimensional Dialogue
Modelling?, sponsored by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Re-
search (NWO), under grant reference 017.003.090.
References
[1] Allwood, J. (1992). On dialogue cohesion. Gothenburg Papers in Theoretical Lin-
guistics 65. Gothenburg University, Department of Linguistics.
[2] Allwood, J. (2000). An activity-based approach to pragmatics. H. Bunt and W. Black
(eds.) Abduction, Belief and Context in Dialogue, Amsterdam: Benjamin, pp.47-81.
[3] Bunt, H. (2000). Dynamic Interpretation and Dialogue Theory. M.M. Taylor, D.G.
Bouwhuis and F. Neel (eds.) The Structure of Multimodal Dialogue, Vol 2., Ams-
terdam: John Benjamins, pp. 139?166.
[4] Bunt, H. (2006). Dimensions in Dialogue Act Annotation. Proceedings LREC 2006,
Genova.
[5] Bunt, H. (2007). Multifunctionality and Multidimensional Dialogue Act Annotation.
E. Ahlsen et al (ed.) Communication - Action - Meaning. Gothenburg, pp. 237 ?
259.
[6] Cohen, R. (1984). A computational theory of the function of clue words in argument
understanding. Coling-ACL 1984, Standford, pp. 251?258.
[7] Cohen, W.W. (1995). Fast effective rule induction. In Proceedings of the 12th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning (ICML?95), pp. 115?123.
[8] Geertzen, J. Petukhova, V. and Harry Bunt. (2007). A Multidimensional Approach
to Utterance Segmentation and Dialogue Act Classification. Proceedings of the 8th
SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, Antwerp, pp. 140?149.
[9] Heeman, P.A. and Allen, J.F. (1999). Speech repairs, intonational phrases and dis-
course markers: Modelling speakers utterances in spoken dialogue. Computational
Linguistics, 12(3): 1?45.
[10] Hirschberg, J. and Litman, D. (1993). Empirical studies on the disambiguqtion of
cue phrases. Computational Linguistics, 25(4): 501?530.
[11] Hovy, E.H. (1995). The multifunctionality of discourse markers. Proceedings of the
Workshop on Discourse Markers, Egmond-aan-Zee, The Nertherlands.
[12] Mann, W. and Thompson, S. (1988). Rhetorical structure theory: toward a functional
theory of text organisation. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[13] Morante, R. (2007). Computing Meaning in Interaction. PhD Thesis, Tilburg Uni-
versity.
[14] Popescu-Belis, A. and Zufferey, S. (2006). Automatic identification of discourse
markers in multiparty dialogues. Working paper 65, ISSCO, University of Geneva.
[15] Schiffrin, D. (1987). Discourse Markers. Cambridge: University Press.
[16] Sporleder, C. and Lascarides, A. (2008). Using Automatically Labelled Examples to
Classify Rhetorical Relations: An Assessment. Natural Language Engineering, 14.03:
369?416.
168
