Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on Language Technology and Resources for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, Humanities, and Education ?LaTeCH ? SHELT&R 2009, pages 43?50,
Athens, Greece, 30 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Development of the Index Thomisticus Treebank Valency Lexicon 
 
 
Barbara McGillivray 
University of Pisa 
Italy 
b.mcgillivray@ling.unipi.it
Marco Passarotti 
Catholic University of the Sacred Heart 
Milan, Italy 
marco.passarotti@unicatt.it
 
  
Abstract 
We present a valency lexicon for Latin verbs 
extracted from the Index Thomisticus Tree-
bank, a syntactically annotated corpus of Me-
dieval Latin texts by Thomas Aquinas. 
In our corpus-based approach, the lexicon re-
flects the empirical evidence of the source 
data. Verbal arguments are induced directly 
from annotated data. 
The lexicon contains 432 Latin verbs with 270 
valency frames. The lexicon is useful for NLP 
applications and is able to support annotation. 
 
1 Introduction 
Over the last decades, annotated corpora and 
computational lexicons have gained an increas-
ing role among language resources in computa-
tional linguistics: on the one hand, they are used 
to train Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
tools such as parsers and PoS taggers; on the 
other hand, they are developed through auto-
matic procedures of linguistic annotation and 
lexical acquisition. 
The relation between annotated corpora and 
computational lexicons is circular: as a matter of 
fact, if linguistic annotation of textual data is 
supported and improved by the use of lexicons, 
these latter can be induced from annotated data 
in a corpus-based fashion. 
In the field of cultural heritage and in particu-
lar that of classical languages studies, much ef-
fort has been devoted throughout the years to the 
digitization of texts, but only recently have some 
projects begun to annotate them above the mor-
phological level. 
Concerning lexicology and lexicography of 
classical languages, a long tradition has produced 
and established many dictionaries, thesauri and 
lexicons, providing examples from real texts. 
Nevertheless, nowadays it is possible and indeed 
necessary to match lexicons with data from (an-
notated) corpora, and viceversa. This requires the 
scholars to exploit the vast amount of textual 
data from classical languages already available in 
digital format,1 and particularly those annotated 
at the highest levels. The evidence provided by 
the texts themselves can be fully represented in 
lexicons induced from these data. Subsequently, 
these lexicons can be used to support the textual 
annotation itself in a virtuous circle. 
This paper reports on the creation of a valency 
lexicon induced from the Index Thomisticus 
Treebank, a syntactically annotated corpus of 
Medieval Latin texts by Thomas Aquinas. The 
paper is organised as follows: section 2 describes 
the available Latin treebanks, their annotation 
guidelines and gives some specific information 
on the Index Thomisticus treebank; section 3 
deals with the notion of valency, while section 4 
describes the state of the art on valency lexicons; 
section 5 illustrates the procedures of acquisition 
and representation of our valency lexicon; fi-
nally, section 6 draws some conclusions and de-
scribes future work. 
2 Latin Treebanks 
Latin is a richly inflected language, showing: 
- discontinuous constituents (?non-
projectivity?): this means that phrasal con-
stituents may not be continuous, but broken 
up by words of other constituents. An exam-
ple is the following sentence by Ovid 
(Metamorphoses, I.1-2): ?In nova fert ani-
mus mutatas dicere formas corpora? (?My 
mind leads me to tell of forms changed into 
new bodies?). In this sentence, both the 
nominal phrases ?nova corpora? and ?muta-
tas formas? are discontinuous; 
- moderately free word-order: for instance, the 
order of the words in a sentence like ?au-
                                                          
1 See, for instance, the Perseus Digital Library (Crane et al, 
2001), or data repositories such as LASLA (Denooz, 1996). 
43
daces fortuna iuvat? (?fortune favours the 
bold?) could be changed into ?fortuna au-
daces iuvat?, or ?fortuna iuvat audaces?, 
without affecting the meaning of the sen-
tence. 
These features of Latin influenced the choice 
of Dependency Grammars (DG)2 as the most 
suitable grammar framework for building Latin 
annotated corpora like treebanks. 
While since the 1970s the first treebanks were 
annotated via Phrase Structure Grammar (PSG)-
based schemata (as in IBM, Lancaster and, later 
on, Penn treebanks), in the past decade many 
projects of dependency treebanks development 
have started, such as the ALPINO treebank for 
Dutch (Van der Beek et al, 2002), the Turin 
University Treebank for Italian (Lesmo et al, 
2002), or the Danish Dependency Treebank 
(Kromann, 2003). On the one hand, this is due to 
the fact that the first treebanks were mainly Eng-
lish language corpora. PSG were a suitable 
framework for a poorly inflected language like 
English, showing a fixed word-order and few 
discontinuous constituents. Later on, the syntac-
tic annotation of moderately free word-order lan-
guages required the adoption of the DG frame-
work, which is more appropriate than PSG for 
such a task. On the other hand, Carroll et al 
(1998) showed that inter-annotator agreement 
was significantly better for dependency tree-
banks, indicating that phrase structure annotation 
was requiring too many irrelevant decisions (see 
also Lin, 1995). 
Although much Latin data is nowadays avail-
able in digital format, the first two projects for 
the development of Latin treebanks have only 
recently started: namely the Latin Dependency 
Treebank (LDT) at the Tufts University in Bos-
ton (within the Perseus Digital Library) based on 
texts of the Classical era (Bamman, 2006), and 
the Index Thomisticus Treebank (IT-TB) at the 
Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Milan, 
based on the Opera omnia of Thomas Aquinas 
(Passarotti, 2007). 
Taking into account the above mentioned fea-
tures of Latin, both the treebanks independently 
chose the DG framework as the most suitable 
one for data annotation. The same approach was 
later on followed by a third Latin treebank now 
                                                          
2 With Tesni?re (1959) as a common background, there are 
many different current DG flavours. See for instance the 
following: Dependency Unification Grammar (Hellwig, 
1986), Functional Generative Description (Sgall, Haji?ov? 
and Panevov?, 1986), Meaning Text Theory (Mel??uk, 
1988), Word Grammar (Hudson, 1990). 
available, which is ongoing at the University of 
Oslo in the context of the PROIEL project 
(Pragmatic Resources in Old Indo-European 
Languages): the aim of PROIEL is the syntactic 
annotation of the oldest extant versions of the 
New Testament in Indo-European languages, 
including Greek, Latin, Gothic, Armenian and 
Church Slavonic (Haug and J?hndal, 2008). 
2.1 Annotation Guidelines 
Since LDT and IT-TB were the first projects of 
their kind for Latin, no prior established guide-
lines were available to rely on for syntactic anno-
tation. 
Therefore, the so-called ?analytical layer? of 
annotation of the Prague Dependency Treebank 
(PDT) for Czech (Haji? et al, 1999) was chosen 
and adapted to specific or idiosyncratic construc-
tions of Latin. These constructions (such as the 
ablative absolute or the passive periphrastic) 
could be syntactically annotated in several dif-
ferent ways and are common to Latin of all eras. 
Rather than have each treebank project decide 
upon and record each decision for annotating 
them, LDT and IT-TB decided to pool their re-
sources and create a single annotation manual 
that would govern both treebanks (Bamman et 
al., 2007a; Bamman et al, 2007b; Bamman et al, 
2008). 
As we are dealing with Latin dialects sepa-
rated by 13 centuries, sharing a single annotation 
manual is very useful for comparison purposes, 
such as checking annotation consistency or dia-
chronically studying specific syntactic construc-
tions. In addition, the task of data annotation 
through these common guidelines allows annota-
tors to base their decisions on a variety of exam-
ples from a wider range of texts and combine the 
two datasets in order to train probabilistic de-
pendency parsers. 
Although the PROIEL annotation guidelines 
are grounded on the same grammar framework 
as the LDT and IT-TB, they differ in a number of 
details, some of which are described in Passarotti 
(forthcoming). 
2.2 The Index Thomisticus Treebank 
The Index Thomisticus (IT) by Roberto Busa SJ 
(1974-1980) was begun in 1949 and is consid-
ered a groundbreaking project in computational 
linguistics. It is a database containing the Opera 
omnia of Thomas Aquinas (118 texts) as well as 
61 texts by other authors related to Thomas, for a 
total of around 11 million tokens. The corpus is 
morphologically tagged and lemmatised. 
44
Early in the 1970?s Busa started to plan a pro-
ject aimed at both the morphosyntactic disam-
biguation of the IT lemmatisation and the syntac-
tic annotation of its sentences. Today, these tasks 
are performed by the IT-TB project, which is 
part of the wider ?Lessico Tomistico Bicul-
turale?, a project whose target is the development 
of a lexicon from the IT texts.3
Presently, the size of the IT-TB is 46,456 to-
kens, for a total of 2,103 parsed sentences ex-
cerpted from the Scriptum super Sententiis Mag-
istri Petri Lombardi. 
3 Valency 
As outlined above, the notion of valency is gen-
erally defined as the number of complements 
required by a word: these obligatory comple-
ments are usually named ?arguments?, while the 
non-obligatory ones are referred to as ?adjuncts?. 
Although valency can refer to different parts of 
speech (usually verbs, nouns and adjectives), 
scholars have mainly focused their attention on 
verbs, so that the notion of valency often coin-
cides with verbal valency. 
Valency is widely used in DG formalisms, but 
it also figures in PSG-based formalisms like 
HPSG and LFG. 
While Karl B?hler can be considered as the 
pioneer of the modern theory of valency,4 Lucien 
Tesni?re is widely recognised as its real founder. 
Tesni?re views valency as a quantitative quality 
of verbs, since only verbs constrain both the 
quantity and the quality (i.e. nouns and adverbs) 
of their obligatory arguments; through a meta-
phor borrowed from drama, Tesni?re classifies 
dependents into actants (arguments) and circon-
stants (adjuncts): ?Le noeud verbal [?] exprime 
tout un petit drame. Comme un drame en effet, il 
comporte obligatoirement un proc?s, et le plus 
souvent des acteurs et des circonstances. Trans-
pos?s du plan de la r?alit? dramatique sur celui 
de la syntaxe structurale, le proc?s, les acteurs et 
les circonstances deviennent respectivement le 
verbe, les actants et les circonstants? (Tesni?re, 
1959: 102).5  
                                                          
3 http://itreebank.marginalia.it. 
4 In the Sprachtheorie, he writes that ?die W?rter einer bes-
timmten Wortklasse eine oder mehrere Leerstellen um sich 
er?ffnen, die durch W?rter bestimmter anderer Wortklassen 
ausgef?llt werden m?ssen? (B?hler, 1934: 173) (?words of a 
certain word-class open up around themselves one or sev-
eral empty spaces that have to be filled by words of certain 
other word-classes?; our translation). 
5 ?The verbal node expresses a whole little drama. As a 
drama, it implies a process and, most of the times, actors 
Arguments can be either obligatory or op-
tional, depending on which sense of the verb is 
involved. For example, the seem sense of the 
verb appear requires two obligatory arguments 
in active clauses, as in the following sentence: 
?That lawyer appears to love his work?. Here the 
second argument (?to love his work?) cannot be 
left out without changing the meaning of the 
verb. On the other hand, optional arguments are 
recorded into the verbal argument structure itself, 
althought they may not appear at the clausal 
level. For instance, in the following sentence the 
object required by the verb eat is missing, but the 
sentence is still acceptable: ?He eats (some-
thing)?. 
Optionality can also act at the communicative 
level as well as at the structural one. For in-
stance, adjuncts can be necessary for communi-
cative intelligibility in particular contexts, as in 
the following sentence: ?I met James at the Mar-
quee club?, where the locative adverbial (?at the 
Marquee club?) is required to answer a question 
like ?Where did you meet James??. On the other 
hand, structural optionality depends on the fea-
tures of the language and applies at the clausal 
level. For instance, as a poorly inflected lan-
guage, English requires the subject of a predicate 
to be expressed in declarative and interrogative 
main clauses, so that a sentence like the follow-
ing is ungrammatical if the subject is missing: 
?[I] slept all morning?. 
Given the so-called ?syntax-semantics inter-
face? (Levin, 1993), arguments are generally 
associated with a predicate sense rather than a 
predicate form, and are structured in sequences 
called ?subcategorization frames? (SCFs) or 
?complementation patterns?. For example, there 
is a semantic difference between the bill sense 
and the attack sense of the verb charge in Eng-
lish, as in the following sentences: 
- (a) ?The hotel charges 80 euros for a night?. 
- (b) ?The army charged the enemy?. 
In these sentences, the two predicate senses 
show two different SCFs: 
- (a) [Subj_NP, Pred, Obj_NP, Obj_PP-for] 
- (b) [Pred, Obj_NP] 
Arguments are also selected by verbs accord-
ing to lexical-semantic properties, called ?selec-
tional preferences? (SPs) or ?selectional restric-
tions?. For example, a sentence like ?*The train 
flew to Rome? is ungrammatical, since it violates 
                                                                                        
and circumstances. Transposed from the dramatic reality to 
structural syntax, the process, the actors and the circum-
stances respectively become the verb, the actants and the 
circumstants? (our translation). 
45
the SP of the verb fly on its subject and can only 
be accepted in a metaphorical context. 
4 Valency Lexicons 
Over the past years, several valency lexicons 
have been built within different theoretical 
frameworks: these lexicons have an important 
role in the NLP community thanks to their wide 
applications in NLP components, such as pars-
ing, word sense disambiguation, automatic verb 
classification and selectional preference acquisi-
tion. 
As shown in Ure?ov? (2004), a valency lexi-
con can also help the task of linguistic annotation 
(as in treebank development), providing annota-
tors with essential information about the number 
and types of arguments realized at the syntactic 
level for a specific verb, along with semantic 
information on the verb?s lexical preferences. 
In the phase of lexicon creation, both intui-
tion-based and corpus-based approaches can be 
pursued, according to the role played by human 
intuition and empirical evidence extracted from 
annotated corpora such as treebanks. 
For instance, lexicons like PropBank (Kings-
bury and Palmer, 2002), FrameNet (Ruppenhofer 
et al, 2006) and PDT-Vallex (Haji? et al, 2003) 
have been created in an intuition-based fashion 
and then checked and improved with examples 
from corpora. 
On the other side, research in lexical acqui-
sition has recently made available a number of 
valency lexicons automatically acquired from 
annotated corpora, such as VALEX (Korhonen, 
et al, 2006) and LexShem (Messiant et al, 
2008). Unlike the fully intuition-based ones, 
these lexicons aim at systematically reflecting 
the evidence provided by data, with very little 
human intervention. The role of intuition is 
therefore left to the annotation phase (where the 
annotator interprets the corpus data), and not ex-
tended to the development of the lexicon itself. 
Corpus-based lexicons show several advan-
tages if compared with traditional human-
developed dictionaries. Firstly, they systemati-
cally reflect the evidence of the corpus they were 
extracted from, while acquiring information spe-
cific to the domain of the corpus. Secondly, 
unlike manually built lexicons, they are not 
prone to human errors that are difficult to detect, 
such as omissions and inconsistencies. In addi-
tion, such lexicons usually display statistical in-
formation in their entries, such as the actual fre-
quency of subcategorization frames as attested in 
the original corpus. Finally, they are less costly 
than hand-crafted lexical resources in terms of 
time, money and human resources. 
While several subcategorization lexicons 
have been compiled for modern languages, much 
work in this field still remains to be done on 
classical languages such as Greek and Latin. Re-
garding Latin, Happ reports a list of Latin verbs 
along with their valencies (Happ, 1976: 480-
565). Bamman and Crane (2008) describe a ?dy-
namic lexicon? automatically extracted from the 
Perseus Digital Library, using the LDT as a 
training set. This lexicon displays qualitative and 
quantitative information on subcategorization 
patterns and selectional preferences of each word 
as it is used in every Latin author of the corpus. 
Relying on morphological tagging and statistical 
syntactic parsing of such a large corpus, their 
approach finds the most common arguments and 
the most common lexical fillers of these argu-
ments, thus reducing the noise caused by the 
automatic pre-processing of the data. 
5 The Index Thomisticus Treebank 
Valency Lexicon 
We propose a corpus-based valency lexicon for 
Latin verbs automatically induced from IT-TB 
data. The automatic procedure allows both the 
extension of this work to the LDT (thanks to the 
common annotation guidelines) and the updating 
of the lexicon as the treebank size increases. 
First, we automatically extract the argu-
ments of all the occurrences of verbal lemmata in 
the treebank, along with their morphological fea-
tures and lexical fillers. 
In the IT-TB, verbal arguments are anno-
tated using the following tags: Sb (Subject), Obj 
(Object), OComp (Object Complement) and 
Pnom (Predicate Nominal); adjuncts are anno-
tated with the tag Adv (Adverbial). The differ-
ence between Obj and Adv corresponds to the 
that between direct or indirect arguments (except 
subjects) and adjuncts. A special kind of Obj is 
the determining complement of the object, which 
is tagged with OComp, such as senatorem in the 
phrase ?aliquem senatorem facere? (?to nominate 
someone senator?). Conversely, the determining 
complement of the subject is tagged as Pnom, as 
in ?aliquis senator fit? (?someone becomes sena-
tor?).6
                                                          
6 As in the PDT, all of the syntactic tags can be appended 
with a suffix in the event that the given node is member of a 
coordinated construction (_Co), an apposition (_Ap) or a 
parenthetical statement (_Pa). 
46
In order to retrieve the arguments realised 
for each verbal occurrence in the treebank, spe-
cific database queries have been created to 
search for the nodes depending on a verbal head 
through the functional tags listed above. 
The head-dependent relation can be either 
direct or indirect, since intermediate nodes may 
intervene. These nodes are prepositions (tag 
AuxP), conjunctions (tag AuxC) and coordinat-
ing or apposing elements (respectively, tags Co-
ord and Apos). 
For example, see the following sentences: 
- [1] ?primo determinat formam baptismi;?7 
(?at first it determines the form of the bap-
tism;?) 
- [2] ?ly aliquid autem, et ly unum non deter-
minant aliquam formam vel naturam;?8 (?the 
?something? and the ?one? do not determine 
any form or nature?) 
Figure 1 reports the tree of sentence [1], 
where the Obj relation between the verbal head 
determinat and the dependent formam is direct. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Tree of sentence [1] 
 
Figure 2 shows the tree of sentence [2]. In 
this tree, two coordinated subjects (aliquid and 
unum) and two coordinated objects (formam and 
naturam) depend on the common verbal head 
determinant through two different Coord nodes 
(et and vel)9. 
                                                          
7 Thomas, Super Sententiis Petri Lombardi, IV, Distinctio 3, 
Quaestio 1, Prologus, 41-6, 42-2. The edition of the text 
recorded in the IT is Thomas (1856-1858). 
8 Thomas, Super Sententiis Petri Lombardi, III, Distinctio 6, 
Quaestio 2, Articulus 1, Responsio ad Argumentum 7, 4-5, 
6-1. 
9 Following PDT-style, the distributed determination ali-
quam, which modifies both the coordinated objects formam 
 
Figure 2 
Tree of sentence [2] 
 
In the case of indirect relation, the interme-
diate nodes need to be detected and extracted, in 
order to be inserted into the lexicon as subcate-
gorization structures containing the syntactic 
roles of the verbal arguments. To represent these 
structures, we distinguished two major types of 
them: subcategorization frames (SCFs) and sub-
categorization classes (SCCs). 
An SCF contains the sequence of functional 
labels of verbal arguments as they appear in the 
sentence order, whereas an SCC reports the sub-
categorization elements disregarding their linear 
order in the sentence. SCFs and SCCs play a dif-
ferent role in our lexicon. On the one hand, SCFs 
are very detailed patterns useful for diachronic 
and/or comparative studies on linear order. On 
the other hand, SCCs are more general and make 
the data in the lexicon comparable with the sub-
categorization structures as usually defined in the 
literature and in other valency lexicons. For each 
of these structures we then created the following 
sub-types, ranging from the most specific to the 
least specific one. 
SCF1: subcategorization frame marking the 
full path between the verbal head (referred to as 
?V?) and each of its argument nodes in the tree. 
SCF1 also assigns the same index to those argu-
ment nodes linked by coordinating or apposing 
elements. For instance, the SCF1 of the verbal 
                                                                                        
and naturam, depends on the coordinating node vel. For 
more details, see Hajic et al (1999), 236-238. 
47
head determino10 in sentence [1] is ?V + Obj?, 
while in sentence [2] is ?(Coord)Sb_Co(1) + (Co-
ord)Sb_Co(1) + V + (Coord)Obj_Co(2) + (Co-
ord)Obj_Co(2)?. In the latter, the intermediate 
nodes Coord are in square brackets and indices 1 
and 2 link the coordinated nodes. These indices 
have been adopted in order to disambiguate sub-
categorization structures where more Obj_Co 
tags can refer to different verbal arguments. For 
instance, in a sentence like ?I give X and Y to W 
and Z?, both the tranferred objects (X and Y) and 
the receivers (W and Z) are annotated with 
Obj_Co. Using indices, the subcategorization 
structure of the verb give in this sentence appears 
as follows: ?Sb + V + (Coord)Obj_Co(1) + (Co-
ord)Obj_Co(1) + (Coord)Obj_Co(2) + (Co-
ord)Obj_Co(2)?. The indices cannot be applied a 
priori to subsequent arguments, since Latin, al-
lowing discontinuous constituents, can show 
cases where coindexed nodes are separated by 
other lexical items in the linear order. 
SCC1: the subcategorization class associated 
with SCF1. The SCC1 of the verb determino in 
[1] is ?{Obj}?, while in [2] is ?{(Coord)Sb_Co(1), 
(Coord)Sb_Co(1), (Coord)Obj_Co(2), (Co-
ord)Obj_Co(2)}?. 
SCF2: a subcategorization frame containing 
only the labels and the indices of the arguments, 
but not the full path. So, the SCF2 of determino 
in [1] is ?V + Obj?, while in [2] is ?Sb_Co(1) + 
Sb_Co(1) + V + Obj_Co(2) + Obj_Co(2)?. 
SCC2: the subcategorization class associated 
with SCF2. For determino, this is ?{Obj}? in [1] 
and ?{Sb_Co(1), Sb_Co(1), Obj_Co(2), Obj_Co(2)}? 
in [2]. 
SCC3: a subcategorization frame containing 
only the argument labels. The SCC3 of determino 
is ?{Obj}? in [1] and ?{Sb, Obj}? in [2], showing 
that in this sentence determino is used as a biar-
gumental verb, regardless of the number of lexi-
cal fillers realised for each of its arguments at the 
surface level. 
6 Conclusion and future work 
Presently, the size of the IT-TB valency lexicon 
is 432 entries (i.e. verbal lemmata, corresponding 
to 5966 wordforms), with 270 different SCF1s. In 
the near future, the lexicon will be enriched with 
valency information for nouns and adjectives. 
The corpus-based approach we followed in-
duces verbal arguments directly from annotated 
data, where the arguments may be present or not, 
                                                                                                                    
10 Determino is the lemma of both the wordforms determi-
nat (sentence [1]) and determinant (sentence [2]). 
depending on the features of the texts. Therefore, 
the lexicon reflects the empirical evidence given 
by the data it was extracted from, encouraging 
linguistic studies on the particular language do-
main of our corpus. 
In addition to the syntactic information re-
ported in the different types of SCFs and SCCs, 
it is possible at each stage to include both the 
morphological features and the lexical fillers of 
verbal arguments, helping define verbal selec-
tional preferences. 
The lexicon may also be useful for improv-
ing the performance of statistical parsers, enrich-
ing the information acquired by parsers on verbal 
entries. On the other hand, moving from parser 
performance to lexicon development, the lexicon 
can be induced from automatically parsed texts 
when an accurate parsing system is available. 
The syntactic and lexical data recorded in the 
lexicon are also important in further semantic 
NLP applications, such as word sense disam-
biguation, anaphora and ellipsis resolution, and 
selectional preference acquisition. Following a 
widespread approach in valency lexicons, a close 
connection between valency frames and word 
senses will be followed in the description of lexi-
con entries: this means that each headword entry 
of our lexicon will consist of one or more SCFs 
and SCCs, one for each sense of the word. 
We plan to make the lexicon available on-
line through a graphical interface usable also 
during the annotation procedures, as has been 
already done for the PDT via the tree editor 
TrEd.11 In this way, the consistency of the anno-
tation process can be tested and enforced thanks 
to the information stored in the lexicon. 
In order to test the accuracy of our system, it 
will be also necessary to evaluate the quality of 
our valency lexicon against the Perseus ?dy-
namic lexicon?, Happ?s list and other existing 
resources for Latin, such as traditional dictionar-
ies and thesauri. A comparison with the lexicon 
by Perseus is also very interesting in a contras-
tive diachronic perspective, as it may show im-
portant linguistic differences between Classical 
and Medieval Latin. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Paolo Ruffolo for his 
help in designing the database architecture. 
References 
11 TrEd is freely available at 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~pajas/tred/. 
48
David Bamman. 2006. The Design and Use of Latin 
Dependency Treebank. In Jan Haji? and Joakim 
Nivre (eds.), TLT 2006. Proceedings of the Fifth 
Workshop on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories. 
December 1-2, 2006, Prague, Czech Republic, In-
stitute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 67-78. 
David Bamman and Gregory Crane. 2008. Building a 
Dynamic Lexicon from a Digital Library. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Confer-
ence on Digital Libraries (JCDL 2008), Pittsburgh. 
David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane and 
Savina Raynaud. 2007a. Guidelines for the Syntac-
tic Annotation of Latin Treebanks, ?Tufts Univer-
sity Digital Library?. Available at: 
http://dl.tufts.edu/view_pdf.jsp?urn=tufts:facpubs:d
bamma01-2007.00002. 
David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Gregory Crane and 
Savina Raynaud. 2007b. A Collaborative Model of 
Treebank Development. In Koenraad De Smedt, 
Jan Haji? and Sandra K?bler (eds.), Proceedings of 
the Sixth International Workshop on Treebanks 
and Linguistic Theories. December 7-8, 2007, Ber-
gen, Norway, Northern European Association for 
Language Technology (NEALT) Proceedings Se-
ries, Vol. 1, 1-6. 
David Bamman, Marco Passarotti, Roberto Busa and 
Gregory Crane. 2008. The annotation guidelines of 
the Latin Dependency Treebank and Index Thomis-
ticus Treebank. The treatment of some specific 
syntactic constructions in Latin. In Proceedings of 
the Sixth International Conference on Language 
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2008). May 28-
30, 2008, Marrakech, Morocco, European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA), 2008. 
Karl B?hler. 1934. Sprachtheorie: die Darstellungs-
funktion der Sprache, Jena: Gustav Fischer, Stutt-
gart. 
Roberto Busa. 1974?1980. Index Thomisticus: sancti 
Thomae Aquinatis operum omnium indices et con-
cordantiae, in quibus verborum omnium et singu-
lorum formae et lemmata cum suis frequentiis et 
contextibus variis modis referuntur quaeque / con-
sociata plurium opera atque electronico IBM 
automato usus digessit Robertus Busa SJ, From-
mann-Holzboog, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt. 
Gregory R. Crane, Robert F. Chavez, Anne Mahoney, 
Thomas L. Milbank, Jeff A. Rydberg-Cox, David 
A. Smith and Clifford E. Wulfman. 2001. Drudg-
ery and deep thought: Designing a digital library 
for the humanities. In Communications of the 
ACM, 44(5), 34-40. 
John Carroll, Ted Briscoe and Antonio Sanfilippo. 
1998. Parser Evaluation: a Survey and a New Pro-
posal. In Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on Language Resources and Evalua-
tion (LREC 1998). May 28-30, 1998, Granada, 
Spain, 447-454. 
Joseph Denooz. 1996. La banque de donn?es du labo-
ratoire d'analyse statistique des langues anciennes 
(LASLA). ? Le M?di?viste et l'ordinateur ?, 33, 14-
20. 
Jan Haji?, Jarmila Panevov?, Eva Bur??ov?, Zde?ka 
Ure?ov? and Alla B?mov?. 1999. Annotations at 
Analytical Level. Instructions for annotators, Insti-
tute of Formal and Applied Linguistics, Prague, 
Czech Republic. Available at: 
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0/doc/manuals/en/a-
layer/pdf/a-man-en.pdf. 
Jan Haji?, Jarmila Panevov?, Zde?ka Ure?ov?, Alla 
B?mov?, Veronika Kol?rov?-Rezn?ckov? and Petr 
Pajas. 2003. PDT-VALLEX: Creating a Large 
Coverage Valency Lexicon for Treebank Annota-
tion. In Joakim Nivre and Erhard Hinrichs (eds.), 
TLT 2003 ? Proceedings of the Second Workshop 
on Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, volume 9 of 
Mathematical Modelling in Physics, Engineering 
and Cognitive Sciences, V?xj? University Press, 
V?xj?, Sweden, 57-68. 
Heinz Happ. 1976. Grundfragen einer Dependenz-
Grammatik des Lateinischen, Vandenhoeck & Ru-
precht, Goettingen. 
Dag Haug and Marius J?hndal. 2008. Creating a Par-
allel Treebank of the Old Indo-European Bible 
Translations. In Proceedings of the Language 
Technology for Cultural Heritage Data Workshop 
(LaTeCH 2008), Marrakech, Morocco, 1st June 
2008, 27-34. 
Peter Hellwig. 1986. Dependency Unification Gram-
mar, In Proceedings of the 11th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics, Universit?t 
Bonn, Bonn, 195-198. 
Richard Hudson. 1990. English Word Grammar, 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford, UK. 
Paul Kingsbury and Martha Palmer. 2002. From 
Treebank to Propbank. In Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation (LREC 2002), Las Palmas ? Gran 
Canaria, Spain. 
Anna Korhonen, Yuval Krymolowski and Ted 
Briscoe. 2006. A Large Subcategorization Lexicon 
for Natural Language Processing Applications. In 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2006), Genoa, Italy. 
Matthias T. Kromann. 2003. The Danish Dependency 
Treebank and the underlying linguistic theory. In 
Joakim Nivre and Erhard Hinrichs (eds.), TLT 
2003 ? Proceedings of the Second Workshop on 
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories, volume 9 of 
Mathematical Modelling in Physics, Engineering 
and Cognitive Sciences, V?xj? University Press, 
V?xj?, Sweden. 
Leonardo Lesmo, Vincenzo Lombardo and Cristina 
Bosco. 2002. Treebank Development: the TUT 
Approach. In Rajeev Sangal and Sushma M. 
Bendre (eds.), Recent Advances in Natural 
Language Processing. Proceedings of 
International Conference on Natural Language 
49
Processing (ICON 2002), Vikas Publ. House, New 
Delhi, 61-70. 
Beth Levin. 1993. English verb classes and 
alternations: a preliminary investigation, 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Dekang Lin. 1995. A dependency-based method for 
evaluating broadcoverage parsers. In Proceedings 
of the IJCAI-95, Montreal, Canada, 1420-1425. 
Igor Mel??uk. 1988. Dependency Syntax: Theory and 
Practice, State University Press of New York, Al-
bany/NY. 
Cedric Messiant, Anna Korhonen and Thierry 
Poibeau. 2008. LexSchem: A Large 
Subcategorization Lexicon for French Verbs. In 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 
2008). May 28-30, 2008, Marrakech, Morocco, 
European Language Resources Association 
(ELRA), 2008. 
Jarmila Panevov?. 1974-1975. On Verbal Frames in 
Functional Generative Description. Part I, ?Prague 
Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics?, 22, 3-40; 
Part II, ?Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguis-
tics?, 23, 17-52. 
Marco Passarotti. 2007. Verso il Lessico Tomistico 
Biculturale. La treebank dell?Index Thomisticus. In 
Raffaella Petrilli and Diego Femia (eds.), Il filo del 
discorso. Intrecci testuali, articolazioni linguisti-
che, composizioni logiche. Atti del XIII Congresso 
Nazionale della Societ? di Filosofia del Linguag-
gio, Viterbo, 14-16 Settembre 2006, Aracne Editri-
ce, Pubblicazioni della Societ? di Filosofia del 
Linguaggio, 04, Roma, 187-205. 
Marco Passarotti. Forthcoming. Theory and Practice 
of Corpus Annotation in the Index Thomisticus 
Treebank. In Proceedings of the Conference 
?Trends in Computational and Formal Philology - 
Venice Padua, May 22-24, 2008?. 
Josef Ruppenhofer, Michael Ellsworth, Miriam R.L. 
Petruck, Christopher R. Johnson and Jan 
Scheffczyk. 2006. FrameNet II. Extendend Theory 
and Practice. E-book available at 
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu/index.php?option
=com_wrapper&Itemid=126. 
Petr Sgall, Eva Haji?ov? and Jarmila Panevov?. 1986. 
The Meaning of the Sentence in its Semantic and 
Pragmatic Aspects, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, NL. 
Lucien Tesni?re. 1959. ?l?ments de syntaxe struc-
turale, Editions Klincksieck, Paris, France. 
Thomas Aquinas. 1856-1858. Sancti Thomae 
Aquinatis, doctoris angelici, Ordinis 
praedicatorum Commentum in quatuor libros 
Sententiarum magistri Petri Lombardi, adjectis 
brevibus adnotationibus, Fiaccadori, Parma. 
Zdenka Ure?ov?. 2004. The Verbal Valency in the 
Prague Dependency Treebank from the Annotator's 
Point of View. Jazykovedn? ?stav ?. ?t?ra, SAV, 
Bratislava, Slovakia. 
Leonoor Van der Beek, Gosse Bouma, Rob Malouf 
and Gertjan van Noord. 2002. The Alpino 
Dependency Treebank. In Mariet Theune, Anton 
Nijholt and Hendri Hondorp (eds.), Proceedings of 
the Twelfth Meeting of Computational Linguistics 
in the Netherlands (CLIN 2001), Rodopi, 
Amsterdam, 8-22. 
50
