Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 1?8,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Discourse Topics and Metaphors
Beata Beigman Klebanov
Northwestern University
beata@northwestern.edu
Eyal Beigman
Washington University in St. Louis
beigman@wustl.edu
Daniel Diermeier
Northwestern University
d-diermeier@northwestern.edu
Abstract
Using metaphor-annotated material that is
sufficiently representative of the topical
composition of a similar-length document in
a large background corpus, we show that
words expressing a discourse-wide topic of
discussion are less likely to be metaphorical
than other words in a document. Our
results suggest that to harvest metaphors more
effectively, one is advised to consider words
that do not represent a discourse topic.
Traditionally, metaphor detectors use the
observation that a metaphorically used item creates
a local incongruity because there is a violation
of a selectional restriction, such as providing a
non-vehicle object to the verb derail in Protesters
derailed the conference. Current state of art
in metaphor detection therefore tends to be
?localistic? ? the distributional profile of the target
word in its immediate grammatical or collocational
context in a background corpus or a database
like WordNet is used to determine metaphoricity
(Mason, 2004; Krishnakumaran and Zhu, 2007;
Birke and Sarkar, 2006; Gedigian et al, 2006; Fass,
1991).
However, some theories of metaphor postulate
certain features of metaphors that connect it to the
surrounding text beyond the small grammatical or
proximal locality. For example, for Kittay (1987)
metaphor is a discourse phenomenon; although
the minimal metaphoric unit is a clause, often
much larger chunks of text constitute a metaphor.
Consider, for example, the TRAIN metaphor in the
following excerpt from a Sunday Times article on
20 September 1992:
Thatcher warned EC leaders to stop their
endless round of summits and take notice
of their own people. ?There is a fear that
the European train will thunder forward,
laden with its customary cargo of gravy,
towards a destination neither wished for
nor understood by electorates. But the
train can be stopped,? she said.
In the example above, the quotation is not in itself
a metaphor, as there is no indication that something
other than the actual train is being discussed (and
so no local incongruities exist). Only when situated
in the context prepared by the first sentence (and
indeed the rest of the article), the train imagery
becomes a metaphor.
According to Kittay, a metaphor occurs when
a semantic field is used to discuss a different
content domain. The theory therefore predicts that a
metaphorically used semantic domain would be off-
topic in the given document.
Although a single document can have singular,
idiosyncratic topics, it is likelier to discuss a mix of
topics that are typical of the discourse of which it is
part. We therefore derive the following hypothesis:
Words in a given document that represent a common
topic of discussion in a corpus of relevant documents
would be predominantly non-metaphorical. That is,
a smaller share of metaphorically used words in a
document would fall in such topical words than the
share of topical words in the document.
We test this hypothesis in the current article.
1
Using a large background corpus, we estimate
the topical composition of the target documents
(section 1) that were annotated for metaphors
(section 2). We then report the results of the
experiment (section 3) that strongly support the
hypothesis, and discuss the findings (section 4). The
concluding section provides a summary and outlines
the significance of the results for the practice of
metaphor detection.
1 Topic identification
1.1 EUI corpus
Our aimwas to create a large corpus of British media
discourse regarding the emerging European Union
institutions, with both Euro-phile and Euro-sceptic
camps represented. Our corpus consists of 12,814
articles drawn from three British newspapers: The
Guardian (34%), The Times (38%), and The
Independent (28%), dating from 1990 to 2000.
We used LexisNexis Academic1 to search for the
Subject index term European Union Institutions
(henceforth, EUI).2 After results are retrieved, we
further narrow them down to only documents on the
subject European Union Institutions in the detailed
subject index of the retrieved results.3,4
1.2 Identification of discourse topics
We converted all 12,858 documents5 (henceforth,
EUI+M corpus) into plain text format and removed
1http://academic.lexisnexis.com/online-services/academic-
features.aspx
2In LexisNexis subject index hierarchy: Government
and Public Administration/International Organization and
Bodies/International Governmental Organizations/European
Union Institutions.
3In the initial search, an article that scores 72% on the
subject would be retrieved, but it would not be classified as
being on this subject, and so would not be included in the final
dataset. Articles in the final dataset tend to score about 90% on
the subject, according to LexisNexis index.
4There is a gap in LexisNexis? index coverage of The
Times during 1996-7 and of The Independent during 2000. To
avoid under-representation of the newspaper and of the relevant
years in the sample, we added articles returned for the search
SECTION(Home news) AND (European Union OR Brussels)
on The Times 01/1996 through 04/1998, and SECTION(News
AND NOT Foreign) AND (European Union OR Brussels) on
The Independent throughout 2000.
512,814 EUI corpus plus 44 documents annotated for
metaphors, to be described in section 2.
words from a list of 153 common function words.
We then constructed an indexing vocabulary V that
included all and only words that (a) contained only
letters; and (b) appeared at least 6 times in the
collection. All documents were indexed using this
21,046 word vocabulary. We will designate all the
indexed words in document i as Di.
To identify the main discourse topics in
the EUI+M corpus, we submitted the indexed
documents to an unsupervised clustering method
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (Blei et al, 2003)
(henceforth, LDA).6 The designation of the clusters
as topics is supported by findings reported in Blei
et al (2003) that the clusters contain information
relevant for topic discrimination. Additionally,
Chanen and Patrick (2007) show that LDA achieves
significant correlations with humans on a topic
characterization task, where humans produced not
just a topic classification but also identified phrases
they believed were indicative of each class.
Using the default settings of LDA
implementation,7 we analyzed the corpus into
100 topics. Table 1 exemplifies some of the
emergent topics.
1.3 Topical words in a text
LDA is a generative model of text. According to its
outlook, every text is about a small (typically 5-7)
number of topics, and each indexed word in the text
belongs to one of these topics. However, in many
cases, the relationship between the word and the
topic is quite tentative, as the word is not particularly
likely given the topic. We therefore use parameter k
to control topic assignments ? we only take LDA?s
assignment of word to topic if the word is in the
top k most likely words for that topic. For k=25,
about 15% of in-vocabulary words in a document
are assigned to a topic; for k=400, about half the
in-vocabulary words are assigned to some topic. We
designate byTki all indexed words in document i that
are assigned to some topic for the given value of k.
The ratio |Tki ||Di| describes the proportion of discoursetopical words in the indexed words for the given
document.
6No stemming was performed.
7downloaded from http://www.cs.princeton.edu/?blei/lda-c/
2
Table 1: Examples of topics identified by LDA in the
EUI+M corpus. All words are taken from top 25 most
likely words given the topic. We boldface one word per
cluster, that could provide, in our view, an appropriate
label for the cluster.
foreign nato military war russian defence soviet
piece un kosovo sanctions bosnia moscow
rail tunnel transport train pounds channel eurostar
ferry trains passengers services paris eurotunnel
countries europe enlargement new membership
members eastern conference reform voting summit
commission foreign join poland negotiations
parliament mep party socialist strasbourg christian
vote leader labour conservative right political green
democrat elections epp
television commission satellite tv broadcasting
tickets film broadcasters bbc programmes media
industry channel public directive
court article justice member directive treaty
question provisions case law regulation judgment
interpretation rules order proceedings
social workers employment working hours
jobs week employers legislation unions
employees chapter rights health minimum
bank central euro monetary rates currency
interest bundesbank markets economic exchange
finance inflation dollar german
players football clubs uefa league fifa game cup
fishing fish fishermen fisheries quota vessels
boats waters sea fleet
racism racist ethnic xenophobia black minorities
jury discrimination white relations
drugs patent research human companies genetic
scientists health medical biotechnology disease
children parents punishment school rights family
childcare corporal education law father mother
controls immigration border asylum checks
passport police citizens crime europol
energy nuclear emissions oil electricity gas
environment carbon tax pollution fuel global cut
commission fraud commissioners brussels report
allegations officials inquiry meps corruption
mismanagement staff santer
2 Metaphor annotation
Ideally, we should have sampled a small sub-corpus
from the EUI corpus for metaphor annotation;
however, the choice of the data for annotation
predated the construction of the EUI corpus.
Our interest being in the way metaphors used
in public discourse help shape attitudes towards
a complex, ongoing and fateful political reality,
we came across Musolff?s (2000) work on the
British discourse on the European integration
process throughout the 1990s. Working in the
corpus linguistics tradition, Musolff (2000) studied
a number of metaphors recurrent in this discourse,
making available a selection of materials he used,
marked with the metaphors.8
One caveat to directly using the database is the
lack of clarity regarding the metaphor annotation
procedure. In particular, the author does not
report how many people participated, or any inter-
annotator agreement figures. We therefore chose
4 out of Musolff?s list of source domains, took
all articles corresponding to them (128 documents),
along with 23 articles from other source domains,
and submitted them to a group of 8 undergraduate
annotators, on top of Musolff?s original markup that
is treated as another annotator.
Annotators received the following instructions,
reflecting our focus on the persuasive use of
metaphor, as part of an argument:
Generally speaking, a metaphor is a
linguistic expression whereby something
is compared to something else that it is
clearly literally not, in order to make a
point. Thus, in Tony Blair?s famous ?I
haven?t got a reverse gear?, Tony Blair
is compared to a car in order to stress
his unwillingness/inability to retract his
statements or actions. We would say in
this case that a metaphor from a VEHICLE
domain is used. In this study we will
consider metaphors from 4 domains.
For the 4 chosen domains we provided the
following descriptions, along with 2 examples for
each:
8available from http://www.dur.ac.uk/andreas.musolff/Arcindex.htm
3
AUTHORITY Metaphors that have to do with
discipline and authority, like school, religion,
royalty, asylum, prison, etc.
LOVE Metaphors from love/romance and family.
BUILD Metaphors that have to do with building
(the process) and houses and other buildings or
constructions, their parts and uses.
VEHICLE Metaphors that have to do with land-
borne vehicles, their parts, operation and
maintenance.
People were instructed to mark every paragraph
where a metaphor from a given domain occurs. They
were also asked to provide a comment that briefly
summarizes the ground for their decision, saying
what is being compared to what.9
Table 2 shows the inter-annotator agreement
figures.
Table 2: Inter-annotator agreement, measured on 2364
paragraphs (151 documents).11
Source Domain of Metaphor ?
LOVE 0.66
VEHICLE 0.66
AUTHORITY 0.39
BUILD 0.43
LOVE and VEHICLE are close to acceptable
reliability, with the other two types scoring low.
In order to understand the nature of disagreements,
we submitted the annotated materials plus some
random annotations to 7 out of the original 8 people
for validation, 4-8 weeks after they completed
the annotations, asking them to accept or reject
9In the topics vs metaphors experiment, we test the
hypothesis on words rather than paragraphs. For metaphors
from a pre-specified domain, such as VEHICLE or LOVE, it
was usually clear which words in the paragraph belong to the
domain and are used metaphorically. People?s comments often
explicitly used words from the paragraph, or made it otherwise
clear through their description. For OpenMeta phase (please see
below), where people were asked to mark metaphors from any
source domain, they were also asked to single out the words in
the paragraph that witness the metaphor, and these are the words
used in the current experiment.
11These are results for binary classification for each metaphor
type rather than a multiclass classification, since some articles
have more than one type and some have none.
metaphor markups. We found that metaphors
initially marked by at least 4 people (out of 9) were
accepted as valid by people who did not initially
mark them in 91% of the cases, on average across
the metaphor types. These are thus uncontroversial
cases, with the missing annotations likely due to
attention slips rather than to genuine differences of
opinion. Metaphors initially marked by 1-3 people
were more controversial, with the average validation
rate of 41% (Beigman Klebanov et al, 2008).
Evidently, some of the metaphors are clearer-
cut than others, yet even the more difficult cases
got non-negligible support at validation time from
people who did not initially mark them. We
therefore decided to regard the whole of the
annotated data as valid for the purpose of the current
research. Our focus is on finding metaphors (recall),
and less on making sure all candidate metaphors are
acceptable to all annotators; it suffices to know that
even the minority opinion often finds support.
In the second stage of the research, we expanded
the repertoire of the metaphor types to include
additional source domains, mainly from Musolff?s
list. The dataset has so far been subjected to
non-expert annotations by a group of the total of
15 undergraduate students. Metaphors from the
source domains of VEHICLE, LOVE, BUILDING,
AUTHORITY, WAR, SHOW, SCHOOL, RELIGION,
MEDICINE were annotated by different subsets of
the students.
The outcome of the second stage of the project is
not sufficient for addressing the issue of discourse
topics vs metaphors, however, as there are instances
of metaphors in the text that do not fall into any
of the source domains singled out by Musolff as
recurrent ones in the discourse under consideration.
We are now at an early stage of the third phrase
we call OpenMeta, where annotators are asked to
mark all metaphors they can detect, not confining
themselves to a given list of source domains.
Only annotators who participated in the previous,
type-constrained, version of the task participate in
OpenMeta project. So far, we have 44 documents
annotated by 3 people for open-domain metaphors.
This subset features as full a coverage of all
metaphors used in the documents as we were able
to obtain so far, and it is going to serve as test data
for the topics vs metaphors hypothesis.
4
Our test set is thus biased towards recurrent
metaphorical domains (those named by Musolff),
and towards metaphors that are relatively salient
to a naive reader, from recurrent or other source
domains. Metaphors marked in the test data are
those afforded a high degree of rhetorical presence
in the discourse ? either quantitatively, because
they are repeated and elaborated, or qualitatively,
because they are striking enough to arrest the
naive reader?s attention. According to the Presence
Theory in rhetoric (Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca,
1969; Gross and Dearin, 2003; Atkinson et al,
2008), elements afforded high presence are key to
the rhetorical design of the argument. These are
not so much metaphors we live by without even
noticing, such as those often studied in Conceptual
Metaphor literature, like VALUE AS SIZE or TIME
AS SPACE; these are metaphors that are clearly a
matter of the author?s conscious choice, closest in
the current theorizing to Steen?s (2008) notion of
deliberate metaphors.
2.1 Pseudo sampling
The annotated data is not really a sample of the
corpus. In fact, it is not known to us exactly how the
documents were chosen; although all 44 metaphor
annotated documents are from the newspapers and
dates participating in the EUI corpus, only 20% are
actually in the EUI corpus. How can we establish
that there is a fit between the EUI collection and
the annotated texts? We check how well discourse
topics cover the documents, in the corpus and in
the annotated material. Specifically, for a fixed
k, is there a difference in the |Tki ||Di| for annotateddocuments as opposed to the corpus at large? Using
a random sample of 50 documents from EUI corpus,
a 2-tailed t-test yielded p < 0.05, for all k, the
trend being towards a better coverage of the EUI
documents than of the metaphor annotated ones.
We hypothesized that this was due to the large
discrepancy in the lengths of the texts: An average
text in the EUI sample is 432 words long, whereas
the metaphor annotated texts are 775 words long on
average, with the shortest having 343 words. Shorter
texts tend to be less elaborate and more ?to the
point?, with a higher percentage of topical words.
To neutralize the effect of length on topical
coverage, we chose from the EUI sample only
documents that were at least 343 words long,
resulting in 31 documents. Comparing those to the
44 metaphor annotated documents, we found p >
0.37 for every k, i.e. the annotated documents are
indistinguishable in topical coverage from similar-
length documents in the EUI corpus.
3 Experiment
3.1 Summary of notation
V All and only non-stop words containing only
letters that appeared in at least 6 documents in
the collection.
Di All words in document i that are in V.
Tki All words in document i that are in V and are
in the top k words for some topic active in
document i according to LDA output.
Mi All words in document i that are in V and are
marked as metaphors in this document.
3.2 Hypothesis
We hypothesize that words in a given document
that are high-ranking representatives of a common
topic of discussion in a relevant corpus are less
likely to be metaphorical than other words in the
document. That is, such words would contain a
smaller proportion of metaphors than their share in
text. Using the definitions above: For an average
document i and any k, |Tki ||Di| >
|Mi?Tki |
|Mi| .
3.3 Results
As we hypothesized, metaphors are under-
represented in topically used words. Thus, for
k=25, about 15% of the indexed words in the
document are deemed topical, containing about
3% of the metaphorically used indexed words
in that document. For k=400, about 53% of the
indexed words are topical, capturing only 22% of
the metaphors.
4 Discussion
4.1 Metaphors from salient domains
A number of domains singled out by Musolff (2000)
as being recurrent metaphors in the corpus, such
5
0.000.100.20
0.300.400.50
0.60
25 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400k
Figure 1: As hypothesized, |Tki ||Di| , shown in circles, is
larger than |Mi?Tki ||Mi| , shown in squares, for various k.
as VEHICLE or LOVE, are also things people care
about politically, hence they also correspond to
recurrent topics of discussion (see clusters titled
transport and childcare in table 1). It has been
shown experimentally that the subject?s in-depth
familiarity with the source domain is necessary
for the metaphor to work as intended ? see for
example Gentner and Gentner (1983) work on using
water flow metaphors for electricity. Our results
suggest that participants in political discourse draw
on domains not only familiar in general, but indeed
highly salient in the specific discourse itself.
As a consequence, an extended metaphor from a
discourse-topical domain can be easily mistaken by
the topic detection software for a topical use of the
relevant items. Consider, for example, an extract
from a 19 December 1991 article in Times:
Denis Healey, former Labour Chancellor
of the Exchequer, urged the primeminister
to stop playing Tory party politics with
the negotiations over Europe and drew an
image of Mr Major as a driver. He said:
?I understand that if you are driving a car
and sitting behind you is a lady with a
handbag and a man with fangs, you may
feel it wiser to drive in the slow lane. My
own advice is that he should pull into a
lay-by, turf the others out and then hand
the wheel over to firmer and safer hands.?
LDA considered {drive driving} to belong to
the topic that deals with safety and road accidents,
including in its 200 most likely words {crash
died accidents pedestrians traffic safety cars maps
motorists}, although additional metaphorically used
items from the same semantic domain, such as
lane and wheel, were not among the top 200
representatives of this topic.
It is an intriguing direction for future research
to compare the topical and metaphorical uses of
such domains, in order to determine which aspects
loom large indeed, being both matters of literal
concern and prolific generators of metaphors, and
how these are manipulated for persuasive effects.
The example above suggests that in the British EU-
related discourse in 1990s safety of driving is both
a topic-of-discussion (?Cyclists and pedestrians are
more vulnerable on British roads than anywhere else
in the European Union?, proclaims The Times on 18
February 2000) and a metaphorical axis, stressing
the importance of care and control, the hallmark
of the Euro-sceptic stance towards the European
integration process.
4.2 Topical metaphors
Putting aside topic detector?s mistakes on extended
metaphors from certain domains such as discussed
in the previous section, what do metaphors in the
topical vocabulary look like? The last topic shown
in table 1 has to do with criticism towards EU
bureaucracy, reflecting extensive discussions in the
British media in the late 1990s of alleged corruption
and mismanagement in the European Commission.
Together with the words cited in the table, this topic
lists root as one of its 300 most likely words.
This word shows up as a metaphor in 3 of our test
documents. In two of them it is used precisely in the
context projected by the topic:
In limpid language, whose meaning no
bureaucrat can twist, these four wise
men and one wise woman delivered, to
their great credit, a coruscating indictment
not just of individual commissioners, but
of the entire management and corporate
culture of the European Commission.
They have made an incontestable case, in
Tony Blair?s words, for ?root and branch
reform?.
6
Here, root is used in the root and branch idiom
suggesting a complete change, a reform, which
comes as part of a bundle with severe criticism.
Yet the figurative nature of this expression as a
metaphor from PLANT domain is apparent to naive
readers, making it an instance of imagery routinely
going together with criticism in this corpus. A
related metaphorical sense of root is attested in
similar contexts in the corpus, further explaining its
connection to the topic:
Not unless they insist on credible systems
to hold commissioners and bureaucrats to
account. And not unless they appoint
a new team with a brief not just to
root out malpractices but to shut down
entire programmes, such as tourism and
humanitarian aid, which the Commission
is incompetent to manage and which
should never have been added to its ever-
expanding empire.
A bloodied European Commission looks
likely to cling on to power today after
an eleventh-hour threat to quit by its
President, Jacques Santer, called the bluff
of the European Parliament ... All
week MEPs had been talking up the
?nuclear option? of sacking the full
Commission body over a burgeoning
fraud and nepotism scandal that dates
from 1995 ... Early 1997: Finnish
Commissioner Erkki Liikanen announces
plan to root out nepotism in Commission
and improve financial controls.
In the third document with root metaphor, root
is used in a different environment, and is not
considered topical by LDA:
For at the root of this conflict lies the
German denial that unemployment has
anything to do with cyclical fluctuations
in the economy.
Our quantitative results show that cases such
as root are more an exception than a rule. Yet,
from the perspective of the argumentative use of
metaphors, such cases are instructive of the way
certain metaphors get ?attached? to certain topics of
discussion. In this case, the majority of mentions
of root in this critical context come from Tony
Blair?s expression that was cited and referenced
widely enough to acquire a statistical association
with the discussion of the Commission?s failings
in the corpus. Indeed, the political significance of
Blair?s successful appropriation of the issue was not
lost on the media:
Tony Blair has swiftly positioned himself
as the champion of ?root and branch?
reform. Not to be outdone, William Hague
unveiled a ?10-point plan? for reform
of the Commission, no doubt drawing
on his extensive McKinsey management
expertise.
In future work, we plan to look closely at the
topical metaphors, as they potentially represent
outcomes of leadership battles fought in the media,
and can thus have political consequences.
5 Conclusion
Using metaphor-annotated material that is
sufficiently representative of the topical composition
of a similar-length document in a large background
corpus, we showed that words expressing a
discourse-wide topic of discussion are less likely to
be metaphorical than other words in a document.
This is, to our knowledge, the first quantitative
demonstration of the connection between
metaphoricity of a given word and its role in the
relevant background discourse. It complements the
traditionally ?localistic? outlook on metaphors that
is based on the observation that a metaphorically
used item creates a local incongruity because there
is a violation of a selectional restrictions between
verbs and their arguments (Fass, 1991; Mason,
2004; Gedigian et al, 2006; Birke and Sarkar, 2006)
or in the adjective-noun pairs (Krishnakumaran and
Zhu, 2007). Global discourse-level information
can potentially be used to focus metaphor detectors
operating at the local level on items with higher
metaphoric potential.
Reining and Lo?nneker-Rodman (2007) use
minimal topical information to focus their search
for metaphors. Working with a French-language
7
corpus discussing European politics, Reining and
Lo?nneker-Rodman (2007) proposed harvesting
salient collocates of the lemma Europe, that
represents the main topic of discussion and is
thus hypothesized to be the main target domain
of metaphors in this corpus. Indeed, numerous
instances of metaphors were collected using a
4-word window around the lemma in their corpus.
Our work can be understood as developing a
more nuanced approach to finding the likely target
domains in the corpus ? those words that represent
a topic of discussion rather than the means to
discuss a topic. Thus, it is not just Europe per se
that is the target, but, more specifically, aspects
such as monetary integration, employment, energy,
immigration, transportation, and defense, among
others. Our results suggest that to harvest deliberate
metaphors more effectively, one is advised to
consider words that do not represent a discourse
topic.
References
Nathan Atkinson, David Kaufer, and Suguru Ishizaki.
2008. Presence and Global Presence in Genres of Self-
Presentation: A Framework for Comparative Analysis.
Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 38(3):1?27.
Beata Beigman Klebanov, Eyal Beigman, and Daniel
Diermeier. 2008. Analyzing Disagreements. In COL-
ING 2008 Workshop on Human Judgments in Compu-
tational Linguistics, pages 2?7, Manchester, UK.
Julia Birke and Anoop Sarkar. 2006. A clustering ap-
proach for nearly unsupervised recognition of nonlit-
eral language. In Proceedings of EACL, pages 329?
336.
David Blei, Andrew Ng, and Michael Jordan. 2003. La-
tent Dirichlet Allocation. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Resarch, 3:993?1022.
Ari Chanen and Jon Patrick. 2007. Measuring correla-
tion between linguists judgments and Latent Dirichlet
Allocation topics. In Proceedings of the Australasian
Language Technology workshop, pages 13?20, Mel-
bourne, Australia.
Dan Fass. 1991. Met*: A method for discriminating
metonymy and metaphor by computer. Computational
Linguistics, 17(1):49?90.
Matt Gedigian, John Bryant, Srinivas Narayanan, and
Branimir Ciric. 2006. Catching metaphors. In Pro-
ceedings of NAACL Workshop on Scalable Natural
Language Understanding, pages 41?48.
Deidre Gentner and Donald Gentner. 1983. Flowing wa-
ters or teeming crowds: Mental models of electricity.
In D. Gentner and A. Stevens, editors, Mental models.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Alan Gross and Ray Dearin. 2003. Chaim Perelman.
Albany: SUNY Press.
Eva Feder Kittay. 1987. Metaphor: Its cognitive force
and linguistic structure. Oxford: Calderon Press.
Saisuresh Krishnakumaran and Xiaojin Zhu. 2007.
Hunting elusive metaphors using lexical resources.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Figurative Language, pages 13?20,
Rochester, New York.
Zachary J. Mason. 2004. CorMet: A computational,
corpus-based conventional metaphor extraction sys-
tem. Computational Linguistics, 30(1):23?44.
Andreas Musolff. 2000. Mirror images of Eu-
rope: Metaphors in the public debate about
Europe in Britain and Germany. Mu?nchen:
Iudicium. Annotated data is available at
http://www.dur.ac.uk/andreas.musolff/Arcindex.htm.
Chaim Perelman and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca. 1969. The
New Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation. Wilkin-
son, J. and Weaver, P. (trans). Notre Dame, IN: Uni-
versity of Notre Dame Press.
Astrid Reining and Birte Lo?nneker-Rodman. 2007.
Corpus-driven metaphor harvesting. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Computational Approaches to Figu-
rative Language, pages 5?12, Rochester, New York.
Gerard Steen. 2008. The Paradox of Metaphor: Why
We Need a Three-Dimensional Model of Metaphor.
Metaphor and Symbol, 23(4):213?241.
8
