Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 47?54,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Quantifying Constructional Productivity with Unseen Slot Members 
 
Amir Zeldes 
Institut f?r deutsche Sprache und Linguistik 
Humboldt-Universit?t zu Berlin 
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany 
amir.zeldes@rz.hu-berlin.de 
 
Abstract 
This paper is concerned with the possibility of 
quantifying and comparing the productivity of 
similar yet distinct syntactic constructions, 
predicting the likelihood of encountering un-
seen lexemes in their unfilled slots. Two ex-
amples are explored: variants of comparative 
correlative constructions (CCs, e.g. the faster 
the better), which are potentially very produc-
tive but in practice lexically restricted; and 
ambiguously attached prepositional phrases 
with the preposition with, which can host both 
large and restricted inventories of arguments 
under different conditions. It will be shown 
that different slots in different constructions 
are not equally likely to be occupied produc-
tively by unseen lexemes, and suggested that 
in some cases this can help disambiguate the 
underlying syntactic and semantic structure. 
1 Introduction 
Some syntactic constructions1 are more productive 
than others. Innovative coinages like the CC: The 
bubblier the Mac-ier (i.e. the more bubbly a pro-
gram looks, the more it feels at home on a Macin-
tosh computer) are possible, but arguably more 
surprising and marked than: I have a bubblier op-
erating system with a Mac-ier look in their respec-
tive construction, despite the same novel lexemes. 
The aim of this paper is to measure differences in 
the productivity of slots in such partially-filled 
constructions and also to find out if this productiv-
ity can be used to disambiguate constructions.  
                                                          
                                                          
1 I use the term ?construction? in a construction grammar sense 
following Goldberg (1995, 2006) to mean mentally stored 
hierarchically organized form-meaning pairs with empty, par-
tially-filled or fully specified lexical material. In this sense, 
both comparative adjectives and the pattern The [COMP] the 
[COMP] are constructions, and the productivity of such pat-
terns is the quantity being examined here. 
As one of the defining properties of language, 
productivity has received much attention in debates 
about the nature of derivational processes, the 
structure of the mental lexicon and the interpreta-
tion of key terms such as compositionality, gram-
maticality judgments or well-formedness. However 
in computational linguistics it is probably fair to 
say that it can be regarded most of all as a problem. 
Familiar items present in training data can be listed 
in lexical resources, the probabilities of their dif-
ferent realizations can be estimated from corpus 
frequency distributions etc. Thus using lexical in-
formation (statistically extracted or handcrafted 
resources) is the most successful strategy in resolv-
ing syntactic ambiguities such as PP-attachment 
(Hindle and Rooth, 1993; Ratnaparkhi, 1998; Stet-
ina and Nagao, 1997; Pantel and Lin, 2000; Kawa-
hara and Kurohashi, 2005), basing decisions on 
previous cases with identical lexemes or additional 
information about those lexemes. Yet because of 
productivity, even very large training data will 
never cover examples for all inputs being analyzed. 
In morphological theory (and corresponding 
computational linguistic practice), the situation has 
been somewhat different: a much larger part of the 
word formations encountered in data can be listed 
in a lexicon, with neologisms being the exception, 
whereas in syntax most sentences are novel, with 
recurring combinations being the exception.2 The 
focus in morphology has therefore often been on 
which word formation processes are productive 
and to what extent, with the computational coun-
terpart being whether or not corresponding rules 
should be built into a morphological analyzer. Syn-
tacticians, conversely, may ask which apparently 
regular constructions are actually lexicalized or 
have at least partly non-compositional properties 
(e.g. collocations, see Choueka, 1988, Evert, 2005, 
2 Compounding represents an exception to this generalization, 
standing, at least for some languages, between syntax and 
word formation and often generating an unusually large 
amount of items unlisted in lexica (cf. Bauer, 2001:36-7). 
47
2009; multiword expressions, Sag et al, 2002; 
lexical bundles, Salem, 1987, Altenberg and Eeg-
Olofsson, 1990, Biber et al, 1999, 2004). 
In morphology, the realization that productivity 
is a matter of degree, rather than a binary trait of 
word formation processes (see e.g. Bauer, 
2001:125-162), has lead to the exploration of quan-
titative measures to assess and compare different 
aspects of the fertility of various patterns (esp. the 
work of Baayen, 2001, 2009). Yet syntactic appli-
cations of these measures have only very recently 
been proposed, dealing with one slot of a pattern 
much like the stem operated on by a morphological 
process (cf. Bar?dal, 2006; Kiss, 2007).  
In this paper I will examine the application of 
measures based on Baayen?s work on morphology 
to different variants of syntactic constructions with 
more or less variable slots. The goal will be to 
show that different constructions have inherently 
different productivity rates, i.e. they are more or 
less liable to produce new members in their free 
slots. If this view is accepted, it may have conse-
quences both theoretically (novelty in certain posi-
tions will be more surprising or marked) and 
practically, e.g. for parsing ambiguous structures 
with novel arguments, since one parse may imply a 
construction more apt to novelty than another.  
The remainder of this article is structured as fol-
lows: the next section introduces concepts underly-
ing morphological productivity and related corpus-
based measures following Baayen (2009). The fol-
lowing two sections adapt and apply these meas-
ures to different types of CCs (such as the faster 
the better) and NP/VP-attached PPs, respectively, 
using the BNC3 as a database. The final section 
discusses the results of these studies and their im-
plications for the study of syntactic productivity. 
2 Morphological Productivity Measures 
Productivity has probably received more attention 
as a topic in morphology than in syntax, if for no 
other reason than that novel words are compara-
tively rare and draw attention, whereas novel 
phrases or sentences are ubiquitous. The exact 
definition of a novel word or ?neologism? is how-
ever less than straightforward. For the present pur-
pose we may use Bauer?s (2001:97-98) working 
definition as a starting point: 
                                                          
3 The British National Corpus (http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/), 
with over 100 million tokens of British English. 
[Productivity] is a feature of morphological proc-
esses which allow for new coinages, [?] coining 
must be repetitive in the speech community [?] 
Various factors appear to aid productivity: type 
frequency of appropriate bases, phonological and 
semantic transparency, naturalness, etc., but these 
are aids to productivity, not productivity itself. 
 
For Bauer, productivity is defined for a morpho-
logical process, which is ideally frequently and 
consistently found and coins ideally transparent 
novel forms. The word ?coining? in this context 
implies that speakers use the process to construct 
the transparent novel forms in question, which in 
turn means the process has a regular output. Yet 
novelty, transparency and regularity are difficult to 
judge intuitively, and the definitions of ?new? vs. 
?existing? words cannot be judged reliably for any 
one speaker, nor with any adequacy for a speaker 
community (cf. Bauer, 2001:34-35).  
This problem has led researchers to turn to cor-
pus data as a sort of ?objective? model of language 
experience, in which the output of a process can be 
searched for, categorized and tagged for evalua-
tion. Baayen (e.g. 2001, 2009) proposes three cor-
pus-based measures for the productivity of word 
formation processes. The first measure, which he 
terms extent of use, is written V(C,N) and is simply 
the proportion of types produced by a process C in 
a corpus of size N, e.g. the count of different nouns 
in -ness out of all the types in N. According to this 
measure, -ness would have a much higher realized 
productivity than the -th in warmth since it is found 
in many more words. However, this measure indis-
criminately deals with all existing material ? all 
words that have already been generated ? and 
hence it cannot assess how likely it is that novel 
words will be created using a certain process. 
Baayen?s other two measures address different 
aspects of this problem and rely on the use of ha-
pax legomena, words appearing only once in a cor-
pus. The intuitive idea behind looking at such 
words is that productively created items are one-
off unique occurrences, and therefore they must 
form a subset of the hapax legomena in a corpus. 
Baayen uses V(1,C,N), the number of types from 
category C occurring once in a corpus of N words 
and V(1,N), the number of all types occurring once 
in a corpus of N words. The second measure, 
termed hapax-conditioned degree of productivity is 
said to measure expanding productivity, the rate at 
48
which a process is currently creating neologisms. It 
is computed as V(1,C,N)/V(1,N), the proportion of 
hapax legomena from the examined category C 
within the hapax legomena from all categories in 
the corpus. Intuitively, if the amount of hapax le-
gomena could be replaced by ?true? neologisms 
only, this would be the relative contribution of a 
process to productivity in the corpus, which could 
then be compared between different processes4. 
The third measure, category-conditioned degree 
of productivity measures the potential productivity 
of a process, meaning how likely it is to produce 
new members, or how saturated a process is. This 
measure is the proportion of hapax legomena from 
category C divided by N(C), the total token count 
from this category:  V(1,C,N)/N(C). It intuitively 
represents the probability of the next item from 
category C, found in further corpus data of the 
same type, to be a hapax legomenon.  
Baayen?s measures (hence p1, p2 and p3 respec-
tively) are appealing since they are rigorously de-
fined, easily extractable from a corpus (provided 
the process can be identified reliably in the data) 
and offer an essential reduction of the corpus wide 
behavior of a process to a number between 1 and 0, 
that is, an item producing no hapax legomena 
would score 0 on p2 and p3, and an item with 
100% hapax legomena would score 1 on p3, even 
if it is overall rather insignificant for productivity 
in the corpus as a whole (as reflected in a low 
score for p2). The measure p3 is the most impor-
tant one in the present context, since it allows us to 
reason conversely that, given that an item is novel 
and could belong to one of two processes, it is 
more likely to have come from whichever process 
is more productive, i.e. has a higher p3 score. 
Indeed the assumptions made in these measures 
do not necessarily fit syntactic productivity at a 
first glance: that the process in question has a 
clearly defined form (e.g. a suffix such as -ness) 
that it accommodates one variable slot (the stem, 
e.g. good- in goodness), and that each different 
stem forms a distinct type. Applying these meas-
ures to syntactic constructions requires conceptual 
                                                          
                                                          
4 This statement must be restricted somewhat: in items show-
ing multiple processes, e.g. bullishness, the processes associ-
ated with the suffixes -ish and -ness are not statistically 
independent, creating a difficulty in using such cases for the 
comparison of these two processes (see Baayen, 2009). In 
syntax the extent of this problem is unclear, since even occur-
rences of NPs and VPs are not independent of each other. 
and mathematical adaptation, which will be dis-
cussed in the next section using the example of 
comparative correlative constructions. 
3 Measuring Productivity in CCs 
Comparative correlatives are a complex yet typo-
logically well attested form of codependent clauses 
expressing a corresponding monotonous positive 
or negative change in degree between two proper-
ties (see den Dikken, 2005 for a cross-linguistic 
overview). For example, in the faster we go, the 
sooner we?ll get there, speed is monotonously cor-
related with time of arrival. A main reason for syn-
tactic interest in this type of sentence is a proposed 
?mismatch? (see McCawley, 1988, Culicover and 
Jackendoff, 1999) between its syntax, which ap-
pears to include two identically constructed para-
tactic clauses, and its semantics, which imply 
possible hypotaxis of the first clause as a sort of 
?conditional? (if and in so much as we go fast?).  
Two other noteworthy features of this construc-
tion in use (the following examples are from the 
BNC) are the frequent lack of a verb (the larger 
the leaf the better quality the tea) and even of a 
subject noun (the sooner the better) 5 and a ten-
dency for the (at least partial) lexicalization of cer-
tain items. The verbless variant often houses these, 
e.g. the more the merrier, but also with verbs, e.g. 
the bigger they come the harder they fall. A con-
text-free grammar might describe a simplified 
variant of such clauses in the following terms: 
 
Scc > the COMP (NP (VP)) 
S > Scc Scc   
 
where Scc is one of the comparative correlative 
clauses, COMP represents either English compara-
tive allomorph (in -er like bigger or analytic with 
more or less in more/less important), and NP and 
VP are optional subjects and corresponding predi-
cates for each clause.6  
However like many CFG rules, these rules may 
be too general, since it is clearly the case that not 
5 The latter form has been analyzed as a case of ellipsis of the 
copula be (Culicover and Jackendoff, 1999:554; similarly for 
German: Zifonun et al, 1997:2338). It is my position that this 
is not the case, as the bare construction has distinct semantic 
properties as well as different productive behavior, see below. 
6 These rules should be understood as agnostic with respect to 
the parataxis/hypotaxis question mentioned above. The paren-
theses mean NP may appear without VP but not vice versa. 
49
all comparatives, nouns and verbs fit in this con-
struction, if only because of semantic limitations, 
i.e. they must be plausibly capable of forming a 
pair of monotonously correlated properties. Corpus 
data shows that comparatives in CC clauses select 
quite different lexemes than comparatives at large, 
that the first and second slots (hence cc1 and cc2) 
have different preferences, and that the presence or 
absence of a VP and possibly a subject NP also 
interact with these choices. Table 1 shows com-
paratives in the BNC sorted by frequency in gen-
eral, along with their frequencies in cc1 and cc2. 
Some frequent comparatives do not or hardly ap-
pear in CCs given their frequency7 while others 
prefer a certain slot exclusively (e.g. more likely in 
cc2) or substantially (e.g. higher in cc1). Columns 
?1 and ?2 show bare comparatives (no subject or 
verb) in cc1 or 2 and the next two columns show 
subsets of bare cc1 or 2 given that the other clause 
is also bare. The last columns show CCs with only 
NPs and no verb, either in one clause or both. In 
bare CCs we find that better selects cc2 exclu-
sively, in fact making up some 88% of cc2s in this 
construction (the COMP the better) in the BNC. 
  
  
                                                          
                                                          
7 Occurrences of items which cannot serve attributively, such 
as more with no adjective and sooner, have been excluded, 
since they are not comparable to the other items. Most occur-
rences of the most frequent item, further, should arguably be 
excluded too, since it is mostly used as a lexicalized adverb 
and not a canonical comparative. However comparative usage 
is also well-attested, e.g.: he was going much further than that. 
A look at the list of lexemes typical to cc1 vs. 
cc2 shows that cc1 tends to express a dependent 
variable with spatiotemporal semantics (higher, 
older, longer), whereas cc2 typically shows an in-
dependent evaluative (better, more likely), though 
many common lexemes appear in both.8 
Although the results imply varying degrees of 
preference and lexicalization in different construc-
tions, they do not yet tell us whether or not, or bet-
ter how likely, we can expect to see new lexemes 
in each slot. This can be assessed using Baayen?s 
measures, by treating each construction as a mor-
phological process and the comparative slot as the 
lexical base forming the type (see Kiss, 2007 for a 
similar procedure).9 The results in Table 2 show 
that all constructions are productive to some ex-
tent, though clearly some yield fewer new types.  
 
 p1 and p2 show that CCs are responsible for 
very little of the productive potential of compara-
tives in the corpus. This is not only a function of 
the relative rarity of CCs: if we look at their rate of 
vocabulary growth (Figure 1), general compara-
tives gather new types more rapidly than CCs even 
for the same sample size10. Using a Finite Zipf 
Mandelbrot Model (FZM, Evert, 2004), we can 
extrapolate from the observed data to predict the 
gap will grow with sample size. 
 toks types hpx p1 p2 p3 
266703 5988 2616 0.00772 0.00651 0.0098
8 I thank Livio Gaeta and an anonymous reviewer for com-
menting on this point. 
9 In fact, one could also address the productivity of the con-
struction as a whole by regarding each argument tuple as a 
type, e.g. <more ergonomic, better> could be a hapax legome-
non despite better appearing quite often. Since each slot mul-
tiplies the chances a construction has to be unique, the nth root 
of the value of the measure would have to be taken in order to 
maintain comparability, thus the square root of pk for 2 slots, the cube root for 3 slots and so on. Another option, if one is 
interested in the chance that any particular slot will be unique, 
is to take the average of pk for all slots. However for the pre-sent purpose the individual score of each slot is more relevant. 
10 The comparative curve is taken from 2000 occurrences 
evenly distributed across the sections of the BNC, to corre-
spond topically to the CCs, which cover the whole corpus. 
word comp cc1 cc2 ?1 ?2 
?1 
(?2) 
(?1) 
?2 n1 n2
n1
(n2)
(n1)
n2 
further 21371                    
better 20727 15 143  89  51 9 22 5 15
higher 15434 97 39 4 2 3  84 23 44 21
greater 13883 82 171 1 1    75 92 35 80
lower 10983 20 27  2    18 12 7 12
older 8714 24 1 1  1  3  1  
?          
longer 3820 45 15 3 1 3  11 3 9 3
bigger 3469 43 13 4 1 3  30 8 15 8
more 
likely 3449  28          2  1
?            
more 
wholistic 1                    
zanier 1 1          1      
Table 1. Comparative frequencies independently and 
in cc1/cc2, with or without nominal subjects/verbs in 
one or both clauses. 
comp 
802 208 140 0.00026 0.00034 0.1745cc1 
802 181 126 0.00023 0.00031 0.1571cc2 
58 45 37 5.80E-05 9.22E-05 0.6379bare1 
58 7 5 9.03E-06 1.24E-05 0.0862bare2 
Table 2. Productivity scores for comparatives, cc-
clauses in general and specifically for bare CCs 
50
  
However, p3 shows the surprising result that 
CCs have more potential productivity than com-
paratives in general, with the bare cc1 slot leading, 
both general CC slots somewhat behind, and the 
bare cc2 last. This means our data does not begin 
to approach covering this category ? the next CC is 
much likelier to be novel, given the data we?ve 
seen so far. 
With this established, the question arises 
whether a CFG rule like the one above should take 
account of the likelihood of each slot to contain 
novel vs. familiar members. For instance, if a 
PCFG parser correctly identifies a novel compara-
tive and the input matches the rule, should it be 
more skeptical of an unseen bare cc1 than an un-
seen bare cc2 (keeping in mind that the latter have 
so far been better in 88% of cases)? To illustrate 
this, we may consider the output of a PCFG parser 
(in this case the Stanford Parser, Klein and Man-
ning, 2003) for an ambiguous example. 
Since CCs are rather rare, PCFGs will tend to 
prefer most other parses of a sentence, if these are 
available. Where no other reading is available we 
may get the expected two clause structure, as in the 
example in Figure 2.11  
 
                                                          
11 The X nodes conform to the Penn Treebank II Bracketing 
Guidelines for CCs (Bies et al, 1995:178).  
 The Stanford Parser fares quite well in cases 
like these, since the pronoun (it, I) can hardly be 
modified by the comparative (*[NP the closer it] or 
*[NP the more worried I]), and similarly for NPs 
with articles (*[NP the closer the time]). Yet article-
less NPs and bare CCs cause problems, as in the 
tree in Figure 3. 
 Figure 2. Stanford Parser tree for: The closer it gets, 
the more worried I become. 
Figure 1. Vocabulary growth curves and FZM ex-
trapolations for comparatives in cc1, cc2 and at large 
in the BNC.  
 
 
Figure 3. Stanford Parser tree for: The less cloudy, 
the better views can be seen to the south. 
 
Here The less cloudy and the better views form one 
NP, separate from the VP complex. Such a reading 
is not entirely impossible: the sentence could mean 
?less cloudy, better views? appositively. However 
despite the overall greater frequency of appositions 
and the fact that less cloudy has probably not been 
observed in cc1 in training data, the pattern of a 
novel form for cc1 and better in cc2 is actually 
consistent with a novel CC. With these ideas in 
mind, the next section examines the potential of 
productivity to disambiguate a much more preva-
lent phenomenon, namely PP attachment. 
4 PP Attachment and Productivity 
The problem of attaching prepositional phrases as 
sister nodes of VP or as adjuncts to its object nouns 
51
is a classic case of syntactic ambiguity that causes 
trouble for parsers (see Hindle and Rooth, 1993; 
Manning and Sch?tze, 1999:278-287; Atterer and 
Sch?tze, 2007), e.g. the difference between I ate a 
fish with a fork and I ate a fish with bones12, i.e. 
denoting the instrument or an attribute of the fish. 
There are also two further common readings of the 
preposition with in this context, namely attached 
either high or low in the VP in a comitative sense: 
I ate a fish with Mary and I ate a fish with potatoes 
respectively, though most approaches do not dis-
tinguish these, rather aiming at getting the attach-
ment site right. 
Already in early work on PP attachment (Hindle 
and Rooth, 1993) it was realized that the lexical 
identity of the verb, its object, the preposition and 
in later approaches also the prepositional object 
noun (Ratnaparkhi et al, 1994) are useful for pre-
dicting the attachment site, casting the task as a 
classification of tuples <v, n1, p, n2> into the 
classes V (VP attachment) and N (NP attachment). 
Classifiers are commonly either supervised, with 
disambiguated training data, or more recently un-
supervised (Ratnaparkhi, 1998) using data from 
unambiguous cases where no n1 or v appears. 
Other approaches supplement this information with 
hand-built or automatically acquired lexical re-
sources and collocation databases to determine the 
relationship between the lexemes, or, for lexemes 
unattested in the tuples, for semantically similar 
ones (Stetina and Nagao, 1997; Pantel and Lin, 
2000). 
Although the state of the art in lexically based 
systems actually approaches human performance, 
they lose their power when confronted with unfa-
miliar items. For example, what is the likeliest at-
tachment for the following BNC example: I can 
always eat dim-sum with my dybbuk? It is safe to 
assume that the (originally Hebrew) loan-word 
dybbuk ?(demonic) possession? does not appear in 
most training datasets, though dim-sum is attested 
more than once as an object of eat in the BNC. 
Crucially, the triple (eat, dim-sum, with) alone 
cannot reliably resolve the attachment site (con-
sider soy-sauce vs. chopsticks as n2). It is thus 
worth examining how likely a novel item is in the 
                                                          
                                                          12 Though in some cases the distinction is not so tenable, e.g. 
we have not signed a settlement agreement with them (Man-
ning and Sch?tze, 1999:286), where with them can arguably be 
attached low or high. Incidentally, the ?fish? examples are 
actually attested in the BNC in a linguistic context. 
relevant slot of each reading?s construction. The 
rest of this section therefore examines productivity 
scores for the slots in eat NP with NP and their 
correlation with different readings as an example. 
Since these cases cannot be identified automati-
cally in an unparsed text with any reliability, and 
since there is not enough hand-parsed data contain-
ing these constructions, a conservative proximity 
assumption was made (cf. Ratnaparkhi, 1998) and 
all occurrences of eat and related forms within ten 
words of with and with no intervening punctuation 
in the BNC were evaluated and tagged manually 
for this study. This also allowed for head-noun and 
anaphor resolution to identify the referent of a slot 
in the case of pronominal realization; thus all slot 
types in the data including pronouns are evaluated 
in terms of a single head noun.  
Results show that out of 131 hits, the largest 
group of PPs (59 tokens) were object noun modifi-
ers, almost all comitatives13, justifying the preva-
lent heuristic to prefer low attachment. However 
verbal instrumentals and high comitatives (25 and 
23 respectively) come at a very close second. The 
remaining 24 cases were adverbial modifications 
(e.g. with enthusiasm). Looking at hapax legomena 
in the respective slots we can calculate the meas-
ures in Table 3. 
 
 The scores show that the verbal instrumental read-
ing is the least likely to exhibit a novel head at the 
n2 slot, which is semantically plausible ? the reper-
toire of eating instruments is rather conventional-
ized and slow to expand. The comitative reading is 
very likely to innovate in n2, but much less so in 
n1, fitting e.g. the ?dim-sum with dybbuk?-
scenario. This fits the fact that one may eat to-
gether with many distinct persons etc., but when 
 n1 slot n2 slot total 
 hapax p3 hapax p3 tokens 
n 39 0.661 45 0.7627 59 
v adv 15 0.625 21 0.875 24 
v com 8 0.3478 20 0.8696 23 
v inst 15 0.6 4 0.16 25 
Table 3. p3 for the first and second head 
noun in nominal and three types of verbal PP 
attachment for eat n with n in the BNC. 
13 Only 4 hits were truely non-comitative noun modifiers, e.g. 
<eat, anything, with, preservatives>, where a comitative read-
ing is clearly not intended. Since the group was so small, all 
noun modifiers have been treated here together. 
52
these are specified, the exact nature of the meal or 
food is often left unspecified14. The adverbial read-
ing is likely to innovate in both slots, since many 
ways or circumstances of eating can be specified 
and these hardly restrict the choice of object for 
eat. Interestingly, the choice of object maintains a 
very stable productivity in all but the high comita-
tive construction. n2 innovation in nominal modi-
fiers is actually lower than for adverbials and 
comitatives, meaning low attachment may not be 
the preferred choice for unknown nouns. 
While these results imply what some reasonable 
expectations may be to find a novel member of 
each slot in each reading, they do not take the iden-
tity of the lexemes into account. In order to com-
bine the general information about the slot with 
knowledge of a known slot member, we may si-
multaneously attempt to score the productivity of 
the construction?s components, namely the noun or 
verb in question, for PP modifiers. This raises the 
problem of what exactly should be counted. One 
may argue that high-attached comitatives and ad-
verbials should be counted separately, since they 
are almost always optional regardless of the verb 
(one can equally well eat or do anything else with 
someone in some way), unlike instrumentals which 
may be more closely linked to the verb. On the 
other hand, the exact constructional sense of such 
PPs is colored by the verb, e.g. eating a meal with 
someone has a rather particular meaning (as op-
posed to coincidentally performing the act of eat-
ing alongside another eater). If the decision is only 
between high and low attachment, then grouping 
all variants together may be sensible in any case.  
Depending on the argument and verb, it is pos-
sible to make fine distinctions, provided enough 
cases are found. For dim-sum, for example, no 
cases of NP modifying with (novel or otherwise) 
are found, making the (correct) high comitative 
reading likely. By contrast, for the head noun fish, 
which is a common object of eat, 37 hits with with-
PPs are found in the BNC, forming 32 preposi-
tional object noun types of which 28 are hapax le-
gomena in this slot. All high readings of with-PPs 
with eat (including intransitive eat) form 92 to-
kens, 68 noun types and 44 hapax legomena. Thus 
fish + PP scores p3=0.756 while eat + PP scores 
                                                          
                                                          
14 In fact the non-food specific nouns breakfast, lunch, dinner, 
dish and meal cover 16 of the high comitative n1 tokens, al-
most 70%. 
0.478, corresponding to less productivity. This 
means novel prepositional objects are substantially 
less probable for the high attachment given that the 
direct object is fish. 
5 Conclusion 
The above results show that similar yet distinct 
constructions, which vary slightly in either con-
stituent structure (high vs. low attachment), seman-
tics (comitative or instrumental PPs), number of 
arguments (more and less bare CCs) or position 
(cc1 vs. cc2),  show very different lexical behavior, 
exhibiting more or less variety in different slots 
and differing proportions of hapax legomena. The 
inference which should become apparent from the 
sharp contrasts in slot scores (especially in p3) 
given the size of the data, is that these differences 
are not coincidental but are indicative of inherently 
different productivity rates for each slot in each 
construction. These properties need not be attrib-
uted to system internal, linguistic reasons alone, 
but may also very well reflect world knowledge 
and pragmatic considerations.15 However, from a 
construction grammar point of view, the entrench-
ment of these constructions in speakers and there-
fore in data is inextricably connected with 
interaction in the world, thus making syntactic 
productivity a plausible and relevant quantity both 
theoretically and potentially for NLP practice. 
It remains to be seen whether or not productiv-
ity scores can help automatically disambiguate 
structures with unseen arguments (e.g. PP attach-
ment with unencountered n2), or even distinguish 
semantic classes such as comitatives, instrumentals 
etc. for novel nouns, for which a classification into 
helpful semantic categories (animate, human and 
so forth) is not available. A large-scale evaluation 
of this question will depend on how easily and re-
liably productivity scores can be extracted auto-
matically from data for the relevant constructions.  
References  
Bengt Altenberg and Mats Eeg-Olofsson. 1990. Phrase-
ology in Spoken English. In: Jan Aarts and Willem 
Meijs, editors, Theory and Practice in Corpus Lin-
guistics. Rodopi, Amsterdam: 1-26. 
15 In this context it is worth mentioning that similar ongoing 
examinations of German CCs reveal different lexical prefer-
ences, implying that some of this behavior is language de-
pendent and to some extent language internally lexicalized. 
53
Michaela Atterer and Hinrich Sch?tze. 2007. Preposi-
tional Phrase Attachment without Oracles. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 33(4): 469-476. 
R. Harald Baayen. 2001. Word Frequency Distributions. 
(Text, Speech and Language Technologies 18.) Klu-
wer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht / Boston / Lon-
don. 
R. Harald Baayen. 2009. Corpus Linguistics in Mor-
phology: Morphological Productivity. In: Anke 
L?deling and Merja Kyt?, editors, Corpus Linguis-
tics. An International Handbook, vol. 2. Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin: 899-919. 
J?hanna Bar?dal. 2006. Predicting the Productivity of 
Argument Structure Constructions. In: The 32nd An-
nual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society. 
Berkeley Linguistics Society, Berkeley. Available at: 
http://ling.uib.no/barddal/BLS-32.barddal.pdf.  
Laurie Bauer. 2001. Morphological Productivity. (Cam-
bridge Studies in Linguistics 95.) Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Ann Bies, Mark Ferguson, Karen Katz and Robert Mac-
Intyre. 1995. Bracketing Guidelines for Treebank II 
Style Penn Treebank Project. Technical report, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania. 
Douglas Biber, Susan Conrad and Viviana Cortes. 2004. 
If you look at?: Lexical Bundles in University 
Teaching and Textbooks. Applied Linguistics, 25(3): 
371-405. 
Douglas Biber, Stig Johansson, Geoffrey Leech, Susan 
Conrad and Edward Finegan. 1999. The Longman 
Grammar of Spoken and Written English. Longman, 
London. 
Yaacov Choueka. 1988. Looking for Needles in a Hay-
stack. In: Proceedings of RIAO ?88. Cambridge, MA, 
609-623. 
Peter W. Culicover and Ray Jackendoff. 1999. The 
View from the Periphery: The English Comparative 
Correlative. Linguistic Inquiry 30(4): 543-571. 
Marcel den Dikken. 2005. Comparative Correlatives 
Comparatively. Linguistic Inquiry, 36(4): 497-532. 
Stefan Evert. 2004. A simple LNRE model for random 
character sequences. In: Proceedings of JADT 2004: 
411-422. 
Stefan Evert. 2005. The Statistics of Word Cooccur-
rences: Word Pairs and Collocations. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Stuttgart. 
Stefan Evert. 2009. Corpora and Collocations. In: Anke 
L?deling and Merja Kyt?, editors, Corpus Linguis-
tics. An International Handbook, vol. 2. Mouton de 
Gruyter, Berlin: 1212-1248. 
Adele E. Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A Construc-
tion Grammar Approach to Argument Structure. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London. 
Adele E. Goldberg. 2006. Constructions at Work: The 
Nature of Generalization in Language. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, UK. 
Donald Hindle and Mats Rooth. 1993. Structural Ambi-
guity and Lexical Relations. Computational Linguis-
tics, 19(1): 103-130. 
Daisuke Kawahara and Sadao Kurohashi. 2005. PP-
Attachment Disambiguation Boosted by a Gigantic 
Volume of Unambiguous Examples. In: Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing (IJCNLP-05): 188-198. 
Tibor Kiss. 2007. Produktivit?t und Idiomatizit?t von 
Pr?position-Substantiv-Sequenzen. Zeitschrift f?r 
Sprachwissenschaft, 26(2): 317-345. 
Dan Klein and Christopher D. Manning. 2003. Accurate 
Unlexicalized Parsing. In: Proceedings of the 41st 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: 423-430. 
Christopher D. Manning and Hinrich Sch?tze. 1999. 
Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Proc-
essing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
James D. McCawley. 1988. The Comparative Condi-
tional in English, German and Chinese. In: Proceed-
ings of the Fourteenth Annual Meeting of the 
Merkeley Linguistics Society. Berkeley Linguistics 
Society, Berkeley: 176-187. 
Patrick Pantel and Dekang Lin. 2000. An Unsupervised 
Approach to Prepositional Phrase Attachment using 
Contextually Similar Words. In: Proceedings of the 
38th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: 101-108. 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1998. Statistical Models for Unsu-
pervised Prepositional Phrase Attachment. In: Pro-
ceedings of COLING-ACL98, Montreal Canada: 
1079-1085 
Adwait Ratnaparkhi, Jeff Reynar and Salim Roukos. 
1994. A Maximum Entropy Model for Prepositional 
Phrase Attachment. In: Proceedings of the ARPA 
Human Language Technology Workshop. Plainsboro, 
NJ: 250-255. 
Ivan Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, Ann 
Copestake and Dan Flickinger. 2002. Multiword Ex-
pressions: A Pain in the Neck for NLP. In: Proceed-
ings of the Third International Conference on 
Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Lin-
guistics (CICLING 2002). Mexico City, Mexico: 1-
15. 
Andr? Salem. 1987. Pratique des segments r?p?t?s. 
Institut National de la Langue Fran?aise, Paris.  
Jiri Stetina and Makoto Nagao. 1997. Corpus Based PP 
Attachment Ambiguity Resolution with a Semantic 
Dictionary. In: Jou Zhao and Kenneth Church, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Very 
Large Corpora. Beijing and Hong Kong: 66-80. 
Gisela Zifonun, Ludger Hoffmann and Bruno Strecker, 
editors. 1997. Grammatik der deutschen Sprache, Bd. 
3. (Schriften des Instituts f?r deutsche Sprache 7.) De 
Gruyter, Berlin / New York. 
54
