Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 346?350,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Concept and Relation Extraction in the Finance
Domain
Mihaela Vela
DFKI Saarbr?cken
Mihaela.Vela@dfki.de
Thierry Declerck
DFKI Saarbr?cken
Thierry.Declerck@dfki.de
Abstract
In this paper, we describe the state of our work on the possible deriva-
tion of ontological structures from textual analysis. We propose an ap-
proach to semi-automatic generation of domain ontologies from scratch,
on the basis of heuristic rules applied to the result of a multi-layered
processing of textual documents.
1 Introduction
In the context of the MUSING R&D European project
1
, which is dedi-
cated to the development of Business Intelligence (BI) tools and modules
founded on semantic-based knowledge and content systems, we are investi-
gating among others the integration of semantic web and human language
technologies for enhancing the technological foundations of knowledge ac-
quisition and reasoning in BI applications.
In the first phase of the project many efforts have been dedicated to
the manual creation of domain related ontologies and their integration in
upper level ontologies. The creation of those ontologies was guided by do-
main experts, who were submitting so-called competency questions to the
ontology engineers in order to support they work on ontology design and
implementation. Since this approach to ontology creation is very time and
resource consuming, we wanted to investigate the possible automation of
ontology building directly from textual documents, with a special focus on
the financial domain.
2 The Approach
We consider the semi-automatic ontology derivation from text as a linguistic
rule-based approach, which on the basis of lexical and syntactic properties
1
See www.musing.eu for more details
346
can suggest potential ontology classes and properties that can be used for
building an ontology.
We suggest a multi-layered approach, which starts with a very shallow
analysis of certain lexical properties of words or very short combination of
words, going from there to Part-of-Speech (POS) Tagging and morphological
analysis, before using, in a next step, deeper syntactic analysis and taking
into account larger parts of text, up to the level of sentences or even para-
graphs. The idea behind this: at the shallow level it is possible to detect
possible classes and relations, which can then be consolidated, refined or re-
jected at further stages of textual analysis, with the help of domain experts
and ontology engineers.
Our final goal is to clearly state what kind of ontological resource can be
extracted from financial documents (annual reports of companies, financial
newspapers) at various level of textual processing. As a data source we work
first with a corpus of economical news articles from the German newspaper
Wirtschaftswoche.
3 String-Based Processing
As a first step in the task of extracting ontology concepts and relations from
(German) textual documents, we decided to look in the corpus for words
occurring alone (and starting with a capital letter) and in the context of
larger strings (which we assume to be mostly nominal compounds). We
call the words that show this property "anchor-words". We consider them
potential labels of ontology classes and the compounds, in which they occur,
as expressing potential relations for the labels of ontology classes.
Take for example the anchor-word konzern (corporation), which is also
occurring as part of the compound medienkonzern (media corporation). At
this very shallow and pattern-based processing level, we tentatively derive
that from the compound construction PREFIX + ANCHOR we can extract
medienkonzern ISA_SUBCLASS_OF konzern. Another example of com-
pound is konzernverwaltung (corporation management). Here we derive
from the compound construction ANCHOR + SUFFIX the relation: konzern
HAS verwaltung (corporation HAS management);
Although the examples demonstrate that a string analysis can to some
extent propose some guidelines for ontology extraction, there are for sure
major limitations, due to the lack of well-defined domain and range spec-
ifications in the proposed relations, the constraint relative to the number
of extracted relations and classes, the multiple appearance of morphological
variations, the lack of textual context etc.
In order to reduce the limitations just mentioned, we started by looking
for alternative formulations of the compounds, which can help in establishing
some filters and validation steps for relation extraction. So for example the
347
expression Chef vom Konzern (chief of the corporation) is validating the
property relation Konzern HAS Chef (corporation HAS chief ), due to the
meaning we can associate with the preposition von (part-of, belonging-to).
Concerning compound reformulations expressed by genitive post- modifi-
cation, like mitarbeiter einer deutschen bank (employees of a german bank),
we can see that they validate the relation extracted from the corresponding
compounds, since the genitive constructions have here a part-of/belonging-
to meaning.
4 Morphology and Lexical Semantics for Ontology
Derivation
A way to reduce some of the limitations described in Section 3 lies in the
use of morpho-syntactic information. So for example the word Firmenchef
(the boss of the firm) would be analyzed as follows:
(1) <W INFL="[17 18 19]" POS="1" STEM="chef" COMP="firmenchef"
TC="22">Firmenchef</W>
This annotation is to read like this: the word Firmenchef has the stem
chef, has POS noun, is the result of combining the word Firmen and the
word Chef, and has certain morphological properties (here encoded with
numbers). We can then describe certain morphological constraints for filter-
ing out some suggested relations from Section 3. For example, Chemiekonz-
ern is introducing a subclass relation between Chemiekonzern and Konzern,
whereas for Grosskonzern (large corporation) the subclass relation between
Grosskonzern and Konzern does not apply. The constraint proposed for
solving this kind of ambiguities is: the compound should consists of two
nouns.
Lexical semantics can also improve the quality of relation extraction.
For the compound Chefdenker (chief thinker), we want to ensure that no
HAS-relation between an ontology class labeled by chief and thinker is sug-
gested. For this purpose we use lexical semantic resources, like WordNet,
and formulate a rule that states that if the word occurring in the prefix
position of a compound is a person, and the second part of the compound
is also denoting a person, then the HAS-relation can not be derived.
Despite of the improvements made possible by morphology and lexical
semantics a major limitation remains: ontology extraction is proposed only
on the basis of word analysis and not on the basis of phrases and sentences,
which offer more context.
348
5 Syntactic Information for the Generation of On-
tologies
By combining the processing steps described above, we were able to extract
possible relevant ontology classes, relations and properties. For further im-
provement we need to consider both the linguistic context and some infor-
mation available in ontologies so far. The syntactic analysis of the sentence
below is a good example to show how a larger linguistic context can help
improving the method described in this paper.
(2) [NP-Subj Er] [VG soll] [PP im Konzern] [NP-Ind-Obj Finanzchef [NE-Pers
Gerhard Liener] ] [VG folgen]
Through the syntactic structuring of the sentence, we can semantically
group the items, so that we can extract the fact that a financial chief is
within a corporation, since the description of job succession is within a cor-
poration (marked by the prepositional phrase im Konzern). This aspect of
ontology learning is being currently investigated and implemented.
6 Conclusions and Further Work
In this paper we have been describing a multi-layer textual analysis strat-
egy that can help in building up ontologies from scratch, or integrate new
suggested ontology classes (or relations and properties) into existing ontolo-
gies. Since this is work in progress we also intended to get a clearer picture
on what kind of ontological knowledge can be extracted from the different
layers of textual processing.
For the "shallowest" parts of our suggested approach we could see that
proposed labels for ontology classes and relations seem to be appropriate.
For sure, some evaluations of this work has to be done. Nevertheless, we
see a big potential in a combination of suggestions generated by linguistic
analysis, domain experts and ontology engineers.
References
Massimiliano Ciaramita, Aldo Gangemi, Esther Ratsch, Jasmin Saric, and Isabel
Rojas. Unsupervised learning of semantic relations for molecular biology ontolo-
gies. In Paul Buitelaar and Philipp Cimiano, editors, Ontology Learning and
Population: Bridging the Gap between Text and Knowledge, pages 91?107. IOS
Press, Amsterdam, 2008.
Philipp Cimiano, Siegfried Handschuh, and Steffen Staab. Towards the self-
annotating web. In Proceedings of the 13th World Wide Web Conference, 2004.
Thierry Declerck and Mihaela Vela. A generic nlp tool for supporting shallow
ontology building. In Proceedings of LREC, Genoa, May 2006.
349
Thierry Declerck, Hans-Ulrich Krieger, Bernd Kiefer, Marcus Spies, and Christian
Leibold. Integration of semantic resources and tools for business intelligence. In
International Workshop on Semantic-Based Software Development held at OP-
SLA 2007, 2007.
Roberto Navigli and Paola Velardi. From glossaries to Ontologies: Extracting Se-
mantic Structure from Textual Definitions, pages 71?91. IOS Press, 2008.
Patrick Pantel and Marco Pennacchiotti. Automatically Harvesting and Ontologiz-
ing Semantic Relations, pages 171?199. IOS Press, 2008.
350
