Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 351?354,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Identifying the Epistemic Value of Discourse
Segments in Biology Texts
Anita de Waard
(1)
Paul Buitelaar
(2)
Thomas Eigner
(3)
(1) Elsevier & Universiteit Utrecht, the Netherlands (anita@cs.uu.nl)
(2) DERI - NLP Unit, Galway, Ireland (paulb@deri.org)
(3) DFKI, Saarbrcken, Germany (teigner@dfki.de)
1 Introduction
To manage the flood of information that threatens to engulf (life-)scientists,
an abundance of computer-aided tools are being developed. These tools aim
to provide access to the knowledge conveyed within a collection of research
papers, without actually having to read the papers. Many of these tools
focus on text mining, by looking for specific named-entities that have scien-
tific meaning, and relationships between these. An overview of the current
state of the art is given in Rebholz-Schuhmann et al (2005) and Couto
et al (2003). Typically, these tools identify a list of sentences containing
relationships between two specific named-entities that can be found using
rules or a thesaurus of synonyms. These sentences represent an overview of
the interactions that are known with a specific entity, thus precluding the
need for an exhaustive literature study. For example, the following are a
few sentences that have been found using a typical text mining tool for the
relationship ?p53 activates *?:
1. The p53 tumor suppressor protein exerts most of its anti-tumorigenic
activity by transcriptionally activating several pro-apoptotic genes.
2. We found that p53 ... activates[,] the promoter of the myosin VI gene.
However, in order to be able to use these statements and to draw conclu-
sions about its subject (?Which entities does p53 activate??) we still need
to read the article that they appeared in, identify the experimental context
and the epistemic (?truth?) value of each statement. For instance, 1. does
not seem to represent an experimental finding that is arrived at in the paper
351
that the sentence is taken from; instead, it seems to be a citation. So, to be
able to evaluate its epistemic value (?How true is this??) we need to read
the paper that contained the sentence and paper(s) where the statement
was first experimentally motivated. In the case of 2., a clear statement is
given on what the authors of the paper have found. But ?How did they
find it??, ?What experimental setup and control experiments were used??,
?What were their assumptions?? Biologists will need to check these and
other issues before accepting 2. as a fact. Our research therefore concerns
the classification of sentences in biology texts by ?epistemic segment type?,
with the purpose of enabling a better way to summarize, mine and compare
statements within biology texts. The current paper describes a first venture
into doing this in a computational way.
2 Epistemic Segment Types for Biology Texts
As motivated elsewhere we have identified seven epistemic segment types
(De Waard, 2007):
? Fact: statement presumed to be accepted as true by the commu-
nity, e.g. Cellular transformation requires the expression of oncogenic
RASV12.
? Hypothesis: possible explanation for a set of phenomena, e.g. This
suggests possible roles for APC in G1 and G0 phases of the cell cycle.
? Implication: interpretation of results, e.g. These results indicate that
our procedure is sensitive enough to detect mild growth differences.
? Method: ways in which the experiment was performed, e.g. We
inserted 500 bp fragments ... in a modified pMSCV-Blasticidin vector.
? Problem: discrepancies or unknown aspects of the known fact corpus,
e.g. The small number of miRNAs with a known function stresses
the need for a systematic screening approach to identify more miRNA
functions.
? Goal: implicit hypothesis and problem, e.g. identify miRNAs that
can interfere with this process and ... contribute to the development of
tumor cells
? Result: a summary of the results of measurements, e.g. we observed
an approximately 4-fold increase in miR-311 signal
352
For example, Fact segments are taken from another source of knowledge
(explicitly referred to or presumed to be known) and therefore not experi-
mentally ascertained in the article, whereas Result segments are obtained
by measurements discussed in the paper itself. For the sentences in the pre-
vious section, we therefore see that 1. is a Fact and 2. is a typical Result
segment. To classify the segments (manually first), we have used several
linguistic clues, as well as an understanding of the context of a segment.
Important linguistic clues are the verb tense of the segment and specific
markers used to identify a segment transition, e.g. the transition between a
Result and an Implication segment is usually indicated by a phrase such as
?These results suggest that?. The segment types and selected specific mark-
ers that we used in our research here are as follows (using regular expressions
to shorten notation):
? Hypothesis: results indicate, suggest, suggesting that
? Implication: data?results demonstrate?suggest?indicate, data?results
show
? Method: by cloning?using, using additionally, we activated?constructed
? Goal: to examine?identify?investigate?mimic?shed light?start to
? Result: as expected?predicted, resulting in, shows that, this confirms
3 Automatic Identification of Epistemic Segment
Types
To investigate if we could use this set of markers for the automatic iden-
tification of segment type, we applied them to an independently developed
data set of 1721 biomedical abstracts on ?mantle cell lymphoma? that we
downloaded from PubMed. We randomly selected 100 sentences, in which
a marker was identified, and to which one out of five segment types (Hy-
pothesis, Implication, Method, Goal, Result) was assigned by a sim-
ple automatic procedure, i.e. we matched the markers to a part-of-speech
enriched version of the PubMed corpus. One or more segment types were
assigned in case of a match. The resulting assignments were then evaluated
by the first author of this paper. Results were encouraging as only 30 out of
100 assignments were incorrect. Most of these (12) were between Hypoth-
esis, Implication, which is not surprising as their markers are overlapping
353
and therefore ambiguous. Others that were somewhat frequent were: Hy-
pothesis instead of Fact (3), Result instead of Fact (3), Result instead
of Method (2), Goal instead of Method (2), Goal instead of Problem
(2). Of these however, Fact and Problem were not covered by our set of
segment specific markers and could therefore not be recognized.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
As a first conclusion, results are encouraging enough to merit further re-
search. We have identified several follow-up steps that can help improve our
results. First, we plan to segment the sentences into smaller discourse units.
For instance, sentences such as the following are quite clearly divided into
two parts: a Goal and a Method:
? Goal: To examine miRNA expression from the miR-Vec system,
? Method: a miR-24 minigene-containing virus was transduced into
human cells.
Such sentences are quite common, as are sentences containing Method,
Result and Result, Implication segments; this clearly indicates that this
move order is logical and occurs often. Secondly, there is a clear correlation
between segment type and verb tense. Method, Result are overwhelm-
ingly stated in the past tense, whereas Fact, Implication are given in the
present tense. Using verb tense as a marker could further improve classi-
fication scores. Lastly, we are interested in applying our epistemic values
to augment and improve bioinformatics tools, and investigating the value of
these categories with users. We are actively pursuing collaborations in this
area.
References
Rebholz-Schuhmann, D., H.Kirsch & F. Couto (2005) Facts from text - is text
mining ready to deliver? PLoS Biology 3(2).
Couto, F., M.J. Silva & P. Coutinho (2003) Improving information extraction
through biological correlation. In Proc. European Workshop on Data Mining
and Text Mining, Dubrovnik.
Waard, A. de (2007) The pragmatic research article. In Proc. 2nd International
Conference on the Pragmatic Web, Tilburg.
354
