Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 333?337,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Semantic Argument Structure in DiscoursE:
The SEASIDE Project
Caroline Sporleder
Computational Linguistics / Cluster of Excellence
Saarland University
66041 Saarbru?cken, Germany
csporled@coli.uni-saarland.de
The recently started SEASIDE project is funded for five years (2008-
2013) by the German Excellence Initiative as part of Saarland University?s
Cluster of Excellence on ?Multimodal Computing and Interaction?. In the
project, we aim to bring together two active research areas which both deal
with ?computing meaning? but currently stand more or less independently
next to each other: discourse processing and computation of semantic argu-
ment structure. We expect that both areas will benefit from this: semantic
argument information will allow for a more sophisticated representation of
discourse meaning, while discourse information can also be beneficial for
systems which compute semantic argument structure (i.e. semantic role la-
bellers). Eventually we aim for an incremental model of text meaning which
can be computed in a robust, data-driven way by utilising and combining
information from several levels of linguistic analysis. The model should be
sophisticated enough to aid applications such as text mining, information
extraction, question answering, and text summarisation.
Discourse processing deals with modelling the meaning of multi-
sentence units. Early approaches (e.g. Hobbs et al, 1993) were heavily
knowledge-based and, while these systems worked well on small, well-defined
domains, they generally did not scale up very well. More recent research
largely abandoned the knowledge-based approach in favour of much shal-
lower systems, either rule-based (Polanyi et al, 2004) or machine-learned
(Soricut and Marcu, 2003). These systems rely largely on surface cues.
While shallow models can be quite successful, they also have clear limita-
tions. For example, progress on discourse parsing has stagnated in the last
years and text summarisation is still a challenge, especially from multiple
input documents.
333
Theories of semantic argument structure, such as Frame Semantics,
model relations within individual sentences, namely the relation between a
lexical item and its semantic arguments such as agent or patient . During the
last five to ten years there has been much research in this area, as witnessed
by several large scale projects aimed at providing lexicons and annotated
corpora (e.g., FrameNet,
1
PropBank,
2
and SALSA
3
), and numerous shared
tasks on semantic role labelling (Baker et al, 2007; Carreras and Ma`rquez,
2005; Carreras and Ma`rques, 2004). While the performance of semantic
parsers is still lower than that of syntactic parsers, it is now good enough
that NLP tasks such as information extraction or question answering can
be shown to benefit from automatically computed semantic argument struc-
tures (Moschitti et al, 2003; Shen and Lapata, 2007).
While Frame Semantics was originally seen as being grounded in dis-
course (Fillmore, 1977), its computational treatment has largely been re-
stricted to the sentence level, which may also be due to the fact that an-
notated data typically consists of sets of individual sentences rather than
of running text, though there has been some effort recently to create full
text annotations as well. Few studies tried to connect frame semantic an-
notations across sentences. Two notable exceptions are Fillmore and Baker
(2001) and Burchardt et al (2005). Fillmore and Baker (2001) analyse a
short newspaper article and discuss how Frame Semantics could benefit dis-
course processing but without making concrete suggestions. Burchardt et al
(2005) provide a more detailed analysis of a short text but their system is
not fully implemented.
In the SEASIDE project we aim to bridge the gap between discourse
processing and semantic argument structure information by (i) enriching
semantic role labelling with discourse information, and (ii) enriching dis-
course models with information about the semantic argument structure of
the individual clauses.
Discourse information could be useful for semantic role labelling in a
number of ways:
? by integrating discourse features in the models, e.g. information about
the rhetorical relations that hold between adjacent sentences, such as
contrast or elaboration, or about the focus structure
? developing statistical models of the roles that are likely to be realised
in different contexts
1
http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu
2
http://verbs.colorado.edu/
?
mpalmer/projects/ace.html
3
http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/salsa/
334
? utilising frame-to-frame relations as specified by FrameNet to improve
frame disambiguation and role labelling
? equipping semantic role labellers with a ?memory? to allow them to
build text meaning representations incrementally rather than having
to start ?from scratch? for each target predicate
We also believe that semantic role labelling should not stop at the sentence
level; semantic argument structures are often incomplete and linking them
across clause boundaries will benefit many NLP tasks. For instance, consider
the verb clear in example (1). This verb evokes the Verdict frame which
has a role for Charges that is not filled locally (i.e., by any of the syntactic
constituents in the second sentence) but can be inferred from the preceding
sentence, which specifies the charges as for murder . Semantic role labelling
systems which operate on the sentence-level miss this crucial fact and will
be unable to fill the charges role of Verdict, even though it is present
in the discourse context. Systems which can link local semantic argument
structures can create more complete meaning representations of a text than
semantic role labellers restricted to the local domain. In order to stimulate
research in this direction, we are organising a Shared Task at SemEval-
2010 on finding links between locally uninstantiated roles and the discourse
context.
4
To our knowledge, the data we are creating for this task will be
the first publicly available reference data set containing information about
global linking of semantic argument structures.
(1) In a lengthy court case the defendant was tried for murder. Eventu-
ally, he was cleared.
While discourse information can be beneficial for the computation of se-
matic argument structures, the reverse is also true: the semantic argument
structures in a text and their relations can provide vital cues about the
coherence of the discourse. Incorporating (automatically computed) argu-
ment structure information leads to more sophisticated models of discourse
structure. Such models encode deeper linguistic information than models
based on surface cues, while still being computable in a data-driven fashion.
Utilising frame semantic information can, for example, explain why exam-
ple (23) is perceived as more coherent than (24): The verb try evokes the
Try defendant frame which is closely linked to the Sentencing frame
evoked by sentence. Furthermore the defendant role of the first frame is
4
See http://www.coli.uni-saarland.de/projects/semeval2010 FG/
335
co-referent with the convict role of the second frame, and the unrealised
court role of the Sentencing frame can be linked to The High Court in
the following sentence. The discourse in (24), on the other hand, is per-
ceived as less coherent. One reason for this is that there are fewer links
between the semantic argument structures in the two sentences. For in-
stance, the Lose possession frame evoked by lost cannot be linked easily
to Try defendant. Nor are any roles shared between the frames in the
two sentences, with the exception of the co-reference between the convict
role of sentencing (Dan Talor) and the donor role of Lose possession
(He). While the absence of obvious semantic argument structure links does
not necessarily mean that a text is not coherent,
5
their presence is likely to
be a fairly reliable cue for coherence.
(2) (3) Dan Taylor was tried for murder. The High Court sentenced
him to life imprisonment.
(4) Dan Taylor was tried for murder. He had lost his car keys.
In the SEASIDE project, we aim to develop models which can compute
interconnected semantic argument representations for a given text, enabling
us to predict such differences in coherence.
References
Collin Baker, Michael Ellsworth, and Katrin Erk. Semeval-2007 task 19: Frame semantic
structure extraction. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 99?104, 2007.
Aljoscha Burchardt, Anette Frank, and Manfred Pinkal. Building text meaning repre-
sentations from contextually related frames ? a case study. In Proceedings of IWCS-6,
2005.
Xavier Carreras and Llu??s Ma`rques. Introduction to the CoNLL-2004 shared task: Seman-
tic role labeling. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Natural Language
Learning (CoNLL-04), pages 89?97, 2004.
Xavier Carreras and Llu??s Ma`rquez. Introduction to the CoNLL-2005 shared task: Se-
mantic role labeling. In Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Computational Natural
Language Learning (CoNLL-2005), pages 152?164, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 2005.
Charles J. Fillmore. Scenes-and-frames semantics, linguistic structures processing. In
Antonio Zampolli, editor, Fundamental Studies in Computer Science, No. 59, pages
55?88. North Holland Publishing, 1977.
Charles J. Fillmore and Collin F. Baker. Frame semantics for text understanding. In Proc.
of the NAACL-01 Workshop on WordNet and Other Lexical Resources, 2001.
5
The sentence sequence Dan Taylor was tried for murder. He had lost his patience. for
example, might be interpreted as coherent.
336
Jerry R. Hobbs, Mark Stickel, Douglas Appelt, and Paul Martin. Interpretation as ab-
duction. Artificial Intelligence, 63(1-2):69?142, 1993.
Alessandro Moschitti, Paul Morarescu, and Sanda Harabagiu. Open-domain information
extraction via automatic semantic labeling. In Proceedings of FLAIRS, pages 397?401,
2003.
Livia Polanyi, Chris Culy, Martin van den Berg, Gian Lorenzo Thione, and David Ahn.
A rule based approach to discourse parsing. In Proc. of the 5th SIGDIAL Workshop in
Discourse and Dialogue, pages 108?117, 2004.
Dan Shen and Mirella Lapata. Using semantic roles to improve question answering. In
Proceedings of Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-07), 2007.
Radu Soricut and Daniel Marcu. Sentence level discourse parsing using syntactic and
lexical information. In Proc. HLT-NAACL-03, 2003.
337
