Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 166?169,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Annotating Discourse Anaphora
Stefanie Dipper
Institute of Linguistics
Bochum University
dipper@linguistics.rub.de
Heike Zinsmeister
Institute of Linguistics
Konstanz University
Heike.Zinsmeister@uni-konstanz.de
Abstract
In this paper, we present preliminary work on
corpus-based anaphora resolution of discourse
deixis in German. Our annotation guidelines
provide linguistic tests for locating the antecedent,
and for determining the semantic types of both the
antecedent and the anaphor. The corpus consists of
selected speaker turns from the Europarl corpus.
1 Introduction
An important component of text understanding is
anaphora resolution, i.e. to determine the refer-
ence of constituents whose interpretation depends
on (the reference of) other textual elements. The
majority of anaphora are instances of noun phrase
anaphora, which relate a noun phrase anaphor to
a nominal antecedent. Grammatical restrictions
(gender, number agreement) and saliency (gram-
matical function, recency) guide the resolution
process in these cases. In addition to pronouns,
definite noun phrases can be viewed as anaphoric
in that they may corefer to some other NP in the
given context. To solve the latter type of anaphora,
lexical semantic knowledge is required, as pro-
vided by an ontology or a database like WordNet.
Another type of anaphora is discourse deixis
(Webber 1988; 1991), which relates a noun phrase
anaphor to a verbal or (multi-)clausal antecedent.
The discourse entities that are introduced by
antecedents of discourse deictic pronouns are
called ?abstract objects? since they refer to prop-
erties and propositional entities (Asher, 1993).
Grammatical restrictions cannot apply since the
antecedent is non-nominal and the anaphor?
commonly in the form of a personal or demonstra-
tive pronoun?is usually in neuter singular. We
assume that in addition to saliency the resolution
process needs to take semantic restrictions into ac-
count (cf. Hegarty et al (2002)).
The automatic procedure of our research effort
can be envisaged as follows: Given some text we
first locate discourse anaphors. Next, the semantic
(= abstract) type of each anaphor is determined,
based on contextual features that are derived from
annotated corpus data. The anaphor?s semantic
type restricts the semantic type of the antecedent,
and thus narrows down the search space. Finally,
the antecedent is located with the help of these se-
mantic restrictions and, again, with contextual fea-
tures derived from the corpus.
2 Related Work
Corpus-based studies have shown that abstract ob-
jects are less salient than other discourse referents,
which has an effect on the choice of the anaphoric
element (Hegarty et al, 2002). The abstract type
of the antecedent and that of the anaphor do not
necessarily coincide. The data suggests that refer-
ence to other types (referred to in the literature as
coercion) is possible only in accordance to an ab-
stractness hierarchy (Hegarty, 2003; Consten and
Knees, 2005; Consten et al, 2007). The hierarchy
starts with events as the most concrete type, which
are anchored in spatial-temporal dimensions, and
ends with propositions as the most abstract types.
Anaphoric reference is possible to antecedents that
are of the same type or less abstract than the
anaphor (Consten and Knees, 2005).
Most works concerning the annotation of
anaphora resolution do not make reference to ab-
stract entities. OntoNotes, for example, only an-
notates reference to verbs (Pradhan et al, 2007).
Annotation research efforts on discourse deixis in-
clude: Eckert and Strube (2000), Byron (2002),
Poesio and Modjeska (2005), Poesio and Artstein
(2008), and Mu?ller (2007) for English; Navarretta
(2000) for Danish; and Recasens (2008) for Span-
ish/Catalan. To our knowledge, there has been no
attempt to systematically annotate such a corpus
of German.
166
Test: Die Zusammenfu?hrung der nationalen und europa?ischen Ebene ist sehr wohl notwendig , obwohl natu?rlich die
Hauptta?tigkeit in den Mitgliedstaaten stattfinden sollte und nur dann auf europa?ischer Ebene eingegriffen werden sollte ,
wenn dies ? na?mlich auf europa?ischer Ebene einzugreifen ? unbedingt notwendig ist .
Anno: Die Zusammenfu?hrung der nationalen und europa?ischen Ebene ist sehr wohl notwendig , obwohl natu?rlich die
Hauptta?tigkeit in den Mitgliedstaaten stattfinden sollte und nur dann [auf europa?ischer Ebene eingegriffen]prop werden
sollte , wenn [dies]prop unbedingt notwendig ist .
Engl: ?It is indeed necessary to bring the national and European levels together, even though, of course, the main work should
be done in the Member States, with the European level intervening only when this is absolutely necessary.?
Figure 1: Paraphrase test to determine the extension of the antecedent.
3 The Corpus
Our corpus consists of texts from the Europarl cor-
pus (Koehn, 2005). As our basis, we selected all
contributions whose original language is German
(including Austrian German).
For the annotation task, we isolated medium-
sized turns, consisting of 15?20 sentences. This
was done to guarantee that the turns were not
too lengthy but still provided enough information
for the annotators to understand the broader con-
text of discussion, so that they could resolve the
anaphors without comprehension problems. From
these turns, we selected those that contained the
anaphor dies ?this?. This is the only anaphor in
German which unambiguously refers to discourse
units.
4 The Guidelines
Our guidelines are based on theoretical research
on discourse semantics as well as work on anno-
tating discourse phenomena.
Given some discourse anaphor (i.e., anaphoric
das, dies, was, es ?that, this, which, it?), the guide-
lines define (i) how to locate the antecedent, (ii)
how to determine the semantic type of the an-
tecedent, and (iii) how to determine the seman-
tic type of the anaphor. For each of these tasks,
the guidelines provide linguistic tests (Dipper and
Zinsmeister, 2009).
4.1 Locating the antecedent
To determine the antecedent of the anaphoric re-
lation, a ?paraphrase test? is applied: The anno-
tator supplements the anaphor by a paraphrase in
the form of na?mlich . . . ?namely . . . ?. The part
that fills the . . . corresponds to the antecedent that
we are looking for, cf. Fig. 1.1 Antecedents can
1The Test line displays the sentence with the anaphor
(marked in bold-face) followed by the inserted paraphrase
(in bold-face and italics). The Anno line shows the same ex-
consist of VPs, (fragments of) main or subordinate
clauses, or multiple sentences.2
4.2 The semantic type of the antecedent
We distinguish 10 types of propositional enti-
ties. Many verbs prototypically denote one type
of propositional entity; gewinnen ?win?, for in-
stance, usually expresses an event. Often, how-
ever, the type of entity that is denoted depends on
the context and usage of the verb; Hans hat A?pfel
gegessen (?Hans ate apples?) denotes a process,
whereas Hans hat zwei A?pfel gegessen (?Hans ate
two apples?) denotes an event because the action
has an end (when both apples are eaten)?i.e., the
action is telic. The semantic types are defined in
terms of the following features: world-dependent,
time-dependent, dynamic, telic, and modal (with
subtypes deontic and epistemic, generic, subjec-
tive) (see e.g., Vendler (1967), Asher (1993)). Ta-
ble 1 displays the different types of propositional
entities and their defining features. It also lists the
labels used for annotating these entities. The en-
tity types are ordered according to their degree of
abstractness.
The entity type ?deict? (deictic) does not fit in
the abstractness hierarchy of the table. It refers
to extra-linguistic entities, such as the external sit-
uation, or an issue that is currently the focus of
attention in parliament, etc.
ample with the identified antecedent underlined. Both the
antecedent and the anaphor are labeled with their seman-
tic types (see below). The Engl line presents an English
translation that is based on the original translations from Eu-
roparl. We used the tool OPUS (http://urd.let.rug.
nl/tiedeman/OPUS) to retrieve the English translations.
2E.g., the anaphor dies alles ?all this? often refers to
an antecedent consisting of multiple sentences. The ac-
tual antecedent can diverge from the one constructed by
the paraphrase test in minor aspects, such as active-passive-
alternations, or bare infinitive vs. zu-infinitive vs. participle.
In some cases, the divergences are more important and could
involve, for instance, the insertion or modification of the main
verb. In such cases, annotators were asked to note and record
the differences.
167
Prop. Entity Label Defining Features Replacement Test
W T Dyn Tel Mod
1. Event ev + + + + - Ereignis (?event?)
2. Process proc + + + - - Vorgang (?process?)
3. State state + + - (-) - Zustand (?state?)
4. Circumstance circ + + - - - Umstand (?circumstance?)
5. Modal (deontic
+ epistemic)
mod + + - - mod Notwendigkeit, Mo?glichkeit, Chance, . . . (?ne-
cessity, possibility, opportunity, . . . ?)
6. Opinion, claim op + + - - subj Meinung, Ansicht, Behauptung, Einscha?tzung,
Forderung, . . . (?opinion, view, claim, assess-
ment, request, . . . ?)
7. Generic gen + +/- - - gen wohlbekannte, allgemeingu?ltige Tatsache (?the
well-known, universal fact?)
8. Fact fact + +/- +/- +/- - Tatsache (?fact?)
9. Proposition prop - - +/- +/- - (Art von) Aktivita?t, Aktion, Eigenschaft, . . .
?(kind of) activity, action, property, . . . ?)
Table 1: Semantic types and their defining features: W(orld), T(ime), Dyn(amic), (Tel)ic, Mod(al)
4.3 The semantic type of the anaphor
To determine the type of anaphors, we defined a
?replacement test?. With this test, the demonstra-
tive anaphor dies, das, etc. is replaced by a suitable
NP, such as dieses Ereignis, dieser Vorgang. The
head noun indicates the type of the propositional
entity (e.g., event, process).3 Table 1 lists the dif-
ferent types of propositional entities and suitable
replacement nouns. The annotators are asked to
choose the most concrete, suitable noun.
5 Results
As a first pilot study on the reliability of our an-
notation guidelines, two student annotators anno-
tated 32 texts that included 48 instances of the
demonstrative pronoun dies ?this?. The pronouns
were marked in bold face, and the annotation was
performed on paper. After annotating 17 texts, the
annotators discussed their intermediate results.
Locating the antecedent: In one case, one of
the annotators decided on a deictic reading and did
not mark an antecedent at all. 40 out of 47 an-
tecedents (85%) were marked with identical spans.
In four cases they chose differing but adjacent
spans and in one case one of the annotators chose
a longer string than the other.
The semantic type of the antecedent: The
type of the antecedents coincided in 28 out of 47
cases (60%, ?=0.52).4 Agreement improved af-
3We use the term ?semantic type of the anaphor? in a
somewhat sloppy way. Put more precisely, the ?semantic type
of the anaphor? indicates the way that the anaphor refers to
(parts of) the propositional discourse referent that is denoted
by the antecedent.
4We computed ? according to www.asc.upenn.edu/
usr/krippendorff/webreliability.doc.
ter the discussion period: 11/17 cases matched
(?=0.60).
The semantic type of the anaphor: The results
with respect to the semantic type of the anaphor
seemed more disappointing: the annotators agreed
in only 22 out of 48 instances (46%, ?=0.37).
However, after the discussion period, agreement
leveled that of the type of the antecedent: 12 out
of 17 cases coincided (?=0.66). In addition to the
semantic type, we annotated the grammatical role
of the anaphor, which occurred as the subject in
79% of cases and as objects elsewhere.
Annotators agreed most often on the four most
concrete types (?ev, proc, state, circ?) and least of-
ten on the three most abstract types (?gen, fact,
prop?). This might be due to the fact that the most
abstract types are applicable in many cases, but an-
notators are advised to choose the most concrete
type that is available. In the majority of the cases
(73%), the anaphor?s type was identical with or
more abstract than the antecedent?s type.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a corpus-driven ap-
proach to discourse deictic anaphora in German.
We introduced annotation guidelines that provide
linguistic tests for locating the antecedent, and
for determining the semantic types of both the
antecedent and the anaphor. Further work will
include exploitation of contextual information in
combination with the semantic types to confine the
set of potential antecedents.
Our corpus consists of selected speaker turns
from the Europarl corpus. In this study, 32 texts
(providing 48 instances of discourse deixis) were
168
annotated according to these guidelines, and first
results concerning inter-annotator agreement are
promising (with an agreement of 85% on the ex-
tension of the antecedent, 60% on the antecedent
type, and 46% on the type of the anaphor). The
pilot study indicates that the paraphrase test helps
the annotators in determining on the extension of
the abstract antecedent.5 It also shows that the lin-
guistic tests for the semantic types have to be re-
fined.
In the next steps, we will switch from paper-
and-pencil annotation to annotation based on the
tool MMAX26. In addition to manually determin-
ing the semantic types of anaphors, we will in-
vestigate robust, fully-automatic approaches to the
derivation of contextual features for anaphora res-
olution. For instance, we plan to take into account
anaphors of the form dieses Ereignis, dieser Um-
stand, etc. (?this event, this circumstance?), which
explicitly name the semantic type of the anaphor.
In a later step other, more ambiguous, types of
anaphors will be included in the investigation.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the anonymous review-
ers for their helpful comments, and our student
annotators: Doris Aimer, Iris Bra?uning, Christine
Enzinger, Stefanie Konetzka, Barbara Mrzyglod.
The work was in part supported by Europa?ischer
Sozialfonds in Baden-Wu?rttemberg.
References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston
MA.
Donna K. Byron. 2002. Resolving pronominal refer-
ence to abstract entities. In Proceedings of the ACL-
02 conference, pages 80?87.
Manfred Consten and Mareile Knees. 2005. Complex
anaphors ? ontology and resolution. In P. Dekker,
editor, Proceedings of the 15th Amsterdam Collo-
quium, Amsterdam: University.
Manfred Consten, Mareile Knees, and Monika
Schwarz-Friesel. 2007. The function of com-
plex anaphors in texts: Evidence from corpus stud-
ies and ontological considerations. In Anaphors
in Text, pages 81?102. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam/Philadephia.
5The study was restricted to instances of the unambiguous
anaphor dies ?this?, which might have simplified the task of
selecting an antecedent.
6MMAX2: http://mmax2.sourceforge.net/.
Stefanie Dipper and Heike Zinsmeister. 2009. An-
notation guidelines ?Discourse-Deictic Anaphora?.
Draft. Universities of Bochum and Konstanz.
Miriam Eckert and Michael Strube. 2000. Dialogue
acts, synchronising units and anaphora resolution.
Journal of Semantics, 17(1):51?89.
Michael Hegarty, Jeanette K. Gundel, and Kaja
Borthen. 2002. Information structure and the ac-
cessibility of clausally introduced referents. Theo-
retical Linguistics, 27(2-3):163?186.
Michael Hegarty. 2003. Type shifting of Entities in
Discourse. Presentation at the First International
Workshop on Current Research in the Semantics-
Pragmatics Interface, Michigan State University.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus
for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings
of MT Summit.
Christoph Mu?ller. 2007. Resolving it, this, and that
in unrestricted multi-party dialog. In Proceedings of
the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 816?823,
Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Costanza Navarretta. 2000. Abstract Anaphora Res-
olution in Danish. In 1st SIGdial Workshop on
Discourse and Dialogue, pages 56?65, Hong Kong,
China, October.
Massimo Poesio and Ron Artstein. 2008. Anaphoric
annotation in the ARRAU corpus. In Proceedings
of the LREC 2008, Marrakech, Morocco.
Massimo Poesio and Natalia N. Modjeska. 2005. Fo-
cus, activation, and this-noun phrases: An empirical
study. In Anto?nio Branco, Tony McEnery, and Rus-
lan Mitkov, editors, Anaphora Processing, volume
263 of Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, pages
429?442. John Benjamins.
Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, Ralph Weischedel,
Jessica MacBride, and Linnea Micciulla. 2007.
Unrestricted coreference: Identifying entities and
events in OntoNotes. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Semantic Computing
(ICSC), Irvine, CA.
Marta Recasens. 2008. Discourse deixis and coref-
erence: Evidence from AnCora. In Proceedings of
the SecondWorkshop on Anaphora Resolution (WAR
II), pages 73?82.
Zeno Vendler, 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy, chapter
Verbs and Time, pages 97?121. Cornell University
Press, Ithaca.
Bonnie L. Webber. 1988. Discourse deixis: Reference
to discourse segments. In Proceedings of the ACL-
88 conference, pages 113?122.
Bonnie L. Webber. 1991. Structure and ostention in
the interpretation of discourse deixis. Language and
Cognitive Processes, 6:107?135.
169
