Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 34?37,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Mining Name Translations from Comparable Corpora  
by Creating Bilingual Information Networks 
Heng Ji 
Computer Science Department,  Queens College and the Graduate Center 
The City University of New York,  New York, NY, 11367, USA 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes a new task to extract and 
align information networks from comparable 
corpora. As a case study we demonstrate the 
effectiveness of this task on automatically 
mining name translation pairs. Starting from a 
small set of seeds, we design a novel approach 
to acquire name translation pairs in a boot-
strapping framework. The experimental results 
show this approach can generate highly accu-
rate name translation pairs for persons, geo-
political and organization entities. 
1 Introduction 
Accurate name translation is crucial to many 
cross-lingual information processing tasks such 
as information retrieval (e.g. Ji et al, 2008). Re-
cently there has been heightened interest in dis-
covering name pairs from comparable corpora 
(e.g. Sproat et al, 2006; Klementiev and Roth, 
2006). By comparable corpora we mean texts 
that are about similar topics, but are not in gen-
eral translations of each other. These corpora are 
naturally available, for example, many news 
agencies release multi-lingual news articles on 
the same day.  There are no document-level or 
sentence-level alignments across languages, but 
important facts such as names, relations and 
events in one language in such corpora tend to 
co-occur with their counterparts in the other. 
However, most of the previous approaches 
used a phonetic similarity based name translitera-
tion module as baseline to generate translation 
hypotheses, and then exploit the distribution evi-
dence from comparable corpora to re-score these 
hypotheses. As a result, these approaches are 
limited to names which are phonetically translit-
erated (e.g. translate Chinese name ???? (You 
shen ke)? to ?Yushchenko? in English). But many 
other types of names such as organizations are 
often rendered semantically, for example, the 
Chinese name ????? (jie fang zhi hu)? is 
translated into ?Liberation Tiger? in English. 
Furthermore, many name translations are context 
dependent. For example, a person name ???
?????? ? should be translated into ?Yasser 
Arafat (PLO Chairman)? or ?Yasir Arafat 
(Cricketer)? based on different contexts.    
Information extraction (IE) techniques ? iden-
tifying important entities, relations and events ? 
are currently available for some non-English lan-
guages. In this paper we define a new notion ?bi-
lingual information networks? which can be ex-
tracted from comparable corpora. An information 
network is a set of directed graphs, in which each 
node is a named entity and the nodes are linked 
by various ?attributes? such as hometown, em-
ployer, spouse etc. Then we align the informa-
tion networks in two languages automatically in 
a bootstrapping way to discover name translation 
pairs. For example, after we extract bilingual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An example for Bilingual Information Networks 
??? 
2. ????? 
Sibling 
3. ??? 
Arrest/2001-06-25
Located 4. ?? 
1. ?????Leader
Located
Leader ??
Capital
?? Birth-Place
Leader 
Arrest/2001-06-25 
2. Montesinos
3. Callao
Jorge Chavez 
Intl. Airport
Located
4. Peru
Located
Located 
Birth-Place 
Arequipa
1. National
Intelligence 
Service
34
information networks as shown in Figure 1, we 
can start from  a common name translation ???
??? -National Intelligence Service (1)?, to 
align its leader as ?????? - Montesinos 
(2)?, align the arrest place of Montesinos as ??
??-Callao (3)?, and then align the location of 
Callao as ???-Peru (4)?. Using this approach 
we can discover name pairs of various types 
(person, organization and location) while mini-
mizing using supervised name transliteration 
techniques. At the same time, we can provide 
links among names for entity disambiguation. 
2 General Approach 
Figure 2 depicts the general procedure of our 
approach. The language pair that we are consid-
ering in this paper is Chinese and English. We 
apply IE techniques to extract information net-
works (more details in section 3), then use a 
bootstrapping algorithm to align them and dis-
cover name pairs (section 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Name Translation Mining Overview 
3 Information Network Creation 
3.1 Bilingual Information Extraction 
We apply a state-of-the-art bilingual information 
extraction system (Chen and Ji, 2009; Ji and 
Grishman, 2008) to extract ACE1 types of enti-
ties, relations and events from the comparable 
corpora. Both systems include name tagging, 
                                                 
1 http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig//tests/ace/ 
nominal mention tagging, coreference resolution, 
time expression extraction and normalization, 
relation extraction and event extraction. Entities 
include persons, geo-political (GPE) and organi-
zations; Relations include 18 types (e.g. ?a town 
some 50 miles south of Salzburg? indicates a 
located relation.); Events include the 33 distinct 
event types defined in ACE05 (e.g.  ?Barry Dil-
ler on Wednesday quit as chief of Vivendi? indi-
cates that ?Barry Diller? is the person argument 
of a quit event occurred on Wednesday). The re-
lation extraction and event extraction compo-
nents produce confidence values. 
3.2 Attribute Conversion 
Then we construct a set of directed graphs for 
each language { }( , )i i iG G V E=  , where iV  is 
the collection of named entities, and iE  is the 
edges linking one name to the other, labeled by 
the attributes derived from the following two 
sources: (1) We select the relations with more 
static types to form specific attributes in Table 22, 
according to the entity types of a linked name 
pair. (2) For each extracted event we compose an 
attribute by combining its type and time argu-
ment (e.g. the ?Arrest/2001-06-25? link in Figure 
1). As we will see in the next section, these at-
tributes are the key to discover name translations 
from the information networks because they are 
language-independent. 
4 Information Network Alignment 
After creating the information networks from 
each language, we automatically align them to 
discover name translation pairs. The general idea 
is that starting from a small seed set of common 
name pairs, we can rely on the link attributes to 
align their related names. Then the new name 
translations are added to the seed set for the next 
iteration. We repeat this bootstrapping procedure 
until no new translations are produced. We start 
from names which are frequently linked to others 
so that we can traverse through the information 
networks efficiently. For example, the seed set in 
processing ACE newswire data includes famous 
names such as ?Indonesia?, ?China?, ?Palestine?, 
?Sharon? and ?Yugoslavia?.  
For each name pair <CHName, EName>, we 
search for all its related pairs <CHName?,
                                                 
2 Many of these attributes are consistent with the definitions 
in NIST TAC-KBP task: http://apl.jhu.edu/~paulmac/kbp/ 
090220-KBPTaskGuidelines.pdf 
Information Network Alignment 
Information  
Network Creation 
Chinese Corpora 
Chinese IE 
English Corpora
English IE
Chinese Infor-
mation Network 
English Infor-
mation Network
Attribute Conversion Attribute Conversion
High-Confidence
Name Pairs 
Graph Traverse based on 
Confidence Estimation
Seed  
Name Pairs 
bootstrapping 
35
Name? 
Name 
Person Geo-political Organization 
Person Spouse, Parent, Child, Sibling Birth-Place, Death-Place, 
Resides-Place, Nationality
Schools-Attended, Employer 
Geo-political Leader Located-Country, Capital - 
Organization Leader Location - 
 
Table 2. Relation-driven Attributes (Name ? Name?) in Information Network 
 
Language 
Corpus 
Chinese English 
ACE CHSet1: XIN Oct-Dec 2000: 150 
documents 
ENSet1: APW Oct-Dec 2000: 150 documents 
ENSet2: AFP&APW Mar-June 2003: 150 documents
TDT-5 CHSet3: XIN Apr-Aug 2003: 
30,000 documents 
ENSet3: XIN Apr-Aug 2003: 30,000 documents 
ENSet4: AFP Apr-Aug 2003: 30,000 documents 
 
Table 3. Number of Documents 
 
ENName?>. Assuming CHName is linked to 
CHName? by an edge CHEdge, and ENName is 
linked to ENName? by ENEdge, then if the fol-
lowing conditions are satisfied, we align 
CHName? and ENName? and add them as seeds 
for the next iteration: 
? CHEdge and ENEdge are generated by IE systems  
with confidence values higher than thresholds; 
? CHEdge and ENEdge have the same attributes; 
? CHName? and ENName? have the same entity type; 
? If CHName? and ENName? are persons, the Dam-
erau?Levenshtein edit distance between the pin-
yin form of CHName? and ENName? is lower 
than a threshold.  
It?s worth noting that although we exploit the 
pinyin information as essential constraints, this 
approach differs from the standard transliteration 
models which convert pinyin into English by 
adding/deleting/replacing certain phonemes.  
5 Experimental Results  
5.1 Data 
We use some documents from the ACE (2004, 
2005) training corpora and TDT-5 corpora to 
manually evaluate our approach. Table 3 shows 
the number of documents from different news 
agencies and time frames. We hold out 20 ACE 
texts from each language to optimize the thresh-
olds of confidence values in section 4. A name 
pair <CHName, EName> is judged as correct if 
both of them are correctly extracted and one is 
the correct translation of the other in the certain 
contexts of the original documents.  
5.2 Overall Performance 
Table 4 shows the number and accuracy of name 
translation pairs discovered from CH-Set3 and 
EN-Set3, using 100 name pairs as seeds. After 
four iterations we discovered 968 new name 
translation pairs with accuracy 82.9%. Among 
them there are 361 persons (accuracy 76.4%), 
384 geo-political names (accuracy 87.5%) and 
223 organization names (accuracy 85.2%). 
 
Iteration 1 2 3 4 
Number of Name Pairs 205 533 787 968
Accuracy (%) 91.8 88.5 85.8 82.9
 
Table 4. Overall Performance 
5.3 Impact of Time Frame and News 
Source Similarity 
One major evidence exploited in the prior work 
is that the bilingual comparable corpora should 
be weakly temporally aligned. For example, 
Klementiev and Roth (2006) used the time dis-
tribution of names to re-score name translitera-
tion. In order to verify this observation, we in-
vestigated how well our new approach can per-
form on comparable corpora with different time 
frames. Table 5 presents the performance of two 
combinations: CHSet1-ENSet1 (from the same 
time frame) and CHSet1-ENSet2 (from different 
time frames) with a seed set of 10 name pairs 
after 5 iterations. 
 
Corpora CHSet1-ENSet1 CHSet1-ENSet2
Number of 
Name Pairs 
42 17 
Accuracy (%) 81.0 76.5 
 
Table 5. Impact of Time Frame Similarity     
In addition, in order to measure the impact of 
news source similarity, we apply our approach to 
the combination of CHSet3 and ENSet4 which 
are from different news agencies. In total 815 
name pairs are discovered after 4 iterations with 
overall accuracy 78.7%, which is worse than the 
results from the corpora of the same news source 
as shown in Table 4. Therefore we can clearly 
see that time and news source similarities are 
36
important to the performance of name translation 
pair mining. 
5.4 Impact of IE Errors 
Since in our approach we used the fully auto-
matic IE pipeline to create the information net-
works, the errors from each component will be 
propagated into the alignment step and thus limit 
the performance of name translation discovery. 
For example, Chinese name boundary detection 
errors caused about 30% of the incorrect name 
pairs. As a diagnostic analysis, we tried to dis-
cover name pairs from CHSet1 and ENSet1 but 
with perfect IE annotations. We obtained 63 
name pairs with a much higher accuracy 90.5%.  
6 Related Work  
Most of the previous name translation work 
combined supervised transliteration approaches 
with Language Model based re-scoring (e.g. Al-
Onaizan and Knight, 2002; Huang et al, 2004). 
Ji et al (2009) described various approaches to 
automatically mine name translation pairs from 
aligned phrases (e.g. cross-lingual Wikipedia 
title links) or aligned sentences (bi-texts). Our 
approach of extracting and aligning information 
network from comparable corpora is related to 
some prior work using comparable corpora to re-
score name transliterations (Sproat et al, 2006; 
Klementiev and Roth, 2006).  
In this paper we extend the target names from 
persons to geo-political and organization names, 
and extract relations links among names simulta-
neously. And we use a bootstrapping approach to 
discover name translations from the bilingual 
information networks of comparable corpora. In 
this way we don?t need to have a name translit-
eration module to serve as baseline, or compute 
document-wise temporal distributions.  
7 Conclusion and Future Work  
We have described a simple approach to create 
bilingual information networks and then discover 
name pairs from comparable corpora. The ex-
periments on Chinese and English have shown 
that this method can generate name translation 
pairs with high accuracy by using a small seed 
set. In the short term, our approach will provide a 
framework for many byproducts and directly 
benefit other NLP tasks. For example, the 
aligned sub-graphs with names, relations and 
events can be used to improve information re-
dundancy in cross-lingual question answering; 
the outlier (mis-aligned) sub-graphs can be used 
to detect the novel or local information described 
in one language but not in the other. 
In the future we plan to import more efficient 
graph mining and alignment algorithms which 
have been widely used for protein-protein inter-
action detection (Kelley et al, 2003). In addition, 
we will attempt using unsupervised relation ex-
traction based on lexical semantics to replace the 
supervised IE pipeline. More importantly, we 
will investigate the tradeoff between coverage 
and accuracy by applying the generated name 
pairs to cross-lingual name search and machine 
translation tasks. 
Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported by 
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
under Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023 via 27-
001022, and the CUNY Research Enhancement 
Program and GRTI Program. 
References  
Y. Al-Onaizan and K. Knight. 2002. Translating 
Named Entities Using Monolingual and Bilingual 
Resources.  Proc. ACL. 
Z. Chen and H. Ji. 2009. Language Specific Issue and 
Feature Exploration in Chinese Event Extraction. 
Proc. HLT-NAACL.  
F. Huang, S. Vogel and A. Waibel. 2004. Improving 
Named Entity Translation Combining Phonetic and 
Semantic Similarities. Proc. HLT/NAACL. 
H. Ji, R. Grishman, D. Freitag, M. Blume, J. Wang, S. 
Khadivi, R. Zens and H. Ney. 2009. Name Transla-
tion for Distillation. Global Automatic Language 
Exploitation. 
H. Ji R. Grishman. 2008. Refining Event Extraction 
Through Cross-document Inference. Proc. ACL. 
H. Ji, R. Grishman and W. Wang. 2008. Phonetic 
Name Matching for Cross-lingual Spoken Sentence 
Retrieval. Proc. IEEE-ACL SLT. 
B. P. Kelley, R. Sharan, R. M. Karp, T. Sittler, D.E. 
Root, B. R. Stockwell and  T. Ideker. 2003. Con-
served pathways within bacteria and yeast as re-
vealed by global protein network alignment. The 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America. 
A. Klementiev and D. Roth. 2006. Named Entity 
Transliteration and Discovery from Multilingual 
Comparable Corpora. Proc. HLT-NAACL.  
R. Sproat, T. Tao and C. Zhai. 2006. Named Entity 
Transliteration with Comparable Corpora. Proc. 
ACL. 
37
