Proceedings of the 2009 Named Entities Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 194?201,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Czech Named Entity Corpus and SVM-based Recognizer
Jana Kravalova?
Charles University in Prague
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
kravalova@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?
Charles University in Prague
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
zabokrtsky@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
This paper deals with recognition of
named entities in Czech texts. We present
a recently released corpus of Czech sen-
tences with manually annotated named en-
tities, in which a rich two-level classifica-
tion scheme was used. There are around
6000 sentences in the corpus with roughly
33000 marked named entity instances. We
use the data for training and evaluating a
named entity recognizer based on Support
Vector Machine classification technique.
The presented recognizer outperforms the
results previously reported for NE recog-
nition in Czech.
1 Introduction
After the series of Message Understanding
Conferences (MUC; (Grishman and Sundheim,
1996)), processing of named entities (NEs) be-
came a well established discipline within the NLP
domain, usually motivated by the needs of Infor-
mation Extraction, Question Answering, or Ma-
chine Translation. For English, one can find liter-
ature about attempts at rule-based solutions for the
NE task as well as machine-learning approaches,
be they dependent on the existence of labeled data
(such as CoNLL-2003 shared task data), unsuper-
vised (using redundancy in NE expressions and
their contexts, see e.g. (Collins and Singer, 1999))
or a combination of both (such as (Talukdar et al,
2006), in which labeled data are used as a source
of seed for an unsupervised procedure exploiting
huge unlabeled data). A survey of research on
named entity recognition is available in (Ekbal and
Bandyopadhyay, 2008).
There has been considerably less research
done in the NE field in Czech, as discussed in
(S?evc???kova? et al, 2007b). Therefore we focus on
it in this paper, which is structured as follows. In
Section 2 we present a recently released corpus
of Czech sentences with manually annotated in-
stances of named entities, in which a rich classi-
fication scheme is used. In Section 3 we describe
a new NE recognizer developed for Czech, based
on the Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifi-
cation technique. Evaluation of such approach is
presented in Section 4. The summary is given in
Section 5.
2 Manually Annotated Corpus
2.1 Data Selection
We have randomly selected 6000 sentences
from the Czech National Corpus1 from the re-
sult of the query ([word=".*[a-z0-9]"]
[word="[A-Z].*"]). This query makes the
relative frequency of NEs in the selection higher
than the corpus average, which makes the sub-
sequent manual annotation much more effective,
even if it may slightly bias the distribution of NE
types and their observed density.2
2.2 Annotation NE Instances with Two-level
NE Classification
There is no generally accepted typology of Named
Entities. One can see two trends: from the view-
point of unsupervised learning, it is advantageous
to have just a few coarse-grained categories (cf.
the NE classification developed for MUC confer-
ences or the classification proposed in (Collins
and Singer, 1999), where only persons, locations,
and organizations were distinguished), whereas
those interested in semantically oriented applica-
tions prefer more informative (finer-grained) cat-
egories (e.g. (Fleischman and Hovy, 2002) with
1http://ucnk.ff.cuni.cz
2The query is trivially motivated by the fact that NEs in
Czech (as well as in many other languages) are often marked
by capitalization of the first letter. Annotation of NEs in a cor-
pus without such selection would lower the bias, but would
be more expensive due to the lower density of NE instances
in the annotated material.
194
Types of NE
a - Numbers in addresses
c - Bibliographic items
g - Geographical names
i - Institutions
m - Media names
n - Specific number usages
o - Artifact names
p - Personal names
q - Quantitative expressions
t - Time expressions
ah - street numbers at - phone/fax numbers
az - zip codes
cb - volume numbers cn - chapt./sect./fig. numbers
cp - page numbers cr - legisl. act numberscs - article titles
gc - states gh - hydronyms
gl - nature areas / objects gp - planets, cosmic objectsgq - urban parts gr - territorial namesgs - streets, squares gt - continentsgu - cities/towns g_ - underspecifiedia - conferences/contests ic - cult./educ./scient. inst.if - companies, concerns... io - government/political inst.i_ - underspecified
mi - internet links mn - periodical
mr - radio stations mt - TV stationsna - age nc - sport scoreni - itemizer nm - in formulanp - part of personal name nq - town quarternr - ratio nw - flat sizen_ - underspecified
oa - cultural artifacts (books, movies) oc - chemical
oe - measure units om - currency unitsop - products or - directives, normso_ - underspecified
pb - animal names pc - inhabitant names
pd - (academic) titles pf - first names
pm - second names pp - relig./myth personsps - surnames p_ - underspecified
qc - cardinal numbers qo - ordinal numbers
tc - centuries td - daystf - feasts th - hours
tm - months tn - minutes
tp - epochs ts - seconds
ty - years
Figure 1: Two-level hierarchical classification of NEs used in the corpus. Note that the (detailed) NE
types are divided into two columns just because of the space reasons here.
195
eight types of person labels, or Sekine?s Extended
NE Hierarchy, cf. (Sekine, 2003)).
In our corpus, we use a two-level NE classifi-
cation depicted in Figure 1. The first level corre-
sponds to rough categories (called NE supertypes)
such as person names, geographical names etc.
The second level provides a more detailed classi-
fication: e.g. within the supertype of geographi-
cal names, the NE types of names of cities/towns,
names of states, names of rivers/seas/lakes etc.
are distinguished.3 If more robust processing is
necessary, only the first level (NE supertypes)
can be used, while the second level (NE types)
comes into play when more subtle information is
needed. Each NE type is encoded by a unique two-
character tag (e.g., gu for names of cities/towns,
gc for names of states; a special tag, such as g ,
makes it possible to leave the NE type underspec-
ified).
Besides the terms of NE type and supertype, we
use also the term NE instance, which stands for a
continuous subsequence of tokens expressing the
entity in a given text. In the simple plain-text for-
mat, which we use for manual annotations, the NE
instances are marked as follows: the word or the
span of words belonging to the NE is delimited by
symbols < and >, with the former one immediately
followed by the NE type tag (e.g. <pf John> loves
<pf Mary>).
The annotation scheme allows for the embed-
ding of NE instances. There are two types of em-
bedding. In the first case, the NE of a certain
type can be embedded in another NE (e.g., the
river name can be part of a name of a city as in
<gu U?st?? nad <gh Labem>>). In the second case,
two or more NEs are parts of a (so-called) con-
tainer NE (e.g., two NEs, a first name and a sur-
name, form together a person name container NE
such as in <P<pf Paul> <ps Newman>>). The
container NEs are marked with a capital one-letter
tag: P for (complex) person names, T for tempo-
ral expressions, A for addresses, and C for biblio-
graphic items. A more detailed description of the
NE classification can be found in (S?evc???kova? et al,
2007b).
3Given the size of the annotated data, further subdivi-
sion into even finer classes (such as persons divided into cat-
egories such as lawyer, politician, scientist used in (Fleis-
chman and Hovy, 2002)) would result in too sparse annota-
tions.
2.3 Annotated Data Cleaning
After collecting all the sentences annotated by the
annotators, it was necessary to clean the data in or-
der to improve the data quality. For this purpose,
a set of tests was implemented. The tests revealed
wrong or ?suspicious? spots in the data (based e.g.
on the assumption that the same lemma should
manifest an entity of the same type in most its oc-
currences), which were manually checked and cor-
rected if necessary. Some noisy sentences caused
e.g. by wrong sentence segmentation in the origi-
nal resource were deleted; the final size of the cor-
pus is 5870 sentences.
2.4 Morphological Analysis of Annotated
Data
The sentences have been enriched with morpho-
logical tags and lemmas using Jan Hajic??s tagger
shipped with Prague Dependency Treebank 2.0
(Hajic? et al, 2006) integrated into the TectoMT
environment (Z?abokrtsky? et al, 2008). Motivation
for this step was twofold
? Czech is a morphologically rich language,
and named entities might be subject to
paradigms with rich inflection too. For
example, male first name Toma?s? (Thomas)
migh appear also in one of the following
forms: Toma?s?e, Toma?s?ovi, Toma?s?i, Toma?s?em,
Toma?s?ove?, Toma?s?u?m . . . (according to gram-
matical case and number), which would make
the training data without lemmatization much
sparser.
? Additional features (useful for SVM as well
as for any other Machine Learning approach)
can be mined from the lemma and tag se-
quences, as shown in Section 3.2.
2.5 Public Data Release
Manually annotated and cleaned 6000 sentences
with roughly 33000 named entities were released
as Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.0. The corpus
consists of manually annotated sentences and mor-
phological analysis in several formats: a simple
plain text format, a simple xml format, a more
complex xml format based on the Prague Markup
Language (Pajas and S?te?pa?nek, 2006) and contain-
ing also the above mentioned morphological anal-
ysis, and the html format with visually highlighted
NE instances.
For the purposes of supervised machine learn-
ing, division of data into training, development
196
and evaluation subset is provided in the corpus.
The division into training, development and evalu-
ation subsets was made by random division of sen-
tences into three sets, in proportion 80% (training),
10% (development) and 10% (evaluation), see Ta-
ble 1. Other basic quantitative properties are sum-
marized in Table 2 and Table 3.
The resulting data collection, called
Czech Named Entity Corpus 1.0, is
now publicly available on the Internet at
http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/tectomt.
Set #Sentences #Words #NE instances
train 4696 119921 26491
dtest 587 14982 3476
etest 587 15119 3615
total 5870 150022 33582
Table 1: Division of the annotated corpus into
training, development test, and evaluation test sets.
Lenght #Occurrences Proportion
one-word 23057 68.66%
two-word 6885 20.50%
three-word 1961 5.84%
longer 1679 5.00%
total 33582 100.00%
Table 2: Occurrences of NE instances of different
length in the annotated corpus.
3 SVM-based Recognizer
3.1 NER as a classification task
In this section, we formulate named entity recog-
nition as a classification problem. The task of
named entity recognition as a whole includes sev-
eral problems to be solved:
? detecting ?basic? one-word, two-word and
multiword named entities,
? detecting complex entities containing other
entities (e.g. an institution name containing
a personal name).
Furthermore, one can have different require-
ments on what a correctly recognized named entity
is (and train a separate recognizer for each case):
? an entity whose span and type are correctly
recognized,
NE type #Occurrences Proportion
ps 4040 12.03%
pf 3072 9.15%
P 2722 8.11%
gu 2685 8.00%
qc 2040 6.07%
oa 1695 5.05%
ic 1410 4.20%
ty 1325 3.95%
th 1325 3.95%
s 1285 3.83%
gc 1107 3.30%
if 834 2.48%
io 830 2.47%
tm 559 1.66%
n 512 1.52%
f 506 1.51%
Table 3: Distribution of several most frequent NE
types in the annotated corpus.
? an entity whose span and supertype are cor-
rectly recognized,
? an entity whose span is correctly recognized
(without regard to its type).
Therefore, we subdivide the classification prob-
lem into a few subproblems. Firstly, we indepen-
dently evaluate the recognition system for one-
word named entities, for two-word named enti-
ties and for multiword named entities. For each
of these three problems, we define three tasks, or-
dered from the easiest to the most difficult:
? Named entity span recognition ? all words of
named entity must be found but the type is
not relevant. For one-word entities, this re-
duces to 0/1 classification problem, that is,
each word is either marked as named entity
(1) or as regular word (0). For two-word en-
tities, this 0/1 decision is made for each cou-
ple of subsequent words (bigram) in the sen-
tence.
? Named entity supertype recognition ? all
words of named entity must be found and the
supertype must be correct. This is a multi-
class classification problem, where classes
are named entity classes of the first level in
hierarchy (p, g, i, ...) plus one class
for regular words.
197
? Named entity type recognition ? all words
of named entity must be found and the type
must be correct.
In our solution, a separate SVM classifier
is built for one-word named entities, two-word
named entities and three-word named entities.
Then, as we proceed through the text, we apply the
classifier on each ?window? or ?n-gram? of words
? one-word, two-word and three-word, classifying
the n-gram with the corresponding SVM classi-
fier. We deliberately omit named entities contain-
ing four and more words, as they represent only a
small portion of the instances (5%).
3.2 Features
Classification features which were used by the
SVM classifier(s), are as follows:
? morphological features ? part of speech, gen-
der, case and number,
? orthographic features ? boolean features
such as capital letter at the beginning of the
word or regular expression for time and year
,
? lists of known named entities ? boolean fea-
tures describing whether the word is listed
in lists of Czech most used names and sur-
names, Czech cities, countries or famous in-
stitutions,
? lemma ? some lemmas contain shortcuts de-
scribing the property of lemma, for example
?Prahou? (Prague, 7th case) would lemma-
tize to ?Praha ;G? with mark ? ;G? hinting
that ?Praha? is a geographical name,
? context features ? similar features for pre-
ceding and following words, that is, part of
speech, gender, case and number for the pre-
ceding and following word, orthographic fea-
tures, membership in a list of known entities
and lemma hints for the preceding and fol-
lowing word.
All classification features were transformed into
binary (boolean) features, resulting in roughly
200-dimensional binary feature space.
3.3 Classifier implementation
For the classification task, we decided to use Sup-
port Vector Machine classification method. First,
this solution has been repeatedly shown to give
better scores in NE recognition in comparison to
other Machine Learning methods, see e.g. (Isozaki
and Kazawa, 2002) and (Ekbal and Bandyopad-
hyay, 2008). Second, in our preliminary experi-
ments on our data it outperformed all other solu-
tions too (based on naive Bayes, k nearest neigh-
bors, and decision trees).
As an SVM classifier, we used its CPAN Perl
implementation Algorithm-SVM.4
Technically, the NE recognizer is implemented
as a Perl module included into TectoMT, which is
a modular open source software framework for im-
plementing NLP applications, (Z?abokrtsky? et al,
2008).5
4 Evaluation
4.1 Evaluation metrics
We use the following standard quantities for eval-
uating performance of the presented classifier:
? precision ? the number of correctly predicted
NEs divided by the number of all predicted
NEs,
? recall ? the number of correctly predicted
NEs divided by the number of all NEs in the
data,
? f-score ? harmonic mean of precision and re-
call.
In our opinion, simpler quantities such as accu-
racy (the percentage of correctly marked words)
are not suitable for this task, since the number
of NE instances to be found is not known in ad-
vance.6
4.2 Results
The results for SVM classifier when applied on
the evaluation test set of the corpus are summa-
rized in Table 4. The table evaluates all subtasks
as defined in Section 3.1, that is, for combination
4http://www.cpan.org/authors/id/L/LA/LAIRDM/
5One of the reasons for integrating the classifier into Tec-
toMT is the fact that it requires the input texts to be sentence-
segmented, tokenized, tagged and lemmatized; all the nec-
essary tools for such preprocessing are already available in
TectoMT.
6Counting also all non-NEwords predicted as non-entities
as a success would lead to very high accuracy value without
much information content (obviously most words are not NE
instances).
198
All NEs One-word NEs Two-word NEs
P R F P R F P R F
span+type 0.75 0.62 0.68 0.80 0.71 0.75 0.68 0.62 0.65
span+supertype 0.75 0.67 0.71 0.87 0.78 0.82 0.71 0.64 0.67
span 0.84 0.70 0.76 0.89 0.80 0.84 0.76 0.69 0.72
Table 4: Summary of the SVM classifier performance (P=precision, R=recall, F=f-measure). Recogni-
tion of NEs of different length is evaluated separately. The other dimension corresponds to the gradually
released correctness requirements.
true type predicted type true type description predicted type description errors
oa x cultural artifacts (books, movies) no entity 184
ic x cult./educ./scient. inst. no entity 74
x gu no entity cities/towns 71
x P no entity personal name container 66
if x companies, concerns . . . no entity 60
x ic no entity cult./educ./scient. inst. 59
io x government/political inst. no entity 57
x ps no entity surnames 47
P x personal name container no entity 43
ps x surnames no entity 41
gu x cities/towns no entity 37
x td no entity days 35
op x products no entity 33
x pf no entity first names 31
T x time container no entity 30
Table 5: The most frequent types of errors in NE recognition made by the SVM classifier.
of subtask defined for all entities, one-word enti-
ties and two-word entities and with gradually re-
leased requirements for correctness: correct span
and correct (detailed) type, correct span and cor-
rect supertype, correct span only.
The most common SVM classification errors
are shown in Table 5.
4.3 Discussion
As we can see in Table 4, the classifier recognizes
span and type of all named entities in text with
f-measure = 0.68. This improves the results re-
ported on this data in (S?evc???kova? et al, 2007a),
which was 0.62. For one-word named entities, the
improvement is also noticeable, from 0.70 to 0.75.
In our opinion, the improvement is caused by
better feature selection on one hand. We do not
use as many classification features as the authors
of (S?evc???kova? et al, 2007a), instead we made a
preliminary manual selection of features we con-
sidered to be helpful. For example, we do not use
the whole variety of 15 Czech morphological cat-
egories for every word in context, but we use only
part of speech, gender, case and number. Also,
we avoided using features based on storing words
which occurred in training data, such as boolean
feature, which is true for words, which appeared
in training data as named entity. We tried employ-
ing such features, but in our opinion, they result in
sparsity in space searched by SVM.
It would be highly difficult to correctly compare
the achieved results with results reported on other
languages (such as f-score 88.76% achieved for
English in (Zhang and Johnson, 2003)), especially
because of different task granularity (and obvi-
ously highly different baselines). Furthermore, in
Czech the task is more complicated due to inflec-
tion: many named entities can appear in several
many different forms. For example, the Czech
capital city ?Praha? appeared in these forms in
training data: Praha, Prahy, Prahou, Prahu.
Table 5 describes the most common errors made
by classifier. Clearly, the most problematic classes
are objects (oa) and institutions (ic, if, io),
199
which mostly remain unrecognized. The problem
is that, cultural artifacts like books or movies, or
institutions, tend to have quite new and unusual
names, as opposed to personal names, for which
fairly limited amount of choice exists, and cities,
which do not change and can be listed easily.
Institutions also tend to have long and com-
plicated names, for which it is especially diffi-
cult to find the ending frontier. We believe that
dependency syntax analysis (such as dependency
trees resulting from the maximum spanning tree
parser, (McDonald et al, 2005)) might provide
some clues here. By determining the head of the
clause, e.g. theatre, university, gallery and it?s de-
pendants, we might get some hints about which
words are part of the name and which are not.
Yet another improvement in overall perfor-
mance could be achieved by incorporating hyper-
nym discovery (making use e.g. of Wikipedia) as
proposed in (Kliegr et al, 2008).
5 Conclusions
We have presented a new recently published cor-
pus of Czech sentences with manually annotated
named entities with fine-grained two-level annota-
tion. We used the data for training and evaluating a
named entity recognizer based on Support Vector
Machines classification technique. Our classifier
reached f-measure 0.68 in recognizing and classi-
fying Czech named entities into 62 categories and
thus outperformed the results previously reported
for NE recognition in Czech in (S?evc???kova? et al,
2007a).
We intend to further improve our classifier,
especially recognition of institution and object
names, by employing dependency syntax features.
Another improvement is hoped to be achieved us-
ing WWW-based ontologies.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by MSM
0021620838, GAAV C?R 1ET101120503, and
MS?MT C?R LC536.
References
Michael Collins and Yoram Singer. 1999. Unsuper-
vised Models for Named Entity Classification. In
Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large
Corpora (EMNLP/VLC), pages 189?196.
Asif Ekbal and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay. 2008. Named
Entity Recognition using Support Vector Machine:
A Language Independent Approach . International
Journal of Computer Systems Science and Engineer-
ing, 4(2):155?170.
Michael Fleischman and Eduard Hovy. 2002. Fine
Grained Classification of Named Entities . In Pro-
ceedings of the 19th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), volume I,
pages 267?273.
Ralph Grishman and Beth Sundheim. 1996. Mes-
sage Understanding Conference - 6: A Brief History.
In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING), volume I,
pages 466?471.
Jan Hajic?, Jarmila Panevova?, Eva Hajic?ova?, Petr
Sgall, Petr Pajas, Jan S?te?pa?nek, Jir??? Havelka,
Marie Mikulova?, Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?, and Magda
S?evc???kova?. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank
2.0.
Hideki Isozaki and Hideto Kazawa. 2002. Effi-
cient Support Vector Classifiers For Named Entity
Recognition. In Proceedings of the 19th Inter-
national Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING?02).
Tomas Kliegr, Krishna Chandramouli, Jan Nemrava,
Vojtech Svatek, and Ebroul Izquierdo. 2008.
Wikipedia as the premiere source for targeted hy-
pernym discovery. WBBT ECML08.
Ryan McDonald, Fernando Pereira, Kiril Ribarov, and
Jan Hajic?. 2005. Non-Projective Dependency Pars-
ing using Spanning Tree Algorithms. In Proceed-
ings of Human Langauge Technology Conference
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (HTL/EMNLP), pages 523?
530, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Petr Pajas and Jan S?te?pa?nek. 2006. XML-based rep-
resentation of multi-layered annotation in the PDT
2.0. In Richard Erhard Hinrichs, Nancy Ide, Martha
Palmer, and James Pustejovsky, editors, Proceed-
ings of the LREC Workshop on Merging and Layer-
ing Linguistic Information (LREC 2006), pages 40?
47, Paris, France.
Satoshi Sekine. 2003. Sekine?s Extended Named En-
tity Hierarchy. http://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/ene/.
Magda S?evc???kova?, Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?, and Oldr?ich
Kru?za. 2007. Named Entities in Czech: Annotat-
ing Data and Developing NE Tagger. In Va?clav Ma-
tous?ek and Pavel Mautner, editors, Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings of the 10th Inter-
national Conference on Text, Speech and Dialogue,
volume 4629 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 188?195, Pilsen, Czech Republic. Springer
Science+Business Media Deutschland GmbH.
200
Partha Pratim Talukdar, Thorsten Brants, Mark Liber-
man, and Fernando Pereira. 2006. A Context Pat-
tern Induction Method for Named Entity Extraction.
In Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-X),
pages 141?148.
Magda S?evc???kova?, Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?, and Oldr?ich
Kru?za. 2007. Zpracova?n?? pojmenovany?ch entit
v c?esky?ch textech. Technical report, U?FAL MFF
UK, Praha.
Zdene?k Z?abokrtsky?, Jan Pta?c?ek, and Petr Pajas. 2008.
TectoMT: Highly Modular MT System with Tec-
togrammatics Used as Transfer Layer. In Proceed-
ings of the 3rd Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation, ACL.
Tong Zhang and David Johnson. 2003. A robust risk
minimization based named entity recognition sys-
tem. In Walter Daelemans and Miles Osborne, ed-
itors, Proceedings of CoNLL-2003, pages 204?207.
Edmonton, Canada.
201
