Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 154?161,
Athens, Greece, 30 ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
What Game Theory can do for NLG: the case of vague language
Kees van Deemter
University of Aberdeen
k.vdeemter@abdn.ac.uk
Abstract
This informal position paper brings to-
gether some recent developments in for-
mal semantics and pragmatics to argue
that the discipline of Game Theory is well
placed to become the theoretical back-
bone of Natural Language Generation. To
demonstrate some of the strengths and
weaknesses of the Game-Theoretical ap-
proach, we focus on the utility of vague
expressions. More specifically, we ask
what light Game Theory can shed on the
question when an NLG system should
generate vague language.
1 NLG as a choice problem
Natural Language Generation (NLG) is the area
of computational linguistics that is concerned with
the mapping from non-linguistic to linguistic ex-
pressions (e.g. Reiter and Dale 2000). This formu-
lation might be taken to suggest that NLG is best
viewed as a kind of translation problem, where the
challenge is to find a way to convert a formal ex-
pression into (for example) an English one. In its
early years, this may have been a fruitful way to
think about NLG but, these days, a better perspec-
tive is of NLG as a choice problem. For after the
advances of recent years, the problem is no longer
such much ?How on Earth can this information be
expressed in English??, but rather ?From all the
possible ways to express this information in En-
glish, which one is the most effective choice??
Let us try to say this a bit more precisely. It is
usually fair to assume that the formal expressions
from which NLG takes its departure are them-
selves clear and unambiguous. Let us call the
inputs to the generator Meanings. Now suppose
we have a grammar that tells us how each given
Meaning can be expressed in a language such as
English. The task for NLG now is to choose, for
each of these Meanings, which of all the different
linguistic Forms that can express it (according to
the grammar) is the best expression of this partic-
ular Meaning. Ultimately, this choice is likely to
depend on a number of other parameters, such as
the identity of the hearer, and the words that have
earlier been used. In the present paper, these ?con-
textual? issues will largely be ignored, allowing us
to simplify by thinking in terms of a mapping from
Meanings to Forms.
The perspective that views NLG as a choice
problem is far from new (see e.g. McDonald
1987, where it takes a central position); in fact,
it forms the methodological spine of Systemic-
Functional Grammar, with its AND/OR graphs
(Bateman 1997). Given this perspective, the ques-
tion comes up what factors determine the choice
between different linguistic Forms. This question
is difficult to answer in detail, but at the most ab-
stract level, the answer is likely to have something
to do with the ?utility?of the different Forms that
can be generated, and perhaps such additional fac-
tors as the cost to the speaker of generating them,
and the cost to the hearer of processing (e.g., pars-
ing and interpreting) them. To utter a sentence is to
perform an action, and the choice between differ-
ent actions is naturally thought of as governed by
utility, understood in the broadest possible sense.
2 Game Theory
The analysis of NLG as driven by the utility of ut-
terances feels natural to people familiar with prac-
tical applications of NLG, where texts are gener-
ated for a real-life setting. More generally, this
type of analysis suits anyone who is interested in
the effects of an utterance on an audience (e.g.,
Mellish and Van der Sluis 2009). To see how
NLG systems could be amenable to a decision-
theoretical analysis, in which the expected pay-
offs associated with different texts are compared,
consider an NLG system that informs roadgrit-
154
ters? decisions about the condition of the roads
in Scotland, to help them decide which ones are
icy enough to require treatment (e.g. Turner et al
2008).
Computerised weather forecasts can tell road
gritters which roads are likely to be icey, and hence
dangerous. There can be thousands of dangerous
roads on a given night, and it is often impossible to
say in a few words exactly which road are danger-
ous (Turner et al 2008). One summary produced
by the generator might approximate the data by
saying ?Roads in the Highlands are icey? while an-
other might say ?Roads above 500 metres are icey?
(assume this covers a larger set of roads). It mat-
ters which of these summaries is generated, be-
cause each summary will lead to a different set of
roads being treated with salt (i.e., gritted). The
first summary may have 10 false positives (i.e.,
roads gritted unnecessarily) and 10 false negatives
(i.e., dangerous roads not gritted); the second sum-
mary might have 100 false positives and only 2
false negatives. In a situation of this kind, which
involves a tradeoff between safety on the one hand,
and money and environmental damage (from salt)
on the other, decision theory would be a natural
framework in which to compare the utility of the
two summaries. If a false positive has a negative
utility of ?0.1 and a false negative one of ?0.5,
for example, then the first summary wins the day.
(Needless to say, the choice of these constants is
crucial, and tricky to justify.)
More specifically, many NLG systems invite
a game-theoretical analysis ? or an Optimality-
Theoretic analysis, which can come down to the
same thing (Dekker and Van Rooij 2000; Van
Deemter 2004 for an application to NLG). Sup-
pose I want to state that all old people are entitled
to certain benefits (cf. Khan et al 2009):
a. Old men and old women are entitled
to benefits.
b. Old men and women are entitled to
benefits.
Which of these two linguistic Forms should I
choose? This depends on the strategy of the
hearer. If the hearer interprets (b) as concerning
all women (rather only the old ones) then my ut-
terance will have misfired to an extent. The suc-
cess (for speaker and/or hearer!) of the speaker?s
generation strategy, in other words, depends on the
hearer?s interpretation strategy.1
1For a game-theoretical perspective on the generation of
This interaction means that decision theory is
not the best tool for analysing the situation, for
whereever different agents? strategies interact, De-
cision Theory gives way to Game Theory. Game
Theory was conceived in the nineteen fourties
(Von Neumann and Morgenstern 1944) and has
since come to be used extensively by economists,
sociologists, biologists, and others. Far from be-
ing limited to games in a limited sense of the word,
Game Theory is the mathematical study of rational
social interaction and, as such, it is reasonable to
expect it to be able to shed light on language use as
well. Perhaps more than anything, it promises to
have the potential to explain why communication
works the way it does. For if we could show that
people?s linguistic behaviour conforms with what
it would be rational for them to do, then this would
have substantial explanatory value.
Work by David Lewis and other on communica-
tion and coordination games helped to make Game
Theory relevant for situations where the players
are not in conflict with each other (Lewis 1969).
A classic example is where two generals are both
intent on attacking an enemy, but while each gen-
eral individually is weaker than the enemy, they
can beat him if they attack at the same time. Com-
munication (?I am going to attack now!?) can help
the generals to cooperate and win the battle. Es-
sentially the same things happens when you try to
meet a friend: neither of you may care where and
when to meet, as long as the two of you end up in
the same place at the same time; communication,
of course, can help you achieve this goal.
Applications of Game Theory to language now
come in many flavours (see e.g. Klabunde 2009,
this conference). In this paper I want to engage
in a small case study: the expression of quanti-
tative information in English. More specifically,
I will focus on the fact that quantitative informa-
tion is often only communicated vaguely. When
a thermometer, for example, measures your body
temperature as 39.82 Celcius, your doctor might
express this by saying that your temperature is
?39.8 degrees?, but he might also round this off
even further, saying that it is ?approximately 40
degrees?. Even more vaguely, she might tell you
that you have ?a high fever?. Which of these lin-
guistic Forms is preferable, and why?
Questions of this kind have led to a lively dis-
referring expressions, where success depends on alignment
between hearer and speaker strategies, see Kibble 2003.
155
cussion among linguists, philosophers, and the-
oretical economists (Lipman 2000, 2006; De
Jaegher 2003; Van Rooij 2003), focussing on the
question under what circumstances vagueness can
lead to a higher utility than crispness. The ques-
tion is important for understanding human com-
munication, because vagueness plays such a cen-
tral role in it. Vague adjectives, for example,
are prevalent among the words first learned by
a typical infant (Peccei 1994) and many of their
subtleties are understood by children of only 24
months old (Ebeling and Gelman 1994). In my
opinion, the understanding of vagueness is equally
important for the NLG community, and particu-
larly for those of us who work on ?data to speech?
(Theune 2001) or ?data to text? (Reiter 2008) sys-
tems, where the expression of quantitative data
plays such a crucial role. For this reason, I have
chosen it as the topic of an informal case study on
the relevance of game theory for NLG.
3 Vagueness in situations of conflict
First, let us focus on a type of situations where it
is relatively easy to understand what the differen-
tial benefits of vagueness can be. We start by ex-
amining a game-theoretic study of a different phe-
nomenon: ambiguity.
3.1 The utility of ambiguity: Aragone`s and
Neeman
Like others who have discussed these issues, we
take vagueness to arise if an expression allows
borderline cases. The word ?tall?, for example,
is vague because in a typical context there can be
people who are difficult to categorise as either tall
or not tall: they are somewhat in between, one is
tempted to say. Ambiguity is something else. It
arises when an expression can be meant in a lim-
ited number of different ways. The word ?letter?,
for example, is ambiguous because it can refer to
one individual character or to the sort of mean-
ingful arrangement of characters that people once
used to communicate long distance. In 1994, two
game theorists asked whether a Game Theoreti-
cal explanation might be given for strategic use of
ambiguity (i.e., where ambiguity is used on pur-
pose), and they came up with the following answer
(Aragone`s and Neeman 1994).
Suppose two unscrupulous politicians position
themselves for an election. Not burdened with
any convictions, they are free to choose between
three different idiologies (left, right, center), de-
pending on what gives them the highest utility; ad-
ditionally, they can choose between two commit-
ment2 levels, chigh and clow, both representable as
real numbers with chigh > clow. Unfortunately,
Aragone`s and Neeman do not say what a commit-
ment level is, but one might think of a more and a
less extreme version of their chosen ideology.
What combination of an ideology and an com-
mitment level should each politician choose? This
depends on the electorate, of course. Suppose
there are three blocs of voters: V(left), V(right)
and V(center). A leftist voter prefers a leftist
politician, and preferably one with a high commit-
ment level. Confronted with a choice between two
rightwing politicians, our leftist voter will prefer
one with a low commitment. A rightwing voter be-
haves as the mirror-image of the leftist voter, while
the neutral voter is neutral between the two idiolo-
gies but, weary of ideology, she prefers low com-
mitment over high commitment. Commitment, in
other words, is only relevant for a choice between
politicians of the same ideology.
If this is the whole story then politicians will
choose an ideology and commitment level based
on their estimates of the numbers of voters in
each bloc, trying to maximise their expected pay-
off, formulated solely in terms of the likelihood of
winning the election. The task for Game Theory is
to work out what combination of strategies might
give both politicians the highest possible payoff,
for example in the sense that a policy change by
just one of the two politicans can never improve
his expected payoff.
But Aragone`s and Neeman?s model allows
politicians to look beyond the election, towards
their anticipated time in government. Surely, a
low commitment is easier to fulfil than a high
commitment, particularly in view of unforeseen
contingencies, so it is nicer to be elected on a
low-commitment platform that does not tie one?s
hands too much. To model this, Aragone`s and
Neeman formulate utility in a way that multi-
plies the probability of a politician?s winning the
elections with a constant that is negatively cor-
related to his commitment. Let Ui(I1, c1; I2, c2)
be the utility for politician i given that politician
1 chooses ideology I1 with commitment level c1,
2Aragone`s and Neeman call these ambiguity levels, but
since the relation with ambiguity is debatable we opt for a
more neutral term. Low commitment equals high ambiguity
and conversely.
156
while politician 2 chooses I2 with level c2. Fur-
thermore, Pi(I1, c1; I2, c2) represents the proba-
bility of i winning the elections given this same
constellation of choices. Let k ? chigh.
Utility formula: Ui(I1, c1; I2, c2) =
Pi(I1, c1; I2, c2)(k ? ci)
Under these assumptions one can show that a low
commitment level (i.e., clow) can sometimes give
a politician a slightly lower probability of winning
the elections (because his core voters will be less
inclined to vote for him), yet a higher overall util-
ity (because his time in office will be easier). For
details see Aragone`s and Neeman (1994).
3.2 The utility of vagueness
It is often thought that Aragone`s and Neeman?s
model demonstrates how ambiguity can be used
strategically, but that it fails to shed light on vague-
ness (e.g. De Jaegher 2003). I do not see, however,
how this view stands up to linguistic scrutiny. To
see why, let me construct what strikes me as a pos-
sible example.
Suppose the ideology in question ? a leftist, or
perhaps a populist one ? is to take away money
from the 10% of richest people and give it to the
10% poorest. Commitment level, in this case,
could be a way of making explicit what percent-
age of the top 10% to give away. One position
might assert that this has to be, say, 50% of their
income, while another position might put this fig-
ure at 5%. But if we identified high commitment
with the 50% position and low commitment with
the 5% position then none of the two commitment
levels would be ambiguous. To make one of them
ambiguous, we would need something like the fol-
lowing:
The ambiguous politicians? game:
? I: take money from the 10% of rich-
est people and divide it equally over the
10% poorest.
? c50: do I with 50% of the money of
each of the richest people.
? cambiguous: do I with either 5% or
50% of the money of each of the rich-
est people.
But this must be a simplification, for we are deal-
ing with a continuum: there is nothing to exclude
percentages in between 25% and 5%, for exam-
ple. It seems, therefore, perfectly possible to con-
struct a version of Aragone`s and Neeman?s game
? an even more plausible version, I believe ? that
hinges on vagueness. For example:
The vague politicians? game:
? I and c50: (as above).
? cvague: do I with a large portion of the
money of each of the richest people
Clearly, cvague involves vagueness, because ?a
large portion? admits borderline cases. In all im-
portant respects the vague politicians? game is
isomorphic to the ambiguous politicians? game:
fierce advocates of redistribution would favour c50
over cvague, for example, because the latter leaves
them uncertain over the amount of redistribution.
It is also plausible that politicians would prefer to
avoid a commitment as clear as c50, because fu-
ture contingencies might make it difficult for them
to honour this promise. In fact, one could ex-
tend the game with a second election, in which the
electorate could give their verdict on a politician?s
time in office, and to adapt the utility formula with
a third term which represents the probability of
winning that second election. Surely, the break-
ing of promises doesn?t do much for a politician?s
changes of being re-elected, and a precise promise
is easier to break than a vague one.
With help from Aragone`s and Neeman, we have
found a situation in which vagueness has a higher
utility than precision.3 It should be noted, how-
ever, that this model (and that of De Jaegher 2003
likewise) hinges on the fact that the interests of the
speaker and the hearer differ: what?s good for the
politician may be bad for his voters. NLG sys-
tems can be faced with similar asymmetries, for
example when an artificial doctor decides to keep
its predictions vague to avoid being contradicted
by the facts; a doctor who says ?These symptoms
will disappear fairly soon? is less likely to get
complaints than one who says ?These symptoms
will have disappeared by midnight next Sunday?.
Something similar holds for a roadgritting system
(like the one in Turner et al 2008), which might
easily face lawsuits if it gets things too evidently
wrong. Advertisements also come to mind, be-
3Another game with this property was described in De
Jaegher (2003), involving a more complex version of the
game of the two generals (section 2). De Jaegher?s game lets
one general tell the other about the preparedness of the en-
emy. The utility of vagueness hinges on a subtle asymmetry
between the generals, only one of whom will suffer if the en-
emy turns out to be prepared. Intriguing though it is, I find it
difficult to see how De Jaegher?s game is relevant to everyday
communication or NLG.
157
cause the interests of the advertiser may not coin-
cide with those of the customer. ? Examples where
vagueness can save money or face are plentiful,
yet one wonders whether vagueness can also be
advantageous in situations where it is one?s honest
aim to inform an audience as well as one can.
4 Vagueness when there is no conflict
So, let us investigate the advantages of vagueness
in situations that are typical for today?s NLG sys-
tems, where the system tries, unselfishly, to assist
a user to the best of its ability.
4.1 Lipman?s questions
The question why vagueness is used strategically
in situations where the interests of speakers and
hearers are essentially aligned was asked perhaps
most forcefully by the economist Barton Lipman.
First he did this in a brief response to an essay by
the famous game theorist Ariel Rubinstein (Lip-
man 2000), and later in a growing but still unfin-
ished discussion paper (Lipman 2006). Lipman
uses what we shall call an airport scenario, where
player 1 asks player 2 to go to the airport to pick
up an acquaintance of player 1. In its simplest
form, the scenario lets player 1 know the referent?s
height with full precision (assuming that such a
thing is possible), while player 2 carries a perfect
measuring device. There are two other people at
the airport, and it is assumed that heights are dis-
tributed uniformly between a maximum denoted
by 1 and a minimum denoted by 0. The payoff for
both players ? please note the symmetry! ? is 1
if player 2 successfully picks the referent, while it
is 0 if she fails (i.e., the first person she addresses
turns out to be someone else).
Lipman observes that, under these assumptions,
vagueness would be bad: why would player 2 say
?He is tall?, for example, if he can say ?He is
183.721cm?? By stating his acquaintance?s exact
height, player 1 will allow player 2 to identify this
person with almost complete certainty, given that
the chance of two people having the exact same
height is almost nil. Lipman also wonders what
would happen if only one predicate was available
to player 1. He proves that, under these assump-
tions, optimal communication arises if a word is
used in accordance with the following rule:
Say ?the tall person? if height(person) >
1/2, else say ?the short person?.
Lipman observes that this concept of ?tall? does
not involve vagueness, because the rule does not
allow any borderline cases: everyone is either tall
or short. In other words, no rationale for vague-
ness has yet been found.
Note that Lipman is not questioning that vague
utterances can be useful, which they evidently can
be (see e.g. Parikh 1994 for a convincing demon-
stration using a game-theoretic approach). He is
asking whether vague expressions can be more
useful than any non-vague expression.
4.2 Answering Lipman
First, let us consider a possible modification of
Lipman?s scenario. In this modified airport sce-
nario the speaker knows the heights of all three
people at the airport. Suddenly it becomes eas-
ier to understand why vagueness can be useful.
For suppose your acquaintance happens to be the
tallest person of the three. You can then identify
him as ?the tall guy?. Arguably, this is safer than
citing the person?s height in centimeters, because
?the tall guy? (meaning, in this case, the same as
tallest guy) does not require the players to make
any measurements: comparisons between heights
can often be made in an instant, and with more
confidence than absolute measurements. I dealt
with cases of this type in my paper on vague de-
scriptions (van Deemter 2006), where a generator
takes numerical height measurements to produce
noun phrases that involve gradable adjectives: ?the
tall guy?, ?the fastest one of the three heavy tor-
toises?. In cases like this, one can argue that
vagueness is only local, in the same way that am-
biguity can be merely local, for example when the
sentence as a whole allows one to disambiguate
an ambiguous word in it (e.g. when a pronoun
gets resolved or a lexical item disambiguated). In
the modified airport scenario, the noun phrase as
a whole (e.g., ?the tall guy?) allows no borderline
cases, so there is no global vagueness here.
Local vagueness is wide-spread and can make
use of different ?precisification? mechanisms.
When I say of a gymnastic exercise, for example,
that it is ?good for young and old?, for example,
then there is nothing vague about my description
of the people involved: I am using vague words
to say that this exercise is good for everyone, re-
gardless of age. Although local vagueness consti-
tutes some kind of answer to Lipman, most lin-
guists assume that globally vague utterances exist
158
as well (even when the interests of the speaker and
the hearer are aligned). Let us assume they are
right and continue to look for a rationale.
Secondly, it has been suggested that strategic
vagueness can arise from a desire to reduce the
?cost? of the utterances involved (e.g. Van Rooij
2003, Ja?ger 2008). One might amplify this idea
by arguing that vague words are part of a highly
efficient mechanism that makes their meaning de-
pendent on the context in which they are used.
The size constraints on ?a small elephant?, for ex-
ample, are very different from those on ?a small
mouse?; this suggests that vague words may not
only be efficient to use but also efficient to learn
(Van Deemter, in preparation). All this seems true
enough but, as an answer to the question ?Why
vagueness?? it does not stand up to Lipman-style
scrutiny. Let me explain why not.
Consider the earlier-mentioned doctor, who
measures your body temperature as 39.82 Celcius.
By stating that you have ?a high fever? (instead of
?thirty eight point eighty two degrees?) the doctor
is pruning away details that are of questionable rel-
evance in the situation at hand. But this does not
force him to use language that is vague: language
that allows borderline cases, in other words. He
could have achieved a similar economy by round-
ing, saying that your temperature is ?(about) forty
degrees?; in this way, he would have reduced in-
formation without being vague. The benefits of
information reduction can be modelled in a game
where communication informs action: if ?38.82
Celcius? and ?39 Celcius? are associated with the
same medical action (e.g., to take an aspirin) then
the fact that ?39 Celcius? is ?cheaper? to produce
and to process will tend to give this expression a
better utility than ?38.82 Celcius?. But informa-
tion reduction does not imply vagueness, so we are
back at square one: Why vagueness?
It might be thought that things change when un-
certainty is taken into account: a measurement of
39.82 Celcius is not as exact as it sounds, for ex-
ample, because errors are likely. The result of the
measurement is perhaps best conveyed by a nor-
mal distribution of which 39.82 is the mean value,
and such a complex curve is difficult to put in just
a few words. Still, the argument of the previous
paragraph continues to apply, because the curve
can be summarised without vagueness: the figure
of 38.82 Celcius is one such summary.
A third suggestion (e.g. Veltman 2002) is that
vague expressions such as ?high fever? do more
than just reduce the information obtained from a
measurement. The expression ?high fever? also
adds bias or evaluation to the raw data, namely
the information that the temperature in question is
worrisome. You do not need domain knowledge
to understand the medical implications: hearing
that something medical is ?high? tells you that you
should be worried.
Once again, this sounds like an excellent rea-
son for using vagueness, particularly in situations
where an understanding of the metric in question
cannot be taken for granted (such as oxygen sat-
uration, the metrics for which mean little to most
of us). Still, it is not evident that this justifies the
use of vagueness. If bias needs to be expressed,
then why not simply add it? Why not state the
exact temperature (or an approximation of it) and
say that this reading should be considered worri-
some? One might respond that this would have
been time and space consuming, but if that is a
problem then why have no conventions arisen for
expressing quantities in two ways, a worrisome
and a non-worrisome one? Why should bias nec-
essarily be coupled with vagueness only, given
that it is as easy to think of a crisp expression that
contains bias as it is to think of a vague expression
that does not (e.g., in the case of an adjective like
?tall?)? A good example of crispness + bias is the
word ?obese?, in the sense of having a Body Mass
Index of over 30. For the reason why obesity was
defined in this way is precisely that this degree of
overweight is considered medically worrisome.
5 Discussion: vagueness and game theory
5.1 Vagueness is harder to justify
than you think
Let us first summarise our findings about vague-
ness, some of which will be discussed more fully
in Van Deemter (in preparation).
It is often easy to see why vague words come in
handy; the modified airport scenario demonstrates
how vague words can create an information loss
that is only local: by making a vague word part
of a referring expression, a crisp borderline is en-
forced on a vague concept, resulting in a beauti-
fully efficient description (e.g., ?the tall guy?) that
is arguably clearer than any expression that relies
on absolute values. This means that the utterance
as a whole is not vague at all: it is only locally
vague. Whether we speak of vagueness in such
159
situations seems a matter of taste.
It is also clear why vagueness can have differ-
ential benefits in communication between agents
whose interests differ more than just minimally
(cf., Horton and Keysar 1996 for experimental ev-
idence of speaker?s laziness in situations where
their interests are approximately aligned), such as
a politician and his potential voters, or like a pro-
fessional who does not wish to be sued by his
clients. In situations of this kind it can be benefi-
cial for a speaker or an NLG system to obfuscate,
exploiting the borderline cases inherent in vague
expressions.
Beyond this, it is suprisingly difficult to see how
vagueness can be advantageous for NLG. This is
partly because there appear to exist some linguistic
issues that NLG researchers are able to disregard.
It seems plausible, for example, that vagueness is
unavoidable in situations where no commonly un-
derstood metrics are available, for instance when
we judge how beautiful a sunset is, how wise a per-
son, or how dismal the weather. As long as NLG
systems use tangible input data (about millimetres
rainfall, for example, or body temperature), these
reasons for vagueness seem irrelevant. Similarly,
there is much that is unknown about the working
of perception even in simple domains. What is it
that allows me to talk about the height of someone
I see, for example? The input to my personal ?gen-
erator? (as opposed to the input to a typical NLG
system) might not be equivalent to a tidy number.
(Could it be some inherently vague percept, per-
haps?) These difficult questions (see also Lipman
2006) must remain unanswered here.
5.2 The utility of utility
Confronted with the claim that Game Theory
should be the theoretical backbone to NLG, some
people might respond that no new backbone is
needed, because the theory of formal languages,
conjoined with a properly expressive variant of
Symbolic Logic, provides sufficient backbone al-
ready. I believe this objection to be misguided.
Admittedly, the disciplines in question are well
suited for saying which Forms can express which
Meanings. But it is far less clear that these disci-
plines have anything to say about the key problem
of NLG: how to choose the most effective way to
express a given Meaning in (for example) English.
This is a vacancy that Game Theory would be well
placed to fulfill, in my opinion. The present paper
has illustrated this claim by discussing the ques-
tion when and why a generator should choose a
vague expression. The fact that this discussion has
yet to produce a clear conclusion is, in my opin-
ion, not due to any shortcomings of Game Theory,
but to the intrinsic difficulty of the problem.
There is, of course, a caveat. The use of game
theory in empirical sciences has, with proper mod-
estly, been described as ?modelling by example?
(e.g. Rasmussen 2001): a mathematical game
shows us an example of how things might be, not
necessarily how things are. The situation is famil-
iar to linguists, of course, and from applications
of mathematics more generally. By inspecting a
formal grammar, for example, one does not learn
much about language, unless there exists evidence
that the lingistic Forms and Meanings pair up as
specified by the grammar. In similar fashion, one
learns little from a Game Theoretical model un-
less one has reason to accept the assumptions that
were built into it: the choices that it assumes avail-
able to the players, and the payoffs related to each
outcome of the game, for example. This means
that Game Theory can come to the aid of linguis-
tic pragmatics and NLG, but that only empirical
research can tell us what games people actually
play when they communicate.
Acknowledgments
Thanks are due to my colleagues Ehud Reiter, Al-
bert Gatt and Hans van Ditmarsch, for useful dis-
cussions on the theme of this paper. Funding from
the EPSRC under the Platform Grant ?Affecting
People with Natural Language? (EP/E011764/1) is
gratefully acknowledged.
References
Aragone`s and Neeman 2000. Enriqueta Aragone`s
and Zvika Neeman. Strategic ambiguity in elec-
toral competition. Journal of Theoretical Politics
12, pp.183-204.
Bateman 1997. John Bateman. Sentence gen-
eration and systemic grammar: an introduction.
Iwanami Lecture Series: Language Sciences.
Iwanami Shoten Publishers, Tokyo.
de Jaegher 2003. Kris de Jaegher. A game-
theoretical rationale for vagueness. Linguistics
and Philosophy 26: pp.637-659.
Dekker and Van Rooij 2000. Bi-directional Op-
timality Theory: an application of Game Theory.
160
Journal of Semantics 17: 217-242.
Ebeling and Gelman 1994. K.S.Ebeling and
S.A.Gelman. Children?s use of context in inter-
preting ?big? and ?little?. Child Development 65
(4): 1178-1192.
Horton and Keysar 1996. William S. Horton and
Boaz Keysar. When do speakers take into account
common ground? Cognition 59, pp.91-117.
Ja?ger 2008. Gerhard Ja?ger. Applications of Game
Theory in Linguistics. Language and Linguistics
Compass 2/3.
Khan et al2009. Imtiaz Khan, Kees van Deemter,
Graeme Ritchie, Albert Gatt, and Alexandra
A.Cleland. A hearer oriented evaluation of refer-
ring expression generation. Proc. of 12th Euro-
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG-2009).
Kibble 2003. Rodger Kibble. Both sides now:
predictive reference resolution in generation and
resolution. Proc. of Fifth International Work-
shop on Computational Semantics (IWCS-2003).
Tilburg, The Netherlands.
Klabunde 2009. Ralph Klabunde. Towards a
game-theoretic approach to content determination.
Proc. of 12th European Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Generation (ENLG-2009).
Lewis 1969. David Lewis. Convention ? A Philo-
sophical Study. Harvard University Press.
Lipman 2000. Barton L.Lipman. Economics
and Language. ?Comments? section, Rubinstein
(2000).
Lipman 2006. Barton L.Lipman. Why is language
vague? Working paper, December 2006, Depart-
ment of Economics, Boston University.
McDonald 1987. Natural Language Generation.
In S.Shapiro Encyclopaedia of Artificial Intelli-
gence, Volume 1. John Wiley, New York.
Mellish and Van der Sluis 2009. Chris Mellish
and Ielka van der Sluis. Towards empirical evalua-
tion of affective tactical NLG. Proc. of 12th Euro-
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG-2009)
Von Neumann and Morgenstern 1944. John von
Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern. Theory of
games and economic behavior. Wiley & Sons,
Princeton, New Jersey.
Parikh 1994. Rohit Parikh. Vagueness and utility:
the semantics of common nouns. Linguistics and
Philosophy 17: 521-535.
Peccei 1994. Jean Stilwell Peccei. Child Lan-
guage. Routledge.
Rasmussen 2001. Eric Rasmussen. Games & In-
formation: an introduction to game theory. Third
Edition. Blackwell Publishing.
Reiter and Dale 2000. Ehud Reiter and Robert
Dale. Building natural language generation sys-
tems. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Reiter 2007. Ehud Reiter. An architecture for
data-to-text systems. In Procs. of 11th Euro-
pean Workshop on Natural Language Generation
(ENLG-2007): pp.97-104.
Rubinstein 1998. Ariel Rubinstein. Modeling
Bounded Rationality. MIT Press, Cambridge
Mass.
Rubinstein 2000. Ariel Rubinstein. Economics
and Language: Five Essays. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. Cambridge.
Theune et al 2001. M.Theune, E.Klabbers, J.R.
de Pijper and E.Krahmer. From data to speech a
general approach. Natural Languag Engineering
7 (1): 47-86.
Turner et al 2008. R.Turner, S.Sripada, E.Reiter
and I.P.Davy. Using spatial reference frames to
generate grounded textual summaries of georefer-
enced data. In Proceedings of INLG-2008. Salt
Fork, Ohio, USA.
Van Deemter 2004. Kees van Deemter. Towards
a probabilistic version of bidirectional OT syntax
and semantics. Journal of Semantics 21 (3).
Van Deemter 2006. Kees van Deemter. Gener-
ating referring expressions that involve gradable
properties. Computational Linguistics 32 (2).
Van Deemter (in preparation). Kees van Deemter.
Not Exactly: in Praise of Vagueness. To appear
with Oxford University Press.
Van Rooij 2003. Robert van Rooij. Being polite is
a handicap: towards a game theoretical analysis of
polite linguistic behavior. In Procs. of Theoretical
Aspects of Rationality and Knowledge (TARK-9),
Bloomington, Indiana.
Veltman 2002. Frank Veltman. Het verschil tussen
?vaag? en ?niet precies?. (The difference between
?vague? and ?not precise?.) Inaugural lecture. Vos-
siuspers, University of Amsterdam.
161
