Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar Engineering Across Frameworks, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 28?36,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Autosegmental representations in an HPSG of Hausa
Berthold Crysmann
Universit?t Bonn
Poppelsdorfer Allee 47, D?53115 Bonn
crysmann@ifk.uni-bonn.de
Abstract
In this paper I shall present a treatment of
lexical and grammatical tone and vowel
length in Hausa, as implemented in an
emerging bidirectional HPSG of the lan-
guage based on the Lingo Grammar Ma-
trix (Bender et al, 2002). I shall argue
in particular that a systematic treatment
of suprasegmental phonology is indispen-
sible in an implemented grammar of the
language, both for theoretical and practical
reasons. I shall propose an LKB represen-
tation that is strongly inspired by linguistic
and computational work on Autosegmental
Phonology. Finally, I shall show that the
specific implementation presented here is
flexible enough to accommodate different
levels of suprasegmental information in the
input.
1 Introduction
Hausa is a tone language spoken by over 30 million
speakers in Northern Nigeria and bordering areas
of Niger. Genetically, the language belongs to the
Chadic sub-branch of the Afroasiatic family.
In this language, both tone and length are lexi-
cally and grammatically distinctive: Hausa distin-
guishes two vowel lengths, as well as two underly-
ing tones, H(igh) and L(ow). At the surface level,
we can observe two level tones, as well as one con-
tour tone (fall). Wolff (1993) cites the following
minimal pairs for tone:
(1) a. f?r?? ? ?look (n)?
b. far`?? ? ?dry season?
c. far?? ? ?white/whiteness?
Rising tone only results from the interaction of
grammatical and intonational tone (Sharon Inkelas
and Cobler, 1987; Inkelas and Leben, 1990).
In addition to its function of differentiating lex-
ical items, tone is also grammatically distinctive:
the paradigms of subjunctive and preterite (=rel-
ative completive) TAM markers partially over-
lap in terms of their segments (k? ?2sg.subj, y?
?3sg.m.subj?, t? ?3sg.f.subj? vs. ka ?2sg.rel.compl,
ya ?3sg.m.rel.compl?, ta ?3sg.f.rel.compl?). Fur-
ther, the bound possessive linker and the previous
reference (=specificity) marker are systematically
distinguished by tonal means alone.
(2) a. r`??ga-r
gown.f-of.f
Aud?
Aud?.m
?Audu?s gown?
b. r`??g?-r
gown.f-spec.f
?the (aforementioned) gown
(3) a. birni-n
town.m-of.m
Kan`?o
Kano
?Kano town?
b. birn?-n
town.m-spec.m
?the (aforementioned) town?
Similarly, vowel length is also distinctive on both
lexical and grammatical levels: Newman (2000)
cites the following pair (inter alia): fa?s `?a ?postpone?
vs. fas `?a ?smash?. Examples of grammatical length
distinctions can again be found in the areas of TAM
marking: in relative clauses and focus construc-
tions, completive aspect is expressed by means of
the relative completive set (or preterite), using short
vowel na ?1.sg.rel.compl, ka ?2.sg.rel.compl?, ya
?3.sg.m.rel.compl? and ta ?3.sg.f.rel.compl?, inter
alia, which contrasts with the long vowel abso-
lute completive na?, ka?, ya?, and ta? used elsewhere
(see Jaggar (2006) for discussion of the use of the
preterite in narratives). Furthermore, Hausa uses
verb-final vowel length to signal presence of a fol-
lowing in-situ direct object (Hayes, 1990; Crys-
mann, 2005).
Despite the fact that the sophisticated models of
suprasegmental phonology developed more than
a quarter of a century ago within Autosegmental
28
Theory (Goldsmith, 1976; Leben, 1973) have al-
ready been rigorously formalised in the nineties
in the context of feature-structure-based computa-
tional phonology (Bird, 1995; Scobbie, 1991; Bird
and Klein, 1994; Walther, 1999), the representa-
tion of tone and length has received little or no
attention in the area of grammar engineering. This
may be partly due to the fact that the languages for
which substantial grammars have been developed
are not tone languages. Existing grammar imple-
mentations of tone languages like Chinese (Fang
and King, 2007) do not appear to make use of au-
tosegmental models either, possibly because the
assignment of tone in an isolating language is not
as intimately connected to inflectional and deriva-
tional processes, as it is in a morphologically rich
language like Hausa.
In this paper, I shall argue that the issue of
suprasegmental phonology is an integral part of any
implemented grammar of Hausa, not only from the
point of view of linguistic adequacy, but also un-
der grammar-engineering and application-oriented
perspectives. I shall propose a treatment of tone
and length in an LKB-grammar of Hausa that sys-
tematically builds on separate representations of
segments, tone and length and discuss how various
salient aspects of Hausa syntax and morphology
can be addressed using a representation inspired
by Autosegmental Theory. Furthermore, I shall ad-
dress how different levels of suprasegmental infor-
mation encoded in the different writing systems em-
ployed in the language can be robustly integrated
into a single grammar, and explore its application
potential.
2 Suprasegmental information in Hausa
writing systems
2.1 Latin script
2.1.1 Standard orthography (Boko)
Modern Hausa is standardly written using (a mod-
ified version of) the Latin script, called bo?k?o. In
addition to the standard 26 letters of the Latin alpha-
bet, Boko uses hooked letters, the apostrophe, as
well as digraphs to represent glottalised consonants
(?, ?, ?, ts [s?], ?y [Pj], ? [P]). Yet, neither tone nor
length are represented in the standard orthography.
2.1.2 Tone & length in scientific and
educational literature
In contrast to the standard orthography, tone and
length are typically fully represented in the aca-
demic literature on Hausa. Besides reference gram-
mars and other scientific publications on the lan-
guage, this includes lexica, some of which exist in
machine-readable form (e.g., the on-line version
of Bargery (1934) at http://bargeryhausa.
gotdns.com/).
Length in scientific publications is typically
marked using one of the following strategies: di-
acritical marking of long (macron or post-fixed
colon; Newman (2000; Jaggar (2001)) or short vow-
els (ogonek; Newman and Ma Newman (1977)),
and segmental gemination of vowels (long) (Wolff,
1993). Regardless of whether the strategy is di-
acritic or segmental, there is a strong tendency
to have short vowels unmarked, representing the
length information on long vowels only.
Tone, by contrast, is exclusively marked by
means of diacritics: again, two systems are typ-
ically used, one marking low tone with a grave
accent leaving high tone unmarked, the other mark-
ing high tone with an acute accent, leaving low
tone unmarked. Besides that, fully toned represen-
tations can also occasionally be found (using acute
and grave accents). Falling tone, which phonologi-
cally corresponds to a H-L contour associated with
a single heavy syllable, is standardly marked with a
circumflex accent. Rising tone, by contrast, which
only ever plays a role in intonational phonology,
as mentioned in section 1, is typically not repre-
sented.1
Apart from the scientific literature, full represen-
tation of suprasegmental information is also pro-
vided in most of the Hausa language teaching liter-
ature, e.g. Cowan and Schuh (1976; Jungraithmayr
et al (2004). Conventions tend to follow those
found in the scientific literature, given that Hausa
language teaching often forms an integral part of
African linguistics curricula.
The marking strategy assumed in this paper fol-
lows the one found in Newman (2000) and Jaggar
(2001), using diacritics for low and falling tones,
taking high tone as the default. Long vowels are
marked by a macron.
2.2 Arabic script (Ajami)
Besides the now standard Latin orthography, Hausa
has been written traditionally using a slightly mod-
ified version of the Arabic script called ?j?mi. To-
day, Ajami is still used occasionally, mainly in the
context of religious texts.
Just like Boko, Ajami does not represent tone.
Owing to the Semitic origin of the script, however,
length distinctions are indeed captured: while short
vowels are solely marked by diacritics, if at all,
long vowels are represented using a combination
of letters and diacritics: long front vowels (/i:/ and
/e:/) using the letter ya (?


), otherwise used for the
palatal glide /j/, long back vowels using the letter
wau (?), also used for the labio-velar glide /w/, and
1Lexical L-H sequences associated with a single syllable
undergo tonological simplification rules (Leben, 1971; New-
man, 1995).
29
long /a:/ being represented by alif ( @ ).2 Vowel
quality (/i:/ vs. /e:/ and /o:/ vs. /u:/) is differentiated
by means of diacritics.
Thus, depending on the writing system, differ-
ent levels of suprasegmental information need to
be processed, ranging from full representation in
scientific and educational texts, over partial rep-
resentation (Ajami), to complete absence of any
tone or length marking (Boko). This means that
the grammar should be able to extract what infor-
mation is available, and robustly deal with both
specified and underspecified input. This is even
more important, if we want to include applications,
where input in parsing is an underspecified rep-
resentation, but output in generation requires full
specification of suprasegmentals, e.g., in TTS or
CALL scenarios.
3 Morphology and suprasegmental
phonology
Hausa morphological processes, like derivation and
inflection, display close interaction between seg-
mental and suprasegmental marking. Affixation in
Hausa is predominantly suffixal, although prefixes
and circumfixes are also attested. On the segmental
level, affixes can be divided into fully specified suf-
fixes, and reduplicative suffixes. Although partial
and full reduplication of entire CV-sequences can
also be observed, probably the most common redu-
plicative pattern involves reduplication and gem-
ination of root consonants, with vowel melodies
prespecified.
Tonally, affixes fall into one of three categories:
affixes lexically unspecified for tone (only prefixes),
tone-integrating affixes (suffixes only) and non-
integrating affixes3. While non-integrating affixes
only specify their own lexical tone, possibly affect-
ing the segmental and suprasegmental realisation
of a preceding syllable, tone-integrating suffixes
holistically assign a tonal melody to the entire word
they attach to.
In contrast to tone, which is often assigned to the
entire morphological word, alternations in length
do not tend to affect the entire base, but rather only
syllables at morpheme boundaries.
3.1 Tone-integrating suffixes
Hausa plurals represent the prototypical case of
tone-integrating affixation. The language has an
2Ajami letter names are the Hausa equivalent of original
Arabic names. For a more complete description of Ajami, see
Newman (2000, pp. 729?740).
3Among the non-integrating affixes, there is a subclass
bearing polar tone, i.e., the surface tone is opposite to that of
the neighbouring syllable.
extremely rich set of morphological patterns for
plural formation: Newman (2000) identifies 15
classes, many of which have between 2 and 6 sub-
classes. Quite a few Hausa nouns form the plural
according to more than one pattern. Among these
15 plural classes, three are particularly productive,
most notably classes 1-3. All these three classes are
tone integrating, as are almost all plural formation
patterns. Thus, regardless of the tonal specification
in the singular, plural formation assigns a regular
tone melody to the entire word:
(4) -o?X?? (H) (Class I)
a. gul`?a (HL) ? gulo?l?? ?drum stick?
b. ta?g`?a (HL) ? ta?go?g?? ?window?
c. gy?l? (LL) ? gyalo?l?? ?shawl?
d. t?mbay`?a (LHL) ? tambayo?y?? ?ques-
tion?
e. kamf?n?? (HLH) ? kamfano?n?? ?com-
pany?
f. kw?m?t?? (LLHL) ? kwamito?c?? ?com-
mittee?
(5) -ai (LH) (Class II)
a. ?lhaj`?? (LHL) ? ?lh`?azai ?Hadji?
b. ?a?l?b?? (HLH) ? ? `?al?bai ?pupil?
c. sankac`?e (HHL) ? s?nk?tai ?reaped
corn laid down in a row?
d. ?lm?bazz?r?? (LLHLH) ?
?lm?b?zz?rai ?spendthrift?
Class I plural formation involves affixation of
a partially reduplicative suffix -o?X?? replacing the
base-final vowel, if there is one. Tone in class I
plurals is all H, regardless of whether the base is
HL, LH, LL, HLH, or LHL. Length specifications,
by contrast are carried over from the base, except
of course for the base-final vowel. The quality
of the affix-internal consonant is determined by
reduplication of the base-final consonant, possibly
undergoing regular palatalisation.
Class II plurals are formed by means of the fully
specified suffix -ai, with an associated integrating
LH. Tone assignment in Hausa is right to left: thus,
L automatically spreads to the left. Again, the tonal
shape of the base gets entirely overridden by the
LH plural pattern. Non-final length specifications,
however, are identical between the singular and the
plural.
3.2 Toneless prefixes
As we have seen above, tonal association in Hausa
proceeds from right to left. As a result, suffixes
carry a lexical specification for tone. Amongst
30
Hausa prefixes, however, one must distinguish be-
tween those prefixes carrying a (non-integrating)
lexical tone specification themselves, and those pre-
fixes which are inherently unspecified for tone but
have their surface tone determined by means of
automatic spreading. An example of a prefix of the
latter type is provided by the reduplicative prefixes
C1VC1- and C1VC2 found with pluractional verbs.
These prefixes consists of an initial consonant that
copies the first consonant of the base, followed by
a short vowel copying the first vowel of the base
(possibly undergoing centralisation). The prefix-
final consonant either forms a geminate with the
following base-initial consonant, or else copies the
second consonant of the base.
(6) C1VC1-
a. darn?ce? (HLH) ? daddarn?ce? (HHLH)
?press down/oppress (gr 1)?
b. kar?nta? (HLH) ? kakkar?nta? (HHLH)
?read (gr 1)?
c. d`?agur`?a (LHL) ? d?dd`?agur`?a (LLHL)
?gnaw at (gr 2)?
d. gy`?aru (LH) ? gy?ggy`?aru (LLH) ?be
well repaired (gr 7)?
With trisyllabic bases, it is evident that the tone
assumed by the prefix is just a copy of the initial
tone of the base.
The tonal pattern assigned to Hausa verbs are
determined by paradigm membership, the so-called
grade (Parsons, 1960), together with the number
of syllables. Tone melodies range from monotonal,
over bitonal, to maximally tritonal patterns. Thus,
tone-assignment to quadrisyllabic verbs, as derived
by pluractional prefixes, is an effect of automatic
spreading.
Pluractional affixation to bisyllabic verbs con-
stitutes a slightly more complicated case: Since
some paradigms assign different tone melodies to
bisyllabic and trisyllabic verbs, prefixation to bi-
syllabic bases triggers a change in tonal pattern.
Note, however, that the tonal pattern assigned to
the derived trisyllabic pluractional verb is just the
one expected for trisyllabic underived verbs of the
same paradigm (cf. underived grade 1 kar?nta? and
grade 2 d `?agur `?a above to the pluractional grade 1
and grade 2 verbs below).
(7) a. ta?k`?a (HL) ? tatt`?aka? (HLH) ?step on
(gr 1)?
b. j`?efa? (LH) ? j?jje?f`?a (LHL) ?throw at
(gr 2)?4
4Owing to the inherent shortness of the reduplicated vowel,
long /e:/ and /o:/ undergo regular reduction to [a] in the
reduplicant.
Thus, instead of the affix carrying lexical tone,
tone is rather assigned holistically to the entire
derived word (Newman, 2000).
3.3 Non-integrating affixes
The third class of affixes we shall discuss are lex-
ically specified for tone again (if vocalic). Yet, in
contrast to tone-integrating suffixes, they do not
override the entire tonal specification of the base.
Examples of tonally non-integrating suffixes are
manifold. They include nominal and verbal suf-
fixes like the bound accusative (polar) and genitive
pronouns, the genitive linker (-n/-r), the inherently
low-tone specificity marker (-n`/-r`), and the regular
gerundive suffix -`wa?, among many others. What is
common to all these suffixes is that they only affect
the segmental and suprasegmental specification of
the immediately preceding base-final syllable.
Regular gerunds of verbs in grades 1, 4, 5, 6 and
7 are formed by affixation of a floating tone-initial
suffix -`wa?. When attached to a verb ending in a
long high syllable, the base final high tone and the
floating low tone combine into a falling contour
tone. If the base ends in a high short syllable, as in
grade 7, or if the base-final vowel is already low,
no tonal change to the base can be observed.
(8) a. kar?nta? ? kar?nt??awa? ?read (gr1)?
b. sayar ? say?rwa? ?sell (gr5)?
c. ka?wo? ? ka?w??owa? ?come (gr6)?
d. ka?m`?a ? ka?m`?awa? ?catch (gr1)?
e. gy`?aru ? gy`?aruwa? ?be repaired (gr7)?
Note that apart from tonal change of high long to
falling, the base undergoes no segmental or length
change.
Consonantal suffixes, like the genitive linker and
the specificity marker, by contrast, necessarily inte-
grate into the coda of the preceding syllable. Since
Hausa does not allow long vowels in closed syl-
lables, base-final long vowels and diphthongs are
shortened. The specificity marker is identical to the
genitive linker, as far as truncation of long vowels
and diphthongs is concerned. It differs from the
genitive linker, in that it is inherently specified as
low, giving rise to a falling tone with high-final
bases. With low-final bases, no tonal change can
be observed.
(9) a. ?wai ? ?wa-n-t? ?(her) egg?
b. r`??ga? ? r`??ga-r-t? ?(her) gown?
c. mo?t`?a ? mo?t?-r-t? ?(her) car?
(10) a. ?wai ? ?w?-n ?the (aforementioned)
egg?
31
b. r`??ga? ? r`??g?-r ?the (aforementioned)
gown?
c. mo?t`?a ? mo?t?-r ?(her) car?
Note that in contrast to tone-integrating suffixes,
segmental and suprasegmental changes are strictly
local, affecting material in adjacent syllables only.
Besides non-integrating suffixes there are some
very rare prefixes that can be regarded as inherently
specified for tone. One such prefix is low tone
b?- that features in singular ethnonyms, like, e.g.
b?haush `?e ?Hausa person?. Typically, the prefix b?-
is accompanied by a final tone-integrating HL suf-
fix - `?e (masc) or HLH -a?/-?ya? (fem), but not always.
With regular ethnonyms, the initial tone of the suf-
fix (H) spreads to the left, up to but excluding the
low tone prefix. The plural of such ethnonyms is
formed without a prefix. Instead, a tone-integrating
H or LH suffix -a?wa? is used. Vowel length of the
base is retained throughout:
(11) F?rans? ?France? ? B?faransh`?e (m), B?-
faransh?ya? (f) , Faransa?wa? (pl) ?French?
(12) Ja?m?s ?Germany? ? B?ja?mush`?e (m),
B?ja?mush?ya? (f) , Ja?musa?wa? (pl) ?French?
Besides the regular pattern, there are a few eth-
nonyms that use a non-integrating -?? e.g. B?g `?obir??
from G `?obir, thus preserving the tonal pattern of the
place name base. According to Newman (2000),
however, many Hausa speakers prefer to use the
regular tone-integrating suffix - `?e instead. Thus, en-
tirely non-integrating formation of ethnonyms has
ceased to be a part of productive Hausa morphol-
ogy.
Moreover, even the productivity of tonally spec-
ified b?- seems to be diminished: while the plu-
ral is still productive, new ethnonyms tend to be
formed using alternate periphrastic constructions
?an/m?tum?n ?son/man of? (Newman, 2000).
(13) a. P?l?s???n? ?Palestine? ? ?an/m?tum?n
P?l?s???n? (m) ? Palas???na?wa? (pl)
?Palestinian?
b. Bosniy? ?Bosnia? ? ?an/m?tum?n
Bosniy? (m) ? Bosniya?wa? (pl)
?Bosnian?
To summarise, I shall take integrating and non-
integrating suffixation as the standard case in
Hausa, together with toneless prefixation. As we
shall see in the description of our implementation
in the following section, the treatment of isolated
cases of tonally specified prefixes will be treated as
a non-productive sub-regularity.
4 Representing autosegmental phonology
in the LKB
4.1 Orthographemics in the LKB
The LKB (Copestake, 2002) has built-in support
for orthographemic alternations, providing support
for inflectional and derivational morphology. Tech-
nically, the orthographemic component of the LKB
adopts a string-unification approach. Below is an
example of the spelling part of regular -o?X?? plural
formation, together with the definitions of letter
sets and wild-cards used. Patterns on the right pre-
empt patterns further to the left.
(14) %(wild-card (?v aeiou))
%(letter-set (!c bcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz???)?)
noun_pl1_vow_ir :=
%suffix (!c?v !co!ci) (t?v toci)
(s?v soshi) (w?v woyi) (ts?v tsotsi)
noun-plural-infl-rule &
...
In the above rule, the letter set !c is string uni-
fied with the corresponding consonantal letter in the
input. Note that in contrast to wild cards (e.g. ?v),
multiple occurrences of letter set identifiers within
the same pattern are bound to the same consonant,
providing a convenient solution to gemination and
partial reduplication.
Orthographemic rules are unary (lexical) rules
consisting of a feature structure description and an
associated spelling change. The orthographemic
part is applied to surface tokens in order to derive
potential stem forms. The parser?s chart is then
initialised with lexical entries that have a corre-
sponding stem form. The orthographemic rules
that have been applied in order to derive the stem
are recorded on an agenda such that the feature
structure part can be applied to the lexical entries
thus retrieved.
Recall from section 2 that Hausa standard or-
thography does not represent tone or length. Thus,
suprasegmentally unmarked strings define the com-
mon denominator for retrieving entries from the
lexicon. But even if the input is marked diacrit-
ically for suprasegmentals, tone-integrating mor-
phology can lead to drastic tonal changes, which
are superficially encoded as segmental alternations
(since ? 6= ?). Moreover, we hope to have shown
above that tone and segmental phonology should
best be treated separately. Consequently, ortho-
graphic representations unmarked for tone consti-
tute the common denominator for all orthographic
input representations.
In a first preprocessing step, tone and length
specifications on input tokens are extracted by
means of a regular expression preprocessing en-
gine built into the LKB (Waldron et al, 2006).
32
Instead of simply removing this potentially valu-
able information, the preprocessor rules convert
the (diacritical) marking of tone and length into an
inverse suffixal representation, separated from the
segmental string by _. Overtly marked high will be
represented as _H, overtly marked low as _L, and
lack of tonal marking is recorded as _*. Similarly,
length information, if present, will be recorded by
means of a colon next to the corresponding tone.
E.g., input ? `?al `??bai ?pupils? will be converted
into ?alibai_*_L_L:, whereas tonally unspec-
ified ?alibai will become ?alibai_*_*_*.
Input partially specified for length (?aalibai),
as, e.g., in Ajami, will receive a representation as
?alibai_*_*_*:.
Once we have separated suprasegmental infor-
mation from the orthography proper and stored
it in the form of suffixal annotations, we can use
LKB?s standard orthographemic machinery to con-
vert the suffixal annotation into feature structure
constraints.5
4.2 Phonological representation
As we have seen above, there are several strategies
of tone and length marking in Hausa. While overtly
marked tone and length is both unambiguous in it-
self and directly enables us to infer what marking
strategy is used, the interpretation of vowels un-
marked for tone or length depends entirely on the
context: if a low-marking strategy is employed, un-
marked segments (=_*) can be interpreted as high.
However, if no marking of tone occurs at all in
the input, unmarked segments should be compati-
ble with any tone. The very same goes for length.
In order to enable the grammar to flexibly infer
the meaning of these underspecified annotations,
we introduce the following type hierarchy of tonal
marking. The only assumption made here is that
the marking strategy being adopted is used consis-
tently across the entire input sentence.6
Lexical and grammatical tones will be one of
high, low, or fall.7 In addition to these three lin-
guistic tones, the type hierarchy features tonal types
that correspond to tonal annotations found in the
input: utone is the type associated with tonally un-
marked syllables, tone_ is the type associated with
5In the near future, we plan to supplant this two-step solu-
tion with a direct conversion of using diacritical information
into feature structure annotations, using the advanced token-
mapping developed by Adolphs et al (2008). At present,
however, this token-mapping has only been integrated into the
Pet run-time system (Callmeier, 2000), but not yet into the
LKB.
6In principle, even this assumption can be relaxed, at the
peril of having reduced cross-sentence disambiguation.
7I do not decompose falling tone into HL sequences,
thereby simplifying the alignment between tone specifications,
length specifications and segments.
a high-marking strategy, _tone corresponds to low-
marking, and _tone_ to full tonal marking (overt
high and low).
(15)
tone
_tone _utone
_uhigh
_tone_
_low_
_high_
_fall_
_low
_high
_fall
utone
utone_
ulow_
ufall
tone_
low_
high_
fall_
low
high
fall
Depending on which annotations are present in
the input, the meaning of underspecified annota-
tions can be determined on the basis of type infer-
ence. The orthographemic rules that consume tonal
annotations do exactly two things: first, they record
the tone specification just found as the first mem-
ber of the TONE list of the daughter, successfully
building up a list of surface tones from right to left.
(16) _HH_ir :=
%suffix (* _H:)
diacritic-irule &
[SUPRA [TONE [LIST #tones,
LAST #tl],
LEN [LIST #lens,
LAST #ll]],
DTR [SUPRA [TONE [LIST
high-marked-list &
<high . #tones>,
LAST #last],
LEN [LIST
long-marked-list &
<long . #lens>,
LAST #ll]]]].
_*_ir :=
%suffix (* \*)
diacritic-irule &
[SUPRA [TONE [LIST #tones,
LAST #tl],
LEN [LIST #lens,
LAST #ll]],
DTR [SUPRA [TONE [LIST
<utone . #tones>,
LAST #last],
LEN [LIST
<ulength . #lens>,
LAST #ll]]]].
If the annotation is that of an overtly unmarked
tone, the underspecified type utone is inserted, oth-
erwise high or low, as appropriate. H or L tone
rules simultaneously constrain the entire tone list
according to the marking strategy, using list con-
straints.
(17) high-marked-list :=
tone-marked-list.
high-marked-null :=
high-marked-list &
tone-marked-null.
33
high-marked-cons :=
high-marked-list &
tone-marked-cons &
[FIRST tone_,
REST high-marked-list].
Presence of a single overtly marked high tone
will constrain every element of the tone list to be
a subtype of high_. According to the hierarchy of
tonal types given above, the greatest lower bound
of utone and high_ however, is low_, denoting (un-
marked) low tone under a high-marking strategy.
Thus, whatever tonal marking is found, unmarked
tones are coerced to represent the opposite tones.
The way the type hierarchy is set up, 4 different
marking strategies are possible: completely unspec-
ified tone, high-tone marking, low-tone marking
and fully explicit high- and low-tone marking.
With the constraints we have just seen, we only
get disambiguation of unmarked tone (and length)
within the same word. In order to disambiguate
across the entire sentence, we use difference lists
of these tone and length lists to propagate the mark-
ing regime to preceding and following words. In
essence, we use two difference lists _LTONE and
_RTONE to propagate from left to right and vice
versa.8 Lexically, every word inserts its own tone
list as the singleton member of each difference list.
The general phrasal types from which all gram-
mar rules inherit now concatenate the _LTONE and
_RTONE values of their daughters left to right and
right to left, respectively.
The tone marking rules given above are then fur-
ther constrained according to the types of _LTONE
and _RTONE. Using list-of-list type constraints as
given below, every word marked for tone will con-
strain the marking regime found to its left and to
its right.
(18) hm-llist := tm-llist.
hm-clist := tm-clist &
hm-llist &
[FIRST high-marked-list,
REST hm-llist].
hm-nlist := hm-llist & tm-nlist.
The treatment of length marking, as we have
hinted at already, is entirely analogous to that of
tone, imposing the corresponding constraints on a
list of vowel length specifications.
With these constraints in place, we get the fol-
lowing disambiguation results (note that the verb
zo? is lexically specified as long):
(19) a. Fully unspecified: Ya zo (3 readings:
ya? zo?, ya zo?, y? zo?)
8Since only overtly marked items can disambiguate tonally
unmarked ones, and the position of these disambiguating items
in the string is not known a priori, we need two lists of lists,
one for disambiguation of preceding material (_LTONE), the
other for following material _RTONE.
b. Length specified: Ya zoo (2 read-
ings: ya zo?, y? zo?)
c. Length specified: Yaa zoo (1 read-
ing: ya? zo?)
d. Tone/length specified: Ya kaawoo
sh? (1 reading: ya ka?wo? sh?)
e. Fully specified: Y? z?? (1 reading:
ya zo?)
f. Inconsistent: Yaa zo (0 readings)
As witnessed above, presence of length mark-
ing coerces vowels not marked as long into the
short vowel reading. Similarly, presence of a single
low tone marking enforces a high tone reading of
overtly unmarked tones.
In generation, the grammar only uses fully spec-
ified tone marking, i.e., application of rules such
as _*_ir is blocked. As a result, we always get a
surface representation with full tone and length in-
formation. Post-generation Lisp functions are used
to convert the suffixal notation into the appropriate
diacritic format.
4.3 Morphology
The main motivation for having tone and length
represented on separate lists is two-fold: first, as
witnessed by Ajami, writing systems may overtly
mark one distinction but not the other. Second, and
more importantly, we have seen in section 3, that
morphological processes tend to leave length in-
tact, even if the entire word is holistically marked
with a completely new tonal melody, unrelated to
that of the base. Having two separate lists, we can
replace the tonal structure in the course of mor-
phological derivation but still have the rhythmic
structure shared between base and derived form by
means of reentrancies.
Here we investigate in more detail the role these
representations play in morphological derivation.
In the previous section, we provided a general
representation of segmental and suprasegmental
information, the latter being encoded by means of
two lists and showed how preprocessor rules and
orthographemic rules are used to extract this infor-
mation from the input and associate it with parts of
the feature structure, such that it can be matched
against morphological and lexical constraints on
length and tone.
Since both tone and length are lexically distinc-
tive, every lexical item specifies the contents of its
SUPRA|TONE and SUPRA|LEN lists. The order of
the elements on these two lists is right to left, facil-
itating a treatment of tone spreading by means of
list types. At the same time, this encoding provides
convenient access to the right-most length and tone
34
specification. Since Hausa is predominantly suf-
fixal, non-holistic morphophonological changes to
tone and length specifications exclusively target the
right-most syllable of the base.
As we have observed above, tonal changes can
be far more global than segmental and length alter-
nations. Thus, we will use the LEN list to synchro-
nise the segmental and suprasegmental represen-
tations. Consequently, length specifications will
always be a closed list. Tone, by contrast, may
involve spreading, i.e. the exact number of indi-
vidual H of an all H tone melody is determined by
the number of available tone bearing units, which
corresponds to vowel length specifications in our
grammar. Since the number of tone bearing units is
already fixed by the length of LEN, and because the
tone marking rules operate synchronously on TONE
and LEN, we are free to underspecify the tonal rep-
resentation as to the exact length of the melody.
Therefore, we can provide a straightforward ac-
count of right-to-left association and left-ward tone
spreading in terms of open tone list types.
(20) h*-list := list.
h*-cons := h*-list &
cons & [FIRST high,
REST h*-list].
h*-null := h*-list & null.
h*-l-list := list.
h*-l-cons := h*-l-list &
cons & [FIRST low,
REST h*-list].
As we shall see shortly, these list types provide
a highly general way to constrain holistic tonal
assignment, independently of the segmental make-
up of the base.
In order to illustrate the interplay between seg-
mental and suprasegmental constraints in morpho-
logical derivation, I provide a treatment of the
two major types of morphological rules: tone-
integrating and non-integrating.9
(21) noun_pl1_vow_ir :=
%suffix (!c?v !co!ci) ...
noun-plural-infl-rule \&
[SUPRA
[TONE [LIST h*-list],
LEN [LIST < long, long . #ll>,
LAST #llast] ],
DTR [SYNSEM.LKEYS.--MCLASS n-pl-1,
SUPRA.LEN [LIST < [] . #ll>,
LAST #llast]]].
Tone integrating affixes In our discussion of the
Class I plural inflection rule above, we have only
specified the segmental changes. As detailed in
the version below, holistic assignment of tone is
achieved by means of a list type constraint on the
9Toneless prefixation with automatic spreading constitutes
just a special sub-case of tone-integrating rules.
TONE of the mother, paired with the absence of
any tonal restrictions regarding the morphological
daughter (the base). The length marking of the two
inherently long suffix vowels is captured by means
of the addition of two long specification at the front
of LEN. Affixation of -o?X?? replaces the base final
vowel. Accordingly, the associated initial length
specification of the daughter is skipped and the re-
maining list is passed on to the length specification
of the mother.
Non-integrating affixes In feminine singular
specificity marking, both non-integrating tone and
length changes can be observed. As depicted be-
low, high-final bases undergo a tone change to fall.
The remainder of the TONE list is structure-shared
between mother and daughter, carrying over any
list constraints that might be imposed there.
(22) f-sg-noun_def_high_ir :=
%suffix (!v !vr) (!vi !vr) ...
noun-def-f-sg-irule &
[SUPRA [TONE [LIST <fall . #tl >,
LAST #tlast],
LEN [LIST <short . #ll>,
LAST #llast]],
DTR [SUPRA
[TONE [LIST <high . #tl>,
LAST #tlast],
LEN [LIST <[] . #ll>,
LAST #llast] ]]].
Likewise, final shortening, which is triggered
by the affixation of a syllable-final consonant, is
captured by an analogous constraint on LEN.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a treatment of tone
and length in Hausa in terms of distinct representa-
tions of segments, tone and length. We have shown
that this separation is not only needed to accommo-
date different orthographic representations in the
input, but that it also paves the way for a more gen-
eral account of Hausa morphology, most notably
holistic assignment of tonal melodies combined
with tone spreading. At present, the grammar is
not only capable of extracting different levels of
suprasegmental annotations contained in the input,
but can also resolving tone and length ambigui-
ties on the basis of grammatical constraints: e.g.,
the ambiguity between genitive linker and previ-
ous reference marker, or the ambiguity between
subjunctive, preterite, and absolute completive in
relative and focus constructions. In the future, we
intend to equip the grammar with parse selection
models, to further enhance disambiguation. Given
the bidirectionality of the grammar and its flexible
support for tone and length, we plan to use it in the
context of TTS and CALL applications in the near
future.
35
References
Peter Adolphs, Stephan Oepen, Ulrich Callmeier,
Berthold Crysmann, Dan Flickinger, and Bernd
Kiefer. 2008. Some fine points of hybrid natural
language parsing. In Proceedings of the 6th Confer-
ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2008), May, Marrakesh.
G. P. Bargery. 1934. A Hausa?English Dictionary
and English?Hausa Vocabulary. Oxford University
Press, London.
Emily M. Bender, Dan Flickinger, and Stephan Oepen.
2002. The grammar matrix: An open-source starter-
kit for the rapid development of cross-linguistically
consistent broad-coverage precision grammar. In
John Carroll, Nelleke Oostdijk, and Richard Sut-
cliffe, editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on
Grammar Engineering and Evaluation at the 19th
International Conference on Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 8?14.
Steven Bird and Ewan Klein. 1994. Phonological anal-
ysis in typed feature systems. Computational Lin-
guistics, 20(3):455?491.
Steven Bird. 1995. Computational Phonology. A
Constraint-based Approach. Studies in Natural
Language Processing. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Ulrich Callmeier. 2000. PET ? a platform for ex-
perimentation with efficient HPSG processing tech-
niques. Journal of Natural Language Engineering,
6(1):99?108.
Ann Copestake. 2002. Implementing Typed Feature
Structure Grammars. CSLI Publications, Stanford.
J. Ronayne Cowan and Russell Schuh. 1976. Spoken
Hausa. Spoken Language Services, Ithaca.
Berthold Crysmann. 2005. An inflectional approach to
Hausa final vowel shortening. In Geert Booij and
Jaap van Marle, editors, Yearbook of Morphology
2004, pages 73?112. Kluwer.
Ji Fang and Tracy Holloway King. 2007. An LFG Chi-
nese grammar for machine use. In Tracy Holloway
King and Emily Bender, editors, Proceedings of the
GEAF 2007 Workshop, CSLI Studies in Computa-
tional Linguistics ONLIN. CSLI Publications.
John A. Goldsmith. 1976. Autosegmental Phonology.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
Bruce Hayes. 1990. Precompiled phrasal phonol-
ogy. In Sharon Inkelas and Draga Zec, editors, The
Phonology-Syntax Connection, pages 85?108. Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Sharon Inkelas and William R. Leben. 1990. Where
phonology and phonetics intersect: The case of
Hausa intonation. In Mary E. Beckman and John
Kingston, editors, Between the Grammar and the
Physics of Speech, Papers in Laboratory Phonol-
ogy, pages 17?34. Cambridge University Press, New
York.
Philip Jaggar. 2001. Hausa. John Benjamins, Amster-
dam.
Philip Jaggar. 2006. The Hausa perfective tense-aspect
used in wh-/focus constructions and historical narra-
tives: A unified account. In Larry Hyman and Paul
Newman, editors, West African Linguistics: Descrip-
tive, Comparative, and Historical Studies in Honor
of Russell G. Schuh, Studies in African Linguistics,
pages 100?133.
Herrmann Jungraithmayr, Wilhelm J. G. M?hlig, and
Anne Storch. 2004. Lehrbuch der Hausa-Sprache.
R?diger K?ppe Verlag, K?ln.
William R. Leben. 1971. The morphophonemics of
tone in Hausa. In C.-W. Kim and Herbert Stahlke,
editors, Papers in African Linguistics, pages 201?
218. Linguistic Research, Edmonton.
William Leben. 1973. Suprasegmental Phonology.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
Paul Newman and Roxana Ma Newman. 1977. Mod-
ern Hausa?English Dictionary. University Press,
Ibadan and Zaria, Nigeria.
Paul Newman. 1995. Hausa tonology: Complexities in
an ?easy? tone language. In John Goldsmith, editor,
The Handbook of Phonological Theory, pages 762?
781. Blackwell, Oxford.
Paul Newman. 2000. The Hausa Language. An En-
cyclopedic Reference Grammar. Yale University
Press, New Haven, CT.
F. W. Parsons. 1960. The verbal system in Hausa.
Afrika und ?bersee, 44:1?36.
Jim Scobbie. 1991. Attribute-Value Phonology. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Edinburgh.
William R. Leben Sharon Inkelas and Mark Cobler.
1987. The phonology of intonation in Hausa. In
Proceedings of the North-Eastern Linguistic Society
17, pages 327?341.
Ben Waldron, Ann Copestake, Ulrich Sch?fer, and
Bernd Kiefer. 2006. Preprocessing and tokenisa-
tion standards in DELPH-IN tools. In Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC-2006), pages 2263?
2268, Genova, May.
Markus Walther. 1999. Deklarative Prosodische
Morphologie, volume 399 of Linguistische Arbeiten.
Niemeyer, T?bingen.
Ekkehard Wolff. 1993. Referenzgrammatik des Hausa.
LIT, M?nster.
36
