Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 161?164,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The FLaReNet Thematic Network: A Global Forum for Cooperation 
 
 
Nicoletta Calzolari 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche  
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale 
?A. Zampolli? 
nicoletta.calzolari@ilc.cnr.it 
Claudia Soria 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche  
Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale 
?A. Zampolli? 
claudia.soria@ilc.cnr.it 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
The aim of this short paper is to present the 
FLaReNet Thematic Network for Language 
Resources and Language Technologies to the 
Asian Language Resources Community. 
Creation of a wide and committed community 
and of a shared policy in the field of Language 
Resources is essential in order to foster a 
substantial advancement of the field. This 
paper presents the background, overall 
objectives and methodology of work of the 
project, as well as a set of preliminary results. 
1 Introduction 
The field of Language Resources and 
Technologies has been developing for years to 
reach now a stable and consolidated status, 
attaining the right to be considered a discipline in 
itself, and as testified by the number of 
conferences and publications explicitly dedicated 
to the topic. Even if Language Resources (in the 
widest sense, i.e. spoken, written and multi-
modal resources and basic related tools) have a 
rather short history, they are nowadays 
recognized as one of the pillars of NLP. The 
availability of adequate Language Resources for 
as many languages as possible is a pre-requisite 
for the development of a truly multilingual 
Information Society. 
At the same time, however, the discipline has 
seen considerable fragmentation during those 
years of fast and enthusiast development, and the 
landscape is now composed by a kaleidoscope of 
different, often conflicting initiatives that vary as 
for research directions, theoretical approaches, 
implementation choices, distribution and access 
policies, languages, domain and modalities 
covered, etc. 
The growth of the field in the last years should 
be now complemented by a common reflection 
and by an effort that identifies synergies and 
overcomes fragmentation. The consolidation of 
the area is a pre-condition to enhance 
competitiveness at EU level and worldwide. 
There is the need of working together to define 
common strategies and to identify priorities for 
the field to advance. Multiple concurring signs 
are now indicating that time is ripe for 
establishing an open language infrastructure, 
something that many of us have been pushing 
since some time and that is now increasingly 
recognized in the community at large as a 
necessary step for building on each other 
achievements. 
Such an open infrastructure can only be 
realized if the Language Resources community is 
cohesive enough to be able to focus on a number 
or priority targets and collectively work towards 
them, and, at the same time, whether it is 
powerful enough to permeate the user 
community, the industry, and the policy-makers. 
2 Why FLaReNet  
Creation of the necessary conditions for the 
development of such an infrastructure cannot 
rely on research activities only and even more 
cannot rely on the initiative of individual groups. 
Instead, strategic actions are crucial, such as 
making contacts with and involving all interested 
parties, sensitize the policy makers and 
institutional bodies, involve associations and 
consortia, disseminating widely the results of 
common efforts. Only by mobilizing this wide 
and heterogeneous panorama of actors can such 
an ambitious goal be attained. 
FLaReNet ? Fostering Language Resources 
Network ? is a Thematic Network funded by the 
161
European Commission under the eContentPlus 
framework (ECP-2007-LANG-617001) 1 . The 
FLaReNet Thematic Network was born with the 
specific aim ? as required by the European 
Commission itself ? to enhance European 
competitiveness in the field of Language 
Resources and Technologies, especially by 
consolidating a common vision and fostering a 
European strategy for the future. A major, long-
term objective ? as well as a powerful means for 
community creation ? is creating the preparatory 
environment for making an open language 
infrastructure a reality. 
3 Objectives 
The objectives of FLaReNet are threefold: 
? The creation and mobilization of a 
unified and committed community in the 
field of Language Resources and 
Technologies; 
? The identification of a set of priority 
themes on which to stimulate action, under 
the form of a roadmap for Language 
Resources and Technologies; 
? The elaboration of a blueprint of priority 
areas for actions in the field and a 
coherent set of recommendations for the 
policy-makers (funding agencies 
especially), the business community and 
the public at large. 
3.1 Creation of a community  
FLaReNet has the challenging task of creating a 
network of people around the notion of 
Language Resources and Technologies. To this 
end, FLaReNet is bringing together leading 
experts of research institutions, academies, 
companies, funding agencies, with the specific 
purpose of creating consensus around short, 
medium and long-term strategic objectives. It is 
of foremost importance that the FLaReNet 
Network be composed of the as widest as 
possible representation of experiences, practices, 
research lines, industrial and political strategies; 
this in order to derive an overall picture of the 
field of Language Resources and Technologies 
that is not limited to the European scenario, but 
can also be globally inspired. The Network is 
currently composed of around 200 individuals 
belonging to academia, research institutes, 
industries and government. Such a community 
                                               
1 http://www.flarenet.eu 
also needs to be constantly increased in a 
concentric way that starts from the core 
disciplines but gradually projects itself towards 
?neighboring? ones, such as cognitive science, 
semantic web, etc. 
3.2 Identification of priority themes 
Language technologies and language resources 
are the necessary ingredients for the development 
of applications that will help bridging language 
barriers in a global single information space, in a 
variety of means (the Web as well as 
communication devices) and for a variety of 
channels (spoken and written language alike). It 
is of utmost importance, however, to identify 
priorities as well as short, medium, and long-
term strategic objectives in order to avoid 
scattered or conflicting efforts. 
The major players in the field of Language 
Resources and Technologies need to 
consensually work together and indicate a clear 
direction and priorities for the next years. 
3.3 Elaboration of a blueprint of actions 
However, whatever action cannot be 
implemented on a long term without the help of 
the necessary financial and political framework 
to sustain them. This is even most true for 
actions regarding Language Resources that 
typically imply a sustained effort at national 
level. To this end, the FLaReNet Network must 
propose the priority themes under the form of 
consensual recommendations and a plan of 
action for EC Member States, other European-
wide decision makers, companies, as well as 
non-EU and International organizations. 
 FLaReNet goals are very ambitious and its 
objectives are to be seen in a more global 
framework. Although they are shaped by the 
European landscape of the field of LR&T, its 
mission is therefore inherently cross-boundary: 
in order to attain such goals getting a global view 
is fundamental. 
To this end, it is important that FLaReNet is 
known by the Asian community, and it knows 
the Asian community. Some Asian community 
players are already members of the Network. 
4 How FLaReNet works 
Work in FLaReNet is inherently collaborative.  
Its means are the following: 
? Working groups 
? Organization of workshops and meetings 
162
? External liaisons 
4.1 Working Groups 
Working Groups are intended as ?think-tanks? of 
experts (researchers and users) who jointly 
reflect on selected topics and come up with 
conclusions and recommendations. The Working 
Groups are clustered in thematic areas and carry 
out their activities through workshops, meetings, 
and via a collaborative Wiki platform. The 
FLaReNet Thematic Areas are: 
? The Chart for the area of Language 
Resources and Technologies in its 
different dimensions 
? Methods and models for Language 
Resource building, reuse, interlinking, 
maintenance, sharing, and distribution 
? Harmonization of formats and standards 
? Definition of evaluation and validation 
protocols and procedures 
? Methods for the automatic construction 
and processing of Language Resources. 
4.2 Organization of workshops and 
meetings 
Meetings and events lie at the core of FLaReNet 
action plan and dissemination strategies. They 
can either be specifically oriented to the 
dissemination of results and recommendations 
(content-pushing events) or, rather, to their 
elicitation (content-pulling events). Three types 
of meetings are envisaged: 
? Annual Workshops, such as the 
?European Language Resources and 
Technologies Forum? held in Vienna, 
February 2009 
? Thematic Workshops related to the work 
of Working Groups 
? Liaison meetings (e.g. those with NSF-
SILT, CLARIN, ISO and other projects as 
the need may arise). 
Annual workshops are targeted to gather the  
broad FLaReNet community together. They are 
conceived as big events, and they aim at 
becoming major events in the Language 
Resources and Technology community of the 
kind able to attract a considerable audience. 
Given the success of the formula exploited for 
the FLaReNet ?Vienna Event?2, it is likely that 
Annual workshops will be organized along the 
same lines. However, this type of event cannot 
be repeated on a frequent schedule. At the same 
time, more focused events centered on specific 
topics and with extensive time allocated for 
discussion are essential. 
To this end, Annual Workshops will be 
complemented by many Thematic workshops, 
i.e. more focused, dedicated meetings with a 
more restricted audience. These are directly 
linked to the work being carried out by the 
various Working Groups and are organized in a 
de-centralized manner, by direct initiative of the 
Working Group or Work package Leaders. In an 
attempt to increase FLaReNet sensitivity to hot 
issues, selection of topics and issues to be 
addressed will be also based on a bottom-up 
approach: FLaReNet members and subscribers 
are invited to submit topics of interest either 
freely or as a consequence of ?Call for topics? 
related to particular events. 
Finally, liaison meetings are those elicited by 
FLaReNet to make contact and create synergies 
with national and international projects that are 
partially overlapping with FLaReNet in either 
their objectives or the target audience. Examples 
of these are the FLaReNet-CLARIN and the 
FLaReNet-SILT liaison meetings. 
4.3 External liaisons  
For a Network like FLaReNet, whose aim is the 
development of strategies and recommendations 
for the field of Language Resources and 
Technologies, coordination of actions at a 
worldwide level is of utmost importance. To this 
end, FLaReNet is planning to establish contacts 
and liaisons with national and international 
associations and consortia, such as LDC, ISO, 
ALTA, AFNLP, W3C, TEI, COCOSDA, 
Oriental-COCOSDA. Specific actions of this 
kind have started already, such as the 
International Cooperation Round Table that took 
place in Vienna. The members of the 
International Cooperation Round Table will form 
the initial nucleus of the FLaReNet International 
Advisory Board. 
5 First results and recommendations 
More than a hundred players worldwide gathered 
at the latest FLaReNet Vienna Forum, with the 
                                               
2 http://www.flarenet.eu/?q=Vienna09, see the Event 
Program to get an idea of the event structure. 
163
specific purpose of setting up a brainstorming 
force to make emerge the technological, market 
and policy challenges to be faced in a 
multilingual digital Europe. 
Over a two-day programme, the participants to 
the Forum had the opportunity to start assessing 
the current conditions of the LR&T field and to 
propose emerging directions of intervention. 
Some messages recurred repeatedly across the 
various sessions, as a sign both of a great 
convergence around these ideas and also of their 
relevance in the field. A clear set of priorities 
thus emerged for fostering the field of Language 
Resources and Language Technology. 
Language Resource Creation. The effort 
required to build all needed language resources 
and common tools should impose on all players a 
strong cooperation at the international level and 
the community should define how to enhance 
current coordination of language resource 
collection between all involved agencies and 
ensure efficiency (e.g. through interoperability).  
With data-driven methods dominating the 
current paradigms, language resource building, 
annotation, cataloguing, accessibility, 
availability is what the research community is 
calling for. Major institutional translation 
services, holding large volumes of useful data, 
seem to be ready to share their data and 
FLaReNet could possibly play a facilitating role.  
More efforts should be devoted to solve how to 
automate the production of the large quantity of 
resources demanded, and of enough quality to 
get acceptable results in industrial environments. 
Standards and Interoperability. In the long 
term, interoperability will be the cornerstone of a 
global network of language processing 
capabilities. The time and circumstances are ripe 
to take a broad and forward-looking view in 
order to establish and implement the standards 
and technologies necessary to ensure language 
resource interoperability in the future. This can 
only be achieved through a coordinated, 
community-wide effort that will ensure both 
comprehensive coverage and widespread 
acceptance. 
Coordination of Language Technology 
Evaluation. Looking at the way forward, it 
clearly appears that language technology 
evaluation needs coordination at international 
level: in order to ensure the link between 
technologies and applications, between 
evaluation campaigns and projects, in order to 
conduct evaluation campaigns (for ensuring 
synchrony or for addressing the influence of a 
component on a system on the same data), in 
order to produce language resources from 
language technology evaluation, or to port an 
already evaluated language technology to other 
languages (best practices, tools, metrics, 
protocols?), in order to avoid ?reinventing the 
wheel?, while being very cautious that there are 
language and cultural specificities which have to 
be taken into account (tone languages, oral 
languages with no writing system, etc). 
Availability of Resources, Tools and 
Information. Infrastructure building seems to be 
one of the main messages for FLaReNet. For a 
new worldwide language infrastructure the issue 
of access to Language Resources and 
Technologies is a critical one that should involve 
? and have impact on ? all the community. There 
is the need to create the means to plug together 
different Language Resources & Language 
Technologies, in an internet-based resource and 
technology grid, with the possibility to easily 
create new workflows. Related to this is 
openness and availability of information. The 
related issues of access rights and IPR also call 
for cooperation. 
6 Join FLaReNet 
In order to constantly increase the community of 
people involved in FLaReNet, as well as to 
ensure their commitment to the objectives of the 
Network, a recruiting campaign is always open. 
People wishing to join the Network can do so by 
filling an appropriate web form available on the 
FLaReNet web site. The FLaReNet Network is 
open to participation by public and private, 
research and industrial organizations. 
7 Conclusions 
The field of Language Resources and 
Technologies needs a strong and coherent 
international cooperation policy to become more 
competitive and play a leading role globally. It is 
crucial to discuss future policies and priorities 
for the field of Language Resources and 
Technologies ? as in the mission of FLaReNet ? 
not only on the European scene, but also in a 
worldwide context. Cooperation is an issue that 
needs to be prepared. FLaReNet may become 
one of the privileged places where these ? and 
future ? initiatives get together to discuss and 
promote collaboration actions. 
164
