Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 260?263,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Towards an Analysis of Opinions in News
Editorials: How positive was the year?
Bal Krishna Bal
Madan Puraskar Pustakalaya, Lalitpur, PatanDhoka, Nepal
and IRIT, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France
bal@mpp.org.np
1 Introduction
Editorials represent opinion articles written by the publisher, editors or
columnists of newspapers. From this perspective, editorials are ideal sources
for outlining views on events and analyzing how they are perceived, e.g.
whether they are positive or negative or the kind of feelings or analysis they
involve (uncertainty, worries, etc.). The proposed work aims at identifying
the linguistic criteria and at creating a model for the aforementioned pur-
pose, which makes use of an adequate set of semantic tags that we have
defined to annotate texts from which a detailed analysis can be carried out.
Currently, the work is in its preliminary stage, primarily focussed on
defining the tags required for the semantic-pragmatic analysis. In parallel
with the definition of tags and text annotation, we explore ways to construct
synthesis of opinions on a given event from various editorials. One of the
challenges is to organize the positive and the negative views, and the asso-
ciated arguments and their strength. We noted that opinions in editorials
are not so apparent, which makes synthesis construction a challenging task.
2 Opinion Mining as a problem
Although Opinion Mining has emerged only quite recently as a subdiscipline
under computational linguistics, a considerable amount of work has already
been done in this direction, which include but not limit to (Hearst,1992),
(Hatzivassiloglou and Wiebe,2000), (Wilson et al, 2005), (Esuli and Sebas-
tiani, 2006) and (Read et al, 2007). These works range from a variety of
task domains like mining the product reviews available on the web, sen-
timent classification of documents, opinion mining and summarization to
260
much more. Irrespective of the nature of different specific tasks, Opinion
Mining generally encompasses the following generic problems: (1) Determin-
ing the subjectivity or identifying the subjective and objective expressions
in texts, where subjective expressions are opinions whereas objective ones
denote facts; (2) Determining the orientation or polarity of the subjective
expressions. A first analysis may be just identifying whether an expression
is positive or negative, but in general other dimensions need to be inte-
grated since opinions are rarely so vivid; (3) Determining the strength of
the orientation of the subjective expressions.
Our problem of mining editorials falls under the larger task domain of
sentiment classification of documents and this essentially involves the prob-
lems 1 and 2 above. Problem 3 also may be partially applicable depending
upon the type of analysis we would like to have as an end result.
3 Linguistic framework and the distinction be-
tween facts and opinions
Since editorials are usually a mix of facts and opinions, there is a clear need
to make a distinction between them. Opinions often express an attitude
towards something. This can be a judgment, a view or a conclusion or even
an opinion about opinion(s). Different approaches have been suggested to
distinguish facts from opinions. Generally, facts are characteristic for the
presence of certain verbs like ?declare? and different tense and number forms
of the verb ?be? etc. Moreover, statements interpreted as facts are generally
accompanied by some reliable authority providing the evidence of the claim,
e.g.:
Fact: Both the two dates announced for the constituent assembly (CA) elec-
tions came and went without the vote taking place.
Reliable authority: Election Commission for CA elections 2007.
Fact: We have fewer people getting killed every day.
Reliable authority Nepal Police Department of Crime and Investigation.
(December 2007)
Opinions, on the other hand, are characterized by the evaluative expres-
sions of various sorts such as the following (Dunworth, 2008):
- Presence of evaluative adverbs and adjectives in sentences - ?ugly? and
?disgusting?.
- Expressions denoting doubt and probability - ?may be?, ?possibly?, ?prob-
ably?, ?perhaps?, ?may?, ?could? etc.
261
<expression expression type=?Fact? opinion type=?Null? opinion orientation=?Null? force=?Null? opin-
ion date=?Null? authority=?Yes?>
This was the year Nepal declared itself a Federal Democratic Republic
</expression>
<expression expression type=?Opinion? opinion type=?Assumptive? opinion orientation=?Positive?
force=?Low? opinion date=?2007-12-31? authority=?Null?>,
but the decision needs to be endorsed which will probably happen in 2008.
</expression> </input>
- Presence of epistemic expressions - ?I think?, ?I believe?, ?I feel?, ?In my
opinion? etc.
It is obvious that the distinction between the two is not always straight-
forward. Facts could well be opinions in disguise and, in such cases, the
intention of the author as well as the reliability of information needs to be
verified. In order to make a finer distinction between facts and opinions and
within opinions themselves, opinions are proposed for gradation as shown
below:
Opinion type Global definition
Hypothesis statements Explains an observation.
Theory statements Widely believed explanation
Assumptive statements Improvable predictions.
Value statements Claims based on personal beliefs.
Exaggerated statements Intended to sway readers.
Attitude statements Based on implied belief system.
4 Results
For the purpose of annotation, the following semantic tag set has been de-
veloped, subject to further extension or modification in the future. The
current annotation scheme can be represented as a list of five parameters
and their possible values as shown below:
Parameter Possible values
expression type Fact, Opinion, Undefined
opinion orientation Positive, Negative, Neutral
opinion date Date of the editorial publication
force Low, Average, High
authority Yes, Average, No
Here, ?force? refers to the strength of the orientation of the opinion. Any
textual expression subject to annotation would go within <expression>
</expression>. A non-applicable parameter for a particular type of ex-
pression would receive a ?Null? value. The annotation of text fragments has
been guided by the presence of evaluative expressions and other criteria as
explained in section III.
For annotation purposes, we have collected the editorials from two online
newspapers (http://ekantipur.com,http://kantipuronline.com/ktmpost.php)
of different dates of the year 2007, amounting to a total of 16 text files
and approximately 320 sentences with an average of 20 sentences per edi-
torial. Two annotators having a fairly good understanding of the English
262
language have been involved in the annotation work. The annotators have
been assigned the same texts to see how semantic annotations can differ
among annotators. Results have shown that the difficulties in the manual
annotation exist at two levels, the first one in determining an expression as
being a fact or an opinion and the other one in grading the opinion as one
of the types, i.e., assumptive or value etc. Wherever the annotators have
confusions about providing one particular value, they have been advised to
provide multiple values separated by commas. A sample of the annotated
text in XML format is given in Fig. 1. above.
5 Conclusion
The work that we have described is currently in the phase of manually
annotating samples of editorials being based on the semantic tag set and
methodology discussed in the document. Further, we plan to develop a
computational model which would suggest methods to automate the pro-
cess of analyzing and synthesizing opinions from editorials. The manually
annotated texts and collected editorials would serve as training data and
test data respectively for validating the proposed computational model.
Acknowledgements: This work was partly supported by the French Stic-
Asia programme.
References
[1] Hearst M. A., Direction-based text interpretation as an information access re-
finement, Text-based intelligent systems: current research and practice in infor-
mation extraction and retrieval, 1992, Erlbaum.
[2] Hatzivassiloglou V. and Wiebe J. M., Effects of adjective orientation and grad-
ability on sentence subjectivity, Proc. 18th Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, 2000, Saarbru?cken.
[3] Wilson T. et al, Recognizing contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment anal-
ysis, Proc. HLT/ EMNLP 2005, Vancouver.
[4] Esuli A. and Sebastiani F. , Determining term subjectivity and term orientation
for opinion mining, Proc. EACL-06, Trento.
[5] Read J.et al, Annotating Expressions of Appraisal in English, Proc. ACL 2007
Linguistic Annotation Workshop, Prague.
[6] Dunworth K., UniEnglish reading: distinguishing facts from opinions, World
Wide Web, 2008, http://unienglish.curtin.edu.au/local/docs/RW facts opinions.pdf
263
