Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 79?86,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A: An Experimental Investigation into. . .
B: . . . Split Utterances
Christine Howes, Patrick G.T. Healey and Gregory J. Mills
Queen Mary University of London
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group, London, E1 4NS
{chrizba, ph, gj}@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
A distinguishing feature of dialogue is that
more that one person can contribute to the
production of an utterance. However, un-
til recently these ?split? utterances have re-
ceived relatively little attention in mod-
els of dialogue processing or of dialogue
structure. Here we report an experiment
that tests the effects of artificially intro-
duced speaker switches on groups of peo-
ple engaged in a task-oriented dialogue.
The results show that splits have reliable
effects on response time and on the num-
ber of edits involved in formulating sub-
sequent turns. In particular we show that
if the second half of an utterance is ?mis-
attributed? people take longer to respond
to it. We also show that responses to ut-
terances that are split across speakers in-
volve fewer deletes. We argue that these
effects provide evidence that: a) speaker
switches affect processing where they in-
terfere with expectations about who will
speak next and b) that the pragmatic effect
of a split is to suggest to other participants
the formation of a coalition or sub-?party?.
1 Introduction
Split utterances, defined simply as utterances
which are split between speakers1, are known
to occur in dialogue, as evidenced by Conversa-
1What we call split utterances have been variously re-
ferred to as collaborative turn sequences (Lerner, 1996;
Lerner, 2004), collaborative completions (Clark, 1996) co-
constructions (Helasvuo, 2004), co-participant completions
(Hayashi, 1999; Lerner and Takagi, 1999) collaborative pro-
ductions (Szczepek, 2000) and anticipatory completions (Fox
and others, 2007) amongst others.
tional Analysis (CA) studies, based on the anal-
ysis of naturally occuring dialogues. In addi-
tion to numerous analyses of split utterances in
generic English dialogues, there are cross lin-
guistic studies, and observations of conversations
with aphasics. In Finnish, split utterances within
a single clause conform to the strict syntactic
constraints of the language (which has a rich
inflectional morphology), despite the change in
speaker (Helasvuo, 2004). Similarly, in Japanese,
a verb-final language, speakers also engage in ?co-
participant completions? (Hayashi, 1999; Lerner
and Takagi, 1999). There is also evidence of
split utterances in conversations with aphasics
(Oelschlaeger and Damico, 1998), demonstrat-
ing that the phenomenon is pervasive in dia-
logue. However, with the possible exception of
Szczepek (2000) who analysed some 200 splits
from 40 hours of recorded English conversation,
these studies tend to be unconcerned with frequen-
cies of occurrence; that split utterances occur at all
renders them worthy of study.
Split utterances are a clear and canonical exam-
ple of coordination in dialogue. In order for one
person to continue an utterance which has been be-
gun by another person requires the hearer to have
coordinated with the initial speaker up to the point
at which they take over the role of producer2.
Analysis of split utterances, when they can or
cannot occur and what effects they have on the co-
ordination of agents in dialogue, is therefore an
area of interest not only for conversational an-
alysts wishing to characterise sytematic interac-
tions in dialogue, but also linguists trying to for-
mulate grammars of dialogue, and psychologists
interested in alignment mechanisms in dialogue.
2Note that this says nothing about whether such a continu-
ation is the same as the initial speakers intended continuation.
79
In this regard, studies of split utterances, in both
spontaneous dialogues and experimentally, as be-
low, provide a complementary way of studying
structural alignment to the traditional experimen-
tal set up exemplified by Branigan and colleagues
(Branigan et al, 2000; Branigan et al, 2003;
Branigan et al, 2006). Indeed, Poesio and Rieser
(In preparation) claim that ?[c]ollaborative com-
pletions . . . are among the strongest evidence yet
for the argument that dialogue requires coordina-
tion even at the sub-sentential level? (italics origi-
nal).
Broadly speaking, there have been two types,
or levels, of explanations of split utterances of-
fered; pragmatic accounts and processing ac-
counts. Pragmatic accounts are favoured by Con-
versational Analysts, with various aspects of split
utterances analysed. However, in line with CA as-
sumptions, these analyses are almost exclusively
concerned with the conditions under which split
utterances can occur. Lerner (1991), for ex-
ample, identifies a number of ?compound? turn-
constructional units, such as the IF-THEN con-
struction (whereby the second participant is in
some sense licensed to provide the THEN part of
the structure). However, Lerner?s insistence on
identifying the circumstances in which split utter-
ances usually occur misses the important general-
isation that, syntactically, they can be anywhere in
a string (his opportunistic completions). His claim
that an anticipatory completion is ordinarily ?de-
signed as a syntactic continuation of the utterance
part it follows at the point of onset?, seems to hold
for all split utterances.
The occurrence of split utterances also has im-
plications for the organisation of turn-taking, as
outlined in Sacks et al (1974). According to Sche-
gloff (1995), turn-taking operates, not on individ-
ual conversational participants, but on ?parties?.
For example, if a couple are talking to a third per-
son, they may organise their turns as if they are
one ?party?, rather than two separate individuals.
Lerner (1991) suggests that split utterances can
clarify the formation of such parties; ?collabora-
tively produced sentences reveal a relationship be-
tween syntax and social organisation. It provides
evidence of how syntax can be mobilised to organ-
ise participants into ?groups?.?
The processing approach towards split utter-
ances is exemplified by the interactive alignment
model of Pickering and Garrod (2004). They
claim that;
. . . it should be more-or-less as easy
to complete someone else?s sentence as
one?s own, and this does appear to be the
case.
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004, p186)
According to this model, speaker and listener
ought to be interchangeable at any point, and this
is also the stance taken by the grammatical frame-
work of Dynamic Syntax (Cann et al, 2005). In
Dynamic Syntax (DS), parsing and production are
taken to use exactly the same mechanisms, lead-
ing to a prediction that split utterances ought to be
strikingly natural (Purver et al, 2006). Addition-
ally, for a third person to process an utterance that
appears to come from two separate speakers ought
not be more difficult than processing the same ut-
terance from a single speaker, regardless of where
in a string the changeover occurs.
According to Poesio and Rieser (In prepara-
tion), ?the study of sentence completions can shed
light on a number of central issues. . . this type of
data may be used to compare competing claims
about coordination ? i.e. whether it is best ex-
plained with an intentional model like Clark?s. . . or
with a model based on simpler alignment models
like Pickering and Garrod?s.? As they see inten-
tions as crucial to dialogue management, they con-
clude that a model which accounts for intentions
(such as their PTT account) better captures their
task specific split utterance data (See Poncin and
Rieser (2006) for details of the German data they
are modelling).
If this is the case, it ought to be more difficult
to process an utterance that appears to be split
between speakers, as opposed to one that comes
from one source, because the intentions of the two
different agents have to be considered in arriving
at an interpretation, and they may appear to have
formed a ?party? with respect to the subject of the
utterance. Additionally it ought to be more dis-
ruptive to the conversation if the utterance is at-
tributed to someone other than the person who
genuinely contributed it, because the hearer would
falsely attribute intentions to the wrong interlocu-
tor. This ought to be especially clear in cases
where the ?conversational momentum? appears to
be with the ?wrong? interlocutor. Contrarily, if a
processing model such as the interactive alignment
model is correct, then no such differences should
80
be observed3.
To test these predictions, an experiment was set
up to alter genuine single-turn utterances into split
utterances at an arbitrary point in the string. Dif-
ferent types of intervention were introduced, in a 2
x 2 factorial design, in order to separate out the ef-
fects of an utterance appearing to come from two
different participants from effects caused by an ap-
parent change of floor.
2 Method
The effects of seeing an utterance split between
speakers or not were tested using the Dialogue
Experimentation Toolkit (DiET) chat tool, as de-
scribed in Healey et al (2003), which enables dia-
logues to be experimentally manipulated.
The DiET chat tool allows interventions to be
introduced into a dialogue in real time, thus caus-
ing a minimum of disruption to the natural ?flow?
of the conversation. In this case, a number of gen-
uine turns in a three way conversation were artifi-
cially split into two sections, with both parts either
appearing to originate from the genuine source, or
one or both parts being falsely attributed to another
participant.
2.1 Materials
2.1.1 The Balloon Task
The balloon task is an ethical dilemma re-
quiring agreement on which of three passengers
should be thrown out of a hot air balloon that will
crash, killing all the passengers, if one is not sac-
rificed. The choice is between a scientist, who be-
lieves he is on the brink of discovering a cure for
cancer, a 7 months pregnant woman, and her hus-
band, the pilot. This task was chosen on the basis
that it should stimulate discussion, leading to dia-
logues of a sufficient length to enable an adequate
number of interventions.
2.1.2 The DiET Chat Tool
The DiET chat tool itself is a custom built java
application consisting of two main components,
which will be outlined in turn; the user interface,
and the server console.
3This is, of course, an oversimplification, and note that in
contrast to pragmatic accounts, no claims are made regard-
ing higher level discourse effects of the split utterance, as the
focus is on the mechanisms which allow split utterances to
occur. Additional mechanisms could of course be posited in
processing models to account for any such differences.
2.1.3 User interface
The user interface is designed to look and feel
like instant messaging applications e.g. Microsoft
Messenger. It consists of a display split into two
windows, with a status bar, indicating whether any
other participant(s) are actively typing, between
them (see figure 1). The ongoing dialogue, con-
sisting of both the nickname of the contributor and
their transmitted text, is shown in the upper win-
dow. In the lower window, participants type and
revise their contributions, before sending them to
their co-participants. All key presses are time-
stamped and stored by the server.
Figure 1: The user interface chat window (as
viewed by participant ?sam?)
2.1.4 Server Console
All text entered is passed to the server, from
where it is relayed to the other participants, not
relayed directly between participants. Prior to be-
ing relayed, some turns are altered by the server to
create fake split utterances.
This is carried out automatically such that a
genuine single-person turn is split around a space
character near the centre of the string. The part
of the turn before the space is relayed first, fol-
lowed by a short delay during which no other turns
may be sent. This is followed by the part of the
turn after the space, as if they were in fact two
quite separate, consecutive turns. In every case,
the server produces two variants of the split utter-
ance, relaying different information to both recip-
ients. Each time an intervention is triggered, one
of the two recipients receives both parts from the
actual source of the utterance (henceforth referred
to as an AA-split). The other recipient receives
one of three, more substantial, manipulations; the
first half could appear to be from the actual ori-
gin with the second part of the split appearing to
originate from the other recipient (an AB-split), or
81
the inverse could be the case (a BA-split), or both
parts could be wrongly attributed to the other par-
ticipant (a BB-split). This design was in order to
separate the effects of a change in conversational
momentum (floor change) from the effects of split-
ting per se, hence the inclusion of the BB condi-
tion where who apparently has the floor is altered
without the utterance being attributable to differ-
ent participants. This contrast is shown in table 1.
Table 1: Comparison of split types
A types:
Should we start now
B sees (AA intervention):
A: Should we
A: start now
C sees (one of):
AB intervention: BA intervention: BB intervention:
A: Should we B: Should we B: Should we
B: start now A: start now B: start now
The intervention is triggered every 10 turns, and
restricted such that the participant who receives
the non AA-split is rotated (to ensure that each
participant only sees any of the more substantially
manipulated interventions every 30 turns). Which
of the three non AA-splits they see (AB, BA or
BB) is, however, generated randomly.
2.2 Subjects
41 male and 19 female native English speaking un-
dergraduate students were recruited for the exper-
iment, in groups of three to ensure that they were
familiar with each other. All had previous expe-
rience of internet chat software such as Microsoft
Messenger and each was paid ?7.00 for their par-
ticipation.
2.3 Procedure
Each of the triad of subjects was sat in front of a
desktop computer in separate rooms, so that they
were unable to see or hear each other. Subjects
were asked to follow the on screen instructions,
and input their e-mail address and their username
(the nickname that would identify their contribu-
tions in the chat window). When they had en-
tered these, a blank chat window appeared, and
they were given a sheet of paper with the task de-
scription on. Participants were instructed to read
this carefully, and begin discussing the task with
their colleagues via the chat window once they
had done so. They were told that the experi-
ment was investigating the differences in commu-
nication when conducted using a text only inter-
face as opposed to face-to-face. Additionally, sub-
jects were informed that the experiment would last
approximately 20-30 minutes, and that all turns
would be recorded anonymously for later analy-
sis. Once all three participants had been logged
on, the experimenter went to sit at the server ma-
chine, a fourth desktop PC out of sight of all three
subjects, and made no further contact with them
until at least 20 minutes of dialogue had been car-
ried out.
3 Results
A post experimental questionnaire and debrief-
ing showed that participants felt the conversations
went as smoothly as face-to-face dialogue. With
the exception of one subject, who had taken part
in a previous chat tool experiment and was there-
fore aware that interventions may occur, none of
the participants reported awareness of any inter-
ventions.
As production and receipt of turns sometimes
occurs in overlap in text chat, it is not possible
to say definitively when one turn is made in di-
rect response to another4. We therefore chose two
separate measures; next turn ? the first turn, by
the first recipient to start and complete a response,
after receipt of the intervention, and global ? all
the turns produced by both recipients between the
most recent intervention and the next intervention,
averaged to produce one data point per recipient
per intervention. This means that in the next turn
condition, only one datapoint is analysed for each
intervention, despite two different people seeing
an intervention (and both usually producing a re-
sponse). This was to try and isolate the initial re-
sponse to an intervention; for the other person who
saw a split but did not respond first, it is not clear
if they are responding to the split utterance, or to
4In online chat, participants can compose their next turns
simultaneously, and turns under construction when another is
received can be subsequently revised, prior to transmission.
This means that a genuine response to a split utterance might
have a negative start time. However, the inclusion of cases
where the whole turn was constructed after receiving the split
(an arbitrary cut-off point, which would catch some turns that
were responses to earlier turns in the dialogue, and miss some
which were begun before the intervention was received and
subsequently revised) should impose the same level of noise
in all cases.
82
the person who already responded to the split ut-
terance. In the global condition, in contrast, there
are two datapoints for each intervention (one for
each of the participants who saw a split utterance).
Of the 253 interventions to which at least one
recipient responded, 89 were AA/AB splits, 99
were AA/BA splits and 65 AA/BB splits. Table 2
shows the n values in each case.
Both next turn and global measures were anal-
ysed according to two factors in a 2 x 2 factorial
design; split ? whether both parts of the utterance
had appeared to come from the same person, or
from different sources ([AA and BB] vs [AB and
BA]), and floor change ? who appeared to have
produced the second part of the split, the genuine
source, or the other participant ([AA and BA] vs
[AB and BB]).
Measures selected for analysis were typing time
of turn (The time, in milliseconds, between the
first key press in a turn and sending the turn to
the other participants by hitting the return key) and
length of turn in characters as measures of produc-
tion; deletes per character (The number of keyed
deletes plus one (to prevent null values) divided
by the total number of characters) as a measure
of revisions; and typing time per character as a
measure of speed. Data in tables are displayed in
the original scale of measurement. However, as
inspection of the data showed that they were not
normally distributed, logarithmic transformations
(using loge) were applied to the data prior to all
formal analyses.
2 x 2 ANOVAs show a main effect of floor
change on the typing time of turn (see table 2).
This holds for next turns (F(3,249) = 7.13, p <
0.05) and globally (F(3,486) = 3.78, p < 0.05),
with participants taking longer over their turns in
the AB and BB conditions. There was no main
effect of split, and no effect of interaction. This
effect is greater locally than globally, with partici-
pants who respond first after seeing a floor change
condition taking more than 40% longer over their
turns than those who saw a non-floor change con-
dition. Globally the difference is in the order of
10%.
There was a main effect of split on the number
of deletes per character , which also held both in
the next turn condition (F(3,249) = 6.26, p < 0.05)
and globally (F(3,486) = 9.23, p < 0.05), with
subjects seeing a split condition (AB or BA) us-
ing fewer deletes per character than those seeing
a non-split condition (see table 3). There was no
main effect of floor change or interaction effect.
This effect is also stronger in the next turn con-
dition, with those not seeing a cross-person split
using over 50% more deletes. In the global condi-
tion, this difference is still 40%, though the overall
proportion of deletes is approximately 25% lower,
from 0.334 per character in the next turn condition
to 0.244 globally.
Table 2: Typing time of turn by type of interven-
tion
Condition Mean (s.d.) N (poss N)
Next Turn
AA 9475.54 (12258.5) 136 (253)
AB 14560.70 (18863.9) 37 (89)
BA 6968.24 (6437.0) 51 (99)
BB 14812.59 (20367.8) 29 (65)
Global
AA 11122.27 (14413.5) 246 (253)
AB 12500.98 (10944.6) 89 (89)
BA 9800.77 (8810.3) 92 (99)
BB 11561.67 (10138.4) 63 (65)
Table 3: Deletes per character by type of interven-
tion
Condition Mean (s.d.)
Next Turn
AA 0.435 (1.63)
AB 0.152 (0.30)
BA 0.202 (0.25)
BB 0.324 (0.61)
Global
AA 0.288 (0.83)
AB 0.192 (0.28)
BA 0.145 (0.18)
BB 0.287 (0.37)
Additional analyses showed an effect of floor
change on length of turn in characters (table 4)
in the next turn condition (F(3,249) = 5.57, p <
0.05) such that turns are longer in the AB and BB
conditions (note that though this might be thought
to be confounded by the typing time of turn, as you
would expect longer turns to take longer to type,
there are no significant effects when ANOVAs are
performed on typing time per character). There is
no main effect of split, or interaction effect. In the
global condition, however, there is a main effect
of split (F(3,486) = 4.08, p < 0.05) such that turns
are longer after seeing an utterance that appears
to be split between two different people (AB and
BA conditions). There is no main effect of floor
change, and no effect of interaction.
83
As the experiment was looking for generic ef-
fects of splitting on coordination, the location of
the splits was random. A post-hoc analysis was
therefore carried out to ascertain whether the stan-
dalone coherence (as judged by the authors) of the
two separate parts of the utterance was a possible
confounding factor. Examples of coherence judge-
ments are shown in table 5.
Table 4: Length of turn in characters by type of
intervention
Condition Mean (s.d.)
Next Turn
AA 23.95 (22.0)
AB 37.76 (34.9)
BA 23.92 (18.4)
BB 26.52 (21.5)
Global
AA 26.41 (20.4)
AB 32.12 (23.9)
BA 28.27 (18.4)
BB 25.78 (13.6)
Table 5: Examples of standalone coherence judge-
ment examples
Part of Split Coherent
First Second 1st 2nd
what the hell is that Y N
the woman is pregnant she should stay Y Y
these people said you did something N Y
I think this is also the wish of the doctor N N
2 x 2 ANOVAs showed that in the next turn con-
dition, there are no main effects of first or sec-
ond part coherence, but there was an interaction
effect of first part coherence by second part co-
herence on deletes (F(3,249) = 4.05, p < 0.05),
such that if both parts are independently coherent,
or if neither part is independently coherent, there
are fewer deletes used in the turn immediately fol-
lowing the intervention (see table 6). There are no
significant global effects.
Table 6: Deletes per character by first and second
part standalone coherence (next turn condition)
Coherence Mean (s.d.)1st 2nd
Y Y 0.198 (0.38)N 0.651 (2.26)
N Y 0.304 (0.66)N 0.206 (0.30)
Running a 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 ANOVA with these ad-
ditional factors does not alter the main effects ob-
served for floor change or split, as detailed above.
There are no additional interaction effects on any
of the measures.
4 Discussion
As this is the first experimental study into split ut-
terances using the DiET chat tool, what follows is
necessarily exploratory. This discussion presents
our current hypotheses as to how best to interpret
the data, as summarised in table 7, below.
Table 7: Summary of significant effects
Effect of Condition on and direction
Floor Next Turn Typing Time
Change and Global (AB ?BB) > (AA ?BA)
Floor Next Turn Number of Chars
Change (AB ?BB) > (AA ?BA)
Split Next Turn Deletes
and Global (AA ?BB) > (AB ?BA)
Split Global Number of Chars
(AB ?BA) > (AA ?BB)
Taking longer over the production of a turn (in-
dependently of typing speed) indicates a lack of
confidence in the conversation (misattributing the
second part of the utterance thus reducing confi-
dence), and is also indicative of local organisation
of turn-taking. If a participant who has seen a floor
change intervention (Participant C) responds first,
then they may be taking longer over their turns be-
cause there is less pressure on them to take a turn.
This is because of the C?s expectations. They will
falsely believe that the fake source (Participant B)
has just completed a turn, and will therefore not
expect them to take the floor, and the genuine
source (Participant A) will not be taking the floor
because they have just completed a turn (though C
does not know this). It is probable that in the turn
immediately following a floor change intervention
both these factors are at play, whereas globally it
is the weaker effect of generic confidence loss that
is observed. This compounding of effects in the
next turn condition would also help explain the di-
vergent effects on the length of turn in characters
in next turn and global conditions.
Regardless of the precise reasons for it, this ef-
fect of floor change on typing time clearly demon-
strates that changing the apparent speaker is dis-
ruptive, perhaps because it alters the forward mo-
84
mentum of the conversation.
More interestingly, independently of a change
of floor, seeing an utterance that appears to be split
between speakers also has an impact on the con-
versation, seen in the amount of revision under-
taken in formulating a response (deletes). One rea-
son why participants might worry less about pre-
cisely formulating their turns following a cross-
person split is that the production of a cross-person
split could have the effect on the recipient of sug-
gesting that the two other participants have formed
a ?party? (Schegloff, 1995) with respect to the de-
cision of who to throw out of the balloon. This
might be understood as signalling the formation
of a strong coalition between the other two partic-
ipants, therefore making the recipient behave as
though they are resigned to the decision of this
coalition. This is not the same as the effect on the
typing time of turn, whereby participants are less
rushed when seeing a change of floor. Deletes, on
the other hand, demonstrate how carefully partici-
pants are constructing their turns. Excerpt 1, taken
from the transcripts shows an example where this
appears to be the case.
Excerpt 1 AB-Split showing apparent coalition
between ?Bhups? and ?Dan? (?fake? part of split
shown in bold)
Bhups: and he can tell his formula
Dan: to tom and susie
If we take split utterances as an indicator of co-
ordination then it is likely that if we believe our
two conversational partners to be in coordination,
we will worry less about precisely formulating our
own contributions. This also backs up the idea that
people are not interchangeable.
The interaction of first and second part coher-
ence also underlines the effect of split on revi-
sions as outlined above. In the case were both
parts of the split could potentially stand as inde-
pendent utterances, they are treated as such and
the number of deletes per character is in line with
the global average (i.e. they are treated as nor-
mal dialogue). In the other non ambiguous case,
where neither part could be interpreted as an ut-
terance on its own, there are also fewer deletes,
in line with the result that there are fewer deletes
in strong split cases. Interestingly, the most dis-
ruptive case is that where the first part could have
been a standalone utterance, but the second part
could not. This could be seen as analogous to a
garden path effect, and provides some indication
that that the building up of interpretations is incre-
mental, and not concerned with who supplies the
input.
These results do not, of course, prejudice the
claim that, at a purely mechanistic level, people
could anticipate the structures needed to complete
a turn, as the interactive alignment model sug-
gests, because they are not concerned with the ac-
tual production of a split utterance, rather on the
effect it has on the conversation. They do indicate
that in terms of the effects of seeing split utter-
ances, the pragmatic approach offers a more fea-
sible level of analysis. For example, if we wish
to treat a jointly produced split utterance as sig-
nalling especially strong alignment, then we need
to account for more than simply syntax.
There is an issue with the design of the exper-
iment which means that the floor change effects
might be caused by a confounding variable; in
essence, because one of the recipients always re-
ceived an AA-split, in the cases which have been
labelled as cases of floor change, the two recipi-
ents will have been left with the impression that a
different person made the final contribution. This
means that there may well be a an effect of con-
founded listener expectation (though see Schober
and Brennan (2003) for discussion), although it
should be noted that this does not have any bear-
ing on the observed differences after an utterance
split between speakers. It is also possible that
split utterances might be particularly marked in a
chat environment, though preliminary results of a
corpus study show that, perhaps surprisingly, split
utterances also occur naturally and as frequently
in text-based chat (Eshghi, in prep) as they do in
face-to-face dialogue (Purver et al, 2009). Be-
cause of these issues, and the already noted po-
tential problems of linearity in text-based chat,
a follow-up study using a character-by-character
chat tool interface is underway. This more directly
enforces turn-taking, as it does not allow partici-
pants to formulate their turn before communicat-
ing it; each character is transmitted as and when it
is entered.
5 Conclusions
The experiment reported here offers clues towards
an understanding of split utterances as an exam-
ple of dialogue phenomena, and provides evidence
85
that speaker switches affect processing where they
interfere with expectations about who will speak
next and that the pragmatic effect of a split is to
suggest to other participants the formation of a
coalition or sub-?party?. It also clearly demon-
strates that this type of experiment provides a fruit-
ful line of future research in the ongoing attempt to
adequately characterise dialogue, though further
developments are needed.
References
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, and A. Cleland. 2000.
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition,
75(2):13?25.
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, J. Pearson, J. McLean, and
C. Nass. 2003. Syntactic alignment between com-
puters and people: The role of belief about mental
states. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, J. McLean, and A. Stewart.
2006. The role of local and global syntactic struc-
ture in language production: Evidence from syn-
tactic priming. Language and cognitive processes,
21(7-8):974?1010.
R. Cann, R. Kempson, and L. Marten. 2005. The Dy-
namics of Language. Elsevier, Oxford.
H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
A. Eshghi. in prep. Uncommon ground: the distri-
bution of dialogue contexts. Ph.D. thesis, Depart-
ment of Computer Science, Queen Mary University
of London.
A. Fox et al 2007. Principles shaping grammati-
cal practices: an exploration. Discourse Studies,
9(3):299.
M. Hayashi. 1999. Where Grammar and Interac-
tion Meet: A Study of Co-Participant Completion in
Japanese Conversation. Human Studies, 22(2):475?
499.
P. G. T. Healey, M. Purver, J. King, J. Ginzburg, and
G. J. Mills. 2003. Experimenting with clarifica-
tion in dialogue. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
M. Helasvuo. 2004. Shared syntax: the gram-
mar of co-constructions. Journal of Pragmatics,
36(8):1315?1336.
G. Lerner and T. Takagi. 1999. On the place
of linguistic resources in the organization of talk-
in-interaction: A co-investigation of English and
Japanese grammatical practices. Journal of Prag-
matics, 31(1):49?75.
G. Lerner. 1991. On the syntax of sentences-in-
progress. Language in Society, pages 441?458.
G. Lerner. 1996. On the semi-permeable character
of grammatical units in conversation: Conditional
entry into the turn space of another speaker. In
E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff, and S. A. Thompson,
editors, Interaction and grammar, pages 238?276.
Cambridge University Press.
G. Lerner. 2004. Collaborative turn sequences. In
Conversation analysis: Studies from the first gener-
ation, pages 225?256. John Benjamins.
M. Oelschlaeger and J. Damico. 1998. Joint produc-
tions as a conversational strategy in aphasia. Clini-
cal linguistics & phonetics, 12(6):459?480.
M. Pickering and S. Garrod. 2004. Toward a mech-
anistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27:169?226.
M. Poesio and H. Rieser. In preparation. Completions,
coordination, and alignment in dialogue. to appear.
K. Poncin and H. Rieser. 2006. Multi-speaker utter-
ances and co-ordination in task-oriented dialogue.
Journal of Pragmatics, 38(5):718?744.
M. Purver, R. Cann, and R. Kempson. 2006.
Grammars as parsers: Meeting the dialogue chal-
lenge. Research on Language and Computation,
4(2-3):289?326.
M. Purver, C. Howes, P. G. Healey, and E. Gre-
goromichelaki. 2009. Split utterances in dialogue:
a corpus study. In SigDial 2009 workshop proceed-
ings.
H. Sacks, E. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974. A sim-
plest systematics for the organization of turn-taking
for conversation. Language, pages 696?735.
E. Schegloff. 1995. Parties and talking together: Two
ways in which numbers are significant for talk-in-
interaction. Situated order: Studies in the social
organization of talk and embodied activities, pages
31?42.
M. Schober and S. Brennan. 2003. Processes of in-
teractive spoken discourse: The role of the partner.
Handbook of discourse processes, pages 123?64.
B. Szczepek. 2000. Formal Aspects of Col-
laborative Productions in English Conversa-
tion. Interaction and Linguistic Structures
(InLiSt), http://www.uni-potsdam.de/u/
inlist/issues/17/index.htm.
86
