Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 146?149,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Online Search Interface for the Sejong Korean-Japanese Bilingual 
Corpus and Auto-interpolation of Phrase Alignment 
 
Sanghoun Song 
Korea Univ. 
Anam-dong, Sungbuk-gu, Seoul, 
South Korea  
sanghoun@gmail.com 
Francis Bond 
NICT Language Infrastructure Group 
2-2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho, 
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 
bond@ieee.org 
 
 
 
  
Abstract 
A user-friendly interface to search bilingual 
resources is of great help to NLP developers as 
well as pure-linguists. Using bilingual re-
sources is difficult for linguists who are unfa-
miliar with computation, which hampers capa-
bilities of bilingual resources. NLP developers 
sometimes need a kind of workbench to check 
their resources. The online interface this paper 
introduces can satisfy these needs. In order to 
implement the interface, this research deals 
with how to align Korean and Japanese phras-
es and interpolates them into the original bi-
lingual corpus in an automatic way. 
1 Introduction 
Bilingual or multilingual corpora are significant 
language resources in various language studies, 
such as language education, comparative linguis-
tics, in particular, NLP. What holds the key posi-
tion in bilingual resources is how to align lin-
guistic units between two languages. In this con-
text, three fundamental questions about how to 
harness bilingual resources can be raised; (i) 
which linguistic unit or level should correspond 
to those in the corresponding language? (ii) 
which method should be employed for align-
ment? (iii) which environments should be pre-
pared for users?  
This paper covers these matters related to bi-
lingual resources and their use. The language 
resource that this paper handles is the Sejong Ko-
rean-Japanese Bilingual Corpus (henceforth 
SKJBC). 1  The original version of the SKJBC, 
constructed in a XML format, aligns sentence by 
                                                 
1 The SKJBC is readily available for academic and research 
purposes only.  For information on license conditions and 
others, please contact the National Academy of Korean Language 
(http://www.korean.go.kr/eng/index.jsp). 
sentence or paragraph by paragraph. This re-
search re-organizes and re-aligns the original 
version using GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) and 
Moses (Koehn et al 2007), and interpolates the 
aligning information into each original file auto-
matically. Turning to the interface, this research 
converts the whole data into a database system 
(MySQL) to guarantee data integrity. Building 
on the database, this research implements an on-
line search system accessible without any restric-
tions; dubbed NARA2. 
2 The SKJBC 
The SKJBC had been constructed as a subset of 
the Sejong project3 which had been carried out 
from 1998 to 2007, sponsored by the Korean 
government. The SKJBC is divided into two 
parts; one is the raw corpus annotated only with 
sentence aligning indices, the other is the POS-
tagged corpus, in which the tag set for Korean 
complies with the POS-tagging guideline of the 
Sejong project, and the morphological analysis 
for Japanese is based on ChaSen (Matsumoto et 
al., 1999). This paper is exclusively concerned 
with the latter, because it is highly necessary for 
the phrase alignment to make use of well-
segmented and well-refined data. Table 1 illu-
strates the basic configuration of the SKJBC. 
Since the prime purpose of the Sejong project 
was to build up balanced corpora, the SKJBC 
consists of various genres, as shown in Figure 1. 
This makes a clear difference from other bilin-
gual resources where the data-type is normally 
homogeneous (e.g. newspapers). Moreover, since 
it had been strictly prohibited to manipulate the 
                                                 
2 The name, NARA, has meanings in both Korean and Jap-
anese. It is a local name in Japan; it also means ?a country? 
in Korean. Since the name can properly stands for this re-
search?s goal, the name has been used as a project title. 
3 http://www.sejong.or.kr/eindex.php 
146
original source for any reasons, the data in 
SKJBC fully reflect on the real usage of Korean. 
These characteristics, however, sometimes work 
against computational implementation. Bi-texts 
do not always correspond to each other sentence 
by sentence; we can find out that there are a 
number of cases that a sentence matches two or 
more sentences in the other language or the cor-
responding sentences might be non-existent. In 
other words, it is almost impossible to align all 
the sentences only one-to-one. These cases even-
tually produce the multiple-to-multiple alignment, 
unless annotators discard or separate them artifi-
cially. No artificial manipulation was allowed 
under construction, the SKJBC contains quite a 
few pairs in a multiple-to-multiple relation. 
 
Korean Japanese 
type token type token
document 50 ( KoJa : 38, JaKo : 12 ) 
sentence 4,030  4,038 
word 21,734  43,534  10,452 93,395 morpheme 9,483  101,266  10,223 
Table 1. Configuration of the SKJBC 
 
Figure 1. Composition of the SKJBC 
3 Alignment 
This section is connected with the first question 
raised in section 1; the proper level of alignment. 
Most bilingual corpora, including the SKJBC, 
have been constructed sentence by sentence de-
spite shortcomings, because it costs too much 
time and effort to annotate word or phrase cor-
respondence by hand (Abeill?, 2003). To anno-
tate more specified alignment between two lan-
guages is to enhance the utility value of the re-
source; this research, first of all, considers how 
to align at the level of word and phrase. 
Multiple Alignments: Because of the prob-
lem mentioned in the previous section, the pairs 
which do not match in a one-to-one relation were 
excluded from the target of alignment. Through-
out a preliminary experiment, it was born out 
that, if they remained, they led to a worse result.  
After casting them away, the number of target 
sentences is 3,776, which account for about 86 
percent of the whole data. 
Word vs. Phrase: To make the units equiva-
lent as far as possible is the crucial factor in 
aligning as accurately as possible. One of the 
main issues that should be taken into account in 
aligning Korean and Japanese phrases is word 
boundary. Though Korean and Japanese share 
lots of features, the boundary of word or phrase 
is inconsistent with each other. The general con-
cept to segment words in Korean is the so-called 
ejeol, tantamount to word-spacing, whereas that 
in Japanese is bunsetsu, what we say. The differ-
ence stems from the different writing style; Ko-
rean inserts spacing between words, while Japa-
nese seldom uses spacing. Consequently, each 
word in Korean is virtually equivalent to a phras-
al unit in Japanese, as given in (1-2). 
 
(1) ??? ?/VV+?/EP+?/EF 
wus-ess-ta 
laugh-PAST-DC ?laughed? 
(2) ?? ??/VIN 
? ?/AU 
warat-ta 
laugh-PAST ?langhed? 
 
The first line (i.e. ejeol) in (1) for Korean corres-
ponds to the first and second line (i.e. bunsetsu) 
in (2). Hence, it is the most suitable choice to 
align Korean morphemes (e.g. ? wus) and Japa-
nese bunsetsu (e.g. ?? warat). 
On the other hand, there is a clear cut between 
lemmatized lexical forms and surface forms in 
Japanese, (e.g. ?? and ?? in the above, re-
spectively), whereas there is none in Korean. In 
order to prevent the result from being biased, this 
paper establishes two training sets (i.e. lemma-
tized and surface forms) for alignment. 
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD): Other 
than the above issues, it is also needed to consid-
er WSD. For example, a Korean word ? salm 
has two meanings; one is ?life? as a nominal ex-
pression, the other is ?boil? as a verbal lexeme, 
which correspond to ? sei, ?? niru, respec-
tively. This research, therefore, makes training 
data composed of each morpheme plus its POS 
tag, such as ??/NNG? and ??/NCPV?. 
4 Auto-interpolation 
Turning to the second question, this part covers 
how to align and annotate. Were it not for auto-
matic processing, it would be painstaking work 
to construct bilingual resources even line by line. 
One popular toolkit to align linguistic units be-
147
tween two languages in an unsupervised way is 
GIZA++. 
Even though GIZA++ yields fairly good 
?word? alignment, much remains still to be done.  
For instance, those who want to study two or 
more languages from a comparative stance are 
certain to need syntactic data which offer more 
information about language diversity than plain 
word-mapping. Besides, Statistical Machine 
Translation (SMT) commonly runs under the 
phrase-based model. This research employs the 
Moses toolkit to establish phrase tables. The 
baseline of this research is the factorless one with 
a five-gram language model. 
In order to measure the accuracy of alignment, 
this research uses the BLEU scoring (Papineni et 
al., 2002) which has been widely used for eva-
luating SMT, under the hypothesis that the 
BLEU score denotes how well-established the 
phrase table is. For the evaluation purpose, 500 
sentences were selected from the SKJBC at ran-
dom, and tested within each SMT baseline, as 
given in Table 2. 
 
KoJa JaKo 
lemmatized 72.72 71.37
surface 72.98 72.83
surface + tag 70.55 68.26
Table 2. BLEU Score 
(3) <link xtargets="1.1.p8.s4 ; 1.1.p14.s3"> 
<phr xtargets="w1 w2 w3 w4 ; w1 w2 w3 w4"> 
<wrd xtargets="w3 ; w1"> 
<wrd xtargets="w5 ; w5"> 
</link> 
(4) <s id=1.1.p8.s4> 
??? kulaya  ?then? 
<w id=w1>??/VV</w>  kule 
<w id=w2>??/EC</w>  yeya 
????.  caywulop-ci  ?be free?  
<w id=w3>???/VA</w>  caywulop ?free? 
<w id=w4>?/EF</w>  ci 
<w id=w5>./SF</w> 
</s> 
(5) <s id=1.1.p14.s3> 
<w id=w1>??</w> ??/NG jiyuu ?freedom? 
<w id=w2>?</w> ?/AU  da  
<w id=w3>??</w> ??/PJC kara  
<w id=w4>?</w> ?/PEN  ne  
<w id=w5>?</w> ?/SYF 
</s> 
 
Korean and Japanese are typologically very 
similar. In particular, they have very similar 
word order, which makes them easy to align us-
ing GIZA++ and Moses. Therefore, we could ex-
pect the baselines to perform well, and Table 2 
proves it. Table 2 indicates the baselines using 
Japanese surface forms are slightly better than 
those using lemmatized forms. The next step is 
to confirm whether or not the baselines with POS 
tags decrease performance. The last line in Table 
2 implies it is not the case, there is a slight de-
cline.  
Building on the last baselines, this research in-
terpolates word and phrase aligning information 
into the original XML files as presented in (3-5), 
which means ?Then, you will be free?. Figure 2 
represents how the online interface this paper 
proposes handles (3-5). 
 
 
Figure 2. Sample of Online Interface 
5 Online Search Interface 
Last but maybe the most important is a user-
friendly interface. Those who have a solid back-
ground in computation could take advantage of 
computational surroundings (e.g. Moses). Most 
linguists, however, are not aware of how to use 
bilingual data so well. It might look uneasy or 
even vague for them to harness bilingual re-
sources for their current research. That means, no 
matter how good the bilingual resource is or no 
matter how well-trained the word or phrase table 
is, unless there is an available interface, the re-
source becomes no more than a very restricted 
one for a small number of people. Bilingual re-
sources are not NLP-dominated ones, admitting 
NLP developers employ them most widely. They 
are also useful in doing comparative language 
research, making learning materials, or even hu-
man translation. Since one of the easiest interface 
in these days would be web-browsers, this re-
search provide a web-interface; NARA (ver. 2).4 
The interface of NARA system looks like a 
common search site (e.g. Google). A simple 
search option takes a position on the front side, 
assuming most of users are unfamiliar with lin-
guistic terms. On the other hand, advanced 
search mode, as given in Figure 3, offers more 
specialized search options. One can search by tag, 
morpheme, or word with specific sub-options, 
such as matching type. One can also select the 
result format such as word, sentence, or span. In 
order to compare the search result in various 
ways, there are some configuration options, such 
as search direction (i.e. KoJa or JaKo), genre, 
source language, etc. 
                                                 
4 http://corpus.mireene.com/nara.php 
148
Turning to the output screen, as shown in Fig-
ure 4, each underlined word has its correspond-
ing word or phrase. When the pointer is over an 
underlined word, the system highlights the re-
lated words and phrases. If it is necessary to 
check out more information (e.g. source), one 
can use ?INFO? buttons. Finally, the interface 
offers a function to save the current result to a 
spreadsheet (MS-Excel). 
6 Conclusion 
Focusing on the Sejong Korean Japanese Bilin-
gual Corpus (SKJBC), this paper covers three 
matters about how to use and show bilingual re-
sources, and provides a user-friendly online in-
terface to search the SKJBC. The NARA inter-
face is applicable to any other bilingual resources 
in further researches, because it has been de-
signed data-independently. We have already used 
it for aligned Korean-English text. 
 
Acknowledgments 
Part of this work was carried out while the first 
author was an intern at the NICT Language In-
frastructure Group. The fist author was also 
sponsored by the BK21 Project (Global Intern-
ship). We owe special thanks to Prof. Jae-Woong 
Choe, Prof. Han-Seop Lee, Dr. Dong-Sung Kim, 
Eric Nichols, Yeolwon Seong, and Inbean Lim. 
References  
Anne Abeill?. 2003. Treebanks. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Hingham, MA, USA. 
Franz J. Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A Systematic 
Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models, 
Computational Linguistics, 29(1): 19-51. 
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and 
Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a Method for Au-
tomatic Evaluation of Machine Translation. 
Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
Philipp Koehn, Marcello Federico, Wade Shen, Nico-
la Bertoldi, Ond?rej Bojar, Chris Callison-Burch, 
Brooke Cowan, Chris Dyer, Hieu Hoang, Richard 
Zens, Alexandra Constantin, Christine Corbett Mo-
ran, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source 
Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. 
Annual Meeting of the ACL. 
Yuji Matsumoto, Akira Kitauchi, Tatsuo Yamashita, 
and Yoshitaka Hirano. 1999. Japanese Morpho-
logical Analysis System ChaSen version 2.0 
Manual. NAIST-ISTR99009. 
Figure 3. Screenshot of Advanced Search Mode 
 
Figure 4. Phrase Alignment for ?a mysterious sea route? 
149
