Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 262?271,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Split Utterances in Dialogue: a Corpus Study
Matthew Purver, Christine Howes,
and Patrick G. T. Healey
Department of Computer Science
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK
{mpurver,chrizba,ph}@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Eleni Gregoromichelaki
Department of Philosophy
King?s College London
Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK
eleni.gregor@kcl.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper presents a preliminary English
corpus study of split utterances (SUs), sin-
gle utterances split between two or more
dialogue turns or speakers. It has been
suggested that SUs are a key phenomenon
of dialogue, which this study confirms: al-
most 20% of utterances were found to fit
this general definition, with nearly 3% be-
ing the between-speaker case most often
studied. Other claims/assumptions in the
literature about SUs? form and distribu-
tion are investigated, with preliminary re-
sults showing: splits can occur within syn-
tactic constituents, apparently at any point
in the string; it is unusual for the sepa-
rate parts to be complete units in their own
right; explicit repair of the antecedent does
not occur very often. The theoretical con-
sequences of these results for claims in
the literature are pointed out. The prac-
tical implications for dialogue systems are
mentioned too.
1 Introduction
Split utterances (SUs) ? single utterances split be-
tween two or more dialogue turns/speakers ? have
been claimed to occur regularly in dialogue, espe-
cially according to the observations reported in the
Conversational Analysis (CA) literature, which is
based on the analysis of naturally occurring di-
alogues. SUs are of interest to dialogue theo-
rists as they are a clear sign of how turns cohere
with each other at all levels ? syntactic, seman-
tic and pragmatic. They also indicate the radi-
cal context-dependency of conversational contri-
butions. Turns can, in general, be highly ellip-
tical and nevertheless not disrupt the flow of the
dialogue. SUs are the most dramatic illustration
of this: contributions spread across turns/speakers
rely crucially on the dynamics of the unfolding
context, linguistic and extra-linguistic, in order to
guarantee successful processing and production.
Utterances that are split across speakers also
present a canonical example of participant coor-
dination in dialogue. The ability of one partic-
ipant to continue another interlocutor?s utterance
coherently, both at the syntactic and the seman-
tic level, suggests that both speaker and hearer are
highly coordinated in terms of processing and pro-
duction. The initial speaker must be able to switch
to the role of hearer, processing and integrating the
continuation of their utterance, whereas the ini-
tial hearer must be closely monitoring the gram-
mar and content of what they are being offered
so that they can take over and continue in a way
that respects the constraints set up by the first part
of the utterance. In fact there is (anecdotal) ev-
idence that such constraints are fully respected
across speaker and hearer in such utterances (see
e.g. Gregoromichelaki et al (2009)). A large pro-
portion of the CA literature on SUs tries to iden-
tify the conditions under which SUs usually oc-
cur (see section 2). However, this emphasis seems
to miss the important generalisation, confirmed
by the present study, that, syntactically, a speaker
switch may be able to occur anywhere in a string.
From a theoretical point of view, the implica-
tions of the above are that, if such observations
have an empirical foundation, the grammar em-
ployed by the interlocutors must be able to license
and the semantics interpret chunks much smaller
than the usual sentence/proposition units. More-
over, these observations have implications for the
nature of the grammar itself: dynamic, incremen-
tal formalisms seem more amenable to the mod-
262
elling of this phenomenon as the switch of roles
while syntactic/semantic dependencies are pend-
ing can be taken as evidence for direct involve-
ment of the grammar in the successful process-
ing/production of such utterances. Indeed, Poesio
and Rieser (to appear) claim that ?[c]ollaborative
completions . . . are among the strongest evidence
yet for the argument that dialogue requires coor-
dination even at the sub-sentential level? (italics
original).
From a psycholinguistic point of view, the phe-
nomenon of SUs is compatible with mechanis-
tic approaches as exemplified by the Interactive
Alignment model of Pickering and Garrod (2004)
where it is claimed that it should be as easy to
complete someone else?s sentence as one?s own
(Pickering and Garrod, 2004, p186). According
to this model, speaker and listener ought to be in-
terchangeable at any point. This is also the stance
taken by the grammatical framework of Dynamic
Syntax (DS) (Kempson et al, 2001; Cann et al,
2005). In DS, parsing and production are taken
to employ the same mechanisms, leading to a pre-
diction that split utterances ought to be strikingly
natural (Purver et al, 2006). However, from a
pragmatic point of view, utterance continuation
by another speaker might involve some kind of
guessing1 or preempting the other interlocutor?s
intended content. It has therefore been claimed
that a full account of this phenomenon requires
a complete model of pragmatics that can handle
intention recognition and formation. Indeed, Poe-
sio and Rieser (to appear) claim that ?the study
of sentence completions . . . may be used to com-
pare competing claims about coordination ? i.e.
whether it is best explained with an intentional
model like Clark (1996)?s . . . or with a model
based on simpler alignment models like Pickering
and Garrod (2004)?s.? They conclude that a model
which includes modelling of intentions better cap-
tures the data.
For computational models of dialogue, how-
ever, SUs pose a challenge. While Poesio and
Rieser (to appear) and Purver et al (2006) pro-
vide general foundational models for various parts
of the phenomenon, there are many questions that
remain if we are to begin automatic processing.
A computational dialogue system must be able
to identify SUs, match up their two (or more)
1Note that this says nothing about whether such a contin-
uation is the same as the initial speaker?s intended continua-
tion.
parts (which may not necessarily be adjacent), in-
tegrate them into some suitable syntactic and/or
semantic representation, and determine the over-
all pragmatic contribution to the dialogue context.
SUs also have implications for the organisation of
turn-taking in such models (see e.g. Sacks et al
(1974)), as regards what conditions (if any) allow
or prevent successful turn transfer. Additionally,
from a socio-linguistic point of view, turn-taking
operates (according to Schegloff (1995)) not on
individual conversational participants, but on ?par-
ties?. Lerner (1991) suggests that split utterances
can clarify the formation of such parties in that
they reveal evidence of how syntax can be em-
ployed to organise participants into ?groups?.
Analysis of SUs, when they can or cannot oc-
cur, and what effects they have on the coordina-
tion of agents in dialogue, is therefore an area of
interest not only for conversational analysts wish-
ing to characterise systematic interactions in di-
alogue, but also for linguists trying to formulate
grammars of dialogue, psychologists and sociolin-
guists interested in alignment mechanisms and so-
cial interaction, and those interested in building
automatic dialogue processing systems. In this pa-
per we present and examine empirical corpus data
in order to shed light on some of the questions and
controversies around this phenomenon.
2 Related Work
Most previous work on what we call SUs has ex-
amined specific sub-cases, generally of the cross-
speaker type, and have referred to these vari-
ously as collaborative turn sequences (Lerner,
1996; Lerner, 2004), collaborative completions
(Clark, 1996; Poesio and Rieser, to appear),
co-constructions (Sacks, 1992), joint produc-
tions (Helasvuo, 2004), co-participant comple-
tions (Hayashi, 1999; Lerner and Takagi, 1999),
collaborative productions (Szczepek, 2000) and
anticipatory completions (Fox and others, 2007)
(amongst others). Here we discuss some of these
views.
Conversation Analysis Lerner (1991) identifies
various structures typical of SUs which contain
characteristic split points. Firstly he gives a
number of ?compound? turn-constructional units
(TCUs), i.e., structures that include an initial con-
stituent that hearers can identify as introducing
some later final component. Examples include the
IF X-THEN Y, WHEN X-THEN Y and INSTEAD
263
OF X-Y constructions:
(1) A: Before that then if they were ill
G: They get nothing. [BNC H5H 110-111]
Other cues for potential anticipatory completions
include quotation markers (e.g. SHE SAID), paren-
thetical inserts and lists, as well as non-syntactic
cues such as contrast stress or prefaced disagree-
ments. Ru?hlemann (2007) uses corpus analysis to
examine sentence relatives as typical expansions
of another interlocutor?s turn (see also (16)):
(2) A: profit for the group is a hundred and
ninety thousand pounds.
B: Which is superb. [BNC FUK 2460-2461 ]
Opportunistic Cases Although Lerner focuses
on these projectable turn completions, he also
mentions that splits can occur at other points such
as ?intra-turn silence?, hesitations etc. which he
terms opportunistic completions:
(3) A: Well I do know last week thet=uh Al was
certainly very ? pause 0.5?
B: pissed off [(Lerner, 1996, p260)]
As he makes no claims regarding the frequency
of such devices for SUs, it would be interesting to
know how common these are (insomuch as they
occur at all and can be accordingly classified), es-
pecially as studies on SUs in Japanese (Hayashi,
1999) show that although SUs do occur, they do
not rely on compound TCUs.
Expansions vs. Completions Other classifica-
tions of SUs often distinguish between expansions
and completions (Ono and Thompson, 1993). Ex-
pansions are continuations which add, e.g., an ad-
junct, to an already complete syntactic element:
(4) T: It?ll be an E sharp.
G: Which will of course just be played as an
F. [BNC G3V 262-263]
whilst completions involve the addition of syntac-
tic material which is required to make the whole
utterance complete:
(5) A: . . . and then we looked along one deck, we
were high up, and down below there were
rows of, rows of lifeboats in case you see
B: There was an accident.
A: of an accident [BNC HDK 63-65]
In terms of frequency, the only estimate we
know of is Szczepek (2000), where there are ap-
parently 200 cross-person SUs in 40 hours of En-
glish conversation (there is no mention of the num-
ber of sentences or turns this equates to), of which
75% are completions.2 As briefly outlined above,
CA analyses of SUs tend to be broadly descriptive
of what they reveal for conversational practices.
Because such analyses present real examples they
establish that the phenomenon is a genuine one;
however, there is no discussion of its scale (with
the exception of Szczepek (2000), which offers ex-
tremely limited figures). Even though as a gen-
uine phenomenon it is of theoretical interest, the
lack of frequency statistics prevents generalisabil-
ity. Therefore, any claims that SUs are pervasive
in dialogue need empirical backing.
Linguistic Models Purver et al (2006) present
a grammatical model for split utterances, using an
inherently incremental grammar formalism, Dy-
namic Syntax (Kempson et al, 2001; Cann et al,
2005). This model shows how syntactic and se-
mantic processing can be accounted for no mat-
ter where the split occurs in a sentence; how-
ever, as their interest is in grammatical process-
ing, they give no account of any higher-level in-
ferences which may be required. Poesio and
Rieser (to appear) present a general model for col-
laborative completions based in the PTT frame-
work, using an incremental LTAG-based gram-
mar and an information-state-based approach to
context modelling. While many parts of their
model are compatible with a simple alignment-
based communication model like Pickering and
Garrod (2004)?s, they see intention recognition as
crucial to dialogue management. They conclude
that an intention-based model, more like Clark
(1996)?s, is more suitable. Their primary concern
is to show how such a model can account for the
hearer?s ability to infer a suitable continuation, but
their use of an incremental interpretation method
also allows an explanation of the low-level utter-
ance processing required. Nevertheless, the use
of an essentially head-driven grammar formalism
suggests that some syntactic splits that appear in
our corpus might be more problematic than oth-
ers.
Corpus Studies Skuplik (1999), as reported by
Poesio and Rieser (to appear), collected data from
German two-party task-oriented dialogue, and an-
notated for split utterance phenomena. She found
that expansions (cases where the part before the
split can be considered already complete) were
2However, this could be affected by her decision not to
include what she calls appendor questions in her data which
could also be argued to be expansion SUs.
264
more common than completions (where the first
part is incomplete as it stands). Given that this
study focuses on task-oriented dialogue, it needs
to be shown that its results can be replicated in nat-
urally occurring dialogue. In addition, de Ruiter
and van Dienst (in preparation) are also in the pro-
cess of studying other-initiated completions, in the
above sense, and their effect on the progressivity
of dialogue turns; however no results are available
to us at this point in time.
Dialogue Models We are not aware of any
system/model which treats other-person splits,
but same-person ones are now being looked at.
Skantze and Schlangen (2009) present an incre-
mental system design (for a limited domain) which
can react to user feedback, e.g., backchannels, and
resume with utterance completion if interrupted.
Some related empirical work regarding the issue
of turn-switch addressed here is also presented in
Schlangen (2006) but the emphasis there centered
mostly on prosodic rather than grammar/theory-
based factors.
3 Method
3.1 Terminology
In this paper, as our interest is general, we use the
term split utterances (SUs) to cover all instances
where an utterance is spread across more than one
dialogue contribution ? whether the contributions
are by the same or different speakers. We there-
fore use the term split point to refer to the point at
which the utterance is split (rather than e.g. tran-
sition point which is associated with a speaker
change). Cases where speaker does change across
the split will be called other-person splits; oth-
erwise same-person splits. One of the reasons
for including same-person splits is that there are
claims in the literature that the initial speaker may
strategically continue completing their own utter-
ance, after another person?s intervention, as an al-
ternative to acceptance or rejection of this inter-
vention (delayed completion, (Lerner, 1996)). In
addition, both grammatical formalisms (Purver et
al., 2006) and psycholinguistic models (Picker-
ing and Garrod, 2004) predict that SUs should be
equally natural in both the same- and other- person
conditions.
As not all cases will lead to complete contri-
butions, and not all will be split over exactly two
contributions, we also avoid terms like first-half,
second-half and completion: instead the contri-
butions on either side of a split point will be re-
ferred to as the antecedent and the continuation.
In cases where an utterance has more than one split
point, some portions may therefore act as the con-
tinuation for one split point, and the antecedent for
the next.
3.2 Questions
General Our first interest is in the general statis-
tics regarding SUs: how often do they occur, and
what is the balance between same- and other-
person splits? Do they usually fall into the specific
categories (with specific preferred split points) ex-
amined by e.g. Lerner (1991), or can the split
point be anywhere?
Completeness For a grammatical treatment
of SUs, as well as for implementing pars-
ing/production mechanisms for their processing,
we need to know about the likely completeness
of antecedent and continuation (if they are al-
ways complete in their own right, a standard head-
driven grammar may be suitable; if not, some-
thing more fundamentally incremental may be re-
quired). In addition, CA and other strategic anal-
yses of dialogue phenomena predict that split ut-
terances should occur at turn-transfer points that
are foreseeable by the participants. Complete syn-
tactic units serve this purpose from this point of
view and lack of such completeness will seem
to weaken this general claim. We therefore ask
how often antecedents and continuations are them-
selves complete,3 and look at the syntactic and lex-
ical categories which occur either side of the split.
Repair and Overlap Thirdly, we look at how
often splits involve explicit repair of antecedent
material, and how this depends on antecedent
completeness. Although, sometimes, repair might
be attributed to overlap or speaker uncertainty, it
also might indicate issues regarding preemptive
tactics on the part of the current speaker who needs
to reformulate the original contribution in order
to accommodate their novel offering or take into
account feedback offered while constructing their
utterance. Amount of repair also indicates the de-
gree of attempt the current speaker is making to
3For antecedents, we are more interested in whether they
end in a way that seems complete (they may have started ir-
regularly due to overlap or another split); for continuations,
whether they start in such a way (they may not get finished
for some other reason, but we want to know if they would be
complete if they do get finished).
265
Tag Value Explanation
end-complete y/n For all sentences: does this sentence end in such a way as to
yield a complete proposition or speech act?
continues sentence ID For all sentences: does this sentence continue the proposition
or speech act of a previous sentence? If so, which one?
repairs number of words For continuations: does this continuation explicitly repair
words in the antecedent? If so, how many?
start-complete y/n For continuations: does this continuation start in such a way as
to be able to stand alone as a complete proposition or speech
act?
Table 1: Annotation Tags
integrate syntactically their contribution with the
antecedent. However, we also examine how often
continuations involve overlap, which also has im-
plications for turn-taking management, and how
this depends on antecedent completeness.
3.3 Corpus
For this exercise we used the portion of the
BNC (Burnard, 2000) annotated by Ferna?ndez and
Ginzburg (2002), chosen to maintain a balance be-
tween context-governed dialogue (tutorials, meet-
ings, doctor?s appointments etc.) and general con-
versation. This portion comprises 11,469 sen-
tences taken from 200-turn sections of 53 separate
dialogues.
The BNC transcripts are already annotated for
overlapping speech, for non-verbal noises (laugh-
ter, coughing etc.) and for significant pauses.
Punctuation is included, based on the original au-
dio and the transcribers? judgements; as the au-
dio is not available, we allowed annotators to use
punctuation where it aided interpretation. The
BNC transcription protocol provides a sentence-
level annotation as well as an utterance (turn)-level
one, where turns may be made of several sentences
by the same speaker. We annotated at a sentence-
level, to allow self-continuations within a turn to
be examined. The BNC also forces turns to be
presented in linear order, which is vital if we are
to accurately assess whether turns are continua-
tions of one another; however, this has a side-
effect of forcing long turns to appear split into sev-
eral shorter turns when interrupted by intervening
backchannels. We will discuss this further below.
Annotation Scheme The initial stage of manual
annotation involved 4 tags: start-complete,
end-complete, continues and repairs ?
these are explained in Table 1 above. Sentences
which somehow require continuation (whether
they receive it or not) are therefore those marked
end-complete=n; sentences which act as
continuations are those marked with non-empty
continues tags; and their antecedents are the
values of those continues tags. Further specific
information about the syntactic or lexical nature of
antecedent or continuation components could then
be extracted (semi-)automatically, using the BNC
transcript and part-of-speech annotations.
Inter-Annotator Agreement Three annotators
were used, all linguistically knowledgeable. First,
all three annotators annotated one dialogue inde-
pendently, then compared results and discussed
differences. They then annotated 3 further di-
alogues independently to assess inter-annotator
agreement; kappa statistics (Carletta, 1996) are
shown in Table 2 below.
Tag KND KBG KB0
end-complete .86-.92 .80-1.0 .73-.90
continues (y/n) .89-.81 .76-.85 .77-.89
continues (ant) .90-.82 .74-.85 .76-.86
repairs 1.0-1.0 .55-.81 1.0-1.0
Table 2: Inter-Annotator ? statistic (min-max)
With the exception of the repairs tag for one
annotator pair for one dialogue, all are above 0.7;
the low figure results from a few disagreements
in a dialogue with only a very small number of
repairs instances. The remaining dialogues
were divided evenly between the three annotators.
4 Results and Discussion
The 11,469 sentences annotated yielded 2,228
SUs, of which 1,902 were same-person and 326
other-person splits; 111 examples involved an ex-
plicit repair by the continuation of some part of the
antecedent.
266
person: same other
overlapping 0 17
adjacent 840 260
sep. by overlap 320 10
sep. by backchnl 460 17
sep. by 1 sent 239 16
sep. by 2 sents 31 4
sep. by 3 sents 5 1
sep. by 4 sents 4 0
sep. by 5 sents 1 0
sep. by 6 sents 2 1
Total 1902 326
Table 3: Antecedent/continuation separation
General Same-person splits are much more
common than other-person; however, this is partly
an artefact of the BNC transcription protocol
(which forces contributions to be linearly ordered)
and our choice to annotate at the sentence level.
Around 44% of same-person cases are splits be-
tween sentences within the same-speaker turn;
and a further 17% are separated only by other-
speaker material which entirely overlaps with the
antecedent and therefore does not necessarily ac-
tually interrupt the turn. Both of these might be
considered as single utterances under some views.
However, we believe that splits between same-
turn sentences must be investigated in that the
transcription into separate sentences does indicate
some pause or other separating prosody and, from
a processing/psycholinguistic point of view, it
should be determined whether other-person splits
occur in the same places as same-person split
boundaries. Even in cases of overlap, one can-
not exclude the fact that the shape of the current
speaker?s utterance is influenced by receipt of the
feedback. Nevertheless, we will examine these
issues in further research and hence we exclude
within-turn splits of this type from here on.
Many splits are non-adjacent (see Table 3), with
the antecedent and continuation separated by at
least one intervening sentence. In same-person
cases, once we have excluded the within-turn
splits described above, this must in fact always
be the case; the intervening material is usually a
backchannel (62% of remaning cases) or a sin-
gle other sentence (32%, often e.g. a clarification
question), but two intervening sentences are possi-
ble (4%) with up to six being seen. In other-person
cases, 88% are adjacent or separated only by over-
lapping material, but again up to six intervening
person: same other
and/but/or 748 116
so/whereas 257 39
because 77 3
(pause) 56 5
which/who/etc 26 4
instead of 4 1
said/thought/etc 14 0
if then 1 0
when then 1 1
(other) 783 161
Table 4: Continuation categories
sentences were seen, with a single sentence most
common (10%, in half of which the intervening
sentence was a backchannel).
Many utterances have more than one split. In
same-person cases, a single utterance can be split
over as many as thirteen individual sentence con-
tributions; although such extreme cases occur gen-
erally within one-sided dialogues such as tutori-
als, many multi-split cases are also seen in general
conversation. Only 63% of cases consisted of only
two contributions. Antecedents can also receive
more than one competing continuation, although
this is rare: two continuations are seen in 2% of
cases.
CA Categories We searched for examples
which match CA categories (Lerner, 1991;
Ru?hlemann, 2007) by looking for particular lex-
ical items on either side of the split. Matching was
done loosely, to allow for the ungrammatical na-
ture of dialogue ? for example, an instance was
taken to match the IF X-THEN Y pattern if the con-
tinuation began with ?then? (modulo filled pauses
and non-verbal material) and the antecedent con-
tained ?if? at any point) ? so the counts may be
over-estimates. For Lerner (1996)?s opportunistic
cases, we looked for filled pauses (?er/erm? etc.)
or pauses explicitly annotated in the transcript, so
counts in this case may be underestimates.4 We
also chose some other broad categories based on
our observations of the most common cases. Re-
sults are shown in Table 4.5
The most common of the CA categories can be
4In further research we will examine other features as spe-
cialised laugh tokens, repetitions etc. as well as their particu-
lar positioning
5Note that the categories in Table 4 are not all mutually
exclusive (e.g. an example may have both an ?and?-initial
continuation and an antecedent ending in a pause), so column
sums will not match Table 3.
267
seen to be Lerner (1996)?s hesitation-related op-
portunistic cases, which make up at least 2-3% of
both same- and other-person splits. Ru?hlemann
(2007)?s sentence relative clause cases are next,
with over 1%; the others make up only small pro-
portions.
In contrast, by far the most common pattern (for
both same- and other-) is the addition of an ex-
tending clause, either a conjunction introduced by
?and/but/or/nor? (35-40%), or other clause types
with ?so/whereas/nevertheless/because?. Other
less obviously categorisable cases make up 40-
50% of continuations, with the most common first
words being ?you?, ?it?, ?I?, ?the?, ?in? and ?that?.
Completeness and repair Examination of the
end-complete annotations shows that about
8% of sentences in general are incomplete, but
that (perhaps surprisingly) only 63% of these get
continued. For both same- and other-person con-
tinuations, the vast majority (72% and 74%) con-
tinue an already complete antecedent, with only
26-28% therefore being completions in the sense
of e.g. de Ruiter and van Dienst (in preparation).
This does, however, mean that continuations are
significantly more likely than other sentences to
follow an incomplete antecedent (p < 0.001 us-
ing ?2(1)). Interestingly, though, continuations are
no more likely than other sentences to be complete
themselves.
The frequent clausal categories from Table 4 are
all more likely to continue complete antecedents
than incomplete ones, with the exception of the
(other) category; this suggests that split points
often occur at random points in a sentence, without
regard to particular clausal constructions (see also
A.1 for more examples and context):
(6) D: you know what the actual variations
U: entails
D: entails. you know what the actual quality
of the variations are.
[BNC G4V 114-117]
For the less frequent (e.g. ?if/then?, ?instead of?)
categories, the counts are too low to be sure.
Excluding all the clausal constructions (i.e.
looking only at the general (other) category),
and looking only at other-person cases, we see that
antecedents often end in a complete way (53%) but
that continuations do not often start in a complete
way (24%). Continuations are more than twice
as likely to start in a non-complete as opposed
to complete way, even after complete antecedents.
Explicit repair of some portion of the antecedent
is not common, only occurring in just under 5%
of splits. As might be expected, incomplete an-
tecedents are more likely to be repaired (13% vs.
2%, p < 0.001 using ?2(1)). Other-continuations
are also significantly more likely to repair their an-
tecedents than same-person cases (10% vs. 4%,
p < 0.001 using ?2(1)).
Problematic cases Examination of the data
shows that SUs is not necessarily an autonomous
well-defined category independent of other frag-
ment classifications in the literature. Besides cases
where it is not easy to identify whether a fragment
is a continuation or not or what the antecedent
is (see A.2), there are also cases where, as has
already been pointed out in the literature (Gre-
goromichelaki et al, 2009; Bunt, 2009), fragments
exhibit multifunctionality. This can be illustrated
by the following where the continuation could be
taken also as request for confirmation/question (7)
or a reply to a clarification request (8):
(7) M: It?s generated with a handle and
J: Wound round?
M: Yes [BNC K69 109-112]
(8) S: Quite a good word processor.
J: A word processor?
S: Which is vag- it?s basically a subset of
Word. [BNC H61 37-39]
In this respect, an interesting category is Lerner?s
delayed completions where often the continuation
also serves as some kind of repair or reformulation
(see e.g. (6) and A.3 (26)).
5 Conclusions
Although most of Lerner (1991)?s categories ap-
pear, they are not necessarily the most frequent.
On the other hand, the general results seem to in-
dicate that splits can occur anywhere in a string,
both in the same- or other- conditions. Both these
are consistent with models that advocate highly
coordinated resources between interlocutors and,
moreover, the need for highly incremental means
of processing (Purver et al, 2006; Skantze and
Schlangen, 2009). From a computational mod-
elling point of view, the results also indicate that
start-completeness of continuations is rare, which
means that a dialogue system has a chance of spot-
ting continuations from surface characteristics of
268
the input. This is hampered though by the fact
that the split can occur within any type of syn-
tactic constituent, hence no reliable grammatical
features can be employed securely. On the other
hand, end-incompleteness of antecedents is not as
common as would be expected and long distances
between antecedent and continuation are possible.
In this respect, locating the antecedent is not a
straightforward task for automated systems, espe-
cially again as this can be any type of constituent.
References
H. Bunt. 2009. Multifunctionality and multidimen-
sional dialogue semantics. In Proceedings of Dia-
Holmia, 13th SEMDIAL Workshop.
L. Burnard. 2000. Reference Guide for the British Na-
tional Corpus (World Edition). Oxford University
Computing Services http://www.natcorp.
ox.ac.uk/docs/userManual/.
R. Cann, R. Kempson, and L. Marten. 2005. The Dy-
namics of Language. Elsevier, Oxford.
J. Carletta. 1996. Assessing agreement on classifica-
tion tasks: The kappa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 22(2):249?255.
H. Clark. 1996. Using Language. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
J. de Ruiter and M. van Dienst. in preparation. Com-
pleting other people?s utterances: evidence for for-
ward modeling in conversation. ms.
R. Ferna?ndez and J. Ginzburg. 2002. Non-sentential
utterances: A corpus-based study. Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues, 43(2).
A. Fox et al 2007. Principles shaping grammati-
cal practices: an exploration. Discourse Studies,
9(3):299.
E. Gregoromichelaki, Y. Sato, R. Kempson, A. Gargett,
and C. Howes. 2009. Dialogue modelling and the
remit of core grammar. In Proceedings of IWCS.
M. Hayashi. 1999. Where Grammar and Interac-
tion Meet: A Study of Co-Participant Completion in
Japanese Conversation. Human Studies, 22(2):475?
499.
M. Helasvuo. 2004. Shared syntax: the gram-
mar of co-constructions. Journal of Pragmatics,
36(8):1315?1336.
R. Kempson, W. Meyer-Viol, and D. Gabbay. 2001.
Dynamic Syntax: The Flow of Language Under-
standing. Blackwell.
G. Lerner and T. Takagi. 1999. On the place
of linguistic resources in the organization of talk-
in-interaction: A co-investigation of English and
Japanese grammatical practices. Journal of Prag-
matics, 31(1):49?75.
G. Lerner. 1991. On the syntax of sentences-in-
progress. Language in Society, pages 441?458.
G. Lerner. 1996. On the semi-permeable character
of grammatical units in conversation: Conditional
entry into the turn space of another speaker. In
E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff, and S. A. Thompson,
editors, Interaction and grammar, pages 238?276.
Cambridge University Press.
G. Lerner. 2004. Collaborative turn sequences. In
Conversation analysis: Studies from the first gener-
ation, pages 225?256. John Benjamins.
T. Ono and S. Thompson. 1993. What can conversa-
tion tell us about syntax. In P. Davis, editor, Alterna-
tive Linguistics: Descriptive and Theoretical Modes.
Benjamin.
M. Pickering and S. Garrod. 2004. Toward a mech-
anistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27:169?226.
M. Poesio and H. Rieser. to appear. Completions, co-
ordination, and alignment in dialogue. Ms.
M. Purver, R. Cann, and R. Kempson. 2006.
Grammars as parsers: Meeting the dialogue chal-
lenge. Research on Language and Computation,
4(2-3):289?326.
C. Ru?hlemann. 2007. Conversation in context: a
corpus-driven approach. Continuum.
H. Sacks, E. A. Schegloff, and G. Jefferson. 1974.
A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50(4):696?735.
H. Sacks. 1992. Lectures on Conversation. Blackwell.
E. Schegloff. 1995. Parties and talking together: Two
ways in which numbers are significant for talk-in-
interaction. Situated order: Studies in the social
organization of talk and embodied activities, pages
31?42.
D. Schlangen. 2006. From reaction to prediction: Ex-
periments with computational models of turn-taking.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference
on Spoken Language Processing (INTERSPEECH -
ICSLP).
G. Skantze and D. Schlangen. 2009. Incremental dia-
logue processing in a micro-domain. In Proceedings
of the 12th Conference of the European Chapter of
the ACL (EACL 2009).
K. Skuplik. 1999. Satzkooperationen. definition und
empirische untersuchung. SFB 360 1999/03, Biele-
feld University.
B. Szczepek. 2000. Formal Aspects of Collaborative
Productions in English Conversation. Interaction
and Linguistic Structures (InLiSt), http://www.
uni-potsdam.de/u/inlist/issues/17/.
269
A Examples
A.1 Split points
(6) D: Yeah I mean if you?re looking at quan-
titative things it?s really you know how
much actual- How much variation hap-
pens whereas qualitative is ?pause? you
know what the actual variations
U: entails
D: entails. you know what the actual quality
of the variations are.
[BNC G4V 114-117]
(9) A: All the machinery was
G: [[All steam.]]6
A: [[operated]] by steam
[BNC H5G 177-179]
(10) K: I?ve got a scribble behind it, oh annual re-
port I?d get that from.
S: Right.
K: And the total number of [[sixth form stu-
dents in a division.]]
S: [[Sixth form stu-
dents in a division.]] Right.
[BNC H5D 123-127]
(11) M: 292 And another sixteen percent is the
other Ne- Nestle coffee ?pause? erm
Blend Thirty Seven which I used to drink
a long time ago and others ?laugh? and
twenty two percent is er ?pause?
U: Maxwell.
M: Maxwell House, which has become the
other local brand now seeing as how
Maxwell House is owned by Kraft, and
Kraft now own Terry?s.
[BNC G3U 292-294]
(12) A: Erm because as Moira said that Kraft is
erm ?pause? now what was she saying,
what was she saying Kraft is the same as
?pause?
M: Craft? [BNC G3U 412-413]
(13) J: And I couldn?t remember whether she
said at the end of the three months or
A: End of the month. [BNC H4P 17-18]
6Overlapping material is shown in double square brackets,
aligned with the material with which it co-occurs.
(14) G: Had their own men
A: unload the boats?
G: unload the boats, yes. [BNC H5H 91-93]
(15) G: That?s right they had to go on a rota.
A: Run by the Dock Commission?
G: Run by the Dock Commission.
[BNC H5H 100-102]
(16) A: So I thought, oh, I think I?ll put lace over
it, it?ll tone the lilac [[down.]]
B: [[down.]] Yes.
Which it is has done
[BNC KBC 3195-3198]
A.2 Uncertain antecedents
(17) C: Look you?re cleaning this ?pause?
[[with erm]]
G: [[That box.]]
C: [[This.]]
G: [[With]] this. [[And this.]]
C: [[And this.]] [[And this.]]
G: [[And this.]]
Whoops! [BNC KSR 9-17]
(18) S: You?re trying to be everything ?pause?
and they?re pushing it away cos it?s not
what they really want ?pause? and they, I
mean, all, all you can get from him is how
marvellous, you?re right, how marvellous
his brothers are ?pause? and yet, what I?ve
heard of the brothers they?re not
C: Not much, [[yeah.]]
S: [[they?re]] not all that marvel-
lous, they?re not really that much to look
[[up]]
C: [[Ah]].
S: to.
C: No [BNC KBG 76-81]
(19) S: Well this is why I think he?d be better
off, hi- his needs ?pause? are not met by a
class teacher. And I don?t think they have
been for this last
C: Mm, we need a support teacher [[to go
there.]]
S: [[for the
last]] year. But yo-, you need somebody
who?s gonna work with him every day
?pause? and ?pause? with an individual
programme and you just can?t offer that
?pause? in a class. [BNC KBG 56-60]
270
(20) M: I might be a bit biased, I think they still
do that but I think erm ?pause?
J: The television has ?pause?
M: the television has made a difference. I
think not only just at fire stations, I think
in the whole of life, hasn?t it?
[BNC K69 51-54]
(21)A5: I?ll definitely use that
U: ?reading?:[ Get a headache ]?
A5: [[in getting to know ]]
A2: [[Year seven ]]
A5: new [[year seven]]
A2: [[Oh yeah]] for year seven
[BNC J8D 190-195]
(22) G: Well a chain locker is where all the spare
chain used to like coil up
A: So it ?unclear? came in and it went round
G: round the barrel about three times round
the barrel then right down into the chain
locker but if you kept, let it ride what we
used to call let it ride well ?unclear? well
now it get so big then you have to run it
all off cos you had one lever, that?s what
you had and the steam valve could have
all steamed. [BNC H5G 174:176]
A.3 Multifunctionality of fragments
(7) Completion and confirmation request:
J: How does it generate?
M: It?s generated with a handle and
J: Wound round?
M: Yes, wind them round and this should,
should generate a charge which rang bells
and sounded bells and then er you lift up a
telephone and plug in a jack and, and take
a message in that way.
[BNC K69 109-112]
(23) Completion and confirmation request:
G: Had their own men
A: unload the boats?
G: unload the boats, yes. [BNC H5H 91-93]
(24) Late completion and (repetitive) confir-
mation:
N: Alistair [last or full name] erm he?s, he?s
made himself er he has made himself co-
ordinator.
U: And section engineer.
N: And section engineer.
N: I didn?t sign it as coordinator.
[BNC H48 141-144]
(25) Completion and clarification reply:
John: If you press N
Sarah: N?
John: N for name, it?ll let you type in the docu
document name. [BNC G4K 84-86]
(26) Expansion and reformulation/repair:
S: Secondly er
J: We guarantee P five.
S: We we are we?re guaranteeing P five plus
a noise level.
J: Yeah. [BNC JP3 167-170]
(27) Expansion and question:
I: I can?t remember exactly who lived on
the right hand side, I?ve forgotten but th
I know the Chief Clerk lived just a little
way down [address], you see, er
A: In one of those little red brick cottages?
[BNC HDK 124-125]
(28) Answer and expansion:
A: We could hear it from outside ?unclear?.
R: Oh you could hear it?
A: Occasionally yeah. [BNC J8D 13-15]
(29) Answer/reformulation and expansion:
G: [address], that was in the middle, more or
less in the middle of the town.
A: And you called that the manual?
G: The manual school, yes.
[BNC H5G 96-98]
271
