Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 322?325,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Dialogue behaviour under high cognitive load
Jessica Villing
Graduate School of Language Technology and
Department of Philosophy, Linguistics and Theory of Science
jessica@ling.gu.se
Abstract
For safety reasons, in-vehicle dialogue
systems should be able to take the cogni-
tive load of the driver into consideration.
However, it is important to distinguish be-
tween two types of cognitive load, namely
if the cognitive load is affecting the driv-
ing behaviour or not. We will present find-
ings from a data collection carried out in
the DICO project1, where the dialogue be-
haviour under high cognitive load is anal-
ysed, and present a novel theory of how
to distinguish between different types of
workload.
1 Introduction
In-vehicle dialogue systems demand dialogue
management that takes the cognitive workload of
the driver into consideration. The primary task is
the driving, and therefore it is necessary to develop
a dialogue system that interferes as little as pos-
sible with the driving task. However, the driver?s
cognitive workload might increase for various rea-
sons, and it is important to distinguish between
workload that is driving-induced (i.e. due to, for
example, a heavy traffic situation) and workload
that is dialogue-induced (i.e. due to a complicated
dialogue). If the workload is driving-induced it is
probably necessary to pause the dialogue to enable
for the driver to concentrate on the driving task,
whereas if the workload is dialogue-induced it is
instead necessary to facilitate the dialogue task,
for example by reformulating a question.
1www.dicoproject.org
2 Data collection
DICO is a project that aims to develop a proof-of-
concept demo system, showing how a spoken dia-
logue system can be an aid for drivers. To study
how an additional distraction or increase in the
cognitive load would affect a driver?s dialogue be-
haviour, a data collection has been made. The goal
was to elicit a natural dialogue (as opposed to giv-
ing the driver a constructed task such as for exam-
ple a math task) and make the participants engage
in the conversation.
The participants (two female and six male) be-
tween the ages of 25 and 36, drove a car in
pairs while interviewing each other. The inter-
view questions and the driving instructions were
given to the passenger, hence the driver knew nei-
ther what questions to discuss nor the route in ad-
vance. Therefore, the driver had to signal, implicit
or explicit, when she wanted driving instructions
and when she wanted a new question to discuss.
The passenger too had to have a strategy for when
to change topic. The reasons for this setup was to
elicit a natural and fairly intense dialogue and to
force the participants to change topic and/or do-
main (e.g. to get driving instructions).
The participants changed roles after 30 minutes,
which meant that each participant acted both as
driver and as passenger. The cognitive load of the
driver was measured in two ways. The driver per-
formed a Tactile Detection Task (TDT (van Win-
sum et al, 1999)) 2, and workload was also mea-
sured by using an IDIS system 3.
2When using a TDT, a summer is attached to the driver?s
wrist. The driver is told to push a button each time the sum-
mer is activated. Cognitive load is determined by measuring
hit-rate and reaction time.
3IDIS determines workload based on the
driver?s behaviour (for example steering wheel
322
The participants were audio- and videotaped,
and then transcribed with the transcription tool
ELAN4, using an orthographic transcription. The
annotation scheme was designed to enable analy-
sis of utterances with respect to topic change for
each domain.
Domain and topic was defined as:
? interview domain: discussions about the in-
terview questions where each interview ques-
tion was defined as a topic
? navigation domain: navigation-related dis-
cussions where each navigation instruction
belonging to the same row in the given route
was defined as a topic
? traffic domain: discussions about the traffic
situation and fellow road-users where each
comment not belonging to a previous event
was defined as a topic
? other domain: anything that does not fit
within the above domains where each com-
ment not belonging to a previous event was
defined as a topic
Topics change has been coded as follows:
? begin-topic: whatever? topic A (new)
? end-topic: topic A (finished)? whatever
? interrupt-topic: topic A (unfinished) ?
whatever
? resume-topic: whatever ? topic A (unfin-
ished)
? reraise-topic: whatever? topic A (finished)
Cognitive load has been annotated as:
? reliable workload: annotated when work-
load is reliably high according to the TDT
(reliability was low if response button was
pressed more than 2 times after the event).
? high: high workload according to IDIS
? low: low workload according to IDIS
movements or driver applying the brake). See
http://www.roadsafe.com/news/article.aspx?article=210
4http://www.lat-mpi.eu/tools/elan/
Silence, regardless of length, has been coded as
a pause.
The annotation schema has not been tested for
inter-coder reliability. While full reliability test-
ing would have further strengthened the results,
we believe that our results are still useful as a basis
for future implementation and experimental work.
2.1 High workload
0%?
5%?
10%?
15%?
20%?
TDT? IDIS? TDT+IDIS?
Workload?
Figure 1: Percentage of annotated workload time.
Figure 1 shows workload measured uniqely by
IDIS, uniqely by the TDT and annotations made
by IDIS and TDT jointly.
The difference in annotation time can be ex-
plained by the fact that IDIS analyses driving be-
haviour while the TDT measures the driver?s re-
action time. IDIS is developed to decide when
it is suitable to show alarms that are non-critical
(such as the indicator for low level of wind screen
washer fluid). Since showing the alarm is not
time critical, IDIS does not measure the individual
driver?s workload directly. Taking this into con-
sideration, IDIS measurements alone might be too
general and approximate when it comes to adapt-
ing a dialogue system to the driver?s cognitive
load. However, neither IDIS nor TDT in isolation
say anything about what is causing the high cog-
nitive load, only that something makes the driver
unable to pay full attention to the task at hand.
These differences can be used to decide what type
of workload the driver is experiencing, which will
be explained next.
3 Workload management
To determine type of workload, the dialoge man-
ager could be extended with a Cognitive Load
Manager (CLM) which has access to two work-
load detectors, a Speech Analyser (SA) and a Vehi-
cle State Analyser (VSA), see figure 2.
Since the driver is talking to a dialogue sys-
tem the most convenient method for determining
323
Speech?analyser?
Vehicle?state?analyser?
Cogni?e ?load?manager?
ASR?
Dialogue?manager?
Figure 2: Architecture of the cognitive load man-
ager.
workload level would be to analyse the speech.
Studies have for example shown that an increased
number of disfluencies such as deletions can in-
dicate increased workload (Shriberg, 2001; Lind-
strom et al, 2008). The driver might also make
sudden changes of domain, e.g. talk as if address-
ing fellow road-users, to indicate that she is busy
sorting out a difficult traffic situation (Villing et
al., 2008). There are no commercial SA systems
present today, however research has shown that
it is possible to detect workload by analysing the
speech signal (Yin et al, 2008).
The VSA analyses the driving behaviour to find
signs of increased workload. Variants of VSA-like
modules are a reality in the vehicle industry today.
For example, if the driver puts the brake on, makes
a left turn or manages the radio or the fan, it is
assumed that the workload is high.
The CLM collects data from the detectors and
determines type of workload based on the com-
bined signals from the SA and the VSA. Type of
workload can be set to driving-induced (workload
that is affecting the driving performance, detected
by the VSA) or dialogue-induced (workload that
is not affecting the driving performance, detected
by the SA) based on four assumptions, shown in
Table 1.
4 Results
4.1 High workload annotations
Figure 3 shows the number of instances of
high workload detected by IDIS alone (possi-
bly driving-induced), by TDT alone (dialogue-
induced) and by both IDIS and TDT jointly
(driving-induced) for each domain. The TDT
makes most annotations in the other and interview
domains and fewest in the traffic domain, while
the TDT and IDIS jointly makes most annotations
in the traffic and other domains and fewest in the
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
?????? ??? ???? ???
??????????????????????????????
Figure 3: High workload measured for each do-
main.
interview domain.
To make the SA more powerful, we wanted to
investigate if an analysis of dialogue behaviour
might improve the possibility to determine work-
load level. The most frequent topic changes are
shown in Figure 4. Most interview related top-
ics are discussed during dialogue-induced work-
load, while traffic related topics are discussed
during driving-induced workload. During possi-
bly driving-induced workload the topics are fairly
equally spread. These results are further discussed
in (Villing, 2009).
0%?
20%?
40%?
60%?
80%?
100%?
Dialogue?induced?Possibly?driving?induced?Driving?induced?
Figure 4: Topic shift during high workload.
Figure 5 shows the average duration of the
driver?s pauses.
Figure 6 shows that the majority of driver utter-
ances are produced during low workload.
5 Discussion
Figure 5 and 6 shows that an analysis of the speech
can give clues about workload level. The dura-
tion of the pauses is increasing during high work-
load, and especially during driving-induced work-
load. This supports our hypothesis that the dia-
logue system should pause when the driver needs
to concentrate on the driving task. This trend can
also be derived from Figure 6, since the number
324
SA + VSA SA VSA
driver speaking driving-induced dialogue-induced false alarm
driver not speaking - - possibly driving-induced
Table 1: CLM output based on information from the SA and the VSA.
0?0,2?
0,4?0,6?
0,8?1?
1,2?1,4?
1,6?1,8?
Low?workload? Dialogue?induced? Possibly?driving?induced? Driving?induced?
Figure 5: Average pause duration for the driver (in
seconds).
Low?workload?Dialogue?induced?Possibly?driving?induced?Driving?induced?
Figure 6: Distribution of driver utterances during
low and high workload.
of utterances are decreasing dramatically under
high workload when comparing with low work-
load. The driver seems to make fewest utterances
during driving-induced workload.
Looking at Figure 3, it seems like the VSA-
like systems present today would benefit from co-
operating with a system that is able to make a
deeper analyse of the cognitive load of the driver.
For example, the traffic domain holds almost no
dialogue-induced workload annotations but sec-
ond most driving-induced, supporting the theory
that people often make comments about the traf-
fic situation to signal that they have to concentrate
on the driving task. The results, although tenta-
tive, can be seen as an indication that it is possi-
ble to distinguish between different types of cogni-
tive load by analysing both driving behaviour and
speech, and that different types of workload de-
mand different dialogue strategies.
6 Future work
Next we will analyse the DICO material regarding
interruptions, to find a relevant interruption place
in the dialogue, i.e. a place where it is most suit-
able to pause in order to disturb the driver as little
as possible.
The resumption behaviour will also be analysed
to see who takes the initiative to resume the dia-
logue and how it is done. The findings will form a
basis for a theory of in-vehicle dialogue manage-
ment.
References
Anders Lindstrom, Jessica Villing, Staffan Lars-
son, Alexander Seward, Nina Aberg, and Cecilia
Holtelius. 2008. The effect of cognitive load on
disfluencies during in-vehicle spoken dialogue. In
Proceedings of Interspeech 2008.
Elisabeth Shriberg. 2001. To "errrr" is human: ecology
and acoustics of speech and disfluencies. Journal of
the International Phonetic Association, 31:153?169.
W van Winsum, M Martens, and L Herland. 1999. The
effect of speech versus tactile driver support mes-
sages on workload, driver behaviour and user ac-
ceptance. tno-report tm-99-c043. Technical report,
Soesterberg, Netherlands.
Jessica Villing, Cecilia Holtelius, Staffan Larsson, An-
der Lindstrom, Alexander Seward, and Nina Aberg.
2008. Interruption, resumption and domain switch-
ing in in-vehicle dialogue. In Bengt Nordstrom and
Aarne Ranta, editors, Proceedings of GoTAL, 6th In-
ternational Conference of Advances in Natural Lan-
guage Processing, volume 5221, pages 488?499,
August.
Jessica Villing. 2009. In-vehicle dialogue man-
agement - towards distinguishing between different
types of workload. In Proceedings of SiMPE, Fourth
Workshop on Speech in Mobile and Pervasive Envi-
ronments (to appear).
Bo Yin, N. Ruiz, Fang Chen, and E. Embikairajah.
2008. Investigating speech features and automatic
measurement of cognitive load. In Proceedings of
2008 IEEE 10th Workshop on Multimedia Signal
Processing, pages 988?993.
325
