Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 4?17,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
A computational account of comparative
implicatures for a spoken dialogue agent
?
Luciana Benotti
LORIA/INRIA, France
benottil@loria.fr
David Traum
ICT/USC, USA
traum@ict.usc.edu
Abstract
Comparative constructions are common in dialogue, especially in
negotiative dialogue where a choice must be made between different
options, and options must be evaluated using multiple metrics. Com-
paratives explicitly assert a relationship between two elements along a
scale, but they may also implicate positions on the scale especially if
constraints on the possible values are present. Dialogue systems must
often understand more from a comparative than the explicit assertion
in order to understand why the comparative was uttered. In this paper
we examine the pragmatic meaning of comparative constructions from
a computational perspective.
1 Introduction
It is a big challenge for computational semantics of dialogue that much of
the meaning of an utterance is conveyed not just through the compositional
meanings of the words themselves, but in relation to the situation in which
the utterance is performed, including the background knowledge, common
ground, goals, and ontologies of the participants. A number of pragmatic
principles have been proposed to bridge this gap, including Grice?s maxims
(and the associated concepts of Implicature and Relevance)
[
6
]
, Accommo-
dation
[
12
]
and Bridging
[
2
]
.
?
This work was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research, Development, and Engineering
Command (RDECOM). Statements and opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the
position or the policy of the United States Government, and no official endorsement should
be inferred.
4
While these principles can provide elegant explanations of how meaning
can be conveyed between people, they often require fairly strong assump-
tions about the common knowledge between participants and the ontologies
that this knowledge must be organized in. There are two general prob-
lems in developing computational accounts of these phenomena. First, it is
sometimes difficult to specify the required knowledge and relationships in a
computational way, such that a reasoner given the input and context can
compute a particular, specific meaning as opposed to other possibilities that
are not as appropriate. Second, even if the principles are sufficiently clear so
that a computational account can be formulated, there may still be a prob-
lem providing a given computational dialogue system with the appropriate
knowledge to carry out the inferences in a way that is congruent with human
interpretations. For a hand-constructed limited domain, the system designer
will often take shortcuts and represent only the knowledge that is necessary
to carry out and understand tasks in that domain. These limitations often
render the dialogue system unable to reason about the domain in as much
detail as a knowledgeable human would, but often this characterization is
sufficient for the purposes of the conversation.
In this paper we examine one aspect of computational non-compositional
meaning: the pragmatic meaning of comparative constructions. Compara-
tive constructions are common in dialogue, especially in negotiative dialogue
where a choice must be made between different options, and options must
be evaluated using multiple metrics. Comparatives explicitly assert a rela-
tionship between two elements along a scale, but they may also implicate
positions on the scale especially if either information about the position of
one of the compared items or constraints on the possible values are present.
Dialogue systems must often understand more from a comparative than the
explicit assertion in order to understand why the comparative was uttered;
why it is relevant to the dialogue.
In the next section, we present linguistic background on comparatives
and conversational implicature. In section 3, we review some issues of how
implicatures play out in dialogue in which multiple participants are involved,
and a listener can clarify a lack of understanding. In section 4, we introduce
the computational framework in which the present work is implemented.
In section 5, we present extensions to this framework which provide the
computational agents with the ability to understand implicatures arising
from comparatives. In section 6 we evaluate this with respect to the scenario
of SASO-EN
[
15
]
, in which an army captain, a doctor, and a town elder
discuss the best location for a medical clinic. Finally, we discuss related
issues, remaining problems, and future work in Section 7.
5
2 Linguistic background
In this section we review some of the previous work on comparatives con-
structions and conversational implicatures in order to establish the necessary
theoretical basis for the discussion on comparative implicatures in the rest
of the paper.
2.1 Comparative constructions
In the classical literature on semantics of natural language comparatives (see
e.g.,
[
4
]
), comparative constructions such as (1) are analyzed as a relation
between two degrees as in (2).
(1) Downtown is safer than the market.
(2) Degree to which downtown is safe > Degree to which the market is
safe.
The problem now, of course, is what a degree is and what are the prop-
erties of the relation >. Abstractly, a degree can be considered just as a
collection of objects ? the collection of those objects that share the same
degree with respect to a given property P . These collections are defined as
the equivalence classes of the equivalence relation =
P
, which in turn is de-
fined in terms of an order >
P
among objects. The relation > among degrees
is defined as a lifting of >
P
to the set of equivalent classes of =
P
. Finally,
scales are defined in terms of degrees, a scale S
P
is a sequence of degrees of
P ordered by the relation >.
Summing up then, once we know what >
P
is for a property P we know
what degrees of P are and how to compare them on scale S
P
. All is good
and well, but this approach assumes the relation >
P
as given. Such a strong
assumption was already criticized by
[
9
]
and certainly cannot be made in a
dialogue system where information about the domain of discourse (in partic-
ular, any order >
P
for a given property P ) is incomplete and is constructed
(and negotiated) during the dialogue. As dialogue system builders, the is-
sue that interests us is, not so much how to determine the truth value of a
particular comparative utterance, but mainly how comparatives contribute
to the construction of the information about the domain. So, for our task
it is crucial to figure out ?where do scales come from??
6
2.2 Conversational implicatures
Modelling how listeners draw inferences from what they hear is a basic
problem for the theories of understanding natural language. An important
part of the information conveyed is inferred, as in the following classical
example by Grice
[
6
]
:
(3) A: I am out of petrol.
B: There is a garage around the corner.
; B thinks that the garage is open and has petrol to sell.
B?s answer conversationally implicates (;) information that is relevant
to A. In Grice?s terms, B made a relevance implicature, he would be flouting
Grice?s maxim of relevance unless he believes that the garage is open. A
conversational implicature (CI) is different from an entailment in that it is
cancelable without contradiction (B can append material that is inconsistent
with the CI ??but I don?t know whether it?s open?). Since the CI can be
cancelled, B knows that it does not necessarily hold and then both B or
A are able to reinforce it (or negotiate it) without repetition. CIs are non-
conventional, they are not part of the conventional meaning of the words but
calculable from their utterance in context given the nature of conversation
as a goal-oriented enterprise.
Scalar implicatures are a type of CI that are particularly relevant to
this paper since they involve the use of scales, as comparatives do. These
implicatures are inferred on the basis of the assumption that the speaker is
trying to make his utterance sufficiently informative for the current purposes
of the exchange. A typical example is:
(4) A is hungry (and B knows it).
A: Did somebody eat the brownies that I bought this morning?
B: Fred ate some of them.
; B thinks that Fred didn?t eat all of them, there are some left.
Theories of scalar implicature have been deeply influenced by Horn?s
dissertation work
[
8
]
. A Horn scale is an ordered sequence of expressions
such as ?some,many,most, all? and ?warm, hot, scalding?. The recipe to
calculate the scalar implicature is the following. The use of a weaker word
in the scale (such as some) implicates that (the speaker believes that) the
stronger form (such as all) is not the case, as exemplified in (4). However,
there are cases in which such a recipe does not apply, such as in (5).
7
(5) A realizes that the brownies were injected with strychnine and suspects
that somebody may have eaten from them (and B knows it).
A: Did somebody eat the brownies that I bought this morning?
B: Fred ate some of them.
In this example the scalar implicature is (at the very least) less likely to
arise, it?s not relevant for the current purposes of the exchange; it doesn?t
matter how many brownies Fred ate, he needs medical attention. Comparing
(4) and (5) we can see that conversational implicatures are affected by the
conversational goals. We believe this to be an starting point for answering
the question left open in Section 2.1: ?Where do scales come from?? and
we will investigate it in next section.
3 Comparative implicatures in dialogue
In this Section we are going to introduce comparative implicatures and to
develop two lines of thought introduced in the previous section, but now in
the context of dialogue. First, we relate the cancellability and negotiability
of CIs and clarification requests in dialogue. It?s often controversial whether
something is actually a CI or not (people sometimes have different intu-
itions). Dialogue provide us with an extra tools for identifying the partici-
pants? beliefs about implicatures: feedback and negotiation of CIs. Listeners
can give both positive (e.g. acknowledgements) and negative (e.g. clarifi-
cation requests) feedback about their understanding and the acceptability
of utterances, which can shed light on how they interpret CIs. Moreover,
speakers can negotiate whether something is really implicated, or whether
an implicature is meant by the speaker. We also investigate the fact that
conversational implicatures change when the conversational goals change.
Conversational goals establish structure on the information that is being
discussed, determining which distinctions are relevant and which are not for
the a given interaction.
3.1 Clarifications
In dialogue, a useful way to spot content that was meant but not actually
said is to look at the kinds of dialogue feedback that is given. Clarification
requests are one important part of this - focusing on cases where the initial
listener is not sure of what the speaker means. Here we use the phrase
clarification requests in its broad sense, including all those questions that
would not make sense without the previous utterance in the dialogue.
8
Many times the clarification requests make the implicatures explicit, this
is illustrated by the fact that the clarification request in (6) can follow Grice?s
example in (3).
(6) A: and you think it?s open?
Here we present clarifications as a test that helps us identify not only
the potential conversational implicatures but also the presuppositions in a
dialogue. (7) is an example of a well studied case of inferrable content: the
presupposition triggered by definite descriptions. In this exchange, A might
believe that the intended referent is salient for different reasons: because it
was mentioned before, because it?s bigger, etc. If such a piece of information
is available to B then he will be able to infer the presupposition and add
it to the conversational record. Otherwise, B might well signal A that the
presupposition did not get through, like in (7).
(7) There are 100 cups on a table.
A: Pick up THE cup.
B: Which cup? (I don?t know which one you are referring to.)
The presence of a conversational implicature must be capable of being
worked out, so the hearer might well inquire about them. The speaker will
have to answer and support the implicature if he wants to get it added to
the common ground. In
[
13
]
, the authors present a study of the different
kinds of clarification requests (CRs) found in a dialogue corpus. Their re-
sults show that the most frequent CRs in their corpus (51.74%) are due to
problems with referring expressions (such as example (7)) and the second
most common (22.17%) are examples like the following.
(8) A: Turn it on.
B: By pushing the red button?
Here, the CR made explicit a potential requirement for the performance
of the requested action. By saying ?Turn it on? A meant that B had to
push the red button but this was not explicitly mentioned in the command
uttered by A. Such an implicature can be inferred from knowledge about the
task (or in Clark terms, from knowledge about the interaction level of joint
action
[
3
]
). From this examples it should be clear that implicated content
is a rich source of CRs.
9
3.2 Goals and Contextual Scales
As described in Section 2, comparative sentences explicitly claim an ordering
of two items on a relevant scale. However, with more context, a comparative
can implicate degrees on a scale as well. If we know the degree of one of
the items then we have a fixed range for the other item. If this range
contains only one possible degree, then the comparative also sets the degree
for this item. In the simplest possible scale in which a comparative could be
applied, there are only two degrees, and a comparative indicates the degrees
of each item even without more knowledge of the degrees of either item. For
example, consider (9) inspired by
[
5
]
:
(9) B is drawing and A is giving instructions to B:
A: Draw two squares, one bigger than the other.
B: Done.
A: Now, paint the small square blue and the big one red.
; A thinks that one of the squares can be described as small and the
other as big.
The question remains, however, of how the scales are selected? These
are not generalized implicatures that always arise. Every time we say ?Fred
is taller than Tom? we don?t mean that ?Fred is tall? and ?Tom is short?.
As discussed in Section 2, conversational implicatures are affected by con-
versational goals. We believe that this is the path that we have to follow in
order to explain comparative implicatures as particularized implicatures.
Predicates such as tall and small are vague in that they can refer to
different ranges of a scale and in fact different scales. Small refers to size,
which as a default we might think of as a continuous scale measure, however,
as in the example above, we might prefer to use a simpler scale. This
phenomena was already noticed by
[
7
]
who says:
There is a range of structures we can impose on scales. These
map complex scales into simpler scales. For example, in much
work in qualitative physics the actual measurement of some pa-
rameter may be anything on the real line, but this is mapped
into one of three values ? positive, zero, and negative.
How are such structures over scales defined? The intuitive idea is that
the structure only distinguishes those values that are relevant for the goals
of the agent; that is when the attribute takes a particular value, it plays a
causal role in deciding whether some agent?s goal can be achieved or not.
10
In the example above, we have only small and big as relevant values for
size, and a comparative in this context will implicate that we are using this
binary scale as well as the degrees that each of the items of comparison have.
4 Computational framework
The computational framework we have used for the implementation is the
ICT Virtual Human dialogue manager
[
14; 16
]
. This dialogue manager al-
lows virtual humans to participate in bilateral or multiparty task-oriented
conversations in a variety of domains, including teamand non-teamnegotiation.
This dialogue manager follows the information state approach
[
11
]
, with a
rich set of dialogue acts at different levels. The dialogue manager is em-
bedded within the Soar cognitive architecture
[
10
]
, and decisions about in-
terpreting and producing speech compete with other cognitive and physical
operations. When an utterance has been perceived (either from processing of
Automatic Speech Recognizer and Natural Language Understanding (NLU)
components which present hypotheses of context-independent semantic rep-
resentations, or messages from self or other agents), the dialogue manager
processes these utterances, making decisions about pragmatic information
such as the set of speech acts that this utterance performs as well as the
meanings of referring expressions. Updates are then performed to the in-
formation state on the basis of the recognized acts. The representations of
semantic and pragmatic elements for questions and assertions are presented
in
[
14
]
. The semantic structure derives from the task model used for plan-
ning, emotion and other reasoning. (10a) shows an example proposition in
this domain, where propositions have an object id, an attribute, and a value
(whose type is defined by the attribute). (10b) shows an assertion speech
act, with this proposition as content.
(10) a. (<prop1> ?attribute safety ?object market ?type state ?value no)
b. (<da1> ?action assert ?actor doctor ?addressee captain ?content
<prop1>)
In the next section, we extend this framework to allow comparative
propositions and speech acts arising from implicatures of comparatives.
5 Implementing comparative implicatures
We have added an ability for the ICT dialogue manager to handle compara-
tive constructions and comparative implicatures. Some of the attributes in
11
the task model for a given domain will be scalar, where there is some implied
ordering of the possible values. This will not be the case for all attributes,
for example, the location allows for different possible places that an entity
can be, but there is no scale among them. For each scalar attribute, P , in
the task model of our domain, we can create a comparative attribute >
P
that will compare objects and values according to the designated scale for
P . (11a) means that X is higher on the P scale than Y. In our system, when
a comparative of the form ?X is P -er than Y ? is uttered, the NLU gener-
ates a semantic frame that has the structure shown in (11a). The dialogue
manager will then create an assertion speech act as represented in (11b) and
then infer the conversational implicatures that arise.
(11) a. (<prop1> ?attribute >
P
?object X ?type state ?value Y )
b. (<da1> ?action assert ?actor A ?addressee B ?content <prop1>)
The comparative implicatures depend on both the nature of the scale
and the available information about the positions of the compared items.
For the special case of a binary scale (e.g. yes > no), the comparative
construction itself can generate multiple implicatures, as in (12).
(12) a. By the definition of the scale S = ?no, yes? and its association with
the attribute P then we know that, if <prop> ?attribute P ?value
V , then V ? S
b. As the utterance asserts (<prop1> ?attribute >
P
?object X ?value
Y ), it is interpreted as asserting (<prop2> ?attribute P ?object
X ?value V 1) and (<prop3> ?attribute P ?object Y ?value V 2),
where values V 1 and V 2 are not known but it is known that V 1 >
V 2
From (12a) we have that V 1 ? S and V 2 ? S, from (12b) we have that
V 1 > V 2. Since S has 2 elements and yes > no, there is a unique valuation
for V 1 and V 2, namely V 1 = yes and V 2 = no. Once the values of V 1
and V 2 are determined the following two dialogue acts are generated as
part of the interpretation and reinserted in the dialogue manager cycle. The
information state will not only be updated with the comparative assertion
?X is P -er than Y ? but also with the two following dialogue acts. The first
one asserts that ?X is P?. And the second one asserts that ?Y is not P?.
(13) (<prop2> ?attribute P ?object X ?type state ?value yes)
(<da2> ?action assert ?actor A ?addressee B ?content <prop2>)
12
(14) (<prop3> ?attribute P ?object Y ?type state ?value no)
(<da3> ?action assert ?actor A ?addressee B ?content <prop3>)
This is the first part of the problem. The question now is when and
how to update the information state with (13) and (14): before, at the same
time or after the explicit assertion (11b)); we will discuss these issues in
next subsection. Moreover, in some contexts the conversational implicature
carried by the comparative will not get through, how are such information
states recognized and what is done instead will be addressed in Section 7.
5.1 When and how is the information state updated?
When interpreting an utterance U that has a conversational implicature I,
the dialogue manager needs to have accessible the content of the implicature
before generating a response. The three approaches presented below make
explicit the implicature in the dialogue, just as if its verbalization has been
uttered during the dialogue. Since the inferred content is made explicit,
these approaches can be seen as implementations of the Principle of Explicit
Addition
[
1
]
which applies both to accommodation of content that has been
lexically triggered (such as presuppositions) as well as content that has not
(such as conversational implicatures).
The after approach: A first approach is to add the inferred assertion I
as further input received by the dialogue manager once it finished
processing the utterance U . The idea for the implementation is simple:
just re-insert the frame of the inferred assertion(s) as an input to the
dialogue manager, as if it had been uttered in the dialogue.
At the same time: A second approach is to consider that a single asser-
tion performs multiple speech acts. The implementation of this option
in the current computational framework is also quite straightforward
because the framework already allows for multiple speech acts asso-
ciated with an utterance and then the information state is correctly
updated.
The before approach: The third approach is to interrupt the processing
of the explicit assertion U to update the information state first with the
implicature I. Such an implementation requires significant changes to
the dialogue manager to interrupt processing on the current assertion
and first interpret the inferred speech acts before re-interpreting.
13
The crucial difference among the three implementations is what content
will be available in the information state when the rest of the content has to
be interpreted. In the same time approach all the updates are independent,
the information state does not contain the implicatures, nor the explicit
assertion when interpreting any of them. In the after approach, U is avail-
able in the information state when interpreting I; by contrast, in the before
approach I is available when interpreting U .
These differences are relevant when they interact with other parts of the
interpretation process, such as reference resolution. Consider for instance
the following utterance:
(15) A: I went to the hospital Saint-Joseph, the British clinic was too far.
A: The doctor gave me some medicine
The utterance ?The doctor gave me some medicine? would normally
be interpreted as implicating that A saw a doctor in the hospital Saint-
Joseph. In order to properly interpret this utterance, it?s important that
the implicature is in the context before resolving the referring expression
?the doctor?. We leave for future work the interaction with other aspects
of interpretation, such as word sense disambiguation.
6 A case-study
We have evaluated the implementation in the context of the SASO-EN sce-
nario
[
15
]
, where both comparatives and binary scales are present in the task
model. This domain contains over 60 distinct states that the agents con-
sider as relevant for plan and negotiation purposes. There are currently 11
attributes used for this domain, 7 of which are binary scales and 4 of which
are non-scalar. Adding the comparative implicature rules from the previous
section allows understanding of additional arguments that were not previ-
ously dealt with adequately by the system. Consider the following fragment
of a dialogue among the Captain (a human agent), the Elder and the Doctor
(two virtual agents) about the location of a clinic.
(16) Captain: Doctor would you be willing to move the clinic downtown?
Doctor: It is better to keep the clinic here in the marketplace.
Captain: Well, downtown is safer than the market
Elder: Why do you think that the market is not safe?
During the interpretation of the comparative uttered by the Captain,
the dialogue manager receives the following semantic frame:
14
(17) (<prop> ?attribute safer ?object downtown ?type state ?value mar-
ket)
Then the inferred rules developed in Section 5 are applied and the in-
formation state is updated not only with an assertion of (17) but also with
the following two assertions:
(18) (<prop1> ?attribute safety ?object downtown ?type state ?value yes)
(<prop1> ?attribute safety ?object market ?type state ?value no)
Since these propositions assert the fact that the market is not safe before
the Elder generates a response, he can directly address and query the reason
for one of these implicatures with ?why do you think that the market is not
safe??
In the general case, we might have to reason about the appropriate scale
to use for this attribute, but in our domain, only one scale is relevant, so
this additional inference is not needed.
Without the comparative implicature rules, neither the elder nor the
doctor would recognize that the captain is asserting something about the
safety of each of the locations and will not be able to properly assess the
argument about desirability of moving the clinic.
7 Discussion
As mentioned in Section 3, the relevant information sources of a dialogue,
such as the task model, shed light on how the scales that are relevant for
calculating implicatures should be constructed. However, once comparative
implicatures are inferred they interact with the structure of the dialogue
in relevant ways. When implicated assertions are already in the context,
because they have been uttered before, the information state does not need
to be updated again with them.
If A says ? and implicates ? but A said ? before in the dialogue then
the context of the dialogue does not have to be updated again with ?. In
this case, we say that the implicature has been bound (to use standard
terminology in the area) and the information state is not modified by it.
The result is a coherent dialogue, a dialogue that gives the intuition of
?continuing on the same topic or stressing the same point? such as in the
following example:
(19) Captain: the market is not safe
Captain: downtown is safer than the market
15
The point can be better illustrated when the two contributions are not
made by the same speaker. In this case, A says ? and B says ? which
implicates ?, then ? has the effect of accepting ? and adding it to the
common ground. This implements the intuition that, in (20), the elder
seems to be supporting the captain in his claim that the market is not safe.
(20) Captain: the market is not safe
Elder: downtown is safer than the market
Finally, implicature cancellation is implemented in a simplistic way in
the current framework. When A says ? and implicates ? but ?? is already
in the common ground, the implicature is simply ignored.
Our implementation captures the intuition that the relevant values of
the properties in a domain are those that are causally related to the agent?s
goals. This is used in order to construct or locate appropriate scales and
infer useful implicatures that interact with the dialogue structure in different
ways. However, not all the predictions achieved by such an implementation
are explainable and further refinement is needed. Consider the following
dialogue:
(21) C: Downtown is safer than the market
C: The US base is safer than downtown
If we apply the inference rules developed in Section 5 to this exchange,
which implicature gets through will depend on the order in which the utter-
ances in (21) are said. If they are said in the order shown in (21) then the
implicature that downtown is safe will get through; if they are uttered in
the opposite order, then the implicature that downtown is not safe will get
through. We leave the study of these kinds of interactions to further work.
It is clear that treating conversational implicatures in dialogue is a com-
plex problem, and that it interacts in relevant ways with other key features
of dialogue, namely positive and negative evidence of understanding. It is
important that the theory of implicatures acknowledges the fact that con-
versational implicatures are a phenomena that arises in conversation and
that then needs to be studied in its environment to be fully understood.
This paper starts by motivating this big picture, and then relates it to the
semantic theory of comparatives and the pragmatic theory of implicatures
in order to address the practical problem of comparative implicatures that
arises in an implemented dialogue agent.
16
References
[
1
]
D. Beaver and H. Zeevat. Accommodation. In The Oxford Handbook of Lin-
guistic Interfaces, pages 503?539. OUP, 2007.
[
2
]
H. Clark. Bridging. In The 1975 Workshop on Theoretical issues in natural
language processing, pages 169?174. ACL, 1975.
[
3
]
H. Clark. Using Language. CUP, 1996.
[
4
]
M. Cresswell. The semantics of degree. In Montague Grammar, 1976.
[
5
]
D. DeVault and M. Stone. Interpreting vague utterances in context. In Proc.
of COLING04, pages 1247?1253, 2004.
[
6
]
H. Grice. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J. L. Morgan, editors, Syntax
and Semantics: Vol. 3: Speech Acts, pages 41?58. AP, 1975.
[
7
]
J. Hobbs. Discourse and inference. To appear.
[
8
]
L. Horn. On the semantic properties of logical operators in english. PhD thesis,
University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), 1972.
[
9
]
E. Klein. A semantics for positive and comparative adjectives. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 4:1?45, 1980.
[
10
]
J. Laird, A. Newell, and P. Rosenbloom. SOAR: an architecture for general
intelligence. AI, 33(1):1?64, September 1987.
[
11
]
S. Larsson and D. Traum. Information state and dialogue management in the
TRINDI dialogue move engine toolkit. Natural Language Engineering, 6:323?
340, September 2000.
[
12
]
D. Lewis. Scorekeeping in a language game. Journal of Philosophical Logic,
8:339?359, 1979.
[
13
]
K. Rodr??guez and D. Schlangen. Form, intonation and function of clarification
requests in german task oriented spoken dialogues. In CATALOG04, pages
101?108, 2004.
[
14
]
D. Traum. Semantics and pragmatics of questions and answers for dialogue
agents. In Proc. of IWCS-5, pages 380?394, 2003.
[
15
]
D. Traum, S. Marsella, J. Gratch, J. Lee, and A. Hartholt. Multi-party,
multi-issue, multi-strategy negotiation for multi-modal virtual agents. In
H. Prendinger, J. Lester, and M. Ishizuka, editors, IVA, volume 5208 of LNCS,
pages 117?130. Springer, 2008.
[
16
]
D. Traum, W. Swartout, J. Gratch, and S. Marsella. A virtual human dialogue
model for non-team interaction. In L. Dybkjaer and W. Minker, editors, Recent
Trends in Discourse and Dialogue. Springer, 2008.
17
