Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 1?9,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
A Cognitive-based Annotation System for Emotion Computing 
 
 
Ying Chen, Sophia Y. M. Lee and Chu-Ren Huang 
Department of Chinese & Bilingual Studies 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
{chenying3176,sophiaym,churen.huang}@gmail.com 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Emotion computing is very important for 
expressive information extraction. In this 
paper, we provide a robust and versatile 
emotion annotation scheme based on cog-
nitive emotion theories, which not only 
can annotate both explicit and implicit 
emotion expressions, but also can encode 
different levels of emotion information for 
the given emotion content. In addition, 
motivated by a cognitive framework, an 
automatic emotion annotation system is 
developed, and large and comparatively 
high-quality emotion corpora are created 
for emotion computing, one in Chinese 
and the other in English. Such an annota-
tion system can be easily adapted for dif-
ferent kinds of emotion applications and 
be extended to other languages. 
1 Introduction 
Affective information is important for human 
language technology, and sentiment analysis, a 
coarse-grained affective computing (Shanahan et 
al., 2006), which is attitude assessment, has be-
come the most salient trend. The polarity-driven 
approach in sentiment analysis is, however, often 
criticized as too general to satisfy some applica-
tions, such as advertisement design and robot 
design, and one way to capture more fine-grained 
affective information is to detect emotion expres-
sions. Unlike sentiment, emotions are cognitive-
based, which consistently occur across domains 
because of its human psychological activities. 
We believe that emotion computing, which is a 
fine-grained and cognitive-based framework of 
affective computing, will provide a more robust 
and versatile model for human language technol-
ogy. 
Since the concept of emotion is very compli-
cated and subjective, comparing to some annota-
tions such as POS annotation and Chinese word 
segmentation annotation, emotion annotation is 
highly labor intensive as it requires careful hu-
man judgment. Both explicit and implicit emo-
tions must be recognized and tagged during emo-
tion annotation, therefore, emotion annotation is 
not a simple assignment exercise as in POS an-
notation. Technically, emotion annotation can be 
divided into two subtasks: emotion detection (i.e. 
differentiate emotional content from neutral con-
tent), which is a very important task for affective 
information extraction, and emotion classifica-
tion (i.e. assign emotion tags to emotional con-
tent.)  
Emotion computing often requires a large and 
high-quality annotated data, however, there is a 
lack of this kind of corpus. This is not only be-
cause of the enormous human involvement, but 
also because of the unavailability of emotion an-
notation scheme, which is robust and versatile 
for both emotion annotation and emotion com-
puting. Tokuhisa et al (2008) is the only work 
that explores the issue of emotion detection 
while most of the previous studies concentrate on 
the emotion classification given a known emo-
tion context (Mihalcea and Liu, 2006; Kozareva 
et al, 2007.) Even for emotion classification, 
some issues remain unresolved, such as the com-
plicated relationships among different emotion 
types, emotion type selection, and so on. Thus, it 
is still far from solving the emotion problem if 
emotion annotation is just considered as emo-
tion-tag assignment.  
In this paper, we first explore the relationships 
among different emotion types with the support 
of a proposed emotion taxonomy, which com-
bines some psychological theories and linguistic 
semantics. Based on the emotion taxonomy, a 
robust and versatile emotion annotation scheme 
is designed and used in both Chinese and English 
1
emotion corpora. Our emotion annotation 
scheme is very flexible, which is only a layer 
added to a sentence, although it can easily be 
extended to a higher level of a text. Our annota-
tion scheme not only can provide the emotion 
type information, but also can encode the infor-
mation regarding the relationship between emo-
tions. With this versatile annotated emotion in-
formation, different NLP users can extract dif-
ferent emotion information from a given anno-
tated corpus according to their applications.  
With such an emotion annotation scheme, a 
large and comparatively high-quality annotated 
emotion corpus is built for emotion computing 
through an unsupervised approach. Tokuhisa et 
al. (2008) pointed out that besides emotion cor-
pus, neutral corpus (i.e. sentences containing no 
emotion) is also very important for emotion 
computing. Therefore, a high-quality neutral 
corpus is also automatically collected using con-
textual information. These two corpora are com-
bined to form a complete emotion-driven corpus 
for emotion computing. Although the unsuper-
vised method cannot provide a perfectly-
annotated corpus, it can easily adapt for different 
emotion computing.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. In Section 2, we give an overview of the 
previous work on emotion annotation and some 
related psychological and linguistic theories. In 
Section 3, we describe our emotion taxonomy 
and emotion annotation scheme. Section 4 dis-
cusses how the unsupervised corpus is created.  
Section 5 presents the pilot experiments for emo-
tion computing with our corpus, which suggests 
that the unsupervised approach of our corpus 
creation is effective. Finally, a conclusion is 
made in Section 5. 
2 Related work 
There is no clear consensus among many psy-
chological and linguistic theories on the concept 
of emotions. Here, we limit our work by the clas-
sic definition of ?emotions? (Cannon, 1927): 
Emotion is the felt awareness of bodily reactions 
to something perceived or thought. 
Emotion is a complicated concept, and there 
are complicated relationships among different 
emotions. For example, the relationship between 
?discouraged? and ?sad? is different with the one 
between ?remorse? and ?sad.? Hobbs & Gordon 
(2008) and Mathieu (2005) explore emotions 
mainly from a lexical semantics perspective, and 
Schr?der et al (2006) designed an annotation 
scheme, EARL, mainly for speech processing. 
Because of the disagreements in emotion theories, 
EARL did not explore the relationships among 
emotion types. In this paper, we focus on emo-
tions in written data, which is very different from 
that of in spoken data in terms of expressions. 
Here, we first adopt psychological theories 
(Plutchik, 1980; Turner, 2000) to create an emo-
tion taxonomy, and then design an emotion anno-
tation scheme based on the taxonomy. 
Since most of the previous emotion corpora 
are either too small (Xu et al, 2008) or compara-
tively ineffective in terms of accuracy (Tokuhisa 
et al, 2008), they cannot satisfy the requirements 
of emotion computing. In this paper, based on 
Natural Semantic Metalanguage (NSM), a cogni-
tive approach to human emotions (which will be 
discussed in the later section), we create an au-
tomatic emotion annotation system. While this 
annotation system needs only a little training da-
ta and does not require human supervision, the 
corpus still maintains a comparatively high qual-
ity. Another significant advantage of our auto-
matic annotation system is that it can easily adapt 
to different emotion applications by simply sup-
plying different training data. 
Most of the existing emotion theories study 
emotions from the biological and psychological 
perspectives, hence they cannot easily apply to 
NLP. Fortunately, NSM, one of the prominent 
cognitive models exploring human emotions, 
offers a comprehensive and practical approach to 
emotions (Wierbicka 1996.) NSM describes 
complex and abstract concepts, such as emotions, 
in terms of simpler and concrete ones. In such a 
way, emotions are decomposed as complex 
events involving a cause and a mental state, 
which can be further described with a set of uni-
versal, irreducible cores called semantic primi-
tives. This approach identifies the exact differ-
ences and connections between emotion concepts 
in terms of the causes, which provide an imme-
diate cue for emotion detection and classification. 
We believe that the NSM model offers a plausi-
ble framework to be implemented for automatic 
emotion computing.  
3 Emotion annotation scheme 
3.1 The emotion taxonomy 
Although there are many emotion theories devel-
oped in different fields, such as biology, psy-
chology, and linguistics, most of them agree that 
emotion can be divided into primary emotions 
and complex emotions (i.e. the combinations of 
2
primary emotions.) There is still controversy 
over the selection of primary emotions, nonethe-
less, ?happiness?, ?sadness?, ?anger?, and ?fear? 
are considered as primary emotions by most of 
emotion theories.  
Plutchik?s emotion taxonomy (Plutchik 1980), 
one of the classic emotion taxonomies, also fol-
lows the division of primary emotions and com-
plex emotions, and Turner's taxonomy (Turner 
2000), which is based on Plutchik?s work, allows  
more flexible combinations of primary emotions. 
In this paper, we adopt Turner?s taxonomy, with 
the two main points emphasized: 
1) For each primary emotion, it is divided into 
three levels according to its intensity: high, mod-
erate, and low. Besides ?happiness,? ?sadness,? 
?anger? and ?fear,? Turner also suggests that 
?disgust? and ?surprise? can be primary emo-
tions (Turner 1996; Turner 2007). In Chinese, 
the character ??? (?surprise?) has a strong abil-
ity to form many emotion words, such as ?? 
(surprise and happiness), and ?? (surprise and 
fear), which is consistent with the explanation of 
?surprise? emotion by Plutchik (1991): ?when 
the stimulus has been evaluated, the surprise may 
quickly change to any other emotion.? Therefore, 
in our annotation scheme, we consider ?happi-
ness,? ?sadness,? ?anger,? ?fear,? and ?surprise? 
as primary emotions. 
2) Complex emotion can be divided into first-
order complex emotions (consisting of two pri-
mary emotions), second-order complex emotions 
(consisting of three primary emotions), and so on, 
according to the number of primary emotions 
that involves in the complex emotion. For exam-
ple, ?pride? (happiness + fear) is a first-order 
complex emotion, which contains a greater 
amount of ?happiness? with a lesser amount of 
?fear.? 
Tables 1 and 2 show some keywords in Turn-
er?s taxonomy, and the symbol ?//? is to separate 
different emotion types. Table 1 lists the five 
most common English keywords and their cor-
responding primary emotions, and Table 2 lists 
the English keywords and their corresponding 
complex emotions. In Table 2, several emotion 
keywords, which express similar emotion 
meaning, are grouped into an emotion type. For 
example, the emotion keywords ?awe, reverence, 
veneration? are grouped into emotion type 
?awe.? For a complex emotion, the order of pri-
mary emotions indicates the importance of those 
primary emotions for that complex emotion. For 
examples, ?envy? is ?fear + anger,? which con-
tains a greater amount of ?fear? with a lesser 
amount of ?anger? whereas ?awe? is ?fear + 
happiness,? which contains a greater amount of 
?fear? with a lesser amount of ?happiness.?  
For English emotion keywords, as Turner?s 
taxonomy missed some common emotion key-
words, we add the emotion keywords from 
Plutchik's taxonomy. Besides, unlike Chinese, 
English words have morphological variations, for 
example, the emotion keyword ?pride? can occur 
in text with the various formats: ?pride,? 
?prides,? ?prided,? ?proud,? ?proudly.? As 
shown in Tables 1 and 2, there are 188 English 
lemmas in our taxonomy. In total, there are 720 
emotion keywords if morphology is taken into 
account.  
Since Turner?s emotion taxonomy is cogni-
tive-based, it is versatile for different languages 
although there is no one-to-one mapping. We 
also explore Chinese emotion taxonomy in our 
previous work (Chen at el., 2009). We first select 
emotion keywords from the cognitive-based feel-
ing words listed in Xu and Tao (2003), and then 
map those emotion keywords to Turner?s taxon-
omy with adaptation for some cases. Lastly, 
some polysemous emotion keywords are re-
moved to reduce ambiguity, and 226 Chinese 
emotion keywords remain. 
Moreover, Turner?s taxonomy is a compara-
tively flexible structure, and more extensions can 
be done for different applications. For example, 
for a complex emotion, not only its primary emo-
tions are listed, but also the intensity of the pri-
mary emotions can be given. For instance, three 
emotion types, which belong to ?anger + fear,? 
are extended as follows: 
Jealousy:      Anger (Moderate) + Fear (Moderate) 
Suspicion:    Anger (Low) + Fear (Low) 
Abhorrence: Anger (High) + Fear (Low) 
Finally, we should admit that the emotion tax-
onomy is still an on-going research topic and 
needs further exploration, such as the position of 
a given emotion keyword in the emotion taxon-
omy, whether and how to group similar emotion 
keywords, and how to decompose a complex 
emotion into primary emotions. 
3.2 The emotion annotation scheme 
Given Turner?s taxonomy, we design our annota-
tion scheme to encode this kind of emotion in-
formation. Our emotion annotation scheme is 
XML scheme, and conforms with the Text En-
coding Initiative (TEI) scheme with some modi-
fications. The emotion scheme is a layer just
3
Primary Emotions Keywords 
Happiness High: ecstatic, eager, joy, enthusiastic, happy//Moderate: cheerful, satisfy, pleased, enjoy, interest//Low: 
sanguine, serene, content, grateful 
Fear High: horror, terror//Moderate: misgivings, self-conscious, scare, panic, anxious//Low: bewilder, reluct, 
shy, puzzles, confuse 
Anger High: dislike, disgust, outrage, furious, hate//Moderate: contentious, offend, frustrate, hostile, an-
gry//Low: contemptuous, agitate, irritate, annoy, impatient 
Sadness High: deject, despondent, sorrow, anguish, despair//Moderate: gloomy, dismay, sad, unhappy, disap-
point//Low: dispirit, downcast, discourage 
Surprise High: astonish//Moderate: startled, amaze, surprise 
Table1: Primary emotions and some corresponding keywords 
Combinations Keywords 
Happiness + Fear Wonder: wonder, wondering, hopeful//Pride: pride, boastful 
Happiness + Anger Vengeance: vengeance, vengeful//Calm: appeased, calmed, calm, soothed//Bemused: bemused 
Happiness + Sadness Yearning: nostalgia, yearning 
Fear + Happiness Awe: awe, reverence, veneration 
Fear + Anger Antagonism: antagonism, revulsed//Envy: envy 
Fear + Sadness Worried: dread, wariness, pensive, helpless, apprehension, worried 
Anger +Happiness Unfriendly: snubbing, mollified, rudeness, placated, apathetic, unsympathetic, unfriendly, unaffection-
ate//Sarcastic: sarcastic 
Anger + Fear Jealousy: jealous//Suspicion: suspicion, distrustful//Abhorrence: abhorrence 
Anger + Sadness Depressed: bitter, depression//Intolerant: intolerant  
Sadness +Happiness Acceptance: acceptance, tolerant//Solace: moroseness, solace, melancholy 
Sadness+ Fear Hopeless: forlorn, lonely, hopeless, miserable//Remorseful: remorseful, ashamed, humiliated 
Sadness+ Anger Discontent: aggrieved, discontent, dissatisfied, unfulfilled//Boredom: boredom//Grief: grief, sullenness 
Surprise + Happiness Delight: delight 
Surprise + Sadness Embarrassed: embarrassed 
Table 2:  First-order complex emotions and some corresponding keywords 
 
beyond a sentence, and encodes emotion infor-
mation for a sentence. This annotation scheme 
can be compatible for any TEI-based annotated 
corpora as long as sentences are clearly marked. 
The emotion-related elements (tags) in our 
annotation scheme are described as follows. For 
easy demonstration, our elements are defined 
with the format of British National Corpus 
(BNC) annotation scheme1 , and our examples 
are also based on BNC annotated text. Figure 1 
gives the definition of each element, and Figure 
2 shows several examples using our annotation 
scheme. Note that <s> element is a tag for a sen-
tence-like division of a text, and its attribute ?n? 
gives the sentence index. In Figure 2, Sentence 1, 
which expresses emotions by emotion keywords, 
contains two types of emotions: ?surprise? (pri-
mary emotion) and ?jealousy? (complex emo-
tion); Sentence 2 is a neutral sentence. 
<emotion> element 
It is used only when the sentence expresses 
emotions. It contains a list of <emotionType> 
elements and a <s> element. As a sentence may 
                                                 
1 http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/XMLedition/U
RG/ 
express several emotions, an <emotion> element 
can contain several <emotionType> elements, 
and each <emotionType> element describes an 
emotion occurring in that sentence separately. 
<neutral> element 
It is used only when the sentence does not 
contain any emotion expression. It contains only 
a <s> element. 
<emotionType> element 
It describes a type of emotion in that sentence.  
It contains an ordered sequence of <pri-
maryEmotion> elements. Attribute ?name? pro-
vides the name of the emotion type, such as 
?surprise?, ?jealousy,? and so on, and it is op-
tional. If the emotion type is a primary emotion, 
the <emotionType> element will have only one 
<primaryEmotion> element, which encodes the 
information of this primary emotion. If the emo-
tion is a complex emotion, the <emotionType> 
element will have several <primaryEmotion> 
elements (each of them describes the primary 
emotion involved in that complex emotion.) At-
tribute ?keyword? is an optional attribution if 
annotators want to provide the indicator of a text 
for that emotion. 
4
   
<primaryEmtion> element 
It describes the property of a primary emotion 
involved in the emotion type. There are three 
attributes: ?order,? ?name,? and ?intensity.?  
?Order? gives the weight of this primary emo-
tion in the emotion type, and the weight value 
decreases with the ascending ?order? value. 
?Name? and ?intensity? provide the name and 
intensity of a primary emotion. To encode the 
information in our emotion taxonomy, the value 
of ?order? is {1,2,3,4,5}, the value of ?name? is 
{?happiness,? ?sadness,? ?anger,?  ?fear?, ?sur-
prise? }, and  the value of ?intensity? is {?high?, 
?moderate?, ?low?.} 
The <primaryEmotion> element seems to be 
redundant because its encoded information can 
be obtained from the given emotion taxonomy if 
the name of the emotion type is available, but 
the presence of this element can make our anno-
tation scheme more robust. Sometimes emotion 
is so complicated (especially for those emotion 
expressions without any explicit emotion key-
word) that an annotator may not be able to find 
an exact emotion type to match this emotion, or 
to list all involved primary emotions. For those 
subtle cases, emotion annotation can be simpli-
fied to list the involved primary emotions as 
many as possible through <primaryEmotion> 
elements. For example, in Sentence 3 in Figure 2, 
although there is no emotion keyword occurring, 
the word ?hurt? indicates the presence of an 
emotion, which at least involves ?sadness.? 
However, because it is hard to explicitly list oth-
er primary emotions, therefore, we give only the 
annotation of ?sadness.?  
Our annotation scheme has the versatility to 
provide emotion data for different applications. 
For example, if textual information input anno-
tated with our scheme is provided for the Japa-
nese robot Saya (Hashimoto et al 2006) to con-
trol her facial emotion expression, a simple 
mapping from our 24 emotion types can be done 
automatically to Saya?s six emotion types, i.e. 
surprise, fear, disgust, anger, happiness, and 
sadness. As four of her emotion types are also 
unique primary emotions, using information en-
coded in <emotionType> element and <pri-
maryEmotion> element will ensure unique 
many-to-one mapping and the correct robotic 
expressions. A trickier case involves her ?anger? 
and ?disgust? emotions. The emotion type ?an-
ger? in our taxonomy includes emotion words 
?anger? and ?disgust?. However, with the ?key-
word? information provided in <emotionType> 
element, a small subset of ?anger? emotion in 
our taxonomy can be mapped to ?disgust? in 
Saya?s system. For example, we could map 
keywords ?dislike, disgust, hate? to ?disgust?, 
element emotion 
{ 
(emotionType)+, 
<s> 
} 
element emotionType 
{ 
attribute name (optional), 
attribute keyword (optional), 
(primaryEmotion)+ 
} 
element primaryEmotion 
{ 
attribute order (optional), 
attribute name (necessary), 
attribute intensity (optional) 
} 
element neutral 
{  
<s> 
} 
Figure 1: The definition of emotion-related elements 
<emotion> 
<emotionType name =  "surprise"  keyword ="surprised"> 
<primaryEmotion  order =  "1" name =  "surprise"  intensity = "moderate"></primaryEmotion> 
</emotionType>   
<emotionType name = "jealousy"  keyword = ?jealousy?> 
<primaryEmotion  order =  "1"  name = "anger" intensity =  "moderate"></primaryEmotion> 
<primaryEmotion  order =  "2"  name =  "fear"   intensity =  "moderate"></primaryEmotion> 
</emotionType> 
<s n = "1"> Hari was surprised at the rush of pure jealousy that swept over her at the mention of Emily Grenfell .</s> 
</emotion> 
<neutral> 
<s n = "2"> By law no attempts may be made to hasten death or prolong the life of the sufferer . </s> 
</neutral> 
<emotion> 
<emotionType> 
<primaryEmotion name =  "sadness"></primaryEmotion> 
</emotionType>    
<s n = "3">He looked hurt when she did n't join him , his emotions transparent as a child 's . </s> 
</emotion> 
Figure 2: The example of sentence annotation 
 
5
and all the remaining ones, such as ?outrage, 
furious,? to ?anger.? 
4 Emotion-driven corpus creation 
Similar to most corpora, our corpus creation is 
designed to satisfy the requirements of real emo-
tion computing. Emotions can be expressed with 
or without emotion vocabulary in the text. It 
seems to be intuitive that emotion computing for 
a context with emotion keywords can be satis-
factory when the collection of emotion vocabu-
lary is comprehensive, such as ?joyful? indicates 
the presence of ?happiness? emotion. However, 
this intuitive approach cannot work well because 
of the ambiguity of some emotion keywords and 
the emotion context shift as the sentiment shift 
(Polanyi and Zaenen, 2004). Moreover, the de-
tection of emotions in a context without emotion 
keywords is very challenging. To deal with these 
problems, we build the emotion corpus, which is 
motivated by the NSM theory. 
According to the NSM theory, an emotion is 
provoked by a stimulus. This indicates one pos-
sible way to detect emotions in text, i.e. the de-
tection of emotional stimulus, which is often 
provided in the text. In other words, emotion 
corpus is a collection of emotion stimuli. Since 
emotion is subjective, the stimulus-based ap-
proach works only when its context is provided. 
For example, the stimulus ? ?build a gym for 
this community? ? may cause different emotions, 
such as ?surprise?, ?happy? and so on, depend-
ing on its context. We also notice that the text 
containing an emotion keyword may contain 
emotional stimulus and its context. Thus, a natu-
ral corpus creation approach comes out. 
 In our system, a pattern-based approach is 
used to collect the emotion corpus, which is sim-
ilar to the one used in Tokuhisa et al (2008), but 
we do not limit to event-driven emotions 
(Kozareva et al, 2008), and adjust our rules to 
improve the quality of emotion annotation. 
There are five steps in our emotion sentence an-
notation as given below, and Steps (2) and (3) 
are to improve the annotation quality. 
1) Extract emotion sentences: sentences con-
taining emotion keywords are extracted by 
keyword matching.  
2) Delete ambiguous structures: some ambigu-
ous sentences, which contain structures such 
as negation and modal, are filtered out.  
3) Delete ambiguous emotion keywords: if an 
emotion keyword is very ambiguous, all sen-
tences containing this ambiguous emotion 
keyword are filtered out. 
4) Give emotion tags: each remaining sentence 
is marked with its emotion tag according to the 
emotion type which the focus emotion word 
belongs to (refer to Tables 1 and 2.) 
5) Ignore the focus emotion keywords: for 
emotion computing, the emotion word is re-
moved from each sentence.  
 Polanyi and Zaenen (2004) addressed the is-
sue of polarity-based sentiment context shift, 
and the similar phenomenon also exists in emo-
tion expressions. In our corpus creation, two 
kinds of contextual structures are handled with: 
the negation structure and the modal structure. 
In both English and Chinese, a negated emotion 
expression can be interpreted as one of the three 
possible meanings (as shown in Figure 3): oppo-
site to the target emotion (S1), deny the exis-
tence of the target emotion (S2), or confirm the 
existence of the target emotion (S3). The modal 
structure often indicates that the emotion expres-
sion is based on the counter-factual assumption, 
hence the emotion does not exist at all (S4 and 
S5 in Figure 3). Although Chinese and English 
have different interpretations about the modal 
structure, for emotion analysis, those sentences 
often do not express an emotion. Therefore, to 
ensure the quality of the emotion corpus, all sen-
tences containing a negation structure or a modal 
structure, which are detected by some rules plus 
a list of keywords (negation polarity words for 
the negation structure, and modal words for the 
modal structure), are removed. 
 
To overcome the high ambiguity of some 
emotion keywords, after Step (2), for each emo-
tion keyword, five sentences are randomly se-
lected and annotated by two annotators. If the 
accuracy of five sentences is lower than 40%, 
this emotion keyword is removed from our emo-
tion taxonomy. Finally, 191 Chinese keywords 
and 645 English keywords are remained.  
Tokuhisa et al found that a big challenge for 
emotion computing, especially for emotion de-
tection, is to collect neutral sentences. Since 
neutral sentences are unmarked and hard to de-
tect, we develop a na?ve yet effective algorithm 
S1  (Neg_Happiness): I am not happy about that. 
S2 (Netural): Though the palazzo is our family home, my 
father had never been very happy there. 
S3  (Pos_Happiness): I 've never been so happy. 
S4  (Netural): I can die happy if you will look after them when 
I have gone.  
S5  (Netural): Then you could move over there and we'd all be 
happy. 
Figure 3: Structures for emotion shift 
6
to create a neutral corpus. A sentence is consid-
ered as neutral only when the sentence itself and 
its context (i.e. the previous sentence and the 
following sentence) do not contain any of the 
given emotion keywords. 
We run our emotion sentence extraction and 
neutral sentence extraction on three corpora: the 
Sinica Corpus (Chinese), the Chinese Gigaword 
Corpus, and the British National Corpus (BNC, 
English), and create three emotion corpora and 
three neutral corpora separately. The Sinica 
Corpus is a balanced Chinese corpus, which in-
cludes documents in 15 kinds of genres; The 
Chinese Gigaword Corpus is a huge collection 
of news reports; The BNC is also a balanced 
corpus, which collects documents from different 
domains.  
To estimate the accuracy of our emotion sen-
tence extraction, we randomly select about 1000 
sentences from the three emotion corpora, and 
have two annotators to check it. Table 3 lists the 
accuracy of those emotions sentences (emotion 
corpus.) To test how good this straightforward 
neutral sentence extraction strategy is, about 
1000 sentences are randomly selected from each 
of the three neutral corpora and are checked by 
two annotators. Table 3 lists the accuracy of 
those neutral sentences (neutral corpus.)  
 Emotion corpus Neutral corpus 
Gigaword 82.17 98.61 
Sinica 77.56 98.39 
BNC 69.36 99.50 
Table 3: The accuracy of the emotion-driven corpora 
From Table 3, the high accuracy of neutral 
corpus proves that our approach is effective in 
extracting neutral sentences from the document-
based corpus which contains contextual informa-
tion. Although the accuracy of emotion corpus is 
lower, it is still much higher than the one re-
ported by Kozareva et al (2008), i.e. 49.4. The 
accuracy is significantly increased by deleting 
ambiguous emotion keywords in Step (3). For 
the 2,474 randomly selected Chinese sentences, 
the overall accuracy of the remaining 1,751 sen-
tence is increased by about 14% after Step (3). 
For the 803 randomly selected English sentences, 
the accuracy of the remaining 473 sentence is 
increased about 21% after Step (3). Whether or 
how the ambiguous emotion keywords in Step 3 
are removed is a tradeoff between the coverage 
and the accuracy of the emotion corpus.  
From Table 3, we also find that the accuracy 
of English emotion corpus is much lower than 
Chinese emotion corpus, which indicates Eng-
lish emotion sentences expressed by emotion 
keywords are more ambiguous than that of Chi-
nese. Moreover, during our emotion corpus 
building, 20.2% of Sinica sentences and 22.4% 
of Gigaword sentences are removed in Step (2) 
and (3), on the contrary, 41.2% of BNC sen-
tences are deleted. Although it is more difficult 
to develop the rules in Step (2) and (3) for Chi-
nese than for English, it also confirms the higher 
ambiguity of emotion expressions in English due 
to the ambiguity of emotion keyword. Finally, 
because of the comparatively-high percentage of 
the sentences removed in Step (2) and (3), more 
exploration about those sentences is needed, 
such as the emotion distribution, the expression 
patterns and so on, and how to re-incorporate 
them into the emotion corpus without hurting the 
whole quality is also our future work.  
We also explore emotions through the sen-
tences (no-emotion-keyword sentences) that do 
not contain any given emotion keyword, because 
our approach extracts only partial neutral sen-
tences and partial emotion sentences in reality. 
For each corpus, about 1000 no-emotion-
keyword sentences are randomly selected and 
checked by two annotators. It is surprising that 
only about 1% of those sentences express emo-
tions. This indicates that it is important for real 
emotion computing, which mainly works on 
formal written text, to deal with the emotion ex-
pressions which contain emotion keywords and 
however are ambiguous, such as the sentences 
deleted in Steps (2) and (3). More exploration is 
needed for the emotion and neutral sentence dis-
tribution on other kinds of written text, such as 
blogs, and on spoken text. 
The unsupervised corpus creation approach 
can easily be adapted for different languages and 
different emotion applications, provided that the 
keyword collection and patterns in Step (2) and 
(3) need some changes.  Moreover, another big 
advantage of our approach is that it can avoid 
the controversy during emotion annotation. 
Emotion is subjective, and therefore disagree-
ment for emotion types often arises if the emo-
tion is not expressed through an explicit emotion 
keyword.  
Overall, the annotated corpus created by the 
unsupervised approach has a comparatively high 
quality, and is suitable for the emotion comput-
ing. As the size of the neutral corpus is much 
bigger than its corresponding emotion corpus, to 
avoid model bias, we randomly select some neu-
tral sentences from the neutral corpus, combin-
7
ing with its corresponding emotion sentences to 
form a complete emotion-driven corpus. 
5 Emotion computing system 
In this paper, we present some pilot work to 
prove that our emotion-driven corpus is useful 
for emotion computing. With the inclusion of 
neutral sentences, emotion detection and classi-
fication is simplified into a general classification 
problem, and a supervised machine learning 
method can be directly applied if enough anno-
tated data are obtained. Here, we choose the 
MaxEnt learning in Mallet as a classifier. 
 Both the Sinica Corpus and the Chinese Gi-
gaword Corpus are segmented, and POS-tagged. 
This allows us to implement the bag-of-words 
approach in the focus sentences in both Chinese 
and English. However, emotions are mostly hu-
man attitudes or expectations arising from situa-
tions, where situations are often expressed in 
more than a single word. Such kind of situations 
tends to be more easily extracted by word bi-
grams (2-gram word) than by word unigram (1-
gram word.) To take this into account, besides 1-
gram words, we also extract word bi-grams from 
the focus sentences.  
There are too many emotion types in our cor-
pus, which can cause data sparse; therefore, we 
choose the most frequent emotions to do explo-
ration. Besides the five primary emotions, for 
Chinese, we select another nine complex emo-
tions, and for English, we select another four 
complex emotions. Other emotion types are re-
named as ?Other Emotions.? 
Since Chinese emotion-driven corpus is much 
larger than the English one, to fairly compare the 
performance, we reduce the size of Chinese cor-
pus in our experiments. Then, for each corpus, 
we reserve 80% as the training data, 10% as the 
development data, and 10% as the test data 
(there are two sets of test data as follows.) In the 
evaluation, for each emotion sentence, if our 
system detects one of its emotion tags, we con-
sider this sentence is correctly tagged. 
Test data set 1 (TDS 1): contains about 10% 
of the sentences from the complete emotion-
driven corpus, and emotion tags are automati-
cally given during the corpus creation.  
Test data set 2 (TDS 2): contains the sen-
tences used in Table 3, which is checked by two 
annotators. If more than one emotion tags co-
exist in a sentence, all of them are chosen to la-
bel the sentence. If there exists an emotion that 
does not belong to any of the emotion types, it is 
labeled as ?Other Emotions.? 
Table 4 shows the performance (accuracy) of 
our system for Test data set 1 and 2 for both 
Chinese and English. We notice that our corpus 
creation approach is effective for emotion com-
puting. As we expect, the 2-gram words can par-
tially catch the emotion stimulus, and improves 
the performances. However, the overall per-
formance is still very low, which indicates that 
emotion computing is a difficult task. From the 
error analysis, it is surprised that for Chinese, 
the mislabeling of emotion sentences as neutral 
sentences (?emotion? vs. ?neutral?) is a common 
error, and whereas, for English, two kinds of 
errors: ?emotion? vs. ?neutral? and ?focus emo-
tions? vs. ?Other emotions? (the mislabeling of a 
sentence with a focus emotion as ?Other emo-
tions,?) occupy at least 50%. The error distribu-
tion confirms the importance of emotion detec-
tion during emotion computing. The high fre-
quency of the error of ?focus emotions? vs. 
?Other Emotions? in English may be because 
there are fewer focus emotion types for English.  
 1-gram words  {1,2}-gram words 
Chinese TDS 1 53.92 58.75 
English TDS 1 44.02 48.20 
Chinese TDS 2 37.18 39.95 
English TDS 2 33.24 36.31 
Table 4: The performances of our system for the test data  
6 Conclusion 
Emotion, no matter its annotation or computing, 
is still a new and difficult topic. In this paper, we 
apply emotion theories to design a cognitive-
based emotion annotation scheme, which are 
robust and versatile so that it can encode differ-
ent levels of emotion information for different 
emotion computing. Moreover, motivated from 
NSM, we develop an unsupervised approach to 
create a large and comparatively high-quality 
corpus for emotion computing, which is proven 
in our pilot experiments to be useful. Moreover, 
this approach makes emotion computing for dif-
ferent applications possible through a little mod-
ification. 
Certainly, there are some issues remaining un-
solved. For corpus construction, we will explore 
emotion distribution in other kinds of corpora, 
such as blog and dialog, and make analysis of 
ambiguous emotion sentences, such as negation 
structure and modal structure. For emotion com-
puting, we did only pilot experiments and more 
work needs to be done, such as feature extrac-
tion. 
8
References  
W. B. Cannon. 1927. The James-Lange theory of 
emotions: A Critical Examination and an Alterna-
tive Theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 
106-124. 
Y. Chen, S. Y. M. Lee and C. R. Huang, 2009. Con-
struction of Chinese Emotion Corpus with an Un-
supervised Approach. In CNCCL-2009, 2009. (in 
Chinese) 
T. Hashimoto, S. Hiramatsu, T. Tsuji and H. Kobaya-
shi. 2006. Development of the Face Robot SAYA 
for Rich Facial Expressions. SICE-ICASE Inter-
national Joint Conference, Busan,Korea. 
J. Hobbs and A. Gordon. 2008. The Deep Lexical 
Semantics of Emotions. Workshop on Sentiment 
Analysis: Emotion, Metaphor, Ontology and 
Terminology (EMOT-08), 6th International con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation 
(LREC-08), Marrakech, Morocco, May 27, 2008. 
P. Livia, A. Zaenen. 2004. Contextual Valence Shift-
ers. In Shanahan, J. G., Y. Qu, and J. Wiebe 
(Eds.), Computing Attitude and Affect in Text: 
Theory and Applications, pp. 1-10. 
Z. Kozareva, Borja Navarro, Sonia Vazquez, and 
Andres Nibtoyo. 2007. UA-ZBSA: A Headline 
Emotion Classification through Web Information. 
In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop 
on Semantic Evaluations.  
Y. Y. Mathieu. 2005.  Annotations of Emotions and 
Feelings in Texts. In Conference on Affective 
Computing and intelligent Interaction (ACII2005), 
Beijing, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pp. 350-357. 
R. Mihalcefa, and Hugo Liu. 2006. A Corpus-based 
Approach to Finding Happiness. In Proceedings 
of AAAI.  
R. Plutchik. 1991. The Emotions. University Press of 
America, Inc. 
R. Plutchik. 1980. Emotions: A psychoevolutionary 
synthesis. New York:Harper & Row. 
M. Schr?der, H. Pirker and M. Lamolle. 2006. First 
suggestions for an emotion annotation and repre-
sentation language. In L. Deviller et al (Ed.), 
Proceedings of LREC'06 Workshop on Corpora 
for Research on Emotion and Affect (pp. 88-92). 
Genoa, Italy. 
J. G. Shanahan, Y. Qu and J. Wiebe. 2006. Comput-
ing attitude and affect in text: theory and applica-
tions, Springer. 
R. Tokuhisa, K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto (Eds.) 2008. 
Emotion Classification Using Massive Examples 
Extracted from the Web. COLING.   
J. H. Turner. 2007. Human Emotions: A sociological 
theory. New York : Routledge, 2007. 
J. H. Turner. 2000. On the origins of human emotions: 
A sociological inquiry into the evolution of hu-
man affect. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.  
J. H. Turner. 1996. The Evolution of Emotions in 
Humans: A Darwinian?Durkheimian Analysis. 
Journal for the theory of social behaviour26:1-34 
L. Xu, H. Lin, J. ZHAO.2008. Construction and 
Analysis of Emotional Corpus. JOURNAL OF 
CHINESE INFORMA TION PROCESSIN. 
X. Y. Xu, and J. H. Tao. 2003. The study of affective 
categorization in Chinese. The 1st Chinese Con-
ference on Affective Computing and Intelligent 
Interaction. Beijing, China. 
A. Wierzbicka, 1996. Semantics: Primes and Univer-
sals. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
9
