Proceedings of the 2009 Named Entities Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 186?193,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Graphemic Approximation of Phonological Context 
for English-Chinese Transliteration 
 
 
Oi Yee Kwong 
Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
Olivia.Kwong@cityu.edu.hk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
Although direct orthographic mapping has 
been shown to outperform phoneme-based 
methods in English-to-Chinese (E2C) translit-
eration, it is observed that phonological con-
text plays an important role in resolving gra-
phemic ambiguity.  In this paper, we investi-
gate the use of surface graphemic features to 
approximate local phonological context for 
E2C.  In the absence of an explicit phonemic 
representation of the English source names, 
experiments show that the previous and next 
character of a given English segment could ef-
fectively capture the local context affecting its 
expected pronunciation, and thus its rendition 
in Chinese. 
1 Introduction 
Proper names including personal names, place 
names, and organization names, make up a con-
siderable part of naturally occurring texts.  Per-
sonal names, in particular, do not only play an 
important role in identifying an individual, but 
also carry the family history, parental expecta-
tion, as well as other information about a person.  
In natural language processing, the proper rendi-
tion of personal names, especially between dis-
similar languages such as Chinese and English, 
often contributes significantly to machine trans-
lation accuracy and intelligibility, and cross-
lingual information retrieval.  This paper ad-
dresses the problem of automatic English-
Chinese forward transliteration (referred to as 
E2C hereafter) of personal names. 
Unlike many other languages, Chinese names 
are characteristic in their relatively free choice 
and combination of characters, particularly for 
given names.  Such apparent flexibility does not 
only account for the virtually infinite number of 
authentic Chinese names, but also leads to a con-
siderable sample space when foreign names are 
transliterated into Chinese.  Underlying the large 
sample space, however, is not entirely a random 
distribution.  On the one hand, there are no more 
than a few hundred Chinese characters which are 
used in names (e.g. Sproat et al, 1996).  On the 
other hand, beyond linguistic and phonetic prop-
erties, many other social and cognitive factors 
such as dialect, gender, domain, meaning, and 
perception, are simultaneously influencing the 
naming process and superimposing on the sur-
face graphemic correspondence. 
As the state-of-the-art approach, direct ortho-
graphic mapping (e.g. Li et al, 2004), making 
use of graphemic correspondence between Eng-
lish and Chinese directly, has been shown to out-
perform phoneme-based methods (e.g. Virga and 
Khudanpur, 2003).  In fact, transliteration of for-
eign names into Chinese is often based on the 
surface orthographic forms, as exemplified in the 
transliteration of Beckham, where the supposedly 
silent h in ?ham? is taken as pronounced, result-
ing in ?? han4-mu3 in Mandarin Chinese and 
? haam4 in Cantonese1. 
However, as we have observed, there is con-
siderable graphemic ambiguity in E2C, where an 
English segment might correspond to different 
Chinese segments.  Such multiple mappings, to a 
large extent, is associated with the phonological 
context embedding the English segment, thus 
affecting its expected pronunciation.  Hence, if 
such phonological context could be considered in 
                                                 
1 Mandarin names are shown in simplified Chinese 
characters and transcribed in Hanyu Pinyin, while 
Cantonese names are shown in traditional Chinese 
characters and transcribed in Jyutping published by 
the Linguistic Society of Hong Kong. 
186
the transliteration model, some of the graphemic 
ambiguity could be resolved.  However, instead 
of going for an explicit phonemic representation, 
which might introduce an extra step for error 
propagation, in the current study we investigate 
the usefulness of surface graphemic features for 
approximating the local phonological context in 
E2C.  Experiments show that the previous and 
next character of a given segment could effec-
tively capture the local phonological context and 
improve transliteration accuracy. 
A short note on terminology before we move 
on: We use ?segment? to refer to a minimal gra-
phemic transliteration unit in the names.  For 
instance, in the data, the name Amyx is translit-
erated as ???? a1-mi3-ke4-si1, the graph-
eme pairs are <a, ?>, <my, ?>, and <x, ??>.  
There are three English segments: ?a?, ?my? and 
?x?; and three Chinese segments: ?, ? and ?
?.  A segment may or may not correspond to 
exactly a syllable, although it often does. 
In Section 2, we will briefly review some re-
lated work.  In Section 3, we will discuss some 
observations on graphemic ambiguity in E2C.  
The proposed method will be presented in Sec-
tion 4.  Experiments will be reported in Section 5, 
with results discussed in Section 6, followed by a 
conclusion in Section 7. 
2 Related Work 
There are basically two categories of work on 
machine transliteration.  On the one hand, vari-
ous alignment models are used for acquiring 
transliteration lexicons from parallel corpora and 
other resources (e.g. Lee et al, 2006; Jin et al, 
2008; Kuo and Li, 2008).  On the other hand, 
statistical transliteration models are built for 
transliterating personal names and other proper 
names, such as by means of noisy channel mod-
els or direct models amongst others, phoneme-
based (e.g. Knight and Graehl, 1998; Virga and 
Khudanpur, 2003), or grapheme-based (e.g. Li et 
al., 2004), or a combination of them (Oh and 
Choi, 2005), or based on phonetic (e.g. Tao et al, 
2006; Yoon et al, 2007) and semantic (e.g. Li et 
al., 2007) features. 
Li et al (2004), for instance, used a Joint 
Source-Channel Model under the direct ortho-
graphic mapping (DOM) framework, skipping 
the middle phonemic representation in conven-
tional phoneme-based methods, and modelling 
the segmentation and alignment preferences by 
means of contextual n-grams of the translitera-
tion units.  Their method was shown to outper-
form phoneme-based methods and those based 
on the noisy channel model. 
The n-gram model used in Li et al (2004) was 
based on previous local context of grapheme 
pairs.  However, as we are going to show in Sec-
tion 3, contexts on both sides of a segment are 
important in determining the actual rendition of 
it in Chinese.  In addition, graphemic ambiguity 
could in part be resolved by means of the phono-
logical context embedding the segment.    Hence 
in the current study, we propose a method modi-
fied from the Joint Source-Channel Model to 
take into account contexts on both sides of a 
segment, and to approximate local phonological 
context by means of surface graphemic features. 
3 Some Observations 
In this section, we will quantitatively analyse 
some properties of E2C based on our data, and 
show the importance of considering neighbour-
ing context on both sides of a certain segment, as 
well as the possibility of approximating phono-
logical properties graphemically. 
3.1 Dataset 
The data used in the current study are based on 
the English-Chinese (EnCh) training and devel-
opment data provided by the organisers of the 
NEWS 2009 Machine Transliteration Shared 
Task.  There are 31,961 English-Chinese name 
pairs in the training set, and 2,896 English-
Chinese name pairs in the development set.  The 
data were manually cleaned up and aligned with 
respect to the correspondence between English 
and Chinese segments, e.g. Aa/l/to ? /? /? .  
The analysis in this section is based on the train-
ing set. 
The Chinese transliterations in the data basi-
cally correspond to Mandarin Chinese pronun-
ciations of the English names, as used by media 
in Mainland China (Xinhua News Agency, 1992).  
Note that transliterations for English names 
could differ considerably in Chinese, depending 
on the dialect in question.  Names transliterated 
according to Mandarin Chinese pronunciations 
are very different from those according to Can-
tonese pronunciations, for instance.   Translitera-
tions used in Mainland China are also different 
from those used in Taiwan region, despite both 
are based on Mandarin Chinese.  A well cited 
example is a syllable initial /d/ may surface as in 
Baghdad ??? ba1-ge2-da2, but the syllable 
final /d/ is not represented.  This is true for trans-
literation based on Mandarin Chinese pronuncia-
187
tions.  For Cantonese, however, it is different 
since ending stops like ?p, ?t and ?k are allowed 
in Cantonese syllables.  Hence the syllable final 
/d/ in Baghdad is already captured in the last syl-
lable of??? baa1-gaak3-daat6 in Cantonese. 
Such phonological properties of Mandarin 
Chinese might also account for the observation 
that extra syllables are often introduced for cer-
tain consonant segments in the middle of an Eng-
lish name, as in Hamilton, transliterated as ??
??  han4-mi4-er3-dun4 in Mandarin Chinese 
(c.f. ??? haam4-mei5-deon6 in Cantonese); 
and Beckham, transliterated as ???? bei4-
ke4-han4-mu3 in Mandarin Chinese (c.f. ?? 
bik1-haam4 in Cantonese). 
3.2 Graphemic Ambiguity 
Table 1 quantitatively describes the training data.  
On average each English name has around 3.14 
segments, or transliteration units.  On average 
each English segment has around 1.7 different 
renditions in Chinese.  On the other hand, al-
though the number of unique Chinese segments 
is just a few hundred, on average one Chinese 
segment could correspond to about 10 different 
English segments.  This suggests that English-
Chinese graphemic segment correspondence 
could be quite ambiguous.  Further analysis is 
therefore needed to see if any systematic patterns 
could be found among such ambiguity. 
 
Unique English names 31,822 
Total English segments 99,930 
Unique English segments 2,822 
Unique Chinese segments 458 
Unique grapheme pairs 4,750 
Table 1. Quantitative Aspects of the Data 
 
Assume transliteration pair mappings are in 
the form <ek, {ck1,ck2,?,ckn}>, where ek stands 
for the kth unique English segment, and 
{ck1,ck2,?,ckn} for the set of n unique Chinese 
segments observed for it in the data.  It was 
found in the training data that n varies from 1 to 
15, while 32.2% of the distinct English segments 
have multiple grapheme correspondence. Table 2 
shows the degree of graphemic ambiguity with 
illustrative examples.  Some of the ambiguity, 
however, is the result of homophones.  The effect 
of homophones (whether or not tones are taken 
into account) in E2C transliteration is worth 
more in-depth investigation, but it is beyond the 
scope of the current study. 
 
Examples 
n Proportion English 
Segment 
Chinese 
Segments 
Source Name Transliteration 
? nei4 Abernathy ???? 
? na4 Adamina ???? 
? ni2 Cranage ???? 
? na2 Buonaparte ??? 
? nao3 Kenall ??? 
? na4 Stranahan ????? 
?5 4.8% na 
? nuo4 Widnall ???? 
? dan1 Lafontain ??? 
? tan3 Stainton ??? 
? ting2 Sartain ?? 4 2.9% tain 
? dun4 Chastain ??? 
? lan2 Granberg ???? 
? lang3 Francine ??? 3 7.3% ran 
? lun2 Karran ?? 
? di4 Christy ???? 
2 17.2% ty ? tai4 Style ??? 
Angie ?? 
1 67.8% gie ? ji2 
Cowgiel ??? 
Table 2. Graphemic Ambiguity of the Data 
188
The other multiple correspondences are never-
theless genuine ambiguity.  The same English 
graphemic segment, depending on its pronuncia-
tion within the name, could be rendered in vari-
ous Chinese segments of very different pronun-
ciations.  To determine the expected pronuncia-
tion of the ambiguous English segment, however, 
the phonological context embedding the segment 
has an important role to play.  For instance, the 
graphemic segment ?na?, when appearing at the 
end of a name, is often pronounced as /na/ and 
rendered as ? na4, especially for female names.  
But when it is in the middle of a name, and espe-
cially before ?th?, it is often pronounced as /nei/ 
and rendered as ? nei4.  Similarly, the segment 
?ty? is often pronounced as /ti/ at the end of a 
name and transliterated as ? di4.  On the other 
hand, if it is in the middle of a name, after an ?s? 
or in front of ?le? or ?re?, it is often pronounced 
as /tai/ and therefore transliterated as ? tai4. 
Take another segment ?le? as an example.  It 
is found to correspond to as many as 15 different 
Chinese segments, including ? li4, ? le4, ? li4, 
? er3, ? lai2, ? li3, etc.  When ?le? appears at 
the end of a name, all but a few cases are pro-
nounced as /l/ and rendered as ? er3, particu-
larly when it follows ?a?, e.g. Dale ?? dai4-
er3 and Dipasquale ?????  di2-pa4-si1-
kui2-er3.  Exceptions are when ?le? at the end of 
a name follows ?r?, where it is often rendered as 
? li4 instead.  On the other hand, when ?le? ap-
pears at the beginning of a name where the 
vowel is often prominently pronounced, it is usu-
ally rendered as ? le4 or ? lai2, e.g. Lepke ?
?? lai2-pu3-ke4, except when it is followed by 
the vowel ?o?, where it is then often transliter-
ated as ? li4, e.g. Leonor ??? li4-ao4-nuo4.  
When ?le? appears in the middle of a name, the 
transliteration is nevertheless more variable.  
Still it is remarkable that ?le? is transliterated as 
? li4 when it is followed by ?c? or ?x?, e.g. 
Alex ???? a4-li4-ke4-si1. 
Such observations thus suggest two important 
points for E2C.    First, contexts on both sides of 
a given segment do play a role in determining its 
likely rendition in Chinese.  Second, the phono-
logical context is important for determining the 
expected pronunciation of an English segment 
given its position in a name.  Hence we propose 
a method, making use of contexts on both sides 
of a segment, to approximate the local phono-
logical context of a segment via surface gra-
phemic features. 
4  Proposed Method 
The Joint Source-Channel Model in Li et al 
(2004) making use of direct orthographic map-
ping and a bigram language model for the seg-
ment pairs (or token pairs in their terms) is as 
follows:  
 
?
=
?? ><><?
><><><=
=
K
k
kkkk
kk
kk
ceceP
cececeP
ccceeePCEP
1
11
2211
2121
),|,(
),,...,,,,(
),...,,,,...,,(),(
 
 
where E refers to the English source name and C 
refers to the transliterated Chinese name.  With K 
segments aligned between E and C, ek and ck re-
fer to the kth English segment and its corre-
sponding Chinese segment respectively. 
While we have grounds for orthographic map-
ping as mentioned in the introduction, there is 
some modification we hope to make to the above 
model.  As pointed out in the last section, local 
contexts on both sides of a given segment should 
be important and useful for modelling the con-
text embedding the segment, which in turn could 
help determine its expected pronunciation.  In 
addition, the phonological environment might be 
sufficiently represented by a neighbouring pho-
neme instead of even a syllable.  Thus we take 
the last character from the previous segment and 
the first character of the next segment (instead of 
the whole neighbouring segment) into account, 
irrespective of their corresponding Chinese seg-
ments.  This could be considered an attempt to 
approximate the local phonological context of a 
given segment by means of surface graphemic 
features, even if we do not go for an explicit 
phonemic representation of the source name. 
Hence we propose to make use of bigrams in 
both directions with equal weighting, and assign 
a score, Score(E,C), to a transliteration candidate 
as below: 
 
?
=
+? ><><
K
k
kkkkkk efccePelcceP
1
11 ))(|,())(|,(  
 
where lc(ek-1) refers to the last character of the 
previous English segment, and fc(ek+1) refers to 
the first character of the next English segment. 
In the rest of this paper, we will refer to this 
method as GAP, which stands for Graphemic 
Approximation of Phonological context. 
189
5 Experiments 
The 31,961 English-Chinese name pairs from the 
NEWS shared task training set were used for 
training, and the 2,896 names in the development 
set were used for testing.  The data were first 
manually cleaned up and aligned with respect to 
the correspondence between English segments 
and Chinese segments. 
5.1 Segmentation of Test Names 
Each test name was first segmented.  All possible 
segmentations were obtained based on the unique 
English segments obtained from the manual 
alignment above. 
The graphemic units are made case-insensitive. 
When finding all possible graphemic segmenta-
tions of the English source names, segments with 
length 1 are only allowed if no longer segment 
with that initial letter followed by a vowel is pos-
sible.  For example, while ?a?, ?k?, ?l?, ?o?, ?v?, 
?s? and ?y? are all observed segments in the 
training data, when computing the transliteration 
for the test name Akalovsky, only two of the 
possible segmentations, A/ka/lo/v/s/ky and 
A/kal/o/v/s/ky, were considered while the rest 
involving more single-letter segments were ig-
nored.  This is justified by three reasons.  First, 
the more alternative segmentations, the more 
alternative transliteration candidates are to be 
evaluated.  This is computationally expensive, 
and many alternatives are in fact quite unlikely.  
Second, single-letter segments are redundant if a 
longer segment is possible.  On the one hand, 
transliterations are usually based on a consonant-
vowel combination as a unit.  A consonant will 
only be on its own as a segment if it occurs 
among a consonant cluster, which has no direct 
syllable correspondence in Chinese.  For exam-
ple, it is useless to single out the second ?k? in 
Akalovsky as the longer segment ?ka? is pro-
nounceable anyway, unlike in names with con-
sonant clusters like Akst.  On the other hand, in 
the cases of doubling consonants like Ross, both 
?s? and ?ss? will correspond to similar sounds.  
Third, the n-gram models favour transliterations 
with fewer segments anyway, so the segmenta-
tions with more single-letter segments will be 
less probable in any case. 
The possible segmentations obtained were 
then ranked by a method similar to GAP.  The 
score for each segmentation candidate S, 
Score(S), is computed by: 
 
?
=
+?
K
k
kkkk sfcsPslcsP
1
11 ))(|())(|(  
 
where sk is the kth segment in a name, lc(sk-1) is 
the last character of the previous segment and 
fc(sk+1) is the first character of the next segment. 
In the experiments, we selected the top N seg-
mentation candidates for use in subsequent steps, 
where N was varied from 1 to 3. 
5.2 Transliteration Candidates 
With the top N segmentation candidates, the 
transliteration candidates were generated by 
looking up the grapheme pairs obtained from 
manual alignment with frequency over a certain 
threshold f.  We tested with f ? 3 and f ? 5.  If 
there is no grapheme pair for a certain segment 
above the threshold, all pairs below the threshold 
would be considered.  All combinations obtained 
were then subject to ranking by the GAP translit-
eration method. 
5.3 Testing 
The transliteration candidates were evaluated and 
ranked by the GAP method.  For comparison, we 
also run the Joint Source-Channel Model (JSCM) 
described in Li et al (2004) on the test data.  In 
addition, we also tested a variation of GAP, 
called GAP-s, where the neighbouring characters 
are replaced by the neighbouring segments in the 
computation of the scores, that is, lc(ek-1) is re-
place by <ek-1,ck-1> and fc(ek+1) is replaced by 
<ek+1,ck+1>.  Note that similar changes were ap-
plied to the ranking of the source name segmen-
tations for both methods accordingly. 
System performance was measured by the 
Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR) (Kantor and 
Voorhees, 2000), as well as the Word Accuracy 
in Top-1 (ACC) and Fuzziness in Top-1 (Mean 
F-score) used in the NEWS shared task.  Only 
the top 10 transliteration candidates produced by 
the systems were considered. 
6 Results and Discussion 
6.1 Candidates Filtering 
As mentioned in the last section, candidates were 
filtered in two stages.  First, when the source 
English name was segmented, only the top N 
segmentation candidates were retained for sub-
sequent processes.  Second, when transliteration 
candidates were generated, only those grapheme 
pairs with frequency ? f, where applicable, were 
considered for the candidates.  Table 3 shows the 
190
results of GAP with various combinations of N 
and f. 
 
 f  \ N 1 2 3 
ACC 0.6357 0.6443 0.6450 
Mean F 0.8558 0.8600 0.8598 
MRR 
3 
0.6961 0.7279 0.7319 
ACC 0.6336 0.6423 0.6430 
Mean F 0.8547 0.8597 0.8595 
MRR 
5 
0.6910 0.7233 0.7280 
Table 3. Performance of GAP 
 
As seen in Table 3, although the top 1 seg-
mentation candidate could already achieve a cer-
tain performance level, taking the top 3 segmen-
tation candidates could nevertheless considerably 
improve the MRR.  This apparently suggests that 
the source name segmentation step could have 
significantly affected the overall performance of 
transliteration.  Taking more segmentation can-
didates into account could help raise some cor-
rect transliterations to a higher rank, but there 
was not much improvement in terms of the accu-
racy at the top 1 position. 
In terms of the grapheme pair frequency, set-
ting the threshold at 3 gave only slightly better 
results than setting it at 5.  A possible reason is 
that about 70% of all unique grapheme pairs 
have frequency below 5, and out of these over 
47% only have single correspondence.  In other 
words, there are a lot of grapheme pairs of low 
frequency, and for those ambiguous English seg-
ments, the distribution of their corresponding 
Chinese segments could be relatively uneven. 
Hence the following comparison between 
various transliteration methods was based on the 
combination of N=3 and f ? 3.  
6.2 System Performance 
To show the effectiveness of our proposed 
method, GAP was compared with JSCM and 
GAP-s.  Table 4 shows the results of the three 
methods. 
 
 JSCM GAP-s GAP 
ACC 0.5760 0.6174 0.6450 
Mean F 0.8309 0.8507 0.8598 
MRR 0.6881 0.7175 0.7319 
Table 4. System Performance Comparison 
 
As evident from Table 4, system GAP-s out-
performed JSCM.  The accuracy at top 1 position 
is much improved, thus boosting the MRR too.  
This improvement therefore supports our hy-
pothesis that contexts on both sides of a given 
segment are important for determining its rendi-
tion in Chinese, where part of the graphemic am-
biguity could be successfully resolved.  Mean-
while, system GAP further improves the results 
from GAP-s, bringing ACC up to 0.6450 and 
MRR to 0.7319.  This shows that the phonologi-
cal context could be better captured, though only 
approximately, by means of the last character of 
the previous segment and the first character of 
the next segment, instead of the whole 
neighbouring segments.  This is because the 
phonological context is often most closely re-
lated to the neighbouring phonemes instead of a 
whole syllable. 
6.3 Examples 
In this section we show two examples from the 
experimental outcomes to illustrate the useful-
ness of the GAP method. 
The name Abercromby, according to the gold 
standard, should be transliterated as ????? 
a4-bo2-ke4-long2-bi3.  This transliteration came 
third in the JSCM system, whose top first and 
second candidates were ?????? a4-bo2-
ke4-luo2-mu3-bi3 and??????? a4-bei4-
er3-ke4-luo2-mu3-bi3 respectively.  On the con-
trary, the expected transliteration came first in 
the GAP system. 
The top 3 source name segmentation candi-
dates for both methods are shown in Table 5.  
The expected segmentation has already been 
identified as the best candidate in GAP, while it 
came third in JSCM. 
 
Top JSCM GAP 
1 a/ber/c/ro/m/by a/ber/c/rom/by 
2 a/be/r/c/ro/m/by a/ber/c/ro/m/by 
3 a/ber/c/rom/by a/be/r/c/rom/by 
Table 5. Segmentations for Abercromby 
 
When it comes to the evaluation of the trans-
literation candidates, the longer candidates could 
even score higher than the expected outcome in 
JSCM.  The statistical data show that the bigram 
c/?+ro/? is far more likely than c/?+rom/?, 
but P(<ek,ck>=<rom,?> | fc(ek+1)=b) is much 
stronger than P(<ek,ck>=<m,? > | fc(ek+1)=b).  
Hence, taking the character on both sides of a 
segment, GAP managed to rank ????? 
highest. 
Another example is the name Regelson, which 
is transliterated as ???? li3-ge2-er3-sen1 in 
the gold standard.  The expected transliteration is 
191
ranked 8th in JSCM and 2nd in GAP.  Although 
P(<ek,ck>=<ge,?> | <ek-1,ck-1>=<re,?>) is much 
higher than P(<ek,ck>=<ge,?> | <ek-1,ck-1>=<re,
?>), when taking the next segment <l,?> into 
account, the likelihood of <ge,?> is lowered.  
Hence the expected transliteration is ranked 
higher in GAP. 
6.4 Error Analysis 
As the proposed method stands, errors could 
have been propagated from two steps.  The first 
is the source name segmentation step.  If it hap-
pens that the top segmentation candidates are 
already wrong to start with, there is no way to 
reach the expected transliteration at all.  Hence it 
is even more important to maintain a high accu-
racy for the segmentation step.  The other error-
propagation step is certainly when transliteration 
candidates are evaluated.  The results for this 
step often heavily rely on the training data.  If it 
happens that the grapheme pair distributions are 
somewhat skewed, particular Chinese segments 
would be preferred irrespective of relevant lin-
guistic or other factors.  On the other hand, if 
many homophones are used for a particular Eng-
lish segment, the chance of reaching the expected 
transliteration with one of the homophones is 
again loosened.  More on this will be discussed 
in the next section. 
For the latter error-propagation step, our at-
tempt to make use of contexts on both sides of a 
segment has been shown to be able to improve 
the results.  To see how much of the errors is at-
tributable to the segmentation step, we roughly 
made an estimation by comparing the length of 
the top 1 candidates given in JSCM and GAP 
with the gold standard.  It was found that 17.8% 
and 14.2% of the first candidates in JSCM and 
GAP respectively do not match the length of the 
gold standard.  More detailed analysis of the 
segmentation results is in progress. 
6.5 Current Limitations and Future Work 
Our current treatment of neighbouring context 
and graphemic approximation of phonological 
context is shown to outperform pure DOM based 
on previous context only.  Nevertheless, there are 
several directions of work which would require 
more investigation to further improve E2C per-
formance. 
First, the source name segmentation step needs 
further improvement to minimise error propaga-
tion from an early step.  Phonological knowledge 
is obviously important in this regard as how a 
given English name should be segmented and 
pronounced is determined by its phonological 
context.  Even without an explicit phonemic rep-
resentation of the source names, more could be 
done in terms of modelling the phonological con-
text via the surface graphemes. 
Second, relating to the above, foreign names 
of different origins often have very different 
phonological properties leading to different pro-
nunciations for the same orthographic forms.  
The silent h in Beckham mentioned earlier is one 
example, even though Chinese transliterations 
are often based on surface orthographic proper-
ties.  Other problematic cases could be from lan-
guages like Russian and German where there are 
relatively more consonant clusters.  For instance, 
the segment ?scho? is often transliterated as one 
syllable (e.g. ? shao4, ? xiao4, or ? she4) but 
the segment ?stro? often leads to three syllables 
(e.g. ??? si1-te4-luo2).  It is therefore impor-
tant to incorporate more phonological knowledge 
into the transliteration model, not only to gener-
ate more reliable and acceptable transliteration 
candidates, but also to reduce effort in evaluating 
phonologically invalid segmentation candidates 
and syllable structures, thus making the task 
computationally less expensive.  
Third, as one of our separate ongoing studies 
shows, homophones are not only abundant in 
Chinese language per se, but also in E2C trans-
literation.  The situation is particularly salient in 
Chinese transliterations based on Cantonese pro-
nunciations.  For example, while some names 
might have two transliterations with different 
pronunciations, like Jackson as ?? zik1-seon3 
or ?? zik1-san4, the same name might also be 
rendered in two forms with a different character 
having the same pronunciation, such as Adam as 
?? or ?? (both pronounced as aa3-dong1 in 
Cantonese).  Two transliterations for the same 
name might have the same sound but different 
tones, e.g. Ashley as ??? aai6-syu4-lei6 or ?
?? aai6-syu1-lei6.  We therefore attempt to 
model the English-Chinese segment correspon-
dence via an intermediate representation of the 
phonetic transcription of the Chinese characters.  
Preliminary results are reported in Kwong (2009).  
Although it happens that only one transliteration 
is given for each name in the gold standard data 
used in this study, the variability of E2C in real-
ity is evident.  It is therefore important for sys-
tems to be able to accommodate acceptable 
transliteration alternatives, particularly for trans-
literation extraction and information retrieval. 
192
Fourth, given that tonal patterns could help 
distinguish some homophone ambiguity, the ef-
fect of the tonal factor and its potential associa-
tion with the pitch and accent in the English 
names is worth further investigation. 
7 Conclusion 
Hence in this paper, we have reported our work 
on approximating phonological context for E2C 
with surface graphemic features.  This is based 
on the observation that certain graphemic ambi-
guity is closely associated with the local contexts 
on both sides of a given segment, the phonologi-
cal properties of which often determine its ex-
pected pronunciation.  Experiments have shown 
that in the absence of an explicit phonemic repre-
sentation of the English source names, the previ-
ous and next character of a given segment could 
be effectively employed to approximate the local 
phonological context affecting the rendition of a 
given segment in Chinese.  Our proposed method 
GAP gives better results than the conventional 
JSCM which only makes use of previous context, 
and GAP-s which considers the whole 
neighbouring segments.  Future work includes 
improving the source name segmentation step to 
minimise error propagation from an early stage, 
incorporating other factors like name origin and 
special phonological properties of different 
source languages into the transliteration model, 
as well as effectively handling homophones and 
tonal patterns in E2C transliteration. 
Acknowledgements 
The work described in this paper was substan-
tially supported by a grant from City University 
of Hong Kong (Project No. 7002203). 
References  
Jin, C., Na, S-H., Kim, D-I. and Lee, J-H. (2008)  
Automatic Extraction of English-Chinese Translit-
eration Pairs using Dynamic Window and Token-
izer.  In Proceedings of the Sixth SIGHAN Work-
shop on Chinese Language Processing (SIGHAN-
6), Hyderabad, India, pp.9-15. 
Kantor, P.B. and Voorhees, E.M. (2000)  The TREC-
5 Confusion Track: Comparing Retrieval Methods 
for Scanned Text.  Information Retrieval, 2(2-3): 
165-176. 
Knight, K. and Graehl, J. (1998)  Machine Translit-
eration.  Computational Linguistics, 24(4):599-612. 
Kuo, J-S. and Li, H. (2008)  Mining Transliterations 
from Web Query Results: An Incremental Ap-
proach.  In Proceedings of the Sixth SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing 
(SIGHAN-6), Hyderabad, India, pp.16-23. 
Kwong, O.Y. (2009)  Homophones and Tonal Pat-
terns in English-Chinese Transliteration.  To ap-
pear in Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, Singa-
pore. 
Lee, C-J., Chang, J.S. and Jang, J-S. R. (2006)  Ex-
traction of transliteration pairs from parallel cor-
pora using a statistical transliteration model.  In-
formation Sciences, 176:67-90. 
Li, H., Zhang, M. and Su, J. (2004)  A Joint Source-
Channel Model for Machine Transliteration.  In 
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 
2004), Barcelona, Spain, pp.159-166. 
Li, H., Sim, K.C., Kuo, J-S. and Dong, M. (2007)  
Semantic Transliteration of Personal Names.  In 
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (ACL 
2007), Prague, Czech Republic, pp.120-127. 
Oh, J-H. and Choi, K-S. (2005)  An Ensemble of 
Grapheme and Phoneme for Machine Translitera-
tion.  In R. Dale, K-F. Wong, J. Su and O.Y. 
Kwong (Eds.), Natural Language Processing ? 
IJCNLP 2005.  Springer, LNAI Vol. 3651, pp.451-
461. 
Sproat, R., Shih, C., Gale, W. and Chang, N. (1996)  
A stochastic finite-state word-segmentation algo-
rithm for Chinese.  Computational Linguistics, 
22(3): 377-404. 
Tao, T., Yoon, S-Y., Fister, A., Sproat, R. and Zhai, C. 
(2006)  Unsupervised Named Entity Transliteration 
Using Temporal and Phonetic Correlation.  In Pro-
ceedings of the 2006 Conference on Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 
2006), Sydney, Australia, pp.250-257. 
Virga, P. and Khudanpur, S. (2003)  Transliteration of 
Proper Names in Cross-lingual Information Re-
trieval.  In Proceedings of the ACL2003 Workshop 
on Multilingual and Mixed-language Named Entity 
Recognition. 
Xinhua News Agency. (1992)  Chinese Translitera-
tion of Foreign Personal Names.  The Commercial 
Press. 
Yoon, S-Y., Kim, K-Y. and Sproat, R. (2007)  Multi-
lingual Transliteration Using Feature based Pho-
netic Method.  In Proceedings of the 45th Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL 2007), Prague, Czech Republic, 
pp.112-119. 
193
