Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Unsupervised and Minimally Supervised Learning of Lexical Semantics, pages 27?35,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Cross-lingual Predicate Cluster Acquisition to Improve  
Bilingual Event Extraction by Inductive Learning 
 
Heng Ji 
Computer Science Department 
Queens College and The Graduate Center 
The City University of New York 
hengji@cs.qc.cuny.edu 
 
  
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we present two approaches to 
automatically extract cross-lingual predi-
cate clusters, based on bilingual parallel 
corpora and cross-lingual information ex-
traction. We demonstrate how these clus-
ters can be used to improve the NIST 
Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) event 
extraction task1. We propose a new induc-
tive learning framework to automatically 
augment background data for low-
confidence events and then conduct global 
inference. Without using any additional 
data or accessing the baseline algorithms 
this approach obtained significant im-
provement over a state-of-the-art bilingual 
(English and Chinese) event extraction sys-
tem. 
1 Introduction 
Event extraction, the ?classical? information extrac-
tion (IE) task, has progressed from Message Un-
derstanding Conference (MUC)-style single 
template extraction to the more comprehensive 
multi-lingual Automatic Content Extraction (ACE) 
extraction including more fine-grained types. This 
extension has made event extraction more widely 
applicable in many NLP tasks including cross-
lingual document retrieval (Hakkani-Tur et al, 
2007) and question answering (Schiffman et al, 
2007). Various supervised learning approaches 
                                                          
1 http://www.nist.gov/speech/tests/ace/ 
have been explored for ACE multi-lingual event 
extraction (e.g. Grishman et al, 2005; Ahn, 2006; 
Hardy et al, 2006; Tan et al, 2008; Chen and Ji, 
2009). All of these previous literatures showed that 
one main bottleneck of event extraction lies in low 
recall. It?s a challenging task to recognize the dif-
ferent forms in which an event may be expressed, 
given the limited amount of training data. The goal 
of this paper is to improve the performance of a 
bilingual (English and Chinese) state-of-the-art 
event extraction system without accessing its inter-
nal algorithms or annotating additional data. 
As for a separate research theme, extensive 
techniques have been used to produce word clus-
ters or paraphrases from large unlabeled corpora 
(Brown et al, 1990; Pereira et al, 1993; Lee and 
Pereira, 1999, Barzilay and McKeown, 2001; Lin 
and Pantel, 2001; Ibrahim et al, 2003; Pang et al, 
2003). For example, (Bannard and Callison-Burch, 
2005) and (Callison-Burch, 2008) described a 
method to extract paraphrases from largely avail-
able bilingual corpora. The resulting clusters con-
tain words with similar semantic information and 
therefore can be useful to augment a small amount 
of annotated data. We will automatically extract 
cross-lingual predicate clusters using two different 
approaches based on bilingual parallel corpora and 
cross-lingual IE respectively; and then use the de-
rived clusters to improve event extraction. 
We propose a new learning method called in-
ductive learning to exploit the derived predicate 
clusters. For each test document, a background 
document is constructed by gradually replacing the 
low-confidence events with the predicates in the 
same cluster. Then we conduct cross-document 
inference technique as described in (Ji and Grish-
27
man, 2008) to improve the performance of event 
extraction. This inductive learning approach 
matches the procedure of human knowledge acqui-
sition and foreign language education: analyze in-
formation from specific examples and then 
discover a pattern or draw a conclusion; attempt 
synonyms to convey/learn the meaning of an intri-
cate word.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 describes the terminology used in this 
paper. Section 3 presents the overall system archi-
tecture and the baseline system. Section 4 then de-
scribes in detail the approaches of extracting cross-
lingual predicate clusters. Section 5 describes the 
motivations of using cross-lingual clusters to im-
prove event extraction. Section 6 presents an over-
view of the inductive learning algorithm. Section 7 
presents the experimental results. Section 8 com-
pares our approach with related work and Section 9 
then concludes the paper and sketches our future 
work. 
2 Terminology 
The event extraction task we are addressing is that 
of ACE evaluations. ACE defines the following 
terminology: 
 
entity: an object or a set of objects in one of the 
semantic categories of interest 
mention: a reference to an entity (typically, a 
noun phrase) 
event trigger: the main word which most clearly 
expresses an event occurrence 
event arguments: the mentions that are in-
volved in an event (participants) 
event mention: a phrase or sentence within 
which an event is described, including trigger 
and arguments 
 
The 2005 ACE evaluation had 8 types of events, 
with 33 subtypes; for the purpose of this paper, we 
will treat these simply as 33 distinct event types. 
For example, for a sentence ?Barry Diller on 
Wednesday quit as chief of Vivendi Universal En-
tertainment?, the event extractor should detect all 
the following information: a ?Personnel_End-
Position? event mention, with ?quit? as the trigger 
word, ?chief? as an argument with a role of  ?posi-
tion?, ?Barry Diller? as the person who quit the 
position, ?Vivendi Universal Entertainment? as the 
organization, and the time during which the event 
happened is ?Wednesday?. 
3 Approach Overview 
3.1 System Pipeline 
Figure 1 depicts the general procedure of our ap-
proach. The set of test event mentions is improved 
by exploiting cross-lingual predicate clusters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. System Overview 
 
The following section 3.2 will give more details 
about the baseline bilingual event tagger. Then we 
will present the predicate cluster acquisition algo-
rithm in section 4 and the method of exploiting 
clusters for event extraction in section 6. 
3.2 A Baseline Bilingual Event Extraction 
System 
We use a state-of-the-art bi-lingual event extrac-
tion system (Grishman et al, 2005; Chen and Ji, 
2009) as our baseline. The system combines pat-
tern matching with a set of Maximum Entropy 
classifiers: to distinguish events from non-events; 
Inductive Learning 
Cross-lingual Predicate 
Cluster Acquisition 
Test 
Document
Baseline 
Event Extraction
Predicate Clusters 
Unlabeled 
Corpora
Cross-lingual 
IE 
Background
Document
Low-confidence 
Event  
Replacement 
Cross-document
Inference
Test Events
Parallel 
Corpora
Alignment 
Based Clustering
Baseline 
Event Extraction
Background 
Events 
Improved
Test Events
28
to classify events by type and subtype; to distin-
guish arguments from non-arguments; to classify 
arguments by argument role; and given a trigger, 
an event type, and a set of arguments, to determine 
whether there is a reportable event mention. In ad-
dition, the Chinese system incorporates some lan-
guage-specific features to address the problem of 
word segmentation (Chen and Ji, 2009). 
4 Cross-lingual Predicate Cluster Acqui-
sition 
We start from two different approaches to extract 
cross-lingual predicate clusters, based on parallel 
corpora and cross-lingual IE techniques respec-
tively. 
4.1 Acquisition from Bilingual Parallel Cor-
pora 
In the first approach, we take use of the 852 Chi-
nese event trigger words in ACE05 training cor-
pora as our ?anchor set?. For each Chinese trigger, 
we search its automatically aligned English words 
from a Chinese-English parallel corpus including 
50,000 sentence pairs (part of Global Autonomous 
Language Exploitation Y3 Machine Translation 
training corpora) to construct an English predicate 
cluster. The word alignment was obtained by run-
ning Giza++ (Och and Ney, 2003). In each cluster 
we record the frequency of each unique English 
word. Then we conduct the same procedure in the 
other direction to construct Chinese predicate clus-
ters anchored by English triggers. 
State-of-the-art Chinese-English word alignment 
error rate is about 40% (Deng and Byrne, 2005). 
Therefore the resulting cross-lingual clusters in-
clude a lot of word alignment errors. In order to 
address this problem, we filter the clusters by only 
keeping those predicates including the original 
predicate forms in ACE training data or Eng-
lish/Chinese Propbank (Palmer et al, 2005; Xue 
and Palmer, 2009).  
4.2 Acquisition from Cross-lingual IE 
Based on the intuition that Machine Translation 
(MT) may translate a Chinese trigger word into 
different English words in different contexts, we 
employ the second approach using cross-lingual IE 
techniques (Hakkani-Tur et al, 2007) on TDT5 
Chinese corpus to generate more clusters.  We ap-
ply the following two cross-lingual IE pipelines: 
 
Chinese IE_MT: Apply Chinese IE on the Chinese 
texts to get a set of Chinese triggers ch-trigger-set1, 
and then use word alignments to translate (project) 
ch-trigger-set1 into a set of English triggers en-
trigger-set1; 
 
MT_English IE: Translate Chinese texts into Eng-
lish, and then apply English IE on the translated 
texts to get a set of English triggers en-trigger-set2. 
 
For any Chinese trigger ch-trigger in ch-trigger-
set1, if its corresponding translation en-trigger in 
en-trigger-set1 is the same as that in en-trigger-
set2, then we add en-trigger into the cluster an-
chored by ch-trigger.  
  We apply the English and Chinese IE systems 
as described in (Grishman et al, 2005; Chen and Ji, 
2009). Both cross-lingual IE pipelines need ma-
chine translation to translate Chinese documents 
(for English IE) or project the extraction results 
from Chinese IE into English. We use the RWTH 
Aachen Chinese-to-English statistical phrase-based 
machine translation system (Zens and Ney, 2004) 
for these purposes.  
4.3 Derived Cross-lingual Predicate Clusters 
Applying the above two approaches we obtained 
438 English predicate clusters and 543 Chinese 
predicate clusters. 
For example, for a trigger ??(injure)?, we can 
get the following two predicate clusters with their 
frequency in the parallel corpora:  
 
?? {injured:99 injuries:96 injury:76 
 wounded:38 wounding:28 injuring:14 wounds:7 
killed:4 died:2 mutilated:1 casualties:1 chop:1 kill-
ing:1 shot:1}.  
 
injured ? {??:1624 ??:102 ?:99 ??:29 ?
?:23 ?:12 ??:10 ??:6 ??:3 ??:2 ??:1
?:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 } 
 
We can see that the predicates in the same clus-
ter are not restrictedly synonyms, but they were 
generated as alternative translations for the same 
word and therefore represent similar meanings. 
More importantly, these triggers vary from very 
common ones such as ?injured? to rare words such 
as ?mutilate?. This indicates how these clusters can 
aid extracting low-confidence events: when decid-
ing whether a word ?mutilate? indicates a ?Life-
29
Injure? event in a certain context, we can replace it 
with other predicates in the same cluster and may 
provide us more reliable overall evidence. 
Figure 2 presents the distribution of clusters 
which include more than one predicate.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Cluster Size Distribution 
 
We can see that most clusters include 2-9 predi-
cates in both English and Chinese. However on 
average English clusters include more predicates. 
In addition, there are many more singletons in 
Chinese (232) than in English (101). This indicates 
that Chinese event triggers are more ambiguous. 
5 Motivation of Using Cross-lingual Clus-
ters for Event Extraction 
After extracting cross-lingual predicate clusters, 
we can combine the evidence from all the predi-
cates in each cluster to adjust the probabilities of 
event labeling. In the following we present some 
examples in both languages to demonstrate this 
motivation. 
5.1 Improve Rare Trigger Labeling  
Due to the limited training data, many trigger 
words only appear a few times as a particular type 
of event. This data sparse problem directly leads to 
the low recall of trigger labeling. But exploiting 
the evidence from other predicates in the same 
cluster may boost the confidence score of the can-
didate event. We present two examples as follows. 
 
 
 
(1) English Example 1 
 
For example, ?blown up? doesn?t appear in the 
training data as a ?Conflict-Attack? event, and so it 
cannot be identified in the following test sentence. 
However, if we replace it with other predicates in 
the same cluster, the system can easily identify 
?Conflict-Attack? events in the new sentences with 
high confidence values: 
 
(a) Test Sentence:  
Identified as  ?Conflict-Attack? Event with Confi-
dence=0: 
 
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been deal-
ing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks 
when the Haifa bus was blown up. 
 
(b) Cross-lingual Cluster 
?? ? { blown up:4 bombing:3 blew:2 destroying:1 
destroyed:1 } 
 
(c) Replaced Sentences 
Identified as ?Conflict-Attack? Event with Confi-
dence=0.799: 
 
He told AFP that Israeli intelligence had been deal-
ing with at least 40 tip-offs of impending attacks 
when the Haifa bus was destroyed. 
? 
 
(2) Chinese Example 1 
 
Chinese predicate clusters anchored by English 
words can also provide external evidence for event 
identification. For example, the trigger word ??? 
(release/parole)? appears rarely in the Chinese 
training data but in most cases it can be replaced 
by a more frequent trigger ???(release)? to rep-
resent the same meaning. Therefore by combining 
the evidence from ???? we can enhance the con-
fidence value of identifying ???? as a  ?Justice-
Release_Parole? event. For example, 
 
(a) Test Sentence:  
Identified as ?Justice-Release_Parole? Event with 
Confidence=0: 
 
????????????????????
?. ? (This suspect was released because of the vio-
lation case but committed a felony again.) 
 
 
30
(b) Cross-lingual Cluster 
releasing ? {??:4 ??:1 } 
 
(c) Replaced Sentences 
Identified as ?Justice-Release_Parole? Event with 
Confidence=0.964: 
 
?????????????????????. 
? 
 
5.2 Improve Frequent Trigger Labeling  
On the other hand, some common words are highly 
ambiguous in particular contexts. But the other 
less-ambiguous predicates in the clusters can help 
classify event types more accurately. 
 
(1) English Example 2 
 
For example, in the following sentence the ?Per-
sonnel-End_Position? event is missing because 
?step? doesn?t indicate any ACE events in the 
training data. However, after replacing ?step? with 
other prediates such as ?quit?, the system can iden-
tify the event more easily: 
 
(a) Test Sentence:  
Identified as ?Personnel-End_Position? Event 
with Confidence=0: 
 
Barry Diller on Wednesday step from chief of Vivendi 
Universal Entertainment, the entertainment unit of 
French giant Vivendi Universal. 
 
(b) Cross-lingual Cluster 
?? ? { resign:6 step:5 quit:3} 
 
(c) Replaced Sentences 
Classified as ?Personnel-End_Position? Event 
with Confidence=0.564: 
 
Barry Diller on Wednesday quit from chief of Vivendi 
Universal Entertainment, the entertainment unit of 
French giant Vivendi Universal. 
? 
 
(2) Chinese Example 2 
 
Some single-character Chinese predicates can rep-
resent many different event types in different con-
texts. For example, the word ??? appears in 27 
different predicate clusters, representing the mean-
ing of hit/call/strike/form/take/draw etc. Therefore 
we can take use of other less ambiguous predicates 
in these clusters to adjust the likelihood of event 
classification.  
For example, in the following test sentence, the 
word ??? indicates two different event types. If 
we replace these words with other predicates, we 
can classify them into different event types more 
accurately based on the evidence from replaced 
predicates and contexts. 
 
(a) Test Sentence:  
Event Classification for trigger word ???: 
 
?????????? (?call?, Phone-Write event 
with confidence 0) ?????????????
??? 10 ???????? (?attacked/killed?, 
Conflict-Attack event with confidence 0.528)???
?????(?attacked?, Conflict-Attack event with 
confidence 0.946)???????????(Several 
days ago the Captain called  urgent telegraphs to ask 
for help, expressing that the boat pilot Cai Mingzhi 
was already killed by mainland fishermen and he 
himself was assaulted and duressed to the mainland.) 
 
 
(b) Cross-lingual Cluster 
 
call? {???:6 ??:6 ?:1 ??:1 } 
 
attack?{??:564 ??:110 ??:114 ??:24 ?
?:15 ??:15 ??:15 ?:8 ?:6 ??:6 ??:5 ?
?:4 ??:3 ??:3 ??:2 ??:2 ?:2 ??:2 ?
?:2 ??:2 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 ??:1 
?:1 ??:1 ?:1 } 
 
(c) Replaced Sentences 
Event Classification for trigger word ??? with 
higher confidence: 
 
???????????  (?call?, Phone-Write 
event with confidence 0.938) ?????????
? ? ? ? ? ? ? 10 ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
(?attacked/killed?, Conflict-Attack event with confi-
dence 0.583)????????(?attacked?, Con-
flict-Attack event with confidence 0.987)?????
?????? 
? 
 
Based on the above motivations we propose to 
incorporate cross-lingual predicate clusters to re-
fine event identification and classification. In order 
31
to exploit these clusters effectively, we shall gen-
erate additional background data and conduct 
global confidence. The sections below will present 
the detailed algorithms. 
6 Inductive Learning 
We design a framework of inductive learning to 
incorporate the derived predicate clusters. The 
general idea of inductive learning is to analyze in-
formation from all kinds of specific examples until 
we can draw a conclusion. Since the main goal of 
our approach is to improve the recall of event ex-
traction, we shall focus on those events generated 
by the baseline tagger with low confidence. For 
those events we automatically generate back-
ground documents using the predicate clusters (de-
tails in section 6.1) and then conduct global 
inference between each test document and its 
background documents (section 6.2).  
6.1 Background Document Generation 
For each event mention in a test document, the 
baseline event tagger produces the following local  
confidence value: 
 
? LConf(trigger, etype): The probability of a 
string trigger indicating an event mention with 
type etype in a context sentence S; 
 
If LConf(trigger, etype) is lower than a threshold, 
and it belongs to a predicate cluster C,  we create 
an additional background document BD by: 
 
? For each predicatei ? C, we replace trigger 
with predicatei in S to generate new sentence 
S?, and add S? into BD.    
6.2 Global Inference 
For each background document BD, we apply the 
baseline event extraction and get a set of back-
ground events. We then apply the cross-document 
inference techniques as described in (Ji and 
Grishman, 2008) to improve trigger and argument 
labeling performance by favoring interpretation 
consistency across the test events and background 
events. 
This approach is based on the premise that many 
events will be reported multiple times from differ-
ent sources in different forms. This naturally oc-
curs in the test document and the background 
document because they include triggers from the 
same predicate cluster. 
By aggregating events across each pair of test 
document TD and background document BD, we 
conduct the following statistical global inference: 
 
? to remove triggers and arguments with low 
confidence in TD and BD; 
? to adjust trigger and argument identification 
and classification to achieve consistency across 
TD and BD. 
 
In this way we can propagate highly consistent 
and frequent triggers and arguments with high 
global confidence to override other, lower confi-
dence, extraction results.  
7 Experimental Results 
7.1 Data and Scoring Metric 
We used ACE2005 English and Chinese training 
corpora to evaluate our approach. Table 1 shows 
the number of documents used for training, devel-
opment and blind testing. 
 
Language Training 
Set 
Development 
Set 
Test Set
English 525 33 66 
Chinese 500 10 40 
 
Table 1. Number of Documents 
 
We define the following standards to determine 
the correctness of an event mention: 
 
? A trigger is correctly identified if its position 
in the document matches a reference trigger. 
? A trigger is correctly identified and classified 
if its event type and position in the document 
match a reference trigger. 
? An argument is correctly identified if its event 
type and position in the document match any 
of the reference argument mentions. 
? An argument is correctly identified and classi-
fied if its event type, position in the document, 
and role match any of the reference argument 
mentions. 
 
 
 
  
32
Trigger  
Identification 
+Classification 
Argument  
Identification 
Argument  
Identification 
+Classification 
             Performance 
 
Language/System 
P R F P R F 
Argument 
Classification 
Accuracy 
P R F 
Baseline 67.8 53.5 59.8 49.3 31.4 38.3 88.2 43.5 27.7 33.9 
English After Using  
Cross-lingual 
Predicate Clusters 
69.2 59.4 63.9 51.7 32.7 40.1 89.6 46.3 29.3 35.9
Baseline 58.1 47.2 52.1 46.2 33.7 39.0 95.0 43.9 32.0 37.0 
Chinese After Using  
Cross-lingual  
Predicate Clusters 
60.2 52.6 56.1 46.8 36.7 41.1 95.6 44.7 35.1 39.3
 
Table 2. Overall Performance on Blind Test Set (%) 
 
7.2 Confidence Metric Thresholding 
Before blind testing we select the thresholds for the 
trigger confidence LConf(trigger, etype) as defined 
in section 6.1 by optimizing the F-measure score of 
on the development set. Figure 3 shows the effect 
on precision and recall of varying the threshold for 
inductive learning using cross-lingual predicate 
clusters. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Trigger Labeling Performance with 
Inductive Learning Confidence Thresholding on 
English Development Set 
 
We can see that the best performance on the de-
velopment set can be obtained by selecting thresh-
old 0.6, achieving 9.4% better recall with a little 
loss in precision (0.26%) compared to the baseline 
(with threshold=0) . Then we apply this threshold 
value directly for blind test. This optimizing pro-
cedure is repeated for Chinese as well. 
7.3 Overall Performance 
Table 2 shows the overall Precision (P), Recall (R) 
and F-Measure (F) scores for the blind test set.  
For both English and Chinese, the inductive 
learning approach using cross-lingual predicate 
clusters provided significant improvement over the 
baseline event extraction system (about 4% abso-
lute improvement on trigger labeling and 2%-2.3% 
on argument labeling). The most significant gain 
was provided for the recall of trigger labeling ? 
5.9% absolute improvement for English and 5.4% 
absolute improvement for Chinese. 
Surprisingly this approach didn?t cause any loss 
in precision. In fact small gains were obtained on 
precision for both languages. This indicates that 
cross-lingual predicate clusters are effective at ad-
justing the confidence values so that the events 
were not over-generated. The refined event trigger 
labeling also directly yields better performance in 
argument labeling. 
We conducted the Wilcoxon Matched-Pairs 
Signed-Ranks Test on a document basis. The re-
sults show that for both languages the improve-
ment using cross-lingual predicate clusters is 
significant at a 99.7% confidence level for trigger 
labeling and a 96.4% confidence level for argu-
ment labeling. 
7.4 Discussion 
For comparison we attempted a self-training ap-
proach: adding high-confidence events in the test 
set back as additional training data and re-train the 
event tagger. This produced 1.7% worse F-measure 
score for the English development set. It further 
33
proves that using the test set itself is not enough, 
we need to explore new predicates to serve as 
background evidence. 
In addition we also applied a bootstrapping ap-
proach using relevant unlabeled data and obtained 
limited improvement ? about 1.6% F-measure gain 
for English. As Ji and Grishman (2006) pointed out, 
both self-training and bootstrapping methods re-
quire good data selection scheme. But not for any 
test set we can easily find relevant unlabeled data. 
Therefore the approach presented in this paper is 
less expensive ? we can automatically generate 
background data while introducing new evidence. 
An alternative way of incorporating the cross-
lingual predicate clusters would follow (Miller et 
al., 2004), namely encoding the cluster member-
ship as an additional feature in the supervised-
learning procedure of the baseline event tagger. 
However in the situation where we cannot directly 
change the algorithms of the baseline system, our 
approach of inductive learning is more flexible. 
8 Related Work 
Our approach of extracting predicate clusters is 
related to some prior work on paraphrase or word 
cluster discovery, either from mono-lingual paral-
lel corpora (e.g. Barzilay and McKeown, 2001; Lin 
and Pantel, 2001; Ibrahim et al, 2003; Pang et al, 
2003) or cross-lingual parallel corpora (e.g. Ban-
nard and Callison-Burch, 2005; Callison-Burch, 
2008). Shinyama and Sekine (2003) presented an 
approach of extracting paraphrases using names, 
dates and numbers as anchors. Hasegawa et al 
(2004) described a paraphrase discovery approach 
based on clustering concurrent name pairs.  
Several recent studies have stressed the benefits 
of using paraphrases or word clusters to improve 
IE components. For example, (Miller et al, 2004) 
proved that word clusters can significantly improve 
English name tagging. The idea of using predicates 
in the same cluster for candidate trigger replace-
ment is similar to Ge et al(1998) who used local 
context replacement for pronoun resolution. To the 
best of our knowledge, our work presented the first 
experiment of using cross-lingual predicate para-
phrases for the ACE event extraction task.  
9 Conclusion and Future Work 
In this paper we described two approaches to ex-
tract cross-lingual predicate clusters, and designed 
a new inductive learning framework to effectively 
incorporate these clusters for event extraction. 
Without using any additional data or changing the 
baseline algorithms, we demonstrated that this 
method can significantly enhance the performance 
of a state-of-the-art bilingual event tagger. 
We have noticed that the current filtering 
scheme based on Propbank may be too restricted to 
keep enough informative predicates. In the future 
we will attempt incorporating POS tagging results 
and frequency information.  
In addition we will extend this framework to ex-
tract cross-lingual relation and name clusters to 
improve other IE tasks such as name tagging, rela-
tion extraction, event coreference and event trans-
lation. We are also interested in automatically 
discovering new event types (non-ACE event types) 
or more fine-grained subtypes/attributes for exist-
ing ACE event types from the derived predicate 
clusters. 
Acknowledgments 
This material is based upon work supported by the 
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency un-
der Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0023 via 27-
001022, and the CUNY Research Enhancement 
Program and GRTI Program.  
References  
David Ahn. 2006. The stages of event extraction. Proc. 
COLING/ACL 2006 Workshop on Annotating and 
Reasoning about Time and Events. Sydney, Australia. 
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Para-
phrasing with Bilingual Parallel Corpora. Proc. ACL 
2005.  
Regina Barzilay and Kathleen McKeown. 2001. Ex-
tracting Paraphrases from a Parallel Corpus. Proc. 
ACL 2001. 
Peter F. Brown, Vinvent J. Della pietra, Peter V. 
deSouza, Jenifer C. Lai, Robert L. Mercer. 1990. 
Class-based N-gram Models of Natural Language. 
Computational Linguistics.  
Chris Callison-Burch. 2008. Syntactic Constraints on 
Paraphrases Extracted from Parallel Corpora. Proc. 
EMNLP 2008. Honolulu, USA. 
Zheng Chen and Heng Ji. 2009. Language Specific Is-
sue and Feature Exploration in Chinese Event Extrac-
tion. Proc. HLT-NAACL 2009. Boulder, Co.  
34
Yonggang Deng and William Byrne. 2005. HMM Word 
and Phrase Alignment for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. Proc. HLT-EMNLP 2005. Vancouver, Can-
anda. 
Niyu Ge, John Hale and Eugene Charniak. 1998. A Sta-
tistical Approach to Anaphora Resolution. Proc. 
Sixth Workshop on Very Large Corpora 
Ralph Grishman, David Westbrook and Adam Meyers. 
2005. NYU?s English ACE 2005 System Description. 
Proc. ACE 2005 Evaluation Workshop. Washington, 
US. 
Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2007. 
Using Information Extraction to Improve Cross-
lingual Document Retrieval. Proc. RANLP2007 
workshop on Multi-source, Multilingual Information 
Extraction and Summarization. 
Hilda Hardy, Vika Kanchakouskaya and Tomek 
Strzalkowski. 2006. Automatic Event Classification 
Using Surface Text Features. Proc. AAAI06 Work-
shop on Event Extraction and Synthesis. Boston, 
Massachusetts. US. 
Takaaki Hasegawa, Satoshi Sekine and Ralph Grishman. 
2004. Discovering Relations among Named Entities 
from Large Corpora. Proc. ACL 2004. Barcelona, 
Spain.  
Ali Ibrahim, Boris Katz and Jimmy Lin. 2003. Extract-
ing Structural Paraphrases from Aligned Monolin-
gual Corpora. Proc. ACL 2003. 
Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2006. Data Selection in 
Semi-supervised Learning for Name Tagging. Proc.  
ACL 2006 Workshop on Information Extraction Be-
yond the Document. Sydney, Australia. 
Heng Ji and Ralph Grishman. 2008. Refining Event 
Extraction Through Cross-document Inference. Proc. 
ACL 2008. Ohio, USA 
Lillian Lee and Fernando Pereira. 1999. Distributional 
Similarity Models: Clustering vs. Nearest Neighbors. 
Proc. ACL1999. pp. 33-40. 
Dekang Lin and Patrick Pantel. 2001. DIRT-Discovery 
of Inference Rules from Text. Proc. ACM SIGDD 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing. 
Scott Miller, Jethran Guinness and Alex Zamanian.2004. 
Name Tagging with Word Clusters and Discrimina-
tive Training. Proc. HLT-NAACL2004. pp. 337-342. 
Boston, USA. 
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. "A System-
atic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment 
Models", Computational Linguistics, volume 29, 
number 1, pp. 19-51. 
Martha Palmer, Daniel Gildea and Paul Kingsbury. 
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus 
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics. Vol-
ume 31, Issue 1. pp. 71-106. 
Bo Pang, Kevin Knight and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Syn-
tax-based Alignment of Multiple Translations: Ex-
tracting Paraphrases and Generating New Sentences. 
Proc. HLT/NAACL 2003. 
Fernando Pereira, Naftali Tishby and Lillian Lee. 1993. 
Distributional Clustering of English Words. Proc. 
ACL1993. pp. 183-190. 
Barry Schiffman, Kathleen R. McKeown, Ralph Grish-
man and James Allan. 2007. Question Answering us-
ing Integrated Information Retrieval and Information 
Extraction. Proc. HLT-NAACL 2007. Rochester, US. 
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2003. Paraphrase 
Acquisition for Information Extraction. Proc. ACL 
2003 workshop on Paraphrasing (IWP 2003). 
Hongye Tan, Tiejun Zhao and Jiaheng Zheng. 2008. 
Identification of Chinese Event and Their Argument 
Roles. Proc. Computer and Information Technology 
Workshops. 
Nianwen Xue and Martha Palmer. 2009. Adding seman-
tic roles to the Chinese Treebank. Natural Language 
Engineering, 15(1):143-172. 
Richard Zens and Hermann Ney. 2004. Improvements 
in Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation. In 
HLT/NAACL 2004. New York City, NY, US 
 
35
