Proceedings of CLIAWS3, Third International Cross Lingual Information Access Workshop, pages 1?2,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
 Cross-Language Information Access: Looking Backward, Looking For-
ward 
Douglas W. Oard 
 
College of Information Studies and Institute for Advanced Computer Studies 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA 
 
 
 
The problem of providing people with the informa-
tion that they seek when that information happens 
to be in an unfamiliar language is not new.  Rather, 
what is new is what we can do to help address that 
challenge.  To illustrate this point, I?ll start my talk 
with a brief recap of two earlier generations of 
automated support for cross-language information 
access, the first from roughly 1964 to 1985, and 
the second from roughly 1989 to the present.  With 
that as background, I?ll then take stock of where 
we are, and where I see unmet needs that call for 
capabilities beyond what can currently be accom-
plished.  I?ll conclude with a few observations 
about how we might expect the role of the research 
community to evolve as progressively more capa-
ble cross-language information access technologies 
become commercially viable. 
 
About the Speaker 
Douglas Oard holds joint appointments as an As-
sociate Professor in the College of Information 
Studies and in the Institute for Advanced Com-
puter Studies at the University of Maryland, Col-
lege Park.  He earned his Ph.D. in Electrical 
Engineering from the University of Maryland.  Dr. 
Oard?s research interests center around the use of 
emerging technologies to support information 
seeking by end users.  One of the leading research-
ers on cross-language information retrieval, he has 
helped lead nine evaluation campaigns focused on 
that problem for the Text Retrieval Conference 
(TREC) and the Cross-Language Evaluation Fo-
rum (CLEF).  In addition to his work on ranking 
algorithms and interaction design for cross-
language information retrieval, his recent research 
has focused on support for search and sense mak-
ing in large collections of conversational media.  
Additional information is available at 
http://www.glue.umd.edu/~oard/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
