Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Text and Citation Analysis for Scholarly Digital Libraries, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 62?70,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
NLP Support for Faceted Navigation in Scholarly Collections
Marti A. Hearst
School of Information, UC Berkeley
102 South Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
hearst@ischool.berkeley.edu
Emilia Stoica
Ask.com
555 12th Street, Oakland, CA 94607
emilia.stoica@ask.com
Abstract
Hierarchical faceted metadata is a proven
and popular approach to organizing infor-
mation for navigation of information col-
lections. More recently, digital libraries
have begun to adopt faceted navigation for
collections of scholarly holdings. A key
impediment to further adoption is the need
for the creation of subject-oriented faceted
metadata. The Castanet alorithm was de-
veloped for the purpose of (semi) auto-
mated creation of such structures. This pa-
per describes the application of Castanet to
journal title content, and presents an eval-
uation suggesting its efficacy. This is fol-
lowed by a discussion of areas for future
work.
1 Introduction
Faceted navigation for searching and browsing
?vertical? content collections has become the stan-
dard interface paradigm for e-commerce shopping
web sites. Faceted navigation, when properly de-
signed, has been shown to be understood by users
and preferred over other organizations (Hearst et
al., 2002; Yee et al, 2003; English et al, 2001).
Although text clustering is an easily automated
technique, numerous studies have found that the
results of clustering are difficult for lay people to
understand (Kleiboemer et al, 1996; Russell et al,
2006; Hornb?k and Fr?kj?r, 1999) and that the
coherent and predictable structure of categorical
metadata is superior from a usability prespective
(Rodden et al, 2001; Pratt et al, 1999; Hearst,
2006a).
An interface using hierarchical faceted naviga-
tion simultaneously shows previews of where to
go next and how to return to previous states in
the exploration, while seamlessly integrating free
text search within the category structure. Faceted
metadata provides organizing context for results
and for subsequent queries, which can act as im-
portant scaffolding for exploration and discovery.
The mental work of searching an information col-
lection is reduced by promoting recognition over
recall and suggesting logical but perhaps unex-
pected alternatives, while at the same time avoid-
ing empty results sets.
Recently, faceted navigation has emerged as the
dominant method for new interfaces for navigat-
ing digital library collections. The NCSU library
catalog was an early adopter among university li-
braries, using the Endeca product as its backend
(Antelman et al, 2006). A usability study with
10 undergraduates comparing this system to the
old library catalog interface found a 48% improve-
ment in task completion time, although the study
did not account for the effects of facets vs. the
effects of fuller coverage in the keyword search.
Additionally, a consortium of university li-
braries (the OCLC) is now using the WorldCat
shared catalog and interface, which features a
faceted navigation component (see Figures 1 and
2). And another popular interface solution is pro-
vided by AquaBrowser, in this case, shown on the
University of Chicago website (see Figure 3). A
recent study on this site found significant benefits
attributable to the faceted navigation facility (Ol-
son, 2007). And finally, the online citation system
DBLP has not one but two different faceted inter-
faces, as does the ACM Digital Library.
These interfaces do a good job of allowing users
to filter by bibliographic attributes such as media,
date, and library. However, in most cases the sub-
ject metadata still is not as rich as it should be to
fully facilitate information browsing and discov-
ery in these systems. In fact, there are a number of
open problems with the use of faceted navigation
for scholarly work. Some of these have to do with
how best to present faceted navigation in the inter-
face (Hearst, 2006b), but others are more relevant
62
Figure 1: Worldcat consortium digital library interface using faceted navigation. The instance shown is
the University of California version, from http://berkeley.worldcat.org .
Figure 2: Digital library interface with faceted navigation, continued, from http://berkeley.worldcat.org .
63
Figure 3: University of Chicago digital library interface using faceted navigation, using an interface from
AquaBrowser.
to NLP, including:
? How to automatically or semi-automatically
create rich subject-oriented faceted metadata
for scholarly text?
? How to automatically assign information
items to faceted category labels?
This paper describes the results of applying
Castanet, a semi-automated approach to creating
faceted metadata, to a scholarly collection. (In
past work it has been shown to work well on a dif-
ferent kind of text (Stoica et al, 2007; Stoica and
Hearst, 2004).) It then discusses some open prob-
lems in building navigation structures for schol-
arly digital libraries.
2 Creating Faceted Metadata
This section first defines faceted metadata, and
then describes the CastaNet alorithm. More de-
tails about the algorithm can be found in a prior
publication (Stoica et al, 2007).
Rather than one large category hierarchy,
faceted metadata consists of a set of categories
(flat or hierarchical), each of which corresponds
to a different facet (dimension or feature type) rel-
evant to the collection to be navigated. After the
facets are designed, each item in the collection is
assigned any number of labels from the facets.
Faceted metadata is intermediate in complexity
between flat categories and full knowledge repre-
sentation. The idea is to develop a set of ?orthog-
onal? categories that characterize the information
space in a meaningful way, using terminology that
is useful for browsing the contents of a domain.
Each facet is a different topic, subject, attribute, or
feature, and some facets have hierarchical ?is-a?
structure. For instance, the facets of a biomedical
collection should cover disease, anatomy, drugs,
symptoms, side-effects, properties of experimen-
tal subjects, and so on. Each biomedical article
can then be assigned any number of category la-
bels from any number of facets. An article on the
effects of tamoxifen on ovarian cancer when tested
on mice could then be navigated to by first starting
with cancer, then selecting drug tamoxifen, and
then body part ovary, or first with tamoxifen, then
navigating to ovary, and further refining by dis-
ease type. This ability to ?mix and match? both
for describing the articles and for navigating the
category structure is key.
The term ?faceted classification? was deliber-
ately chosen in the Flamenco project to echo the
old library science term of that name (Hearst,
2000), but with a rejection of the strict terms re-
quired for construction of controlled vocabulary,
which mandates exhaustive, mutually exclusive
category composition. Rather, the faceted naviga-
64
tion approach for design of search interfaces calls
for category systems that are expressed at a mean-
ingful level of description, use approachable lan-
guage (unless designed for specialists), are consis-
tent in terms of specificity at each level, avoiding
becoming too broad or too deep.
The most difficult part of the design is determin-
ing whether or not compound concepts should be
created. For instance, when evaluating tags for a
digital library like librarything, should terms like
?african history? and ?british literature? be sepa-
rated into two facets, one containing major writing
types (history, literature), and another nationalities
(african, british), or should the modifying struc-
ture be retained, as there are many kinds of history
and many kinds of literature? Most likely, the an-
swer should depend on the makeup of the collec-
tion and the usage that the users are expected to
want to make of it.
The next subsections briefly describe related
work in automated creation of structure from text,
the Castanet alorithm and its output on journal
article title text, and the results of a usability study
on this output.
2.1 Related Work
One way to create faceted metadata is to start with
existing vocabularies, and in fact work has been
done on this area. The Library of Congress Sub-
ject headings are shown in the U Chicago cata-
log, despite a statement by Antelman et al (2006)
about the ?unsuitability of Library of Congress
Subject Headings (LCSH) as an entry vocabulary.?
There has also been work on converting LCSH
into faceted metadata (Anderson and Hofmann,
2006). Work on the Flamenco project converted
the Art and Architecture thesaurus to a faceted cat-
egory system manually (Hearst et al, 2002). How-
ever, automated techniques are desirable.
Other methods that are influential but claimed
to make a meaningful category structure, but not
necessarily a faceted one, include the LDA (Latent
Dirichlet Allocation) method (Blei et al, 2003),
which uses a generative probabilistic model of dis-
crete data to create a model of documents? topics.
It attempts to analyze a text corpus and extract the
topics that combine to form the documents. The
output of the algorithm was originally evaluated
in terms of perplexity reduction but not in terms of
understandability of the topics produced.
Sanderson and Croft (1999) propose a method
called Subsumption for building a hierarchy for a
set of documents retrieved for a query. For two
terms x and y, x is said to subsume y if the follow-
ing conditions hold: P (x|y) ? 0.8, P (y|x) < 1.
To evaluate the algorithm the authors asked 8 par-
ticipants to look at parent-child pairs and state
whether or not they were ?interesting.? Partici-
pants found 67% to be interesting as compared
to 51% for randomly chosen pairs of words. Of
those interesting pairs, 72% were found to display
a ?type-of? relationship.
Another class of solutions make use of exist-
ing lexical hierarchies to build category hierar-
chies, as we do in this paper. For example, Nav-
igli and Velardi (2003) use WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) to build a complex ontology consisting of
a wide range of relation types (demonstrated on
a travel agent domain), as opposed to a set of
human-readable hierarchical facets. Mihalcea and
Moldovan (2001) describe a sophisticated method
for simplifying WordNet in general, rather than
tailoring it to a specific collection.
Zelevinsky et al (2008) used an approach
of looking at keywords assigned by authors
of ACM publications to documents, computing
which terms had high importance within those
documents, and then using the highest scoring
among those documents to assign new keywords
(referred to in the paper as tags) to the documents.
The tags were shown as query term refinements in
a digital library interface.
Only limited related work has attempted to
make faceted category hierarchies explicitly.
Dakka et al (Dakka and Ipeirotis, 2008; Dakka
et al, 2005) is one of these. Their approach is a
combination of Subsumption and Castanet; they
use lexical resources like WordNet and Wikipedia
to find structure among words, but also use them
to determine which words in a collection are most
useful to include in a faceted system. The facet hi-
erarchy is made via Subsumption. The evaluation
of their most recent work on news text finds strong
results for assessments made by judges of preci-
sion and recall. Furthermore, when facets were
shown in a search interface to five users, the key-
word usage dropped in favor of clicking on cate-
gories, as task completion time was reduced while
satisfaction remained unchanged. No examples
of facet categories produced by the algorithm are
shown, and the role of hierarchy is not clear, but
the approach appears especially promising for de-
65
termining which words of long documents to in-
clude in building facet systems.
2.2 Castanet Applied to Journal Titles
The main idea behind the Castanet alorithm is
to carve out a structure from the hypernym (?is-
a?) relations within the WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998)
lexical database (Stoica et al, 2007; Stoica and
Hearst, 2004). The Castanet alorithm assumes
that there is text associated with each item in the
collection, or at least with a representative subset
of the items. The textual descriptions are used
both to build the facet hierarchies and to assign
items (documents, images, citations, etc.) to the
facets, and the text can be fragmented.
The algorithm has five major steps which are
briefly outlined here. For details, see (2007).
1. Select target terms from textual descriptions
of information items.
2. Build the Core Tree:
? For each term, if the term is unambigu-
ous, add its synset?s IS-A path to the
Core Tree.
? Increment the counts for each node in
the synset?s path with the number of
documents in which the target term ap-
pears.
3. Augment the Core Tree with the remaining
terms? paths:
? For each candidate IS-A path for the am-
biguous term, choose the path for which
there is the most document representa-
tion in the Core Tree.
4. Compress the augmented tree.
5. Remove top-level categories, yielding a set of
facet hierarchies.
In addition to augmenting the nodes in the tree,
adding in a new term increases a count associ-
ated with each node on its path; this count corre-
sponds to how many documents the term occurs in.
Thus the more common a term, the more weight it
places on the path it falls within. The Core Tree
acts as the ?backbone? for the final category struc-
ture. It is built by using paths derived from unam-
biguous terms, with the goal of biasing the final
structure towards the appropriate senses of words.
Currently a word can appear in only one sense in
the final structure; allowing multiple senses is an
area of research.
Figures 4 and 5 show the output of the Cas-
tanet alorithm when applied to the titles of jour-
nals from the bioscience literature. Note that even
the highly ambiguous common anatomy words are
successfully grouped using this algorithm, pre-
sumably because of the requirement that each
word occur in only one location in the ontology
and because the anatomy part of the ontology is
strongly favored during the part of the process
in which the core tree is built with unambiguous
terms. (Although some versions of Castanet use an
advanced version of WordNet Domains (Magnini,
2000), they were not used in the construction of
this category set.)
As reported earlier (Stoica et al, 2007), an eval-
uation of this algorithm was conducted by asking
information architects with expertise in the do-
main over which the algorithm was run to state
whether or not they would like to use the output
of the algorithm to build a website. The output of
Castanet was compared to Subsumption (Sander-
son and Croft, 1999) and to LDA (Blei et al,
2003).
As reported earlier, on a recipes collection, all
34 information architects overwhelming preferred
Castanet. They were asked to respond to how
likely they would be to use the output, on a scale
of: definitely no, no, yes, definitely yes. For Cas-
tanet, 85% of the evaluators said yes or definitely
yes for intent to use. Subsumption received 38%
answering yes or definitely yes, and LDA was re-
jected by all participants.
The study was also conducted using a biologi-
cal journal titles collection. 3275 titles were used
(although a significant number are not in English
and so many are missed by the algorithm). The
15 participants who evaluated the Biomedical ti-
tles collection were required to be frequent users
of PubMed (the online library for biomedicine),
but were not required to be information architects,
as it was difficult to finding information architects
with biological expertise. These participants were
biologists, doctors, medical students and medical
librarians.
7 participants saw both LDA and Castanet, and
8 participants saw both Subsumption and Cas-
tanet (a pilot test found that participants who saw
both Subsumption and LDA became very frus-
trated with the tasks, so the two options were com-
pared pairwise to Castanet for subsequent trials).
For Castanet, 11 out of 15 participants (73%) an-
66
Figure 4: Castanet output on journal title text.
Figure 5: Castanet output on journal title text, continued.
67
Figure 6: LDA output on journal title text.
Figure 7: Subsumption output on journal title text.
68
swered yes or definitely yes to a desire to use its
output. 1 out of 7 participants answered yes to a
desire to use LDA, and 1 out of 8 answered yes to
Subsumption. LDA received 4 ?definitely no? re-
sponses, whereas Subsumption received only one
of these, and no one said definitely no to Castanet.
2.3 Open Problems
Although quite useful ?out of the box,? the Cas-
tanet alorithm could benefit by several improve-
ments and additions:
1. The processing of the terms should recognize
spelling variations (such as aging vs. ageing)
and morphological variations. Verbs and ad-
jectives are often quite important for a collec-
tion and should be included, but with caution.
2. In a related point, the system should have a
way of suggesting synonyms to annotate a
given node, as opposed to listing closely re-
lated words as children or siblings of one an-
other.
3. Some terms should be allowed to occur with
more than one sense if this is required by the
dataset. For example, the term brain is an-
notated with two domains, Anatomy and Psy-
chology, which are both relevant domains for
a biomedical journal collection.
4. Words that appear in noun compounds and
phrases that are not in WordNet should re-
ceive special processing.
5. Currently if a term is in a document it is as-
sumed to use the sense assigned in the facet
hierarchies; this is often incorrect, and so
terms should be disambiguated within the
text before automatic category assignment is
done.
6. WordNet is not exhaustive and some mecha-
nism is needed to improve coverage for un-
known terms.
7. Castanet seems to work better when applied
to short pieces of text (e.g., journal titles vs.
full text); to remedy this, better methods are
needed to select the target terms.
8. A method for dynamically adding facets and
adding terms to facets should be developed,
especially a method for allowing user tags to
be incorporated into the exising facet hierar-
chies.
Recent work by Dakka et al (Dakka and Ipeiro-
tis, 2008) can help with point 7, and some recent
work by Koren et al (Koren et al, 2008) seems
promising for 8.
Robust evaluation methods are also needed;
making use of log information about which facets
are heavily used can help inform decisions about
which facets work well and which need modifica-
tion or additions.
Acknowledgements: Megan Richardson pro-
vided valuable contributions in her work on the
study reported on here. Emilia Stoica did this
work while a postdoctoral researcher at UC Berke-
ley.
References
J.D. Anderson and M.A. Hofmann. 2006. A fully
faceted syntax for Library of Congress subject
headings. Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
43(1):7?38.
K. Antelman, E. Lynema, and A.K. Pace. 2006. To-
ward a twenty-first century library catalog. Infor-
mation technology and libraries, 25(3):128?138.
David Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan.
2003. Latent dirichlet alocation. Journal of Ma-
chine Learning Research, 3:993?1022.
W. Dakka and P.G. Ipeirotis. 2008. Automatic extrac-
tion of useful facet hierarchies from text databases.
In IEEE 24th International Conference on Data En-
gineering, 2008. ICDE 2008, pages 466?475.
W. Dakka, P.G. Ipeirotis, and K.R. Wood. 2005. Au-
tomatic construction of multifaceted browsing inter-
faces. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM international
conference on Information and knowledge manage-
ment, pages 768?775. ACM New York, NY, USA.
J. English, M.A. Hearst, R. Sinha, K. Swearingen,
and K.-P. Yee. 2001. Examining the usability
of web site search. Unpublished Manuscript,
http://flamenco.berkley.edu/papers/epicurious-
study.pdf.
Christiane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Elec-
tronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
M.A. Hearst, J. English, R. Sinha, K. Swearingen, and
K.-P. Yee. 2002. Finding the flow in web site search.
Communications of the ACM, 45(9), September.
M.A. Hearst. 2000. Next Generation Web Search: Set-
ting Our Sites. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin,
23(3):38?48.
M.A. Hearst. 2006a. Clustering Versus Faceted Cat-
egories For Information Exploration. Communca-
tions Of The Acm, 49(4):59?61.
69
M.A. Hearst. 2006b. Design recommendations for
hierarchical faceted search interfaces. In SIGIR?06
Workshop On Faceted Search, Seattle, Wa, August.
K. Hornb?k and E. Fr?kj?r. 1999. Do Thematic Maps
Improve Information Retrieval. Human-Computer
Interaction (INTERACT?99), pages 179?186.
A.J. Kleiboemer, M.B. Lazear, and J.O. Pedersen.
1996. Tailoring a retrieval system for naive users. In
Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Symposium on Doc-
ument Analysis and Information Retrieval (SDAIR
?96), Las Vegas, NV.
J. Koren, Y. Zhang, and X. Liu. 2008. Personalized
interactive faceted search. WWW ?08: Proceeding
of the 17th international conference on World Wide
Web.
Bernardo Magnini. 2000. Integrating subject field
codes into WordNet. In Proc. of LREC 2000,
Athens, Greece.
Rada Mihalcea and Dan I. Moldovan. 2001.
Ez.wordnet: Principles for automatic generation of
a coarse grained wordnet. In Proc. of FLAIRS Con-
ference 2001, May.
Roberto Navigli, Paola Velardi, and Aldo Gangemi.
2003. Ontology learning and its application to auto-
mated terminology translation. Intelligent Systems,
18(1):22?31.
T.A. Olson. 2007. Utility of a faceted catalog for
scholarly research. Library Hi Tech, 25(4):550?561.
W. Pratt, M.A. Hearst, and L. Fagan. 1999. A
knowledge-based approach to organizing retrieved
documents. In Proceedings of 16th Annual Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence(AAAI 99), Orlando,
FL.
K. Rodden, W. Basalaj, D. Sinclair, and K. R. Wood.
2001. Does organisation by similarity assist im-
age browsing? In Proceeedings of ACM CHI 2001,
pages 190?197.
D.M. Russell, M. Slaney, Y. Qu, and M. Hous-
ton. 2006. Being literate with large document
collections: Observational studies and cost struc-
ture tradeoffs. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences (HICSS?06).
Mark Sanderson and Bruce Croft. 1999. Deriving con-
cept hierarchies from text. In Proceedings of SIGIR
1999.
E. Stoica and M. Hearst. 2004. Nearly-automated
metadata hierarchy creation. In Companion Pro-
ceedings of HLT-NAACL?04, pages 117?120.
E. Stoica, M.A. Hearst, and M. Richardson. 2007. Au-
tomating Creation of Hierarchical Faceted Metadata
Structures. In Human Language Technologies: The
Annual Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL-HLT 2007), pages 244?251.
K.-P. Yee, K. Swearingen, K. Li, and M.A. Hearst.
2003. Faceted metadata for image search and
browsing. In Proceedings of ACM CHI 2003, pages
401?408. ACM New York, NY, USA.
V. Zelevinsky, J. Wang, and D. Tunkelang. 2008. Sup-
porting Exploratory Search for the ACM Digital Li-
brary. In Workshop on Human-Computer Interac-
tion and Information Retrieval (HCIR?08).
70
