Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 90?94,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Deep Linguistic Multilingual Translation and Bilingual Dictionaries
Eric Wehrli, Luka Nerima & Yves Scherrer
LATL-Department of Linguistics
University of Geneva
fEric.Wehrli, Luka.Nerima, Yves.Scherrerg@unige.ch
Abstract
This paper describes the MulTra project,
aiming at the development of an efficient
multilingual translation technology based
on an abstract and generic linguistic model
as well as on object-oriented software de-
sign. In particular, we will address the is-
sue of the rapid growth both of the trans-
fer modules and of the bilingual databases.
For the latter, we will show that a signifi-
cant part of bilingual lexical databases can
be derived automatically through transitiv-
ity, with corpus validation.
1 Introduction
The goal of the MulTra project is to develop a
grammar-based translation model capable of han-
dling not just a couple of languages, but poten-
tially a large number of languages. This is not
an original goal, but as 50 years of work and in-
vestment have shown, the task is by no means an
easy one, and although SMT has shown fast and
impressive results towards it (e.g. EuroMatrix),
we believe that a (principled) grammar-based ap-
proach is worth developing, taking advantage of
the remarkable similarities displayed by languages
at an abstract level of representation. In the first
phase of this project (2007-2009), our work has
focused on French, English, German, Italian and
Spanish, with preliminary steps towards Greek,
Romanian, Russian and Japanese.
To evaluate the quality of the (still under devel-
opment) system, we decided to join the WMT09
translation evaluation with prototypes for the fol-
lowing language pairs: English to French, French
to English and German to English. In this short
paper, we will first give a rough description of the
MulTra system architecture and then turn to the
difficult issue of the bilingual dictionaries.
The MulTra project relies to a large extent on
abstract linguistics, inspired from recent work in
generative grammar (Chomsky, 1995, Culicover &
Jackendoff, 2005, Bresnan, 2001). The grammar
formalism developed for this project is both rich
enough to express the structural diversity of all the
languages taken into account, and abstract enough
to capture the generalizations hidden behind ob-
vious surface diversity. At the software level, an
object-oriented design has been used, similar in
many ways to the one adopted for the multilingual
parser (cf. Wehrli, 2007).
The rapid growth of the number of transfer
modules has often been viewed as a major flaw
of the transfer model when applied to multilingual
translation (cf. Arnold, 2000, Kay, 1997). This ar-
gument, which relies on the fact that the number of
transfer modules and of the corresponding bilin-
gual dictionaries increases as a quadratic function
of the number of languages, is considerably weak-
ened if one can show that transfer modules can
be made relatively simple and light (cf. section 2),
compared to the analysis and generation modules
(whose numbers are a linear function of the num-
ber of languages). Likewise, section 3 will show
how one can drastically reduce the amount of work
by deriving bilingual dictionaries by transitivity.
2 The architecture of the MulTra system
To a large extent, this system can be viewed as an
extension of the Multilingual Fips parsing project.
For one thing, the availability of the ?deep linguis-
tic? Fips parser for the targeted languages is a cru-
cial element for the MulTra project; second, the
MulTra software design matches the one devel-
oped for the multilingual parser. In both cases, the
goal is to set up a generic system which can be re-
defined (through type extension and method rede-
finition) to suit the specific needs of, respectively,
a particular language or a particular language pair.
90
2.1 Methodology
The translation algorithm follows the traditional
pattern of a transfer system. First the input
sentence is parsed by the Fips parser, produc-
ing an information-rich phrase-structure repre-
sentation with associated predicate-argument rep-
resentations. The parser also identifies multi-
word expressions such as idioms and colloca-
tions ? crucial elements for a translation sys-
tem (cf. Seretan & Wehrli, 2006). The transfer
module maps the source-language abstract repre-
sentation into the target-language representation.
Given the abstract nature of this level of repre-
sentation, the mapping operation is relatively sim-
ple and can be sketched as follows: recursively
traverse the source-language phrase structure in
the order: head, right subconstituents, left sub-
constituents. Lexical transfer (the mapping of a
source-language lexical item with an equivalent
target-language item) occurs at the head-transfer
level (provided the head is not empty) and yields
a target-language equivalent term often, but by no
means always, of the same category. Following
the projection principle used in the Fips parser, the
target-language structure is projected on the ba-
sis of the lexical item which is its head. In other
words, we assume that the lexical head determines
a syntactic projection (or meta-projection).
Projections (ie. constituents) which have been
analyzed as arguments of a predicate undergo
a slightly different transfer process, since their
precise target-language properties may be in
part determined by the subcategorization fea-
tures of the target-language predicate. To take
a simple example, the direct object of the
French verb regarder in (1a) will be trans-
ferred into English as a prepositional phrase
headed by the preposition at, as illustrated in
(2a). This information comes from the lexical
database. More specifically, the French-English
bilingual lexicon specifies a correspondence be-
tween the French lexeme [
VP
regarder NP ]
and the English lexeme [
VP
look [
PP
at NP ] ].
For both sentences, we also illustrate the syntactic
structures as built, respectively, by the parser for
the source sentence and by the translator for the
target sentence.
(1)a. Paul a regarde? la voiture.
b. [
TP
[
DP
Paul ] a [
VP
regarde? [
DP
la [
NP
voiture
] ] ] ]
(2)a. Paul looked at the car.
b. [
TP
[
DP
Paul ] [
VP
looked [
PP
at [
DP
the [
NP
car ] ] ] ] ]
2.2 Adding a language to the system
Given the general model as sketched above, the
addition of a language to the system requires (i) a
parser and (ii) a generator. Then for each language
pair for which that language is concerned, the sys-
tem needs (iii) a (potentially empty) language-pair
specific transfer module, and (iv) a bilingual lex-
ical database. The first three components are de-
scribed below, while the fourth will be the topic of
section 3.
Parser The Fips multilingual parser is assumed.
Adding a new language requires the following
tasks: (i) grammar description in the Fips formal-
ism, (ii) redefinition of the language-specific pars-
ing methods to suit particular properties of the lan-
guage, and (iii) creation of an appropriate lexical
database for the language.
Generator Target-language generation is done
in a largely generic fashion (as described above
with the transfer and projection mechanisms).
What remains specific in the generation phase is
the selection of the proper morphological form of
a lexical item.
Language-pair-specific transfer Transfer from
language A to language B requires no language-
pair specification if the language structures of A
and B are isomorphic. Simplifying a little bit,
this happens among closely related languages,
such as Spanish and Italian for instance. For
languages which are typologically different, the
transfer module must indicate how the precise
mapping is to be done.
Consider, for instance, word-order differences
such as adjectives which are prenominal in Eng-
lish and postnominal in French ? a red car vs.
une voiture rouge. The specific English-French
transfer module specifies that French adjectives,
which do not bear the [+prenominal] lexical fea-
ture, correspond to right subconstituents (vs. left
subconstituents) of the head noun. Other cases are
more complicated, such as the V2 phenomenon
in German, pronominal cliticization in Romance
languages, or even the use of the do auxiliary in
English interrogative or negative sentences. Such
cases are handled by means of specific procedures,
91
which are in some ways reminiscent of transfor-
mation rules of the standard theory of generative
grammar, ie. rules that can insert, move or even
delete phrase-structure constituents (cf. Akmajian
& Heny, 1975).
So far, the languages taken into account in
the MulTra project are those for which the Fips
parser has been well developed, that is English,
French, German, Italian and Spanish. Of the 20
potential language pairs five are currently opera-
tional (English-French, French-English, German-
French, German-English, Italian-French), while 6
other pairs are at various stages of development.
3 Multilingual lexical database
3.1 Overview of the lexical database
The lexical database is composed for each lan-
guage of (i) a lexicon of words, containing all
the inflected forms of the words of the language,
(ii) a lexicon of lexemes, containing the syn-
tactic/semantic information of the words (corre-
sponding roughly to the entries of a classical dic-
tionary) and (iii) a lexicon of collocations (in fact
multi-word expressions including collocations and
idioms). We call the lexemes and the collocations
the lexical items of a language.
The bilingual lexical database contains the in-
formation necessary for the lexical transfer from
one language to another. For storage purposes, we
use a relational database management system. For
each language pair, the bilingual dictionary is im-
plemented as a relational table containing the asso-
ciations between lexical items of language A and
lexical items of language B. The bilingual dictio-
nary is bi-directional, i.e. it also associates lexi-
cal items of language B with lexical items of lan-
guage A. In addition to these links, the table con-
tains transfer information such as translation con-
text (eg. sport, finance, law, etc.), ranking of the
pairs in a one-to-many correspondence, seman-
tic descriptors (used for interactive disambigua-
tion), argument matching for predicates (mostly
for verbs). The table structures are identical for
all pairs of languages.
Although the bilingual lexicon is bidirectional,
it is not symmetrical. If a word v from lan-
guage A has only one translation w in language
B, it doesn?t necessarily mean that w has only one
translation v. For instance the word tongue cor-
responds to French langue, while in the opposite
direction the word langue has two translations,
tongue and language. In this case the descriptor
attribute from French to English will mention re-
spectively ?body part? and ?language?. Another
element of asymmetry is the ranking attribute used
to mark the preferred correspondences in a one-to-
many translation1. For instance the lexicographer
can mark his preference to translate lovely into the
French word charmant rather than agre?able. Of
course the opposite translation direction must be
considered independently.
What is challenging in this project is that it ne-
cessitates as many bilingual tables as the number
of language pairs considered, i.e. n(n   1)=2 ta-
bles. We consider that an appropriate bilingual
coverage (for general purpose translation) requires
well over 60?000 correspondences per language
pair.
In the framework of this project we consider
5 languages (French, English, German, Italian,
Spanish). Currently, our database contains 4 bilin-
gual dictionaries (out of the 10 needed) with the
number of entries given in figure 1:
language pair Number of entries
English - French 77?569
German - French 47?797
French - Italian 38?188
Spanish - French 23?696
Figure 1: Number of correspondences in bilingual
dictionaries
Note that these 4 bilingual dictionaries were
manually created by lexicographers and the qual-
ity of the entries can be considered as good.
3.2 Automatic generation
The importance of multilingual lexical resources
in MT and, unfortunately, the lack of available
multilingual lexical resources has motivated many
initiatives and research work to establish collabo-
ratively made multilingual lexicons, e.g. the Pa-
pillon project (Boitet & al. 2002) or automatically
generated multilingual lexicons (see for instance
Aymerish & Camelo, 2007, Gamallo, 2007).
We plan to use semi-automatic generation to
build the 6 remaining dictionaries. For this pur-
pose we will derive a bilingual lexicon by transi-
tivity, using two existing ones. For instance, if we
have bilingual correspondences for language pair
1This attribute takes the form of an integer between 6 (pre-
ferred) and 0 (lowest).
92
A! B and B! C, we can obtain A! C. We will
see below how the correspondences are validated.
The idea of using a pivot language for deriv-
ing bilingual lexicons from existing ones is not
new. The reader can find related approaches in
(Paik & al. 2004, Ahn & Frampton 2006, Zhang
& al. 2007) . The specificity of our approach is
that the initial resources are manually made, i.e.
non noisy, lexicons.
The derivation process goes as follows:
1. Take two bilingual tables for language pairs
(A, B) and (B, C) and perform a relational
equi-join. Perform a filtering based on the
preference attribute to avoid combinatory ex-
plosion of the number of generated corre-
spondences.
2. Consider as valid all the unambiguous cor-
respondences. We consider that a generated
correspondence a ! c is unambiguous if for
the lexical item a there exists only one corre-
spondence a! b in the bilingual lexicon (A,
B) and for b there exists only one correspon-
dence b ! c in (B, C). As the lexicon is non
symmetrical, this process is performed twice,
once for each translation direction.
3. Consider as valid all the correspondences ob-
tained by a pivot lexical item of type colloca-
tion. We consider as very improbable that a
collocation is ambiguous.
4. All other correspondences are checked in a
parallel corpus, i.e. only the correspondences
actually used as translations in the corpus
are kept. First, the parallel corpus is tagged
by the Fips tagger (Wehrli, 2007) in order
to lemmatize the words. This is especially
valuable for languages with rich inflection,
as well as for verbs with particles. In order
to check the validity of the correspondences,
we count the effective occurrences of a given
correspondence in a sentence-aligned paral-
lel corpus, as well as the occurrences of each
of the lexical items of the correspondence. At
the end of the process, we apply the log like-
lihood ratio test to decide whether to keep or
discard the correspondence.
3.3 Results of automatic generation
The English-German lexicon that we used in the
shared translation task was generated automati-
cally. We derived it on the basis of English-French
and German-French lexicons. For the checking of
the validity of the correspondences (point 4 of the
process) we used the parallel corpus of the debates
of the European Parliament during the period 1996
to 2001 (Koehn, 2005). Figure 2 summarizes the
results of the four steps of the derivation process:
Step Type Eng.-Ger.
1 Candidate corresp. 89?022
2 Unambiguous corresp. 67?012
3 Collocation pivot 2?642
4 Corpus checked 2?404
Total validated corresp. 72?058
Figure 2: Number of derived entries for English-
German
We obtained a number of entries compara-
ble to those of the manually built bilingual lex-
icons. The number of the correspondences for
which a validation is necessary is 19?368 (89?022-
(67?012+2?642)), of which 2?404 (approximately
12%) have been validated based on the the Eu-
roParl corpus, as explained above. The low figure,
well below our expectations, is due to the fact that
the corpus we used is not large enough and is prob-
ably not representative of the general language.
Up to now, the English-German dictionary re-
quired approximately 1?400 entries to be added
manually, which is less than 2% of the entire lexi-
con.
4 Conclusion
Based on a deep linguistic transfer approach and
an object-oriented design, the MulTra multilingual
translation system aims at developing a large num-
ber of language pairs while significantly reduc-
ing the development cost as the number of pairs
grows. We have argued that the use of an abstract
and relatively generic linguistic level of represen-
tation, as well as the use of an object-oriented soft-
ware design play a major role in the reduction of
the complexity of language-pair transfer modules.
With respect to the bilingual databases, (corpus-
checked) automatic derivation by transitivity has
been shown to drastically reduce the amount of
work.
Acknowledgments
The research described in this paper has been sup-
ported in part by a grant from the Swiss national
science foundation (no 100015-113864).
93
5 References
Ahn, K. and Frampton, M. 2006. ?Automatic Gen-
eration of Translation Dictionaries Using In-
termediary Languages?? in Cross-Language
knowledge Induction Workshop of the EACL
06, Trento, Italy, pp 41- 44.
Akmajian, A. and F. Heny, 1975. An Introduction
to the Principles of Generative Syntax, MIT
Press.
Arnold, D. 2000. ?Why translation is difficult for
computers? in H.L. Somers (ed.) Computers
and Translation : a handbook for translators,
John Benjamin.
Aymerich, J. and Camelo, H. 2007.? Automatic
extraction of entries for a machine translation
dictionary using bitexts?? in MT Summit XI,
Copenhagen, pp. 21-27
Boitet, Ch. 2001. ?Four technical and organi-
zational keys to handle more languages and
improve quality (on demand) in MT? in Pro-
ceedings of MT-Summit VIII, Santiago de
Compostela, 18-22.
Boitet, Ch., Mangeot, M. and Se?rasset, G.
2002. ?The PAPILLON project: coopera-
tively building a multilingual lexical data-
base to derive open source dictionaries & lex-
icons? in Proceedings of the 2nd workshop
on NLP and XML, COLING 2002, Taipei,
Taiwan.
Bresnan, J. 2001. Lexical Functional Syntax, Ox-
ford, Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. 1995. The Minimalist Program,
Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.
Culicover, P. & R. Jackendoff, 2005. Simpler Syn-
tax, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Gamallo, P. 2007. ?Learning Bilingual Lexi-
cons from Comparable English and Spanish
Corpora? in Proceedings of MT Summit XI,
Copenhagen.
Hutchins, J. 2003. ?Has machine translation im-
proved?? in Proceedings of MT-Summit IX,
New Orleans, 23-27.
Kay, M. 1997. ?Machine Translation : the Dis-
appointing Past and Present? in R.A. Cole, J.
Mariani, H. Uskoreit, G. Varile, A. Zaenen
and A. Zampoli Survey of the State of the
Art in Human Language Technology, Giar-
dini Editori.
Koehn, P. 2005. ?Europarl: A Parallel Corpus
for Statistical Machine Translation?? in MT
Summit 2005.
Ney, H. 2005. ?One Decade of Statistical Machine
Translation? in Proceedings of MT-Summit
X, Pukhet, Thailand.
Paik, K., Shirai, S. and Nakaiwa, H. 2004. ?Au-
tomatic Construction of a Transfer Dictio-
nary Considering Directionality?, in COL-
ING 2004 Multilingual Linguistic Resources
Workshop, Geneva, pp. 25-32.
Seretan, V. & E. Wehrli, 2006. ?Accurate Colloca-
tion Extraction Using a Multilingual Parser?
in Proceedings of the ACL, 953-960, Sydney,
Australia.
Wehrli, E. 2007. ?Fips, a ?deep? linguistic mul-
tilingual parse? in Proceedings of the ACL
2007 Workshop on Deep Linguistic process-
ing, 120-127, Prague, Czech Republic.
Zhang, Y., Ma, Q. and Isahara, H. 2007. ?Build-
ing Japanese-Chinese Translation Dictionary
Based on EDR Japanese-English Bilingual
Dictionary? inMT Summit XI, Copenhagen,
pp 551-557.
94
