Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 125?129,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
WordNet and FrameNet as Complementary Resources for Annotation
Collin F. Baker
International Computer Science Institute
1947 Center St., Berkeley, California 94704
collinb@icsi.berkeley.edu
Christiane Fellbaum
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540-5233
fellbaum@princeton.edu
Abstract
WordNet and FrameNet are widely used lexi-
cal resources, but they are very different from
each other and are often used in completely
different ways in NLP. In a case study in which
a short passage is annotated in both frame-
works, we show how the synsets and defini-
tions of WordNet and the syntagmatic infor-
mation from FrameNet can complement each
other, forming a more complete representa-
tion of the lexical semantic of a text than ei-
ther could alone. Close comparisons between
them also suggest ways in which they can be
brought into alignment.
1 Background and motivation
FrameNet and WordNet are two lexical databases that
are widely used for NLP, often in conjunction. Because
of their complementary designs they are obvious candi-
dates for alignment, and an exploratory research project
within the larger context of the semantic annotation of
the the American national Corpus is currently under-
way. We give specific illustrative examples of annota-
tions against both resources, highlighting their different
contributions towards a rich semantic analysis.
WordNet (WN):1 (Fellbaum, 1998), is a large elec-
tronic lexical database of English. Originally con-
ceived as a full-scale model of human semantic orga-
nization, it was quickly embraced by the Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) community, a development
that guided its subsequent growth and design. Word-
Net has become the lexical database of choice for NLP
and has been incorporated into other language tools,
including VerbNet (Kipper et al, 2000) and OntoNotes
(Hovy et al, 2006). Numerous on-line dictionaries, in-
cluding Google?s ?define? function, rely significantly
on WordNet.
WordNet?s coverage is sometimes criticized as be-
ing too fine-grained for automatic processing, though
its inventory is not larger than that of a standard col-
legiate dictionary. But the present limitation of auto-
matic WSD cannot be entirely blamed on existing sys-
tems; for example, Fellbaum and Grabowski (1997)
1http://wordnet.princeton.edu
have shown that humans, too, have difficulties identi-
fying context-appropriate dictionary senses. One an-
swer is clearly that meanings do not exist outside con-
texts. Furthermore, although WN does contain ?sen-
tence frames? such as ?Somebody ?-s something?
for a transitive verb with a human agent, it provides
little syntagmatic information, except for what can
be gleaned from the example sentences. WordNet?s
great strength is its extensive coverage, with more than
117,000 synonym sets (synsets), each with a definition
and relations to other synsets covering almost all the
general vocabulary of English.
FrameNet (FN):2 (Fontenelle, 2003) is a lexical
resource organized not around words per se, but se-
mantic frames (Fillmore, 1976): characterizations of
events, relations, and states which are the conceptual
basis for understanding groups of word senses, called
lexical units (LUs). Frames are distinguished by the
set of roles involved, known as frame elements (FEs).
Much of the information in the FrameNet lexicon is
derived by annotating corpus sentences; for each LU,
groups of sentences are extracted from a corpus, sen-
tences which collectively exemplify all of the lexico-
graphically relevant syntactic patterns in which the LU
occurs. A few examples of each pattern are annotated;
annotators not only mark the target word which evokes
the frame in the mind of the hearer, but also mark
those phrases which are syntactically related to the tar-
get word and express its frame elements. FrameNet is
much smaller than WordNet, covering roughly 11,000
LUs, but contains very rich syntagmatic information
about the combinatorial possibilities of each LU.
Given these two lexical resources with different
strengths, it seems clear that combining WN and FN
annotation will produce a more complete semantic rep-
resentation of the meaning of a text than either could
alone. What follows is intended as an example of how
they can usefully be combined.
2 Case Study: Aegean History
The text chosen for this study is a paragraph from the
American National Corpus3 (Ide et al, 2002), from the
Berlitz travel guide to Greece, discussing the history of
2http://framenet.icsi.berkeley.edu
3http://www.americannationalcorpus.org
125
Greece, specifically the Aegean islands after the fall of
Byzantium to the Crusaders. Although brief, its three
sentences provide ample material to demonstrate some
of the subtlety of both WN and FN annotation:
(1) While Byzantine land was being divided, there
was no one in control of the seas, so pirates raided
towns on many of the islands. (2) To counter this, the
populations moved from their homes on the coast and
built settlements inland, out of sight of the raiding par-
ties. (3) This created a pattern seen today throughout
the Aegean of a small port (skala) which serves an in-
land settlement or chora, making it easier to protect the
island from attack.
Below, we present three tables containing the anno-
tation of both the WordNet synsets for each open class
(content) word in the text4 and the FrameNet frames
and the fillers of the frame elements in each sentence.
We also provide brief notes on some interesting fea-
tures of the semantics of each sentence.
2.1 Discussion of Sentence 1, shown in Table 1 on
page 4 :
(2) Information about what the land was separated into
is not given in the sentence nor clear from the context,
so the PARTS FE has been annotated as ?indefinite null
instantiated? (INI). Clearly this is an intentional action,
but because the verb is passive, the agent can be (and
is) omitted, so the AGENT FE is marked as ?construc-
tionally null instantiated? (CNI).5
(4) In addition to FEs and their phrase types and
grammatical functions, FrameNet annotates a limited
set of syntactic facts: here, in is annotated as at ?sup-
port preposition?, allowing control to function as an ad-
jectival, and was as a copula, allowing no one to fill the
External syntactic position of in control.
(5) Since FN is based on semantic frames, annota-
tion of nouns is largely limited to those which express
events (e.g. destruction), relations (brother), or states
(height). For the most part, nouns denoting artifacts
and natural kinds evoke relatively uninteresting frames,
and hence relatively few of them have been included
in FN. However, there are three such instances in this
sentence, seas, islands (9), and towns (12); In all three
cases, the frame-evoking noun also denotes the filler of
the FE LOCALE.
(6) At the top level of organization, so evokes
the Causation frame. Actually, it is misleading to
simply annotate control of the seas in the frames
Be in control and Natural features; here, we regard
seas as metonymic for ?ship traffic on the seas?, but
neither the FN annotation nor the WN definition indi-
cates this.
(7) The noun pirates evokes the very rich frame of
4Note that for reasons of space, many WN examples have
been omitted.
5In fact, the previous sentence describes the sack of Con-
stantinople by the Crusaders, so they can be inferred to be the
dividers of the lands, as well.
Piracy, and also denotes the filler of the FE PERPE-
TRATOR, but that is the only FE filled in in that frame.
Instead, pirates actually fills the ASSAILANT FE of the
Attack frame, (8); the main idea is about the raids, not
the piratical acts on the seas that the same people have a
habit of committing. Note that the WN definition takes
the view that raiding coastal towns is a typical part of
piracy.
(10) Political locales roughly corresponds to
?Geopolitical entity? in named entity recognition.
Despite the relatively fine level of detail of the anno-
tations, there are still many important semantic features
of the sentence not represented in FrameNet or Word-
Net. For example, there is no treatment of negation cum
quantification, no representation of the fact that there
was no one in control should mean that Be in control
is not happening.
2.2 Discussion of Sentence 2, shown in Table 2 on
page 5:
The two highest level predicates in this sentence are
moved (2) and built (6), in the frames Motion and
Building respectively; since they are conjoined, the
phrase to counter this fills the FE PURPOSE in both
frames. 6 In (2) the GOAL FE of the Motion is marked
as definite null instantiation (DNI), because, although
it is not expressed in the VP headed by moved, it is
recoverable from context (i.e. the second VP).
(4) Note that FN puts this sense of home in the Build-
ings frame7, but WN has a less specific definition. (6)
Coast is a Relational natural feature because it is de-
fined in relation to another natural feature; a coast
has to be the coast of some land mass, although here
the land mass is DNI. (9) Inland both evokes a Loca-
tive relation and denotes the GROUND FE. (10) FN and
WN agree on a sense of sight denoting the range of vi-
sion. (11) WN?s example sentence for raid is precisely
about pirates.
2.3 Discussion of Sentence 3 shown in Table 3 on
page 5:
(2) The concept of ?pattern? is very slippery?the ar-
rangement of port and inland settlement is both spa-
tial and temporal in terms of building practices over
centuries. (3) This sense of see can refer to the area
in which something is seen, the time, or the condi-
tions under which it can be seen; these are subsumed
by the FE STATE. (4) Today expresses a Tempo-
ral collocation and denotes the LANDMARK. (Repe-
titions of the words settlement and island have been
omitted.) The interrelation among (7), (10), (11) and
(12) is rather complex: the arrangement in which the
port serves the settlement has the making easier as a
result. The arrangement is also the CAUSE FE of mak-
ing. Easier in the Difficulty frame requires an EX-
6This is a peripheral FE, common to all frames which
inherit from the Intentionally act frame.
7Not to be confused with the Building frame, in (7).
126
PERIENCER FE which is not specified here (thus INI)
and an ACTIVITY FE, to protect. The FE PROTEC-
TION (which can be a person, a thing, or an activity) is
marked CNI, because it is the external argument of the
infinitive.
3 Towards an alignment of WordNet and
FrameNet
We hope these examples have shown that finding re-
lated WN and FN senses can contribute to text under-
standing. Fellbaum and Baker (2008) discuss the re-
spective strengths and weaknesses of WN and FN as
well as their complementary advantages that could be
fruitfully exploited aligning the two resources. Work
of this type is actually underway; researchers are semi-
automatically annotating selected lemmas in the Amer-
ican National Corpus with both FN frames and WN
senses. The lemmas are chosen so as to reflect the part
of speech distribution in text and to represent a spec-
trum of frequency and polysemy. A preliminary group
of instances are manually tagged by trained annotators,
and then the teams working on WN and FN annota-
tion discuss and resolve discrepancies among the tag-
gers before the remaining tokens are annotated.
Three cases sum up the annotation and alignment
process:
(1) In the very unlikely case that a synset and a frame
contain exactly the same set of lexemes, their corre-
spondence is simply recorded.
(2) In the more common case in which all the words
in a synset are a subset of those in the frame, or all the
words in a frame are a subset of those in the synset, this
fact is also recorded.
(3) In case two synsets are subsets of the LUs of one
frame, we will record this and note that it as a possible
candidate for collapsing the synsets, respectively.
FN and WN are two comprehensive but comple-
mentary lexical resources. Both WN?s paradigmatic
and FN?s syntagmatic approach to lexical semantics are
needed for a rich representation of word meaning in
context. We have demonstrated how text can be an-
notated against both resources to provide the founda-
tion for deep language understanding and, as an im-
portant by-product, help to align the word senses of
these widely-used resources. Of course, these ex-
amples were manually annotated, but automatic sys-
tems for word-sense disambiguation (largely based on
WordNet) and FrameNet role labeling (Johansson and
Nugues, 2007; Coppola et al, 2008) are improving
rapidly. The project just described is intended to pro-
vide more gold-standard annotation (both WN and FN)
to help train automatic systems for both WN and FN
annotation, which are clearly related tasks e.g. (Prad-
han et al, 2007; Erk, 2005).
Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge support from the National
Science Foundation (#IIS-0705199) for the work re-
ported here.
References
Bonaventura Coppola, Alessandro Moschitti, Sara
Tonelli, and Giuseppe Riccardi. 2008. Automatic
framenet-based annotation of conversational speech.
In Proceedings of IEEE-SLT 2008, pages 73?76,
Goa, India, December.
Katrin Erk. 2005. Frame assignment as word sense
disambiguation. In Proceedings of IWCS 6, Tilburg.
Christiane Fellbaum and Collin F. Baker. 2008. Can
WordNet and FrameNet be made ?interoperable??
In Jonathan Webster, Nancy Ide, and Alex Chengyu
Fang, editors, Proceedings of The First International
Conference on Global Interoperability for Language
Resources, pages 67?74, Hong Kong. City Univer-
sity.
Christiane Fellbaum and J. Grabowski. 1997. Anal-
ysis of a hand-tagging task. In Proceedings of
the ACL/Siglex workshop. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Christane Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet. An
electronic lexical database. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge/Mass.
Charles J. Fillmore. 1976. Frame semantics and the
nature of language. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 280:20?32.
Thierry Fontenelle, editor. 2003. International Jour-
nal of Lexicography?Special Issue on FrameNet,
volume 16. Oxford University Press.
Eduard H. Hovy, Mitch Marcus, Martha Palmer,
Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw, and Ralph-
Weischedel. 2006. OntoNotes: The 90% solution.
In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL 2006, New York.
Nancy Ide, Randi Reppen, and Keith Suderman. 2002.
The American National Corpus: More than the
web can provide. In Proceedings of the Third
Language Resources and Evaluation Conference
(LREC), pages 839?44, Las Palmas, Canary Islands,
Spain.
Richard Johansson and Pierre Nugues. 2007. LTH:
Semantic structure extraction using nonprojective
dependency trees. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluations
(SemEval-2007), pages 227?230, Prague, Czech Re-
public, June. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Karin Kipper, Hoa Trang Dang, and Martha Palmer.
2000. Class-based construction of a verb lexicon. In
Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, Austin, TX. AAAI-2000.
127
Sameer Pradhan, Edward Loper, Dmitriy Dligach, and
Martha Palmer. 2007. Semeval-2007 task-17: En-
glish lexical sample, srl and all words. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth International Workshop on Se-
mantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007), pages 87?92,
Prague, Czech Republic, June. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
1. Frame: Political locales: [CONTAINER POSSESSOR
Byzantine] [LOCALE LAND]
WN: (adj) Byzantine (of or relating to or characteristic
of the Byzantine Empire or the ancient city of Byzan-
tium) (n) domain, demesne, land (territory over which
rule or control is exercised) ?his domain extended into
Europe?; ?he made it the law of the land?
2. Frame: Separating: [WHOLE Byzantine land] was
being DIVIDED [AGENT CNI] [PARTS INI]
WN: (v) divide, split, split up, separate, dissever, carve
up (separate into parts or portions) ?divide the cake into
three equal parts?; ?The British carved up the Ottoman
Empire after World War I?)
3. Frame: Existence: [TIME While Byzantine land was
being divided], THERE WAS [ENTITY no one in con-
trol of the seas]
4. Frame: Be in control: there [was COPULA]
[CONTROLLING ENTITY no one] [in SUPPORT] CON-
TROL [DEPENDENT ENTITY of the seas]
WN: (n) control (power to direct or determine) ?under
control?)
5. Frame: Natural features: [LOCALE SEAS]
WN: (n) sea (a division of an ocean or a large body of
salt water partially enclosed by land)
6. Frame: Causation:
[CAUSE While Byzantine land was being divided, there
was no one in control of the seas], SO [EFFECT pirates
raided towns on many of the islands]
7. Frame: Piracy: [PERPETRATOR PIRATES]
WN: (n) pirate, buccaneer, sea robber, sea rover (some-
one who robs at sea or plunders the land from the sea
without having a commission from any sovereign na-
tion)
8. Frame: Attack: [ASSAILANT pirates] RAIDED
[VICTIM towns on many of the islands]
WN: (v) foray into, raid (enter someone else?s territory
and take spoils) ?The pirates raided the coastal villages
regularly?)
9. Frame: Political locales: [LOCALE TOWNS]
[RELATIVE LOCATION on many of the islands].
WN: (n) town (an urban area with a fixed boundary that
is smaller than a city)
10. Frame: Locative relation: [FIGURE towns] ON
[GROUND many of the islands]
11. Frame: Quantity: [QUANTITY MANY]
[INDIVIDUALS of the islands]
12. Frame: Natural features: [LOCALE ISLANDS]
WN: (n) island (a land mass (smaller than a continent)
that is surrounded by water)
Table 1: FN/WN Annotation of sentence 1
128
1. Frame: Thwarting: To COUNTER [ACTION this],
[PREVENTING CAUSE the populations moved . . . raiding
parties]
WN:(v) anticipate, foresee, forestall, counter (act in
advance of; deal with ahead of time)
2. Frame: Aggregate: [AGGREGATE POPULATIONS]
WN: (n) population (the people who inhabit a terri-
tory or state) ?the population seemed to be well fed and
clothed?
3. Frame: Motion:
[PURPOSE To counter this], [THEME the populations]
MOVED [SOURCE from their homes on the coast]
[GOAL DNI]
WN: (v) move (change residence, affiliation, or place
of employment)
4. Frame: Buildings: [BUILDING HOMES] [PLACE on
the coast]
WN: (n) home, place (where you live at a particular
time) ?deliver the package to my home?
5. Frame: Locative relation: [FIGURE their homes] ON
[GROUND the coast]
6. Frame: Relational natural features:
[FOCAL FEATURE COAST] [RELATIVE LOCATION
DNI]
WN: (n) seashore, coast, seacoast, sea-coast (the shore
of a sea or ocean)
7. Frame: Building:
[PURPOSE To counter this], [AGENT the populations]
. . . BUILT [CREATED ENTITY settlements] [PLACE in-
land], [PLACE out of sight of the raiding parties].
WN: (v) construct, build, make (make by combining
materials and parts)
8. Frame: Locale by use: [LOCALE SETTLE-
MENTS]
WN: (n) village, small town, settlement (a community
of people smaller than a town)
9. Frame: Locative relation: built [FIGURE settle-
ments] [GROUND INLAND]
WN: (adv) inland (towards or into the interior of a re-
gion) ?the town is five miles inland?
10. Frame: Range: . . . out of [DISTANCE SIGHT]
[PARTICIPANT of the raiding parties]
WN: (n) sight, ken (the range of vision) ?out of sight of
land?
11. Frame: Attack: RAIDING [ASSAILANT parties]
WN: (v) foray into, raid (enter someone else?s territory
and take spoils) ?The pirates raided the coastal villages
regularly?
12. Frame: Aggregate: [AGGREGATEPROPERTY raid-
ing] [AGGREGATE PARTIES]
WN: (n) party, company (a band of people associated
temporarily in some activity) ?they organized a party to
search for food?
Table 2: FN/WN Annotation of sentence 2
1. Frame: Creating:
[CAUSE This] CREATED [CREATED ENTITY a pattern
seen today . . . from attack].
WN: (v) create (bring into existence) ?He created a new
movement in painting?
2. Frame: Pattern: PATTERN [DESCRIPTOR seen to-
day throughout the Aegean] [ENTITIES of a small port
(skala) which serves an inland settlement or chora]
WN: (n) practice, pattern (a customary way of opera-
tion or behavior) ?they changed their dietary pattern?
3. Frame: Perception experience: [PHENOMENON a
pattern] SEEN [TIME today] [STATE throughout the
Aegean] [PHENOMENON of a small port . . . from attack].
[PERCEIVER PASSIVE CNI]
WN: (v) witness, find, see (perceive or be contempora-
neous with) ?You?ll see a lot of cheating in this school?
4. Frame: Temporal collocation: [TRAJECTOR EVENT
a pattern seen] [LANDMARK EVENT TODAY]
[TRAJECTOR EVENT throughout the Aegean. . . attack]
WN: (n) today (the present time or age) ?the world
of today? (n) Aegean, Aegean Sea (an arm of the
Mediterranean between Greece and Turkey. . . )
5. Frame: Dimension: [DIMENSION SMALL] [OBJECT
port]
WN: (adj) small, little (limited or below average in
number or quantity or magnitude or extent)
6. Frame: Locale by use: [DESCRIPTOR small]
[LOCALE PORT]
WN: (n) port (a place (seaport or airport) where people
and merchandise can enter or leave a country)
7. Frame: Assistance: [HELPER a small port (skala)]
[HELPER which] SERVES [BENEFITED PARTY an in-
land settlement or chora], [RESULT making it easier to
protect the island from attack]
WN: (v) service, serve (be used by; as of a utility) ?The
sewage plant served the neighboring communities?
8. Frame: Locative relation: [GROUND INLAND]
[FIGURE settlement]
10. Frame: causation: [CAUSE a small port (skala)
which serves an inland settlement or chora], MAK-
ING it [EFFECT easier to protect the island from attack.]
[AFFECTED DNI]
WN: chora: not in WordNet (v) make, get (give certain
properties to something) ?This invention will make you
a millionaire?
11. Frame: Difficulty: EASIER [ACTIVITY to protect
the island from attack]. [EXPERIENCER INI]
WN: (adj) easy (posing no difficulty; requiring little ef-
fort) ?an easy job?; ?an easy victory?
12. Frame: Protecting: [PROTECTION CNI] PROTECT
[ASSET the island] [DANGER from attack]
WN: (v) protect (shield from danger, injury, destruc-
tion, or damage) ?Weatherbeater protects your roof
from the rain?
14. Frame: Attack: from ATTACK. [ASSAILANT DNI]
WN: (n) attack, onslaught, onset, onrush ((military) an
offensive against an enemy (using weapons)) ?the at-
tack began at dawn?
Table 3: FN/WN Annotation of sentence 3
129
