Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 189?190,
Athens, Greece, 30 ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
USP-EACH: Improved Frequency-based Greedy Attribute Selection 
 
 
Diego Jesus de Lucena 
University of S?o Paulo 
S?o Paulo - Brazil 
diego.si@usp.br 
Ivandr? Paraboni 
University of S?o Paulo 
S?o Paulo - Brazil 
ivandre@usp.br 
 
  
 
Abstract 
 
We present a follow-up of our previous fre-
quency-based greedy attribute selection strate-
gy. The current version takes into account also 
the instructions given to the participants of 
TUNA trials regarding the use of location in-
formation, showing an overall improvement 
on string-edit distance values driven by the re-
sults on the Furniture domain. 
1 Introduction 
In previous work (Lucena & Paraboni, 2008) we 
presented a frequency-based greedy attribute se-
lection strategy submitted to the TUNA Chal-
lenge 2008. Presently we further the issue  by 
taking additional information into account - 
namely, the trial condition information available 
from the TUNA data - and report improved re-
sults for string-edit distance as required for the 
2009 competition. 
2 Background 
In Lucena & Paraboni (2008) we presented a 
combined strategy based on attribute frequency 
and certain aspects of a greedy attribute selection 
strategy for referring expressions generation. A 
list P of attributes sorted by frequency is the cen-
tre piece of the following selection strategy: 
 
? select all attributes whose relative frequency 
falls above a threshold value t  (t was esti-
mated to be 0.8 for both Furniture and 
People domains.) 
? if the resulting description uniquely de-
scribes the target object, then finalizes.  
? if not, starting from the most frequent 
attribute in P, search exhaustively for an 
attribute g such that g, if selected, would rule 
out all remaining distractors in the context. 
 
The overall effect obtained is twofold: on the 
one hand, in a complex situation of reference (in 
which many attributes may rule out many dis-
tractors, but more than one will be required to 
achieve uniqueness) the algorithm simply selects 
frequent attributes. This may be comparable to a 
human speaker who has to single out the target 
object but who does not have the means to come 
up with the ?right? attribute straight away.  
On the other hand, as the number of distractors 
decreases, a single attribute capable of ruling out 
all distractors will eventually emerge, forcing the 
algorithm to switch to a greedy strategy and fi-
nalize. Once again, this may be comparable to 
what a human speaker may do when an appropri-
ate attribute becomes sufficiently salient and all 
distractors in the context can be ruled out at 
once. 
The above approach performed fairly well (at 
least considering its simplicity) as reported in 
Lucena & Paraboni (2008). However, there is 
one major source of information available from 
the TUNA data that was not taken into account 
in the above strategy: the trial condition 
represented by the +/- LOC feature. Because this 
feature distinguishes the very kinds of instruction 
given to each participant to complete the TUNA 
task, the information provided by -/+ LOC is 
likely to have a significant impact on the overall 
results. This clear gap in our previous work 
represents an opportunity for improvement dis-
cussed in the next section. 
3 Algorithm  
The present work is a refined version of the 
original frequency-based greedy attribute selec-
tion strategy submitted to the TUNA Challenge 
2008 (Lucena & Paraboni, 2008), now taking 
also the trial condition (+/-LOC) into account.  
189
 In the TUNA data, +LOC indicates the in-
stances of the experiment in which participants 
were told that they were allowed to refer to the 
X,Y coordinates of the screen (i.e., selecting the 
X- and/or Y-DIMENSION attributes), whereas 
-LOC indicates the trials in which they were dis-
couraged (but not prevented) to do so. In prac-
tice, references in +LOC trials are more likely to 
convey the X- and Y-DIMENSION attributes 
than those in which the -LOC condition was ap-
plied.  
Our modified algorithm simply consists of 
computing separated frequency lists for +LOC 
and -LOC trial conditions, and then using the 
original frequency-based greedy approach with 
each list accordingly. In practice, descriptions are 
now generated in two different ways, depending 
on the trial condition, which may promote the X- 
and Y-DIMENSION attributes to higher posi-
tions in the list P when +LOC applies. 
Using the TUNA Challenge 2009 develop-
ment data set, the attribute selection task was 
performed as above. For the surface realisation 
task, we have reused the English language sur-
face realisation module provided by Irene Lang-
kilde-Geary for the TUNA Challenge 2008.  
4 Results  
The following Figure 1 shows mean sting-edit 
distance and BLEU-3 scores computed using the 
evaluation tool provided by the TUNA Challenge 
team. For ease of comparison with our previous 
work, we also present Dice and MASI scores 
computed as in the previous TUNA Challenge, 
although these scores were not required for the 
current competition. 
 The most relevant comparison with our previ-
ous work is observed in the overall string-edit 
distance values in Figure 1: considering that in 
Lucena & Paraboni (2008) we reported 6.12 edit-
distance for Furniture and 7.38 for People, the 
overall improvement (driven by the descriptions 
in the Furniture domain) may be explained by the 
fact that the current version makes more accurate 
decisions as to when to use these attributes ac-
cording to the instructions given to the partici-
pants of the TUNA trials (the trial condition +/-
LOC. ) 
 On the other hand, the divide between +LOC 
and -LOC strategies does not have a significant 
effect on the results based on the semantics of 
the description (i.e., Dice and MASI scores), 
which remain the same as those obtained previ-
ously. This may be explained by the fact that us-
ing location information inappropriately counts 
as one single error in Dice/MASI calculations, 
but it may have a much greater impact on the 
wording of the surface string (e.g., one single use 
of the X-DIMENSION attribute may be realized 
as ?on the far left?, adding four words to the de-
scriptions.) 
 
 
 Overall Furniture People 
String-edit distance 6.03 4.78 7.50 
BLEU-3 0.19 0.31 0.04 
Dice 0.74 0.82 0.65 
MASI 0.53 0.63 0.41 
Figure 1. Results (TUNA Challenge 2009 development data set) 
 
 
5 Conclusion  
We have presented a refined version of our pre-
vious frequency-based greedy attribute selection 
strategy. The current version takes into account 
the instructions given to the participants of 
TUNA trials regarding the use of location infor-
mation (the trial condition +/-LOC.)  
 Results obtained using the TUNA Challenge 
2009 development data set show improvements 
on string-edit distance, suggesting that the gener-
ated descriptions resemble more closely those 
seen in the TUNA corpus. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work has been supported by CNPq-Brazil 
(484015/2007-9) and FAPESP (2006/03941-7). 
References  
Lucena, Diego Jesus de, and Ivandr? Paraboni (2008) 
USP-EACH Frequency-based Greedy Attribute Se-
lection for Referring Expressions Generation. 
Proc. of INLG-2008 (TUNA Challenge 2008). Salt 
Fork, US, pp.219-220. 
190
