Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 355?358,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
A semantic relatedness metric based on free link
structure
Sander Wubben
TiCC
Tilburg University
s.wubben@uvt.nl
Antal van den Bosch
TiCC
Tilburg University
antal.vdnbosch@uvt.nl
Abstract
While shortest paths in WordNet are known to correlate well with
semantic similarity, an is-a hierarchy is less suited for estimating se-
mantic relatedness. We demonstrate this by comparing two free scale
networks ( ConceptNet and Wikipedia) to WordNet. Using the Finkelstein-
353 dataset we show that a shortest path metric run on Wikipedia
attains a better correlation than WordNet-based metrics. Concept-
Net attains a good correlation as well, but suffers from a low concept
coverage.
1 Introduction
In this paper we propose a new estimate metric for semantic relatedness, by
finding the shortest path between two concepts in a semantic network. The
semantic networks that we exploit are the extracted free link structures of
Wikipedia and the ConceptNet 3 database, a commonsense knowledgebase
[3]. Various metrics of calculating semantic similarity have been developed
for WordNet [1] and applied to Wikipedia?s category graph [7]. These mea-
sures tend to perform well on semantic similarity (how synonymous two
words are), but not very well on semantic relatedness (how related two
words are).
2 Free-link pathfinding
The graph extracted from Wikipedia contains over 2 million nodes and 55
million edges, from respectively the number of articles and the number of in-
ternal links. ConceptNet contains over 18 thousand usable concepts (nodes)
355
and over 254 thousand useful assertions (edges). To find paths between con-
cepts in these massive networks, they need to be indexed well and and the
algorithms need to be efficient.
For the current study, the English Wikipedia dump dated 12 March
2008 is downloaded
1
. To form the network, only the article names and
hyperlinks between the articles are extracted, constituting the link structure.
ConceptNet 3 can be freely downloaded
2
. Due to the database being in N3
format, the links can be extracted straightforwardly. The Porter stemmer
3
is used for normalization of the concepts.
Because of the richness and scale of the links in these networks, which
both can be argued to have scale free characteristics [6, 8], a breadth-first
search is the best option. As we index both incoming and outgoing links,
forward and backward chaining can be used simultaneously. Therefore, we
choose to utilize a bidirectional breadth-first search algorithm.
3 Experiments
To evaluate the task we compare our results to how humans would do given
the same task. Most available datasets focus on semantic similarity rather
than semantic relatedness. Examples of these are the Rubenstein and Good-
enough and Miller and Charles wordpairs. The Finkelstein-353
4
test collec-
tion is a dataset that does contain semantic relatedness scores. It contains
353 wordpairs, among which the 30 wordpairs from the Miller & Charles
dataset. The collection contains English word pairs along with human-
assigned relatedness judgements.
The breadth-first free-link pathfinding search algorithm is applied to
both the Wikipedia and the ConceptNet data, generating semantic relat-
edness estimates for the Finkelstein pairs. To compare our metric against
path-based metrics based on WordNet, the WordNet::Similarity package
5
is used [5] on WordNet 3.0 [4].
1
http://download.wikimedia.org/enwiki/20080312/enwiki-20080312-pages-articles.
xml.bz2
2
http://conceptnet.media.mit.edu/conceptnet\_en\_20080605.n3.bz2
3
http://www.ldc.usb.ve/
~
vdaniel/porter.pm
4
http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/
~
gabr/resources/data/wordsim353/wordsim353.
html
5
http://search.cpan.org/dist/WordNet-Similarity/
356
WordNet measures 0.18 - 0.45
WikiRelate! 0.19 - 0.48
ESA Wikipedia 0.75
Free-link Wikipedia, directed 0.45
Free-link Wikipedia, undirected 0.53
Free-link ConceptNet 0.35
Free-link ConceptNet, non-missing 0.47
Table 1: Spearman?s ? rank order coefficients of different measures with
human judgements.
4 Results
As displayed in Table 1 (displaying also the results from ESA and WikiRe-
late! taken from [2]), the basic directed free-link pahfinding measure applied
on Wikipedia shows a Spearman?s ? = 0.45, while the undirected measure
shows a ? = 0.53 with human judgements on the full Finkelstein dataset.
Only the word defeating was not found in Wikipedia.
In ConceptNet, 58 of the Finkelstein pairs were not found, significantly
impairing its score: ? = 0.35. When we look only at those word pairs
for which a path was found, the measure applied to ConceptNet performs
sightly better than the directed Wikipedia measure, but worse than the more
comparable undirected Wikipedia measure: ? = 0.47.
5 Discussion
With a correlation of 0.53 for undirected search versus 0.43 for directed
search with the human judging scores of the Finkelstein-353 dataset, the
former appears the better suited way of exploiting the Wikipedia network
for a semantic relatedness metric. It also outperforms undirected search in
ConceptNet, which only scores a correlation of 0.35. This lower score can
be mainly attributed to the lack of coverage of ConceptNet. But even when
only non-missing wordpairs are considered, ConceptNet performs worse than
Wikipedia with a correlation of 0.47 with human judgements.
The method introduced here outperforms any other existing pathfinding
method for calculating semantic relatedness. It also outperforms methods
that makes use of WordNet?s extended gloss vectors. This cannot be ex-
plained by coverage: both in WordNet 3.0 and in the Wikipedia dump that
was used only one wordpair was not found. Arguably, the results show that
357
free link structure in conceptual networks is better suited for finding se-
mantic relatedness than hierarchical structures organized along taxonomic
relations as WordNet.
While ESA?s performance (? = 0.75) is even higher, the comparison
is off. ESA is a fully integrated machine learning architecture that makes
extensive use of Wikipedia?s free text. Our free link measure is a simple
and portable method that uses only the link structure of any given free
associative conceptual network. We aim to improve the method and use it
in various applications, such as automated ontology building and memory
based paraphrasing.
References
[1] A. Budanitsky and G. Hirst. Evaluating wordnet-based measures of
lexical semantic relatedness. Computational Linguistics, 32(1):13?47,
2006.
[2] E. Gabrilovich and S. Markovitch. Computing Semantic Relatedness
using Wikipedia-based Explicit Semantic Analysis. Proceedings of the
20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 6?
12, 2007.
[3] H. Liu and P. Singh. Conceptnet ? a practical commonsense reasoning
tool-kit. BT Technology Journal, 22(4):211?226, 2004.
[4] G. A. Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Commun. ACM,
38(11):39?41, 1995.
[5] T. Pedersen, S. Patwardhan, and J. Michelizzi. Wordnet::similarity -
measuring the relatedness of concepts, 2004.
[6] S. Spek. Wikipedia: organisation from a bottom-up approach. In Wik-
iSym ?06: Proceedings of the 2006 international symposium on Wikis,
New York, NY, USA, Nov 2006. ACM.
[7] M. Strube and S. P. Ponzetto. Wikirelate! computing semantic related-
ness using wikipedia. In 21. AAAI / 18. IAAI 2006. AAAI Press, july
2006.
[8] S. Wubben. Using free link structure to calculate semantic relatedness.
Master?s thesis, Tilburg University, the Netherlands, 2008.
358
