Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 66?69,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
The RWTH Machine Translation System for WMT 2009
Maja Popovic?, David Vilar, Daniel Stein, Evgeny Matusov and Hermann Ney
RWTH Aachen University
Aachen, Germany
Abstract
RWTH participated in the shared transla-
tion task of the Fourth Workshop of Sta-
tistical Machine Translation (WMT 2009)
with the German-English, French-English
and Spanish-English pair in each transla-
tion direction. The submissions were gen-
erated using a phrase-based and a hierar-
chical statistical machine translation sys-
tems with appropriate morpho-syntactic
enhancements. POS-based reorderings of
the source language for the phrase-based
systems and splitting of German com-
pounds for both systems were applied. For
some tasks, a system combination was
used to generate a final hypothesis. An ad-
ditional English hypothesis was produced
by combining all three final systems for
translation into English.
1 Introduction
For the WMT 2009 shared task, RWTH submit-
ted translations for the German-English, French-
English and Spanish-English language pair in both
directions. A phrase-based translation system en-
hanced with appropriate morpho-syntactic trans-
formations was used for all translation direc-
tions. Local POS-based word reorderings were ap-
plied for the Spanish-English and French-English
pair, and long range reorderings for the German-
English pair. For this language pair splitting
of German compounds was also applied. Spe-
cial efforts were made for the French-English and
German-English translation, where a hierarchi-
cal system was also used and the final submis-
sions are the result of a system combination. For
translation into English, an additional hypothesis
was produced as a result of combination of the
final German-to-English, French-to-English and
Spanish-to-English systems.
2 Translation models
2.1 Phrase-based model
We used a standard phrase-based system similar to
the one described in (Zens et al, 2002). The pairs
of source and corresponding target phrases are ex-
tracted from the word-aligned bilingual training
corpus. Phrases are defined as non-empty contigu-
ous sequences of words. The phrase translation
probabilities are estimated using relative frequen-
cies. In order to obtain a more symmetric model,
the phrase-based model is used in both directions.
2.2 Hierarchical model
The hierarchical phrase-based approach can be
considered as an extension of the standard phrase-
based model. In this model we allow the phrases
to have ?gaps?, i.e. we allow non-contiguous parts
of the source sentence to be translated into pos-
sibly non-contiguous parts of the target sentence.
The model can be formalized as a synchronous
context-free grammar (Chiang, 2007). The model
also included some additional heuristics which
have shown to be helpful for improving translation
quality, as proposed in (Vilar et al, 2008).
The first step in the hierarchical phrase extrac-
tion is the same as for the phrased-based model.
Having a set of initial phrases, we search for
phrases which contain other smaller sub-phrases
and produce a new phrase with gaps. In our sys-
tem, we restricted the number of non-terminals for
each hierarchical phrase to a maximum of two,
which were also not allowed to be adjacent. The
scores of the phrases are again computed as rela-
tive frequencies.
2.3 Common models
For both translation models, phrase-based and hi-
erarchical, additional common models were used:
word-based lexicon model, phrase penalty, word
penalty and target language model.
66
The target language model was a standard n-
gram language model trained by the SRI language
modeling toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). The smooth-
ing technique we apply was the modified Kneser-
Ney discounting with interpolation. In our case we
used a 4-gram language model.
3 Morpho-syntactic transformations
3.1 POS-based word reorderings
For the phrase-based systems, the local and
long range POS-based reordering rules described
in (Popovic? and Ney, 2006) were applied on the
training and test corpora as a preprocessing step.
Local reorderings were used for the Spanish-
English and French-English language pairs in or-
der to handle differences between the positions of
nouns and adjectives in the two languages. Adjec-
tives in Spanish and French, as in most Romanic
languages, are usually placed after the correspond-
ing noun, whereas for English it is the other way
round. Therefore, for these language pairs local
reorderings of nouns and adjective groups in the
source language were applied. The following se-
quences of words are considered to be an adjective
group: a single adjective, two or more consecutive
adjectives, a sequence of adjectives and coordinate
conjunctions, as well as an adjective along with its
corresponding adverb. If the source language is
Spanish or French, each noun is moved behind the
corresponding adjective group. If the source lan-
guage is English, each adjective group is moved
behind the corresponding noun.
Long range reorderings were applied on the
verb groups for the German-English language pair.
Verbs in the German language can often be placed
at the end of a clause. This is mostly the case
with infinitives and past participles, but there are
many cases when other verb forms also occur at
the clause end. For the translation from German
into English, following verb types were moved to-
wards the beginning of a clause: infinitives, infini-
tives+zu, finite verbs, past participles and negative
particles. For the translation from English to Ger-
man, infinitives and past participles were moved
to the end of a clause, where punctuation marks,
subordinate conjunctions and finite verbs are con-
sidered as the beginning of the next clause.
3.2 German compound words
For the translation from German into English, Ger-
man compounds were split using the frequency-
based method described in (Koehn and Knight,
2003). For the other translation direction, the En-
glish text was first translated into the modified
German language with split compounds. The gen-
erated output was then postprocessed, i.e. the
components were merged using the method de-
scribed in (Popovic? et al, 2006): a list of com-
pounds and a list of components are extracted from
the original German training corpus. If the word
in the generated output is in the component list,
check if this word merged with the next word is in
the compound list. If it is, merge the two words.
4 System combination
For system combination we used the approach de-
scribed in (Matusov et al, 2006). The method is
based on the generation of a consensus transla-
tion out of the output of different translation sys-
tems. The core of the method consists in building
a confusion network for each sentence by align-
ing and combining the (single-best) translation hy-
pothesis from one MT system with the translations
produced by the other MT systems (and the other
translations from the same system, if n-best lists
are used in combination). For each sentence, each
MT system is selected once as ?primary? system,
and the other hypotheses are aligned to this hy-
pothesis. The resulting confusion networks are
combined into a signle word graph, which is then
weighted with system-specific factors, similar to
the approach of (Rosti et al, 2007), and a trigram
LM trained on the MT hypotheses. The translation
with the best total score within this word graph is
selected as consensus translation. The scaling fac-
tors of these models are optimized using the Con-
dor toolkit (Berghen and Bersini, 2005) to achieve
optimal BLEU score on the dev set.
5 Experimental results
5.1 Experimental settings
For all translation directions, we used the provided
EuroParl and News parallel corpora to train the
translation models and the News monolingual cor-
pora to train the language models. All systems
were optimised for the BLEU score on the develop-
ment data (the ?dev-a? part of the 2008 evaluation
data). The other part of the 2008 evaluation set
(?dev-b?) is used as a blind test set. The results re-
ported in the next section will be referring to this
test set. For the tasks including a system combi-
nation, the parameters for the system combination
67
were also trained on the ?dev-b? set. The reported
evaluation metrics are the BLEU score and two
syntax-oriented metrics which have shown a high
correlation with human evaluations: the PBLEU
score (BLEU calculated on POS sequences) and
the POS-F-score PF (similar to the BLEU score but
based on the F-measure instead of precision and
on arithmetic mean instead of geometric mean).
The POS tags used for reorderings and for syn-
tactic evaluation metrics for the English and the
German corpora were generated using the statisti-
cal n-gram-based TnT-tagger (Brants, 2000). The
Spanish corpora are annotated using the FreeLing
analyser (Carreras et al, 2004), and the French
texts using the TreeTagger1.
5.2 Translation results
Table 1 presents the results for the German-
English language pair. For translation from Ger-
man into English, results for the phrase-based sys-
tem with and without verb reordering and com-
pound splitting are shown. The hierarchical sys-
tem was trained with split German compounds.
The final submission was produced by combining
those five systems. The improvement obtained by
system combination on the unseen test data 2009
is similar, i.e. from the systems with BLEU scores
of 17.0%, 17.2%, 17.5%, 17.6% and 17.7% to the
final system with 18.5%.
German?English BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 17.8 31.6 39.7
+reorder verbs 18.2 32.6 40.3
+split compounds 18.0 31.9 40.0
+reord+split 18.4 33.1 40.7
hierarchical+split 18.5 33.5 40.1
system combination 19.2 33.8 40.9
English?German BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 13.6 31.6 39.7
+reorder verbs 13.7 32.4 40.2
+split compounds 13.7 32.3 40.1
+reord+split 13.7 32.3 40.1
system combination 14.0 32.7 40.3
Table 1: Translation results [%] for the German-
English language pair, News2008 dev-b.
The other translation direction is more difficult
and improvements from morpho-syntactic trans-
1http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/projekte/corplex/TreeTagger/
formations are smaller. No hierarchical system
was trained for this translation direction. The com-
bination of the four phrase-based systems leads
to further improvements (on the unseen test set
as well: contrastive hypotheses have the BLEU
scores in the range from 12.7% to 13.0%, and the
final BLEU score is 13.2%).
The results for the French-English language
pair are shown in Table 2. For the French-to-
English system, we submitted the result of the
combination of three systems: a phrase-based with
and without local reorderings and a hierarchical
system. For the unseen test set, the BLEU score of
the system combination output is 24.4%, whereas
the contrastive hypotheses have 23.2%, 23.4% and
24.1%. For the other translation direction we did
not use the system combination, the submission is
produced by the phrase-based system with local
adjective reorderings.
French?English BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 20.9 37.1 43.2
+reorder adjectives 21.3 38.2 43.6
hierarchical 20.3 36.7 42.6
system combination 21.7 38.5 43.8
English?French BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 20.2 39.5 45.9
+reorder adjectives 20.7 40.6 46.4
Table 2: Translation results [%] for the French-
English language pair, News2008 dev-b.
Table 3 presents the results for the Spanish-
English language pair. As in the English-to-
French translation, the phrase-based system with
adjective reorderings is used to produce the sub-
mitted hypothesis for both translation directions.
Spanish?English BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 22.1 38.5 44.1
+reorder adjectives 22.5 39.2 44.6
English?Spanish BLEU PBLEU PF
phrase-based 20.6 29.3 35.7
+reorder adjectives 21.1 29.7 35.9
Table 3: Translation results [%] for the Spanish-
English language pair, News2008 dev-b.
68
The result of the additional experiment, i.e. for
the multisource translation int English is presented
in Table 4. The English hypothesis is produced by
the combination of the three best systems for each
language pair, and it can be seen that the transla-
tion performance increases in all measures. This
suggests that each language pair poses different
difficulties for the translation task, and the com-
bination of all three can improve performance.
F+S+G?English BLEU PBLEU PF
system combination 25.1 41.0 46.4
Table 4: Multisource translation results [%]:
the English hypothesis is obtained as result of
a system combination of all language pairs,
News2008 dev-b.
6 Conclusions
The RWTH system submitted to the WMT 2009
shared translation task used a phrase-based sys-
tem and a hierarchical system with appropriate
morpho-syntactic extensions, i.e. POS based word
reorderings and splitting of German compounds
were used. System combination produced gains
in BLEU score over phrasal-system baselines in
the German-to-English, English-to-German and
French-to-English tasks.
Acknowledgments
This work was realised as part of the Quaero Pro-
gramme, funded by OSEO, French State agency
for innovation.
References
Frank Vanden Berghen and Hugues Bersini. 2005.
CONDOR, a new parallel, constrained extension of
Powell?s UOBYQA algorithm: Experimental results
and comparison with the DFO algorithm. Journal of
Computational and Applied Mathematics, 181:157?
175.
Thorsten Brants. 2000. Tnt ? a statistical part-of-
speech tagger. In Proceedings of the 6th Applied
Natural Language Processing Conference (ANLP),
pages 224?231, Seattle, WA.
Xavier Carreras, Isaac Chao, Llu??s Padro?, and Muntsa
Padro?. 2004. FreeLing: An Open-Source Suite of
Language Analyzers. In Proceedings 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC), pages 239?242, Lisbon, Portugal,
May.
David Chiang. 2007. Hierarchical phrase-based trans-
lation. Computational Linguistics, (33):201?228.
Philipp Koehn and Kevin Knight. 2003. Empiri-
cal methods for compound splitting. In Proceed-
ings 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL),
pages 347?354, Budapest, Hungary, April.
Evgeny Matusov, Nicola Ueffing, and Hermann Ney.
2006. Computing Consensus Translation from Mul-
tiple Machine Translation Systems Using Enhanced
Hypotheses Alignment. In Proceedings of EACL
2006 (11th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics),
pages 33?40, Trento, Italy, April.
Maja Popovic? and Hermann Ney. 2006. POS-based
Word Reorderings for Statistical Machine Trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC), pages 1278?1283, Genoa, Italy, May.
Maja Popovic?, Daniel Stein, and Hermann Ney. 2006.
Statistical machine translation of german compound
words. In Proceedings of the 5th International Con-
ference on Natural Language Processing (FinTAL),
pages 616?624, Turku, Finland, August. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer Verlag.
Antti-Veikko Rosti, Necip Fazil Ayan, Bing Xiang,
Spyros Matsoukas, Richard Schwartz, and Bonnie
Dorr. 2007. Combining Outputs from Multiple Ma-
chine Translation Systems. In Human Language
Technologies 2007: The Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics; Proceedings of the Main Confer-
ence, pages 228?235, Rochester, New York, April.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM ? an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proceedings Interna-
tional Conference on Spoken Language Processing
(ICSLP), volume 2, pages 901?904, Denver, CO.
David Vilar, Daniel Stein, and Hermann Ney. 2008.
Analysing soft syntax features and heuristics for hi-
erarchical phrase based machine translation. Inter-
national Workshop on Spoken Language Translation
2008, pages 190?197, October.
Richard Zens, Franz Josef Och, and Hermann Ney.
2002. Phrase-based statistical machine translation.
In M. Jarke, J. Koehler, and G. Lakemeyer, editors,
25th German Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(KI2002), volume 2479 of Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence (LNAI), pages 18?32, Aachen, Ger-
many, September. Springer Verlag.
69
