Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Multiword Expressions, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 23?30,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Exploiting Translational Correspondences for Pattern-Independent MWE
Identification
Sina Zarrie?
Department of Linguistics
University of Potsdam, Germany
sina@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Jonas Kuhn
Department of Linguistics
University of Potsdam, Germany
kuhn@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
Based on a study of verb translations in
the Europarl corpus, we argue that a wide
range of MWE patterns can be identified in
translations that exhibit a correspondence
between a single lexical item in the source
language and a group of lexical items in
the target language. We show that these
correspondences can be reliably detected
on dependency-parsed, word-aligned sen-
tences. We propose an extraction method
that combines word alignment with syn-
tactic filters and is independent of the
structural pattern of the translation.
1 Introduction
Parallel corpora have proved to be a valuable re-
source not only for statistical machine translation,
but also for crosslingual induction of morphologi-
cal, syntactic and semantic analyses (Yarowsky et
al., 2001; Dyvik, 2004). In this paper, we propose
an approach to the identification of multiword ex-
pressions (MWEs) that exploits translational cor-
respondences in a parallel corpus. We will con-
sider in translations of the following type:
(1) Der
The
Rat
Council
sollte
should
unsere
our
Position
position
beru?cksichtigen.
consider.
(2) The Council should take account of our position.
This sentence pair has been taken from the
German - English section of the Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005). It exemplifies a translational cor-
respondence between an English MWE take ac-
count of and a German simplex verb beru?cksichti-
gen. In the following, we refer to such correspon-
dences as one-to-many translations. Based on a
study of verb translations in Europarl, we will ex-
plore to what extent one-to-many translations pro-
vide evidence for MWE realization in the target
language. It will turn out that crosslingual corre-
spondences realize a wide range of different lin-
guistic patterns that are relevant for MWE iden-
tification, but that they pose problems to auto-
matic word alignment. We propose an extraction
method that combines distributional word align-
ment with syntactic filters. We will show that
these correspondences can be reliably detected
on dependency-parsed, wordaligned sentences and
are able to identify various MWE patterns.
In a monolingual setting, the task of MWE ex-
traction is usually conceived of as a lexical as-
sociation problem where distributional measures
model the syntactic and semantic idiosyncracy ex-
hibited by MWEs, e.g. (Pecina, 2008). This ap-
proach generally involves two main steps: 1) the
extraction of a candidate list of potential MWEs,
often constrained by a particular target pattern
of the detection method, like verb particle con-
structions (Baldwin and Villavicencio, 2002) or
verb PP combinations (Villada Moiro?n and Tiede-
mann, 2006), 2) the ranking of this candidate list
by an appropriate assocation measure.
The crosslingual MWE identification we
present in this paper is, a priori, independent
of any specific association measure or syntactic
pattern. The translation scenario allows us to
adopt a completely data-driven definition of what
constitutes an MWE: Given a parallel corpus,
we propose to consider those tokens in a target
language as MWEs which correspond to a single
lexical item in the source language. The intuition
is that if a group of lexical items in one lan-
guage can be realized as a single item in another
language, it can be considered as some kind of
lexically fixed entity. By this means, we will
not approach the MWE identification problem
by asking for a given list of candidates whether
these are MWEs or not. Instead, we will ask for
a given list of lexical items in a source language
whether there exists a one-to-many translation for
this item in a target language (and whether these
23
one-to-many translations correspond to MWEs).
This strategy offers a straightforward solution to
the interpretation problem: As the translation can
be related to the meaning of the source item and
to its other translations in the target language, the
interpretation is independent of the expression?s
transparency. This solution has its limitations
compared to other approaches that need to auto-
matically establish the degree of compositionality
of a given MWE candidate. However, for many
NLP applications, coarse-grained knowledge
about the semantic relation between a wide
range of MWEs and their corresponding atomic
realization is already very useful.
In this work, we therefore focus on a general
method of MWE identification that captures the
various patterns of translational correspondences
that can be found in parallel corpora. Our exper-
iments described in section 3 show that one-to-
many translations should be extracted from syn-
tactic configurations rather than from unstructured
sets of aligned words. This syntax-driven method
is less dependent on frequency distributions in a
given corpus, but is based on the intuition that
monolingual idiosyncracies like MWE realization
of an entity are not likely to be mirrored in another
language (see section 4 for discussion).
Our goal in this paper is twofold: First, we want
to investigate to what extent one-to-many transla-
tional correspondences can serve as an empirical
basis for MWE identification. To this end, Sec-
tion 2 presents a corpus-based study of the rela-
tion between one-to-many translations and MWEs
that we carried out on a translation gold standard.
Second, we investigate methods for the automatic
detection of complex lexical correspondences for
a given parallel corpus. Therefore, Section 3 eval-
uates automatic word alignments against our gold
standard and gives a method for high-precision
one-to-many translation detection that relies on
syntactic filters, in addition to word-alignments.
2 Multiword Translations as MWEs
The idea to exploit one-to-many translations for
the identification of MWE candidates has not re-
ceived much attention in the literature. Thus, it is
not a priori clear what can be expected from trans-
lational correspondences with respect to MWE
identification. To corroborate the intuitions intro-
duced in the last section, we carried out a corpus-
based study that aims to discover linguistic pat-
Verb 1-1 1-n n-1 n-n No
anheben (v1) 53.5 21.2 9.2 16 325
bezwecken (v2) 16.7 51.3 0.6 31.3 150
riskieren (v3) 46.7 35.7 0.5 17 182
verschlimmern (v4) 30.2 21.5 28.6 44.5 275
Table 1: Proportions of types of translational cor-
respondences (token-level) in our gold standard.
terns exhibited by one-to-many translations.
We constructed a gold standard covering all En-
glish translations of four German verb lemmas ex-
tracted from the Europarl Corpus. These verbs
subcategorize for a nominative subject and an ac-
cusative object and are in the middle frequency
layer (around 200 occurrences). We extracted all
sentences in Europarl with occurences of these
lemmas and their automatic word alignments pro-
duced by GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003). These
alignments were manually corrected on the basis
of the crosslingual word alignment guidelines de-
velopped by (Grac?a et al, 2008).
For each of the German source lemmas, our
gold standard records four translation categories:
one-to-one, one-to-many, many-to-one, many-to-
many translations. Table 1 shows the distribution
of these categories for each verb. Strikingly, the
four verbs show very different proportions con-
cerning the types of their translational correspon-
dences. Thus, while the German verb anheben
(en. increase) seems to have a frequent parallel
realization, the verbs bezwecken (en. intend to)
or verschlimmern (en. aggravate) tend to be real-
ized by more complex phrasal translations. In any
case, the percentage of one-to-many translations is
relatively high which corroborates our hypothesis
that parallel corpora constitute a very interesting
resource for data-driven MWE discovery.
A closer look at the one-to-many translations re-
veals that these cover a wide spectrum of MWE
phenomena traditionally considered in the liter-
ature, as well as constructions that one would
usually not regard as an MWE. Below, we will
shortly illustrate the different classes of one-to-
many translations we found in our gold standard.
Morphological variations: This type of one-to-
many translations is mainly due to non-parallel re-
alization of tense. It?s rather irrelevant from an
MWE perspective, but easy to discover and filter
automatically.
24
(3) Sie
They
verschlimmern
aggravate
die
the
?Ubel.
misfortunes.
(4) Their action is aggravating the misfortunes.
Verb particle combinations: A typical MWE
pattern, treated for instance in (Baldwin and
Villavicencio, 2002). It further divides into trans-
parent and non-transparent combinations, the lat-
ter is illustrated below.
(5) Der
The
Ausschuss
committe
bezweckt,
intends,
den
the
Institutionen
institutions
ein
a
politisches
political
Instrument
instrument
an
at
die
the
Hand
hand
zu
to
geben.
give.
(6) The committee set out to equip the institutions with a
political instrument.
Verb preposition combinations: While this
class isn?t discussed very often in the MWE lit-
erature, it can nevertheless be considered as an id-
iosyncratic combination of lexical items. Sag et al
(2002) propose an analysis within an MWE frame-
work.
(7) Sie
They
werden
will
den
the
Treibhauseffekt
green house effect
verschlimmern.
aggravate.
(8) They will add to the green house effect.
Light verb constructions (LVCs): This is the
most frequent pattern in our gold standard. It ac-
tually subsumes various subpatterns depending on
whether the light verbs complement is realized as a
noun, adjective or PP. Generally, LVCs are syntac-
tically and semantically more flexible than other
MWE types, such that our gold standard contains
variants of LVCs with similar, potentially mod-
ified adjectives or nouns, as in the example be-
low. However, it can be considered an idiosyn-
cratic combination since the LVCs exhibit specific
lexical restrictions (Sag et al, 2002).
(9) Ich
Ich
werde
will
die
the
Sache
thing
nur
only
noch
just
verschlimmern.
aggravate.
(10) I am just making things more difficult.
Idioms: This MWE type is probably the most
discussed in the literature due to its semantic and
syntactic idiosyncracy. It?s not very frequent in
our gold standard which may be mainly due to its
limited size and the source items we chose.
(11) Sie
They
bezwecken
intend
die
the
Umgestaltung
conversion
in
into
eine
a
zivile
civil
Nation.
nation.
(12) They have in mind the conversion into a civil nation.
v1 v2 v3 v4
Ntype 22 (26) 41 (47) 26 (35) 17 (24)
V Part 22.7 4.9 0.0 0.0
V Prep 36.4 41.5 3.9 5.9
LVC 18.2 29.3 88.5 88.2
Idiom 0.0 2.4 0.0 0.0
Para 36.4 24.3 11.5 23.5
Table 2: Proportions of MWE types per lemma
Paraphrases: From an MWE perspective, para-
phrases are the most problematic and challenging
type of translational correspondence in our gold
standard. While the MWE literature typically dis-
cusses the distinction between collocations and
MWEs, the boarderline between paraphrases and
MWEs is not really clear. On the hand, para-
phrases, as we classified them here, are transparent
combinations of lexical items, like in the exam-
ple below ensure that something increases. How-
ever, semantically, these transparent combinations
can also be rendered by an atomic expression in-
crease. A further problem raised by paraphrases is
that they often involve translational shifts (Cyrus,
2006). These shifts are hard to identify automat-
ically and present a general challenge for seman-
tic processing of parallel corpora. An example is
given below.
(13) Wir
We
brauchen
need
bessere
better
Zusammenarbeit,
cooperation
um
to
die
the
Ru?ckzahlungen
repayments.OBJ
anzuheben .
increase.
(14) We need greater cooperation in this respect to ensure
that repayments increase .
Table 2 displays the proportions of the MWE
categories for the number of types of one-to-many
correspondences in our gold standard. We filtered
the types due to morphological variations only (the
overall number of types is indicated in brackets).
Note that some types in our gold standard fall into
several categories, e.g. they combine a verb prepo-
sition with a verb particle construction. For all
of the verbs, the number of types belonging to
core MWE categories largely outweighs the pro-
portion of paraphrases. As we already observed
in our analysis of general translation categories,
here again, the different verb lemmas show strik-
ing differences with respect to their realization in
English translations. For instance, anheben (en.
increase) or bezwecken (en. intend) are frequently
25
translated with verb particle or preposition combi-
nations, while the other verbs are much more of-
ten translated by means of LVCs. Also, the more
specific LVC patterns differ largely among the
verbs. While verschlimmern (en. aggravate) has
many different adjectival LVC correspondences,
the translations of riskieren (en. risk) are predomi-
nantly nominal LVCs. The fact that we found very
few idioms in our gold standard may be simply
related to our arbitrary choice of German source
verbs that do not have an English idiom realiza-
tion (see our experiment on a random set of verbs
in Section 3.3).
In general, one-to-many translational corre-
spondences seem to provide a very fruitful ground
for the large-scale study of MWE phenomena.
However, their reliable detection in parallel cor-
pora is far from trivial, as we will show in the
next section. Therefore, we will not further in-
vestigate the classification of MWE patterns in
the rest of the paper, but concentrate on the high-
precision detection of one-to-many translations.
Such a pattern-independent identification method
is crucial for the further data-driven study of one-
to-many translations in parallel corpora.
3 Multiword Translation Detection
This section is devoted to the problem of high-
precision detection of one-to-many translations.
Section 3.1 describes an evaluation of automatic
word alignments against our gold standard. In
section 3.2, we describe a method that extracts
loosely aligned syntactic configurations which
yields much more promising results.
3.1 One-to-many Alignments
To illustrate the problem of purely distributional
one-to-many alignment, table 3 presents an eval-
uation of the automatic one-to-many word align-
ments produced by GIZA++ that uses the stan-
dard heuristics for bidirectional word alignment
from phrase-based MT (Och and Ney, 2003). We
evaluate the rate of translational correspondences
on the type-level that the system discovers against
the one-to-many translations in our gold standard.
By type we mean the set of lemmatized English
tokens that makes up the translation of the Ger-
man source lemma. Generally, automatic word
alignment yields a very high FPR if no frequency
threshold is used. Increasing the threshold may
help in some cases, however the frequency of the
verb n > 0 n > 1 n > 3
FPR FNR FPR FNR FPR FNR
v1 0.97 0.93 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
v2 0.93 0.9 0.5 0.96 0.0 0.98
v3 0.88 0.83 0.8 0.97 0.67 0.97
v4 0.98 0.92 0.8 0.92 0.34 0.92
Table 3: False positive rate and False negative rate
of GIZA++ one-to-many alignments
translation types is so low, that already at a thresh-
old of 3, almost all types get filtered. This does not
mean that the automatic word alignment does not
discover any correct correspondences at all, but it
means that the detection of the exact set of tokens
that correspond to the source token is rare.
This low precision of one-to-many alignments
isn?t very surprising. Many types of MWEs con-
sist of items that contribute most of the lexical se-
mantic content, while the other items belong to the
class of semantically almost ?empty? items (e.g.
particles, light verbs). These semantically ?light?
items have a distribution that doesn?t necessarily
correlate with the source item. For instance, in
the following sentence pair taken from Europarl,
GIZA++ was not able to capture the correspon-
dence between the German main verb behindern
(en. impede) and the LVC constitute an obstacle
to, but only finds an alignment link between the
verb and the noun obstacle.
(15) Die
The
Korruption
corruption
behindert
impedes
die
the
Entwicklung.
development.
(16) Corruption constitutes an obstacle to development.
Another limitation of the word-alignment mod-
els is that are independent of whether the sen-
tences are largely parallel or rather free transla-
tions. However, parallel corpora like Europarl are
know to contain a very large number of free trans-
lations. In these cases, direct lexical correspon-
dences are much more unlikely to be found.
3.2 Aligning Syntactic Configurations
High-precision extraction of one-to-many trans-
lation detection thus involves two major prob-
lems: 1) How to identify sentences or configura-
tions where reliable lexical correspondences can
be found? 2) How to align target items that have a
low occurrence correlation?
We argue that both of these problems can be
adressed by taking syntactic information into ac-
26
count. As an example, consider the pair of paral-
lel configurations in Figure 1 for the sentence pair
given in (15) and (16). Although there is no strict
one-to-one alignment for the German verb, the ba-
sic predicate-argument structure is parallel: The
verbs arguments directly correspond to each other
and are all dominated by a verbal root node.
Based on these intuitions, we propose a
generate-and-filter strategy for our one-to-many
translation detection which extracts partial, largely
parallel dependency configurations. By admitting
target dependency paths to be aligned to source
single dependency relations, we admit configura-
tions where the source item is translated by more
than one word. For instance, given the configura-
tion in Figure 1, we allow the German verb to be
aligned to the path connecting constitute and the
argument Y2.
Our one-to-many translation detection consists
of the following steps: a) candidate generation
of aligned syntactic configurations, b) filtering the
configurations c) alignment post-editing, i.e. as-
sembling the target tokens corresponding to the
source item. The following paragraphs will briefly
caracterize these steps.
behindert
X 1 Y 1
Y 2
an to
X 2 obstacle
create
Figure 1: Example of a typical syntactic MWE
configuration
Data We word-aligned the German and English
portion of the Europarl corpus by means of the
GIZA++ tool. Both portions where assigned flat
syntactic dependency analyses by means of the
MaltParser (Nivre et al, 2006) such that we ob-
tain a parallel resource of word-aligned depen-
dency parses. Each sentence in our resource can
be represented by the triple (DG, DE , AG,E). DG
is the set of dependency triples (s1, rel, s2) such
that s2 is a dependent of s1 of type rel and s1, s2
are words of the source language. DE is the set
of dependency triples of the target sentence. AG,E
corresponds to the set of pairs (s1, t1) such that
s1, t1 are aligned.
Candidate Generation This step generates a
list of source configurations by searching for oc-
curences of the source lexical verb where it is
linked to some syntactic dependents (e.g. its argu-
ments). An example input would be the configura-
tion ( (verb,SB,%), (verb,OA,%)) for
our German verbs.
Filtering Given our source candidates, a valid
parallel configuration (DG, DE , AG,E) is then de-
fined by the following conditions:
1. The source configuration DG is the set of tu-
ples (s1, rel, sn) where s1 is our source item and
sn some dependent.
2. For each sn ? DG, there is a tuple (sn, tn) ?
AG,E , i.e. every dependent has an alignment.
3. There is a target item t1 ? DE such that
for each tn, there is a p ? DE such that p is
a path (t1, rel, tx), (tx, rel, ty)...(tz, rel, tn) that
connects t1 and tn. Thus, the target dependents
have a common root.
To filter noise due to parsing or alignment er-
rors, we further introduce a filter on the length of
the path that connects the target root and its de-
pendents and w exclude paths cross contain sen-
tence boundaries. Moreover, the above candi-
date filtering doesn?t exclude configurations which
exhibit paraphrases involving head-switching or
complex coordination. Head-switching can be de-
tected with the help of alignment information: if
there is a item in our target configuration that has
an reliable alignment with an item not contained in
our source configuration, our target configuration
is likely to contain such a structural paraphrases
and is excluded from our candidate set. Coordina-
tion can be discarded by imposing the condition on
the configuration not to contain a coordination re-
lation. This Generate-and-Filter strategy now ex-
tracts a set of sentences where we are likely to find
a good one-to-one or one-to-many translation for
the source verb.
Alignment Post-editing In the final alignment
step, one now needs to figure out which lexical
material in the aligned syntactic configurations ac-
tually corresponds to the translation of the source
item. The intuition discussed in 3.2 was that all
27
the items lying on a path between the root item
and the terminals belong to the translation of the
source item. However, these items may have other
syntactic dependents that may also be part of the
one-to-many translation. As an example, consider
the configuration in figure 1 where the article an
which is part of the LVC create an obstacle to has
to be aligned to the German source verb.
Thus, for a set of items ti for which there is a de-
pendency relation (tx, rel, ti) ? DE such that tx is
an element of our target configuration, we need to
decide whether (s1, ti) ? AG,E . This translation
problem now largely parallels collocation trans-
lation problems discussed in the literature, as in
(Smadja and McKeown, 1994). But, crucially, our
syntactic filtering strategy has substantially nar-
rowed down the number of items that are possi-
ble parts of the one-to-many translation. Thus, a
straightforward way to assemble the translational
correspondence is to compute the correlation or
association of the possibly missing items with the
given translation pair as proposed in (Smadja and
McKeown, 1994). Therefore, we propose the fol-
lowing alignment post-editing algorithm:
Given the source item s1 and the set of target items
T , where each ti ? T is an element of our target
configuration,
1. Compute corr(s1, T ), the correlation be-
tween s1 and T .
2. For each ti, tx such that there is
a (ti, rel, tx) ? DE , compute
corr(s1, T + {tx})
3. if corr(s1, T + {tx}) ? corr(s1, T ), add tx
to T .
As the Dice coefficient is often to give the best
results, e.g. in (Smadja and McKeown, 1994), we
also chose Dice as our correlation measure. In fu-
ture work, we will experiment with other associa-
tion measures. Our correlation scores are thus de-
fined by the formula:
corr(s1, T ) =
2(freq(s1 ? T ))
freq(s1) + freq(T )
We define freq(T ) as the number of sentence
pairs whose target sentence contains occurrences
of all ti ? T , and freq(s1) accordingly. The ob-
servation frequency freq(s1?T ) is the number of
sentence pairs that where s1 occurs in the source
sentence, and T in the target sentence.
The output translation can then be rep-
resented as a dependency configuration
of the following kind :((of,PMOD,%),
(risk,NMOD,of),(risk,NMOD,the), (run,OBJ,risk),
(run,SBJ,%)) which is the syntactic representation
for the English MWE run the risk of.
3.3 Evaluation
Our translational approach to MWE extraction
bears the advantage that evaluation is not exclu-
sively bound to the manual judgement of candi-
date lists. Instead, we can first evaluate the system
output against translation gold standards which are
easier to obtain. The linguistic classification of the
candidates according to their compositionality can
then be treated as a separate problem.
We present two experiments in this evaluation
section: We will first evaluate the translation de-
tection on our gold standard to assess the gen-
eral quality of the extraction method. Since this
gold standard is to small to draw conclusions about
the quality of MWE patterns that the system de-
tects, we further evaluate the translational corre-
spondences for a larger set of verbs.
Translation evaluation: In the first experiment,
we extracted all types of translational correspon-
dences for the verbs we annotated in the gold stan-
dard. We converted the output dependency con-
figurations to the lemmatized bag-of-word form
we already applied for the alignment evaluation
and calculated the FPR and FNR of the trans-
lation types. The evaluation is displayed in ta-
ble 4. Nearly all translation types that our sys-
tem detected are correct. This confirms our hy-
pothesis that syntactic filtering yields more reli-
able translations that just coocurrence-based align-
ments. However, the false negative rate is also
very high. This low recall is due to the fact that
our syntactic filters are very restrictive such that a
major part of the occurrences of the source lemma
don?t figure in the prototypical syntactic configu-
ration. Column two and three of the evaluation ta-
ble present the FPR and FNR for experiments with
a relaxed syntactic filter that doesn?t constrain the
syntactic type of the parallel argument relations.
While not decreasing the FNR, the FPR decreases
significantly. This means that the syntactic filters
mainly fire on noisy configurations and don?t de-
crease the recall. A manual error analysis has also
shown that the relatively flat annotation scheme of
our dependency parses significantly narrows down
28
the number of candidate configurations that our al-
gorithm detects. As the dependency parses don?t
provide deep analyses for tense or control phe-
nomena, very often, a verb?s arguments don?t fig-
ure as its syntactic dependents and no configura-
tion is found. Future work will explore the im-
pact of deep syntactic analysis for the detection of
translational correspondences.
MWE evaluation: In a second experiment, we
evaluated the patterns of correspondences found
by our extraction method for use in an MWE con-
text. Therefore, we selected 50 random verbs oc-
curring in the Europarl corpus and extracted their
respective translational correspondences. This set
of 50 verbs yields a set of 1592 one-to-many types
of translational correspondences. We filtered the
types wich display only morphological variation,
such that the set of potential MWE types com-
prises 1302 types. Out of these, we evaluated a
random sample of 300 types by labelling the types
with the MWE categories we established for the
analysis of our gold standard. During the clas-
sification, we encountered a further category of
oneto- many correspondence which cannot be con-
sidered an MWE, the category of alternation. For
instance, we found a translational correspondence
between the active realization of the German verb
begru??en (en. appreciate) and the English passive
be pleased by.
The classification is displayed in table 5. Al-
most 83% of the translational correspondences
that our system extracted are perfect translation
types. Almost 60% of the extracted types can be
considered MWEs that exhibit some kind of se-
mantic idiosyncrasy. The other translations could
be classified as paraphrases or alternations. In our
random sample, the portions of idioms is signifi-
cantly higher than in our gold standard which con-
firms our intuition that the MWE pattern of the
one-to-many translations for a given verb are re-
lated to language-specific, semantic properties of
the verbs and the lexical concepts they realize.
4 Related Work
The problem sketched in this paper has clear con-
ncetions to statistical MT. So-called phrase-based
translation models generally target whole sentence
alignment and do not necessarily recur to linguis-
tically motivated phrase correspondences (Koehn
et al, 2003). Syntax-based translation that speci-
fies formal relations between bilingual parses was
Strict Filter Relaxed Filter
FPR FNR FPR FNR
v1 0.0 0.96 0.5 0.96
v2 0.25 0.88 0.47 0.79
v3 0.25 0.74 0.56 0.63
v4 0.0 0.875 0.56 0.84
Table 4: False positive and false negative rate of
one-to-many translations.
Trans. type Proportion
MWE type Proportion
MWEs 57.5%
V Part 8.2%
V Prep 51.8%
LVC 32.4%
Idiom 10.6%
Paraphrases 24.4%
Alternations 1.0%
Noise 17.1%
Table 5: Classification of 300 types sampled from
the set of one-to-many translations for 50 verbs
established by (Wu, 1997). Our way to use syn-
tactic configurations can be seen as a heuristic to
check relaxed structural parallelism.
Work on MWEs in a crosslingual context has
almost exclusively focussed on MWE translation
(Smadja and McKeown, 1994; Anastasiou, 2008).
In (Villada Moiro?n and Tiedemann, 2006), the au-
thors make use of alignment information in a par-
allel corpus to rank MWE candidates. These ap-
proaches don?t rely on the lexical semantic knowl-
edge about MWEs in form of one-to-many trans-
lations.
By contrast, previous approaches to paraphrase
extraction made more explicit use of crosslingual
semantic information. In (Bannard and Callison-
Burch, 2005), the authors use the target language
as a pivot providing contextual features for iden-
tifying semantically similar expressions. Para-
phrasing is however only partially comparable to
the crosslingual MWE detection we propose in
this paper. Recently, the very pronounced context
dependence of monolingual pairs of semantically
similar expressions has been recognized as a ma-
jor challenge in modelling word meaning (Erk and
Pado, 2009).
The idea that parallel corpora can be used as
a linguistic resource that provides empirical evi-
dence for monolingual idiosyncrasies has already
29
been exploited in, e.g. morphology projection
(Yarowsky et al, 2001) or word sense disambigua-
tion (Dyvik, 2004). While in a monolingual set-
ting, it is quite tricky to come up with theoretical
or empirical definitions of sense discriminations,
the crosslingual scenario offers a theory-neutral,
data-driven solution: Since ambiguity is an id-
iosyncratic property of a lexical item in a given
language, it is not likely to be mirrored in a tar-
get language. Similarly, our approach can also be
seen as a projection idea: we project the semantic
information of simplex realization in a source lan-
guage to an idiosyncratic, multiword realization in
the target language.
5 Conclusion
We have explored the phenomenon of one-to-
many translations in parallel corpora from the
perspective of MWE identification. Our man-
ual study on a translation gold standard as well
as our experiments in automatic translation ex-
traction have shown that one-to-many correspon-
dences provide a rich resource and fruitful basis
of study for data-driven MWE identification. The
crosslingual perspective raises new research ques-
tions about the identification and interpretation of
MWEs. It challenges the distinction between para-
phrases and MWEs, a problem that does not arise
at all in the context of monolingual MWE ex-
traction. It also allows for the study of the rela-
tion between the semantics of lexical concepts and
their MWE realization. Further research in this di-
rection should investigate translational correspon-
dences on a larger scale and further explore these
for monolingual interpretation of MWEs.
Our extraction method that is based on syn-
tactic filters identifies MWE types with a much
higher precision than purely cooccurence-based
word alignment and captures the various patterns
we found in our gold standard. Future work on the
extraction method will have to focus on the gener-
alization of these filters and the generalization to
other items than verbs. The experiments presented
in this paper also suggest that the MWE realiza-
tion of certain lexical items in a target language
is subject to certain linguistic patterns. Moreover,
the method we propose is completely languagein-
dependent such that further research has to study
the impact of the relatedness of the considered
languages on the patterns of one-to-many transla-
tional correspondences.
References
Dimitra Anastasiou. 2008. Identification of idioms by mt?s
hybrid research system vs. three commercial system. In
Proceedings of the EAMT, pp. 12?20.
Timothy Baldwin and Aline Villavicencio. 2002. Extract-
ing the unextractable: a case study on verb-particles. In
Proceedings of the COLING-02, pp. 1?7.
Colin Bannard and Chris Callison-Burch. 2005. Paraphras-
ing with bilingual parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp. 597?604 .
Lea Cyrus. 2006. Building a resource for studying transla-
tion shifts. In Proceedings of the 5th LREC, pp. 1240?
1245.
Helge Dyvik. 2004. Translations as semantic mirrors. From
parallel corpus to WordNet. Language and Computers,
1:311 ? 326.
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pado. 2009. Paraphrase assess-
ment in structured vector space: Exploring parameters and
datasets. In Proc. of the EACL GEMS Workshop, pp. 57?
65.
Joa?o de Almeida Varelas Grac?a, Joana Paulo Pardal, Lu??sa
Coheur, and Diamantino Anto?nio Caseiro. 2008. Multi-
language word alignments annotation guidelines. Techni-
cal report, Tech. Rep. 38 / 2008 INESC-ID Lisboa.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003.
Statistical phrase-based translation. In Proceedings of the
NAACL ?03, pp. 48?54.
Philipp Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statis-
tical machine translation. In MT Summit 2005, pp. 79?86.
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, and Jens Nilsson. 2006. Malt-
parser: A data driven parser-generator for dependency
parsing. In Proc. of LREC-2006, pp. 2216?2219.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic com-
parison of various statistical alignment models. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Pavel Pecina. 2008. A machine learning approach to multi-
word expression extraction. In Proceedings of the LREC
MWE 2008 Workshop, pp. 54?57.
Ivan A. Sag, Timothy Baldwin, Francis Bond, and Ann
Copestake. 2002. Multiword expressions: A pain in the
neck for NLP. In Proc. of the CICLing-2002, pp. 1?15.
Frank Smadja and Kathleen McKeown. 1994. Translating
collocations for use in bilingual lexicons. In Proceedings
of the HLT ?94 workshop, pp. 152?156.
Begon?a Villada Moiro?n and Jo?rg Tiedemann. 2006.
Identifying idiomatic expressions using automatic word-
alignment. In Proc. of the EACL MWE 2006 Workshop,
pp. 33?40.
Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction gram-
mars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora. Comput.
Linguist., 23(3):377?403.
David Yarowsky, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicentowski.
2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis tools via robust
projection across aligned corpora. In Proceedings of HLT
2001, pp. 1?8.
30
