Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on the Interaction between Linguistics and Computational Linguistics, page 1,
Athens, Greece, 30 March, 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Machine Translation and its philosophical accounts
Stelios Piperidis
Institute for Language and Speech Processing,
?Athena? Research Centre
spip@ilsp.gr
Abstract
This paper attempts to explore the interrelation 
between  philosophical  accounts  of  language 
and respective technological  developments in 
the field of human language technologies.  In 
doing so, it focuses on the interaction between 
analytical philosophy and machine translation 
development,  trying  to  draw  the  emerging 
methodological analogies.
1 Introduction
Philosophical accounts of science and respective 
technological development bear a tight interrela-
tion  and  continuous  interplay.  Likewise,  philo-
sophical  investigations  of  language  bear  their 
own implications on how technology processing 
language,  in  monolingual  or  multilingual  set-
tings, evolves. 
In  the  multilingual  setting,  machine  translation 
feasibility,  its  presuppositions and implications, 
brings forth a range of questions, applicable to 
human translation as well, including, but not lim-
ited to, linguistic and ontological relativity, inde-
terminacy of translation,  inscrutability of  refer-
ence,  representational  function of language,  the 
problem of meaning. 
Bar  Hillel?s  claims  on  the  infeasibility  of  ma-
chine translation and the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 
with  the  linguistic  determinism  and  relativity 
principles, partly backed up by Quine?s ontologi-
cal relativity and later Wittgenstein?s private lan-
guage  and  variability  of  language  games  have 
haunted the way of thinking in machine transla-
tion development. Indeterminacy,  relativity, and 
the consequent abolition of the one gold transla-
tion idea, however, as well as the necessity for 
frameworks  integrating  pragmatic  and  be-
havioural  data  in  translation  have  played  their 
role  in  advancing  machine  translation  design 
paving the way for observed paradigm shifts at 
all stages of development.  
In broadly dividing machine translation history 
in the rule-based and corpus-based eras,  in  the 
50?s  and  80?s  respectively,  one  can  draw  the 
analogies that would rather point to a tight inter-
action between philosophical  accounts and ma-
chine translation paradigms.
Early contemporary analytic philosophy, through 
conceptual,  reference-bound  analysis  and  com-
positionality principles, provided the foundation 
for  representational,  rule  and  knowledge-based 
approaches  of  early  machine  translation,  from 
50?s through the 80?s. The turn, in analytic phi-
losophy, to an understanding of meaning though 
use,  to  pragmatics  and  behaviourism,  may  be 
paired and seen as laying the foundation for the 
machine  translation paradigm shift  observed in 
the 80?s. In this pairing, it is the use of the much 
required parallel (or comparable) translation data 
that could be seen as constituting the behavioural 
data  base,  with  each  alignment  function  being 
conceived of as the result of a radical translation 
process, where a source language sentence pro-
vides the sensory data and a target language sen-
tence provides the linguistic observation. In such 
a framework, this aligned data source does pro-
vide the ?translation manual?, which after a se-
ries of  inductive operations does converge to a 
potentially usable set of translation relations. 
Along this line, we will discuss, in this talk, the 
continuous  relations  between  analytic  philoso-
phy, linguistic science and human language tech-
nologies. Such relations, direct or indirect, can be 
bi-directional and can possibly work towards bet-
ter understanding and facilitating the virtuous cy-
cle between language technology and its theoreti-
cal underpinnings.        
1
