Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 94?101,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
?Sorry? seems to be the hardest word
Allan Ramsay Debora Field
School of Computer Science Dept of Computer Science
Univ of Manchester Univ of Sheffield
Manchester M60 1QD, UK Sheffield S1 4DP, UK
Abstract
We are interested in the ways that language
is used to achieve a variety of goals, where
the same utterance may have vastly different
consequences in different situations. This is
closely related to the topic of creativity in lan-
guage. The fact that the same utterance can
be used to achieve a variety of goals opens up
the possibility of using it to achieve new goals.
The current paper concentrates largely on an
implemented system for exploring how the ef-
fects of an utterance depend on the situation
in which it is produced, but we will end with
some speculations about how how utterances
can come to have new kinds of uses.
1 Introduction
We are interested in the ways that language is used to
achieve a variety of goals, where the same utterance
may have vastly different consequences in different
situations. We will take, as a running example, the
use of the single word ?Sorry?.
We will look at a number of situations in which
this word may be uttered, and investigate the ways
in which its consequences may be determined by
considering the goals and belief states of the partic-
ipants. The kinds of reasoning that lie behind the
various uses of this word are, we believe, typical of
the way that utterances can be used to achieve novel
aims. ?Sorry? is perhaps a fairly extreme case: very
simple indeed on the surface, very complex indeed
in terms of its uses. Any account of how this specific
word gets used will have lessons for other kinds of
novel action.
As with many common but slippery words, dic-
tionary definitions are not much help when trying to
work out what ?sorry? means: Merriam-Webster, for
instance, has ?feeling sorrow, regret, or penitence?
as the primary definition, and the free dictionary
(www.thefreedictionary.com has ?Feeling
or expressing sympathy, pity, or regret?. These def-
initions are, as is common for words whose mean-
ings are highly context dependent, essentially circu-
lar. How much do we gain from knowing that ?sorry?
is a word that is used to express sorrow, or from the
free dictionary?s definition of ?sympathy? as a ?feel-
ing or an expression of pity or sorrow for the distress
of another??
Perhaps, then, considering a set of examples of
situations where someone utters this word is a better
way of getting at what it means. The following is a
rather long list, but then there are a very wide set of
situations in which people say ?sorry?. That is, after
all, the problem:
(1) a. EXPRESSION OF DISAPPOINT-
MENT
I?m sorry I missed your talk. I forgot
to set my alarm. I?d really been
looking forward to seeing your demo.
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE NOT TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry I missed your talk. My flight
was delayed. [situation: S & H mutu-
ally knew that S was counting on H to
help with a demo during the talk.]
94
c. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry I missed your talk. I forgot
to set my alarm. [situation: S & H mu-
tually knew that S was counting on H
to help with a demo during the talk.]
(2) a. EXPRESSION OF EMPATHY
I?m sorry that this situation is so awful
for you. I would not be coping if I were
in your shoes.
b. APOLOGY FOR A 3RD PARTY?S
ACTION WHILE NOT TAKING
FULL PERSONAL RESPONSIBIL-
ITY
I?m sorry that this situation is so
awful for you. My parents have
really excelled themselves this time
[sarcasm].
c. APOLOGY FOR A 3RD PARTY?S
ACTION WHILE ALSO TAKING
FULL PERSONAL RESPONSIBIL-
ITY
I?m sorry that this situation is so awful
for you. As head of the division I take
full responsibility, and I am submitting
my resignation.
d. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry that this situation is so aw-
ful for you. I should have been more
careful.
e. EXPRESSION OF EMPATHY
I?m sorry that this situation is so awful
for you. I?m not sorry for causing the
situation, because I didn?t cause it. But
I am sorry it is so awful.
(3) a. EXPRESSION OF DISDAIN+PITY
I?m sorry they?re not good enough. It?s
your loss.
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry they?re not good enough. I
tried very hard, but I couldn?t get them
quite right.
(4) a. EXPRESSION OF EMPATHY
I?m sorry, Dave, I?m afraid I can?t do
that. All the pod locks are jammed
shut. I have tried everything I can think
of, but I can?t get them open.
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry, Dave, I?m afraid I can?t do
that. I have turned the tables and you
are my prisoner now.
(5) a. EXPRESSION OF REGRET
I?m sorry I told him. Things would be
much simpler for me now if I?d kept
quiet.
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry I told him. I know I promised
you I wouldn?t but it just slipped out.
(6) a. EXPRESSION OF REGRET
I?m sorry I killed their daughter. She
was in the wrong place at the wrong
time. [Speaker feels no remorse for
killing, only regret for killing the
wrong person.]
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry I killed their daughter. It was
a terrible thing I did.
If nothing else, these examples show how flexible
the word ?sorry? is. About all they have in common
is that the speaker is referring to some action or state
of affairs which is disadvantageous to someone (usu-
ally, but not necessarily, either the speaker or hearer:
see (6) for a counter-example). The follow-up sen-
tences then say something more about the speaker?s
attitude to this action or state of affairs (we will
use the generic term ?event? to cover both of these).
Just what the speaker?s attitude to the event is varies
wildly: the glosses in the examples use terms like
95
?empathy?, ?apology?, ?regret?, but these are almost
as slippery as ?sorry? itself.
2 Literal uses of ?sorry?
The idea that ?sorry? is ambiguous, with fifteen dif-
ferent senses, is ludicrous. Apart from anything else,
we have another dozen examples up our sleeves that
do not fit any of the patterns above, and it would be
easy to find yet further uses. It seems more plausi-
ble that it has a single meaning, which can be used
as the trigger for a variety of ideas depending on the
the nature of the event and the beliefs of the speaker
and hearer. The task of determining what a speaker
meant by using this word in a given utterance then
devolves to epistemic inference. This does not actu-
ally make it very easy; but it does at least put it in
the right place.
We will take it, then, that ?sorry? is an adjective
that takes a sentential complement, and that the in-
terpretation of a sentence involving it is something
like Fig. 11. In other words, (1a) says that right now
the relation sorry holds between me and the fact that
I missed your talk.
That seems fair enough, but it also seems rather
weak. We cannot do anything with it unless we
know what follows from saying that the relation
sorry holds between a person and a proposition. In
other words, we need to start writing axioms (mean-
ing postulates, rules, definitions, . . . ) to link this re-
lation with other concepts.
The first thing we note is that any such axioms
will be inherently intensional: sorry is a relationship
between a person and a proposition (a description
of a state of affairs). We will therefore have to use
1We use the ?restricted quantifiers? ?X :: {P}Q and ?X ::
{P}Q as shorthand for ?X(P ? Q) and ?X(P&Q)
?Lat(L,
sorry(ref (?M(speaker(M))),
?N: {past(now,N)}
?Oevent(miss,O,P,Q)
&?(O,object,ref (?R(own(ref (?S(hearer(S))),R) & sort(talk,R,T,U))))
&?(O,agent,ref (?V (speaker(V)))) & aspect(N,simplePast,O)))
&aspect(now,simple,L)
Figure 1: Logical form for (1a)
some kind of intensional logic for writing our ax-
ioms. We follow (Chierchia and Turner, 1987; Fox
and Lappin, 2005) in using a variant on ?property
theory? (Turner, 1987) for this purpose. Property
theory has the required expressive power for writ-
ing rules that discuss propositions, and it has an ax-
iomatisation which allows the implementation of a
practical theorem prover (Ramsay, 2001).
So what do we want to say about sorry? The very
first observation is that it is factive: if I am sorry
about something, then it must have happened. I can-
not (sensibly) say that I am sorry that the moon is
made of green cheese, because it isn?t. Our first ax-
iom, then, says that anything that anyone is sorry
about is indeed true (A1):
(A1)
?B?C(sorry(B,C) ? C)
The only other thing that all the examples above
have in common is that the speaker wishes that the
proposition she is sorry about were not true (A2):
(A2)
?B?C(sorry(B,C) ? C & wish(B,?(C)))
There are, indeed, cases where absolutely nothing
more follows from the use of ?Sorry?:
(7) My dear Pandora, you?re going to be sorry
you opened that.
In (7), the speaker is simply telling their hearer
that she is going to wish she hadn?t opened it, what-
ever it is. No hint of apology or remorse or empathy.
Just a plain a statement of fact: at some time in the
future the hearer is going to wish that she?d left the
box closed.
It is hard to find a distinction between the set of
propositions that follow from every use of a term and
its meaning. We will therefore take it that (A1) and
(A2) characterise the meaning of ?sorry?: that the
proposition in question is true, and that the person
who is sorry about it wishes that it wasn?t.
96
How, then, do all the other examples get their
force? The key is that once you have said that you
wish something were not true, two questions arise:
why do you wish it were not so, and why are you
telling me that you wish it were not so. To answer
these two questions you have to think harder about
what the proposition in question is like.
There are two particularly interesting issues.
Who, if anyone, was responsible for the proposition
being true; and who, if anyone, is affected by it. In
particular, if the speaker is the person who was re-
sponsible for it then wishing that it were not now
true entails wishing that they had not earlier per-
formed the action that led to it; and if the person
who is affected by it is the hearer, and the effect
is adverse, then the fact that the speaker wishes it
were not true establishes some degree of empathy
between the two.
Before we can start formalising these notions we
need to introduce rules that specify responsibility
and affectedness.
The simplest rules for these notions are centred
around the roles that individuals play in events.
What, for instance, is the difference between (8a)
and (8b)?
(8) a. I saw him fall off a cliff.
b. I watched him fall off a cliff.
They both refer to the same set of events: he fell
off a cliff, and I had my eyes open and looking in
that direction at the time (and I was awake, and var-
ious other routine side-conditions). The difference
is that (8b) implies a degree of control: that I was
aware that he was falling, and I deliberately kept my
attention on what I was seeing.
One way of capturing this distinction concisely is
by using names for thematic roles which reflect the
way that the individuals concerned are involved: if,
for instance, we say that the speaker was the patient
of the seeing event in (8a), but was the agent in (8b),
then we can use rules like (A3) and (A4) to distin-
guish between cases where someone was just acci-
dentally involved in an event from ones where they
caused it or where they intentionally caused it.
(A3)
?B?C: {?(C,actor,B) ? ?(C,agent,B)}
cause(B,C)
(A4)
?B?C: {?(C,agent,B)}intended(B,C)
We can use (A3) and (A4) to pick out cases where
the person who is sorry for some state of affairs is in
fact the person who caused it to come about. We will
not yet say much about what follows from recognis-
ing these cases. For the moment we will just label
them as cases where the person regrets the event in
question.
(A5)
?B?C : {wish(B,?(C))}
?D : {C ? cause(B,D)}
regret(B,D))
Note that what the person is sorry about is a
proposition, but what they regret is an event (in a
classical Davidsonian treatment of events (David-
son, 1980)). The key question here is whether the
description of the state of affairs entails the existence
of an event for which they are responsible. The rules
in (A3) and (A4) provide the relevant support in very
many cases: just using a verb whose set of thematic
roles includes one with connotations of causality is a
shorthand for making a statement about responsibil-
ity. There are, of course, other more complex cases,
but in many such cases the key lies in spotting se-
quences of causally related events where the start of
the sequence involves the person in a causal role.
Given these rules, we can distinguish between the
cases in (9):
(9) a. I?m sorry I saw him fall off a cliff.
b. I?m sorry I watched him fall off a cliff.
If we assume that the hearer believes what the
speaker tells them, then following (9)b we can ask
who believes that someone regrets something:
| ?- prove(bel(X, regret(A, B))).
A = ?#speaker?,
B = ?#166?,
X = ?#hearer? ?
yes
The hearer believes that the speaker regrets some-
thing, namely the action of watching someone fall
of a cliff (represent here by a Skolem constant #166,
introduced by the existential quantifier for the event
in the logical form for (9b), shown in Fig. 2.
97
sorry(#user,
?O: {past(now,O)}
?Pevent(watch,P,Q,R)
&?(P,
-event,
?S: {sort(cliff ,S,T,U)}
?Vevent(fall,V,W,X) & ?(V,agent,#171) & off (V,S) & aspect(now,simple,V))
&?(P,agent,#user) & aspect(O,simplePast,P))
Figure 2: Logical form for (9b)
Although the speaker regrets watching this unfor-
tunate event, he cannot be seen as apologising for it.
An apology expresses regret that the speaker caused
something unfortunate to happen to the hearer. We
need the axiom A6 below to describe this situation:
(A6)
?B?C: {regret(B,C)}
?D?E: {want(D,?(E))
& E ? event(F,C,G,H)}
apologise(B,D,C)
In other words, if B regrets performing the action
C then if C is part of some situation which D re-
gards as undesirable, the B can be seen as apologis-
ing to D.
We also need, of course, descriptions of situations
which people might find undesirable. A typical rule
might be as in (A7), which simply says that people
do not want to be hurt (any individual B wants the
proposition event(hurt,D,E,F)&?(D,object,B) to be
false for all D,E and F ):
(A7)
?B?C?Dwant(B,
?(event(hurt,D,E,F)&?(D,object,B)))
Given A6 and A7, we can see that saying ?I am
sorry I hurt you? would be an apology: the speaker
is saying that he wishes that ?I hurt you? was not
true, and since this is something which was under
the speaker?s control (so he regrets it), then since
it also something that the hearer did not want then
the speaker?s utterance of this sentence is indeed an
apology.
Clearly this approach to the problem requires a
great deal of general knowledge. There is nothing
esoteric about A7. On the contrary, it as about as
obvious a fact of life as it is possible to imagine.
Collecting a large enough body of such rules to
cope with everyday language is, indeed, a daunt-
ing task, but it is the sheer number of such rules
that make it problematic, not the nature of the rules
themselves.
Once we have this background knowledge, how-
ever, we can see that various rather subtle differ-
ences between the basic uses of ?Sorry? emerge quite
straightforwardly from rules like the ones above.
Many of these rules are inherently intensional, as
noted above, so for a program to be able to work out
whether someone is actually apologising for some
action it will have to have access to a theorem prover
for an intensional logic. Fortunately such theorem
provers exist (see e.g. (Ramsay, 2001) for an exam-
ple).
3 Indirect uses
The axioms in Section 2 let us distinguish between
some of the examples in (1)?(6). We are faced
with two remaining questions. What do we gain
by labelling some examples as instances of regret or
apology, and what do we do about the less obvious
cases?
The key to both these questions is that linguistic
acts are inherently epistemic. They are concerned
with conveying information about what the speaker
S believes, including what she believes about the
hearer H?s beliefs, with the intention of changing
H?s beliefs.
We will consider, in particular, the cases that we
have labelled as apologies. What is the point of an
apology? What does S want to achieve by making
an apology?
We have characterised apologising above as the
act of saying that S wishes some proposition P were
98
not true, in a situation where S is responsible for P
being true and is something that H would like to be
untrue. Note that all that S actually did was to say
that she wished P were not true. There is nothing
in the form of the utterance ?I am sorry that I didn?t
do the washing up? that makes it obviously different
from ?I am sorry that you didn?t do the washing up?.
The two utterances do, of course, feel very different?
one is an apology, the other is something more like
a threat or an admonition?but their structural prop-
erties are very similar. They are both, essentially,
simple declarative sentences.
To get a closer grip on why they convey such radi-
cally different underlying consequences, we will re-
visit the idea that linguistic actions are just actions,
to be dealt with by specifying their preconditions
and effects, to be linked together by some planning
algorithm so that they lead to outcomes that are de-
sirable for the speaker.
We have argued elsewhere for a very sparse treat-
ment of speech acts (Field and Ramsay, 2004; Field
and Ramsay, 2007; Ramsay and Field, 2008). The
argument starts by considering the classical use of
AI planning theory in domains such as the blocks
world, where the preconditions of an action are a
set of propositions that must hold before that action
can be performed, and the effects are a set of actions
that will definitely hold after it has been performed.
If preconditions and effects were not entirely rigid
in this way then planning algorithms, from the origi-
nal means-end analysis of (Fikes and Nilsson, 1971)
through more modern approaches that involve static
analysis of the relationships between different types
of action (Kambhampati, 1997; Nguyen and Kamb-
hampati, 2001; Blum and Furst, 1997) would just
not work.
Suppose, however, that we try to give this kind of
description of the linguistic act of stating something.
What should the preconditions and effects of the act
of stating something be?
There seem to be very few limits on the situations
in which you can state something. Consider (3) (re-
peated here).
(3) a. EXPRESSION OF DISDAIN+PITY
I?m sorry they?re not good enough. It?s
your loss.
b. APOLOGY FOR OWN ACTION
WHILE ALSO TAKING FULL PER-
SONAL RESPONSIBILITY
I?m sorry they?re not good enough. I
tried very hard, but I couldn?t get them
quite right.
It is very hard to say that the speaker is performing
two different actions when she utters the words ?I?m
sorry they?re not good enough? in these two exam-
ples. She is, clearly, intending to achieve different
outcomes in the two cases, but they are, surely, the
same action, in the same way that getting the milk
out of the fridge in order to make custard and get-
ting the milk out of the fridge in order to in order
to make space for the orange juice are the same ac-
tion. In both (3a) and (3b) S is claiming to be sorry
that they (whatever they are) are not good enough.
In (3a), of course, it is clear that she does not believe
that this is true. Nonetheless, the form of the utter-
ance makes it clear that she is making a statement.
This is typical of linguistic actions. It is possible
to state things that you do not believe, or to ask ques-
tions where you already know the answer, or to issue
commands which you do not want to have carried
out. Unless we want to have as many sub-types of
the action ?statement? as there are examples in (1)?
(6) (and then the dozen other examples that we did
not include, and then all the ones we haven?t thought
of) then we have to see whether we can make a sin-
gle, rather simple, act cover all these cases.
What are the preconditions and effects of this act?
The only completely essential precondition for mak-
ing a statement is that you have the proposition in
question in mind, and the only thing that you can
be sure that your hearer will believe is that you had
it in mind. When S states a proposition P , S may
believe it (3a); or she may disbelieve it (3b); or she
may be unsure about it (there are no examples of this
in (1)?(6), but situations where a speaker makes a
statement despite not having an opinion on whether
it is true or not can occur). The situation for H is
even less clear: H may or may not believe that S
is being honest, and he may or may not believe that
S is reliable. Hence, H may decide that although S
has claimed P she does not actually believe it; and
even if he does decide that she believes it, he may
regard her being unreliable (on, at least, the topic of
99
P ) so he may decide not to believe it anyway. And
as for what S believes that H will believe after she
has uttered P , the possibilities are almost boundless
. . . The only thing you can be reasonably sure of is
that so long as H was paying attention and the ut-
terance was not ambiguous then H will know that
a claim was made, and hence that its preconditions
must have held (because that is what preconditions
are: a set of propositions that must held in order for
the action to be performable).
The only safe characterisation of a claim seems to
be as in Fig. 3
claim(S, H, P)
pre: bel(S, P) or bel(S, ?P) or bel(S, P or ?P)
effects:
Figure 3: Preconditions and effects of ?claim?
The preconditions will hold so long as S has
thought about P (and so long as P is not something
paradoxical like the Liar Paradox). They do not hold
at all times for all speakers. Until you read the sen-
tence ?Dan Holden hit some good first serves last
night? it was not the case that you believed that this
sentence was either true or false, because you had
never thought about it before. Thus the precondi-
tions of this action are roughly equivalent to saying
that S has the proposition P in her mind.
Given the extremely wide range of conclusions
that H can come to, it seems safest not to say any-
thing about the effects of a claim. It would be fairly
pointless to say that the effects of a claim are either
H believes S believes P or H believes that S does
not believe P or H believes that S believes that P is
false, and that either H believes P or H is agnostic
about P or H believes P is false. What we can say
is that if H realises that S has claimed P then he
will be recognise that S deliberately raised the topic
of P ?s truth value. In order to come to a conclusion
about why S should do this, he will have to come
to some view on S?s opinion of P . In other words,
a claim is an invitation to verify bel(S, P) or bel(S,
?P) or bel(S, P or ?P).
This will, of course, always be verifiable unless
P is a paradox, but the process of verification will
typically have side-effects. In particular, bel(S, P)
or bel(S, ?P) or bel(S, P or ?P) can be verified
by showing that bel(S, P) holds, or by showing that
bel(S, ?P) holds. H?s first move, then, will be to
investigate bel(S, P). S will know this, so if S does
believe P then if she also thinks that H has a reason-
able model of her beliefs then she will conclude that
H will shortly have the proposition bel(S, P) avail-
able to him.
If, on the other hand, S believes that P is false
then again assuming that H has a reasonable model
of her beliefs she can assume that he will shortly
have bel(S, ?P) available to him. In other words, if S
believes that H?s picture of her beliefs is reasonably
complete and reasonably accurate then by claiming
P she can bring either P or ?P to H?s attention.
Given that linguistic acts are public, in the sense
that all the participants are aware that they have
taken place and that all the other participants are
aware of this, both S and H will be aware that
H knows that one of bel(S,P ), bel(S,?P ) and
bel(S,Por?P ) is true. However, this disjunction is
so uninformative that it amounts to an invitation to
H to try to work out which disjunct actually holds.
Furthermore, S knows that it is tantamount to such
an invitation, and H knows that S knows this. Thus
the simple act of producing a highly uninformative
utterance in a public situation will lead both S and
H to expect that they will both believe that H will
try find out which of the disjuncts actually holds.
This allows S to say ?I?m sorry they?re not good
enough? in a situation where both parties know that
S actually believes they are good enough. H will
try to check the preconditions of S?s act of claiming
to be sorry about the situation. He will not man-
age to verify that S is sorry about, but he can show
that she is not: the fact that she believes they are
good enough will clash with (A1), which says that
you can only actually be sorry about things that are
true. Thus S has brought to the fact that she does
not believe they are not good enough, whilst also
raising the possibility that she might have been, but
is not, sorry about something. She has done so in a
way that has forced H to think about it, and to arrive
at these conclusions for himself, which is likely to
be more forceful and indeed more convincing than
if she had just asserted it. In other words, by saying
that she has sorry about something she has conveyed
the complex message that the proposition in ques-
tion is not true, and that she is not apologising for
100
H?s disappointment with the situation.
4 Conclusions
In the first part of the paper we explored the way
that the consequences of direct uses of a word like
?Sorry? can vary, depending on aspects of the propo-
sition under consideration. Saying that you wish
some state of affairs for which you are responsi-
ble and which adversely affects your hearer did not
hold has different consequences from saying that
you wish that some more neutral proposition were
true. The degree of (admitted) responsibility of the
speaker for the situation affects these consequences
? ?I?m sorry I shrank your favourite jumper? carries
a different message from ?I?m sorry your favourite
jumper shrank when I did the washing yesterday? be-
cause of the indirectness of the causal link between
me and the shrinking in the second example. We
have all the machinery for accounting for examples
like these implemented, via a theorem prover which
can handle intensionality and which can effectively
ascribe beliefs to individuals. Clearly this relies on
background knowledge about everyday facts such as
the obsvervation that people generally dislike being
hurt (A7). We do not have a massive repository of
such general knowledge, and inspection of publicly
available sources such as CYC and ConceptNet sug-
gests that they generally omit such very basic facts,
presumably because they are so self-evident that the
are below the radar of the compilers. Nonethe-
less, there is nothing about such rules that makes
them particularly difficult to express, and we have no
doubt that if we had more general-knowledge of this
kind then we would be able to determine the conse-
quences of a wide range of literal uses of ?Sorry?.
The later discussion of indirect uses of ?sorry?
is more speculative: we have an implementation
of a planner which can use very underspecified ac-
tions descriptions of the kind in Fig. 3 by look-
ing for instantiations of such an action which en-
tail some proposition in a particular situation, rather
than simply looking for actions whose effects match
the user?s goals, and we have used this to explore a
number of examples of ?indirect speech acts?. There
is more work to be done here, but the kind of anal-
ysis we are looking at has the potential for handling
entirely novel uses of linguistic acts that approaches
that enumerate a fixed set of acts (e.g. (Austin, 1962;
Searle, 1969; Cohen and Perrault, 1979; Allen and
Perrault, 1980; Cohen et al, 1990) with detailed pre-
conditions and effects, would find more difficult. In
the same way that having a very simple definition of
?sorry? and allowing the different consequences to
emerge in the light of other information that is avail-
able in the situation lets us treat an open-ended set
of literal uses of this word, using a very simple no-
tion of linguistic act and allowing the different con-
sequences to emerge in different situations leads to
the possibility of accounting for entirely novel uses.
References
J F Allen and C R Perrault. 1980. Analysing intention in utter-
ances. Artificial Intelligence, 15:148?178.
J Austin. 1962. How to Do Things with Words. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford.
A Blum and M L Furst. 1997. Fast planning through planning
graph analysis. Artificial Intelligence, 90(1-2).
G Chierchia and R Turner. 1987. Semantics and property the-
ory. Linguistics and Philosophy, 11(3).
P R Cohen and C R Perrault. 1979. Elements of a plan-based
theory of speech acts. Cognitive Science, 7(2):171?190.
P R Cohen, J Morgan, and M E Pollack. 1990. Intentions in
Communication. Bradford Books, Cambridge, Mass.
D Davidson. 1980. Essays on actions and events. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
D G Field and A M Ramsay. 2004. Sarcasm, deception, and
stating the obvious: Planning dialogue without speech acts.
Artificial Intelligence Review, 22:149?171.
D G Field and A M Ramsay. 2007. Minimal sets of minimal
speech acts. In Recent Advances in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (RANLP?07), pages 193?199, Borovets, Bulgaria.
R E Fikes and N J Nilsson. 1971. Strips: a new approach to the
application of theorem proving to problem solving. Artificial
Intelligence, 3(4):251?288.
C Fox and S Lappin. 2005. Foundations of Intensional Seman-
tics. Blackwell.
S Kambhampati. 1997. Refinement planning as a unifiying
framework for plan synthesis. AI Magazine, 18(2):67?97.
X Nguyen and S Kambhampati. 2001. Reviving partial order
planning. In IJCAI, pages 459?466.
A M Ramsay and D G Field. 2008. Speech acts, epistemic
planning and Grice?s maxims. Logic and Computation,
18:431?457.
A M Ramsay. 2001. Theorem proving for untyped constructive
?-calculus: implementation and application. Logic Journal
of the Interest Group in Pure and Applied Logics, 9(1):89?
106.
J R Searle. 1969. Speech Acts: an Essay in the Philosophy of
Language. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
R Turner. 1987. A theory of properties. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 52(2):455?472.
101
