Proceedings of the 2009 Named Entities Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 76?79,
Suntec, Singapore, 7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Phonological Context Approximation and Homophone Treatment 
for NEWS 2009 English-Chinese Transliteration Shared Task 
 
 
Oi Yee Kwong 
Department of Chinese, Translation and Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 
Olivia.Kwong@cityu.edu.hk 
 
  
 
Abstract 
This paper describes our systems participating 
in the NEWS 2009 Machine Transliteration 
Shared Task.  Two runs were submitted for the 
English-Chinese track.  The system for the 
standard run is based on graphemic approxi-
mation of local phonological context.  The one 
for the non-standard run is based on parallel 
modelling of sound and tone patterns for treat-
ing homophones in Chinese.  Official results 
show that both systems stand in the mid range 
amongst all participating systems. 
1 Introduction 
This paper describes our systems participating in 
the English-Chinese track of the NEWS 2009 
Machine Transliteration Shared Task. 
The apparently free combination of Chinese 
characters in names is not entirely ungoverned.  
There are no more than a few hundred Chinese 
characters which are used in names.  Moreover, 
beyond linguistic and phonetic properties, many 
social and cognitive factors are simultaneously 
influencing the naming process and superimpos-
ing on the surface graphemic correspondence. 
Our systems in the standard and non-standard 
runs aim at addressing two issues in English-
Chinese forward transliteration (referred to as 
E2C hereafter), namely graphemic ambiguity and 
homophones in Chinese respectively. 
By graphemic ambiguity, we refer to the mul-
tiple mappings between English segments and 
Chinese segments.  For example, the English 
segment ?ty? could be rendered as ? di4 as in 
Christy ???? ke4-li3-si1-di4, or ? tai4 as 
in Style ??? si1-tai4-er31.  Although direct 
                                                 
1 The transcriptions in this paper are in Hanyu Pinyin. 
orthographic mapping (e.g. Li et al, 2004) has 
been shown to work even more effectively than 
phoneme-based methods (e.g. Virga and Khu-
danpur, 2003), it is observed that phonological 
context plays an important role in resolving gra-
phemic ambiguity.  In the absence of an explicit 
phonemic representation of the source names, 
our GAP system, to be described in Section 4.1, 
attempts to approximate the local phonological 
context for a given segment by means of surface 
graphemic properties. 
An English name could be acceptably translit-
erated in various ways, e.g. ??? xi1-la1-li3, 
??? xi1-la1-li4, ??? xi1-la1-li4, as well as 
??? xi1-la1-rui3 are all possible translitera-
tions for Hilary.  Homophones are abundant in 
Chinese, as evident from the first three alterna-
tives above.  However, conventional translitera-
tion models often rely heavily on the distribution 
of the training data, which might preclude infre-
quent but similarly acceptable transliteration 
candidates.  Also, Chinese is a typical tonal lan-
guage.  The sound-tone combination is important 
in names.  Names which sound ?nice? are often 
preferred to those which sound ?monotonous?.  
Our SoToP system to be described in Section 4.2 
thus attempts to model sound and tone patterns in 
parallel, to deal with homophones more reasona-
bly despite possible skewed prior distributions. 
Related work will be briefly reviewed in Sec-
tion 2, and the datasets will be described in Sec-
tion 3.  The systems for both runs and their per-
formance will be reported in Section 4, followed 
by future work and conclusion in Section 5. 
2 Related Work 
There are basically two categories of work on 
machine transliteration.  First, various alignment 
models are used for acquiring transliteration 
76
lexicons from parallel corpora and other re-
sources (e.g. Kuo and Li, 2008).  Second, statis-
tical models are built for transliteration.  These 
models could be phoneme-based (e.g. Knight and 
Graehl, 1998), grapheme-based (e.g. Li et al, 
2004), hybrid (Oh and Choi, 2005), or based on 
phonetic (e.g. Tao et al, 2006) and semantic (e.g. 
Li et al, 2007) features. 
The core of our systems is based on Li et al?s 
(2004) Joint Source-Channel Model under the 
direct orthographic mapping framework, which 
skips the middle phonemic representation in 
conventional phoneme-based methods and mod-
els the segmentation and alignment preferences 
by means of contextual n-grams of the translit-
eration segment pairs (or token pairs in their ter-
minology).  A bigram model under their frame-
work is thus as follows: 
 
?
=
?? ><><?
><><><=
=
K
k
kkkk
kk
kk
ceceP
cececeP
ccceeePCEP
1
11
2211
2121
),|,(
),,...,,,,(
),...,,,,...,,(),(
 
 
where E refers to the English source name and C 
refers to the transliterated Chinese name.  With K 
segments aligned between E and C, ek and ck re-
fer to the kth English segment and its corre-
sponding Chinese segment respectively. 
3 Datasets 
The current study used the English-Chinese 
(EnCh) data provided by the shared task organis-
ers.  There are 31,961 English-Chinese name 
pairs in the training set, 2,896 English-Chinese 
name pairs in the development set, and another 
2,896 English names in the test set.  The Chinese 
transliterations basically correspond to Mandarin 
Chinese pronunciations of the English names, as 
used by media in Mainland China (Xinhua News 
Agency, 1992). 
The training and development data were 
manually cleaned up and aligned with respect to 
the correspondence between English segments 
and Chinese segments, e.g. Aa/l/to ?/?/?, and 
the pronunciations for the Chinese characters 
were automatically looked up. 
Based on all the unique English segments re-
sulting from manual alignment, all possible seg-
mentations of a test name were first obtained, 
and they were then ranked using a probabilistic 
score computed by: 
 
?
=
+??
K
k
kkkk sfcsPslcsPSScore
1
11 ))(|())(|()(  
 
where S is a segmentation sequence with K seg-
ments, sk is the kth segment in S, lc(sk-1) is the 
last character of segment sk-1 and fc(sk+1) is the 
first character of segment sk+1. 
4 System Description 
4.1 Standard Run ? GAP 
Our system for the standard run is called GAP, 
which stands for Graphemic Approximation of 
Phonological context. 
Although direct orthographic mapping has 
been shown to be an effective method, it is nev-
ertheless observed that phonological context sig-
nificantly contributes to the resolution of some 
graphemic ambiguity.  For example, the English 
segment ?le? was found to correspond to as 
many as 15 Chinese segments in the data, includ-
ing ? li4, ? le4, ? li4, ? er3, ? lai2, ? li3, 
etc.  When ?le? appears at the end of a name, all 
but a few cases are rendered as ? er3, e.g. Dale 
?? dai4-er3 and Dipasquale ????? di2-
pa4-si1-kui2-er3.  This is especially true when 
the previous character is ?a?.  On the contrary, 
when ?le? appears at the end of a name following 
an ?r?, it is more often rendered as ? li4 instead, 
e.g. Berle ?? bo2-li4.  On the other hand, ?le? 
at the beginning of name is often rendered as ? 
le4 or ? lai2, e.g. Lepke ??? lai2-pu3-ke4, 
except when it is followed by the vowel ?o?, 
where it is then often transliterated as ? li4, e.g. 
Leonor ??? li4-ao4-nuo4.  Such observation 
thus indicates two important points for E2C.  
First, the phonological context is useful as Eng-
lish graphemic segments could be ambiguous in 
terms of pronunciation, and the actual pronuncia-
tion often determines which Chinese segment is 
to be used.  Second, local contexts on both sides 
are important as they indicate the environment in 
which the segment is embedded, which might 
affect the way it is pronounced. 
GAP thus attempts to approximate local pho-
nological context by means of surface graphemic 
properties, making use of bigrams in both direc-
tions.  Since the phonological environment might 
be sufficiently represented by a neighbouring 
phoneme instead of a whole syllable, we ap-
proximate the phonological context with one 
character on both sides of a given English seg-
ment, irrespective of their corresponding Chinese 
77
segments.  Using single characters on both sides 
could also ensure that a small and consistent pa-
rameter space is maintained.  Hence, weighting 
the context on both sides equally, GAP assigns a 
score Score(E,C) to a transliteration candidate 
with K segment pairs as follows: 
 
?
=
+? ><><
K
k
kkkkkk efccePelcceP
1
11 ))(|,())(|,(  
 
where <ek,ck> is the kth English-Chinese segment 
pair, lc(ek-1) is the last character of segment ek-1 
and fc(ek+1) is the first character of segment ek+1. 
Taking the top 3 segmentation candidates, the 
transliteration candidates were generated by 
looking up the grapheme pairs obtained from 
manual alignment with frequency f ? 3.  If there 
is no grapheme pair above the threshold, all pairs 
below the threshold would be considered.  All 
combinations obtained were then subject to rank-
ing with Score(E,C) above. 
4.2 Non-standard Run ? SoToP 
The homophone problem is notorious in Chinese.  
As far as personal name transliteration is con-
cerned, unless there are standardised principles 
prescribed, the ?correctness? of transliterated 
names is not clear-cut at all.  As a tonal language, 
how a combination of characters sounds is also 
important in naming.  As in the example given in 
Section 1, one cannot really say any of the trans-
literations for Hilary is ?right? or ?wrong?, but 
perhaps only ?better? or ?worse?.  Hence naming 
is more of an art than a science, and automatic 
transliteration should avoid over-reliance on the 
training data and thus missing unlikely but good 
alternative candidates. 
Our system for the non-standard run, SoToP, 
thus aims at addressing this cognitive or percep-
tual aspect of transliteration beyond its linguistic 
and phonetic properties.  Instead of direct ortho-
graphic mapping, we use a Sound model (SoM) 
and a Tone model (ToM) in Parallel.  The SoToP 
architecture is shown in Figure 1. 
SoM basically assembles the homophones and 
captures the sound patterns in terms of a graph-
eme-phoneme mapping.  The operation of SoM 
is like GAP above, except that the <ek,ck> pairs 
are replaced by <ek,sok> pairs, where sok refers to 
the phonetic transcription in Hanyu Pinyin 
(without tone) for the kth Chinese segment in a 
candidate. 
ToM, on the other hand, captures the tone pat-
terns of transliteration, irrespective of the sound 
and the character choice.  Although English does 
not have tones, the intonation and stress of a syl-
lable may prompt for the usage of a Chinese 
character of a certain tone.  Chinese, on the other 
hand, is a tonal language.  The tone patterns are 
more cognitive in nature, as some combinations 
may just sound awkward for no apparent reason.  
Moreover, some sound-tone combinations might 
result in undesirable homophones, which are also 
avoided in names in general.  The operation of 
ToM is also like GAP, except that the <ek,ck> 
pairs are replaced by <ek,tok> pairs, where tok 
refers to the tone for the kth Chinese segment in 
a candidate. 
The Candidate Generator combines the top M 
candidates from ToM and top N candidates from 
SoM to generate character combinations by look-
ing up a pronunciation table.  The lookup table 
lists the homophones for each sound-tone com-
bination found in the data.  In the current study, 
both M and N were set to 3.  The generated can-
didates were then ranked by a simple bigram 
model based on the bigram probabilities of the 
Chinese segments. 
4.3 System Testing 
The two systems were tested on the NEWS de-
velopment data, containing 2,896 English names.  
System performance was measured by the fol-
lowing evaluation metrics: Word Accuracy in 
Top-1 (ACC), Fuzziness in Top-1 (Mean F-
score), Mean Reciprocal Rank (MRR), MAPref, 
MAP10, and MAPsys.  Detailed description of 
these metrics can be found in the NEWS shared 
task whitepaper (Li et al, 2009). 
Table 1 shows the system testing results on the 
development data.  The standard run, GAP, in 
general gives better results than the non-standard 
run, SoToP.  One possible reason is apart from 
the source name segmentation step, SoToP has 
more steps allowing error propagation as the 
mapping was done separately with sound and 
tone, whereas GAP directly maps English seg-
ments to Chinese segments at the graphemic 
level. 
  
Metric GAP SoToP 
ACC 0.645 0.597 
Mean F-score 0.860 0.836 
MRR 0.732 0.674 
MAPref 0.645 0.597 
MAP10 0.223 0.206 
MAPsys 0.225 0.335 
Table 1. System Testing Results 
78
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4 Official Results 
The two systems were trained on both the train-
ing data and development data together, and run 
on the test data.  The official results are shown in 
Table 2.  The performance of the two systems is 
in the mid range amongst all participating sys-
tems, including standard and non-standard runs.  
Despite the shortcoming and lower performance 
of SoToP, modelling the sound and tone patterns 
has its merits for handling homophones.  For ex-
ample, the expected transliteration for Mcgiveran, 
???? mai4-ji2-fu2-lun2, was ranked 6th by 
GAP but 1st by SoToP.  The segment ?ve? is 
much more likely rendered as ? fu1 than as ? 
fu2, but ToM in SoToP was able to capture the 
preferred tone pattern 4-2-2-2 in this case. 
 
Metric GAP SoToP 
ACC 0.621 0.587 
Mean F-score 0.852 0.834 
MRR 0.718 0.665 
MAPref 0.621 0.587 
MAP10 0.220 0.203 
MAPsys 0.222 0.330 
Table 2. Official Results on Test Data 
 
5 Future Work and Conclusion 
Thus we have reported on the two systems par-
ticipating in the NEWS shared task.  The stan-
dard run, GAP, relies on direct orthographic 
mapping and approximates local phonological 
context with neighbouring graphemes to help 
resolve graphemic ambiguity.  The non-standard 
run, SoToP, attempts to address the homophone 
issues in Chinese, by modelling the sound and 
tone patterns in parallel, and subsequently com-
bining them to generate transliteration candidates.  
In general GAP gives better results than SoToP, 
while both are in the mid range amongst all par-
ticipating systems.  Future work includes more 
error analysis and improving the accuracy of in-
dividual steps to minimise error propagation.  
The possible combination of the two methods is 
also worth further investigation. 
Acknowledgements 
The work described in this paper was substan-
tially supported by a grant from City University 
of Hong Kong (Project No. 7002203). 
References  
Knight, K. and Graehl, J. (1998)  Machine Translit-
eration.  Computational Linguistics, 24(4):599-612. 
Kuo, J-S. and Li, H. (2008)  Mining Transliterations 
from Web Query Results: An Incremental Ap-
proach.  In Proceedings of SIGHAN-6, Hyderabad, 
India, pp.16-23. 
Li, H., Zhang, M. and Su, J. (2004)  A Joint Source-
Channel Model for Machine Transliteration.  In 
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of ACL, 
Barcelona, Spain, pp.159-166. 
Li, H., Sim, K.C., Kuo, J-S. and Dong, M. (2007)  
Semantic Transliteration of Personal Names.  In 
Proceedings of 45th Annual Meeting of ACL, Pra-
gue, Czech Republic, pp.120-127. 
Li, H., Kumaran, A., Zhang, M. and Pervouchine, V. 
(2009)  Whitepaper of NEWS 2009 Machine 
Transliteration Shared Task.  In Proceedings of 
ACL-IJCNLP 2009 Named Entities Workshop 
(NEWS 2009), Singapore. 
Oh, J-H. and Choi, K-S. (2005)  An Ensemble of 
Grapheme and Phoneme for Machine Translitera-
tion.  In R. Dale et al (Eds.), Natural Language 
Processing ? IJCNLP 2005.  Springer, LNAI Vol. 
3651, pp.451-461. 
Tao, T., Yoon, S-Y., Fister, A., Sproat, R. and Zhai, C. 
(2006)  Unsupervised Named Entity Transliteration 
Using Temporal and Phonetic Correlation.  In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP 2006, Sydney, Australia, 
pp.250-257. 
Virga, P. and Khudanpur, S. (2003)  Transliteration of 
Proper Names in Cross-lingual Information Re-
trieval.  In Proceedings of the ACL2003 Workshop 
on Multilingual and Mixed-language Named Entity 
Recognition. 
Xinhua News Agency. (1992)  Chinese Translitera-
tion of Foreign Personal Names.  The Commercial 
Press. 
 
Sound Model (SoM) 
Tone Model (ToM) 
Candidate Generator English name 
Chinese 
candidates + 
Figure 1. The SoToP Architecture for E2C Transliteration 
79
