Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 291?294,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Towards Acquisition of Taxonomic Inference
Piroska Lendvai
Tilburg centre for Creative Computing
Tilburg University, Netherlands
p.lendvai@uvt.nl
Abstract
On a pilot corpus of Dutch medical encyclopedia texts, we focus
on the mechanism of taxonomic inference that involves the extraction
of co-hyponym terms, and the taxonomic or domain-specific lexico-
semantic relation in the form of a textual hypothesis, which coordinates
these. An initial set of inference elements can be acquired by syntactic
and semantic alignment, additionally driven by document structure.
From the terms and the related hypothesis we can harvest lexical pat-
terns, which are linked to annotated domain concepts. The aim of the
process is to learn inference patterns and apply the system to short
as well as unstructured documents where fewer or no discourse-level
cues are available, in order to acquire new co-hyponyms linked to their
coordinating term via a specified relation.
1 Introduction
It is shown in several studies that thematic coherence has an impact on doc-
ument structure, hence identifying discourse relations can facilitate access to
semantic content; for an overview of relevant issues in the field of discourse
parsing see [2]. In the case of stylistically guided documents, pressure for
brevity and clarity is superimposed on the creative interplay between form
and factual content of narration. An encyclopedia entry often provides a
definition of an entity of which several subtypes exist; these need to be sep-
arately treated in the entry. However, the use of tables, charts, bulleted
lists and other visual means that are inherently well suited for representing
hierarchically structured data is traditionally not favourable in dominantly
textual media that need to remedy this by providing lexical, syntactic, and
structural cues to the reader.
291
Linguistic constructions that are employed to convey structured informa-
tion can be macro-propositions, for example ?pre-announcements? of certain
subtopics that are going to be addressed in the document, such as There ex-
ists an acute and a chronic form of gallbladder disease, or recurring lexical
and syntactic elements (?chains?) across the passages treating the subtopics,
as in the excerpt from the encyclopedia entry on Digestive tract:
The first organ is the tongue which is only present in the phylum Chordata.
The second organ is the esophagus. ... The third organ is the stomach. ...
Such constructions serve to alleviate the readers? cognitive load required to
make semantic inference about hierarchical and semantic relations (e.g., that
tongue, esophagus, and stomach are co-hyponyms of the hypernym digestive
tract, and all three are organs of it). Most importantly, many encyclopedia
articles treating co-hyponyms do not feature any of these linguistic means,
but operate by activating real-world knowledge, thus it is an empirical re-
search issue how to trace back such information.
While extracting hyponym-hypernym pairs is a popular topic in the lit-
erature, initiated by the seminal paper of [1], identifying specific types of
hypernymy relations has only been addressed for a limited set of general
concepts [3]. We target the detection of domain-specific lexio-semantic rela-
tions (sometimes broadly called ?associative?) together with traditional hy-
pernymy and meronymy relations, by modelling it as a taxonomy inference
phenomenon. Representing these relations between domain-specific entities
can be a first step in the construction of an ontological model, which is an
important asset of knowledge-based applications.
Taxonomy inference consists of an n-tuple of terms, two or more of them
linked by a coordinate relation, where each of these is linked by either hyper-
nymy or associative relation to a common coordinating term. The relation
between mother and child node is governed by a certain semantic property
of the parent node, which is in the case of meronymy and hypernymy best
expressed by a noun (e.g. in the medical domain method, phase, form),
or in the case of domain-specific relatedness by a verb (such as occurs in or
attacks). The coordinating relation can typically be induced from factual do-
main knowledge but often remains implicit in the text: while it is non-trivial
to retrieve it, especially for the co-hyponymic terms, based on a single docu-
ment and/or lexico-semantic resources, it is an extremely productive general
mechanism of cognitive inference.
292
2 Data
Our pilot corpus comprises 108 entries from the Dutch Spectrum Medical
Encyclopedia
1
, these were obtained based on identifying repetitive occur-
rences of 13 topic labels manually assigned to layout-based sections (treatment,
symptoms, cause, etc.) within an entry. Token-level annotation was also
manual, using 12 coarse-grained domain concepts such as body part, duration,
disease, disease symptom, microorganism, method of diagnosis.
We illustrate the complexity of phenomena underlying taxonomy infer-
ence by the following entry (the document and section titles are set in italics).
Jaundice, or icterus, is a condition whereby a yellowish discoloration of the
skin, the mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes appears. This is caused
by increased levels of the gall pigment bilirubin in the blood serum. ...
Adults
Adults can develop jaundice by three means. By an interruption to the
drainage of bile in the biliary system (e.g. due to a gallstone or a tumor).
... By diseases of the liver (e.g. hepatitis). The liver?s ability to metabolise
and excrete bilirubin is reduced, leading to a buildup in the blood. ... By
an increased rate of bilirubine production. ...
Babies
Babies can develop a sort of jaundice (icterus neonatorum) shortly after
birth as a consequence of relatively increased breakdown of red blood cells
... .
In this entry, the onsets of the two subsections exhibit some syntactic
and lexical parallelism; after establishing their similarity, our aim is to lo-
cate the relation between the two main terms (adults and babies) in these
sections. Spotting lexical overlap and using wildcards yields the expression
?X can develop Y?, and we hypothesise that the verb phrase instantiates the
domain-specific lexico-semantic relation shared by the coordinate terms in
connection to the term jaundice.
Note that this entry does not contain a separate passage of text that
can be designated as the hypothesis of the above relation, thus we fall back
on the lexical string (i.e., the VP) when extracting the relation. Also note
that taxonomy inference can be embedded: we observe syntactic similarity
among three sentences in the Adults subsection. Their coordinating hyper-
nymy relation is literally expressed by the very first sentence of the section,
yielding the pattern ?X can develop Y by [NUM] means?, this sentence is
1
http://www.winklerprins.com/linkpages/Algemenenaslag.html
293
thus regarded as the inference hypothesis of the three sentences featuring
the overlapping onsets.
3 Goals and Evaluation
Our goal is to investigate if we can bootstrap the linking of coordinate terms
via a specific type of relation, inferrable from the given document collection.
Next to measuring the utility of sentence alignment based on standard, au-
tomatically obtained syntactic (dependency, part-of-speech) and semantic
(cosine, querying lexical semantic databases) similarity cues as well as dis-
course markers (anaphore) for this task, our focus is on the role lexical
patterns can play in this process. We test the impact of two factors on har-
vesting lexical patterns as inference elements: (a) syntactic and semantic
segmentation: enriching these with dependency as well as semantic roles,
and (b) clustering the patterns according to domain concepts.
The results are manually evaluated, preparing training data for further
bootstrapping. The system is eventually applied to the full IMIX corpus of
Dutch medical encyclopedia texts
2
to process single-section (i.e., unstruc-
tured) documents and automatically detect and link coordinate terms by
domain-specific relations in these new documents. The obtained terms are
matched to available Dutch terminological resources in the medical domain
3
.
References
[1] M. Hearst. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora.
In Proc. of COLING, pages 539?545, 1992.
[2] M-P. Pe?ry-Woodley and D. Scott. Introduction to the special issue on
computational approaches to discourse and document structure. Trait-
ment Automatique des Langues, 47(2), 2006.
[3] M. Thelen and E. Riloff. A bootstrapping method for learning semantic
lexicons using extraction pattern contexts. In Proc. of ACL, 2002.
2
http://ilk.uvt.nl/imix
3
http://taalunieversum.org/taal/terminologie/medisch/
294
