Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 162?170,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Bridging the Gap between Domain-Oriented and
Linguistically-Oriented Semantics
Sumire Uematsu Jin-Dong Kim Jun?ich Tsujii
Department of Computer Science
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku Tokyo 113-0033 Japan
{uematsu,jdkim,tsujii}@is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
This paper compares domain-oriented and
linguistically-oriented semantics, based on the
GENIA event corpus and FrameNet. While
the domain-oriented semantic structures are
direct targets of Text Mining (TM), their ex-
traction from text is not straghtforward due
to the diversity of linguistic expressions. The
extraction of linguistically-oriented semactics
is more straghtforward, and has been studied
independentely of specific domains. In or-
der to find a use of the domain-independent
research achievements for TM, we aim at
linking classes of the two types of seman-
tics. The classes were connected by analyz-
ing linguistically-oriented semantics of the ex-
pressions that mention one biological class.
With the obtained relationship between the
classes, we discuss a link between TM and
linguistically-oriented semantics.
1 Introduction
This paper compares the linguistically-oriented and
domain-oriented semantics of the GENIA event cor-
pus, and suggests a factor for utilizing NLP tech-
niques for Text Mining (TM) in the bio-medical do-
main.
The increasing number of scientific articles in the
bio-medical domain has contributed in drawing con-
siderable attention to NLP-based TM. An impor-
tant step in NLP-based TM is obtaining the domain-
oriented semantics of sentences, as shown at the bot-
tom of figure 1. The BioInfer (Pyysalo et al, 2007)
and the GENIA event corpus (Kim et al, 2008) pro-
vide annotations of such semantic structures on col-
lections of bio-medical articles. Domain-oriented
semantic structures are valuable assets because their
representation suits information needs in the do-
main; however, the extraction of such structures is
difficult due to the large gap between the text and
these structures.
On the other hand, the extraction of linguistically-
oriented semantics from text has long been studied
in computational linguistics, and has recently been
formalized as Semantic Role Labeling (Gildea and
Jurafsky, 2002), and semantic structure extraction
(Baker et al, 2007)(Surdeanu et al, 2008). Seman-
tic structures in such tasks are exemplified in the
middle of figure 1. The linguistically-oriented se-
mantic structures are easier to extract, although the
information is not practical to the domain.
We aim at relating linguistically-oriented frames
of semantics with domain-oriented classes, thus
making a step forward in utilizing the computa-
tional linguistic resources for the bio-medical TM.
Of all the differences in the two type of seman-
tics, we focused on the fact that the former frames
are more sensitive to the perspective imposed by
the sentence writer. In the right hand-side exam-
ple of figure 1, the linguistically-oriented structure
treats PBMC, a cell entity, as an agent; however the
bio-medical structure reflects the scientific view that
there are no agents, objects acting with intention, in
bio-molecular phenomena.
As a preliminary investigation, we selected
four representative classes of bio-molecular phe-
nomena; Localization, Binding, Cell adhesion,
and Gene expression, and investigated domain-
oriented annotations for the classes in the GENIA
162
?, whereas in many other cell types, NF-kappa B TRANSLOCATES from cytosol to nucleus as a result of ?
?, both C3a and C3a(desArg) were found to enhance IL-6 RELEASE by PBMC in a dose-dependent manner.
Natural?language
FrameNet?expression?(Linguis?ally?oriented?seman?s) 
Class:?????Mo?n?Theme:?NF?kappa?B?Source:?from?cytosol?Goal:?????to?nucleus?
Class:????Releasing?Theme:?IL?6?Agent:???PBMC?
GENIA?expression?(Biologically?oriented?seman?s) 
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????NF?kappa?B?FromLoc:?cytosol?ToLoc:??????nucleus?
Theme:????IL?6?FromLoc:?(inside?of)?PMBC?ToLoc:??????(outside?of)?PMBC?
Figure 1: A comparison of the linguistically-oriented and biologically-
oriented structure of semantics
event corpus. Expressions mentioning the four
classes were examined and manually classified into
linguistically-oriented frames, represented by those
defined in FrameNet (Baker et al, 1998). FN frames
associated to a bio-molecular event class constitute a
list of possible perspectives in mentioning phenom-
ena of the class.
The rest of this paper is structured in the fol-
lowing way: Section 2 reviews the existing work
on semantic structures and expression varieties in
the bio-medical domain, and provides a compari-
son to our work. In section 3, we describe the GE-
NIA event corpus, and the FrameNet frames used as
linguistically-oriented classes in our investigation.
Sections 4 and 5 explain the methods and results of
the corpus investigation; in particular the sections in-
vestigate how the linguistic frames were associated
to the domain-oriented classes of semantics. Finally,
we provide discussion and conclusion in section 6
and 7.
2 Related Work
Existing work on semantics approached domain-
oriented semantic structures from linguistically-
oriented semantics. In contrast, our approach uses
domain-oriented semantics to find the linguistic se-
mantics that represent them. We believe that the two
different approaches could complement each other.
The PASbio(Wattarujeekrit et al, 2004) pro-
poses Predicate Argument Structures (PASs), a type
of linguistically-oriented semantic structures, for
domain-specific lexical items, based on PASs de-
fined in PropBank(Wattarujeekrit et al, 2004) and
NomBank(Meyers et al, 2004). The PASs are de-
fined per lexical item, and is therefore distinct from a
biologically-oriented representation of events. (Co-
hen et al, 2008) investigated syntactic alternations
of verbs and their nominalized forms which oc-
curred in the PennBioIE corpus(Kulick et al, 2004),
whilst keeping PASs of the PASBio in their minds.
The BioFrameNet(Dolbey et al, 2006) is an at-
tempt to extend the FrameNet with specific frames
to the bio-medical domain, and to apply the frames
to corpus annotation. Our attempts were similar, in
that both were: 1) utilizing the FN frames or their
extensions to classify mentions of biological events,
and 2) relating the frames and the FEs (roles of par-
ticipants) with classes in domain ontologies; e.g. the
Gene Ontology(Ashburner et al, 2000).
As far as the authors know, it is the first at-
tempt to explicitly address the problem of linking
linguistically-oriented and domain-oriented frames
of semantics. However, it has been indirectly stud-
ied through works on TM or Relation Extraction
using linguistically-oriented semantic structures as
features, such as in the case with (Harabagiu et al,
2005).
3 Corpora
?We used domain-oriented annotations of the GE-
NIA event corpus and linguistically-oriented frames
defined in FrameNet (FN), to link domain-oriented
and linguistically-oriented frames of semantics. We
briefly describe these resources next.
163
Mo?n 
Releasing
Ge?g 
A?ching 
Being_located
Becoming
Event StateGENIA?event
Biological_process
Viral_life_cycle
Cellular_process
Physiological_process
Cell_adhesion
Cell_communica?n 
Localiza?n 
Binding
Metabolism
DNA_metabolism
Gene_expression
Crea?g 
Being_a?ched 
Figure 2: The resulting relationship between linguistically-oriented and
biologically-oriented frames.
The GENIA event corpus consists of 1,000 Med-
line abstracts; that is, 9,372 sentences annotated
with domain-oriented semantic structures. The an-
notation was completed for all mentions of biolog-
ical events, and resulted in 6,114 identified events.
Examples of annotated event structures are shown at
the bottom of figure 1. Each structure has attributes
type and themes, which respectively show the bio-
logical class of the mentioned event and phrases ex-
pressing the event participants. The event classes are
defined based on the terms in the Gene Ontology.
For example, the Localization class in the GENIA
event corpus is defined as an equivalent of the GO
term Localization (GO0051179). The event classi-
fications used in the corpus are depicted in the left
hand-side of figure 2. Arrows in the figure depict
the inheritance relations defined in the GENIA event
ontology. For instance, the Localization class is de-
fined as a type of Physiological process. Each of
the annotated structures has additional attributes that
point phrases that the annotator of the structure used
as a clue. Among the attributes, the clueType at-
tribute shows a clue phrase to the event class. In our
investigation, the attribute was treated as a predicate,
or an equivalent of the lexical unit in the FN.
FN is a network of frames that are are
linguistically-oriented classifications of semantics.
A FN frame is defined as ?a script-like conceptual
structure that describes a particular type of situation,
object, or event and the participants and proposi-
tions involved in it,? and is associated with words,
or lexical units, evoking the frame. For instance, the
verbs move, go and fly are lexical units of the Mo-
tion frame, and they share the same semantic struc-
ture. Each FN frame has annotation examples form-
ing an attestation of semantic overlap between the
lexical units. Additionally, FN defines several types
of frame-frame relations; e.g. inheritance, prece-
dence, subframe, etc. The right hand-side of figure
2 shows some FN frames and inheritance relation-
ships between them. The FN provides linguistically-
oriented classifications of event mentions based on
surface expressions, and also shows abstract rela-
tions between the frames.
4 Additional Annotation
Our aim is to link linguistically-oriented and
domain-oriented frames of the bio-medical text?s se-
mantics. A major problem in this task was that there
were no annotated corpora with both types of se-
mantic structures. Therefore, we decided to concen-
trate on the mentions of a few classes of biological
phenomena, and to annotate samples of the mentions
with linguistically-oriented structures conforming to
164
Freq. Keyword Frame
693 binding Attaching
247 bind Attaching
125 interaction Attaching, Being attached
120 complex ?
99 bound Attaching, Being attached
91 interact Attaching, Being attached
61 form Becoming
52 crosslink Attaching
46 formation Becoming
Table 1: The most frequent keywords of the Binding class,
mentioned 2,006 times in total.
Freq. Keyword Frame
131 translocation Motion
81 secretion Releasing
75 release Releasing
32 secrete Releasing
25 mobilization Motion
23 localization Being located
20 uptake Getting
18 translocate Motion
15 expression Creating
9 present Being located
Table 2: The most frequent keywords of the Localization
class, mentioned 582 times in total.
the FrameNet annotations.
The following provides the annotation proce-
dures. First, we collected linguistic expressions that
mention each of the selected GENIA event classes
from the GENIA event corpus. We then sampled
and annotated them with their linguistically-oriented
semantics which conformed to the FrameNet.
4.1 Target Classes and Keywords
We concentrated mainly on the mentions of four GE-
NIA classes; Localization, Binding, Cell adhesion,
and Gene expression. Gene expression, Binding,
and Localization are three of the most frequent four
classes in the GENIA event corpus.1 Binding and
Localization are the two most primitive molecular
events. The Cell adhesion class was included as a
comparison for the Binding class.
Counting keywords for mentioning events was
close to automatic. We extracted phrases pointed
by a clueType attribute from each event structure.
We then tokenized the phrases, performed a simple
stemming on the tokens, and counted the resulting
words. The stemming process simply replaced each
inflected word to its stem by consulting a small list
of inflected words with their stems. Manual work
was only used in making the small list.
4.2 FN Annotation
A major challenge encountered in annotating a sam-
pled expression with a semantic structure conform-
ing to FN, was in the assignment of a FN frame to
1Except correlation and regulation classes which express re-
lational information rather than events.
the mention. Our decision was based on the follow-
ing four points: 1) keywords used in the mention, 2)
description of FN frames, 3) syntactic positions of
the event participants, and 4) frame-frame relations.
The first indicates that a FN frame became a can-
didate frame for the mention, if the keyword in the
mention is a lexical unit of the FN frame. FN frames
and their lexical units could be easily checked by
consulting the FN dictionary. If there were no en-
tries for the keyword in the dictionary, synonyms or
words in the keyword?s definition were used. For ex-
ample, the verb translocate has no entries in the FN
dictionary, and the frames for verbs such as move
were used instead.
For the second point, we discarded FN frames that
are either evoked by a completely different sense of
the keyword, or too specific of a non-biological sit-
uations.
Before we assigned a FN frame to each mention,
we manually examined the syntactic positions of all
event participants present in the sampled GENIA
mentions. Combinations of the syntactic position
and event participants observed for a keyword were
compared with sample annotations of the candidate
FN frames.
We checked frame-frame relations between the
candidate frames, because they can be regarded
as evidence that shows that the conception of the
frames is related. For our aim, it was sufficient to
choose a set of frames that best describes the differ-
ent perspectives for mentioning one type of molecu-
lar phenomena. Even when some keywords seemed
to be dissimilar in the three points mentioned above,
165
Freq. Keyword Frame
98 adhesion Being attached
19 adherence Being attached
16 interaction Being attached, Attaching
15 binding Attaching
8 adherent Being attached
Table 3: The most frequent keywords of the Cell adhesion
class, mentioned 193 times in total.
Freq. Keyword Frame
1513 expression Creating
357 express Creating
239 production Creating
71 overexpression Creating
69 produce Creating
62 synthesis Creating
Table 4: The most frequent keywords of the
Gene expression class, mentioned 2,769 times in
total.
a single frame could be assigned to them if it was
quite clear that they shared a similar perspective.
The frame-frame relations provided in the FN were
treated as clues to the similarity.
Keywords frequently used in each event class are
listed in tables 1, 2, 3, and 4, with the final assign-
ment of FN frames to each keyword.
5 Analysis
After the linguistic annotation was performed, we
compared the GENIA event structure and the frame
structure of each sampled expression, and obtained
relations of the GENIA class-FN frame and GE-
NIA slot-FN participant. The resulting relationships
between FN frames and the four GENIA classes
demonstrate a gap between linguistically-oriented
and domain-oriented classification of events, as
shown in figure 2.
The relations can be explained by decomposing it
into two cases: 1) 1-to-n mappings, and 2) n-to-1
mappings. The n-to-n mapping from GENIA to FN
can then be regarded as a mix of the two cases. In
the following sections, the two cases are described
in detail. Further, we show conversion examples of
a FN structure to a GENIA event structure, which
were supported by the obtained GENIA participant-
FN participant relations.
5.1 1-to-N Mapping: Different Perspectives on
the Same Phenomena
A 1-to-n mapping from GENIA to FN can be ex-
plained as the case where the same molecular phe-
nomena are expressed from different perspectives.
5.1.1 Binding Expressed in Multiple frames
The Binding class in GENIA is defined as
?the selective, often stoichiometric interaction of a
molecule with one or more specific sites on an-
other molecule.? We associated the class with three
frames, and two frames of the three, Attaching and
Becoming frames, represent different perspectives
for mentioning the class. The Being attached frame
shares the same conception as Attaching, but ex-
presses states instead of events. See table 1 for key-
words of the class, and the frames assigned to the
words.
Attaching: In the perspective represented by this
frame, a binding phenomenon was recognized as a
event in which protein molecules were simply at-
tached to one another.
[The 3?-CAGGTG E-boxItem] could BIND
[USF proteinsGoal], ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 10037751, Event IDs E11, E12, E13)
Becoming: In the perspective represented by this
frame, a product of a binding event was treated, on
the surface, as a different entity from the original
parts.
When activated, [glucocorticoid recep-
torsEntity] FORM [a dimerFinal category] ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 10191934, Event ID E5)
This type of expression was possible because a prod-
uct of a binding often obtains a different function-
ality, and can be treated as a different type of en-
tity. Note that this frame was not associated with the
Cell adhesion class described in section 5.2.
166
A CB?
Figure 3: A schematic figure of translocation.
Being attached: Annotators recognized a protein
binding event from the sentence below, which basi-
cally mentions a state of the NF-kB.
In T cells and T cell lines, [NF-kBItem]
is BOUND [to a cytoplasmic proteic in-
hibitor, the IkBGoal].
(PubMed ID 1958222, Event ID E2, E102)
Although this type of expression shares a similar
point of view with the Attaching frame, we classi-
fied these expressions into the Being attached frame
in order to demonstrate cases in which a prerequisite
Binding event was inferred from a state.
5.1.2 Translocation Expressed in Multiple
Frames
The Localization class in the GENIA corpus is de-
fined as a class for ?any process by which a cell, a
substance, or a cellular entity, such as a protein com-
plex or organelle, is transported to, and/or main-
tained in a specific location.? Sampled expressions
of the class separated into mentions of a process, by
which an entity was transported to a specific loca-
tion, and those of the process in which an entity was
maintained in a specific location. We concentrate on
the former in this section, and describe the latter in
section 5.1.3.
We associated the frames: Motion, Releasing and
Getting with what we call translocation events, or
Localization events in which an entity was trans-
ported to a specific location. Figure 3 provides a
schematic representation of a translocation event.
Each of the three frames had a different perspective
in expressing the translocations. See table 2 for key-
words of the frames.
Motion: This group consists of expressions cen-
tered on the translocated entities of the translocation
- namely, B in the figure 3.
[NK cell NFATTheme] ? ? ? MIGRATES [to
the nucleusGoal] upon stimulation,? ? ?
(PubMed ID 7650486, Event ID E33)
Activation of T lymphocytes ? ? ? results
in TRANSLOCATION [of the transcrip-
tion factors NF-kappa B, AP-1, NFAT, and
STATTheme] [from the cytoplasmSource] [into
the nucleusGoal].
(PubMed ID 9834092, Event ID E67)
These expressions are similar to those of the Motion
frame in the FN.
[Her footTheme] MOVED [from the
brakeSource] [to the acceleratorGoal] and the
car glided forward.
Releasing: This group consists of expressions
centered on a starting point of the translocation -
namely, A in the figure 3.
In [unstimulated cells whichAgent] do not
SECRETE [IL-2Theme], only Sp1 binds to
this region, ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 7673240, Event ID E13)
Activation of NF-kappaB is thought to
be required for [cytokineTheme] RELEASE
[from LPS-responsive cellsAgent], ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 1007564, Event ID E14)
The verbal keywords occurred as a transitive in
most cases, and had subjects and objects that ex-
pressed starting points and entities in the transloca-
tions. This is a typical syntactic pattern of the Re-
leasing frame, if we regarded an Agent in the FN as
a starting point of the movement of a Theme.
[The policeAgent] RELEASED [the sus-
pectTheme].
Getting: This group consists of expressions cen-
tered on a goal point of the translocation - namely,
C in figure 3. We assumed that this group has an
opposite point of view from the Releasing frame.
The noun uptake was found to be a keyword in this
group.
The integral membrane ? ? ? appears to play
a physiological role in binding and UP-
TAKE [of Ox LDLTheme] [by monocyte-
macrophagesRecipient], ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 9285527, Event ID E10)
167
To summarize, we observed three groups of ex-
pressions that mention translocation events, and
each group represented different perspectives to
mention the events. Each of the groups and the as-
sociated frame seemed similar, in that they shared
similar keywords and possible syntactic positions to
express the event participant.
5.1.3 Localization excluding Translocation
Expressed in Multiple Frames
Localization events excluding translocations were
expressed in the Being located and Creating frames.
Being located: This group consists of expressions
that simply mention an entity in a specific location.
? ? ? [recombinant NFAT1Theme] LOCAL-
IZES [in the cytoplasm of transiently
transfected T cellsLocation] ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 8668213, Event ID E23)
Creating: A noun expression was observed to be
used by instances mentioning the presence of pro-
teins.
horbol esters are required to induce
[AIM/CD69Created entity] Cell-surface EX-
PRESSION as well as ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 1545132, Event ID E12)
Expressions in these cases indicate an abbrevi-
ation for gene expression, which is a event of
Gene expression class. This type of overlap be-
tween the Localization and Gene expression is ex-
plained in section 5.2.2
5.2 N-to-1 Mapping: Same Conception for
Different Molecular Phenomenon
In contrast to the cases described in section 5.1, the
same conception could be applied to different bio-
logical phenomena.
5.2.1 Shared Conception for Binding and
Cell adhesion
Molecular events classified into Binding and
Cell adhesion shared the conception that two enti-
ties were attached to each other. However, types of
the entities involved are different. They are: the pro-
tein molecule in Binding, and cell in Cell adhesion.
CD36 is a cell surface glycoprotein
? ? ?, which INTERACTS with throm-
bospondin, ? ? ?, and erythrocytes para-
sitized with Plasmodium falciparum.
In the sentence above, an event involving a cell sur-
face glycoprotein and thrombospondin was recog-
nized as a Binding, whereas an event involving a cell
surface glycoprotein and erythrocytes was classified
as a Cell adhesion event.
5.2.2 Shared Expressions of Localization and
Gene expression
Both Localization and Gene expression classes
are connected with the Creating frame. Some
Localization events have a dependency on the
Gene expression event. Protein molecules are made
in events classified into the Gene expression class.
[Th1 cellsCreator] PRODUCE [IL-2 and
IFN-gammaCreated entity], ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 10226884, Event ID E11, E12)
The molecules are then translocated somewhere.
Consequently, localized protein molecules might in-
dicate a Gene expression event, and a phrase ?pro-
tein expression? was occasionally recognized as
mentioning a Localization.
horbol esters are required to induce
[AIM/CD69Created entity] cell-surface EX-
PRESSION as well as ? ? ?
(PubMed ID 1545132, Event ID E12)
5.3 Conversion of FN Structures to GENIA
Events
During the investigation, we compared participant
slots of GENIA and FN structures, in addition to the
structures themselves. Figures 4 and 5 depict con-
version examples from a FN structure and its par-
ticipants to a GENIA structure, with the domain-
oriented type of each participant entity. The conver-
sions were supported by samples, and need quanti-
tative evaluation.
6 Discussion
By annotating sentences of the GENIA event corpus
with semantic structures conforming to FrameNet,
we explicitly compared linguistically-oriented and
168
Class:????Releasing?Theme:?Protein?Agent:???Cell?
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?(inside?of)?Cell?ToLoc:??????(outside?of)?Cell?
Class:?A?ching?Item:?Protein?A?Goal:?Protein?B?
Class:??Binding?Theme:?Protein?A,?protein?B?
FrameNet?expression
Class:????Mo?n?Theme:?Protein?Source:?Cell?loca?n?A?Goal:?????Cell?loca?n?B?
GENIA?expression
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?Cell?loca?n?A?ToLoc:??????Cell?loca?n?B?
Class:????Ge?g?Theme:?Protein?Recipient:?Cell?
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?(outside?of)?Cell?ToLoc:??????(inside?of)?Cell?
FrameNet?expression
GENIA?expression
Class:?Becoming?En?y:????????????????? Proteins?Final_category:?Pro?n_complex ?
Class:??Binding?Theme:?Proteins?
Figure 4: FN-to-GENIA conversions for Binding
Class:????Releasing?Theme:?Protein?Agent:???Cell?
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?(inside?of)?Cell?ToLoc:??????(outside?of)?Cell?
Class:?A?ching?Item:?Protein?A?Goal:?Protein?B?
Class:??Binding?Theme:?Protein?A,?protein?B?
FrameNet?expression
Class:????Mo?n?Theme:?Protein?Source:?Cell?loca?n?A?Goal:?????Cell?loca?n?B?
GENIA?expression
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?Cell?loca?n?A?ToLoc:??????Cell?loca?n?B?
Class:????Ge?g?Theme:?Protein?Recipient:?Cell?
Class:???????Localiza?n?Theme:????Protein?FromLoc:?(outside?of)?Cell?ToLoc:??????(inside?of)?Cell?
FrameNet?expression
GENIA?expression
Class:?Becoming?En?y:????????????????? Proteins?Final_category:?Pro?n_complex ?
Class:??Binding?Theme:?Proteins?
Figure 5: FN-to-GENIA conversions for Localization.
domain-oriented semantics of the bio-molecular ar-
ticles. Our preliminary result illustrates the gap be-
tween the two type of semantics, and a relationship
between them. We discuss development of a Text
Mining (TM) system, in association with the extrac-
tion of linguistically-oriented semantics, which has
been studied independently of TM.
First, our result would show that TM involves at
least two qualitatively different tasks. One task is
related to our results; that is, recognizing equiva-
lent events which are expressed from different per-
spectives, and hence expressed by using different
linguistic frames, and at the same time distinguish-
ing event mentions which share the same linguistic
frame but belong to different domain classes. Our
investigation indicates that this task is mainly depen-
dent on domain knowledge and how a phenomenon
can be conceptualized. Another task of TM is the ex-
traction of linguistically-oriented semantics, which
basically maps various syntactic realizations to the
shared structures. In order to develop a TM system,
we need to solve the two difficult tasks.
Second, TM could benefit from linguistically-
oriented frames by using them as an intermediat-
ing layer between text and domain-oriented infor-
mation. The domain-oriented semantic structures,
which is a target of TM, are inevitably dependent
on the domain. On the other hand, the extraction of
linguistically-oriented semantics from text is less de-
pendent. Therefore, using the linguistically-oriented
structure could be favorable to domain portability of
a TM system.
Our aim was explicitly linking linguistically-
oriented and domain-oriented semantics of the bio-
molecular articles, and the preliminary result show
the possibility of the extraction of linguistically-
oriented semantics contributing to TM. Further in-
v tigation of the relationship would be a important
step forward for TM in the bio-molecular domain.
Our investigation was preliminary. For exam-
ple, conversions from FN structures to GENIA event
structures, depicted in figures 4 and 5, were based
on manual investigation. Further, they were attested
by limited samples in the corpus. For our results to
contribute to a TM system, evaluation of the conver-
sions and automatic extraction of such conversions
must be considered.
7 Conclusion
This paper presents a relationship of domain-
oriented and linguistically-oriented frames of se-
mantics, obtained by an investigation of the GE-
NIA event corpus. In the investigation, we anno-
tated sample sentences from the GENIA event cor-
pus with linguistically-oriented semantic structures
as those of FrameNet, and compared them with
domain-oriented semantic annotations that the cor-
pus originally possesses. The resulting relations
between the domain-oriented and linguistically-
oriented frames suggest that mentions of a bio-
logical phenomenon could be realized in a num-
ber of linguistically-oriented frames, and that
the linguistically-oriented frames represent possible
perspectives in mentioning the phenomenon. The
resulting relations would illustrate a challenge in
developing a Text Mining system, and would indi-
cate importance of linguistically-oriented frames as
an intermediating layer between text and domain-
oriented information. Our future plan includes
evaluation of our conversions from a linguistically-
oriented to a domain-oriented structure, and auto-
matic extraction of such conversions.
169
References
M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein,
H. Butler, J. M. Cherry, A. P. Davis, K. Dolinski, S. S.
Dwight, J. T. Eppig, M. A. Harris, D. P. Hill, L. Issel-
Tarver, A. Kasarskis, S. Lewis, J. C. Matese, J. E.
Richardson, M. Ringwald, G. M. Rubin, and G. Sher-
lock. 2000. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of
biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nat Genet,
25(1):25?29, May.
Collin F. Baker, Charles J. Fillmore, and John B. Lowe.
1998. The berkeley framenet project. In Proceedings
of the 17th international conference on Computational
linguistics, pages 86?90, Morristown, NJ, USA. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Collin Baker, Michael Ellsworth, and Katrin Erk. 2007.
Semeval-2007 task 19: Frame semantic structure ex-
traction. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluations (SemEval-2007),
pages 99?104, Prague, Czech Republic, June. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
K. Bretonnel Cohen, Martha Palmer, and Lawrence
Hunter. 2008. Nominalization and alternations in
biomedical language. PLoS ONE, 3(9):e3158, 09.
Andrew Dolbey, Michael Ellsworth, and Jan Scheffczyk.
2006. Bioframenet: A domain-specific framenet
extension with links to biomedical ontologies. In
Proceedings of the Second International Workshop
on Formal Biomedical Knowledge Representation:
?Biomedical Ontology in Action? (KR-MED 2006),
volume 222 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings. CEUR-
WS.org, Nov.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):245?288.
Sanda M. Harabagiu, Cosmin Adrian Bejan, and Paul
Morarescu. 2005. Shallow semantics for relation
extraction. In IJCAI-05, Proceedings of the Nine-
teenth International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence, pages 1061?1066.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, and Jun?ichi Tsujii. 2008.
Corpus annotation for mining biomedical events from
literature. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(1):10.
Seth Kulick, Ann Bies, Mark Liberman, Mark Man-
del, Ryan McDonald, Martha Palmer, Andrew Schein,
Lyle Ungar, Scott Winters, and Pete White. 2004.
Integrated annotation for biomedical information ex-
traction. In Lynette Hirschman and James Puste-
jovsky, editors, HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Bi-
oLINK 2004, Linking Biological Literature, Ontolo-
gies and Databases, pages 61?68, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA, May 6. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
A. Meyers, R. Reeves, C. Macleod, R. Szekely, V. Zielin-
ska, B. Young, and R. Grishman. 2004. The nombank
project: An interim report. In A. Meyers, editor, HLT-
NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annota-
tion, pages 24?31, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, May
2 - May 7. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sampo Pyysalo, Filip Ginter, Juho Heimonen, Jari
Bjorne, Jorma Boberg, Jouni Jarvinen, and Tapio
Salakoski. 2007. Bioinfer: a corpus for information
extraction in the biomedical domain. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 8(1):50.
Mihai Surdeanu, Richard Johansson, Adam Meyers,
Llu??s Ma`rquez, and Joakim Nivre. 2008. The conll
2008 shared task on joint parsing of syntactic and se-
mantic dependencies. In CoNLL 2008: Proceedings
of the Twelfth Conference on Computational Natu-
ral Language Learning, pages 159?177, Manchester,
England, August. Coling 2008 Organizing Committee.
Tuangthong Wattarujeekrit, Parantu Shah, and Nigel Col-
lier. 2004. Pasbio: predicate-argument structures for
event extraction in molecular biology. BMC Bioinfor-
matics, 5(1):155.
170
