Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 118?121,
Athens, Greece, 30 ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Precision and mathematical form in first and subsequent mentions of
numerical facts and their relation to document structure
Sandra Williams and Richard Power
The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes MK7 6AA, U.K.
s.h.williams@open.ac.uk; r.power@open.ac.uk
Abstract
In a corpus study we found that authors
vary both mathematical form and preci-
sion1 when expressing numerical quanti-
ties. Indeed, within the same document,
a quantity is often described vaguely in
some places and more accurately in others.
Vague descriptions tend to occur early in a
document and to be expressed in simpler
mathematical forms (e.g., fractions or ra-
tios), whereas more accurate descriptions
of the same proportions tend to occur later,
often expressed in more complex forms
(e.g., decimal percentages). Our results
can be used in Natural Language Gener-
ation (1) to generate repeat descriptions
within the same document, and (2) to gen-
erate descriptions of numerical quantities
for different audiences according to math-
ematical ability.
1 Introduction
This study is part of the NUMGEN project2, which
aims (a) to investigate how numerical quantity de-
scriptions vary in English, (b) to specify a gram-
mar that covers these variations, and (c) to develop
an algorithm that selects appropriate descriptions
for people with different levels of mathematical
ability. We collected, from newspapers, popular
science magazines and scientific journals, exam-
ples of numerical facts that were mentioned more
than once, so that first mentions could be com-
pared with subsequent mentions. For example in
the following text, two mentions of the same nu-
merical fact ? the proportion of A grades in UK
A-level examinations in 2008 ? are underlined:
1Our use of the term precision has nothing to do with pre-
cision in information retrieval (i.e., the percentage of docu-
ments retrieved that are relevant).
2http://mcs.open.ac.uk/sw6629/numgen
A-level results show record number of
A grades
Record numbers of teenagers have re-
ceived top A-level grades
By Graeme Paton, Education Editor
More than a quarter of papers were
marked A as results in the so-called gold
standard examination reach a new high.
. . .
According to figures released today by
the Joint Council for Qualifications,
25.9 per cent of A-level papers were
awarded an A grade this summer . . .
(Daily Telegraph, 14 August 2008)
Comparing the two, (a) the first (More than a
quarter) is less precise than the second (25.9 per
cent), (b) its mathematical form, a common frac-
tion, is less complex than the decimal percentage
form of the second, and (c) its string has more
characters (i.e., it is not shorter in length as might
be expected if it were a summary). Also, the two
mentions occur in different parts of the document
? the first paragraph, and the fifth paragraph.
1.1 What do we mean by precision?
To compare the precision of numerical expres-
sions we needed a more exact definition of the
concept. We derived the following rules to deter-
mine precision:
? Precision increases with the number of sig-
nificant figures
? Round numbers imply vagueness (implicit
approximation)
? Modifiers increase the precision of round
numbers when they indicate the direction of
approximation (> or <)
? Common proportional quantities imply
vagueness (implicit approximation similar to
round numbers)
118
Our first rule concerns arithmetical precision ?
i.e., the number of significant figures. Thus 344
with three significant figures is more precise than
340 with only two and 56% with two significant
figures is more precise than 50% with one.
Second, we adhere to Krifka?s RNRI (round
number round interpretation) theory that when
speakers or writers mention a round figure such as
sixty, they mean that the actual figure is slightly
less than or more than the round number un-
less they explicitly modify it with (say) exactly,
and similarly, hearers or readers interpret it as
rounded (Krifka, 2007). As a consequence, sixty
and around sixty have the same level of precision,
while exactly sixty is more precise than sixty.
Third, we take into account modifiers (or nu-
merical hedges) such as under, over, more than,
and verbs such as topped. So we say that over
sixty and topped sixty are more precise than sixty
since they give more information.
Finally, we extend Krifka?s ideas (2007) to
cover common proportional quantities. Krifka
confined his ideas to scalar and numerical quan-
tities, but we propose that they can also be applied
to common proportions such as half, two thirds
and three quarters and their ratio, decimal, per-
centage and multiple equivalents. We hypothesise
that when speakers or writers use a common pro-
portion, they implicitly round up or down just the
same as with round whole numbers, so we would
argue that around a half is the same level of preci-
sion as a half, whereas more than half is more pre-
cise than half. When comparing different types,
we take the implied vagueness of common propor-
tions into account, so that we consider 25% to be
more precise than one quarter.
1.2 Maths form and conceptual complexity
Numerical proportions may be expressed by dif-
ferent mathematical forms, e.g., fractions, ratios,
percentages. Complexity of mathematical form
denotes the amount of effort and numerical skill
required by readers to interpret a numerical quan-
tity; as complexity of mathematical concepts in-
creases, the amount of effort required for compre-
hension also increases.
As a convenient measure of the complexity of
mathematical forms, we employ a scale corre-
sponding to the levels at which they are intro-
duced in the Mathematics Curriculum for Schools
(1999); that is, we assume that simple concepts are
Maths Form Level or
Complexity
Whole numbers 1?10 Level 1
Whole numbers 1?100 Level 2
Whole numbers 1?1000 Level 3
1-place decimals Level 3
Common fractions Level 3
Money and temperature Level 3
Whole numbers > 1000 Level 4
3-place decimals Level 4
Multiples Level 4
Percentages Level 4
Fractions Level 5
Ratios Level 5
Decimal Percentages Level 6
Standard index form Level 8
Table 1: Scale of Level/Complexity extracted
from the Maths Curriculum for Schools (1999)
taught before difficult ones, so that a child learns
whole numbers up to ten at Level 1, then much
later learns standard index form (e.g., 4.12x106)
at Level 8 (table 1).
2 Hypotheses
Our hypotheses about repeated mentions of nu-
merical facts are as follows:
? Precision will increase from first to subse-
quent mentions.
? Level of complexity of mathematical forms
will increase from first to subsequent men-
tions.
? Changes in precision and mathematical form
are related to document structure.
3 Empirical Study
3.1 The NUMGEN Corpus
The corpus has 97 articles on ten topics, where
each topic describes the same underlying numer-
ical quantities, e.g., 19 articles on the discovery of
a new planet al published in the first week of May
2007 (from Astronomy and Astrophysics, Nature,
Scientific American, New Scientist, Science, 11
newspapers and three Internet news sites). In total,
the corpus has 2,648 sentences and 54,684 words.
119
3.2 Corpus analysis and annotation
The articles were split into sentences automati-
cally, then checked and corrected manually. We
annotated 1,887 numerical quantity expressions
(788 integers, 319 dates, 140 decimals, 87 frac-
tions, 107 multiples, 66 ordinals, 336 percentages
and 44 ratios).
In this study, we looked for coreferring phrases
containing numerical quantities, such as the sen-
tences . . . of papers were marked A and . . . of A-
level papers were awarded an A grade in the above
text, and compared the numerical expressions as-
sociated with them.3 Then, for each fact, we noted
the linguistic form of first and subsequent men-
tions in each text and their document positions.
3.3 Judgements on precision and
mathematical level
Two readers (the authors) judged whether preci-
sion had changed from first to subsequent men-
tions of a numerical fact in a text, and if so,
whether it had increased or decreased, according
to the rules set out in the list in section 1.1. We
also judged the conceptual complexity of mathe-
matical forms, ranging from 1 to 8 (as defined in
table 1). For precision, the judges agreed on 94%
of cases (Cohen?s kappa is 0.88). Differences were
resolved by discussion.
3.4 Results
Table 2 shows results for binomial tests on 88
cases of repeated numerical facts. They show
a clear trend towards unequal precision between
first and subsequent mentions and, in the 62 cases
where it is unequal, an overwhelming trend for
precision to increase. Regarding mathematical
level (i.e., the complexity scale for mathematical
form), the trend is for subsequent mentions to have
a level equal to that of first mentions, but in the 31
cases where it is unequal, they show a significant
trend towards an increase in level ? i.e., subse-
quent mentions are conceptually more difficult.
Our first hypothesis (precision increases from
first to subsequent mentions) is thus clearly sup-
ported. Our second hypothesis (level of concep-
tual complexity increases from first to subsequent
mentions) is supported by significant increases in
level only where the level changed. Note that by
3Note that the numerical facts themselves do not corefer,
since they are merely properties of coreferring sets or scales
(Deemter and Kibble, 2000).
Observation n Prop. Sig.
Precision: Equal 26 .30 .0002
Unequal 62 .70
Precision: Increase 56 .90
Decrease 6 .10 .00001
Maths Level: Equal 57 .65
Unequal 31 .35 .007
Maths Level: Increase 25 .81
Decrease 6 .19 .0009
Table 2: Binomial tests on repeated mentions,
based on .5 probability, 2-tailed, Z approximation.
our definition, complexity of mathematical con-
cepts is distinct from precision: for example, 59
is more precise than 60 but equally complex (both
are taught at Level 2 ? whole numbers up to 100).
Further investigation revealed that mathematical
level tended to remain the same where both men-
tions were at the beginning of a document (n=14,
p < 0.005, in a 2-tailed binomial test, as above).
Hypothesis three (changes in precision and
mathematical form are related to document struc-
ture) is partially validated in that precision and
mathematical level both increase from early to
later positions in the document structure.
4 Discussion
Are these results surprising? We believe they show
that appropriate presentation of numerical infor-
mation requires surprising sophistication. It is
usual to summarise information early in an arti-
cle, but with numerical facts, summarisation can-
not be equated with lower precision or with sim-
pler mathematical form. If summarisation means
identifying important facts and presenting them
in a condensed form, then why are early men-
tions of numerical facts not condensed? A sur-
prisingly large proportion of first mentions (45%)
had longer (or equally long) strings than subse-
quent mentions (see the text in the introduction,
where More than a quarter is longer than 25.9 per
cent). Also, why change the mathematical form?
It is not obvious that 25.9% should be converted
to a common fraction. Intuitively we might reason
that 25.9% is close to 25% which can be expressed
by the simpler mathematical form a quarter, but it
is far from obvious how this reasoning should be
generalised so that it applies to all cases.
A side-effect of our analysis is that it pro-
vides some empirical evidence in support of
120
Krifka?s RNRI theory (2007); however, the data
is sparse. Ten repeated mentions of numerical
facts had round, whole number first mentions
and subsequent mentions that were more precise,
e.g., 200,000. . . 207,000. Thus demonstrating that
authors do indeed write round numbers which
they intend readers to interpret as being approxi-
mate. There is similar evidence from 22 examples
demonstrating that RNRI can be extended to com-
mon proportions.
5 Related work
Communicating numerical information is impor-
tant in Natural Language Generation (NLG) be-
cause input data is wholly or partially numerical
in nearly every NLG system, but the problem has
received little attention. For example, SUMTIME
summarises weather prediction data for oil rig per-
sonnel e.g., 1.0-1.5 mainly SW swell falling 1.0
or less mainly SSW swell by afternoon (Reiter et
al., 2005) but would require much greater flexi-
bility to present the same numerical facts to non-
professionals.
The difficulty of communicating numerical in-
formation has been highlighted in educational and
psychological research. Hansen et al?s book
(2005) provides ample evidence of confusions that
many children have about e.g., decimal places; in-
deed, they demonstrate that many believe 68.95%
is larger than 70.1% -- misconceptions that often
persist into adulthood. Even professionals misun-
derstand the mathematics of risk. Gingerenzer and
Edwards (2003) found doctors calculate more re-
liably with reference sets than with proportions.
We are not aware of any research on linguistic
variation in proportions; in fact, a recent special is-
sue on numerical expressions contained no papers
on proportions (Corver et al, 2007).
6 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we presented:
? A set of rules for determining precision in nu-
merical quantities that is sufficient to cover
the examples in our corpus
? A scale for conceptual complexity in numer-
ical expressions derived from the Mathemat-
ics Curriculum for Schools.
? A corpus of sets of articles whose main mes-
sage is to present numerical facts
? Empirical results demonstrating trends to-
wards increasing precision and complexity in
repeat mentions of numerical facts with posi-
tion in document structure.
Our results identify an interesting and well-
defined problem that will be addressed in the fi-
nal stage of NUMGEN: how to derive appropriate
simplified expressions (less precise, simpler math-
ematical form) for use in contexts like the open-
ings of articles, or communications intended for
readers with lower levels of mathematical ability.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks to members of The Open University
NLG Group. NUMGEN is supported by ESRC4
Small Grant RES-000-22-2760.
References
N. Corver, J. Doetjes, and J. Zwarts. 2007. Linguis-
tic perspectives on numerical expressions: Introduc-
tion. Lingua, Special issue on Linguistic perspec-
tives on numerical expressions, 117(5):751?775.
K. Van Deemter and R. Kibble. 2000. On Corefer-
ring: coreference in MUC and related annotation
schemes. Computational Linguistics, 26:629?637.
G. Gigerenza and A. Edwards. 2003. Simple tools
for understanding risks: from innumeracy to insight.
British Medical Journal, 327:714?744.
A. Hansen, D. Drews, J. Dudgeon, F. Lawton, and
L. Surtees. 2005. Children?s Errors in Maths:
Understanding Common Misconceptions in Primary
Schools. Learning Matters Ltd, Exeter, UK.
M. Krifka. 2007. Approximate interpretation of num-
ber words: A case for strategic communication. In
G. Bouma, I. Kraer, and J. Zwarts, editors, Cognitive
foundations of interpretation, pages 111?126, Am-
sterdam. Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van
Wetenschapen.
Qualification and Curriculum Authority. 1999. Math-
ematics: the National Curriculum for England. De-
partment for Education and Employment, London.
E. Reiter, S. Sripada, J. Hunter, J. Yu, and I. Davy.
2005. Choosing words in computer-generated
weather forecasts. Artificial Intelligence, 167(1-
2):137?169.
4Economic and Social Research Council
121
