Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 46?54,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Exploiting Comparable Corpora with TER and TERp
Sadaf Abdul-Rauf and Holger Schwenk
LIUM, University of Le Mans, FRANCE
Sadaf.Abdul-Rauf@lium.univ-lemans.fr
Abstract
In this paper we present an extension of a
successful simple and effective method for
extracting parallel sentences from com-
parable corpora and we apply it to an
Arabic/English NIST system. We exper-
iment with a new TERp filter, along with
WER and TER filters. We also report a
comparison of our approach with that of
(Munteanu and Marcu, 2005) using ex-
actly the same corpora and show perfor-
mance gain by using much lesser data.
Our approach employs an SMT system
built from small amounts of parallel texts
to translate the source side of the non-
parallel corpus. The target side texts are
used, along with other corpora, in the lan-
guage model of this SMT system. We then
use information retrieval techniques and
simple filters to create parallel data from
a comparable news corpora. We evaluate
the quality of the extracted data by show-
ing that it significantly improves the per-
formance of an SMT systems.
1 Introduction
Parallel corpora, a requisite resource for Statistical
Machine Translation (SMT) as well as many other
natural language processing applications, remain
a sparse resource due to the huge expense (human
as well as monetary) required for their creation.
A parallel corpus, also called bitext, consists in
bilingual texts aligned at the sentence level. SMT
systems use parallel texts as training material and
monolingual corpora for target language model-
ing. Though enough monolingual data is available
for most language pairs, it is the parallel corpus
that is a sparse resource.
The performance of an SMT system heavily
depends on the parallel corpus used for train-
ing. Generally, more bitexts lead to better perfor-
mance. The existing resources of parallel corpora
cover a few language pairs and mostly come from
one domain (proceedings of the Canadian or Eu-
ropean Parliament, or of the United Nations). The
language jargon used in such corpora is not very
well suited for everyday life translations or transla-
tions of some other domain, thus a dire need arises
for more parallel corpora well suited for everyday
life and domain adapted translations.
One option to increase this scarce resource
could be to produce more human translations, but
this is a very expensive option, in terms of both
time and money. Crowd sourcing could be an-
other option, but this has its own costs and thus
is not very practical for all cases. The world
wide web can also be crawled for potential ?par-
allel sentences?, but most of the found bilingual
texts are not direct translations of each other and
not very easy to align. In recent works less ex-
pensive but very productive methods of creating
such sentence aligned bilingual corpora were pro-
posed. These are based on generating ?parallel?
texts from already available ?almost parallel? or
?not much parallel? texts. The term ?comparable
corpus? is often used to define such texts.
A comparable corpus is a collection of texts
composed independently in the respective lan-
guages and combined on the basis of similarity of
content (Yang and Li, 2003). The raw material for
comparable documents is often easy to obtain but
the alignment of individual documents is a chal-
lenging task (Oard, 1997). Potential sources of
comparable corpora are multilingual news report-
ing agencies like AFP, Xinhua, Al-Jazeera, BBC
etc, or multilingual encyclopedias like Wikipedia,
Encarta etc. Such comparable corpora are widely
available from LDC, in particular the Gigaword
corpora, or over the WEB for many languages
and domains, e.g. Wikipedia. They often contain
many sentences that are reasonable translations of
46
each other. Reliable identification of these pairs
would enable the automatic creation of large and
diverse parallel corpora.
The ease of availability of these comparable
corpora and the potential for parallel corpus as
well as dictionary creation has sparked an interest
in trying to make maximum use of these compa-
rable resources, some of these works include dic-
tionary learning and identifying word translations
(Rapp, 1995), named entity recognition (Sproat
et al, 2006), word sense disambiguation (Kaji,
2003), improving SMT performance using ex-
tracted parallel sentences (Munteanu and Marcu,
2005), (Rauf and Schwenk, 2009). There has been
considerable amount of work on bilingual compa-
rable corpora to learn word translations as well
as discovering parallel sentences. Yang and Lee
(2003) use an approach based on dynamic pro-
gramming to identify potential parallel sentences
in title pairs. Longest common sub sequence, edit
operations and match-based score functions are
subsequently used to determine confidence scores.
Resnik and Smith (2003) propose their STRAND
web-mining based system and show that their ap-
proach is able to find large numbers of similar doc-
ument pairs.
Works aimed at discovering parallel sentences
include (Utiyama and Isahara, 2003), who use
cross-language information retrieval techniques
and dynamic programming to extract sentences
from an English-Japanese comparable corpus.
They identify similar article pairs, and then, treat-
ing these pairs as parallel texts, align their sen-
tences on a sentence pair similarity score and use
DP to find the least-cost alignment over the doc-
ument pair. Fung and Cheung (2004) approach
the problem by using a cosine similarity measure
to match foreign and English documents. They
work on ?very non-parallel corpora?. They then
generate all possible sentence pairs and select the
best ones based on a threshold on cosine simi-
larity scores. Using the extracted sentences they
learn a dictionary and iterate over with more sen-
tence pairs. Recent work by Munteanu and Marcu
(2005) uses a bilingual lexicon to translate some
of the words of the source sentence. These trans-
lations are then used to query the database to find
matching translations using information retrieval
(IR) techniques. Candidate sentences are deter-
mined based on word overlap and the decision
whether a sentence pair is parallel or not is per-
formed by a maximum entropy classifier trained
on parallel sentences. Bootstrapping is used and
the size of the learned bilingual dictionary is in-
creased over iterations to get better results.
Our technique is similar to that of (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005) but we bypass the need of the
bilingual dictionary by using proper SMT transla-
tions and instead of a maximum entropy classifier
we use simple measures like the word error rate
(WER) and the translation edit rate (TER) to de-
cide whether sentences are parallel or not. We
also report an extension of our work (Rauf and
Schwenk, 2009) by experimenting with an addi-
tional filter TERp, and building a named entity
noun dictionary using the unknown words from
the SMT (section 5.2). TERp has been tried en-
couraged by the outperformance of TER in our
previous study on French-English. We have ap-
plied our technique on a different language pair
Arabic-English, versus French-English that we re-
ported the technique earlier on. Our use of full
SMT sentences, gives us an added advantage of
being able to detect one of the major errors of
these approaches, also identified by (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005), i.e, the cases where the initial
sentences are identical but the retrieved sentence
has a tail of extra words at sentence end. We dis-
cuss this problem as detailed in section 5.1.
We apply our technique to create a parallel cor-
pus for the Arabic/English language pair. We
show that we achieve significant improvements
in the BLEU score by adding our extracted cor-
pus to the already available human-translated cor-
pora. We also perform a comparison of the data
extracted by our approach and that by (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005) and report the results in Sec-
tion 5.3.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next
section we first describe the baseline SMT system
trained on human-provided translations only. We
then proceed by explaining our parallel sentence
selection scheme and the post-processing. Sec-
tion 5 summarizes our experimental results and
the paper concludes with a discussion and perspec-
tives of this work.
2 Task Description
In this paper, we consider the translation from
Arabic into English, under the same conditions as
the official NIST 2008 evaluation. The used bi-
47
texts include various news wire translations1 as
well as some texts from the GALE project.2 We
also added the 2002 to 2005 test data to the paral-
lel training data (using all reference translations).
This corresponds to a total of about 8M Arabic
words. Our baseline system is trained on these bi-
texts only.
We use the 2006 NIST test data as development
data and the official NIST 2008 test data as in-
ternal test set. All case sensitive BLEU scores
are calculated with the NIST scoring tool with re-
spect to four reference translations. Both data sets
include texts from news wires as well as news-
groups.
LDC provides large collections of monolingual
data, namely the LDC Arabic and English Giga-
word corpora. There are two text sources that do
exist in Arabic and English: the AFP and XIN col-
lection. It is likely that each corpora contains sen-
tences which are translations of the other. We aim
to extract those. We have used the XIN corpus
for all of our reported results and the collection
of the AFP and XIN for comparison with ISI. Ta-
ble 1 summarizes the characteristics of the corpora
used. Note that the English part is much larger
than the Arabic one (we found the same to be the
case for French-English AFP comparable corpora
that we used in our previous study). The number
of words are given after tokenization.
Source Arabic English
AFP 138M 527M
XIN 51M 140M
Table 1: Characteristics of the available compara-
ble Gigaword corpora for the Arabic-English task
(number of words).
3 Baseline SMT system
The goal of statistical machine translation (SMT)
is to produce a target sentence e from a source sen-
tence f . It is today common practice to use phrases
as translation units (Koehn et al, 2003; Och and
Ney, 2003) and a log linear framework in order
to introduce several models explaining the transla-
tion process:
e? = argmax p(e|f)
1LDC2003T07, 2004E72, T17, T18, 2005E46 and
2006E25.
2LDC2005E83, 2006E24, E34, E85 and E92.
= argmax
e
{exp(?
i
?ihi(e, f))} (1)
The feature functions hi are the system models
and the ?i weights are typically optimized to max-
imize a scoring function on a development set
(Och and Ney, 2002). In our system fourteen
features functions were used, namely phrase and
lexical translation probabilities in both directions,
seven features for the lexicalized distortion model,
a word and a phrase penalty and a target language
model (LM).
The system is based on the Moses SMT toolkit
(Koehn et al, 2007) and constructed as follows.
First, Giza++ is used to perform word alignments
in both directions. Second, phrases and lexical re-
orderings are extracted using the default settings
of the Moses SMT toolkit. The target 4-gram
back-off language model is trained on the English
part of all bitexts as well as the whole English Gi-
gaword corpus.
4 System Architecture
The general architecture of our parallel sentence
extraction system is shown in figure 1. Starting
from comparable corpora for the two languages,
Arabic and English, we first translate Arabic to
English using an SMT system as described in the
above sections. These translated texts are then
used to perform information retrieval from the
English corpus, followed by simple metrics like
WER, TER or TERp to filter out good sentence
pairs and eventually generate a parallel corpus.
We show that a parallel corpus obtained using this
technique helps considerably to improve an SMT
system.
4.1 System for Extracting Parallel Sentences
from Comparable Corpora
We start by translating the Arabic XIN and AFP
texts to English using the SMT systems discussed
in section 2. In our experiments we considered
only the most recent texts (2001-2006, 1.7M sen-
tences; about 65.M Arabic words for XIN ). For
our experiments on effect on SMT quality we use
only the XIN corpus. We use the combination
of AFP and XIN for comparison of sentences ex-
tracted by our approach with that of (Munteanu
and Marcu, 2005). These translations are then
treated as queries for the IR process. The design
of our sentence extraction process is based on the
heuristic that considering the corpus at hand, we
48
ENSMT
used as queries per day articles candidate sentence pairs parallel sentences
+?5 day articlesfrom English Gigaword
English
translations 
tail
removal
sentences with
extra words at ends
+
parallel 
number / table
comparison      length  
removing
Arabic
comparable
corpus
AR
WER/TER/TERp
Figure 1: Architecture of the parallel sentence extraction system.
can safely say that a news item reported on day X
in the Arabic corpus will be most probably found
in the day X-5 and day X+5 time period. We ex-
perimented with several window sizes and found
the window size of is to be the most accurate in
terms of time and the quality of the retrieved sen-
tences. (Munteanu and Marcu, 2005) have also
worked with a ?5 day window.
Using the ID and date information for each sen-
tence of both corpora, we first collect all sentences
from the SMT translations corresponding to the
same day (query sentences) and then the corre-
sponding articles from the English Gigaword cor-
pus (search space for IR). These day-specific files
are then used for information retrieval using a ro-
bust information retrieval system. The Lemur IR
toolkit (Ogilvie and Callan, 2001) was used for
sentence extraction.
The information retrieval step is the most time
consuming task in the whole system. The time
taken depends upon various factors like size of the
index to search in, length of the query sentence
etc. To give a time estimate, using a ?5 day win-
dow required 9 seconds per query vs 15 seconds
per query when a ?7 day window was used. We
placed a limit of approximately 90 words on the
queries and the indexed sentences. This choice
was motivated by the fact that the word alignment
toolkit Giza++ does not process longer sentences.
A Krovetz stemmer was used while building the
index as provided by the toolkit. English stop
words, i.e. frequently used words, such as ?a? or
?the?, are normally not indexed because they are
so common that they are not useful to query on.
The stop word list provided by the IR Group of
University of Glasgow3 was used.
The resources required by our system are min-
imal : translations of one side of the comparable
corpus. It has already been demonstrated in (Rauf
and Schwenk, 2009) that when using translations
as queries, the quality of the initial SMT is not
a factor for better sentence retrieval and that an
SMT system trained on small amounts of human-
translated data can ?retrieve? potentially good par-
allel sentences.
4.2 Candidate Sentence Pair Selection
The information retrieval process gives us the po-
tential parallel sentences per query sentence, the
decision of their being parallel or not needs to be
made about them. At this stage we choose the
best scoring sentence as determined by the toolkit
and pass the sentence pair through further filters.
Gale and Church (1993) based their align program
on the fact that longer sentences in one language
tend to be translated into longer sentences in the
other language, and that shorter sentences tend to
be translated into shorter sentences. We initially
used the same logic in our selection of the candi-
date sentence pairs. However our observation was
that the filters that we use, WER, TER and TERp
implicitly place a penalty when the length differ-
3http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/resources/
linguistic_utils/stop_words
49
ence between two sentences is too large. Thus us-
ing this inherent property, we did not apply any
explicit sentence length filtering.
The candidate sentences pairs are then judged
based on simple filters. Our choice of filters
in accordance to the task in consideration were
the WER (Levenshtein distance), Translation Edit
Rate (TER) and the relatively new Translation Edit
Rate plus (TERp). WER measures the number
of operations required to transform one sentence
into the other (insertions, deletions and substitu-
tions). A zero WER would mean the two sen-
tences are identical, subsequently lower WER sen-
tence pairs would be sharing most of the common
words. However two correct translations may dif-
fer in the order in which the words appear, some-
thing that WER is incapable of taking into ac-
count. This shortcoming is addressed by TER
which allows block movements of words and thus
takes into account the reorderings of words and
phrases in translation (Snover et al, 2006). TERp
is an extension of Translation Edit Rate and was
one of the top performing metrics at the NIST
Metric MATR workshop 4. It had the highest ab-
solute correlation, as measured by the Pearson cor-
relation coefficient, with human judgments in 9
of the 45 test conditions. TERp tries to address
the weaknesses of TER through the use of para-
phrases, morphological stemming, and synonyms,
as well as edit costs that are optimized to corre-
late better with various types of human judgments
(Snover et al, 2009). The TER filter allows shifts
if the two strings (the word sequence in the trans-
lated and the IR retrieved sentence) match exactly,
however TERp allows shifts if the words being
shifted are exactly the same, are synonyms, stems
or paraphrases of each other, or any such combi-
nation. This allows better sentence comparison
by incorporation of sort of linguistic information
about words.
5 Experimental evaluation
Our main goal was to be able to create an addi-
tional parallel corpus to improve machine transla-
tion quality, especially for the domains where we
have less or no parallel data available. In this sec-
tion we report the results of adding these extracted
parallel sentences to the already available human-
translated parallel sentences.
4http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/
/tests/metricsmatr/2008/
#words BLEU
Bitexts Arabic Eval06 Eval08
Baseline 5.8M 42.64 39.35
+WER-10 5.8M 42.73 39.70
+WER-40 7.2M 43.34 40.59
+WER-60 14.5M 43.95 41.20
+WER-70 20.4M 43.58 41.18
+TER-30 6.5M 43.41 40.08
+TER-50 12.5M 43.90 41.45
+TER-60 17.3M 44.30 41.73
+TER-75 24.1M 43.79 41.21
+TERp-10 5.8M 42.69 39.80
+TERp-40 10.2M 43.89 41.44
+TERp-60 20.8M 43.94 41.25
+TERp-80 27.7M 43.90 41.58
Table 2: Summary of BLEU scores for the best
systems selected based on various thresholds of
WER, TER and TERp filters
We conducted a range of experiments by adding
our extracted corpus to various combinations of
already available human-translated parallel cor-
pora. For our experiments on effect on SMT qual-
ity we use only the XIN extracted corpus. We
experimented with WER, TER and TERp as fil-
ters to select the best scoring sentences. Table 2
shows some of the scores obtained based on BLEU
scores on the Dev and test data as a function of
the size of the added extracted corpus. The name
of the bitext indicates the filter threshold used, for
example, TER-50 means sentences selected based
on TER filter threshold of 50. Generally, sen-
tences selected based on TER filter showed bet-
ter BLEU scores on NIST06 than their WER and
TERp counter parts up to almost 21M words. Also
for the same filter threshold TERp selected longer
sentences, followed by TER and then WER, this
fact is evident from table 2, where for the fil-
ter threshold of 60, TERp and TER select 20.8M
and 17.3 words respectively, whereas WER selects
14.5M words.
Figure 2 shows the trend obtained in function
of the number of words added. These experiments
were performed by adding our extracted sentences
to only 5.8M words of human-provided transla-
tions. Our best results are obtained when 11.5M
of our extracted parallel sentences based on TER
filter are added to 5.8M of News wire and gale par-
allel corpora. We gain an improvement of 1.66
BLEU points on NIST06 and 2.38 BLEU points
50
 41.5
 42
 42.5
 43
 43.5
 44
 44.5
 45
 5  10  15  20  25  30
BL
EU
 sc
ore
 on
 nis
t06
Arabic words for training [M]
baseline
TERTERpWER
 38.5
 39
 39.5
 40
 40.5
 41
 41.5
 42
 5  10  15  20  25  30
BL
 sc
ore
 on
 nis
t08
Arabic words for training [M]
baseline
TERTERpWER
Figure 2: BLEU scores on the NIST06 (Dev,
top) and NIST08 (test, bottom) data using an
WER,TER or TERp filter as a function of the num-
ber of extracted Arabic words added.
on NIST08 (TER-60 in table 2 ).
An interesting thing to notice in figure 2 is that
no filter was able to clearly outperform the others,
which is contradictory to our experiments with the
French-English language pair (Rauf and Schwenk,
2009), where the TER filter clearly outperformed
the WER filter. WER is worse than TER but less
evident here than for our previous experiments for
the French-English language pair. This perfor-
mance gain by using the TER filter for French-
English was our main motivation for trying TERp.
We expected TERp to get better results compared
to WER and TER, but TER filter seems the better
one among the three filters. Note that all condi-
tions in all the experiments were identical. This
gives a strong hint of language pair dependency,
making the decision of suitability of a particular
filter dependent on the language pair in considera-
tion.
5.1 Sentence tail removal
Two main classes of errors are known when ex-
tracting parallel sentences from comparable cor-
pora: firstly, cases where the two sentences share
many common words but actually convey differ-
ent meaning, and secondly, cases where the two
sentences are (exactly) parallel except at sentence
ends where one sentence has more information
than the other. This second case of errors can
be detected using WER as we have the advan-
tage of having both the sentences in English. We
detected the extra insertions at the end of the IR
result sentence and removed them. Some exam-
ples of such sentences along with tails detected
and removed are shown in figure 3. Since this
gives significant improvement in the SMT scores
we used it for all our extracted sentences (Rauf
and Schwenk, 2009). However, similar to our ob-
servations in the last section, the tails were much
shorter as compared to our previous experiments
with French-English, also most of the tails in this
Arabic-English data were of type as shown in last
line figure 3. This is a factor dependent on re-
porting agency and its scheme for reporting, i.e,
whether it reports an event independently in each
language or uses the translation from one language
to the other .
5.2 Dictionary Creation
In our translations, we keep the unknown words as
they are, i.e. in Arabic (normally a flag is used so
that Moses skips them). This enables us to build a
dictionary. Consider the case with translation with
one unknown word in Arabic, if all the other words
around align well with the English sentence that
we found with IR, we could conclude the trans-
lation of the unknown Arabic word, see figure 3
line 5. We were able to make a dictionary us-
ing this scheme which was comprised mostly of
proper nouns often not found in Arabic-English
dictionaries. Our proper noun dictionary com-
prises of about 244K words, some sample words
are shown in figure 4. Adding the proper nouns
found by this technique to the initial SMT sys-
tem should help improve translations for new sen-
tences, as these words were before unknown to the
system. However, the impact of addition of these
words on translation quality is to be evaluated at
the moment.
51
Arabic:                   	
 
      
     
  !"855 #!"
      $% &'
 
  ()%
 % *!& .
Query: Thousands of officials began counting the votes registered in tens of thousands of electronic machines in 855
towns and cities across the country at 8 a.m.
Result: Thousands of officials began counting the votes registered in tens of thousands of electronic machines in 855
towns and cities across the country at 8 a.m. thursday.
Arabic:               &
 +)* *, - %. /(& 0&1$ " 
,
 (
 
 	
2" * 3&1* 4 .
Query: 5was referring to the current stalemate between his government and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam .
Result: Wickremesinghe was referring to the current stalemate between his government and the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam ( LTTE )   REBELS .
Arabic:                %6 /17
 !.
  1
 #(" &1,
 
 87" 9
: 4 !7" ;<
 2= " 2>
 4?  .
Query: Bono adopted this position after some legislators asked the government to rethink the Spanish military presence
in Afghanistan .
Result: Bono adopted this attitude after some legislators asked the government to reconsider the Spanish military
presence in Afghanistan . ( SPAIN-AFGHANISTAN ) .
Figure 3: Some examples of an Arabic source sentence, the SMT translation used as query and the
potential parallel sentence as determined by information retrieval. Bold parts are the extra tails at the end
of the sentences which we automatically removed.
Figure 4: Examples of some words found by our
dictionary building technique.
5.3 Comparison with previous work
LDC provides extracted parallel texts extracted
with the algorithm published by (Munteanu and
Marcu, 2005). This corpus contains 1.1M sen-
tence pairs (about 35M words) which were auto-
matically extracted and aligned from the mono-
lingual Arabic and English Gigaword corpora, a
confidence score being provided for each sentence
pair. We also applied our approach on data pro-
vided by LDC, but on a different subset. Since we
had used the recent data sets our corpora were till
year 2006, whereas ISI?s data were till year 2004.
We filtered our data according to the time interval
of their data (date information was provided for
each sentence pair) and used them to compare the
two data sets. Both AFP and XIN were used in
these comparison experiments since the available
ISI?s data was comprised of these two collections.
To perform the comparison, we have, firstly,
the ISI parallel sentences and secondly the paral-
lel sentences extracted by using our approach us-
ing the same time frame and comparable corpora
as ISI. We used our sentences as filtered by the
TER filter and added them to the already avail-
able 5.8M of human-translated (as done in previ-
ous experiments). The result is shown graphically
in figure 5. Adding the ISI parallel data to the
5.8M baseline parallel corpus (total 27.5M words)
yielded a BLEU score of 43.59 on NIST06 Dev
set and 41.84 BLEU points on NIST08 test set.
Whereas we were able to achieve a BLEU score of
43.88 on NIST06 Dev and 41.35 on NIST08 test
set (using a total of 16.1M words), which amounts
to an increase of 0.29 BLEU points on the NIST06
Dev set. Note that this gain is achieved by using
a total of only 10.3M of our extracted words as
compared to 21.7M of ISI corpus to get their best
result. However we were not able to improve as
much on the NIST08 test corpus.
The trend in BLEU score in figure 5 clearly
52
 42
 42.5
 43
 43.5
 44
 44.5
 5  10  15  20  25  30
BL
EU
 sc
ore
 on
 nis
t06
Arabic words for training [M]
OurISI
 39.5
 40
 40.5
 41
 41.5
 42
 42.5
 5  10  15  20  25  30
BL
EU
 sc
ore
 on
 nis
t08
Arabic words for training [M]
OurISI
Figure 5: BLEU scores on the NIST06 and
NIST08 data using the ISI parallel corpus and our
comparative extracted bitexts in function of num-
ber of extracted Arabic words added.
shows that our sentence selection scheme selects
good sentences, and is capable of achieving the
same scores but with much less sentences. This
is because in the scheme of ISI, the confidence
scores provided are based on the IR and maximum
entropy classifier scoring scheme, whereas our fil-
ters score the sentences based on linguistic sen-
tence similarity, allowing us to retrieve the good
sentence pairs from the bad ones. Once informa-
tion retrieval is done, which is the most time con-
suming task in both the techniques, our approach
is better able to sort out the good IR extracted
sentences as is evident from the results obtained.
Moreover our scheme does not require any com-
plex operations, just simple filters which are well
adapted to the problem at hand.
6 Conclusion and discussion
Sentence-aligned bilingual texts are a crucial re-
source to build SMT systems. For some language
pairs bilingual corpora just do not exist, the ex-
isting corpora are too small to build a good SMT
system or they are not of the same genre or do-
main. This need for parallel corpora, has made the
researchers employ new techniques and methods
in an attempt to reduce the dire need of this cru-
cial resource of the SMT systems. Our study also
contributes in this regard by employing an SMT
itself and information retrieval techniques to pro-
duce additional parallel corpora from easily avail-
able comparable corpora.
We use translations of the source language com-
parable corpus to find the corresponding paral-
lel sentences from the target language compa-
rable corpus. We only used a limited amount
of human-provided bilingual resources. Starting
with small amounts of sentence aligned bilingual
data large amounts of monolingual data are trans-
lated. These translations are then employed to find
the corresponding matching sentences in the tar-
get side corpus, using information retrieval meth-
ods. Simple filters are used to determine whether
the retrieved sentences are parallel or not. By
adding these retrieved parallel sentences to al-
ready available human translated parallel corpora
we were able to improve the BLEU score on the
test set(NIST08) by 2.38 points for the Arabic-
English language pair.
Contrary to the previous approaches as in
(Munteanu and Marcu, 2005) which used small
amounts of in-domain parallel corpus as an initial
resource, our system exploits the target language
side of the comparable corpus to attain the same
goal, thus the comparable corpus itself helps to
better extract possible parallel sentences. We have
also presented a comparison with their approach
and found our bitexts to achieve nice improve-
ments using much less words. The LDC com-
parable corpora were used in this paper, but the
same approach can be extended to extract parallel
sentences from huge amounts of corpora available
on the web by identifying comparable articles us-
ing techniques such as (Yang and Li, 2003) and
(Resnik and Y, 2003).We have successfully ap-
plied our approach to French-English and Arabic-
English language pairs. As this study strongly
hinted towards language pair dependancy on the
choice of the filter to use to select better sentences,
we intend to investigate this trend in detail.
53
References
Pascale Fung and Percy Cheung. 2004. Mining very-
non-parallel corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon
extraction via bootstrapping and em. In Dekang
Lin and Dekai Wu, editors, EMNLP, pages 57?63,
Barcelona, Spain, July. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
William A. Gale and Kenneth W. Church. 1993. A
program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora.
Computational Linguistics, 19(1):75?102.
Hiroyuki Kaji. 2003. Word sense acquisition from
bilingual comparable corpora. In NAACL ?03: Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics on Human Language Technology, pages
32?39, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Josef Och, and Daniel Marcu.
2003. Statistical phrased-based machine translation.
In HLT/NACL, pages 127?133.
Philipp Koehn et al 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit
for statistical machine translation. In ACL, demon-
stration session.
Dragos Stefan Munteanu and Daniel Marcu. 2005. Im-
proving machine translation performance by exploit-
ing non-parallel corpora. Computational Linguis-
tics, 31(4):477?504.
Douglas W. Oard. 1997. Alternative approaches for
cross-language text retrieval. In In AAAI Sympo-
sium on Cross-Language Text and Speech Retrieval.
American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2002. Discrimina-
tive training and maximum entropy models for sta-
tistical machine translation. In ACL, pages 295?302.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A sys-
tematic comparison of various statistical alignement
models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19?51.
Paul Ogilvie and Jamie Callan. 2001. Experiments
using the Lemur toolkit. In In Proceedings of the
Tenth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-10), pages
103?108.
Reinhard Rapp. 1995. Identifying word translations in
non-parallel texts. In Proceedings of the 33rd an-
nual meeting on Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 320?322, Morristown, NJ, USA. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Sadaf Abdul Rauf and Holger Schwenk. 2009. On the
use of comparable corpora to improve SMT perfor-
mance. In EACL, pages 16?23.
Philip Resnik and Noah A. Smith Y. 2003. The web
as a parallel corpus. Computational Linguistics,
29:349?380.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Lin-
nea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study of
translation edit rate with targeted human annotation.
In ACL.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, and Richard Schwartz.
2008. Language and translation model adaptation
using comparable corpora. In Proceedings of the
2008 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing, pages 857?866, Hon-
olulu, Hawaii, October. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2009. Fluency, adequacy, or
HTER? Exploring different human judgments with
a tunable MT metric. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
259?268, Athens, Greece, March. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Richard Sproat, Tao Tao, and ChengXiang Zhai. 2006.
Named entity transliteration with comparable cor-
pora. In ACL-44: Proceedings of the 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Computational Linguistics and
the 44th annual meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 73?80, Morristown,
NJ, USA. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Masao Utiyama and Hitoshi Isahara. 2003. Reliable
measures for aligning Japanese-English news arti-
cles and sentences. In Erhard Hinrichs and Dan
Roth, editors, ACL, pages 72?79.
Christopher C. Yang and Kar Wing Li. 2003. Auto-
matic construction of English/Chinese parallel cor-
pora. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 54(8):730?742.
54
