Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Semantics, pages 277?281,
Tilburg, January 2009. c?2009 International Conference on Computational Semantics
Computing implicit entities and events
for story understanding
Rodolfo Delmonte, Emanuele Pianta
Universita` Ca? Foscari and IRST, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Venezia
delmont@unive.it, pianta@itc.it
1 Introduction
In order to show that a system for text understanding has produced a sound
representation of the semantic and pragmatic contents of a story, it should be
able to answer questions about the participants and the events occurring in
the story. This requires processing linguistic descriptions which are lexically
expressed but also unexpressed ones, a task that, in our opinion, can only be
accomplished starting from full-fledged semantic representations. The over-
all task of story understanding requires in addition computing appropriate
coreference and cospecification for entities and events in what is usually re-
ferred to as a Discourse Model. All these tasks have been implemented in
the GETARUNS system, which is subdivided into two main meta-modules
or levels: the Low Level System, containing all modules that operate at sen-
tence level; High Level System, containing all the modules that operate at
discourse level by updating the Discourse Model. The system is divided up
into a pipeline of sequential but independent modules which realize the sub-
division of a parsing scheme as proposed in LFG theory where a c-structure
is built before the f-structure can be projected by unification into a DAG
(Direct Acyclic Graph). In this sense we try to apply phrase-structure rules
in a given sequence as they are ordered in the grammar: whenever a syntac-
tic constituent is successfully built, it is checked for semantic consistency, as
LFG grammaticality principles require [1].
GETARUNS has a highly sophisticated linguistically based semantic
module which is used to build up the Discourse Model. Semantic process-
ing is strongly modularized and distributed amongst a number of differ-
ent submodules which take care of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning, Discourse
Level Anaphora Resolution, and other subsidiary processes like Topic Hier-
archy which cooperate to find the most probable antecedent of coreferring
277
and cospecifying referential expressions when creating semantic individuals.
These are then asserted in the Discourse Model (hence the DM), which is
then the sole knowledge representation used to solve nominal coreference.
Semantic Mapping is performed in two steps: at first a Logical Form is pro-
duced which is a structural mapping from DAGs onto unscoped well-formed
formulas. These are then turned into situational semantics informational
units, infons which may become facts or sits (non factual situations). Each
unit has a relation, a list of arguments which in our case receive their se-
mantic roles from lower processing - a polarity, a temporal and a spatial
location index. Inferences can be drawn on the facts repository as will be
discussed below.
2 Implicit entities and implicatures
Conversational implicatures and implications in general, are based on an
assumption by the addressee that the speaker is obeying the conversational
maxims (see [2]), in particular the cooperative principle. We regard the
mechanism that recovers standard implicatures and conversational implica-
tions in general, as a reasoning process that uses the knowledge contained in
the semantic relations actually expressed in the utterance to recover hidden
or implied relations or events as we call them. This reasoning process can
be partially regarded as a subproduct of an inferential process that takes
spatio-temporal locations as the main component and is triggered by the
need to search for coreferent or cospecifiers to a current definite or indef-
inite NP head. This can be interpreted as bridging referential expression
entertaining some semantic relation with previously mentioned entities. If
we consider a classical example from [5] (A: Can you tell me the time? ; B:
Well, the milkman has come), we see that the request of the current time
is bound to a spatio-temporal location. Using the MILKMAN rather than
a WATCH to answer the question, is relatable to spatio-temporal triggers.
In fact, in order to infer the right approximate time, we need to situate the
COMING event of the milkman in time, given a certain spatial location.
Thus, it is just the ?pragmatic restriction? associated to SPACE and TIME
implied in the answer, that may trigger the inference.
2.1 The restaurant text
To exemplify some of the issues presented above we present a text by [7]. In
this text, entities may be scenario-dependent characters or main characters
independent thereof. Whereas the authors use the text for psychological
278
experimental reasons, we will focus on its computability.
(0) At the restaurant. (1) John went into a restaurant. (2) There was a
table in the corner. (3) The waiter took the order. (4) The atmosphere was
warm and friendly. (5) He began to read his book.
Sentence (1) introduces both JOHN as the Main Topic in the Topic Hier-
archy and RESTAURANT as the Main Location (in the role of LOCATion
argument of the governing verb GO and the preposition INTO). Sentence
(2) can potentially introduce TABLE as new main Topic. This type of sen-
tences is called presentational in the linguistic literature, and has the prag-
matic role of presenting an entity on the scene of the narration in an abrupt
manner, or, as Centering would definite it, with a SHIFT move. However,
the TABLE does not constitute a suitable entity to be presented on the
scene and the underlying import is triggering the inference that ?someone
is SITting at a TABLE?. This inference is guided by the spatio-temporal
component of the system. GETARUNS is equipped with a spatio-temporal
inferential module that asserts Main Spatio-Temporal Locations to anchor
events and facts expressed by situational infons. This happens whenever an
explicit lexical location is present in the text, as in the first sentence (the
RESTAURANT). The second sentence contains another explicit location:
the CORNER. Now, the inferential system will try to establish whether the
new location is either a deictic version of the Main Location, or it is semanti-
cally included in the Main Location, or else it is a new unconnected location
that substitutes the previous one. The CORNER is in a meronymic seman-
tic relation with RESTAURANT and thus it is understood as being a part
of it. This inference triggers the implicature that the TABLE mentioned in
sentence (2) is a metonymy for the SITting event. Consequently, the system
will not assume that the indefinite expression a table has the funciton to
present a new entity TABLE, but that an implicit entity is involved with a
related event. The entity implied is understood as the Main Topic of the
current Topic Hierarchy, i.e. JOHN.
We will now concentrate our attention onto sentence (3). To account
for the fact that whenever a waiter takes an order there is always someone
that makes the order, GETARUNS computes TAKE ORDER as a com-
pound verb with an optional implicit GOAL argument that is the person
ORDERing something. The system then looks for the current Main Topic of
discourse or the Focus as computed by the Topic Hierarchy Algorithm, and
associates the semantic identifier to the implicit entity. This latter procedure
is triggered by the existential dummy quantifier associated to the implicit
279
optional argument. However, another important process has been activated
automatically by the presence of a singular definite NP, ?the WAITER?,
which is searched at first in the Discourse Model of entities and proper-
ties asserted for the previous stretch of text. Failure in equality matching
activates the bridging mechanism for inferences which succeeds in identify-
ing the WAITER as a Social Role in a RESTAURANT, the current Main
Location.
The text includes a sentence (4) that represents a psychological state-
ment, that is it expresses the feelings and is viewed from the point of view of
one of the characters in the story. The relevance of the sentence is its role in
the assignment of the antecedent to the pronominal expressions contained in
the following sentence (5). Without such a sentence the anaphora resolution
module would have no way of computing JOHN as the legitimate antecedent
of ?He/his?. However, in order to capture such information, GETARUNS
computes the Point of View and Discourse Domain on the basis of Informa-
tional Structure and Focus Topic by means of a Topic Hierarchy algorithm
based on [3] and [8].
2.2 Common sense reasoning
GETARUNS is also able to search for unexpressed relations intervening
in the current spatio-temporal location. To solve this problem in a princi-
pled way we needed commonsense knowledge organized in a computationally
tractable way. This is what CONCEPTNET 2.1 ([6]) provides. ConceptNet
- available at www.conceptnet.org - is the largest freely available, machine-
useable commonsense resource. Organized as a network of semi-structured
natural language fragments, ConceptNet consists of over 250,000 elements
of commonsense knowledge. At present it includes instances of 19 semantic
relations, representing categories of, inter alia, temporal, spatial, causal, and
functional knowledge. The representation chosen is semi-structured natu-
ral language using lemmata rather than inflected words. The way in which
concepts are related reminds ?scripts?, where events may be decomposed in
Preconditions, Subevents and so on, and has been inspired by Cyc ([4]).
ConceptNet can be accessed in different ways; we wanted a strongly con-
strained one. We choose a list of relations from this external resource and
combine them with the information available from the processing of the text
to derive Implicit Information. In other words, we assume that what is be-
ing actually said hides additional information which however is implicitely
hinted at. ConceptNet provides the following relations: SubEventOf, First-
SubeventOf, DesiresEvent, Do, CapableOf, FunctionOf, UsedFor, EventRe-
280
quiresObject, LocationOf. Let us see how this information can be exploited
to interpret another classical example from the Pragmatics literature: A:
I?ve just run out of petrol ; B: Oh, there?s a garage just around the corner.
There are a number of missing conceptual links that need to be inferred in
this text, as follows: Inf1 : the CAR has run out of petrol; Inf2 : the CAR
NEEDS petrol; Inf3 : garages SELL PETROL for cars.
In addition, in order to use ConceptNet we need to link petrol and garage
to gas/gasoline and gas station respectively. Now we can query the ontology
and will recover the following facts. The whole process starts from the first
utterance and uses RUN OUT OF GAS: (Do ?car? ?run out of gas?). Then
we can use GAS STATION and CAR to build another query and get (Do
?car? ?get fuel at gas station?), where FUEL and GASoline are in IsA
relation. Eventually we may still get additional information on the reason
why this has to be done: (Do ?person? ?don?t want to run out of gas?),
(SubeventOf ?drive car? ?you run out of gas?), (Do ?car? ?need gas petrol
in order to function?), (Do ?gas station? ?sell fuel for automobile?). These
may all constitute additional commonsense knowledge that may be used to
further explain and clarify the implicature.
References
[1] Joan Bresnan. Lexical-Functional Syntax (Blackwell Textbooks in Linguistics).
Blackwell Publisher, September 2000.
[2] H.P. Grice. Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and J.L. Morgan, editors, Syntax
and Semantics, volume 3. New York Academic Press, 1975.
[3] B. Grosz. Focusing and description in natural language dialogues. Cambridge
University Press, 1981.
[4] Douglas B. Lenat. CYC: A large-scale investment in knowledge infrastructure.
Communications of the ACM, 38(11):33?38, 1995.
[5] Stephen Levinson. Pragmatics. Cambridge University Press, 1983.
[6] Hugo Liu and Push Singh. ConceptNet: A practical commonsense reasoning
toolkit. BT Technology Journal, 22(211?226), 2004.
[7] A.J. Sanford and S.C. Garrod. Thematic subjecthood and cognitive constraints
on discourse structure. Journal of Pragmatics, 12(5-6):519?534, 1988.
[8] C. Sidner. Focusing in the comprehension of definite anaphora. In M. Brady
and R. Berwick, editors, Computational models of discourse, pages 267?330.
MIT Press, 1983.
281
