Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 108?111,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The Coding Scheme for Annotating Extended Nominal Coreference 
and Bridging Anaphora in the Prague Dependency Treebank 
Anna Nedoluzhko,  Ji?? M?rovsk?,  Petr Pajas
Charles University in Prague
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics
{nedoluzko, mirovsky, pajas}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz
Abstract
The present paper outlines an ongoing project 
of annotation of the extended nominal corefer-
ence and the bridging anaphora in the Prague 
Dependency Treebank. We describe the anno-
tation  scheme  with  respect  to  the  linguistic 
classification of coreferential and bridging re-
lations and focus also on details of the annota-
tion process from the technical point of view. 
We present methods of helping the annotators 
?  by  a  pre-annotation  and  by  several  useful 
features  implemented  in  the  annotation  tool. 
Our method of the inter-annotator agreement 
is focused on the improvement of the annota-
tion  guidelines;  we  present  results  of  three 
subsequent measurements of the agreement.
1 Introduction
The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT 2.0) is a 
large collection  of linguistically  annotated  data 
and documentation (Haji?  et al, 2006). In PDT 
2.0,  Czech  newspaper  texts  are  annotated  on 
three  layers.  The most abstract  (tectogrammati-
cal) layer includes the annotation of coreferential 
links of two types: grammatical coreference (typ-
ically within a single sentence) and textual coref-
erence (for pronominal and zero anaphora). The 
current paper focuses on the present annotation 
of  extended  textual  coreference,  where  the 
anaphoric  expression  is  neither  personal  pro-
noun, nor zero. Also the annotation of bridging 
anaphora on PDT is discussed.
In the last few years, a number of annotation 
schemes have been released, three of which are 
to be shortly presented here. The MUC is consid-
ered to be the most standard annotation scheme 
(Hirschman, 1997) and it  is  used in more than 
one  application  (MUC-6,  MUC-7,  ACE).  The 
advantage of this scheme is its simplicity and a 
very  detailed  linguistically  oriented  coding 
scheme.  It  has  been  however  criticized  for  its 
vague interpretation of the notion of coreference 
and for  the  limited  coverage of  relations  (only 
identical  relation  between  nouns  is  annotated). 
One of the most well known later approaches is 
MATE (Poesio, 2004)  and its  extension on the 
GNOME  corpus.  The  project  is  meant  to  be 
multi-functional. The annotation scheme was pri-
marily  developed  for  dialog  acts  analyses,  but 
may be easily  adapted  for  any other  investiga-
tion. In the extended GNOME scheme, the iden-
tical  coreference  is  annotated  along with  some 
bridging  relations,  such  as  ELEMENT,  SUB-
SET,  POSSession  and  OTHER for  underspeci-
fied relations. In PoCoS (Krasavina and Chiar-
chos, 2007), a two layer coreference annotation 
scheme was suggested: the Core Layer is general 
and reusable, while the Extended Layer supports 
a wider range of specific extensions.
In this document, we present the application of 
coreference  annotation  on  a  slavonic  language 
(Czech).  Czech  has  no  definite  article,  so  in 
many cases, an anaphoric relation cannot be eas-
ily identified. That's why we concentrated solely 
on coreference, i.e. on the case when two expres-
sions denote the same entity. Anaphoric relation 
between  non-coreferential  objects  is  annotated 
separately,  together  with  some  other  types  of 
bridging anaphora (see 2.1).
2 Methods of coreference and bridging 
anaphora annotation
Subject to annotation are pairs of coreferring ex-
pressions, the preceding expression is called an-
tecedent, the subsequent one is called anaphor.
The  (mostly  manual)  annotation  of  the  ex-
tended  coreference  and  bridging  anaphora  pro-
ceeds  basically  in  one  phase.  Unlike 
MUC/MATE/PoCoS projects,  where  annotation 
is divided into two phases (identifying  elements 
that can come in coreference relation (so called 
?markables?) and  establishing  anaphoric  rela-
tion), we do not make preliminary annotation of 
?markables?. Realizing the disadvantage of diffi-
cult agreement comparison, we still think that to 
separate identifying ?markables? is unnecessary 
in case of a language without grammatical cate-
gory of definiteness.
108
2.1 The annotation scheme
For the time being, we annotate textual corefer-
ence and bridging anaphora. In what follows, we 
briefly  present  the  classification  of  these  two 
types of context-dependences.
The  cases  where  anaphor  is  a  personal, 
demonstrative or zero pronoun are already anno-
tated in PDT. In the present annotation, the most 
cases of anaphoric expressions are expressed by 
NP with  nominal  head,  in  some cases  also  by 
pronominal  demonstrative  adverbs  (there,  then 
etc.),  adjectives  (by  named  entities  (e.g.  Ger-
many ? German) and possessive forms)), numer-
als or verbs (own ? ownership), see ex. (1).
Textual coreference is further classified into 
two types ? coreference of NPs with specific  or 
generic coreference. This decision is made on the 
basis of the expectation, that generic coreferen-
tial  chains  have  different  anaphoric  rules  from 
the specific ones. Into this group, there is also in-
cluded  a  big number  of  abstract  nouns,  whose 
coreference is not quite clear in every particular 
case. So, the generic type of textual coreference 
serves as the ambiguity group too. 
In  bridging anaphora we distinguish PART, 
SUBSET and FUNCT traditional  relations  (see 
e.g. Clark 1977), CONTRAST for coherence rel-
evant  discourse  opposites  (e.g.  People don't  
chew, it's cows who chew) and further underspec-
ified group REST, which is  used  for capturing 
bridging references ? potential  candidates for  a 
new bridging group (e.g. location ? resident, rel-
atives, event ? argument and some others).
2.2 Annotation Principles
In order to develop maximally consistent annota-
tion scheme, we follow a number of basic princi-
ples. Some of them are presented below: 
Chain principle: coreference relations in text 
are organized in ordered chains.  The most recent 
mention  of  a referent  is  marked  as  antecedent. 
This  principle  is  controlled  automatically  (see 
3.1.2). Chain principle does not concern bridging 
anaphora.
Principle of the maximum length of corefer-
encial  chains also  concerns  only  the  case  of 
coreference.  It  says  that  in  case  of  multiple 
choice, we prefer to continue the existing coref-
erence chain, rather than to begin a new one. To 
satisfy  this  principle,  grammatical  coreferential 
chains are being continued by textual ones, and 
already annotated  textual  coreferences  are con-
tinued  by  currently  annotated   non-pronominal 
links in turn.
The principle of maximal size of an anaforic 
expression:  subject  to annotation is always the 
whole  subtree  of  the  antecedent/anaphor.  This 
principle is partially directed by the dependency 
structure  of tectogrammatical trees  and may be 
sometimes counter-intuitive. See ex. (1):
(1)Henry's brother Nicholas has owned the 
Hall  for  27  years.  On  Nicholas'  death,  it 
passed  into  the  ownership  of  his  nephew, 
Yarburgh Greame
The principle of cooperation with the syntac-
tic structure of a given dependency tree: we do 
not annotate relations, which are already caught 
up by the  syntactic  structure  of  the  tectogram-
matical tree. So, unlike most schemes, we do not 
annotate predication and apposition relations.
Preference  of  coreference  over  bridging 
anaphora: in case of multiple choice, we prefer 
coreference.
3 The Tool and Data Format
The primary format of PDT 2.0 is called PML. It 
is  an  abstract  XML-based  format  designed  for 
annotation of treebanks. For editing and process-
ing data in PML format, a fully customizable tree 
editor  TrEd  has  been  implemented  (Pajas  & 
?t?p?nek 2008).
TrEd  can  be  easily  customized  to  a  desired 
purpose by extensions that are included into the 
system as modules. In this section, we describe 
some features of an extension that has been im-
plemented for our purposes.
The data  scheme used  in  PDT 2.0 has  been 
slightly extended to support the annotation of the 
extended textual  coreference (that  has ? unlike 
the originally annotated textual coreference ? a 
type)  and  the  bridging  anaphora  (that  has  not 
been annotated before and also has a type). Tech-
nically,  various  kinds  of  non-dependency  rela-
tions between nodes in PDT 2.0 use dedicated re-
ferring  attributes  that  contain unique identifiers 
of the nodes they refer to.
3.1 Helping the Annotators
We employ two ways of helping the annotators 
in their  tedious  task. First,  we pre-annotate the 
data with highly probable coreference relations. 
The annotators check these links and can remove 
them  if  they  are  wrong.  This  approach  has 
proved to be faster than letting the annotators an-
notate  the  data  from scratch.  Second,  we have 
implemented several supporting features into the 
annotation  tool  (the  TrEd  extension)  that  help 
during the annotation process.
109
3.1.1 Pre-Annotation
We use a list of pairs of words that with a high 
probability  form  a  coreferential  pair  in  texts. 
Most of the pairs in the list consist of a noun and 
a derived adjective, which are different in Czech, 
e.g.  Praha  ?  pra?sk?  (in  English:  Prague  ? 
Prague,  like  in  the  sentence:  He  arrived  in  
Prague and found the Prague atmosphere quite  
casual).  The rest  of the list  is formed by pairs 
consisting  of  an abbreviation  and its  one-word 
expansion, e.g. ?R ? ?esko (similarly in English: 
USA ? States).  The whole list consists of more 
than  6  thousand  pairs  obtained  automatically 
from  the  morphological  synthesizer  for  Czech, 
manually checked and slightly extended.
3.1.2 Annotation
Several features have been implemented in the 
annotation tool to help with the annotation.
Manual  pre-annotation: If  the  annotator 
finds a word in the text that appears many times 
in the document and its occurrences seem to co-
refer,  he can create a coreferential chain out of 
these  words  by  a  single  key-stroke.  All  nodes 
that  have  the  same  tectogrammatical  lemma 
(t_lemma) become a part of the chain.
Finding the nearest antecedent: The annota-
tion  instructions  require  that  the  nearest  an-
tecedent is always selected for the coreferential 
link.  The  tool  automatically  re-directs  a  newly 
created coreferential arrow to the nearest one (in 
the already existing coreferential chain) if the an-
notator  selects  a farther  antecedent  by mistake. 
However, the rule of the nearest antecedent can 
be broken in less clear situations. For example, if 
there are three coreferential words in the text, A, 
B and C (ordered from left to right), and the an-
notator connects A and C (overlooking B), and 
later realizes that B is also coreferential with A 
and creates the arrow from B to A, the tool re-
connects  the  C?A arrow  to  C?B.  Thus,  the 
chain C?B?A is correctly created.
Preserving the coreferential chain: If the an-
notator  removes  an  arrow  and  a  coreferential 
chain is thus interrupted, the tool asks the anno-
tator whether it should re-connect the chain.
Text highlighting: The annotation of the ex-
tended  textual  coreference  and  the  bridging 
anaphora is  performed on the tectogrammatical 
layer of PDT. However, the annotators prefer to 
work on the surface form of the text, using the 
tectogrammatical trees only as a supporting de-
piction of the relations. After selecting a word in 
the sentences (by clicking on it), the tool deter-
mines  to  which  node  in  the  tectogrammatical 
trees the word belongs. Then, the projection back 
to the surface is performed and all words on the 
surface that belong to the selected node are high-
lighted. Only one word of the highlighted words 
is a lexical counterpart of the tectogrammatical 
node  (which  is  usually  the  word  the  annotator 
clicked on ? only in cases such as if the annotator 
clicks on a preposition or other auxiliary word, 
the lexical counterpart of the corresponding tec-
togrammatical  node  differs  from  the  word 
clicked  on).  Using  this  information,  also  all 
words  in  the  sentences  that  have  the  same 
t_lemma (again, we use only the lexical counter-
parts)  as  the  selected  word,  are  underlined. 
Words that are connected with the selected word 
via a coreferential chain are highlighted in such 
colors that indicate whether the last connecting 
relation in the chain was textual or grammatical. 
Moreover,  all  words  that  are  connected  via  a 
bridging anaphora with any word of this corefer-
ential chain, are highlighted in a specific color.
4 Application and Evaluation
The annotation of the extended textual  corefer-
ence  and  the  bridging  anaphora  started  in  No-
vember 2008. Two annotators work on different 
texts  (each document  is  annotated only by one 
annotator),  except  for  a small  overlap  used for 
measuring the inter-annotator agreement.
As of April 2009, about one fifth of PDT 2.0 
data  has been  annotated.  The detailed  numbers 
are summed in Table 1:
number of annotated documents 611
total number of sentences 9,425
total number of words 157,817
total number of tectogrammatical nodes 
(excl. the technical root) 127,954
number of newly annotated co-referring 
nodes  (bridging  relations  and  textual 
coreference)
16,874
number of co-referring nodes including 
the textual coreference originally anno-
tated in PDT 2.0
20,532
% of co-referring nodes 16 %
Table 1. Annotation statistics
Figure 1 presents the proportion of  types of 
coreferential  and  bridging  relations  in  the  cur-
rently annotated part of PDT1. TK_0 is used for 
textual coreference of specific NPs, TK_NR for 
textual  coreference  of  non-specific  NPs,  other 
abbreviations are believed to be self-explaining. 
1  Including the originally annotated textual coreference 
in PDT 2.0.
110
Inter-annotator agreement: For the purposes 
of checking and improving the annotation guide-
lines,  we  require  a  more  strict  inter-annotator 
agreement than agreement  on sets  (for  corefer-
ence),  often  used  in  other  projects  (e.g.  Pas-
soneau  2004).  For  both  the  extended  textual 
coreference  and the  bridging anaphora,  we use 
F1-measure for the agreement on the antecedent, 
and Cohen's  ? (Cohen 1960) for the agreement 
on the type of the link. In Table 2, the results of 
the three performed measurements of the inter-
annotator agreement are presented:
arrows 
TC (F1)
arrows 
TC + 
types 
(F1)
TC 
types 
only 
(?)
arrows
bridging 
(F1)
arrows
bridging
+ 
types (F1)
bridging 
types 
only
(?)
1st measure-
ment 
(40 sent.) 0.76 0.67 0.54 0.49 0.42 0.79
2nd measure-
ment
(40 sent.) 0.64 0.41 0.33 0.52 0.52 1
3rdmeasure-
ment 
(100 sent.) 0.80 0.68 0.67 0.59 0.57 0.88
Table 2. Evaluation of the inter-annotator agreement
5 Conclusion
We have presented the annotation scheme and 
principles  for  the  extended  textual  coreference 
and the bridging anaphora in PDT 2.0.
Pre-annotation and features of the annotation 
tool that help the annotators have been described 
in detail. We have presented basic statistics about 
the  annotation  completed  so  far  and  results  of 
first  measurements of the inter-annotator agree-
ment (which are difficult to compare to other ap-
proaches, as we do not use "markables"). 
Improvement of the inter-annotator agreement 
is  in  our  focus  for  the  upcoming  stage  of  the 
project. The experience shows that the agreement 
is greatly affected by parameters of the text as a 
whole. Short texts are generally far less demand-
ing for their interpretation than longer ones, texts 
with  many  abstract  and  general  notions  allow 
more  possibilities  of  interpretation  and  so  on. 
Frequent  problems  causing  inter-annotator  dis-
agreement  are  of  two  types  -  different  under-
standing  of  the  content  and  inaccuracy  of  the 
coding  scheme.  The  first  case  is  hardly  to  be 
solved entirely. The problems of the second type 
are  being  worked  on:  we  prepare  the  detailed 
classification of the inter-annotator disagreement 
and regularly specify the annotation guidelines.
Acknowledgment 
We gratefully  acknowledge  the support  of the 
Czech  Ministry  of  Education  (grant  MSM-
0021620838),  the  Czech  Grant  Agency  (grant 
405/09/0729), the European Union (project Com-
panions  ?  FP6-IST-5-034434),  and  the  Grant 
Agency  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the 
Czech Republic (project 1ET101120503).
References 
Clark, H. 1977. Bridging. In Johnson-Laird and Wa-
son, editors,  Thinking: Readings in Cognitive Sci-
ence. Cambridge. 411-420.
Cohen, J. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for nomi-
nal  scales.  Educational  and  Psychological  Mea-
surement, 20(1), 37-46.
Haji?,  J.  et  al.  2006.  Prague  Dependency  Treebank 
2.0.CD-ROM,  Linguistic  Data  Consortium,  LDC 
Catalog No.: LDC2006T01, Philadelphia.
Hirschman, L. 1997. MUC-7 coreference task defini-
tion. Version 3.0.
Krasavina, O. and  Ch. Chiarcos. 2007. PoCoS ? Pots-
dam  Coreference  Scheme.  Proc.  of  ACL  2007, 
Prague, Czech Republic
Ku?ov? L. and E. Haji?ov?. 2004. Coreferential Rela-
tions in the Prague Dependency Treebank. In 5th 
Discourse Anaphora and Anaphor Resolution Col-
loquium. Edi??es Colibri.
Pajas, P. and J. ?t?p?nek 2008. Recent advances in a 
feature-rich framework for treebank annotation. In 
The 22nd Interntional Conference on Computatio-
nal  Linguistics  ?  Proceedings  of  the  Conference. 
Manchester, pp. 673-680.
Passonneau, R. 2004. Computing Reliability for Core-
ference. In Proceedings of LREC, vol. 4, Lisbon, 
pp. 1503-1506.
Poesio, M. 2004 The MATE/GNOME Proposals for 
Anaphoric  Annotation,  Revisited.  Proc.  of  SIG-
DIAL.
Figure 1. Types of  relations
111
