Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation , pages 85?89,
Athens, Greece, 30 March ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
The TALP-UPC phrase-based translation system for EACL-WMT 2009
Jos? A.R. Fonollosa and Maxim Khalilov and Marta R. Costa-juss? and
Jos? B. Mari?o and Carlos A. Henr?quez Q. and Adolfo Hern?ndez H. and
Rafael E. Banchs
TALP Research Center
Universitat Polit?cnica de Catalunya, Barcelona 08034
{adrian,khalilov,mruiz,canton,carloshq,adolfohh,rbanchs}@talp.upc.edu
Abstract
This study presents the TALP-UPC sub-
mission to the EACL Fourth Worskhop
on Statistical Machine Translation 2009
evaluation campaign. It outlines the ar-
chitecture and configuration of the 2009
phrase-based statistical machine transla-
tion (SMT) system, putting emphasis on
the major novelty of this year: combina-
tion of SMT systems implementing differ-
ent word reordering algorithms.
Traditionally, we have concentrated on
the Spanish-to-English and English-to-
Spanish News Commentary translation
tasks.
1 Introduction
TALP-UPC (Center of Speech and Language
Applications and Technology at the Universitat
Polit?cnica de Catalunya) is a permanent par-
ticipant of the ACL WMT shared translations
tasks, traditionally concentrating on the Spanish-
to-English and vice versa language pairs. In this
paper, we describe the 2009 system?s architecture
and design describing individual components and
distinguishing features of our model.
This year?s system stands aside from the
previous years? configurations which were per-
formed following an N -gram-based (tuple-based)
approach to SMT. By contrast to them, this
year we investigate the translation models (TMs)
interpolation for a state-of-the-art phrase-based
translation system. Inspired by the work pre-
sented in (Schwenk and Est?ve, 2008), we attack
this challenge using the coefficients obtained for
the corresponding monolingual language models
(LMs) for TMs interpolation.
On the second step, we have performed
additional word reordering experiments, com-
paring the results obtained with a statisti-
cal method (R. Costa-juss? and R. Fonollosa,
2009) and syntax-based algorithm (Khalilov and
R. Fonollosa, 2008). Further the outputs of
the systems were combined selecting the trans-
lation with the Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR) al-
gorithm (Kumar, 2004) that allowed significantly
outperforming the baseline configuration.
The remainder of this paper is organized as
follows: Section 2 presents the TALP-UPC?09
phrase-based system, along with the translation
models interpolation procedure and other minor
novelties of this year. Section 3 reports on the ex-
perimental setups and outlines the results of the
participation in the EACL WMT 2009 evaluation
campaign. Section 4 concludes the paper with dis-
cussions.
2 TALP-UPC phrase-based SMT
The system developed for this year?s shared
task is based on a state-of-the-art SMT sys-
tem implemented within the open-source MOSES
toolkit (Koehn et al, 2007). A phrase-based trans-
lation is considered as a three step algorithm:
(1) the source sequence of words is segmented
in phrases, (2) each phrase is translated into tar-
get language using translation table, (3) the target
phrases are reordered to be inherent in the target
language.
A bilingual phrase (which in the context of SMT
do not necessarily coincide with their linguistic
analogies) is any pair of m source words and n
target words that satisfies two basic constraints:
(1) words are consecutive along both sides of the
bilingual phrase and (2) no word on either side of
the phrase is aligned to a word outside the phrase.
Given a sentence pair and a corresponding word-
to-word alignment, phrases are extracted follow-
ing the criterion in (Och and Ney, 2004). The
probability of the phrases is estimated by relative
frequencies of their appearance in the training cor-
pus.
85
Classically, a phrase-based translation system
implements a log-linear model in which a foreign
language sentence fJ1 = f1, f2, ..., fJ is trans-
lated into another language eI1 = e1, e2, ..., eI by
searching for the translation hypothesis e?I1 maxi-
mizing a log-linear combination of several feature
models (Brown et al, 1990):
e?I1 = argmaxeI1
{ M?
m=1
?mhm(eI1, fJ1 )
}
where the feature functions hm refer to the system
models and the set of ?m refers to the weights cor-
responding to these models.
2.1 Translation models interpolation
We implemented a TM interpolation strategy fol-
lowing the ideas proposed in (Schwenk and Es-
t?ve, 2008), where the authors present a promis-
ing technique of target LMs linear interpolation;
in (Koehn and Schroeder, 2007) where a log-linear
combination of TMs is performed; and specifi-
cally in (Foster and Kuhn, 2007) where the authors
present various ways of TM combination and ana-
lyze in detail the TM domain adaptation.
In the framework of the evaluation campaign,
there were two Spanish-to-English parallel train-
ing corpora available: Europarl v.4 corpus (about
50M tokens) and News Commentary (NC) corpus
(about 2M tokens). The test dataset provided by
the organizers this year was from the news do-
main, so we considered the Europarl training cor-
pus as "out-of-domain" data and the News Com-
mentary as "in-domain" training material. Unfor-
tunately, the in-domain corpus is much smaller in
size, however the Europarl corpus can be also used
to increase the final translation and reordering ta-
bles in spite of its different nature.
A straightforward approach to the TM interpo-
lation would be an iterative TM reconstruction ad-
justing scale coefficients on each step of the loop
with use of the highest BLEU score as a maxi-
mization criterion.
However, we did not expect a significant gain
from this time-consumption strategy and we de-
cided to follow a simpler approach. In the pre-
sented results, we obtained the best interpola-
tion weight following the standard entropy-based
optimization of the target-side LM. We adjust
the weight coefficient ?Europarl (?NC = 1 ?
?Europarl) of the linear interpolation of the target-
side LMs:
P (w) = ?Europarl ? PwEuroparl + ?NC ? PwNC (1)
where PwEuroparl and PwNC are probabilities as-
signed to the word sequence w by the LM esti-
mated on Europarl and NC data, respectively.
The scale factor values are automatically opti-
mized to obtain the lowest perplexity ppl(w) pro-
duced by the interpolated LM P (w). We used the
standard script compute ? best ? mix from the
SRI LM package (Stolcke, 2002) for optimization.
On the next step, the optimized coefficients
?Europarl and ?NC are generalized on the interpo-
lated translation and reordering models. In other
words, reordering and translation models are in-
terpolated using the same weights which yield the
lowest perplexity for LM interpolation.
The word-to-word alignment was obtained from
the joint (merged) database (Europarl + NC).
Then, we separately computed the translation and
reordering tables corresponding to the in- and out-
of-domain parts of the joint alignment. The final
tables, as well as the final target LM were obtained
using linear interpolation. The weights were se-
lected using a minimum perplexity criterion esti-
mated on the corresponding interpolated combina-
tion of the target-side LMs.
The optimized coefficient values are: for Span-
ish: NC weight = 0.526, Europarl weight = 0.474;
for English: NC weight = 0.503, Europarl weight
= 0.497. The perplexity results obtained using
monolingual LMs and the 2009 development set
(English and Spanish references) can be found in
Table 1, while the corresponding improvement in
BLEU score is presented in Section 3.3 and sum-
mary of the obtained results (Table 4).
Europarl NC Interpolated
English 463.439 489.915 353.305
Spanish 308.802 347.092 246.573
Table 1: Perplexity results obtained on the Dev
2009 corpus and the monolingual LMs.
Note that the corresponding reordering models
are interpolated with the same weights.
2.2 Statistical Machine Reordering
The idea of the Statistical Machine Reordering
(SMR) stems from the idea of using the power-
ful techniques developed for SMT and to translate
86
the source language (S) into a reordered source
language (S?), which more closely matches the
order of the target language. To infer more re-
orderings, it makes use of word classes. To cor-
rectly integrate the SMT and SMR systems, both
are concatenated by using a word graph which of-
fers weighted reordering hypotheses to the SMT
system. The details are described in (?).
2.3 Syntax-based Reordering
Syntax-based Reordering (SBR) approach deals
with the word reordering problem and is based on
non-isomorphic parse subtree transfer as described
in details in (Khalilov and R. Fonollosa, 2008).
Local and long-range word reorderings are
driven by automatically extracted permutation pat-
terns operating with source language constituents.
Once the reordering patterns are extracted, they
are further applied to monotonize the bilingual
corpus in the same way as shown in the previ-
ous subsection. The target-side parse tree is con-
sidered as a filter constraining reordering rules to
the set of patterns covered both by the source- and
target-side subtrees.
2.4 System Combination
Over the past few years the MBR algorithm uti-
lization to find the best consensus outputs of dif-
ferent translation systems has proved to improve
the translation accuracy (Kumar, 2004). The sys-
tem combination is performed on the 200-best
lists which are generated by the three systems:
(1) MOSES-based system without pre-translation
monotonization (baseline), (2) MOSES-based
SMT enhanced with SMR monotonization and (3)
MOSES-based SMT augmented with SBR mono-
tonization. The results presented in Table 4 show
that the combined output significantly outperforms
the baseline system configuration.
3 Experiments and results
We followed the evaluation baseline instructions 1
to train the MOSES-based translation system.
In some experiments we used MBR decod-
ing (Kumar and Byrne, 2004) with the smoothed
BLEU score as a similarity criteria, that al-
lowed gaining 0.2 BLEU points comparing to the
standard procedure of outputting the translation
with the highest probability (HP). We applied the
Moses implementation of this algorithm to the list
1http://www.statmt.org/wmt09/baseline.html
of 200 best translations generated by the TALP-
UPC system. The results obtained over the official
2009 Test dataset can be found in Table 2.
Task HP MBR
EsEn 24.48 24.62
EnEs 23.46 23.64
Table 2: MBR versus MERT decoding.
The "recase" script provided within the base-
line was supplemented with and additional mod-
ule, which restore the original case for unknown
words (many of them are proper names and loos-
ing of case information leads to a significant per-
formance degradation).
3.1 Language models
The target-side language models were estimated
using the SRILM toolkit (Stolcke, 2002). We tried
to use all the available in-domain training mate-
rial: apart from the corresponding portions of the
bilingual NC corpora we involved the following
monolingual corpora:
? News monolingual corpus (49M tokens for
English and 49M for Spanish)
? Europarl monolingual corpus (about 504M
tokens for English and 463M for Spanish)
? A collection of News development and test
sets from previous evaluations (151K tokens
for English and 175K for Spanish)
? A collection of Europarl development and
test sets from previous evaluations (295K to-
kens for English and 311K for Spanish)
Five LMs per language were estimated on the
corresponding datasets and interpolated follow-
ing the maximum perplexity criteria. Hence, the
larger LMs incorporating in- and out-of-domain
data were used in decoding.
3.2 Spanish enclitics separation
For the Spanish portion of the corpus we imple-
mented an enclitics separation procedure on the
preprocessing step, i.e. the pronouns attached to
the verb were separated and contractions as del
or al were splitted into de el or a el. Conse-
quently, training data sparseness due to Spanish
morphology was reduced improving the perfor-
mance of the overall translation system. As a
87
post-processing, the segmentation was recovered
in the English-to-Spanish direction using target-
side Part-of-Speech tags (de Gispert, 2006).
3.3 Results
The automatic scores provided by the WMT?09
organizers for TALP-UPC submissions calculated
over the News 2009 dataset can be found in Ta-
ble 3. BLEU and NIST case-insensitive (CI) and
case-sensitive (CS) metrics are considered.
Task Bleu CI Bleu CS NIST CI NIST CS
EsEn 25.93 24.54 7.275 7.017
EnEs 24.85 23.37 6.963 6.689
Table 3: BLEU and NIST scores for preliminary
official test dataset 2009 (primary submission)
with 500 sentences excluded.
The TALP-UPC primary submission was
ranked the 3rd among 28 presented translations
for the Spanish-to-English task and the 4th for the
English-to-Spanish task among 9 systems.
The following system configurations and the in-
ternal results obtained are reported:
? Baseline: Moses-based SMT, as proposed
on the web-page of the evaluation campaign
with Spanish enclitics separation and modi-
fied version of ?recase? tool,
? Baseline+TMI: Baseline enhanced with TM
interpolation as described in subsection 2.1,
? Baseline+TMI+MBR: the same as the latter
but with MBR decoding,
? Baseline+TMI+SMR: the same as Base-
line+TMI but with SMR technique applied to
monotonize the source portion of the corpus,
as described in subsection 2.2,
? Baseline+SBR: the same as Baseline but with
SBR algorithm applied to monotonize the
source portion of the corpus, as described in
subsection 2.3,
? System Combination: a combined output of
the 3 previous systems done with the MBR
algorithm, as described in subsection 2.4.
Impact of TM interpolation and MBR decod-
ing is more significant for the English-to-Spanish
translation task, for which the target-side mono-
lingual corpus is smaller than for the Spanish-to-
English translation.
We did not have time to meet the evalua-
tion deadline for providing the system combi-
nation output. Nevertheless, during the post-
evaluation period we performed the experiments
reported in the last three lines of Table 4 (Base-
line+TMI+SMR, Baseline+SBR and System com-
bination).
Note that the results presented in Table 4 differ
from the ones which can be found the Table 3 due
to selective conditions of preliminary evaluation
done by the Shared Task organizers.
System News 2009 Test CI News 2009 Test CS
Spanish-to-English
Baseline 25.82 24.37
Baseline+TMI 25.84 24.47
Baseline+TMI+MBR (Primary) 26.04 24.62
Baseline+SMR 24.95 23.62
Baseline+SBR 24.24 22.89
System combination 26.44 25.00
English-to-Spanish
Baseline 24.56 23.05
Baseline+TMI 25.01 23.41
Baseline+TMI+MBR (Primary) 25.16 23.64
Baseline+SMR 24.09 22.65
Baseline+SBR 23.52 22.05
System combination 25.39 23.86
Table 4: Experiments summary.
88
4 Conclusions
In this paper, we present the TALP-UPC phrase-
based translation system developed for the EACL-
WMT 2009 evaluation campaign. The major nov-
elties of this year are translation models interpola-
tion done in linear way and combination of SMT
systems implementing different word reordering
algorithms. The system was ranked pretty well for
both translation tasks in which our institution has
participated.
Unfortunately, the promising reordering tech-
niques and the combination of their outputs were
not applied within the evaluation deadline, how-
ever we report the obtained results in the paper.
5 Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Spanish Gov-
ernment under grant TEC2006-13964-C03 (AVI-
VAVOZ project).
References
P. Brown, J. Cocke, S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra,
F. Jelinek, J.D. Lafferty, R. Mercer, and P.S.
Roossin. 1990. A statistical approach to machine
translation. Computational Linguistics, 16(2):79?
85.
A. de Gispert. 2006. Introducing linguistic knowledge
into Statistical Machine Translation. Ph.D. thesis,
Universitat Polit?cnica de Catalunya, December.
G. Foster and R. Kuhn. 2007. Mixture-model adap-
tation for SMT. In In Annual Meeting of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics: Proc. of the
Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion (WMT), pages 128?135, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic, June.
M. Khalilov and J. R. Fonollosa. 2008. A new subtree-
transfer approach to syntax-based reordering for sta-
tistical machine translation. Technical report, Uni-
versitat Polit?cnica de Catalunya.
Ph. Koehn and J. Schroeder. 2007. Experiments in do-
main adaptation for statistical machine translation.
In In Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Proc. of the Second Workshop
on Statistical Machine Translation (WMT), pages
224?227, Prague, Czech Republic, June.
Ph. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Con-
stantin, and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: open-source
toolkit for statistical machine translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL) 2007, pages 177?180.
Sh. Kumar and W. Byrne. 2004. Minimum bayes-risk
decoding for statistical machine translation. In In
HLTNAACL?04, pages 169?176.
Sh. Kumar. 2004. Minimum Bayes-Risk Techniques in
Automatic Speech Recognition and Statistical Ma-
chine Translation. Ph.D. thesis, Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity.
F. Och and H. Ney. 2004. The alignment template
approach to statistical machine translation. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 3(4):417?449, December.
M. R. Costa-juss? and J. R. Fonollosa. 2009. An
Ngram reordering model. Computer Speech and
Language. ISSN 0885-2308, accepted for publica-
tion.
H. Schwenk and Y. Est?ve. 2008. Data selection and
smoothing in an open-source system for the 2008
nist machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings
of the Interspeech?08, pages 2727?2730, Brisbane,
Australia, September.
A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM: an extensible language
modeling toolkit. In Proceedings of the Int. Conf.
on Spoken Language Processing, pages 901?904.
89
