Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Parsing Technologies (IWPT), pages 142?145,
Paris, October 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Application of feature propagation to dependency parsing 
Kepa Bengoetxea Koldo Gojenola 
IXA NLP Group, Technical School of Engineering, Bilbao 
University of the Basque Country, Plaza La Casilla 3, 48012, Bilbao 
kepa.bengoetxea@ehu.es, koldo.gojenola@ehu.es 
Abstract 
This paper presents a set of experiments per-
formed on parsing the Basque Dependency 
Treebank. We have applied feature propaga-
tion to dependency parsing, experimenting the 
propagation of several morphosyntactic fea-
ture values. In the experiments we have used 
the output of a parser to enrich the input of a 
second parser. Both parsers have been gener-
ated by Maltparser, a freely data-driven de-
pendency parser generator. The transforma-
tions, combined with the pseudoprojective 
graph transformation, obtain a LAS of 77.12% 
improving the best reported results for Basque. 
1 Introduction 
This work presents several experiments per-
formed on dependency parsing of the Basque 
Dependency Treebank (BDT, Aduriz et al 
2003). We have experimented the idea of feature 
propagation through dependency arcs, in order to 
help the parser. Feature propagation has been 
used in classical unification-based grammars as a 
means of propagating linguistic information 
through syntax trees. We apply this idea in the 
context of inductive dependency parsing, com-
bining a reduced set of linguistic principles that 
express feature propagation among linguistic 
elements with Maltparser (Nivre et al 2007a), an 
automatic dependency parser generator. 
We have concentrated on propagating several 
morphosyntactic feature values from: a) auxiliary 
verbs to the main verb, b) the last constituent to 
the head noun, in noun phrases c)  the last con-
junct to the conjunction, in coordination.  
This work was developed in the context of de-
pendency parsing exemplified by the CoNLL 
shared task on dependency parsing in years 2006 
and 2007 (Nivre et al 2007b), where several sys-
tems had to compete analyzing data from a typo-
logically varied range of 11 languages. The tree-
banks for all languages were standardized using 
a previously agreed CoNLL-X format (see Fig-
ure 1). BDT was one of the evaluated treebanks, 
which will allow a direct comparison of results. 
Many works on treebank parsing have dedi-
cated an effort to the task of pre-processing train-
ing trees (Nilsson et al 2007). When these ap-
proaches have been applied to dependency pars-
ing several works (Nilsson et al 2007; Ben-
goetxea and Gojenola 2009) have concentrated 
on modifying the structure of the dependency 
tree, changing the shape of the graph. In contrast, 
rather than modifying the tree structure, we will 
experiment changing the information contained 
in the nodes of the tree. This approach requires 
having an initial dependency tree in order to ap-
ply the feature propagation process, which will 
be obtained by means of a standard trained 
model. This way, the features will be propagated 
through some incorrect dependency arcs, and the 
process will be dependent on the reliability of the 
initial arcs. After enriching the tree, a second 
parsing model will try to use this new informa-
tion to improve the standard model. This process 
can also be seen as an example of stacked learn-
ing (Martins et al 2008, Nivre and McDonald 
2008) where a second parser is used to improve 
the performance of a first one. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 presents the main resources used in this 
work. Section 3 presents three different propos-
als for the propagation of the most important 
morphological features. Next, section 4 will 
evaluate the results of each transformation, and 
the last section outlines the main conclusions. 
2 Resources 
This section will describe the main elements that 
have been used in the experiments. First, subsec-
tion 2.1 will present the Basque Dependency 
Treebank data, while subsection 2.2 will describe 
the main characteristics of Maltparser, a state of 
the art and data-driven dependency parser. 
2.1 The Basque Dependency Treebank 
The BDT can be considered a pure dependency 
treebank, as its initial design considered that all 
the dependency arcs would connect sentence to-
kens. Although this decision had consequences 
on the annotation process, its simplicity is also 
an advantage when applying several of the most 
142
efficient parsing algorithms. The treebank con-
sists of 55,469 tokens forming 3,700 sentences, 
334 of which were used as test data. 
(1) Etorri (come) dela (that-has) eta 
(and) joan  (go) dela (that-has) esan 
(tell) zien (did) mutil (boy) 
txikiak(the-little) 
He told the little boy that he has come 
and he has gone 
 
Figure 1 contains an example of a sentence 
(1), annotated in the CoNLL-X format. The text 
is organized in eight tab-separated columns: 
word-number, form, lemma, category , subcate-
gory, morphological features, and the depend-
ency relation (headword + dependency). Basque 
is an agglutinative language and it presents a 
high power to generate inflected word-forms. 
The information in Figure 1 has been simplified 
due to space reasons, as typically the Features 
column will contain many morphological fea-
tures, which are relevant for parsing. 
2.2 Maltparser 
Maltparser (Nivre et al 2007a) is a state of the 
art dependency parser that has been successfully 
applied to typologically different languages and 
treebanks. While several variants of the base 
parser have been implemented, we will use one 
of its standard versions (Maltparser version 0.4). 
The parser obtains deterministically a depend-
ency tree in linear-time in a single pass over the 
input. To determine which is the best action at 
each parsing step, the parser uses history-based 
feature models and discriminative machine learn-
ing. In all the following experiments, we made 
use of a SVM classifier. The specification of the 
features used for learning can in principle be any 
kind of data in Figure 1 (such as word-form, 
lemma, category or morphological features). 
3 Experiments  
We applied the following steps: 
a) Application of feature propagation to the 
training data, using the gold standard arcs, ob-
taining a ?enriched training data?.  
b) Training Maltparser on the ?enriched train-
ing data? to generate a ?enriched parser?.  
c) Training Maltparser with the training data, 
without any transformation, to generate a 
?standard parser?.  
d) Parse the test data with the ?standard 
parser?, obtaining the ?standard output?.  
e) Apply feature propagation to the ?standard 
output?, using the dependency arcs given by 
the parser (with some incorrect arcs), obtain-
ing the ?standard parser?s enriched output?. 
f) Finally, parsing the ?standard parser?s en-
riched output? with the ?enriched parser?, 
Index Word Lemma Category Subcategory Features  Head Dependency 
1 etorri etorri V  V  _   3 lot 
2 dela izan AUXV  AUXV  SC:CMP|SUBJ:3S 1 auxmod 
3 eta eta CONJ  CONJ  _   6 ccomp_obj 
4 joan joan V  V  _   3 lot 
5 dela izan AUXV  AUXV  SC:CMP|SUBJ:3S 4 auxmod 
6 esan esan V  V  _   0 ROOT 
7 zien *edun AUXV  AUXV  SUBJ:3S|OBJ:3P 6 auxmod 
8 mutil mutil NOUN  NOUN  _   6 ncsubj 
9 txikiak txiki ADJ  ADJ  CASE:ERG|NUM:S 8 ncmod 
10 . . PUNT  PUNT_PUNT _   9 PUNC 
 
Figure 1: Example of a BDT sentence in the CONLL-X format 
(V = main verb, AUXV = auxiliary verb, SC = subordinated clause, CMP = completive, ccomp_obj = clausal 
complement object,  SUBJ:3S: subject in 3rd person sing., OBJ:3P: object in 3rd person pl.). 
 
auxmod 
coord 
auxmod auxmod 
coord 
ccomp_obj 
 
 
 
 
Etorri da+la  eta joan da+la  esan zien  mutil txiki+ak  
come has+he+that and go has+he+that tell did+he+them  boy little+the 
V AUXV+3S+CMP CONJ V AUXV+3S+CMP V    AUXV+SUBJ3S+OBJ3P  NOUN ADJ+ERG 
Figure 2: Dependency tree for the sentence in Figure 1. 
(V = main verb; AUXV: auxiliary verb; CMP: completive subordinated mark; CONJ: conjunction; ERG: ergative case). 
 
ncmod 
ncsubj 
143
evaluating the output with the gold test data. 
We have applied three types of feature propa-
gation of the most important morphological fea-
ture values: a) from auxiliary verbs to the main 
verb (verb phrases) b) from post-modifiers to the 
head noun (noun phrases) c) from the last con-
junct to the conjunction (coordination). This was 
done because Basque is a head final language, 
where many relevant features are located at the 
end of constituents. Figure 3 shows (dotted lines) 
the arcs that will propagate features from child to 
parent. The three transformations will be de-
scribed in the following subsections.  
3.1 Verb compounds 
In BDT the verbal elements are organized around 
the main verb, but much syntactically relevant 
verbal information, like subordination type, as-
pect, tense and agreement usually appear at-
tached to the auxiliary verb, which is the de-
pendent. Its main consequence for parsing is that 
the elements bearing the relevant information for 
parsing are situated far in the tree with respect to 
their head. In Figure 2, we can see that the mor-
pheme ?la, indicating a subordinated completive 
sentence, appears down in the tree, and this could 
affect the correct attachment of the two coordi-
nated verbs to the conjunction (eta), as conjunc-
tions should link elements showing similar 
grammatical features (-la in this example). Simi-
larly, it could affect the decision about the de-
pendency type of eta (and) with respect to the 
main verb esan (to say), as the dependency rela-
tion ccomp_obj is defined by means of the ?la 
(completive) morpheme, far down in the tree. 
Figure 3 shows the effect of propagating the 
completive feature value (CMP) from the auxil-
iary verb to the main verb through the auxmod 
(auxiliary modifier) relation. 
3.2 Noun Phrases 
In noun phrases and postpositional phrases, the 
most important morphological feature values 
(case and number) are situated in the last post-
modifier after the noun. Figure 3 shows the ef-
fect of propagating the ergative (ERG) case fea-
ture value from the adjective (the last constituent 
of the noun phrase) to the noun through the rela-
tion ncmod (non-clausal modifier).  
3.3 Coordination 
Coordination in BDT was annotated in the so 
called Prague Style, where the conjunction is 
taken as the head, and the conjuncts depend on it. 
Basque is head final, so usually the last conjunct 
contains syntactically relevant features. We ex-
perimented the promotion of the category, case 
and subordination information from the last con-
junct to the conjunction. In the example in Figure 
3, the conjunction (eta) receives a new feature 
(HV for Head:Verb) from its dependent. This can 
be seen as an alternative to (Nilsson et al 2007) 
who transform dependency arcs. 
4 Evaluation 
Evaluation was performed dividing the treebank 
in three sets: training set (45,000 tokens), devel-
opment and test sets (5,000 tokens each). Train-
ing and testing of the system have been per-
formed on the same datasets presented at the 
CoNLL 2007 shared task, which will allow for a 
direct comparison. Table 1 presents the Labeled 
Attachment Score (LAS) of the different tests on 
development and test data. The first row presents 
the best system score (76.94% LAS) in CoNLL 
2007. This system combined six variants of a 
base parser (Maltparser). The second row shows 
the single Maltparser approach which obtained 
the fifth position. Row 3 presents Bengoetxea 
and Gojenola?s results (76.80% LAS) when ap-
plying graph transformations (pseudo-projective, 
coordination and verb groups) to Basque, in the 
spirit of Nilsson et al (2007). Row 4 shows our 
results after applying several feature optimiza-
tions, which we will use as our baseline. 
auxmod 
coord 
auxmod auxmod 
coord 
ccomp_obj  
 
 
 
 
Etorri  da+la  eta  joan  da+la  esan zien    mutil  txiki+ak  
come  has+he+that and   go  has+he+that tell did+he+them   boy    little+the 
V+CMP   AUXV+3S+CMP CONJ+HV    V+CMP AUXV+3S+CMP      V    AUXV+SUBJ3S+OBJ3P NOUN+ERG ADJ+ERG 
Figure 3: Dependency tree after propagating the morphological features. 
 
ncmod 
ncsubj 
144
Feature propagation in verb groups (PVG) im-
proves LAS in almost 0.5% (row 6 in Table 1). 
While coordination and case propagation do not 
improve significantly the accuracy by themselves 
(rows 7 and 8), their combination with PVG (verb 
groups) significantly increases LAS (+0.86%, 
see row 10). Looking at the accuracy of the de-
pendency arcs used for feature propagation, aux-
liary verbs are the most reliable elements, as 
their arcs (linking it to its head, the main verb) 
have 97% precision and 98% recall. This is in 
accord with PVG giving the biggest increase, 
while arcs related to coordination (63% precision 
and 65% recall) give a more modest contribution. 
BDT contains 2.9% of nonprojective arcs, so 
we experimented the effect of combining the 
pseudoprojective transformation (Nilsson et al 
2007) with feature propagation, obtaining a LAS 
of 77.12%, the best reported results for the BDT. 
5 Conclusions 
We have performed a set of experiments using 
the output of a parser to enrich the input of a 
second parser, propagating the relevant morpho-
logical feature values through dependency arcs. 
The best system, after applying three types of 
feature propagation, obtains a 77.12% LAS 
(2.05% improvement over the baseline) on the 
test set, which is the best reported result for 
Basque dependency parsing, improving the better 
published result for a combined parser (76.94%). 
Acknowledgements 
This research was supported by the Basque Gov-
ernment (EPEC-RS, S-PE08UN48) and the Uni-
versity of the Basque Country (EHU-EJIE, 
EJIE07/05).  
References  
I. Aduriz, M. J. Aranzabe, J. M. Arriola, A. Atutxa, A. 
Diaz de Ilarraza, A. Garmendia and M. Oronoz. 
2003. Construction of a Basque dependency 
treebank. Treebanks and Linguistic Theories. 
Kepa Bengoetxea and Koldo Gojenola. 2009. Explor-
ing Treebank Transformations in Dependency 
Parsing. Proceedings of RANLP?2009. 
Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Joakim Nivre J., Eryigit G., 
Megyesi B., Nilsson M. and Saers M. 2007. Single 
Malt or Blended? A Study in Multilingual 
Parser Optimization. Proceedings of the CoNLL 
Shared Task EMNLP-CoNLL. 
Andr? F. T. Martins, Dipanjan Das, Noah A. Smith, 
Eric P. Xing. 2008. Stacking Dependency Pars-
ing. EMNLP-2008. 
Jens Nilsson, Joakim Nivre and Johan Hall. 2007. 
Tree Transformations for Inductive Depend-
ency Parsing. Proceedings of the 45th ACL. 
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Jens Nilsson, Chanev A., 
G?lsen Eryi?it, Sandra K?bler, Marinov S., and 
Edwin Marsi. 2007a. MaltParser: A language-
independent system for data-driven depend-
ency parsing. Natural Language Engineering.  
Joakim Nivre, Johan Hall, Sandra K?bler, Ryan 
McDonald, Jens Nilsson,  Sebastian Riedel and 
Deniz Yuret. 2007b. The CoNLL 2007 Shared 
Task on Dependency Parsing. EMNLP-CoNLL. 
Joakim Nivre and Ryan McDonald. 2008. Integrat-
ing graphbased and transition-based depend-
ency parsers. ACL-2008. 
  LAS 
 System Development Test 
1 Nivre et al 2007b (CoNLL 2007) -  76.94%  
2 Hall et al 2007 (CoNLL 2007)   74.99%  
3 Bengoetxea and Gojenola 2009   76.80%  
4 Feature optimization (baseline) 77.46%  75.07%  
5 Proj 78.16%  (+0.70) *75.99%  (+0.92) 
6 PVG 78.14%  (+0.68) 75.54%  (+0.47) 
7 PCOOR 77.36%  (-0.10) 75.22%  (+0.15) 
8 PCAS 77.32%  (-0.14) 74.86%  (-0.21) 
9 PVG + PCAS  78.53%  (+1.09) 75.42%  (+0.35) 
10 PCOOR + PVG + PCAS  78.31%  (+0.85) *75.93%  (+0.86) 
11 PCOOR + PVG 78.25%  (+0.79) *75.93%  (+0.86) 
12 Proj + PVG  78.91%  (+1.45) *76.12%  (+1.05) 
13 Proj + PVG + PCOOR  + PCAS 78.31%  (+0.85) *77.12%  (+2.05) 
Table 1. Evaluation results  
(Proj: Pseudo-projective, PVG, PCAS, PCOOR: Propagation on verb compounds, case (NPs)  and coordination; *: statistically 
significant in McNemar's test with respect to labeled attachment score with p < 0.01) 
 
145
