Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Unsupervised and Minimally Supervised Learning of Lexical Semantics, pages 10?17,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Utilizing Contextually Relevant Terms in Bilingual Lexicon Extraction
Azniah Ismail
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York YO10 5DD UK
azniah@cs.york.ac.uk
Suresh Manandhar
Department of Computer Science
University of York
York YO10 5DD UK
suresh@cs.york.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper demonstrates one efficient tech-
nique in extracting bilingual word pairs from
non-parallel but comparable corpora. Instead
of using the common approach of taking high
frequency words to build up the initial bilin-
gual lexicon, we show contextually relevant
terms that co-occur with cognate pairs can be
efficiently utilized to build a bilingual dictio-
nary. The result shows that our models using
this technique have significant improvement
over baseline models especially when highest-
ranked translation candidate per word is con-
sidered.
1 Introduction
Bilingual lexicons or dictionaries are invaluable
knowledge resources for language processing tasks.
The compilation of such bilingual lexicons remains
as a substantial issue to linguistic fields. In gen-
eral practice, many linguists and translators spend
huge amounts of money and effort to compile this
type of knowledge resources either manually, semi-
automatically or automatically. Thus, obtaining the
data is expensive.
In this paper, we demonstrate a technique that uti-
lizes contextually relevant terms that co-occur with
cognate pairs to expand an initial bilingual lexi-
con. We use unannotated resources that are freely
available such as English-Spanish Europarl corpus
(Koehn, 2005) and another different set of cognate
pairs as seed words.
We show that this technique is able to achieve
high precision score for bilingual lexicon extracted
from non-parallel but comparable corpora. Our
model using this technique with spelling similarity
approach obtains 85.4 percent precision at 50.0 per-
cent recall. Precision of 79.0 percent at 50.0 percent
recall is recorded when using this technique with
context similarity approach. Furthermore, by using
a string edit-distance vs. precision curve, we also
reveal that the latter model is able to capture words
efficiently compared to a baseline model.
Section 2 is dedicated to mention some of the re-
lated works. In Section 3, the technique that we used
is explained. Section 4 describes our experimental
setup followed by the evaluation results in Section
5. Discussion and conclusion are in Section 6 and 7
respectively.
2 Related Work
Koehn and Knight (2002) describe few potential
clues that may help in extracting bilingual lexi-
con from two monolingual corpora such as identi-
cal words, similar spelling, and similar context fea-
tures. In reporting our work, we treat both identical
word pairs and similar spelling word pairs as cog-
nate pairs.
Koehn and Knight (2002) map 976 identical
word pairs that are found in their two monolin-
gual German-English corpora and report that 88.0
percent of them are correct. They propose to re-
strict the word length, at least of length 6, to in-
crease the accuracy of the collected word pairs.
Koehn and Knight (2002) mention few related works
that use different measurement to compute the sim-
ilarity, such as longest common subsequence ratio
(Melamed, 1995) and string edit distance (Mann
10
and Yarowski, 2001). However, Koehn and Knight
(2002) point out that majority of their word pairs
do not show much resemblance at all since they
use German-English language pair. Haghighi et al
(2008) mention one disadvantage of using edit dis-
tance, that is, precision quickly degrades with higher
recall. Instead, they propose assigning a feature to
each substring of length of three or less for each
word.
For approaches based on contextual features or
context similarity, we assume that for a word that
occurs in a certain context, its translation equivalent
also occurs in equivalent contexts. Contextual fea-
tures are the frequency counts of context words oc-
curring in the surrounding of target word W. A con-
text vector for each W is then constructed, with only
context words found in the seed lexicon. The context
vectors are then translated into the target language
before their similarity is measured.
Fung and Yee (1998) point out that not only the
number of common words in context gives some
similarity clue to a word and its translation, but the
actual ranking of the context word frequencies also
provides important clue to the similarity between a
bilingual word pair. This fact has motivated Fung
and Yee (1998) to use tfidf weighting to compute the
vectors. This idea is similar to Rapp (1999) who
proposed to transform all co-occurrence vectors us-
ing log likelihood ratio instead of just using the
frequency counts of the co-occurrences. These val-
ues are used to define whether the context words are
highly associated with the W or not.
Earlier work relies on a large bilingual dictionary
as their seed lexicon (Rapp, 1999; Fung and Yee,
1998; among others). Koehn and Knight (2002)
present one interesting idea of using extracted cog-
nate pairs from corpus as the seed words in order
to alleviate the need of huge, initial bilingual lex-
icon. Haghighi et al (2008), amongst a few oth-
ers, propose using canonical correlation analysis to
reduce the dimension. Haghighi et al(2008) only
use a small-sized bilingual lexicon containing 100
word pairs as seed lexicon. They obtain 89.0 percent
precision at 33.0 percent recall for their English-
Spanish induction with best feature set, using top-
ically similar but non-parallel corpora.
3 The Utilizing Technique
Most works in bilingual lexicon extraction use lists
of high frequency words that are obtained from
source and target language corpus to be their source
and target word lists respectively. In our work, we
aim to extract a high precision bilingual lexicon us-
ing different approach. Instead, we use list of con-
textually relevant terms that co-occur with cognate
pairs.
Figure 1: Cognate pair extraction
These cognate pairs can be derived automatically
by mapping or finding identical words occur in two
high frequency list of two monolingual corpora (see
Figure 1). They are used to acquire list of source
word Ws and target word Wt. Ws and Wt are contex-
tually relevant terms that highly co-occur with the
cognate pairs in the same context. Thus, log likeli-
hood measure can be used to identify them.
Next, bilingual word pairs are extracted among
words in these Ws and Wt list using either context
similarity or spelling similarity. Figure 2 shows
some examples of potential bilingual word pairs,
of Ws and Wt, co-occurring with identical cognate
pairs of word ?civil?.
As we are working on English-Spanish language
pair, we extract bilingual lexicon using string edit
distance to identify spelling similarity between Ws
11
and Wt. Figure 3 outlines the algorithm using
spelling similarity in more detail.
Using the same Ws and Wt lists, we extract bilin-
gual lexicon by computing the context similarity be-
tween each {Ws,Wt} pair. To identify the context
similarity, the relation between each {Ws, Wt} pair
can be detected automatically using a vector similar-
ity measure such as cosine measure as in (1). The A
and B are the elements in the context vectors, con-
taining either zero or non-zero seed word values for
Ws and Wt, respectively.
Cosine similarity = cos(?) = A?B||A|| ? ||B|| (1)
The cosine measure favors {Ws,Wt} pairs that
share the most number of non-zero seed word val-
ues. However, one disadvantage of this measure is
that the cosine value directly proportional to the ac-
tual Ws and Wt values. Even though Ws and Wt
might not closely correlated with the same set of
seed words, the matching score could be high if Ws
or Wt has high seed word values everywhere. Thus,
we transform the context vectors from real value
into binary vectors before the similarity is computed.
Figure 4 outlines the algorithm using context simi-
larity in more detail.
In the algorithm, after the Ws and Wt lists are ob-
tained, each Ws and Wt units is represented by their
context vector containing log likelihood (LL) values
of contextually relevant words, occurring in the seed
lexicon, that highly co-occur with the Ws and Wt re-
spectively. To get this context vector, for each Ws
and Wt, all sentences in the English or Spanish cor-
pora containing the respective word are extracted to
form a particular sub corpus, e.g. sub corpus soci-
ety is a collection of sentences containing the source
word society.
Using window size of a sentence, the LL value
of term occurring with the word Ws or Wt in their
respective sub corpora is computed. Term that is
highly associated with the Ws or Wt is called con-
textually relevant term. However, we consider each
term with LL value higher than certain threshold
(e.g. threshold ? 15.0) to be contextually relevant.
Contextually relevant terms occurring in the seed
lexicon are used to build the context vector for the
Figure 2: Bilingual word pairs are found within context
of cognate word civil
Figure 3: Utilizing technique with spelling similarity
12
Figure 4: Utilizing technique with context similarity
Ws or Wt respectively. For example, word participa-
tion and education occurring in the seed lexicon are
contextually relevant terms for source word society.
Thus, they become elements of the context vector.
Then, we transform the context vectors, from real
value into binary, before we compute the similarity
with cosine measure.
4 Experimental Setup
4.1 Data
For source and target monolingual corpus, we de-
rive English and Spanish sentences from parallel Eu-
roparl corpora (Koehn, 2005).
? We split each of them into three parts; year
1996 - 1999, year 2000 - 2003 and year 2004
- 2006.
? We only take the first part, about 400k sen-
tences of Europarl Spanish (year 1996 - 1999)
and 2nd part, also about 400k from Europarl
English (year 2000 - 2003). We refer the partic-
ular part taken from the source language corpus
as S and the other part of the target language
corpus as T.
This approach is quite common in order to ob-
tain non-parallel but comparable (or same domain)
corpus. Examples can be found in Fung and Che-
ung (2004), followed by Haghighi et al (2008).
For corpus pre-processing, we only use sentence
boundary detection and tokenization on raw text.
We decided that large quantities of raw text requir-
ing minimum processing could also be considered as
minimal since they are inexpensive and not limited.
These should contribute to low or medium density
languages for which annotated resources are limited.
We also clean all tags and filter out stop words from
the corpus.
4.2 Evaluation
We extracted our evaluation lexicon from Word Ref-
erence? free online dictionary . For this work, the
word types are not restricted but mostly are con-
tent words. We have two sets of evaluation. In one,
we take high ranked candidate pairs where Ws could
have multiple translations. In the other, we only con-
sider highest-ranked Wt for each Ws. For evalua-
tion purposes, we take only the top 2000 candidate
ranked-pairs from the output. From that list, only
candidate pairs with words found in the evaluation
lexicon are proposed. We use F1-measure to evalu-
ate proposed lexicon against the evaluation lexicon.
The recall is defined as the proportion of the high
ranked candidate pairs. The precision is given as the
number of correct candidate pairs divided by the to-
tal number of proposed candidate pairs.
4.3 Other Setups
The following were also setup and used:
? List of cognate pairs
We obtained 79 identical cognate pairs from the
?from website http://www.wordreference.com
13
top 2000 high frequency lists of our S and T but
we chose 55 of these that have at least 100 con-
textually relevant terms that are highly associ-
ated with each of them.
? Seed lexicon
We also take a set of cognate pairs to be our
seed lexicon. We defined the size of a small
seed lexicon ranges between 100 to 1k word
pairs. Hence, our seed lexicon containing 700
cognate pairs are still considered as a small-
sized seed lexicon. However, instead of acquir-
ing this set of cognate pairs automatically, we
compiled the cognate pairs from a few Learn-
ing Spanish Cognates websites ?. This ap-
proach is a simple alternative to replace the
10-20k general dictionaries (Rapp, 1999; Fung
and McKeown, 2004) or automatic seed words
(Koehn and Knight, 2002; Haghighi et al,
2008). However, this approach can only be
used if the source and target language are fairly
related and both share lexically similar words
that most likely have same meaning. Other-
wise, we have to rely on general bilingual dic-
tionaries.
? Stop list
Previously (Rapp, 1999; Koehn and Knight,
2002; among others) suggested filtering out
commonly occurring words that do not help
in processing natural language data. This idea
sometimes seem as a negative approach to the
natural articles of language, however various
studies have proven that it is sensible to do so.
? Baseline system
We build baseline systems using basic context
similarity and spelling similarity features.
5 Evaluation Results
For the first evaluation, candidate pairs are ranked
after being measured either with cosine for context
similarity or edit distance for spelling similarity. In
this evaluation, we take the first 2000 of {Ws, Wt}
candidate pairs from the proposed lexicon where Ws
may have multiple translations or multiple Wt. See
Table 1.
?such as http://www.colorincolorado.org and
http://www.language-learning-advisor.com
Setting P0.1 P0.25 P0.33 P0.5 Best-F1
ContextSim (CS) 42.9 69.6 60.7 58.7 49.6
SpellingSim (SS) 90.5 74.2 69.9 64.6 50.9
(a) from baseline models
Setting P0.1 P0.25 P0.33 P0.5 Best-F1
E-ContextSim (ECS) 78.3 73.5 71.8 64.0 51.2
E-SpellingSim (ESS) 95.8 75.6 71.8 63.4 51.5
(b) from our proposed models
Table 1: Performance of baseline and our model for top
2000 candidates below certain threshold and ranked
Setting P0.1 P0.25 P0.33 P0.5 Best-F1
ContextSim-Top1 (CST) 58.3 61.2 64.8 55.2 52.6
SpellingSim-Top1 (SST) 84.9 66.4 52.7 34.5 37.0
(a) from baseline models
Setting P0.1 P0.25 P0.33 P0.5 Best-F1
E-ContextSim-Top1 (ECST) 85.0 81.1 79.7 79.0 57.1
E-SpellingSim-Top1 (ESST) 100.0 93.6 91.6 85.4 59.0
(b) from our proposed models
Table 2: Performance of baseline and our model for top
2000 candidates of top 1
Using either context or spelling similarity ap-
proach on S and T (labeled ECS and ESS respec-
tively), our models achieved about 51.2 percent of
best F1 measure. Those are not a significant im-
provement with only 1.0 to 2.0 percent error reduc-
tion over the baseline models (labeled CS and SS).
For the second evaluation, we take the first 2000
of {Ws, Wt} pairs where Ws may only have the high-
est ranked Wt as translation candidates (See Table
2). This time, both of our models (with context
similarity and spelling similarity, labeled ECST and
ESST respectively) yielded almost 60.0 percent of
best F1 measure. It is noted that using ESST alone
recorded a significant improvement of 20.0 percent
in the F1 score compared to SST baseline model.
ESST obtained 85.4 percent precision at 50.0 per-
cent recall. Precision of 79.0 percent at 50.0 percent
recall is recorded when using ECST. However, the
ECST has not recorded a significant difference over
CST baseline model (57.1 and 52.6 percent respec-
tively) in the second evaluation. The overall perfor-
mances, represented by precision scores for different
14
Figure 5: String Edit Distance vs. Precision curve
range of recalls, for these four models are illustrated
in Appendix A.
It is important to see the inner performance of the
ECST model with further analysis. We present a
string edit distance value (EDv) vs. precision curve
for ECST and CST in Figure 5 to measure the per-
formance of the ECST model in capturing bilingual
pairs with less similar orthographic features, those
that may not be captured using spelling similarity.
The graph in Figure 5 shows that even though
CST has higher precision score than ECST at EDv
of 2, it is not significant (the difference is less than
5.0 percent) and the spelling is still similar. On the
other hand, precision for proposed lexicon with EDv
above 3 (where the Ws and the proposed translation
equivalent Wt spelling becoming more dissimilar)
using ECST is higher than CST. The most significant
difference of the precision is almost 35.0 percent,
where ECST achieved almost 75.0 percent precision
compared to CST with 40.0 percent precision at EDv
of 4. It is followed by ECST with almost 50.0 per-
cent precision compared to CST with precision less
than 35.0 percent, offering about 15.0 percent preci-
sion improvement at EDv of 5.
6 Discussion
As we are working on English-Spanish language
pair, we could have focused on spelling similar-
ity feature only. Performance of the model using
this feature usually record higher accuracy other-
wise they may not be commonly occurring in a cor-
pus. Our models with this particular feature have
recorded higher F1 scores especially when consid-
ering only the highest-ranked candidates.
We also experiment with context similarity ap-
proach. We would like to see how far this approach
helps to add to the candidate scores from our corpus
S and T. The other reason is sometimes a correct tar-
get is not always a cognate even though a cognate
for it is available. Our ECST model has not recorded
significant improvement over CST baseline model in
the F1-measure. However, we were able to show that
by utilizing contextually relevant terms, ECST gath-
ers more correct candidate pairs especially when it
comes to words with dissimilar spelling. This means
that ECST is able to add more to the candidate scores
compared to CST. Thus, more correct translation
pairs can be expected with a good combination of
ECST and ESST.
The following are the advantages of our utilizing
technique:
? Reduced errors, hence able to improve preci-
sion scores.
? Extraction is more efficient in the contextual
boundaries (see Appendix B for examples).
? Context similarity approach within our tech-
nique has a potential to add more to the can-
didate scores.
Yet, our attempt using cognate pairs as seed words is
more appropriate for language pairs that share large
number of cognates or similar spelling words with
same meaning. Otherwise, one may have to rely on
bilingual dictionaries.
There may be some possible supporting strate-
gies, which we could use to help improve further
the precision score within the utilizing technique.
For example, dimension reduction using canonical
correlation analysis (CCA), resemblance detection,
measure of dispersion, reference corpus and further
noise reduction. However, we do not include a re-
ranking method, as we are using collection of cog-
nate pairs instead of a general bilingual dictionary.
Since our corpus S and T is in similar domain, we
might still not have seen the potential of this tech-
nique in its entirety. One may want to test the tech-
nique with different type of corpora for future works.
15
Nevertheless, we are still concerned that many
spurious translation equivalents were proposed be-
cause the words actually have higher correlation
with the input source word compared to the real
target word. Otherwise, the translation equivalents
may not be in the boundaries or in the corpus from
which translation equivalents are to be extracted.
Haghighi et al(2008) have reported that the most
common errors detected in their analysis on top 100
errors were from semantically related words, which
had strong context feature correlations. Thus, the
issue remains. We leave all these for further discus-
sion in future works.
7 Conclusion
We present a bilingual lexicon extraction technique
that utilizes contextually relevant terms that co-
occur with cognate pairs to expand an initial bilin-
gual lexicon. We show that this utilizing technique
is able to achieve high precision score for bilingual
lexicon extracted from non-parallel but comparable
corpora. We demonstrate this technique using unan-
notated resources that are freely available.
Our model using this technique with spelling sim-
ilarity obtains 85.4 percent precision at 50.0 percent
recall. Precision of 79.0 percent at 50.0 percent re-
call is recorded when using this technique with con-
text similarity approach. We also reveal that the
latter model with context similarity is able to cap-
ture words efficiently compared to a baseline model.
Thus, we show contextually relevant terms that co-
occur with cognate pairs can be efficiently utilized
to build a bilingual dictionary.
References
Cranias, L., Papageorgiou, H, and Piperidis, S. 1994.
A matching technique in Example-Based Machine
Translation. In International Conference On Compu-
tational Linguistics Proceedings, 15th conference on
Computational linguistics, Kyoto, Japan.
Diab, M., and Finch, S. 2000. A statistical word-level
translation model for comparable corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the Conference on Content-based multimedia
information access (RIAO).
Fung, P., and Cheung, P. 2004. Mining very non-parallel
corpora: Parallel sentence and lexicon extraction via
bootstrapping and EM. In Proceedings of the 2004
Conference on Empirical Method in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP), Barcelona, Spain.
Fung, P., and Yee, L.Y. 1998. An IR Approach for
Translating New Words from Nonparallel, Compara-
ble Texts. In Proceedings of COLING-ACL98, Mon-
treal, Canada, 1998.
Fung, P., and McKeown, K. 1997. Finding Terminology
Translations from Non-parallel Corpora. In The 5th
Annual Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Hong Kong,
Aug 1997.
Haghighi, A., Liang, P., Berg-Krikpatrick, T., and Klein,
D. 2008. Learning bilingual lexicons from monolin-
gual corpora. In Proceedings of The ACL 2008, June
15 -20 2008, Columbus, Ohio
Koehn, P. 2005. Europarl: a parallel corpus for statistical
machine translation. In MT Summit
Koehn, P., and Knight , K. 2001. Knowledge sources
for word-level translation models. In Proceedings of
the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP).
Koehn, P., and Knight , K. 2002. Learning a translation
lexicon from monolingual corpora. In Proceedings of
ACL 2002, July 2002, Philadelphia, USA, pp. 9-16.
Rapp, R. 1995. Identifying word translations in non-
parallel texts. In Proceedings of ACL 33, pages 320-
322.
Rapp, R. 1999. Automatic identification of word transla-
tions from unrelated English and German corpora. In
Proceedings of ACL 37, pages 519-526.
16
Appendix A. Precision scores with different recalls
Appendix B. Some examples of effective extraction via utilizing technique
17
