Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Grammar Engineering Across Frameworks, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 10?18,
Suntec, Singapore, 6 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Developing German Semantics on the basis of Parallel LFG
Grammars
Sina Zarrie?
Department of Linguistics
University of Potsdam, Germany
sina@ling.uni-potsdam.de
Abstract
This paper reports on the develop-
ment of a core semantics for German
which was implemented on the ba-
sis of an English semantics that con-
verts LFG f-structures to flat meaning
representations in a Neo-Davidsonian
style. Thanks to the parallel design
of the broad-coverage LFG grammars
written in the context of the ParGram
project (Butt et al, 2002) and the
general surface independence of LFG
f-structure analyses, the development
process was substantially facilitated.
We also discuss the overall architec-
ture of the semantic conversion sys-
tem from a crosslinguistic, theoretical
perspective.
1 Introduction
This paper reports on the development of a
core semantics for German which was imple-
mented on the basis of an English semantics
that converts LFG f-structures to flat mean-
ing representations in a Neo-Davidsonian
style. The development strategy relies on the
parallel design of the broad-coverage LFG
grammars written in the context of the Par-
Gram project (Butt et al, 2002). We will
first describe the overall architecture of the
semantic conversion system as well as the
basic properties of the semantic representa-
tion. Section 3 discusses the development
strategy and the core semantic phenomena
covered by the German semantics. In sec-
tion 3.4, we will discuss the benefits and the
limitations of the presented architecture for
crosslingual semantics by means of an ex-
ample phenomenon, the semantics of clause-
embedding verbs. The rest of this introduc-
tion will be devoted to the broader theoreti-
cal context of this work.
Recently, the state of the art in wide-
coverage parsing has made wide-coverage se-
mantic processing come into the reach of re-
search in computational semantics (Bos et
al., 2004). This shift from the theoret-
ical conception of semantic formalisms to
wide-coverage semantic analysis raises many
questions about appropriate meaning repre-
sentations as well as engineering problems
concerning the development and evaluation
strategies of semantic processing systems.
The general aim of this work is to explore
wide-coverage LFG syntax as a backbone for
linguistically motivated semantic processing.
Research in the framework of LFG has tra-
ditionally adopted a crosslingual perspective
on linguistic theory (Bresnan, 2000). In the
context of the ParGram project, a number
of high quality, broad-coverage grammars for
several languages have been produced over
the years (Butt et al, 2002; Butt and King,
2007).1 The project?s research methodology
particularly focusses on parallelism which
means that the researchers rely on a com-
mon syntactic theory as well as development
tools, but which also concerns parallelism on
the level of syntactic analyses. As the LFG
formalism assumes a two-level syntax that di-
1Also see the webpage for a nice project overview:
http://www2.parc.com/isl/groups/nltt/pargram/
10
vides the analysis into a more language and
surface dependent constituent structure and
a functional structure which basically repre-
sents the surface independent grammatical
relations of a sentence, it constitutes a partic-
ularly appropriate basis for large-scale, mul-
tilingual syntax.
Parallel grammar development bears the
practical advantage that the resources de-
velopped for a particular language can of-
ten easily be ported to related languages.
Kim et al (2003) report that the Korean
ParGram grammar was constructed in two
months by adapting the Japanese grammar
for Korean. Moreover, parallel grammars
have a straightforward application in multi-
lingual NLP tasks like machine translation
(Frank, 1999).
A general motivation for multilingual, deep
grammars are higher-level NLP tasks which
involve some kind of semantic or meaning-
sensititive processing (Butt and King, 2007).
The work presented in this paper shows that
parallel grammar development not only fa-
cilitates porting of grammars, but substan-
tially facilitates the development of resources
and applications that involve such a par-
allel grammar. We rely on the semantic
conversion system presented in (Crouch and
King, 2006) to implement a system that de-
rives semantic representations from LFG f-
structures for German. Due to the paral-
lelism of syntactic f-structure input, the Ger-
man core semantics could be implemented
within a single month.
2 F-Structure Rewriting as an
LFG Semantics
Since the early days of LFG, there has
been research on interfacing LFG syntax
with various semantic formalisms (Dalrym-
ple, 1999). For the English and Japanese
ParGram grammar, a broad-coverage, glue
semantic construction has been implemented
by (Crouch, 1995; Umemoto, 2006). In con-
trast to these approaches, the semantic con-
version described in (Crouch and King, 2006)
is not driven by a specific semantic theory
about meaning representation, nor by a the-
oretically motivated apparatus of meaning
construction. Therefore, we will talk about
?semantic conversion? instead of ?construc-
tion? in this paper.
The main idea of the system is to convert
the surface-independent, syntactic relations
and features encoded in an f-structure to nor-
malized semantic relations. The representa-
tion simplifies many phenomena usually dis-
cussed in the formal semantic literature (see
the next section), but is tailored for use in
Question Answering (Bobrow et al, 2007a)
or Textual Entailment (Bobrow et al, 2007b)
applications.
The semantic conversion was implemented
by means of the XLE platform, used
for grammar development in the ParGram
project. It makes use of the built-in trans-
fer module to convert LFG f-structures to
semantic representations. The idea to use
transfer rules to model a semantic concstruc-
tion has also been pursued by (Spreyer and
Frank, 2005) who use the transfer module to
model a RMRS semantic construction for the
German treebank TIGER .
2.1 The Semantic Representation
As a first example, a simplified f-structure
analysis for the following sentence and the
corresponding semantic representation are
given in figure 1.
(1) In the afternoon, John was seen in the park.
The basic idea of the representation exem-
plified in figure 1 is to represent the syntactic
arguments and adjuncts of the main predi-
cate in terms of semantic roles of the context
introduced by the main predicate or some
higher semantic operator. Thus, the gram-
matical roles of the main verb in sentence
(1) are semantically normalized such that the
subject of the passive becomes a theme and
an unspecified agent is introduced, see fig-
ure 1. The role of the modifiers are speci-
11
fied in terms of their head preposition. This
type of semantic representation is inspired by
Neo-Davidsonian event semantics (Parsons,
1990). Other semantic properties of the event
introduced by the main verb such as tense or
nominal properties such as quantification and
cardinality are explicitely encoded as conven-
tionalized predications.
The contexts can be tought of as propo-
sitions or possible worlds. They are headed
by an operator that can recursively embed
further contexts. Context embeddings can
be induced by lexical items or syntactic con-
structions and include the following opera-
tors: (i) negation (ii) sentential modifiers
(possibly) (iii) coordination with or (iv) con-
ditionals (v) some subordinating conjunc-
tions (without) (vi) clause-embedding verbs
(doubt).
The representation avoids many formal se-
mantic complexities typically discussed in
the literature, for instance the interpreta-
tion of quantifiers by encoding them as con-
ventionalized semantic predications. Given
this skolemized first-order language, the
task of textual entailment can be conceived
as matching the hypothesis representation
against the semantic representation of the
text where higher-order reasonning is ap-
proximated by explicit entailment rules (e.g.
all entails some, past does not entail present),
see (Bobrow et al, 2007b) for a presentation
of an RTE system based on this semantic rep-
resentation.
2.2 The Semantic Conversion
The XLE transfer module, which we use for
the implementation of the conversion of f-
structures to semantic representations, is a
term rewrite system that applies an ordered
list of rewrite rules to a given f-structure
input and yields, depending on the rewrite
rules, new f-structures (e.g. translated f-
structures) or semantic representations. The
technical features of the XLE transfer mod-
ule are described in (Crouch et al, 2006).
An important feature for large-scale develop-
+VTYPE(%V, %%), +PASSIVE(%V,+),
OBL-AG(%V, %LogicalSUBJ), PTYPE(%LogicalSUBJ,%%),
OBJ(%LogicalSUBJ,%P)
==> SUBJ(%V, %P), arg(%V,%N,%P).
Figure 2: Example rewrite rule for passive
normalization
ment is for instance the mechanism of packed
rewriting that allows for an efficient represen-
tation and processing of ambigous f-structure
analyses.
The semantic conversion, as described in
(Crouch and King, 2006), is not a priori con-
strained by a formal apparatus of meaning
assembly. The main intuition of the con-
version is that the embeddings encoded in
the syntactic analysis have to be normalized
or reencoded in a way such that they cor-
respond to a semantic embedding. An ex-
ample rewrite rule which applies to passive
f-structure analyses and converts them to an
active analysis is given in figure refpassive-
fig.
In order to be maintainable and extensible,
the set of transfer rules producing the seman-
tic representations are organized in a modu-
lar way. The main steps of the semantic con-
version are given in the following: (i) Flat-
tening of syntax specific f-structure embed-
dings that don?t correspond to semantic em-
beddings (ii) Canonicalization of grammati-
cal relations (e.g. depassivization) (iii) Mark-
ing of items that induce a semantic embed-
ding (which is not encoded in the f-structure)
(iv) Linking of f-structure scopes and context
of the semantic representation. (v) Remov-
ing of f-structure specific features.
An explicitely modular conception of the
transfer procedure also facilitates its port-
ing to other languages. Thus, steps 1 and
2 (and partly 3) may be dependent on the
language specific f-structure encoding, while
the general steps from 3 and 5 don?t have to
be changed at all when porting the transfer
rules to another language.
12
??
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
pred ?see
?
NULL,
(
? SUBJ
)
?
?
subj
?
?
?
?
pred ?John?
case nom
gend-sem male
... ...
?
?
?
?
adjunct
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
pred ?in
?
(
? OBJ
)
?
?
obj
[
pred ?afternoon?
case obl
]
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
pred ?in
?
(
? OBJ
)
?
?
obj
[
pred ?park?
case obl
]
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
ctx_head(t,see),
in_ctx(t, past(see)),
in_ctx(t, cardinality(John,sg)),
in_ctx(t, cardinality(afternoon,sg)),
in_ctx(t, cardinality(park,sg)),
in_ctx(t, specifier(afternoon,the)),
in_ctx(t, specifier(park,the)),
in_ctx(t, time_expr(afternoon:8,+)),
in_ctx(t, proper_name(John,name,John)),
in_ctx(t, role(Agent,see,agent_pro)),
in_ctx(t, role(Theme,see,John)),
in_ctx(t, role(prep(in),see,afternoon)),
in_ctx(t, role(prep(in),see,park))
Figure 1: LFG f-structure analysis and corresponding semantic representation
3 From English to German
Semantics
3.1 Semantic Grammar Development
In contrast to the various gold standard tree-
banks available for the development and eval-
uation of parsers, gold standards for seman-
tic representations are hardly available. This
has a number of methodological implications
for ?semantic grammar? development. For
instance, the authors in (de Paiva and King,
2008) argue for large-scale development of a
semantics that is based on an application-
oriented testsuite of entailment pairs instead
of sentences and their theoretically correct
representations. However, in the context of
this work, we didn?t focus on a semantic ap-
plication, but we wanted to assess the porta-
bility of the semantic representations to other
languages directly. Adopting such a theory-
driven perspective on semantic grammar de-
velopment, the only possibility to account for
the accuracy of the semantic construction is
to manually inspect the output of the system
for a necessarily small set of input sentences.
Moreover, the transfer scenario compli-
cates the assessment of the system?s cover-
age. While in (Bos et al, 2004), the coverage
of the meaning construction can be quanti-
fied by the number of syntactic analysis that
the construction algorithm can process, the
transfer conversion will never fail on a given
syntactic input. Since the transfer rules just
try to match the input, the unmatched fea-
tures just pass unchanged to the output and
will be probably deleted by some of the catch-
all rules which remove remaining syntactic
features in the final step of the conversion.
Therefore, manual inspection is necessary to
see whether the conversion has processed all
the input it was supposed to process.
This limited evaluation scenario entails
that the semantics developer has to think
hard about defining the set of phenomena he
wants to cover and document precisely which
type of syntactic phenomena his semantics
intends to assign an interpretation to. There-
fore, in the rest of this section, we will try
to give a concrete overview of the type of
phenomena that is covered by the English-
German semantics.
3.2 A Parallel Testsuite
In consequence to these considerations on
evaluation, a central aspect of our develop-
ment metholodogy is a testsuite of German
sentences which represents the ?core seman-
tics? that our systems covers. The multi-
13
lingual perspective provided a major orien-
tation for the composition of this testsuite.
As our base English semantics implicitely de-
fines a set of core phenomena interpreted by
the syntax-semantic interface, we dispose of a
set of grammatical f-structure relations that
receive a particular semantic representation.
Fortunately, the developers of the English se-
mantics had documented many ?core? trans-
fer rules (assuring the normalization and con-
text embedding) with example phrases or
sentences such that one could easily recon-
struct the type of phenomenon each transfer
rule was intended to analyze.
On the basis of this system documenta-
tion, we first conceived an English testsuite
where each sentence contained a construc-
tion related to the application of a specific
transfer rule. For each of the sentences we
selected a German sentence which exhibited
the German counterpart of the phenomenon
targeted in the English sentence. For in-
stance, if a transfer rule for relative clauses
fired on a given English sentence we trans-
lated the German sentence such that it con-
tained a relative clause. As most of the test
sentences target fairly general phenomena at
the syntax-semantic interface (see the next
section), there was a parallel German realiza-
tion of the construction in most of the cases.
In cases where no straightforward parallel
realization could be found, we recur to a se-
mantically parallel translation. For instance,
the English cleft construction exemplified by
the following sentence of our testsuite, does
not have a syntactically parallel realization
in German. In this case, the sentence was
translated by a ?semantic? equivalent that
emphasizes the oblique argument.
(2) a. It is to the store that they went.
b. Zum Markt sind sie gegangen.
During the development process, the test-
set was further extended. These extensions
were due to cases where the English gram-
mar assigns a uniform analysis to some con-
structions that the German gramamr dis-
tinguishes. For instance, while the En-
glish grammar encodes oblique arguments
the same way it encodes direct objects, the
German grammar has a formally slightly dif-
ferent analysis such that rules which fire on
obliques in English, don?t fire for German in-
put. Now, the final parallel testsuite com-
prises 200 sentence pairs.
The following enumeration lists the basic
morpho-syntactic phenomena covered by our
core semantics testsuite.
1. Sentence types (declaratives, interroga-
tives, quotations etc.)
2. Coordination (of various phrase types)
3. Argument - semantic role mapping, in-
cluding argument realization normaliza-
tion (depassivization etc.)
4. Sentential and verbal modification (dis-
cursive, propositional, temporal, etc.)
5. Nominal modification (measures, quan-
tifiers, comparatives, etc.)
6. Tense and aspect
7. Appositions and titles
8. Clause-embeddings, relative clauses,
gerunds, etc.
9. Predicative and copula constructions
10. Topicalization
It turns out that the abstract conception
of LFG f-structure analysis already assumes
a major step towards semantic interpreta-
tion. Many global syntactic properties are
explicitely represented as feature-value pairs,
e.g. features for sentence type, mood, tense
and aspect. Moreover, the f-structure al-
ready contains many information about e.g.
the type of nominal phrases (proper names,
quantified phrases etc.) or types of modifiers
(e.g. adverb types). Finally, this also jus-
tifies our testsuite approach since the range
of syntactic variation on this abstract level is
much smaller than on the level of word-order.
14
3.3 Parallel Core Semantics
The English core semantics developped by
(Crouch and King, 2006) comprises 798 (or-
dered!) rewrite rules. As we hypothesized
that a major part of the English rules will
also apply to German f-structure input, we
first copied all English transfer rules to the
German semantics and then proceeded by
manual error correction: For each German
test sentence, we manually checked whether
the transfer semantics produce an interpre-
tation of the sentence which is parallel to the
English analysis. In case a mismatch was de-
tected, the respective rules where changed or
added in the German transfer rule set.
To cover the 200 sentences in our parallel
testsuite, 47 rewrite rules had to be changed
out of the 798 rules which constitute the core
English semantics. Out of these 47 rules, 23
rules relate to real structural differences in
the f-structure encoding for German and En-
glish. The rest of the modifications is mainly
due to renamings of the features or lexical
items that are hard-coded in the transfer
grammar.
While in a more surface-oriented syntax,
it would be hardly possible to design largely
parallel syntax-semantic interfaces for the
range of phenomena listed in the last section,
the surface-independence (and the resulting
relative crosslingual generality) of LFG f-
structures ensures that a major part of the
English core semantics straightforward-ly ap-
plies to the German input.
An impressive illustration of the language
independence of LFG f-structure analyses in
the ParGram grammars is the pair of anal-
yses presented in figure 3, produced by the
semantic conversion for the example pair in
(3).
(3) a. Wo hat Tom gestern geschlafen?
b. Where did Tom sleep yesterday?
The representation for the German sen-
tence was produced by running the English
transfer semantics on German syntactic in-
put. Although the word-order of English
and German questions is governed by dis-
tinct syntactic principles, the semantic rep-
resentation of the German sentence is almost
entirely correct since the f-structure analy-
ses abstract from the word-order differences.
The only fault in the German representation
in 3 is the interpretation of the temporal ad-
verb yesterday - gestern. The transfer rule
for temporal verb modification didn?t fire be-
cause the adverb type features for English
and German differ.
3.4 Discussion: Clause-embeddings
and Semantic Fine-graininess
The crosslinguistic parallelism of the seman-
tics presented in this paper is also due to the
relative coarse-grained level of representation
that interprets many phenomena prone to
subtle crosslingual divergences (e.g. the in-
terpretation of quantifiers or tense and as-
pect) in terms of conventionalized predica-
tions, e.g. the interpretation of tense as
past(see) in figure 1. Thus, the real se-
mantic interpretation of these phenomena is
deferred to later representation or processing
layers, as in this framework, to the defini-
tion of entailment relations (Bobrow et al,
2007b). A meaning representation that de-
fers much of the semantic interpretation to
the formulation of entailment rules runs the
obvious risk of making to few theoretical gen-
eralizations which results in very complex en-
tailment rules. This section will briefly illus-
trate this problem by discussing the represen-
tation of clause-embeddings in our semantics.
The various semantic operators defined by
the semantic conversion to induce an em-
bedding (see section 2.1) embed a seman-
tic entity of the type context which can be
roughly considered as the common semantic
type of ?proposition?. An example for the se-
mantic representation of a clause-embedding
verb is given in figure 4.
For many semantic applications, such em-
bedded contexts are of particular interest
since they often express propositions to
15
ctx_head(ctx(s),schlafen),
ctx_index(t,schlafen),
in_ctx(t,interrogative(ctx(s))),
in_ctx(ctx(s),perf(schlafen)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),pres(schlafen)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),query_term(wo)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),cardinality(?Tom?,sg)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),proper_name(?Tom?,name,?Tom?)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(?Agent?,schlafen,?Tom?)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(adeg,gestern,normal)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(adeg,wo,normal)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(amod,schlafen,gestern)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(amod,schlafen,wo))
ctx_head(ctx(s),sleep),
ctx_index(t,sleep),
in_ctx(t,interrogative(ctx(s))),
in_ctx(ctx(s),past(sleep)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),query_term(where)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),cardinality(?Tom?,sg)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),time_expr(yesterday,?+?)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),proper_name(?Tom?,name,?Tom?)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(?Agent?,sleep,?Tom?)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(occurs_during,sleep,yesterday)),
in_ctx(ctx(s),role(prep(where),sleep,where))
Figure 3: Parallel semantic analyses for the sentence pair given in example (3)
whom the speaker is not committed to, i.e.
which aren?t veridical. In our system, the
veridicality inferences that these embeddings
exhibit are computed by further knowledge
representation modules that explicitely rep-
resent the speaker commitment of a context
(Bobrow et al, 2007b). Concerning the com-
plements of clause-embedding verbs, these
inferences are modelled via a lexical verb
classification that basically distinguishes im-
plicatives (manage to TRUE - don?t manage
to FALSE ) and factives (know that TRUE -
don?t know that TRUE ) (Nairn et al, 2006).
Veridicality entailments of sentential comple-
ments are treated as a interaction of the lex-
ical class of the subordinating verb and the
polarity of the context.
(4) Tom glaubt, dass der Nachbar ihn nicht
erkannt hat.
?Tom believes that the neighbour didn?t rec-
ognize him.?
This account of clause-embeddings - a uni-
fied semantic representation and a lexical en-
tailment classification - generalizes and prob-
ably simplifies too much the various theoret-
ical insights into the semantics of comple-
mentation. In the formal semantics litera-
ture, various theories opt for a semantic rep-
resentation that assumes several types of ab-
stract semantic entities (e.g. events (Parsons,
1990), situations (Barwise and Perry, 1999)
or other, very fine-grained categories (Asher,
1993) ). In terms of entailment, the typologi-
cal literature reports crosslingually relatively
stable distinctions of types of complements
according to the semantic relations the ma-
trix verbs have to their complement (Givon,
1990). For instance, while in example (5),
the infinite complement has causal, tempo-
ral and spatial relations to the matrix event,
there is no such inferential relation between
matrix and complement in example (4) .
(5) Seine Freundin brachte ihn dazu, ein Haus zu
bauen.
His girlfriend made him build a house.
Moreover, the semantics of clause-
embedding verbs shows subtle distinctions
with resepct to other linguistic features
(apart from the polarity of the context) that
can trigger a particular speaker commit-
ment. For instance, in languages that have a
morphological aspect marking (like Frensh,
in the following example), the following
aspectually motivated entailments can be
observed (see (Bhatt, 2006)):
(6) Jean pouvait soulever cette table, mais il ne
l?a pas fait.
?Jean was able.IMP to lift this table, but he
didn?t do it.?
(7) Jean a pu soulever cette table, #mais il ne l?a
pas fait.
?Jean was able.PERF to lift this table,#but
he didn?t do it.?
In sentence (6), the imperfect aspect
16
causes the modality of the complement such
that it is not necessarily true, while in sen-
tence (7), the embedded clause is neces-
sarily true due to the perfective aspect of
the clause-embedding verb. This aspectual
matrix-com-plement relation is however only
observable for certain types of modality or
clause-embedding verbs and has no clear se-
mantic parallel in other languages that don?t
have aspectual marking.
For another type of clause-embedding
verbs, called epistemic verbs, the recent for-
mal semantics literature discusses many ex-
amples where the lexical neutral entailment
class is overriden by pragmatic interpretation
constraints that cause the embedded com-
plement to be interpreted as true although
the embedding operator does not entail the
veridicality of its complement (Simons, 2006;
von Fintel and Gillies, 2007). As an exam-
ple, consider the following text - hypothe-
sis pair annotated as a valid entailment in
the Pascal RTE 3 set alough the hypothesis
clearly refers to an embedded proposition in
the given text.
(8) Between March and June, scientific observers
say, up to 300,000 seals are killed. In Canada,
seal-hunting means jobs, but opponents say
it is vicious and endangers the species, also
threatened by global warming.
(9) Hunting endangers seal species. FOLLOWS
(RTE3 ID:225)
Such examples suggest that entailments
concern various aspects of the meaning of
a sentence or proposition, thus, not only its
veridicality but also its temporal properties,
informations about involved agents, space
and time. These properties are clearly re-
lated to the semantic type of the embedded
clause.
Purely lexical entailment rules for clause-
em-bedding operators will be very hard to
formulate in the light of the complex in-
teraction of the various linguistic parame-
ters. These considerations reveal a general
trade-off between a representation that gen-
ctx_head(t,glauben),
ctx_head(ctx(kennen),kennen)),
ctx_head(ctx(nicht,nicht),
in_ctx(t,role(sem_comp,glauben,ctx(nicht))),
in_ctx(t,role(sem_subj,glauben,?Andreas?)),
in_ctx(ctx(kennen),role(sem_obj,kennen,pro)),
in_ctx(ctx(nicht),role(adeg,nicht,normal)),
in_ctx(ctx(nicht),role(amod,ctx(kennen),nicht)
Figure 4: Example representation for context
embeddings, sentence (4)
eralizes over many (purely) theoretical and
crosslingual subtleties and a representation
that does not capture certain generalizations
which would lead to a more linguistically in-
formed account of entailment relations. Fu-
ture work on the semantics presented in this
paper will have to take such tensions into ac-
count and think about the general goals and
applications of the semantic representation.
4 Conclusion
This work amply illustrates the positive
implications of crosslinguistic, parallely de-
signed resources for large-scale linguistic en-
gineering. Due to the abstract f-structure
layer in LFG syntax and its parallel imple-
mentation in the ParGram project, further
resources that build on f-structure represen-
tations can be very easily ported to other lan-
guages. Future research will have to investi-
gate to what extent this also applies to more
distant languages, like Urdu and English for
instance.
The paper also discussed some problematic
aspects of the development of a large-scale
semantic system. The crosslingual develop-
ment perspective allowed us to define a set
of core semantic phenomena covered by the
representation. However, from a formal se-
mantic view point, the simplifying represen-
tation obstructs potential crosslingual differ-
ences in semantic interpretation. Future re-
search still has to be conducted to develop
a more general development and evaluation
methodology for the representation of mean-
ing.
17
References
Nicholas Asher. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects
in Discourse. Studies in Linguistics and Philoso-
phy. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Jon Barwise and John Perry. 1999. Situations and
Attitudes. CSLI Publications.
Rajesh Bhatt, 2006. Covert Modality in Non-finite
Contexts, volume 8 of Interface Explorations, chap-
ter Ability modals and their actuality entailments.
Mouton de Gruyter.
Daniel G. Bobrow, Bob Cheslow, Cleo Condoravdi,
Lauri Karttunen, Tracy Holloway King, Rowan
Nairn, Valeria de Paiva, Charlotte Price, and
Annie Zaenen. 2007a. PARC?s Bridge ques-
tion answering system. In Tracy Holloway King
and Emily M. Bender, editors, Proceedings of
the GEAF (Grammar Engineering Across Frame-
works) 2007 Workshop, pages 13?15.
Daniel G. Bobrow, Bob Cheslow, Cleo Condoravdi,
Lauri Karttunen, Tracy Holloway King, Rowan
Nairn, Valeria de Paiva, Charlotte Price, and An-
nie Zaenen. 2007b. Precision-focused textual in-
ference. In ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual
Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 28 ? 29.
Johan Bos, Stephen Clark, Mark Steedman, James R.
Curran, and Julia Hockenmaier. 2004. Wide-
coverage semantic representations from a CCG
parser. In COLING ?04: Proceedings of the 20th
international conference on Computational Lin-
guistics, page 1240, Morristown, NJ, USA. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Joan Bresnan. 2000. Lexical-Functional Syntax.
Blackwell, Oxford.
Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway King. 2007. XLE
and XFR: A Grammar Development Platform
with a Parser/Generator and Rewrite System.
In International Conference on Natural Language
Processing (ICON) Tutorial.
Miriam Butt, Helge Dyvik, Tracy Holloway King, Hi-
roshi Masuichi, and Christian Rohrer. 2002. The
Parallel Grammar Project.
Richard Crouch and Tracy Holloway King. 2006.
Semantics via F-Structure Rewriting. In Miriam
Butt and Tracy Holloway King, editors, Proceed-
ings of the LFG06 Conference.
Dick Crouch, Mary Dalrymple, Tracy King, John
Maxwell, and Paula Newman, 2006. XLE Doc-
umentation.
Dick Crouch. 1995. Packed Rewriting for Mapping
Semantics to KR. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Computational Semantics.
Mary Dalrymple. 1999. Semantics and Syntax in
Lexical Functional Grammar: The Resource Logic
Approach. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Valeria de Paiva and Tracy Holloway King. 2008.
Designing testsuites for grammar-based systems
in applications. In Proc. of the COLING GEAF
Workshop 2008.
Anette Frank. 1999. From Parallel Grammar Devel-
opment towards Machine Translation (shortened
version). In Miriam Butt and Tracy Holloway
King, editors, Proceedings of the LFG-99 Con-
ference, CSLI Online Publications, University of
Manchester. Section 4 of: Miriam Butt and Ste-
fanie Dipper and Anette Frank and Tracy Hol-
loway King.
Talmy Givon. 1990. Syntax, volume 2. Benjamins.
Roger Kim, Mary Dalrymple, Ronald M. Kaplan,
Tracy Holloway King, Hiroshi Masuichi, and
Tomoko Ohkuma. 2003. Multilingual Grammar
Development via Grammar Porting. . In ESSLLI
2003 Workshop on Ideas and Strategies for Multi-
lingual Grammar Development.
Rowan Nairn, Cleo Condoravdi, and Lauri Kart-
tunen. 2006. Computing relative polarity for tex-
tual inference. In Inference in Computational Se-
mantics (ICoS-5).
Terence Parsons. 1990. Events in the semantics of
English, volume 19 of Current studies in linguistics
series ; 19. MIT Pr., Cambridge, Mass. [u.a.].
Mandy Simons. 2006. Observations on embedding
verbs, evidentiality, and presupposition. Lingua.
Kathrin Spreyer and Anette Frank. 2005. The
TIGER 700 RMRS Bank: RMRS Construction
from Dependencies. In Proceedings of LINC 2005,
pages 1?10.
Hiroshi Umemoto. 2006. Implementing a Japanese
Semantic Parser Based on Glue Approach. In Pro-
ceedings of The 20th Pacific Asia Conference on
Language, Information and Computation.
Kai von Fintel and Anthony S. Gillies. 2007.
An opinionated guide to epistemic modality. In
Tamar Gendler Szabo and John Hawthorne, edi-
tors, Oxford Studies in Epistomology, Vol. 2. Ox-
ford University Press.
18
