Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 178?181,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
The SILT and FlaReNet International Collaboration for Interoperability
Nancy Ide
Department of Computer Science
Vassar College
Poughkeepsie, New York USA
ide@cs.vassar.edu
James Pustejovsky
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts USA
jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu
Nicoletta Calzolari
CNR-ILC
Pisa, Italy
glottolo@ilc.cnr.it
Claudia Soria
CNR-ILC
Pisa, Italy
claudia.soria@ilc.cnr.it
Abstract
Two major projects in the U.S. and Eu-
rope have joined in a collaboration to work
toward achieving interoperability among
language resources. In the U.S., a project
entitled ?Sustainable Interoperability for
Language Technology? (SILT) has been
funded by the National Science Founda-
tion under the INTEROP program, and in
Europe, FLaReNet Fostering Language
Resources Network has been funded
by the European Commission under the
eContentPlus framework. This interna-
tional collaborative effort involves mem-
bers of the language processing commu-
nity and others working in related ar-
eas to build consensus regarding the shar-
ing of data and technologies for language
resources and applications, to work to-
wards interoperability of existing data,
and, where possible, to promote standards
for annotation and resource building. In
addition to broad-based US and European
participation, we are seeking the partici-
pation of colleagues in Asia. This pre-
sentation describing the projects and their
goals will, we hope, serve to involve mem-
bers of the community who may not have
been aware of the effort before, in particu-
lar colleagues in Asia.
1 Overview
One of today?s greatest challenges is the develop-
ment of language processing capabilities that will
enable easy and natural access to computing facil-
ities and information. Because natural language
processing (NLP) research relies heavily on such
resources to provide training data to develop lan-
guage models and optimize statistical algorithms,
language resources?including (usually large) col-
lections of language data and linguistic descrip-
tions in machine readable form, together with
tools and systems (lemmatizers, parsers, summa-
rizers, information extractors, speech recognizers,
annotation development software, etc.)? are criti-
cal to this development.
Over the past two decades, the NLP commu-
nity has invested substantial effort in the creation
of computational lexicons and compendia of se-
mantic information (e.g., framenets, ontologies,
knowledge bases) together with language corpora
annotated for all varieties of linguistic features,
which comprise the central resource for current
NLP research. However, the lack of a thorough,
well-articulated longer-term vision for language
processing research has engendered the creation of
a disjointed set of language resources and tools,
which exist in a wide variety of (often incom-
patible) formats, are often unusable with systems
other than those for which they were developed,
and utilize linguistic categories derived from dif-
ferent theoretical frameworks. Furthermore, these
expensive investments are often produced only for
one of several relatively isolated subfields (e.g.,
NLP, information retrieval, machine translation,
speech processing), or even worse, for one appli-
cation in one subfield. In addition, the high cost of
resource development has prevented the creation
of reliable, large-scale language data and anno-
tations for many phenomena, and for languages
other than English.
Interoperability of resources, tools, and frame-
works has recently come to be recognized as per-
haps the most pressing current need for language
processing research. Interoperability is especially
178
critical at this time because of the widely recog-
nized need to create and merge annotations and
information at different linguistic levels in order
to study interactions and interleave processing at
these different levels. It has also become criti-
cal because new data and tools for emerging and
strategic languages such as Chinese and Arabic as
well as minor languages are in the early stages of
development.
Two major projects in the U.S. and Europe have
joined in a collaboration to work toward achiev-
ing interoperability among language resources. In
the U.S., a project entitled ?Sustainable Interoper-
ability for Language Technology? (SILT) has been
funded by the National Science Foundation under
the INTEROP program, and in Europe, FLaReNet
Fostering Language Resources Network has been
funded by the European Commission under the
eContentPlus framework. This international col-
laborative effort involves members of the lan-
guage processing community and others working
in related areas to build consensus regarding the
sharing of data and technologies for language re-
sources and applications, to work towards inter-
operability of existing data, and, where possible,
to promote standards for annotation and resource
building. In addition to broad-based US and Eu-
ropean participation, we are seeking the participa-
tion of colleagues in Asia.
To ensure full community involvement and con-
solidation of effort, SILT and FLaReNet are estab-
lishing ties with major ongoing projects and con-
sortia, including the International Standards Orga-
nization TC37 SC4 (Language Resource Manage-
ment)1, The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),
the Text Encoding Initiative, the ACL Special In-
terest Group on Annotation (SIGANN)2, and oth-
ers. The ultimate goal is to create an Open Lan-
guage Infrastructure (OLI) that will provide free
and open access to resources, tools, and other in-
formation that support work in the field, in order to
facilitate collaboration, accessibility for all mem-
bers of the community, and convergence toward
interoperability.
The following sections outline the goals of SILT
and FLaReNet.
1http://www.tc37sc4.org
2http://www.cs.vassar.edu/sigann
2 SILT
The creation and use of language resources spans
several related but relatively isolated disciplines,
including NLP, information retrieval, machine
translation, speech, and the semantic web. SILT?s
goal is to turn existing, fragmented technology and
resources developed within these groups in rela-
tive isolation into accessible, stable, and interop-
erable resources that can be readily reused across
several fields.
The major activities of the effort are:
? carefully surveying the field to identify the
resources, tools, and frameworks in order to
examine what exists and what needs to be
developed, and to identify those areas for
which interoperability would have the broad-
est impact in advancing research and devel-
opment and significant applications depen-
dent on them;
? identifying the major efforts on standards de-
velopment and interoperable system design
together with existing and developing tech-
nologies, and examining ways to leverage
their results to define an interoperablity in-
frastructure for both tools and data;
? analyzing innovative methods and techniques
for the creation and maintenance of language
resources in order to reduce the high costs,
increase productivity, and enable rapid devel-
opment of resources for languages that cur-
rently lack them;
? implementing proposed annotation standards
and best practices in corpora currently under
development (e.g., American National Cor-
pus3, TimeBank4) to evaluate their viability
and feed into the process of further standards
development, testing, and use of interoper-
ability frameworks (e.g., GATE5, UIMA6)
and implementation of processing modules,
and distributing all software, data, and anno-
tations.
? ensuring the broadest possible community
engagement in the development of consensus
and agreement on strategies, priorities, and
3http://www.anc.org
4http://www.timeml.org/site/timebank/timebank.html
5http://gate.ac.uk
6http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/uima/
179
best approaches for achieving broad interop-
erability by means of sessions, open meet-
ings, and special workshops at major confer-
ences in the field, together with active main-
tenance of and involvement in open web fo-
rums and Wikis;
? providing the technical expertise necessary to
turn consensus and agreement into robust in-
teroperability frameworks along with the ap-
propriate tools and resources for their broad
use and implementation by means of tutorials
and training workshops, especially for under-
graduate and graduate students in the field.
3 FLaReNet
The multilingual Europe urgently needs language
technologies in order to bridge its language bar-
riers. In order to achieve better quality and fast
development of language technologies that seam-
lessly work on all devices, for spoken and written
language alike, the European scenario now needs a
coherent and unified effort. The demand for cross-
lingual technologies is pressing, the expectations
are high, and at the same time, the field is suf-
fering from fragmentation, lack of vision and di-
rection. The main objective of FLaReNet is to
steer the process that in the near future will de-
fine the actors, the overall direction and the prac-
tical forms of collaboration in language technolo-
gies and their ?raw material?, language resources.
Under this respect, the goals of FLaReNet lie at
a higher level than those of SILT, as they are ori-
ented towards consolidating a community around
a number of key topics that, in the end, will allow
networking of language technology professionals
and their clients, as well as easy sharing of data,
corpora, language resources and tools.
From this perspective, FLaReNet has three
main lines of action:
The creation and mobilization of a unified
and committed community in the field of Lan-
guage Resources and Technologies. To this end,
FLaReNet is bringing together leading experts of
research institutions, academies, companies, fund-
ing agencies, public and private bodies, both at
European and international level, with the spe-
cific purpose of creating consensus around short,
medium and long-term strategic objectives. The
Network is currently composed of around 200 in-
dividuals belonging to academia, research insti-
tutes, industries and government.
The identification of a set of priority themes
on which to stimulate action, under the form of a
roadmap for Language Resources and Technolo-
gies. In order to avoid scattered or conflicting ef-
forts, the major players in the field of Language
Resources and Technologies need to consensually
work together and indicate a clear direction of ac-
tion and a shared policy for the next years. This
will take the form of identification of priorities of
intervention as well as short, medium, and long-
term strategic objectives at all levels, from re-
search directions to implementation choices, from
distribution and access policies to the landscape
of languages, domain and modalities covered by
Language Resources and Technologies.
The elaboration of a blueprint of priority ar-
eas for actions in the field and a coherent set of
recommendations for the policy-makers (funding
agencies especially), the business community and
the public at large. Whatever action cannot be im-
plemented on a long term without the help of the
necessary financial and political framework to sus-
tain them. This is even most true for actions re-
garding Language Resources that typically imply
a sustained effort at national level. To this end,
the FLaReNet Network will propose the priority
themes under the form of consensual recommen-
dations and a plan of action for EC Member States,
other European-wide decision makers, companies,
as well as non-EU and International organizations.
The following Thematic Areas are currently
covered by FLaReNet:
? The Chart for the area of LRs and LT in its
different dimensions
? Methods and models for LR building, reuse,
interlinking, and maintenance
? Harmonisation of formats and standards
? Definition of evaluation and validation proto-
cols and procedures
? Methods for the automatic construction and
processing of Language Resources
FLaReNet builds upon years of research and de-
velopment in the field of standards and language
resources, as well as on the achievements (both
in terms of results and community awareness),
of past EU projects such as EAGLES7, ISLE8,
7http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/home.html
8http://www.ilc.cnr.it/EAGLES/isle/ISLE Home Page.htm
180
INTERA9, and LIRICS10. Close collaboration is
also established with many relevant ongoing EU
projects, such as CLARIN11.
9http://www.elda.org/intera
10http://lirics.loria.fr/
11http://www.clarin.eu
181
