Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 142?145,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
Towards a Methodology for Named Entities Annotation
Kar?n Fort
INIST / LIPN
2 all?e du Parc de Brabois,
54500 Vandoeuvre-l?s-Nancy, France
karen.fort@inist.fr
Maud Ehrmann
XRCE
6 Chemin de Maupertuis,
38240 Meylan, France
Ehrmann@xrce.xerox.com
Adeline Nazarenko
LIPN, Universit? Paris 13 & CNRS
99 av. J.B. Cl?ment,
93430 Villetaneuse, France
nazarenko@lipn.univ-paris13.fr
Abstract
Today, the named entity recognition task is
considered as fundamental, but it involves
some specific difficulties in terms of anno-
tation. Those issues led us to ask the fun-
damental question of what the annotators
should annotate and, even more important,
for which purpose. We thus identify the
applications using named entity recogni-
tion and, according to the real needs of
those applications, we propose to seman-
tically define the elements to annotate. Fi-
nally, we put forward a number of method-
ological recommendations to ensure a co-
herent and reliable annotation scheme.
1 Introduction
Named entity (NE) extraction appeared in the mid-
dle of the 1990s with the MUC conferences (Mes-
sage Understanding Conferences). It has now be-
come a successful Natural Language Processing
(NLP) task that cannot be ignored. However, the
underlying corpus annotation is still little studied.
The issues at stake in manual annotation are cru-
cial for system design, be it manual design, ma-
chine learning, training or evaluation. Manual an-
notations give a precise description of the expected
results of the target system. Focusing on manual
annotation issues led us to examine what named
entities are and what they are used for.
2 Named Entities Annotation: practice
and difficulties
Named entity recognition is a well-established
task (Nadeau and Sekine, 2007). One can recall its
evolution according to three main directions. The
first corresponds to work in the ?general? field,
0This work was partly realised as part of the Quaero Pro-
gramme, funded by OSEO, French State agency for innova-
tion.
with the continuation of the task defined by MUC
for languages other than English, with a revised set
of categories, mainly with journalistic corpora1.
The second direction relates to work in ?special-
ized? domains, with the recognition of entities in
medicine, chemistry or microbiology, like gene
and protein names in specialized literature2. The
last direction, spanning the two previous ones, is
disambiguation.
For each of those evaluation campaigns, cor-
pora were built and annotated manually. They
are generally used to develop automatic annotation
tools. ?To Develop? is to be understood in a broad
sense: the goal is to describe what automatic sys-
tems should do, to help writing the symbolic rules
they are based on, to learn those rules or decision
criteria automatically, and, finally, to evaluate the
results obtained by comparing them with a gold
standard. The annotation process brings into play
two actors, an annotator and a text. The text anno-
tation must follow precise guidelines, satisfy qual-
ity criteria and support evaluation.
In the general field, the MUC, CoNLL and
ACE evaluation campaigns seem to have paid at-
tention to the process of manual NE annotation,
with the definition of annotation guidelines and
the calculation of inter-annotator (but not intra-
annotator) agreement, using a back-and-forth pro-
cess between annotating the corpus and defining
the annotation guidelines. Nevertheless, some as-
pects of the annotation criteria remained problem-
atic, caused mainly by ?different interpretations
of vague portions of the guidelines? (Sundheim,
1995). In the fields of biology and medicine, texts
from specialized databases (PubMed and Med-
Line3) were annotated. Annotation guidelines
1See the evaluation campaigns MET, IREX, CoNNL,
ACE, ESTER and HAREM (Ehrmann, 2008, pp. 19-21).
2See the evaluation campaigns BioCreAtIvE (Kim et al,
2004) and JNLPBA (Hirschman et al, 2005).
3www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed, http://medline.cos.com
142
were vague about the annotation of NEs 4, and few
studies measured annotation quality. For the GE-
NIA (Kim et al, 2003), PennBioIE (Kulick et al,
2004) or GENETAG (Tanabe et al, 2005) corpora,
no inter- or intra-annotator agreement is reported.
If NE annotation seems a well-established prac-
tice, it involves some difficulties.
As regards general language corpora, those dif-
ficulties are identified (Ehrmann, 2008). The first
one relates to the choice of annotation categories
and the determination of what they encompass.
Indeed, beyond the ?universal? triad defined by
the MUC conferences (ENAMEX, NUMEX and
TIMEX), the inventory of categories is difficult to
stabilize. For ENAMEX, although it may be ob-
vious that the name of an individual such as Kofi
Annan is to be annotated using this category, what
to do with the Kennedys, Zorro, the Democrats or
Santa Claus? For the other categories, it is just
as difficult to choose the granularity of the cat-
egories and to determine what they encompass.
Another type of difficulty relates to the selection
of the mentions to be annotated as well as the de-
limitation of NE boundaries. Let us consider the
NE ?Barack Obama? and the various lexemes that
can refer to it: Barack Obama, Mr Obama, the
President of the United States, the new president,
he. Should we annotate proper nouns only, or also
definite descriptions that identify this person, even
pronouns which, contextually, could refer to this
NE? And what to do with the various attributes
that go with this NE (Mr and president)? Coordi-
nation and overlapping phenomena can also raise
problems for the annotators. Finally, another dif-
ficulty results from phenomena of referential plu-
rality, with homonyms NEs (Java place and Java
language) and metonyms (England as a geograph-
ical place, a government or sport team).
Our experience in microbiology shows that
these difficulties are even more acute in special-
ized language. We carried out an annotation ex-
periment on an English corpus of PubMed notices.
The main difficulty encountered related to the
distinction required between proper and common
nouns, the morphological boundary between the
two being unclear in those fields where common
nouns are often reclassified as ?proper nouns?, as
is demonstrated by the presence of these names
4(Tanabe et al, 2005) notes that ?a more detailed defi-
nition of a gene/protein name, as well as additional annota-
tion rules, could improve inter-annotator agreement and help
solve some of the tagging inconsistencies?.
in nomenclatures (small, acid-soluble spore pro-
tein A is an extreme case) or acronymisation phe-
nomena (one finds for example across the outer
membrane (OM)). In those cases, annotators were
instructed to refer to official lists, such as Swiss-
Prot5, which requires a significant amount of time.
Delimiting the boundaries of the elements to be
annotated also raised many questions. One can
thus choose to annotate nifh messenger RNA if it is
considered that the mention of the state messenger
RNA is part of the determination of the reference,
or only nifh, if it is considered that the proper noun
is enough to build the determination. Selecting se-
mantic types was also a problem for the annota-
tors, in particular for mobile genetic elements, like
plasmids or transposons. Indeed, those were to be
annotated in taxons but not in genes whereas they
are chunks of DNA, therefore parts of genome. A
particularly confusing directive for the annotators
was to annotate the acronym KGFR as a proper
noun and the developed form keratinocyte growth
Factor receptor as a common noun. This kind of
instruction is difficult to comprehend and should
have been documented better.
These problems result in increased annotation
costs, too long annotation guidelines and, above
all, a lot of indecision for the annotators, which
induces inconsistencies and lower-quality annota-
tion. This led us to consider the issue of what the
annotators must annotate (semantic foundations of
NE) and, above all, why.
3 What to Annotate?
3.1 Various Defining Criteria
Ehrmann (2008) proposes a linguistic analysis
of the notion of NE, which is presented as an
NLP ?creation?. In the following paragraphs, we
take up the distinction introduced in LDC (2004):
NE are ?mentions? refering to domain ?entities?,
those mentions relate to different linguistic cate-
gories: proper nouns (?Rabelais?), but also pro-
nouns (?he?), and in a broader sense, definite de-
scriptions (?the father of Gargantua?). Several
defining criteria for NE can be identified.
Referential Unicity One of the main charac-
teristics of proper nouns is their referential be-
haviour: a proper noun refers to a unique refer-
ential entity, even if this unicity is contextual. We
consider that this property is essential in the usage
of NEs in NLP.
5http://www.expasy.org/sprot/
143
Referential Autonomy NEs are also au-
tonomous from the referential point of view. It
is obvious in the case of proper nouns, which are
self-sufficient to identify the referent, at least in a
given communication situation (Eurotunnel). The
case of definite descriptions (The Channel Tunnel
operator) is a bit different: they can be used to
identify the referent thanks to external knowledge.
Denominational Stability Proper nouns are
also stable denominations. Even if some varia-
tions may appear (A. Merkel/Mrs Merkel), they
are more regular and less numerous than for other
noun phrases6.
Referential Relativity Interpretation is always
carried out relatively to a domain model, that can
be implicit in simple cases (for example, a country
or a person) but has to be made explicit when the
diversity in entities to consider increases.
3.2 Different Annotation Perspectives
The defining criteria do not play the same role
in all applications. In some cases (indexing and
knowledge integration), we focus on referential
entities which are designated by stable and non-
ambiguous descriptors. In those cases, the NEs
to use are proper nouns or indexing NEs and they
should be normalized to identify variations that
can appear despite their referential stability. For
this type of application, the main point is not to
highlight all the mentions of an entity in a doc-
ument, but to identify which document mentions
which entity. Therefore, precision has to be fa-
vored over recall. On the other hand, in the tasks
of information extraction and domain modelling, it
is important to identify all the mentions, including
definite descriptions (therefore, coreference rela-
tions between mentions that are not autonomous
enough from a referential point of view are also
important to identify).
As it is impossible to identify the mentions of all
the referential entities, the domain model defines
which entities are ?of interest? and the boundary
between what has to be annotated or not. For
instance, when a human resources director is in-
terested in the payroll in the organization, s/he
thinks in terms of personnel categories and not
in terms of the employees as individuals. This
appears in the domain model: the different cate-
gories of persons (technicians, engineers, etc.) are
6A contrario, this explains the importance of synonyms
identification in domains where denominations are not stable
(like, for instance, in genomics).
modelled as instances attached to the concept CAT-
OF-EMPLOYEES and the individuals are not rep-
resented. On the opposite, when s/he deals with
employees? paychecks and promotion, s/he is in-
terested in individuals. In this case, the model
should consider the persons as instances and the
categories of personnel as concepts.
Domain modelling implies making explicit
choices where texts can be fuzzy and mix points
of view. It is therefore impossible to annotate the
NEs of a text without refering to a model. In the
case of the above experiment, as it is often the
case, the model was simply described by a list of
concepts: the annotators had to name genes and
proteins, but also their families, compositions and
components.
4 Annotation methodology
Annotation guidelines As the targeted annota-
tion depends on what one wants to annotate and
how it will be exploited, it is important to provide
annotators with guidelines that explain what must
be annotated rather than how it should be anno-
tated. Very often, feasibility constraints overcome
semantic criteria,7 which confuses annotators. Be-
sides, it is important to take into consideration the
complexity of the annotation task, without exclud-
ing the dubious annotations or those which would
be too difficult to reproduce automatically. On the
contrary, one of the roles of manual annotation
is to give a general idea of the task complexity.
The annotators must have a clear view of the tar-
get application. This view must be based on an
explicit reference model, as that of GENIA, with
precise definitions and explicit modelling choices.
Examples can be added for illustration but they
should not replace the definition of the goal. It
is important that annotators understand the under-
lying logic of annotation. It helps avoiding mis-
understandings and giving them a sense of being
involved and committed.
Annotation tools Although there exists many
annotation tools, few are actually available, free,
downloadable and usable. Among those tools are
Callisto, MMAX2, Knowtator or Cadixe8 which
was used in the reported experiment. The features
7"In [src homology 2 and 3], it seems excessive to require
an NER program to recognize the entire fragment, however,
3 alone is not a valid gene name." (Tanabe et al, 2005).
8http://callisto.mitre.org, http://mmax2.sourceforge.net,
http://knowtator.sourceforge.net, http://caderige.imag.fr
144
and the annotation language expressivity must be
adapted to the targeted annotation task: is it suf-
ficient to type the textual segments or should they
also be related? is it possible/necessary to have
concurrent or overlapping annotations? In our ex-
periment on biology, for instance, although the an-
notators had the possibility to mention their un-
certainty by adding an attribute to the annotations,
they seldom did so, because it was not easy to do
using the provided interface.
Annotation evaluation Gut and Bayerl (2004)
distinguishes the inter-annotator agreement, which
measures the annotation stability, and the intra-
annotation agreement that gives an idea on how
reproducible an annotation is. The inter- and intra-
annotator agreements do not have to be measured
on the whole corpus, but quite early in the annota-
tion process, so that the annotation guidelines can
be modified. Another way to evaluate annotation
relies on annotator introspection. Annotators are
asked to auto-evaluate the reliability of their an-
notations and their (un)certainty attributes can be
used afterwards to evaluate the overall quality of
the work. Since we did not have several anno-
tators working independently on our biology cor-
pus, we asked them to indicate the uncertainty of
their annotations on a carefully selected sample
corpus. 25 files were extracted out of the 499 texts
of our corpus (5%). This evaluation required only
few hours of work and it enabled to better qualify
and quantity annotation confidence. The annota-
tors declared that around 20% of the total number
of annotation tags were "uncertain". We observed
that more than 75% of these uncertain tags were
associated to common nouns of type bacteria and
that uncertainty was very often (77%) linked to the
fact that distinguishing common and proper nouns
was difficult.
More generally, a good annotation methodology
consists in having several annotators working in-
dependently on the same sample corpus very early
in the process. It allows to quickly identify the dis-
agreement causes. If they can be solved, new rec-
ommendations are added to the annotation guide-
lines. If not, the annotation task might be simpli-
fied and the dubious cases eliminated.
5 Conclusion and Prospects
In the end, two main points must be considered for
a rigorous and efficient NE annotation in corpus.
First, as for the content, it is important to focus,
not on how to annotate, but rather on what to anno-
tate, according to the final application. Once spec-
ified what is to be annotated, one has to be cau-
tious in terms of methodology and consider from
the very beginning of the campaign, the evaluation
of the produced annotation.
We intend to apply this methodology to other
annotation campaigns of the project we participate
in. As those campaigns cover terminology and se-
mantic relations extraction, we will have to adapt
our method to those applications.
References
Maud Ehrmann. 2008. Les entit?s nomm?es, de la
linguistique au TAL : statut th?orique et m?thodes
de d?sambigu?sation. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Paris 7.
Ulrike Gut and Petra Saskia Bayerl. 2004. Measuring
the reliability of manual annotations of speech cor-
pora. In Proc. of Speech Prosody, pages 565?568,
Nara, Japan.
Lynette Hirschman, Alexander Yeh, Christian
Blaschke, and Alfonso Valencia. 2005. Overview
of biocreative: critical assessment of information
extraction for biology. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(1).
J.-D. Kim, T. Ohta, Y. Tateisi, and J. Tsujii. 2003. Ge-
nia corpus?a semantically annotated corpus for bio-
textmining. Bioinformatics, 19:180?182.
Jin-Dong Kim, Tomoko Ohta, Yoshimasa Tsuruoka,
Yuka Tateisi, and Nigel Collier. 2004. Introduc-
tion to the bio-entity recognition task at JNLPBA.
In Proc. of JNLPBA COLING 2004 Workshop, pages
70?75.
Seth Kulick, Ann Bies, Mark Liberman, Mark Mandel,
Ryan McDonald, Martha Palmer, Andrew Schein,
and Lyle Ungar. 2004. Integrated annotation for
biomedical information extraction. In HLT-NAACL
2004 Workshop: Biolink. ACL.
LDC. 2004. ACE (Automatic Content Extraction)
english annotation guidelines for entities. Livrable
version 5.6.1 2005.05.23, Linguistic Data Consor-
tium.
David Nadeau and Satoshi Sekine. 2007. A survey
of named entity recognition and classification. Lin-
guisticae Investigaciones, 30(1):3?26.
B. Sundheim. 1995. Overview of results of the MUC-6
evaluation. In Proc. of the 6th Message Understand-
ing Conference. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
Lorraine Tanabe, Natalie Xie, Lynne Thom, Wayne
Matten, and John Wilbur1. 2005. Genetag: a tagged
corpus for gene/protein named entity recognition.
Bioinformatics, 6.
145
