Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 90?98,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c?2009 ACL and AFNLP
 
Syntactic annotation of spoken utterances: 
A case study on the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
 
Barbora Hladk? and Zde?ka Ure?ov? 
 
Charles University in Prague 
Institute of Formal and Applied Linguistics  
{hladka, uresova}@ufal.mff.cuni.cz 
 
Abstract 
Corpus annotation plays an important 
role in linguistic analysis and computa-
tional processing of both written and 
spoken language. Syntactic annotation 
of spoken texts becomes clearly a topic 
of considerable interest nowadays, 
driven by the desire to improve auto-
matic speech recognition systems by 
incorporating syntax in the language 
models, or to build language under-
standing applications. Syntactic anno-
tation of both written and spoken texts 
in the Czech Academic Corpus was 
created thirty years ago when no other 
(even annotated) corpus of spoken texts 
has existed. We will discuss how much 
relevant and inspiring this annotation is 
to the current frameworks of spoken 
text annotation. 
1 Motivation 
The purpose of annotating corpora is to cre-
ate an objective evidence of the real usage 
of the language. In general, it is easier to anno-
tate written text ? speech must be recorded and 
transcribed to process it whilst texts are avail-
able ?immediately?; moreover, written texts 
usually obey standard grammar rules of the 
language in questions, while a true transcript of 
spoken utterances often does not. 
The theoretical linguistic research considers 
the language to be a system of layers 
(e.g. the Government and Binding theory 
(Chomsky, 1993), the Functional-Generative 
Description of the language (Sgall, Haji?ov?, 
Panevov? 1986)). In order to be a valuable 
source of linguistic knowledge, the corpus an-
notation should respect this point of view. 
The morphological and syntactic layers 
of annotation represent a standard in today?s 
text corpora, e.g. the Penn Treebank, 
the family of the Prague Dependency Tree-
banks, the Tiger corpus for German, etc. Some 
corpora contain a semantic annotation, such as 
the Penn Treebank enriched by PropBank and 
Nombank, the Prague Dependency Treebank in 
its highest layer, the Penn Chinese or the 
the Korean Treebanks. The Penn Discourse 
Treebank contains discourse annotation. 
It is desirable that syntactic (and higher) an-
notation of spoken texts respects the written-
text style as much as possible, for obvious rea-
sons: data ?compatibility?, reuse of tools etc. 
A number of questions arise immediately: 
How much experience and knowledge ac-
quired during the written text annotation can 
we apply to the spoken texts? Are the annota-
tion instructions applicable to transcriptions in 
a straightforward way or some modifications 
of them must be done? Can transcriptions be 
annotated ?as they are? or some transformation 
of their inner structure into a written text struc-
ture must precede the annotation? The Czech 
Academic Corpus will help us to find out the 
answers. 
2 Introduction 
The first attempts to syntactically annotate 
spoken texts date back to the 1970s and 1980s 
when the Czech Academic Corpus ? CAC 
(Kr?l?k, Uhl??ov?, 2007) and the Swedish Tal-
banken (Nilsson, Hall, Nivre, 2005) appeared. 
Talbanken was annotated with partial phrase 
structures and grammatical functions, CAC 
with dependency-based structures and analyti-
cal functions. Thus both corpora can be re-
garded as belonging to the pioneers in corpus 
linguistics, together with the paper-only ?Quirk 
corpus? (Svartvik, Quirk, 1980; computerized 
later as the London-Lund Corpus).1  
                                                 
1
 When these annotation projects began in the 1960s, 
there were only two computerized manually annotated 
corpora available: the Brown Corpus of American Eng-
90
 During the last twenty years the work on 
creating new treebanks has increased consid-
erably and so CAC and Talbanken have been 
put in a different light, namely with regard to 
their internal formats and annotation schemes. 
Given that, transformation of them became 
necessary: while the Talbanken?s transforma-
tion concerned only the internal format, trans-
formation of CAC concerned both internal for-
mat and annotation scheme. 
Later, more annotated corpora of spoken 
texts have appeared, like the British Compo-
nent of the International Corpus of English 
(ICE-GB, Greenbaum, 1996), the Fisher Cor-
pus for English (Cieri et al, 2004), the Childes 
database 2 , the Switchboard part of the Penn 
Treebank (Godfrey et al, 1992), Corpus 
Gesproken Nederlands (Hoekstra et al, 2001) 
and the Verbmobil corpora.3 The syntactic an-
notation in these corpora is mostly automatic 
using tools trained on written corpora or on a 
small, manually annotated part of spoken cor-
pora. 
The aim of our contribution is to answer 
the question whether it is possible to annotate 
speech transcriptions syntactically according to 
the guidelines originally designed for text cor-
pora. We will show the problems that arise in 
extending an explicit scheme of syntactic an-
notation of written Czech into the domain of 
spontaneous speech (as found in the CAC).  
Our paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion 3, we give a brief description of the past 
and present of the Czech Academic Corpus. 
The compatibility of the original CAC syntac-
tic annotation with a present-day approach 
adopted by the Prague Dependency Treebank 
project is evaluated in Section 4. Section 5 is 
the core of our paper. We discuss phenomena 
typical for spoken texts making impossible to 
annotate them according to the guidelines for 
written texts. We explore a trade-off between 
leaving the original annotation aside and anno-
tating from scratch, and an upgrade of the 
original annotation. In addition, we briefly 
compare the approach adopted for Czech and 
those adopted for other languages. 
                                                                       
lish and the LOB Corpus of British English. Both contain 
written texts annotated for part of speech. Their size is 1 
mil. tokens. 
2
 http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/grasp/ 
3
 http://verbmobil.dfki.de/ 
3 The Czech Academic Corpus: past 
and present (1971-2008) 
The idea of the Czech Academic Corpus 
(CAC) came to life between 1971 and 1985 
thanks to the Department of Mathematical 
Linguistics within the Institute of Czech Lan-
guage. The discussion on the concept of aca-
demic grammar of Czech, i.e. on the concept 
of CAC annotation, finally led to the tradi-
tional, systematic, and well elaborated concept 
of morphology and dependency syntax (?mi-
lauer, 1972). By the mid 1980s, a total of 
540,000 words of CAC were morphologically 
and syntactically manually annotated.  
The documents originally selected for the 
CAC are articles taken from a range of media. 
The sources included newspapers and maga-
zines, and transcripts of spoken language from 
radio and TV programs, covering administra-
tive, journalistic and scientific fields. 
The original CAC was on par with it peers at 
the time (such as the Brown corpus) in size, 
coverage, and annotation; it surpassed them in 
that it contained (some) syntactic annotation. 
CAC was used in the first experiments of sta-
tistical morphological tagging of Czech (Haji?, 
Hladk?, 1997). 
After the Prague Dependency Treebank 
(PDT) has been built (Haji? et al, 2006), a 
conversion from the CAC to the PDT format 
has started. The PDT uses three layers of anno-
tation: morphological, syntactic and ?tecto-
grammatical? (or semantic) layers (henceforth 
m-layer, a-layer and t-layer, respectively).  
The main goal was to make the CAC and the 
PDT compatible at the m-layer and the a-layer, 
and thus to enable integration of the CAC into 
the PDT. The second version of the CAC pre-
sents such a complete conversion of the inter-
nal format and the annotation schemes. The 
overall statistics on the CAC 2.0 are presented 
in Table 1. 
Annotation transformation is visualized in 
Figure 1. In the areas corresponding to the cor-
pora, the morphological annotation is symbol-
ized by the horizontal lines and syntactical an-
notation by the vertical lines.  
Conversion of the originally simple textual 
comma-separated values format into the Pra-
gue Markup Language (Pajas, ?t?p?nek, 2005) 
was more or less straightforward. 
Morphological analysis of Czech in the 
CAC and in the PDT is almost the same, ex-
cept that the morphological tagset of CAC is 
91
 slightly more detailed. Semi-automatic conver-
sion of the original morphological annotation 
into the Czech positional morphological tagset 
was executed in compliance with the morpho-
logical annotation of PDT (Hana et al, 2005). 
Figure 1 shows that morphological annotation 
conversion of both written and spoken texts 
was done. 
The only major problem in this conversion 
was that digit-only tokens and punctuation 
were omitted from the original CAC since they 
were deemed linguistically ?uninteresting?, 
which is certainly true from the point of view 
of the original CAC?s purpose to give quantita-
tive lexical support to a new Czech dictionary. 
Since the sources of the CAC documents were 
no longer available, missing tokens had to in-
serted and revised manually. 
Syntactic conversion of CAC was more de-
manding than the morphological one. In a pilot 
study, (Ribarov et al, 2006) attempt to answer 
a question whether an automatic transforma-
tion of the CAC annotation into the PDT for-
mat (and subsequent manual corrections) is 
more effective than to leave the CAC annota-
tion aside and process the CAC?s texts by a 
statistical parser instead (again, with subse-
quent manual correction). In the end, the latter 
variant was selected (with regrets). No distinc-
tion in strategy of written and spoken texts an-
notation transformation was made. However, 
spoken texts were eventually excluded from 
the CAC 2.0 (Figure 1). Reasons for this are 
explained in detail in the following two sec-
tions. 
4 Syntax in the CAC and the PDT 
4.1 Syntactic annotation in the CAC 
The syntactic analysis of Czech in the CAC 
and in the PDT is very much alike, but there 
are phenomena in which the CAC syntactic 
annotation scenario differs from the PDT, even 
though both corpora are based on the same 
linguistic theory (?milauer, 1969), i.e. on the 
dependency grammar notion common to the 
?Prague school? of linguists since the 1930s.  
However, the syntactic annotation differs 
between the two corpora. The CAC works with 
a single syntactic layer, whereas the PDT 
works with two independent (although inter-
linked) syntactic layers: an analytical (syntac-
tic) one and a tectogrammatical one (a-layer 
and t-layer, respectively). In this paper, we are 
referring to the a-layer of the PDT in our com-
parisons unless specifically noted for those 
elements of the tectogrammatical annotation 
that do have some counterpart in the CAC. 
 
 
Figure 1 Overall scheme of the CAC conver-
sion 
 
Style form4 #docs #sntncs 
(K) 
#tokens 
(K) 
Journalism w 52 10 189 
Journalism s 8 1 29 
Scientific w 68 12 245 
Scientific s 32 4 116 
administrative w 16 3 59 
administrative s 4 2 14 
Total w 135 25 493 
Total s 44 7 159 
Total w&s 180 32 652 
Table 1 Size of the CAC 2.0 parts 
The CAC annotation scheme makes a sub-
stantial distinction between two things: surface 
syntactic relations within a single clause as 
well as syntactic relations between clauses in a 
complex sentence. These two types of syntac-
tic information are captured by two types of 
syntactic tags. 
(a) Word-level (intra-clausal) syntactic tag is 
a 6-position tag assigned to every non-
auxilliary (?autosemantic?) word within a 
single clause, representing the intra-
clausal dependency relations.  
(b) Clause-level (intra-sentential) syntactic 
tag is a 8-position tag assigned to the first 
token of each clause in a complex sen-
tence, representing the status (and possi-
ble dependency) of the given clause 
within the given (complex) sentence. 
                                                 
4
 Either written (w) or spoken (s) texts. 
written  
spoken  
written  
C
A
C 
P
D
T 
2.
0 
written  
spoken  
C
A
C 
2.
0 
theory  theory  
guidelines  guidelines  
92
 The CAC thus annotates not only depend-
ency relations within a single clause but also 
dependency relations within a complex sen-
tence. 
A description of the 6-position and the 8-
position tags is given in Tables 2 and 3, respec-
tively. (Ribarov et al, 2006) gives a detailed 
description. 
4.2 Syntactic annotation in the PDT 
The PDT a-layer annotates two main things: 
a dependency structure of the sentence and 
types of these dependencies.  
Representation of a structure of the sentence 
is rendered in a form of a dependency tree, the 
nodes of which correspond to the tokens 
(words and punctuation) that form the sen-
tence. The type of dependency (subject, object, 
adverbial, complement, attribute, etc.) is repre-
sented by a node attribute called an ?analytical 
function? (afun for short; the most frequent 
values of this attribute are listed in Table 4).  
4.3 CAC vs. PDT 
Comparing the CAC and the PDT syntactic 
annotation scenarios, we can see that the anno-
tation of the major syntactic relations within a 
sentence is very similar, from similar adapta-
tions of the theoretical background down to the 
high-level corpus markup conventions. For 
example, in both corpora the predicate is the 
clausal head and the subject is its dependent, 
unlike the descriptions we can find in the tradi-
tional Czech syntactic theory (?milauer, 1969). 
Another (technical) similarity can be found in 
the way the dependency types are encoded. In 
both corpora, the dependency type label is 
stored at the dependent. No confusion arises 
since the link from a dependent to its governor 
is unique. 
However, the list of differences is actually 
quite long. Some are minor and technical: for 
example, in the PDT an ?overarching? root of 
the sentence tree (marked AuxS) is always 
added, so that all other nodes appear as if they 
depend on it. Some differences are more pro-
found and are described below. 
We are not going to list all the differences in 
individual syntactic labels - they can be found 
easily by confronting Tables 2 and 4, but we 
would like to draw the readers? attention to the 
main dissimilarities between the CAC?s and 
the PDT?s syntactic annotation scenarios. 
 
Punctuation 
The first difference can be observed at first 
glance: in CAC no punctuation marks can be 
found (as mentioned in Section 3). While some 
might question whether punctuation should 
ever be part of syntax, in computational ap-
proaches punctuation is certainly seen as a 
very important part of written-language syntax 
and is thus taken into account in annotation 
(for important considerations about punctua-
tion in spoken corpora, see Section 5). 
Digits 
CAC leaves out digital tokens, even though 
they are often a valid part of the syntactic 
structure and can plausibly get various syntac-
tic labels as we can see in the PDT annotation, 
where nothing is left out of the syntactic tree 
structure. 
Prepositions and function words 
The next most significant difference is in the 
treatment of prepositions (or function words in 
general, see also the next paragraphs on con-
junctions and other auxiliaries). Whereas CAC 
neither labels them nor even includes them in 
the dependency tree, PDT at the a-layer, re-
flecting the surface shape of the sentence, 
makes them the head of the autosemantic 
nodes they ?govern? (and labels them with the 
AuxP analytical function tag). The CAC way 
of annotation (rather, non-annotation) of 
prepositions is, in a sense, closer to the annota-
tion scenario of the underlying syntactic layer 
(the t-layer) of the PDT, It is also reflected in 
the adverbial types of labels (column 2 in Ta-
ble 2) ? these would all be labeled only as Adv 
at the (surface-syntactic) a-layer of the PDT, 
but at the (deep) t-layer, they get a label from a 
mix of approx. 70 functional, syntactic and 
semantic labels. Unfortunately, only seven 
such labels are used in the CAC, resulting in 
loss of information in some cases (adverbials 
of aim, accompaniment, attitude, beneficiary, 
etc.); the same is true for certain subtypes of 
time and location adverbials, since they are not 
distinguished in terms of direction, location 
designation (on/under/above/next to and many 
other), duration, start time vs. end time, etc. 
Conjunctions 
Further, subordinating as well as coordinat-
ing conjunctions get only a sentential syntactic 
tag in the CAC (if any), i.e. they are labeled by 
93
 the 9-position tag but not by the word-level, 
intra-clausal syntactic tag. In PDT, subordinat-
ing and coordinating conjunctions get assigned 
the analytical function value AuxC and Co-
ord, respectively, and they are always in-
cluded in the syntactic tree. For subordinating 
conjunctions, the CAC approach is again in 
some ways similar to the annotation scenario 
of the tectogrammatical layer of PDT ? de-
pendencies between clauses are annotated but 
the set of labels is much smaller than that of t- 
layer of the PDT, again resulting in a loss of 
information. For coordination and apposition, 
the difference is structural; while CAC marks 
an a coordination element with a specific label 
(value ?1? in the column 6 of a word-level tag 
and the same value in column 8 of the clause-
level tag, see Tables 2 and 3), PDT makes a 
node corresponding to the coordination (appo-
sition) a virtual head of the members of the 
coordination or apposition (whether phrasal or 
clausal). CAC thus cannot annotate hierarchy 
in coordination and apposition without another 
loss of information, while PDT can. 
Reflexive particles 
In CAC, reflexive particles se/si are often left 
unannotated, while PDT uses detailed labels 
for all occurrences. Lexicalized reflexives 
(AuxT in the PDT), particles (AuxO) and re-
flexive passivization (AuxR) and also certain 
(yet rare) adverbial usages (Adv) are not anno-
tated in the CAC at all. The only case where 
CAC annotates them is in situations where 
they can be considered objects (accusative or 
dative case of the personless reflexive pronoun 
sebe). 
Analytic verb forms 
In CAC, no syntactic relation is indicated for 
auxiliary verbs, loosing the reference to the 
verb they belong to; in the PDT, they are put as 
dependents onto their verb, and labeled AuxV 
to describe their function. 
Special adverbs and particles 
In PDT, there are also syntactic labels for 
certain type of ?special? adverbials and parti-
cles, such as rad?ji [better], z?ejm? [probably], 
tak? [also], p?ece [surely], jedin? [only]. In 
CAC, dependencies and syntactic tags for 
these tokens are missing. 
Other differences in both syntactic scenarios 
will be described in the next section since they 
are related to spoken language annotation.  
5 CAC syntactic annotation of spoken 
utterances  
Current Czech syntactic theory is based al-
most entirely on written Czech but spoken lan-
guage often differs strikingly from the written 
one (M?llerov?, 1994). 
In the CAC guidelines, only the following 
word-level markup specifically aimed at the 
spoken utterance structure is described: 
? non-identical reduplication of a word 
(value ?7? in column 6), 
? identical reduplication of a word (value 
?8? in column 6), 
? ellipsis (value ?9? or ?0? in column 6). 
Let?s take this spoken utterance from CAC: 
CZ: A to jsou tro?ku, jedna je, jedna m? sv?tlou 
budovu a druh? m? tmavou budovu, ony jsou um?s-
t?ny v jednom, v jednom are?le, ale ta, to centrum, 
pat?ilo t?, bylo to v bloku Univerzity vl?msk?, a j? 
jsem se ptala na univerzit?, na, v Univerzit? svo-
bodn?, ?e, no a to p?eci oni nev?d?, to nanejv??, to 
prost? jedin?, kdy? je to Univerzita vl?msk?, tak o 
tom oni p?ece nemohou nic v?d?t, a nic. 
(Lit.: And they are a bit, one is, one has a light 
building and the second has a dark building, they 
are placed in one, in one campus, but the, the cen-
ter, it belonged to the, it was in a bloc of the Flem-
ish University, and I asked  at the University, in, at 
the Free University, that, well, and that surely they 
don?t know, it at most, it simply only, if it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely cannot know 
anything, and nothing.) 
Words jsou [are] and ta [the] represent a non-
identical reduplication of a word; that is why 
they have been assigned the value ?7? (as de-
scribed above), while je [is], jednom [one], to 
[the] and nic [nothing] represent an identical 
reduplication of a word, i.e. they get the value 
?8? (?identical reduplication of a word?). The 
description does not quite correspond to what a 
closer look at the data reveals: ?7? is used to 
mark a reparandum (part of the sentence that 
was corrected by the speaker later), while ?8? is 
used to mark the part that replaces the reparan-
dum (cf. also the ?EDITED? nonterminal and 
the symbols ?[?, ?+? and ?\? in the Penn Tree-
bank Switchboard annotation (Godfrey et al, 
1992). Ellipsis (the value ?9?) was assigned to 
the words tro?ku [a bit] and t? [to the].  
94
 However, our sample sentence contains 
more phenomena typical for spoken language 
than CAC attempts to annotate, for example:  
- unfinished sentences (fragments), with 
apparent ellipsis: A to je tro?ku? [And 
they are a bit?], 
-  false beginnings (restarts): jedna je, 
jedna m? [one is, one has], 
- repetition of words in the middle 
of sentence:  jsou um?st?ny v jednom, 
jednom are?le [they are placed in one, in 
one campus], 
- redundant and ungrammatically used 
words: ony jsou um?st?ny v jednom?, 
univerzit?, na,v Univerzit? svobodn?,? 
[, they are placed in one? at the Univer-
sity, in, at the Free University, ], 
- redundant deictic words: ?ale ta, to cen-
trum? [?but the, the center?], 
- intonation fillers:  no [well], 
- question tags: na Univerzit? svobodn?, 
?e [at the Free University, that], 
- redundant conectors: kdy? je to Uni-
verzita vl?msk?, tak to o tom [if it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely can-
not know anything], 
- broken coherence of utterance, ?teared? 
syntactic scheme of proposition: ale ta, 
to centrum, bylo to v bloku [but the, the 
center, it belonged to the, it was in a 
bloc], 
- syntactic errors, anacoluthon:  p?eci 
nemohu nic v?d?t, a nic. [surely (I) can-
not know anything, and nothing]. 
The CAC syntactic scenario does not cover 
these phenomena in the guidelines (and tag 
tables), and even if some of them would easily 
fall in the reparandum/repair category (such as 
the phrase jedna je, jedna m? [one is, one 
has]), which is seemingly included, it does not 
annotate them as such. Moreover, these are just 
some of the spoken language phenomena, 
taken from just one random utterance; a thor-
ough look at the spoken part of the CAC re-
veals that most of the well-known spoken lan-
guage phenomena, e.g. grammatically incoher-
ent utterances, grammatical additions spoken 
as an afterthought, redundant co-references or 
phrase-connecting errors (Shriver, 1994, Fitz-
gerald, 2009), are present in the texts but left 
unnoticed.  
In comparison, however, the PDT covers 
none of these typical spoken structures in the 
text annotation guidelines (the main reason 
being that it does not contain spoken material 
in the first place). Thus, at the surface-
syntactic layer (the a-layer) of the PDT, there 
are only limited means for capturing such spo-
ken phenomena.  
For example, words playing the role of fill-
ers could get the analytical function AuxO de-
signed mostly for a redundant (deictic or emo-
tive) constituent.  
Many phenomena typical for spoken lan-
guage would get, according to the PDT guide-
lines, the analytical function ExD (Ex-
Dependent), which just ?warns? of such type 
of incomplete utterance structure where a gov-
erning word is missing, i.e. it is such ellipsis 
where the dependent is present but its govern-
ing element is not. 
In Figure 2, we present an attempt to anno-
tate the above spoken utterance using the stan-
dard PDT guidelines. The ?problematic? 
nodes, for which we had to adopt some arbi-
trary annotation decisions due to the lack of 
proper means in the PDT annotation guide-
lines, are shown as dark squares. For compari-
son, we have used dashed line for those de-
pendency edges that were annotated in the 
CAC by one of the spoken-language specific 
tags (values ?7?, ?8?, ?9? in the column 6 of the 
original annotation, see above at the beginning 
of Sect. 5), 
Most of the square-marked nodes do corre-
spond well to the PDT labels for special cases 
which are used for some of the peripheral lan-
guage phenomena (ExD, Apos and its mem-
bers, several AuxX for extra commas, AuxY 
for particles etc.).  
It can also be observed that the dashed lines 
(CAC spoken annotation labels) correspond to 
some of the nodes with problematic markup in 
the PDT, but they are used only in clear cases 
and therefore they are found much more spar-
ingly in the corpus. 
6 Conclusion 
Courage of the original CAC project?s team 
deserves to be reminded. Having the experi-
ence with the present spoken data processing, 
we do appreciate the initial attempts with the 
syntactic annotation of spoken texts. 
95
 Given the main principles of the a-layer of 
PDT annotation (no addition/deletion of to-
kens, no word-order changes, no word correc-
tions), one would have to introduce arbitrary, 
linguistically irrelevant rules for spoken mate-
rial annotation with a doubtful use even if ap-
plied consistently to the corpus. Avoiding that, 
transcriptions currently present in the CAC 
could not be syntactically annotated using 
the annotation guidelines of the PDT. 
However, in the future, we plan to complete 
the annotation of the spoken language tran-
scriptions, using the scheme of the so-called 
?speech reconstruction? project (Mikulov? et 
al., 2008), running now within the framework 
of the PDT (for both Czech and English)5. This 
project will enable to use the text-based guide-
lines for syntactic annotation of spoken mate-
rial by introducing a separate layer 
of annotation, which allows for ?editing? of the 
original transcript and transforming it thus into 
a grammatical, comprehensible text. The ?ed-
ited? layer is in addition to the original tran-
script and contains explicit links between them 
at the word granularity, allowing in turn for 
observations of the relation between the origi-
nal transcript and its syntactic annotation 
(made ?through? the edited text) without any 
loss. The scheme picks up the threads of the 
speech reconstruction approach developed for 
English by Erin Fitzgerald (Fitzgerald, Jelinek, 
2008). Just for a comparison see our sample 
sentence (analyzed in Sect. 5) transformed into 
a reconstructed sentence (The bold marking 
means changes, and parentheses indicate ele-
ments left out in the reconstructed sentence.).  
CZ: A (to) jsou tro?ku rozd?ln?,(jedna je,) jedna 
m? sv?tlou budovu a druh? m? tmavou budovu.(, 
ony) Jsou um?st?ny (v jednom,) v jednom are?le, 
ale (ta,) to centrum (, pat?ilo t?,) bylo (to) v bloku 
Univerzity vl?msk?(,) a j? jsem se ptala na (univer-
zit?, na, v) Univerzit? svobodn?.(, ?e, no a to p?eci 
oni nev?d?, to nanejv??, to prost? jedin?,) Kdy? je 
to Univerzita vl?msk?, tak o tom oni p?ece nemo-
hou nic v?d?t (, a nic). 
(Lit.: And they are a bit different, one has a light 
building and the second has a dark building. They 
are placed in one campus, but the center (, it be-
longed to the, it) was in a bloc of the Flemish Uni-
versity, and I asked at the (University, in, at the) 
Free University.(, that, well, and that surely they 
don?t know, it at most, it simply only,) If it is the 
Flemish University, so they surely cannot know 
anything(, and nothing).) 
                                                 
5
 http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdtsl 
 
Figure 2. A syntactic annotation attempt 
(PDT-guidelines based) at the sample CAC 
sentence. The dashed edges are the only ones 
containing some spoken-language specific 
CAC annotation, the others correspond as 
close as possible to the PDT annotation sce-
nario. Square-shaped nodes mark the problem-
atic parts (phenomena with no explicit support 
in the PDT guidelines). 
96
  
 
Governor Dependency 
relation 
Dependency 
subtypes Direction Offset 
Other 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Tag Desc.  Tag Desc.  Tag Desc. 
1 Subject + Right 1-6 Coordination 
types 
2 Predicate - Left 
 
7,8 Repetitions  
(for the 
spoken part) 
3 Attribute   9, 0 Ellipses 
4 Object     
5 Adverbial     
6 Clause core     
7 Trans. type     
8 Independent 
clause member 
    
9 Parenthesis 
 
Values 
specific 
to the 
dependency 
relation 
(see  
column 1) 
  
 
Distance between 
words (two digit 
string: for ex. 01 
denotes 
neighboring 
word) 
  
Table 2 Main word-level syntactic tags in the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
Governing clause/word Clause ID Clause Type Subordination 
(dep.) type Gov. noun Gov. 
clause 
Clausal relation 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
 Tag Desc. Tag Desc.   Tag Desc. 
1 
 
Simple    1 Coordination 
2 Main   2 Parenthesis 
1 Subject 3 Direct Speech 
2 Predicate 5 Parenthesis in 
direct speech 
3 Attribute 6 Introductory 
clause 
4 Object 8 Parenthesis, in-
troductory clause 
5 Local ! Structural error 
Two-digit id 
(unique 
within a 
sentence: for 
ex. 91 de-
notes the  
first sentence 
3 Sub-
ordinated 
... ?. 
One-digit 
relative posi-
tion of a noun 
modified by 
the clause 
Attributive 
clauses only 
Two-digit 
id of the 
governing 
clause 
... etc. 
Table 3 Clause-level syntactic tags in the Czech Academic Corpus 
 
Analytic function Description 
Pred Predicate  
Sb Subject 
Obj Object 
Adv Adverbial 
Atr Attribute 
Pnom Nominal predicate, or nom. part of predicate with copula to be 
AuxV Auxiliary verb to be 
Coord Coordination node 
Apos Apposition (main node) 
AuxT Reflexive tantum 
AuxR Reflexive,neither Obj nor AuxT (passive reflexive) 
AuxP Primary preposition, parts of a secondary preposition 
AuxC Conjunction (subordinate) 
AuxO Redundant or emotional item, ?coreferential? pronoun 
ExD A technical value for a node depending on a deleted item (ellipsis with dependents) 
Aux.., Atv(V),.. Other auxiliary tags, verbal complements, other special syntactic tags 
Table 4 Dependency relation tags in the Prague Dependency Treebank 
 
97
 Acknowledgement 
We gratefully acknowledge the support of 
the Czech Ministry of Education through the 
grant No. MSM-0021620838 and ME 838 and 
the Grant Agency of Charles University in 
Prague through the grant No. GAUK 
52408/2008. 
We wish to thank Jan Haji?, whose com-
ments stimulated us to make our paper better. 
We are grateful to Petr Pajas for Figure 2 pre-
senting a wide dependency tree. 
References  
Christopher Cieri, David Miller, Kevin Walker. 
2004. The Fisher Corpus: a Resource for the 
Next Generations of Speech-to-Text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 4th LREC, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 
69-71. 
John J. Godfrey, Edward C. Holliman, Jane 
McDaniel. 1992. SWITCHBOARD: Telephone 
speech corpus for research and development, 
IEEE ICASSP, pp. 517-520.  
Erin Fitzgerald. 2009. Reconstructing spontaneous 
speech. PhD thesis, Baltimore, Maryland. 
Erin Fitzgerald, Frederick Jelinek. 2008. Linguistic 
resources for reconstructing spontaneous speech 
text. In LREC Proceedings, Marrakesh, Mo-
rocco, pp. 1?8. 
Sidney Greenbaum (ed.). 1996. Comparing English 
Worldwide: The International Corpus of English. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Jan Haji?, Barbora Hladk?. 1997. Tagging of inflec-
tive languages: a comparison. In Proceedings of 
ANLP'97, Washington, DC, pp. 136--143. 
Jan Haji? et al 2006. The Prague Dependency 
Treebank 2.0, (Linguistic Data Consortium, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA), Cat. No. LDC2006T01. 
Ji?? Hana, Daniel Zeman, Jan Haji?, Hana Hanov?, 
Barbora Hladk?, Emil Je??bek. 2005. Manual for 
Morphological Annotation. TR-2005-27, ?stav 
form?ln? a aplikovan? lingvistiky, MFF UK. 
Heleen Hoekstra, Michael Moortgat, Ineke Schuur-
man, Ton van der Wouden 2001. Syntactic An-
notation for the Spoken Dutch Corpus Project. In 
Daelemans, W.; Simaan, K.; Veenstra. J.; Zavrel, 
J. (eds.): Computational Linguistics in the Neth-
erlands 2000. Amsterdam/New York, Rodopi, 
pp. 73-87.  
Noam Chomsky. 1993. Lectures on Government 
and Binding: The Pisa Lectures. Holland: Foris 
Publications, 1981. Reprint. 7th Edition. Berlin 
and New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Jan Kr?l?k, Ludmila Uhl??ov?. 2007. The Czech 
Academic Corpus (CAC), its history and pres-
ence, In Journal of quantitative linguistics. 14 
(2-3): 265-285. 
Marie Mikulov?. 2008. Rekonstrukce standard-
izovan?ho textu z mluven? ?e?i v Pra?sk?m z?vis-
lostn?m korpusu mluven? ?e?tiny. Manu?l pro 
anot?tory. TR-2008-38, Institute of Formal and 
Applied Linguistics, MFF UK. 
Olga M?llerov?. 1994. Mluven? text a jeho syntak-
tick? v?stavba. Academia, Praha.  
Jens Nilsson, Johan Hall, Joakim Nivre. 2005. 
MAMBA meets TIGER: Reconstructing a Tree-
bank from Antiquity. In Proceedings of 
NODALIDA 2005 Special Session on Treebanks 
for Spoken and Discourse, Copenhagen Studies 
in Language 32, Joensuu, Finland, pp. 119-132 
Petr Pajas, Jan ?t?p?nek. 2005. A Generic XML-
based Format for Structured Linguistic Annota-
tion and its Application to the Prague Depend-
ency Treebank 2.0. TR-2005-29, Institute of 
Formal and Applied Linguistics, MFF UK.  
Kiril Ribarov, Alevtina B?mov?, Barbora Hladk?. 
2006. When a statistically oriented parser was 
more efficient than a linguist: A case of treebank 
conversion, In Prague Bulletin of Mathematical 
Linguistics, 1 (86):21-38.  
Petr Sgall, Eva Haji?ov?, Jarmila Panevov?. 1986. 
The meaning of the sentence in its semantic and 
pragmatic aspects, ed. by J. Mey. Reidel, 
Dordrecht; Academia, Praha.  
Elisabeth Shriberg. 1994. Preliminaries to a Theory 
of Speech Disfluencies. PhD thesis, University of 
California, Berkeley. 
Jan Svartvik and Randolph Quirk. 1980. A Corpus 
of English Conversation. Lund. 
Vladim?r ?milauer. 1972. Nauka o ?esk?m jazyku. 
Praha. 
Vladim?r ?milauer. 1969. Novo?esk? skladba. 
St?tn? pedagogick? nakladatelstv?. Praha. 
 
98
