Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 102?105,
Athens, Greece, 30 ? 31 March 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards a game-theoretic approach to content determination
Ralf Klabunde
Ruhr-Universita?t Bochum
Bochum, Germany
klabunde@linguistics.rub.de
Abstract
This paper argues for a game-theoretic ap-
proach to content determination that uses
text-type specific strategies in order to de-
termine the optimal content for various
user types. By means of content deter-
mination for the description of numerical
data the benefits of a game-theoretic treat-
ment of content determination are out-
lined.
1 Introduction
This is a programmatic paper on the principles of
content determination in natural language genera-
tion (NLG). It arose from the insight that we do not
know much about the underlying principles and
computational properties of several tasks in NLG.
Especially conceptualization ? the selection of the
information to be conveyed in a natural language
text, and the adaptation of this information to the
language-specific requirements ? is still a white
spot on the generation map (Guhe, 2007). Content
determination is that sub-process during concep-
tualization that is responsible for the selection of
the information to be conveyed and its ordering.
Several authors assume that establishing rhetori-
cal relations between informational units and the
successive construction of tree structures for the
overall information should also be considered as
a content determination task (see, e.g. Reiter and
Dale (2000)), but I will ignore this task in this pa-
per and confine my considerations to the selection
and ordering of informational units, in particular
propositions.
Content determination is coupled with the lin-
guistic domain in two ways, since the content does
not only need to be expressible in the target lan-
guage, but the determination process is already
affected by pragmatic organisation principles for
specific text types. I am convinced that game the-
ory is the appropriate tool for a formulation of
these principles.
In what follows, I will first explain why
content determination should be viewed as a
game played by the speaker/system S and
the speaker?s/system?s representation of a lis-
tener/user L ? the ?user model?. After that I will
outline the different strategies relevant for content
determination by means of the content for user-
tailored descriptions of numerical data.
2 Appproaches to content determination
in NLG
The various approaches to content determination
proposed in the literature may be classified in a
two-dimensional way, viz. with respect to infor-
mation flow (top down vs. bottom-up), and with
respect to the methods used (reasoning or the use
of schemas).
From an engineering perspective ? the dominant
view in NLG ? a top-down approach, focusing on
the communicative goal and using schemas which
determine where to realize which information, is
the most attractive and most often method used, al-
though it lacks of a theoretical grounding. A deep
reasoning approach would thus be more attractive,
but is not always feasible in practice.
One of the problems in content determination is
that the amount and quality of the information to
be conveyed depends on the interests and cognitive
abilities of the respective user and the coherence
requirement. Content determination is selecting
material from the domain in the hope that it will
permit a coherent realization as a text. Hence, this
sub-task should be viewed as a process that is also
constrained by pragmatic principles for establish-
ing coherence.
I proceed on the assumption that a theoretically
well-founded reasoning approach can be estab-
lished within the framework of analytic game the-
ory (see, e.g., Shoham and Leyton-Brown (2009)).
102
The benefit of a game theoretic treatment is its fo-
cus on interacting agents and the reasoning mech-
anisms associated with games: If we are able to
show that the content to be conveyed is determined
by concepts of rational interaction, then we get
insights into the principles that guide the overall
content determination process.
The basic ideas are as follows: First, the ran-
dom device ? used in game-theoretic pragmatics
to provide S with some meaning ? must be re-
placed by a function that maps informational units
of the domain to propositions. Additionally, L?s
reasoning capabilities are taken into account. The
interplay of both components reflects S?s cogni-
tive effort to construct the proposition and repre-
sents some of the adaptive cognitive mechanisms
of S . It is well known from pragmatic and psy-
cholinguistic studies that speakers do not only try
to minimize their own effort in the production pro-
cess, but that they take into account features of the
listener and adopt content and form of their utter-
ance to the listener?s assumed cognitive and lin-
guistic capabilities. Hence, the process of content
determination is guided by speaker-strategies and
adaptation processes which should be modelled as
adopted addressee-strategies. Under this view, the
ultimate goal of content determination is to find a
coherent catenation of propositions that is tailored
to the addressee: S is a decision-maker and she is
already playing with L at pre-linguistic stages.
3 Game theoretic pragmatics
Ja?ger (2007) describes the conception of game-
theoretic pragmatic analyses as follows: A game
is an utterance situation with a speaker S and a
hearer L as players. The actions performed by
these players are the production and interpretation
of utterances, and the payoffs represent the cogni-
tive and linguistic expenses of both players. If a set
M of meanings is given and a set F of linguistic
forms, a speaker strategy s is a function from M
to F . Accordingly, a hearer strategy h is a func-
tion from F to M . In this paper, I assume that
M is a set of propositions, i.e. a set of situative,
truth-functional, concepts.
Within this framework, the production process
is treated in a simplifying way. A random device
assigns some meaning m ? M to S who has to se-
lect an appropriate form f ? F . Successful com-
munication is given if L is able to reconstruct m
from f . The ?-function defines just this:
?m(s, h) =
{
1 iff h(s(m)) = m
0 otherwise
(1)
S has a choice between simple or more complex
expressions to express the meaning m. In order
to measure this complexity, a function cost from
F to the nonnegative real numbers is given whose
exact shape is of no interest for this paper. The
speaker utility us refers to the cost-function in ad-
dition to some positive coefficient k that repre-
sents the speaker?s priorities. A low value of k
indicates that communicative success is more im-
portant than minimal effort, and a high value of k
means that effort is more important than success.
us(m, s, h) = ?m(s, h)? k ? cost(s(m)) (2)
The addressee?s utility can be identified with the
?-function:
uh(m, s, h) = ?m(s, h) (3)
In order to adopt Ja?ger?s characterization of a
game-theoretic model of communication to NLG
purposes, one has to modify it into two direc-
tions. The minor change concerns the random de-
vice that assigns meanings to the speaker. I replace
this device by a function i that maps informational
units d of the domain D to propositions p ? M .
The production grammar s picks up these propo-
sitions and transforms them into linguistic forms
f .
The more substantial change concerns the
hearer strategy. From an NLG perspective, one is
not primarily interested in a hearer strategy that
maps forms to meanings, but in the effect of the
conveyed information w.r.t. the hearer?s informa-
tion state T
L
. The aim of S is to modify T
L
, but it
is L who decides how to process the information
conveyed by S . In general, L?s interpretation task
is to find an explanation for p on the basis of his
own beliefs. In other words, interpretation is ab-
ductive reasoning (Hobbs et al, 1993). Suppose
S conveys a set of propositions A. Then the ac-
tions available to L ? if A is new information for
him ? are several update mechanisms up(T
L
, A).
He may just add A to T
L
and accept A as new in-
formation without finding any explanation for A:
up(T
L
, A) = (T
L
? A) = T
L
. The other extreme
would be to compute the set of all logical conse-
103
quences of T
L
?A, i.e. up(T
L
, A) = Cn(T
L
?A).1
However, this set is just the ideal state of a logi-
cally omniscient person; a more realistic view is to
characterize the strategies of L by different depths
in reasoning, starting from depth = 0 (i.e. T
L
?A)
up to some information state close to Cn(T
L
?A).
I use up(T
L
, A) ? Cn(T
L
? A) to represent this
state. Note that up(T
L
, A) ? Cn(T
L
? A) is not
a fixed information state but depends on the user
type. If the players want to be communicatively
successful, L should ideally try to find an expla-
nation for A that results in that mentioned infor-
mation state. Hence, communicative success with
respect to a single proposition p may now be de-
fined by:
?d(s, h, i, up) =
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
1 iff h(s(i(d))) = i(d) = p
and
up(T
L
, p) ? Cn(T
L
? {p})
0 otherwise
(4)
The speaker utility is defined as:
us(s, h, i, up) = ?d(s, h, i, up) ? k ? cost(i(d))
(5)
and the hearer utility is
uh(s, h, i, up) = ?d(s, h, i, up) (6)
Within this overall picture of information ex-
change and communicative success, content deter-
mination is the interplay of i with up(T
L
, ran(i)),
i.e. the update of L?s information state with the
range of i. In the rest of this paper I will show
by means of an example how this interplay can be
spelled out in detail. As will hopefully become ap-
parent, the approach amounts to some sort of game
? a game that takes into account specific strategies
of S and the abductive inference strategies of L to
create a content that is optimal for both.
4 Content determination for reports of
numerical data
Let us assume that the content underlying reports
of performance data shall be tailored to an expert
and a layman, respectively. The essential concep-
tualization process for content of this type is the
summarization of numerical data to propositional
units that are tailored to the addressee?s needs. I
1Consider that abduction in its simplest form can be re-
formulated in deductive terms.
use normal form games for this task in which the
expertises of the users are reflected in different
Nash equilibria. L as expert requires content with
a different equilibrium than L as layman does.
The basic scenario is as follows: A speedome-
ter f provides data about speed and the distance
covered during a cycling tour. These numerical
data shall be transformed into propositional units
that are optimal for the respective user types. For
reasons of clarity, let us assume two different user
types only, a training expert and a layman who
want to receive a detailed and a more shallow de-
scription, respectively. In both cases the actual
values recorded by the speedometer will be com-
pared with ideal training values, and the deviations
from these ideal values shall be reported in the
generated text.
Of course, the main task for S is to summa-
rize these numerical data in single propositions,
but how to determine the amount of data to be put
into one proposition? I assume that S?s side of the
coin is an approximation problem. The grade of
detail required for the expert and the layman shall
be given by an approximation a of the function f .
Let us assume that the approximation is 1/10 for
the expert and 1/5 for the layman (?x ? dom(f) :
a(x) = x ? x/10 or a(x) = x ? x/5). Table
1 shows an exemplary function for the first seven
measure points and the approximations used.
distance speed ideal approx. approx.
n value 1/10 1/5
1 25.3 25 22.5 - 27.5 20.0 - 30.0
2 28.2 26 23.4 - 28.6 20.8 - 31.2
3 31.7 27 24.3 - 29.7 21.6 - 32.4
4 30.5 28 25.2 - 30.8 22.4 - 33.6
5 32.8 29 26.1 - 31.9 23.2 - 34.8
6 31.1 30 27.0 - 33.0 24.0 - 36.0
7 25.8 30 27.0 - 33.0 24.0 - 36.0
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Table 1: Some numerical data
In addition to the values that are outside of the ap-
proximations, the degree of exceeding or going be-
low the ideal value should be taken into account
as well. We do not just want to generate a sen-
tence like at kilometer 3 you went too fast if the
actual values were outside the approximation hull
and much higher than the ideal one, but at kilome-
ter 3 you went much too fast. Therefore, we define
a threshold such that every value above that thre-
shold will be classified as being much higher than
104
the ideal value, and all values below that threshold
are classified as being an exiguous deviation from
that ideal value. Then the six relevant speaker ac-
tions are N-0, N-1, 1/10-0, 1/10-1, 1/5-0 and
1/5-1 with 0 and 1 indicating no use of a threshold
and the use of one relevant threshold, respectively.
According to section 3, the strategies of L con-
cern the interpretation grammar, i.e. the mapping
from linguistic forms to propositions (h : F ? P )
and an update of L?s information state that may
include (abductive) reasoning. The abductive in-
ferences drawn by the layman differ from those
of the expert by the profundity of the explana-
tion: While the layman is primarily interested in
increasing his fitness, the expert should be inter-
ested in a more profound explanation. Let us as-
sume three update strategies: NOINFERENCES, i.e.
up(T
L
, P ) = T
L
?P , EXHAUSTIVEREASONING,
i.e. up(T
L
, P ) = (T
L
? P ) ? Cn(T
L
? P ), and
MUNDANEREASONING, i.e. reasoning with only
a very limited number of inferences involved.
The payoffs for the players may be motivated
as follows. For S holds: A more detailed con-
tent requires more effort in providing that content.
Furthermore, realizing the degree of exceeding the
value requires additional cognitive effort. Since S
pursues to reduce her efforts, the highest payoff
will be associated with the lowest effort. The more
detailed the content is, the lesser is L?s effort to
reason. However, a text that explains everything
violates the Gricean maxim of quantity. There-
fore, L should prefer at least mundane reasoning,
and we could motivate the listener?s payoffs by the
number of inferences to be drawn.
The utility matrix in Table 2 shows the ac-
tion combinations of S and L as layman. The
Nash equilibrium is the strategy (1/5-0, MUN-
DANEREASONING); S will generate propositions
that comprise the numerical data outside of the
widest approximation hull, and without any fur-
ther differentiation w.r.t. the degree of exceeding
the ideal values. S knows that L?s interpretation of
the propositions is an abductive proof graph that
represents a simple explanation of them.
With L as expert the payoffs must be swapped.
Since the expert is able to find a more profound
explanation, he strives for exhaustive reasoning.
S , in turn, knows this and will therefore select
the smaller approximation. Hence, we get the
utility matrix in Table 3 with (1/10-0, EXHAUS-
TIVEREASONING) as Nash equilibrium.
NOINF. MUNDANER. EXH.R.
N-0 1,5 1,7 1,1
N-1 0,6 0,8 0,2
1/10-0 3,5 3,7 3,1
1/10-1 2,6 2,8 2,2
1/5-0 6,5 6,7 6,1
1/5-1 5,6 5,8 5,2
Table 2: Utility matrix with L as layman
NOINF. MUNDANER. EXH.R.
N-0 1,5 1,1 1,7
N-1 0,6 0,2 0,8
1/10-0 6,5 6,1 6,7
1/10-1 5,6 5,2 5,8
1/5-0 3,5 3,1 3,7
1/5-1 2,6 2,2 2,8
Table 3: Utility matrix with L as expert
5 Outlook
Due to the programmatic status of this paper, sev-
eral issues have been omitted we will deal with in
our future work. The most pressing tasks concern
the action sets of S and L that must be refined,
and the payoffs must be based on empirical obser-
vations. However, as sketchy as the given example
may be, it shows that NLG stands to benefit from
Game Theory.
References
Markus Guhe. 2007. Incremental Conceptualization
for Language Production. Lawrence Erlbaum, Mah-
wah, NJ.
Jerry Hobbs, Mark Stickel, Douglas Appelt, and Paul
Martin. 1993. Interpretation as Abduction. Artifi-
cial Intelligence, 63, 69-142.
Gerhard Ja?ger. 2007. Evolutionary Game Theory and
typology: a case study. Language, 83, 74?109.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge.
Yoav Shoham and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2009. Mul-
tiagent Systems: Algorithmic, Game-theoretic and
Logical Foundations. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
105
