Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 32?39,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c?2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Gaiku : Generating Haiku with Word Associations Norms
Yael Netzer? and David Gabay and Yoav Goldberg? and Michael Elhadad
Ben Gurion University of the Negev
Department of Computer Science
POB 653 Be?er Sheva, 84105, Israel
{yaeln,gabayd,yoavg,elhadad}@cs.bgu.ac.il
Abstract
creativeness / a pleasing field / of bloom
Word associations are an important element
of linguistic creativity. Traditional lexical
knowledge bases such as WordNet formalize
a limited set of systematic relations among
words, such as synonymy, polysemy and hy-
pernymy. Such relations maintain their sys-
tematicity when composed into lexical chains.
We claim that such relations cannot explain
the type of lexical associations common in
poetic text. We explore in this paper the
usage of Word Association Norms (WANs)
as an alternative lexical knowledge source
to analyze linguistic computational creativity.
We specifically investigate the Haiku poetic
genre, which is characterized by heavy re-
liance on lexical associations. We first com-
pare the density of WAN-based word asso-
ciations in a corpus of English Haiku po-
ems to that of WordNet-based associations as
well as in other non-poetic genres. These
experiments confirm our hypothesis that the
non-systematic lexical associations captured
in WANs play an important role in poetic text.
We then present Gaiku, a system to automat-
ically generate Haikus from a seed word and
using WAN-associations. Human evaluation
indicate that generated Haikus are of lesser
quality than human Haikus, but a high propor-
tion of generated Haikus can confuse human
readers, and a few of them trigger intriguing
reactions.
? Supported by Deutsche Telekom Laboratories at Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev.
? Supported by the Lynn and William Frankel Center for
Computer Sciences.
1 Introduction
Traditional lexical knowledge bases such as Word-
Net formalize a limited set of systematic relations
that exist between words, such as synonymy, pol-
ysemy, hypernymy. When such relations are com-
posed, they maintain their systematicity, and do not
create surprising, unexpected word associations.
The human mind is not limited to such system-
atic relations, and people tend to associate words to
each other with a rich set of relations, such as non
systematic paradigmatic (doctor-nurse) and syntag-
matic relations (mash-potato) as identified by Saus-
sure (1949). Such associations rely on cultural
(mash-television), emotional (math - yuck) and per-
sonal experience (autumn - Canada).
In linguistic creativity, such as prose or poetry
writing, word associations play an important role
and the ability to connect words into new, unex-
pected relations is one of the key mechanisms that
triggers the reader involvement.
We explore in this paper the usage of Word As-
sociation Norms (WANs) as an alternative lexical
knowledge source to analyze linguistic computa-
tional creativity. WANs have been developed in psy-
chological research in the past 40 years. They record
typical word associations evoked by people when
they are submitted a trigger word. Such associations
(e.g., table to chair or cloth) are non-systematic, yet
highly stable across people, time (over a period of 30
years) and languages. WANs have been compiled in
various languages, and provide an interesting source
to analyze word associations in creative writing.
We specifically investigate the Haiku poetic
32
genre, which is characterized by heavy reliance on
lexical associations. The hypothesis we investigate
is that WANs play a role in computational creativ-
ity, and better explain the type of word associations
observed in creative writing than the systematic re-
lations found in thesauri such as WordNet.
In the rest of the paper, we refine our hypothe-
sis and present observations on a dataset of English
Haikus we collected. We find that the density of
WAN-based word associations in Haikus is much
higher than in other genres, and also much higher
than the density of WordNet-based associations. We
then present Gaiku, a system we developed to auto-
matically generate Haikus from a seed word using
word association norms. Evaluation we performed
with a group of 60 human readers indicates that the
generated Haikus exhibit interesting creative charac-
teristics and sometimes receive intriguing acclaim.
2 Background and Previous Work
2.1 Computational Creativity
Computational creativity in general and linguistic in
particular, is a fascinating task. On the one hand, lin-
guistic creativity goes beyond the general NLP tasks
and requires understanding and modelling knowl-
edge which, almost by definition, cannot be formal-
ized (i.e., terms like beautiful, touching, funny or in-
triguing). On the other hand, this vagueness itself
may enable a less restrictive formalization and allow
a variety of quality judgments. Such vague formal-
izations are naturally more useful when a computa-
tional creativity system does not attempt to model
the creativity process itself, but instead focuses on
?creative products? such as poetry (see Section 2.3),
prose and narrative (Montfort, 2006), cryptic cross-
word clues (Hardcastle, 2007) and many others.
Some research focus on the creative process itself
(see (Ritchie, 2006) for a comprehensive review of
the field). We discuss in this paper what Boden
(1998) calls P-Creativity (Psychological Creativity)
which is defined relative to the initial state of knowl-
edge, and H-Creativity (Historical Creativity) which
is relative to a specific reference culture. Boden
claims that, while hard to reproduce, exploratory
creativity is most successful in computer models of
creativity. This is because the other kinds of creativ-
ity are even more elusive due to the difficulty of ap-
proaching the richness of human associative mem-
ory, and the difficulty of identifying our values and
of expressing them in computational form.
We investigate in our work one way of addressing
this difficulty: we propose to use associative data as
a knowledge source as a first approximation of hu-
man associative capabilities. While we do not ex-
plain such associations, we attempt to use them in
a constructive manner as part of a simple combina-
tional model of creativity in poetry.
2.2 Word Associations and Creativity
Associations and creativity are long known to be
strongly connected. Mendick (Mendick, 1969) de-
fines creative thinking as ?the forming of associative
elements into new combinations which either meet
specified requirements or are in some way useful.?
The usefulness criterion distinguishes original think-
ing from creative thinking. A creative solution is
reached through three main paths: serendipity (ran-
dom stimuli evoke associative elements), similar-
ity (stimuli and solution are found similar through
an association) and mediation (both ?problem? and
?solution? can be associated to similar elements).
In our work, we hypothesize that interesting Haiku
poems exhibit creative word associations. We rely
on this hypothesis to first generate candidate word
associations starting from a seed word and follow-
ing random walks through WANs, but also to rank
candidate Haiku poems by measuring the density of
WAN-based associations they exhibit.
2.3 Poetry Generation
Although several automatic and semi-automatic po-
etry generation systems were developed over the
years, most of them did not rise above the level of
?party tricks? (Manurung et al, 2000). In his the-
sis, (Manurung, 2003), defined a poem to be a text
that meets three properties: meaningfulness, gram-
maticality and poeticness. Two of the few systems
that attempt to explicitly represent all three prop-
erties are reported in (Gervas, 2001) and (D??az-
Agudo et al, 2002). Both systems take as input a
prose message provided by the user, and translate it
into formal Spanish poetry. The system proposed
in (Manurung et al, 2000) is similar in that it fo-
cuses on the syntactic and phonetic patterns of the
poem, putting less stress on the semantics. The sys-
33
tem starts with a simple seed and gradually devel-
ops a poem, by making small syntactic and semantic
changes at every step.
Specifically in the subfield of Haiku generation,
the Haiku generator presented in (Wong and Chun,
2008) produces candidate poems by combining lines
taken from blogs. The system then ranks the can-
didates according to semantic similarity, which is
computed using the results returned by a search en-
gine when querying for words in each line. Hitch-
Haiku (Tosa et al, 2008), another Haiku generation
system, starts from two seed words given by the user.
It retrieves two phrases containing these words from
a corpus, and then adds a third phrase that connects
both input words, using lexical resources.
In our work, we induce a statistical language
model of the structure of Haikus from an analysis
of a corpus of English Haikus, and explore ways to
combine chains of lexical associations into the ex-
pected Haiku syntactic structure. The key issues we
investigate are the importance of WAN-based asso-
ciations in the Haiku generation process, and how a
chain of words, linked through WAN-based associa-
tions, can be composed into a Haiku-like structure.
2.4 Haiku
Haiku is a form of poetry originated in Japan in
the sixteenth century. The genre was adopted in
Western languages in the 20th Century. The origi-
nal form of a poem is of three lines of five, seven
and five syllables (although this constraint is loos-
ened in non-Japanese versions of Haiku (Gilbert and
Yoneoka, 2000)). Haiku, by its nature, aims to re-
flect or evoke emotion using an extremely economi-
cal linguistic form; most Haiku use present tense and
use no judgmental words; in addition, functional or
syntactic words may be dropped. Traditional Haiku
involve reference to nature and seasons, but modern
and western Haiku are not restricted to this theme1.
We adopt the less ?constraining? definition of the
author Jack Kerouac (2004) for a Haiku ?I propose
that the ?Western Haiku? simply say a lot in three
short lines in any Western language. Above all, a
Haiku must be very simple and free of all poetic
1Senryu poetry, similar in form to Haiku, is the Japanese
genre of poems that relate to human and relationships, and may
be humorous. Hereafter, we use Haiku for both the original
definition and the Senryu as well.
trickery and make a little picture and yet be as airy
and graceful as a Vivaldi Pastorella.? (pp. x-xi). In
addition, we are guided by the saying ? The best
haiku should leave the reader wondering ? (Quoted
in (Blasko and Merski, 1998))
2.5 Word Association Norms
The interest in word associations is common to
many fields. Idiosyncrasy of associations was used
as a diagnostic tool at the beginning of the 20th cen-
tury, but nowadays the majority of approaches deal
less with particular associations and more with gen-
eral patterns in order to study the structure of the
mental lexicon and of semantic memory (Rubinsten
et al, 2005).
Word Association Norms (WAN) are a collection
of cue words and the set of free associations that
were given as responses to the cue, accompanied
with quantitative and statistical measures. Subjects
are given a word and asked to respond immediately
with the first word that comes to their mind. The
largest WAN we know for English is the University
of South Florida Free Association Norms (Nelson et
al., 1998).
Word Association Norms and Thesauri in NLP
Sinopalnikova and Smrz (2004) have shown that
when building and extending semantic networks,
WANs have advantages over corpus-based meth-
ods. They found that WANs cover semantic rela-
tions that are difficult to acquire from a corpus: 42%
of the non-idiosyncratic cue-target pairs in an En-
glish WAN never co-appeared in a 10 words win-
dow in a large balanced text corpus. From the point
of view of computational creativity, this is encourag-
ing, since it suggests that association-based content
generation can lead to texts that are both sensible
and novel. (Duch and Pilichowski, 2007)?s work,
from a neuro-cognitive perspective, generates neol-
ogisms based, among other data, on word associa-
tion. (Duch and Pilichowski, 2007) sums ?creativity
requires prior knowledge, imagination and filtering
of the results.?
3 WordNet vs. Associations
Word association norms add an insight on language
that is not found in WordNet or are hard to acquire
from corpora, and therefore can be used as an ad-
ditional tool in NLP applications and computational
34
creativity.
We choose the Haiku generation task using word
associations, since this genre of poetry encapsulates
meaning in a special way. Haiku tend to use words
which are connected through associative or phono-
logical connections (very often ambiguous).
We hypothesize that word-associations are good
catalyzers for creativity, and use them as a building
block in the creative process of Haiku generation.
We first test this hypothesis by analyzing a corpus of
existing Haiku poems.
3.1 Analyzing existing text
Can the creativity of text as reflected in word as-
sociations be quantified? Are Haiku poems indeed
more associative than newswire text or prose? If
this is the case, we expect Haiku to have more asso-
ciative relations, which cannot be easily recovered
by WordNet than other type of text. We view the
WAN as an undirected graph in which the nodes
are stemmed words, and two nodes are connected
iff one of them is a cue for the other. We take the
associative distance between two words to be the
number of edges in the shortest path between the
words in the associations-graph. Interestingly, al-
most any word pair in the association graph is con-
nected with a path of at most 3 edges. Thus, we
take two words to be associatively related if their
associative distance is 1 or 2. Similarly, we define
the WordNet distance between two stemmed words
to be the number of edges in the shortest path be-
tween any synset of one word to any synset of the
other word2. Two words are WordNet-related if their
WordNet distance is less than 4 (this is consistent
with works on lexical-cohesion, (Morris and Hirst,
1991)).
We take the associativity of a piece of text to be
the number of associated word pairs in the text, nor-
malized by the number of word pairs in the text of
which both words are in the WAN.3 We take the
WordNet-relations level of a piece of text to be the
number of WordNet-related word pairs in the text.
2This is the inverse of the path-similarity measure of (Ped-
ersen et al, 2004).
3This normalization is performed to account for the limited
lexical coverage of the WAN. We don?t want words that appear
in a text, but are not covered by the WAN, to affect the associa-
tivity level of the text.
SOURCE AVG. ASSOC AVG. WORDNETRELATIONS (<3) RELATIONS (<4)
News 0.26 2.02
Prose 0.22 1.4
Haiku 0.32 1.38
Table 1: Associative and WordNet relations in various
text genres
We measure the average associativity and Word-
Net levels of 200 of the Haiku in our Haiku Cor-
pus (Section 4.1), as well as of random 12-word
sequences from Project Gutenberg and from the
NANC newswire corpus.
The results are presented in Table 1.
Perhaps surprisingly, the numbers for the Guten-
berg texts are lower on all measures. This is at-
tributed to the fact that Gutenberg texts have many
more pronouns and non-content words than the
Haiku and newswire text. Haiku text appears to
be more associative than newswire text. Moreover,
newswire documents have many more WordNet-
relations than the Haiku poems ? whenever words
are related in Haiku, this relatedness tends to be cap-
tured via the association network rather than via the
WordNet relations. The same trend is apparent also
when considering the Gutenberg numbers: they have
about 15% less associations than newswire text, but
about 30% less WordNet-relations. This supports
the claim that associative information which is not
readily available in WordNet is a good indicator of
creative content.
3.2 Generating creative content
We now investigate how word-associations can help
in the process of generating Haikus. We define
a 5 stage generative process: theme selection in
which the general theme of the Haiku is decided,
syntactic planning, which sets the Haiku form and
syntactic constraints, content selection / semantic
planning which combines syntactic and aesthetic
constraints with the theme selected in the previous
stages to form good building blocks, filtered over-
generation of many Haiku based on these selected
building blocks, and finally re-ranking of the gen-
erated Haiku based on external criteria.
The details of the generation algorithm are pre-
sented in Section 4.2. Here we focus on the creative
aspect of this process ? theme selection. Our main
claim is that WANs are a good source for interest-
35
ing themes. Specifically, interesting themes can be
obtained by performing a short random walk on the
association graph induced by the WAN network.
Table 2 presents the results of several random
walks of 3 steps starting from the seed words ?Dog?,
?Winter?, ?Nature? and ?Obsession?. For compar-
ison, we also present the results of random walks
over WordNet glosses for the same seeds.
We observe that the association network is bet-
ter for our needs than WordNet. Random walks in
WordNet are more likely to stay too close to the seed
word, limiting the poetic options, or to get too far
and produce almost random connections.
4 Algorithm for generating Haiku
4.1 Dataset
We used the Word Association Norms (WAN) of the
University of South Florida 4 (Nelson et al, 1998)
for discovering associations of words. The dataset
(Appendix A, there) includes 5,019 cue words and
10,469 additional target that were collected with
more than 6,000 participants since 1973.
We have compiled a Haiku Corpus, which in-
cludes approximately 3,577 Haiku in English of var-
ious sources (amateurish sites, children?s writings,
translations of classic Japanese Haiku of Bashu and
others, and ?official? sites of Haiku Associations
(e.g., Haiku Path - Haiku Society of America).
For the content selection part of the algorithms,
we experimented with two data sources: a corpus of
1TB web-based N-grams supplied by Google, and
the complete text of Project Gutenberg. The Guten-
berg data has the advantage of being easier to POS-
tag and contains less restricted-content, while the
Google Web data is somewhat more diverse.
4.2 Algorithm Details
Our Haiku generation algorithm includes 5 stages:
theme selection, syntactic planning, content selec-
tion, filtered over generation, and ranking.
The Theme Selection stage is in charge of dictat-
ing the overall theme of our Haiku. We start with
a user-supplied seed word (e.g. WINTER). We then
consult the Association database in order to enrich
the seed word with various associations. Ideally, we
would like these associations to be close enough to
4http://w3.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
the seed word to be understandable, yet far enough
away from it as to be interesting. After some ex-
perimenting, we came up with the following heuris-
tic, which we found to provide adequate results. We
start with the seed word, and conduct a short random
walk on the associations graph. Each random step
is comprised of choosing a random direction (either
?Cue? or ?Target?) using a uniform distribution, and
then a random neighbor according to its relative fre-
quency. We conduct several (8) such walks, each
with 3 steps, and keep all the resulting words. This
gives us mostly close, probable associations, as well
as some less probable, further away from the seed.
The syntactic planning stage determines the
form of the generated Haiku, setting syntactic and
aesthetic constraints for the generative process. This
is done in a data-driven way by considering common
line patterns from our Haiku corpus. In a training
stage, we POS-tagged each of the Haiku, and then
extracted a pattern from each of the Haiku lines. A
line-pattern is a sequence of POS-tags, in which the
most common words are lexicalized to include the
word-form in addition to the POS-tag. An example
for such a line pattern might be DT the JJ NN.
We kept the top-40 frequent patterns for each of the
Haiku lines, overall 120 patterns. When generating a
new Haiku, we choose a random pattern for the first
line, then choose the second line pattern conditioned
on the first, and the third line pattern conditioned
on the second. The line patterns are chosen with a
probability proportional to their relative frequencies
in the training corpus. For the second and third lines
we use the conditional probabilities of a pattern ap-
pearing after the previous line pattern. The result
of this stage is a 3-line Haiku skeleton, dictating the
number of words on each line, their POS-tags, and
the placement of specific function words.
In the Content Selection stage, we look for pos-
sible Haiku lines, based on our selected theme and
syntactic structure. We go over our candidate lines5,
and extract lines which match the syntactic patterns
and contain a stemmed appearance of one of the
stemmed theme words. In our current implemen-
tation, we require the first line to contain the seed
word, and the second and third line to contain any of
5These are POS-tagged n-grams extracted from a large text
corpora: the Google T1 dataset or Project Gutenberg
36
SEED WAN WORDNET
Dog puppy adorable cute heel villain villainess
Dog cat curious george hound scoundrel villainess
Winter summer heat microwave wintertime solstice equinox
Winter chill cold alergy midwinter wintertime season
Nature animals instinct animals world body crotch
Nature natural environment surrounding complexion archaism octoroon
Obsession cologne perfume smell fixation preoccupation thought
Obsession compulsion feeling symptom compulsion onomatomania compulsion
Table 2: Some random walks on the WordNet and WAN induced graphs
the theme words. Other variations, such as choos-
ing a different word set for each line, are of course
possible.
The over generation stage involves creating
many possible Haiku candidates by randomly
matching lines collected in the content selection
stage. We filter away Haiku candidates which have
an undesired properties, such as repeating the same
content-word in two different lines.
All of the generated Haiku obey the syntactic and
semantic constraints, but not all of them are interest-
ing. Thus, we rank the Haiku in order to weed out
the better ones. The top-ranking Haiku is the output
of our system. Our current heuristic prefers highly
associative Haikus. This is done by counting the
number of 1st and 2nd degree associations in each
Haiku, while giving more weight to 2nd degree as-
sociations in order to encourage ?surprises?. While
all the candidate Haiku were generated based on a
common theme of intended associative connections,
the content selection and adherence to syntactic con-
straints introduce additional content words and with
them some new, unintended associative connections.
Our re-ranking approach tries to maximize the num-
ber of such connections.6
5 Evaluation
The ultimate goal of a poetry generation system is to
produce poems that will be considered good if writ-
ten by a human poet. It is difficult to evaluate to what
extent a poetry generation system can meet this goal
(Ritchie, 2001; Manurung et al, 2000). Difficulties
arise from two major sources: first, since a creative
6While this heuristic works well, it leaves a lot to be desired.
It considers only the quantity of the associations, and not their
quality. Indeed, when looking at the Haiku candidates produced
in the generation stage, one can find many interesting pieces,
where some of the lower ranking ones are far better than the top
ranking.
work should be novel, it cannot be directly evaluated
by comparison to some gold standard. Second, it is
hard for people to objectively evaluate the quality of
poetry. Even determining whether a text is a poem
or not is not an easy task, as readers expect poetry
to require creative reading, and tolerate, to some ex-
tent, ungrammatical structures or cryptic meaning.
5.1 ?Turing Test? Experiment
To evaluate the quality of Gaiku, we asked a group
of volunteers to read a set of Haiku, indicate how
much they liked each one (on a scale of 1-5), and
classify each Haiku as written by a human or by a
computer.
We compiled two sets of Haiku. The first set
(AUTO) contained 25 Haiku. 10 Haiku chosen at
random from our Haiku corpus, and 15 computer
generated ones. The computer generated Haiku
were created by identifying the main word in the first
line of each human-written Haiku, and passing it as
a seed word to the Haiku generation algorithm (in
case a first line in human-written Haiku contained
two main words, two Haiku were generated). We in-
cluded the top-ranking Haiku returning from a single
run of the system for each seed word. The only hu-
man judgement in compiling this set was in the iden-
tification of the main words of the human Haiku.
The second set (SEL) was compiled of 9 haiku po-
ems that won awards7, and 17 computer Haiku that
were selected by us, after several runs of the auto-
matic process. (Again, each poem in the automatic
poems set shared at least one word with some poem
in the human Haiku set).
The subjects were not given any information
about the number of computer-generated poems in
the sets.
7Gerald Brady Memorial Award Collection http://www.hsa-
haiku.org/bradyawards/brady.htm 2006-2007
37
The AUTO questionnaire was answered by 40
subjects and the SEL one by 22. (Altogether, 52 dif-
ferent people took part in the experiment, as some
subjects answered both versions). The subjects were
all adults (age 18 to 74), some were native English
speakers and others were fully fluent in English. Ex-
cept a few, they did not have academic background
in literature.
5.2 Results and Discussion
Results are presented in Table 3 and Figure 1.
Overall, subjects were correct in 66.7% of their
judgements in AUTO and 61.4% in SEL. The aver-
age grade that a poem - human or machine-made -
received correlates with the percentage of subjects
who classified it as human. The average grade and
rate of acceptance as written by human were signifi-
cantly higher for the Haiku written by people. How-
ever, some computer Haiku rivaled the average hu-
man poem in both measures. This is true even for
AUTO, in which both the generation and the selec-
tion processes were completely automatic. The best
computer Haiku of SEL scored better than most hu-
man Haiku in both measures.
The best computer poem in SEL was:
early dew / the water contains / teaspoons of honey
which got an average grade of 3.09 and was classi-
fied as human by 77.2% of the subjects.
At the other extreme, the computer poem (SEL):
space journey / musical instruments mythology /
of similar drugs
was classified as human by only 9% of the subjects,
and got an average grade of 2.04.
The best Haiku in the AUTO set was:
cherry tree / poisonous flowers lie / blooming
which was classified as human by 72.2% of the sub-
jects and got an average grade of 2.75.
The second human-like computer generated
Haiku in each set were:
spring bloom / showing / the sun?s pyre
(AUTO, 63.8% human) and:
blind snakes / on the wet grass / tombstoned terror
(SEL, 77.2% human).
There were, expectedly, lots of disagreements.
Poetry reading and evaluation is subjective and by
Human Poems Gaiku
AUTO avg. % classified as Human 72.5% 37.2%
avg. grade 2.86 2.11
SEL avg. % classified as Human 71.7% 44.1%
avg. grade 2.84 2.32
Table 3: Turing-test experiment results
itself (in particular for Haiku) a creative task. In ad-
dition, people have very different ideas in mind as to
a computer?s ability to do things. (One subject said,
for example, that the computer generated
holy cow / a carton of milk / seeking a church
is too stupid to be written by a computer; how-
ever, content is very strongly connected and does
not seem random). On the other end, subjects often
remarked that some of the human-authored Haiku
contained metaphors which were too obvious to be
written by a human.
Every subject was wrong at least 3 times (at least
once in every direction); every poem was wrongly-
classified at least once. Some really bad auto-poems
got a good grade here and there, while even the most
popular human poems got a low grade sometimes.
6 Discussion and Future Work
Word association norms were shown to be a useful
tool for a computational creativity task, aiding in the
creation of an automatic Haiku-generation software,
which is able to produce ?human-like? Haiku. How-
ever, associations can be used for many other tasks.
In the last decade, lexical chains are often used in
various NLP tasks such as text summarization or text
categorization; WordNet is the main resource for
detecting the cohesive relationships between words
and their relevance to a given chain (Morris and
Hirst, 1991). We believe that using word association
norms can enrich the information found in WordNet
and enable the detection of more relevant words.
Another possible application is for assisting
word-finding problem of children with specific lan-
guage impairments (SLI). A useful tactic practiced
as an assistance to retrieve a forgotten word is by
saying all words that come to mind. The NLP task,
therefore, is for a set of a given associations, recon-
struct the targeted word.
38
0 20 40 60 80 100
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
% of subjects who classified the poem as written by a human
Av
ar
eg
e 
gr
ad
e
 
 
Gaiku poems
Human poems
0 20 40 60 80 100
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
% of subjects who classified the poem as written by a human
Av
ar
eg
e 
gr
ad
e
 
 
Gaiku poems
Human poems
Figure 1: Average grades and percentages of subjects who classified poems as written by humans, for AUTO (left)
and SEL. Circles represent Haiku written by people, and stars represent machine-made Haiku
References
D.G. Blasko and D.W. Merski. 1998. Haiku poetry
and metaphorical thought: An invention to interdisci-
plinary study. Creativity Research Journal, 11.
M.A. Boden. 1998. Creativity and artificial intelligence.
Artificial Intelligence, 103(1?2).
F. de Saussure, C. Bally, A. Riedlinger, and
A. Sechehaye. 1949. Cours de linguistique gen-
erale. Payot, Paris.
B. D??az-Agudo, P. Gerva?s, and P. A. Gonza?lez-Calero.
2002. Poetry generation in COLIBRI. In Proc. of EC-
CBR.
W. Duch and M. Pilichowski. 2007. Experiments with
computational creativity. Neural Information Process-
ing, Letters and Reviews, 11(3).
P. Gervas. 2001. An expert system for the composition of
formal Spanish poetry. Journal of Knowledge-Based
Systems, 14.
R. Gilbert and J. Yoneoka. 2000. From 5-7-5 to 8-8-8:
An investigation of Japanese Haiku metrics and impli-
cations for English Haiku. Language Issues: Journal
of the Foreign Language Education Center.
D. Hardcastle. 2007. Cryptic crossword clues: Generat-
ing text with a hidden meaning BBKCS-07-04. Tech-
nical report, Birkbeck College, London.
J. Kerouac. 2004. Book of Haikus. Enitharmon Press.
H.M. Manurung, G. Ritchie, and H. Thompson. 2000.
Towards a computational model of poetry generation.
In Proc. of the AISB?00.
H.M. Manurung. 2003. An evolutionary algorithm ap-
proach to poetry generation. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Edinburgh.
S.A. Mendick. 1969. The associative basis of the cre-
ative process. Psychological Review.
N. Montfort. 2006. Natural language generation and nar-
rative variation in interactive fiction. In Proc. of Com-
putational Aesthetics Workshop at AAAI 2006, Boston.
J. Morris and G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed
by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of
text. Computational Linguistics, 17.
D.L. Nelson, C.L. Mcevoy, and T.A. Schreiber.
1998. The University of South Florida Word
Association, Rhyme, and Word Fragment Norms.
http://www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/.
T. Pedersen, S. Patwardhan, and J. Michelizzi. 2004.
Wordnet::similarity - measuring the relatedness of
concepts. In HLT-NAACL 2004: Demonstrations.
G. Ritchie. 2001. Assessing creativity. In Proc. of
AISB?01 Symposium.
G. Ritchie. 2006. The transformational creativity hy-
pothesis. New Generation Computing, 24.
O. Rubinsten, D. Anaki, A. Henik, S. Drori, and Y. Faran.
2005. Free association norms in the Hebrew language.
Word Norms in Hebrew. (In Hebrew).
A. Sinopalnikova and P. Smrz. 2004. Word association
thesaurus as a resource for extending semantic net-
works. In Communications in Computing.
N. Tosa, H. Obara, and M. Minoh. 2008. Hitch haiku:
An interactive supporting system for composing haiku
poem. In Proc. of the 7th International Conference on
Entertainment Computing.
M. Tsan Wong and A. Hon Wai Chun. 2008. Automatic
Haiku generation using vsm. In Proc. of ACACOS?08,
April.
39
