 Textual Emotion Processing From Event Analysis 
 
 
Chu-Ren Huang?, Ying Chen*?, Sophia Yat Mei Lee?  
?Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies * Department of Computer Engineering 
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University China Agricultural University 
{churenhuang, chenying3176, sophiaym}@gmail.com 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Textual emotion recognition has gained a lot of 
attention recent years; it is however less devel-
oped due to the complexity nature of emotion. In 
this paper, we start with the discussion of a num-
ber of fundamental yet unresolved issues concern-
ing emotion, which includes its definition, 
representation and technology. We then propose 
an alternative solution for emotion recognition 
taking into account of emotion causes. Two pilot 
experiments are done to justify our proposal. The 
first experiment explores the impact of emotion 
recognition. It shows that the context contains rich 
and crucial information that effectively help emo-
tion recognition. The other experiment examines 
emotion cause events in the context. We find that 
most emotions are expressed with the presence of 
causes. The experiments prove that emotion cause 
serves as an important cue for emotion recognition. 
We suggest that the combination of both emotion 
study and event analysis would be a fruitful direc-
tion for deep emotion processing. 
1 Introduction 
The study of emotion attracts increasingly greater 
attention in the field of NLP due to its emerging 
wide applications, such as customer care (Gupta et 
al., 2010), and social information understanding 
(Lisa and Steyvers, 2010). In contrast to sentiment, 
which is the external subjective evaluation, emo-
tion mainly concentrates on the internal mental 
state of human (Ortony et al, 1987). Emotion is 
indeed a highly complicated concept that raises a 
lot of controversies in the theories of emotion re-
garding the fundamental issues such as emotion 
definition, emotion structure and so on. The com-
plexity nature of emotion concept makes auto-
matic emotion processing rather challenging. 
Most emotion studies put great effort on emo-
tion recognition, identifying emotion classes, such 
as happiness, sadness, and fear. On top of this 
surface level information, deeper level informa-
tion regarding emotions such as the experiencer, 
cause, and result of an emotion, needs to be ex-
tracted and analyzed for real world applications. 
In this paper, we discuss these two closely related 
emotion tasks, namely emotion recognition and 
emotion cause detection and how they contribute 
to emotion processing. 
For emotion recognition, we construct an emo-
tion corpus for explicit emotions with an unsuper-
vised method. Explicit emotions are emotions 
represented by emotion keywords such as e.g., 
?shocked? in ?He was shocked after hearing the 
news?.  In the course of emotion recognition, the 
keyword in an explicit emotion expression is de-
leted and only contextual information remains. In 
our pilot experiments, the context-based emotion 
identification works fairly well. This implies that 
plenty of information is provided in the context 
for emotion recognition. Moreover, with an in-
depth analysis of the data, we observe that it is 
often the case that emotions co-occur and interact 
in a sentence. In this paper, we deal with emotion 
recognition from a dependent view so as to cap-
ture complicated emotion expressions.   
Emotion is often invoked by an event, which in 
turn is very likely to elicit an event (Descartes 
1649, James 1884, Plutchik 1980, Wierzbicka 
1999). Despite the fact that most researches rec-
ognize the important role of events in emotion 
theories, little work, if not none, attempts to make 
explicit link between events and emotion. In this 
paper, we examine emotion constructions based 
on contextual information which often contains 
considerable relevant eventive information. In 
particular, the correlations between emotion and 
cause events will be explored based on empirical 
data. Emotion causes refer to explicitly expressed 
propositions that evoke the corresponding emo-
tions.  
To enhance emotion recognition, we examine 
emotion causes occurring in the context of an 
emotion. First, we manually annotate causes for 
emotions in our explicit emotion corpus. Since an 
emotion cause can be a complicated event, we 
model emotion cause detection as a multi-label 
problem to detect a cross-clause emotion cause. 
Furthermore, an in-depth linguistic analysis is 
done to capture the different constructions in ex-
pressing emotion causes.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
discusses some related work regarding emotion 
recognition and emotion cause detection. In Sec-
tion 3, we present our context-based emotion cor-
pus and provide some data analysis. Section 4 
describes our emotion recognition system, and 
discusses the experiments and results. In Section 5, 
we examine our emotion cause detection system, 
and discuss the performances. Finally, Section 6 
concludes our main findings for emotion process-
ing from the event perspective.   
2 Related Work  
Most current emotion studies focus on the task of 
emotion recognition, especially in affective lexi-
con construction. In comparison with emotion 
recognition, emotion cause detection is a rather 
new research area, which account for emotions 
based on the correlations between emotions and 
cause events. This section discusses the related 
research on emotion recognition and emotion 
cause detection. 
2.1 Emotion Recognition 
Although emotion recognition has been inten-
sively studied, some issues concerning emotion 
remain unresolved, such as emotion definition, 
emotion representation, and emotion classification 
technologies. 
For the emotion definition, emotion has been 
well-known for its abstract and uncertain defini-
tion which hinders emotion processing as a whole. 
Ortony et al, (1987) conducted an empirical study 
for a structure of affective lexicon based on the 
~500 words used in previous emotion studies. 
However, most of the emotion corpora in NLP try 
to avoid the emotion definition problem. Instead, 
they choose to rely on the intuition of annotators 
(Ren?s Blog Emotion Corpus, RBEC, Quan and 
Ren, 2009) or authors (Mishne?s blog emotion 
corpus, Mishne, 2005). Therefore, one of the cru-
cial drawbacks of emotion corpora is the problem 
of poor quality. In this paper, we explore emotion 
annotation from a different perspective. We con-
centrate on explicit emotions, and utilize their 
contextual information for emotion recognition.  
In terms of emotion representation, textual 
emotion corpora are basically annotated using ei-
ther the enumerative representation or the compo-
sitional representation (Chen et al, 2009). The 
enumerative representation assigns an emotion a 
unique label, such as pride and jealousy. The 
compositional representation represents an emo-
tion through a vector with a small set of fixed ba-
sic emotions with associated strength. For instance, 
pride is decomposed into ?happiness + fear? ac-
cording to Turner (2000).  
With regard to emotion recognition technolo-
gies, there are two kinds of classification models. 
One is based on an independent view (Mishne, 
2005; Mihalcea and Liu, 2006; Aman and Szpa-
kowicz, 2007; Tokuhisa et al, 2008; Strapparava 
and Mihalcea, 2008), and the other is a dependent 
view (Abbasi et al 2008; Keshtkar and Inkpen, 
2009). The independent view treats emotions sep-
arately, and often chooses a single-label classifica-
tion approach to identify emotions. In contrast, the 
dependent view takes into account complicated 
emotion expressions, such as emotion interaction 
and emotion co-occurrences, and thus requires 
more complicated models. Abbasi et al (2008) 
adopt an ensemble classifier to detect the co-
occurrences of different emotions; Keshtkar and 
Inkpen (2009) use iteratively single-label classifi-
ers in the top-down order of a given emotion hier-
archy. In this paper, we examine emotion 
recognition as a multi-label problem and investi-
gate several multi-label classification approaches.    
 2.2 Emotion Cause Detection 
Although most emotion theories recognize the 
important role of causes in emotion analysis (Des-
cartes, 1649; James, 1884; Plutchik, 1962; Wierz-
bicka 1996), yet very few studies in NLP explore 
the event composition and causal relation of emo-
tions. As a pilot study, the current study proposes 
an emotion cause detection system.  
Emotion cause detection can be considered as a 
kind of causal relation detection between two 
events. In other words, emotion is envisioned as 
an event type which triggers another event, i.e. 
cause event. We attempt to examine emotion 
cause relations for open domains. However, not 
much work (Marcu and Echihabi, 2002; Girju, 
2003; Chang and Choi, 2006) has been done on 
this kind of general causal relation for open do-
mains. 
Most existing causal relation detection systems 
contain two steps: 1) cause candidate identifica-
tion; 2) causal relation detection. However, Step 1) 
is often oversimplified in real systems. For exam-
ple, the cause-effect pairs are limited to two noun 
phrases (Chang and Choi, 2005; Girju, 2003), or 
two clauses connected with selected conjunction 
words (Marcu and Echihabi, 2002). Moreover, the 
task of Step 2) often is considered as a binary 
classification problem, i.e. ?causal? vs. ?non-
causal?.  
With regard to feature extraction, there are two 
kinds of information extracted to identify the 
causal relation in Step 2). One is constructions 
expressing a cause-effect relation (Chang and 
Choi, 2005; Girju, 2003), and the other is seman-
tic information in a text (Marcu and Echihabi, 
2002; Persing and Ng, 2009), such as word pair 
probability. Undoubtedly, the two kinds of infor-
mation often interact with each other in a real 
cause detection system. 
3 Emotion Annotated Sinica Corpus 
(EASC) 
EASC is an emotion annotated corpus comprising 
two kinds of sentences: emotional-sentence corpus 
and neutral-sentence corpus. It involves two com-
ponents: one for emotion recognition, which is 
created with an unsupervised method (Chen et al 
2009), and the other is for emotion cause detection, 
which is manually annotated (Chen et al 2010).  
3.1 The Corpus for Emotion Recognition 
With the help of a set of rules and a collection of 
high quality emotion keywords, a pattern-based 
approach is used to extract emotional sentences 
and neutral sentences from the Academia Sinica 
Balanced Corpus of Mandarin Chinese (Sinica 
Corpus). If an emotion keyword occurring in a 
sentence satisfies the given patterns, its corre-
sponding emotion type will be listed for that sen-
tence. As for emotion recognition, each detected 
keyword in a sentence is removed, in other words, 
the sentence provides only the context of that 
emotion. Due to the overwhelming of neutral sen-
tences, EASC only contains partial neutral sen-
tences besides emotional sentences. For 
experiments, 995 sentences are randomly selected 
for human annotation, which serve as the test data. 
The remaining 17,243 sentences are used as the 
training data.  
In addition, in the course of creating the emo-
tion corpus, Chen et al (2009) list the emotion 
labels in a sentence using the enumerative repre-
sentation. Besides, an emotion taxonomy is pro-
vided to re-annotate an emotion with the 
compositional representation. With the taxonomy, 
an emotion is decomposed into a combination of 
primary emotions (i.e. happiness, fear, anger, 
sadness, and surprise). 
From this corpus, we observe that ~54% emo-
tional sentences contain two emotions, yet only 
~2% sentences contain more than two emotions. 
This implies emotion recognition is a typical mul-
ti-label problem. Particularly, more effort should 
be put on the co-occurrences of two emotions. 
3.2 The Corpus for Emotion Cause De-
tection 
Most emotion theories agree that the five primary 
emotions (i.e. happiness, sadness, fear, anger, and 
surprise) are prototypical emotions. Therefore, for 
emotion cause detection, we only deal with the 
emotional sentences containing a keyword repre-
senting one of these primary emotions. Beyond a 
focus sentence, its context (the previous sentence 
and the following sentence) is also extracted, and 
those three sentences constitute an entry. After 
filtering non-emotional and ambiguous sentences, 
5,629 entries remain in the emotion cause corpus.  
Each emotion keyword is annotated with its 
corresponding causes if existing. An emotion 
keyword can sometimes be associated with more 
than one cause, in such a case, both causes are 
marked. Moreover, the cause type is also identi-
fied, which is either a nominal event or a verbal 
event (a verb or a nominalization).  
From the corpus, we notice that 72% of the ex-
tracted entries express emotions, and 80% of the 
emotional entries have a cause, which means that 
causal event is a strong indicator for emotion rec-
ognition.  
Furthermore, since the actual cause can some-
times be so complicated that it involves several 
events, we investigate the span of a cause text as 
follows. For each emotion keyword, an entry is 
segmented into clauses with some punctuations, 
and thus an entry becomes a list of cause candi-
dates. In terms of the cause distribution, we find 
~90% causes occurring between ?left_2? and 
?right_1?. Therefore, our cause search is limited to 
the list of cause candidates which contains five 
text units, i.e. <left_2, left_1, left_0, right_0, 
right_1>. If the clause where emotion keyword 
locates is assumed as a focus clause, ?left_2? and 
?left_1? are the two previous clauses, and ?right_1? 
is the following one. ?left_0? and ?right_0? are the 
partial texts of the focus clause, which locate in 
the left side of and the right side of the emotion 
keyword, respectively. Finally, we find that ~14% 
causes occur cross clauses. 
4 Emotion Processing with multi-label 
models   
4.1 Multi-label Classification for Emo-
tion recognition 
Based on our corpus, two critical issues for emo-
tion recognition need to be dealt with: emotion 
interaction and emotion co-occurrences. Co-
occurrence of multiple emotions in a sentence 
makes emotion recognition a multi-label problem. 
Furthermore, the interaction among different emo-
tions in a sentence requires a multi-label model to 
have a dependent view. In this paper, we explore 
two simple multi-label models for emotion recog-
nition. 
The Binary-based (BB) model: decompose the 
task into multiple independent binary classifiers 
(i.e., ?1? for the presence of one emotion; ?0? for 
the absence of one emotion), where each emotion 
is allocated a classifier. For each test instance, all 
labels (emotions) from the classifiers compose a 
vector. 
The label powset (LP) model: treat each possible 
combination of labels appearing in the training 
data as a unique label, and convert multi-label 
classification to single-label classification.  
Both the BB model and the LP model need a 
multi-class classifier. For our experiment, we 
choose a Max Entropy package, Mallet1. In this 
paper, we use only words in the focus sentence as 
features. 
4.2 Emotion Recognition Experiments 
To demonstrate the impact of our context-based 
emotion corpus to emotion recognition, we com-
pare EASC data to Ren?s Blog Emotion Corpus 
(RBEC). RBEC is a human-annotated emotion 
corpus for both explicit emotions and implicit 
emotions. It adopts the compositional representa-
tion with eight emotion dimensions (anger, anxi-
ety, expect, hate, joy, love, sorrow, and surprise). 
For each dimension, a numerical value ranging in 
{0.0, 0.1, 0.2... 1.0} indicates the intensity of the 
emotion in question. There are totally 35,096 sen-
tences in RBEC. To fairly compare with the 
EASC data, we convert a numerical value to a 
binary value. An emotion exists in a sentence only 
when its corresponding intensity value is greater 
than 0.  
For RBEC data, we use 80% of the corpus as 
the training data, 10% as the development data, 
and 10% as the test data. For EASC, apart from 
the test data, we divide its training data into two 
sets: 90% for our training data, and 10% for our 
development data. For evaluation of a multi-label 
task, three measures are used: accuracy (extract 
match ratio), Micro F1, and Macro F1. Accuracy 
is the extract match ratio of the whole assignments 
in data, and Micro F1 and Macro F1 are the aver- 
 
 
 
                                                           
1
 http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/ 
Table 1: The overall performances for the multi-label models   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
age scores of F scores of all possible values for all 
variables. Micro F1 takes the emotion distribution 
into account, while Macro F1 is just the average 
of all F scores. Note that due to the overwhelming 
percentage of value 0 in the multi-label task, dur-
ing the calculating of Micro F1 and Macro F1, 
most previous multi-label systems take only value 
1 (indicating the existence of the emotion) into 
account. 
In Table 1, we notice that the emotion recogni-
tion system on our context-based corpus achieves 
similar performance as the one on human-
annotated corpus. This implies that there is rich 
contextual information with respect to emotion 
identification. 
5 Emotion Cause Detection 
Most emotion theories agree that there is a strong 
relationship between emotions and events (Des-
cartes 1649, James 1884, Plutchik 1980, Wierz-
bicka 1999). Among the rich information in the 
context of an emotion, cause event is the most 
crucial component of emotion. We therefore at-
tempt to explore emotion causes, and extract 
causes for emotion automatically.  
5.1 Emotion Cause Detection 
Based on the cause distribution analysis in Section 
3.2, in contrast to binary classification used in 
previous work, we formalize emotion cause detec-
tion as a multi-label problem as follows.  
Given an emotion keyword and its context, its 
label is the locations of its causes, such as ?left_1, 
left_0?. Then, we use the LP model to identify the 
cause for each sentence as well as an emotion 
keyword. With regard to emotion cause detection, 
the LP model is more suitable than the BB model 
because the LP model can easily capture the pos-
sible label combinations.  
   In terms of feature extraction, unlike emotion 
recognition, emotion cause detection relies more 
on linguistic constructions, such as ?The BP oil 
spill makes the country angry?, ?I am sad because 
of the oil spill problem? and so on. 
According to our linguistic analysis, we cre-
ate 14 patterns to extraction some common emo-
tion cause expressions. Some patterns are 
designed for general cause detection using linguis-
tic cues such as conjunctions and prepositions. 
Others are designed for some specific emotion 
cause expressions, such as epistemic markers and 
reported verbs. Furthermore, to avoid the low 
coverage problem of the rule-based patterns, we 
create another set of features, which is a group of 
generalized patterns. For details, please refer to 
Chen et al (2010).  
5.2 Experiments 
For EASC, we reserve 80% as the training data, 
10% as the development data, and 10% as the test 
data. For evaluation, we first convert a multi-label 
tag outputted from our system into a binary tag 
(?Y? means the presence of a causal relation; ?N? 
means the absence of a causal relation) between 
the emotion keyword and each candidate in its 
corresponding cause candidates. We then adopt 
three common measures, i.e. precision, recall and 
F-score, to evaluate the result. 
A naive baseline is designed as follows: The 
baseline searches for the cause candidates in the 
order of <left_1, right_0, left_2, left_0, right_1>. 
If the candidate contains a noun or a verb, this 
clause is considered as a cause and the search 
stops. 
Table 2 shows the overall performances of our 
emotion cause detection system. First, our system 
based on a multi-label approach as well as power-
ful linguistic features significantly outperforms 
the na?ve baseline. Moreover, the greatest im-
provement is attributed to the 14 linguistic pat-
terns (LP). This implies the importance of 
linguistic cues for cause detection. Moreover, the 
general patterns (GP) achieve much better per-
 EASC RBEC 
 BB LP BB LP 
Accuracy 21.30 28.07 22.99 28.33 
Micro F1 41.96 46.25 44.77 44.74  
Macro F1 34.78 35.52 36.48 38.88  
formance on the recall and yet slightly hurt on the 
precision. 
The performances (F-scores) for ?Y? and ?N? 
tags separately are shown in Table 3. First, we 
notice that the performances of the ?N? tag are 
much better than the ones of ?Y? tag. Second, it is 
surprising that incorporating the linguistic features 
significantly improves the ?Y? tag only (from 33% 
to 56%), but does not affect ?N? tag. This suggests 
that our linguistic features are effective to detect 
the presence of causal relation, and yet do not hurt 
the detections of ?non_causal? relation. Further-
more, the general feature achieves ~8% improve-
ments for the ?Y? tag. 
 
Table 2: The overall performance with different 
feature sets of the multi-label system 
 Precision Recall F-score 
Baseline 56.64 57.70 56.96 
LP 74.92 66.70 69.21 
+ GP 73.90 72.70 73.26 
 
Table 3: The separate performances for ?Y? and 
?N? tags of the multi-label system 
 ?Y? ?N? 
Baseline 33.06 80.85 
LP 48.32 90.11 
+ GP 56.84 89.68 
 
6 Discussions 
Many previous works on emotion recognition 
concentrated on emotion keyword detection. 
However, Ortony et al (1987) pointed out the dif-
ficulty of emotion keyword annotation, be it man-
ual or automatic annotation. Emotion keywords 
are rather ambiguous, and also contain other in-
formation besides affective information, such as 
behavior and cognition. Therefore, contextual in-
formation provides important cues for emotion 
recognition. Furthermore, we propose an alterna-
tive way to explore emotion recognition, which is 
based on emotion cause. Through two pilot ex-
periments, we justify the importance of emotion 
contextual information for emotion recognition, 
particularly emotion cause.  
We first examine emotion processing in terms 
of events. Context information is found to be very 
important for emotion recognition. Furthermore, 
most emotions are expressed with the presence of 
causes in context, which implies that emotion 
cause is the crucial information for emotion rec-
ognition. In addition, emotion cause detection also 
explores deep understanding of an emotion. Com-
pared to emotion recognition, emotion cause de-
tection requires more semantic and pragmatic 
information. In this paper, based on the in-depth 
linguistic analysis, we extract different kinds of 
constructs to identify cause events for an emotion.  
To conclude, emotion processing is a compli-
cated problem. In terms of emotion keywords, 
how to understand appropriately to enhance emo-
tion recognition needs more exploration. With 
respect to emotion causes, first, event processing 
itself is a challenging topic, such as event extrac-
tion and co-reference. Second, how to combine 
event and emotion in NLP is still unclear, but it is 
a direction for further emotion studies.  
References  
Abbasi, A., H. Chen, S. Thoms, and T. Fu. 2008. Af-
fect Analysis of Web Forums and Blogs using Cor-
relation Ensembles?. In IEEE Tran. Knowledge and 
Data Engineering, vol. 20(9), pp. 1168-1180. 
Aman, S. and S. Szpakowicz. 2007. Identifying Ex-
pressions of Emotion in Text. In Proceedings of 
10th International Conference on Text, Speech and 
Dialogue, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 4629, 
196--205.   
Chang, D.-S. and K.-S. Choi. 2006. Incremental cue 
phrase learning and bootstrapping method for cau-
sality extraction using cue phrase and word pair 
probabilities. Information Processing and Man-
agement. 42(3): 662-678. 
Chen, Y., S. Y. M. Lee and C.-R. Huang. 2009. Are 
Emotions Enumerable or Decomposable? And Its 
Implications for Emotion Processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd Pacific Asia Conference on Lan-
guage, Information and Computation.  
Chen, Y., Y. M. Lee, S. Li and C.-R. Huang. 2010. 
Emotion Cause Detection with Linguistic Construc-
tions. In Proceedings of the 23rd International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics. 
Descartes, R. 1649. The Passions of the Soul. USA: 
Hackett Publishing Company. 
Ghazi, D., D. Inkpen and S. Szpakowicz. 2010. Hierar-
chical versus Flat Classification of Emotions in Text. 
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on 
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Genera-
tion of Emotion in Text. Los Angeles, CA: NAACL. 
Girju, R. 2003. Automatic Detection of Causal Rela-
tions for Question Answering. In the 41st Annual 
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, Workshop on Multilingual Summarization 
and Question Answering - Machine Learning and 
Beyond, Sapporo, Japan. 
Gupta, N., M. Gilbert, and G. D. Fabbrizio. Emotion 
Detection in Email Customer Care. In Proceedings 
of NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational 
Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion 
in Text. 
James, W. 1884. What is an Emotion? Mind, 9(34): 
188?205. 
Keshtkar, F. and D. Inkpen. 2009. Using Sentiment 
Orientation Features for Mood Classification in 
Blog Corpus. In Proceedings of IEEE International 
Conference on Natural Language Processing and 
Knowledge Eng. (IEEE NLP-KE 2009), Sep. 24-27. 
Marcu, D. and A. Echihabi. 2002. An Unsupervised 
Approach to Recognizing Discourse Relations. In 
Proceedings of ACL. 
Mihalcea, R., and H. Liu. 2006. A Corpus-based Ap-
proach to Finding Happiness. In Proceedings of 
AAAI. 
Mishne, G. 2005. Experiments with Mood Classifica-
tion in Blog Posts. In Proceedings of Style2005 ? the 
1st Workshop on Stylistic Analysis of Text for Infor-
mation Access, at SIGIR 2005. 
Ortony, A., G. L. Clore, and M. A. Foss. 1987. The 
Referential Structure of the Affective Lexicon. Cog-
nitive Science, 11: 341-364. 
Pang B., L. Lee and S. Vaithyanathan. 2002. Thumbs 
up? Sentiment Classification Using Machine Learn-
ing Techniques. In Proceedings of EMNLP02, 79-86. 
Pearl, L. and M. Steyvers. 2010. Identifying Emotions, 
Intentions, and Attitudes in Text Using a Game with 
a Purpose. In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2010 
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Analy-
sis and Generation of Emotion in Text. Los Angeles, 
CA: NAACL. 
Persing, Isaac and Vincent Ng. 2009. Semi-Supervised 
Cause Identification from Aviation Safety Reports. 
In Proceedings of ACL. 
Plutchik, R. 1980. Emotions: A Psychoevolutionary 
Synthesis. New York: Harper & Row. 
Quan, C. and F. Ren. 2009. Construction of a Blog 
Emotion Corpus for Chinese Expression Analysis. 
In Proceedings of EMNLP. 
Strapparava, C. and R. Mihalcea. 2008. Learning to 
Identify Emotions in Text. In Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Applied Computing ACM-SAC. 
Tokuhisa, R., K. Inui, and Y. Matsumoto. 2008. Emo-
tion Classification Using Massive Examples Ex-
tracted from the Web. In Proceedings of COLING.   
Turner, J. H. 2000. On the Origins of Human Emotions: 
A Sociological Inquiry into the Evolution of Human 
Affect. California: Stanford University Press. 
Wierzbicka, A. 1999. Emotions across Languages and 
Cultures: Diversity and Universals. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
  
