Harvesting Re-usable High-level Rules
for Expository Dialogue Generation
Svetlana Stoyanchev
Centre for Research in Computing
The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK
s.stoyanchev@open.ac.uk
Paul Piwek
Centre for Research in Computing
The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, UK
p.piwek@open.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper proposes a method for extract-
ing high-level rules for expository dialogue
generation. The rules are extracted from di-
alogues that have been authored by expert
dialogue writers. We examine the rules that
can be extracted by this method, focusing on
whether different dialogues and authors ex-
hibit different dialogue styles.
1 Introduction
In the past decade, a new area of Natural Language
Generation (NLG) has emerged: the automated gen-
eration of expository dialogue, also often referred to
as scripted, authored or fictive dialogue. Research in
this area began with the seminal study by Andre? et
al. (2000), which explored generation of dialogues
between a virtual car buyer and seller from technical
data on a car. This strand of work was developed fur-
ther in the NECA project (van Deemter et al, 2008)
and has since been extended to other domains, in-
cluding explanation of medical histories (Williams
et al, 2007), patient information leaflets (Piwek et
al., 2007) and Wall Street Journal articles (Hernault
et al, 2008).
Systems for generating expository dialogue have
explored different inputs (databases, knowledge rep-
resentations and text), generation methods (e.g.,
rule versus constraint-based approaches) and out-
puts (from dialogue scripts in text form to audio and
computer-animated dialogue). A common trait of all
these systems is, however, that at some point in the
generation process, they produce a dialogue script, a
text file which specifies what the interlocutors say,
possibly enriched with mark-up for dialogue acts,
speech and gestures ? see, e.g., Piwek et al (2002).
These systems are different from conventional dia-
logue systems in that the system does not engage in
a dialogue with the user; rather, the system generates
a dialogue between two or more fictitious charac-
ters for the user/audience to view and learn from. In
other words, the dialogue is used to deliver informa-
tion to the user or audience, rather than between the
interlocutors. Piwek (2008) discusses several empir-
ical studies that identify benefits of the use of expos-
itory dialogue for education and persuasion.
In this paper, we take a step towards addressing
two shortcomings of the work so far. Firstly, all
the work cited has relied on hand-crafted resources
(typically rules) for creating the dialogue. With the
resources being created by non-expert dialogue au-
thors (e.g., academic researchers), generated dia-
logues based on these resources may not be optimal;
for instance, Williams et al (2007) found that gener-
ated dialogues can be too information-dense, requir-
ing conversational padding. Secondly, the resources
for creating dialogue are tied to a specific domain,
making it hard to redeploy a system in new domains.
We propose to address the first issue by automat-
ically creating dialogue generation resources from a
corpus of dialogues written by known effective dia-
logue authors. This fits in with a trend in dialogue
modelling and generation to create resources from
empirical data (Oh and Rudnicky, 2002; DeVault et
al., 2008; Henderson et al, 2008; Belz and Kow,
2009).
The second issue is addressed by specifying di-
alogue generation rules at a level of detail that ab-
stracts over the particulars of the domain and fits in
with existing NLG architectures. The reference ar-
chitecture of Reiter and Dale (2000) identifies three
principal NLG tasks: Document Planning (DP),
Microplanning and Realisation. DP is primarily
non-linguistic: it concerns selection of information
and organization of this information into a coherent
whole. The latter is achieved by making sure that
the information is tied together by Rhetorical Rela-
tions such as Contrast, Elaboration and Explanation,
in other words, it is part of a Rhetorical Structure.
We propose that dialogue generation rules interface
with Rhetorical Structure and map to a Sequence of
Dialogue Acts.
Interestingly, the interface between DP and Mi-
croplanning has also been identified as a place where
decisions and preferences regarding style take an ef-
fect (McDonald and Pustejovsky, 1985). A ques-
tion that we explore in this paper is whether dialogue
styles exist at the highly abstract level we focus on
in this paper. We concentrate on style in the sense of
?[t]he manner of expression characteristic of a par-
ticular writer?1.
The remainder of this paper is set up as follows.
In Section 2, we introduce the corpus that we use to
extract dialogue generation resources. Section 3 ex-
amines the dialogues in the corpus for prima facie
evidence for stylistic differences between authors at
the dialogue level. In Section 4, we describe our ap-
proach to extracting high-level dialogue generation
rules from the corpus. Next, in Section 5 we anal-
yse the resulting rules, looking for further evidence
of different dialogue styles. We also compare the
rules that were harvested from our corpus with hand-
crafted rules in terms of content and variety. Finally,
Section 6 contains our conclusions and a discussion
of avenues for further research.
2 A Parallel Monologue-Dialogue Corpus
The current work makes use of a corpus of human-
authored dialogues, the CODA corpus.2 In total, this
corpus consist of about 800 dialogue turns. This
1From definition 13.a. of the Oxford English Dictionary at
http://dictionary.oed.com
2Further information on the construction of this cor-
pus can be found in the annotation manual at comput-
ing.open.ac.uk/coda/AnnotationManual.pdf.
paper is based on three dialogues from the cor-
pus: George Berkeley?s ?Dialogues between Hylas
and Philonous? (extract of 172 turns), Mark Twain?s
?What is man?? (extract of 445 turns) and Yuri Gure-
vich?s ?Evolving Algebras? (extract of 89 turns).
Berkeley?s dialogue is one of the classics of philoso-
phy, arguing for the, at first sight, extravagant claim
that ?there is no such thing as material substance in
the world?. Twain, according to the Encyclopaedia
Britannica ?one of America?s best and most beloved
writers?, takes on the concept of free will. Gure-
vich?s dialogue deals with the mathematical concept
of evolving algebras. Of these dialogues, Twain is
by a large margin the longest (over 800 turns in total)
and the only one which is aimed specifically at the
general public, rather than an academic/specialist
audience.
For each of the dialogues, the corpus also con-
tains human-authored monologue which expresses
the same content as the dialogue. Monologue and
dialogue are aligned through mappings from mono-
logue snippets to dialogue spans. As a result, the
CODA corpus is a parallel monologue-dialogue cor-
pus. Both the monologue and dialogue come with
annotations: the monologue with Rhetorical Struc-
ture Theory (RST) relations (Mann and Thompson,
1988; Carlson and Marcu, 2001) and the dialogue
side with an adaptation of existing Dialogue Act an-
notation schemes (Carletta et al, 1997; Core and
Allen, 1997). Table 2 contains an overview of these
RST relations and Dialogue Act labels.
3 Dialogue Analysis
In this section we examine whether there is prima
facie evidence for differences in style between the
three dialogues. Whereas existing work in NLG on
style has focused on lexical and syntactic choice,
see Reiter and Williams (2008), here we focus on
higher-level characteristics of the dialogues, in par-
ticular, proportion of turns with multiple dialogue
acts, frequencies of dialogue act bigrams, and rela-
tion between dialogue acts and speaker roles.
An important reason for determining whether
there are different styles involved, is that this has
implications for how we use the corpus to create
expository dialogue generation resources. If differ-
ent dialogues employ different styles, we need to be
RST relations Dialogue Acts
Enablement, Cause, Evaluation (Subjective, Inferred),
Comment, Attribution, Condition-Hypothetical, Contrast,
Comparison, Summary, Manner-means, Topic-Comment
(Problem-Solution, Statement-Response, Question-
Answer, Rhetorical Question) Background, Temporal,
Elaboration/Explanation, (Additional, General-Specific,
Example, Object-attribute, Definition, Evidence, Reason),
Same-unit
Explain, Info-Request (Init-Factoid-
InfoReq, Init-YN-InfoReq, Init-
Complex-InfReq), Init-Request-
Clarify, Response-Answer (Resp-
Answer-Yes/No, and Resp-Answer-
Factoid), Resp-Agree, Resp-
Contradict
Table 1: RST relations and Dialogue Acts used in the CODA corpus. Annotators used the fine-grained
categories in italics that are listed in brackets. For the current study, we rely, however, on the higher-level
categories that preceed the fine-grained categories and which combine several of them.
careful with creating resources which combine data
from different dialogues. Merging such data, if any-
thing, may lead to the generation of dialogues which
exhibit features from several possibly incompatible
styles. Since our aim is specifically to generate dia-
logues that emulate the masters of dialogue author-
ing, it is then probably better to create resources
based on data from a single master or dialogue.
3.1 Multi-act Turns
One of the characteristics of dialogue is the pace
and the amount of information presented in each
of the speaker?s turns. In a fast-paced dialogue
turns are concise containing a single dialogue act.
Such dialogues of the form A:Init B:Response A:Init
B:Response ... are known as ?pingpong? dialogue.
Twain?s ?What is man?? dialogue starts in this fash-
ion (O.M. = Old Man; Y.M = Young Man):
O.M. What are the materials of
which a steam-engine is made?
Y.M. Iron, steel, brass, white-metal,
and so on.
O.M. Where are these found?
Y.M In the rocks.
O.M. In a pure state?
Y.M. No?in ores.
. . .
One character serves as the initiator and the other
replies with a response. With turns that contain more
than one dialogue, henceforth multi-act turns, this
pattern can be broken:
O.M. . . .
And you not only did not make that
Author Twain Gurevich Berkeley
Multi-act 34% 43% 24%
Layman/Expert 45%/55% 36%/64% 51%/49%
Table 2: Proportion of multi-act utterances and their
distribution between Layman and Expert
machinery yourself, but you have NOT
EVEN ANY COMMAND OVER IT.
Y.M. This is too much.
You think I could have formed no
opinion but that one?
O.M. Spontaneously? No. And . . .
Multi-act turns are turns comprised of multiple dia-
logue acts, such as the Young Man?s in the exam-
ple above, where a Resp-Contradict (?This is too
much.?) is followed by an Init-YN-Request (?You
think I could have formed no opinion but that one??).
The dialogue pace may vary throughout a dia-
logue. We, however, find that overall proportions
of multi-act turns and their distribution between ex-
pert and layman vary between the authors (see Ta-
ble 2). Gurevich?s dialogue has the highest propor-
tion (43%) of multi-act turns and majority of them
are attributed to the expert. Only 24% of Berkeley?s
dialogue turns consist of multiple dialogue acts and
they are evenly split between the expert and the lay-
man. Gurevich?s dialogue is the type of dialogue
where an expert gives a lesson to a layman while
in Berkeley?s dialogue one character often comple-
ments ideas of the other character making it difficult
to determine which of the characters is an expert.
The amount of multi-act turns seems to be one of
the stylistic choices made by a dialogue author.
3.2 Dialogue Diversity
Figure 1: Bigram coverage for the 1-st to 4th most
frequent bigrams.
Dialogues are essentially a sequence of turns,
where each turn consists of one or more dialogue
acts. For our measure of dialogue diversity we focus
on two-turn sequences (i.e., turn bigrams), where a
turn is identified by the sequence of dialogue acts it
contains.
We define bigram coverage for i as the percent-
age that the top i most frequent bigrams contribute
to all bigrams in the corpus. Diversity of the dia-
logue is inversely related to the dialogue coverage.
In a dialogue with minimal diversity, the same turn,
consisting of one or more dialogue acts, is repeated
throughout the dialogue. The turn bigram consisting
of two such turns has 100% bigram coverage.
Figure 1 shows the coverage for 1 ? i ? 4 for
each author in the corpus.3 Out of the three authors,
Twain?s dialogues are the most diverse where the top
4 bigrams constitute only 15% of all bigrams. In
Gurevich?s dialogues the four most frequent bigrams
constitute 25% and in Berkeley 40%.
Note that for all three authors the dialogue cov-
erage for the 4 most frequent bigrams is quite low
indicating high variability in bigrams used. To
achieve such variability in automatically generated
dialogues we need a large number of distinct gener-
ation rules.
3This range was chosen for illustration purposes. Bigram
coverage can be compared for any i ?total number of distinct
bigrams.
3.3 Dialogue Acts and Speaker Roles
One of the most frequent bigrams for all three au-
thors was, not unexpectedly, the sequence:
A: InfoRequest
B: Response-Answer
There is, however, a difference in the roles of speak-
ers A and B. In all dialogues, one of the speakers
took on the expert role and the other the layman role.
For the aforementioned bigram, both in Berkeley?s
and Gurevich?s dialogues the layman typically ini-
tiates the request for information and the expert re-
sponds (and often goes on to explain the response in
Gurevich?s dialogue):
Q: Is it difficult to define basic
transition rules in full generality?
A: No. Here is the definition.
? Any local function update is a rule.
. . .
(From Gurevich?s dialogue)
In contrast, in Twain?s dialogues the roles are typ-
ically reversed: the expert asks and the layman re-
sponds:
O.M. Then the impulse which moves you
to submit to the tax is not ALL
compassion, charity, benevolence?
Y.M. Well?perhaps not.
Both techniques allow the author to convey a par-
ticular piece of information, but each giving rise its
very own dialogue style.
4 Approach to Rule Extraction
Comparing statistics for individual dialogues gives
us some idea about whether different styles are in-
volved. The true test for whether different styles are
involved is, however, whether for the same content
different realizations are generated. Unfortunately,
for our three dialogues the content is different to be-
gin with. The parallel corpus allows us, however, to
get around this problem. From the parallel corpus
we can extract rules which map RST structures to
dialogue act sequences. The Lefthand Side (LHS)
of a rule represents a particular rhetorical structure
found in the monologue side, whereas the Right-
hand Side (RHS) of the rule represents the dialogue
act sequence with which it is aligned in the corpus.
Such rules can be compared between the different
dialogues: in particular, we can examine whether the
same LHS gives rise to similar or different RHSs.
4.1 Comparison with previous work
Hernault et al (2008) manually construct surface-
level rules mapping monologue to dialogue.
Surface-level rules execute text-to-text conversion
operating directly on the input string. In our ap-
proach, we separate the conversion into two stages.
A first stage converts RST structures to Dialogue
Act sequences. A second stage, which is beyond
the scope of this paper, converts Dialogue Act se-
quences to text.
A further difference between the current approach
and Hernault et al?s is that the LHS of our rules
can match nested RST structures. This covers, what
we call, simple rules (involving a single RST re-
lation, e.g., Contrast(X,Y)) and complex rules (in-
volving 2 or more nested RST relations, e.g., Con-
trast(Condition(X,Y),Z)). Hernault et al only allow
for simple rules. A detailed comparison between our
approach and that of Hernault et al, using the attri-
bution rule as an example, can be found in Section
5.3.
id DA turns
0 Init-YN-
InfoReq
Is your mind a part of your PHYSI-
CAL equipment ?
0 Resp-
Answer-No
No.
1 Explain It is independent of it ; it is spiritual
2 Init-YN-
InfoReq
Being spiritual, it cannot be af-
fected by physical influences?
2 Resp-
Answer-No
No.
3 Init-YN-
InfoReq
Does the mind remain sober with
the body is drunk ?
- decorative Well?
3 Resp-
Answer-No
No.
Table 3: Example of annotated dialogue (from Mark
Twain?s ?What is man??).
4.2 Rule Extraction Algorithm
Table 3 and Figure 2 show annotated dialogue (au-
thored by Twain) and its annotated monologue trans-
lation. Each terminal node of the RST structure
corresponds to a part of a monologue snippet. All
nodes with the same id correspond to a complete
Condition
Attribution
id=2
Contrast
id=0
id=1
Being spiritual,
by phisical influences.
nuc
id=3
Let?s for a minute 
assume that
Explanation
it can not be affected
your mind is not partid=0
of your physical equipment, it is spiritual.that it is independent of it,
However, 
the mind    does not
remain sober
when the bodyis drunk.
nuc
nuc
Figure 2: RST structure for the translation of dia-
logue in Table 3
span rule
0-0 Attribution(0, 0)
0-1 Attribution( Explanation(0, 1))
2-3 Contrast(2, 3)
0-3 Condition (Attribution( Ex-
plain(0, 1)), Contrast(2, 3))
Table 4: RST sub-structures: LHS of monologue-to-
dialogue mapping rules
snippet and are linked to the dialogue act(s) with the
same ids. The relation between monologue snippets
and dialogue act segments is one-to-many. In other
words, one snippet (e.g. snippets with id=0, id=2)
can be expressed by multiple dialogue act segments.
Rules are extracted as follows: For each (auto-
matically extracted) sub-structure of the RST struc-
tures on the monologue side, a rule is created (see
Table 4). Two constraints restrict extraction of sub-
structures: 1) spans of the structure?s terminal nodes
must be consecutive and 2) none of the ids of the
terminal nodes are shared with a node outside the
sub-structure.
For example, Explanation(0, 1) is not extracted
because the node with id=0 appears also under the
Attribution relation which is not a part of this sub-
structure.
Additionally, rules are generated by removing a
relation and its satellite node and moving a nucleus
node one level up. Attribution(0, 0) was extracted
from a tree that had the Explanation relation and its
satellite child 1 pruned. This operation relies on the
validity of the following principle for RST (Marcu,
1997): ?If a relation holds between two textual spans
of the tree structure of a text, that relation also holds
between the most important units of the constituent
subspans.?
The RST sub-structure is the LHS of a rule and
dialogue act sequences are the RHS of a rule.
5 Results: Analysis of the Rules
In this section we describe the rules collected from
the corpus. We compare the rules collected from the
dialogues of different authors. We also compare the
rules constructed manually in previous work with
the rules collected from the corpus, specifically for
the attribution relation.
5.1 Rule Statistics
relation Twain Gurev Berk all
simple 31 (33) 29 (38) 25 (26) 81 (97)
complex 19 26 16 61 (61)
null 15 (22) 9 (18) 9 (27) 25 (67)
total 65 64 50 167
# turns 85 78 96 259
Table 5: Numbers of extracted distinct structural
rules (total occurrences are parenthesized)
relation Twain Gurevich Berkley
attribution 15% 2% 12%
contrast 18% 9% 17%
expl/elab 34% 47% 26%
eval 9% 6% 21%
other 24% 36% 24%
total 100% 100% 100%
Table 6: Proportions of relations expressed as rules
relation Twain Gurevich Berkley
overall 2.4 1.9 2.9
contrast 2.3 2 2.6
elab/expl 2.7 1.7 3.3
eval 2 2 2.5
Table 7: Average number of turns in simple rules
Simple rules are the rules with one RST relation in
the LHS. Complex rules are the rules with multiple
RST relations in the LHS. In Table 4, rules for the
LHS 0-0 and 2-3 are simple while the rules for 0-1
and 0-3 are complex. Null rules are the rules with no
RST relation in the LHS.
From our sample of 259 translated and annotated
dialogue turns from the corpus, we extracted 81 sim-
ple, 61 complex, and 25 null rules (null rules involve
no RST structure and are discussed below). Table 5
shows the number of distinct rules per author.4 In
parentheses we show the number of actual (not nec-
essarily distinct) rule occurrences in corpus. The
majority of simple rules in the corpus (65 out of 81)
occur only once.5 This shows that the dialogue au-
thors use a variety of dialogue act sequences when
presenting their arguments in dialogue.
To compare dialogue styles we compare the rules
across the dialogues of different authors. Table 6
shows the proportions of relation types in each au-
thor?s dialogues that are mapped to a dialogue struc-
ture and produce a mapping rule.6 Not all relations
in monologue are mapped to a dialogue structure.
For example, Explain moves may contain multiple
clauses that are presented by a single character in
the same turn. We find differences in distributions
of relation types mapped to dialogue between the
three authors (Fisher?s exact test p<.01). Berkeley?s
dialogues produce more mapping rules with Eval-
uation and less with Explanation/Elaboration rela-
tions than the other two authors. Gurevich?s di-
alogues produce less mapping rules with Attribu-
tion and Contrast relations than the other two au-
thors. This difference between distributions of re-
lation types mapped to dialogue has an important
implication for dialogue generation. Dialogue gen-
eration programs may vary the style of a dialogue
by choosing which discourse relations of the mono-
logue are mapped to dialogue turns.
Another relevant property of a rule is the number
of turns in the RHS of the rule. Number of turns in a
rule shows how many times the dialogue characters
switch to present information of the monologue cor-
responding to the LHS of the rule. The average num-
bers of turns in the RHS of all rules of the Twain,
Gurevich, and Berkeley dialogues are 2.4, 1.9, 2.9
respectively (see Table 7). They are all pairwise sig-
nificantly different (t-test p < .05) ranking the au-
4Two rules are distinct if either their LHS (relation in mono-
logue) or RHSs (sequence of dialogue acts) are different.
565=81-(97-81)
6This includes simple and complex rules
thors in the order Gurevich < Twain < Berkeley
according to the number of turns in the RHS of the
rule. Similar ranking also appears as a trend for in-
dividual relations suggesting that this is the effect of
the author?s style rather than the relations (the dis-
tribution of relation types is different across the au-
thors). This suggests that dialogue generation may
affect the style of automatically generated dialogue
by selectively choosing rules with longer (or shorter)
RHS.
5.2 Null Rule
A null rule is a rule where a sequence of dialogue
turns between two characters corresponds with a text
segment with no rhetorical relation. A text segment
without a rhetorical relation corresponds to a leaf
node in the RST structure. A null rule typically cre-
ates a dialogue fragment consisting of a yes/no ques-
tion (Init-YN-Info-Req) followed by yes/no answer,
or a complex information request (e.g. What is your
opinion on X?) followed by an Explain dialogue act,
or a presentation of an argument (Explain dialogue
act) followed by a response that signals agreement
(Resp-Agree). Null rules create more interactivity in
the dialogue.
The monologue segment corresponding to the
LHS of a null rule may be in a rhetorical relation
with another segment, such that the LHS of the null
rule is embedded into another rule. Table 8 shows an
example of a null rule embedded in a contrast rule.
Turns 1 - 3 correspond to the RHS of the Null rule
and 1 - 4 correspond to the RHS of the Contrast rule.
Null rules can be used to turn information into
dialogue, even when there is no RST relation. For
example, we may want to convey the piece of in-
formation A,B,C,D,E in that order, with rel1(A,B)
and rel2(D,E). Whereas a simple rule may apply to
relations and turn them into dialogue, C is left un-
touched. However, a null rule can be applied to C, to
also turn its presentation into a dialogue exchange.
5.3 Case Study: the Attribution Rule
In this section we present a comparison of manu-
ally created rules for the RST attribution relation and
rules extracted from the CODA corpus.
Hernault et al manually construct two surface-
level rules for the Attribution (S,N)7 relation (see
7N is a nucleus phrase that carries main information and S is
Table 9). In the Dialogue Act column we show
the dialogue act representation of the correspond-
ing surface-level rules. The first rule converts attri-
bution relation into a Complex-Info-Request by the
Layman followed with the Explain by the Expert.
The second rule converts the attribution relation into
Explain by the Expert, Factoid-Info-Request by the
Layman and Factoid-Response by Expert. In both
rules, the Expert is the one providing information
(N) to the Layman and information is presented in
Explain dialogue act
Table 10 shows six attribution rules we collected
from phrases with attribution relation in the corpus
(Twain1-4,Berkeley1,Gurevich)8. We notice several
differences with the manually constructed rules:
? The variety of dialogue act sequences: each
RHS of the rule (or dialogue act sequence) is
different.
? Main information (N) can be presented by
either the expert (Twain1, Twain2, Twain3,
Berkeley1) or by the layman (Twain4, Gure-
vich1).
? Main information (N) can be presented in
different dialogue acts: Explain dialogue act
(Twain1, Twain4, Berkeley), YN-Info-Request
(Twain2, Twain3), or Complex-Info-Request
(Gurevich).
? Contextual information is part of the rule and
may be used when choosing which rule to ap-
ply.
6 Conclusions and Further Work
In this paper, we have introduced a new approach to
creating resources for automatically generating ex-
pository dialogue. The approach is based on ex-
tracting high-level rules from RST relations to Di-
alogue Act sequences using a parallel Monologue-
Dialogue corpus. The approach results in rules that
are reusable across applications and based on known
expert dialogue authors.
After examining differences between the dia-
logues in the corpus in order to obtain prima facie
evidence for differences in style, we conducted a
detailed evaluation of the rules that were extracted
a satellite phrase that contains the entity to whom N is attributed
8These are all the rules for attribution RST relation from 50
annotated turns for each author
Turn Speaker Dialogue act Dialogue
Contrast rule. Segment with contrast relation:
[He never does anything for any one else?s comfort , spiritual or physical.] [EXCEPT ON THOSE DISTINCT TERMS
? that it shall FIRST secure HIS OWN spiritual comfort ].
Null rule. Segment without rhetorical relation:
He never does anything for any one else?s comfort , spiritual or physical
1 Layman decorative Come!
2 Expert Init-YN-Request He never does anything for any one else ? s comfort , spiritual or physical ?
3 Expert Resp-Answer-No No
4 Expert Explain EXCEPT ON THOSE DISTINCT TERMS ? that it shall FIRST secure HIS
OWN spiritual comfort .
Table 8: Contrast rule example containing null rule from Twain dialogue.
Rule 1
Speaker Surface-level Rule Dialogue act Example Dialogue
Layman What did + GetSubject(S+N) + Getmain-
VerbLemma(S+N)
Complex-Info-Request What did S say?
Expert AddifNotPresentIn(N, That) + N Explain N
Rule 2
Expert RemoveIfPresentIn(N, That) + N Explain N
Layman Who GetMainVerb(N) that? Factoid-Info-Req Who said that?
Expert GetSubjectFromSentence(S+N) Factoid-Response S did
Table 9: Manually created rules for Attribution(S,N) relation (Hernault et al, 2008)
from the corpus. We extracted 167 distinct rules and
discussed the three types of rules: null, simple and
complex (depending on the number of RST relation
in the LHS: 0, 1 or more).
We found differences between authors in several
respects, specifically:
? number of turns per simple rule
? number of dialogue acts per simple rule
? combination of speaker roles and dialogue acts
A detailed comparison between our automatically
extracted attribution rule and the hand-crafted rules
used by Hernault et al showed up a number of
differences. Apart from the fact that the corpus
yielded many more rules than the two manually cre-
ated ones, there were differences in which interlocu-
tor presented particular information and which dia-
logue acts were being used.
The current work has focussed on high-level map-
ping rules which can be used both for generation
from databases and knowledge representations and
also for generation from text. In future work, we
will focus on mapping text (in monologue form) to
dialogue. For this we need to combine the high-
level rules with rules for paraphrasing the text in the
monologue with text for the dialogue acts that ex-
press the same information in dialogue form. For
automatically extracting these surface level map-
pings we will draw on the approach to learning para-
phrases from a corpus that is described in Barzilay
and McKeown (2001). An important component of
our future effort will be to evaluate whether automat-
ically generating dialogues from naturally-occurring
monologues, following the approach described here,
results in dialogues that are fluent and coherent and
preserve the information from the input monologue.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
of INLG2010 for their helpful comments and our
colleagues in the Open University?s NLG group
for stimulating discussions on the content of this
paper. The research reported in this paper was
carried out as part of the CODA project (CO-
herent Dialogue Automatically generated from
text; see http://computing.open.ac.uk/coda/)
which is funded by the UK Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council under grant
EP/G/020981/1.
References
E. Andre?, T. Rist, S. van Mulken, M. Klesen, and
S. Baldes. 2000. The automated design of believable
dialogues for animated presentation teams. In Em-
Speaker Dialogue act Dialogue
Twain1 I will put that law into words, keep it in your mind: FROM HIS CRADLE TO HIS GRAVE A MAN NEVER DOES...
Satellite of Summary
Layman Init-YN-InfoReq Will you put that law into words?
Expert Resp-Answer-Yes Yes.
Expert Resp-Explain This is the law, keep it in your mind. FROM HIS CRADLE TO HIS GRAVE A
MAN NEVER DOES...
Twain2 I can not imagine that there is some other way of looking at it. Satellite of Explanation
Expert Init-Complex-InfoReq /clarify What makes you think that?
Layman decorative Pray what else could I think?
Expert Init-YN-InfoReq Do you imagine that there is some other way of looking at it?
Twain3 One cannot doubt that he felt well.Satellite of Evaluation-Conclusion
Expert Init-YN-InfoReq He felt well?
Layman Resp-Answer-Yes One cannot doubt it.
Twain4 As I said a minute ago Hamilton fought that duel to get PUBLIC approval. Nucleus of Explanation
Layman Init-Explain/contradict A minute ago you said Hamilton fought that duel to get PUBLIC approval.
Resp-Agree Resp-Agree I did.
Berkeley1 You can not conceive a vehement sensation to be without pain or pleasure.
Expert Init-Explain Again, try in your thoughts, Hylas, if you can conceive a vehement sensation to
be without pain or pleasure.
Layman Resp-Contradict You can not.
Gurevich I will explain what static algebras are exactly. Nucleus of Statement-response
Layman Init-Complex-InfoReq Please explain to me what static algebras are exactly.
Expert Resp-Agree Gladly.
Table 10: Attribution Examples. Satellite is italicised.
bodied Conversational Agents, pages 220?255. MIT
Press, Cambridge, Mass.
R. Barzilay and K. McKeown. 2001. Extracting Para-
phrases from a Parallel Corpus. In Proceedings of the
ACL, Toulouse, France.
A. Belz and E. Kow. 2009. System Building Cost vs.
Output Quality in Data-to-Text Generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural
Language Generation (ENLG?09), Athens, Greece.
J. Carletta, A. Isard, and J. C. Kowtko. 1997. The relia-
bility of a dialogue structure coding scheme. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 23:13?31.
L. Carlson and D. Marcu. 2001. Discourse tagging
reference manual. Technical Report ISI-TR-545, ISI,
September.
M. Core and J. Allen. 1997. Coding dialogs with the
damsl annotation scheme. In Working Notes: AAAI
Fall Symposium on Communicative Action in Humans
and Machine.
D. DeVault, D. Traum, and R. Artstein. 2008. Making
Grammar-Based Generation Easier to Deploy in Dia-
logue Systems. In Procs SIGdial 2008, Ohio, June.
E.Reiter and S. Williams. 2008. Three approaches to
generating texts in different styles. In Proceedings of
the Symposium on Style in text: creative generation
and identification of authorship.
J. Henderson, O. Lemon, and K. Georgila. 2008. Hy-
brid Reinforcement / Supervised Learning of Dialogue
Policies from Fixed Datasets. Computational Linguis-
tics, 34(4):487?511.
H. Hernault, P. Piwek, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka.
2008. Generating dialogues for virtual agents using
nested textual coherence relations. In IVA08: 8th In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents.
William C. Mann and Sandra A. Thompson. 1988.
Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional the-
ory of text organization. Text, 8(3):243?281.
D. Marcu. 1997. From Discourse Structures to
Text Summaries. In The Proceedings of the
ACL?97/EACL?97 Workshop on Intelligent Scalable
Text Summarization, pages 82?88, Madrid, Spain.
D. McDonald and J. Pustejovsky. 1985. A computational
theory of prose style for natural language generation.
In Proceedings of the second conference on European
chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 187?193, Geneva, Switzerland.
A. Oh and A. Rudnicky. 2002. Stochastic natural lan-
guage generation for spoken dialog. Computer Speech
and Language, 16(3/4):387?407.
P. Piwek, B. Krenn, M. Schroeder, M. Grice, S. Bau-
mann, and H. Pirker. 2002. RRL: A Rich Repre-
sentation Language for the Description of Agent Be-
haviour in NECA. In Proceedings of the AAMAS work-
shop ?Embodied conversational agents - let?s specify
and evaluate them!?, Bologna, Italy, July.
P. Piwek, H. Hernault, H. Prendinger, and M. Ishizuka.
2007. T2D: Generating Dialogues between Virtual
Agents Automatically from Text. In Intelligent Virtual
Agents, LNAI 4722, pages 161?174. Springer Verlag.
P. Piwek. 2008. Presenting Arguments as Fictive Dia-
logue. In Proceedings of 8th Workshop on Computa-
tional Models of Natural Argument (CMNA08), Patras,
Greece, July. ISBN 978-960-6843-12-9.
E. Reiter and R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural Lan-
guage Generation Systems. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
K. van Deemter, B. Krenn, P. Piwek, M. Klesen,
M. Schroeder, and S. Baumann. 2008. Fully gener-
ated scripted dialogue for embodied agents. Artificial
Intelligence Journal, 172(10):1219?1244.
S. Williams, P. Piwek, and R. Power. 2007. Generat-
ing Monologue and Dialogue to Present Personalised
Medical Information to Patients. In Procs ENLG
2007, pages 167?170, Schloss Dagstuhl, Germany.
