Treebank of Chinese Bible Translations 
Andi Wu 
GrapeCity Inc. 
andi.wu@grapecity.com 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports on a treebanking 
project where eight different modern 
Chinese translations of the Bible are 
syntactically analyzed.  The trees are 
created through dynamic treebanking 
which uses a parser to produce the 
trees.   The trees have been going 
through manual checking, but correc-
tions are made not by editing the tree 
files but by re-generating the trees with 
an updated grammar and dictionary.  
The accuracy of the treebank is high 
due to the fact that the grammar and 
dictionary are optimized for this specif-
ic domain.  The tree structures essen-
tially follow the guidelines of the Penn 
Chinese Treebank.  The total number 
of characters covered by the treebank is 
7,872,420 characters. The data has 
been used in Bible translation and Bi-
ble search.  It should also prove useful 
in the computational study of the Chi-
nese language in general. 
1 Introduction 
Since the publication of the Chinese Union 
Version (CUV???) in 1919, the Bible 
has been re-translated into Chinese again 
and again in the last 91 years.  The transla-
tions were done in different time periods 
and thus reflect the changes in the Chinese 
language in the last century.  They also 
represent different styles of Chinese writ-
ing, ranging over narration, exposition and 
poetry. Due to the diversity of the transla-
tors? backgrounds, some versions follow 
the language standards of mainland China, 
while other have more Taiwan or Hong 
Kong flavor.  But they have one thing in 
common: they were all done very profes-
sionally, with great care put into every sen-
tence.  Therefore the sentences are usually 
well-formed.  All this makes the Chinese 
translations of the Bible a high-quality and 
well-balanced corpus of the Chinese lan-
guage. 
 
To study the linguistic features of this text cor-
pus, we have been analyzing its syntactic 
structures with a Chinese parser in the last few 
years.  The result is a grammar that covers all 
the syntactic structures in this domain and a 
dictionary that contains all the words in this 
text corpus.  A lot of effort has also been put 
into tree-pruning and tree selection so that the 
bad trees can be filtered out. Therefore we are 
able to parse most of the sentences in this cor-
pus correctly and produce a complete treebank 
of all the Chinese translations.   
 
The value of such a treebank in the study and 
search of the Bible is obvious.  But it should 
also be a valuable resource for computational 
linguistic research outside the Bible domain.  
After all, it is a good representation of the syn-
tactic structures of Chinese. 
2 The Data Set 
The text corpus for the treebank includes eight 
different versions of Chinese translations of 
the Bible, both the Old Testament and the New 
Testament.  They are listed below in 
chronological order with their Chinese names, 
abbreviations, and years of publication: 
 
 Chinese Union Version 
 (??? CUV 1919)  
 Lv Zhenzhong Version  
(????? LZZ 1946) 
 Sigao Bible  
(???? SGB 1968 ) 
 Today?s Chinese Version  
(?????? TCV 1979) 
 Recovery Version  
(??? RCV 1987) 
 New Chinese Version  
(??? NCV 1992) 
 Easy-to-Read Version  
(????? ERV 2005) 
 Chinese Standard Bible  
(?????? CSB 2008)   
 
All these versions are in vernacular Chinese 
(???) rather than classical Chinese (??
?), with CUV representing ?early vernacular? 
( ? ? ? ? ? ) and the later versions 
representing contemporary Chinese.  The texts 
are all in simplified Chinese. Those 
translations which were published in 
traditional Chinese were converted to 
simplified Chinese.  For a linguistic 
comparison of those different versions, see Wu  
et al(2009). 
 
In terms of literary genre, more than 50% of 
the Bible is narration, about 15% poetry, 10% 
exposition, and the rest a mixture of narrative, 
prosaic and poetic writing.  The average 
number of characters in a single version is 
close to one million and the total number of 
characters of these eight versions is 7,672,420. 
 
Each book in the Bible consists of a number of 
chapters which in turn consist of a number of 
verses.  A verse often corresponds to a sen-
tence, but it may be composed of more than 
one sentence.  On the other hand, some sen-
tences may span multiple verses.  To avoid the 
controversy in sentence segmentation, we pre-
served the verse structure, with one tree for 
each verse.  The issues involved in this deci-
sion will be discussed later. 
3 Linguistic Issues 
In designing the tree structures, we essentially 
followed the Penn Chinese Treebank (PCTB) 
Guidelines (Xia 2000, Xue & Xia 2000) in 
segmentation, part-of-speech tagging and 
bracketing.  The tag set conforms to this stan-
dard completely while the segmentation and 
bracketing have some exceptions. 
 
In segmentation, we provide word-internal 
structures in cases where there can be varia-
tions in the granularity of segmentation.   For 
example, a verb-complement structure such as 
?? is represented as  
 
 
so that it can be treated either as a single word 
or as two individual words according to the 
user?s needs.  A noun-suffix structure such as 
???? is represented as 
 
to accommodate the need of segmenting it into 
either a single word or two separate words.  
Likewise, a compound word like ??  is 
represented as  
 
to account for the fact that it can also be ana-
lyzed as two words.  This practice is applied to 
all the morphologically derived words dis-
cussed in Wu (2003), which include all lin-
guistic units that function as single words syn-
tactically but lexically contains two or more 
words.  The nodes for such units all have (1) 
an attribute that specifies the word type (e.g. 
Noun-Suffix, Verb-Result, etc.) and (2) the 
sub-units that make up the whole word.  The 
user can use the word type and the layered 
structures to take different cuts of the trees to 
get the segmentation they desire. 
 
In bracketing, we follow the guidelines of 
Penn Chinese treebank, but we simplified the 
sentence structure by omitting the CP and IP 
nodes.  Instead, we use VP for any verbal unit, 
whether it is a complete sentence or not.  Here 
is an example where the tree is basically a pro-
jection of the verb, with all other elements be-
ing the arguments or adjuncts of the VP: 
 
 
There are two reasons for doing this.  First of 
all, we choose not to represent movement rela-
tionships with traces and empty categories 
which are not theory-neutral.  They add com-
plexities to automatic parsing, making it slow-
er and more prone to errors.  Secondly, as we 
mentioned earlier, the linguistic units we parse 
are verses which are not always a sentence 
with an IP and a CP.  Therefore we have to 
remain flexible and be able to handle multiple 
sentences, partial sentences, or any fragments 
of a sentence.  The use of VP as the maximal 
project enables us to be consistent across dif-
ferent chunks. Here is a verse with two sen-
tences: 
 
 
Notice that both sentences are analyzed as VPs 
and the punctuation marks are left out on their 
own.  Here is a verse with a partial sentence: 
 
This verse contains a PP and a VP.  Since it is 
not always possible to get a complete sentence 
within a verse, we aim at ?maximal parses? 
instead of complete parses, doing as much as 
we can be sure of and leaving the rest for fu-
ture processing.  To avoid the clause-level am-
biguities as to how a clause is related to anoth-
er, we also choose to leave the clausal relations 
unspecified.  Therefore, we can say that the 
biggest linguistic units in our trees are clauses 
rather than sentences.  In cases where verses 
consist of noun phrases or prepositional phras-
es, the top units we get can be NPs or PPs.  In 
short, the structures are very flexible and par-
tial analysis is accepted where complete analy-
sis is not available. 
 
While the syntactic structure in this treebank is 
underspecified compared to the Penn Chinese 
Treebank, the lexical information contained in 
the trees are considerably richer.  The trees are 
coded in XML where each node is a complex 
attribute-value matrix.  The trees we have seen 
above are visualizations of the XML in a tree 
viewer where we can also view the attributes 
of each node in a tooltip, as shown below: 
 
Here, the attributes tell us among other things 
that (1) this node is formed by the rule ?DNP-
NP?, (2) the head of this phrase is its second 
child (position is 0-based), (3) there is no 
coordination in this phrase, (4) this is not a 
location phrase, (5) this is not a time phrase, (6) 
the NP is a human being, and (7) the head 
noun can take any of those measure words (?
?): ??????????? and ?. There 
are many other attributes and a filter is applied 
to determine which attributes will show up 
when the XML is generated. 
4 Computational Issues 
As we have mentioned above, the trees are 
generated automatically by a Chinese parser.  
It is well-known that the state-of?the-art natu-
ral language parsers are not yet able to produce 
syntactic analysis that is 100% correct.  As a 
result, the automatically generated trees con-
tain errors and manual checking is necessary.  
The question is what we should do when errors 
are found. 
 
The approach adopted by most treebanking 
projects is manual correction which involves 
editing the tree files.  Once the trees have been 
modified by hand, the treebank becomes static.  
Any improvement or update on the treebank 
will require manual work from then on and 
automatic parsing is out of the picture.  This 
has several disadvantages.  First of all, it is 
very labor-intensive and not everyone can af-
ford to do it.  Secondly, the corrections are 
usually token-based rather than type-based, 
which requires repetitions of the same correc-
tion and opens doors to inconsistency.  Finally, 
this approach is not feasible with trees with 
complex feature structures where manual edit-
ing is difficult if not impossible. 
 
To avoid these problems, we adopted the ap-
proach of dynamic treebanking (Oepen et al
2002) where corrections/updates are not made 
in the tree files but in the grammar and dictio-
nary that is used to generate the trees.  Instead 
of fixing the trees themselves, we improve the 
tree-generator and make it produce the correct 
trees.  Every error found the trees can be traced 
back to some problem in the grammar rules, 
dictionary entries, or the tree selection process.  
Once a ?bug? is resolved, all problems of the 
same kind will be resolved throughout the 
whole treebank.  In this approach, we never 
have to maintain a static set of trees.  We can 
generate the trees at any time with any kind of 
customization based on users? requirement.    
 
Dynamic treebanking requires a high-accuracy 
syntactic parser which is not easy to build.  A 
Chinese parser has the additional challenge of 
word segmentation and name entity recogni-
tion.  These problems become more managea-
ble once the texts to be parsed are narrowed 
down to a specific domain, in our case the do-
main of Biblical texts.   
 
The dictionary used by our parser is based on 
the Grammatical Knowledge Base of Contem-
porary Chinese (GKBCC) licensed from Bei-
jing University.  It is a wide-coverage, feature-
rich dictionary containing more than 80,000 
words. On top of that, we added all the words 
in the eight translations, including all the prop-
er names, which are not in the GKBCC.  The 
total vocabulary is about 110,000 words.  
Since we follow the PCTB guidelines in our 
syntactic analysis, the grammatical categories 
of GKBCC were converted to the PCTB POS 
tags.   
 
With all the words in the dictionary, which 
eliminates the OOV problem, the only problem 
left in word segmentation is the resolution of 
combinational ambiguities and overlapping 
ambiguities. We resolve these ambiguities in 
the parsing process rather than use a separate 
word segmenter, because most wrong segmen-
tations can be ruled out in the course of syntac-
tic analysis (Wu and Jiang 1998).     
 
Our grammar is in the HPSG framework. In 
addition to feature-rich lexical projections, it 
also bases its grammatical decisions on the 
words in the preceding and following contexts.  
Multiple trees are generated and sorted accord-
ing to structural properties.  The treebank con-
tains the best parse of each verse by default, 
but it can also provide the top N trees.  The 
grammar is not intended to be domain-specific.  
Almost all the rules there apply to other do-
mains as well.  But the grammar is ?domain-
complete? in the sense that all the grammatical 
phenomena that occur in this domain are cov-
ered.   
 
The developers of the treebank only look at the 
top tree of each verse.  If it is found to be in-
correct, they can fix it by (1) refining the con-
ditions of the grammar rules, (2) correcting or 
adding attribute values in the lexicon, or (3) 
fine-tuning tree ranking and tree selection.  For 
phrases which occur frequently in the text or 
phrases which are hard to analyze, we store 
their correct analysis in a database so that they 
can be looked up just like a dictionary entry.  
These ?pre-generated? chunks are guaranteed 
to have the correct analysis and they greatly 
reduce the complexity of sentence analysis. 
 
The same grammar and dictionary are used to 
parse the eight different versions.  The devel-
opment work is mainly based on CSB.  There-
fore the trees of the CSB text have higher ac-
curacy than those of other versions.  However,  
due to the fact that all the eight versions are 
translations of the same source text, they share 
a large number of common phrases.  As our 
daily regression tests show, most fixes made in 
CSB also benefit the analysis of other versions. 
5 Evaluation 
Due to the optimization of the grammar and 
dictionary for the Bible domain, the accuracy 
of this Chinese parser is much higher than any 
other general-purpose Chinese parsers when 
the texts to be parsed are Chinese Bible texts. 
Therefore the accuracy of the trees is higher 
than any other automatically generated trees.  
Unfortunately, there is not an existing treebank 
of Chinese Bible translations that can be used 
as a gold standard for automatic evaluation.  
We can only examine the quality through ma-
nual inspection.  However, there does exist a 
segmented text of the CUV translation.1  Using 
this text as the gold standard is ideal because 
the development data for our system is CSB 
rather than CUV or other versions.  
 
As we have mentioned above, the segmenta-
tion from the trees can be customized by tak-
ing different cuts in cases where word-internal 
structures are available.  In order to make our 
segmentation match the existing CUV segmen-
tation as closely as possible, we studied the 
CUV segments and made a decision for each 
type of words.  For example, in a verb-
complement construction where both the verb 
and the directional/resultative complement are 
single characters, the construction will be 
treated as a single word.  
 
We evaluated the segmentation of our CUV 
trees with the scoring script used in the first 
                                                
1 The segmented CUV text was provided by Asia 
Bible Society. 
international Chinese segmentation bakeoff 
(Sproat & Emerson 2003).  Here are the results: 
 
Recall:  99.844% 
Precision: 99.826% 
F-Score: 99.845% 
 
We don't show the OOV numbers as they are 
not relevant here, because all the words have 
been exhaustively listed in our dictionary. 
 
Of a total of 31151 verses in the Bible, 30568 
verses (98.13%) do not contain a single error 
(whole verses segmented correctly).   
Of course, segmentation accuracy does not 
imply parsing accuracy, though wrong seg-
mentation necessarily implies a wrong parse.  
Since we do not have a separate word segmen-
ter and segmentation is an output of the pars-
ing process, the high segmentation accuracy 
does serve as a reflection of the quality of the 
trees.  There would be many more segmenta-
tion errors if the trees had many errors. 
6 Use of the Treebank 
The treebank has been used in the area of Bible 
translation and Bible search.  In Bible transla-
tion, the trees are aligned to the trees of the 
original Hebrew and Greek texts2.  By examin-
ing the correspondences between the Chinese 
trees and the Hebrew/Greek trees, one is able 
to measure how faithful each translation is to 
the original.  In Bible search, the trees makes it 
possible to use more intelligent queries based 
not only on words but on syntactic relations 
between words as well. 
 
An obvious use of the treebank is to train a 
statistical parser.  Though the domain speci-
                                                
2 The Hebrew and Greek trees were also provided 
by Asia Bible Society. 
ficity of the treebank makes it less likely to 
build from it a good lexicalized statistical pars-
er that can be used in the general domain, we 
can still extract a lot of non-lexical syntactic 
information from it.  It can fill many of the 
gaps in the parsers that are built from other 
treebanks which consist mainly of news ar-
ticles.   
 
A special feature of this treebank is that it is 
built from a number of parallel texts -- differ-
ent Chinese translations of the same verses.  
By aligning the parallel trees (ideally through 
the original Hebrew and Greek trees as pivots), 
we can acquire a knowledge base of Chinese 
synonyms and paraphrases.  Presumably, the 
different Chinese subtrees corresponding to the 
same Hebrew/Greek subtree are supposed to 
convey the same meaning.  The words and 
phrases covered by those subtrees therefore 
represent Chinese expressions that are syn-
onymous.  A knowledge base of this kind can 
be a valuable addition to the lexical study of 
Chinese. 
7 Summary 
We presented a Chinese treebank of parallel 
Bible translations.  The treebank is built 
through dynamic treebanking where the trees 
are automatically generated by a Chinese pars-
er optimized for parsing Biblical texts.  The 
trees can serve as a useful resource for differ-
ent language projects. 
 
References 
Sproat, Richard and Thomas Emerson. 2003. The 
First International Chinese Segmentation Ba-
keoff. In Proceedings of the Second SIGHAN 
Workshop on Chinese Language Processing, Ju-
ly 11-12, Sapporo, Japan.  
Wu, Andi, J. and Z. Jiang, 1998. Word segmenta-
tion in sentence analysis, in Proceedings of 1998 
International Conference on Chinese Information 
Processing, pp. 46--51. 169--180, Beijing, China.  
 Wu, Andi. 2003. Customizable Segmentation of 
Morphological Derived Words in Chinese. In In-
ternational Journal of Computational Linguistics 
and Chinese Language Processing, 8(1):1-27. 
Wu, And, Arron Ma, Dong Wang. 2009.  Fidelity 
and Readablity ? a quanatative comparison of 
Chinese translations of the New Testament.  
Proceedings of the Conference on ?Interpretation 
of Biblical Texts in Chinese Contexts?, Sichuan 
Univeristy, December 2009. 
Xia, Fei. 2000. Segmentation Guidelines for the 
Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). Technical Report, 
University of Pennsylvania.  
Xia, Fei. 2000. The Part-Of-Speech Tagging Guide-
lines for the Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). 
Technical Report, University of Pennsylvania. 
Xue, Nianwen and Fei Xia. 2000. The Bracketing 
Guidelines for the Penn Chinese Treebank (3.0). 
Technical Report, University of Pennsylvania. 
Oepen, Stephan, Dan Flickinger, Kristina Toutano-
va, Christoper D. Manning. 2002. LinGO Red-
woods: A Rich and Dynamic Treebank for 
HPSG In Proceedings of The First Workshop on 
Treebanks and Linguistic Theories (TLT2002), 
Sozopol, Bulgaria. 
  
