Applying semantic frame theory to automate natural language
template generation from ontology statements
Dana Danne?lls
NLP research unit, Department of Swedish Language
University of Gothenburg, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden
dana.dannells@svenska.gu.se
Abstract
Today there exist a growing number of
framenet-like resources offering seman-
tic and syntactic phrase specifications that
can be exploited by natural language gen-
eration systems. In this paper we present
on-going work that provides a starting
point for exploiting framenet information
for multilingual natural language genera-
tion. We describe the kind of information
offered by modern computational lexical
resources and discuss how template-based
generation systems can benefit from them.
1 Introduction
Existing open-source multilingual natural lan-
guage generators such as NaturalOWL (Galanis
and Androutsopoulos, 2007) and MPIRO (Isard et
al., 2003) require a large amount of manual lin-
guistic input to map ontology statements onto se-
mantic and syntactic structures, as exemplified in
Table 1. In this table, each statement contains a
property and two instances; each template con-
tains the lexicalized, reflected property and the two
ontology classes (capitalized) the statement?s in-
stances belong to.
Ontology statement Sentence template
painted-by (ex14, p-Kleo) VESSEL was decorated by PAINTER
exhibit-depicts (ex12, en914) PORTRAIT depicts EXHIBIT-STORY
current-location (ex11, wag-mus) COIN is currently displayed in MUSEUM
Table 1: MPIRO ontology statements and their
corresponding sentence templates.
Consider adapting such systems to museum vis-
itors in multilingual environments: as each state-
ment is packaged into a sentence through a fixed
sentence template, where lexical items, style of
reference and linguistic morphology have already
been determined, this adaptation process requires
an extensive amount of manual input for each lan-
guage, which is a labour-intensive task.
One way to automate this natural language map-
ping process, avoiding manual work is through
language-specific resources that provide semantic
and syntactic phrase specifications that are, for ex-
ample, presented by means of lexicalized frames.
An example of such a resource in which frame
principles have been applied to the description and
the analysis of lexical entries from a variety of se-
mantic domains is the Berkeley FrameNet (FN)
project (Fillmore et al, 2003). The outcome of
the English FN has formed the basis for the devel-
opment of more sophisticated and computation-
ally oriented multilingual FrameNets that today
are freely available (Boas, 2009).
This rapid development in computational lexi-
cography circles has produced a growing number
of framenet-like resources that we argue are rel-
evant for natural language generators. We claim
that semantic and syntactic information, such as
that provided in a FrameNet, facilitates mapping
of ontology statements to natural language. In
this paper we describe the kind of information
which is offered by modern computational lexi-
cal resources and discuss how template-based nat-
ural language generation (NLG) systems can ben-
efit from them.
1.1 Semantic frames
A frame, according to Fillmore?s frame semantics,
describes the meaning of lexical units with refer-
ence to a structured background that motivates the
conceptual roles they encode. Conceptual roles
are represented with a set of slots called frame
elements (FEs). A semantic frame carries infor-
mation about the different syntactic realizations of
the frame elements (syntactic valency), and about
their semantic characteristics (semantic valency).
A frame can be described with the help of
two types of frame elements that are classified
in terms of how central they are to a particular
frame, namely: core and peripheral. A core ele-
ment is one that instantiates a conceptually nec-
essary component of a frame while making the
frame unique and different from other frames. A
peripheral element does not uniquely characterize
a frame and can be instantiated in any semantically
appropriate frame.
1.2 The language generation module
The kind of language generation system discussed
here consists of a language generation module
that is guided by linguistic principles to map its
non-linguistic input (i.e. a set of logical state-
ments) to syntactic and semantic templates. This
kind of generation system follows the approaches
that have been discussed elsewhere (Reiter, 1999;
Busemann and Horacek, 1998; Geldof and van de
Velde, 1997; Reiter and Mellish, 1993).
The goal of the proposed module is to associate
an ontology statement with relevant syntactic and
semantic specifications. This generation process
should be carried out during microplanning (cf.
Reiter and Dale (2000)) before aggregation and re-
ferring expression generation take place.
1.3 The knowledge representation
The knowledge representation which serves as the
input to the language generator is a structured on-
tology specified in the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) (Berners-Lee, 2004) on which programs
can perform logical reasoning over data.
Ontological knowledge represented in OWL
contains a hierarchical description of classes (con-
cepts) and properties (relations) in a domain. It
may also contain instances that are associated with
particular classes, and assertions (axioms), which
allow reasoning about them. Generating linguis-
tic output from this originally non-linguistic input
requires instantiations of the ontology content, i.e.
concepts, properties and instances by lexical units.
2 From ontology statements to template
specifications
Our approach to automatic template generation
from ontology statements has three major steps:
(1) determining the base lexeme of a statement?s
property and identifying the frame it evokes,1 (2)
matching the statement?s associated concepts with
the frame elements, and (3) extracting the syntac-
tic patterns that are linked to each frame element.
1Base lexemes become words after they are subjected to
morphological processing which is guided by the syntactic
context.
The remainder of this section describes how
base lexemes are chosen and how information
about the syntactic and semantic distribution of the
lexemes underlying an ontological statement are
acquired.
2.1 Lexical units? determination and frame
identification
The first, most essential step that is required for
recognizing which semantic frame is associated
with an ontology statement is lexicalization. Most
Web ontologies contain a large amount of linguis-
tic information that can be exploited to map the
ontology content to linguistic units automatically
(Mellish and Sun, 2006). However, direct verbal-
ization of the ontology properties and concepts re-
quires preprocessing, extensive linguistic knowl-
edge and sophisticated disambiguation algorithms
to produce accurate results. For the purposes of
this paper where we are only interested in lexical-
izing the ontology properties, we avoid applying
automatic verbalization; instead we choose man-
ual lexicalization.
The grammatical categories that are utilized to
manifest the ontology properties are verb lexemes.
These are determined according to the frame defi-
nitions and with the help of the ontology class hi-
erarchy. For example, consider the statement cre-
ate (bellini, napoleon). In this domain, i.e. the
cultural heritage domain, the property create has
two possible interpretations: (1) to create a physi-
cal object which serves as the representation of the
presented entity, (2) to create an artifact that is an
iconic representation of an actual or imagined en-
tity or event. FrameNet contains two frames that
correspond to these two definitions, namely: Cre-
ate Representation and Create physical artwork.
Figure 1: A fragment of the ontology.
By following the ontological representation de-
parting from the given instances, as illustrated in
Figure 1, we learn that bellini is an instance of the
class Actor, napoleon is an instance of the class
Represented Object, and that napoleon is the rep-
resented entity in the painting p-163. Thus, in this
context, an appropriate lexicalization of the prop-
erty create is the verb paint which evokes the Cre-
ate Representation frame.
For clarity, we specify in Table 2 part of the in-
formation that is coded in the frame. In this ta-
ble we find the name of the frame, its definition,
the set of lexical units belonging to the frame, the
names of its core elements and a number of sen-
tences annotated with these core FEs.
Create representation
Def
A Creator produces a physical object which is to serve as a Representation
of an actual or imagined entity or event, the Represented.
LUs carve.v, cast.v, draw.v, paint.v, photograph.v, sketch.v
core
Creator (C) (1) Since [ Frans]C PHOTOGRAPHED [them]R ten
FEs
years ago the population has increased.
(2) [ Picasso]C DREW [some violent-looking birds]R .
Represented (R) (3) When [ Nadar]C PHOTOGRAPHED [ her ]R ,
Desbordes-Valmore was sixty-eight.
(4) [ Munch]C PAINTED [ himself ]R as a ghost.
Table 2: Frame Create representation.
2.2 Matching the ontology concepts with
frame elements
In this step, the set of core frame elements which
function as the obligatory arguments of the re-
quired lexeme are matched with their correspond-
ing ontology concepts. The algorithm that is ap-
plied to carry out this process utilizes the FE Tax-
onomy and the ontology class hierarchy.2
Matching is based on the class hierarchies. For
example: Actor, which is a subclass of Person is
matched with the core element Creator, which is
a subclass of Agent because they are both charac-
terized as animate objects that have human prop-
erties. Similarly, Represented Object, which is a
subclass of Conceptual Object, is matched with
the core element Represented, which is a subclass
of Entity because they are both characterized as
the results of a human creation that comprises non-
material products of the human mind.
This matching process leads to consistent speci-
fications of the semantic roles specifying sentence
constituents which are not bound to the input on-
tology structure.3
2.3 Semantic and syntactic knowledge
extraction
Semantic frames, besides providing information
about a lexeme?s semantic content, provide infor-
mation about the valency pattern associated with
2The Frame Element Taxonomy: http://www.
clres.com/db/feindex.html
3One of the basic assumptions of our approach is that se-
mantically, languages have a rather high degree of similarity,
whereas syntactically they tend to differ.
it, i.e. how semantic roles are realized syntac-
tically and what are the different types of gram-
matical functions they may fulfill when occurring
with other elements. An example of the syntactic
patterns and possible realizations of the semantic
elements that appear in the Create representation
frame are summarized in Table 3.4 From this in-
formation we learn the kind of syntactic valency
patterns that are associated with each semantic el-
ement. For example, we learn that in active con-
structions Creator appears in the subject position
while in passive constructions it follows the prepo-
sition by. It can also be eliminated in passive con-
structions when other peripheral elements appear
(Example 2), in this case it is the FE Time (T).
Although it is a peripheral element, it plays an im-
portant role in this context.
FEs Syntactic Pattern
[C, R] [ [ NP Ext], [NPObj ] ]
Example 1: [Leonardo da Vinci]C painted [this scene]R
[R, T] [ [ [NPExt], PP[in]Dep] ]
Example 2: [The lovely Sibyls]R were painted in [the last century]T .
[R, C, T] [ [ NP Ext] , [ PP[by]Dep], [ PP[in]Dep] ]
Example 3: [The Gerichtsstube]R was painted by [Kuhn]C in [1763]T .
Table 3: Syntactic realizations of the lexical entry
paint.
This knowledge is extracted automatically from
the FN database and is converted to sentence spec-
ifications with the help of a simple Perl script. Be-
low is a template example which specifies the sen-
tence construction of the sentence in Example 3:
(template ( type: passive)
(( head: |paint|) (feature: (tense: past) )
( arg1 (Represented (head: |gerichtsstube|) (
determiner: |the|))
arg2 (Creator (head: |kuhn|) (mod: |by|))
arg3 (Time (head: |1763|) (mod: |in|))))
3 Testing the method
To test our approach, we employ the MPIRO do-
main ontology content.5 Table 4 illustrates some
of the results, i.e. examples of the ontology state-
ments, the frame that matched their property lex-
icalization, and their possible realization patterns
that were extracted from the English FrameNet.
The results demonstrate some of the advantages
of the syntactic and semantic valency properties
provided in FN that are relevant for expressing nat-
ural language. These include: Verb collocations
4FN?s abbreviations: Constructional Null Instantia-
tion (CNI), External Argument (Ext), Dependent (Dep).
5<http://users.iit.demokritos.gr/
?eleon/ELEONDownloads.html>
Nr Ontology statement Frame Possible realization patterns
(1) depict (portraitMED , storyITE) Communicate MEDIUM depict CATEGORY.
categorization MEDIUM depict ITEM of CATEGORY.
(2) depict (modigCRE , portraitREP ) Create physical artwork CREATOR paint REPRESENTATION.
CREATOR paint REPRESENTATION
from REFERENCE in PLACE.
(3) depict (kuhnCRE , flowerREP ) Create representation CREATOR paint REPRESENTED.
REPRESENTED is painted by CREATOR in TIME.
(4) locate (portraitTHE , louvreLOC) Being located THEME is located LOCATION.
(5) copy (portraitORI , portraitCOP ) Duplication COPY replicate ORIGINAL.
CREATOR replicate ORIGINAL.
Table 4: Ontology statements and their possible realization patterns extracted from frames. Each instance
is annotated with the three first letters of the core frame element it has been associated with.
examples (1) and (2). Intransitive usages, exam-
ple (4). Semantic focus shifts, examples (3) and
(5). Lexical variations and realizations of the same
property, examples (1), (2) and (3).
4 Discussion and related work
Applying frame semantics theory has been sug-
gested before in the context of multilingual lan-
guage generation (De Bleecker, 2005; Stede,
1996). However, to our knowledge, no generation
application has tried to extract semantic frame in-
formation directly from a framenet resource and
integrate the extracted information in the genera-
tion machinery. Perhaps because it is not until now
that automatic processing of multilingual framenet
data become available (Boas, 2009). Moreover,
the rapid increase of Web ontologies has only re-
cently become acknowledged in the NLG commu-
nity, who started to recognize the new needs for
establishing feasible methods that facilitate gen-
eration and aggregation of natural language from
these emerging standards (Mellish and Sun, 2006).
Authors who have been experimenting with
NLG from Web ontologies (Bontcheva and Wilks,
2004; Wilcock and Jokinen, 2003) have demon-
strated the usefulness of performing aggregation
and applying some kind of discourse structures in
the early stages of the microplanning process. As
mentioned in Section 1.1, peripheral elements can
help in deciding on how the domain information
should be packed into sentences. In the next step
of our work, when we proceed with aggregations
and discourse generation we intend to utilize the
essential information provided by these elements.
Currently, the ontology properties are lexical-
ized manually, a process which relies solely on the
frames and the ontology class hierarchies. To in-
crease efficiency and accuracy, additional lexical
resources such as WordNet must be integrated into
the system. This kind of integration has already
proved feasible in the context of NLG (Jing and
McKeown, 1998) and has several implications for
automatic lexicalization.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we presented on-going research on
applying semantic frame theory to automate natu-
ral language template generation.
The proposed method has many advantages.
First, the extracted templates and syntactic alterna-
tions provide varying degrees of complexity of lin-
guistic entities which eliminate the need for man-
ual input of language-specific heuristics. Second,
the division of phases and the separation of the dif-
ferent tasks enables flexibility and re-use possibil-
ities. This is in particular appealing for modular
NLG systems. Third, it provides multilingual ex-
tension possibilities. Framenet resources offer an
extended amount of semantic and syntactic phrase
specifications that are only now becoming avail-
able in languages other than English. Because
non-English framenets share the same type of con-
ceptual backbone as the English FN, the steps in-
volved in adapting the proposed method to other
languages mainly concern lexicalization of the on-
tology properties.
Future work aims to enhance the proposed
method along the lines discussed in Section 4 and
test it on the Italian and Spanish framenets. We
intend to experiment with the information about
synonymous words and related terms provided in
FN (which we haven?t taken advantage of yet) and
demonstrate how existing NLG applications that
are designed to accommodate different user needs
can benefit from it.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to express her gratitude to
Maria Toporowska Gronostaj for useful discus-
sions about lexical semantics and to Olga Caprotti
for making suggestions for improving the paper.
I thank three anonymous reviewers for their en-
couraging comments on an earlier version of this
paper.
References
Tim Berners-Lee. 2004. OWL Web Ontology Lan-
guage reference, February. W3C Recommendation.
Hans C. Boas. 2009. Multilingual FrameNets in Com-
putational Lexicography.
Kalina Bontcheva and Yorick Wilks. 2004. Automatic
report generation from ontologies: the MIAKT ap-
proach. In Proceedings of the Nineth International
Conference on Applications of Natural Language to
Information Systems (NLDB), pages 324?335.
Stephan Busemann and Helmut Horacek. 1998. A
flexible shallow approach to text generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Nat-
ural Language Generation (IWNLG 98), pages 238?
247, Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario.
Inge M. R. De Bleecker. 2005. Towards an optimal
lexicalization in a natural-sounding portable natural
language generator for dialog systems. In ACL ?05:
Proceedings of the ACL Student Research Workshop,
pages 61?66, Morristown, NJ, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Charles J. Fillmore, Christopher R. Johnson, and
Miriam R.L. Petruck. 2003. Background to
framenet. International Journal of Lexicography,
16(3):235?250.
Dimitrios Galanis and Ion Androutsopoulos. 2007.
Generating multilingual descriptions from linguisti-
cally annotated OWL ontologies: the NaturalOWL
system. In Proceedings of the 11th European
Workshop on Natural Language Generation, Schloss
Dagstuhl.
Sabine Geldof and Walter van de Velde. 1997. An
architecture for template-based (hyper)text genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the Sixth European Work-
shop on Natural Language Generation, pages 28?
37, Duisburg, Germany.
Amy Isard, Jon Oberlander, Ion Androutsopoulos,
and Colin Matheson. 2003. Speaking the users?
languages. IEEE Intelligent Systems Magazine,
18(1):40?45.
Hongyan Jing and Kathleen McKeown. 1998. Com-
bining multiple, large-scale resources in a reusable
lexicon for natural language generation. In Proceed-
ings of the 17th international conference on Compu-
tational linguistics, pages 607?613, Morristown, NJ,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chris Mellish and Xiantang Sun. 2006. The semantic
web as a linguistic resource: Opportunities for natu-
ral language generation. Knowledge-Based Systems,
19(5):298?303.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. 2000. Building Natural
Language Generation Systems. MIT Press and The
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
Ehud Reiter and Chris Mellish. 1993. Optimizing the
costs and benefits of natural language generation.
In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 93), pages
1164?1169, Chambery, France.
Ehud Reiter. 1999. Shallow vs. deep techniques for
handling linguistic constraints and optimisations. In
DFKI, editor, In Proceedings of the KI99 Workshop.
Manfred Stede. 1996. Lexical semantics and knowl-
edge representation in multilingual sentence gener-
ation. Ph.D. thesis, Department of Computer Sci-
ence, University of Toronto.
Graham Wilcock and Kristiina Jokinen. 2003. Gen-
erating responses and explanations from RDF/XML
and DAML+OIL. In Knowledge and Reasoning
in Practical Dialogue Systems IJCAI, pages 58?63,
Acapulco.
